ANOTHEKPYPYA, OR GLORIOUS MYSTERIES. WHEREIN The grand proceedings betwixt
Christ and the Soul: As also the Discoveries, of those his hidden secrets of
Renovation, with the Saints Peregrination, last Mutation, and Glorification,
their graces Consummation: is clearly laid open to the great supportation, and
comfort of all drooping, stooping, and unsettled hearts; by which they may fully
see, what they have been, are, and shall be, to their everlasting contentment.

BY S. M. Minister of the Gospel of God.

To the Saints is made known, what is the riches of the glory of this Mystery
among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of Glory. Col. 1. 27.

Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called,
them he also Justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Romans 8.
30.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Symmons, in the year 1647.

GLORIOUS MYSTERIES.
I CORINTH. 15. 8. And last of all, he was seen of me also, as of one borne out
of due time.
CHAP. I. Of the visions of Christ.
DIvine patience has a large latitude. God can suffer, and suffer long Tardus
ad poenam, ad salutem cunctis celer est Deus.
; would men return at last unto an everlasting stay: his compassions fail
not, that is the cause that all consume not: Servants of the 'leventh hour
shall have equal pay with those that are of the third, sixth, and ninth: as the
first may be last, so the last shall be first, as Christ has said. Resistance
against sweetest Majesty, and releeving mercy may be long lasting, yet if it
has a period Christ cannot cast off, will in nowise cast out, such as come
unto him. A man may be last in the John 6. 37.
Regeneration, and yet equal to the first in the apprehension, and
participation of Jesus Christ.

Last of all, viz. beyond which time he could proceed no farther against Christ
(...) a continendo, and cohibendo id viz. in quo necesse est, ut consistamus
ultra quod pergerenon liceat. Beza. Mat. 19. 30. (...).
: I was not among the first that saw him; that is my grief; yet see I did, and
see I do, him that is invisible. He that sees least and the last does as truly
see, and as freely enjoy the Lord Jesus, as he who sees most; apprehended with
the first. Despair then! where art thou? and what ground have thou to survive
in man? Who would despair of the hope of life, when God's so good to a man so
bad as Paul was before Conversion?

Presumption! thou may not live neither; for though true Repentance be never
late; yet late Repentance is seldom true Poenitentia vera nunquam sera, at
poenitentia sera raro vera. Aug.
: as he once said. Christ spared one Thief at last, that none should despair:
and but one that none may presume: this digression is for caution to
presumptuous spirits.

THree things concur to make up a right sight natural. An Object: a medium (as
the air enlightened, or some such thing) and a seeing faculty. It Is so in all
spiritual sight that is right too.

Christians! Consider First, God in his Glory is the object of your spiritual
sight: and know you not, that the more glorious your object is, the more is
your sight gladded, so long as it is not overwhelmed? for there is a time, when
glorious Majesty is an object too strong for the spiritual sight. Excellens
sensibile destruit sensum.
God is invisible, not because obscure; but for that he is too glorious for
mortal sight, put on immortality then, that you may see aright, him in whom you
believe. But in Heaven, the eye of the soul shall be enlarged and made
capatious, suitable, to its glorious object to take in much of God. What say
ye? Is It not evident in created light, that the more light the eye has, the
better it is pleased, if the eye it self be sound and right? even so it is in
the things of the Spirit. Will you hear what a soul, restless without God,
said. It Is this, One thing have I desired of Psalm. 27. 4.
the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in his house all the days
of my life. And why? to behold his beauty: dwell with him; but 'twas that he
might see him, still be in his presence, have his eye upon him: He looks, and
likes, elects, and loves, when God sets himself in sight. Does not the glory
of God, who is beauty it self, comeliness it self, keep a God-like man's
eye upon the object? What can be more alluring then the loveliness of the
loveliest Lord? What can rejoice the spiritual sight more? Christians! are you
not astonished with the perfections of this object, when you look upon it in
earnest? if you be not, it is your sin, and let it cause many thoughts of
heart within your secret parts. Dear friends! it is a sad thing to have so bad
an eye, as that so good an object should not be of greatest force to ravish
both sight and sense, bringing the whole soul into a glorious rapture, in the
beholding of such a glorious aspect.

Secondly, spiritual sight has a medium too; Jesus Christ's that medium: the
good God may be seen; but it is in, and through a good Christ *. Christ is (...)
the very beam, splendor, and brightness of his Fathers glory, the express
Image of his person Heb. 1. 3. Est magna gratia in hac voce. (...), ab (...)
and (...) splendorem emitto: proprie est splendour ad res externas resultans ex
interna facultate: quemadmodum splendour a sole promanat, Polan. Syntag.
Refulgentia qualis solis splendour est autem solis: and radiorum ejus
splendorisque eadem natura. Aret. in loc.

Effulgentia relucentia Greg. in loc. Significat etiam splendorem ab alla luce
editum; sic filius est splendour a luce paterna editus: sicut in Symbola legitur
lumen de lumine Victorin. Strigel. in Nor. Test. superloc.


: For Christ proceeds from the Father, as Light, brightness, rays, and beams
from the Sun, in the Firmament of Heaven Christus a Patre procedit sicut lux,
splendour, and radii a Sole. Hyperius in locum.
. The Suns beams and streams of light are pure: darkness comes not nigh
them: so is Christ, who is the brightness of the Father. O glorious God! thou
art the greatest good.

And Christ has told you (you seeing Christians!) that he who has seen the
Son, has seen the Father John 14. 7. 9. and cap. 1. 18. Luke 10. 22.
also, and that no man knows the Father, but the Son, and him to whom the
Son reveals him. And is not the Father best seen in the Son? who dare see
the face of Majesty, without a Jesus? no mortal man can see the face of the
immortal God, and live: only God-man, the man Christ Jesus, is found worthy,
as Gods equal, to mediate betwixt an offended Lord, and offending man. Blessed
Messiah! thou art a suitable good to thine in this respect. Christ is the medium
to this glorious object of spiritual sight. Christians! you may have food from
Heavens storehouses: but then forget not to bring the Lord's Benjamin with
you; for if so, you may not see his face: you may see God, and take him in also
into your spirits; but it must be in the name and strength of Jesus Christ, in
whom the Father is reconciling souls to his blessed self, and then it is but
ask and receive: seek, and find: knock, and it shall be opened to you: When
you draw near to God. Only Christ is the way to life, and to Iter od gratiam,
est gratia.
the Father of all such mercies; for he is truth and life it self with the
Father. Sensible souls! what go ye out for to see, a reed shaken in the wind?
Is there any vision like this, or sight comparable to this? what! is there so
glorious an object, or medium in spiritual sight? O^ the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how (...) searchable are his Judgments,
and his ways past finding out!

Thirdly, spiritual sight has a light too, a light super-sensuall,
super-naturall: Natural light may give insight into divine impressions of
wisdom, power, and providence in Creation, protection, and preservation of
outward things; but can it reach further? Can natural light give information
in things above nature, things of Grace? Can flesh and blood reveal God and
Christ to a wanting soul? Christ says nay to such a thing. Thou art Christ,
said Peter to Jesus: and what was the reply? 'twas this. Blessed art thou, and
why? for flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee; but my Father which is
in Heaven. It Is ablessed part of bliss; that the invisible God, and the
invisible good is not to be unfolded by natures light: for were it so, what
poor discoveries then would nature make of mysterious grace? spiritual
things, visions of Christ, are foolishness to a natural heart; nor can a
spiritual object be received by it, because it is spiritually discerned.
Spiritual things are to a natural 1 Cor. 1. 14.
heart's sight and sense like music, in a dead man's ear, which moves him not,
affects him not. What good does he find in it? what does he take in of it?
Surely nothing. Only Christ can reveal himself in a soul, to that soul. As
the Sun rays reveals its own luster, or as fire reveals its own heat and
vigor by giving heat, making hot, things held unto it. Nature may reveal God
as Maker and sustainer of things, both above and below, but cannot show you a
God, reconciling himself to your souls in a Christ. The best advanced and
enlarged spirit of nature is below this great employment: Light is not seen but
by the light: darkness cannot discover it: the Light may shine in darkness,
but Ioh. 1. 5.
darkness comprehends it not: so only grace can discover its own original,
Jesus Christ: only something of God in man can discover rightly God himself
unto man. Without holiness there is no sight had of holiest Majesty: Heb. 12.
14.
true sight of God and Christ is had only by the light of his own perfections;
and when we see light it self, it is by, and in his own light, as David
notes: we Psa. 36. 9.
our selves, alas! see Christ obscurely and every good. We are by nature
darkness it self: which thing shows that the light of spiritual sight is
super-sensuall. But would you know the parts of this worthy sight, glorious
vision? then your election's good: these times have made Athenians many, and
the great question that now is, is this: friends! what news have you: but alas
for us all! that things of Christ are as things unheard of to so many. Would
you see the sights above the world? weel press after perfection in the
principles thus.

1. Right sight of Christ is to see him as he is: when Christ appears he shall
be seen as he is. The most 1 John 3 2.
of men see the Lords Christ promiscuously, rudely, untowardly: These have no
right vision: Christ has an inamouring glory. Christians! Is it so in your
eyes? does his beauty steal away your hearts? have you observed him well? is
he the fairest of ten thousand in your esteem? does this lovely Lord delight
your spiritual sense of seeing? why should it not? Christians are not filled
with heare-saies concerning Jesus Christ, they will ascend to live above means
in the use thereof. David had an Absalom, who had no blemish in him from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, and that none in Israel was so much
to be praised, as he, for his beauty: but was he like Christ? If compared to
him he is nothing, has no comeliness at all. Believers! can you see Christ as
he is? that is your work, and that is the sight of worth: if you cannot now do
it, ere long ye shall; when ye come into the Kingdom of your Father. What
though you do but see in part now, because Messiah's but in part revealed? It
does not here appear what Saints shall be, or what Christ is, and will be
unto them hereafter. Glory must reveal what grace cannot. Little children!
mind these thiags, see him as he is, see his glory, behold that. A child of
God will beseech his Father to show him his glory Exodus 33.18
. So John speaking of Christ says, we beheld his glory. (...) Verbum non
simplieiter videre significat sed spectare, i. c. diligenter and fix intueri
aliquid seu novum and admirandum spectaculum Iansen in Concord. Evang.

Spectavimus seu novum and admirandum spectaculum Eras. (...) est cum
admiratione and stupore in ueti Beza in oecumen. Quasi in theatro diligenter,
perspicae, hilariter, cum dijudicatione and dilectatione. Lo^i^.


saw it intentively, visibly. Christ's Glory is a Christians Crown, and his
own glotie sha'd serve Christ: veil to Christ's glory, as the Angels cover
their faces, viz. their glory in the presence of his: much glory gives much
light; it is light in darkness, life in death, and joy in heaviness. When he
shows you his glory 'twill transport you, as Peter in the transfiguration:
'twill force you to say, it is good to be there where glory is resplendent:
'twill cause you to cry out; let us make this our mansion, pitch our tents
here. Oblessed Diety! humanity is best lodged, when most lost in this
matchless glory.

Secondly, right sight of Christ is experimental. To see Christ for a man's
own self, and soul, with a man's own eyes (as Job speaks) and not another.
Hearing Job 19.26, 27.
of Christ by the ear serves not Saints turns: a hearty feeling of his
inward workings is that a Christ-knowing Christian seeks most after. Some are
all for heads fullness; but a right spectatour of Christ covets hearts fullness
of Christ's holy presence; hearty motions toward Christ, by Christ's power,
savor more with savorie Christians then headie notions of Christ among acutest
wits. To discourse of Christ is sweet and good; but to seed on Christ is much
better. Christians! do you feed and eat heartily of this bread of God? Is it
good to you? does it do good in you? answer for your selves, you worthies of
the world to come! Can you say, I behold the Lamb of God that takes away my
sins, as well as the sins of others, that come to the Father by him? Can
you say with Job: be's my Redeemer: with Mary, my God, Lord, and Savior: my
Mediator, my Intercessour, and Peacemaker? now blessed are you then; and the
eyes that see the things that you see Lu. 10. 22, 23.
. You are blessed with Christ's own sweetest lips. Who then can curse when
Christ does bless? Care not then for the worst of foes; but be strong in the
Lord thy strength and thy redeemer.

Now, to insix this principle on your spirits, note these things. Experience
has a teaching and teachable virtue in it, it is the best teacher, as our
Proverb runs. For

First, it strengthens memory, can put on, record all, the breathings,
movings, and workings of Christ toward a Christian's soul. It Is called by
Philosophers Multiplex memoria, it is remembrance upon remembrance, mercies
flowing into the mind of believers: experience is the matter of multitudes of
thoughts Psalm. 94. 19.
: It makes the thoughts of God many in the minds of the good.

Secondly, it strengthens affection; too one, that has a hearty taste of the
Lord Psalm. 34. 8.
Christ from experience; has a hearty love to him: Will you hear the voice
of experience? it is this. O taste and see how good the Lord is? such a one's
well affected, and affecting also all that follow Christ: the warmth, Spirit
and life of such his kind of speaking; is found very taking in the hearts of
sound Disciples, and does discover whence it is, whether 'twould, and to what it
tends.

Thirdly, it rectifies the judgment. One that has had a through, inward,
sensible, and invisible, pledge of Jesus Christ, his dearest love and nearest
communion with his own soul: that man or woman has right thoughts of Christ,
and his own estate also; for the thoughts of the righteous are right Prove.
12.5.
. And hence, and only hence, it is that he speak's right words of Christ? Job's
friends had not Jobs experience, were not so much acquainted with God, and the
nature of his dealings with himself, and his: and what follows? God says
they spoke not right things of him as did his servant Job Job 42. 7.
. All other sorts of sayings of men, concerning Christ, are the speakings out
of a man's self more than God.

Fourthly, it strengthens the will to elect Christ and Christ's things. One
that has drawn water out of this well of Salvation with the well's own
bucket, and has drunck a hearty draught of the water of life; his will, to
speak out Christ, and his goodness, goes beyond his power. And sad he is with
Paul, that he cannot do the good he would. I speak of one that has drawn
good from Christ with Christ's own abilities; has received him in his own
manner; suffered him to abide in him according to his own order. And now mark
well the evil of the contrary state: by what a man has when he wants
experience.

First, 'twill be but a borrowed light, sight, and apprehension that you will be
proved to have used; and the evil of that is very great: in these respects.
First, 'twill be your sin: for you are bound to use and improve your own
talents, not to build upon another's foundation *: a snare, which (to Romans 15.
20.
the Apostles comfort) he did escape. Secondly, 'twill be your shame: you
account it a disgrace, and are ashamed to be seen on this day in borrowed
garments: but 'twill be greater cause of shame at the last day, to be found
clothed with no better perfections, then the borrowed parts, and acquired arts
of others: to have no knowledge of Christ but what is traditionall: taken in
from creatures like your selves. What a great shame and unspeakable blushing
will it cause in you then; when you shall be stripped of all your borrowed
garments, and shall seem as you are there; who would not be as you seemed
here? Thirdly, 'twill be your Judgment: you Mat. 25. 24. 31.
shall be judged for not using your own gifts, and that in a right manner. We
have a true Proverb, every man shall answer for his own sins, and it is as
true, that every man shall answer for not using his own graces: Every one
shall give account of himself to God *, says the Scriptures: of Romans 14. 12.
himself and his own experiences in the Kingdom of grace. Fourthly, 'twill
be your loss, you have no more then you use, and so: use it is even so with us
all: we enjoy no more then we do experimentally employ. What good wilt be to
me to discourse plausibly of a rich man's treasure, when the meanness of my
being, and course of living, plainly speaks it is none of my own? and what good
will all thy parts and portion do thee, when thou shall die of this disease,
non-experimentall acquaintance with Christ? who will know you then as little as
you know him. The loss will be of these things. First, loss of time: time
might be better spent relating to a man's own benefit, and respecting that.
Secondly, loss of labor: the Apostle was what he was by the grace of God
which was in him, and tells you that grace was not given him in 1 Cor. 15. 10.
vain (...) 'T was not made void.
, 'twas not lost labor. May we not truly say of experimental sight of Christ,
as Job did to his friends of speaking out the truth. O! how forcible are right
Job. 6. 25.
words? and we say too, O! how forcible is a right sight of Christ.

Thirdly, to see Christ, is to see Christ as a man is seen of Christ, and for
the same reason, to the same end: it is to know as you are known, and to
apprehend that, for which also you are apprehended of Phil. 3. 12.
Christ Jesus Or rather (...). If I may comprehend that, for which I am
comprehended.
.

First, Christ sees all the turnings, and windings, and secrets of his peoples
hearts: all the first rises, motions, and conceptions of things within their
secret parts. There Is nothing in his, hid from him, so shall Christians see and
know Christ one day* and that for ever: see all he is and has: what thoughts
he has had of them from the beginning: what a world of love has been, and is
stored up in his blessed breast for them: they shall see the perfection of all
his mercies and compassions toward them: and in the Son you shall see the
Father, and how little cause you have had in this world, to say will God be
merciful no more: has he forgotten to be gracious; has he shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure? how little reason can be rendered for such despair:
there is nothing in God and Christ, that is communicable to the creature which
shall be hid from thee; thou precious child of a precious Father! thou shall
know as thou art known: this is to see Christ clearly: this is a glorious
vision; but it is not had till you have entered the heavenly Canaan.

Secondly, Christ looks on a poor Soul that he may fall in love with it.
Christians! how do you serve Christ? do you set your eyes, hearts, and hands
on Jesus Christ that you may show your love to him, lay fast hold on him, and
with Jacob not let him stir from you, till he has blessed you with
right hand favors?

How stands your hearts toward Christ? Are you well affected toward him? does
looking breed liking, and liking longing in your breasts, and spirits after much
of him? Let me tell you, if your sight be right which you have of him, 'twill
serve you so; the more you see him, the better you like, and long for his
society.

And now, distressed souls! whom sin and the Serpent has stung, behold a
Jesus, look up to the author of grace and healing: what! will you die in your
sins, and be damned for ever, rather then that the Lord Christ should work
his will upon you, pluck your sins from you, which are as your right hands and
eyes unto you? are you good at burning? have mercy on your selves and precious
souls, and mind these things For (...).


First, all heirs of everlasting life longed to see Christ before their
deaths, and had their desires. What made old Simeon desire to depart this world
in peace but this? He had seen Christ as well by faith as sense. What put Paul
into his two great straights, a loathnesse to die, and a loathnesse to live: a
desire to die, and a desire not to die: but this? He had seen much of Christ.
Me thinks I should hear you say of Christ, as Jacob of his Joseph, it is
enough my sonne's yet alive, Gone. 45. ult.
I Will go and see him before I die. Seekers of Christ! what thoughts have you?
what words fall from you concerning this thing? your Savior's alive, will live
for ever* and do not you long to see him before you die? If not, your graves
will be Sepulchers both to you and your comforts, and you will lie down in
sorrow. And, profane souls! Let me tell you from the Lord, it is a miserable
thing to see death before you have seen Jesus Christ. To die Christlesse is to
die a Godless, graceless, and heaven less wretch: to make a worse end than
bruits. Unsanctified souls! where is the sounding of your own bowels for
your own welfare? does not thy heart quake, and all thy parts shake to think
of the slighting of a Jesus, and of trampling under foot his most precious
blood? It had been better for thee thou had never had being then not to have a
well being in the Lord Christ.

Will you hear the language of a Christlesse man at the Judgement-day? it is
this: Mountains and rocks fall upon me, and hide me from the face of him that
sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. All such men's Joys have
a mar-mirth with them: when such an one dies, all dies with him: his sin
being excepted, which shall ever live in the memory of the Lord of Hosts, and
give life to the parties own misery.

Secondly, your necessity call's for it Ingens telum n^cessitas. Live. O
quantum cogit egestas!
: you must mind him, for you want him: necessity is made a cause of minding
somethings: Christ tells of some that would not sup with him, would not come at
him; and what think ye was the cause? one had purchased ground, and he must
see to it; Another had bought cattle and he Lu. 14, 18, 20.
must prove them: A third had married a wife, and he could not come, would be
excused: for necessity made them all do it. Alas poor souls! is it a fault
to own a Christ, accept of a Jesus, a Savior? Is it an offense in your esteem
so to do, that ye would be excused for it? Or is it a burden that you beg to
be excused from it? the Lord lay no other burden on my own soul, then Jesus
Christ his yoke, and fellowship with my spirit. But who can read, without
remorse of heart, and moistened eyes, the return that Christ made to those
unworthie persons, and their unworthie sayings? Not one of them Ver. 24.
shall taste of my Supper. Tender hearts! do not trouble you to see
faithless men so much their own foes, as not to taste of Christ's Supper?
And, incorrigible sinners! Do you know and feel the weight of this censure,
sentence? it is not to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God: it is not to have the least mouthfull of hidden Manna: not to
have any thing to do with the bread of God, and food of souls; it is to have
all wants and no supplies to be wretched, poor, blind, and naked; and yet not
in the way to receive one mercy. See you not what it is then to supply the
wants of an outward man, by increasing the wants of an inward?

Does necessity cause an abounding man to have a worldly mind? o! what
necessities, like those of the soul? what wants are more piercing,
distressing, and vexing, then inward wants? I tell thee no mortal wants ought
so much as immortallitie: you have need of him for Wisdom, righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption that in all your services he may pray in you,
pray and plead for you to your heavenly Father; work in you, and work for you
his own blessed will and work, and to present you, and what is yours,
blameless before his Fathers presence in life, death, and at the Judgment
day. Consider! Do not storms drive men into a harbor? and do not Wars
constrain men into strong Castles and holds? oh then! Let wants drive thee
unto a Christ, and let him drown thy self in himself, who is the ocean of
supplies.

Thirdly, a right sight of Christ gives a right sight of self, and selfs
estate; men never see themselves so well, as when they most see Jesus Christ.
Christians! You may see in Christ what you have been, are, and shall be. What
you have been.

First, what excellent creatures ye were, when ye stood in your first
Parents: how exquisite that righteousness, and holiness was, in which you
were first made, after the Lords own likeness: but you have lost it, and
therefore also the sight on it, such as it then was; but you may, beholding
Christ again, find it in him: as a second Adam he has done, does, and ever
will keep his integrity, station, and perfection, without any the least
alteration: you may see in him what glorious ones you were, before ye were
cast out of an earthly Paradise. This is the mystery, ye shall know by him,
what you were before you were, what a blessed estate standing man was in, what
an excellent nature he had before it was lost, how well he might have lived,
and all his posterity, had he not sinned with outward senses, and stained his
inward soul: he sinned with his senses by hearing with his ears, the praises
of the fruit, beholding it with his eyes, touching with his hand, and tasting
with his palate. Thus sin, entering by his senses, got into the world, and
death by sin; himself being made sensual, with all his posterity by that
act.

Secondly, what you are,

First, by degeneration: how much unlike what you once were. When you see his
holiness, do not you see your own unholinesse? when you see his purity and
passing Sanctity, do not you by means of that see your own impuritie and
surpassing depravitie? Will you hear what a God-beholding man said once, 'twas
this: Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of uncle an lips, and I
dwell in the mids of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of hosts. 'Twas his trouble (and he gives the reason;) that his
lips were not cleaner, like the Lords, and that his society was so unclean,
that it did unfit him for communion with the highest God and King: it pierced
his honest heart that he had no greater a part of the Lords holy nature in him.
Christians! When you see the Lords lowliness, do not you see your own
loftiness? When you see Christ's humility, do not you see your own pride?
When you see his clemency, cannot you then see your own natural cruelty to
your selves and others? so also by the light of his patience, you may see your
own passion: by his kindness to you, your own unkindnesse to him, by all his
faithfullnes, your own unfaithfulnes, and by his fruitfulnes in good, your own
barre^u^s?

Secondly, by restoration: what a vast difference is betwixt grace and the
best refined nature? Moreover, there is now a more firm union betwixt thy soul
and God, then was betwixt God and man at that time: for had the union then been
as strong as now, Adam had never lost himself, and his by sin: the oneness
that is betwixt God and his people is such, that they can never any more be
parted and taken asunder: besides all this; Adam was left to himself, and to
his own will: to choose whether he would stand or fall: But now Christians are
not left to themselves, and cannot have their will; God will never leave them,
nor forsake them, and they shall never fall more so to endanger themselves and
souls, as he then did: for God is both able and willing to make them stand. Is
not this to see your selves truly, and fully, and whatsoever you are,
uprightly, and what you are not in such a manner; surely no vision is like
this, no sight like this.

Thirdly, what you shall be. It does not here appear what you shall be; but
in Christ, and where Christ is, you may plainly, clearly, and thoroughly be
resolved of that: for when you see him even as he is, so shall you your selves
be: Christ breathes out sweetly this self same thing: Father! I will that
those whom thou have given John 17. 24.
me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. Christ's glory is
transforming: he will have you with him, that you may behold him: and what is the
issue? it is this: you will be changed into the same glory, you cannot escape it,
there you, with open face, as in a glass beholding the glory of 2 Cor. 3. 18.
the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, and that of
the Lord the Spirit (...)
. Can a representation of his glory, by a medium, transform so sweetly? Has
glory such a power? Oh then! what will it do, when we shall behold it
without means, more clearelie then a glass can represent it?

Fourthlie, all right sight of Christ has in it a sustaining nature, a
heart-releeving virtue, a soule-reviving ability: things of Heaven are all
supporting, much more Christ himself, whose presence is the Heaven above, as
he is God equal to the Father: do you want an experiment of this also? the
Apostle gives you one, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.
when he tells you that, Christ and all his obedience is and was for your
sakes; adding that for this cause we faint not in the perishing estate of the
outward man, whilst the inward is renewed day by day, whilst light affections
work us unto, fit (...)
us for (...), massy glory; and all this, when we look not at things which
are seen; but at things which are not seen. When the invisible soul's lost in
her unseen Savior, she is safe and takes her rest; for the Lord makes her
dwell in safety.

Christ's soldiers! pray tell me, what seen power and might sustained you in
all your spiritual warefare that you have had? I can tell you none at all; for
when you were in the field against sin, Satan, the world, and self, had you
not all the Lords own armor on? The helmet of Salvation, breast plate of
righteousness, Ephesians. 6. 13. to 18.
the girdle of truth, with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
and above all the shield of Faith, whereby you were able to quench all fiery
darts shot and darted at you, your souls and peace: and, when you were
smitten, did not Christ stand by you, with you, and in you? Did not he teach
your hands to war, and singers to sight, as David speaks? had not he your
hand in his, and caused you to give some mortal wounds, kill that which would
have killed you your selves, souls and all: which being gone, all was gone
with you. Who stood by Joshua when he called on God, and Satan stood at his
right hand to resist him? was it not the Angel of the Covenant, Jesus Christ?
Zech. 3.
who, when the Tempter accused him for standing before the Lord in filthy
garments, did excuse him, remove his rags, and give him robes? and does not
Christ stand every Christian in the like stead? Sure I am, if ever you did
overcome, and were not foiled in the Lords fights and fields, 'twas thus with
you. O how precious, and how cordial are the thoughts of these things! the
number whereof no end ye know. Who then that is wise desires not to see Christ,
and himself in Christ, before he behold his last, greatest and approaching
change and dissolution? It Is a blessed thing to be able to graspe Christ and
death in the arms at once, at one and the same time, and is it not an
everlasting curse to die Christlesse? Search the Scriptures, and you will find it
so.

Finally, let the Lord persuade: would you know the usefulness, of such right
apprensions of Christ, then consider these things sincerely.

First, 'twill increase inward Joy. Have you a mind to be merry? be much in
this, and 'twill make you right glad: other mirth may end in mourning; but this
cannot, this makes the spirit rejoice in God its Savior, (as she said) there
are many Joy-makers, as friends, estates, the treasures and pleasures of this
life; the Scriptures tell you of a joy of harvest, and a Joy of heart; a Joy of
harvest is very great, but this brings joy Isa. 9. 3. 65. 14.
of heart, both great and good, a cordial Joy. Precious souls! sow precious
seed weeping; but a precious Christ being the fruit, they reap their crop
singing: some sow in tears, weeping, mourning, sighing, roaring, and wailing
after this dearest Lord, and Jesus; but when they find him, themselves are
found to reap in joy: Righteous ones! what though as the Spouse you have gone
about Cant. 3.
seeking him, whom your souls love, even early and late, by night, as well as
day, and have long desired society with him, yet have not found him, and your
selves in him? Consider, he seeks as well as you, has lost as well as you:
besides, when he finds you, and you him, you will hold him fast; and so good is
he, you will not let him go; Christ told the Jews that Abraham rejoiced to see
his day, did see it, and was glad. And sensual worldlings Ioh. 8. 56.
! what e're you deem of such a favor, it skills not, sure I am, that a right
sight of Christ, will make a right-sighted Christian glad at heart; nothing
does him so much good as this: small things cause laughter in the face, when
the heart's a stranger to the Joy; but this, as it is the nature of great
things, will make the heart glad, even then when the face of a man, and face of
times is very sad: the comforts arising hence are meat for Saints to eat,
which the world knows not of: and now a word to you that would glory in
something, what can be your glory? which shall not be your shame, besides the
knowledge of Jesus Christ?

God has said. The wise man may not glory in his wisdom; neither Isa. 9. 23,
24. Jer. 9.23, 24.
the mighty man in his might, nor yet the rich man in his riches. Why? who
shall glory then? and in what shall men glory? if not in such desirable
things; well Jehovah has said, Let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands, and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise
loving-kindnesse, Judgment, and Righteousness on the Earth: for in these
things I delight. God has showed you what to glory in, gracious spirits! it is
in your acquaintance with him: when you know, and understand him aright; see
him as he is; viz. full of loving-kindnesse, Judgment, and Righteousness, one
that acts as he is: it is his delight to do such things? Believers! are you
like him, by looking upon him? are you changed in this respect? Mark well,
what it is you glory, delight, and take pleasure in.

Secondly, 'twill strengthen patience under the cross and chastizement for
Christ: do you suffer from the hands of unreasonable men? and would you be
avenged of them, as of your enemies? looking up to Christ you will find* he is not
yet avenged of his enemies: does God suffer, and shall not man? does the head
endure the contradiction of sinners against himself? and can the members think
to be free? Is It not all reason in the world, that head and members, should be
fellow-sharers, in the sufferings of the whole body mystical? who dare deny
it? 'twas a sweet saying of a faithful witness to the truth of Jesus, who
seemed to faint, under his great trial; and being offered a cup of spirits, to
sustain him, replied thus; My Lord, and Master had gall, and vinegar given
him: as if he had been astonished, to see himself fare better then Christ: and
indeed, experienced Christians! when you think in sufferings you are served
ill, you should consider, sweet Christ was not served so well: that will still
your murmurings; for can you suffer as much as he has done? I tell you nay:
yet farther does the event or end of things, bring cares upon you? why! James
commands you by the Spirit, to behold, and see the end James 5. 11.
of the Lord. You may think your troubles will end ill, have an evil end; but
God can put a good end to ill beginnings: as some things may be sweet to the
taste, yet bitter in the belly; so other things may be unsavorie, in the first
concoction, which may be better in, and by the second; though in things
natural, or corporal it is not so, as Physicians have said.

CHAP. II. Of right Regeneration.
Fallen man's rising is graduall, first, by Grace, and next by Glory: by man
came the malady, and by man also comes the remedy: a fruit less first birth
may be repaired by a second: by Adam sin entered, and reigned unto death, and
by Adam grace entered, reigning unto life, ('it is the second Adam that now I
mean) Grace can make up, what nature has lost; amend what nature has done
amiss: First, birth's privilege is nothing: Second, birth's privilege is all
things, all in all, referring to felicity: Regeneration antecedes
Glorification: He that is borne but once dies twice; but he that is borne twice
shall not taste of the second death.

First-births are an Emblem of the second; there is a certain likeness betwixt
them both: we will give you a hint of the whole thus.

FIrst, natural births bring sufferings, both on the bearer, and on that which
is born: the mother has her pangs and thro's, and the child's in straites too,
till it is brought from the womb, into the world: spiritual births bring
sufferings also, the Spirit that brings forth is a sufferer too, as well as
doer, it being quenched. Spiritual Christians! you can tell, that you have
often quenched the holy Spirit, even in all its motions, strivings, and
contestations, within you. Have not you when the Spirit has diswaded from
evili, and persuaded to good, neglected its sweetest motions? how seldom have
you moved with the Spirit, against the flesh, and for the Lord? ask your
hearts this question, obedient sons of God: where, almost, is that man, or
woman, that is kind to the Spirit? gives it good entertainment? Ah Lord! thy
Spirit meets with hardest measure, from our flesh: and is it not grieved, vexed,
and resisted also? if men go one step further, which is to despite it; they
have done their worst against it, and their own souls also. These are the
steps which reach to Hell. Take heed you tread not the first of them, quench
not the Spirit. It Is a very sad thing, to sin so fowly, that if a man
sinne's but one sin more, he falls finally: next to resisting, comes
despighting, and then how can you be renewed by Repentauce? Is not this to
venture the loss of a precious soul desperately? and to be unkind to the
Spirit immenslie? than which what is more dismal? the Spirit suffers, being
quenched.

And then the flesh, that suffers being crossed, in all its corruptions: In the
second birth, right Regeneration, all who are Christ's, have their flesh
crucified; Gal. 5. 4.
with the affections, passions, and lusts, proud flesh is beaten down, and
Christ's humble Spirit set on high: in such a soul, love to sin, is the life
of sinnne; if you loath it 'twill die: hatred unto it is a wounding of it, who
knows not this, that knows Jesus Christ? and hates sin, as it is hateful,
and makes hateful? sin is, or should be to Saints more hateful then all
things, and to creatures most hurtful. When nothing else is hateful, or can
make so in the sight of God: Will you mind what one borne of God has said?
'twas this, I hate the evil I do. Love of sin must die, when love of Christ
will live, and be lively: lustings after sin are lessened too; if not wholly
mortified: one of the Lords births, though he sin, yet he hungers not after
it, does not thirst to commit it, has but listlesse desires toward it, and
troubled he is, that he does at all desire such an undesirable thing; he would
feign be, and do, better then he is, and does, though his flesh be crossed,
and himself, made to suffer.

Secondly, in natural birth's, the bearers bowels yerne toward the babe in the
birth, least it should prove abortive; right glad's the parent, to see the
child live, and do well: her saying's like his, is my son safe? deal gently
with 2 Samuel 18.32. and 5.
him for my sake. In spiritual births, the bearers bowels yerne too: the Lords
bowels work toward babes in Christ, least they should miscarrie; and loath
is he that poor souls should perish, die in sin and be damned. Hence those
sayings, how shall I give thee up? how shall I do this? or that against thee?
God would rather bring up, then give up, or cast out any soul: will you mark
his saying in sacred writ? it is this, I desire not the death of sinners: I had
rather they would repent, and live, turn you, turn you, Ier. 31. 20.
why will you die? Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since
I spoke unto him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled, and do sound for him, I will surely have mercy upon him.

O! how glad is God when men do prove good, live the life of Christ, and prove
godly Christians:

Thirdly, before the natural birth, the babe in the womb receives not
nourishment in an ordinary way, but in an extraordinary manner, not by the
mouth, but at the navell, is cherisht invisibly: yet cherished it is, and does
well: In spiritual births, babes in Christ are fed too, but it is
mysteriouslie, not in an ordinary way, the ordinary way is praying, reading,
hearing, pondering, and conferring of the good things of God: but before this
babe spiritual can tell how to use his mouth, how to improve this ordinary
means of life so, as to take in nourishment by it; God by some extraordinary
way, breaks invisiblie and sweetly upon the soul, and gives it a taste of
his soule-ravishing Joys, inwardly, secretly. And yet, although he has it,
he cannot tell you how he came by it, how he took it in; so strangely was
he ravished: he feels much, but can speak out little of the Lords goodness
to his own soul; for is it not the nature of such things to cause joy in the
heart more than in the countenance, when other things are wont to make only
outwardly cheerful? The wind blows where it list's, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whether it goes: so is
every one that is borne of the Spirit. Is not the way of the Lord with a soul,
like the way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent on the rock, neither
of which you are able to track? the way of a ship in the midst of the Sea,
which you cannot find out? so hidden and mysterious are his workings. Saints
live the life of their Savior invisiblie, not by bread only.

Fourthly, before natural birth's, babes in the womb void not excrements: it is
the same in this case: before that a man's borne again, comes out of the womb
of sin, death, and Hell. Though he have the most refined nature, yet voids
he not excrementall sins, filthy, defiled, and defiling garments: he
preferres rags before robes, that is his folly; Experience! speak thou, is it
not true? Let the dispencers of the Lords sacred mysteries cry out, and cry
on, never so often, if you live in your sins, you shall die, die the death of
Devils themselves, yet you will never part with your excrimentall sins, till
you are come through the straights, and felt the pangs of the new birth. O!
that men were wise and would consider this thing, wisely, and well: who would
not long to be borne again, to have a new nature, and name; and be made like
to Christ?

Fifthly, in natural birth's, Homo epitome mundi vagiens nascitur.
babes are borne crying, as the Philosopher notes. In spiritual birth's, babes
of Christ are borne crying too: Grace in a Christian will do like grace, lead
him to the Throne of grace, and acquaint him with the God of Grace, through
Jesus Christ: while he is living he is crying, and praying to the living God, and
wellspring of every good. Christians! when you were first changed, had your
eyes first opened, did you not, as well as now you do, hunger after Christ's
Communion? was it not very sweet unto you, when in all your wants you were
carried out unto the God of supplies? and was it not a great ease to your
spirits, when you could, and did pour out your souls before him? Babes of
Christ! when borne, do echo to their Father, cry for cry. When Christ cries
out Saul, Saul, the answer is, who art thou o Lord? and what would thou have
me to do? then Saul of Tarsus Acts 9.
must be sent to; for behold he prays, says Jesus: he prays. God says to
his child, seek my face, and the child's heart answers, thy face Lord will I
seek, there is like for like. Saints love to retaliate with their God: would you
hear the hearty cry of a hearty Christian? it is this. As the heart pants
after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee oh God! my soul
thirsts for God, for the living God; Psa. 42. 12.
when shall I come, and appear before God? the sweetest presence of sweetest
Majesty is refreshing, that, babes of Christ do know full well.

Sixthly, a babe of the natural birth, in the day of its nativitie, is a
poor, polluted, helpless, and shiftlesse creature, has nothing but what is
given it, nor has it a power to deserve any thing. It Is an object of loathing
to many: but is not an object of love almost to any, and it is shiftlesse, it
may lie and sit still, as in the open field, to the loathing of its person; but
cannot stir head, hand, or foot, to help it self, to releeve it self. So in
the Spiritual, does not God, when he comes in, to change men, find them in
their blood, polluted, with a navell uncut, unwashed, not salted, unswadled,
not pitied, and much loathed? and who can show mercy to such, if God did not?
did not God cast his skirt over such, how naked would they be and appear? Eze.
16.4, 5, 6.


7. A child of the natural birth, being brought forth, by an instinct of
nature lives lingering after the mothers breasts: so in the spiritual, the
newborn child lives hungring after the brest's of Christ's consolations, and
that by an instinct of grace; were there no means to stir up, no reward to
accrue, yet babes of Christ could do no other but long after the sincere milk
of Gods word, as newborn babes, that they may grow thereby. The purest word
and freest 1 Pet. 2. 2.
from mixture is that, they most covet. Christians! what are your desires? and
how strong are they this way? you see what some by an instinct of grace can
do: be you wise in heart then, prove your selves, and tell me: is this your
work?

Eighthly, a newborn babe, sucking, is satisfied with sincere milk, and that
alone, when nothing else can please it, satisfy, or appease it is crying-out
loud: so in the spiritual, when a poor soul has ranged the world through
for delights and fullness, has tried all ways and means to quiet it self;
at last it sits down, finding no rest in the creatures, and resolves, the Lord
shall be its resting place, and when it wants the comforts of this life, yea,
sometimes even bread for his hungry stomach, it can go to his Fathers house
and home, and there find bread enough, even the bread of God: can be content
with the breasts of Christ* when, if you give it all the world, you cannot still
it, fill it; for its wanting still: but at the breast it can suck, and be
delighted with the abundance of that glory, as the Prophet speaks. Oh sweet
Isa. 56. 10, 11.
God! how good art thou? and how much good do thou to the souls of men?

And now let all seek after this viz. to be borne again. God does you a
greater favor, when he makes you live the life of Christ, than The life of
grace is far beyond the life of nature.
when he causes you to live the life of man. It Is a more blessed thing by
innumerable degrees to be borne twice than once; for the one can but give you
entrance into an earthly Canaan at the best, which does not always do so
well, the other gives you entrance into an heavenly one, which birth never
does amiss to any. Who, that is wise, will then boast of his natural birth,
when he has never come under the power of the spiritual, never felt it is
pangs, nor been partaker of it is privileges? Careless souls! do you want a
spur to this purpose? consider! as there is a paritie betwixt them, so there
is a disparitie in respect of the excellency of the one above the other.

For first the natural is by carnal copulation, and is a fleshly Generation;
the first man is of the earth, earthie: and how can he be clean, 1 Cor. 15.
47.
that is borne of a woman? as Job has said. But the spiritual is by a
spiritual Job 25. 4.
union and communion of God and Christ with the soul of man, and is a
spiritual Regeneration: he that will enter the Kingdom of God must be borne
again of the Spirit: said Christ: and that which is so borne is spirit, as
that which is borne of the flesh is flesh. The second man is the Lord from
Heaven. Do not you see then, the last is more noble then the first, and that
the spiritual excells? who, considering this, desires not to be borne again?
2. The seed of the natural is corruptible, mortal, may perish and die; but
that of the spiritual is incorruptible, immortal, remains for ever. Ye are
borne again, (says the Scripture) 1 Pet. 1. 23.
not of corruptible seed; but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives
and abides for ever. He that is borne of God sins not, that is, not unto
death, and why? mark that; for the seed of God remains in him: the seed
that is in 1 John 3. 9.
him is of an immortal nature.

3. In the natural the conception is sinful: David tells his God that he was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did his mother conceive him: and may we not
all truly say to each other, as the Pharisees to the blind man, thou art
altogether borne in sin. I am altogether borne in sin, shapen in sin; o
vain man! why boasts thou so much of thy noble birth, who know est nothing of
thy Regeneration? But the spiritual is a holy conception of the grace and
goodness of a good and gracious God: a gracious spirit can tell you he is what
he is by the grace of God that is in him. Are not 1 Cor. 15. 10.
all the conceptions of Gods Spirit in the soul like himself; very holy,
very spiritual, very heavenly? what conceptions like them, or to be compared
with them? Surely none. In the natural, birth men are borne brutish: vain man
would be wise; but he is borne like a wild asses colt. Men by nature are
cruel, cross, Job 11, 12.
perverse, unteachable, hard to be entreated: but by grace, holy, heavenly,
harmless.

4. In the natural, babes are born to grief, sorrow, and trouble. Although
afflictions come not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the
ground, yet man is borne to trouble, as the sparkles fly upward. It Is natural
for a man to know sorrow. But in the spiritual, he is borne to peace, Joy, and
quietness. When a man's begotten again, he is begotten to a 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
lively hope, to an inheritance uncorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for him. And are not the fruits, or births of the
Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Goodness, Faith, and the like? By the natural birth
you are brought forth into a troublesome, irksome world; but by the spiritual
out of troubles into peace. In the world babes of Christ shall have trouble;
but in him they shall have peace which passes Ioh. 16.
understanding. Now tell me, you wise virgins! whether Martha, or Mary has
chosen the better part? Whether Heavens quietness be not better then earth's
cumbrances? whether interest in Christ, and by that, a right title to the
creatures be not better, then a portion in the creatures by usurpation without
Jesus Christ? By the spiritual birth privilege you inherit all things: by the
natural nothing: although you possess something. You have seen what the
spiritual birth is by its likeness and unlikeness to the natural: we will now
show you how God brings in, and brings up returning sinners. Thus.

First, He principles them. Secondly, acts them. Thirdly, builds them. And
fourthly, confirms them.
First, God is said to principle man, when, by uniting himself to the soul by
his Spirit, he does invisiblie sow the seeds of all grace in the heart at once;
grace is called the seed of God. Union disposes for communion, communion
corroborates union. Ioh. 3. 9.


It Is a passive reception of Christ that now I mean; that, whereby a principle
is begotten in the will. Christ joins the means and end together: so should
the godly do Election, vocation, Justification, Sanctification, Humiliation,
then comes the end which is glorification.

Secondly, Christ acts them, draws out those principles also.

First, his first act is illumination, he shines out from Heaven with a clear
light upon the hearts of men, and upon their ways. Light was the first thing
that appeared in the old Creation, and it is the first that appears in the new
Creation also: Light Genesis 1. 1.
was the first ornament of the world, wherewith the Lord decked it as with a
garment Answ.
, and this light is Christ. For, ye were once darkn^sse; but are now Light in
the Psalm. 104. 2. Ephesians. 5. 8.
Lord: Light discovers darkness: Regeneration is a translation from darkness
into light. True Converts! how like you that; his light discovers sin, all
the closest secrets of closest hearts, and Justice incensed against the sinner?
Light discovers the unevenesse of a man's way, and what it is in the account of
Justice it self. Ioh. 1. 9.
This light's immediate. (Christ in you the hope of glory) it has no means
of conveyance, but acts like it self, scrutinously: the light of this Sun,
like the wise men's star, never leaves a soul till 'tas lead it to a Savior,
a means of escape from all sins evil; Divine light informs men on whom the
Lord has laid help, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
even on one that is mighty, and able to save: that is the next act of
illumination, viz: a discovery of the sufficiencies, as well as the
efficiencies, of a Jesus; that he is able to save to the utmost all that come
unto God by him; and that he can in no wise cast out them that come unto him:
it brings glad tidings to sad souls: sin may be mighty; but Christ is
mightier, will subdue it: sins may be many; but Christ's mercies are more:
sins may be greatly incensing; but Christ is greatly pleasing unto an
offended Majesty, and sinners in the Son cannot be displeasing unto the
Father: he loves light, for he dwells in it: this divine light reveals 1 Timothy
6. 16.
all. Returning sinner! why droopest thou? Can thy sin undo thee, when it is
laid on Christ? sad soul! why weepest thou as one without hope? can thou be
worse then whom God has pardoned, and Christ has purchased, cleansed, and
saved? Think not so, least thou sin against the remedy it self. Light from
Heaven will reveal Christ to thee, and thee to thy self, thou sinking soul!
thy wants and Christ's supplies shall meet together; then do not distrust of
that.

Secondly, Chri'sts second act in man, by which he draws out his own
principles, is humiliation, begetting in the subject low thoughts of self, and
all selfs worth: shall I tell you what they say sincerely, whom God and
Christ, by the Spirit has humbled? it is this, I am a worm and no man. I am
not worthy to be called a son, make me as a hired servant. I am the least of
all the Saints: yea the least of all thy mercies. Oh! that I were but a door
keeper in thy house. Christ humbles whom he will exalt: Gods method is first
to lay low, and after to set aloft: yet note you, it is truth in the inward
parts he chiefly aims at: some are so graduall in putting upon much, that they
prove irregular in discouraging little; though truth of grace; selfe-loathing
also, for selfe-defilements, joins hands with this grace: would you know how
Christ humbles, breaks the heart kindly? it is thus: by setting himself with
his wounds open before their eyes; as peirced by their sins. I will power
upon my people a spirit of grace and supplication: mark that: and then they
shall look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him as one mournes
for the loss of a first borne. Can you look on a pierced Zech. 12. 10.
Christ, you flintie hearts! and not be broken, pierced your selves? if you
do, it is because the Spirit of grace is not poured out upon you. When Peter
set forth a crucified Christ, were not Acts 2 36.37.
his hearers pricked at the heart, when they believed, through grace given,
that they were the very men the preacher meant? Could his looks fetch tears
from Peter's eyes, and will not his wounds do the like to others? what hinders?
This is Christ's way, to abase men kindly; and who more kindled in love to
Christ than such who are so laid low? you see his acts, and his ways to effect
his blessed will on man. Christ has his ends too in humbling such as he will
save: we will show what his ends be as briefly as may be.

First, Christ humbles that he may inhabit, he dwells in the highest Heavens,
with him also, that is, o^ a contrite, humble, and low spirit, to revive him.

And as it is uncomfortable not Isa. 57. 15.
to dwell in God, so in like manner, it is disconsolate not to have a God
dwelling in us: are not Cities and Kingdoms without Inhabitants very
solitary? even so is a soul without God, very dismal, very uncheerefull.
Christ's presence is reviving, this Christ knows, and thus he humbles that
he may inhabit, make the heart his mantion, dwelling place. God dwells in
highest heavens, and lowest souls.

Secondly, Christians are humbled to make them lovely in the sight of the Lord:
An humble soul is a comely one, meekness is a great inward ornament; is in
the sight of God of great price: a 1 Pet. 3. 4.
proud heart is void of Christ's comeliness wears not his robe of graces.
Consider! Does God prize, greatly prize the meek in heart, the quiet in
spirit? then you! that study to be esteemed of him, covet to be humbled by
him.

Thirdly, Christ humbles that he may exalt: When thou wa'st little in thine
own eyes, wa'st thou not 1 Samuel 15. 17.
made head of the Tribes of Israel, and the King over them? says Samuel to
Saul. When Saul thought himself one of the smallest of the Tribes of Israel,
and his family the least of all the families of the Tribe of Benjamin; then
God made him greatest. But when he waxed proud, and rejected the Lord, and his
words spoken to him by his Prophets, God rejected him; and his latter end was
worse then his beginning: do not you now observe a vast difference between the
fruits of God's humbling man, and man's exalting himself? mark the end of each
operation, and then tell me, is it not sweet to be laid and kept low by Christ;
that this grace may have its perfect work in you, as well as other graces: let
all true converts speak: Is not Christ most advanced by man, when man's most
abased by Christ? who can deny it?

Fourthly, Christ makes humble that he may be familiar with the humble spirit:
God and Christ is a stranger to the lofty in heart, will not be familiar with
them as a man with his friend: will you hear the Lord himself speak, who
best knows his own mind in this principle? it is this. Though the Lord be
high, yet has he respect to the lowly; but the proud he knows afar off:
he knows them; but it is at a distance, not as friends nearely alied to his
blessed self: he knows them as enemies and uses them so; he resists, the
proud, but gives grace to the humble. Many incomes from the highest Heavens
have the lowest souls: Christ does not* when a man's down, add afflictions
to his bonds, deject; or reject a soul that is dejected already; but when he is
down, helps him up, when he has much trouble, gives him much peace, for much
sorrow, much Joy, garments of joy for the spirit of heaviness to humble
hearts: he is called a God that comforts those that are cast down; but 2 Cor.
7. 6.
he is to the proud a stranger, o sweet Lord! there is none like to thee, nor are
there any works like thine.

Fifthly, Christ humbles to conform, those he will save to himself, as well in
grace, as glory: Christ himself was humble, and feign would he have his to be,
and do, like him: Learn of me says Christ, Mat. 11. 29.
for I am meek and lowly of heart. How sweet a design is this? what! do all
Christ's acts prove transforming, is all he does done to change us into the
similitude of himself? o great mystery! blessed is he that understands it,
and improves it. To be like Christ is to enter glory in this term of life,
to be in part what we shall be for ever completely: for what is the glory of
the just and children of God in Heaven, but their likeness unto Jesus Christ?
When John spoke of great things to come in glory not apparent, he sums up
all in this one saying; we shall be like Christ. Humility makes man the
Emblem 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
of Christ: for he was humble, but pride makes man the Emblem of Satan, the
Father of Pride; as proud as Luciser, that is the world's proverb concerning
some: but how glorious would it be, were it possible to find men as humble as
Christ? Humility is Gods Creature, pride is the Devils: you see then how
needful a grace it is as well as faith and love with other graces: then suffer
your selves to be made like Christ in this, and admire his goodness in this
excellent end he propounds in his workings in you, and actings of you, for
good, because the pride of a man shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold
the humble in Spirit. Prove. 29.23.


Christ's third act in, and on man is his bringing up the soul, and infixing
of it to the object so apprehended by it. Men are mightily prone to seek out
many comforters: but Christ will have his to have but one, and in him all true
contentments. Christ first removes all props that a soul might rest on, and
take comfort in, on this side himself. Is it prosperity that some lean on?
when they are settled on their lees, and have their cares of Christ, and soul
choked, he changes that into adversity, and then in their afflictions they will
seek him early: when Christ withdrawes himself, returns to his place, they will
acknowledge their offense and seek his face whose presence was not prized
before: when men smart by outward and inward wants, then supplies from Christ
are desirable, very seasonable. Christ will teach mercies worth by its want,
to those he loves: health is best prized in sickness, riches most prized in
poverty, libertie's most prized in infringment.

So Christians learn to prize the sweetness of their Saviors presence, by
the bitterness of his absence: do we doat on friends? Christ will take them
hence; to let us know there is no friend like Christ: thus he cleares it out to
the soul, that all props beside himself, are broken reeds, that will deceive
when most weight is laid on them, or broken cisternes which hold no water when
we think there is most in them.

Secondly, Christ removes all obstructions that hinder conjunction with him.
Does unworthiness discourage? Christ assures them he is worthy, and he is so
in himself for their sakes, and that living waters are powered out to thirsty
souls freely: that such have most of Christ, and receive most from Christ, who
carry least unto Christ: that a man's own Righteousness effects not, nor can
his own unrighteousness hinder, his Justification, because men are justified
freely by his grace, and that there is one who justifies the ungodly; if they
be returning backsliders: that it is more pride then humility to keep from
Christ merely for a man's unworthiness of Christ.

Thirdly, Christ works in the heart a true persuasion, on Scripture-ground,
that himself and all his benefits are made over to such a person in
particular, that he may know that his Redeemer lives, that he shall see him
for himself, Job 19. 25.
that he is his God, his Lord, his Savior, his Mediator, his Intercessour,
his Advocate at the Throne of grace.

Christ's third act is a building of them: when Christ has prepared 1 Pet. 2.
5. Heb. 3. 6.
materials, then he falls to building.

Christ builds Christians.

First, by keeping them and all their graces in continual action: there are
sometimes fightings without, fears within, to exercise 2 Cor. 7. 5.
grace, to quicken faith, patience, and watchfulness: God suffers sometimes
one corruption to get strength, sometimes another, to keep them doing, as well
as believing, fighting as well as falling: sometimes unruly passion strives to
reign, then the Spirit strives that patience may have its perfect work, at
another time worldly sorrow fills the whole man, then the strife is, that all
sorrow may be turned into sorrow for sin: now cares of the carcass eat a man
and his comforts up, then means is used that the soul be cared for too, that
all cutting cares be cast on God, for he cares for his own, while Satan
tempts to despair: another while he tempts men to presume, this makes work
for grace, does not weaken, but strengthen grace, for virtue gets strength by
wounds. Add to this, pride, vain Virescit vulnere, virtus.
glory, hearts hypocrisy, formalitie, sensuality, incredulity, infidelity,
deadness of heart, dullness in divine services, frowardness, untowardnesse,
unwatchfulnesse, coldness in affections, weakness in desires after Christ,
badnesse of memory, mispending mercies, time, talents, wantonness, abuses of
Christ's love, breach of bonds and Covenants, relapses, recidivations, and the
like.

Secondly, by infusing strength suitable to oppositions: some, like Pharaoh's
taskmasters require much work, but give no abilities thereunto; but Christ is
no such Master, if he lays burdens on a soul, he gives a heart and parts
able to sustain it. Which of his servants did e're come into great straights,
who had not great helps? Some have slept on the cold ground and were
healthful, when in public employments for Christ? whereas being wearied in
their own personal employments, though they have reposed themselves on beds
of down, been well fedd, and warmely clad; yet could they not have health and
life's vigor in them. Christminding Christians have said it: and has not he
promised to lay no more on you then you are able to bear? is not this a
specimen, that he is a merciful Master? if afflictions be many which surprise
the Saints, strength shall be given either of body or mind to uphold them.
When the Lord foresaw that Paul should be troubled, and much opposed in Acaiah,
be accused before Gallio; Acts 18. 14.
how think ye he was enabled for the encounter? 'twas thus: the Lord Christ
appeared to him in a vision, saying: Be not afraid, but speak, and hold ^ot
thy peace, ver. 9, 10.
for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: he had great
trials; but he had great strength: the strength of God was with him, the arm
of God wrought deliverance for him. In all afflictions God observes a mean, is
never in the extreme, he has said he will correct in measure, yet will not
leave men altogether Jer. 30. 11.
unpunished: he has a rod, and he has a staff as David speaks: yet so
pitiful is he, that Psalm. 23.
he will not cudgel a weakly child; for that were to break his bones, because
he is tender, and a switch, or rod may suffice. O soul! consider, thy Savior
can tell how much thou smart'st under every twigge he lays upon thee, and how
much thy heart breaks under every blow received from him: then consider;
would thou in patience possess thy soul, and self, under all thy
sufferings? thy abilities and difficulties are with thee in measure, given thee
by measure. And moreover, what though sin be a grace-weakning vice, yet if
grace be afforded in proportion, sin shall perish, when grace will flourish;
so well works God in the souls of his servants, and upon their spirits. Is
not this to be built up, and that upon the rock Jesus Christ, who is a never
failing, firm foundation? it is to grow according to the measure of the stature
of Christ.

It Is a causing of his to live only upon himself, and his glorious Father: to
live above all things; even those things which would be above them, and keep
them under. Shall I tell you, ye disconsolate souls! what Christ, first or
last, will cause you to live above? They Are such things as these.

First, Christ helps his to live above corruptions: would you know how? it is
thus, by giving souls a sight of pardoning promises, as well as a sense of
incensing sins, and imperfect services. Some pore too little, others so much,
upon their sins, that they have scarce a heart to ponder their Savior, or
any of his sweetest sayings; are listlesse lovers of the Lord Jesus. Sad
Souls! let me tell you, your sins do keep you under. Discouragements with
fears and distrust, have surpised you, got above you; and will not this
thing, if allowed of, make you go drooping, stooping, mourning to your graves?
what is of more force to kindle discomfort within your breasts? God would have
men be sensible of sin, stand, and go under it as under a heavy burden:
but shall sense of sin be such, as that it should hinder from the sight of
the Lamb, who is the means of escape from its evil, stain, filth, guilt, and
power? God forbid.

Secondly, Christ cause's his to live above temptation: and that is thus: When
they in the time of greatest temptation, being assaulted, are made to reassault
Satan, and stand, or else if they do fall, makes them fight even falling, with
their weapons in their hands: when though they are slaughtered, foiled and do
fall, yet they cannot be overcome. As he said of persecuted Christians Occidi
poterant, vinci non poterant, Cyprian. Deo duce non potest esse dubious belli
eventus, Eraz. Mar.
. And can the event of that fight be doubfull, where the Lord is the Leader? I
trow not. Christ makes Christians do like himself in such a case; retort back
the Serpents own subtle arguments to him again. When Satan alleged
Scripture to allure Christ to sin, he alleadges Scipture to prove he should
not tempt the Lord God; but serve him: Mat. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
so, when Satan censures a soul to his face, and which is more, even to and
before the face of God, should he do. Does the Tempter suggest unto thee. Thou
art a castaway, art wicked, and therefore thy self, and services are an
abomination to the Lord, that many better than thy self are in Hell, that thou
art an hypocrite, do but dissemble, wilt fall away, come to nothing, have
sinned against the Holy Ghost, and that thy day of grace is past? it is sweet to
reply as he, who art thou that condemnest? it is a Christ that died, yea
rather, that is risen again, who is ever at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. Therefore Satan get thee hence; for thou savourest
not the things which be of God, and thou should not thus tempt the servants
of Christ, who are one with him, as 'twere bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, and much more. Thus not to give place to temptation, is to overcome it,
and live above it; it is to be firmly built upon the rock of ages, Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, Christ in building helps some to live above gracious evidences: and
that after this manner: working the soul to a close with, and dependence upon
an absolute promise, when the glory of an evidence, from the conditional
promise, is eclipsed.

There Is a time when some of Gods dear children stagger, betwixt the promises
and conditional performances. Gracious spirits! you can tell, that this is
your very case. Alas for some! how hardly do they live, and how uncheerefull
do they spend their days on earth: because the Comforter, who should releeve
their souls, is far from them? as the Church once said.

Others also would be glad at the heart, could they graspe Christ in the
precious Promise, by a precious Faith; and what hinders this? even this is the
thing, corruption and carnal reason intervenes, comes between the soul and
home. Hence objections are raised against God, Gospel, Christ, Promise, self,
and all; because the evidence is darkened, does not at all exist. To support
such, build up such, it pleases the Father of mercies, as well as Spirits, to
convince and persuade the soul, that he will supply what is wanting, will heal
backslidings freely, work both will and deed fully, and thus he sustaines
the soul in life, raises it up as it were from the grave of despair, and
dismal distress.

Fourthly, Christ help's some to live above glorious manifestations of his
Fathers love. It Is after this sort, viz: when in the absence of those
manifestations, just ones are made to live, and rejoice in the invisible
essence of God; viz. when they live and rejoice in the Lord, when they see him
not, and that with Joy unspeakeable and full of glory: when a Christian can
live waiting on him, who has hid his face from him, as the Prophet said he
would do: it is an easy thing to swim when the head's held up; but it is a
singular thing to be kept from drowning, when the whole man's kept under water.
Christians! through Christ you may and can do singular things: this is one:
when the Sun is no more thy light by day, neither for brightness Isa. 60. 19.
does the Moon give light unto thee, yet the unseen Lord's to thee an
everlasting light, and thy God's thy glory. When, as the Church said, Micah 7,
8.
thou sit in darkness, yet have determined the Lord shall be a light unto
thee. When, as Paul said, thou see no light of Sun, Moon, or Stars
appear for many days, and yet can live like a child of light in thickest
darkness: tell me, tell me, thou spiritual soul! is not this to live above
even glorious manifestations of dearest love? if not: what is it then? verily,
verily I say unto thee, thou that so live, live by Christ, like Christ,
with him, in him, whilst he thus acts in thee, for thee, and by thee.

Thirdly, Christ builds his: and that he does by cherishing and nourishing
them with heart-ravishing comforts and solicitations. Christ's coming into a
soul is very restorative, his being solicitous with her is very instructive:
when he comes to her, much good comes along with him; for he never comes into
an empty heart with an empty hand. He fills the hungry with good things.
Satan's all for emptiing the soul of good things; but Christ is all for
filling: Christ makes his abound toward Heaven and heavenly minds. Did you
ever see such a guest, you keepers of his Temple! which is within you, which
you have of him? does not his custom make you rich to keep open house for
ever? Alas my friends and worthies of the other world! when he first used your
hearts, his house, you were worth nothing, had nothing but sin, that is
nothing, it is but vanity, emptiness: what insides had you? and how unclean
were they? and were your outsides ought but bodies of unsanctified parts? what
were all your members less than weapons of unrighteousness, raised up both
against your selves and Savior also? was not your whole man a slave of Satan,
his captive prisoner? now when he repaires you, puts a glory upon you,
dispossesses Satan in you, fills your hearts with himself, does he not then
build you up as a spiritual house for himself? True Converts! answer to the
question, is not this one thing that Christ has done for you, in your
conversion from sin to himself? is not this course the means of bringing
and breeding up your souls; for the heavenly Academie above? is not this to
make you fit to be partakers of that inheritance of the Saints in light? Does
Col. 1. 12.
not this kindness deserve a giving thanks to the Father, who has made you so?

Fourthly, Christ confirms his; even those he will save.

First, by giving them some setlednesse of Spirit, concerning their final
condition; the knowledge of what a man shall be in the end, and for ever, is
the great Question; and most stated by some: and when the Spirit speaks, that
it shall be everlastingly well, then the soul's safe. What breeds doubts,
fear's and distrustings, so much as this? whence are those cries? I am a
wretch, shall be damned, and go to Hell* am a castaway, have deceived many,
and am deceived my self, whilst I seemed what I was not, and so beguiled my
own soul. There Is no mercy for me, I have so sinned against it: Christ dyed
not for me, such a one as I, there is much in God; but nothing for me, my
heart's hardened against the use of means. Is It not hence? their unacquaintance
with the certainty of what their condition shall be? for then, the Serpent
subtly winds himself in; and makes the condition of such to be worse than
it is. Now, when Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, does arise, shining into,
and upon that soul, all those mists of ignorance and error are soon
disper'd, and then at the last the unsettled soul is made steadie, you cannot
move it: though fears arise, and doubts be many, and trialls more, yet this is
the result of all in such a soul; well, let God do what he will with me,
I Will hang on him: though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. I have many rubs
in my heavenly race; but I shall get through all at last: I am often brought to
call in question what my final estate is: but yet I cannot say but God has
done something in me, sure I am, I would not allow of sin for all the world,
and, if my heart deceives me not, I would be better then I am, would feign love
God, serve him and fear him, that is my desire, and I do not sin; but I am
troubled at it, troubled in the actings, and it brings me on my knees to the
God of pardons. Thus it pleases Jehovah to work secretly the souls
settlement in a fit season, which may fitly be called Christ's way of bringing
up his children.

Secondly, by assuring them of his ability, and activitie to keep them from a
total Apostasy, and fatal destiny. Will you know how, confirmed Christians
speak? It Is thus. When I fall I shall arise. God, first, or last, fastens
Micah 7. 8.
that truth upon the soul, which the Psalmist speaks of: Viz: that, though a
good man fall he shall not be utterly cast down: and what is the reason? for
the Lord upholds him with his hand. Fears, of falling from Christ in
tribulations that attend Christians, or toward the close of time, keep some
under, makes them sad, till Christ confirms them, and makes them glad.
Persevering grace! thou art a Jewel, and happy is that soul that has thee,
and holds out to the end.

HEB. 11. 13, 14, 15 16. And they confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things declare plainly, that they
seek a Country: And truly, if they had been mindful of that Country, from
whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned: But now
they desire a better Country, etc.
CHAP. III. Of the Saints perigrination in this evil world.
HEavenly minds, whilst ranging through an earthly Region, are far from
their heavenly home: this world's a strange Country to the worthies of the
other: Days on earth, are but days of pilgrimage to heirs of Heaven, and
few, and evil, are all of them: the wise in heart, covet to escape the foolish
snare, of placing souls rest, and happiness in earthly contentments: loath
are they, that full Barnes, fair structures, goods, heaped up for many years,
should keep them out of their own Country; the Canaan above: for this were to
dwell in a strange land for ever, or else in some worseplace: Citizens of
Heaven are strangers here.

We'lshew you first, what it is to be a stranger. Secondly, whence it is.
Thirdly, the use you are to make of it.

FIrst, it is to be there, where a man's out of his proper place, as a fish on
the dry Land; and this is the case of all Saints under the Sun: when a man
has holiness, Heaven's his home: he may seek the things of this world, yea
great things; but not for himself, for God has said, seek them not: he is to
be, for Christ, as well as to do for him, and to seek things which are
above, where Christ sits, at the right hand of God: he may use this world; but
it must be so, as Col. 3. 1.
though he used it not: holy hearts! you may love things below, in measure,
putting bounds to your love; but you may not set your affections, fix them upon
these things, lodge them in, and on these things here.

When you are about to set them, (says the Apostle) set them on things which are
above: and why? ver. 2, 3.
for your life is hid with Christ, in God; speak out, you Denizens of Heaven!
Do not you survive in Christ? dwell in him? Is this world your own, and only
home? will you hear, what other strangers have said, that did precede you?
'twas this, our conversation is in Heaven. You Phil. 3. 20.
Saints, and servants of the most High! when you dwell much in, and upon the
world; you do not like your selfs, refined, but like your selves, depraved:
not like strangers in the earth, and sojourners in the world; but like great
householders, lasting, earthly inhabitants.

Secondly, He Is a stranger who lives, under the dominion, of a strange King:
the children of this world live under the reign of the God of this world; who
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, so as that they are waxen
fat, and full; as though they lacked nothing, if not, what means their
subjection, laying down of their necks, to the yoke of the Laws, customs,
fancies, and fashions of this world? what is the reason, they follow the
multitude to sin; and drink in iniquity; as the fish does water? Is It not
hence? they are under the rule, and Regiment, of the Prince that rules in the
air; and works in the children of disobedience: Profane souls! does not
this speak you, strangers in Heaven? and unto the life of holiness, without
God in the world? What can you say for your selves? and what reason can you
give, why that sentence of the Judge, should not pass upon you? which is, if
you amend not, you shall not enter into his rest: and making excuses, to keep
your selves from Christ, shall not taste of his Supper, eat of his dainties;
are your actions a captivation of your selves, and affections, to Christ: or
Satan, sin, and the flesh, who are Antichrists? Consider it sadly; for your
case is put seriously, as to the business in hand: Now the worthies of the
world to come, are strangers in this land; for this very reason, they have
another King; are the subjects of another Kingdom; and are guided, ruled, and
governed, by the Laws, and customs of that Country, which is above; whence
they come, and to which place, at the end of their travailes, and the travailes
of their souls, they shall return.

Believers! you are, or should be governed, by the Law of the Spirit of life: a
Law of love, an inwritten Principle received, from Father, Son, and Spirit;
so that were it possible, you should not know the Law Moral, yet would you not
be as Paul speaks Romans 2. 14.
of some justly; a Law unto your selves? would not grace command you, and the
divine nature, constrain you, into a dutiful frame? do not dutiful children
love to do duties to their Parents? Not to be, and do, like sons, is to
force an abdication from the Father: what! could Heathens, having no Law, do
the things contained in the Law; and that by nature? and shall Christians do
less with grace, which does so much excel, the most refined nature? The
Apostle affirms, they had an inwritten principle; viz. the work of the Law,
written in their hearts: so, Christ's familiars! make report, do not your
souls long to be subject unto Christ? are not you under his Dominion, if so,
that proves you, blessed pilgrims, and strangers here.

Thirdly, he is stranger-like, Ad placitum Principis.
who, lives in a land, or leaves it, only at the pleasure of the Prince; such
strangers are Saints here; when God the King of Saints pleases, their beings
must receive their periods: God has put bounds to earthly beings; and it is
from the good pleasure of his will, to Christ's co-heires.

Strangers to Heaven as well as strangers on earth, have bounded

But it is not pleasure, it is displeasure: it is but his willingness to show his
wrath, and make his power known, that he endures, with much long suffering,
the Romans 9. 22.
vessels of wrath, fitted, to destruction (says the Apostle.) What though all
things come alike to all (as the wise man speaks) and that there is one event
to the Righteous and to the wicked; yet there is Eccles. 9. 2.
Gods good will appearing to the one, whilst his ill will breaks forth in the
events of the other: the good man has peace in his end, whilst there is no
peace to the wicked says my God; but they are like to the raging seas which
cast up mire and dirt. Saints are here at the good pleasure of their Prince,
and therefore stranger-like on earth, so also is their substance with them at
the good pleasure of his will: get what they can, God will have the disposing
of it in love. You see then, heavenly Inhabitants! you are not this worlds
children, that, the house you must put on, is a house from Heaven,
immortality, everlasting life: 2 Cor. 5. 2.
and this is that home the Lord would have you groan earnestly for, that you
may be clothed therewith.

Fourthly, he is a stranger, who has double duties and burdens laid upon him,
because he is not a peculiar native of that Country where he dwells: such are
Saints while in the body, and dwelling here; for they have burdens of their
own to bear, and they also bear the burdens of other men.

First, of their own? they have that, made burdensome to them, which is not
made so to others, to earthly men: sin is their burden, both the sins of
themselves and others: though God has laid the iniquity of Saints on his
Son, that they shall never be their burden hereafter, and that themselves
shall never feel their weight for future; yet has he made their weight
heavy to them, whilst in the body. My iniquities are gone over my head, and
are a burden too heavy for me. The good man could not stand under the
burden, when the cry of his crime was ascended on high, and tells you he has
no rest in his bones, nor soundness in his flesh, by reason of his sin. That
he is troubled with it, and bowed down greatly: that it makes him go mourning
all the day long. What though it is better to feel their pressures here, than
lie under them in Hell? yet, in that they are a burden to Saints here, and not
to sinners, it demonstrates them strangers in this world. For men of this world
find not sin ponderous in them, they can swallow it down without any the
least dislike, check, or curb given to it. But sinners! what though you're
incensible now? you shall find your sense of feeling hereafter. I can guess at
your diseases: suffering grieves you more than sinning? sin is your Heaven,
such as it is: if not; what means your complaining and crying out of the one,
but not of the other?

Secondly, burdens of others: the sin that others feel not, because it is in
them as its proper place, even that (I say) makes the Saints know sorrow. A
righteous soul's vexed, fretted, sadded from day to day, whilst he 2 Pet.
1.8.
hears, sees, and observes the unlawful deeds of men: and 'twas such a
trouble to the Prophet, that rivers of waters ran down his eyes, for the
breach of the Law: viz. abundance of tears shedd he for other men's sins:
whereas, alas! in this age, men are seldom seen to weep for their own sins.
Oh England! thy people grow in knowledge, but not in practice; they are all for
speculation. Many of thy people know sin; but few there are who have a heart to
sorrow for sin. I Will tell thee thy disease; thou art Judgment sad, but not
sin sad: Joy has so much transported some (whether headie or hearty, let
experience speak) that there is little growth of other graces found. Faith,
Love, Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, Mercifulness, and Brotherly kindness
are rarities in these tottering times. Ah Lord! what will the end of these
things be? English Atheists! must Saints bear your burden here? what then?
why? you shall bear't your selves hereafter: ungrateful hearts! you have
melting Prophets, whose souls weep in secret places for your pride, whose
eyes weep sore, and run down with tears on your behalf; such strangers
have burden enough, and more then they can bear, did not God lay help on one
that is mighty: they have burdens of suffering too. Both their own and others:
the Saints have many real fears, sorrows, sufferings, fightings, and
smitings, within; which the children of this world feel not, many sower
morsells, and many a bitter cup which others taste not of; is not this to be
used like a stranger? what fears of falling? cares of standing? desires of
believing, living, and loving the Lord Jesus, are there found in them, that are
not elsewhere? and are there any sorrows like to theirs? Children of this
world are safe in the hands of Satan, who acts them, and works in them; hence
they are not disturbed, not molested, and tormented by him, as Gods children
be; who can have no rest in the world by reason of him, and sin which is his
creature: when any rest they take, it is in him whose dwelling is far above
this unworthie station. Strangers can hardly live in a strange Land, such is
the opposition they have from sundry causes. Soldiers of Jesus Christ endure
hardship, whilst in the Church Militant: add to this, the sufferings of
others, who is weak, and 2 Timothy 2. 3. 2 Cor. 11. 29.
they are not? offended, and they burn not? afflicted, and their bowels yerne
not, stir not? certainly there is a sweet nearness, and blessed dearnesse of
affections, betwixt united members of Christ's body mystical: for their
affections do all run in one, and the same vein; a vein of 3 Ep. Ioh 1. 7.
truth, as those who love in truth, knowing truth, and for the truths sake.
When God brought evil on I^m. 3. 1. to 25.
the Church, Jeremiah cries out, I am the man that have seen affliction by the
rod of his wrath. I am brought into darkness, he has turned his hand against
me, he has broken my bones, co^pass'd me with gall and travel, made my chain
heavy, has shut out my prayer, and as for the wormwood, and the gal, my soul
has them still in remembrance: with many expressions of like importance. And
Paul was but one Member of the Church; yet there came upon him daily, 2 Cor.
11. 23.
the care of all the Churches, he bare their burden, as well as his own; and
so fulfilled the Law of Christ. The like to Paul is the case of some now: Some
one Christian takes care for all the Churches: surely then these acts, so
strange to the world, must needs prove Saints to be strangers here. But whence
is it, and why does God serve his sons and daughters thus? put them into a
strange Land? Let them live for a time so far from home? whence is it he puts
them into the hands of this world, which is so unkind a nurse, to them, and
whatsoever else is his? we will show you whence it is that so kind a father puts
his children into such an unkind world.

First, that they may see the vast difference, which is betwixt earth and
Heaven: unsanctified ones see no difference betwixt the one and the other,
all is alike to them: could they live below, and know no wants, not meet with
changes, have their hearts desire, they would seek no other Heaven, be
content to live below, and not above the world: for Christ's unsavourie and
very fulsome to such full hearts: selfesufficient ones, who bar out the
sufficiences of Christ, keep at a distance from him: sensual selfecontent
with seen things, and seeing is believing with such an one: Besides this, Rest
is sweet to the labourer, as the Proverb is; so Heaven's then exceeding good to
the godly, after their wearied stepps, and long and irksome travailes on
earth: mercies are best, when most missed: Heaven is to Saints as the Inn to
the traveller, a great refreshment: Heaven is by so much the more glorious, by
how much Earth's ignoble.

And was it not the Lords intention, that a Rest should remain for the children
of God, when the time of refreshment should come from his presence? Is not this
to put a difference betwixt rest and trouble? what does it more? Saints are bid
to run ne the race that is set before them. Now you know there is a great
disparitie betwixt the beginning, middle, and end of a race: these honest
footmen have great weariness, trouble, and rubbs; yea, sometimes falls and
bruises in their heavenly race; but the end is in Heaven, and there is rest,
with reward in fullness.

Secondly, to glimpse out glory to a faithless people, by persons under their
own form: that his light may shine in them, and from them in the midst of a
perverse generation: there is much of the glory of God in his Image on the
godly: he could take them hence, and state them in Heaven, as soon as they
open the womb; but that evil men may see there is some that love him, and live
like him, as well as others that slight him, and live like the Prince of
darkness: Do not these children of blessed light let the world see, by their
conversation, what a life their Father leads and lives? note this well:
earthly men are much led by examples of men, and God sends good men to give
examples to the bad; yea, he has sent a good Christ, who has left an example,
that all should tread his stepps. This takes off the cloak of excuse from the
back of sin, now men have seen, there is no cloak for their sin; because
there is nothing imitable and observable, in any person, or thing, which may not
be found in Christians, or Christ; in one, or other the sons of God.

Thirdly, besides this; God sends some into the world, even their strange Land,
and place of captivity, to save others from fatal ruin, for a time: the
Saints being in this world supports many, and keeps them alive: God would soon
put an end to such cumberers of the ground, did not his sons stand in the
gap: then unkind world! how can thou abuse such props of thy peace as these
be? when Lot's out of Sodom, the whole is set on fire: so when all the Lords
righteous Noah's are got into the arc Christ, and Heaven; the whole world's
destroyed with fire; for the Spirit has said it, who cannot lie: that
vengeance shall be taken 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.
by sire, when troubled Saints shall have rest, and when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not his Gospel: who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorisied in his Saints, and
admired by all them that believe, and then shall the wicked themselves be
revealed too, with all their sligh secret tricks and shifts, whom the Lord
shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming: as the same Apostle affirms. Then consider these
things, profane 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
souls! esteem these strangers more, least that you incur the displeasure
of God, and your beings here be of no value, no long duration.

Fourthly, God sends his hither to dispose of them for higher things: some are
sent to lesser schools, to fit them for exercise in greater places: this
world's the school of the Cross to the Saints, and when they have learned how
to bear a Cross, they shall wear a Crown: when they have learned to be
sustained under a loss, they shall inherit all Christ, and whatsoever is
gain: Saints must enter heaven; but it is, as the Scripture speaks, through
many tribulations. Gold is not pure, if not tried, water's not sweet without a
current: Vessels are not bright, if not scowred; nor are Saints fit to enter
Heaven, if not prepared: Hence, that saying: Give thanks to the Father, who
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance, of the Saints in Light:
made us, we are not found meet, but the Lord makes us meet, while we are
survivers in this world: holiness, and heavenly mindedness in Saints, is
their fitness for Heaven and happiness: and suffering fits for reigning: our
light afflictions, if we be 2 Cor. 4. 17.
sons of God, work for us, or work us unto, as the word signifies, a more
exceeding weight of glory.

Light afflictions to exceeding massy glory, and momentarie sufferings fit us
for, work us to, eternal reigning. God prepared Mat. 25. 34.
for his children a Kingdom before the foundation of the world, and the same
God prepares them to be fit Subjects for such a Kingdom, yea, and which is
more, to be fit Princes and Kings in that Kingdom: he has washed away their
sins in his own blood, and has made them Kings, and Priests unto God, and
his Father: says the Spirit to the seven Churches of Rev. 1. 5, 6.
Asia.

Fifthly, that grace might have a being, as well as Glory: grace has a being
only in the gracious here, and had not God brought them into this strange
Land, where should especial grace have existed, save in the breast of its
Original? true it is, there had been glory to God on high: as the Angels sang,
when they appeared to the Shepherds; but where would have been peace on earth,
and good will toward men, if God had not brought forth his chosen vessels, to
make peace with them, make known his good will toward them? what brought the
babe Jesus into the womb and world, bred him up in the shape of a man, made
him do and suffer like a God; but the power and good pleasure of his Father,
for his childrens good, whom he knew would be strangers in this world? and is
not the Kingdom of grace on earth, in the hearts of these strangers? where
is it else? how are all the manifestations of grace, and favor from God made
apparent; but to his chosen? being here, they are here to be called,
sanctified, justified, and saved from hence. Oh great mysteries and rarely
observed of any! Now to apply: would you know your state, and relation in
which you stand, as to the business in hand? then note these things and mark
them well.

1. What price do you put on to rid himself from such feculent matters here,
and out of the greatness and goodness of his Spirit, with the nobleness of
his divine disposition, is altogether ambitious of the presence of the Lamb,
and immutable good things. Strangers on earth can tell you the truth of this
Relation: and you, Denizens of Heaven! tell me, has not God wrought your heart
to this frame? if he has not, he will do it first, or last: for the Citizens
of Heaven set not much by the best things on earth, when they are themselves,
and act like their Savior.

Secondly, a stranger on earth is known by his Language: thou art a Galilean,
for thy speech bewrayes Mat. 26. 73. Mark. 14.70.
thee: Or as another Evangelist, thy speech agrees thereunto: so one who is a
Citizen of Heaven is known by his speech; he speaks a language different
from the worlds natives: the Scriptures tell you of a sound speech which cannot
be condemned: that is the language of Heaven, and all its Natives: whereas the
children of this world have a putid, unfound, rotten language; such as the holy
Lord cannot own, but will call to account for every idle Col. 4. 6.
word that is spoken by them: hence the Apostle moves the Church of the
Collossians to speak, like Christ, words with grace, seasoned, as with salt;
that have the savor of God in them: and in the new Covenant, the Lord bound
himself to give to his children a pure language, that they might call on the
Zep. 3. 9.
name of the Lord with one consent. What Is all this, but to show, that he would
have them differ from other people, be known by their speech? a Christian
should be known by his discourse, in all societies: what though sinners can
speak the language of Saints; yet Saints should not speak the language of
sinners: will you hear how these spoke, who are now in Heaven? 'twas thus; as
they were allowed of God, not as they who please men, but God which approves 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
the heart: and can the heart be good when the speech is bad? the Scripture
says nay, and in this the worlds Proverb may convince it, viz. As is the man
such is his speech: unclean speakers! a word to you, your speech bewraies you
too: shows you are earthly men, have earthly minds; for out of the abundance
of the heart, the mouth speaks. What will you do in the day of inquisition
for sin, the great and terrible day of the Lord? Dare you use unclean speech
then, before the spotless Lamb of God, and Judge of quick and dead? if so,
use it now: if not, shun it, that Christ may give you a discharge from that,
and all other your sins.

Thirdly, a strangers mind and motion's homeward: he may be where he lacks
nothing, is well accommodated, has many friends and more pleasures; yet still
his heart's at home, his mind's carried thither, and all his motion's that way:
(for home's homely, as we say) it is even so with men of the high Country,
whilst in this low Region: Paul tells you, he pressed forward after the
mark: he was in the world, and enjoyed enough for a stranger too; but yet his
mind was with Christ, and in Heaven, his own Country; his motion was that way
also: and was it not his good opinion of his heavenly home, that caused those
words to fall from him; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And
why? for it is best of all, I have Christ while I live; but when I die, I shall
have gain: what motive more strong, to provoke to longings after heavenly
mansions? Children of God! hie you home, for the night draws on, and the
posting Sun of worldly Joys, treasures, and pleasures, is almost set, let
the Lord then try your hearts and search your reins in this respect; for if
you be strangers, 'twill thus be known: ask your hearts this question,
whither, and to what place, or end do all my actions and motions tend? when
you draw nigh to God querie thus: what do I approach his holy presence for?
is it to put on my house from Heaven? is it, that my love may be lessened to my
earthly Tabernacle? say to thy soul in the night season: where have I been?
what have I done, this by past day, and to what end did my being and doing
tend? some men's pains, cares, and fears tend to intomb them in the world,
bury them in the earth: these are not strangers here, are not in a strange
land. Earthly souls and sensual! Look about you, and consider your estate:
for heavenly ones are lost in God, drowned in Christ, Heaven's their home.

Fourthly, strangers in a strange land content themselves only with things
needful, as they pass through the land of their pilgrimage: aspire not after
any great matters; If they mind their home sincerely: is it not as true of such,
who are Citizens of Heaven? a little contents them, when they are themselves.
Paul had learned what ever his condition was, therewith to be contented: and
why? 'twas because he was a stranger, and his hope of the things of this world
was very little. So, honest hearted Israel desired but food and raiment, and
then promised the Lord should be his God: so Abraham was content to dwell in
Tents, who might have had stately Heb. 11.9. 10.
structures, to show he was in a strange Country, and looked for a City
which has foundations, whose maker and builder is God: and me thinks, I
should hear all sayings of Saints about outward things, to hold harmony with
that of Agur: Lord give Prove. 29.8, 9.
me neither poverty nor riches, but seed me with food convenient; and on the
same ground, he had: left you be full and deny him: which, it is a thousand to
one, you will do, and then say, who is the Lord? or being poor, steal, and so
take the name of your God in vain: add to these, two things more, to cause
content in strangers.

First, fullness is only at your own home: if you look for it here, you do
but beat the air; for it has pleased the Father that all fullness should
dwell in Christ: now when you are at your Fathers house, and have Christ in
your arms, you may say you're full* have bread enough; but never till then:
does not the wise man tell you that all is vanity under the Sun: viz:
vacuitie, emptiness, and lightness: it has left the creature, (as we said
before) you must be above the natural Sun, before you can epsy, or take in
a spiritual fullness: and, is it not better to have it there, where you may
hold it? Lay these things among your cutting cares, and careful thoughts, and
then you shall find those thoughts will be eaten up of these; the lesser things
will be lost among the greater. When David doated much on the world, what was
the issue? 'twas this, he thought himself a fool for so doing; tells the Lord
he was ignorant, and as a beast, a bruit before him. Psalm. 73.


And at last, he sweetly sings, whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is
none on earth that I desire besides thee: then he had enough; and beloved
strangers! let me tell you, you either have, or shall have enough too: as the
Proverb is: for when you awake you shall be satisfied with the Lords Image: at
the Resurrection, God will make you amends (I am sure) for all your hard
measure that you receive in this strange land.

Secondly, unnecessarie things: things you need not, are not in straights for,
are but as lumber, and luggidge, which will hinder you, and press you down as
you're running your heavenly race. Does not experience teach, that some have
more of the worlds wealth, than they can tell how to use? does not that hinder
in heavenly engagements? I know nothing more obstructive. Oh! how good is God
to his, then, when he rids them of needless luggidge, strips them of seen
things, that he may cloth them with unseen things, an invisible,
incorruptible, immortal substance? does not one staff support the Traveller
when a bundle of staves brings him under. Oh then! that all, who intend for
Heaven, would seek no more provision for the journey, then will help them
thither. Oh soul! will it not grieve thee to consider, that when thou have
certainly thought thou art as high as Heaven, thou shall by an evil world be
laid as low as Hell? be then in earnest a stranger to it, and in it? for to be
a stranger to the other world, will hinder from entering into thy Masters Joys.

Fifthly, strangers engage not themselves, too much, in the affairs of the
Natives of strange lands: strangers must not be medlers, as the Proverb is.
Citizens of Heaven! would you show your selves to be strangers here? plunge not
your selves too deep then in the negotiation of the Natives of this world; who
make it their business, to be mighty, wealthy, honorable, pleased and
pleasur'd here: but do not you do so; meddle not with that their business;
hasten home, and why? for their's most might, wealth, pleasure, and treasure,
in heavenly places. What can you think of, which is in this world, and is not
in your Fathers house?

And now, you strangers! you! be not loath then, neither fear to leave this
strange land: would you hasten to your journeyes end? is your heart at home?
let these things then give life to your endeavors that way.

First, till you leave it, you're far from your best friends, and chiefest
favors. When the prodigal child was from his Fathers house, it is said he was
in a far Country: and is not your case the same; who dwell in God? What! are
husks, hardly got, so good? what! shall they be more in esteem than bread?
if you will not come from among the swine, your Father will fetch you: it is
better then, to go and meet him, while his arms are open to receive you, his
head bowed to salute you, and his heart drawn out to feast you, feed you,
cloth and adorn you with Jewels. Consider, your father is of another
Country, he, that begot you again, lives in Heaven, a great way hence: and
what are you here for, but to dispatch your Fathers business? as Jesus told
his Mother. Are not you the Lords factours? and must factours stay always
abroad? what! shall they forget their native Country, and not hasten to it?
who, that is wise, does not strive lawfully to be at his heavenly home? What!
know you not that your Father's your best benefactour? Besides, your spiritual
brethren and sisters, with all your holy acquaintaince, are within those
heavenly places: a godly child may have his thoughts running out on his godly
parents deceased; a husband his thoughts on his wife, and on the contrary, the
wife on her husband: but alas! they cannot see their faces till God has taken
them out of this strange land: who then would be wedded to this world, and not
rather weaned from it, and married to the Lord? Yet further, your portion and
dowry is above, also: your reward's with the Lord in the land of the living:
how then can you like to dwell in a land, where there is such dying of persons
and portions? some live by bread only, in a sense; but children from on hie
cannot: the mind or soul is the man, as we say, and that cannot, may not
survive in such a manner, by such means.

This strange land can only minister to the body, has not one savourie
morsel for the soul; does rather contaminate and desile the soul, than
refresh it. O divine, Celestial soul! it is the safest way for thee then, to
fly from this strange land in all thy motions, as from the face of a Serpent.

Secondly, you should not be loath to leave it, when providence will have it
so; for till then you will be foiled, vexed, and soiled with filthy sins:
they will bear you down, keep you under, bring you low, when you would be on
high with God in the Heavens: whilst the soul is in the body, sin lodges
with her, will have room as well as she. Oh! how unrulie a guest is sin?
Besides, here, in this strange land, you cannot sing your Hebrew songs so
sweetly, with such fullness of Joy, as in your own Country: if this world,
which sometimes inthrals you, should require of you songs, bid you be merry.
Alas! this is no place for such Joy, as is a Joy of heart: hearty Joy is in
Heaven, and me thinks I should hear such a voice from Christians, as was
heard in the Temple before the fall of the Jews, Migremus hinc, let us go
hence, let us go hence. Thus, as children learn to speak, and delight in the
language of their Parents; so should you, in imitation of Christ.

Finally, I beseech you, if you be strangers, that you would, as Pilgrims and
strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Spirit: so
says the Lord of Rests: for certainly sin cannot enter Heaven. Oh! what a
blessed good would it prove to you? if you would be and do now, what you are
willing to be and do then, when purest glory must make the scrutinie for,
and into impurest sins.

1 CORINTHIANS 15. 51, 52. Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed, etc.
CHAP. IV. Of the Saints last and best change.
MUtable man has made his times variable, Adam changed his mind, and God
changed his mansions. Paradise could not hold him, who held not God in his
thoughts; let go an unparaleld good. When man altered his doing, God altered
his being. All changes are our own, the Lord has said he change's not.
Mutation by sin was the malady, but mutation by grace and glory is the
remedy: man has changed for the worse, yet man is changed for the better,
that is the mystery. Man has made himself mutable, yet the immutable God will
translate him into an immutable estate of good: though the changes of life be
many, yet a change by death deprives them of beings. He Is best that lives at
rest, can never alter more: Now there remains such a rest for the people of
God.

Saints have their appointed time of change. We Will therefore show you what a
change is: next the several sorts of changes, and then the use of them; even
after this manner.

FIrst to be changed, is to have a different manner of being; it is the
cessation of a person or thing, from being what it once was. We Will now show you
what the changes of this world be, and then the sundry kinds of them: thus.

1. Either such as respect the body. 2. The soul or Spirit. And thirdly, such
as concern them both jointly.
First, external changes. Saints whilst in the body are children of change,
nor can their enjoyments of life be found immutable. Certainly the sorrows
of life, exceed the pleasures of the living: strange are the turnings of
things, as well as times. The turning of riches into poverty, Plenty into
scarcity, Health, into sickness, Joy into heaviness show, that all seen good
is short lived. The Lord's arrows stick fast in some, and fester foully.
Children of change! tell me (if you can) how soon is a friend-like amity
turned into a foe-like enmity, even in these our days? How do friends start
aside like a broken bow, from fidelity, to Treachery? as Ephraim once did?
Consociation, and Communion, is now turned into Separation, and confusion;
shall I give you the reason? it is the want of immutable, unchangeable love.
Husbands, and wives, Parents, and children, Masters, and servants, are rent in
sunder; by reason of some different opinions. Does not this speak out strange
alterations? What does it more? and what does all this, but imbitter the
comforts of a former communion? There Is nothing in this world found
long-lasting, God has added brevitie, as well as vacuitie, unto all outward
things. Secondly, there is a change of spirits too, God has given some, other
spirits then what they once had.

The Scripture tells you of a newness of Spirit, there is not an annihilation,
but a mutation in this respect. This is to have the hearts frame, turned into
Christ's frame, a corrupt mind, converted into the mind of Christ; Passion,
turned into Patitience, Pride into Meekness, hardness, into softness,
Loftiness, into lowliness. Hence the understanding makes right discoveries of
Christ, and self, the will inclines unto, and closes with, better objects
than it was wont to do. Then affections of love to sin, are turned into
hatred of sin: and nothing is so much beloved of him, as that Christ who
suffered for sin. If any evil be discovered, he shunnes it, if any good, he
embraces that, is right glad of that, oh how good is such a change! It Is a
comfort to see gross metal pure, dark air clear, a dead Lazarus live, and
be lively: But the comfort arising thence, is not worthy the name of comfort,
if compared to that comfort arising hence.

Thirdly, such a change as does refer to them both jointly, and that is a
change of life; a life of nature, into a life of grace, a life of grace into a
life of glory: the first is sweet, and good, viz. the life of nature, but the
second is sweeter and better, viz. that of grace: the third, the best and
sweetest life of all. Viz: that of glory. And it is always God's method with
those he will save, thus to turn nature into Grace; and Grace into Glory: and
that by one and the same Spirit, who works out nature, works in grace, and
works up the gracious unto Glory. Such a change is exceeding good, makes
exceeding glad: But alas! who can number the sorrows of such, as shall be
translated from under mercies, into everlasting miseries? from a pleasing
earth, into a tormenting Hell? Lord! what a sad, and bad change is this? and
what mortal can abide thy coming? oh that natural men then would become
gracious, that in fine they may become glorious! and let me tell thee who ever
thou art, such a change as this, will sweeten all other thy changes in this
world.

In a word, to be gloriously changed, is to have a vile body made like unto
the glorious body of Jesus Christ. But first, the livelie body, must be
turned into lifelesse Elements, whereof it is compounded. It Is a change of the
bodies materials, and elementarie qualities, and this last, even this is that
blissful thing our Apostle speaks of: this is that glorious Mystery which
merits observation. Behold, I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but
we shall all be changed. Oh renewed soul! Remember thou in all thy thoughts,
and ways, the worth, and comfort of this thy last, and best change: thus thy
Autumn is turned into a spring, thy heaviness of the night, into the Joy of
the morning, even the morning of the Resurrection. Now, that day come not on
you as a thief in the night, mind much these rules following.

1. Expect it. 2. Rejoice in it. 3. Suffer God to dispose you for it, expect
it, and that on these grounds.
1. Life's brevitie. 2. Death's certainty. 3. Your own Necessity.
Life's brevitie. What is life? it is said in the Scripture's that it is but a
show, and alas! what is Psalm. 39. 6.
that? it is but of a short aspect, though made very glorious by the skill of
the Artificer; and then it is shut up though the eye be not satisfied with
seeing. And elsewhere it is called a shadow, which Joh 8, 9.
if you do graspe, what have you gained? open your hands, and you will find it is
nothing: James 4. 14.
Besides, when the Sun is set, or the Medium of its Representation, it is
briefly forgotten, as a thing whose Idea was never in mind. It Is but a vapor
which the wind will soon dissipate, scatter, and disperse. A Post that hastens
name what you can that is of the swiftest wing, yet you will find life's speed is
greater; by which it hasten's out of the living, the posting Sun of worldly
wealth and greatness is set in an instant, in a moment. We every day stand
with our lives in our hand, as David phrases his days on earth. Life has many
out-lets, but few in-lets. There Is many ways to go out of the world, but
only one way into the world: and that passage is very dangerous too; some
have beings in the womb, and at last it is made their tomb, they never see the
world. Others bring to the birth, but want strength to bring forth. Job may
well called a flower; for though it is sweet; yet it is of an earthly breed: It
has a glory too; but the best glory of a flower must be preserved by a
shower, and when all is done it withers, and is lost at last.

Secondly, Deaths certainty: it will not fail you, 'twill find you wherever
you go: therefore when thy bones are full of marrow, and riches comes in as a
flood: Argue thus, yet I must die. Christexpecting Christians can tell you,
that a wife, a child, a friend, nor any of them, can be enjoyed for ever: That
their estates, comforts, and lives, are going, declining, will desert them, and
therefore do long for, and desire a change, after which they can change no
more.

It Is further clear thus. First, from Gods decree. It is appointed Heb. 9. 27.
for all men once to die. Secondly, from the constitution of our natures. Man's
nature is a composition 2 Cor. 5. 1.
of wasting ingredients, he is made up of dying materials; The Apostle calls
the body a house of earth; and know you not that earth may be and is
corrupted, does breed that which will infect, and infest it, with a noisome
stench? Besides, a house of earth is weak: and what is there, which has not
power on that which is weakness it self? Add to this, that a Tabernacle is
not made to last long, it is made on purpose for a short time of exigence, and
distress.

Thirdly, the defilements of our nature, they put us to the sword, murder us
in our comforts; have given being to this last change as well as others. Trees
and plants breed the worms which at last make them lifelesse, and so do we
serve our selves, and souls. If Adam give Romans 3. 12.
leave to sin, sin will give way to death. There Is no man living, who shall
not have his fit of dying; though the death of Saints be precious in the sight
of the Lord, yet die they must; for his only begotten son did not escape it.
What then though a man strive, repine, order his diet, entreat, and shun
occasions; yet as the Psalmist speaks, none shall deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave: Live he as long as Methuselah, yet must he die at last.
Grayheaded sinners! what mean you to stand it out with God so long, to break
with God for a trifle? what is your life, that should be spent, laid out for
him, and that he requires from you? It Is not worth the honor to be accounted
of force, to draw your souls from God. Oh then! make no more waste of time,
redeem it; for if Christ has redeemed you, you cannot squander away the whole
thereof, and give him none. Remember, it is a difficult thing to die well.

Thirdly, man's necessity, and that first in respect of the body. A
corruptible body, cannot enter into the incorruptible Heavens? it must die and
be changed: It must leave its filth in the grave, before it can be meet to
dwell in the heavenly places above. The body is now the substance and matter
of all diseases, putrifactions, infirmities, and deformities, although you take
in the comeliest Creature your eyes have seen within the bounds of this
observation: For is it not conceived in the likeness of flesh, heat of lust,
and stain of sin? the sensible Prophet sincerely confessed it. Besides, who
knows Psa. 51. 5.
not that knows Christ, that it is the livelie instrument of sin? The very
excrements of whose nostrills, ear's, pores, and other passages duly and
truly considered, will seem more loathsome then the uncleanest sink or
vault. Oh! what vile bodies have we! and how great need have we that they
should be changed, buried in the dust and refined? Trees and plants bring forth
leaves, flowers, fruits, and pleasant smells; But man's body brings forth
naturally nothing but vermin, worms, rottenness, and a filthy stench.
Lord! what is man that thou art mindful of him? and what has he to be proud
of, who is made of such materials?

First, in respect of the soul; that she may be freed from that discord which
is in the body, until the change comes; for whilst the body lives a
natural life, there is no business can be dispatched which concerns the
souls welfare, without a mutiny in the heart: the flesh is a homebred
enemy, a bosom Rebel, that is daily against the Spirit, because they are
contraries. The flesh, alas! forestalls all Divine motions, actions, and
endeavors, of the soul, and Spirit; and it begets, and breeds, an
indisposednesse toward them all; though all the ways of God be pleasantness,
and all his paths peace; yet this body of flesh will make them seem irksome,
burdensome, and full of trouble. Is It not high time then, that the body
should be changed? made a better servant to the soul? Besides it is sinne-sick
distempers are infanable, whilst it is here, for has it not brought on man a
certain necessity of sinning? so that we cannot but displease the highest
Lord.

Do you doubt of this? why the Scriptures tell you, that those who are in the
flesh cannot please God; that wretched Law of the Romans 8. 8.
members wars against the Law of the mind, and Spirit of life: which brings the
whole man into an insupportable bondage. This is man's misery in his uprisings,
and downe-lyings, a depraved nature Romans 7. 23.
is his associate, and as David speaks, innumerable evils do encompasse him
about; and have taken hold of him: that he is not able to look up to Heaven.
This bring's Psalm. 40. 12.
to mind a worthy saying of like concernment. O flesh, flesh! I can neither
live with thee, nor without thee. Now at the rebreathing in, or the re-uniting
of the soul, to its own proper person; the body shall be found
incorruptible: and that, even that; will be found the last and best
Resurrection.

Secondly, rejoice, in, and at the: whilst we are here we converse and
commerce with greatest sinners; and with innumerable sins: we, alas! walk
among the Tombs, with men that lie under the powers and pledges of the
everlasting death, persons who die living, and will at last live dying, and yet
never be dead. In this life, Gracious Christians! you hear the greatest
Majesty's name profaned; his ways blasphemed, truths defamed, and do see his
friends are foiled and spo'ld: But after death you shall never hear such evil
tidings any more. Who then, that is wise, will love, and long to live with the
dead; more then the living? or in the society of condemned persons, in a
noisome goal, rather than to have fellowship with the glorious Princes of God,
in the Heaven of matchless and endless glory? In this Babylon faithful
Jews are forced to hang their Harpes upon the willowes; are much disabled from
singing sweetly to the Lamb their Hebrew songs: certainly then all whose
mansions are with God; are, or should be, weary of this world: weaned from
this situation; peinched with the coldness of this climate; for this world
alas! is a great cooler to the heat of a gracious heart.

And were they as subject to it, as its children are, were they as much
entangled with it: Though now they may have a little heat, yet then they would
have none at all.

Secondly, 'twill free, and remove you from all carnal objects; then there
shall be no more Gold, nor greatness, to allure you from God: no sin, nor
sins pleasure to entice and bewitch you, lie prostrate before you: no self,
nor Satan, to tempt and entrap you: Good Lord! what a good case will thine then
be in? who? or what can express those joyous rarities, and transcendent
verities, of such glorious beings? Oh! how unsearchable are the riches of such
grace, and favor? Narrow hearts! open your selves, and the gates of your
souls, and let the King of glory come in: why should he be unto you as a
wayfaring man, that stays but for a night and is gone?

Thirdly, 'twill alter the nature of all your spiritual distresses: there
shall be then, no more doubts unresolved; no more sins, the 'ile be destroi'd;
no more graces unrevived: no more fears of final falling; no more queries
about the truth of your high calling, no more want of God, Christ, and the good
desired; no more dislike of, and from unknown Christians; no strangeness of
carriage among known members of Christ's body mystical. In a word, there
shall after this change, never be any more hearts hardness; minds blindness,
wills perverseness, loves coldness, zeales rashness, listlesse desires,
heartlesse prayers, tiresome spirit, or rebellious flesh; But, holy hearts! you
shall be God-like, Christ-like in all things.

3. Suffer God to dispose you for it, since 'twill come and you must be changed.
Men square wood before they build, discipline their Troops, e're they join in
battle; rigg, trim, and furnish their ships, ere they launch, put forth to
Sea: so God is fitting some, every day of life; for the day of death. Would you
know the way, by which the Lord effects this blessed fitness; for so glorious
a change? so great a work, as is the work of dying? observe then rightly,
these serious things in the sequel: God fits his children for such a decease,
thus.

First, by making the body of sin irksome to them. There are some, who with
David, have their sins ever before them; cannot forget them * are greevously
Psalm. 51. 3.
burdened with them, and their cry is such as this. Oh! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? This, even this has made some weary of the
world, yea, and weary of themselves too: all the while longing to be there,
where they might never see, or seele it more. Such had rather die a thousand
deaths, then live dishonouring him; in whose favor stands their life: and
whose loving-kindnesse is better than life; as David speaks. Hence also every
sanctified sorrow, and suffering, of this earthly life; puts him upon minding
his last and longed for home: every decay of strength, dimnes of sight, dulnes
of hearing, and disabilitie of being, and doing, with all sickness, weakness,
aches, and pains: these I say do forewarne him of his approaching decease. And
thus with Job he waits all the days of his life, until his appointed change
comes. Holy hearts! you're well acquainted with the state of this distress;
and therefore, you must sign, and seal to the truth of this experiment: yet
let not your hearts be troubled, for sins burden shall be removed, and you
your selves certainly secured, and saved.

Secondly, by making death to them desirable: this is a deathsweetning way: and
he acts in the business after this manner. First suggesting into their
thoughts, that when death surprizeth them it shall be stinglesse; and what is
the sting of death? why the Scriptures tell you it is sin: sin is deaths
Arrow, which when it is shot into the bowels of the soul, at the appointed
time of change, oh! how does it wound with horror, cut with amazement; and
pierce with dread, of a great, just, and glorious Majesty? And then, how does
the poor soul fester with despair, whilst she cannot believe, or hope to
be well, and do well, after death: who has been, and done, so ill, in time
of life. And certainly, if in life, there is no discharge from sin; in death,
the soul will greatly fear, if not thoroughly feel its discharge from Christ.

But to you that are in Jesus Christ, be this word spoken. The Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made you free; from the law of sin and
death: The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. viz.
sins Law; Romans 8. 1.2. 1 Cor. 1. 15.
for this place seems to explain the other.

Thus you are freed from both the power of sin and death also. I may add,
and the victory of the grave, which cannot imprison, or infringe your bodies
long; so long, as to retain you for ever. Give thanks then unto God, who has
given you the victory, through your Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and sing
with Paul, o death where is thy sting? o grave where is thy victory? For when
a poor soul considers within her self thus: well, I am now near my time of
change; I must leave the world: But Christ has promised that he will be with me
to the end of my course; and has also assured me, that my sins are forgiven,
and forgotten; I have a discharge from them, through the mercy of God. Is she
not then ready to cry out? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Death do thy
duty freely: and thus the poor, drooping, doubting Christian, lives dying;
yet never tastes of the second death. God acquits the soul in Justification
from sins guilt; and cleanses the soul through Sanctification from sins
filth; he that is washed from his old polutions, has the heavenly ornaments of
Christ's Spirit: He Is fit to solemnize a marriage with the Lamb. God also
persuades the soul, that he has found a righteousness; as well as a ransom
for her. Now believers may conclude then, as the Scripture speaks: that
Righteousness delivers from death: And that the righteous has hope in his
end. He fits his to be changed by mortification also, for when God, by his
Spirit, has crucified sin; that would have slain the soul Death cannot hurt
much, in smiring the carcass. Hence is that of Christ. Fear not them who kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul.

Secondly, the Lord makes the change desirable to some by inlightning Heb. 7.
25.
their eyes, and strengthening their hearts, unto a fight and sense of all the
al-sufficiencies of Christ; to sustain the soul under the straights of such a
death: what though sin upbraids thee, Satan affrights thee, and thine own
heart trembles within thee, and that thou art at a stand, know not what to
do, nor how to die? Yet believe, for Christ will carry thee through. Christ
did not give himself for thee in vain, that he should give thee up in thy last,
and greatest trial; give thee into the hands of Satan. Why then, lean on him,
who is a stay of strength and you will not miscarrie: He that has, and is had, of
a good Christ shall be sure of a good death with strength and peace.

Thirdly, by giving his a through taste of that heavenly joy, hearty
holiness, and real happiness; that themselves shall possess in the fruition
of Christ, when once they are changed. This the Scripture calls first fruits of
the Spirit, and of glory. And is it not this, that makes the Saints themselves,
groan within themselves; waiting for the Redemption of their bodies? Romans 8.
23.
The Lord has said it, Oh! how does the taste of Heavens joy, and of the
powers of the world to come; strengthen a renewed Christian, leaning on Christ,
to lie under the stroke of death? yea, even to long that so great a work were
over? and thus God sweetens death to the good; gives it a good savor, when
they come to taste it, it being the same cup, which Christ himself did first
drink of.

Now you have heard how it fares with the good, at their last change; and how
good such a change is to them: But alas! for the bad, the Christ-lesse man,
it is bitter unto him. These things imbitter death to the graceless.

1. The biting and tumifying sting of death, that indisposeth to dying well:
It Is biting: oh! how will the woeful thoughts of a misspent life, of by past
sins, of slighting Jesus, and his holy ways, like fiery darts, and scorching
Scorpions, pierce through the soul and Spirit? Then unclean sinners, as James
speaks of James 5. 3.
the rust of ill gotten, and ill kept gold; the guilt of your sins shall eat
your flesh as it were fire: Then even then all scruing deceivers, shall be
forced to say of their own unlawfully acquired goods, as Israel of Idols, get
you hence: But alas! these are thy works, and they will follow thee, flow
faster into thy mind, then thou can get them out, and make thy soul weary
even to the death.

Secondly, Death's sting tumifies also, Judas sinned, betrayed his Master,
improved the reward: But what was his end? he fell headlong, burst asunder in
the midst, and all his bowels gushed out: Death had stung him, and the sting
made him swell so, that, his tumor being great, the world could not hold him;
and for have that he might the sooner be at his own place, he betrayed
himself into the hands of Satan, was his own executioner. There Is a time when
stoutest sinners shall burst asunder, under the hand of austeerest Justice. If
the Lord's love makes not breaches on man's Spirit, draws him not up toward
Heaven; his wrath will break it, beat it even to powder, and cast it down
into the lowest Hell. O sinners! Learn then while a Savior teaches, what an
evil sin is.

Secondly, the sudainnesse of an Heb. 4. 27.
approaching Judgment. After death comes Judgment, and what is the Judgment?
Christ-lesse man or woman! I have sad news for thee: thou thy self and all
thou art, must be presented before a Holy, most Just, and mighty God: And with
thee shall thou bring all thy vain thoughts, will thou, nill thou, idle words,
unclean and sinful works, misspent time and Talents; In a word all the
secrets of thy heart shall then be torn in pieces, revealed, and unfolded:
yea, those secrets, which no eye has seen, but his, which is ten thousand
times brighter then the Sun; yea, even those secret sins which have been
covered here by restraint from God, or men, shall be uncovered there: so that
thou will be filled with astonishment to see that which thine eyes never did,
nor ever would behold. There the hearts closest corners, and darkest depths,
shall then be laid open, made visible, before the face of God, Christ, Angels,
and men. A mere discourse of Righteousness, and Judgment to come, God being
in it, and Foelix hearning of it, what effects did it work in him think you?
why the Text tells you it made him to tremble, and to bid Paul be gone, he
could not endure to hear on it. So Belshazzar Dan. 5. 5, 6.
saw but the writing of Judgment upon the wall, which did but import a
temporal scourge: And his countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him,
so that the joints of his Ioines were loosed, and his knees smote one against
another. And what is any carnal man more, then sensual Belshazzar, or carnal
Foelix, that he should think himself secure from Judgment? You then that put
this evil day far from you, bear in mind this thing: A son of Love could
not endure that; he prayed, Enter not into Judgment with thy servant o Lord:
How then can a child of wrath abide it, who is by nature nothing else? It Is
called in Scripture the day of the Lord, his great day, his terrible day. It Is
the day of Christs's coming Joel. 2. 11.
says the Prophet Malachie. And who shall stand when Mal. 3. 2.
he appears? for he is like a Refiners fire, and fullers soap. Thus you have
seen things that imbitter the change to some, even all that know not Christ,
and obey not his Gospel.

Thirdly, the certain standing before an impartial Judge of quick and dead,
who cannot, will not connive at sin, and sinners; When all flesh shall
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ: that every one may receive the
things 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.
done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good, or
evil. knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, We persuade men says the
Apostle. Oh! how terribly, intolerable are the thoughts of this! surely words
cannot utter it: then he, who said, Lord depart from me, I Will have none of thy
ways, shall find that God has said Amen to his prayers. Add to this, that
though he stand to be judged, yet he shall fall in the Judgment. For the
ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, as the Psalm. 1. 5.
Psalmist notes. You then! whose destruction is of your selves, if your
precious souls miscarrie: Consider sensibly in whom your help lies, make out
toward a Jesus betime; for there is no mercy showed on the other side the
grave; one drop of water which is but a very small thing: if mis'd and
desired, cannot be obtained: Then, if ever you will own free grace and
fellowship with Christ. Do it now, even while it is called Heb. 4. 11.
to day; hear his voice and harden not your hearts: for this day let slip, you
may never have another. Resisting sinners! I wish you well, my bowels are
troubled for you; oh pity your selves! and let not sinlive to kill your
souls: as it has served others who are gone to their own place. Remember,
and forget not Jerusalems fall and folly: least sweet Christ hide the day of
peace from your eyes, as once he served her.

Fourthly, the stinging thoughts of being Christ-les, and friendles, at that
Tribunal bar of heavenly Majesty: The thoughts of having no Advocate with the
Father, to speak one good word for the soul to the Irefull Judge; none to
stand betwixt God and the soul, none to keep off the strokes and blows. When
Conscience shall suggest, and cause a man to cry out in bitterness of his
spirit; Ah wretch that I am, I have lived so ill, I cannot die well, nor
willingly: yet die I must, but cannot tell what will become of my poor soul
and self! I am now giving up the Ghost, but alas! I know not who shall have
it; I have been Satan's servant, and sins servant, all my days, have slighted
glorious means of acquaintance with God, have been weary of Sermons, weary
of spiritual services, and spiritual society: Thus have I made the Judge my
foe, and the Advocate my adversary; And woe is me I know neither of them
both. And then though such cry out; Mountains and hills fall upon us, and
hide us from the presence of him, that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb: Mountains will not do it for them. Then men shall shreeke and
cry out with trembling, Lord, Lord. Hosanna thou son of David have mercy on
us: yet shall have no other Answer but this, I tell you, I know not whence you
are, depart from me; you shall go thither, where there shall be weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of teeth. When you shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Luke 13.
27, 28.
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom, and you your selves thrust out.
Or that of Christ; I profess Mat. 7. 23.
unto you, I never knew you, then, even then, those who have been ashamed of
Christ, and of his words; in a sinful, and adulterous generation: shall find
Christ will be ashamed of them, as he comes to Judge in the glory of his
Father, with the Mark. 8. last.
holy Angels. Ah Lord! can no healing be found for these wounded souls? Is
there no balm in Gilead for them? open their hearts, inlighten their minds,
observe their wants, and supply them all; lay hold on their sins, and subdue
them fully: and, secure, sensual souls! I say to you, as they to Jonah,
Arise you sleepers, call on your God.

Fifthly, the resignation of the soul into the hands of Satan, a devilish
tormenting Tyrant, a cruel enemy to all mankind: one that, odio intestino
prosequitur follows and pursues man with a deadly hatred. Satan has an
Interest in some now, but then he will have the principle: some are of him as
Christ speaks, and those must unto him at the close of time. Then Satan puts
in a bill of indictment, as large as that book of Zachary; wherein is
alleged all evil deeds that e're were committed: yea Conscience, Zcah. 5.
neither good nor quiet, will accuse, and memory give bitter evidence, the
whilst the Devils are Ezekiel. 2. 10.
ready to fetch away the soul. In a word, the whole man, and every part
thereof will be distressed, those very eyes which were quick and active to
behold Luke 12. 20.
vanity, shall loose their light and see nothing but bloud-guiltinesse of
sin: and the other senses after their order shall fail, and fall, the mind,
reason, and Memory, as heavenly powers of the soul, shall be shaken with
fearful storms of despair, and flashings of Hell fire. Then the earthly
house shall shake and tremble, yea, the humors like an overflowing Sea, shall
roar and rattle; Then the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
Moon into blood, and the stars shall fall from Heaven. The air shall be
full of storms, and flashing Meteors, the earth it self also shall tremble,
the Sea roar, and men's hearts shall fail for fear, expecting the end of such
sorrowful beginnings, which shall receive no periods. Then he, or she that
has spent so many days or nights in vain, and idle pastimes, would give a
world, could it be done, for one hours delay: that they might repent, be
reconciled to God, and live. Repent now, desperate sinner! Compare things
together, say to thy self, in earnest thus. There is a sin that I am
addicted to, as Pride, Passion, Covetousness, Luxury, Profaneness, of this
and the other sort; which if I live in, and go on, I die for ever; I loose
God, Christ, Heaven, and my own soul too, and then what gain I? Nothing but
the pleasures of sin, which are levitie, vanity, and then the pressures of
Hell which are perplexity. The Proverb is, if a man do venture, and run a
hazard, let him do it for something: so let us do as well as say. What!
shall I gratify Satan for tempting, the flesh for suggesting, the world for
alluring to sin, with the loss of my precious soul? when I am gone, all is
gone with me. And Christians! be you resolved in this particular, do not you
like these; what though Satan roares Lyon-like, The flesh draws one way, the
world another? yet stand you fast, quit your selves like men, be strong in the
Lord your strength: persevere, hold out to the end, let no man take your Crown
for if you are redeemed from thrall: by precious blood: then come not into such
bondage again, work not in such Turkish Galleys any more, that your last
change be not bitter, and if you are right for Christ, be assured you cannot.

Sixthly, the stinging thoughts of an exclusion, and ejection from Gods blessed
presence, and all familiarity with him and his in those heavenly places; this
loss, even this (as the Learned have proved) is a greater torment, then ought
else can be unto damned souls Poena da^ni, seu divinae visionis privatio,
omnium omnino suppliciorum summum est, quo Deus hominem punire potest: Nam uti
videre Deum, ipsissima beatitudo est: Ita, Deum videre non posse, maxima
damnatorum poena est, etc.

Inter supplicia omnia hoc futurum est summum, maximumque a conditoris aspectu
vel brevi morula detineri.

Intollerabilis est Gehenna and illa poena: tamen licet quis innumeras ponat
gehennas, tale nil dicet, quale illa faelici excidere gloria, a Christo odio
haberi: audire, Nescio vos Chrysoft. ad Po. Antioch.

Omnia vero gehennae supplicia superabit, Deum non videre, and bonis carere,
quae in potestate habuisti obtinere. Bern. de inter domo. cap. 38.

Intollerabilis quidem res est etiam gehenna: quis nescit, and supplicium illud
horribile? tamen si mill aliquis ponat gehennas, nihil tale dicturus est,
quale est a beatae illius gloriae honor repelli, exosumque Christo, and audire
ab illo: non novi. vos. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 24.


. And it is fitly called a pain of loss, viz. an unhappie and everlasting
banishment, from the highest heaven; and the beatificall vision of the most
glorious sovereign, and chiefest good. It Is not to have the least influence of
heat and life, from the least Ray of that Sun-like, resplendent body of
Christ: not to have one glance of its glory, not to have one taste of those
overflowing rivers of pleasures, not to have one glimpse of that inaccessable
light, and Jehovah's glory. What shall I say the loss is? And how shall I
esteem it? Surely none, but one, who has been in Heaven, heard and seen what is
there; can tell you what it is to be shut out thence. Paul could and did do
something this way, having had in a rapture a little glimpse of that infinite
glory; And having drunk a small drop, of those ever springing fountains of
matchless Joy and Peace: Hence was he brought to call the most excellent
things of this life, and the knowledge of them but dross and dung, yea, even
dogs meat, in comparison of those things above: Oh how sweet! how comfortable!
how refreshing are the surpassing rarities of Heaven! Honest souls! do not
your hearts burn within you, when you think on them, discourse on them, and
read of them, even burn with love to them? Sure I am whatever you think of
these things, and whatsoever the work is that they make upon your spirits;
that the loss of them will be bitter: And I seriously acknowledge through Gods
goodness, I count nothing gain in respect of them, when I am my self, and
compare the best of other things with them. Oh pain of loss! thou peircest
the very heart, soul, and inward parts, do wound deeply: The pain of sense
is but as a scar in the flesh, to this; for, this cuts the very heart in
pieces, breaks it to shivers: Do you not see this confirmed by common
experience? oh how does it fret, vex and disquiet men to loose good bargains
on earth? when a man does but let slip an opportunity of taking a good
peniworth of commodities, when it has been offered: How does he upbraid
himself with his negligence failing; and folly? There are some cannot get such
a fault out of their minds along time, especially if the gain that would have
come that way, was such, as that it would have made them rich men, as long as
they lived after. Aye! but what is that bargain, purchase, or prize to this?
that may be lost in a moment, and at the best it lasts not long; for life it
self is but short with all the accommodations of it: but I must needs tell all
intelligent hearts, there is enough in God to make you rich for ever; and if he
makes a bargain with you, gives himself for your selves, he will warrant his
commodity to last for ever, and to serve for every turn: Heaven is meat,
drink, and clothing, health, liberty, and harboring, unto all that are
seated there. You see then by this, what it is that imbitters death, and the
change to some: this last has most gall and wormwood in it, namely, the pain
of loss, which Christ's sensible servants never sustain. Finally, unto you,
who are the redeemed of the Lords Christ, be these things spoken. Fear not but
desire to see this day, your last, and best, even the last and best of all your
changes. Consider.

First, the day of your change is the Lords pay-day, every labourer in the
Lords vineyard, shall then receive his penny; every prayer shall then have its
answer; Every hungring, and thirsting soul shall then be filled, shall never
hunger nor thirst more: Every sigh, groan, and the tears that have fallen
from the eyes of Saints in secret, or else where, shall have their fruit, even
the quiet fruits of righteousness; which were sown in peace many years
before: And then all tears shall be wiped off from all faces of Saints, yea,
even every grace shall then be glorious. Moses did and suffered much when he
did but eye the reward, what then shall we be, suffer, and do, when we
receive it? Then 'twill go well with the righteous, no man's latter end will be
like theirs.

First, the soul will be in its prime then, for whilst it is in a
corruptible body, it is so ruled by senses, and is so fiercely carried on by
sensual appetites, that it is compelled to give way to the body; and cannot
follow the light either of nature, or Reason: Hence the truth is withheld in
unrighteousness, and the soul cannot act like her self; like a Spirit, whose
nature is to sore aloft, toward the place whence she came. Now till then, the
soul is made a servant, and cannot look out at the eyes, but 'twill be
infected, nor hear by the ears, but 'twill be distracted, nor smell at the
nostrills, and not be tainted, taste by the tongue and not be allured, or touch
by the hand, and not be defiled: And every sense on every occasion and
temptation is ready to betray the soul, until the body is changed and made
glorious. Who then that is wise will not long for his approaching decease, that
he may enter the Celestial Paradise? to exchange his brass for gold, his
vanity for felicity, vileness for honor, bondage for freedom, a lease of
life temporal, for an inheritance of life immortal: Since that to live here is
to die? for how much we live, so much we die; every step of life is a step
toward death: and he that has lived the half of his days, is dead the half
of himself. Death gets first our Infancy, then our youth, and so forward, and
certainly as long as we have lived, so long we have died.

But it is very grievous, and irksome to me, to think of the taking asunder
of soul and body: Might they go together as Enoch's did, the change would
be more comfortable.

They are put asunder but for a time, after which the'l be united
Hypostaticall did, when his body lay in the grave. The Lords presence is with
the body in the dust, as much as the soul is in Heaven with God, and in his
presence. God told Jacob he would go down with him into Egypt, and on. 46. 4.
also surely bring him up again; But Jacob was dead ere he was brought up
again. Therefore he carried up his carcass out of Egypt, not his soul, and so
fulfilled his blessed Promise. Saints! why care you so much for the carcass?
why fear you to let it lie in the dust, and to be turned into its own
materials? there is not a bone, nerve, or sinew of the whole shall be lost; he
keeps all the bones of the Righteous, says the Psalm 34. 20.
Prophet. And has not Christ told you that the hairs of your heads are
numbered? He has told them one by one, and certainly in the Resurrection,
though you may have more in order to perfection: yet you shall not have less.
Is not this comfortable? Does it not warm you at the heart, and refresh you to
see how you are cared for? then, as you are not like children of wrath in your
living, so loath to be like them in your lothnesse of dying. Add to this, that
the grave is but the Lords Treasury, wherein he lays all the bodies of his
Saints: or may fitly be called a second womb. Now consider well. God might
have made the first womb thy tomb, and then how could thou have beheld his
greatest glory; Therefore grudg not at Gods proceedings in such a kind as this:
For God means your good in such an alteration. The body falls but like an
ear of corn into the ground, that it may sprout and spring up more
gloriously: who then minding Heaven, lets his mind run so much on his earthly
Tabernacle? is so loath to lay it down? Surely Abraham's change was still
before him, and he bought him burying places. and Job waited for it all the
days of his life. In a word, the soul shall have no need of the body, until
the Resurrection; she is happy of her self till then: Nor can a glorified
soul return into a sinful body again: Hence it is evident, as some
conceive, that Lazarus his soul was not in Heaven, was not a glorified soul,
for if so 'twould not have returned into a sinful body: But the union betwixt
soul and body was losed at that time, and the soul was still in the body:
tanquam in sede, non tanquam in organo. 'Twas in the body, but did not animate
the body.

Secondly, that you be not loath to stoop to Christ in this great work of
dying, and that you may have comfort in it. Consider further.

That it is no more but a mere mutation, it is not an annihilation, being
turned into nothing; but a being turned into something better then you were:
and who, that has understanding will not let fall a handful of dirt to take up
a handful of Gold? it is but like Joseph's act of changing his garments, when
he went in to Pharaoh; You shall but for a few hours, it may be, but for a
few minutes, be putting off and on that which the Scripture calls clothing.
Put off, and lay aside the rags of mortality, and sin, and then put on the
robes of immortality, eternity, and glory. A Christian at the most does but
taste aliquid mortis, his death is but as a sleep.

Thirdly, this change will put a period to all other thy changes, at death they
all shall loose their beings; Here you find changes of Joy, and sorrow,
comforts, and crosses, sickness, and health, abundance, and wealth: But after
this you shall never be troubled any more, with a sick body, sad estate, and
common losses; And for inward changes they shall cease also, whereas here
you're sometimes free, anon distressed, sometimes you have a sweet taste of
Heaven, at other times distracted with fears of Hell, sometimes stroaked with
Christ, and the comforts of the Spirit, anon stricken with Satan, one while
magnifying God for grace, another while crying out of sins violent workings
in your minds and members; But at this day of change you will be released for
ever, from sin and Satan, and you shall be as free, as heart can wish, or
desire. In a word, it is your year of Jubilee: in the year of Jubilee, every
one that-had lost or sold his lands, upon the sounding of the Trumpet returned,
and received them again; so you Saints of the most high God shall have what
you have lost, even the fullness of that Image which you lost in Adam, of all
knowledge, wisdom, Righteousness, and true holiness, which then he had, and
lost, and you shall enjoy a better estate than ever he lost, or sold.

JOHN 17. 22, 23, 24. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them,
that they may be one even as we are one, etc. Father I will that they also whom
thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which
thou have given me, etc.
CHAP. V. Of the unfolding of Glory, or the Inheritance of Saints when changed.
Christ's gifts are largely extensive, he gives all he has to his, what would
they more? Christ's sayings are all truth: neither Grace nor Glory, nor any
good thing does he withold from his. The Glory which thou gave me, I have
given them. The end of Christ's amity is unity: all Christ's drift is to
increase union betwixt himself and his: if discontent surprise his, they shall
have all he is and has, ere he will be at odds with them: Oh what a Jesus is
this! Christ's friends fare as himself does; If he have Glory they cannot want
it, that they may be one. The union of Christ with Christians, is like that of
Christ with God, some things excepted: even as we are one, etc. All Christ's
acts have his whole will in them: Father I will, etc. Christ loves that his
should be indwellers in Glory, dwell with him: such Inmates offend not him: I
will that they may be with me where I am. Christ loves to have his Glory looked
on, give him what he loves: for will not looking breed liking? and liking
longing after such a blessing? that they may behold my glory, etc. We Will show
what the Glory is that is given, and that as succinctly as may be.

GLory in the general, is nothing else but apparent excellency, and even so
the word is used in Scripture, for even that which was made glorious, had no
Glory in this respect (...) by reason of the glory which excels. 2 Cor. 3.
10. Nonunquam (...) ^pud philosophosest ide^ quod (...) seu (...). Item fama
rumor, and in bonam and in malam partem saepius ad bonae famae existimatione^
restringitur; unde vertitut gloria, honor. Eras. opinio and per syncchdochen
generis gloria, quia gloria est opiniopraeclara de alicujus sapientia and
virtute. Pisc. in Gal. 2. 2. Matie, Math. 6. 29. Acts 7. 2. splendour, Luke 9.
31. Acts 22. 11. brightness, Hebr. 1. 3. and 2 Cor. 3. 7. And in this place
heavenly felicity or eternal glory. Hinc (...) quod significat, ornare gloria,
glorificare, usurpatur vel de collatione boni praeclari and singularis vel de
manifestatione, and predicatione gloriae. Tarnovius.
It Is excellent, for it is the Lords Glory-Christ enjoynes his followers to to
say to his Father, Thine is the Glory: and in Scripture phrase whenever God
is added to things, it denotes them eminent; as the city of God, the mountain
of God, the increases of God, It is apparent too. My soul thirsts, and my
flesh longs for thee, to see thy glory, so as I have seen it in the
Sanctuary. Hence it is that where a Believer is, where Christ is; he shall
clearly see, and fully know the excellencies of God, and Christ: yea, what his
own excellency is, by virtue of his union and communion with them both; for
then that Glory will be apparent above, which is not so apparent here below.

Three things there are that make everlasting Glory.

1. The Lords revealing of himself to the soul clearly and immediately. 2ly.
His communicating of himself unto her fully, and at once. 3. The convolution
or turning of the whole soul on God, according unto what he reveals of
himself in such a manner.
1. A clear revelation of God, Tunc et enim justi cuncta scient quae Deus fecit
scienda tam ea quae praeterita, quam ea quae post modum sunt futura. Anselm de
similitud. Cap. 54. Neque sola visio Dei sanctis hominibus in coelo promittitur
sed etiam omnium rerum, quas fecit Deus, etc. Greg. ^e aetern. felicit, l. 3.
c. 2.
and in him many other secrets. Then shall be made evident those sacred secrets,
and glorious mysteries of the holy Trinity; of the unity of Christ's Humanity
with the Divine nature, and of Christians with Christ: then all the causes of
God's eternal Council, in Election and Reprobation; as also the manner of the
Creation of the World, with the fall of the Angels, and all the mysteries of
the work of Redemption, together with the spiritual substances, offices,
orders and excellencies of those Angels that stand. The nature, immortality,
operations, and original of our own souls, and that after a way
unutterarable.

Visions of God, and glory on Earth, are dark; we see darkely says the
Scripture: would we see clearly, we must wait then til we are in Heaven. For
whilst he talked with God, the skin of his face did shine, so, as that the
people were afraid to come nigh him. Ex. 34. 29, 30.
God told Moses, he could not see his face, viz. all his Glory, and live: (a
part he did see:) But no living man is found capatious enough to take in such a
degree of glory, as is the fullness of Gods face and favor. Is It not the
darkness of the vision, and the obscurity of the evidences of Gods grace and
favor, that sometimes makes a child of light sit in darkness, and can see no
light? what (save this very thing) made the Church cry out, Lord thou Lam. 3.44.
have covered thy self with a cloud, so that our Prayers should not pass
through? and Job, Lo he goes by Job 9. 11.
me and I see him not; he passes on also, but I perceive him not. If it be
said the Revelation is not dark in it self: but to such as it concerns, it is
the apprehension which is dark that such have of it: It Is granted: but still
it is evident we see darkly here, and that God and glory are but revealed in
part, whiles we are here, so that imperfect revelations are dark
comparatively, referring to what they shall be.

How do some precious souls grieve, take on, mourn and complain, because they
cannot see God to be theirs, and themselves to be his, and abiding in him
clearly? To such be it now spoken, ere long disconsolate soul! thou shall
Gloria habitat rupibus. Clem. Alex. (...) Where there is an excellency there is a
great difficulty.
be in his arms, behold his glory, and thine own too, which he has given
thee, even there where this kind of darkness, nor any other of what nature
soever can ever approach. Revelations of God in heaven are immediate also, as
well as clear; there, languishing souls! you that here mourn after God, cry
night and day after the Father of Spirits, are sick of love: there (I say) you
shall not need to be staid with flaggons, or comforted with Apples; (as the
Spouse once desit'd) for God shall be all unto you then. The Greek Poet when he
had recited an obscure Poem, and all his Auditors had left him, except Plato,
spoke thus: Plato is to me in steed of al. Plato est mihi pro omnibus.
So a soul that is forsaken of all, except God, finds God in stead of all to
her. And you also that now take great pains, and have many weary fits in
prayer, hearing, reading, conference, and meditations; shall then rest from
those labors, and enjoy God and Christ, without any such means.

Others also, whose hearts are now full of cares, fears, and sorrows about
the manner of doing such services: one while bewailing badnesse of memory,
another while coldness of affection, at another time deadness of heart,
drowsinesse and dullness of spirit, with all carnal, idle, wandering thoughts,
uncheerfulnesse, unfitness, and unsuitablenesse, to and for such holy
employments: even those (I say) shall then be freed from all such burdens:
they shall have nothing there to care for, nor shall they have any employment
to take pains in; for it shall be, not a pain, but a pleasure to follow the
Lamb whither soever he goes, with whom is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand are pleasures for evermore.

2ly. His communicating of himself fully and at once. On earth God
communicates of his fullness: but the communication of all fullness it self is
only in Heaven. Besides, the communication of fullness which Saints receive
here, is only of grace for grace: Believers! if you will receive glory for glory,
expect till you be where Christ is, in whom such fullness dwells. Father I will
that they may be where I am: to behold my glory. That, even that will be their
renown, who shall dwell in light mavelous

God does this; first, to keep under selfe-advancing sins: we, Alas! are
invincibly prone to lift up our selves, and let Christ lie low, who never
deserved such unkindnesse at our hands: we rise in our own conceits immensly,
above measure; hence we constrain the Lord to leave thorns in our flesh,
something or other to beget anguish in us; sometimes a Satan, a Devil to buffet
us, and beat us out of our high holds: If in-comes from heaven abound on men's
spirits, oh how apt are they to wax fat, and forget the rock whence they are
hewn? yea, the very breasts that gave them suck, ran out freely for their
nourishment? But what a sad and bad thing is this; that men should be evil
because God is good? That God cannot abound in Revelation, but man will abate
in humiliation? Paul sinned once thus, but it brought him on his knees thrice
to the God of pardons; God will not communicate all his fullness on earth, least
men should be full of spiritual tumors on such a bottom: he will first have
them where they can be proud no more, and then they shall inherit all fullest
glory. Oh the height, and the depth of the wisdom of God! how unsearchable are
his Counsels, and his ways past finding out! but.

2. God gives not out all his fullness here, for earthly vessels, unglorified
Christians cannot hold it all whilst in the body. The Widows oil increast
whilst her Vessel could receive it: but when once the Vessels were straightened,
its increase was suspended. Christians have had, and still have as much of God
here, as such Vessels will hold: speak experience! Are not some so full of
Christ at some times, as that they can scarce contain themselves in a huge
world? and hence would feign be with Christ, that they may be more enlarged
like their object, to receive as much of him as can be given? What mortal can
tell how much the affections of Saints are inflamed, and how much their zeal is
kindled, when God comes in sweetly, and comfort breaks in upon them like a
flood? Then, even then, how loose they stick to the Creatures, and how much
they long to be above them with the Creator, I want words to express. These
like the Israelites, when once they had got a taste of the grapes of Canaan,
they cannot be at quiet until they are carried thither. Is not this to keep men
longing, who would be found lothing, had they all fullness here? what is it
else? God speaks good to the heart, but it is here a little, and there a little,
to keep their stomachs open, that he may put in more when he has a mind so to
do. God communicates all at once in heaven too: (though some have other
thoughts) this puts a difference betwixt fruition of his communications on
earth, and the possession of them in heaven: for here he gives out himself but
by degrees, now a little and then a little as we said before. God serves his
children as you deal with yours: an heir in his minority is kept under, to
make him know himself, and he receives his substance only by parcels, and
small pieces: but when he comes to be of full years, then his whole
inheritance comes in at once. And in this sense as the Apostle speaks the
believing heir, while he is a child, differs nothing from a serva^t, though he
be Lord of all. But when he is of ripe years, and comes into those heave^ly
places, he is made a Lord, yea a King, and his Father gives him his portion
all at once, Gal. 4.1.
If discoveries of God in glory be not full, and at once, then these
absurdities would follow.

1. The vision of God then would be but graduall, but imperfect, and in part,
there as well as here: and still the glorified would stand in doubt, when the
rest should be revealed, which kind of doubting would argue distrust, which
cannot possibly have place in heaven. Nor did it ever enter into the thoughts
of the most High, that the least occasion should be given to such an evil; And
certainly when Saints are where they can sin no more from any cause in
themselves, or without themselves; such as urge the Principle must needs be
guilty of charging God: For by the rules and laws of such kind of arguing,
'twill easily be gathered that the Lord's shutting in of himself though but
for a season, makes the soul question the certainty of future discoveries.
Concerning which persons, I had almost said their blasphemy is of a very high
nature: but.

2. Where then were the Saints cessation from labor; would there not then be
a continual want of the exercise of grace? yea even of faith, hope, patience,
and long-suffering, until the accomplishment of such a full discovery of God
to the soul. And who knows not that those graces shall cease to exist and be,
when once the Saints are made glorious? For what need will there be of faith to
evidence things visible, and such things as are not at a distance from the Sts?
what need of hope to wait for that which is had already? and what an
uncomfortable Doctrine will this be found to dying Christians. In a word,
grace is swallowed up of glory; yet I grant that love shall be ever active in
those heavenly places.

The third part of glory is the convolution or turning of the whole soul on
God, according unto what he reveals of himself in such a manner: here alas!
Christians cannot roll themselves on God immediately and fully. Here the means
is called in to help, and we see little is done; but by the means. Faith comes
by hearing, as the Scriptures speak.

Besides, who can do it fully, when as he that knows but in part, trusts,
and believes but in part; for how can he assent unto what he knows not? Add
to this, that here the thoughts wander from God, cannot be kept in in holy
employments; and the heart is often absent, and afar off, when the person is
present, as God complains: and this either from some defect, in the manner of
the administration of the word (the absence of the spirit and power concurring)
or some cause subordinate thereunto. But in Heaven the presence of God holds
the soul close to it self, so that it cannot wander, cannot stir from God;
and the Majesty and glory, with the amiablenesse of the same presence, draws
out all the abilities of the whole soul, to act answerable unto the laws,
nearenesse, and dearness of such a relation as is betwixt God and her self.
Hence it is as easy for a glorified, soul to be turned on God, and to do for
God, as to be, God having freed her from all power of acting otherwise, and
having also implanted in her an in-written constitution, an innate instinct by
glory. To be completely glorified, is to be freed from all imperfections of
soul and body, and to enjoy all perfection in them both jointly: which by
reason of Terminus a quo, viz. the miseries and evils that Saints are
delivered from, is fitly called in sacred writ, Redemption; and in regard of
terminus ad quem, it is as truly and properly 1 Cor. 1. 30. Gal. 3. 13. Ephesians. 1.
13, 14. Ephesians. 1. 3. John 3. 36. 1 Pet. 5. 10. and Cap. 1. 4.
styled beatification, life, eternal Glory, glorification, and an immortal
inheritance.

On which two branches there grows that blissfull fruit, which the glorified
eat in the midst of the Paradise of God. Of these 2. in their order it is that
we intend to speak.

We begin first with the immunities of the soul, which are a part of her
glory; The first is glorious liberty, such as is peculiar to the children of
God, viz. freedom from all infringements, and soule-straitning powers.

1. All power and possibility of sinning against her sovereign good;
conceptions of sin shall then cease to be, much more then shall the births of
sin, which are Death, be annihilated. There remains no Condemnation for her,
because she is in Christ, walks after the spirit of God, and follows the Lamb
whither soever he goes. Sin, Death, Devils and Hell, are swallowed up in the
victories of her Husband.

2. From al spots of sin, all spiritual impurity, all low thoughts of God, and
high thoughts of her self, all irregularity of will, as it was rebellious to
right reason with greatest opposition: Though here she could not elect or
reject like the Lord, yet in glory she shall. Add to this her freedom from
all unsoundnesse of judgment, and taints of error; which while she was
unglorified she was subject unto; in all her apprehensions, receptions, and
conceptions of the most Holy God, and his most Holy things, or of her self and
others. Besides, her freedom from all impuritie, and imbecility of affection;
her love then shall be undefiled, like unto Christ's, and not weak, cold or
feeble, as't is whilst in an earthly Tabernacle.

3. From all instruments of sin. She Will then be freed from such a body, whose
members are all weapons of unrighteousness, and rebellious servants to her, as
she is a soul: the Law, viz. the power of the members, can rebel no more
against the law of her mind, to lead her captive to sins law, viz. sins
power. The unruly Carcass shall never cross, vex, and disquiet her more;
Serenity and Magnanimity shall then cover her as a garment. She shall then
have the substance, dominion, and strength of a Spirit, which is such as is in
the Angels of God, one of which did in one night slay 185000. 2 Kings 19. 35.
Nor shall the vile body ever let in sin by the senses, to contaminate the
precious soul any more.

The senses of hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting and touching shall be
spiritualized, ere that the soul will employ them again. The soul shall never
re-enter into an unglorious body, when once she is rid on it; Nor shall she ever
have need so to do, for shall she not be contained in God? and is not that
better then to exist in a natural body? The souls of Sts, although their
strength be now held in, and buried in their massy, sinful, weak bodies,
shall then appear in their native and original strength.

Finally, there shall be then men's sana, in corpore sano: a sound mind in a
sound body.

The parts of the bodies glory are such as these;

1. Freedom from all wants, weaknesses, distempers, and uncomelinesse. Neither
blindness, lamenesse, deafness, nor crookedness shall enter that place of
perfection. The bodies of Saints though they dye imperfect, yet shall they rise
made perfect in all their parts. What though their bodies be without form,
comeliness, and fashion; yet they shall be made handsome, beautiful, and comely,
just like unto the glorious body of Christ: yea, and which is more, they shall,
says the Text, be fashioned in the whole body like unto his body: be as
handsome bodied as Christ is, and have as comely a Person, and feature as he
himself has, whom the Father loves dearly. Mephibosheth shall have no
lamenesse in his feet then, he shall not halt before God in glory: nor shall
Moses stammer, and falter with his tongue, or need an Interpreter in that day.
For has not God promised to turn unto Zeph. 3. 9.
his people a pure language, that they may all call upon the Lord to serve him
with one consent; or as in the Original, with one shoulder.

2. It shall have no want of outward sustenance. Beings on earth may consist in
what men shall eat, and in that where with they shall be clothed. Providence
existing in such supportments: but the Kingdom of Heaven, and Saints beings
there, consists not in meats or drinks: but in righteousness, and true
holiness. They shall hunger Revel. 7. 16, 17.
no more, neither shall they thirst any more; for the Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne shall feed them, and lead them to living fountains of
water, as the spirit speaks.

Thirdly, add to this, that the bodies weakness with want of health shall
cease then. Here the discord of the bodies Elementarie qualities, and its
corruptible nature concurring begets distempers, diseases, putrifactions, and
contagions; Although afflictions come not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground: but in glory by the powerful influence of
Divine Majesty upon the whole man, there shall be a perfect harmony and
agreement among all such qualities and dissonant humors. Their bodies whether
hot and dry, or cold and moist, shall have perfect health and strength. Then
ulcerous Lazarus shall be found as whole as a fish; and in that day all inward
or outward contagions, and hurtful impressions shall cease to be. They shall
not hurt nor destroy in all my Isa. 11. 9.
holy mountain says God. There Is no beating, bruising, wounding, stabbing, or
killing of bodies in glory: then the most high God with a stretched-out arm,
will free the Carcass from all disposednesse to any inward decays of strength,
or vital spirits: which estate in Scripture is aptly called a Condition, or
Inheritance, incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Potentia non moriendi ex quadam
hypothesi unionis cum anima originali ter perfecta immortali.
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them* Hence the
body is invested with Potentia non moriendi, immortality, it can never be a
dying body any more, nor shall the Saints ever have cause to cry any more, oh!
who shall deliver me from this body of death? and is not this that blessed
day of the bodies redemption from sin and death, its wages? What but this
made those followers of Christ, who had received the first fruits of this glory
we speak of, to groan within themselves, waiting to enter this rest?

4. And what miss of sleep can there be then, when the body has ceased from
its labors, which makes it wanting in such a kind. Besides, there will be no
lack of fire to heat us, or air to cool and strengthen the bodies
breathing; for there shall be an aura Quae supplet defectumaeris corporibus
glorificatis.
caelestis as some affirm, which shall supply the want of air to glorified
bodies: but I rather judge there shall be no miss of such things, because
there shall be no sun to scorch them, neither cold to pinch them: the sun
shall not light upon them, nor any heat as the holy Ghost has said.

5. And can you think that he who clothes Lillios on earth without their own
pains taking, will let Saints in heaven go naked? Has not the Lamb of God
promised that his shall walk with him in white? and that his raiment is so fit
and large, and covers so well, as that nakedness cannot appear. Who took away
Joshuah's filthy Revel. 7. 16.
garments, when he stood before the Lord, caused his iniquities to pass from
him, and clothed him with change of raiments? was it not the Angel of the
Covenant, Jesus Christ?

6. Its universal freedom from Sicut spiritus carni serviens non incongrue
carnalis ita caro spiritui serviens, recte appellatur spiritualis, etc. Aug. de
civit. Dei, l. 13. c. 20.
all power to affront the spirit of Christ, by disobedience and dishonor. And
as subjection to sin and Satan shows the body is natural whilst here: so
submission to the spirit of Christ there, will show it is a spiritual body,
which is another part of its glory.

8. A general exemption from Restat ergo ut suam recipiat quisque mensuram,
quam vel habuit in juventure, etiamsi senex est mortuus: vel fuerat habiturus
si ante est defunctus. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 15.

Circa triginta annos defini erunt esse etiam seculi hujus doctissimi homines
juventutem. Idem. Ibid.

Resurgent omnes tam magni Corpore quam vel erant vel futuri erant in juvenili
aetate. Idem. Ibid.


all minority, Infancy, youth, old age, and witherdnesse, by all which the
body's found in an imperfect state: Infants, youths, and aged persons, if in
Covenant with God, shall rise in the perfection of strength and years: which
as some have proved shall be such as is found to be in persons about the age
of 30. or as others affirm, about the age of 33. and then, as others have made
good by arguments, the child shall rise in that perfect strength it would have
had, had it lived until the time of the fullest perfection of growth.

Now to the second branch of the definition, viz. That to be glorified is to
enjoy all perfection in soul and body both jointly, and of that thus.

1. The soul and body shall externally enjoy a most exquisite knowledge of God,
the godly, and 1 Cor. 12. 1.
of themselves also, when once they are made glorious. An exquisite and perfect
knowledge of God, they shall both see him not only mentally and
contemplatively: but also with the bodies eyes corporally: For the glorious God
will let in such a great light, and give such a great strength of sight unto
them both; as that the eyes of them both shall be opened, enlarged, and
perfectly apted to concord with himself the object.

Whence was that of Job. I Job 19. 26, 27.
know that in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall b^hold him, and not a stranger; as it is in the Original, was it not
hence? viz. that he had assurance in his own soul, being sealed with the spirit
of promise, that such a thing should be? and does not God approve this saying?
when he says he spoke right words of him? And which is more, we shall see and
enjoy him perfectly in our selves: we see and know the Lord on this side glory
but by fits, now and then; even as a waifaring man, who stays but for a night,
and is gone: or else we see him spiritually, as the Disciples saw him
corporally, when he was coming toward them: they said, says the Text, he is
a Ghost. So when God comes in upon our spirits with joy and gladness, comfort
and refreshment, we are prone to think it is not he. How many precious Saints
are there under Heaven, whose souls with David refuse to be comforted; shun
the Lord in his comforts as if he were a Ghost? And though he say never so often,
as Christ to his Disciples, be of good cheer, Matthew. 14.27
fear not to be comforted, It is I? Yet how hardly are men brought to believe,
being slow of heart? yea, and though possibly they do not think a Ghost is
coming toward them: yet, do they not often conclude that strong consolations
are delusions and illusions of a false spirit?

We do not only fear vainly those things which cannot hurt us: but also dread
even perversely those things which occasion our Non solum inaniter metuamus quae
nocere non possunt, sed perverse etiam horreamus ea quae ad salutem faciunt:
Mucs.

Ludit suavisstuie, cum nos putamus omnia esse perditissima. Luther.

In tentationibus fingimus Deum alium: quam revera est putamus Deum tum non
esse Deum, sed phantasma, hoc est, horribile spectrum quod nos velit devorare.
Luther.

Quoad in angust^is sumus, non est credendum nostris Cogitationibus de Deo.
Luther.


safety.

For do not many rather conclude that Satan's transformed into an Angel of
light, then that themselves are transformed into Christ? who can deny it? and
that this unbelief argues an imperfect sight, and knowledge of God, and of his
grace and favor? Such sad souls the spirit of bondage has chained up still;
yea, some have, and do possess God here yet will not see and know such a
thing: You that raise up more objections against God and your selves, then can
meet with answers; Is not this your case?

Secondly, we shall see him perfectly in the Creatures also, when we are in
glory: Whilst we are here, we see not so much of God in the creature as there
is: we are too much bent to see the Lord rudely, ignorantly, and obscurely, as
he comes unto us in the creatures. Alas! how seldom Long extra septa
evehimur. Chrysostom.
do we observe and consider what of God we take in by the Creatures? how
much we enjoy him in connection with them? And although fire, could not warm
us, food could not strengthen us, raiment could not secure us from scorching
heat and pinching cold, were it not that God were in them, to give heat to the
first, put nourishment in the second, and a conserving quality in the third;
Yet how hardly are we brought to see, and wonder at the Lord in such a
dispensation? Is not this to overlook the Creator in the creatures? And is not
such a sight of God too like that which the Heathen had of him? some of whom
beholding him under the notion of Causa causarum only, did color over their
creature-worship; by affirming, that though they did worship the Sun, Moon,
and Stars with other created things, yet that they did not worship the
Creature, but God in the Creatures; For said they, God is in every thing, and
the truth is, we all of us do things of this nature very confusedly, and
preposterously. If this were not so, what hinders (could we see the Lord
perfectly in the creatures) but that we might take in God, when: we take in the
Creature, and so have soul and body fed together? But glory helps all this;
for when Saints are glorified, they shall see God as he is in himself and in
themselves, and also as he is in the creaturs perfectly. And holy hearts! in
the interim see as much of God as you can in all your morsells, and mercies,
because it is very good for you so to do. Remember the Israelites of whom it is
said, that while the Numb. 11. 33.
flesh was between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled, and they dyed, and why for they did not observe that God was in the
mercy, which caused murmuring in them.

2. A perfect knowledge of the godly there is: as some have proved, Ibi a
singulis omnes, ibi ab omnibus singuli cognoscentur, nec quem-quam omni non
latebit, qua patria, qua gente, qua stirpe, quis editus fuerit, vel quid etiam
in vita sua fecerit. Anselm de similitud. c. 59.
All Saints shall be known of every particular Saint and every particular
Saint shall be known of all: there shall be no stranger in heaven In caelo
nullus erit alienus. Aug. Ep. 6. ad Italicam
: in glory Sts shall know not only their acquaintance in this world, but also
those whom they never saw here, even as persons seen and known before. Yet in
a carnal manner after the flesh shall no man possibly know or be known. Yea
that very Jesus that on earth was known after the flesh, shall be known so no
more. All knowledge there shall be spiritual, even as is the object and Medium
thereof. Add to this, that knowedge of Saints in Heaven shall be personal, as
well as spiritual; That this is so, many men of God have fully cleared by
Scripture and Reason.

1. By arguments drawn from Adam who knew Evah as soon as he saw her, though
he had never seen her nor known her before Si enim Adamas virtuae imaginis
divinae concratae Evam de corpore suo su^ptam cum e somno evigilasset illico
agnovit, etc. Kemnit.
.

2. By arguments fetched from the Disciples, knowing Moses and Elias in the
transfiguratio^, where glory was but weakly shadowed forth. Arguing that in
the fullness of that glorious light, they would know them better Petrus in
monte in mortali corpore Mosem and Eliam quos nu^quam viderat revelatione
interne cogno vit. Mat. 11. 34. Buchan.
.

3. Boni bonos in regno, and mali malos in supplicio agnoscunt. Greg.
By arguments fetched from Dives, his knowledge of Abraham in Heaven, when the
distance was great betwixt them: and that therefore the knowledge of Saints in
Heaven who are present with each other, must needs be certain and excellent,
with some others of like concernment Vide Kemnit Harm. Evang. C. 87. and Buc.
Ioc. 39. and Greg Dial. l. 4. c. 33.
. Alwhich are impregnable for matter of proof; And although some think they
have never proved a point sufficiently, till all is spoken thereunto that may
be, with whom I consent not; yet shall I adventure to give in something more,
since, I am upon the subject.

1. That knowledge which may most augment the comfort of communion, and without
which lowship is not sweet, shall be in glory: but that is a personal knowledge
of each other, therefore such a kind of knowledge shall be there. How
uncomfortable it is to have fellowship with strangers, persons we know not, let
all men judge. Who will lay open his heart to a stranger? or mind almost the
words of a stranger? yea trust himself in the company of strangers? 'twas a
great heart-smart and grief to David, that God had put his lovers and friends
far from him: yea his acquaintance into darkness: that Psalm 88. ult.
he must be yoked to the society of strangers; so 'twas matter of great
complaint to Job, that his acquaintance were estranged from Job 19. 13.
him, become strangers to him. But as 'twas said before, there shall be no
stranger in glory, nor shall there be any cause of such complaints there, for
acquaintance cannot be put far from us there, for we shall then be linked
to each other, and all of us unto the Lord, so as not to stir from him
without him: But.

2. That knowledge, which may most increase the joy of the Just, in their
heavenly Mansions, shall be in that heavenly place: but a perfect knowledge of
Saints will most increase the just man's joy. All my delight is in the Saints,
and in them that excel. Therefore the righteous shall know one another in the
Kingdom of their Father. A sight had of the Saints persons, and faces on
earth, does much increase the joy of a believing beholder. They that fear
thee, will be glad when they Psalm 119.74.
see me: because I have hoped in thy word, said the sensible Prophet: and
me-thinkes it is a great refreshment to see the face, and have the society of a
sanctified Saint. I have known some converts that have longed, and loved to
look on such, and to be where such have come: much more then will a sight and
knowledge of them, being had in Heaven, where knowledge is fully perfect,
delight a believing soul.

3. That knowledge by which a man shall know as he is known, shall be in
Heaven: but that is 1 Cor. 13. 12.
personal and corporal, God knows the Saints persons. Personal did I say?
yea more then personal for Saints in Heaven, in Glory, shall know each other
by their names, God knows them by their names; thou have told me says Moses,
thou know me Exodus 33. 12.
by my name. And so shall Saints know each other in glory, else how can they
know as they are known? On earth we sometimes know many persons by sight, but
we know not their names. Now in glory we shall know one another by the same
names we had on earth.

2. We shall have in glory a perfect knowledge of our selves, that great
lesson of mankind. before the whole man is glorified we cannot see our
selves, and what we are. Who knows the spirit Eccles. 3. 21.
of a man that goes upward? as the wise man speaks. It Is above the reach of a
mortal wight, to know what spirit he is of fully, and who can know the nature
of that heart that is deceitefull above all things, and desperately wicked? as
the spirit spoke in the Prophets time? Oh what a neast of unclean sins is
made there! what depths of darkest decets, and closest shifts are harbored
there! whose inclinations being sometimes scanned, do promise a sweet frame
for God, when at another time upon an opportunity and advantage of sinning,
their carriage is such, that they render a man desperately vile. So as that a
man can at no time know what he is or would be.

And is it not hence that he one while hopes, and another while fears, now
presumes, and anon despaires, is one while as high as Heaven, another while as
low as hell in his own account.

And here is the misery while we are in the flesh, we cannot or will not see
into them; and have right thoughts of them: but in glory we shall know what
insides we had before we came there, and how much more vile we would have
been here, had not God restrained us: yea, and that we had in us as bad natures
as the worst of men, before grace made the difference. And shall we not then
see how great a mercy and favor the Lord vouchsafed us, when he pulled us out
of the fire, our legs out of the stocks, and our whole man out of the chains
of darkness, claws and jaws of Satan, and from under the power of sin?
but chiefly for that mighty gift we received, when the Father made Christ our
own. And all this that we may give thanks to the Father, who has made us meet
being vile sinners, to become glorious Saints; That we may clearly see what
cause we have given us to magnify the Compassions, cares, and endeavors of
the Trinity, for our Redemption and advancement in the Paradise of God. And
that we should eternally sing Halelujahs to the Lamb that sits on the Throne
of matchless Majesty; we shall Non est beatus, esse quise non putat.
know our selves, and that we are in an estate of Bliss.

We Will say no more of the first kind of perfection, viz. exquisite knowledge,
which the whole man possessing, is thereby very glorious.

2. Perfect holiness, happiness, Spiritualia erunt, non quia corporaesse
desiste^t, sed quia spiritu vivicante subsistent. Aug.
and spirituality. Happiness puts not an end to holiness, but makes it
perfect. Holiness is most perfect in Heaven, and there is no sight of holiest
Majesty without it. This shall be both of nature and actions; crossenesse and
foulness of nature cannot enter into those places which are on high. Our
natures shall be spotless, and our actions they shall be blameless. There Is
nothing done in glory that can be blameworthy: but to this purpose we spoke
before.

3. Superiority. No man shall be under the jurisdiction of others; all Saints
are superiors in Heaven; there is no difference betwixt him that was the Master
and him that was the Servant. He that was a King on earth, fare's no better in
glory, then does the meanest subject in respect of command. Saints are all
fellows in Heaven; Yea those wealthy Christians, which here will scarce
vouchsafe to look upon the meanest of their fellow members in Christ: wretched
thing that it is! shall in that day see those poor ones of Christ eyed, and
prized of God in glory as much as themselves, and shall seee them as rich, and
as well Crowned and Throned, as he that was willingly ignorant of them.

Doubtless thou art our Father, Isa. 63. 16.
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not: thou O Lord
art our Father, and our Redeemer, said the Prophet. Though the Brethren will not
know them, the Father will; doubtless he will do like himself. And then all
Oeconomicall, Political, Ecclesiastical Relations shall cease. There shall be
none to command, nor any to be obeyed but the Lord, and his Christ, our Jesus.
There the poor shall not fear the frowns of the rich, dread their threats,
nor want their aids: but poor Lazarus shall sit down with rich Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and with David the King on the same Throne, in the Kingdom
of his Father. And the poor widow of Sarepta, as well as rich Dorcas of Joppa,
Acts 9. 36. 39
shall have a Throne, and a crown in glory: For God is no respecter Matthew. 8.
39.
of persons: Saints shall be all alike in preferment there: the Lord makes no
difference in giving grace, nor will he do it in conferring glory. He put no
difference between us and them, purifying our hearts by says, as Peter
speaks. Peter had truth of grace, and they had it too; God minded not their
persons. Though Peter and some of the rest had been his ancient servants, and
the other had never seen the inside of his house, God purged them as well as
the Apostles; it is so in glory, all shall sit as near to Christ as can be. For
the weak and poor Christian is as much allied to Christ and as dear to him, as
the strong and wealthy can be. Christ shed as many tears, sweat as many
drops, endured as many stripes, and paid as great a price for the one as for
the other. And in glory it shall be known, how he takes his Lambs in his
arms, carries them in his bosom, and leads gently those that are with Isa.
40. 11.
young. Add to this Dominion perfect rule over the Creatures, which we lost in
our first Parents. He that overcommeth, and is crowned with glory, shall have
power over Revel. 2. 26.
Nations, and shall rule with a rod of Iron, as it is said.

Lastly, an orient splendour, and peerless brightness of resplendent light,
shall cover the whole man as a garment.

Then shall the righteous shine Matthew. 13.43.
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father: Who has ears to hear, let
him hear. And will not this, even this, occasion an infinite, unconceivable,
and unparalled gladness Nonquia solis etiam splendorem non superabunt, sed
quando nihil fulgentius sole videmus, propterea re apertissima nobis ad
exprimendum usus est. Chrysostom in Mat. Hom. 12.
throughout the very soul, spirit, and whole man?

In a word, there shall be first, that (...) a necessary supply of outward
things.

Secondly, that (...) a being in Gods favor, and having a good aspect from God.

Thirdly, that (...) a welldoing, or right acting according to the emminencies
thereof.

Thus of the parts of glory; a word or two of the adjuncts, and we apply the
whole.

First, it is a coherent glory, such as agrees with, and is suitable unto the
whole man. For a man to be clothed with the perfections of Plants, or
Animalls, that will not make him glorious, the perfections of other things will
not do it, it must be such as is suitable to him as he is a man, even a man
renewed.

Secondly, it is emminent, has worth in it, for glory is the most lofty
condition, a thing that is better then a man's self. All the creatures besides
man, are inferior to a soul; an unseen soul cannot be advanced with any seen
substance, for she is more noble then any such thing: And things below the
soul cannot set the soul aloft, it must be something better then a soul which
can do that. Now nothing but God is better: and he will do it.

Thirdly, it is a contenting good, causing calmness, and serenity of spirit,
so that when once the soul has what she likes and loves, and is assured of
the sufficiency thereof, knows she is not to seek, has, and lies on her Center:
This makes her estate delectable, full, comfortable, and well-pleasing; and as
he said in a bad sense, so may a glorified person say in a good sense; Soul
take thine ease. And with the Prophet; Soul return to thy rest, for the LORD
has dealt bountifully Psalm. 16. 7.
with thee, and has delivered my soul from Death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

Fourthly, perfect love, there shall be no jarres, nor stirs in glory, no
heart-burnings, and evil surmisings against each other, there shall be no
prosperity that can be envied, nor shall there be any adversity to be
despised: but of this before.

Fifthly, lasting, everlasting, it has perennity and perpetuity in it: and
thus the difference is made apparent, which is found betwixt things above, and
things below, things of heaven, and things of the earth.

Sixthly, and all this is made ours by it is conjunction with us, as the
conjunction of the soul with Christ, and Christ with the soul, is a means to
strengthen the proprieties of them both, which they have in each other: so the
good things of Christ and glory being conjoined with us, do make them our own.

O glory, glory! thou art sought of many after a sort: but enjoyed only of a
few that seek thee rightly. Augustine reckons up no less then 288. opinions of
several learned Philosophers about happiness, some placing it in one thing,
some in another thing, being every one different in their conceits, opposing
what each other held.

And yet they did but beat the air, and were in a Labrinth, not being able to
get out. Surely if natural parts, and helps of nature could fathom the depths
of such a glory; such great wits might have accomplished it: But it is only the
gracious, that can tell what it is to be glorious.

Now let all who expect to be and do so well as they should in life and death,
and after the Judgment, premize these things of weight and worth, and consider
their Pondus sincerely. Oh! who minding these things can have the heart to
harm themselves, with making Idols of inferior things, and placing souls
happiness in outward enjoyments, and never advance further, or rise higher.

I Remember a saying of a Philosopher, who seeing great possessions which he
had lost, spoke thus. Had not these things perished, I could not have been safe.
So great an obstruction is the cleaving to these outward Non essem ego salvus,
nisi istae perjissent Anaxagoras.
things, unto the welfare of the inner man. Good Lord! what fools are men,
that seek so much for a portion in the Creatures, and so little for an
Interest in thee? If thy love be beter then life, then thy dislike is more
bitter then death; What then is thy fury? These things mar the taste of
worldly treasure.

First, that both in the getting, and also in the keeping of such things, a
man's always prone to offend his God. And who would live to injure his God,
vex his spirit, stain his nature, and procure his displeasure? yet all this
moves not ungodly men to seek for a Jesus.

Secondly, a man's still subject to be displeased by the Lord. Men are usually
crossed every moment, and every day has it is evil both of sin and
punishment; sometimes we are Matthew. 6. ult.
crossed in things we most like, A man sets not his love largely on a Wife,
Child, Friend, or pleasant and pleasing thing, but ordinarily it is taken from
him, or else hee'^ took from them. At other times a man desires things not
attaineable, which is a very great, but a secret vexation. And is not all time
laid out in bewailing what is past, a loathing what we have tasted, and a
longing for what we have not tasted? which were it had, would no more fill us,
then this we have already.

We alas! are like men seasicke, who shift from room to room to find ease:
but whilst the winds arise, and the waters swell, humors are but stirred, not
taken away. And often times we wait for better days: but they are hid from our
eyes. Thus we are caught like birds in a snare, yet skip up and down as if
nothing ailed us. And which is worse, the joys of Gods presence are for the
greatest part kept from us here, which made Monica the Mother of Austin cry
out Quid hic faciemus? cur non ocyus migtamus? Cur non hinc avolamus?
heartily; What do we here? why depart we not swifter? why slye we not hence?

Thirdly, outward things are not as they seem, and are esteemed, they have
indeed a glorious shows, and are admired: but inspice ea, view their insides
and you will find that they fill the head with cares, and the heart with
vexation.

'Twas a good speech of an Emperor, whatsoever he himself was: you (said
he) gaze on my purple Robe, and Golden Crown: but did you know what cares are
under it, you would not take it up from the ground to have it.

Fourthly, Heavenly or earthly advancement is not in them. To Heaven they help
not, for riches avail not in the day of wrath. Advance on Earth they shall
not, for it is the Lords prerogative only, to do that for men. Promotion
comes neither Psalm 75. 6, 7
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South: but God's the Judge, he
pulls down one, and sets up another, as the Prophet speaks.

Fifthly, they are unsuitable to the nature of a soul, and her sublimitie. And
can you think that the Lord brought us into the World only to accommodate the
Carcass with things suitable thereunto? The soul must have a bonum congruum,
ere she can be glorious, or begin to be so; But these things accord not with
her. For is not the soul of an immortal nature? then how can dying things
nourish and refresh a living soul? she cannot get or make a living out of all
seen things in the world, nor can she live to her liking on sweetest husks that
be here. She Is but hospes corporis, and that may please the Host, which cannot
please or pleasure the Guest; and that may fat the carcass, which starves the
soul. A man may have the desires of his heart in these things, and still
retain leanenesse in his soul. Woeful experience proves it to be true in some.
Besides, good things of this life are but particular, can only supply
particular wants: but the desires of the soul are universal after good, and
all good. God is all good to the renewed soul. Oh then let us not pursue the
creature Tanquam haec sit nostri medicina doloris.
so, as though that would cure our maladies, heal our miseries, and bring us to
glory.

And now wretched sinners be persuaded, lay not out strength, and time on that
which is not bread, and on that which satisfies not, neither kill your selves
and souls carelessly: but walk in the ways of the Lord, for he meets every
one that works righteousness, and remembers him in his ways. Be no longer
your own foes to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, with the loss of
the Pleasures and Treasures of Heaven for ever; and let God become your friend,
who can stand you in stead in the evil day. Consider, he is such a friend as
is both wealthy, and helpful; If a poor man has a rich friend, and one that is
helpful too, then his heart is eased.

A Courtier in the Court of King Cyrus, being upbraided with the meandness of
his estate, replied thus; What need I care, (...), Cyrus is my friend. When a
man is sanctified, and in Gods favor, has not he much more cause to say so
of God? When he wants, let him say, God's my friend, when Satan, sin, and the
world play the part of enemies, say, well, but God is mine; and all Saints in
all places may cry out Emanuel, oh! how great a consolation is this? Besides,
he is always one and the same to a returned backslider, he is a friend in
adversity, such an one is worth the prizing, he will be in trouble with his as
well as in peace, and then (...), as he said, where God is, there is heaven. If a
man goes to prison, and God goes thither with him, and stays there by him, he
then enjoyes a Heaven. Oh then prize him, prize him, for every one prizeth
something, and some things that are worth nothing: Let Christians then much
more prize him who is more then all things, and worth more then all things; for
no man was ever cursed that had him, nor was ever any blessed without him.

Soli Sapienti Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

