A SERMON Preached before the KING AT St. JAMES's, April 16. 1696.

Being a Day of Public Thanksgiving for the Discovery of a Horrid Design to
Assassinate His Majesty's Person: And for the Deliverance of the Nation from a
French Invasion.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCVI.

The Bishop of NORWICH's THANKSGIVING-SERMON Before the KING AT St. JAMES's,
April 16. 1696.

A SERMON Preached before the KING at St. JAMES's.
PSALM L. 15. -- I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
THE Goodness of God, which inclined him to create so great a number of Beings,
of whose Service he could have no want, having all Perfections contained in his
own Nature, and essential to it, moved him, ever since they did exist, to
preserve them.

Among the Creatures of several Kinds and Ranks which God brought into the
World, to some he gave a Capacity to discover his Being, and that he was the
Maker of all things, and did conserve and govern them; who by considering the
Works of his Creation, and either viewing them singly, or comparing them
together, must discern Wise Design, Exact Order, Mutual Fitness and
Subserviency one to another, every where among, them, and thence necessarily
conclude, that the Author of all these Productions is endued with Infinite
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; and that it is most reasonable for them who have
received so Noble a Nature from him, to reverence, love, and honor him for it.

But what he did enable his Creatures to find out by their Reasoning Faculties,
he has manifested more fully to them by Revelation; as well what concerns the
Excellency of his own Nature, as what relates to them, and their Dependency
upon him.

He has taught them, that he is their Sovereign Lord, of whom they hold all,
and that it is their Duty to worship and praise him for his Loving Kindness;
that as he only can furnish them with the common Supports of Life, so they are
to pray to him for them; that as he will rescue them out of danger, so they
ought humbly to recommend themselves to his Care and Protection; and after he
has made a way for their Escape, heartily to return him Thanks for their
Deliverance.

Thus to be grateful to our Principal Benefactor, is not only agreeable to
Natural Light and Justice, but the great Law of our Religion. I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me.

In the Text these Two Propositions are plainly contained.

(1.) That Deliverances are from God.

(2.) That it is our Duty to glorify and honor him for them.

In treating of the first, I will show (1.) That all Deliverances are from God.

(2.) That some are more evidently so, as having the plain and visible Marks of
his Hand impressed upon them.

(1.) That all Deliverances are from God: Before I enter upon the Proof of
which, I would premise (1.) That this Assertion does not imply, That God will
deliver us, if we do nothing our selves toward obtaining our Safety; he has
promised that his Grace shall attend and promote our honest Endeavors, but
gives no ground to the idle and negligent to hope for his help, who will make
no use of their Natural Powers derived from him for their own Preservation.

(2.) Neither from hence does it follow, That God will encourage men in the
pains they themselves take to get out of Trouble, if they do not humbly address
to him for his help; The calling upon him in the day of trouble, being the
express Condition upon which he will deliver us.

(3.) Nor though men pray vehemently to God, have they the least reason to
expect he will fetch them out of those Dangers they have run themselves into,
by being engaged in any wicked Design. Should Robbers, Pirates, Murderers,
Assassines, Traitors to their King and Country, pray for the Success of their
Villainy, and that they may escape the Stroke of Justice, God would be so far
from granting their Petitions, that he would take their Prayers for a new
Injury and Affront, and abhor their Sacrifice as much as their Sin.

4. Neither are these things to be so strictly understood, as if the wicked
should never escape out of any danger; for they sometimes may call upon God,
and he may have so much regard to their Prayers, as to take them out of the
hands of their Enemies, who may be worse than themselves, to induce them to
repent, and return to him and their Duty; they may humble themselves before
God, and he defer the Calamity to a further time, which he had threatened to
bring presently upon them: Thus upon the Humiliation of Ahab, who did evil
above all that were before him, God delays the Execution of the Judgment he had
denounced against his House, unto the days of his Son.

Moreover, very bad men sometimes do deeds of Charity and Mercy, and God
suffers their few Good Works for a season to cover their many Evil ones, so
that they are not always brought immediately to Light and Punishment.

God also may permit the Wicked to succeed in their Evil Designs in order to
correct and reform his own People, when they trust more in the Arm of Flesh,
than in God their Savior; and when upon any loss, or disappointment, they grow
uneasy and ungrateful, and do not retain a due sense of his great and manifold
Mercies.

Lastly, The Wicked often do prosper, and are suffered to climb high, not out
of kindness to them, but that their fall may be the greater; and that the
Divine Vengeance may be the more conspicuous in their final overthrow.

These things being premised, I proceed to observe, That Deliverances are of
several sorts, both with respect to them for whom they are wrought, and with
respect to the Evils from which they set us free.

Some are confined to single Persons, or reach but to private Families, or
Towns; and some extend to whole Countries and Nations, indeed to all the Race
of Mankind, as that Transcendent Deliverance in the Redemption of the World by
our Lord Jesus Christ. And as the Redemption Christ did purchase for us with
his Blood was the most comprehensive, taking in the whole Stock of Men; so was
it the most valuable, as rescuing us from the power of Sin, which brought the
Wrath of God upon us; and from the wages of Sin, everlasting Punishment, which
is the greatest of Evils.

As to single Persons, God guards their Souls against the Designs of their
spiritual Enemies, the World, the Devil, the Flesh, either by keeping them out
of the way of the Tempters, or by enabling them to overcome their Temptations,
so as they shall not be hurt, or led captive by them. It is also to the
Goodness of God that particular men owe the preservation of their Health, Life,
Reputation, and Estates: He defends their Lives from the malignity of Diseases,
from the covetousness of Oppressors, who would kill, that they might take
possession; from the malice of their cruel Enemies, that thirst after their
blood; and from a vast number of dangerous Accidents, which are not to be
imputed either to their own folly, or the ill will of other men.

He also protects the Reputation of the Innocent, and delivers them from the
Slanders of lying Lips; he secures men's Estates, not only from the Assaults of
Robbers and Thieves, but from the violence of Fires, Tempests, and Floods, and
from all other Casualties.

But though there is no Creature so small and inconsiderable, that God does not
take care of it; yet for the most part, the Acts of his Providence are more
apparent and discernable in the ordering and management of the greater portions
of the World; his hand is more visible in the government and disposal of
Countries and Kingdoms, than of particular Places and Families; of Kings, and
Men in Authority, than of private Persons; whether in their ruin, when they
turn their hearts from the Lord their God, and give themselves up to commit
evil; or in their Preservation, when they do that which is right in his eyes,
and keep the Covenants and Statutes which he has commanded them.

And it is to the extraordinary Providence of God, that we are beholden for
this joyful Occasion of assembling our selves together, who has delivered our
King from the hands of cruel and barbarous Men, that had conspired to
Assassinate and Murder his Sacred Person; and preserved our Nation from an
Invasion, for which all things were prepared and made ready by a Powerful
Neighbor, with design to conquer our Country, and to bring that Bondage and
Slavery upon us, under which his own Subjects do labor and groan.

Had God, justly incensed by our Iniquities, permitted these Hellish Plots to
have taken effect against the Person of our Dread Sovereign, and the Land of
our Nativity, it is not easy to conceive the Fears, Horror, and Confusion with
which we should have been overwhelmed; nor the Rage and and Cruelty with which
our Enemies would have followed their Blow to have obtained a full Conquest,
and made us completely miserable.

We could with no reason have expected the least degree of tenderness, or pity
from them, who had so far divested themselves not only of Religion, but
Humanity it self, as to murder the Father of their Country, under whose
Protection they for many years had lived safely; neither should we have had
more ground to hope for favor from that Prince, by whose Arms we were to be
invaded, who in his whole Conduct seems to have greater regard to the
amplifying of his Who has suffered so many things to be said of him, not only
full of rank Flattery, but which savor much of Blasphemy; viz. Viro immortali,
p. 42. Factis miracula firmat; totus me indiget orbis, p. 44. Nusquam meta
mihi; nusquam devius, p. 45. Vae cui Iratus Jupiter, p. 47. Per se cuncta
videt, p. 48. Qui nec errat, nec ceffat, p. 54. Histoire du Louis le Grand. Par
les Medailles.
Glory and Power, and the enlargement of his Dominions, than to the honesty of
his Cause, and the Rights of them with whom he does contend; and whose Mercy,
or even Faith and Justice, the unhappy whom he has conquered, have no reason to
applaud.

Neither perhaps are these Failings so much to be charged upon the Ambition of
his Natural Temper, as upon an unenlightned Zeal he has to promote a Religion,
which allows men to do very many ill things.

For where Popery has a full Influence upon men, they will break through all
Ties, Natural, Civil, or Divine, to serve that Interest. Neither Laws, nor
Edicts, nor Promises, nor Oaths, nor Vows, nor sense of former Kindnesses, have
been found Bands strong enough to hold them.

There are indeed Doctrines taught in that Church, which are great hindrances
to good Life, and dispose men to violate the Moral Duties of Nature and
Religion, without any great shock of their Consciences, or fear of Future
Punishment. They get rid of their Fears by the Doctrines of Penance, Purgatory,
Memorabilis est dispositio Philip. IV. Hispan. Reg. qua constituit ut 100000
Missae ex sua intention dicerentur, and quidem ut si ipse non amplius its opus
habeat, Patri ac Matri suae bono cederent; sed si hi jam in Coelo essent; eorum
animabus applicarentur, qui in Bellis Hispanicis mortem oppetierint. Puffendorf
de Cons. and Diss. Protest, p. 43.
Masses for the Dead; and make their Consciences easy by those of Equivocation,
Absolution; and that they are not bound to keep the Faith they have engaged to
Heretics (which is the good Name they are pleased to give us), whom they will
not allow to have any Right to Truth, or Justice, or so much as to their own
Lives.

Hereupon many of that Communion think it no Sin at all to kill us; and the
most zealous and bigoted among them believe it a Good Work, and that they
shall merit Heaven by doing God and their Church such Laudable Service.

Since these Principles have found Entertainment in the World, what Havoc has
been made of the Lives of Men? what Effusion of Christian Blood?

During a short Reign in our own Kingdom, Men and Women of Holy and Peaceable
Lives, to a great number, were burnt at the Stake, because they would not
embrace Opinions devised by the Church of Rome, and imposed for Articles of
Faith, which are not contained in the Holy Scripture, nor known to the
Primitive Christians.

In the Country from whence we now were threatened with an Invasion, as we are
informed by some of their own Hist. Hen. IV. Bishop of Rodez. p. 24.
Authors, the Throats were cut of near a Hundred thousand Protestants in the
space of a few days: When Tidings of it reached the Court of Mezeray Hisf. p
722. Gregory XIII. Pontificatus initia laetiora Iaetus de Parisiensi
Hugonotorum caede nuncius fecit. Hor. Tursellin. Soc. Jesu, lib. X.
Rome, his Holiness the Pope received them with in-expressible Joy; O diem
illum plenum loetitiae and hilaritatis, quo tu, Beatissime Pater, hoc ad te
nuncio allato, Deo Immortali, and Divo Ludovico Regi, cujus haec in ipso
pervigilio evenerant, gratias acturus indictas a te supplicationes pedes
obiisti, Muret. Orat. 22. coram Pontifice Romans habita v. Calend. Jan. 1572.
he went to St. Lewis's Church in Procession, to give God Thanks for the
Success; Quia neque ullum dicendi argumentum, hoc quidem tempore reperiri
potest, in quo plus aut dignitatis aut delectationis inesse videatur, peto a
te, Beatissime Pater, ut hoc temporis, quod mihi ad dicendum tua benignitate
conceditur, in harum potissimum rerum tractatione consumi collocarique
patiaris. Muretus, ib.
heard Panegyrical Orations on that Occasion with extreme Satisfaction and
Pleasure; Edito ampliffimae indulgentiae Displomate, Stradae Bell. Belgic. lib.
7.
granted ample Indulgences, Molmet. Hist. Sum. Pontific. Per eorum Numismata,
P.93
and on a Medal stamped for that purpose; he caused this Hellish Tragedy to be
represented as the work of an Angel: Which none could have undertaken, before
they had by a long custom of sinning brought themselves to hope, that there
were no Invisible Powers, no Angels, nor God to observe the Wickedness of men,
and to punish it.

Queen Elizabeth sat a long time on the Throne, loved and honored by her
Subjects for her Wise and Righteous Government, and yet there was hardly any
part of her Reign without a Plot carried on by her restless Enemies of that
Religion.

At one time -- Aggregaverat quosdam Nobiles Romanae Religionis Studio
inflammatos, Cambden Eliz. p. 405.

Conantur docere licitum esse principes excommunicatos e Medio tollere, and si
jus violandum, Religionis Catholicae Causa violandum, Id. p. 406.

Abingtonus, Barnwellus, Charnocus, and Savagius prompti and alacres in caedem
jurant, Ibid.


several Gentlemen, Zealots of the Roman Church, some of whose Accomplices had
undertaken to make out, That it was Lawful to take off Princes excommunicated;
and that if Right and Justice are ever to be violated, it is allowable in such
Cases as tend to advance the Catholic Religion, did readily and cheerfully
enter into a Conspiracy, and bind themselves by an Oath to Murder her Majesty.
But the Providence of God which now discovered the late Traitors, brought then
their black Contrivances to light, and they suffered condign Punishment for
them.

But of all bloody Designs that Popish Counsels have hatched, and they seem to
outdo all others, there is none that had so contracted its Venom and Malignity
together, like the Rays of the Sun in a glass, and which in the most
compendious manner would have destroyed so many, and of such high Quality, as
the Gunpowder Plot. Caligula wished the People of Rome had but one Neck, that
he might cut it off at one Blow; and the Horrible Cruelty which the Pagan
Tyrant had only in his Wishes and Speculation, the Christians of the Church of
Rome would have put in Practice, and with one Stroke have killed the King, the
Nobility, and the Representatives of the People.

And is there not reason to believe, that the same Evil Spirit, which pusht on
the Romanists in the days of our Fathers to such horrid impiety, did govern
these wretched Men in the Present Plot? which in some respect does exceed that
former Treason. For at the same time that the Life of the King was to be taken
away by Wicked Traitors at home, there was an Army in readiness to have made a
Descent upon us from abroad, sufficient not only to destroy the Lords, and the
Commons, who represent the People, but the People themselves; and there is
great cause to think they would have made the Sword drunk with Blood, before
they had put it up.

It is most unaccountable how any Protestant should have been concerned in it;
and yet it cannot be denied, that some there were of that Religion, and Church,
which abhors such Doctrines; they were of that Church, but had departed from
it, before they did engage in these Horrible Designs.

I say, it is unaccountable, since in the time of the late King they wish
restored, their Religion, the Laws, the Rights, and the Liberties of the
Nation, were in a manner all subverted; and the King, on whose Power all their
hopes of restoring him are built, is one that caused all his own Protestant
Subjects, who would not forsake their Religion, to be imprisoned, banished, or
put to death; by which Severities he has rooted them out of their Native Soil,
and left no appearance of them in their own Country.

Is it to be thought he would treat Strangers more tenderly than he has done
his own People? or that he would tolerate the Exercise of the Reformed Religion
in this Kingdom after he had conquered it, who has extirpated it in his own,
where his Subjects had a right by Law to enjoy it, and were not guilty of the
least undutiful Behavior to provoke him to violate their Rights?

And here I should have thought it necessary to do an Act of Justice to our
Religion, in renouncing and disavowing the late Proceedings of those
Clergymen, who absolved two Persons that were condemned for Treason, and at
their death showed no tokens of Repentance for that Detestable Crime, as being
contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of England, and scandalous
to all good Christians in her Communion, had it not been done already, as far
as can be in the present Circumstances, by the Bishops of the Church, and, I
doubt not, with the hearty Concurrence of the rest of the Clergy.

While such Pernicious Opinions as these find favor in the World, and there
are men bad enough to practice them, we have great need to fly unto God for
Protection. We cannot reflect upon the inhumane Slaughter intended both of our
King, and of our People, without horror and detestation; we cannot think of our
Wonderful Deliverance without hearts full of Joy, Praise, and Thanksgiving,
ready to be offered to God our Gracious Deliverer.

Great is the Lord, Pial. 145. 3. 107. 43. 64. 9.
and mavelous, Worthy to be praised; there is no end of his greatness. Whosoever
is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Men shall fear, and declare the works of the Lord;
for they shall wisely consider of his doings.

Indeed a little consideration and thought will convince us, that all
Deliverances, whether private or public; whether of single Persons, or of
whole Nations, are due to God. All men are sensible that they cannot preserve
themselves; they find no power within them, either that was the cause of their
being, or that can certainly secure their Estates, their Credit, or Friends, or
prolong even their own Lives.

Men, seemingly to themselves, and others, in sound health, are in a day or
two's time carried off by a Malignant Disease; Death surprising them when they
had set it at a great distance, and scarce allowed it any room in their
thoughts. So Thefts, and Fires, and other Accidents, Quem dies vidit veniens
superbum, Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem. Senec. in Thyeste.
sweep away their Estates, against which the nicest Care and strictest Guards
are no absolute Security.

Greater Uncertainties do attend War and Peace, Public Councils, and the State
of Kingdoms: Counsels, through want of knowledge of many things, may be wrong
taken; or the Wisest by Treachery may be discovered, or defeated; small
circumstances of things change the fate of Battles; things which were not
observed, or so much as thought of when they began, and they that assured
themselves to return Conquerors from the Field, have been carried away
Prisoners.

Such as pretend to be our Friends, may be plotting against us; and our truest
Friends may not have skill and strength to deliver us; or be out of the way,
when we stand in most need of their help. And as we discover no sufficiency in
our selves, or Friends on Earth to save us from trouble and danger, so have we
no ground or warranty to address our selves to the Souls in Heaven of Saints
departed; since we have no assurance they know how, or what we do; nor that
they could help us, if they had knowledge of our Affairs.

Much less can we apprehend how they should hear the Prayers of some Millions
of Persons dispersed through all Countries, put up at the same time: which is in
effect to allow them Omniscience, and Omnipresence, two of the Properties of
the Divine Nature. It is therefore intolerable Presumption in the Writers of
the Church of Rome to suppose such Powers and Authorities to be lodged in the
Virgin Tua enim omnipotentia manifest ostenditur, quia multos de sua
damnatione jam certos, multos in aqua praesocatos, multos ex improviso mortuos,
qui dum caderent tuo Patrocinio se commendarunt, liberasti; multos etiam qui
fine Poenitentia decesserunt in peccato mortali, a diaboli faucibus eripuisti,
and ur possent agere poenitentiam ad vitam reduxisti. Eusebius. Nieremb. Tropaea
Mariana, p. 7. 8.

Nomen Mariae convenit nominibus Dei. 1. El. 2. Eloha. 3. Elohim. 4. Sabbath.
5. Eloim. 6. Qui est, vel sum quod sum. 7. Adonai. 8. Jehova. 9. Saddai. 10.
Tetragrammaton, quod Jehovah pronuncianc. Biverm, de Privilegiis filiae Dei
Mariae, p. 165.


Mary, and St. Anna, abs te nequeunt mortalia pectora frustra

Poscere, quodque voles nata, Deusque volet. Beiselius in Rosar. S. Annae.

Cum alii Sancti habeant suffragia a Christo impetrare suis devotis, per modum
supplicationis, S. Anna autem sicut Avia Christi habet jus imperandi and
praecipiendi Christo, sicuti etiam matter Maria, nec fas est negare quod
postulat. Pelhart de Temeswaer, Sermon, 3. de S. Anna


Ann her Mother, and other Saints, which are peculiar to God himself.

They must have very false Notions of God and of his Creatures, who imagine
either that he can transfer, or that a Creature is capable of receiving those
Attributes, which are in their own nature incommunicable, and which without a
Contradiction cannot be separated from a Being infinitely perfect. There is
therefore nothing we can firmly rely on, either for the safety of our Persons,
or the private Comforts of this Life, or the Public Good of our Country, but
God himself: Upon him it is we must call in time of trouble, and he will
deliver us.

The Heathens had such a just sense of humane Frailty, that they did attribute
all the great Turns in their Condition to something above their own power. Cum
Divis volentibus, quod been eveniat mando tibi. Cato de re rustic. cap 14.

Te sancre venerans precibus invicte invoco,

Porrenta ut populo, Patria, veruncent been. Non. Marcel. c.2.


To the Will of God they ascribed the good success of their Affairs, and hoped
by his Aid to be delivered from Calamities. (...)Pindar, Od. 8.
That the happiness of his planting was the more durable. (...)Soph. Electr.
That when he will punish, there is no escaping for the Strong. Saepe Jovem
vidi cum jam fua mittere vellet

Fulmina, Thure dato sustinuisse manum. Ovid.


That his displeasure might be appeased by their humbly addressing themselves
to him. Aristotle tell us, that the ancient Philosophers, who treated of the
Original, and Corruption of things, did define nothing, or leave no Opinion
concerning Fortune. -- That nothing proceeded from it. -- That a Mind or Nature
was precedent to it, and therefore necessarily, the first Cause of the Effects,
not only ascribed to Fortune, but of the Universe.(...). Arist. Nature. Auscult.
l. 2. c. 6.
And tho sometimes they talk of the influence Fortune has over humane Affairs,
yet they acknowledge it to be subject to the pleasure of God. Omnem Deum, qui ab
homine colitur, necesse est inter solemnes ritus, and precationes Patrem
nuncup^ri, non tantum henoris gratia, verum ctiam rationis; quod and antiquior
est homine, and quod vitam, salutem, victum prastar ut Pater. La^itius apud
Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Wherefore in their Prayers they style God their Father, that is, the Author of
their Life, Health, and Goods. (...), Procli Chrestom.p. 7.
They dedicated Honses to Religious Uses, and had several kinds of Verses,
which they appropriated to the Service of the Gods. Hinc cum praelio dimicare
constituerunt, ea, quae bello ceperunt, plerunque devovent, capta immolant,
Caesar. Cem. lib. 6. Bello foeliciter confecto, gratias agi Diis, and
supplicationes ad omnia pulvinaria haberi Senatus decernebat. Live. Hist. lib.
30, 35, 37.
Before Battles and after Victories they returned them solemn Thanks, and part
of the Spoils of War they devoted to God, and offered them in Sacrifice, as an
acknowledgment that the event of things is in his disposal.

And though their Temples were stately and well adorned, (...)Aristot. Rhet.
lib. 3.
and the Spices rich and sweet which were burnt upon their Altars, Animadverto
Deos ipsos, non tam accuratis adcrantium precibus, quam innocentia, and
sanctitate laetari; gratioremque existimari, qui delubris eorum puram,
castamque mentem quam qui meditatum carmen intulerit. PlinPanger.
and their Prayers accurately composed, yet the wisest of them thought that the
Piety, Innocence, and Purity of their Minds, would be more grateful and
acceptable to God than the Costliness of their Sacrifices, and the Eloquence of
their Language.

And these Notions which the Pagans had of God did result form the Idea and
Conception of a Being infinitely perfect; for if God be Almighty, nothing can be
brought about by any Power, which does not depend on his, and spring from him:
So if he be Omniscient, (...). Trismegist. apud Suid. Romans 11.36.
not any thing can come to Pass without his privity; no event can be casual or
uncertain with respect to him, who sees and knows Effects while they are in
their Causes, and disposes of them according to his good pleasure: For of him
and through him, and to him are all things: To whom be Glory for ever.

Secondly, I proceed to show that some Deliverances are more evidently from
God, as having the plain and visible Mark of his hand impressed upon them.

First, The glory of those Deliverances more especially are to be given to God
which happen to Men without their own Wisdom and Contrivance, and where they
had ussed no precautions against them: When at the same time Men arrive at the
knowledge of their danger, and of their deliverance, there can be no boasting of
their own foresight, nor place to praise the Scheme of Policy formed by
themselves. God often surprises his People with great Mercies, of which they
had not the least expectation, that they may not have so much as a pretense to
thank any but him for them.

So our Preservation from the late horrid Conspiracy is not to be imputed to
the Wisdom of our Counsels, but to the Providence of God, which so awakened the
Consciences of some of the Malefactors, that they made a voluntary discovery of
it. And that which should more deeply affect us with our Escape, and engage us
to give God greater Thanks for it, is, Ut tanta repent mucatio non fine Deo
videretur. Salust.
That this execrable Plot was ripe for Execution, and the Blow ready to be
given, when, by his Mercy, it was detected.

2. Those Deliverances are to be looked on as coming more immediately from God,
which we receive after no hope was left of flying from the Mischief which was
imagined against us: When although we might foreseee the Storm, yet we had no
power to ward against it, or to put it by. Though we might know out danger, yet
it was too big for us, we were not able to deal with it; the little Strength we
had to defend out selves, bearing no Proportion to the mighty Force of the
Enemies who intended to assault us: Now to be saved after Men had despaired of
a Deliverance, and when their Adversaries were secure of a Conquest, must be
owned to be the visible Work of the Lord of Hosts.

It is the wise Method of Divine Providence, (...). Stobaep. 581.
often to let us miscarry in those Designs of which we were sure and confident,
and to bring those good things to pass of which we had no hope; both to
convince us of our own Infirmity, and to induce us upon all occasions to
address out Prayers unto him, who is able to save us in our greatest Distress.
Thus his People of Old, when in the time of their trouble they cried unto him,
he heard them from heaven, and according to his manifold mercies, he gave them
saviors, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies, Neh. 9. 27.

This was our Condition before the late happy Revolution, when much Endeavor
was used to suppress our Holy Religion, and to discountenance those who professed
it; when our Laws, that guard our Lives and Properties, were dispensed with,
and the Yoke of Popery was ready to be tied on our Necks, and we saw no way of
escaping, then, God, in his Goodness, was pleased do make His present Majesty
the great Instrument of our Preservation.

(3.) The Providence of God is very apparent in these Deliverances which are
brought to pass by the Disappointment of our own Counsels and Resolutions,
which, had they taken effect according to our Minds, would have proved of
dangerous consequence to us; for so little do we see into things, that God
often saves us, by frustrating the very Designs we had laid for our
Preservation.

And this holds as well in the Private Concerns of particular Men, as in the
Public Affairs of Nations: There is hardly any good Man, but in the Course of
his Life, has found reason to thank God, for having denied him the things he
had most set his Heart upon; he being sensible that much of the good
Circumstances of his present Condition is owing to his former Disappointments:
Nay, upon due Consideration, wise Men are satify'd, that if they had had their
Will in Matters that once they eagerly pursued, it would have undone 'em. And
the joyful cause of our present Solemnity is an eminent Instance of God's
Mercies of this kind; for one Branch of our Deliverance is fully due to his
Providence, which would not permit us to put our own Counsels in execution; for
had our Fleet pursued the Expedition, that was according to Human
Understanding, prudently designed, the Passage would have been laid open for
the Army that was in a readiness to invade us; and there were but few Forces
left then in the Kingdom, either to have hindered their Landing, or to have put
a stop to their Progress.

(4.) We may manifestly discern the Hand of God in those Deliverances which
proceed from Causes over which we have no power. Of this sort are all those
that are produced by the Wind, or the Sun, or the Rains, or the Frost, or other
remarkable Changes of Weather. Histories of all Ages do testify, that the
greatest Victories both by Land and Sea, have had their great Turn from those
things that were quite out of the command of the Mighty and the Proud, and were
entirely directed by the Wisdom of Providence.

Seafaring Men oblige themselves to perform their Voyages to such Ports, and by
such times, if the Wind and Weather favor them; that is, if God pleases. And
what is expressly contained in their Contracts, is implied, and ought to be
owned in all Enterprises relating to Affairs of highest Nature, and under the
conduct of the wisest Men.

Under the former Head of this Discourse, we considered our Deliverance, as
proceeding from a Disappointment of the Methods that were taken for our
Defense; and here we observe, that that Disappointment was caused by the Winds,
and at that time also when we apprehended they blew against us, and in favor
of our Enemies; insomuch that if we had had them in our own keeping, and could
have made them move according to our mind, we should have been exposed to the
utmost hazard of being overrun by a foreign Enemy.

Wherefore if we have no command over many of those Causes which bring of stop
Victories, and that contribute to the safety or destruction of Kingdoms; and if
we had any Influence, might often use it to our own disadvantage, let us look
to God, from whom comes our help; Let us adhere to him in all the Changes of
Life, to whose (...). Iambl. de Sect. Pythag.
Goodness and Power, we must attribute the Beginning, the Increse; and the
Accomplishment of all our Virtuous Designs; let us beg his Guidance in our
Undertakings, and his Blessing upon them, without which they will come to
nothing; and glorify him, as for all his Mercies, so particularly for this our
Deliverance.

We come now to consider by what Actions we shall glorify God acceptably for
these his gracious Dispensations, and make such Returns as will please him.

(1.) We glorify God by a sincere acknowledgment that he, as has been proved,
is the Author of our Preservation, and that it was the Work of his Providence
that our Enemies were discovered, and put to shame, and that we have escaped
out of the Snare they had laid for us. We must with thankfulness confess, that
all our own Cares and Projects would not have been sufficient to preserve us,
had not God appeared on our side; and that with less Preparations our Enemies
might have destroyed us, had not he fought against them.

God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be had in
reverence of all them that are round about him. In thy name shall they rejoice
all the day, and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted. For thou art the
glory of their strength, in thy favor our horn shall be exalted For the Lord
is our defense, and the Holy One of Israel is out King, Psalm. 89. 7, 16, 17, 18.

(2.) We honor God by stirring up in our minds a true Sense of the Mercies we
own he has done for us: We glorify him when we reflect upon his Works with
Pleasure and Joy, and have entire satisfaction in his administration of the
Affairs of the World; when we heartily believe his Government to be Wise and
Merciful, and that the crossest Dispensations will turn to, and end in, the
Advantage of his faithful Servants. There must be an agreeableness in all the
Motions and Inclinations of our Hearts, to the sense we have of God's kindness.
After such large Experiments of Faithfulness and Care, we ought not to distrust
his Providence in any future Difficulty or Danger; and when any unreasonable
Fear begins to lay hold of us, we must endeavor to banish it, by Reflections
on the great things he has done sor us already.

Neither ought we to repine at the Expenses which are necessary for the defense
of our Country, nor to murmur at Grievances which the wisest Governments have
never been able wholly to prevent; since how great soever they seem to us, they
bear no Comparison with the wonderful Mercies we have received.

(3.) We glorify God when we are not content only with cherishing a secret
Sense of it in our Souls, but when we testify before Men what mavelous
Kindness he has shown to us; when we lay hold of every opportunity to publish
it to others, that our Friends, our Neighbors, and all good People, may
rejoice together with us, and hence be encouraged to trust in God, and to cast
their Care upon him.

But the highest Testimony of Public Thankfulness is, to assemble our selves
in the House of God, and with united Hearts and Lips, to set forth his Praise.
And if we do bring Minds filled with Love and Gladness, our Christian Sacrifice
will ascend up into Heaven with a sweet savor, such as God will graciously
receive: And the Angels, who show so much Joy at the Conversion of Sinners,
will be much more delighted with the Triumphs of the Saints, in ascribing Glory
to God.

(4.) We glorify God by endeavoring to preserve in our Memories these
Deliverances of his, whereof at present we have so lively a Sense: So that
neither Business nor Pleasure, nor length of Time, may wear them out of our
Minds. It will pass for a true Mark of the Honor we have for God, that his
Favors have made so deep an Impression in us, as will last all the Days of our
Life: And when also we convey the History of them down to our Posterity, and
afford them Matter of Thanks to render to him for the glorious Works of his
Providence done not only in their own time, but in the Days of their Fathers.

Thus what the people of Israel had heard, or known, or their fathers had told
them, they were bound not to hide from their children, but to show to the
generations to come, the praises of the Lord; and his strength, and his
wonderful works that he had done, that the generations to come might know them,
even the children which should be born; who should arise and declare them to
their children; that they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works
of God, but keep his commandments, Psalm. 78. v. 3 -- 7.

(5.) We glorify God by our humble Confession that we did not deserve the
great and many Deliverances he has wrought for us; but that they were wholly
due to his infinite Goodness, Such a sincere Acknowledgment cuts off all
pretense of Right to his Mercy; and the more we exclude our own Merit, the
higher we exalt God's free Grace. And surely it much enhances the Kindness
manifested in our present Escape, that God has snatched us, an ungrateful
People, from the Brink of Ruin, who are so far from having any Claim to his
Favors, as having served him better than others, that we must ascribe it to
his infinite Goodness and Mercy, that the open Profaneness, avowed Irreligion,
monstrous Unthankfulness of so many amongst us, have not yet provoked him to
give us up, not only to our Lusts, but to the Fury of our bitter and implacable
Enemies.

(6.) We glorify God by letting the Mercies he has bestowed on our Country
incline us to Love and Charity, and to be reconciled to one another. It is
natural to imitate the Examples of those we have in the highest esteem; and if
we really honor God in our Souls, we shall strive to do like him in all
Instances, wherein Creatures can copy after their Creator. By forgiveness of
Injuries, by healing of Breaches, and renewing of Friendships, we do that good
to one another, which God has extended to us all, and make our Behavior much
to resemble his.

No course like this, will fix and continue his Favor among us, and increase
our strength to resist our Enemies. As nothing will more discourage and ruin
the designs of wicked Men against us, than the firm Union of our Minds, and
Affections, so nothing has given so much life to their hopes of making an easy
Prey of us, as our Divisions. Surely then the extraordinary care God has had of
us, should dispose us to lay aside all private Animosities, and Self Ends, and
heartily to join together in pursuit of the public Good.

We cannot but be sensible how much our King and our Kingdom have been under
the peculiar Care of God. How osten has God preserved his Majesty's Life, not
only in the day of Battle from open Enemies, but from the execrable
Conspiracies of bloody Men, who would secretly have murdered him? The very
Winds that now detained our Ships for the necessary guard of our Coasts, did
not long since lock up the Fleet of our Enemies, when they had framed a design
to burn ours in the Harbor, and to cover the Descent they intended to make
upon us.

And will not now every private Man thank God heartily on this Day for his
inestimable Mercies, when by his Thankfulness, he will not only workout his
Salvation, but effectually contribute to the Preservation and Happiness of the
Country where he lives? Shall we not praise God with all our Soul, when the so
doing will not only purchase us a Reward in the other World, but is attended
with present Blessings, and is the way alone to secure to our Nation God's
Assistance and Protection in future times? To render Thanks to the Lord for his
loving Kindness will give Cheerfulness to our Spirits, when things have an ill
Aspect; Courage to our Hearts, and Strength to our Hands in the greatest
danger; and though all Men, Pagans as well as Christians are convinced that there
can be no accession to Veterum sanctisumorum hominum exempla secutus: Illi
enim, quod ali* menta, patriam, lucem, se devique ipsos Deorum dono habebant,
ex omnibus aliquid Diis sacrabant; magis adeo ut se gratos approbarent, quam
quod Deos iis arbitrarentur indigere. Censorin. de die Not. cap. 1.
God's infinite Glory by the Acts of our Honor, yet they are sensible that the
sincere performance of this Duty does dispose God to love them, and to do good
to them, and does prepare their Hearts for, and open and enlarge their capacity
to receive his Benefits.

And things being so, shall we not think our selves highly obliged by our
public Praise and Thanksgivings, to contribute what we can to maintain that
Cause, which God has been pleased to make so much his own? Should we not be all
ready to join our Heads, our Hearts, our Hands, our Affections and utmost
Endeavors to serve his Majesty for our own Preservation? Should we not above
all things every one do his Part, when God has been graciously pleased, as it
were without our asking, to show himself on our side, now to engage him to
continue with us? which is impossible otherwise to be hoped for, than by
promoting a general Reformation.

Which if any one is yet to begin, that has any Generosity in him, from whence
shall he choose to date it, rather than from such a day as this, a day when we
are to thank God for such extraordinary, such wonderful Deliverances, as we
have not seen the like given to any other People, the common Deliverance of our
King and our Nation, of our Bodies and our Souls; and not only of our selves,
but of our Posterity. Surely whosoever has any sense of Gratitude moving in
him, cannot but feel it move powerfully in his Heart at this time, to glorify
God, as he demands it in our Text, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
men.

Now to join our Prayers together with our Thanksgivings, May God be graciously
pleased to preserve the King's Person, which has been so often exposed in the
Defense of ours; may he whom Providence has guarded against so many Swords, and
so many Bullets, in the Field, and in the Frenches; never to be taken off by
Poison; or fall by the vile Hand of any barbarous Assassine; may all his People
Love and Serve him; and may he long live to defend the Established Church, the
Laws and Rights of these Realms; the Reformed Religion; and, to restore Peace
to the Christian World, upon good and lasting Foundations: And in the end, for
all his Righteous Labors, may he receive a Crown of Glory.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TWO Sermons of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence, Preached before the
Queen at White Hall, August 17. and 24. 1690. on Prove. 3. 6.

A Sermon Preached at St. Andrew's Holborn, June 28. 1691. on Gal. 6. 7.

Of Religious Melancholy: A Sermon Preached before the Queen, at White Hall,
March 6. 1691. on Psalm. 42. 6.

Of the Immortality of the Soul: A Sermon Preached before the King, at
White Hall, on Palm Sunday, 1694. on Matthew. 10. 28.

These by the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN Lord Bishop of Narwich.


