(...) OR, The Yernings of CHRIST'S bowels toward his languishing FRIENDS.

Wherein the sincerity, ardency, constancy, and super-eminent excellency of the
love of Jesus Christ; as it works from him toward his Friends: is delineated,
discussed, and fitly applied;

BY S. M. Minister of the Gospel of God.

I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live; Yea I said unto thee when
thou wast in thy blood, live.

Behold thy time was the time of Love: yea I entered into a Covenant with thee,
and thou becamest mine,

Ezekiel. 16.6.8. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church, Ephesians. 5.32. -- (...). Isocr. Orat. ad Demon. Non requiescit amor in
quacunque superficiali adeptione amati, sed quaerlt amatum perfect habere,
quasi ad intima illius perveniens, etc. Aqu. 1. 2ae. 28. a. 2. LONDON, Printed
by Matthew Symmons, in the year 1647.

To the Right Honorable Philip Lord Wharton Baron of Wharton.
Right Honorable,
Inexpressible and unconceivable are those cordial joys, which proceed from
the in-commings of Jesus Christ upon the Soul, and her outgoings toward the
Messiah again; For is it not an heaven on earth, so to commerce with Christ?
what, but this may be compared to that Heaven above, where God gives out
himself in fullest measures, begetting like motions and operations in the
glorified Saints? What gives the Saints mercies and morsels a right relish save
this, Mea non prosunt sine me, nec tua prosun^ sine te, Bern.
Christ's coming in upon as hand in hand with them, and making them good to us?
and can any thing but his absence mar the taste of mercies? what shall I say? he
that has Christ wants not, Is habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia.
he that wants Christ inherits not what he seems to have. What Is good to us
without God? Toll meum et tell D^^.
and what can be bad to us when we enjoy him? Quid si sine domo, et non sine
domino, sine vest, si non sine fide, sine sibo, sine lecto, et non sine
Christo?
what the Father said of Joy, that may I say of the Joy-maker, and much more.
There is so great a sweetness in heavenly joy, that if one small drop thereof
should fall into Hell, it would swallow up all the bitterness of that Tophet.
Tanta est dulcedo caelestis gaudij, ut si una guttula difflueret in infernum,
totam a maritudinem inferni absorberet. Aug.
Christ being had, makes bitter things sweet, rough things smooth, and massy
things light: Oh! what a Jesus have we? does not the Saints lothnesse to be
rent from him, speak out sweetly what an one he is, to such as sit under his
shade with delight? Qui semel Christi dulce dinem gustaverit deficile ab illo
seperari sustinet. Bern.
Oh the power, purity, immensity, and perenity of his love, mercy and
goodness! how precious a thing is it to have, and to be had of such a precious
Christ? Certainly time will discover it, 'twill be known at the time of his
glorious appearance to judge the secrets of closest hearts, and to be honored
of all that believe: Of which number, I take the boldness to repute your
Honor, to be in the front among persons of Honor. And what do I more then
revive the ancient report which has gone forth concerning your Honor, many
years since? Simulata non diu durant.
what bad men say it skils not; sure I am, good men speak you a man of a
moderate spirit, one who loves truth for the truths sake: how you have done,
and do still countenance the godly part of any party, I need not tell the World:
but that which does most ennoble your Honor, and make you most famous, is God's
speaking out his approbation of you, to your own soul; for that only is
Circumcision, which is of the heart, and he is a right Christian, whose praise is
not of men only, but of God. Sir, I humbly present you with this small
Treatise, and why should I doubt of your favorable acceptance, in whose noble
breast such wisdom and ingenuity is found? Let him doubt that lists; for I
will not: the book is your honors, such as it is, and if men mestake not, it
discovers hidden secret passages, and proceedings, betwixt Christ and the Soul:
and what is more reviving to a spiritual person? In a word, this is but a small
acknowledgement of your Honors worth, yet future opportunities may cause to
abound: go on in well-doing noble Patriot, and prosper, reconcile the
differences of Saints, do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with God; you
may do much good by your good example; For, as the Father spoke, an Excellent
Lord is better then an excellent Law. Thus shall you live so, as that you need
not fear to die, and propagate Gods glory with your own name and fame to
future generations. Now that it may be the lot of your honorable self, with
your noble Consort, and all your Posterity, to prize Christ, live in him, be
saved by him, and stated in everlasting glory with him, shall be the desire and
prayer of him who is,

Your Honors humbly devoted to serve you in the things of Christ, SAM: MOORE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE great and glorious GOD whom we adore, Thom 1^ part q. 20. Artic. 4.
is love, and what is best he loves most. His love is great to his work, his
people, his truth: but unto CHRIST it is above all, yea above the whole
universe. Raynerij Pantheolog: Tom, 1o p. 129.
The greater any Good is, the greater it is belove'd. The more near,
acceptable, like, excellent, lasting, perfect any good is, by so much it is the
greater. The LORD CHRIST in all these he is the nearest to God, his humane
nature is united to the divine, John 1.14. Mar. 16.19. Ephesians. 1.20, 21
he sits at the right hand of Majesty in glory: his acceptablenesse was
emphatically twice witnessed from Heaven, Matthew. 3.17.17. chapter 5. John 16.23.
Ephesians. 1.6.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, and its for his sake that
we are accepted. As for likeness, the foundation and strength of love (for
wheresoever's the greatest likeness, Hebr. 1.3.
there is the greatest love) He is the express Image of the Father, and his
glory does fully resemble the Fathers glory for excellency, John 1.14.
it is his transcendently, he is the chiefest among ten thousand, C^^. 10.
John 1.14.
the only begotten Hebr. 1.6. Angels must adore him, and all men must give him
equal honor with the Father; John 5.23.
He Is the most excellent and lasting good without any seed of corruption,
Acts 2.31. Esa 9.6.
the everlasting Father, Hebr. 13.8. The same for ever, full of all
perfections, all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were in him, he had all
power, Col. 2.3.
all things, Colossi. 1.19. all fullness, Colossians 2.9. even the fullness of
the Divinity, Mat. 28.18. John 3.35.
so that he was and is altogether lovely, and called the Fathers Well-beloved.

Now notwithstanding that CHRIST was the great and chief object of the
FATHER'S love, the delight of his eye, and pleasure of his soul, yet Him has
he given unto the Sons of men for their life, John 10.10. For their light
and learning, John 8.12. Matthew. 11.29. For their livelihood, John 6.51. For
their redemption and forgiveness, Gal. 3.13. Colossians 1.14. For their peace
and reconciliation, Ephesians. 2.14.16. For their righteousness, Jerem. 23.6. Romans
10.4. For their sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. For their Covenant, Esa 42.6. For
their Counselor, Esaias 9.6. For their Consolation, Hebrews 2.25. For their
Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. For their Advocate, 1 John 2.1. For the Shepherd and
Bishop of their Souls, 1 Peter 2.25. For their Sanctuary, Esaias 8.14. For their
supply, John 1.16. For their hope, Acts 28.20. For their Foundation, Ephesians.
2.20. For their Father, Esaias 9.6. For their Physician, Luke 4.18.10.34. For
their Salvation, Luke 1.69. And for their Glory, Luke 2.32.

The Father therefore having given his dearly and deeply beloved Son unto
us for such ends and purposes, we should not doubt but that he will be all
these unto us. This Author in the first part of his Elaborate work lays open
the yernings of Christ's bowels toward all his languishing Friends.

Reader, if thou be one of them, here is an Optic Glass in which thou may
clearly see how the Heart and Bowels of CHRIST stand toward poor sinners, and
so toward wards thy self. What would thou have, which from him is not
haveable? Do thou want life, light, maintenance, countenance: is it pardon,
peace, purity thou would have? speak, is it Righteousness, Council,
Comfort, friend-ship, safety thou need? Art thou wounded and want
healing? Art thou pursued by the Enemy, and want deliverance? is it grace or
glory thou desire? would thou have a word spoke for thee to the great KING
of HEAVEN? have thy Cause pleaded for thee there? Is It resolution, assurance,
salvation thou sighest and seek after? In CHRIST who is All thou may
find all. Look into this Treatise, it sweetly sets out the Samaritanesse or
compassionatenesse of Christ? it shows thee how ready he is to supply thy
wants, and satisfy thy longings. Here thou shall feel him drawing thy heart
unto himself, and showing thee the sight of glorious. Mysteries. It Is our
ignorance of Christ's love and bowels, that fills us with fears, doubts, and
jealousies, that keeps us under bondage, and causes us to rest in shadows
and low things. The Author has provided a good Remedy, he has opened
Christ's heart to thee, to draw thy heart to Him: and where should Saints hearts
be but where the heart of the Father is, and that is in Christ. His transcendent
worth affects him, his transcendent worth and bowels should affect us. Love to
any thing changes the heart into the likeness of the thing loved. If a man
love earthly things, he is vir terrenus, an earthly man, and his love is
earthly; If a man love heavenly things, he is vir caelestis a heavenly man, and
his work is heavenly. Would thou be a heavenly man, and love with heavenly
love. This Work will teach thee to love Christ, which will change thy heart
into the nature of Christ's heart, and so thy self and love will both become
heavenly, and the more heavenly thou art, the more fit for heavenly visions,
and glorious Mysteries.

Reader, this Treatise needs not my pen, it speaks for it self, thou may
account it amongst thy treasures. It has that in it is better then the Red
earth of the world. The God of all truth teach thee by his spirit to know prize
and practice all truth.

Thine if thou love the truth, W. Greenhil.

A Table of some few Heads contained in this Book.
Part. 1. CHAP. 1. What Is meant by loving, page. 1. etc. How men are said to be
Christ's own: all are Christ's own by right of dominion, for he is Lord of all.
page 4. Christ's flock bis own by a six-fold right, page 4. 5. 6. End, what it
signifies, p. 7. 8. 9.
Chap. 2. THe love of Jesus Christ what for kind, 1. Sincere, without mixture.
2. Not selvish, he loves not for rewards. 3. Chaste, undefiled. 4. Full immense.
page 11. 5. Free, and acts freely. p. 17. Christ's love in what respects free.
page 21. etc. 6. A tractive drawing. p. 25. 26. 7. Coersive constraining. p.
27. 8. Immutable, it cannot change, and why, in three particulars. p. 28.
CHAP. 3. Christ's love, what for degree. 1. Christ's love's more then a friend,
and how cleared by diverse instances. page 34, etc. 2. Christ loves more then a
Father. page 39. 3. More then a Husband. p. 40. 4. Christ loves man more then
he loves himself, made evident in many particular cases. page 41, etc. 5. The
love betwixt Christ and christians, greater then that love which is betwixt the
Soul and the body. page 44. 6. Christ loves man more then man loves Christ.
Three reasons of that. Ibid, etc.
CHAP. 4. CHrist's love, how discovered to his in two particulars. By words or
works. By words, there are 3. sorts of Christ's loue-discovering words. page 50.
etc. Christ prays to his Father for Saints, and to what end. 1. That their
graces fail not. page 56. 57. And therein Christ peswades the soul of two
things to comfort and confirm it. 1. That he has prayed for as bad as that
soul can be. 2. That he always prevailed for what he prayed. page 58, etc. 2.
He prays that their natures soil not. page 61. Christ prays to the Father
in Sts. how, and in what sense. page 62. Christ putting words in his Disciples
mouths, and how. p. 65, etc. Christ's love, how discovered by works. 1. By
doing for them. 2. By suffering for them. 3. By suffering with them. p. 74, 75.
Doing for them, and that 1. in serving of them. Ibid. 2. In making his services
easy to them six ways. p. 76, ctc. Christ discovering his love by suffering
for his. page 82. The glory of the grace and favor of Jesus Christ to his, how
discovered in suffering for them, showed in six things. page 83, etc. The
glory of that great work glimps'd out by five things more. page 94, etc.
Christ discovering hearty love to his followers by suffering with them, and
how. page 103, etc.
CHAP. 5. TO what end Jesus Christ sets his love on lovelesse sinners and
sinful souls. Christ loves a poor polluted Soul to make it lovely in his
own blessed sight, and unto his own glorious self. page 111, etc. 2. To
present his object blameless both to himself, and also to his Father. page
113. How Christ differs from other lovers in this respect. page 114. 3ly. To
present his beloved ones spotless, he sets his love on souls to cleanse, and
sanctify them to his own and his Fathers use. p. 115. 4. Christ loves to save
the soul harmless, preserve and keep it alive. Satan loves to destroy: but
Christ loves to save. page 116, 117 Christ's affection to his, calling for
action from them for him. Ibid. 1. He Is active for you, prays for you, pleads
for you at the Throne of grace night and day, against the accuser of the
Brethren. page 118. 2. Satan's vassalls are active for him, and it is a most
abominable thing, and not to be paralelled, that children of darkness should
do more for their Father, then do children of light for theirs. Ibid.

PART. 2. CHAP. 1. CHrist-like affections working toward Christ. page 1. The
rise of this. 1. Divine love is active, and it acts toward Christ for
fullness. p. 2. 2. Christ is the Center to divine Love, and arising aloft in
him it has rest; and the soul it self is then a serene Spirit. page 3. 3.
Every thing has its end, and moves toward that: love has its end too and
thitherward it moves. Grace has no other end but God and glory. Love is a
grace, and a great one, full of heavenly motion. page 4. 4. Divine Love is the
Divine nature, and cannot be confined in man who is but an heap of earth and
'twill break forth upward till it become Glory. page 5. 5. Best intelects covet
best objects, Christians have the best intelects, therefore they love Christ.
page 6. Christ how the best object of Love Divine, made plain in three
particulars. 6. Divine Love goes out, works toward Christ by a Divine
instinct it ascends upward: for it can do no other. page 8. 7. A spiritual
soul is righteous, sees it is a righteous thing to love Christ, see's some
must love Christ, and she knows none has more cause then she. Ibid. 8 A
divine soul is reasonable, sees it is but reasonable, to love him who loved
her when she had nothing in her worthy of love. page 9.
CHAP. 2. CHristians showing love to Christ and how, in twelve remarkable
things. page 9, etc.
CHAP. 3. LOvers of Christ, how known. 1. Such as love Christ, see a motive in
Christ, to stir up love (it being the emminencie of an object that ottracts
love. page 29. 2. A soul that loves Christ thirsts after his presence, has
never enough of his communion with her. p. 30, 31. 3. One that loves Christ,
fears to disprease him: true Lovers are loath to offend those they prize and
love. page 33. 4 True love is of the person of Christ, were he without portion
or privileges. A Christ under shame as well as Glory, a Christ abas'd as well
as exalted. page 33, 34. 5. One that loves Christ would fain he, and do like
Christ. p. 35, 36. 6. They love Christ's friends as the object of his delight.
p. 37, 38.
CHAP: 4. THe passage of Divine Love as it works toward Christ, may be
obstructed, and how, cleared in six particulars. page 39, etc.
CHAP. 5. CHrist keeping love alive in cbristians, and how, showed in many
particulars. page 50, etc. Incentives to love Christ, what, in ten particulars
handled at large. page 59, etc.

PART. 3. CHAP. 1. What things agree to make up a right sigt natural. p. 3.
Visions of Heaven glorious, and why. Ibid. They have in them God a glorious
object, Christ a glorious medium, and a light super-sensuall, supernatural,
and glorious too. page 4, etc. Right sight of Christ, what. 1. To see him as he
is, p. 11, 12, 13. 2. Right sight of Christ is experimental. page 14. The good
arising from such a sight of Christ, what, expressed in four particulars. page
4, etc. The evil of the contrary, not to see Christ ezperimentally, cleared by
four things also. page 18, etc. 3. Right sight of Christ, is to see Christ as a
man is seen of Christ. p. 21. How a Christian is seen of Christ, in two
particulars. Ib. A persuasion to look up to Jesus, and why. p. 23. Incentives
to that glorious work, what. 1. All heirs of everlasting life longed to see
Christ before their death, and had their desires. page 24. The language of a
Christ-less man or woman at the Judgement-day, what. page 25. 2. Man's necessity
calls for this, he must mind a Jesus, see him by faith, for he wants him, and
there is not another. page 26. 3. A right sight of Christ gives a right sight
of self, and selfs estate, it being most certain, that men never see
themselves so well as when they most see Jesus Christ. page 28. Sight of
Christ, what sight of self it gives. In him we may see what we have been, are,
and shall be. page 29, etc. 4. All right sight of Christ has in it a sustaining
nature, a heart-relieving virtue, a soule-reviving ability, things of Heaven
being all supporting, much more Christ himself. page 34. 5. 'Twill increase
inward joy, a joy of heart, which excells the joy of harvest. page 37, etc. 6.
'Twill strengthen patience under the cross, and chstaizement for Christ. page
40, 41, 42.
CHAP. 2. THe likeness betwixt the 1. and 2d. or the natural and spiritual
birth what, in eight particulars. page 43, etc. Four reasons why men should
esteem it a greater privilege to be borne twice, then to be borne but once.
page 56, 57, 58, 59. How God brings in, and brings up returning sinners. 1. He
principles them. 2. Acts them. 3. builds them. 4. Constrmes them. page 60. How
God principles those be will save. Ibid. Christ's act by which he draws out
those principles, what. 1. Illumination. page 61. What work light makes in a
dark Soul. Ibid, etc. 2. Humiliation. page 63. How Christ humbles men kindly.
page 64, 65. To what end Christ humbles, lays low chosen vessels. page 66. How
Christ builds Christians. 1. by keeping them and all their graces in continual
action. p. 74. 2. By infusing strength suitable to opposition. page 75. What
Christ in building helps his people to live above, whilst they live in the
body. 1. Above corruption. 2. Above temptations. 3. Above gracious evidences.
4. Above glorious manifestations of his Fathers love, and how. page 79. etc.
Christ confirms his, and how. p. 87. The effects of such stability of heart in
that respect, what. page 88. The faith of Saints concerning this, what. page
90.
CHAP. 3. CItizens of heaven are strangers here. What it is to be a stranger
here, 4. particulars of that. page 92, etc. Whence it is that Christ lets his
live so far from home, that God so kind a Father, puts his children into such
an unkind world. page 105. 1. To put a difference betwixt Earth and Heaven. 2.
To glimpse out Glory to a faithless people. page 107. 3. To save others alive.
page 108, 109. 4. To dispose them for higher things, and how, page 110, 111. 5.
That grace might have a being as well as glory. page 112. Strangers on Earth
how known. 1. By the price they put on glory, and the thoughts they have of
Heaven. page 113. 2. By the language they speak. page 114. 3. A strangers mind
and motion is home-ward, though he lacks nothing. page 116, etc. The practice
of Sts making good this principle, and how. Ibid. 4. Strangers in a strange
Land content themselves only with things needful. page 119. 5 Strangers engage
not themselves too much in the affairs of the natives of strange Lands. page
123. How little cause Saints have to love this strange Land, or be loath to
leave it. 1. Till then they are far from their best friends and chiefest
favors, they are in a far Country, whilst from their Fathers house. page
124. Other considerations to loosen the Saints from the world. p. 125, 126. 2.
They should not love it, be loath to leave it: for till then they will be foiled,
vexed and soiled with filthy sins. page 127. Saints being strangers, what they
should be, and do, whilst ranging through this earthly region. p. 128.
CHAP. 4. SAints have their appointed time of change. To be changed, what. It Is
to have a different manner of being: it is the cessation of a person or thing
from being what it once was. page 130. The sundry sorts of changes, what in 3
particulars. p. 131, 132, 133. 134 To be gloriously changed, what. page 135. A
threefold employment for Saints in order to a disposing of them for their
last, greatest, and best of changes. page 136, etc. Saints have need to be
changed, two reasons of that. p. 140, etc.
CHAP. 5. GLory, what. page 182. What things concur to make up everlasting
glory. page 183, etc. To be glorified completely, what. page 196, etc. The
glory of the soul in heaven, what. page 197, etc. What the glory of the body
shall be in the Kingdom of heaven. page 199, etc. What the glory is that
soul and body shall possess jointly. p. 206, etc. The adjuncts of glory,
what. page 224, etc.


The Errata.
Part 1. PAge 1. l. 3. r. acts are, p. 6. r. (...) p. 8. l. 12. r. p. 8. l. 2.
r. (...) p. 3. l. 10. r. usual, p. 30. r. crucis, p. 34. l. 11. r. meted p.
55. l. r. his. p. 65. l. 25. r. on, p 67. r. risisse, p. 80. r. rebellis, p.
93. r. nisi, p. 114. l. 10. r. she, p. 65. r. nobis, p. 73. murorum, p. 30. r.
numero, p. 42. r. Aethyopissam quandam, p. 56. l. 12 r. promisory, p. 80. r.
protegentis, and dele via.

Part 2. Page 33. r. in cum. p. 62. r. perfect, p. 56. r. absentia, p. 68. r.
judicant. p. 3. l. 19. r. Center, p. 56. l. 21. r. Ieopardy, p. 59. l. 26. r.
Ishmael.

Part 3. Page 8. l. 7. r and, p. 12. l. t. r he, p. 14. l. 2. r. thy, p. 34. l.
23. r. afflictions, p. 47. l. 8. r. loath, p. 46. l. 2. dele to, p. 54. l. 21.
r. its so. l. 22. p. 61. l. 24. ^. this, p. 80. l. 20. r. doubtful, p. 106. l.
8. r. weary, p. 116. l. r. r. those, p. 52 l. 14. r. soul, p. 158. l. 3. r
hearing, p. 182. l. 10. dele to, p. 183. l. 1 dele where, p. 206. l. 4. r.
eternally, p. 167. r. exosumer, esse Christo. p. 212. r. Coacreatae. Some other
lesser faults there be, which the Printer and Corrector desire the Reader to
relieve with his pen.

THE YERNINGS OF Christ's bowels toward his languishing FRIENDS.
Joh. 13.1. (...).
Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. Quum
dilex isset suos qui erant, etc. Montanus. (...) diligo and simpliciter amo.

CHAP. I. Of the sense of the words, and their usefulness unto all
Christ-obeying Christians.
WHere affection is the spring of action, and operation, love is perfect to
perpetuity. Christ act's as he is, he is with out end, so is his love. Things
of Heaven are all lasting, everlasting: you may guess at their beginnings, but
never at their endings.

The word in the original (...).
properly signifies, to love something by adhering to it with the mind and
heart: Suidas, seu aliquem amore complector and cum aliquo amicitiam colo: as 1 John 2 10. Mat. 6.24. cha. 22.37. Mark. 10.21. (...).
so to be content and satisfied with it, as that a man desires nothing else Me
aut amabis, aut quo contentus sum diliges. Cic. Others say it is more then (...)
as com^ounded of (...) valde, and (...), acquiesco: quae enim diligimus in iis
acquiescimus. Alsied- in Lexic. signisicat contentum esse acquiescere, Casaub.
in Mar. 10.21. (...) apud LXX. Interpretes, non semper pro diligere, sed and
pro amicis blandisque verbis compellare, and laudare, sumitur, ut Cant. 1.14.2.
Paral. 18.2.
. It Is hearty love, Christ is said* to love the young man: viz. he spoke
friendly to him, and dealt gently with him, as the word there imports. Blessed
Messiah the Saints Savior, at his last departure from them; adhered to them
with all his might, soul, mind, and strength: and was so fully satisfied with
them, took such great content in them, as that he desired no other portion
besides them. And thus speaking sweetly and kindly to them, call's them his
own Peculiariter destinatus, These. 1. v. 5. peculiaris, ab (...), cujus est
certa quaedam, and minime cum caeteris communis idea, Cajet. 1 Cor: 11.6. vide
Bezam in loc. The Lord Christ is called (...), God's own Son, quod sit
filius Dei per aeternam generationem.
, as being his peculiar portion.

His own, every word of Christ has its weight, every word drop's sweetness
as the honey comb. Christians you see your blessed lot, you are Christ's own,
and Christ is your own. This comfortable kind of speaking to Christians is
very useful in Scripture; as Jesus Christ is the faithfull's own, so the
faithful are Jesus Christ's own, Romans 14.4. God is termed (...) the believing
Christians own master, he shall be holden up by his own Master; for God is
able to make him stand.

Christians! have you had experience of the powerful workings of Gods love
toward you, and on your Spirits? and do you fear a final falling, a
partial, or total declining from Jesus Christ, and his sweetest ways of
soule-ravishing contentments? Remember God's your own, he both can, and will
make you stand. Those that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, that
shall never be removed.

In general consider, Christ has and may claim title to all by a right of
dominion, and so all then are Christ's own, as he is Lord of all creatures. But
Christ's flock are his own thus.

1. By right of donation, God has given some to Christ, and what is more a man's
own, then that which is given him? The great God gives great gifts like
himself: millions of souls had Christ given him, 1 Timothy 2.6.

2. By right of purchase and Redemption, Jesus Christ has bought some, 1 Cor.
6.20. given precious, Fortasis epithetum, (pretiosa) nonnullum habet respectum
ad pretium sanguinis Christi, and meritorium ejus- Lorinus, in locum
blood for some precious souls, 1 Pet. 1.19. (...), he gave himself for us:
not only (...) a ransom, but also (...), a counter-ransome for all our
sins. Oh thou man of God, ponder these things well in thine own mind.
Christ gave his own self for thy self, and art not thou then his own? can
thou then have the heart to act such a part of unkindnesse against him as to
serve thy self? God forbid.

3. By right of conquest, he has conquered some with kindness, and overcome
some with unexpressible love, he has subdued them to himself, and their
sins with Satan down to the dust, and therefore they may well be his, and
shall not he have the greatest share in them? May not Christ say to a subjected
soul, as Paul to Philemon: thou owe me even thine own self? Me think's
the soul should thus reply, yea Lord, and take me and all mine, for thine own
use, my soul, Spirit, strength, what I am, or may be, for it is thine own.

4. By right of stipulation, Ezekiel. 16.8.
or Covenant-making, I entered into a Covenant with thee and thou becamest mine:
(...) I entered into a contract, or bargain with thee, and shall not the Lord
have his bargain?

5. By right of a gracious communication, some are sweetly sanctified to the
use of Christ, to the service of Christ and no other. The Lord has set apart
him that is godly for himself. Some are vessels of honor, fitted for their
Masters use, Jo. 17.19.22. Ps. 4.3.

6. A Believer is Christ's own, by a right of Regeneration, as he is begotten
again, in and after Christ's own Image. God the Father, through Christ by his
Spirit, has begotten them again into Christ's own likeness. The first Adam
begat a son in his own likeness, after his own Image Genesis 5.3. (...) vel ut
aliqui volunt, (...). genuit secundum figuram suam.
, the second Adam did so too. And being begotten again in his likeness, as
children truly like their own heavenly Father: they are truly and properly
called his own children. End signifies diversely Denique Erasmus tandem Beza, ad
finem usque i. e. indesinentur Piscator. Omni tempore hoc est semper perpetuo.
. First the continuation of a thing, Psalm. 102.17, 18. He shall regard the
prayer of the destitute, and not despise it, this shall be written for the
Generations to come, i. e. inperpetuum for ever. Isal. 9.7. The Lord shall
endure for ever. * Assidue Drusius, this sense from the place, Nazian. perpetuo
vulg. lat. in finem.


Where the Chaldie has it in saeculum, the Septuagint, (...), Christ loves his
own with an everlasting love.

Christians! do ye sometimes doubt, through misapprehensions and mistakes?
it is without cause given on Jesus his part. Secondly, end's put sometimes for
extremity, as misery sorrow, and suffering, is the end of sinning; death is
the end of life, sorrow, misery, and death, is man's extremity. Messiah loves
his own, in all their extremities.

3. Sometimes it signifies perfection The Graecians significantly call end and
perfection by one and the same term, (...) significat tam perficio, quam finem
facio, fineo, obeo, or consummo, benevertit ergo Poeta, Phyllirides pucrum,
cithara perfecit Achillem.
also as growth is the end of youth, i. e. the perfection of youth.

Glory is the end of grace, viz. the perfection of grace, for grace is initiall
glory, glory begun: a christian, that is sanctified, seasoned, and set apart to
the Lords use, begin's to live the life of glory even here in the Kingdom of
grace. Grace is glory inchoate, Glory is grace consummate.

4. Sometimes the scope, or final cause Scopus, seu, causa finalis, Romans 10.4.
1 Timothy 1.5. significat etiam exitus seu eventus. Phil. 3.19. James 5.11.
of things: Christ is called (...), the end of the Law, for righteousness to
every man that believes, viz. that perfection of holiness, and that exquisite
righteousness, with greatest fulness, which the most holy God, and his most
holy Law aimed at: and which is more, he did completely answer, and fully
satisfy the exactest mandates, and precepts, of the same strictest Law for
every believing soul. Christ loves his to the same end the Law aims at, viz.
to make them holy, and present them blameless, before his Father with
exceeding great joy. Ah Lord! who is wise, and see'th not strength of love shed
abroad by the Spirit in the hearts of thine?

In this text it is put for death onley, he loved them to the end, i. e. to the
death, not that death could put an end to Christ's love, by which he adhered,
and does adhere to his. Christ's love's immortal. Mors igitur non finit omnia.
Death only ends mortal things, Death was not able to break the bands of
friendship, which were betwixt head and members, Christ and christians, that
could not destroy the power of union betwixt him and his, for how could death
put an end to that which took away its sting from it? Christ's love to his
subdued him to encounter with Death, Hell, and the grave, who is now triumphing
over all principalities and Powers. The sense then may be such as this, that it
put an end to his terrene, and mortal life, and conversation, amongst them
here Mors vocatur (...) non quod omnia in morte, and cum morte, siniantur, quia
etiam de Christi morte, haec appellatio usurpatur, sed quia terrenae and
mortali huic vitae, ac mundanae conversationi finem imponit. Gerh. in locum
comin Joh. 13.1.
, and so he loved them to the end of that course he steered with them here in
the body. For 'twas come to this, that bodily presence must now for a time be
suspended, corporal fellowship certainly ended, though very sad news to the
hearts of his followers, Disciples, yet all in love. Now he and his must be
taken asunder for a time, that they may be joined together again, when time
shall be no more. Thus when Jesus knew the hour was come, that he should
depart out of this world to the Father, loving his own he loved them, did
cleave to them, even unto the end. The note from the words then may be such as
this. Christ loves christians with a lasting, yea, an everlasting love. Loving
he loved and that to the end.

CHAP. II. Of the nature of Christ's Love.
ALl motion is as the propension is, in the primum mobile, first moover.
God is good, that is his nature, and he does good, that is the fruit of his
peerless goodness, some descriptions have their bounds, but can you limit
limitlesse love?
Christ's love is such as himself is, full of all amiable glory: Christ's
goodness is not hid, we will show you first what it is, and then the degrees on it.
FIrst Christ's love unto believing souls, is for kind, sincere, without
mixture, a love without hatred, a liking without loathing. The sons of men
love with a mixed kind of love, there love has some ingredient of dislike in
it, which is soon discovered as occasion serves. But the Son of God does not
so, is not so easily incensed against those he loves. Men hate the persons of
men, men when they are offended with the failings of others, do forthwith, if
they can, avenge themselves: upon the persons of those by whom they are
injured. But Christ takes vengeance only on sin, thou wast a a God that
forgavest them, says the Prophet, though thou took'st vengeance on their
inventions, Ps. 99.8. Christ sees himself in christians whom sin cannot
destroy, he loves them for his own sake, he accepts what is his, forgives
what is theirs Accipit suum, remittit tuum.
.

Christ loves them because himself is in them, and cannot loath them, for as
he cannot deny himself, so neither can he dislike himself.

2. It is not self-ish, he loves not for rewards, if he did, where should he
have them? other lovers aim at themselves so much in loving others, as that
oft-times they loose themselves in self-love, every man had rather be better to
himself then to another Omnes sibi melius esse malle quam alteri. Teren.
. But Christ may truly say to his friends, 2 Cor. 12.14.
as Paul did to the Corinthians. I seek not yours but you; he is better to
others then to himself, suffered for many, but brought not suffering on any.
Christ seeks not himself; but thy self. Oh soul! has he any dowry with
thee, when he makes thee his spouse? thou have nothing of thine own to give
him but thy sin: thou art nothing of thy self for him, but a heap of earth,
senseless, a mere rudis indigestaque moles, what is there in thee that so
great a Majesty should set his love upon thee? Or if there were something in
thee for Christ, as there is not, is he a gainer by it? can he receive that he
does not possess already Talis est dilectio Dei erga nos, quatenus nihil boni
a nobis ipsi proprie accrescit. Amesius de consc. and ejus cas. l. 4. c. 10. 2
Cor. 4.15.
? Nay are not we receivers and he a giver?

Consider his love, he is what he is for your sakes, you sons of love and
chosen friends, all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might,
through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. Speaking in the
antecedent verse of Christ's resurrection, he died and was buried for you, and
is risen again for your sakes. Lo, see an infallible character of a non-selfe
lover! he sanctified himself, Joh. 17.19.
set apart himself for you, herein is the praise of his grace; that when he
was rich he became poor for your sakes: 2 Cor. 8.9.
that you through his poverty might be made rich. And you know it says Paul,
God has made you to know it; that this was his free Grace: that he sought not
yours, but you.

Thirdly, it is chaste, undefiled, whence those Epithites, Love, Dove,
undefiled sister, Cant. 5.2. to take away the suspicion of unchaste love Ut
tolleretur suspicio foedi amoris. Hirom. adver. Iovinian, lib. 1. Tam a me
pudica est, quam mea si soror sit, Plautus.
: for this name sister implies a detestation of all fleshly impurity. Ignatius
that holy Martyr called Christ by this name, my love, says he, was crucified:
carnal ears, eyes, and hearts, take in carnal conceits of Christ's love,
sport themselves with the Letter: but the series of the letter is nothing
serious, as Bernard notes Nihil enim serium habet literae series. Ber. sup.
Cant. sermon. 6.
. And therefore let the spiritual Spouse of Christ, conceive spiritually of
such heavenly and sweet expressions of love ut spiritualis audi spiritualiter
amatoria verba cantai, Orig. in Cant. hom. 2. Non virum and foeminam, sed
verbum and animam sentias. Ber. ibid.
: view not so much the outside of the phrase as the inside of the sense. He
loves you christians with a pure, perfect and undefiled love. Break the bone
of the letter and thou shall find the marrow of the sense frange os literae,
and invenies medullam intelligentiae. Petrus Bles. Ser. 3.
It Is the property of beasts to live on chafe, of men to live on corn,
Fumentorum est paleis hominum frumentis vesci. Greg. proeam. in Cant.
go forth therefore from the sense of the flesh to the understanding of the
mind Egredimini desensu carnis, ad intelctum mentis. Ber in Epipha. ser. 2.
.

Fourthly, It is full, in him all fullness dwells Omne imperfectum redigitur ad
perfectum, si nos ad Christum, a quo omnis perfectio descendit. Savanat. Expos.
4. orat. Domini.
, Col. 1.19. it has height, and depth, length and breadth, in it: of his
fullness we receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. Christ had not grace by
measure, in this he was anointed above his fellows: who had grace only by
measure. There is not only in Christ (...) a sufficiency, but also (...) a
redundancie of grace, as the Philosopher distinguishes, for this the Apostle
affirms, he has a sufficiency and Fullness of grace, 2 Cor. 9.8. (...) in
every necessity, (...) at every time, (...) of every grace. fullness is for
emptiness, and it is the joy and glory of Christians, my friends, that their
fullness is in their head.

That it is where it is safe, and from whence it flows fully and sweetly into
their souls. Christ is the well, thou believing soul let down thy bucket,
and drink and live. Christ loves out of the abundance of goodness, because
he expects no profit out of us: for we are unprofitable servants: but our
love to him is out of the want of goodness, because we stand in need of God
Sed ejus amor ex abundantia bonitatis, quia nullum e nobis commodum expectat;
nos enim servi sumus inutiles Deo, Luke 17.10. nostra autem erga eum est ex
indigentia, quia Deo indigemus. Amesius in medul. l. 2. cap. 7.
. Christ has in him the fullness of a fountain, give he never so much out to
us: he has never the less in himself he is an inexhaustible wellspring of
life, he is not only full in himself, and for himself: but also
communicatively unto others.

Fifthly, Christ's love is free Non habet quo intret gratia, ubi meritum
occupavit. Bern. in cant. sermon. 67.
, acts freely in dispensation to every spiritual soul, I will love them
freely, Hos. 14.4.2. Cor. 5.4. men oft-times do not the good they might, when
they have opportunity; but Christ seeks for an opportunity, waits for it, goes
about doing good. You have some lovers that will love; but then there is this
defect in their love, it is only extorted from them, by kindnesses and
courtesies done to them, and received by them, from them whom they affect: but
can you force love from Christ Omnia quae de Christo legeris non necessitate,
sed sponte facta reperies Orig. in genesis hom. 8. Matthew. 10.8.
? if you could you need not: for he love's freely, he is free enough, freely you
have received. Christ's bowels yerne fully, all his gifts are given freely,
come from him freely. Romans 8.32. Romans 3.24.
Justification comes freely, Sanctification, Glorification freely, The Lord did
not set his love upon you, nor choose you because you were more in number then
any people: for ye were the fewest of all people; but because he loved you,
Deuteronomy 7.7, 8. he did it not from any motive arising from you; for there was
nothing in you to draw and kindle his love: but he did it because he did it
Amat quia amat Bern.
. He chooses none worthy of himself, but by choosing them makes them worthy
Nullu^ eligit dignum, sed eligendo efficit dignum. Aug. cont. Iuli, Pelag. l.
5. c. 3.
. These things demonstrate freenes of grace to be in Christ, and to flow from
him into believers.

First, in that when he sets his love upon a soul, he finds nothing in that
soul worthy of love: he finds much matter of loathing; but nothing that is
matter of love, as an object fit and suitable for Divine love to fasten upon.
When a poor sinner lies buried in pollutions, and fleshly defilements, and
has no cause in him moving Christ to love, he makes lovely, and then loves,
though he finds that soul loathsome, Ezekiel. 16. from the third to the eight.

Christ himself became uncomely, Isa. 53.2.
that he might the better cover their uncomely parts with his comeliness, he
was without forms and comeliness, and when men saw him, there was no beauty
that they should desire him: this he was for your sakes. Christ does as we our
selves do, upon those members that we think to be less honorable; 1 Cor.
12.23.
even on them we bestow more abundant honor, and on our uncomely parts, more
abundant comeliness. Christ bestows on the more uncomely sinner, receiving
him, the more abundant comeliness: so that the greatest sinners, make the most
gracious Saints. Paul was once, one of the chief of sinners, the worst of men:
but after the Lord Christ in mercy looked on him: and wrought kindly upon his
Spirit, he became then one of the best of men; in labors more abundant for
Christ then all others. Oft-times it falls out, that such as are most rejected
of men, are most respected of God. A lame Mephibosheth, a halting creeple, a
blind Pharisee, a leprous Samaritan, Luke 12 16. an ulcerous Lazarus, a woman
with a bloody issue, Mark. 5.34. Persons unclean, and contemptible, objects of
disdain in the eyes of men Non desormitate corporis animus foedatur: sed
pulchritudine animi corpus ornatur. Senec.
, he has chosen also persons of mean employments, as Amos a heards-man,
Gideon a thrasher, Abel a shepherd, Noah a husbandman, Joseph a Carpenter,
Peter and Andrew fishers; James and John fishers, mending their nets were
called, and a Jailer with many others of this world's poor, who were rich in
Faith, when chosen. Mary a harlot, Rachel a harlot, Paul a blasphemer: some of
all sorts of sinners have been and shall be saved through the riches of his
grace: yet God forbid you should sin that Grace may abound: do not so sin
against Christ; for if ye are Christ's, ye dare not.

Secondly, in that he comes upon a lovelesse sinner, and sinful soul,
unseene, unsought, and not desired.

1. Unseen, a man by nature is borne spiritually blind, he see's not his own
wants, nor Christ's worth: the sinfulness of sin, nor the goodness and
sweetness of a Savior: he see's not his own misery, perceives not the nature
of the Lords mercy, he considers not his spiritual penury. Christ comes upon
the spirits of men invisibly, unseen, which shows it is from free love: and
that no provision can be made in any soul for the Lord Christ; but what he
brings along with him.

Secondly, unsought, I am found of them that sought me not; I said behold me,
behold me, to a people that was not called by my name, I saiah 65.1. viz. the
heathen Gentiles, that could not seek, nor grope for, and after Jesus Christ: a
people that had not so much as a good name, to commend them (if it were
possible) to Christ, much less good natures. What then moved this blessed
lover to set his love upon them? was it any thing they had for Christ, or to
bring unto Christ? surely no. What then? 'twas the freeness of Christ's will
to do good, that moved him to love freely. I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, that is his determination. He Is unsought, not sought of them: but
they are sought of him. He Is the seeker before conversion, (if there be any)
which must needs be, if there be any reconcilement betwixt God and the soul.
Luke 9.10.
I am come to seek and to save that which is lost. Christ seeks us before we
do or can seek him, we are lost till then. Christ elects us also, before we
can elect him: Joh. 15.6.
you have not chosen me says Christ, but I have chosen you: you see then
Christ's love is free, and acts freely toward such as he will save.

Thirdly, Christ works on the souls of men when not desired, natural men do
not know him, are not acquainted with him, Job. 21.14.
his outgoings and incommings before them, Scientia non habet inimicum praeter
ignorantem. Tolerabilior est paena vivere non posse, quam nescite. Senec.
they are enemies to the knowledge of a crucified Christ, and it is certain
there can be no desire of unknown objects: When we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him, Isaiah 53.2. The Prophet predicts what
carnal and natural men would think, and conceive of Christ in their natural
conditions. If men see no beauty in Christ, no loveliness and sweetness in
him, it is impossible they should desire him: for it is the excellency, luster,
and beauty of an object, that strengthens desires toward it, and fixes the
eye of the intellect, the understanding upon it. Christ loves when not desired,
and therefore loves freely.

Fourthly, it is free for that it acts against repulses Christ sometimes works
his works on cross and perverse natures: some Christians have as cross
spirits by nature, as can be in nature found: yet he chooses them when better,
and sweeter natures are refused. Ah Lord! what a great mystery of godliness is
this?
, love cannot be acquired by doing injuries, deserved by repulses: and
therefore free, Isaiah 65.23. I stretched out my hands all the day, to a
rebellious people: a people that provokes me to anger continually to my face.
Was this the way to be beloved of God? much less to procure love: was it not
the direct way to be ruined, stripped of God, Christ and all goodness Maium
est agere quod prohibetur, sed agere quia prohibetur pessimum. Joh. 21.14.
? and yet you see he stretches out his arm, he not only put's it forth; but
also stretches it forth, as if he should strain himself, to embrace those
that will come out of darkness, into mavelous light and liberty. Is not this
grace free? what so free as this? Natural men before Christ's Spirit comes
into their hearts, in powerful workings; they cry out: Lord depart from us, we
will none of thy ways: and did not the Lord in love, draw nigh to them, where
were they? what would their end be? Christ's love is free.

Sixthly, it is attractive, it is a drawing love, I have drawn thee with loving
kindness, Jer. 31.3. Some lovers love dearly: but cannot draw their objects
nigh to them: they love but are not loved again: their love is fruitless: But
Christ's love begets love, love like it self. Draw me says the Spouse, and I
will run after thee. Christ could draw tears from Peter's eyes, with one
look of love, and he wept bitterly Petrus, tunc flevit quando in cum Christus
respexit. Bern. de mod. been viv. ser. 10. Petrus flevit and tacuit, quia quod
defleri solet, non solet excusari, and quod defendi non potest. ablui potest.
Ambr. 10.3. ser. 46. Greg. Homil. 30. in Evang.
says the Text. Christ's love is magnes amoris the Loadstone of love. it
draws Iron hearts to it, and makes them melt before the Sun of Righteousness:
when it shines upon them sweetly.

Christ's love is a heart ravishing love, he can snatch a Paul into the third
heavens, and fill him with joy, peace and glory invisibly: he can so wrap him
up in the thoughts of his love, and fruits of his goodness, as that the man is
lost in God, is in an ecstasy, cannot tell you what he has seen, felt, or
heard. Gracious spirits! you can say Amen to the truth of these things. Has
not his love served you as zeal did David? ha's't not eaten you up? 'twill
first, or last serve you so, ye favorites of Heaven. Christ's effectual love
is not laid out in vain: for loving to the end, he holds his object close to
himself, till he has it where it cannot get from him: even in his own mansion
and dwelling place. Christ draws with bands of love, Hosea 11.3. Christians,
if words will not fasten you to your Savior, deeds must, he has bands for
you: and if he get you in bands, he will hold you fast.

Seventhly, it is coercive, both within himself, and also in all his members.
What made him to veil his glory, become flesh, and save his people, but love
Nihil enim est quod non toleret, qui perfect diligit.
? he loved me, and what follows? he gave himself for me: when once you have
his love, you have his heart, whatsoever he is and has: hear the Father
speak to dejected souls. John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
Quod omnibus promittitur, singulis promittitur.
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. So loved, viz.
so infinitely, so transcendently, so incomprehensibly, there is a sic without a
sicut, mark that wisely and well.

Does thy unsutablenesse to Christ, and unworthiness of Christ afflict thee?
Remember his love will cause him to stoop to thee, and make thee worthy in
himself. And that very apprehension, if cordial and real, if hearty and
sincere: even that I say is a fruit of Christ's love, shed abroad in thy heart
already, this abasing of thy self is a lifting up of Christ in thine own
soul, who has already made thy heart his home. What force is that which moved
him, who of himself is so violent in all victory, to be so vanquished with all
violence Quae est ista quaeso vis, tam violentia ad victoriam, tam victam ad
violentiam? Bern. super Cant. ser. 64. Nulla vis major pietate vera est.
Triumphat de Deo amor. Id. Ibid.
? Amor est, nothing but the force of love: Nazianzen calls love a sweet tyrant
Dulcis, tyrannus. Nazianzen, orat. 28. in Maxim.
.

In his members, what gives life and motion to all the parts of his body
mystical but love? all action of theirs are the product of his affection to
them: the more Christ's love has its perfect work on a believing soul, the
more lively and lovely are the reachings out of that soul toward Christ: the
blessed light of the Lords favorable countenance, shining out unto a
Spiritual soul, makes labors many, after Messiah's presence, love's coercive.

Eighthly, it is immutable, cannot change, vary, or alter, neither length of
time, distance of place, nor strength of deformity, can work an alteration in
his love. The love of man is very variable, we love by fits, and so does every
fool, he loves in his mood, while the pang lasts: But as the torrent is up
and down, so it is with many lovers, they are either as high as the skies, or
else as low as hell: either those they love are the best with them, or the
worst living, because they are unsteady, constant in nothing, but in
inconstancy. But the love of Christ is always the same, the injuries we do to
Christ, although they have their fruit in discomfort, and occasion the hiding
of his face, with the suspension of the manifestations of his love for a
season, which indeed is a hell on earth to a sanctified soul Substractio
gratlae est maxima poena. Alst. in sent: l. 2. tract. 30. q. 2.
. Yet these injuries, even these I say, do not alter, or lessen his love to
his Nube solet pulsa candidus esse dies. Ovid. Afflictio dat intellectum, quos
Deus diligit castigat. Deus optimum quemque aut mala valetudine, aut luctu
afficit. Seneca. Unde datum est vulnus, contigit inde salus.
: for God can visit transgressions with arod, and iniquities with stripes;
nevertheless his loving-kindnesse shall continue with his, (...), Nocumenta,
Documenta. Schola cruis, Schola lucis. Detrimenta corpotum, incrementa
virtutum. Greg. Iam. 1.17.
and he will not suffer his faithfulness to fail toward them, Psalm. 99.32,
23. Christ can scourge his friends for and from their sins, as well as for
the exercise of their graces: and yet love them dearly, constantly, and
ardently. In him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Not so much as a
shadow, color of alteration, or mutation; (...), he will in no wise cast you
out, Joh. 6.37. and he that escapes the Lords affliction, may suspect his own
adoption Qui excipiturd munero flagellatorum, excipitur a numero filiorum.
. Trees are rooted the more firmly by shaking Deus unicum habet filium sine
peccato, nullum sine flagello.
. The Persian Kings shunned familiarity with their Subjects, and were seldom
seen, that they might be the more honored Persona Regis sub specie Majestatis
occulitur. Just. l. 1.
: so Christ serv's Christians.

1. It Is not length of time that can work, or occasion an alteration in his
love. It Is everlasting, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Hos. 2.19.
Jer. 31.3. Behold I will betroth thee unto me for ever. We may through tract
and length of time, forget and be forgotten. As Joseph forgot his Brethren, and
was forgotten of them. Length of time may either wholly wear out out
affections, or else cool and lessen their heat, and strength, toward our
familiars: But Christ's love tak's not cold, is not cooled toward his, it is
always firm, free, full, fervent, Heb. 13.5. He has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. The words are emphaticall; (...), there is a
duplication of the subject of the Promise, I will not leave, I will not
forsake, and a multiplication of Negatives Est negationis conduplicatio, ut fit
vehementior pollicitatio. Estius in locum.
, there are five negatives in the promise, by which he intimates, he will not,
yea he will not surely, he will not forsake his servants: he will never totally
reject them, he will not utterly forsake them. I will not leave you
comfortless, or as Orphans, as children without parents (...) Non descrit,
etiamsi dese rere videatur, non deserit etiamsi deserat. Austin. Nam non
dicessit Deus, quando recessit.
.

Secondly, no distance of place were it never so great, yea, although 'twere as
great, as that which is betwixt the lowest earth, and highest heaven: yet
cannot this part Christ and Christians, or impare the strength of his
affections toward them, work the least alteration in his love: yea even now,
although his glorious Majesty possesses the heavens, yet his heart is where
'twas, it is toward his Saints on earth. You blessed babes and friends of
Christ! your head in the heavens prays for you, pleads for you, takes notice
of you, and all your sufferings: he is in Heaven entered before you, but it is to
make way for you, fit a place for you, and preserve your rooms till you come,
assure your selves he cannot forget you, do not you forget him.

Thirdly, nor can strength of deformity work a change in his love, he can love
Job on the dunghill, with his filthy carcass, Jerymiah in the d'ungeon with his
rotten rags Anima quae nunc pannoso vestitu and servili habitu, tegi putatur:
in regno Coelorum Regina, and nobilis Regi astans reperitur. Basil. l. de vera
Virg.
, Lazarus whilst begging with his running sores: Jonah in the Whale's belly,
though his head's bound up with weeds. Abel tumbling in his own blood, Paul and
Silas in the stocks, with contemptible chains: as he is no respecter of
persons, so neither is he a respecter of conditions: he never withholds his
affection, from his people in affliction.

CHAP. III. Of the degrees, or rather the immensities of of Christ's
unsearchable love.
Infiniteness has no demensities, by finite considerations.

Christ's love is of an infinite nature.

There Is a measure in every thing sait's our Proverb: but Christ's love
out-vies the worlds Proverb: it is without me asure, has no measure in it. It Is
nothing above Geometry, that is an Art that may teach to measure the earth; but
the Heavens are not so far from the Earth, as the degrees of Christ's love
are above all Arts and parts of men.

Can you measure him who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand,
Isaiah 40.12.
and meeted out Heaven with a span?

Christ's love's immense, knowing Christians can tell you so, and that no
mortal can describe its measure, we will illustrate its greatness a little, as
the earthlinesse of the instrument will permit, and leave the rest to be
revealed in Heaven, to all heavenly minds.

THe degrees of love as well as the truth, strength, force, and ardencie
thereof, are as the relation is in which it acts, which may be shadowed out
thus.

First, Christ loves more then friends, there may be a knitting of souls among
friends, as in Jonathan and David: but did you ever hear of a knitting of
natures? 1 Samuel 18.1. vide 2 Samuel 1.26.
friends of Christ! Christ has knit your natures to his, you are one nature as
well as one flesh, are you glad on it? can the two natures of two friends be
united in one person? Christ has don't, this is the mystery of perfect love.
The Law commands, love thy neighbor as thy self, but extends no farther: but
Christ has done a great deal more, mark believing soul! Christ's love to
thee, has excelled the love of friends. For Christ loved thee not only as
himself, as his Father commanded: but also more then himself, as his love
constrained. Has he not given his own life to save thine? was not his soul
weary to the death, to refresh thine, under the powers of that death which is
death indeed? it is the second death I mean, to which the first is but a
shadow. He was as a sheep led to the slaughter, to free his sheep from such
shambles. I lay down my life for my sheep, that is the heavenly voice, do you
hear it you sheep of Christ? Joh. 10.15. Can Paul cry up some that would, for
his good, have pulled out their right eyes, so well they loved him? oh
sanctified souls! you have greater cause to cry up Christ? for he would and
did draw out both his eyes, yea his precious soul to do you good, both now
and in your latter end also, so well be loved you, and he is the same he was,
you blessed babes of Christ.

Secondly, Friends may peradventure die for friends, and that is the greatest
love that man can show, Joh. 15.13. but Christ's love is more, he died for foes
Non existentes immo and resistentes. Ber. sup. Cant. ser. 20. Romans 5.8.
, Christ can bleed freely, to make a resisting rebel live sweetly, the life of
God. Christ will crown those with glory, that had a heart to crown him with
thorns Pudeat sub spinato Capite Membrum fieri delicatum. Bern. in festo. omn.
Sanct. ser. 5.
, if they will receive him, he is kind to the unthankful, that is his goodness,
he can bless them that have cursed him, love them that hate him, pray for
them that persecute him, oh flesh and blood! thou can not do these things.

This is the praise of Christ's love, if you say he died for his friends, we
may answer as he did, for his friends indeed, as being heartily loved of Christ
Pro jam amicis nondum quidem amantibus, sed tamen tam amatis. Bern. in Psalm.
qui habitat.
: though like unkind friends, they loved him not again. Or as Aquinas, not his
friends as loving him any thing, only his friends as loved by him alone Non
amici quasi amantes tantum amici ut amati. Thom. Aquin. in Johan. uti Barrad.
to 4. l. 4. c. 15.
.

And, which is more, Christ in suffering was no murmurer in the least measure;
he was led as a sheep to the slauohter, and opened not his mouth, closed his
blessed lips and was silent; Oh Lamb of God! thou art exceeding good, when we
suffer for friends, there is some heart-risings in us, some harsh and hard
expressions fall from us: discontented words are uttered by us, yea much more
when we suffer for our enemies. But Christ was free from this, did not charge
his God with folly, what ever he brought on him.

Some grudge to do him service, who never grudged to save them, would they
once accept of his love. Sweet Christ's ill served of some, who have been well
served of him, some think all too much they do for Christ, who thought all
too little that he could do for them, would they come in; But they will not come
to him that they may have life, sad souls! I Will sigh for you, thus he refuses
his own cure, who acquaints not the Physician with his grief Ipse sibi
denegat ceram, qui medico non publicat causam. Aug. Epist. 118
, he dies deservedly who refuses Christ bringing life eternally Merito
peritaegrotu^ qui medicum non vocat, sed ultro venienentem respuit. Musculus.
Prima pars sanitatis, est velle sanati. Seneca.
.

Secondly, Christ loves more then a Father, he loves children of Light more
then Parents can do theirs. David may wish he had dyed for his Absalom; but
the heart's deceitful, and chiefly delusive in its affections. That love may
seem strong, which in great undertakings and workings may prove weak. Christ
did not only wish a death once, to preserve his from dying twice; but did also
embrace it: will you hear his comfortable sayings, in two or three words? it is
this, I lay down my life, no man takes it from me, few words but full of
worth. They came from his heart; had David died, he could but have kept one
alive, and that not long: but Christ's dying has kept millions alive, who
shall never die the second death. Christians! what say you to your heavenly
Father? can you love as you are beloved? how can you forget his goodness? you
cannot live, much less die without the comforts of his love, without him ye
can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. (...) seorsim a me, severed from me Calv. Camer.
etc.
.

Thirdly, Christ loves more than a husband, where is the husband that will marry
with a black, deformed, and adulterous wife? and when he has got her, so love
her as to lay down his life for her Quis enim potest sic ducere, ut moriatur
pro ea quam vult ducere? Si enim mori pro ea quam vult ducere voluerit, non
e^it qui ducat. Securus autem ille pro sponsa mortous est, quam resurgens e^at
ducturus. Aug. in Psalm. 122.
? Christ has done it, and thou know it, believing soul! if thou know
what thou were, when Christ betrothed thee to him. Christ matcheth like Moses,
Moses his spouse could not be more defective in nature and outward comeliness,
than was Christ's Spouse in grace, and inward comeliness: and yet thou Spouse
of Christ! consider, Moses could not do that for his Spouse which Christ has
done for thee, Moses married a certain Ethiopian, but could not metamorphise
or change her color Moses E^^i^yss^u^ quand^m duxit uxorem, sed ejus non
potuit mutare colorem. Bern dom. 1. ^ost. octa. Epiph ser. 2.
, she was as black, when made his wife, as ever she was before: But Christ
makes of black white, finds foul, but makes fair In sola anima pulchritudo,
and turpitudo apparent, and ideo is solus vir pulcher est, qui est virtute
preditus. Alexan. poedog. l. 2. c. 12.
, that is his method. Psalm. 45.13. (...). All the glory of the Kings Daughter is
within, as the Septuagint read the words, 'tas ever been Christ's lot to light
of spiritually uncomely Spouses, sweet Lord! thou marriest merely for love,
when Christ seeks a soul he never asks the question, what is she, or what
has she, he will have her if she will have him, so great's his love. It Is not dowry
or feature he have it? all he aims at is love for love Quam quaeris alium,
inter sponsus, necessitudinem, vel connexionem, praeter amari and amare. Bern.
in Cant. ser. 31.
.

Fourthly, Christ loves man more than man loves himself, all men seem to love
themselves, but really they do it not, thy soul's thy self, and that is
neglected, whence are all those cares and pains about thy carcass? why lay'st
thou so much out on dust? Is the bodies worth like the soul's Quid de te, tu
ipse tam male meiuisti, ut inter bona tua nolis aliquod esse malum nisi
tcipsum, Aug. in sermon. de temp.
? was not he found a fool that heaped up goods for many years, and placed
felicity in them, and in one night, lost them soul and all? can thou say
thou love thy self, and yet workest not toward Heaven for thy soul, thy
better part? what shall the body be sed, warmely clad, sweetly accommodated,
and shall only the soul be brought to poverty? Is this self-love to let self
die for ever, for lack of looking too? will thou bury a living soul in a dead
body, who for many years has given life to thy members, and at the close of
days will thou lodge it in a hell of torment Qui fecit te sine te, non
salvabit te sine te. Aug. Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum?
? oh noble soul! thou art a spirit whose nature's to be active and act upward:
but thy prison the body has been thy ruin. Blessed God! what a bad case is
such a soul in?

Others seem to seek out for their souls, seem to show some love to
themselves, but do no more then grope after true bliss. Some seek to be, and
do well in their latter end: but it is but as the Sodomites grop'd for Lots
door in the dark. Reach after it they do, but it is only ignorantly, as some
worship they know not what, so some seek they know not what: others seek they
know not where, vitam beatam quaerunt in regione mortis. They seek Heaven in
Hell, Is est homo calamitatis fabula, insoe-Ncitatis tabula.
the living among the dead, a living Christ in ways of death. Is this to love
thy self? The Lord be good to such a soul.

Christ loves thee more then thou love thy self: for his care is more for
thy soul then is thine own. Thou can let slip away precious opportunities,
of soul refreshing rarities, and never observe the emptiness of all seen
things: but Christ watches always, never slumbreth, never sleeps, waits that
he may be gracious to thy graceless self. Oh sinner! what is the frame of thy
heart when thou ponder'st these things? Did thou ever hear of such a friend
that could overlove thy self in thee, seek things for thy own peace like to
Christ? Is not this love of the highest degree? does not this speak him an
enlarging good, when thou art straitning thine own bowels against, and
toward thy self, in the things of thine own welfare.

Fifthly, Christ loves more then a soul. For, first a soul may leave her
body in the dust, but cannot raise't up again: but Christ will raise his body
though buried in bottomes of greatest depth. Secondly, the soul quickens with
a borrowed life, but Christ quickens with his own life. Christ loves his own
body, more then the soul can love her own body. Two things show the soul's
strength of love to her own body.

1. Fear of death. 2. Loathnesse to die.
For the first, men tremble to think of that separation which is then made
betwixt soul and body, it is as he calls it, a terrible separation Horrendum
divortium, Bern. sup. Cant. ser. 26.
, not only of the dead from the living, but also of the dead from it self, a
separation of the dead body from its own soul, which is it self. Timore
casto autem timeat, homo separationem a Deo. Bern.


Secondly, loathnesse to dye, the soul shrink's at the bodies dissolution, and
they each of them grieve to part with each other. Is there not in them, who
shall live for ever, a loathnesse to die? which loathnesse, arising neither
from a desire of possessing present pleasures, nor from a fear of suffering
future torments in hell fire, must needs spring from this root, the love that
is betwixt soul and body. Hylarion, when he was about to die, spoke to his
soul thus, Go out my soul, go out, what fear thou? what doubtest thou
Egredere, anima mea, Egredere: quid times? quid dubitas? Hierom. in vita
Hillarion.
? discovering that his soul was loath to leave her earthly home, loath to go
to her heavenly Father, the only Father of Spirits, oh the love it self of
none, but of such an one who is love its self D. Walls. ser. lise and death of
Christ.
1 John 4.8. God is love.

Christ's and Christians union is greater then that of soul and body, thus. 1.
The soul is truly and properly said to be in the body, but the body cannot
truly and properly be said to be in the soul, for it is impossible Ultra posse
non est esse.
. But Christ is said to be in his, and they are said to be in him. 2. There is
a greater union between the one, then is between the other Caput and corpus
unus est Christus. Aust.
, and therefore the greater love: for the more the unity is, the more is the
amity.

Sixthly, Christ loves man more then man loves God, though you take in the best
of men within the limits of this conclusion. Abraham may give a Son, an only
son Sint and in hoc parenti triplicata supplicia, silius, charissimus, quem
diligis Orig. in locum. Fulmen non minus terribile Abrahamo, quam si jubetur
cor sibi cruere, immo secum universo mundo in Infernum praecipitare. Paraeus in
Genesis 22.
, a son he loved to the Lord his God in love, through many straits, and yet
not be so much in love with God, as he is in love with him: a man may give his
own life, self, and soul to Jesus Christ, and yet not love as he is beloved.
For first, love in this life is little, and can you think its acts are so
great; Nothing acts beyond the compass of its own abilities. Secondly, we
are the Lords debtors, our lives are his by right: but Christ is debtor to
none, he paid many debts of many thousands, but owed not a mite to any
Promittendo se fecit debitorem. Aug.
. 3. Christ's love to us is greater then ours to him, for 'tas a greater fruit,
his love makes lovely: but ours adds nothing to his beauty, we may get by
him, but what gains he by us? can we augment his glory? that were to help the
Sun to shine, whose glory needs no increase. Dear friends! tell me what
thoughts have you of Christ's love, and what work does it make on your
spirits? can you at last admire the height, depth, length, and breadth, of such
a grace, in such a person as Christ is? you see, friends of Christ! all these
lovers have done worthily, Prove. 31.29.
and yet as Solomon says of the virtuous woman, many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou excellest them all: so may I say of Christ and much more,
many lovers have done worthily, but thou excellest them all.

CHAP. IV. Of the Discoveries and manifestations of Christ's love.
SOme things have a greater show than substance; but the things of Christ are
no such things.

Some men have got an Art to seem what they are not, these do like
themselves, not like Christ: for Christ cannot do so:

He Is as good as he seems, but cannot seem the half of that he is, in
himself, and unto his, while they live in this inferior world.

Some want Bowels, or else shut up those they have in time of others need; but
Christ abounds with Bowels, and they are always open, never shut against his
chosen.

Hence is that multiplication of that merciful word, Hosea 11.8. How shall I
give thee up? how shall I deliver thee? how shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? and the Lord gives you the reason of this his
arguing, within himself his heart was turned, his repentings were kindled, set
on fire within his bless'ed breast.

Christ's love, and the discovery on it, do pass th'apprehension of mortal
weights; but unto you who must put on immortality: be it shadowed out thus.

DIscoveries of love are either verbal, or actual and practical. Christ
discovers his love to his by words, or works, expressions or actions. By
words, Christ lets his know he loves them, speaking good to them, and of them
to his Father.

First, by words of nomination, by the sweet Epithets he gives them, as is
usual among all lovers, save that in this; Christ outstrips them all: when he
is verbal he is always real, so are not other lovers. These sweet words
demonstrate love, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Joh. 15.15. Mark. 3.35. Cant. 4.12. Mal. 3.17.
Zach. 2.8. Ioh. 21.5. Cant. 2.10. Dent. 32.9. Cant. 4.11.
Cant. 5.2. Love, Dove, undefiled, and those other words elsewhere, my friend,
my brother, my sister, my Jewels, the apple of mine eye, my children, my fair
ones, my portion, my Spouse. Are not these expressions full of love? do not
these words of Christ speak you beloved? We take it mighty kindly when the
great ones of this world speak friendly to us, and we think it a favor, a
friendship more worth then gold. How will some plot, contrive, and lay their
heads together for a few good words from an earthly Monarch, Prince, or
Potentate? Let such behold the King of Kings putting out himself freely in
sweetest terms. His Spouse loved to hear him speak, let me hear thy voice,
Cant. 2.14.
for it is sweet, and thy countenance is comely. Saints feel sweetness in
their Saviors words: he gives his beloved good names which are better then
precious ointments. Christ also knows his by those names, Thou have told me
says Moses, that thou know me by name. Exodus 33.12.


Though those he has elected may keep from him many years, and not come at
him until their through conversion: yet when they come to him he can call
them by their names: he can call out Saul, Saul, go to such a place, thou art
a chosen vessel. Though afflictions both of body and mind may so change men as
Job was changed, by his noisome body, poor estate, mean dwelling, which was
on a dunghill. Or as Lazarus was changed with running fores, so as that a man
that had seen them before, would say, that is not Job, this is not Lazarus, yet
God has not forgotten them, he knows them, yea, he knows them by name, he
can say this is my friend Abraham, this is my servant Job, this is my son Adam,
tho'other is my child David, a man after my own heart: he calls them together
as you do your children by name, Fetch mysonnes from far says the Lord, he
cannot forget his.

What the Heathen Orator spoke flatteringly of Julius Caesar, namely that he
was wont to forget nothing but wrongs and injuries Nihil oblivisci solet, nisi
injurias. Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.12. chap. 10.17.
, is most true of God, and Christ. He forgets nothing but the sins of his
people, I will forgive, and remember their finnes no more. The Lord blots out
their sins, that they condemn them not, puts them away that they hurt the^
not, casts them behind his back, as though he regarded them not, casts them
into the Sea, that they drown them not, covers them, that they appear not in
the Judgment: does not impute them, as if they were not.

A second sort of love discovering words that fall from Christ's sweetest lips,
are words of consolation. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God:
speak you comfortably to Jerusalem, I saiah 40.1.2. O ye rectified
Christians! consider the fruit of Christ's words, what fruits words spoken of
Christ have. It Is said of Elizabeth, when she heard the salutations of Mary,
with the tidings of a Jesus: that the babe leapt in her belly, and she was
filled with the Holy Ghost. The good woman was transported above her self,
that not only the babe; but her self also leaped for Joy: Luke 2.41. to 5.
and she brake out into singing, of God's great goodness to her.

Consider what soule-ravishing comfort there is, in words spoken by Christ.
Christ's words warm well, as far as they go. Did not our hearts burn
within us, Luk 24.32.
when he talked with us, spoke to us? were we not inflamed with love, ravished
with joy, yea, ravished in spirit, especially when he opened to us the
Scriptures, those precious sountaines of living waters? when Christ speaks to
the heart with power, he speaks from his heart in love: and such kind of
speaking must needs be very taking, in, and upon the Spirits of Saints.

Tell me o ye servants of the most High! when you feed, where he feeds his
flock, when you rest with him at noone, in the scorching times of trouble, from
within, and from without, (tell me I say,) Is not this fruit sweet to your
taste? did you ever taste the like? Cant. 2.3.
what, have you not found your hearts raised, your Spirits quickened, your
doubts resolved, your souls filled with his marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.5.6.
and that invisibly Pulcherrimam insulam videmus, etiam cum non videmus. Lyps.
ep. ad Cambd^^.
? my soul shall be satisfied, as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips: when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate
on thee in the night watches, says the Prophet, as if he should say, I cannot
once think on thee, and thy goodness: but it fattens my soul, and strengthens
me: as a man is strengthened with marrow: much more in the multitude of my
thoughts within me, do thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94.19. and
elsewhere, the good man is so full of the comforts of his good God, after he
had spoken peace, and comfort to him; that his mouth is too narrow for his
heart and observation: and breaks out thus. 139. Psalm. 17, 18.
How precious are thy thoughts to me oh God? How great is the sum of them? If
I should count them they are more then the sands, when I awake I am still with
thee. viz. I cannot be from thee, I cannot be without thee, thou art so good to
me. Thou man of God admire his goodness, deplore thine own vileness.

A third sort of Christ's love discovering words, are words of Promise
Quaelibet divina promissio est dilectionis Dei erga nos testimonium. Calv. l.
3. Jnst. c. 2. Policitis dives, in praestatione ditior.
, promissary words; he discovers his love by sweerest promises: made to them he
loves, even as it is usual among all lovers: Promises that do assure In Dei
promissis nulla falsitas est, quia infacienais nulla est omnipotenti
difficultas. Fulgent.
them of spiritual helps and sufficiencies. First, that he prays to his
Father for them. Secondly, that he prays to his Father in them, he prays to
his, and their Father for them.

First, that their graces fail not. Secondly, that their natures soil not.
That their graces fail not. Peter, says Christ, Satan has desired to have
you, that he might winnow you, and sift you as wheat; he would have you in his
sive to sift out your grace, and preserve nothing but the chafe of your sins
to witness against you: Si homo, Angelus, Archangelus aliquid promiserit,
forte quis dubitaverit: suprema vero essentia Spiritus dei testimonium nobis
intus perhibente, quisnam dubitationis locus? Chyrs. apud par.
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. I will put you in my
sive, and sift out your chafe; but preserve your wheat: for a witness against
Satan and all his fellows, the evil Angels, that kept not their standing (as
you shall do) but fell from it. And this is the promise I Will make unto mine,
that I will purely purge away all their dross, and take away all their tin,
Isaiah 1.25. Do you doubt that your faith may faint, wax weak, pale, and
wanne, that your affections may be cooled, and lessened, that your zeal of
God and his glory may be quenched? what of this your ebb of grace? I will pray
the Father for you, that your graces fail not, And you shall have your flood
of grace, as well as ebb. But I am troubled with such temptations as I have not
heard of, I am sometimes tempted to believe, Christ will not pray for me; nor
will God hear for such a wretch as I am: well says Christ, he is a liar and
was so from the beginning. Resist him Debuit juxta vos dicere non quidem
surgite and orate, sed surgite and resistite. Inquit. Hier. contra pela. l. 2.
, and so weak is his power that he has, and so strong is the power that thou
have of me: that he will flee from thee Idem hortatur ut pugnemus, adjuvat ut
vincamus, deficientes sublevat, and vincentes coronat.
.

Christ persuades and possesses the soul of two things to confirm and
comfort it. First, that he has prayed for as bad, as that soul can be. 2.
That he always prevailed for what he prayed, for though it is said, that God
hears not sinners, and that their prayers are in his esteem as abomination;
yet he hears his son, for he is no sinner, never was. Father I thank thee
says Christ Tam refert quis, quam, quid?
, that thou have heard me, and I know that thou hear me always, Joh.
11.41.42. The Father loves the Son, and shows him whatsoever himself
does. Joh. 5.20. and he loves his Saints though they have sinned, in his
Son. The Apostle gives a strong reason of this, for God has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame:
before him in love. So that you see, Christians! for your comfort, when the
Father did choose Christ: he also chose you in Christ. Hence, although you are
full of blame, blameworthy in your selves; yea although very unholy in your
selves, respecting the strictness that should be in you: yet says the Apostle
you are chosen in him for this end, that you might be and appear blameless in
this Christ before the Father. All this is through love, in love.

Now Christians! look about you, remember and consider what a Jesus you have,
how good he is, how dearly and greatly he loves you, what a friend he is to
you with the Father, and then tell me, can you show unkindnesse to this Christ?
can you deal discourteously with him in sinning against him? I tell thee o
man, I tell thee o woman, whosoever thou art, Etsi multi Gehennam omnium
malorum supcemum atque ultimum putant; Ego tamen sic sentio, sic assidue
praedicabo, multo accerbius esse Christum offendere, quam in gehenna malis
vexari. Chrysostom. Matthew. Hom. 37.
that have come under the working power of the Lords goodness, thou can not
willingly prove unkind to this friend of friends. And if thou do forget the
rock whence thou art hewne, and the breasts that gave thee suck, as some have
done: will it not grieve thy heart, pierce thy soul, and wound thy Conscience,
if it has any tenderness in it, to hear thy sweet Savior reply to thee as
Absalom to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16.17. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? as he
will do if thou abuse his love, will not such a saying of Christ as this be
quick and powerful, sharper then a two edged sword to dagg and stab thy heart?
Consider thy self therefore, and be to Christ as thou would he should be
to thee.

Secondly, Christ prays that thy nature soil not, be not soyled by sin, the
best of men have unclean natures: but Christ prays they may be cleansed in
love, Joh. 17.15. I pray says Christ, that thou would keep them from the
evil of the world, 2 Pet. 20.
that they may never be stained with (...), the defilements of the world, and
v. 17. Father sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. Cleanse,
wash, purge away their soiling sins, even theirs, and all that believe
through their word, v. 20. Christ prays for all his. And the meanest christian
if he does believe, has a share in Christ's prayers for his Sanctification.
What though the Lord replies not to a poor Christian when he cries out to him
about his soul, as Moses about Miriam, heal her now? what if he does not
heal now, even now, when thou desire healing, yet heal he will, he hears
his son, and thy self in him, and will heal when healing is best for thee.
Some languish under sins filth, guilt, and pressure, with a Spirit of
bondage, many years, cannot believe their sin is pardoned, their souls
purged: and yet at the last they find Christ, who is the means of escape from
the evil of sin, does wash it away by his blood, so that they can sensibly
say as that Martyr at the stake who had long waited for the Lords Christ, he is
come, he is come. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come and
will not tarry.

Thirdly, Christ prays to the Father in you by his Spirit, (which is another
spiritual help and sufficiency) the Spirit it self makes intercession for
you, that is, the Spirit of God within you. Romans 8.26.
Thus, first by giving matter of prayer to them, all the prayers of the Saints
that are made aright, are the dictates of the Spirit of God and Christ. The
Spirit dictates and works a sight and sense of sin, of a man's own wants,
inward or outward emptiness and unworthiness; A sight of Christ's fullness,
worth and freeness, for the good of all his people; as also what he is of God
to every believing soul, viz. wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. Christ within you reveals himself and his Father to you, Christ
is said to pray in Christians; for they have his matter, use his matter.
Because you are sons, Gal. 4.6.
God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts Remanet quaedam
ignorantiae obseuritas in intellectu secundum quam (ut etiam dicitur. Romans 8.)
Quid oremus sicut oporter, nescimus, propter varios enim retum eventus, and qui
nos ipsos non perfect cognoscimus, non possimus ad plenum scire quid nobis
expediat, ideo necesse est ut a Deoditigamur and protegamur, qui omnia novit
and omnia potest, Aqu. sum. 2^. q 109. a. 9.
crying. Christians! when you cry unto God, Christ by his Spirit is crying in
you, and calling out, Abba, Abba, Father, Father, can you then doubt of being
heard, when Christ prays in you whom the Father hears always?

Secondly, Christ in them, poures forth their requests to the Father, and that
by words suitable to his Majesty, and their necessity: this is called the help
of the Spirit, by reason of man's infirmity; and this help is afforded, because
we know not what to pray for as we ought. It Is good to have a helper when we
go into the presence of a great God, especially when we are helpless: for
did not the Spirit help, who else can give supply in such a case? Or what can
be pleasing to God, save that which comes from God? can any thing lead to God,
ascend unto him, besides that which descended from him? surely nothing; only
he that searches the heart knows the mind of the Spirit, because that makes
intercession according to the will of God, Romans 8.27. God and Christ puts words
in his peoples mouths, as is clear from Hos. 14.2. Turning to the Lord say
these words, take away our iniquities, remove our sins from us; receive us
graciously: be favorable to us, so shall we render to thee, the calves of our
lips, that is, we will be thankful, so Luke, 11. from the first to the fifth.
When the Disciples desired Christ to teach them to pray, he puts words into
their mouths, saying when ye go to my God, and your God, speak thus, call
him Father, the very name prays for us Ipsum nomen, ^rat pro no^is.
, pray him to sanctify his own name, to let his Kingdom come, his Kingdom
of grace into the hearts of the graceless, to let his will be done upon you,
in you, and by you: and for manner, so an earth as it is done in heaven, viz.
willingly, chearefully, readily, with much willingness, without any the least
weariness, ask for bread for the day, all necessaries for the comfortable
being of the outward man, ask forgiveness of sins, for he is blessed to
whom the Lord imputes not sin, though he has little of the things and
necessaries of this life. Beg, you be not lead into temptation, viz. not
suffered to be tempted, or else be kept from falling under the temptation,
Jubet orare, ne in tentationem dueantur, i. e. ne ab ca vincantur Aug. l. de
Cor. and great. c. 6.
and from being overcome of it, and that you may be delivered from all evil
of sin, and suffering. Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
unto you, if ye continue in me, and my words abide in you, Joh. 15.7. ask
and ye shall have. Christ names not what shall be given, to let us know that
gift is above all that can be named Non dicitur quid dabitur, quia donum supra
omne nomen. Aug.
. Secondly, or without words, for prayer is mental as well as vocal; and
although a Spirit of sonship is a Spirit of Prayer, and every son of God is a
man of prayer: yet some sweet souls, as dear to Christ as others, cannot
sometimes, by reason of some distempers, and distractions of body and mind; (I
say they cannot) utter their minds by words, at the Throne of grace. Romans 8.26.
Now Christ by his Spirit helps Est metaphora ab onerious sump^a, quae utrinque
admotis manibus sublevantur, Beza. (...), so Luke 10.40. The Greek wor^^'s a
decompound, and there is great force in it.
these, sometimes even to sigh out their wants and sorrows before him, and
obtain o sometimes to groan out their desires unto him: sometimes by weeping,
shedding tears, which have a secret language and voice in the ears of the
Lord of rests, Psalm. 6.8. Thou have heard the voice of my weeping, and Christ
himself has wept for some Christu^ flevisse legimus, rifisse nunquam.
Salvian. l. 6. Cum Spiritus hominis suspi^or, Spiritus Dei aspirat. Cyprian.
Matthew. 6.
, sometimes the heart's so full of sorrow, so sad, and heavy, that nothing can
be said or done: then, even then the Spirit helps, and all through love.

Christ has promised his beloved friends corporal succors; every morsel a
Saint receives: he has it in way of a promise. The Lord feeds others too,
but it is only so as he does the beasts of the field; in an ordinary way of
providence: wicked men may have much, and yet inherit nothing, because they
possese not God in their enjoyments, enjoy not him in conjunction, and
connection with the Creatures. Take no thought says Christ, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed, It Is
enough for a Gentile, a Heathen, a stranger to God and Christ to be cuttingly
careful for these things: that has never a heavenly Father to provide for him
Does your heavenly Father feed the fowls of the Heavens? and shall he not
much more feed you? Does he cloth the Lillies of the field, better than
Solomon in all his glory, and cloth the grass of the field, Wicked men are
like the grass of the field with their gloria brevis, whose end's to be burned.
which remains but for a time? and shall he not cloth thee, who shall live
for ever, abide for ever? these are some of Christ's comfortable love
discovering words.

And many other such like there be, which for number are as the Stars of the
Firmament that cannot be told.

It Is said that one Crane a precious Christian, though of mean estate in
outward things, being about to die, and it being demanded by his friends, what
should become of his children: he answered thus. God that provided for the
Ravens, will also certainly provide for the young Cranes, and according to the
good man's faith so it was, that all his children were well provided for in this
evil world. Psalm. 34.9.
There is no want to them that fear him, that is, of what is good for them,
and to miss an evil thing is no injury to them. If the Lord of his goodness
does foresee, that riches will be a snare to one or other his sons of love,
and therefore withholds them from them: what does that child want? save
something, which if he had, 'twould make him more wanting in better things.
Some have much of the world, and this has been the fruit of it, the cares of
getting and keeping, together with the fears of loosing the things of this
life, 'tas almost drunk up all that delight, Joy, and content, they should and
might have had, in a spiritual God, Christ, and spiritual things. If any man
loves this world, the love of the Father is not in him.

Some like the bird that is fastened to a stone, would be on the wing, on high
toward Heaven: but when they attempt to ascend, they are drawn back, and held
down with a stone in the heart, and another in the hand. God has given some
their hearts desire, but has sent leanenesse into their souls: and what
profit was there in that? had it no been better to have wanted those things,
which fat the carcass and starve the soul, which is the most precious Jewel
we have in this world? It is one mystery in Godliness, to have nothing, and
yet lack nothing. A Christian may have nothing and yet lack nothing. Luke 22.35.
When I sent you without purse, scrip, and shoes, lacked you any thing? and
they said nothing.

Divine Providence makes up outward wants another way: The Martyr had noe food,
and yet he lacked none: for as he had no meat: so he had no stomach, and all
the Apostles wants, and sorrows, were but an as it were so, 2 Cor. 6.9.10.
but as it were dying, and yet living, as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as
poor, yet rich, and making many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things. Christ was their all, as it were what it was not, for when a
Christian possesses God; he injoyes all: and what wants he? surely there is
none who live in God and his Christ, but shall be kept alive in this world, and
if they be not it is no great matter; for this is not their Country: they will
never be well and at hearts ease, till they be at their heavenly home.

Christ promises health also, and protection to his in mercy, Prove. 7, 8. and
c. 4.22. Luke 21.18.
all the hairs of your head are numbr'd Si sic custodiuntur, superflua tua, in
quanta securitate est, anima tua. Aug. Sed sicut Capillus de capite, sic nec
momentum p^ribit de tempore. B^^^.
. If that sickness and infringement do surprise thee, yet, is it any more but
an exchange of mercies? God shuts out Moses from an earthly Canaan, which was
an affliction to him, but then gives him a heavenly one for it ^n C^^is
rep^sita est major comp^nsatio. Calvin.
, one mercy for another: did we not sometimes meet with changes, we should
like Jeshurom wax fat, and forget the Lord. Afflictions, sicknesses, and
weaknesses, with wants and exigencies, are as needful and as good for some as
their ordinary food. Yea, if they were not good in themselves, as there is an
evil of punishment as well as sin: yet God makes them good to some, they
were good to David, Psalm. 119.1. They give us a true taste of the bitterness,
that is, in the tree of evil: for we in nothing do more taste, and sensibly
perceive the sinfulness of sin than in suffering. Hence that, Oh the
wormwood and the gall! my soul has them still in remembrance: and is humbled
within me, Lam. 3.19.20. Here was the taste of sin in the suffering Civitatis
evertio est morum non murotum casus. Aug.
. It brings to mind our sin, as in the case of Pharaohs Butler. Secondly, it is
a mercy in that it drives us to the God of mercy. And means of escape from
sin and miscrie. In their afflictions the'l seek me early Number tibi cum
fauces urit sitis, aurea quaeris. pocula. Hor. ser. l. 1. Sat. 2.
, says the Lord. Many persons are carelessly remiss in walking with God, and
calling on God, can keep from him for days together, succession of days one
after another, sometimes months, and scarce speak a word to God. Is this thy
kindness to thy friend?

Do we not take it ill, if we meet a friend as we walk the streets morning
and evening, if our friend gives not the salutation, of a good morrow, or a
good even? Do we not say he is proud and stiff, or careless and regards not
his neighbor? what suppose ye will God think then of some that serve him
worse? Is it not pride that makes thee pass by him, not give him a word, and
but seldom a thought? Is it not pride that estrangeth thee from God? yea, it
is, and it will estrange God from thee, he knows the proud afar off. Is not
the whole fabric of man's body made upright? set upward? when other creatures
are made to look downward, and all to signify that he should mind God,
Heaven, and highest things Os homini sublimi dedit Coelumque videre jussit, and
erectos ad fidera tollere vultus. Ovid. Metamor. l. 1. sab 1.
. Ah Lord! What will the end of these things be? will not the end be bitter?

Secondly, Christ's love is practical, and is discovered.

1. In his doing for them. 2. In his suffering for them. 3. In his suffering
with them.
First, he serv's them, wonder therefore ye Celestial souls! he that is Lord
of all is a servant to all; who are of the election of grace: Matthew. 20.28. The
son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Now what think
you did subdue this conquering King of Saints? make him serve? was it not love?
great love, free love: he took on him the form of a servant, not only of a
good servant to obey: but also of a bad servant to be beaten Non solum servi ut
subesset, sed quasi mali servi ut vapularet. Bern. ter. quart. Heb. poenos.
. He was as if he had been the worst of servants, buffeted, stripped, scourged,
chastized, and pierced, led to prison to Judgment, and to death, and for your
sakes he was beaten and abused. Cibus hominis muravit se, inpabulum pecoris,
homine mutato in pecus. Ber. sup. Cant. ser.
Now Christians! did he not love you? what discoveries of love do you desire
more real than these? The Lord make you such to him, as he is to you.

Secondly, in making exchanges with them, even best things for worst In primis
de suis meliora contulit, in secundis de nostris inferiora suscepit; Aug. de
tompor. ser. 9.
: living quickening grace, for dead and sottish nature. Spirit for flesh; Mercy
for misery; Riches for poverty. Glory for shame; a Crown for a Cross; Life
for death. Christians! can you tell when you are well? all Christ, and all
Christ's things are yours. Are you pleased? If not, the Lord of hosts is
displeased: you have his help, you have his heart, he is eternally yours; this
is love indeed.

Thirdly, in making his services easy to them, and that he does. (First,) by
suting and fitting his employments agreeable to the abilities of his servants,
his Commandments are not grievous, the more grievous then is the breach of
them Quo levi^s mandatum, eo geaviu. peccatum.
; men of this world do put their servants on doing more then they are able,
oppressing them; which thing must needs make their service irksome, and very
unpleasant. But Christians! here is your comfort, that Christ's work does never
over-match the strength of the Operator. 1 Cor 10.13. The faithful God says
Paul will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able to bear, it is
a work of Christ, and his service to endure temptation. Christ's servants!
consider your Masters love, what if Satan assaults you, it is not you he
encounters withal; but the power of Christ in you; and so you shall be able
to reassault Satan. His grace is sufficient 2 Cor. 12.9.
for thee Sufficit mihi gratia tua, cum defici^ virtus mea Bern. apud Cornel. a
lapide in locum.
, and which is more, the Lord Christ gives thee a medicine with the malady, a
cure with the disease. Oh spiritual soul! thy straits and reliefes come hand
in hand unto thee, a means of escape with the temptation; this instance may
suffice. Thou may see by this, how sweetly, God season's crosses with
comforts.

Secondly, by a continuation of intrinsecall supplies, while's they are engaged
by him that there be no impairing of the strength of his servants. Services of
men do oft-times wast and consume the strength of servants: some are even
worn out by them, have done so much for their Masters, as that they can do
nothing for themselves. But in Christ's services, the Saints are as able at the
last, as first, for Alpha and Omega is with them. Such as wait on the Lord
shall renew their strength. Such mount up with wings like Eagles, run, and
shall not be weary, walk, and not faint. The services of Christ are all
strengthening, not at all weakening.

Thirdly, by frequent forbearances when they offend, he shows love in that,
other Masters are prone to make the worst of every fault: But Christ does not
tax thus, discourage, dishearten, and discomfort so, for every fault. You,
righteous Enoch's! that walk with God, can speak better things of God than
so; if your endeavors be at the highest, that you do what you are able, he
makes no words of the sins of your services to discourage you; Lam. 3.22.
his compassions fail not Compassio impassibilitate perdurat. Bern. de grad.
humil.
, his bowels cease not yerning toward his, Psalm. 78.38. being full of
compassion he forgave them their iniquity, and destroyed: them not, many a time
turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath: many a time,
often Christ is frequent in forbearances, he can suffer much, and suffer long.
Christians! is he to you a pattern of like piety?

Fourthly, by exacting no more from them, than he has promised to work in
them. If God will have oneness of heart, newness of Spirit, contrition,
faith, patience, love, Ezekiel. 36.27. c. 11.19, 20.
he work it in you Is dat qui mandat, qui jubet ille juvat.
. Friends! many complain of want of power to serve Christ, they cannot do
this, or that, or the other: but is it not want of will? Christ supplies thy
former want Da domine quod jubes, and jube quid vis. Aug.
; He will put his Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in his Statutes,
and ye shall know his Judgments, and do them; you shall be his people, and
he will be your God; and if want of will be the burden, he will supply that want
also. My people shall be willing in the day of my power Juvat idem qui jubet.
Auson.
: power, and will go hand in hand when Gods goodness works kindly in us.

Fifthly, by a continuation of his presence with them, for their assistance,
when they fail in point of a right performance Cum nullum agens, secundum a
gat, nisi in vertute primi sitque caro spiritur perpetuo rebillis uon potest
homo licet jam gratiom consecutus, per seipsum operare bonum, and vitare
peccatum absque novo auxilio Dei ipsum moventis, ^irigentis and protegentes,
quamvis alia habitualis gratia ad hoc ci necessaria non est via. Aqui. sum. 1.
q. 2^. q. 103. d. g.
. It Is some ease to a servants mind, when his Master will put to his hand to
set forward the work: even so Christ does speed the performances of his
people, by putting under his hand. Will not this encourage? what can be more
inlivening to living Christians? my soul follows hard after thee, says
David, he was much in the thoughts of God, God was with him, and he with God:
but what is the reason? thy right hand upholds me. Psalm. 63.8. Christ's
followers take hold on his Cross, and Christ will lay hands on it too, yea, and
bear the heavier end for them. It Is with a Christian, as with plants; which
the heat, and influence of the Sun makes to thrive; when Christ the Sun of
Righteousness shines upon them, is present with them, they prosper: all things
grow in their hands, and their comfort's in the hands of Christ; such as is his
presence with them, such is their life, and no other.

Sixthly, by setting before them the same Joy, that his Father set before him
in all his doings, and sufferings; the best way to encourage a servant in his
work is to set the reward before his eye: thus God the Father served his
Christ Heb. 12.2.
, consider him therefore, least you be weary of well doing, and faint in your
minds verse. 3.
. Christians! you are apt and prompt to weariness in spiritual services, to
faintness under the Cross of Christ; But says the Lord, ver. 2.
look unto Jesus, consider his patience, his suffering, and remember, for your
comfort, how he now reigns, the greatness and goodness of Christ's pay,
smoth's the the roughness of heavens way.

Secondly, in suffering for them Multo efficatior Christi mors in bonum, quam
peccata nostra in malum: Christus potentior ad salvandam quam Demon ad per,
dendum. Bern.
, true lovers will suffer to their loss; that they may gain the thing they
desire: and having got that they love, their hearts are at rest. Christ
suffered loss even of his glory for a season, that the travail of his soul
might prosper in his hands, and that he might inherit the sons of his love,
his peculiar portion. Christ suffered both in life and death, and for their
sakes he loved not his life to the death. Consider the greatness of that work of
dying for them, by the worthiness and fitness of the person: which makes the
salvation more glorious then else it could have been; which appears to have
in it a heavenly glory, thus.

First, that only Christ, and his death could be able to part that strife
which was betwixt an offended God, and offending man, he is our peace says the
Scripture, who has made both one, and broken down the middle wall of
partition between us: he abolished the enmity in his flesh; he made in himself
of twain one new man Ephesians. 2.14, 15.
. Before this, God, and his people by election, were twaite, did disagree, and
can two walk together except they agree? if they could, what comfort should a
soul have, to walk and work with an Enemy, trust himself in the hand of an
Enemy? Now this blessed act of Christ's love, has made God, and his people
friends, has taken away the wall of partition, so that now we may go boldly
and freely to the Throne of grace Heb. 4.16.
, through Christ, who before durst not see his face. Now that there was but
one, and had not he undertook it, there had been no other, 'twas greatest love
that he, in man's distress, would do it. There are two reasons of his fitness
in this particular respect.

First, he only could discover, how great the breach was that sin had made.

Secondly, he only could make the atonement, being in favor with God, the
Lords equal.

Secondly, that he be able to bear the deserts of the offender, only Christ
was able to bear the just demerits of sin, that wrath of a Divine Majesty
that was due to sin. Alas! humanity cannot stand under the wrath of such
Diety, a little displeasure of God you see, can break us in pieces beat us to
powder. We cannot tell how to behave our selves under small afflictions, a
little pain in the head, tooth, heart, belly, back, or sides, casts us down;
when as all the pains and evils of this life, are less then the least of all
our sins; how much less then could humanity stand under the wrath due to
every sin of one person? nay, to every sin of every person? It must be a God
as well as a man that was able to do this. This Christ did, he stood under
the sins of all the elect, that ever did, or ever shall survive in this
inferior world. Think of it then, was there ever any sorrows like to his
sorrows Lam. 1.12.
? what a burden bare he? The Church uses the speech to Christ, when she was
under but small suffering; but might not Christ to dampe the Spirit of
murmuring under a light Cross, have said so to her and all her children. You
just ones! you see his fitness to die for you.

Thirdly, that he be able to satisfy for the offense, none else could satisfy
Divine Justice, and a just Law for sin, o! who then would sin, since such
suffering was required for satisfaction? Some men will fear to offend against
the civil Law, if they perceive that any great satisfaction is required, any
great mulct inflicted for the breach of the Law.

Hence murders, rapines, buggeries are not so many as they would be, because
the Law exacts no less then life in such a case; and pray tell me, what is the
life of man to the life of God? of Christ? it is nothing; yet some out of
natural tenderness, will weep for the death of a man; and that in great
measure: but have not one tear for Christ, think not of him, are every day
striving as much as in them lies to crucify the Lord of Glory afresh, and put
him to open shame by their sins. If it be not so, what means the breaking
out of your piercing sins, flinty hearts? o foolish and unkind! will ye thus
requite the Lord, and the love of Christ?

Fourthly, that he be without sin, he that is a sinner can but die for his
own sin; as in the case of two malefactors, the suffering of the one cannot
acquit the other, because they are both under one and the same condemnation:
Christ was thus afflicted for your sakes. Silver and gold was not the price of
our souls, corruptible thing's were invalid to this purpose; 'twas precious
blood 1 Pet. 1.18.
, not of a sinner, but of one that saves from sin: a Lamh of God without
blemish, spotless ver. 19.
.

Fifthly, that he personate the party offending, so as that the same perfection
of nature may fall for sin; which fell in, and by sin. Christ was the
common person, personating, as a second Adam, the first Adam and all his
posterity: offering the same nature for sin, which fell by sin, from the
pattern of perfection, God himself. By man came death, and by man came the
resurrection from the dead 1 Cor. 15.21
, man for man, person for person, nature for nature, name for name ver. 45.
.

Sixthly, that the satisfaction be eqivolent to the indemnitie suffered and
sustained.

God suffered by the loss of his Image in man, so as that nothing, except the
like in value to what was lost, is of equal value in the Lords esteem. Thus
did Christ and much more for the Elect, he gave to his Father a more refined,
and better accomplished nature then Adam lost: for, Adam was left mutable, and
so he might either stand or fall: But Christ has so ordered the matter for
Christians, as that, that part of the Divine nature which they have is
incapable of any such mutation Qui operatur ut accedamus, operatur ne
discedamus Aug. de bon. persev. c. 7. Phil. 1.6.
, sooner may the Heavens bow down to the earth, and the earth it self ascend
to the Heavens, darkness it self be made as the Light: then that grace can
cease to be grace, till it becomes glory.

Satisfaction must be plenary. First, to put a glory upon Justice, the Justice
of him who exacts the reparation, and that for the setting forth 1. The
austerity of Justice. 2. The impartiality of it.


First, thus it pleased the Father to bruise Christ for sinners, to set forth
the austerity of his Justice in this particular, whereas he would not be
content with a slight satisfaction or payment. God will have one worthy for
another, yea, a person ten thousand times more worthy to satisfy for the
wrong, than was he that did the wrong: for, the first man was of the earth,
earthie, who did the wrong; the second man was the Lord from Heaven 1 Cor.
15.47.
, who made the satisfaction.

Secondly, the impartiality of Justice, in discovering, that the most high will
not connive at sin, no not in his own, and only begotten Son, the Son
of his dearest love: Romans 8.32. he spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all; so that if the dearest Son of his dearest love will take upon
him the sins of the elect, he must bear their chastizement. He was wounded
for their transgressions, and bruised for their iniquities, the chastizement of
their peace was laid on him, and by his striyes they are healed Isa. 53.5.
.

Could not Christ escape for sin that he took upon him? did not God spare a
Son of love? where then, you sons of wrath! can you be safe from the hand
of Justice? Every man by nature is a son of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and without this
grace Christ had not been a Son of love, oh ye sinners in Syon! stand amazed
at this strictness of God against sin: and turn not your eyes from the
things of your peace; lest you discover your selves to be lost, to whom the
glorious Light of the glorious Gospel is hid, to whom the way of peace is
unknown: for God will put resplendent glory upon his Justice, in the fall of
some, as well as rise of others, the damnation of some, as well as salvation of
others.

Thirdly, does not his wisdom and Mercy deserve to be sharers in the glory
too? doubtless his wisdom was infinitely seen in this Sapientiae Dei quasi
perdix fovet filios, quos non peperit: quasi gallina congregat pullas sub alis:
quafi Aqulla provocat ad volandum. Bern. sent.
: for who but the Lord himself, and what but the wisdom of a God could find
out such a way to satisfy his Justice, and propagate his mercy? that austerity
and lenity should dwell together in the same breast. That Is a mirror of
Miracles, and are not his mercies above all his works? who dare deny it? Mercy
and Judgments do proceed from God, as honey and the sting come from the Be;
Honey comes from the Be naturally, is not forced, but comes sweetly and
freely. But the sting comes forth by provocation, stimulation. So Mercy comes
from God sweetly, and freely Magna^ injuri^^ Deo facit, qui diffidet de ejus
miserecordia. Aug.
without forcing, for, who can extort from him? force him Bonitas invicti non
vincitur, infiniti miserecordia non finitur. Fulgent.
? it is as natural for God to do good, as to be good, it is as impossible for
him to cease to do, as to cease to be. Mercy is his delight. Now acts of
Justice are more strange acts to him Tua quidem malitia mensuram habet, Dei
autem miserecordia mensuram non haber; tua malitia circumscripta est, etc.
Chyes. hom. 3. de poenitent.
, and they are called his strange Acts in the Scriptures. Judgment comes not
from him, till he be provoked, and incenced by us against our persons.

And there is this reason of Gods proceeding in this kind, the motive or moving
cause to his mercy is in himself: but the motive or moving cause to acts of
Justice, is without himself, within us Deus and Pater miserieordiarum, sed
quod judicat and condemnat, nos eum quodammodo cogim us Bern. de not. Dom:
. So that when the proper cause (which is sin in us) is removed, then that
real product of sin, that fruit and effect of sin (which is an incurring
of the Lords displeasure) is no more existent. Hence those sayings of the Lord
to Asa, The Lord is with you while ye are with him: but if you forsake him,
he forsakes you. When we keep up society with God and Christ, he cannot be
against us, nor can he ever forsake us, until he be forsaken of us Deus nifi
deserentem se non deserit non nos deserit fons, si nos fontem non deseramus.
Aug. in Johan. 32. Tu me non deseris nisi prius ego te deseram. Aug. in solilo.
c. 14.
, you see the cause and the effect. Then who is a God like to our God? that
forgives iniquity, transgression and sin, and is not angry for ever,
because he delights in Mercy. You have seen, you children of Light! the
fitness, worthiness, and sufficiency of your Saviors person, parts, and
courage to suffer for you; and how truly he has made over what he has been,
and don, even to you, for your good. Does not this speak you beloved? do you
not see God in the face, and acts of Christ smiling upon you? Consider, was he
thus fit to suffer for you? and is he now fit to reign for you? Then account
him most fit to reign in you, and to be exalted by you. But we will glimpse out
the glory of this great work a little more.

First, that highest Majesty should bow it self to lowest indignity, we are
but as worms to him Altus est Deus, humilis est Christianus, si vult ut altus
Deus, vicinetur illi, ille humilis fiat: magna mysteria, fratres, Deus super
omnia est. Erigis te, and non illum tangis: humilias te, and ipse ad te
descendit. Aug. in Psalm. 34.
. What? that the glorious God should seek for a Harmony with unglorious man,
fallen man, man that had lost all his comeliness, man that is borne like a
bruit? that he who had for his associates, a glorified God, and glorified
Angels; should veil his glory, come down from Heaven, become flesh, and be
like other men, yea, the meanest of them, even a servant? Is not this glorious?
all glorious? is not this love expressed? drawn out ad vivum, to the life?

Secondly, the cohabitation of two natures in one, and the same person with
harmony. Is it not the property of contrarieties to disagree, not to exist
peaceably in one, and the same subject? Fire ye know resists water, (when
injected,) with a fiery hissing; yet Christ you see has effected and
accomplished this natural impossibility. He made his Godhead, and manhood, to
dwell together in one person with peace: and strong was the union. Herein, even
in this sense, was that fulfilled in him, which was typed out concerning him by
the pillar of God, the cloudy pillar; there was Light and darkness, two
contraries in one pillar. Were not our natures darkness it self, till he joined
his Light with them in one person?

Thirdly, in that man's rising by Christ, and living the life of grace and
glory, should be contrived both by Father and Son from all eternity even
before man was, and had fallen by sin from his God. Christ's blood was
effectual before existent Sanguis Christi profuit, antequam fuit Bern.
, that he should be, and not be, at one and the same time be in God, and yet
not in the womb or world, God has chosen you in Christ says the Apostle,
before the foundation, of the world, then certainly before you had being in the
world. This Christ was for the good of Christians, and thus Christians were
through the goodness of God, and Christ. Christians! you were in Gods favor
before your generation, before you were begotten and conceived, and God
discovers it unto you, and that you are beloved, he speaks you beloved by
Regeneration. This may fitly be called a third part of the works glimpsed
glory Qui in factis Dei rationem non videt infirmitatem suam considerans cur
non videat, rationem videt. Greg. in Job. c. 9.
.

4. In that there is now such a firm league of friendship betwixt God and his
people, as if they had never been ad odds in a way of enmity.

Christ and his people are good friends, now they speak together, confer
together, teed together, dwell together, lodge together, and live together Omne
bonum concordiae cognatum est. Spond. in homilia. 2.
. Now says Christ, my Father is pleased, all is well, and we are well pleased
too. You are now no more a far off, but are made nigh by my blood, it is now I
in you, and you in me, and both of us one with the Father, he is my God, and
your God, my Father and your Father. Is not here matter for a sweet song? ye
Singers of Israel! and sons of God? cannot you make melody in your hearts
with the heroic acts of your Master? Should you not sing praises for the
Victory of your King, the King of Saints, you could not show your selves
Roylists of the Court of Heaven.

Fifthly, in that there should be such a sutablenesse, and usefulness of the
work, unto the desires and exigencies of Saints. Things may be good in
themselves, and yet, notwithstanding, not being found to suit with the wants of
the needy; they are not good unto them. As the body is not satisfied with
things Spiritual, so the soul is not content with things Corporal. External
things may satisfy the body, help it, relieve it in distress: but when the
soul is in distress, all the world is to it but like a great Cipher, it
amounts to nothing. There must be a fitness in the object, the ear is not
pleased with light and colors, nor is the eye with soundes Eis solum fruimur,
in quibus voluntas delectata quiescit. Aquin. S. P. 1.2. q. 11. a. 3.
. The spiritual man is carried to spiritual things: as the natural man to
natural things: and as in motion there is no rest, till in a fit place; so in
this case, you cannot quiet a spiritual soul with a thousand worlds: Interest
in God must do her good, or nothing. Every thing is fitted for its object.
What comfort does a piece of flesh yield to a sheep? and of what use is a rich
pasture to a man? that only is comfortable to us, that is good to us, and that
only is good to us, that agrees to us. The best dish agrees not with him, who
has an antipathy against it.

Silver and Gold, Pearls, and things precious, yea, and many more seen things,
as honor, preferment, and the like may be good in themselves, and for their
usefulness, as they serve men's turns. But apply seen things to an unseen
soul, and you will find she cannot relish them, she feels no savor in them, no
more then in a dry chip, as our Proverb runs, and why? because they do not
agree to her as she is a Spiritual substance, therefore not good to her. Now
of all other good, God is the summum bonum Omne bonum in summo bono.
, and his workings toward his children are about the application of things
necessary for them, and suitable to them.

This great work of Christ's dying for you has such a fruit as will fulfill
all your desires, supply all your wants, redress all your grievances: for in
all your comfortless conditions, ye may fetch comfort from Christ's sufferings
and death for you, you may fetch sweetness thence: as thus, when you want, you
may argue: did Christ die for a time that I may live for ever? and shall I
think he will not keep me alive here Dic nobis qui praeparas, quid praeparas?
replebimur bonis dcmus, sed qui bus? etc. quaerimus qued oculus non videt, etc.
Bern. ser. 11. in Cant. explicans illud Isayae, c. 64.4.
for a time also? did the Lord give Christ to me, and will he not with him give
me a convenience of other things, at least, as much as is good for me? Thus
little children, you may possess your souls in peace that passes
understanding. Thus the Apostle did, my God shall supply all wants, yours and
mine, and Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things, even all that
he has?

The distinction of goods in Augustine, is exceeding memotable, remarkable, and
sweet; There is says he, Bona Throni, and there is bona scahelli, goods of
the Throne of bliss and grace, as God, Christ, and whatsoever spiritual good
he conferres. Secondly, goods of the footstool, as the Creatures and comforts
of this life, the accommodations of this world, whence we may infer. That
God, and the godly: Christ, and Christians: as they have but one Throne, which
is heavenly, (and that to them all) so also they have but one footstool. Now
God makes the earth his footstool, so should the godly do also Si terram
amas, terra es: si Deum amas, quid vis, ut dicam? Deus es. Aug.
. Christians ought in a good sense, to lay the world, and the things of the
world, under the soles of their feet Quam sordet mihi terra, cum Coelum
intueor? Adrian. Pedibus duntaxat, terram tangentibus. (...). Christ. hom. 2.
de incomp. De^i. not.
: and not make them and prize them as the Crown of their head. And especially
when they hinder you from being crowned with Christ's Crown, which is a Crown
of glory, and your greatest dignity.

Now Christians! consider by this, and what has been said, what Christ, and
this blessed act of Christ is to you: how that you have the goods of the
Throne, and now God having given you Christ, having procured for you ablessed
Throne to set your selves upon, what cause have you to be troubled, if he
denies you, or takes from you a footstool, whereon to set your feet? Let not
your hearts be troubled, you believe in God; believe also in Christ, and be
established for ever, yea, believe his Prophets, and you shall prosper.

The second discovery of love by suffering on the behalf of his, is his
suffering with them. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel
of his presence saved them. In his love, and his pity he redeemed them, and
he hare them and carried them all the days of old. It Is some comfort to have a
companion in suffering Comes in via, pro vehiculo est.
, it is much more comfortable to have a helping companion, that will take off
some of a man's burden. He has laid help on one that is mighty.

First, Christ is with his in losses, he bears a share of those losses, they
shall not be all loss to them that fear him: he will give them something
again, yea, some better thing, then what they have lost for him, and in
following or going along with him: and though the world be but as loss to a
soul; yet Godliness is great gain with contentment; He that loses his life
for Christ, and the Gospels sake, shall save it, Mark. 8.35. Christ will make
up and repair the loss again, and does not he give a better thing than this
life in the room on it? What Is this life, and all the accommodations thereof to
that life which is above? the life of the world's ignoble, most mean, and
passing poor to the life of God, and the glorified in Heaven. Then friends!
what loose you? can you tell? I tell you, that to die here, is to begin to live
for ever hereafter.

Secondly, in Infringements and imprisonments of the body he suffers with
them, gives rest unto them Tranquillus Deus, tranquillat omnia, and qaictum
aspice^e, quiescere est. Bern. in Cant. 23.
: and is it not better you sensible souls to be in prison with Christ, than to
be at Liberty without him? nay, is it not better to be in Hell with him, than
in heaven without him? (if such a thing could be?) does not his presence prove
a Heaven Christus nobiscum. 1. Politice, ut Rex in Regno; Dux in exercitu. 2.
Occonomice, ut Pater in domo. 3. Ethice, ut ratio in homine. 4. Physice, ut
anima in corpore, Cornel. a lapide
? what is the Heaven above, but the fruition of God and Christ, and Christians!
tell me: when you enjoy much of Christ in the closet, or Congregation: when you
feel the warmth, heat, and vigor of all his love and spiritual graces
working upon your drooping Spirits, do they not revive you? put much life in
you? his words are Spirit and life, much more then are his works. Is it not
your Heaven to enjoy, and for your souls to possess their beloved's presence
Heu Domine Deus, rara hora, and brevis mora. Bern. in Cant. ser. 13. Res
delicata est Spiritus Dei. Tertu!. Memor sum, quanta pace fruebar, cum in
Domino gaudebam, ideo nunc magis doleo, quia scio, quid perdidi, scio quam
maxima bona amisi, read quod per peccatum mihi abstuli, read quod mea culpa
perdidi. Savanarol. medit in Psalm. Miserere, etc.
?

Thirdly, in wounds, or hurts of the body or mind, if Saul goes to Damascus,
and treads but on the feet of Christ, the meanest and lowest of his servants.
Does not Christ bow his head, yea, all his body to save them? will it not make
him cry out, Saul, Saul, why do thou tread on my feet, persecute me in the
least of my members? yea, certainly had he never opened his mouth before, yet
then as the dumb son of Craesus, by straining his voice had the strings of
his tongue unloosed, when he saw his Father like to be butchered, crying, Oh!
kill not King Craesus: so Christ (could the former be which cannot be in him
yet) then, when they suffer, he suffers with them, and cries as to Saul. Kill
not my children, pierce me not, cut me not in pieces, rob not, imprison me
not, he now plainly speaks this in our ears by his word, could we but mind
it. Christians! when you are touched with a hurtful touch (so sensible is he,
that) he is touched in the apple of his eye too, his eye smarts whose you are,
and he that made eyes, assure your selves, will soon heal that eye sore,
when it is seasonable to do it.

Lastly, in hurts of the mind. Are you wounded in Spirit, troubled in mind,
tempted? he is tempted with you, wounded with you, troubled with you, is not
this love, discovered? Now he is in Heaven, he is touched with a feeling, of
your infirmities on earth Inchoata in incarnatione, completa in ascensione,
Cornel. a Lapide.
. Are you tempted? so was he, and that in all points like to you, sin being
excepted, viz. sin did not tempt him as it does you, but then he was tempted
by Satan to sin, as well as Satan tempts you to sin This I take to be the
sense of the place.
; instance that sore temptation, to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the
Temple, to murder himself; and that temptation he tempted him withal to
commit Idolatry, to fall down and worship a Devil like a Heathen: he also
tempted him to distrust, infidelity, when he would have had him make bread of
stones, as though God could not live without bread, or as though there were not
enough of God in the blessed man, to sustain him a little longer, yea, for
ever (if he pleased) without food.

CHAP. V. Of the ends of Chrisi's love.
EVery thing has its end Prove. 23.18.
, and every thing is such as its end is, as the thing is towhich it tends:
all is well that ends well, that is the Proverb, not more ancient then true, it is
the end that crowns the action; when God would prove a person, action, or thing
to be good or evil, he takes this course, observes, (and bids us observe also)
what the end of the person or thing is, at which it aims or tends, mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright man, says the Lord, for the end of that
man is Psalm. 37.37.
peace, though he has trouble in his beginning and progress, yet has he
peace in his end, viz. his way tends to peace, though he sowes in tears, yet
he reapes in joy, for Light, is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart; men sow to the end they may reap. Thus he proves an upright
man to be a good man, by his good end. So says he, the end of the wicked shall
be cut off.

Viz. He shall miss of all that he aims at, he thinks whatsoever his life
be, his death shall be good, he aims at happiness after a sort, but takes
asunder the means, from the end; when such an one dies, all his thoughts
perish, where is his hope when God takes away his soul, says Job, either his
sin with himself shall have no end, for sin in its fruits go to hell with
him, lives for ever with him, sins are his works and they follow him, or,
secondly, his end shall be, and that most certainly, the beginning of his never
ending torment, by pain of loss and sense, together, viz. his sin tends
that way, leads thither. Some desire Heaven but it is not so much for the
society of God and Christ, as from a carnal conceit, that there is no want,
there they shall have fullness. Do not carnal men dream of carnal eating in
Christ's Kingdom? happy (said the Jews) are they who shall eat bread with
thee in thy Kingdom; but this end showed their desire was carnal; for Christ
reproves them, when he tells them, the Kingdom of Heaven consists not in
meats, or drinks, but in Righteousness and true holiness. Every true lover
propounds to himself his end, has his end, and that is true of Christ, he
has ends for which he loves, and to which his love tends. His ends are such as
these.

1. To make his object lovely. 2. To present his Spouse blameless. 3. To keep
the soul stainlesse. 4. To save the soul harmless.
FIrst he loves to make his lovely in his own blessed sight, and unto his own
glorious self. Christ loves comely Christians, Christ's frame on a Christians
spirit, is a Christ-aluring beauty: a choice Spouse's distance from her loyal
husband is a cord of love to draw his presence to her, long suspension of
personal fellowship makes communion sweeter, when enjoyed. Christ's presence
is good to Christians, and communion with them is good to him, a souls
distance from her husband Christ is very great, yet many pledges of dearest
love pass betwixt them, something of Christ, being in the soul, brings all
Christ to dwell there; he loves himself, and delights to dilate where himself
is. Some love to fulfill lust and natures fancy; but Christ loves that his
object may be lovely, to himself, and all his offspring. The bridegroom
loves to see his Bride adorned on a bridal day, would have her as neat as hand
can make her, that her aspect may be pleasing to him, Christ loves to cloth
his people with a heavenly glory, he loves a soul, that he may present it to
himself a glorious Creature, it is inward Glory I now speak of, Christ has no
lust to feed, sins not found in him he seeks nelther bodies pelf, nor the
minds riches, sweet Messiah, thy ends are good.

Christ sets his love on naked souls; In some parts of the world, some buy
their wives and cloth them, so does Christ in every corner of the earth gives
himself for them, and then puts a glory upon them. Christ's glory is
transforming, some have seen it as in a glass, and have been changed by it
into the same Image, from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord 2 Cor.
3.18.
. Christ himself assumed our nature; that he might cloth and adorn us with
his: like to like, says the Proverb, Christ loves his object to make it like
him, and then clos'es with it, cannot stick loose to it: so pure's his love.
Other lovers may alter in their love, because they cannot augment their objects
luster, amiable aspect; but Christ can make his object as comely as he will;
then where is the ground of change? not in the object, not in the Subject,
therefore not at all. I the Lord change not, that is his saying, who is
immutable.

Secondly, Christ loves to present his object blameless, both to himself, and
also before his Father. Some lovers will find no fault in the objects they list
to embrace, but having received them, find nothing else in them but faults: is
this to love in truth? you earthly sensual lovers! Christ finds out faults
before he espouses a soul to himself: but then through love covers them,
buries them, forgets them: Christ never upbraids a soul with what he has
formerly been and done, God upbraids no man. Some speak well of that they like,
until they have got it, and then the worst word they have's too good for it:
but Christ speaks worst of souls before he is wedded to them, but when of
twain they are one flesh, he speaks and makes the best he can of them, and the
least good that is in them: he cannot break a bruised reed, nor can he quench
the smoking flax: he cannot rip up old breaches betwixt his Spouse and him,
but he is good at kindling smallest sparks of saving grace, though buried in a
heap of ashes: he is wont to make much weakness little, and little strength
much. Some Lovers will hide nothing they know, by those they have seemed to
love, will you call this love? it is perfect hatred; but heavenly favorites!
your heavenly husband's not so unkind, he covers all evils, and uncovers all
good in them he loves. Prove. 16.12.
It Is said he is able to present blameless before his Father, with exceeding
great joy Jude 24.
, and he is as active, as able in such a kind of presentation.

Thirdly, he loves to present his object spotless, Christ sets his love on
souls to cleanse them Ephesians. 5.27.
, and sanctify them to his own, and his Fathers use.

Satan loves to have souls that he may stain them, pollute them, bereave them
of their glory, and Christ's Image that is in them, he is all for soiling of
souls, that he may foil them, and ensnare them; but Christ takes out the
spots of his own flesh; he sets his love on a soul to wash it from all
filthiness of flesh and Spirit, Ezekiel. 16.6.7.
the souls time of misery, is Christ's time of mercy: when thou wast in thy
blood, I said to thee live, and thy time was the time of love. John tells the
seven Churches of Asia, Christ loved us, and then washed away our sins by his
blood, heavenly husband! thou love to good purpose. Christ loves to make holy
as well as happy, he would have her without blemish, spot, or wrinckle.

Fourthly, Christ love's that he may save harmless, preserve his object free
from danger; Satan loves to destroy, but Christ loves to save. All Christ's
favors run into this: the souls salvation of whom he loves: he is called the
Savior of his body the Church; Ephesians. 5.23.
the head you know contrives and advise's for the whole body. Such a head is
Christ, he came to save, as well as seek lost souls. When Christians are in
Christ, their selves and souls are in safe hands, Job. 10.29.
no man shall pluck them out of my Fathers hand says Christ, and what power's
like to his: Spouse of Christ! thou may trust thy self with thy heavenly
Husband, put thy life in his hand; for he came not to destroy the believing
world, but to save it. Oh you sons of Sion! how careful is Christ of you?
his eye is upon you, his ear open to your cry; Christ watches his children as
you watch yours, he will not let a child go out of his sight, least he catch a
fall, and bruise or maime himself, and spoil his beauty, and when he does get
a fall, Christ's ears are open, he can quickly hear him cry, and then he
gives him a helping hand, till he is risen again. You are in his hand, and in
his heart, and shall hereafter dwell in his heavens, what would you more? And
now my friends! that Christ has show d his affection by doing and suffering
for you, he expects action from you toward him, and for him.

Consider, intelligent hearts!

First, is not he active for you? he prays for you, pleads for you at the
Throne of grace, against the accuser of the brethren: then drink not in
forsaken sins, against which both your selves, and Savior also, has put up
prayers with tears, and strong cries in the days of his flesh.

Secondly: are not Satan's vassalls active for their Prince of darkness? Do
they not lay their heads and hearts together? unite all their forces, to follow
that Prince, who rules in the air, and works in the children of disobedience,
to advance his Kingdom, enlarge his Dominion, as Hell has enlarged her self?
do not they seek to make his Proselites many? and shall the children of
darkness be wiser, and more active in their generation, and for their Prince?
then are the children of Light in their generation and for their King and
Savior 2 Samuel 1.20.
Jesus Christ? God forbid. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets
of Askelon, least the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, and least the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. Love deserves love; oh, you children of
Light! you cannot give warmth to your garments, but you shall receive't again.
Oh then! be rooted and grounded in faith with love. Comprehend you with all
the Saints, what the height, length, depth, and breadth, of Christ's love is.
Then shall you sing Hallelujah to God in the highest Heavens, when the time of
refreshment shall be in the presence of the Lamb, with exceeding great Joy to
Just ones Secundum laborem accipient, non secundum proventum, Bern. Non meritis
operantis sed miseratione donantis. Aug. Deus coronat dona sua, non merita
nostra.
.

FINIS.

