MOORE MAJOR.
Curia Specialis tent. die Lunae xxixno. Maii 1682. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
Secundi Angl', etc. xxxiiiita.

This Court does desire Dr. Moore to Print his Sermon Preached yesterday at the
Guild Hall Chapel before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.
A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, AND THE Court of ALDERMEN AT
GUILD HALL Chapel, ON The 28th of May, 1682.

By JOHN MOORE, D. D. Chaplain to the Right Honorable Heneage Earl of
Nottingham, Lord High Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kittilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Moore Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen of
the City of London.
My LORD,
THE Meekness, Peace, and Charity, of which our Savior was so Zealous a
Preacher, and so great an Example, seem to be in a manner lost in the beats,
bitterness, and noise, with which men manage their Disputes about his holy
Religion: as if the Character of a true Christian was to be taken rather from
the contentiousness of his Spirit, and his skill in Controversy, than the
Purity of his Mind and Conversation. When yet nothing can bring a greater
disparagement upon Christianity, and prove more fatal to the Professors of it,
than to make it the occasion of those Evils and Mischiefs among Men, and of
that disturbance in the World, which God purposely intended it should allay and
extinguish.

It was my design in this Discourse, which in obedience to your Commands, I now
make Public, to take men off from their furious debates about (...) often, not
material to (...) earnestly to press them unto the ex(...) of those Primitive
Virtues, upon which our Religion has always laid so much stress, and which our
Lord has so plainly declared to be the indispensable conditions of our
Salvation: by showing that all necessary Christian Doctrines have a natural
tendency to that Godliness, which is now too generally neglected. And I am the
more bold to perfix your Lordships name to it; because you are known to be so
fair a Pattern of that Practical Religion I recommend, both in your private
life as a Christian; and in your Public Capacity as a Magistrate.

I am, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant John Moore.


A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. May 28. 1682.
1 TIMOTHY VI.3. And to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness.


WHen we consider there never was any Religion in the World, which did so
earnestly recommend, and so strictly enjoin Godliness, as the Christian
Religion has done, and yet that so little of it does appear in the lives of
Christians, we must conclude, that there are either great defects in the
Religion, or faults in the Professors of it: we must: either say there is not a
sufficiency in the means Christianity does prescribe and afford toward the
attainment of true Piety and Virtue; or else that the blame is to be laid upon
them, who having undertaken the Christian Profession, do neglect, or despise
the means and instruments provided by their Religion to make them Holy here,
and happy for ever.

And it will not be hard to determine on which side the fault lies; for God and
Religion have not been wanting to Men* but Men have been wanting to themselves.
There being nothing required in our Religion as our Duty, and a necessary
Condition of our Happiness, which is above our strength assisted with that
Grace, which every one may obtain who sincerely prays to God for it. (...) S.
Chrysostom. m Joan. c. 1.
Therefore if men will not make use of that Grace, which God so plentifully
poures forth upon all, it is but fit and equal, that they impute their defects
to themselves. And few have had the boldness directly to charge their Vices
upon God; as if he had denied them power and opportunitys to have been better.

They will lay their faults upon themselves, but with some private reserves and
Suggestions, that those faults are very pardonable ones; as being neither much
offensive to God, nor plainly repugnant to the state of good men. So the Common
way has been for men to frame such a model of Religion to themselves, as might
suit with a vicious life, and help to quiet the complaints of an uneasy
conscience. Thus when Persons are debauched in their morals, Sed vitam quidem
luxuriosam, sententiam autem impiam ad velamen malitiae ipsorum nomine
abutuntur, S. Iren. p. 122. Difficile haeriticum inveniri qui diligie
castitatem, Hieron. in Oseae c. 9.
they are apt presently to turn Heretics in their Faith. It having been
observed, that nothing is more usual, than for men to shelter the Monstrous
impiety of their lives, under some or as notoriously impious Opinion; and to
depart as far in their belief from the true Doctrins of Christ; as they had
before Strayed in their practice from his Holy precepts.

Thus some men have justified a wicked life, by denying the differences between
Good and Evil; and others have excused it, by pretending all their actions are
under a fatal decree, and come necessarily to pass. Some again make the
performance of Obedience to Gods Laws very needless, by disowning his
providence and care of the World. Others would exempt themselves from the ties
of godliness and virtue by fansying their Religion to consist only in true
believing: and others place it all in outward show and Ceremony. Some again
hope they may enjoy both the brutish pleasures of this life and the pure ones
of the next, and carry their sins a long with them to Heaven, by so exalting
and extending Gods mercy unto obstinately Impenitent Sinners, as to deny both
his Justice and Truth: and others cut the sinews of Religion by calling in
question the Resurrection of the Dead, and the rewards of the Life to come.

So Simon Magus, that infamous Magician, and Founder of all the Heresys which
followed him, that he might serve his vain Glory and Ambition did covet the
gifts of the Holy Ghost; and hoped to purchase them by Money; Irenaei lib. 1.
c. 20.
he also boasted that he himself was God; and appeared in Samaria as the
Father, among the Jews as the Son, and to the Gentiles as the holy Spirit: he
also denied that Man had any liberty of will; or that there was any necssity of
good Works, Iren. l. 1 c. 21.
So the Nicolaitans, for a cover to their abominable Lusts, taught there ought
to be Community of Wives, and that to commit Fornication, and to eat meats
offered to Idols were things indifferent. Thus Menander and Marcion disowned
Gods being the maker of the World, Justin Mart. Apol. 2. p. 70.
ascribing that work of Omnipotency to Angels. Thus also Himenaeus and Philetus
denied the Resurrection.

Some of these ungodly Men lived in the days of the Apostles, of whom St. Jude
says, Jude v. 4.
they turned the grace of God into lasciviousness denying the only Lord God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now what in the Primitive Church was the disease
only of some few Men, seems in our unhappy age, to have been a plague, which
has generally infected, and spread its malignity over the Face of the Christian
World.

Great numbers in these times, as they have given themselves up to the
filthiest of the vices among the Ancient Heretics; so have they espoused the
worst of their Opinions to defend them.

If Cerinthus and Ebion of all the Books of the New Testament, Iren. l. 1. c.
26. Epiphan. (...)res. 8, and 10.
would only receive the Gospel of St. Matthew; because it was writ in Hebrew:
Leviath. p. 20^*
we have them who do affirm that the whole Bible derives all its Authority from
the Civil Magistrate; and that it is the legislative power of the Common w(...)
which gives it the force of a Law,

Clem. Alex. Strom. 3. Epiphan. Haer. 7.
If Carpocrates declared that there was nothing simply and absolutely good or
evil in its self, but only according to the opinion of Men, it is well known
who has published the very same Doctrine.

Epiph. Haer. 24. and 31.
If Basilides and Valentinus contended for the lawfulness of the promiscuous
use of Women, and many wives; there is a Pretender to Reformation among us, who
that he may give some Reputation to Bastardy, Moral Marriage, lib. 3. p. 71.
and free it from that Illegitimation, which constantly the Christian Church
has fixed upon it, has in Print affirmed, that carnal knowledge between Persons
not prohibited by the moral Law, tho, without Contract, License, Witnesses or
Minister, is a Marriage Lawful, Holy, and Indissoluble according to the Law of
God. To advance which Assertion he has arraigned not only the Laws of our own
Nation, but of the whole Christian, and I may say, Pagan World too. And what
well becomes the Publishers of false and dangerous Opinions, he has managed his
bad cause with great confidence of the Truth of it, and with as much contempt
of all that are of another mind; Lib. 2. ^. (...)
there being scarce a profession of men among us, whom he has not treated with
disrespect and ill language: nay, he will not allow that the present Ministers
of the Gospel can produce any better evidence of their Divine Commission, than
those who claim under Mahomet; Lib. 2. p. 145.
and charge it as a Wickedness upon the Translators of the Bible, that in
their false Translation only, the seventh Comandment does forbid Adultry, and
the tenth the Coveting our Neighbors Wife. Now let the People see what a kind
of Reformation they are to expect in Church and State, if ever the Management
of it fall into such men's hands, who are daily complaning of the great want of
it; and quarreling with every thing in the present Establishment.

If some hundred years ago there appeared in the World Evangelium Aeternum a
Blasphemous Book with a specious Title, Scriptum scholae Parisien. Edit
Wolfang. Wissenburgh.
which pretended to be a far more perfect Gospel than that of our Saviors; and
that in less than fifty years it would cause it to be laid aside; we have also
a Gospel collected out of the Works of a late Cardinal, Cardinal Pallavicin.
the Doctrins whereof are as much according to the flesh and the lusts thereof,
as those of our Lords are according to Godliness. If there were false Apostles
who would have tied the burden of Jewish Ceremonies about the necks of the
first Christians, are there not also at this day a considerable party of Men,
who by superadding a multitude of positive, unuseful and Arbitrary
Constitutions to Christianity, have renderd it almost insupportable. The
Humility and the Devotion, the Patience and the Contentment, the Charity and
the Contempt of the World, and the Forgiveness of Enemies and Injuries, which
made the Primitive Christians so famous among their very Persecutors, being
stifled and even buried under so much of pompous Dress and superfluous
Garnishment.

If Simon would have bought the Powers of the Holy Ghost, are there not now*
Men who sell Pardons of Sin? insomuch that if a Man have money enough to answer
for his Sins, and do not transgress beyond the Proportion of his Estate, the
precise rate is known at which he can certainly redeem his Iniquities.

Nay, as if these times were the sink in which the very dregs of all Heresies
had settled, it has in our days been Published, (under the color of Philosophy)
that the substance of all things whatsoever is the same; in which Assertion God
and his Creatures are confounded: Spinosae op. p^st(...). p. 398.
and that no Substance can produce another; the consequence of which
Proposition is, that every Substance in the World is self existent and
Independent. Blasphemies surely never before broached among Christians; and
which are as false and absurd in all Philosophy, as they are repugnant to true
Religion; and as much to be abhorred for their impiety, as they are easy, to be
confuted for their inconsistency with right reason.

But now since there are so many Dangerous Rocks upon which the Men of this Age
are apt to Split themselves, the great Question will be by what compass we are
to steer? to which we cannot give a better answer than by proposing and
recommending to serious consideration, this passage of St. Paul in our Text,
which will prove an effectual Rule, whereby to discern useful Christian
Doctrines from false and hurtful ones, viz. they must be according to
Godliness, and that which gave occasion to St. Paul to lay down this Rule, was
the several Errors contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, which had stolen into
the Church in his days: all which he reproves upon this account, that they
were not according to Godliness. A list of some of these, we have in this
Epistle he gives a Caution to Timothy not to give heed to fables and endless
Genealogies, which migh minister Questions for witty Men to dispute upon: but
not edify in the Faith, nor promote Charity, which was the end of the
Commandment, V. 19.
He reflects upon some such Men, as having made a shiprack of the Faith. He
assures him, the holy Spirit had expressly declared, C. 4.
that in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils i.e. by the seducement of the Devil
they would again revive the Pagan Religion of the worshipping of Demons. C. 6.


Again, St. Paul reprehends and confutes another pernicious Doctrine, which had
found a welcome entertainment among Servants converted to the Faith, who by the
craft of, false Teachers were easily led into a persuasion, that the Christian
Religion had dissolved the Bonds they before stood in to their Masters. For if
their Masters were Infidels, then Christian liberty was insisted upon, Christ
having made them free from their yoke: but if they were believers, than
Christian brotherhood was claimed, for Christians are all brethern in Christ;
and in Consideration of this Spiritual Relation, they presumed themselves to be
on the same level with their Masters.

But to the first, St. Paul replies, that notwithstanding their Masters were
yet unconverted, they were to render them all due honor and service, least
either by their haughty carriage, or disobedience, the Name of God and the
Doctrine of Christ should be Blasphemed; and to the others who had believing
Masters, his answer was, that they should not despise them because they are
brethern; but rather do them service; because they are Faithful and beloved
partakers of the Benefit: not only because it was one Branch of Christian Duty,
for Servants to be obedient to their Masters; but because their Masters, whose
tempers were softened by the love which the Religion of Jesus does inspire,
would treat them tenderly. and kindly; and be glad of an opportunity of being
beneficial to them, and this is the Doctrine which is according to Godliness.

V. 3, 4, 5.
For if any man Teaches otherwise: and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes
of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
desputings of Men of Corrupt minds, destitute of the Truth, supposing that gain
is godliness, from such withdraw thy self.

So dangerous a thing it is for a Christian, more to busy himself about
Contentious disputes; than the Rules of an holy Life; for a doting upon
Questions may betray him into that wrath and envy, which shuts men out of the
Kingdom of Heaven: but it must be a continual exercise of himself according to
Godliness that will carry him thither. So true also is it, that neither the
Spiritual relation of Brotherhood between Christians has destroyed the several
Orders, Ranks, and Qualitys of men in civil Societys; nor that Christian
liberty has taken away the obligation, which is upon Servants to be obedient to
their Masters; and the Duty that is upon the People to be Subject to their
Governors; this being part of the Doctrine which is according to Godliness.

But to come to a further improvement of our Text, there are these five
Propositions which seem very proper and natural to be insisted on from it, and
which accordingly I shall make it my business to treat of in this Discourse.

(1.) That Godliness is a fixed and certain thing, not variable according to
places and times or the humors of men: but the reasons of it are Eternal and
Unchangeable.

(2) That the Scope and end of the Doctrines of the Gospel is to advance
Godliness, and recommend the practice of it to mankind.

(3.) That it is an Argument both of the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion, that all the Doctrines thereof are Conformable to Godliness.

(4.) That they who teach or persuade men they may be saved by their true
Opinions or sound Belief, tho not accompanied with a Godly life, do defeat the
very design of the Gospel, and obstruct that influence it should have on the
minds of men.

(5.) That whatsoever Doctrins are not according to Godliness, are so far from
being necessary, that they cannot be true.

(1.) That Godliness is a fixed and certain thing, not variable according to
places and times or the humors of men. This is apparent both from the Text, and
the Reason of the thing; first of all, the Text plainly implys it, St. Paul
requires every man should give consent to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness. What can we gather from hence, but that according to him Godliness,
must be the standard and measure, by which men are to Judge of Doctrines? if a
Doctrine be according to Godliness, he is to assent to it, if not according to
Godliness, he is to dissent from it.

All men therefore must have one certain unvariable notion of Godliness in
their minds; or else they can never know what Doctrines they are to embrace;
and what to reject. But secondly, this does more evidently follow from the
notion of Godliness it self: for Godliness is nothing else but a being like
God, it is a Copying out in our minds and manners, all the perfections of the
Divine Nature, so far as we are capable.

Now if those qualitys and perfections in God be Eternal and unalterable, then
certainly the notion of Godliness in us must be so also. It is true, if we go
to the criticism of the word, this term of Godliness is sometimes used in a
stricter sense, and imports no more then the worship of God properly so called;
which consists in our having just and worthy apprehensions of God, and in
rendering to him that Love, Thanksgiving, Honor and Adoration which is due to
the Great Governor of the World, and our best Benefactor.

But in the larger sense of the word, and as it is here taken by the Apostle,
Godliness is a Comprehension of all the Moral Virtues; and takes in not only
acts of Religion toward God; but those of Righteousness toward our Neighbor,
and of Sobriety with respect to our Selves.

In a word, It is a walking sutably to that Nature, and that Reason which God
has given us, and for Gods sake. Which notion of Godliness being admitted, it
cannot possibly be thought an Arbitrary thing; but must be eternal and
immutable; as the nature of mankind is, or rather as God is, who contrived that
nature.

We may talk what we please of the indifference of Good and Evil; but the more
we think, the more we shall be convinced that there is an Eternal goodness and
evil in things as they fall under a Moral Consideration.

Now some actions have an agreeableness with Gods holy Nature, and some an
utter incongruity with it: and if his holy Nature is always the same eternal
and unchangeable, then also will those things be eternally good which have an
agreement with this blessed Nature; and those eternally evil which do vary from
it; thus as to love and honor God, are acts most agreeable to his perfect
Nature; so will it be eternally the duty of the Creature to pay them unto him;
and it is a repugnancy in terms to suppose, God can command his Creatures to
hate him; or to do the least thing which is contrary to the rectitude of his
Nature.

Besides there are such eternal respects and relations between things, that
some actions will be ever good and some evil. We cannot suppose a Benefactor;
but we must acknowledge that gratitude and thanks are his due. We cannot allow a
person to be Innocent, but we must grant too, that no injury or hurt ought to
be done unto him.

How unreasonable then is that Opinion, which makes the Civil Law of the
Magistrate the only measure of Good and Evil? for should the Magistrate forbid
me to put up Prayers to God, would therefore the service of God be Evil? or
should he Command me to kill my Father, would therefore Parricide be lawful?

If so, then there are actions antecedently good to the Laws of the Magistrate,
and dutys not alterable by them: in performance of which does the Godly man
exercise himself Day and Night.

They are (says Justin Martyr) (a) very acceptable to God who do those things,
(...), Justin. Mart. dial cum Tryph. p. 263.
which are in their own Nature Universally and Eternally good.

(2.) The Scope and end of the Doctrines of the Gospel, is to advance
Godliness, and to recommend the practice of it to Mankind; it being much truer
of Christ's Doctrines, what was said of the Lacedaemonian Laws, That it is the
property of them all, Nie. Cragins de Repub. Lacedaem. p. 171.
to inflame men's minds with the love of virtue, and to create a contempt of
empty and sensual pleasure. To this end all the Precepts of our Lord, all his
great actions, and grievous sufferings were directed. But for the further
illustration and proof of this point, give me leave to offer these three things
to your Consideration.

(1.) That not any of the Discourses, or Sermons of our Savior, were made upon
Subjects purely speculative. The Sermons he Preached were to teach men to be
humble, meek, pure, and peaceable; to bear reviling language patiently, and
willingly to submit to Persecution for Righteousness sake; to put hypocrisy out
of Countenance, and to reform such notions in Religion as were impediments to
real Piety, and upheld men in wicked life. And in this Course he was carefully
followed by his Apostles, and those who were joined with them in planting his
Religion.

Concerning the Original of the Soul, whether it be immediately Created, or
infused, or derived from the Parents, and the manner of its Union with the
body; concerning the orders, ranks, and numbers of the Angels, and how they
converse and convey their thoughts to each other; concerning the bounds,
figure, and capacity of Heaven the Scholemen have written great Volums; but the
Inspired Writers have treated very sparingly; because an accurate skill in
these nice speculations, and much acquaintance with them, will not make us one
jot the better men; since we may have our heads full of these curious notions
without advancing one step nearer Heaven, and being in the least degree* more
acceptable to God.

(2.) The revelation God has made of himself in Scripture is, such, as most
Conduces to the promotion of Godliness, and of his great design of putting us
upon the attainment of these qualifications which can only fit us for the
Kingdom of Heaven, and are the necessary terms of our Salvation; for there we
constantly find God to be set forth, as Just and Righteous in all his works, as
pure and holy in all his ways: and as the rewarder only of them who love and
fear him, and keep his Commandments.

Nay, God is there pleased to ascribe unto to himself the passions of men,
love, hatred, anger, revenge, hope, grief and repentance, not that these
passions are properly in God, who is wholly free from the imperfections, which
cause them in us but merely in Condescension to the weakness of our Nature, and
to help the slowness of our understanding: to the end that what is there
declared to be the object of Gods Love and Hatred, his Grief or Anger, might be
the object of ours likewise; and more strongly affect us. And as an Evidence of
this we may Observe, that these passions hardly ever are attributed to God in
Scripture, but to encourage Virtue or discourage Vice. So true is it, that the
several descriptions the Bible gives us of God are accommodated to the
Doctrine of Godliness, and do tend to the advancement of it.

Now as this seems to be the only Reason why God has made some discovery of the
Perfections of his blessed Nature unto us, that we should profoundly reverence
him and sincerely love him, and Religiously conform our selves unto his Will;
so if we neglect to answer the ends of this glorious manifestation, God will
declare at the day of Judgment, that he knows us not, as he has already
declared we know not him; St. John 1. c. 2. v. 4.
he that says he has known him and keeps not his Commandments is a liar,
and the truth is not in him.

Upon this Argument St. Basil speaks excellently, taking his occasion from
those words of our Lord. I know my sheep and am known of mine. St. Basil. hom.
25. p. 599.
What do you mean by knowing? do you understand what Gods Essence is? or can
you measure his greatness? no my sheep know me, that is, they hear my Voice.
See then by what means you may Arrive at the knowledge of God; it is by hearing
his Commands and doing them, when you have heard them. The knowledge then of God
consists in the observation of his Commandments, not in a curious prying into
the nature of his Essence, and the things above the World: not in the
contemplations of Invisible Beings; my Sheep know me, and I know Mine. It is
enough for you to know you have a good Shepherd, who has laid down his life
for the Sheep. Let this then be the bounds of your knowledge of God. But the
questions that concern the immensity of the Divine Nature are dangerous to him
who puts them; and can never be penetrated into, by him who undertakes to
answer them; the best cure for such is silence.

So that knowledge and practice, how much soever they may differ in our notions
of them, are in Christian Religion but two terms importing the same matter. And
as they who keep not the Commandments, cannot in a Scripture sense, without a
lie, pretend that they know God; so neither at the day of Judgment will Christ
know them, who lived in disobedience to the great laws of his Religion, and
neglected the chief instances of their Duty. Insomuch that to those who have
eaten and drank in his presence, and heard him Preach in their Streets, and
upon that score only do claim a knowledge of him, and an interest in his Death
and Sufferings, he will reply, I tell ye, I know not whence you are, depart
from me, all ye Workers of iniquity. Wherefore that man does but deceive
himself, and will in the end certainly miscarry, who diligently Searches after
Knowledge only that he may gratify a vain curiosity, and qualify himself to
become an able Disputant in Religion; for all our knowledge will avail us
nothing, unless it have an influence upon our practice, and prove serviceable
to us in the reformation of our manners.

In this State then of Imperfection, and trial of our Obedience, we need to
enquire no further after the Essence of God, and study the mysteries of his
incomprehensible Nature, then it may either serve to instruct us in such
Instances and Cases as it is our Duty to imitate him, and be as conformable to
him as we can; or furnish us with Arguments that will give us courage to break
through the difficulties and opposition that we may meet with in our Christian
Race, and minister Patience and Comfort to us under the bitterest Persecutions
we shall suffer for the sake of our Master, and because we would not do
violence to our Consciences. Indeed in the life that will follow this, we shall
see God as he is, and all the glories of the Divinity will lie open to our eyes.

Then in the Company of the whole Church Triumphant, of all the Saints and
Angels, we shall stand round about the Throne, and for ever behold, search
into, admire, and adore the infinite wisdom and goodness and Power of God; and
with the highest transport of Love and joy, we shall bless and praise and
magnify the Lamb, with whose blood all our defilements are washed away, and our
Robes made white; and by whose all-powerful mediation we are admitted into the
glorious presence of God, and shall continue to all Eternity, as much as we are
capable, to partake more and more of the Divine Perfections.

(3.) There is no fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, but an obligation
naturally flows from it to some instance or other of a good Life.

If the Doctrine be, that God is the maker of Heaven and Earth, does not an
obligation from thence lve upon all his Creatures to Gratitude and Praise? if
the Doctrine be, that God is the great Sovereign of the World, does not a duty
plainly follow, that we his Subjects are to govern our selves by his Laws? does
not the Doctrine of his Infinite Goodness make it our duty to love him and
imitate him; and that of his irresistible Power to dread the giving him the
least offense, and to submit our selves to his pleasure? does not the Doctrine,
that Truth is one of his Essential Attributes, make it our duty to believe him,
and to depend upon his promises? does not the Doctrine of his unsearchable
Wisdom oblige us to give up our wills unto his, and to leave the Events of
things to his wise Disposal? does not the Doctrine of his Omnipresence, his all
seeing Eye engage us to have a constant and awful regard of him, and to walk
circumspectly in all our paths?

The Doctrine of Gods providence being concerned not only in our most weighty
affairs, but also extending even to those small things, of which we our selves
take no thought, what powerful motives does it afford us against dejection,
pensiveness of mind, and immoderate cares? the Doctrine of all things working
together for the good of the faithful Servants of God, what a mighty obligation
does it lay upon us to be contented and easy in our present condition, how much
soever it may be beset with adversities and afflictions; and to take no
indirect course, to use no unlawful method or means to get out of it? the
Doctrine of Gods only having such a power over our Souls that he can destroy
them, how plainly does it imply, that we are to dread God more than man, and to
disobey man rather than God? The Doctrine of the necessity of the Sufferings
and Passion of Christ, does it not make it our indispensable duty to mortify
the Flesh and to crucify the Lusts thereof, Heb. 11.25.
and to prepare our selves rather to suffer Affliction with the people of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a Season? and should not the Doctrine of
his Resurrection and Ascension, carry our thoughts and great designs into the
other World, and fix our Hearts and all our Affections upon the Treasure which
is in Heaven? In a word, does not the Doctrine of a day of Judgment, in which
sentence shall pass upon all men for every Thought, Word, and Deed, Oblige us,
if we have the least love of our selves, and dessire of our own eternal
welfare, to put our Accounts in exact Order, and to break off our Sins by a
timely and sincere Repentance?

And this was the method generally of the Apostles; when they have delivered a
Doctrine, they presently draw an Inference from it, which is in the nature of a
Precept: and where they do not express the Precept, it is ever implied, and
easy thence to be Concluded. Seeing all these things shall be disolved, what
manner of Persons ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness? i. e.
if ye believe this Christian Doctrine of the dissolution of the World, your
lives must come up to your Principle, and your faith be rendered effectual by
the holiness of your Conversation; 1 John 3.3.
every man that has this hope in him, he purifyeth himself even as he is pure;
do you hope to see God, it unquestionably follows, that you are to endeavor
to be like him, by imitating his purity? Col. 3.1.
if ye then be Risen with Christ seek those things which are above, i. e. if ye
believe Christ's Resurrection, and as believers of it have been Baptized into a
profession of the Christian Faith, then it becomes you to mind those things
which will procure your own Resurrection likewise. C. 2. v. 6.
As ye therefore have received Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk ye in him; if ye
have received the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, let not your behavior carry any
thing in it unsuitable to his holy Doctrine, but be ye mindful to Govern your
selves by the Practical Rules therein contained.

But against the point I am now upon, some will be apt to object, that one
great Doctrine of our Religion, the mystery of the holy Trinity, does not seem
at all to concern a good life; now tho it may so seem to them who slightly
examine things, yet those who shall be at the pains more exactly to consider
this Doctrine will be otherwise persuaded. For when we consider God so loved
the World as to send his only begotten son, to save all them from perishing who
shall believe on him, does not this lay the highest obligation upon us which is
possible to make all the returns of praise, and love, and gratitude, and
obedience?

When we consider there was that aversion in the divine nature to sin, that God
would not pardon it before ample satisfaction was made at the Cost of the blood
and life of his own Son, can there be any argument in the World more effectual
to deter a man from sin, and if he have any ingenuity, to make him abhor the
thoughts of it? when we consider that this very same Son of God, who was the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and express image of his person, is now our
high Priest, and has entered the holy of holies, and does daily offer up our
prayers to God, and constantly there intercede with him on our behalf; will not
this be apt to create in us a mighty confidence to address our selves to the
throne of Heaven in all our wants, and strong hopes that God will never forsake
us in distress?

When we consider the holy Spirit has consecrated our bodies, and made them the
Temples wherein he will vouchsafe to dwell, Vid. Rupertum de Glorificatione
Trinitat Lib. 1. c. 11.
(which is the peculiar privilege and mercy of the Gospel) is there not a deep
engagement thereby laid upon us, to prepare these bodies for his reception, by
keeping them pure from intemperance and filthy Lusts for fear we greive this
holy guest, and cause him to desert such unclean habitations, and vex him that
he turn to be our enemy?

And so I hope the sense of the 2d. Point is cleared, and the truth of it
established, that it is the design of the Doctrines of the Gospel to advance
Godliness, and that there is an aptness, and direct tendency in them all to
enforce the practice of it upon Christians, this notion the Ancients had of
Christian Religion when they styled it an (...)
institution according to Godliness (...), Eusebius. de m^n. Evang. P. 12. and 24.
and an institution that comprehends all virtue; and accordingly the first
Christians (as Minut. Felix observes) Non tam notaculo Corporis guam modestiae*
and innocentiae. signo. Min. Fe^lix.
were distinguished from other men not by any thing peculiar in their habit and
dress; but by their innocence and modesty. Nec aliunde noscibiles quam de
emendatione vitiorum Pristinorum, Tertul. ad Scapulam c. 2.
There was no other mark of a new convert, but his having forsaken his old
vices.

(3.) It is an Argument both of the Truth and excellency of the Christian
Religion, that the Doctrines of it are according to Godliness. Godliness (as we
have shown) is the sum of the duties of natural Religion: and what duty is
there in natural Religion, but in the code of the Royal Christian Law it is
more clearly propounded, more fully explained, more strongly confirmed?

Now what greater Argument is there for the truth of the Doctrines of any
Religion, than their agreeableness to the common sentiments of mankind? or what
more manifest proof of the excellency of the precepts of it, than their harmony
with the Laws of Nature? for the most material objections against any
Instituted Religion, are either that its Principles are contradictory to clear
Reason, or its Duties repugnant to Natural Laws. Since those Principles can not
be true which contradict right Reason, nor those Precepts good which are
repugnant to the Laws of Nature.

For if we cannot be certain of the truth of those things, for which there is
plain and manifest Reason, we cannot be certain of the truth of any thing; and
it must be granted, that natural Religion is the Foundation upon which all
revealed Religion does stand; because from natural Light is fetched the proof of
the Existence of God, which revealed Religion does always suppose.

Now there is nothing commanded in our Religion but what becomes the
perfections of the Divine Nature, and agrees with those Eternal Laws which flow
from it: there is nothing required of us but what suits with the Native
Principles of our own Souls, and our truest Interest: there is nothing
propounded in our Religion, as a point of Faith, but we have sufficient Reason
to believe it; there is nothing exacted as a Duty, but we have exceeding good
motives to do it. We may find the great duties of our Religion all writ upon
our own Nature. And it was well said by Trithemius in his Answer to Maximilian
the Emperor. Etsi Christiana Religio inter omnium Mortalium sectas naturae
legibus vicinior, and magis con(...)s habea^ and proxima, and. Joan.
(...)ithem. Praefat. lib. Octo quaestion.
That of all the Sects and Religions in the World, none approached so near to
the Laws of Nature, nor were so conformable to them as the Christian Religion.

Neither is there any thing that will contribute so much toward the
accomplishment of our natural capacities, as a life conformable to the Laws of
our Religion; since as God designed Religion to advance our nature, and make us
more nearly resemble him; so profaneness and irreligion set God and us at the
greatest concievable distance, and turn man, upon whom the divine Image was
stamped, into the shape of the Devil or of the beast that Perish.

Thus should you suppose the contray of every Christian Law enacted, that
insted of forgiving Enemies, reconciling our selves to our adversarys, and
showing mercy to the distressed, we should be commanded to revenge every little
injury unto Death, to be implacably malicious where we have had a quarrel, and
cruel even to extremity with the poor and unfortunate, would not mankind be
changed into a race of Wolves and Tigers, shall I say, or become a new order of
Devils incarnate?

And suppose also that we were enjoined to be false to our words, unjust in our
dealing, treacherous to our trust, would not all civil societies be disolv'd?
all commerce destroyed? and the World become a great den of Thievs and Robbers?
if it was required of us to eat always to gluttony and to drink to excess,
would the effect of our obedience be any other, than the spoiling our health,
the besotting our rational faculties, and the transforming the Children of Men
into a Herd of Swine?

So little reason have we to complain of the Commandments of God as either
difficult, or grievious, when it is evident, that were we to receive laws in
the matter and all the circumstances of them contrary to those with which God
now Governs the World, we should cry out of our duty as intolerable, and sink
under our burdens as not being able to bear them.

And so much cause is there to bless God for ruling the World by Righteous Laws
and having given us a Religion, which our own faculties being judges, and we
trust and rely upon in all other Cases, is most reasonable and excellent; As
being perfective of our nature, and Worthy of the wisdom of God who contrived
it, as being framed with great Condescension to the infirmities of man, and
carrying a plain conformity in it to the attributes of God.

(4.) That they who Teach and Persuade Men they may be Saved by their true
Opinions or sound Belief, tho not Accompanied with a Godly life, do defeat the
very design of the Gospel and Obstruct that Influence it should have on the
minds of men.

Christianity is a Covenant wherein as God has obliged himself to bestow
rewards, so he has bound man too, to yield Obedience. How absurd then is their
opinion who think a Covenant does not bind on both sides, how hurtful is their
mistake who teach Christians, there is no service required on their part in
this new Covenant? what ground or color could there be to think the Religion
instituted by Jesus should consist in the belief only of a set of Propositions,
without intermedling in the affairs of Life, and the Government of our will and
affections, when all his Sermons were so many Lectures upon virtue, and at the
last day he will judge us by our Works? when he has Established so many rules for
the ordering of our thoughts, words, and actions in every Condition; and
required a sincere, though not a Perfect observance of them all.

We are Commanded to Watch and Pray, to fight the good sight of Faith, to
strive that we may enter in at the strait Gate, to work out our own Salvation
with fear and trembling, to run that we may obtain, and to take the Kingdom of
Heaven by Violence.

These Phrases contain a Description of the Dutys of a Christian, and the
degrees wherein they are required of him. They show he is to work as well as
believe; and that what he does must be withal his might, and with as much
perfection as he can? his Life must be Productive of much, and the best fruits;
the nature of his Christian Inployment does make it Necessary, that he pursue
it with great Intention of Mind and Earnestness of will, and that he put to all
his Strength. The Christians duty is represented under the Metaphor of a Race
to convince him, that he must strip and free himself of whatever does Clogg or
Burden him, and use his utmost Speed, and not Slacken his pace till he has
obtained, that is, till he comes to the end of the Race and his Life. his Duty
also is expressed by a narrow Way, and strait Gate, to show that his calling is
attended with great difficulties, and that they are only to be broke through by
Zealous Contention; he that will enter must strive. The reward indeed which is
proposed to Christians is very tempting, and of most inestimable Value; it is a
Kingdom; but he that sets himself to rest, and folds his hands shall never be
the better for it: for that Kingdom shall only be taken and possessed by them who
violently invade it.

Nothing can be performed without Gods assistance who works in men to will and
to do; but then it is only in those who Concur with him, and do work out their
own Salvation with Care and Concernment, with fear and trembling. Christ has
purchased for us a liberty, as to Places and Times, as to the choice and
difference of meats: but not a liberty to omit our Duty, or do the least sin,
he has freed our shoulders from the burden of Moses Law: but not discharged our
obligation to any one Moral Virtue, or Law of nature. The Faith that will carry
a man to Heaven must be a Faith that Works by love; and love is the keeping
the Commandments.

So the holy Scripture declares, so the Primitive Fathers taught.

St. Ignatius makes Faith and Love the whole Duty of a Christian; (...). Ignat.
Ep. ad Ephesians.
Faith the beginning, Love the end; (...), ibid.
Faith the guide, Love the way: and he hardly ever recommends the one but in
the Company of the other. (...). Clem, Alex. Strom. lib. 2. p. 384. Credam,
diligam Demn and proximum, mihi caetera non sunt necessaria; Tertul. de jejun.
c. 2.
Faith preceeds, Fear builds, Love makes perfect.

(5) That whatsoever Doctrines are not according to Godliness, are so far from
being necessary, that they cannot be true. For if it be the Scope and End of
the Gospel to advance Godliness; and that it is an argument both of the
Credebility and excellency of it, that it does so, as I have before proved,
then it plainly follows, if we suppose the Doctrine of the Gospel to be a true
Doctrine, that all such Opinions as are either contrary to the Godliness, or do
disserve the interests of it, can neither be necessary Doctrines, nor true ones.

Seeing then the truth of this Proposition is evident from the foregoing
discourse; I shall only now make it my business briefly to reflect on some of
the many ill opinions, which tho they have been taught for sound and Orthodox;
yet, upon examination, will appear not to be according to Godliness.

(1.) The first I take notice of is that, of Gods being the Author of Sin, That
God is the Author not of those actions alone, in and with which sin is, but of
the very Pravity, Ataxie, Anomie, Irregularity, and Sinfulness it self, which
is in them; yea, that God has more hand in men's sinfulness than they
themselves. Archer's Comfort for Believers, p. 36, 37. vid. Dr. Pierce's
Preface to his Discourse of the Nature of Sin.

Neither do I see how Dr. Twiss can be excused from this Imputation: his words
are these. Fatemur Deum non modo ipsius operis Peccaminosi; sed Intentionis
malae Authorem esse, etc. Twiss Vindicat. Gratiae, p. 36. Quaecunque Deus
Praescit fore, illa voluit and decrevit, at Peccatum Praeseit sore, ergo
Peccatum voluit and decrevit. Joan. Maccovii Colleg. de Praedesim. p. 16.

Et certe hec (...)mmos Tree(...)gos quosdam, precipu^ Piscatorem and
(...)w(...)sum co adduxit, ut Naturam permissionis Dei considerantes, non
so(...) Deum peccatum veil s^atuerint* verum e(...)em aliqui eorum durioribus
Phrasibus quoad Communem Opinionum, verissimis tamen usi sint: nimirum Deum
Peccato indigere, sive opus habere ex hypothesi decreti illustratonis Gloriae
and Manifestationis Misericordiae and just^tiae sitae, etc. Joan. Szydlovii
(...). question. p. 128.


which has been expressly maintained by some men. Now it is not possible that
Opinion should be true, which is inconsistent with the Reason of mankind, or
manifestly repugnant to the Attributes of God: for all Controversies in
Religion must be decided by Reason, either from the Principles of Natural
Religion, or Divine Revelation; and from the Principles of Natural Religion it
is evident that there can be nothing in a Religion which comes from God, that
is repugnant to his Essential Attributes, that is, to himself.

Now that God should be the Author of Sin, that is the Author of what does
offend and dishonor him, is very absurd and unreasonable, that he should be
Author of that which he has so often and solemnly declared, he does abhor and
detest thwarts with the attribute of his truth: and that he should be the
efficient cause of all the wickedness, which is done, and he will so severely
Punish, is a gross repugnancy not only to his infinite goodness, but his
justice it self, Such Opinions as these deprive God of the holiness essential
to his Nature; and In Precatiembus DI. plerumque sancti appella^. P. Merulae
Comment. in E(...) Fragment. p. 106. Erissonii sormul. lib. 1. p. (...)
which even by the Gentiles unassisted with the light of the Gospel in their
Prayers and Devotions was constantly ascribed to him.

(2.) The Doctrine of irrespective decrees cannot be according to Godliness;
because it takes away the ground of all the motives to a Godly Life. For if a
man be included within the decree of Election, the greatest sins will not Damn
him; and if he be left out of it, the most holy Life cannot put him in a
capacity of Salvation.

Again, if God has decreed to save or reprobate men without regard had to
either their good or evil Lives, then they will be saved or lost without any
respect had of either: for what God has decreed, that certainly will come to
pass; but to say that Men shall have sentence pass upon them to go either to
Heaven or Hell, without any consideration of their Faith and Obedience on one
hand, or their infidelity and impenitence on the other, is to make a day of
Judgment unnecessary; and repugnant to that justice according to which God has
declared he will then proceed. We must all appear before the judgment of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.

(3.) Among these ill Opinions we may rank that of the Popish Casuists, who
teach that the Et illam ample^luntur non ignobiles Magistri atque Doctores,
quando Desendunt, Praeceptum Charitatis, per se, tantum obligare in Articulo
mortis. Amadaei Guimenii Opuscul. p. 119.
precept of loving God, is in it self only Obligatory at the very point of
Death, although we be always under the protection of Gods unwearied Providence,
and do every moment that we breath receive good at his hand; tho there is no
day of our Lives but we offend, and stand in fresh need of his mercy; yet these
Licentious Casuists, to say no worse of 'em, are of opinion, that it is a Putat
Vasques sussicere, si diligamus Deum in sine vitae. Escobar. Theol. Mo^al. p.
63.
sufficient return of Gratitude to God, for the infinite and unspeakable Acts
of his love to us, if in the end of our Lives we express one act of Love
toward him. But there needs no other Confutation in this Auditory of an
Opinion so impious, and directly contrary to the first and greatest Commandment
of the Evangelical Law, than the bare rehearsal of it.

(4.) Another Doctrine to be reflected upon, is that, which Teaches and Directs
us to the use of such Means for the promotion of Christian Religion, as are
destructive of the ends of it. The end of Christian Religion is to make men
sincere in what they profess, true to their word, and upright in their
dealings; and therefore they who by lying and perjury, equivocation and
reserves, endeavor to propagate the Religion of our Blessed Savior, do by the
means they use, subvert the end they pretend to serve. The design of Christian
Religion is to teach men Peace and Subjection to all lawful Authority,
therefore they who would instill Principles of Sedition and Rebellion, in order
to the work of Reformation, do defile and corrupt that pure Religion, which
they make such a show of reforming.

The end of Christian Religion is to render men harmless, kind and Charitable
one to another, therefore they who Condemn men's bodies to the stake and fire,
in order to refine their Minds? and cut their Throats, to save their Souls,
instead of doing service to the institution of Christ, they bring the utmost
slander and disgrace upon it, that possibly they can. No we must not do evil
that good may come of it, we may not make use of unlawful means, to bring about
an honest end. God in no Case will allow it; neither can true Religion ever be
reduced to such extremity, as to stand in need of it.

But the time not allowing, that I should further pursue this point, or take
any more of the Doctrines into consideration, which are not according to
Godliness: I shall beg leave to conclude the whole discourse, with some
application of it to our selves, and the unhappy times, into which we are
fallen; times wherein so many Errors in Faith; so many vices in Practice have
prevailed contrary to the Doctrine of Godliness.

And what Guide can we take; what Method may we use, to rectify our Judgments,
and recover our virtue? to remove our present evils; and to avert the
calamities we all fear? it will be in vain to search for the causes, or the
cures of our miseries in the Politics, or among the Stars: when they are, in
great Part, lodged within our own breasts, and there to be found.

Nations and Kingdoms have their growths and declensions, their rise and their
periods, as well as particular Persons: but with this difference, that they
never waste and decline before the temperance, and the modesty, and the
innocence, and the honesty of their Inhabitants have first so done.

When an universal corruption has overspread the manners of a Nation, then the
disease will come to a dangerous Crisis; its Condition will be desperate, and
such as all wise and good men must deplore: not only the Reputation, Fame, and
Glory thereof will be much obscured; but the very life and being of it will be
highly endangered.

When a long Custom of sinning, has taken from men the very sense of their
guilt; and they are so deeply enslaved to their Lusts* as to be in love with
the fetters that confine them; when the distemper has prevailed so much upon
the vital parts, that no desire longer remains in the Patient of Recovering,
then all hopes will be past, unless a speedy Remedy can be applied.

And this Remedy every man by the grace of God has in his own power; which is
by repentance to turn from the evil of his ways; and without all further delay
to make have to keep Gods Commandments: this is the only Course, whereby he may
save himself; and do as much, as in him lies, to preserve his Country.

For it is neither force of Arms, nor a multitude of Laws, that without a
thoro reformation in the Lives of Men can recover a sick and languishing
Kingdom.

Now if every one would be as Zealouly concerned, and as really painful and
laborious to approve himself to God by a Conscientious performance of all the
unquestionable Conditions which are required to make a man a true Christian, as
he is to recommend himself to his own party; there would soon be less faction
and turbulency, and more love and Religion among us: and we should not thus be
divided and subdivided into such a number of little Sects, who ought all to be
closely united in one body for the defense of our Reformed Religion against the
common Enemy.

If insted of being so apt to censure or misrepresent the designs and actions
of our Governors, which we seldom fully know, and often quite mistake, and by
which means their hearts are hardened against, and their affections estranged
from the People; and the just Reverence which the People owes them lost, or
abated; and so the management of Public affairs rendered in a manner
unpracticable; every man would do his part to promote Peace, and Virtue, and
the cherishing a good understanding among us, what a turn would this make in
the condition of things? what a visible stop would this put to our growing
fears and jealousies? and our Ears would no more be grated with terrifying
stories, and complaints, after men were once earnestly busy in procuring the
Public good and quiet?

If insted of inventing names to distinguish, and bespatter men; and then
spightfully fastening them one upon another: if instead of narrowly prying into
the faults of others; and the seeing them all double, or representing them as
great again as they are; it being too common to charge the things done
ignorantly upon men as their wilful crimes; to interprit their mere mistakes
for acts of malice; and to add something of our own to every bad report of 'em.

If instead of raking in every kennel to find proper Materials to blacken and
vilify each other, by which means an Infinite Scandal is cast upon that pure
and peaceable Religion we profess, and the powerful efficacy of its Doctrins
hindered, not only among our selves, but among Infidels (as has been Verum nihil
plane majori est impedimento, quam nostratium Christianorum (quos Ethnicis
praelucere ad omnem justitiam ac Castitatem oportuerat) tauto Nomini ac
Professioni minime consentanea quotidianae vitae documenta: neque enim tantum
spectata Paucorum innocentia and virtus adstruit Evangelio fidem; quantum
insignis multorum, and notissimi fere cujusque avaritia and improbitas admit.
P. Maffei Hist. Indic. lib. 6. p. 276.
often sadly complained of by those who have endeavored their Conversion) we
would all take a True and Faithful survay of our own Condition: and heartily
beg the Pardon of God and our Neighbor for all the injuries we shall find, we
have done to both: and also humbly implore Gods Grace, and Join to it our
earnest endeavors, that in the time to come, our Faith may be sound, and our
manners pure; these changes would prove the best Expedients, to recall that
Tranquillity and Peace, all that love and respect, all that good will, mutual
trust and confidence, which at any time heretofore our prosperous Nation has
been blessed withal; and I am sure no others without these can.

How often has God in a Fatherly way admonisht us, that he might not smight us?
how often has he given us some slight wounds, to the end we might avoid the
fatal strokes of his justice? how often has h^ laid his gentle Chastisements
upon us, that we might take care to escape being buried under the ruins which
his terrible judgments are wont to bring upon a Kingdom?

And shall none of the various methods God has used work a change, and real
amendment in us? shall the mighty things he has done for us, and the tender
care he has ever had of us be all in vain?

If neither his clemency will invite us to consider, nor his severity awaken us
out of our ungrounded security it must prove fatal to us. May then the
threatening dangers affright and persuade us; may the multitude of the Divine
Mercies allure us; may the secret motions of the Holy Spirit excite us to seek
the Lord while he may be found, before the acceptable time pass away; and his
injured and long abused patience change into implacable fury.

May that Zeal we bear for the best Religion, and a Church purely Reformed, and
of all others coming nearest to the Primitive Pattern, which so extremly
suffers by so general a decay of Piety, and the increase of Schisms, and
Parties, and Factions; may the love we bear to our Country, whose overthro is
threatened by the wickedness of its Inhabitants; may the care of our own Souls,
which will everlastingly perish, if we do not every one truly Repent, prevail
upon us to return unto God, and our Duty.

In a word, may all these Considerations together prevail upon us forthwith to
take up firm and steady resolutions to conform our own wills, in all things,
unto the Divine Will; to govern our thoughts and deeds by the laws and example
of our blessed Savior; to subdue every lust and unruly passion, and to make us
strictly purpose never again, to do any thing to to the dishonor of the great
God that made us, tho in the smallest instance; and where we are strongly
tempted to it by the greatness either of the profit or danger.

FINIS.

