THE SPIRITVAL EXERCISES. OF THE MOST VIRTUOUS and Religious D. GERTRVDE MORE
of the holy Order of S. Bennet and English Congregation of our Ladies of
Comfort in Cambray, she called them.

Amor ordinem nescit.

And Idiots Devotions.

Her only Spiritual Father and Directour the Ven. Fa. Baker styled them.

Confessiones Amantis.

A Lovers Confessions.

Amans Deum anima, sub Deo despicit vniuersa.

A soul that loves God, despises al things that be inferior unto God. Imit.
l. 2. c. 5.

Printed at Paris, by LEWIS DE LA FOSSE, in the Carme street, at the sign of
the Looking Glass. M. DC. L VIII.

With Approbation.

REnowned, More whose bloody Fate
England near yet could expiate,
Such was thy constant Faith, so much
Sir Thom- More,
Thy Hope, thy Charity was such;
As made thee twice a Martyr prove;
Of Faith in Death, in Life of Love!
View here thy Grandchilds broken Har^
Wounded with a Seraphick Dart.
Who while she lived mortals among
Thus to her Spouse Divine she sung.
Mirror of Beauty in whose Face
The essence lives of every Grace!
True luster dwells in thy sole sphere
Those glimmerings that sometimes appear^
In this dark vayl, this gloomy night
Are shadows tipped with glow worm light^
Show me thy radiant parts above,
VVbere Angels unconsumed move
Where amourous fire maintains their li^^
As man by breathing Air, surui^es.
But if per^hance the mortal eye,
That views thy dazzling looks mnst dye
With blind faith here i will kis them and desi^
To feel the heat, before I see the fire.
D. GERTRVDE MORE MAGNES AMORIS AMOR. R. Loch^m sculp^it


TO THE R. MOTHER
The R. Mother Bridgit More of Saint Peter and Saint Paul most worthy
Prioresse of the English Benedictin Nunns of our Lady of Hope in Paris.
REVEREND MOTHER,
This devout Book comes to you of right being your natural sisters excellent
Goods, and there is no other heir left to it but your des^ruing self besides I
know few or none do any way ^retend to it, but you and your Religious ^^ock who
exactly trace by true practice ^o Practice, divine practice the only ^eans) the
same holy paths this book ^reats of. Take and acccept of it therefore R.
MOTHER: I guess I need not much inuit you, for I dare say it will be most
dear to you, and most highly esteemed by you, and yours. If it chance to fall
into the hands of any such as may reject, or cry it down: (as some few did the
Idiots Devotions of the same Spirit lately set forth) it will (as that did) but
receive the greater luster thereby, and be more highly prised, by how much it
may be misprised by such sensual persons as relish not the Spirit of God, or
whose vain and flashing wits as it were spurn at the Divine, and true heavenly
Wisdoms. That it has some hands set in the margin, and diverse characters in
many places to point out certain matter and make them more remarakable, is no^
but that in a manner every line and syllable is most remarkable and worthy t^ be
observed. And that some places o^ Scripture are quoted in the margin, an^ not
al, is because those be the more clea^ plain and unmingled texts, though the
whole Book has nothing in it almost bu^ Scripture.

And if there be somewhat in the latter end the very same with what is said in
the preface, it will not much annoy since good advise cannot be too often
rtpeated.

I will say nothing of the admirable graces and gifts of the Author (let the
Book speak them) because I should seem thereby to praise, and extol you (her
natural Sister, and imbued with the same natural and supernatural gifts) then
which nothing would be more ungrateful and distastful unto you. Howsoever R.
MOTHER give me leave to inuit and incite you and your Holy Company to go on
cheerfully and couradgiously in these sacred and secret Paths of Divine Love.
With your Beauty and Fairnes intend, proceed prosperiously and reign. Let the
wisemen, or rather wits of the world laugh at you. They senseless think your
life Madness, and your ways dishonorable. Be not I say dismayed. For your
Truth Mildnes, Justice; and your Right hand (which is is your Spiritual Prayer)
vvil marueillously conduct you. So desirous to be partaker of yeur holy
Prayers, and committing you to the Divine Protection, I rest ever

R. MOTHER, Your most humble servant and faithful friend in our Lord. F. G.

THIS DEVOVT SOULS. ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader. With an Apology for herself,
and her spiritual Guide, and Director the V. F. Augustine Baker.
Wherein is excellently described a true interne, contemplative Spiritual
life, and the manner how to live happily in it, with right, and true Obedience
to God an man.

IT may seem very strange (and that very justly) that I should write what
here I have written; But when I have here declared my reason for it, I may
perhaps pas with the censure only of being a little presumptuous. Yet God ( who
is my witness in all, and my ^esire above al) knows upon what grounds I have
done it; And that it is but for mine own private comfort and help, and to be
seen by no other, but against my will, my superiors only excepted, from whom
(as they shall require) I will not conceal the very secrets of my heart much
less this which I have written to lie by me, wherein there may be what they
may mislike and correct, to which I shall most willingly submit my-self. Yea and
though it seem to me to be a great help to me to have that which I have writ
in more light to read when I am either in obscurity of temptation, or other
bodily indisposition to which I may be often incident. Yet I will suppress it
at their command and good pleasure, and put the want thereof willingly to the
hazard:
out of confidence in the assistance of God, who is a lover, and rewarder of
Obedience. Which virtue (howsoever it may be otherwise thought) I honor from
my heart, and believe verily that not^^ng that I do which does not partake of
that is of any regard at al with God.

^. F. Aug. Baker
This I have thus affirmed because he who has been my Master, and Father in a
spiritual life: and has brought me into a course, which much satisfies my
soul, and conscience between me and God: (It tending to nothing but to love God
by seeking him above al Graces and Gifts: And by withdrawing all inordinate
affection from al created things to become f^ee to love and praise God in as
pure and perfect a manet, as this life will admit. And also to true submission,
and subjection of myself for God to whomsoever he puts over me in this life,
with as great a contempt of my-self as my frailty can reach unto.)

Is notwithstanding taxed now by the same words in a manner which were alleged
against our blessed Savior. Luke 20.23.
We have found this man subuerting the people, and forbidding to give tribute
to Caesar. Which though none can justly say of him; Yet it has pleased God to
honor him so much as to have him even in a public instrument (which I have
heard read) covertly pointed at, taxed and accused of this manner of proceeding.

They taking for their ground, the impe^fections of some through mere frailty
committed in this kind. As also because some who are of other ways, and
understand not this, affirm it may be inferred out of his books that subjects
(in what they pretend to have a divine call to) may resist contradict and
disobey Superiors. Which that it may be inferred I cannot deny: ^ince a meaner
wit then he that affi^meth this may draw strange consequences out of any book
in the house, if he will look upon them with no other intention, but to carpe.
But if they will ta^e one place with another and consider what we believe, and
practice also, according to our imp^rfection and fra^lty, they will see and find
in practice the quite contrary. And what was allowed by Fa. Baker concerning
shifting to get time and means for ou^ prayer, was but in case that Super^ors
did account it but an unprofitable exercise.
Which was the only thing I have often heard him affirm in which he would
ever allow a soul to deal in any shifting manner with their Superiors under
what pretense soever.

And this in itself was never held to be a sin, but an imperfection, which
he also th^ught it to be. But this r^ason, for his as it were winking at their
imperfection, was to make souls that were apt for prayer to make the h^gher
esteem ^hereof, and perceive the necessity of prosecuting it daily and
diligently too, if they ever desired to arrive to any perfect degree in the
love of God. Which esteem if it had not b^ such means been brought into the
house: It would have been hard for ^im to have made a soul believe and
acknowledge the necessity, and nobility of it. For it may be practiced by some a
long t^me before they find any extraordinary benefit by it, and til they find
the effect of it in their own souls they may be apt to neglect, and make no
esteem of it in these days when al most every one of esteem inuaigh against
it as the most dangerous or unprofitable exercise in the world.

For some hold one of these opinions, and somo hold the other, to wit. Some
hold it only vn^rofitable. Others say it is very profitable if one could avoid
the perils of it, which yet in women they hold a thing almost impossible.
Which opinion of the two I most feared, because those that hold it pretend by
their objection to have some experience in a spiritual life: And therefore their
words are the apter to make in a soul the greater impression: but as for the
former, it plainly shows a mere ignorance in the affirmers.

To by carried away therefore with this opinion and error of the dangerousnes
of a spiritual life. Is that which by these writings I intended, and desired to
avoid by the help, and Grace of Almighty God. And therefore when I was clear
and not obscured with fear (which I am very subject to) I set down these
things to be a help, and comfort to me am^dst the oppositions to that which I
have found and experienced so proper and good for me. Which yet whether it be
or no my Superiors will be better able to judge, seeing not only what I believe
in all, and my opinion in these things they so much fear our error in; but
also my practice in a particular manner.

Now as for the shifting about our Prayer, which is the chief ground of the
forsaid public instrument before mentioned, that wholly tends (supposing our
belief, and practice to be according) to the disgrace of those who are in that
course of prayer, and to affright those who come after from following their
advise in any thing. They being there painted out in plain terms to be
enemies to the gouuernment of Superiors, as having had their instructions by a
strange, and indirect way, and means. I say for all that has been faid in this
kind of following our prayer, (come on it what will through opposition of
Superiors) I dare affirm that opinion of Fa. Bakers has to us been recalled
by him long before the publishing of the instrument. For it was only for an
entrance, uot for a continuance since a soul well settled in prayer would not
need it-though at first for four or five years a soul by being hindered from
two serious recollections in a day by her Superiors, would have perhaps been in
great danger of inconueniency to her progres, and also never have been able to
have obeyed ^s she should. Which is a certain effect of a truly prosecuted
course of prayer: ^ supposing it be one who is fit for it; ^or otherwise it may
be very convenient ^or her to be put into some other course more proper for her,
and if she resist Supuriors in it, she will be in danger of great inconvenience,
if not errors by her misunderstanding, and mis-applying that which was not for
her turn, and this we have in this very house seen and known) which if by
untimely hindering (a soul apt for it) a Superior procure^ he will also incur
an inconueniency though not so great as hers. Which is that she who would (by
prosecuting discreatly a course of Mental pra^er) have become subject if it
were necessary even to a very d^gg;
becomes for want of that strength, and help which therein she got, to be
almost impossible to be ruled by the wisest man in the world.

For living in Religion (as I can speak by experience) if one be not in a
right course between God and our soul:
Ones nature grows much worse; then ever it would have been, if they had lived
in the word. For Pride, and self love which are ^ooted in our soul by sin
finds means to strengthen themselves exceedingly in one in Religion, if she
be not in a course that may tea^h her, and procure her true Humility. For by
^he corrections, and contradictions which cannot be avoided by any living in a
Religious community, I found my heart ^rown (as I man say) as hard as a stone,
and nothing could have been able to have mollified it; but by being ^ut into a
course of prayer; by which a soul tends toward God, and learneth of him the
true lesson of humbling her-self. Which effect I finding by following Father
Bakers plain, simple^ easy and sweet instructions, I was loath to change them
for them I could not understand. And for this reason by all the meanes^ could
imagin^ I have endeavored to strengthen my-sel^ by writing, gathering, and
thus (as i^ some part of my papers i^ will appear) addressing my speech to our
Lord. This way i^ so plain, and easy that a^ long as the sou^ hold^th
Humilit^, it is impossible for her t^ err to her great inco^ueniency, at least
in h^ main point which ^s the love of God. For i^ less imports for smaler sins,
her im^erfectio^s and errors or bangors, ^ speaking of suc^ as are accounted
such by some precise an^ exact persons) as to ouershoot herself i^ that in
which another would have c^m^ off with honor, or some such point, n^ way
greatly to the purpose, as to any hinderance to her course. Yea by these things
(I say) she rather gains then loses since many time^ they are a great
occasion of Humility to her soul, which much aduanceth her, and is above al
chiefly necessary for her. For love to God, and true Humility increase the one
the other and are inseparable companions.

In fine as to the point of following Prayer, when the Superior as that time
would
otherwise employ her which I was speaking of before. I say that after the soul
has been some goo^ space pract^sed in that exercise The Superiors cannot
hinder her in it by imposing that which to them seems fit: And the s^ul w^l
have no desire to resist them neither can she do it without a check from God
Almig^ty. For no impl^ym^nts which Religious women have in Religion can h^nder
them (after they have had a good entrance) that the Superiors can impose upon
the^, for if they pray not a^ one time thy can easily pray at another,
or best of al pray with the work itself, and make the work their prayer.

This therefore being so that Fa Baker did this at first, but as a shift in the
beginning, there is no just cause to find such fault with it, he doing it for
these two rea^^ns. First, because some chief Superiors had so poor an opinion
of Prayer, that they thought they did God good service when they hindered them,
who seem to make esteem of it. The other reason, because those he gave his
instructions to, and seemed to him most fit for them, were likly to come into
place of Authority; and thereby were not only themselves to suffer much by the
continual opposi^ions they were like to find; but also were to bear a great
part of the others Burdens which were more fearful, and had been a lesser time
practiced in the course: who yet were likely (if they were encouraged) to
prosper very well in a spiritual, and internal life. These two were I say in
part his reasons, which made him go so far in this point. And yet we that had
these instructions delivered by him, had them with such circumstances that we
could not possibly take liberty in any thing that was contrary to our
Superiors minds by his Books, or words.

And verily I may with a safe conscience affirm, that if I would never so
fain, I could not find any thing in his books, nor in any of this
i^structions, on which I could ground my-self (without a check in my
conscience, for doing the instructions wrongs) to neglect, omit, shift of, or
sheightly to perform any thing of my Superiors commanding, or ordaining. Nor
could I ever infer any thing out of them, but that they tend only, and wholly
to humble the soul; and urge her to seek, desire, and rest in God alone. And
this I dare affirm under all the Oaths in the world, if Justice by lawful
authority should exact the same of me.
For not any book which he hat writ has ever tended to any thing else, then
that we should live with all submission and subjection to God, and our
Superiors. And if he had taught ^he contrary, an extraordinary effect of it
would have appeared in us before now, we having been dealt with (being
our^elues in authority) as we have been; And ^ndeed in such manner that no
humain in^tructions could have enabled us quietly to ^aue supported the same.
The grace of God only, and tending to him by the way ^f love could do it; which
so humbles the soul that no difficulty, or disgrace can ha^pen which she
expects not, and ^herefor is abled willingly to embrace the ^^me.

Verily I can affirm this by mine own experience that a cross word, or a
slight reprehension before I was in this course was more insupportable to me,
and did more disquiet my mind, then all the diffi^ulties and disgraces, which
have fallen upon me since, have done. For now me thinks though I be neglected by
the whole world: By flying to our Lord he eases me of al my burden. And as I
have desired to have no friend, or comfort but him so it pleases him, neither
in doubts, fears, payns, disgraces, nor any other miseries (whereunto this
life of ours is so subject) to reject me. Only he exacts of me that in all the
con^radictions he sends me I humble my-self, and be confident of his help;
which, if I do so, I shall be much more sure, then i^ in mine own hands^ had a
most absolute power to help my-self.

And this humble confidence makes ones way so clear that the soul has few,
or no questions in many years, though they have such very near that are never
so well able to resolve them This want o^ questions is almost all the ground of
difficulty between these souls and the Confessor, who thinks himself neglected
t^ have souls have no more bu^ines with hi^ then in mere conf^ssion.
But I know no^ how the souls can ^elpe it, though there^by they should offend
the whole world It seems to some a great presumption^ that the soul seems
^o think her-self f^^ to guide her-self, and al^o by it they in^ferre that she
sleighteth others though he^ Superiors as not fit to govern her, so ignorant do
they think she does esteem them. But God and her own conscience knows that
none of these things are the cause of her being so reserved, as indeed she is,
unless she be asked by them: which if she be they will see that she does not in
any kind slight, or neglect them; yet in speaking she uses discretion where
and to whom (for one Superior may be fit to be treated with in one point, and
another in another) which none can judge or term a breach of Obedience, and
yet this is the furthest that ever Fa. Baker taught.

And who would not think it a mere folly; if I out of pretense of Obedience,
and greater Perfection should treat with one in matter of conscience (in which
I were doubtful) who had such di^^iculty with me in his nature that he were as
little able to judge in my case as I were in mine own. For my part our
Congregation giving leave for it, and wanting those who are able to judge aright
in my case; as well as in others. I should do not only my-self an injury thus
foolis^ly to go to work; but also him, whom I should thus treat with upon these
terms. Which foolish proceedding is not a proper effect of true Obedience,
but rather a phansy, and mere folly.

O how far is it then from Fa. Bakers meaning to teach, or allow of any thing
which may savor of disobedience! It is true that that which those term
Obedience, who draw it to nothing, but a mere politic course (that leaves by
the practice of it in a soul a poor effect in comparison of that which by the
vow of Obedience, God and the Church intends) serves where it is practiced
to keep better order then where there is no Obedience at al (which God knows in
these days is too ordinary:) for opposing against Superiors is a course which
cannot stand without great inconveniences For if God require that seculars
should obey the Prince, and the Laws of the Realm, so far as it may be done
without offense to his own Laws: and if it be required of them that they pay
taxes which are by the King unjustly exacted: What shall Religious persons
alleadg for their defense, if after the vow of Obedience they resist, and
withstand their laweful Superiors in what they may justly exact (as we ought to
judge al to be that is not apparent sin and offense to God:) and better it is to
obey in never so imperfect a manner, then to cont^nd, and withstand Superiors
under what pretense soever. For though it be true that some great saints have
afflicted their subjects, and misunderstood their proceedings: yet we shall
always read that the good subject never sought for other remedy then Patience
expecting (for their clearing in the matter) God Almighties good will, and
pleasure who permitteh this often to hapen without the fault of the subject
much less of the Superior who may do that in justice which we subjects are not
able to comprehend the cause off.
Neither need we trouble our-selues with thinking of that, but regard God in
all and walk solicitously with him: and then will al turn to our good, and God
will infailibly teach us true Obedience which is a virtue that makes our life
in some sort to resemble the life of the Saints in Heaven. For they in all
regard God, and are totally subject to him. They greiue not to see others in
higher degree then they, but see it is just it should be in all things as it is
they praise God in all the sins they see committed in the world and are
resigned, though they hate sin, And wonder to see such a Goodness as God is so
forgotten by men, and so little sought after by aspiring through love toward
him. This they see, and yet they remain in Peace; and: so shall we (thongh in a
far inferior manner if we perporme Obedience as we ought, and obey God as
readily as the shadow follows the body;
by which course we shall become truly happy. And this is our end of coming to
Religion, and if we do comply with our obligation in this kind we shall live
quietly and die confidently; for the Humility that is in this practice will carry
us through al things. This way of true Obedience, and subjection to God in all
things, is a way which though we walk as it were upon thorns by reason of the
contradictionss, temptations, pains, and afflictions with which those are tried
that must be his true friends: yet the regard that the soul in all has of him,
and the love which by all increases in her, makes it seem to her that she
walks upon Roses in comparison of the difficulties she suffered when she
sought her own will, by following it, and seeking her own ease, and honor.

This is that Obedience which Fa. Baker so much commends, and wishes souls to
make right use of in there Obedienco to Superiors which is so immediate a
disposition to it, and so great a help to strenthen, and perfect it: and which
if we neglect in vain do we pretend to practife that toward God. For their
ordinances, and orders are a most certain argument of his will: And nothing will
he bid a soul do contrary to them.

And if it should seem otherwise to the soul, yet by his own words she would
know that she were to stand to their judgment til he altered their minds,
which he always does, if it be according to his will, and necessary for his
honor that) the Superior condescend. This I am confident he does teach, and
hold; and never other doctrine did I ever hear him affirm, and what might be
construed in a contrary sense was but to condescend to the imperfection of
beginners: who if they had been held to such precise Obedience, as some would
exact of them, they would have been in great danger never to have obeyed
rightly at al. For by exacting virtue and the practice thereof above the Grace
and ability of a simple beginner; they make Obedience and other virtues seem
to be by practice an intolerable burden, and they by this means also faint in
their way even in their first beginning. Whereas if they had been to do things
with discretion they vould have been able to go faster on every day then other.
And this one point is of sueh moment that for want of the true practice
thereof, it comes many times that the burdens of Religion seem so heavy to
good and well meaning ^ouls.

And in this point do most men differ from Fa. Baker in their direction of
souls more them in any other point. And if this course had not by him been held
with me in an extraordinary manner; and that he had not daily for a long time
encouraged me not to be daunted with my sins, and imperfections, (assuring me
that it would al tur^ to my good, if by prayer I would endeavor to tend to
God, and use the bes^ means I could (yet with all possible patience with my-self
for my defects) to re^forme my-self in all inordinate affection^ to created
things and this more by quiet^nes then extraordinary force.) I know no^ what
would have become of me. By thi^ means (I say) diverse imperfections t^ which I
was subject (and which I defit^ed, yet could not at first reform) fell of b^
little, and little: when God Almighty, di^ (as I may say) see his time. Which
wa^ a quite coutrary course to that which wa^ extolled by all that ever I met
with before Who can give for the most part no other advise then to overcome al
things by forc^ and violence.

But God did show to me plainly in read^ing Fa. Baker Books that my way was t^
overcome my-self as I could, not as (...) would; but expect Gods good pleasure
(...) it. And then when he pleased if I did (...) best, I should by his Grace
get the better (...) that which with all my industry I was n^^ able to overcome.
Which made me (...) clearly my own frailty, and how little (...) are able to
do of our-selues; yea indeed even nothing that is good. For when I have been
able to overcome my-self in a thing many a time, yet when I have thought
my-self thereby secure that I was able to do it again, I have failed more then
ever before, which makes me never dare to presume of my own strengh in any
thing how little soever it seem: for if I do I am sure to fail.

Another thing besides this point of Obedience (by a certain persons means) is
much feared in us by our Fathers: And that is that we slight, neglect and
contemn al books, and instructions but Fa. Bakers; (Which is as God knows)
quite otherwise. For though (as may be gathered by what I have here collected
and noted) I do arm my-self by all the means I can imagine against those
Objections which are
made by those of contrary ways that I may hold on my way which seems to be so
proper, and fit for my desired estate which I have taken upon me by my
profession; I have no reason to alter for ways I am not able to understand; my
conscience being ^atisfied with this I am in: and my Supe^iors never yet
condemning the same. Yet ^s I say I am far from sleighting other instructions;
but hold they are very good for them for whom they may be proper, which they do
not seem for me. Because the more I read, or hear of them the more confused^
and without coherence they seem to be. For I find nothing but saying and
unsaying as i^ seems to me, as in one place urging mos^ vehemently the
necessity of mental prayer^ and in twenty other places making it a mos^
impossible thing to give ones self to praye^ without more endangering our
salvation then before.

And where they treat of Obedience they treat of as it seems to me in such
manner that it is almost impossible to find ou^ how, or which way one may
perform (...) in any certain, or quiet manner. But the more they speak of it,
the more impossibl^ thing they seem to make it. And verily^ could never put it
together to make other sense of it do what I ^an, then to draw i^ to this: (as
they expres it,) that it is a mo^^ seruil thing and much like that where wit^
s^ruants are subject for fifty shillings a ye^ in the world, and no further
effect could come to me by the practice of it (as th^^ seem to mean) as to any
true knowled^^ of God, or my-self, then would have com^ by my being a servant
in the world, on^^ forsooth by reason it is performed by us i^ virtue of our
vow of Obedience, which makes them acts of greater perfection an^ consequently
of much more merit. But th^^ is a subtle point fitter to be disputed then
n^eessary to be believed. For I know, and that by experience that it is
possible to comply with our external Obediences and perform them so that the
Superior shall have one in good esteem, and be able to discover no great defect
in our performance of them: And yet the soul as far from knowing what true
obedience is, as she was when she came into Religion, performing them all that
while but in a natural manner, of which proceeding nothing can be expected but a
natural effect. Pride and disob^dience increasing daily in the soul, which is
an entrance (if God prevent it not) to unspeakable inconvenience. But yet
though I could draw no sure, and solid ground, for a soul by Obedience
according to such instructions, yet the defect may be in me as to those ways,
and not in the instructions. For some have affirmed they find much good by
them; of which I am exceeding glad. For so souls may live Quietly, Obediently,
and Humbly in the house, it is al one to me by what mean^s, or by whom God
Almighty does it. And there are some in the house that I should adu^se rather
to read such instructions then Fa. B^kers (if I were worthy to give advise,)
And this I would do if they we^e both private men, but much more now these
instructions are delivered by the Confessor whose place deserves an
extraordinary respect which to my power shall ever be given him, or any other in
his place whosoever he be. But yet I must needs say that of al in this house I
could never see, but one who could discourse, and distinguish his points in,
and of Obedience, and draw out of them a settled quiet, and satisfactory course,
but that when he is gone they be as far to seek as they were before in the
understanding of it. For another will expres it in another manner, and so under
al while they live they must as it were begin again.

This therefore was that which made me so affect F. Bakers instructions at first
when he delivered them: because I saw they were grounded upon God, (not upon
him) who could never fail whatsoever became of him. And by this regarding God
in all, and doing al out of Obedience to him; our soul becomes so humble, that
it lives in a manner, as subject to al she lives with as any one can be to any
Superior in the world. She troubles not her head disputing how, which way, and
in what manner she shall obey in this, or that: but she simply obeys in all as far
as her frail^y will permit, and as willingly would she be the most abject, and
most neglected in the house as ever she was willing to do any thing in all her
life. For having recours to God makes her insensible to those things so fat as
may stand with flesh and blood. And God does send,
and give a soul that seeks nothing but sincearly to love, and please him)
such occasions to humble herself (which to none can be seen; because the
knowledge, and cause is wholly within herself) that it is of more force to
humble her then her being neglected of all the world would be; though that be
also a great help and a great favor of God. For her soul can never be pure,
and free for the ascending to the praise of God, til it be very humble, which
the more a sonl endeavors to be, the more Peace does she enjoy, and the
freer access does she find to God, and the less impediments between him and
her soul.

For this true Humility, and Obedieuce to God which Fa. Baker does so urge a
soul to in all his Words and Books is an immediate disposition to that which S.
Paul wished to us. Which is that our conversation may be in Heaven. And never
was there such perceptible friendship love, and correspondence be^ween any in
this world (how great soever their love might seem) as there is between those
souls, and our Lord, and his Angels, and Saints in Heaven. Which though it be
not so perceiuable to sense as the other which is founded upon that alone; yet
by Faith, and love the soul does more plainly, and certainly enjoy it, then we,
can be certain of any thing which with our co^poral eyes may be seen: and such
a confidence does accompany his love that she desires not to be more certain
of any thing. She can wish, then that she depends wholly of her God alone:
whose will is above al mast dear to her, and to whom she often cries out in
her soul with the glorious S. Augustine, saying: That all that abundance that is
not her v^ry God him-s^lf is to her, but extreme penury. And therefore she
fears not any want of temporal mean^. For she accounts it too great an
happiness, and honor that by the want of that which is necessary for the
sustenance of nature, she should have the occasion the sooner to enjoy him her
only desire, whom while she lives here she cannot fully enjoy: Because noue can
see God^ and live, til which be granted her al things seem as nothing to her.
For she longing and sighing only after him nothing can comfort, or satisfy her
soul while He gives not him-self to her. Yet in this banishment she remain^th
content, because Hi^ will is by her even in this life preferred before her own.

Although those instructions before by me mentioned do much seem to be like
the Jesuits as I gather by their books, yet I hold them to be nothing so
intelligible as theirs, but more confufed by reason he would bring these, and
Fa. Bakers into one, and make a co^pleat life for a soul out of both. Which if
he (to wit the Compiler of those instructions she much misliks for
contemplative souls) can do for his own understanding, and practice: yet I shall
think he will find few that will be able to do in it as he does; but will confound
one with another, and he able with quiet and satisfaction to practice neither.

For those that cannot use any discourse to be held to it,
it does them little, or no good. And those that can do nothing but by the
means of discourse will profit as little by other ways. Now for my own part I do
profes I could never find good: by discours^ neither did I stand in need
thereof. For it was an easy matter for any that could have given me
instructions for the way of love (which is by the exercise of the will) to
persuade me that to love God, and seek after him alone was a most happy thing,
and that it alone was able to make me truly happy: for I did desire this
exceedingly of my-self, and was very desirours to dispose my^self for such a
course betwixt my soul, and God as might make me most pleasing to him: and make
me not as I then was such a stranger to him. And this I thought was by me to be
brought about by a means which I was very defective in; And that was by asking
of questions of those who were most l^kly to tell me what I should do to compass
this my desire. Which I, failing in, and when I did ask was yet as far from
knowing as I was before, I thought to get it by reading, and the more I read
the les I did understand: which made me almost quite out of heart. But going to
Father Baker almost in a desperate case: He told me my way must be by Prayer^
for which he gave me some instructions according as he delivers them in his
Idiots Devotion, and refer^ed me for the rest in that point to God. Which he
doing, and giving al other instructions for other things suitable: I found
presently that course of l^ue which I so much desired. And though I went so
simply to work that I desired to know nothing, (^or curiosity in read^ng those
things which help to this course is very dangerous though in thems^lues they
seem but simple,) yet God did make al things to me so plain that was necessa^y
for me to know, that I wondered to see such an alteration in my soul. Yea by may
saying the divine office (of which merely by my extraordinary, memory I had
gotten a little vuderstanding) he did so enlighten and instruct me, that no
industry of mine own could have attained such knowledge (for this my only
purpose of loving God, and humbling my-self) as I had even thus for nothing;
for my pains, and industry was so little that it was not so much as to be
esteemed. And thus God of his mere Mercy deals still with my soul; for which
if I by not humbly grateful, no punishment is sufficient for me. But I hope
though I be so frail and weak; yet his Grace will in all assist me which I
beseech you to beg of him for me.

It sussiseth not for the soul that there is in God himself whom the soul
seeks after) Simplicity, or Unity: but there must also be al possible
Simplicity in the soul herself, for the making her fit to treat with God, and
thereupon become united to him. The more simple or one that the soul is (which
is that the more she is free and rid of al thoughts of creatures which cause
multiplicity) the liker is she to God who is simplicity itself, and the more
apt, and worthy to become united to Him.
And therefore all the cunning, and industry of a spiritual master should ever
be by all lawful means to rid the soul of al multiplicity incombrances, blocks,
and al other things that are enemies to the forsaid Simplici^y in soul. And
indeed every image o^ a created thing is an impediment to the said simplicity;
And therefore is to be rejected at such time as the soul is in case to apply
itself immediately to God.

He that is a true spiritual Master will in such a case take great heed how he
lay any thing on the soul least it cause the forsaid impediment. Every soul of
her own nature is apt to contract multiplicity, and impediments enough: and if
she have withal a Master to devise, and lay more on her how can she be but held
back, and be indisposed for the said perfect immediate treaty wi^h God And one
only impediment is impediment enough, and hinders al.

The spirit of Simplicity does bring, and cause much Peace in the soul for
tending wholly toward that one thing which is only necessary;
It makes the soul as insensible as it can toward al other things digestin^
and passing over with patience vnkindnes^ and injuries, whereby her life
becomes pro^perly a life of Patience. Also as this simplicit^ is grounded upon
plain, and simple instru^ctions, so is it, and must i^ withal be as we founded
upon simple, and plain dealin^ with God, and Man. Simply intending Go^ and
avoiding al double dealing, and al v^due intention.

A true spiritual life should be one ^on^ continued thread lasting from the
time o^ his conue^sion to the end of his life. Saint Paul reprehendeth those
who are ever learning, and never ^ome to the perfection of knowledge. Such are
they who yelding to temptations loose their supernatural light, and fall into a
state of less light which is more natural then fupernatural and ^therefore is
but darkness in comparison of the other light, and always is deceitful and
erroneous as to the ^inding of the right way toward God. Whereas the other
said internal light within then proceeded from a Superior cause or gift that is
more supernatural.

The things absolutely necessary for those who shall begin, and prosper in a true
spiritual course are these that follow.
1. INstructions proper for a contemplative life. 2. Secondly, an aptnes to
understand, and practice the said instructions aright. 3. Thirdly, a great
couradg to withstand al temptations come they from within, or without that
might draw her into multiplicity from simplicity: and especi^lly sear w^^h
soon draws one into the most pestilent multiplici^y that is makes one more
blind every day then other; and consequently into more d^ffidence, whereby they
are made almost wholly incapable of conuersing with God, unless God show them
their errors, and they begin again: which is a hard matter to do, if a soul
have once lost her light: which God I beseech him deliver al capable souls from
doing. For it is the greatest ingratitude that can be offered to God, and none
but God can tell the miseries, perplexities, and difficulties that attend on
such a soul all the days of her life, as Saint Angela does testify with terrible
words. 4. Fourtly there is necessary in the soul a good, and right judgment for
the understanding of things a right For else the soul will erroneously understand
al things though never so plain. The more she knows the farther she is to seek,
and the more errors she falls into. And better it were if such souls could be
known (which is almost impossible til they have had some knowledge of a
spiritual life: for many times they seem to have a greater aptnes then the
most capable souls, and a greater inclination toward God then others; and yet
run into error, and are in danger (do what they can, that have the care of
them) (to breaks their brayns, or overthrow their bodies) that they never had
spiritual instructions further then for the Active life. 5. Fifthly, a great
capacity of tending toward God by the exercise of the will: which being
prosecuted together with true mortification of themselves will bring^ says
Blosius, to a mystic Union, and ^perfection in time convenient.
Of those that have al these conditions there are yet great difference: for
some have more aptnes, and find les impediments then others, and some have more
light, and others les, as it pleases God. Yet those that are most bumble, and
faithful to him though they seem les clear are the most pleasing to God, who
be blessed by all. Amen,

The Observing of the divine call,
which indeed should be, and is the very life of a spiritual life, Is by most
spiritual Masters now a days turned into a scorn, or scoff. And therefore no
meruail that true spirituality should in these days be so rare, and almost
unknown. Nay if a soul give but her-self to prayer she shall have an hundred
enemies one obiecting against one point, another against another of her
proceedings.

Every one (according to their spirit, and humor (desiring to reform her in
they know not what themselves; which if she be moved with, no other effect is
like to come of it, then happened to the Painter who altered his work so long,
and often that at last it had neither form nor fashion; And al other that had
procured this alteration in the picture (which at first was a very good one)
called the workman fool for his labor.

The Application whereof is very plain and proper to our purpose.

1. First. There is difference between Unity, and Union: for as Unity is but
one thing, so union is a coupling together at last of two things.
2. Secondly, simpl^city is a singlenes, or being alone, and simple is single,
that is a thing alone. And therefore simple, or single^ and one or simplicity,
and unity is but the self same thing. 3. Thirdly, multiplicity is a many
foldnes of things, and two, or more diuer things do make a multiplicity; but
one things and les then two will not make a multiplicity, God and a creature
both though of together as distinct things are a multiplicity: not because the
apprehension of Go^ being apprehended but acco^ding to Fait^ but because of the
thinking of the creature, not as in God (for then it would cause no
multiplicity) is a thing distinct from God; and a creature alone thought of
without any apprehension withal of God if it be not to be termed multiplicity
(which it is in the takings of mystic Authors) yet is it not most certainly
the simplicity in soul that is required for union with God. 4. Fourtly, God is
but one rhing, or an Unity, simplicity, or a singlenes. For though al things,
and al diversity of things be indeed in God; yet they are al of them but one
thing in him. Yea whatsoever thing, or things be in him they are God himself.
God was, and is that one thing (which our Savior defending S. Mary Magdelen
said to be) only necessary.
The imperfect Contemplative spirits, who commonly in their external businesses
are in their interior full of multiplicity; do yet for all that when their
businesses are l^id aside, and they betake themselves to their recollection at
the season proper for it^ (in regard they have as it were a natural, and
habitual propension toward God, and his immediate presence with a loathing, or
at least neglect, or disesteeme of al creatures as to any affection to them)
easily surmont al multiplicity of images that could be occasioned by their
precedent employments, wherein their souls had never fixed their love: as who
were not, nor could be satified, or much delighted with them.


All the spiritual men in the world are not able by their instructions to make
another that yet of herself it most apt ^or it to become truly spiritual,
without the scholar herself do withal carefully observe, and pursue the
foresaid Lghts and Calls, as her primum mobile, or first mouer^ And to say^ Tak^
al your instructions from without, is al one in effect as to say; Tend not to
Contemplation For God, and none but He is the true, and immediate Teacher, and
Directour in the most obscure and supernatural way of Contemplation. Yet here ^
would be understood that under these terms of divine interior Lights,
Motions, and Calls which I take to be the ro^t, and cause of al her true
Obediences, and other good needs: I intend, and comprrhend al Calls through
other obligations as when they are otherwise commande^ by the universal divine
Law natural, o^ positive: by the Church, or o; her huma^ Law, or by the wills of
Superiors. And ^ true spiritual Man should do nothing bu^ out of the said root,
or cause which is the divine Call.

A supernatural Discretion is miparted b^ God to a welminded soul that
disposet^ her-self for it. which disposit^on consists ^hiefly in the use of
abstraction, and prayer. This is the light by which God guides ^ouls which he
leads to Contemplation, and thereby teaches them what is necessary for them
to know, or do externally or internally: so far as conduces to the said end.
Simple, and unlearned souls by ^he said light come to find out those internal
ways most obscure of themselves;
which no man though never so learned and acutely witted can discern, or find
^ut of himself.

The most spiritual man in the world cannot instill this light into another. Al
he can do is exteriorly to teach a soul how to dispose her-self for it. And as
a soul that has never so great a capacity for it (speaking ordinarily) cannot
find it out without the help of some experienced person; so one that has no
aptnes for it, all the teachers in the world cannot put it into her.
And those that have the aptnes can never find true comfort, and satisfact^on,
but in con^emplatiue instructions, and being once well instructed will find al
things preach them to her in their kind, nor will she understand any thing she
reads, or hears but in that s^nse, if it be to any purpose. Finding that to be
her only secure way, and al things to help her thereunto, if it be not her own
fault, how much soever the fore mentioned medlers mislik of her proceedings,
and misinterpret them. So one that has not that aptnes will misunderstand al,
or most of those instructions and wonder how they can be practiced without
falling into this, or that error, and taking this, or that liberty by them thus
measuring others by their own understanding of things.

This was always thus, and ever will be, be the persons never so holy, God
permitting it for the exercise of both. I mean only amongst women: for men
though they should be defective in practice yet they have it by speculation if
they be scholars And verily I am of Saint Teresaes min^ that learned men are
not so apt to put sou^ out of their way, as the unlearned are^ For if the
unlearned be spiritual, and no^ truly spiritual: it is ineredible the
Martyrdom that a Contem^latiue soul has t^ undergo being under his chardge,
and young miracle it will be for her (if she ha^ not many to encourage her) to
hold t^ the instructions proper for her, and which only she can prosper: and
out o^ which if he should put her, he would b^ the first but only her-self that
would b^ weary of her. But if she hold patience ^^ will fair with her as it did
with S. Ma^^ Magdalene, that our Savior will answ^^ ^or her, as far as it is
convenient for her ^btayning the best part, which shall never ^e taeken from her.

Nothing is more improper for a Con^emplatiue soul then to contend, com^lain,
or justify herself, al her remedy for ^he most part being to come from Silence,
Prtience, Humility and Resignation. I except where justice does require a
simple re^^tion of the Truth to Superiors; when the ^ood of her own, or other
souls in the ^owse requires it. And that she must never do suddenly, or out of
passion, or auersi^n, but it behooves her to consult the matter often and
seriously with our Lord, and in the mean time to behave her-self humbly to the
party, or parties and do them both with God, and man al offices of true charity
she can.

The supernatural light, or discretion is to be nourrished, and increased by all
the external helps that can be afforded. And great heed is to be taken that it
be not obscured, or destroyed: as God knows it may easily be, if we look not
well about us. And the least mote of darkness defeats the whole sight, God
permitting it for our ^^nnes, and negligences when it happe^eth.

This light is commonly never given but where the internal senses are naturally
adapted, and made proper for the receiving, an^ using of it. And therefore
extrauagant imagi^nations though otherwise never so deuou^ or of never so
retired natures are vncapabl^ of it: yea are in manifest peril to mistake^ at
least of making right of use of it, misap^ply, and misunderstand (to their
gre^^ prejudice, and others great inconuenie^^ce, and trouble) this doctrine of
the diui^^ C^l. And better it were, if it were pos^^^ble, that such souls
should never so mu^^ as hear of the divine call.

This confirms that old proverb which says, one man's meat is another man's
pe^^son, and so it is in this. For a soul truly a^^ for Contemplative
instructons can n^^uer find any solidity, or certainty in a^^ other thing then
this of observing of (...) divine call in all things; and finds that it (...) at
hand at al times, and al occasions to ^^ her guide, and directrix; (such a
capaci^^ is there in our soul to have relation to G^^ in all cases, and in
particular it is necessa^^ in doubtful cases. For where he determ^^neth ^t by
Obedience, or necessity, it we^^ to tempt him to desire Him otherwise (...)
declare his ^il to us,) so as I say that (...) the soul can find no comfort, or
certain^ in any other instructions so on the other sid nothing is more
perilous to be mi^^vnderstood by those that have not an ap^^^es for a
Contemplative life, or the inter^al exercise thereof, though otherwise never so
good souls, and of never so good ^eaning.

None are capable of rightly vnderstan^ing and practicing this instruction of
the ^iuine call,
but they who are resolved to ^eny themselves in all things, and who ^ittingly,
and willingly adhere to no crea^^d thiug: for if the so I do willingly re^^in
an affection to any thing she is at a ^op, and can go no further. For God must
^e sought, and loved wholly if we desire and endeavor to arrive to perfection.

This observing the divine call was that su^^^ly which S. Augustine speaks of
in his ^onfessions, where he lamenteth his case ^f darkness, and blindness before
he had ^^uen himself wholly, and seriously to the ^^^uice of God, and to
observing, and liu^^g according to his Justice. These are his ^ords. And I was
not then acquainted with ^^at true interior Justice which judges not by
^^stome, but by the most righteous law of Al^ighty God. And certainly the
better dis^^sition the soul is in of living and walk^^g in this light, and
according to this Iu^^^ce, the better will she prosper in a spiri^^al life, and
the more clear will her way (...), and the les peril of erring; for it is the
^ay of Humility, And no^e but the hmuble can walk in this light long, or find
a^^ gust therein.

They will either leave the light, or t^^ light will worthily leave them if ever
the^ had it.

Thaulerus says that God rewards (...) works but his own, the purer our
inte^^tion is in doing suffering, or forbearing, t^^ more is it His own, and
the more perfe^^^ly a soul complieth with her duty to wa^^ God (in that manner
that he exacteth of h^^ and is proper to her state, and the gra^^ given her)
the more she pleases God. A^^ in this respect it is truly said that
Ob^^^^ence is better then Sacrifice: for we do ne^^ fo much, if it be not that,
and in that m^^ner God requires it of us; we shall (...) in blindness and find
no peace in our so^^ for God has ordained a certain way, (...) means for every
soul, for her walkin^ and profiting in the way of Perfectio^^ And in that only
will they find their p^^^gres to consist, to observe what it is (...) exacts of
them, and enables them to; (...) not what others do or can do, or h^^ done. For
as we al differ in face so ^ we differ in the manner of our exerc^^^ that are
interior. As for example if (...) who is of a free nature, and can ^^^dure,
little abstraction should force (...) self to as much as those who are of s^^
and retired natures, and ^o recollect her^elf in time of work, and other times,
^n which by order of the house she is to ^eep silence (which exterior silence
she is ^o observe) she would but hurt her ^ealth, and it may be her lead, and
not ^^el be able to recollect her-self then, nor ^t the time proper for
Recollection, and ^o loose al for want of discretion. Where^s if she should do
what she is able, and ^o more, and abstract her-self by little, and little as
God shall increase his grace, she ^il in time be enabled to that which will ^e
sufficient for her, and God will require ^o more but what he has given, which
^ow little soever it be, we ought to ac^ount it more then we deserve, and
em^loying that well he will inc^ease it, who (...) more willing and desirous to
give then we can be to receive. If we line so reti^edly as he will enable us, we
shall easily ^erceiue what he does require, and exact of us in every thing: for
we being Reli^ious are by Obedienee, and necessity for ^he most part disposed
of; and for the rest we have God always present to consult with, and when we
cannot by that means ^e resolved he will show us how, and where ^e shall
otherwise be resolved. But those ^h^t go the way of true Humility, and
^ortification will have few questions after they are well grounded, and
instructed (...) a spiritual life. For, for the most part (...) questions do
but tend to the winding o^^ selves out of some Cross or Mortificatio^ or easing
our mind of some di^ficult^ which will if we yield thereto but put o^ our eyes,
and consequently put us out of (...) right way. Yea though those we con^^ with
be never so spititual, or vndersta^^ our case never so well, and of these I ha^^
been most afraid of al: for from oth^^ we can easily restraign our-selues, but
from them upon pretense that we may ease (...) minds, and at least do our
selves no han^ if it do us no good, we often cause (...) prejudice and
obseurity to our souls: (...) yet when al comes to al we must (...) that we do,
if we will be the faithful ^^^^uants of God, and profit in a spiritual (...) If
ever God do stand to his promise (...) ever he did, and will to al his promis^
or granting when he is asked, and of op^^^ing to those that knock: where, or
wh^^ will he fulfill such promis more truly, (...) certainly then in the case
where a simp^^ and sinceare meaning soul out of necess^^^ and with all
resignation, and humility b^ at his hands the solution of that, that co^^cerns
her for his service and honor, (...) the salvation, and perfection of her-self
his love.

The more a soul holds her-self to this light, and walks by, it the more her
light increases; and the more she leaves this light and walks by another^
seeming light, the more her darkness increases. The cleerer this light is in
her soul the better able she is to judge what is the just and most righteous
will of Alm:
God in those things which Faith, and Obedience has not determined: for what
one is bound to believe, and do for salvation the Catholic Church, does
determine; but what we are to do for perfection there be many different
opinions; yet al agree in this that it must be the way of Abnegation, but for
the rightly applying of Spiritual and contemplative instructions to ones own
particular. He is the only able teacher who is the most true ^oue, and light
the holy Ghost, of whom the Author of the scale of perfection writes ^o his
scholar being a woman thus. For grace (which Fa. Baker tearme^h a call) shall
even ^each thee by itself if thou will but observe ^t, and follow it til thou
come to the end, al that is necessary for thee from time to time, ^or God alone
can only teach this way.

And of those who give themselves se^iously to walk in the way of Perfection,
^aint John speaks thus. 1. Io. 2. 20.27.
But you have the ^nction from the holy one, and know al things, and the
unction which you have received from him let it abide in you; and you have no
need that any man teach you, but as this vnctio^ teaches you of al things, and
it is true, an^ it is no lie. And as it has taught you abid^ in him.

There are two reasons, or necessitie^ why God himself should take on him, an^
perform the office of a Contemplatiu^ Master.

1. The first is because he can and no^ but he can; for though the soul may
hau^ an instruction from another, yet is she to make use of it but according to
her i^^ternal Masters dir^ction, and as if he, an^ none other had given it
her. 2. The second reason of Conuenienc^ or necessity of Gods being the Teach^^
is, that though man also could resolve doubts, and give al directions both
inte^^nal and external; yet were it not only i^^conuenient, but even impeditiue
to her (...) her way to Contemplation, by reason (...) the solicituds, and
distractions the so^ would incur by such occasions as causi^^ a life merely of
distractions. For in some souls there do occur to be resolved fr^^quent, and
daily, or howrly passage (...) the forepart of a spiritual course (espe^cially
in the interior) which of the^^selues are questionable: but such goi^^ forth
for resolution ^ould mar al in a co^^templatiue spirit, as causing a life
merely of distraction, and multiplicity, and those the most profound, and
pernicious distractions, as being upon mere internal matters: for solicitudes
about the interior are the most prejudicial that are as to tendance to
co^templation: because they most obscure the soul, and yet this is the miserable
life of scrupulous persons. Whereas the soul having always her Master at
hand, and that nearer to her then she is to herself, and He an infallible one,
and a most quick dispatcher, all the mischiefs of the precedent case are
avoided, and she satisfied in her questions with all sufficience, and security.
Neither will it be sufficient for the soul in this excursions that it is judged
a reasonable occasion to ask a question by him ^he consulteth: for if it were
a thing wher^n God himself would have resolved her, if ^he would have had
patience, or else that it were a thing that for her mortification he would have
had her ignorant in:
she will perhaps incur much obscurity for such go^ng forth without her internal
Masters ^eaue, and liking, and withal such a check ^n her conscience that she
could with more ^ase have endured the displeasure of all the world: then have
thus displeased her be^^ued, whom alone she desires, intends, and thirsts
after, and to whom to adhere, and in here she puts al her content and
happiness. Al he does and permits seems mos^ just,
and reasonable to her, and to live interiorsly, and exteriorly according to
the right Rule of his justice, is al she desires. These are they which (our
Savior said) should Adore ^im in Spirit, and Truth, and of whom it is said, All the glory of the so^ is within, for the Kingdom of God is with^^ us, such a
soul may truly say. I will hear^ what my Lord God says within me. Th^^ my most
sweet Lord God be ever adored and praised, and sought after by us al, an^
blissed, and praised by all in Heaven, an^ earth for ever, and ever. Amen.
Thaulerus says that it is as easy for o^ that has an aptnes for an internal
life, an^ will be diligent, and obseruant in it, (...) note, observe, and
discern the divine (...) within him, as it is for one to discern (...) ^ight
hand from his left. And it is plain (...) our rule, that our holy Fathers
desire that souls should observe their internal (...) and the tracts of the
divine spirit who is the proper Maist^r of the interior. And it but a mere
natural course that we can (...) by the mere instruction of man, fr^^ whom
only we have our first help, a^ instruction, and then the souls capable (...)
living a true internal life are to be referred to God the only Teacher of the
way of spirit.

And where it is objected by those who pretend to be spiritual that following
the divine Tracts, Mo^^ons and Calls is perilous dangerous, and without al
warrant, or security. It may be answered (supposing always an aptnes in the
party that has the instructions) that as the power of God surpasses the power
of man; so the warrant, and security of God which a true internal liver finds
from God is far beyond the warrant of a mortal man: the warrant of one man
being contradicted by another: that from God is able to stand in all the
contrarieties, changes, and opposi^ions which happen out of the differing of al
men in indifferent things: for as for other things God refers the soul to
the ordinary means he uses in those cases. As for example for confession of
mortal sins she most confess them to a P^iest who has jurisdiction over her,
and for a true doubt she must not presume that he must resolve her by him-self,
but she must ask according to discretion, and obedience; and for her rule, and
other obligations of Religion she must observe them out of Obedience to God,
and su^e^iors, which being done, and also going, and walking the way of the
cross, what warrant I pray you will she need (after her conscience is once well
settled) from confessor or Superior. Woe be to those, at lea^t woe in this
respect, that have a confidence rather in men then in God. And those that
praise so much the security of a soul that has no other confidence in God at
her death but so far as she is warranted by he^ Confessor:
for she cannot but by this means die perplexed, and troubled. For to^day I have
a Confessor which will warrant me^ and to morrow another who will doubt of my
case. To day I have one so precise that he will warrant me in nothing, and to
mo^^ow I have one who thinks he can pearse so far into al things that if I
will adhere unto him, and no body else he will answer for all. He goes away; and
another who must assist me at my death com^th who is of a good meaning, but
cannon pearse so far, as the other: He at first finding us to fear, fears
too: We have forgot our couradg upon the others warrant going before, and fall
into fear with him at the present: And yet ou^ soul does not alter before God
a^cording to every ones apprehension we meet with: if it d^d, or if this were
all the certainty that were to be found between God, and our souls in Religion,
we might bid al true confidence a lieu (I mean those only who are apt for an
internal life^ for as for others I do not take upon me to know their case) and
place our peace upon that which is as changeable as the moon: to wit, the
humors, and opinions of men in indifferent things. I have had my-self a
Confessor who though he had the largest conscience that ever I knew good man
have in my life, in what he pleased, yet out of the difficulty he had with me
in his nature, and out of his aptnes thereby to take al I did and said in
another sense then I meant it: he could, and did turn twenty things, which my
other Confessors made no great matter of, into horrible mortal si^s, and would
have frighted me from the Sacraments til I had settled my conscience according
to his will, and mind. What was I to do in this case? I h^d been warranted by
three former Confessors two of which were my chief Superiors and Doctors of
Divinity; and now this present wholly doubted my case: he had (as he pretended)
agrea^er reach into my case then all the rest, and they were simple to him in
discovering truly the state of my soul. But should I in this case put my soul
into h^s hands, who desired to know all that ha^ passed ^n my life to inform
him in some things he desi^ed to know ^out of policy thereby also to tie me to
him self more absolutely? Verily if I had thus put my-self on him, I had done
great wrong to God: and I might have bid farewell to al true peace hereafter:
but standing to my former warrant, and giving him the respect was due to him,
and being reserved toward him, I have hitherto God be praised kept my-self out
of his fingers. And also by the grace of God hope to hold on my way in tendance
toward God, thereby raising my-self (according as his divine Majesty shall
vouchsaf to enable me) out of my natural fear to the lout of God, Who is only
able to satisfy, and satiate our soul. And not as this my Confessor would have
had me to plunge my-self by reason of his words, and threats of my miserable
state: which notwithstanding his apprehensions is so much, and no more, as it
is in the sight of God, who changes not his opinion of us, as the humor of
the Confessor may be: but imagines us according to what we really are in very
truth. But these spiritual men of this kind would be so absolute that there is
no power left in the soul thus under such to have relation, or confidence in
God, whereby those for the most part under them, if they be poor simple women,
of how good spirits soever, live miserable dejected lives: for it is their only
way to bring their politic, and absolute government about. And ordinarily
under this pretense they do it; saying that there is no way to make this, or
that soul humble, but to bring them into such fear, that they neither dare
speak, think, or do any thing without their approbation. At least so far they
must have relation to them, as it may serve this turn to inform them of what
is for their purpose: and then that soul is happy in their eyes, and they will
declare that they are so to others: that they may follow their example. Then
the perplexity the soul suffers they term a profitable pil to cure their
disease with all. And the confusion they suffer to see thems^lues disloyal to
God and man, to serve their Confessors turn; he terms a suffering for
Justice, and warranteth them, what harm, disquiet, or confusion soever comes
by this their doings to others, or themselves out of Obedience to him, he will
answer for it, and therein they have done God, and their Congregation great,
and faithful service.

O misery, that all this should be fathered upon holy Obedience the most noble
of al virtues! who sees not that this is a turn^ng of religious Obedience (in
those that simply desire to perform it) to a policy abominable to be thought
or named. O my G^d was this thy meaning when we vowed our selves to thee! Or
rather did not, Thou say, be as wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves? Thou
did not, say, be so foolish under pretense of blind Obedience, that thou
shall not know thy right hand from the left. Thou bidst us give to Caesar what
is Caesar's, and to Thee what is Thine. By truly obeying thy will, Law, and
Euangelical counsels we grow wiser. But by pretending to practice Obedience,
Charity, Humility, Patience, etc. in perfection before we be ripe for it^
(through perseuerant prayer, and concurrence of thy grace which does not such
things suddenly) we loose al, and live in blindness, and the highest we come to,
is s^ruile fear, and mere folly. O happy are they to whom God gives an
aptnes for an internal Contemplative life,
and withal some one who may instruct them in it. Verily the mos^ part of souls
in this howse^ who have been fit for it, have been s^tisfied with so few
instructions that in a manner they might be expressed in five lives. As for
example tha^ they Transcend Fear, and Tend to God b^ the exercise of the will,
by which in tim^ (as pleases God) al impediments shall b^ removed between God,
and their soul^ Which Blosius warranteth a perseueri^ soul in his ^nstitutions
very confidently.

But alas those that are not in this simp^ way have such an apprehension of a
spir^^tual internal life, and make it seem so perilous, and dangerous, that
souls would be frighted exceedingly to read their books, and hear their Sermons
(which cannot be avoided possibly) if they were not armed with armor of proof
by God, and those who live in, and walk this happy way of simplicity: Which
whosoever truly walks will not co^demn much less contemn those who speak
against it, but humble themselves in all things: knowing that others who live
extrouerted lives may be more pleasing to God then they and that for many
reasons which they may easily conceive. And yet it does not hinder these, at
least it ought not, from prosecuting their ways to which they are called; and
in which by God Almighties: infinite mercy they have so many books of Fa. Bakers
own writing, and transcribing to encourage, and comfort them in all the
opposition which G^d does permit only for our exercise, and not by it that we
should be put out of our way through our defect in patience, which the very
exercisers of us would for the most p^rt be very sorry for; if it should so
happen, how soever the public instrument and other speechs do sound to us. For
who can doubt that is a wise man that a soul that has a good, and found
natural judgment, solid Contemplative instructions, many in the house that
practice the same doctrine aright, and a quiet nature seconded with concurrence
of God Almighties Grace, and goes in all the way of Abnegation, and
Resignation, should pass many years without cause of questions about her
interior. For who doubts, but the soul may love God more and more every day,
and extend her will as infinitely toward God as she can, and bear al occurring
difficulties with as much patience as she can, and perform her ordinary
obediences by the orders of the house, and particular ordinances of Superiors
with as much relation to God, and out of Obedience to him as she can: and all this without any great questions. Yea, the forsaid course of spirit, in a
manner takes away al occasion of questions at least of intricate questions,
which draws the soul our of her interior more then into it. And by the way I
say this, that those souls who are apt to ask questions though they be never
so quiet, devout innocent natures, or have never so much wit, and judgment
they will never prosp^r in a contemplative course, and in those instructions.
And therefore will do well, and much better to take the ordinary instructions of
these days: and it were well if such souls never heard nor read ^ontemplatiue
books, and instructions; because they misunderstanding them will make both
themselves, and others also with them, to lay the defect which was only in
them upon the unfitness of the instructions for woman: for it will seem to them
that they cannot possibly be practiced by women without perils, and dangers
unspeakable: which wrong done to souls put out of their way by this means (who
would have happily prospered therein (redoundteh to the dishonor of Almighty
God. But yet as it seems to them that they cannot be practiced without great
danger: So those on the contrary who are fit, and capable for these ways see
and experience how little peril there is in them: for can a soul be too humble,
and love God too well? No certainly. And this is all the course of this internal
life, and to this only it tends, to love God, and to humble our selves.

Let us therefore make that benefit God wills we should by these oppositions,
and contradictions we find and feel from ou^ Order, to wit. To humble
our-selues in all, and behave our selves with all respect, and Obedience to them,
as if they had done nothing. Let us encouradge one another to this, and let us
not think God cannot be well served by any other course then this. For certainly
the Jesuits who have the perfection in their institute of the Active life, are
in a very proper course for their kind of life: for that spiritual exercise
which they yearly take does them much good, and makes them deal with the more
pure intention in their action^, and affairs being also strenthned with a daily
recollection w^^ makes them foresee many inconveniences, and thereby prevent
them better then they who do give themselves to no such thing: for who can
think but it helps a man much to proceed with the more prudence, when by a
certain re^irednes he has so much foresight of his businesses, and occasions.
They have also a settled form or fashion in all their proceedings, and exercises
which those whom they take into their order must conform themselves to,
how apt or unapt soever they be for it in their nature And they having indeed
the choice in a manner of all the prime wits of their schools, are easil^ able
to find those, who are able to uphold, and maintain that politic manner among
them. The main point of vpholdin^ and maintaining of it being the exact
Obedience which they require of al, and which al with one uniform consent
standing upon, and performing, they thus as they do, uphold the same form, and
grow in all too hard for all other orders; they being al in a manner divided
amongst themselues^ and these of al nations standing against all the world for
themselves. Besides the subordination is also much strengthened with the fear
they have, who desire to make any resistance how little soever of being put out
of their order to their perpetual in^amy and shame, and want with all of that
which is necessary: which they are incident to who leave this order.

This I say helps them to the power of disposing without any resistance of
any under them according as it may be most for the temporalities, and honor to
the order. VVithal they have a great regard to the employing of men according
to their abilities having almost all the best imploiments at their disposing:
(and that is a great matter to the maintaining of their order in greatness, for
if they wanted abundance of action their order would quickly fall into great
desolation And this is the reason
as I conceive which makes the Nunns of Contempl^tiue orders prosper so il
under their hands^ Because they put them into Exercises of discourse, and yet
withal do not go about to bring their houses into that subordination which they
have amongst themselves. And besides they can not find these poor women
sufficient action to employ themselves in: and therefore out of the Abundance
of wit which they get by that superficial recollection;
they devise, and make for themselves unnecessary, and unprofitable action. And
this was in the light of Truth certainly forseene by their founder Saint
Ignatius,
when he absolutely forbad them the care, and government of Religious women: and
with this his foresight I wish he had so provided that they indeed had never
meddled, or undertaken in this kind: for better it is ^or women to be kept in
their ignorance whereby they would be the more easily ruled; then to be puffed
up with knowledge so little for the good (and so far short of what is necessary
for the perfection) of their souls. Yet Hospital Nunns make a good shift with
their instructions: which shows plainly that those who follow their kind of
sensible exercises without going further, or looking after a more spiritual
prayer of the will, must be held in much Action, or else they will be apt to make
a great stir. But in enclosed Monasteries action sufficient in this kind is
impossible to be had, or found. And there^or I wish with all my heart that either
this course were not amongst such, so much as known, or else that they rested
not in ^hese first exercises, but proceeded to the most noble, yea as
Seraphinus F^rmanus says, to the Omnipotent exercise of the will. Which if it
were now practiced in our, and other contemplar^ue Orde^s as it should, qui^kly
would they surpas in knowledge, and al moral, and divine Virtues those whose
furthest pretense in these sensible exercises is but to do their actions with
the more deliberation, and consequently with the more humain discretion; which
it gaiueth indeed; but it is but in a manner a mere natural proceeding: only so
far as it may be grounded in Faith, and Charity, it deserves both more praise,
and reward then a mere natural action. But how far those proceedings are from
leading a soul to perfect Charity whieh is the end of our coming to Religion
may be seen by the few ^aints which it now produces. And though they have a
great advantage by their uniformity in exercises,
and their agreement among themselves; yet this being generally accounted to
proceed, and to be vpheld by policy; it works no great effect for the most
part, further then by it with all others, and against al others to serve their
own turn: which is a quite contrary effect to that, which that Order produced
when it was in its prime, by having in it some great Contemplatiues, and when
they did so much good and were so beneficial to the whole world. And different
also from that which our order and others were, when in like manner they
flowrishd with Saints. For then the honor of God was sought, and al Orders
with one uniform consent did concur to the advancement of tbat alone^ They then
applied themselves to several exercises in the exterior every one according to
his institute; some more easy, some more strict; some of more action, and some
of les. Yet interiorly their end was al one, that was to find God in their
souls. And out of that, perfect Charity did grow in them by those internal
exercises: They did every one (not out of custom, or because he was of such, or
such an order) as God did require, and enable them employ part of their time in
gaining and doing good unto souls. Then there was not such sollicitous,
entangling, and as I may so say sole care of temporalities, God taking care of
them, and casting them on them. Then there wa^ indeed, perfect amity without
interest, or fond affection to their impediment of loving, and seeking God
alone, who is that one thing which is only necessary. Then there was no
exceptions of persons, but they were contented so Gods honor were advanced by
any as well as by their own order or themselves. O Lord my God, if this spirit
might be revived again how much would my soul rejoice! If S^ Benets, S.
Augustine, S. Francis, S. Ignatius Children were al (as perfectly as this life
would permit) united together, and did with one heart, and consent seek and
labor to advance thy honor, and praise, as our Founders do wish in heaven,
then would the spirit of the primitive Church flourish, and thy torn, and
mangled members of thy Church be healed, and perfectly set together again; Then
sinners, and heretics would easily be converted by them to thee. Then there
would be another learning then now there does flourish in our order, and others;
for thou by them would speak who make the tongues of infants eloquent.
Then they by prayer conuersing in a familiar, and tender manner with thee would
speak so that none would be able to resist thee in them. Then their judgment
would be so cleared that they would understand most hidden mysteries. Then an
hour of prayer would instruct them more fully, then an hundred years study ca^
do if they have not in all things relation to thee the only true wisdom, and in
whose light, is true light only to be seen. By loving thee, and dying to
themselves in all things they would become masters of themselves, and all the
world. Then nothing would move them, nothing would affright them, because, thou
would be their comfort, and stay in all things. Certainly there is a wonderful
difference between the Obedience which a soul that lives an internal life
gives to a Superior, and that which we give out of custom. The fomer is slow
at first and seems very defective therein: the other so violent many times at
first that it continues not longt; he former grows more strong, and firm
every day then other, and the later grows oftentimes a greather burden every
day then other. Certainly a soul that pretends to live an internal spiritual
life, and yet has not a great esteem of Obedience, is much to be feared, and
in great peril of errors; yet that which in these days is termed Obedience, I
do not mean: for I knew one who having a Confessor that had much difficulty
with her though he a^^irmed that it was a great breach of Obedience to have
relation (while he bore that place) to any other, yet she made use in cases of
difficul^y (with leave of an higher Superior) of another, whom she thought more
able to judge in that which concerned her; and yet she hops this was no
breach of Obedience: for if she had thought that God in this case had exacted
of her not ^o have gone to another, she would (what difficulty soever she had
endured) have made use of no other: But this she thought was not his plea^ure:
because she was in a probability to fall into great inconveniences, if she
treated with him in an inward manner. Who professed by his deeds, and words to
take advantage of any thing she could that might serve his turn as far as he
could in conscience; beside the d^fficulty he had with her in his nature made
him incapable of judging aright in that which belonged to her: for that
difficul^y of his made him misapprehend al she did, or said. If she held her
peace she neglected him, if she spoke she did it to sound him ^o serve her own
turn; if she was compassionate toward him in his infirmities, she flattered
him; if she offered him not that which he stood need of, she was auerted from
him. And thus it passed between them which made her have as little to do with
him as Obedience to higher powrs would permit her: for by their orde^ she was
to confess weekly to him which was no small difficulty ^o her: but she knowing
it to be Gods will, did it out of Obedience to him to whom if we do as we ought
we must be subject in all things without exceptions.

And this is the benefit of an internal life that makes one capable of seeing,
and knowing of Gods will, and also most ready to perform it which way soever he
signifies it to them:
and makes them obey as readily and willingly a simple impertinent Super^or, as
they would an Angel, or the wisest crea^ure in the World. Yea if a worm, or any
creature we^e orda^ned by God to rule over them, they would see, and embrace
with all their hearts his will by them, for without this total subjection to God
it is impossible to become truly spiritual: for if we resist his will in our
Superiors in vain do we pretend to please him. We must learn therefore this
virtue of him, that true Humility and Obedience may be out stay in all; which
two virtues together with the divine virtue of Disc^e^ion, he vvil teach us,
if we labor to become more and more humble: for seeing that it is his will we
should obey, and become truly humble How can we doub^ but he vvil give us the
Grace, if we ^umbly, and pe^seuerantly beg it of him, and practice them upon
occasion as well as we can? for he him-self says; When we ask our father
bread he does not give us a stone, nor if we asko him a fi^h he does not give
us a serpent: much les will he deny us what is necessary to make us pleasing to
him; if we seek^ or desire nothing but by true love to be faithful to him.

O Prayer, Prayer able to obtain al things! O how comes it to pass my Lord
that this Omnipotent prayer, as some of thy dear servants style it, should be
so vnknovvn; yea even by them whom th^^ tearmest the salt of the earth
contemned, at least as to the practice of poor simple women; for vvom they
hold it above al things most dangerous even to mine own knowledge, as I hau^
known affirmed by Superiors of several Orders! O misery to be lamented most
heartily by those that have a taste in Prayer, and by the effect thereof know,
how sweet a thing it is to attend only, and wholly to the praise, and love of
God? Surely the want of the wisdom which by prayer the Saints did gain, is
the teason why custom in all things does take place (for the most part in the
world) of true reason. The world surely was never r^formed of sins, and
errors, but by the wisdom which comes from God, and is far different from
that which is accounted wisdoms by the world which is as S. Paul says,
foolishnes with God: for the wisdoms of God proceeds out of humility, and
perfect Charity. This wisdoms did Saint F^ancis enjoy, when yet by the world
he was desirous to be accounted a fool, which opinion thongh many had of
him, yer the effect of his wisdoms was evidently seen by the great
reformation he made in the world.

It vvil never go well, and peaceably in the world as long as they are only
employed,
and have the spiritual gou^rnment of souls, who take policy for their chief
ground next to Faith; which in the order and manner of their vvritings in these
days me thinks they seem in all to pretend: for they prize that most which may
serve their turn, and suppres al orders but their own (though not in plain
terms) as far inferior to them in all things. And that indeed it is not so to
me seems evident; for I know none, but may be compared to them in a^ things,
but policy. This is my simple opinion. If the soul has not so much wit, or
discretion when she knows for certainty or else doubts of the certainty of
a thing that cocerns her: or knovving the certainty vvil go, and ask, it as a
doubt; or taking it as a doubt se^ing need to ask vvil not pu^ her-self to
ask, I may vvarrant her from ever coming to contemplation. Whosoever are lead
by the spirit of God, they are the children of God. As S. Paul said: If we
were the perfect children of God his spirit would live, and reign in us. But
for as much as yet we are not: we are seriously to labou^ to be; and that he
may be Al in All with us, and in us: and his diui^e voice and w^^ only
regarded, and executed and none b^^ his. And let us take the greatest heed th^^
can be of lessening the worthy estimation of the divine call that in itself is
the pri^^ verity, or divine way proceeding from it Let us extol and commend it
as we vvou^^ do God him-self; and dispose us, and ^^ others as much as we are
able that in all things it may be observed, and fulfilled by us al.

But O Religion, No Religion where the knowledge of the divine call is as it were
unknown unless it be in speculation: or perhaps through ignorance is persecuted,
depraved, obscured derided, banished, and sought to be pulled up by the roots,
and kept out of the hearts of those that desire it, or are capable of it! Surely
God will take all this as done to him-felf, and revenge it in an extraordinary
manner: except where invincible ignorance excuses this proceeding. But yet for
the verity of this doctrine, or the general practice of it God will never permit
the gates of hell to pr^uail so far as to be able to extinguish it. Because it is
the root, and cause of al sanctity in his Church: howsoever he may permit it to
be lost out of the hearts of some particular persons through their frailties,
and the working of others. And surely, Nisi quia Dominus erat in nobis; Unless
that God had been in us, and helped of late more then man did, or could;
Obscuratus penitus fuisset pusilus noster sol, and versa in densissimas
tenebras tenuis nostra lux: Our little sun had been wholly obscured, and our
small light turned into a thick darkness by the late proceedings, by writings,
preachings, speakings, threatenings, libellings, and other actings of some
persons the Divine call had been exploded clean lost and abandoned.

The Religious Fa. whom she chiefly points at for opposing the free following
of the divine call and ^a. Bakers doctrine, did upon his death bed repent him of
it, and was very sorry he had done it, professing him-self never to have been
any true practiser of such spirituality, and that he had taken upon him that
which he could not judge of: and he further declared that he much liked, and
approved al entierly what Fa. Baker had written, and taught.
But God would not suffer it neither will he: yet far be it from any man to say,
or think that it was directly intended, or maliciously done; It was at the
most, but indirectly at sin^ omni pra^a voluntate, and without any intention.
But God only, and their own consciences know what has passed therein by the
occasion of the said late proceedings. I mean what fears, what doubts,
what perils, what shakings, what internal probations, explorations,
purifications, etc. Sed benedictus es Domine Deus meus, Qui adiuuisti nos, and
consolatus es nos; Qui ex mag^a tentatione magnum fecisti prouentum, Qui ex
tenebris lucem creas, and veritatem ex erroribus and faelsitate f^cis magis
clarescere. Mane nobiscum in aeternum. Instrue, conforta, stabili, veritas tua
mancat in aternum, spiritus tuus bonus nos instruat, dirigat protegat, and
ducat in via quae ducit ad te. De nobis caeci sumus, and lux non est in nobis;
Vine, regna, and splendesce intra nos dissipetur, and in uihilum redigatur
nubes tenebrarum, and ignoran^iae. O vere, and sole sol! adoramus te orientem,
fruamur lucente, Qui^^ deficimus desicientes. In te, and per the spiremus,
respiremus, and expiremus.

Superiors in my poor judgment after they have granted, and declared most
ample, and almost al possible authority to their deputies (for the government
of poor fearful souls that raight have been ruled according to Gods will with
les then a beck) have need to have an eye, and good respect to matters: and not
expect that God must always do for their safeguard, that which themselves
might do.

They speak with little consideration, who say, it is enough to do what a
Counselor advises, especially in virtue of his place, or office: unless they
regard withal that the soul has been so taught by God or man that she knows
how to use such counsel for her profit, and namely ^or contemplation. For if
this were so there would not be such searsity of illuminated persons as there
are; and I have known some who have been so obedient that they never did any
thing contrary to their Superiors will, nor refused to do any thing that was
enjoined them by their Superiors: yea further were so inward with their
Superiors that they seemed one heart, and one soul with them, and yet for all
that they have affirmed in my hearing, that they were as ignorant of God, and
as great strangers to him as they were when they first took the habit: yea not
altogether so feruerous and devout as when they entered into Religion seven
years before. So that it se^mes either the Superior must be spiritual to make
his subject so; or the subject must be so spiritual as to know how to benefit
him-self by his obedience, and other exercises, or else he w^l never come to
perfection, let him have never so great aptnes to a spiritual life, or read, or
hear never so much to that effect. For where we read of great supplies on Gods
part for, and in works of ^bedience; either the subject, o^ Superior was an
illuminated person, and had a great regard to G^d in that which was done, or
commanded, that it was his will, and what he would have to be done in it, he did
clearly see in his interior. For if some disposition, were not required in the
party, or parties, for God to do, and supply great matters in the soul by that
bare word, do it for Obedience, a Superior might by the command have God so at
his command and at a beck that he commanding his subject to come to perfection,
or to do such or such a work in such, and such perfection, God should presently
enable the soul to do it so; Though neither the subject, or Superior knew what
perfection were further then by speculation. But the expecting of such miracles
is absurd: for God has ordained another way to come to perfection. And never
any by this course come to find out the right way, or ever attain to that
degree of perfection which is so much spoken of, and even out of ignorance
exacted, and expected the first day of taking the habit, to wit of blind
Obedience. Which yet in some sort, some who have good, and quiet natures
attain to (but the clean contrary way to that which they should do) to wit to
a blind Obedience without sense, or reason: never going further in it or by it
then to a natural perfection: which though it be much extolled by those that
see her, and is better for her soul then to obey only in what she list, and no
more, which is another extreme: yet she grows but by this into favor with
Superiors, and into credit with those with whom she lives, and into a certain
natural perfection of mortification which little benefitteth her soul, and for
which if she look not well about her, she will receive her reward in this life,
to wit by satisfying, and contenting her-self with the good liking, and
applause of her Superiors, and companions, and thinking that if she can please
them she discharges her duty to God as to her obligation of tending to
perfection. But if there we^e to be no other effect of al our mortifications,
and abstractions, and other Obediences in Religion; I should say, Woe is me that
I was Religious, But to this may be answered that by our vows and virtue of
our profession we have a double merit for all that we do: whereas if we were not
Religious we should have but a single reward, and this the Church by her power
and the superaboundance of the merits of our Savior (of which she has the
distribution by way of Indulgence: or by virtue of vows made by souls that are
in the favor, and grace of God, and consequently her dear children) imparteth
to us that are Rel^gious. But t^ this I reply that if this were sufficient the
world would never have been fuller of S^ints then now, for there were never
more Religious; and yet none will deny that the world was ever so, without
Saints as it is at this day since Christ's time. Which plainly shows that
there is to be some other disposition in the soul for her advancing by the
exercises of Religion. And that the having made the Profession, and living
laudably therein in the sight of others, is not sufficient for her before God;
nor the pretended examples of former times: nor that blind Obedience which is
so much extolled, and commended by all to be exacted in perfection of her before
she have found good entrance into her interior by prayer and abstraction, and
can regard God in that which is to be performed by her, and by the good
disposition that is in her so^l turn it to good, and not to the obscuring of
her soul. For otherwise it will be blind Obedienee indeed and obscure her soul
so that she can neither perform that nor any thing else as God does require she
should; which if she do not, it will little auail her that others like of it.

By which you see that only living in Religion
and pleasing our Superiors will not advance us in the way of perfection, nor
practicing a blind Obedience which has in it neither reason nor discretion;
and presuming to practice virtues in perfection before we are come to any
perfection is to break our necks for ever coming to perfection. Can a soul of a
years standing in Religion take upon her to be come to Abraham's perfection;
surely if she do, I should hardly expect to see God prosper that her
presumption with an Abraham's reward. It is plain therefore that we may very
ab^urd^ly oftentimes apply the examples of Saints to our poor imperfect case,
and get little by it. Yet this is not to disapproue of a souls prompt
Obedience, for that is most laudable. And those souls who are in a
contemplative course, and end eauour nothing bu^ by ^ntring into their interior
to be able to regard God and his will, or call in every thing they do or omit,
will grow more obedient and ^ubmissiue every day then other and perform that
which is said; that they should be subject to enery living creature for God.
Which those other hasty, and inconsiderat persons who will pract^se every thing
presently in its perfection will never arrive to: but rather for their hastines
(if there natures be not the better) they will be found more stubborn,
rebellious, and more hard to be ruled fiften, or twenty years after their
coming into Religion then they were the first day. And then they will look for
these, and these privileges; their Antiquity forsooth must be respected; they
must be exempted from ptostrations, and if they have behaved themselves more
submissiuely, and obediently then others though it were but merely out of the
quietness of their natures; they must be observed, respected and preferred in
Office before al others, or else they have infinite wrong; and they pretend if
they be neglected, it will be a cause of others less Obedience, and respect to
Superiors: who they say will rather prefer others that will not take it well to be
thus humbled then one who may be made a fool of as I have been all this while,
and it seems ever shall be. Had not Superiors better wink at a little want of
too much forwardnes in an imperfect soul who does it merely out of
consideration of her own frailty, and that she may not obscure, or put out that
little light which by much labor, care, and industry she has through Gods
grace, and assistance gotten in her soul for the finding out, and walking in
the way of perfection, and contemplation? Yes certainly: it were far better for
Superiors to pass over some slight imperfections which have no sin in them,
in a s^ul who seriously labors for perfection. For such a ^oul will give, as
it is given her: that is to say, that as God of his mercy, and godnes by her
conuersing with him, by her suffering that he lays upon her with the best
resignation she can, and by observing the divine call, and will, and living
according to the Justice of God, shall strenghten her soul, and purify it in his
love; and so much the more prompt, and ready to obey will she be, and give every
day more and more respect to Superiors.

And there is one thing in this virtue of Obed^ence principally to be observed,
and practiced to make it pleasing to God, and an advancement to the soul: and
that is that the thing commanded, and done be according to the Justice of God.
But to this may, or will be answered that all that is not a sin, if it be
commanded us by our Superiors is according to the Justice of God. But if this
were so, so many more would come to perfection, then do: And it would be far
more easy to come to it then it is; But p^rfection, and sanctity must be gotten
by others means then by persuading our selves, that we shall come to it by
simply doing, from time to time what our Superio^ wills, or bids us. If
with all we do not in our interior regard God in his Justice, as well as the
exterior bidding of Superiors, and do it more out of the regard of that then
the other: yea as much as is pos^ible (if we will do it well) we are to do it
with a simple pure regard of God, and his call; for though the interior call
never contradicts the exterior^ (for if it do, it is to be strewdly
suspected) and that for the most part of things to be done in Religion God
caelleth the soul by exterior Obedience; Yet it is his will that in all those
things as well as in mere internal,
the soul should simply regard him, and that as absolutely as if he by him-self
had bidden, or commanded her. Neither does such a soul regard who, or what, or
in what manner God requires it at her hands, but it suffiseth her that it is he
that exacteth it of her, whom she in simplicity of spirit endeavors to
regard in all things with out any mean of creatures; Which makes the soul
indifferent whether she were commanded by an Angel, or a worm if it were Gods
will: rather to command her, and signify his will to her by the worm; not that
she esteemed not of the Angel in a far higher degree, but because she would not
make any thing her object, or do any thing out of any other respect then to
conform her-self to the divine Justice in all things,
and regard him alone in all she did, or omitted. And c^rtainly let a soul be
persuaded, or persuade her-self what she will as a means to arrive to
perfection, she shall never find true peace (if she be of a contemplative
spirit, and be not defective in her natural judgment) but by following the
divine call, and regarding that in all she does, or omitteth: and though she do
all that Superiors command, yet to do it with as little regard of them, and as
much of God as if he had immediately commanded her by him-self. And so much as
God shall by his grace (concurring with her care, and diligence) enable her to
work in this observation of the divine call, so much the more light, she shall
have for the observing of it, so much the more profit, and peace will she find
in her own soul: and so much the more shall she walk according to the Justice of
God, of which how much the more our works do partake, so much are they worth
and no more: for as Tau^erus says, God rewards no works but his own.

Where it is said in our Constitutions that after our profession we have not
so much as power over our own bodies, or souls. I understand it that by the
very nature of our profession we are so bound to tend to Perfection: that we
should do nothing but in regard to God, whose will we have ^here professed, to
choos for our own, and whose Justice we will with all diligence perform, let him
signi^y it by what, whom, and in what m^ner h^ please: without any regard of
our own profit, or commodity for time, or eternity; and certainly in this sense
Obedience cannot be too much commended. But let our actions be never so much
commended, and applauded by our Superiors, and al others: if it go not right
between God, and our souls, it will be but little to our comfort, or profit. And
if we reflect upon the circumstances of the Superiors command wh^reby we may
obscure that regarding God in our souls we shall never become perfect in
Obedience. For as S. Paul says, Power was not given for destruction, but for
edification, and applying it, performing it, and exacting it in an other manner
then as it was meant, and ordained by God in and by our Religious Profession:
is the reason that so few become p^rfectly Obedient: for by making our
Obedience to regard Superiors in the first place; for example to trouble, and
perplexe our-^elues in thin^ing it must be done with this circumstance, and
this manner, and at this time, and diverse other circumstances little to the
purpose, or else I shall not perform my Obedience in perfect^on. This is to tire
out my-self, and make my-self weary of Obedence, and not to serve God with
alacri^y, and ^here^ul willingness. This is to find his yoke intolerable, and
not sweet and easy; which certainly if it be not to us it is our own fault, and
not his. For he has set such order, and measure in all things, that the more
they are done according to his will the more easily are they done; for he is far
from being the Author of disquiet, and confusion, His spirit i^ Justice, and
Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. And it is we that by our prepost^rousnes do
pervert his Justice, and cause that effect in our souls by that which we
pretend he exacts: This Sir Thomas Mo^e the fa^^u^ L^r^ Chancellor of England
B^essed, and r^novv^e^ Martyr of Christ JESUS was her great, great
Grandfather.
And so (as sir Thomas More says) the vrchin wench goes whining up, and down,
as if nothing she did, or could do (for some circumstance, or other which was
wanting in it) did please Him; VV^^ yet indeed is so easily pleased by those of
good wills, and who intend, or desire nothing but to please, and content him,
and seek him simply, and purely, not any gift, or grace, but according to his
will: that if there were no world but this and that my soul were to die with my
body yet I would choos to serve, and please him alone, and none but him; rather
then by doing the contrary
have al others my friends, and have all the honors, pleasures, and in fine the
whole world at my command; and this though I were also to suffer, and subject
my-s^lf for his sake to every living creature whilst ^^ lived. For in this
kind of life lies ^^d the greatest Heaven that can be enjoyed upon earth. And
though he try the souls with diverse temptations, yet he does it with much
regard of their frailty, and does so accommodate his grace to that he lays
upon them: that they find he reserues that for to morrow which the soul was not
able to have borne with profit to d^y.
And the soul so plainly sees that she of her-self is able to do nothing: so
that if she had overcome one difficulty or temptation a thousand times, she
dares no more confide in her being able to overcome it again then if she had
never done it yet in all her life. And yet she is so confident in God, that if
it were pronounced unto her by God him-self (who can no^ deceive or be
deceived) that there were infinite disgraces, pains, temptations, pouerties, and
confusions hung over her head; All the care she would take would be to beseech
God continually that as he provided those troubles for her, so he may enable
her to bear them without offending him therein, and in that manner for his glory
that he intended by sending them: for of herself she willingly acknowledges
that no feather is more easily carried a way with a violent wind, then her soul
would be carried to hell by the least temptation the devil could suggest unto
her if he did not in all things by his grace protect her. And the longer, and
the more faithfully a soul has served our Lord the cleerer does it appear to
her,
that whatsoever is well done by her it is so wholly to be attributed to God,
that she deserves most just punishment if she take any part of it to her-self;
or presume by what she has done by his power, to be able to endure the least
cross that can befall her of her own self.


But to return to that I was speaking of, I mean Obedience. I say (in the words
of a most learned man Albertus Magnus Master to the divine Saint Thomas of
Aquin) that so far as any virtue pertaks of discretion so much of virtue has
it in it, and no more. So tha^ if a soul practice Humility, Charity^ Obedience,
and in fine a^y other virtue without discretion it will more partake of folly,
then true virtue as the effect in the pr^ctiser will show. This discretion is
the pure gift of God the which he never so abounda^tly bestows upon any but
that they are al their life to have relation daily, and howrly to him by
prayer,
in which he teaches them as far as it is necessary for them what they are to
do, or what means they must take to know what is best to be done in all that
they doubt of. For whether he resolve them by him-self, or by others, they
acknowledge it to come from him, neither do they desire to be their own
choosers in this, or any thing else, and so it comes al to one pass, as to
them; for they regard him a like in all things. Neither can one generally
speaking, apply another case to onesself without danger: because the
circumstances may much differ, and so make that in them a folly, which was in
another Perfection. Which many times we blindly do,
and no wonder if we prosper accordly. For in all things we are to have relation
to God, and do what he exacts, and not what is the custom or what this, or that
body has done in the like case. And if we do otherwise we shall be as blind as
beetles, and never prosper in a true internal, contemplative, spiritual life.
And for want of well practicing this point many get no entrance into their
interior al their life, though they have in them a very great aptnes for it.
And this point I have before touched in one place of these my notes for mine
own remembrance, which I have written down either as I hard them from Fa.
Baker, or as they came into my head when I was least obscured with the passion
of fear, to be a help to me^ or at least some little light when I was not so
well able to help myself.

And reason I had having so many occasions to try me within and without,
and to put me into perplexity, and fear. For one in eminent place did labor
^y his ob^ections to divert me though not with il intention, but out of a
pretense of putting me into a course more proper for me, as for example, becau^
I was full of imperfections he pretended that contemplative instructions were no
way proper for me, and that I took too much liberty by them, they being proper
for those of more tender, and fearful consciences then I was. And in fine gave
it me under his hand very resolutly as a determination from my Gostly Father,
as in the place of God Almighty that those that gave me contemplative
instructions, and applied the liber^y tha^ was necessary for contemplative
souls (o^ which he says there are not two in all the house) to me, might give
me peace, b^^ never true peace in God. These were his words which did so much
astonish me that it made me puruay for all the instructions that I could tha^
might uphold me in that which I found was the only way that I could prosper in,
or be able to find our Saviors yoke sweet, and his b^rth^^ light: for I had
suffered so much before God did bestow the favor upon me o^ being put into a
course that was prope^ for me, and this for near ^iue years afte^ my coming
over, and had fallen into so many great inconveniences and miseries tha^ noue
could believe it, but I that felt it^ And though I made a shift a days to set ^
good face on it, yet in the night I bewai^ed my miseries with more then
ordinary Tears of which God and our blessed Lady were Witnesses of, though few
others on earth. And I did rowse up all the books in the house, and whatsoever I
found that any had done to please God, I took notes of it and did it as I
could. And this course I always held since I came into Religion: as also to
consult with all the men that any had found good by in the house, and yet all this would do me no good. And me thought I Was as great a stranger to Almighty
God as I was in England when I scarce thought (as to any good I did) whether
there were a God, or no. And being thus perplexed, and tossed with a thousand
imaginations, and overwhelmed with miseries, yea almost desperate through the
fear, and consideration of my sins; My Mystris advised me ^o go to Father
Baker telling me that fowre^ or five in the house had found good by him, and
that at least it was no harm to try, and it would do me no harm though it did
me no good; for he was a very grave man, and one that was much respected in the
Congregation, such like words as these she used to me and I in my nature being
not very hard to be ruled (though I remember I had no great mind to it of
my-self) did as she bid me which being done I found my-self in fifteen days so
quiet that I wondered at my-self:
the which was so soon as I had received from him some general instructions.
As that I must give al to God, without any reservation wittingly, and willingly
of any inordinate affection to any creature: the which I found my-self willing
to do. And that ^ must use prayer twice a day, which I found my-self capable
of; and though I found little of that which is called sensible devotion, yet I
found that with a little industry, I was able to use it with much profit, and
that it did make any thing very ^ollerable which happened to me. Yea, and it
made me capable of understanding any thing that was necessary for me in a
spiritual life, and discovers daily to me that which is an impediment between
God, and my soul as far as is necessary: and makes me abhor to do any thing in
the wo^ld for any other intention then out of the regard of God, and because God
would have me so do. And I find by, and in the exercise of prayer G^^ does find
such means to humble we that all the creatures in the world could never have
found them out for me, and also sends me such internal crosses, and shows me
yet so plainly what I shall do in them (if I will advance my soul by them as he
desires) that it were ^ut to obscure my soul to ask questions about them, and
will, or nil I, I must bear them. And thus I see that God does so ^emper every
thing he lays upon me, that it is so much and no more then I am able to
bear, and is convenient for me. And ^e thinks I see that any thing I overcome
^s so wholly to be attributed to God that I cannot presume to be able to endure
the ^east cross in the world, and should think ^t an extreme presumption to
expose my-self to hazard, by wilfully putting my-self of mine own accord to the
suffering of any thing but what Obedience, and necessity provides for me,
which I find to be enough.

Thus upon occasion I have foolishly strayed from my purpose, and now I return
to me matter of applying blindly the practice of Saints to our imperfect case:
for God will prosper us by those exercises that h^ thinks good, and not by
those of our own inventions. If the soul simply regard God in the best manner
she can, it will be as easy for her to see what he would have her to do, or
omit. (I mean in things that are not sin) when to ask, when to hold her peace;
when to pray, and how to pray, etc) as it is easy to discern her right hand
from the left, or the Sun from the Moon, but this w^l be if she go the way of
abnegation, and not else; and if s^^ rest in God above al creatures and have
relation to him as well as she can according t^ her imperfect state in all things
whatsoe^er either in a general, or particular manner (...) the case requires:
for we cannon prospe^ any other way in a spiritual course, or b^ any other
means then the divine conduct^ And this not prospering any other way^ or by any
other means then God pleases may be very well applied in some sort t^ the case
where the director out of his ow^ head, and out of his own customs would have
the soul pray in that manner he has good by: And if God lead her by another way
th^n he has gone, she is wrong howsoever it be indeed. And if the soul be fu^^
of perceptible imperfections in her outward carriadge, and if in occasions she
be apt to ouershoot her-self sometimes in jest, sometimes in earnest, then he
will determine she is not fit for internal exercises unless they be very gross and
sensible ones. And if she will not believe him in this so far as presently to
relinquish her former directions, she goes astray. I^to which directions
notwithstanding she has been put by the adu^se of her chief Superior, and
found by prosecuting what she had begun that her soul was reformed by little
and little, and that she was willing, and enabled by Gods grace to amend any
^articular defects that the Confessor found (...) her, and reprehended her for:
only ^hen he misliked her course and would ^ot tell her why nor wherefor, but in
a ^onfused manner she stood upon her guard, and held her peace, having before
endea^oured by all informations she could, and ^s well as she could to expres
her-self, that ^he might do things with his good leave, and liking. I say she
held her peace, and ^vas confident that her course was never ^he vvors for his
fearing, and meant not ^y the grace of God to alter it: til Supe^iors by
diligent examination of her (which ^he most willingly will accept, and give them
all the informations she can, as she ^^th done him) should judge thereof to
those determination she finally meant to ^and. For my part I say, I shall fol^ow
her ^xample the best I can. But if besides her ^mperfections, he by some inward
dis^ourse perceived by her (when she was in ^ome darkness, and much obscured for
that ^ime with the passion of fear) that she ^ad some scruples of her former
life which ^roubled her; though indeed she had been ^duised by two who knevv
her conscien^e as well as she could make them, and who were men of as much
respect as any ^n the Congregation, and one of them her chief Superior, and the
other her directo^ for many years: Notvvithstanding I sa^ she had both their
warrants for what she did under their hands, and indeed find^ her-self
checked in conscience by G^^ him-self in an extraordinary manner, when she does
in this point yield to follovv he^ own sense, desire, and fear rather the^
what they have advised her. Yet I say ^ this Ghostly Father of hers should
think i^ not only fit, but altogether necessary t^ bring her into al fear he
could, pretending that the liuelines of her nature, and the great couradg she
had could not be abat^ed with any thing else then with lettin^ her, and
aduising her to diue into her con^s^ience, and case as much as she would and
that she could never come to profit bu^ by laying a good foundation by this
mean^ which he pretended was so necessary for some things which he discovered
in her that it was hard (if possible) for her to be saved unless she did proceed
in this manner: what would you advise the poor soul to do? I will tell you what I
do, and upon what reasons I do it, as well as ^ can.

1. First, for the il ground which he said I laid, he grounded it upon, these
reasons ^ first was upon the vnsetlednes he thought was in my conscience: which
indeed wa^ ^s it is at sometimes in which humor he once lighted upon me. And
as to this I comforted my-self that I needed not to ^eare: seeing I had done
what I had been advised to by the said two upon whom I relied in it; Nay also
when he was better able to judge in my case, he advised me the very same
him-self. As also when I am in prayer, and most clear, I see I cannot please
God by any other means then by standing to the advice that has been given me
by the said two in this kind. 2. Secondly, he grounded himself upon a conceit,
that I held so constantly to the course I had been put into before he came out
of Policy, because I would not be taxed with inconstancy, and also because I
might loose the interest in those who had the same instructions, and that
partly because they were many of them, the most eminent persons in the house
for natural talents. But to this I answer^ed my-self that as for Policy, I did
not well understand it, and so far as I did understand it, I did abhor it even
out of ^his respect that those who practiced it (in ^he nature I understood him
he meant) ^ead miserable lives, and must oblige them^elues more to the humors
of many to ^ring their ends about, (then the love of liberty would have
permitted me if ^ had had no better intention,) and lye^^ for the most part mis
of their ends in tha^ which they most desired, and perhaps undergo great
disgraces in having their plots discovered: this I say if I had had no other
inte^^ion would have made me abhori^^ But I also comforted my-self with this:
tha^ since I first entered into this course,
I neue^ desired the friendship or favor of any creature living, nor so much
as^ durst wis^ deliberatly that any thing should happe^^ otherwise then it did.
And when I though^ it for the honor of God, and good of the Convent, I did not
fear any disgrace, o^ diffic^lty that could happen unto me i^ that I thought
fit to be done. And wha^ I did in it out of other intention or natural
inclination, I desired that God should purge me for it by any contrary succes
in the business as he pleased. 3. A third reason, he had (as the before mentioned
writing of his gives me to think^ as I understood it) was out of this respect^
that I was cheerful, merry, and free, notwithstanding he had judged my case to
b^ so bad, and perilous, whereby he might think that I slighted his
admonishmen^^^ and was insensible of my own miserable case. As to his I had
these reasons to comfort and help me. One was that refle^ing upon my own
conscience between God, and my soul, I saw no cause but that ^ might hope that
matters went well between him, and me; and that I was never the wors for his
fear of me, and some things he charged me with I found my-self innocent of, and
some others I found my-self guilty of I endeavored the best I could to amend.
Also for my showing my-self cheerful, it was partly to bear up my-self; and
partly because I thought that was the way to make him the sooner to let me
alone, as indeed it happened. And another reason was because I am naturally
sad, and had more then ordinary exercise as that time which made me more
subject to it. And also I find it necessary to be as cheereful as I can, because
nothing obscures my soul, and hinders my Prayer, and transcendance so much as
yielding to sadness.
I also perceived both by his writings words, and sermons that he in all things
almost misunderstood my case, that though he were very spiritual as for his own
particular, and in a course that he seems to me to prosper very well in, and
which was apt to be much applauded by the admirers of sensible things; yet he
was far short of being able to direct a soul to Contemplation who was in
nature, and by grace apt for those instructions that tend to it. And I
perceived also that although he could ^auour almost no books but those of
Contemplative Authors, yet he still misunderstood them so in his application of
their writings to others that al his proceedings turned rather to the breeding
of a dangerous multiplicity in the soul, then to the riddance which is so
absolutely necessary: that without the director help the soul in that, in vain
is al he can do to her, as to her coming to Contemplation.

I also perceived that he misliked the happy i^structions we had received, (and
which caused in me so much peace, and comfort: after so much perplexity, and
affliction) because some had misunderstood, and mis-practised, and mis-applyed
them. This I say made me much to suspect his sufficiency, as for rightly
understanding Contemplative instructions in which, and by which (as I had
experienced for five, or six years before) I could only prosper, and live
contented i^ my state. This I s^y I wondered, at because it did plainly appear
that those who were weary of those instructions, in which other prospered so
well, were for some notable reasons wholly incapable of benefitting themselves
by such instructions (...) least in these days when true Spirituality has so
many oppositions, and adversaries, and so few that help, and bear up a soul
in them, and I say upon these terms such souls can never hold to them. And
therefore it were fit (and he as fit as any) they should seek to be put into a
more sensible course, which might be taught by man from time to time as they
stood in need of. Whereas others who are truly capable of spiritual
contemplative instructions, after the soul is once well instructed, her director
has little to do but to rid her in all things as much as he can lawfully, and
to refer her to God, who can only teach perfect Prayer, and bring the soul to
true Perfection. But those men who think themselves able to bring a fool to
perfection of Prayer by imposing their devises upon her, and will limit God by
their pretending that she is bound to obey them, and can prosper by no other
exercises then ^uch as they seem to have found good by. From such men I say
God bliss al capable souls, least they put themselves into their hands: for
if they under any pretense follow their inventions, and leave the way that God
has placed them in, and would prosper them by; the miserable effect will show
how little part God had in this their doing: for as his works have most happy
succes, so ours have mo^^ woeful; and if we lay it upon Obedience we do God
infinite wrong. Because the effect of Obedience if it be true Obedience, is very
profitable to a soul, and never preiudicial^ but it is when we give that to
Caesar, that (...) Gods, that it succeeds il with us by obeyng ^ for by this
pretended Obedience we darken, and obscure our soul contrary to God^ meaning,
and intention. And it is always seen that when a soul suffers her-self to be
put out of her way by a director, or Superior, that when she thinks she has
done al she can, as to the doing their will, yet she is further from it then she
was before, and both the Superior, and she mis of their desire. She because she
has lost her peace which made her capable of giving her Superior his due
without prejudice to her soul, and of doing it, as it was Gods will she should;
the which now she finds clean contrary by reason of her perverting the sweet
order of Justice, she being now so obscured that she knows not what to give
God, and what Caesar. And by this means the Superior also misseth of what he
intended, because now the soul gives him less then she did before.

We have infinite examples of the happy succes of Saints though their Superiors
were not always such as seconded them in all particulars, sometimes they being
such as did not understood them, and God permitting it for their greater good.
And a soul shall always find contradiction from some Superior, or other: And yet
if the soul live in her interior as she should, it will be no impediment to her
progres, no more then it was to S. Teresa, Ioannes de Cruce, Balthazar Aluares
of the Society of JESUS who was persecuted by his order, and his writtings
suppressed (as I have heard even to this day. And Ioannes de Cruee besides other
co^tradictions eight months put in prison by his Superior. And these souls
though they might seem to others to have varied from true Obedience; yet the
effect showed they were far from such matter. And these days there is in
contemplative souls a more seeming disobedience then heertofore because there
are fewer Superiors then ever there were that will concur, or approve of their
proceeding. But does this exempt Religious from the right Obedience more then
heertofore? No certainly; for their is no way but by Obedien^e to come to God,
and no virtue without Obedience is pleasing to God. But it is an Obedience that
regards God, and that does what he would: And not a foolish pretended
Obedience which is in the letter, and not in the spirit. None can truly see
how to obey but out of an internal light given and imparted to the soul by God,
who is the true teacher of Obedience, and al other solid virtues. And in these
days where true Obedi^nce is so little known, and where Obedience is counted
to be practiced in perfection, when the subject is punctual out of a simpathy
of nature with his Superior, and can by reason of a quiet nature magnify him,
and think that they must have no other relation to God in his world then by
their Superior, whom to please, and whose good will, and good word to enjoy is
the perfection of what they came for, without further acq^aintance with God in
their soul. This I say being now termed Obedience, it is no wounder the world
is so scarce of Saints. God I beseech him teach us that Obedience which is
sound; for the other vanishes away as smoke as to any solid effect in the foul.

It is an easy matter to talk, and exhort souls to conform themselves in their
interior to others where there is no obligation, or any profit to come of it,
and though it be against the stream of a true spirit, and ^al, and though he
that thus advises us is here to day; and gone to morrow; yet the perplexity
that comes by such proceedings, if it be contrary to what God requires of us,
may stick by us while we live to our great harm and grief. But were they that
thus urge us (out of a certain custom) ever put to it themselves? No su^ely:
for if they had they would have more feeling of others being put out of their
way. I speak not of a direct putting of a soul out; for that is to palpable of
being il, but of a^ indirect which pretends many things in excuse, and in
particular more perfection, etc. But the poor soul if she be by these pretenses
put out of her way, will find her-self both void of comfort, quiet, and
perfection. For God never prospers indiscreet, and inconsiderate proceedings;
though we in them, and for them be applauded by all the world. All that draws to
multiplicity, and estranging from God, in our interior let us blis our selves
from as the poison of our soul, and any thing, or creature that would interpose
itself between God, and our soul, is an impediment to ^ontemplation Woe be to
those souls, if they have a capacity for an intern^l life, that are studying
how to write and speak to creatures to the pouring out of their affections.
For by this means their affection will be taken up by the way, and the creatures
will be more regarded then the Creator, though the subject of their writings be
of, and for God. Much vanity I have known in this kind, the Ghostly Father
admiring the wit, devotion, and humility of his penitent. And the penitent b^
having her proceedings in that kind admired, published, and applauded by her
Ghostly Father, was in great danger to vanish away in her own cogitations.
These sensible proceedings often draw the soul (do what she can) more to men
then God.

There are two things now a days by which we take upon us to measure other men's
perfection. The one is by the quietness of their nature. And the other is if we
be Superiors we judge, by the simpathy that is between them, and us; tearming
them most humble, obedient, etc. that are most stutable to our spirit, and
sense, those specially do so whose exercise is in sense, and who put much
perfection in sensible devotion. But certainly true Humility is so subtle a
thing that none can judge who is most perfect therein, but God; and those to
whom he reuealeth it. And this is the reason why it is said; Tha^ the judgments
of God are far different from, those of men.

Power was given by God, for edification^ and not for destruction. The which
edification principally consists in the Superior-accommodating him-self to
the interior divine call of his subject; and with that intention are al
Religious professions made, and to be intended by the Professors, and Accepters
of the Profession, and especially ac^ording to the intention of our holy Mother
the Church, by whose warrant those Pro^essions receive their validity. And
therefore a Superior that neglects to proceed with ^is subjects according to
such their divine ^^l accommodated to the rule strayeth from the scope, and
intention of Religious Pro^ession. And for the avoiding of these mischiefs, as
also for the difficulty that the Superiors find, and have in the true discovery
of ^^ternal calls that are of mere spiritual things, I may say was the cause,
wherefor the Holy Ghost ( who is the proper master of true spirituality) has
inspired the pens of the torrent of his Doctors of the holy Church, to declare,
and teach that souls as well in Religion as out of it, Are free for their mere
interior whereby they may be able to follow such teaching from the Holy Ghost
him-self, as man cannot afford them: though man may hurt, or destroy such
teachings easily where God permits it: and themselves yield to it to their
own great los, and harm. And the interior is of that great, and infinite worth,
and moment, that so that that may be well, it is no matter what comes of al
other things. Yea then al other things will be well, if that be in good case by
harkening to, and following the divine interior call which is al in all, to a
capable soul. O woe, woe, yea a thousand times woe to a soul that is frighted by
any threats, overcome by (...) temptat^ons^ or cast down by yelding (...)
fears into that perplexity which make^ her unfit to hear, and follow what G^^
speaks to her soul, and dis-inableth h^^ from following prayer, which
Seraphina^ Firmanus terms for the Nobility, a^^ worth of it; Omnipotent! O
you souls wh^ are capable of prayer, be greatful to o^^ Lord,
for it is the greatest happiness that ca^ be possessed in this life. For by it,
it is ea^^ passing through al things how hard, an^ painful soever. By it we
come to be fami^liar with God him-self, and to conuers (...) Heaven; By it al
impediments will be re^moued between God, and our souls; By (...) we shall
receive light for all that God would do by vs^ By it we shall come to regar^ God
in all, and wholly neglect our-selue^ By it we shall know how to converse o^ earth
without prejudice to our souls. An^ in fine by it, we shall prays God, and
be^come so united to him, that nothing shall b^ able to separate us for time or
eternity from his sweet Goodness. O let him be al in all to v^ who can only
satisfy our souls. He is his ow^ Prays in which, and by which we are infinitely
happy though of our-selues we a^^ able to prays, and love him, but in a very
poor manner. Who can say (that desires nothing but to love, and prays him) that
they ^e poors seeing, h^ (...) ho is more theirs then ^ey are there own, is so
rich, and to whom nothing is wanting that should make him ^ infinite happiness.
In this let us joy, in this ^t us glory without intermission. When ^e are not
able actually to attend to him, and prays him, let us commend our heart, ^^d
soul to the saints in Heaven who with^u^ ceasing prais our Lord. Let us by them
do ^^at which we are not able to do by ourselves. ^ea let us desir him ( who is
his own prays, ^o is only able to do as he deserves) to ^pply what he desirs
we should wish him.

Let us rest in him alone, and not in any^hing that is, or can be created. Let
us not ^eek the gift but the giver. Let us seek no other comfort, but to be
able with out al comfort to be true to him. O how little is all the ^oue we can
give him in comparison of that he ^eserueth from us. Where therefore is their
^^ome in our souls, for any created thing? Let us wish, and desire, and as far
as it lies (...) us procure that al love be given to him. Let him have al Glory
al Honor, and prays. ^et us desire the favor of none but him ^lone, to whose
free disposition let us stand for time, and eternity as absolutely by our ^il,
as if we had never had being. Nothing we do or suffer let us esteem great,
for our sins deserve we should endure much more. Let our whole care tend to the
magnifying of him; Let his Honor be ours, (...) Glory ours and let us seek
nothing but to (...) wholly his: who is most worthy to be th^^ He is. It is his
delight to be with the childr^^ of men? What should comfort us, but t^ prays,
and love him. Those that seek him sha^ find him if they seek him withal their
ha^^ O who would seek any thing instead of hi^ or any thing besides him, being
he is not more willing to give us any thing then him-self^ here by Grace, and
in Heaven by Glory^ Let us adore him in Spirit and Truth, al w^ can give him is
nothing unless we entirely give him our selves, and that also cannon add to his
Greatness, and Glory; yet if we do this, so much does his divine Maiesty^
esteem of this gift,
it being al we can give him; that for it, and in requital of it, h^ will give
us him-self. Al his gifts, and graces are as means to the preparing us for
thi^ end, if we use them rightly with humility, and according to the just will
of Almighty God^ Let us extend our will to serve, love, prays, please, and
magnify our Lord to the uttermost we are able: yea without al limits, or
bounds, let us desire his Honor, til suc^ time as we may be swallowed up in
the bottomless ocean of al love, and prais God i^ him-self in whom, and by whom
only we can prays him, as we ought. Let us love hi^ here as far as we are
possibly able without ^egard of our selves either, for time or eter^ity. This
is the humble love that feels ^o burden. This is the true love that know^th
not how to attribute any thing it does, ^r suffers to itself. It chooses
not wher^n God should make use of her, but accommodateth its-self to his
pleasure in all things. ^f it were his will to have it so, she would ^ather for
ever be picking of chips, or straws ^hen out of her own election be doing that
which is most admired, or might seem to ^er to procure her the greatest
reward. O ^ou souls on whom God bestows this love ^hink it not much to bear
the burden not only of your-selues but of al you live with: ^or God bears you
up in all, more then you ^an conceive or imagine! Beware above al things of
pride; for that cast even Angels ^ut of Heaven. A soul of prayer as long as ^he
keeps humility is in little, or no peril of going out of her way.

Give to Caesar that is Caesar's, and that to God, that is Gods. Matt. 22.21.
If there be not som^^hing due to God which cannot be given to men; or if it
were so confused that there ^ere no certainty what were due to the one, ^o wit
God: and what were due for God ^o the other, to wit, man: a soul would be so
confused as to teaching, and leading the way of Perfection, that she would
never know where to begin, and where to end^ or when she did well,
or il. For certain^ when the soul does that by men, wh^ ought to be done by
God, and can be d^ by none but him; It goes not well with h^^ as for walking in
a true co^templatiue co^^ She also does not well when she would ha^ God do that
by himself, which he would d^ by means of Superiors, or directors. A^^
certainly if a soul be a capable soul of co^^templatiue instructions, and be
well groun^^ed in them by help of one experienced, a^^ walk the way of entire
abnegation seeki^^ God, and not his gifts, and be diligent (...) observing
what God will do by himself (...) her soul, and wherein he refers her t^
others, and walk with that indifferency th^^ it is al one to her which way, or
by who^ God will manifest his will to her: She shall (...) easily see what, and
how to do in all things to please God best, as she may discern the Sun from the
Moon. And this is to give th^^ to God that is Gods, and that to Caesar that i^
Caesar's.

FINIS.
Devout spiritual Reader.
I Desire none other should cast their eye on this true interne spiritual
Book; And I doubt not but your patience will bear with ^he many faults escaped
by a strangers pres^e; And your Charity correct them by ta^ing your pen in your
hand, and adding that is wanting a whole word, a letter, or letters, and taking
away what is super^^ous. One great one I will particularly duise you of, to wit
page the 19. l. 22. in ^he preface there wants a not. So that you must read,
wanting not those, in steed of wanting those. For so it is in the original in
her own hand. The others the sense will direct you how to correct. Adie^.

The Approbation.
Having read over this small Treatise en^tituled, The Spiritual Exercises of the
most Religious and verruous Dame Gertrud^ More, etc. with much comfort, and
edification seeing the fervent expressions o^ divine love in her pious soul.
And finding nothing in it iarring with the universal Belief, or Christian
Morality of our Catholic Church, I have willingly approved it as such; and set
my hand hereunto, at Paris the 26. of March 1658.

Hen. HOLDEN.

The Approbation.
THese Confessions or Soliloques written by the late deceased Dame Gertrude More
Religious of the English Convent of Cambray of the holy Order of S^ Bennet,
pious fspring of that Noble and Glorious Martyr sir Thomas More, Chancellor of
England, containing nothing but a true practice of that divine Book of the
Imitation of Christ (restored of late to the true Author John Gerson Venerable
Abbot of the same Order) approved by all for the mirror of Christian and
Religious perfection, needs no Approbation but a serious recommendation to al
such as desire a true pattern to attain to the perfect love of God by affectiue
prayer and practice thereof. Sic censeo ego. Parisiis. 1. Aprilis 1658.

Fr. VVALGRAVIVS Doct. Theol. Monachus and Prior Benedictinus.

CONFESSIONES AMANTIS. THE CONFESSIONS OF A louing^ and pious soul to
allmighty God.
THE FIRST CONFESSION.
MY Lord; we often read in our office (of the Breuiary) that those that forsake
all for thy sake, Math^ 19. 30.
shall receive a hundred fold in this life, and life everlasting in the next.
This we read, and hear; this was spoken by thy own mouth, and therefore of the
truth thereof we cannot doubt, nor in the hope ^hereof can we be deceived;
presup^osing we on our part be not wanting of that which is necessary to the
per^ormance of that which thou exactest. But tell me, I beseech thee, my God^
tell me I say for thy own sake, what i^ it^, that thou exactest of them who
shall obtain this thy promise? for I see ma^ny leave their parents, friends,
ac^quaintance, their fortunes, their ric^ possessions, country, and all, and
ye^ is it plain that they find not this hundred fold in this life; that is
the forerunner of the everlasting in the next. For I see their state is a
burden to them, and the obligations of Obedience and religious observance is
esteemed by them a great servitude, and burden. What is the meaning of this my
Lord Shall I doubt that those who resolutly, and willingly forsa^e all the
world for for thee would stick at forsaking themselves also, seeing that by
forsaking, and denying themselves, they should find thee in a most particular
manner in their souls? Is such forsaking of ourselves to be accounted a loosing
of our selves? O no! but it is a most sweet^ and happy exchange, to leave o^^
own^ wills for to perform thine; to be subject for thee to every living
creature, is not a burden, but the greatest ^iberty in this world. But (alas)
my God, the reason why we find thy yoke a burden, is, because we bear it not
with thee, by which only it is to be made an easy yoke. If souls who have
actually forsaken the world, and in desire themselves also (which most coming
into Religion are desirous to do) were but putt into some course between thee,
and their souls by those who had the care of them, or authority over them,
they would not, as they do, fly back from their first intention, but would
every day more, and more by conuersing with thee, get more light to know thy
will, and strength to perform it; But being ignorant how to converse with
thee, and how in all things to have relation to thee, thy yoke becomes more,
and more burdensome to them, and every day they fall into new difficulties,
and inconueniencies, and are in danger at last to fall into open rebellion
against their lawful Superiors, and some of them into strange friendships; a
thing which is worthy to be bewailed with blouddy tears, that hearts capable of
thy love, and by profession consecrated thereunto, should so miserably loose
themselves in pouring out themselves, where, and from whom no true comfort can
be found, or had. O Lord, remove these impediments from those who are thine by
so many titles; let them know thee, and of thee, that they may love nothing
but thee; and let them love thee that they may know themselves, and their own
weaknes^ and also thy power and Majesty. O my Lord, how infinitely is my soul
bound to praise, and love thee, since by means of a faithful servant of
thine, V. Fa. Baker
I have been instructed in thy law, and taught how to have in all things
relation to thee, my only beloved, by which means all Crosses, miseries,
pains, disgraces, temptations, are most tolerable to me, I having thee so
present to whom I may speak, or write, and by whom (though I am contemptible
in the eyes, as I justly deserve to be; of all the world) I am not yet
despised, or ^eglected; for which infinite mercy, ^ll praise and honor be
given to the^. O when shall I be grateful^ to thee? Or that shall I render for
all thou besto^est on me? I have nothing, but a heart desirous to love, and
praise thee; but for ability to do either, alas, my God it is wanting to me. O
that all loves might be wholly conuerred to thee! At least let those who have
dedicated themselves to thee, cease to desire any thing out of thee; Send them
means to know how sweet it is to have no friend but thee, and to be neglected
by all but thy sweet mercy.

O can that soul that loves her God
For very shame complain
To any other then himself
Of what she does sustain!
No way to her was ever sound,
Nor ever shall there be,
But taking up thy Cross my Lord,
Thereby to follow thee.
This is the Way, the Truth, the Life,
Which leads unto heaven,
None is secure, but only this,
Though seeming nere so even.
Those that do walk this happy^ path,
JESUS does company;
But those who go another way,
Will err most miserably.
And in this way do not think much,
That thou do much endure;
No, though it be from holy men;
For God does this procure,
That thou may seek himself alone,
And putt thy trust in him,
And not in any creatures living,
How good so ere they seem.
For suffering by the means of the will
Will little thee advance;
But to be sensur'd by the good,
Goes near to thee perchance^
Alas we show but little ^oue,
If we must choose which way,
Our Lord must try our Love to him,
And not in all obey.
We must submitt our selves to him,
And be of cheerful heart;
For he expects much of them
Who be of Mary's part.
For she must bear a censure hard
From all without exception;
But thou, O Lord, wilt her excuse,
Who art her souls election.
If she will patiently sustain,
And be to thee attent,
Thou favorably willt judge of her,
Who know her hearts intent.
For all but thou, as well she sees,
May err concerning her;
They only judge as they conceive,
But thou can never err.
Complain not therefore, loving soul,
If thou willt be of those,
Who love their God more then themselus,
and Mary's part have chose.
If all thou do be taken ill
By those of high perfection;
And further if thou be accused
To be of some great faction,
Our Lord will answer all for thee,
If thou willt hold thy peace,
And from contentions, and complaints
Willt patiently surcease,
Leaving all, care unto thy God,
And only him intend;
Yet what is ill, reform in thee,
And this will all amend.
As far as he does think it good,
Who is most just, and wise,
He will thee by afflictions purge,
From what displease his eyes.
Willt thou of all that love thy God,
From suffering be exempt?
O no, but bliss, as others do
thy God, and live content!
Amidst the various accidents,
That do to thee befall,
Committ thy self, and all to God
Who seeks our good in all.
Thy self art blind, and cannot judge
What is the best for thee;
But he does pearce into all things,
How h^dd so ere they be.
My heart shall only this desire,
That thou my Lord dispose,
Even as thou please in all things,
Till these mine eyes thou close
By death, which I so much desire,
Because it will procure
Me to enjoy my God, my all.
Where I shall be secure
That none from me can take my Lord;
But for eternity,
I shall enjoy my only good,
And to him ever be
United by a knott of Love,
Which nothing shall unity,
But will remain, as permanent
As his Divinity.
O happy hour, when willt thou come,
And set my Spirit free,
That I may love and praise my God
For perpetuity,
Contemplating his glorious face
With all that him adore,
Singing with them his sweetest praise,
For ever, and ever more!
In this is such and so great comfort, and peace, that well may the soul be
termed to receive a hundred fold in this life, who despises it-selfe, and
all other things that it may find thee, O how free is such a soul to fly with
the wings of Love to the throne of thy Divine Majesty; Never was there, or can
be imagined such a Love; as is between an humble soul, and thee. Who can
express: what passes between such a soul, and thee? Verily neither man, nor
Angel is able to do it sufficiently; and the more such a soul knows of thee,
the more sound becomes her humility, the which thy self only can teach one
perfectly; and it is impossible to get it in verity, and perfection, but by
conuersing with thee. O my God bestow this heavenly gift on me, which only
finds favor before thee. Those that possess it are able in, and by thee to
bear all things, to understand all things as far as it is necessary for
them. For one learneth more in Prayer of thee in one hour, then all creatures
in the world could teach one in fifty years; for that which thou teach is
sound, solid, and secure; because it tends to nothing but to love thee, and
neglect it self. Thy words bring force and strength in themselves; thy words
are words of peace to the soul; thy words are not like the words of men, which
pass, as a sound through the air; bu^ thine pearse the very bottom of our
souls; Let me hearken therefore to thee, who speaks love and most certain
truth; The wisdom of the world is foolishnes before thee; But thy wisdom is
much to be desired, and for it willingly ought we to give all our substance; to
it we ought to be espowsed; and by it if we will be happy, all our actions
ought to be governed. Allthough thou did say, Math^ 18. 3.
that unless we become as little children we could not enter into the kingdom
of heaven, yet withal thou have said, Math^ 10, 16.
that we ought to be wise as serpents, and simple as doves; where thou put
that we should be wise before we be simple, and not simplicity before wisdom;
whereof I ask thee the reason, O my Lord, with all the humility I am possibly
able. For it seems to me^ that therein^ as in all thy words, there is a hidden
Mystery; tell me, I say, my God (of whom in all cases, and doubts I ask
solution, and many times by it thou do make many things manifest to my
simplicity;) tell me ^ say) what was the reason? Verily it seems to me, that
thou biddest us be wise before we become simple, because that is only true
Simplicity, which follows true Wisdom. For we cannot become truly
simplified in our soul, but by thy heavenly gift of true wisdom. For there
is a simplicity which is without wisdom, and discretion, which little avails
to perfection. This virtue of Simplicity becomes more, and more perfect in the
soul, as she increases in humility, and charity; yet at the very first of our
conversion this is in some sort practiced by us, if we do as we ought to do. As
for example; to become pleasing to thee, it is absolutely necessary that a soul
walk simply and sincerly before thy self and all men; and read, and hear,
obey, and per^forme all in a simple, and humble manner; not searching into that
which belongs not unto her; this (I say) thou do exact; for nothing is more
odious to thee, then the contrary practice; But yet this does not diminish our
natural reason; but makes it more clear, and able to comprehend what is
necessary for us. This virtue also therefore bestow upon me, who even in my
nature (as thou well know) did ever above all things hate dissembling, and
dissimulation. O Lord, poor as I am, and most sinful, thus thou ^eest how I
presume to speak unto ^h^e; but easily shall I obtayn pardon of thee, because
thou ouerflowest with ^he abundance of thy mercy; for which Glory, Praise,
Adoration be to thee, who art my Lord, and my God, and only desired by me. I
have no friend to speak, or treat with but thee, and some of thy Saints, to
whom thou have given charge of me, and to whom I fly when my sins affright
me; amongst whom next after thy Dear Mother, the Queen of mercy, is my
beloved S. Augustine.

O Glorious Saint whose heart did burn,
And flame with Love Divine,
Remember me most sinful wretch,
Who hunger starved does pine.
For want of that which thou enioyest
In such abundant measure;
It is my God that I do mean,
My joy, and all my treasure.
Thy words O Saint are truly sweet,
Because thou do address
Them unto him who is only meet
Our mis'ries to redress.
At whose intorcession much have thou done for me; Honor them, my Lord for me
who am so poor that^ have nothing to present them, or thee; only a desire of
being grateful to thee, who be by all eternally pray^sed. Amen. (It was S.
Augustine the Doctor and amorous servant of God, yt she here meant.)

THE SECOND CONFESSION.
Omnis ex vobis qui non renunti at omnibus quae possident, Luke 14.
non potest meus esse discipulus. Qui habet aures audiendi audiat. All you who
renounce not all you possess, cannot be my disciple, who has ears of hearing
let him hear.
THESE are thy words, my Lord which though they seem hard at first, yet being
explicated to our souls by thee, they become most easy, and sweet to perform;
Teach me therefore my God, I beseech thee for thy mercies sake, teach me I say,
how I shall perform this to the glory of thy ^oly name; Thou have inflamed my
^art, as thou know, with such a con^inuall desire, and longing after thee,
that it seems easy to me to perform whatsoever is exacted by thee. For
though I be frail above all I can express, or imagine, yet I am confident in
thee, by whose help and power it is possible to give me to do all that it
pleases thee to exact of me; Psalm. 142.
Teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God. Let me Love thee, because to
want thy Love is a most grievous affliction to me. Far as thou know, it is
from me to have willingly a divided heart to thee. Is it possible that having
but one soul, and heart, I should bestow any of the affection they are capable
of, on any thing but thee? O fa^r be this from me; Nothing that could happen to
my soul would so afflict, and discomfort me, as to see it adhered to any
created thing, or to it very-selfe, willingly, to the impediment of my being
wholly possessed by thee. Make me that thou would have me, that I may as thou
exactest, praise thee. This shall be my study, my care, and all my endeavor,
to sing in my heart songs of Love to thee, who art only desired and sought after
by me; In thy praise I am only happy; in which my joy, I will exullt with all
that love thee, For what can be a comfort to me, while I live separated from
thee, but only to remember, that my God, who is more mine, then I am my own,
is absolutely and infinitely happy? O let this thy Love wholly transform me into
it self, that I may become insensible to all created things whatsoever; Let
me be wholly possessed by thee, who by so many titles lays claim to me. Can I
say, or think that any thing is worthy of love but thee? O, no; but if I had
then thousand hearts, all were to ^ little to bestow upon thee^ Shall^ I any
more be so miserable,
as by loving, having, adhering to, or desiring any created thing, to become
estranged from thee, in whom I have placed all my hope, love, and desire^ I
have indeed chosen thee for my only love, light, hope, comfort, refuge,
^elight, and whatsoever else can be desired, or imagined, but it was not of ^y
self; but thy mercy and goodness ^nforced me, even whither I would (...) no, by
sending me the means to now how to serve thee, and withal ^iuing me grace of
loathing all which was not to be a help to me. O ^^ese thy mercies when I
recount before thee, even depriueth me of my ^ery senses, to see thee to have
been so ^ood, and merciful to her, who as it is ^ade plain to me by thee,
has offen^ed, and been more ungrateful to thee ^hen any I did either see, or
hear off. shall not I therefore humble my soul before thee, and at the feet of
all for the ^^^e of thee, who has been thus tender of her good, who of all
thine is the last, and least, and most contemptible; the which being so
apparent to me, I will ^et more and more humble my self ^y desiring to be
despised by all, for ^^y honor, and glory. Thus, my Lord, ^ust, and ashes
presumes to speak unto thee; and sitting alone I read what write of thee, and
calling to mind what thou have done for me, I reioye^ in the multitude of thy
mercy. For nothing can here be found in what I here write for my comfort,
being bannished from him whom till I may enjoy as he is in himself nothing
will ^ rest in; for nothing can satiat me. Yet as I say, it alaieth my grief
for having offended thee, and of being thus remo^te from my beginning (to which
mos^ ardently I long to return as pure, as I was created by thee) This my
speaking in all my misery to Thee. None therefore can wonder at me. For as one
who desi^reth the prefence of her beloved, and expects when it shall be, can
take no comfort till she see whom she so much desires; In the mean while
spending her time, sometimes with thinking that this joy to her will shortly
be, and sometimes being wearied with long expectation, she employeth her self
in some thing which may a little recrea^ her heart, while thus with her it must
be; and above all it is a pleasure to her to hear of him, which she cannot ^et
see. Thus, O Lord, it passes even ^n that love, which will, and deserves ^o
pass; which none deserves but ^^ou. And there is no comparison able ^o
express the love which is between a faithful soul, and thee. For the more we
love thee, the more pure and quiet ^ecometh the soul by this thy heavenly
charity, Whereas, alas! it fares ^arre otherwise with us when we love any
thing out of thee, and which, is an im^ediment to thy Love; which misery before
thee, in the bitterness of my sou^e, I bemoane; because thou having made our
soul so capable of thy divine Love, and so able to have relation in all to
thee, it is an ingratitude able to ^s^onish me, that we should east away our
love upon that which is so little able^ to satisfy our soul, and whereof there
is as little certainty as there is of the ^ind; yea even in a moment we loose
the favor, and opinion of one, upon whom we have bestowed much time in winning
it. O folly, which be henceforth far from me! Let that infinite extent, and
desirable freedom of my will, power it self out wholly upon thee, that at last
i^ may become perfectly united to thy divine Majesty. O how little worth (when ^
am with thee) is the desiring of the praise, applause, and commendation of men,
who are now o^ one mind, and now of another, nothing being permanent under the
sunn. Verily when in thy light I see this truth, it seems to me to be an
intolerable burden to be esteemed, and praised by men, whose favor often
makes us incur thy displeasure^ at least my frailty causes it so to me.
Help me therefore, and make me by all to become truly humble, and pleasing to
thee who be adored three and one for all eternity, to thy infinite glory. Amen.

THE THIRD CONFESSION.
O That I were able to win the hearts of the whole world to thee! which seeing
I am not able to do, let me be no let at least to any souls of ^eing thee.
All love and praise is due unto thee, and all pain, reproach, confusion, and
shame unto me, which ^rant I may bear without offending thee, and then a
thousand times welcome be any of them, which may in^rease my love to thee. O
let me forsak all for thee, which thou willest us to do, yt we may find thee!
What is this thou say (tell me thy poor servant) leave all? Have I any
thing to leave which is not more burdensome to keep, then it is pain to
leave. If I seek my self, what do I labor for, but my own pain? If I
forsake my self for thee, behold a most sweet peace is found by me. Thus there
for are thy Laws; The more perfectly we perform them, the more delightful is
thy yoke. They were made by thee out of thy love to us; and if we love, they
will be most easy, and pleasant to us. For indeed where thou biddest us leave
and forskae all, that we may find rest in our souls, thou speak to us, as
being sensual. For when we leave our friends, riches, honors, pleasures, yea
and even (which is most of all) our very selves, wha^ have we left, or
forsaken? Some thin^ indeed, as it seems to us, these thing are, when through
blindness, and igno^rance, we esteem them as benefit and comforts; but doing it
upon (...) word, we find we have left nothing, ^^ find thee who art all things.
We have left our friends, who are incident to leave us, when we stand in most
need of them. We have left honor, which being had proves nothing else but^
mere burden to us. And so in fine nothing is there to be left, which if (...)
did but love our own peace and qui^^ without all further respect, we would
choose as the very best what thou do^^ exact. For virtue is amiable in it self
and those that had but a very show of it, as to what it is indeed, even among
the Heathe^s were honored for God^ Who therefore would not follow the my God,
in whom alone is to be foun^ true good? Thou teach the mild and humble, thy
ways, and thou rest^ willingly in a peaceful heart. What ca^ bring true peace
to our soul, but t^^ ^oue? Give this Love therefore to me, ^ho wishes and
de^ireth only, that ^n all I may be true to thee.

THE FOVRTH CONFESSION.
O My Lord and my God, to whom I dust and ashes am not worthy to speak! Yet
hear me my Lord recounting here before thee thy own ^ords spoaken by thy
servant in thy name, who art truth it self. Psalm. 33. 12.
Venife filij ^^^ite me, timorem Domini docebo vos. Pro^ibe ling^am tuam e
malo, and labia tua ne ^juantur dolum. Diuerte a malo, and fac ^nam; inquire
pacem, and persequere eam. Psalm. 33. 14.
Conte o Sonns Hear^ me I will ^each you the ^eare of our Lord. Forbid thy
tongue from evil, ^ thy lips that they speak not guile, turn from evil and do
good, seek peace, and pro^ecute itt. Here thou biddest me as thy child come
to thee, and thou willt teach ^e thy fear, as that thou art my Lord. ^eere
thou biddest me refrain my ton^ue from guile, and my lips that they spea^k
not guile, and also hate evil, and do good, inquire afte^ peace and follow it,
these last words in^deed comprehending all. But of who^ shall I inquire peace
my Lord, and my Go^ of whom I say, shall I inquire to lea^ it? Truly of thy
self, who in teachin^ me the way of peaoe, can give me gra^ce to follow it.
Of thee therefore I desi^re to learn, whose words are work^ Speak to my heart;
speak so that I may hear, and follow it; Give me the Humility which knows no
guile; Give me the Love that accompanies it. L^^ thou know that there was
never more necessity of begging in this kind thy help; because humble Love is
now of the world almost unknown, yea even of them who should teach it the
res^^ the wisdom of thy truth is set a side^ and that which is the wisdom
of the world bears sway over all; out of which it grows, that even
Humility, Obedience, and Charity (the most noble virtues that are, or can be)
are exacted and practiced even by way of human policy, which makes so little
union in the world be^weene them those whole study ought to b^, how they might
love, and draw most forci^ly all the hearts, and souls in the ^orld to the pure
love of thee. O Lord how far have our sins cast us from ^hee! In lighten my
soul, O Lord, I ^umbly beseech thee, while here, to my grief, I do in the
bitterness of my soul, rehearse these things before ^hee, whom I (most
contemptible, and ^nworthy) find in all so willing to ^ear, and help me. If we
would love, we should abundantly partake of ^hee. For nothing is held by thee
too dear for them, who alone above all creatures, and comforts seek the pure
^oue of thee. Out of this true love bet^een a soul and thee, there arises such
a knowledge in the soul, that it ^oatheth all that is an impediment to ^er
further proceeding in the Love of thee. O Love, Love, even by naming ^hee, my
soul loses it self in ^hee! Nothing can satiat my soul my Lord, as it is well
known to thee, but ^o be swallowed up in thee for all eternity. No knowledge
which here we can have of thee, can satisfy my soul seeking, and longing
without ceasing after thee. By faith we are certain of thee, and by Love we in
some sort experience in our souls thy greatness, and goodness, thy beawty, and
sweetness, which more confirms us in the hope of thee. O what knowledge is to
be compared to that which is taught the humble by thee, which tends yet only
to thy making her understand her own nothing, and mere dependence of thee. Thy
words, (as my dear S. Augustine says, speaking in his wonted manner to thee)
do-^^e^ smile upon those yt neither seek, o^ desire any thing but thee. What
cans^ thou deny to such, as thus love thee? Verily thou seem so enamoured of
them, as if thou were forgettfull of the infinitnes of thy Majesty. The more
they become humble, the more they are regarded by thee, and the more (in thy
light) do they perceive their unworthiness to be thus advanced to love thee,
which the more short it is of that which in will they desir by more, and more
humility to become before thee, the more they endea^our to become grateful to
thy infinite mercy. O who can express the joy that an humble soul takes in
being despised for thee! Verily nothing does she esteem so great a burden, as
to be favored, honored, esteemed, or applauded by men, whose opinion she
fears may deceive her through her great frailty! O how little is the opinion
of men to be esteemed, seeing they are so ^^ekle, inconstant, and easily
deceived! but thy judgments, my Lord God, are true, and justified in
themselves; be thou my witness, and defender, who ^^nst not be deceived; and
then let all the world censure me as they please;
a good conscience is better then a thousand witnesses; give me this then; and
I shall easily pass through all things! Speak, my Lord, peace to my heart, that
I may attend to thee alone my only beloved. Shall I after all thy benefits
desir any thing beside thee? O no, my God^ far, far, far be this misery from
me,
after my soul has been thus urged by thee to sigh, long, and thirst without
ceasing after being united with thee.

THE FIFTH CONFESSION.
TELL me, my Lord, I beseech thee, what can my soul pretend if it seek any
thing with thee, which is an impediment to my truly loving thee? What can I, I
say, pretend, seeing no peace, or comfort can be found, but only in thee? What
do we when we desire comfort of thee, but deprive our selves of a most happy
liberty, which they enjoy who desire nothing for time or eternity,
but (without al regard of themselves) to be perfectly conformable to thee. If
we would live without all intention, or wish: but of enjoying thee (which
cannot be done, but by a truly humble and faithful soul) the devil could not
overcome us by any wile. We should easily retain true peace with our selves,
with all the world, and above all with thee. For when we adhere to any created
thing we become a slave to our Passion, and are in eminent danger of sin. No
way is plain, secure, and easy, and without peril of all error, but this,
that the soul seek nothing but thee her Creator; Esaias. 35. 8.
This is the way, in which a fool cannot err; this is the way without
questions, in which a soul without all impediment adhereth to thee, the
fountain of all true wisdom who willingly illuminateth our needy souls, if
we will but give thee our heart, and soul to thy self; thou considerest not our
former sins, after thou have once blotted them out, but do upon them (who
have had the manners of beasts in times past) most bountifully, and abundantly
bestow and refresh them with the sweet dew of thy grace, which having tasted in
their soul, it makes them loath all that is less then Thee; neither can they
take any content, but in hearing thy name, speaking to thee, and longing after
thee, after tho^ haft wounded their soul with thy Divine Charity. O let me
sit alone silent to all the world, and it to me, that^ may learn the song of
Love, and praise o^ thee, which is so infinitely due to thee from me! This song
none can sing but those that truly love thee, and whose only consolation is to
be without all comfort as often, and as much as it shall please thee. Nothing
as thou know, do I putt any joy, or comfort in, but in sighing after thee,
wh^ a^t not here (as thou art) to be by us seen. O teach me those virtues,
which draw a soul so out of her self into thee, that she becomes insensible to
all things but thee; these virtues are, true Humility which knows not how to
exallt it self, perfect Subjection to thee, and Discretion which can only be
taught by thy Majesty, and yet is so necessary, that no virtue has more virtue
in it, then partaketh of true Discretion. For without that, we instead of true
virtue practice absurd follies! O my Lord. above all things let me seek thy
glory, who be praised by all creatures for all eternity^ Amen.

THE SIXTH CONFESSION.
IS it any wonder, my Lord God that in all my doubts, temptations, pains, and
in this continual warrfare which I find upon earth^ and in my grief of being
separated by sins daily unwillingly committed, and living in flesh and blood
from thee my only beloved and my most infinite good, I recurre to thee for
succor, and help? What shall I do, if I should not in all things speak unto
thee, consult with thee, and have relation to thee? what would become of me,
whose frailty, and weakness is above all that can be imagined, much less
expressed by me; but by recurring to thee I find, and get light, and a certain
sweet, and heavenly repast toward the sustaining of all the miseries this
bannishment of ours is subject unto. Alas, thou know I have placed all my
peace and hope in thee; All I desire is, that may love thee, and become totally
subject to thee; Do with me whatsoever thou please. For I desire no more
power to choose any thing any more, then if I had never been; only thy-self I
long for and desire to possess, and obtain; yet in what manner, and measure as
thou did from all eternity will, and ordain. For in this desire, my soul,
heart, and will have no limitts, nor can they sufficiently extend themselves to
their fill, save only by loving and praising thee by thy self (which is my
refuge) all power in my self I feeling utterly to fail. Certainly only by
loving, knowing, and enjoying thee can my soul become truly happy: bring me to
this I beseech thee, seeing that thou vouchsafest such a desire to her who is
thy poorest, sinnfullest and most contemptible creature: neither is there any
creature, nor can there be, of so little desert, but that they deserve what thou
do to and for my soul far, far, far be^or me; All the Glory therefore be
given to thee. For nothing but confusion is due unto me; which grant I may
bear patiently when through thy just judgment it falls upon me.

THE VII. CONFESSION.
I Have inquired of others about all those things which I thought appertained,
or might be a help to me for the better service of thee; But no stability could
I find in any Instructions till I was referred to thee, who art that one thing
which is only necessary.
Few are the Instructions which to a good will were necessary, if we were
referred to thee, as our principal, and only Master, and Director, who can
indeed never err, and is allways present, and both teaches us what Obedience,
and Humility is, and gives grace also to perf^rm them, which none can do but
thy-self. O how happy are they who truly adore thee in truth, and Spirit! For
these in thy light shall see light, and in thy strength are able to pass
through all difficulties, how great soever. These adhering faithfully to thee,
sustain their Crosses so cheerfully, as if in their suffering they beheld thee
for whom they suffer, with their corporal eyes. And they desyring no knowledge
of thee but what they have by faith (which is only secure,
and void of all peril of error) Thou wonderfully confirmest them in the
light of that which is in it-selfe so secure. What comfort can a soul take in
any created thing, who has placed her joy in thee alone? No Angel can satisfy
her, or make her grei^e the lesser, while she is bannished from her God, who is
her Glory, and her Crown. Yet one thing she has to be some comfort to her
while thus it stands with her, which none can take from her;
and that is the having of relation upon all occurrents to thee immediately in
her soul, in such a manner that nothing can interpose it self between thee,
and her. She indeed highly esteems all that thou have made; every thing as it
is derived by partaking of thy grace; More in perfection of which degree, are
Angels and the Souls of men, and she prefers the latter (that are yet in
this world) before herself in all things: but yet as in comparison of thee,
they are to her, as if they were mere nothing, as for resting or placing her
felicity in them. For well she knows that if there were no soul yet created,
nor ever to be, but only her own soul, and that ^ere (as all souls are)
capable of thee, she should by possessing thee alone, and without them be
infinitely happy; for thus it is; for nothing can ^atiat a reasonable soul, but
only thou; And having of thee, who art indeed all, nothing could be said to be
^anting to her. Thus my God it stands with me; for which all glory and praise
be given to thee eternally. For if it had not stood thus with our souls, that
our happynes had only depended on thee, some defect there would have been,
that might have been an impediment between a soul and thee. O that some who
live wholly to thee, and experience the infinite desire thou have to impart thy
self to all reasonable souls, would come out of their solitud, and their
living wholly ^or the good of themselves, and declare the way of Love to hungry,
and even starued souls! O how many would then be as tractable Lambs, who now
rebel as stiff-necked souls! Fa. ^^er.
Verily thou know that before I met with such a servant of th^e my heart
seemed ^o me and also to others, to be grown (living yet in Religion more hard
as to any good, then ever was a stone; but heating thy law made by him so easy,
and plain, it was great joy to my soul, and little did it seem to suffer all
the pain, and misery in the world, so I might please and serve thee my only
beloved. I had indeed inquired about thee of many before, and those such as
were most likely to have known; they all agreed in points necessary to
salvation, neither should I have erred as I did, if I had followed them; but
what was the mean, and way to a perfect Union with thee in my soul, I could
not at all hear, or learn. For they had (as some of them humbly professed) been
for twenty years employed in hearing Confessions; and in studies, thereby
endeavoring to thy great honor to work the salvation of streying souls,
which was a happy course for them, so yt they had little experience in
directing Contemplative souls; But as one of them professed, who was our chief
Superior, V. R. F. Rudesind Barlo.
if we had not found one of our own Order, who could in this have given
satisfaction to our souls, he would have sought over all the world most
willingly to have found, and procured one for us; for which Humility, and
Charity of his, I beseech thee my Lord God to reward him as beseems thy
infinite Goodness And grant that we, who have, or shall find benefit by these
most happy Instructions, may be as faithful to thee, as it is possible for
souls laden with flesh, and blood; and let our hearts study nothing else, but
how to love th^e; and by perfect subjection let our souls live quietly under
whomsoever is set over us by thee. For in vain do we pretend to obey thee,
if we be not pliable to those that are set over us by thy Divine Majesty. For
those who truly endeavor to please thee would obey a worm, if it could
command in the name,
and power of thee. For so much is an action pleasing to thee, as it is done in
that manner it is exacted of us by thee; which good will, and pleasure of thine
we cannot learn but by conuersing with thee, which if we do, and live withal
as well as our frailty will permit, wholly to thee, and seek our own abiection,
it will easily appear to us how, and which way in all things we shall behave
our selves to become truly obedient to thee. For either by the Rule, custom,
or order of the house, or by the special ordinance of the Superior God shows
us what to do,
they being infallible declarations of his will, and the most certain of all;
Or else for things for which they refer us to thee, as for the manner of our
Prayer, and such like things, thou teach an humble soul what therein to do,
and when to ask of others, and when to seek the solutions from thee; But indeed
as I have confessed to thee before, speaking ordinarily, few are the questions
that occur in the way yt is of humble Resignation;
Only thou requirest, that how clearly, or securely soever a soul walk, she be
ready in all that is required of her by Superiors, to give them a faithful
account, and to amend, and correct whatsoever they judge amiss; This lesson
they learn who in all have relation to thee, and thou give them grace to obey
in all for thee, if we dispose our souls to hear, and follow thee. For thou
give one grace to one, and an other to an other, and some may do that with
profit, which would to another be a mayn prejudice. Thou give wisdom to all
thy little ones, but not to all in one manner, but to a Superior in one kind,
and to a subject in another. In all therefore if we will truly obey, we ought to
observe ourselves, what does hinder, and what does help toward the obtaining
of thy divine Love, for which all things are and have been ordained by thy
divine Goodness; and yet to do this as we ought, passes so between thee, and
us: that none can discern it by us,
unless perhaps they hold the same course. For this proceeding does not make a
soul singular in her actions, and cariadge (for singularity is a vice which
thou extremely hate) but rather makes one exceedingly love the common
obediences, and external exercises, all of them putting ones soul in mind of
her duty toward thee in all things; and so have thou ordained, and disposed
the orders of this house, that they are a sufficient book ^o teach us our duty,
and do show us when to Praise thee, and when to cease from actually doing it;
When to speak, and when to be silent; and for my part following them as well as
I can, quietly, and out of Obedience to thee, I find them all most necessary,
and proper to advance a soul in the true Love of thee; and particularly the
Divine Off^ce is such a heavenly thing, that in it we find whatsoever we can
desire. For sometimes in it we address us to thee for help, and pardon for our
sins; and sometimes thou speak to us; so that it pearceth, and wounds
with desire of thee, the very bottom of our souls, and sometimes thou
teach a soul to understand more in it of the knowledge of thee, and of
themselves, then ever could have been by all the teaching in the world,
showed to a soul in five hundred years; and as I have often already said thy
words are works; and therefore happy are the humble, and peaceful of heart; for
these find such free access to thee, that thou be come indeed all in all
and above all to them, while they seel^ nothing but thee; and no peril is
there to them in their way, as long (...) they retain true Humility in the^^
souls. For who can hurt a soul, (...) deceive her, while she adhereth
faithfully to thee? but if she presume any thing of herself, what perills^ and
danger she is subject unto, and she apt to fall into, none can conceive, much
less express. And to this effect of showing a soul how to walk securely,
writes thy great servant the Author of the following of Christ in his 21.
Chapter of his third book, whose words with great joy I read, and before thee
speaking too, I will here bring them in; beseeching thee to instruct me in the
true practice of them. For they contayn the way in which a fool cannot err,
and without the practice of this, our souls lie open to all the snares of the
Devil: thine, and our enemy; No instruction did she so much regard, so
frequently reflect^on, or more volue, and ^^^olve in her mind, nor more
delighted in, ^hen this that follows, being merely of ^er own finding, and
obs^ruing in the said ^ook; which she was familiar in; and no ^aruaile,
considering the excellency, and ^ecessity of it for the purpose which she has
mentioned, being the securing of one in a Spiritual course, thus therefore does
he say ^peaking to her soul.

Super omnia, and in omnibus requiesces ^^ima mea in Domino semper: quia ipse
est ^anctorum aeterna requies. Da mihi dul^s^me and amantissime Jesus, in Te
super ^mnem Salutem and Pulchritudinem, super omnem Gloriam and honorem, super
omnem ^^tentiam and Dignitate^, super omnem Scie^tiam and Subtilitatem, super
omnes Diuitias and Arts, super omnem Laetitia^ and Exultationem, superomnem
famam and Laudem, super omnem Suauitatem and Consolatione^, super omnem Spem
and Promissionem, super omne Meritum and Desiderium, super omnia dona and
munera, quae potes dare and infundere, super omne Gaudium and iubilationem,
quam potest men's capere and ^^ntire: Denique super Angelos and Archangelos:
super omnem Exercitum Coeli, and super omnia visibilia, and inuisibilia, and
super omne quod Tu D^us meus non es^ Quia Tu Domine Deus meus, super omnia
optimus es, Tu solus Altissimus, Tu solus Potentissimus, Tu solus
Sufficientissimus and Plenissimus, Tu solus Suauissimus and Solatiosissimus, Tu
solus Pulcherrimus and Amantissimus: Tu solus Nobilissimus and Gloriosissimus
super omnia, in quo cunct^^ bona simul perfect sunt, and semper fu^runt, and
erunt. Atque ideo minus est and ins^ffici^ns, qui^quid pr^ter Teipsum mihi
donas, aut de teipso reuelas vel promitt^^ Te non viso, nec plene adepto.
Quoniam quidem non potest cor meum veraciter requiescere, nec totaliter
contentari, nisiin Te requies^at, and omnia dona, omnemque Creaturam
transcendat.

Above all things, and in all things my soul thou shall ever rest in God, for
he is the eternal rest of the Saints. Grante Me most sweet, and loving Jesus
to Rest in Thee above all Creatures; above all Health, and Beauty, above all
Glory, and Honor; above all I owre, and Dignity; above all Knowledge, and
Subtility; above all riches, and Arts; Above all joy, and ^ladnesse; above all
fame, and Praise; ^boue all sweetness, and Comfort; above ^ll Hope, and
Prom^se, above all meritt, and Desire; above all Gifts, and prefents that Thou
can give, and impart; above all joy, and Iubilee that the Mind can re^eiue,
and feel: lastly above Angels, and Archangells, above all the heavenly Host,
above all things visible, and invisible; and above All that Thou art not my
God.

For Thou my Lord God art good above all goods, Thou alone most high; Thou
alone ^ost powrefull; Thou alone most full, and sufficient; Thou alone most
sweet, and comfortable; thou alone most beautiful, and loving, Thou alone most
noble, and Glorious above all Things, in whom all ^oods together are most
perfectly, have been, and ever shall be. And therefore it (...) too little,
and not sufficient whatsoever Thou bestowest on Me besides thy self, or
reuealest of t^y self, or promisest, whilst Thou art not seen, nor fully
obtained. For surely my Heart cannot rest, nor be fully contented unless itt
rest in Thee, and transcend all gifts, and Creatures whatsoever. All things,
desires, and loves are vain^
But only that which tends
To God alone our chiefest good,
And all things else transcends.
My soul therefore by this sweet Love
shall day, and night aspire,
And rest in God (all things above)
My Love, and life's desire.
And while I live, I Will never cease
To languish for his Love,
Breathing, and sighing after him,
Till he my life remove.
For since ^ am not where I love,
How can I comfort find,
But only in the song of Love
By Love to me assigned?
And where so ere ^his word is (...) love
It yields a silver sound;
But if that word I miss in it
Me thinks I want my ground.
Nothing so simple can be pennd
If it but treat of Love,
But that it serves in some sort
My sadness to remove.
And shall my soul by senseless love,
Which yet is never true,
Bestow more love where it is lost,
Then where 't is only due?
^ no my God, but rather let
Such folly be to me
A means to urge my sinful soul
To Love more fernently!
And henceforth let me draw no breath,
But to aspire by Love
To thee my God, and all my good
By whom I live and move.
No Stagge in chase so thirsty is,
Or greedy of sweet spring,
As is my soul of thee my God
While I here sighing sing.
My soul where is thy Love, and Lord,
Since him thou can not find?
O cheer up heart, be comforted,
For he is in thy mind!
To him relation thou may have,
As often as thou goes
Unto the closett of thy heart,
Thy griefs for to disclose.
As silly Lambs from ravening Woolues
For help to Sheapheards fly,
So shall my soul in every case
For help, and council hye,
To thee my God by humble Prayer,
In hope, and confidence,
That thou my Lord willt succor me,
And be my souls defense.
And seeing that my God is rich
How can I say, I Am poor?
And he more mine, then I mine own:
What can I wish for I more?
And in his Majesty, and power,
Much more I will rejoice,
Th^n if of all in heaven, and earth
I had command, and choice.
My God one thing alone thou know
I fear and apprehend,
Which is my Lord for to displease,
Whose mercies have no end.
From all that does displease thine eye^^
Be pleased to set me free,
For nothing else in heaven, or earth,
Do I desire but thee.
And let me rather death embrace,
Then thee my God offend,
Or in my heart to give thy place
To any other friend.
Nothing would greiue my soul so much,
As in me to perceive
Any affection in the world
That thine would me bereave.
I know thou must possess alone,
Or else we are not thine,
In such good plight as we should be,
If light to us did shine,
As thou desire it should do
By grace our souls within;
For which are all the helps we have
Intended, and have been
Imparted, and bestowed by thee,
That we might live alone
To thee who satiat'st pure souls
With joys that are unknown.
And woe to them a thousand times,
Who interest have in any,

Or have divided hearts to thee,
After thy gifts so many.
For thou have purchased our love
At too too dear a rate,
To have a partner in our heart,
Which justly thou do hate.
O this thy wrong makes Angels blush
O make it far from me
Since that I am both body and soul
All conseerate to thee!
And I also will greiue with them,
To see thee have such wrong
From souls selected by thy self
To sing with them the song
Of Love, and praise to thee, O God,
And even in this place
To Contemplate thee, as we may,
O sweet and happy grace!
If we would die unto our selves
And all things else but thee,
It would be natural to our souls
For to ascend, and be
United to our Center dear,
To which our souls would hy,
Being as proper then to us,
As fire to upwards fly.
O let us therefore love my God,
For Love pertaines to him,
And let our souls seek nothing else,
But in this Love to swim,
Till we absorpt by his sweet Love
Return from whom we came,
Where we shall melt into that Love,
Which ioyeth me to name.
And never can I it too much Speak of, or it desire,
Since that my God, who is Love it self,
Does only Love require.
Come therefore all, and let us love
And with a pure aspect,
Regard our God in all we do,
And he will us protect.
O that all things upon the earth,
Re-ecchoed with thy praise
My everlasting glorious God,
The Ancient of days!
And it I wish with all my soul
Incessantly to sing;
But seeing this I cannot do,
My sighs to heaven shall ring;
Yea if I writ out all the sea,
Yet could I not express
The joy, and comfort I do feel
In what thou do possess.
No gifts, or grace, nor comforts here
How great so ere they be,
Can satiat my longing soul,
While I possess not thee.
For thou art all my hearts desire,
Yea all that I do crave,
In earth, or heaven now, and ever
Thou art all that I would have.
And I do wish with all my soul,
That to thee I could pray,
With all my heart, and all my strength
Ten thousand times a day.
Let peoples, tribes, and tongues confess
Unto thy Majesty;
And let us never cease to sing
Sanctus, Sanctus to thee.
These are his words my Lord God, which whosoever practices, shall find a
Spiritual internal life so easy, sweet, secure, and void of all questions,
that they will walk (even in this bannishment, where our life is termed, and
that most justly, a continual warrefare) with a heavenly peace, ^ob. 7. 1.
and security. For to that soul who proposes nothing to herself but thy self
alone, above all gifts, and creatures, what can interpose it self for to harm
her, while she remains thus confident, and humble between thy Maiesty^ and
her soul. Certainly so subject does such an one live to thee, and to all others
in that manner, as shall be exacted by thee, that there can nothing carry her
away, while thus it stands with her, to any error of vanity; and her love is
so founded in true Charity, and practiced with such Humility, and so in her
very soul, that nothing can interrupt her conversation with thee; Besides in a
soul who walks upon this secure ground of only seeking thee, and only resting
in thee, such a divine light does shine, that she judges according to the
justice of thy Divine will, and not according to sense, or custom, which in
these blind days takes place almost in all things of true reason; and this for
want of having recourse to thee, my Lord, who art the only true light; and of
this defect it proceeds, that the divine ways of Love are now held so
perilous, and insecure,
in which my God thou have an infinite wrong, seeing that we were made only to
Love, and attend to the praise of thee, our Lord. It is true, those who will
pretend to lead a Spiri^uall life, and yet seek not in all to deny themselves,
but desire this gift, or this grace, this favor, or that comfort, let them
pretend for their excuse in it whatsoever they please, do often times miserably
deceive, not only themselves, but also many others, and bring an internal life
wholly into a scorn, and contempt to the prejudice of their own souls, and
also of many others. But I wish that those that do this simply by being for a
Spiritual life unapt, might give themselves to that which by Superiors should
be found most fitting for them,
and no^ be a cause that thy sweet mercy, an^ goodness should have such wrong as
that other souls who were fit should be hindered from having relation to thee,
by which their souls would be turned wholly into Love, by a vehement desire,
and longing after thee, that one thing that is only necessary; and from this
house.

( To wit of the Benedictine Nunn^ (...) Cambray. The same she means for
Pa^^^ issued thence, and where her natural Sister of the same Spirit Gouernes
at present.) I beseech thee for thy own sake, keep this misery, which of all
other is the greatest that I can comprehend o^ imagine.

THE EIGTH CONFESSION.
BLESSED is that Simplicity (says my foremencioned Author in his fourth book
of the Following of Christ) that forsakes the difficullt way of many
questions. Those are his words in his said divine Book, where he proves the
way of Love to be so easy, and secure, as I have before signified. O how happy
are they who follow thee in Humility, and Simplicity of heart! for these have
few doubts which are the cause of questions. The more a soul is void of doubts,
the more capable is she (speaking ordinarily) of these secret ways of the
Divine Love For commonly her way must be to resign herself to thy will. What
room is there left then for questions? Yet when it is thy will, that in a
real doubt she ask, thou teach her how to proceed in it, that it may be a
help to her soul, and no hindrance, which seldom happens when without thy
leave, and sending she presumes to endanger herself to be entangled by falling
out of one doubt, and question into five hundred others. Let it be with my
soul, Kings 1. 19.
O Lord, as it is said of Anna the Mother of thy Prophet Samuel, that she
turned her countenance no more toward several ways. For having been taught,
and instructed by thy sweet mercy, that One thing is to me only necessary, let
me not loose my self by following, or trying those several ways of which she
speaks. I have as thou know, my God, had sufficient trial of them, to the
great misery, and difficulty of my poor soul for that time; let me now sing,
and that from the bottom of my soul, Psalm. 72.28 Psalm. 7^.25.
that it is good for me to adhere to my God, besides whom what is to me in
heaven, or what desire I on earth? Only thy self my Lord is desired by me, and
only thou can comfort and satisfy me. It becomes me to become wholly subject
to thee, so that for time, and eternity, thou may dispose of me as it pleases
thee, which with my whole soul I beseech thee to do, and then I shall be as
happy as I desire to be. Thou know that since I was taught what it was to
love thee, I never durst wish, or desire any thing. For it appears plain to
me, that my blindness, and ignorance is so great, that even in the desire of
that which in it self is good, I may be extremely deceived. Only thy-selfe
knows what is most to thy honor, and best for me; and therefore whatsoever
thou do, shall be best welcome to me. I desire no liberty to choose any thing
besides thee, because it suffiseth me if thou will become all in all, and above
all to me; which desire. I know is pleasing to thee, and therefore I beseech
thee inlardg my heart, and soulin this longing, and sighing after thee my only
beloved. Let my heart be free to thee. For none deserves any part therein
besides thee. O how great a grief would it be to me, if any c^^ated thing should
be an impediment to my being wholly thine! Verily if I should find, that my will
were false to thee by desiring any thing but thee, nothing in heaven, or earth
could comfort me, while thus it stood between my heart, and thee. Give me
therefore grace to be faithful to thee, who has showed such an infinite mercy
toward me, as to let me know of the way of Love, whereby all Crosses become
tolerable to me. Never shall I be satisfied with blessing thee, and thanking
thee for this thy Mercy. All, that love thee, praise thee for me, who am not
worthy to name thee. Verily if I be now ungrateful to thee, it is pity thy
earth should bear me. Yet thou know my extreme frailty, and therefore in all
have mercy on me, and in the end save me who putt all my hope in thee. What
shall I render for this thy infinite benefit bestowed on me? Verily if I should
be despised by all the world, as I justly deserve to be, and should have, and
feel the pains of all that ever have suffered for thee, and should be shutt
up in a place which were only big enough to contain me, and were (as unworthy
of them, as indeed I believe, and acknowledge my self to be) debarred of the
Sacraments,
by which such grace to souls, is so abou^dantly imparted by thee, and were
held for a reprobate by all that are most esteemed, and respected by me, yet
this were little to endure in requital of this benefit which I have here
recounted before thee, and which I read with so much joy, that it is a solace
to me in those difficulties which are only known to thee, and which would, if I
were not exceedingly helped by thee, quite ouerwhelme me for as it is well
known to thee, they do oftentimes make all my strength decay so that I seem to
be left without so much as is sufficient to go even about the house; But when I
have been thus dealt with by thee, I have been withal enabled more fervently
to praise thee; And thy intention by it was apparent to me. For by it thou
did so abate pride that was most strong in me, that all I could have done, or
devised, or all other creatures with me, could not so much in many years have
humbled me, and have bread such a contempt in my soul of resting, or taking
delight in any thing which was less then thee. Thus, my God, thou dealest with
me, who, as I have often said, am not worthy to name thy Majesty; and I see, if
we will but give our selves wholly to the seeking after thee, and dispose our
selves to suffer whatsoever it shall please thee, we shall not need to take
care for any thing, but how to please, and praise thee.
For thou willt provide Crosses such, and so much as will be sufficient to make
v^ become that, thou would ^aue us to be; and in those of thy sending there is
no danger, if we will endeavor to be faithful to thee, and in them call often
upon thee. But when we place such perfection in suffering, that we think we do
nothing unless we be in matters of suffering, and are as it were loath to loose
time (as we think we do) by being without occasion of suffering,
we oftentimes fail in those Crosses which ^e in such an humor do lay upon our
selves or thrust our selves into without thy leave, and disable us from
undergoing, and suffering those which then, or afterward are by thee thought
to be fitter for us; and we seeing our selves to fail in these of our own
undertaking, which we made our selves sure to be able to stand unto, grow to be
dejected, yea sometimes even so far as to mistrust all the course we had held
before. For we remembering we endured greater matters before, (being of Gods
sending, and through his grace) presumed now also of that strength which then
we had, which was not, as we conceived, ours, but our Lords, who rewards no
works but his own. If we will therefore in all live secure, let us desire
nothing, no not even to have matter of suffering, save so far, as it shall be
his pleasure. For certain^ly to suffer for him is so great an honor, that one
may justly esteem herself unworthy thereof; and yet it is a thing so necessary
to advance us in the way of Love, that we need not doubt but God will provide
it when he sees it fit; and when he does send it, come it which way it will,
it will be no impediment to a faithful soul; but her only way, in this as
well as all other things, for to live secure, is, to be as a little child by
humble Resignation,
and let God do with us in all what he will. For only by this means we can
live in Peace, and avoid the snares of self love, and the devil. For a soul
that is apt to esteem greatly of a little suffering, and thinks when she has
in it a slight occasion, that it lays open the way to great matters between
God, and her soul, God uses to lead her by another way, till she see, and
acknowledge her error; and many times she falls into sin, and imperfection
by her greedines to advance her soul by untimely suffering, which at last
makes her cry out to thee; O Lord; how great is my blindness, and frailty? help
me therefore my God in all these miseries, which here thy sinful servant
speaks of as a guilty person to thee; Great, great is my folly, and frailty,
and therefore for help, and strength I fly unto thee; spare my soul sinning
before thee, and let me now begin to love only thee; help me in all, my Lord
for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 59. 13.
I will therefore confide in thee my God, my mercy, who be Adored, Praised, and
Exalted, for time and eternity. Amen.

THE NINTH CONFESSION.
LEX Domini immaculata conuertens animas; Psalm. 18. 8. 9.
testimonium Domini fidele sapientiam praestans paruulis; Iustitiae Domini
rectae laerificantes corda; praeceptum Domini lucidum illuminans oculos. The
Law of our Lord is immaculate, correcting souls, the Testimony of our Lord is
faithful, giving Wisdom to little Ones. The Justices of our Lord be right,
making hearts joyful: the precept of our Lord light some illuminating the eyes.
These my God are the words of thy Royal Prophet, which are (as it follows in
the same Psalm) to be desired above gold, and rich precious stones; yea they
are more sweet to a loving soul then the honny, or the honny comb. Let this
Law of thine convert my soul, that it may become one of thy little ones to whom
the grace of true Wisdom is often promised by thee. Let thy Justice make my
heart joyful. For in the per^ormance thereof is true Peace only to be found
They that live according to this thy Justice, do enjoy such a divine
tranquillity, that it cannot be expressed by any pen whatsoever. None can walk
in this path of true Justice (in perfection) but the humble. Those find out in
thy light what is thy best will, and pleasure in all things as far as humane
flesh will admit, and perform thy just will, as well as human frailty will
reach. When we do perform any thing by this just rule of thy holy will, we find
an admirable effect the^eof in our soul. This is that which by performing in
all things we become truly subject to thee, and have the merit of Obedience,
which makes all our actions so noble before thee; and of which virtue of
Obedience how much,
or how little our actions partake, so much, and no more do they deserve
reward. Worthyly may Obedience be preferred before Sacrifice. For it is that
which governs heaven, and earth, and which only deserves reward in thy
sight. Happy are they who walk this way. For they have a ^ast even of the joys
of heaven. For as they there obey thy will, so these thy humble souls do also
endeavor to do the same. This Obedience to thee makes the Angels as ^ell
content with their degree of Glory, as to be of the Seraphins, who are yet in a
far higher degree in thy Kingdom. This makes the Saints content with theirs;
this makes souls on earth who aspire to thee with all their hearts, to limit
their desires with thy good will, and pleasure, and by this means they desire
neither life, nor death; but in it conform themselves to thy most just will;
this makes them desire disgrace, nor Glory neither pain nor health, neither
Crosses, nor comforts. This Obedience to thee, and to Superiors for thee, made
some souls pleasing to thee by living in the wilderness, and others by living
in a Community, some by living to the profit of their neighbor, and others by
living, and attending only to thee in their souls, some by living in high, and
eminent degree, and having command over many others, and some by being
esteemed abject, and the very scumme of the world; and these if they had of
their own choice, and election chosen the contrary state, would never have
arrived to true Sanctity: Some also by many pains, and Crosses come to thee,
and some only by an internal affection to thee, having that in affection which
others suffer in act, they also are respected by thee; By which it appears how
great a subjection is exacted by thee of those who desire to become united to
thee, and never can we prosper in a Spiritual life unless we hearken to thee,
and observe even in the least things, what thou would have us do, and go that
way thou would have us in all things whatsoever. For we may be sure thou
willt lead us by the way of Abnegation which is the way of the Cross which if
we will walk with humility, and simplicity, we shall with security arrive at
the port of eternal Glory, and enjoy thee our only beloved in that degree thou
had ordained for us from all eternity, live we long, or die we soon. For only
in thee can we be happy, and by thy mere grace can we deserve to enjoy thee.
What we overcome is so done in thy strength that the glory is wholly due to thee
alone; and this I find daily, seeing that when I presume of my own strength,
though it be in a thing which I have often overcome, and many times far
greater it seems to me, yet I fail in that, even often to the offending thee
my Lord in an extraordinary manner. From this error therefore my God hereafter
deliver thy poor contemptible servant, that I may prais^ thee who art my only
strength, and hope^ Lead me which way thou willt, so^^ may bless thee in all,
and rest in thee above all. From thee the strong receive their strength, and in
thee sinners that have nothing of our own have wherewith to supply all our
want; thou flyest up with them who by an ardent love have surmounted all
created things, and are firmly united to thee in Spirit; and thou also lendest
thy sweet hand to thy little, and imperfect ones who are of a good will, to
help them out of the mire, and dirt of passions, and inordinate affections; In
this mercy my soul does hope, and rejoice, and I do in my poverty congratulate
the perfections of others, beseeching thee to make me partaker of their merits;
And above all out of the abundance of thy own store, give me where^ith to
retorn to thee for all the mer^ies thou have showed to my sinful ^oul. Let
me please thee, and praise ^hee, and desire no more but that thou do with me
whatsoever thou know most to thy honor. O that souls would convert their
heart wholly to thee the most desirable beawty, Psalm. 144.9.
to whom if we compare all that is fair which thou have made, they will seem
^o be without all beawty, and light! O if by humility souls would dispose
themselves for the Divine Love, what a reformation would there quickly be in
the whole world? When I remember how many souls separate themselves by sinful
sinning from thee, Psalm. 33. 6.
it pearceth my very soul, seeing they forsak him, who is an infinite good and a
most amiable beawty. Remember, O Lord, for thy own sake our extreme frailty,
and give gra^e that we may all convert, and return by Love to thy Divine
Majesty, whose mercies are above all thy works; for which Glory be ever to thee
by all for time, and eternity. Amen.

THE X. CONFESSION.
ACCEDITE ad Deum, and illuminamini, and facies vestrae non confundentur. Come
to Him, and be illuminated; and your faces shall not be confounded. These words
in our divine Office are spoken not only by him, who by thy own testimony was
a man according to thy own heart, but proceeded from the holy Ghost, the Spirit
of all truth, who speaks by the Prophets and Apostles for the comfort,
instruction, and illumination of such as are true members of our holy Mother
the Church, how weak, and contemptible soever they be; In the belief of which
Church, and in hope of thy mercies, which I have always experienced to be great
toward me thy poor servant, I fly to thee in all my doubts, and obscurities,
which sin, ignorance, and imperfection cause to my soul in her way ^owards
thee her only desired Beloved; ^he, by whom thou speak this, had ^^cepted any,
I should not have da^d to have applied it to my self; ^ut as it is, I should
do thee wrong, ^o fly from thee, when thou bidst me ^^me, and be illuminated;
Though my ^^nnes be great, yet thy mercies ex^eed all the sins in the world;
I ^ill therefore come to thee, that my ^^ce be not confounded; I will approach
^o thee the only true light, that my sou^^ may Love thee, being guided by ^his
thy light. In this light the glorious (...). Augustine walked in an
extraordi^ary manner, when he cried out with ^ most amorous heart; Lord let me
know ^hee, and let me know my-selfe. These ^wo knowledges are inseparable
^ompanions, and increase the one ^y the other. For who can know thee ^nlesse he
know himself, unless he ^e taught by thee? Those that would ^now some thing of
thee, and would be favored by thee, for any end but to love thee, and to learn
to despise themselves be in peril of a most dangerous ruin. For those that
walk the true way of the Cross, desire n^ favor but to be able without a^
comfort to be faithful to thee m^ Lord God. Those that have done the contrary
(of which alas there hau^ not been a few) are they which hau^ brought a
Spiritual life into such contempt, that they shall have in ^ manner all the
world about their eare^ to censure them who enter into it one obiecting, it
will put one out o^ his wits, as they have found by experience in many that
venture^ upon such a course; Others say; Those that affect singular ways of
Spirit are in eminent peril of being deluded by the devil; Others pretend
that those (poor souls) pretend such perfection, that they slight, and
contemn the courses of others, though their Superiors, and betters, which is
an evident sign, that they are for all their pretense in a great error.
Others object that they abstract their affections from all the world, and
indeed would seem to be dead to all creatures, but that this they do, that
they may the better love themselves; and while they seek themselves in a
Spiritual manner in the gifts, and graces of God, they say they are in more
danger then those that live in sin, and wickedness. Others alleadg, that the
quietness they seem to enjoy in occurring accidents of difficulty, is either
natural, or else because they pretending to lead forsooth a Spiritual life are
bound in honor to endure them patiently, least otherwise they be proved to
their disgrace to be but in an imaginary course, which a Spiritual life in
these days is generally held to be. Thus, and in infinite other manners, as it
is known to thee, I have in some sort experienced, even from them, whom I could
have expected by the place they ^ear, to have been hartned in my desire of
tending to thee to the uttermost ability of my soul; but well might they do it,
seeing they were also in place, where they were bound to reform in me what was,
and is amiss in my life, which I must confess is very much, but yet I confide
in thy help. But in fine the objections against an internal life are so many,
that much help is necessary for a soul that shall be able to hold, and go
through with all objections, and difficulties in that kind. For one says; for
want of this circumstance, all their life is in peril; and another says, that
the said circumstance may stand with a true Spiritual life; but yet that there
is another matter, or circumstance which were necessary to be reformed in their
course; and thus in their exceptions there be so many minds, as men; and yet
none of them can say, there is any sin in that which they alleadg for such a
mayn impediment, the fault being indeed only that it is not suitable to their
apprehension, and experience in spiritual matters. Thus therefore it stands with
souls that in these days would lead a Spiritual life; But those who place all
their hope in thee my God, shall remain stable as a rock, and in thee who art
their strength, and refuge they live peaceable, and content, having the
testimony of their conscience to b^ their comfort amidst all oppositions, and
contradictions. But above all objections which I have heard, that goes nearest
my heart, is when I read, or hear, that it is perilous to walk the way of Love,
and that (as some would seem to prove) no soul in any other course, or state
is in such peril, as is a soul who gives herself to thi^ study; But let them
affirm that who will. For my part I will shutt my ears from harkning to such
men; because nothing is more plain, more easy, more secure, more pleasant then
the way of Love. For that way of Love it cannot be called, if the soul seek in
it any thing but thee alone, which these men would make it almost impossible
for one to do. But thou know (my God) that in this thou have wrong. For it
being thy own desire that souls should love thee, and thou having made them
only for that end that they might wholly attend, even in this life, to the Love,
and Praise of thee alone; how can this way be dangerous, where the only
endeavor of the soul is that thy will be in all fullfilled? who can doubt of
thy assistance, and help therein, though we be able to do nothing of our
selves? Verily it cannot be doubted any more then it can be feared, that thou
willt cease to be good to thy creatures which thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood. Let not souls therefore I beseech thee by any such frights be
brought into fear of walking this noble, and amiable way; but let us sing in
hope; Psalm. ^6. 1.
Dominus illuminatio mea, and salus mea, quem timebo? Si Deus pro nobis, quis
contra nos. My Lord is my light, and my Salvation whom shall I fear? If God be
with us, what matter is it who is against us. Let us proceed humbly, till we
be admitted to enjoy thee the God of Gods in Sion, where thy praise shall be
perfected in us. These things therefore remembering, and recounting before thee,
do strengthen my soul, that it fall not from the stedfastnes, which is
grounded, and founded upon thee; To harten, and inconradg my soul by speaking,
and writing thus to thee, was the cause why these things have been written by
me, which I read, when I cannot (for some indisposition in body or mind)
otherwise think upon thee; and when I am overwhelmed in any misery, it becomes
most tolerable by having thus conference with thee, who never disdainest me;
for which all Glory be given to thee, who art my Lord, and my God blessed for
all eternity. Amen Alleluia.

THE XI. CONFESSION.
O My Lord, to whom I will speak, and before whom my heart shall not be silent,
while thus it stands with me, least the heavy weight of sins and my
disordered passions do oppress my soul, and separate it from thee, the only
desire, and beloved of my heart. It behooves me indeed to be silent, and that
all created things be likewise silent to me, to the end ^ may hear the sweet
whispering of thy voi^^, and attend in most quiet repose of soul to thy Divine
Majesty, speaking to my heart. But this must be when my soul is drawn, and
sweetly attracted by thee to attend to what it shall please thee to work in me.
But now in these my sins which passions, and inordinat affections cause in me;
My soul does cry out in the bottom thereof, and call upon thee who art my
refuge, helper, and deliverer in all these my afflictions, and miseries; and
this my prayer is not rejected by thee, because thou art a bottom less Sea of
mercy. O when shall my soul see all impediments removed, that it may be united
to thee, and retorn to thee, from whom it had her being, to this end, that it
might by pure Love become capable of enjoying thee for all eternity! What are
all things to me without thee? Verily nothing but a shadow, neither can any of
them, no nor all of them together satisfy, or comfort me. By Loving, Pleasing,
and Praising thee, as thou would have me, shall I become truly content, and
happy, and by no gifts, or graces, or favors besides, how great soever they be.
Return, ret^rn my soul to him yt only can satiat thee, and without whom all
things, as thou see, are most bitter and unpleasing to thee. Only by
Humility, and Obedience, can this be accomplished in thee. Humble, despise, and
subject thy self in all without exceptions, that he may take pity on thee.
Indeed, my Lord, I desire thus to become for thee, For I may truly say; Psalm.
72. 23.
I was brought to nothing, and I knew it not; and I am as a beast before thee;
and yet also I may say, Psalm. 72.
yt I am allways with thee, and thou with me by thy preventing mercy. It is a
poor way ^o think to become honorable by standing upon our points; and yet
this is that which now is most in practice in these days. O how far is this
from the practice of thy Saints, and servants, who thought it their greatest
honor to be despised, neglected, reviled, and contemned by all this world, to
the end they might become honorable in thy eyes, my Lord, who has said, Math.
5. 11.
that blessed are we, when we are spoken ill of by men, and persecuted by them.
Give me this true humility, I beseech thee, which makes souls capable of
receiving this thy blessing promised to the humble^ and those which serve thee
for Love, whose joy thou thy self art, and who follow thee by the way of the
Cross, which seems indeed contemptible in their eyes who do not discern, nor
discover the hidden treasure that lies in the confusion received, and embraced
with the arms of Love by a faithful soul, who seeks nothing but to imitate
her beloved, who died the ignominious death of the Cross to purchase her love,
and to make her of an enemy, to become an intimate, and inward friend of this
our heavenly Bridegroom.
This poverty, and contempt I say, which thy little ones do undergo in this
life, (my Lord God) seems to the lovers of this world, to be an intolerable
burden; but those that truly walk this way of Humility,
do find that in it lies the greatest comfort, and sweetness that can be found,
and enjoyed in this world. For thou bear thy-self the burden of the humble,
and what touches them touche^h the apple of thine eye. Nothing do thou think
to dear for them, seeing all thy gifts, graces, favors, and comforts, which
thy goodness imparteth to them, they use only to thy praise, and to the abasing
of themselves under the feet of all thy creatures, as most unworthy of this thy
mercy, of all of them. O what power has an humble soul with thee, while she
becomes totally subject to thee, even as if no power of willing, or choosing
were given her by thee, which while she does, well it goes with her before
thee, and great is the liberty of such an one, while she only desires, and
seeks thee. For in doing so, we do become capable in an extraordinary manner
of enjoying thee, who though thou art not to be seen in this life as thou art,
yet an humble soul is not ignorant of thee. For her faith is wonderfully
cleared, and great is the knowledge of a soul, which by love obtains the
heavenly wisdom of thee, Math. 11. 2
which thou have hidden from the wise, and prudent of the world, and revealed
it to thy little ones, who sigh, and long without ceasing to become united to
thy Divine Majesty, that thy Praise may be perfected in them to thy eternal
Glory. O how frequently, and confidently do these souls fly unto thee; and how
often are they even amazed to see thy infinite sweetness, and most amiable
beawty; Nothing is so present to them, as is this their Lord God; yea my God,
such a knowledge of thee does Love cause in an humble soul, that it makes her
for a time neither to see, feel, yea nor to think of any thing besides thee;
but this in this vale of tears is not of long continuance, and has many
interruptions by ^eason of the strife between our spirit and our three enemies,
the world, the flesh, and the devil; but yet thy grace is in all occasions
near to our soul, and nothing shall blemish the purity thereof, if we humbly
adhere unto thee, and wholly mistrust our own forces (as we well may) and be
confident in thee, who art so merciful, and pitiful to those who presume not
to have any strength but thee. This humble love is able to go through all
difficulties, and to bear all burdens, and to sustain all pains and
disgraces; because it seeks only thee for her wittnes, who art her glory, her
honor, and her crown, most near, and dear to her, yea even more present then
she is to herself, and more hers then she is her own; and consequently being
wholly forgetful of herself, she only seeks, and intends thy praise and
glory, my Lord God, the peace of her heart, and the comfort of her soul. It
seems to a soul at first that by denying, forsaking, neglecting, and
despising herself she shall undergo a most grievous Martyrdom; but by
approaching to thee my God, and conuersing with thee in a most loving, and
tender manner, and beseeching thy assistance in all her streightnesses, and
necessities, she finds this way of Abnegation sweet above all the delights of
the world.
For by rectifying our will, and conforming it in all to thine, we walk an easy
way, and find a ^ast of the joy, which they feel who are in heaven united to
thee for all eternity, with whom let us praise thee for ever and ever. Amen,
Amen, I beseech thee.

THE XII. CONFESSION.
^ant. ^. 7.
SI dedexit homo omnem substantiam domus s^ae pro Dilectione, quasinihil
despiciet eam. If any Man shall give a^ the substance of his hows for Love, as
if it were nothing He shall despise it. O my Lord, and my God, to whom only all
Love is due! Behold I desire with all my heart to give all for this thy Love.
But alas what has thy poor servant to give thee? Verily nothing that may
deserve this thy Love, as a requital, it being above all I am, or can suffer,
or do. What can I give thee, seeing I have nothing but what I have received of
thee? If I give thee my body, and soul, what is that in comparison of what I
owe unto thee? them indeed I have consecrated to thee, but as due to thee by
right, not as before appertaining to me, unless I ^ould vsurp that which I was
to restore to thee. What then shall I give ^hee for this thy love so much
desired, and sighed after by me? If I reflect upon my self, I have nothing to
give to thee; But shall I in this my extreme ^ouerty, and nothing, despair of
gaining, and obtaining this most desirable Love of thee, which rejoices my
soul even to name, and speak of to thee? No, No, I will not fear to obtain it
of thee. For if that which I have, and am, be (as indeed it is) short of
deserving this favor from thee (which is of being indeed one of those who
seek, desire, and love only thy self, and all others merely for thee) yet I
will give thy-self to thee, who art all my joy, and the only desire, and
treasure of my heart; By thy-self I will praise thee, and in thee I will hope to
be transformed into that love which shall be swallowed up in thee for all
eternity. Only to love thee was my soul created, and only by being turned wholly
into love can my soul be truly happy. What can my soul desire out of ^hee,
seeing thou art only Good, and the most incomprehensible beawty, which the
Angels are never satisfied with beholding, being infinitely delighted while
they are wholly turned into the pure love, and Praise of thee. We here in this
vale of tears do sigh with tears in our eyes, longing to enjoy thee, and to
be freed from the occasions of offending thy sweet Mercy. We (I say) sigh, and
make our moan to thee while it is daily said to our soul, where is thy God?
Yea, even I say so, speaking to thee, where art thou my Lord, and when shall I
without all mean be united to thee, that my love may be intierly bestowed upon
thee, and nothing but thy self live, and reign in me, that without ceasing I
might Praise, and Adore thee, the most glorious, and amiable Majesty, to whom
all knees ought to bow; and prostrat: we ought to acknowledge our mere
dependence of thee. O how plain do thou sometimes show it me, that I am
nothing,
and less then nothing, while I stand before thee, neither can any thing be by
justice due to me, otherwais then by thy mere mercy if I should never, so
faithfully serve, and praise thee! For what can they challenge of thee, who
were not able so much as to move, or be without thee, much less do any good,
or suffer any thing purely for the love of thee. Give me therefore, that I may
have to give unto thee, seeing by my self I am not able according to my desire
to love, and praise thee; by thy-self without ceasing I will praise, and love
thee, and in thy mercy, and grace shall my soul hope to become truly pleasing
to thee; here I will by faith adhere to thee, and by love my soul shall both
day, and night aspire unto thee, till at last by the merits of thy death, and
Passion, 1. Cor. 15.55.
death shall be swallowed up in victory. In the mean time let the love of
true Charity instruct me, which is more strong then death, that I may
faithfully serve thee, though it be not yet admitted me to enjoy thee. Let me
rest in nothing but thee, and let thy name be my defense, and comfort, which
to hear, and behold, does above all earthly things delight, and refresh me
amidst the storms of temptations which daily assault me. O my God; indeed thou
art that unchangeable light, which I ever come to consult with in all my
afflictions, and necessities; and behold^ to my unspeakable comfort, and
strength) I hear thee giving answers, by saying this, and commanding that, and
this I do by resorting to thee often! This is that which delights me, and I
fly as speedily to this pleasure as I justly may from all the actions which are
imposed upon me even by necessity it self; and it exceedingly ^eioiceth me to
sit down and sigh after thee, and by speaking, and writing to, and of thee, to
become at least for that short time forgettful of all things besides thee. This
is that which makes the grievous but then of flesh, and blood tolerable to me:
in which living my soul by sin comes often (to my grief above all other
miseries) wounded to thee, craving and beseeching, for thy ownsake that I may
never fail to beg, and find mercy of thee, whom to offend is the only misery
that can in this life befall me, and no pain, or difficulty is feared by me,
save so far as it may (considering my extreme frailty) be a means to make me
offend thee. O Lord do not reject me, though I have never done any good, and am
so far from truly loving thee!
I will now take the adui^e given me, to fly, be silent, and quiet; and I will
howerly come to learn the song of Love, and Praise of thee: teach me to know my
self, and to know thee. I desir that wisdom which despises all for love of
thee, and only yt knowledge do I wish for, that securely guides a soul toward
thee, and into thee. Those that love thee, and seek only to please thee, are
those which have a sight in part, of what in heaven we shall enjoy clearly for
all eternity. O what knowledge does a truly loving soul obtain of thee, and how
much is her faith confirmed in the greatness, beawty, and infinitnes of thy
Majesty! but alas they are drawn down by the weight of their corruptible flesh,
and sometimes even forgett what they have with the eyes of their soul seen, and
learnt of thee; and sometimes foolishly think they are something, till they
feel the effect of this their misery, and offend thee through their pride, and
forgettfullnes of their own nothing, and of the greatness of thy Majesty, which
pride above all things deliver me from, I beseech thee, because it makes souls
so odious before thy self and all that love thee. Let me give all Glory to
thee, who without any desert of mine, have thus sweetly with Grace prevented
me, for which be thou ever by all Praised, and Adored. Amen.

THE XIII. CONFESSION.
O Lord, whose Power, Majesty, and Wisdom have no end, have mercy on me
sinner, and give me leave to speak unto thee my God, and ask thee, whither men
are pleasing to thee, because they abound with human knowledge. And behold thou
affirmest; no; but unhappy are they who can pearce into all things,
if they be ignorant of thee. Let me therefore love, and then I shall not be
ignorant of that knowledge which makes souls so pleasing in thine eyes, to
wit, knowledge of thee, and my self. O Love which in lightnest souls, and
inflamest hearts with chaste love, flow into my soul! This love is honorable
wisdom, and though the enioyers thereof be accounted fools by the wise of
this world, yet thou have another opinion of them; and their humble souls find
much favor in thy pure eyes, my God! With this Love did those abound, of whom
S. Paul speaks, yt they went up, Hebr. 11.
and down in goats skins, needy, despised, hidden in dens, and caves, of
whom the world was not worthy; yet some of thy Saints became very honorable,
and glorious even in the eyes of the world, the which was forced to acknowledge
thee great in, and by them; and there was no resisting of thy wisdom speaking
by them, amongst which of these thy servants was the great S. Augustine Doctor,
and light of thy Church a most ardent lover of thee my God. He in those books
of his that I have seen, turns his speeches so to thy Majesty, that his
words thereby become sweeter then ordinary; and while he declares his own
misery, he gives to understand to us thy most abundant mercy, that all that
desire to love thee my God^ may (being invited by him) praise thee with him,
and for the favor showed by thee to him. O that all to whom thou offrest the
favor of bestowing on them thy divine Love, (if they would after sinning by
true Humility dispose themselves for it) would become (by his example)
grateful to thee, and love thee as thou would by them be beloved! O how soon
do thou by thy Grace wipe out the sinn^^ of such, who now detesting their
former il lives do strive by humble love to become grate^ull to thee for thy
preventing Mercy? O Lord, my God, though thou have forgiven me much, yet I am
far from loving thee much; Those who now enjoy thee, yt have heertofor been
sinners as I, be they Intercessors to thee for me^ and be thou ever praised for
thy infinite mercy by all thy Majesty's creatures for ever an^ ever; Amen.

THE XIV. CONFESSION^
O Lord my God, who sweetly disposest all things, give thy poor contemptible
creature leave to speak unto thee, who art the only desire of my soul, and my
hope from my youth, and entierly beloved of my heart; To thee I will speak, and
write, not as to one a far of; but to stir up my soul to Love thee alone, and
to draw occasions out of all things to praise, and exalt thee, whose mercies
are above all thy works. To whom should I make my moan in all my miseries, but
to thy self who art my God, and All, and who art nearer to me, then I am to my
self? To whom should I go to be instructed but to the fountain of all wisdom?
Behold men change their minds, and almost every man differs in opinion from
another, in matters that are indifferent, and so great is my ignoran^e, and
blindness naturally, that vn^esse thou instruct me, I shall all ways ^auer, and
never come to any true ^erfection of knowledge. They stand at ^oo great a
hazard, who confide in ^hemselues, and cast not their hope ^holy upon thee. All
creatures are unstable, and those that seek not ^hee above all creatures, but
putt their trust more in men then in thee, will find no true peace in their
souls. O that I did truly Love! for by Love only my soul shall become capable
of understanding truth. Love is humble, ^eaceable, subject to thee in all
things. The soul that loves thee is more conversant in heaven then on earth;
and what here she of necessity must admit of, serves to her rather as a
cessation then any consolation. The soul that Loves, finds occasion in all,
and by all things to praise thee my God, and to humble it self. Such are
willingly subject for thee, and do see how odious it is to thee, to see that
subjects should contemn, contradict, or withstand the power in Superiors, and
make their imperfection a color for our sinne^ If it be right between our
souls an^ thee, we shall gladly obey thee, spea^ke thou or ordain thou by whom
tho^^ please. Teach me therefore to obey for thou only can instruct me wh^
true humble Obedience is. If thou d^ not teach me, I may perhaps give to Caesar
what is t^yne, and deny to give Caesar what is due to him by thy will. Let me
obey therefore for thee^ and in order to thy will, and with an internal regard
of thee, whose due is all the subjection, and love that can be given by my poor
soul. Open the eyes of my soul that I may see what thou exactest in all things.
Instruct me by whom, and in what manner tho^ please; So I may but know what
thy will, and pleasure is, it suffizeth thy poor servant. Give me grace to
obey thee my God, with all that Love thee, for ever, Amen.

THE XV. CONFESSION.
O Lord my God, what soul that truly loves thee, can complain what difficulties
soever she endures, or how great a desolation soever obscures her soul, or how
great pains soever she sustaines, seeing thou, whom she loves more then her
life, and self, art always the same, beholding with an amorous, and loving eye,
the loving soul, afflicted by thee, or by thy permission, rather to try her
fidelity, then to oppress her with such a burden that might separate her from
her only beloved; for seeing nothing is dreaded by her but to be separated from
her God, she holding humility, and confidence, thou, O Lord, wilt never permit
her to be overcome. For thou make the quarrel thine own thus fought by us,
and the victory ours, though indeed gained by thee, not by our own selves. O
how happy am I in thy Power, and Glory? Verily, though I were to return to my
own nothing, yet I could not account my self void of an infinite happiness,
seeing my God, who is more mine then ^ am my own, would remain, and be the same
in all Wisdom, and Majesty; Th^s is the repose of my labor, and the crown of
my glory, in which I will exult in my greatest calamities, and miseries, O Love
let me live in, and to thee, and die to all created things whatsoever! O Love,
Love, live, reign, and wholly possess my soul! Consider not, O my God so much
what I am, and have been, as what I desire to be. O Lord, my God, and all my
Good.

THE XVI. CONFESSION.
O Lord my God; Father of the poor, and true comforter of all afflicted souls;
be merciful to my desolate heart, and stir it up to perfect love of thee,
that I may simply seek thee, and sigh after thee my beloved absent, and not for
the sorrow I feel at the present. Let me long to embrace thee with the arms
of my soul, and think it little to endure any misery in body, or soul, to be at
last admitted into the boosom of my Love, fairest, and choicest of thousands.
Let all fall down, and adore my God, the glory of my heart. Let the sound of
his Praise be heard to sound, and resound over all the earth.

O when shall my soul, having transcended it self, and all created things, be
firmly united to thee, the beloved of my heart, resting in thee, not in thy
gifts or graces, and neither desiring, nor taking any satisfaction in any work,
or exercise whatsoever, but in all pains, temptations, contempts, de^olations,
pouerties, and miseries either of body, or mind, conforming my self to thy
sweet will for time and eternity, who as justly as ever thou did any thing,
may condemn my soul eternally to hell, from which nothing but thy mere
mercy were able to save, and deliver me; and daily I should incurr this
sentence, if thou did not out of thy goodness ever help, and protect me, thy
sinful seruant^

This only I desi^, this only I ask, that I may in all things praise thee, and
that I may desire no comfort, but to be able without all comfort, human, or
divine, to be true to thee, and not offend thy Ha^osty.

THE XVII. CONFESSION.
TO whom but to thee, my Lord should I fly in all temptations, and Crosses,
whose arms are open to embrace, all repentant sinners, and whose hands are
lifted up to give a sweet benediction to all in misery; If I either had, or
desired to have any friend, or comforter but thee, I could not with confidence
fly into thy bos^ome for succor in this which is now fallen on me. I^ ever thou
had rejected any that hoped iu thee, I might fear; but as it is, I will sing
in my affliction with tea^es in mine eyes to thee, and never leave to hope in
thine abundant mercy.

Is it much that I serve thee, whom all creatures are bound to serve? and we
are so happy in being subject to thee, that no lib^r^y is to be compared to the
happiness of depending of thee.

THE XVIII. CONFESSION.
WHEN thou art present, O my God, then my heart reioiceth, and in pea^e sings
thy praises; but when thou hidest thy beawtifull face, my soul becomes
exceedingly obscured, and troubled; yea even overwhelmed in darkness, and
misery, in which case long remaining (which is most justly permitted by thee
for my humiliation) what shall I do to lift up my soul to thee, but as one sick
with love of her absent beloved? to speak with him it is impossible, the
distance of place is so great; but yet she may hear others who speak of him,
which a little mitigateth her misery, though while he is absent al is irksome
to her, because the delay afflicts her heart; But yet, is she without all
comfort? No; for she may write to, and of him; and if none will carry it to her
dear beloved, it shall remain by her, that he may see at his return, how she
languished for love, and could take comfort in nothing that all creatures could
offer, or propose to her soul, while she possessed not what she only desired;
her life by love being more with her beloved, then where she lived; for which
cause, she hears, and yet minds not what is said, unless perhaps they treat,
feelingly of her absent love, and speak in his praise; She sees, and yet
cannot take comfort in what she beholds; She sleeps, but her heart waketh;
and in fine while she cannot enjoy her beloved, nothing can satisfy her unquiet
heart. Thus my God even sensual, and unreasonable love transporteth a reasonable
soul; But if natural love be of that force, what does that soul feel, whom
thou have wounded with thy pure Love? And of what power is that love that is
seconded by thee, who art the fountain of all true Love, and sweetness? What
shall I say of a soul yt has tasted how sweet our Lord is? Verily she yet
living, dies a thousand deaths, because she sees herself so far from
possessing thee my God, whom none can see, and live; nor none enjoy as thou art
in thy self, till thou free her of the heavy, and sinful burden of flesh, and
bloud^ And allthough thou do admit her longing, and sighing after thee
alone, to, I know not what, nor can I expres, the unspeakable joy, and
delights, which I say thou some times admittest her to; (therein not like to
the lovers in this world, who oftimes reject where they are most beloved) yet
out of thy care of her, thou suddenly turnest away thy face, at which till she
love thee for thy self, she will become troubled, and too too impatient in the
delay which thou make of returning to her again; the which if she bear with a
resigned mind, making thy will her law, above all the desires of her heart, and
sit solitary like the turtle dove, thou willt in good time assuredly return,
and being absent wilt be present to hear her prayers, and see her tears shed
for the sorrow she conceiueth to offend thee her desired beloved, whom she
would love withal her heart, with all her soul, and all her strength, and
praise thee day, and night without ceasing, as it beseemes a soul languishing
with thy love.

THE XIX. CONFESSION.
REMEMBER, O my God, that thou madst me for to love thee. Why therefore do
thou permit me to offend so sweet a Goodness? Although none do find thee in an
extraordinary manner in the bottom of their souls, but those that serve thee
my God for Love, and walk by the way of the Cross, yet I do confidently
affirm, that thy yoke, and burden, thy Law, and thy Cross, are not by far so
heavy, grievous, and burden ^ome, as be the pain^ul ways of ^in, which seem
^o be sweetened with some delights^ but in the heart it proves more bitter then
gall; whereas thy yoke being born by a truly loving soul, is many times heavy
when thou leauest her, thereby to show her, how little she can do, or suffer of
her self, and that she may glory in thee, and not in her own power, and humble
herself, and not prefer her^elf before others; when I say thou please to
leave her thus as it were forlorn, she feels indeed a great burden, and
nothing can comfort her, till thou her desired, and only beloved return. For
she having forsaken all for thee, and having tasted of thy sweetness, says
with the Prophet; Psalm. ^. 8.37
Turn away mine eyes that they see not vanity; least like a dog she return to
her vomit; and after having had a glimering of thy light, she, because she
feared she should not be able to sustain thy chastisements and should forgett,
and loose herself by these tribulations, and desirous that she might be happily
enabled to en^er the more fully into thee, and fearing (I say) her own frailty,
she thus again cries out to thee by these other words of the Psalmist,
saying; Pas. 187.2.
Domine Deus salutis meae; in die clamaui and nocte coram te. O Lord God of my
salvation, day, and night have I cried after Thee. For who but thy self can
comfort a soul that indeed neither seeks nor desires any thing but thee my
God? O when shall I spend all my strength, and forces in singing thy Praises!
Who would set their hearts upon any thing but thee, seeing thou have made all
other things so hard to be obtained, that we might seek only thee, for whom we
were made, and whose Love we may more easily obtain then any thing else
whatso^uer? O let me Love thee, who only for that end did create me! We
would have that which is worth nothing, and many times greiue for the loss of
that which would but cause us perplexity, and trouble to have; In the mean
time neglecting that which thou so infinitely desire to bestow upon us, to
wit, thy love, then which noth^ng is so good, or sweet, or that brings such
true peace to the soul.

THE XX. CONFESSION.
WITHOUT pain, it is impossible (O my most Amiable God) to live in love. But
if the difficulties which thy true friends, and servants feel, were weighed
with the miseries of those, who rather seek to please themselves, and others
then thee- there would be found an infinite dis^parity. For thy yoke is sweet,
and thy burden light to the simple, and humble, and to those who serve thee
for love, and whose joy thou thy self art, and who nothing else but thee, my
God, do se^k for, in time, or eternity, These I say, are despised, contemned,
afflicted, pained, tempted, troubled, and many times sit sorrowful with a
heavy heart, and sad countenance; But thy will being their law, and thy
disposition their consolation, I may boldly affirm, that in all this they
suffer nothing, in comparison of the fond^ lovers of this world; because thou
being ever more present to them then they to themselves, do when thou see
thy time refresh their souls with the light, and comfort of thy grace; yea
seeming to be even prodigal of thy sweetness, to such as abide faithful to
thee in their tribulations, and hope, confide, and glory in thee, and not in
themselves, and who take occasion in all they see, hear, suffer, overcome, to
humble themselves under thy mighty hand, and bless, and praise thy Justice,
and Mercy in all things whatsoever; Amongst which number admit me poor, and
contemptible sinner, to thy greater glory (for this thy Mercy) from all
creatures, for ever and ever Amen.

THE XXI. CONFESSION.
O My Lord, and my God, remove al impediments between thy Goodness, and my poor
soul, that I may love thee, who only deseruest all love, and honor. Give me an
humble, and peaceful heart, that thou may inhabit therein, as thou desire
Suppres in me by thy sweet Grace the sin of pride which makes me as yet so
odious to thy Divine Majesty. O if we did but by true Humility abase our
selves, what beams of true light would shine in the bottom of our souls! O
what amity is there between thy Divine Majesty, and an humble soul! Nothing but
Humility could have drawn thee down to the earth; and only Humility can make us
capable of being drawn by ^hee up to heaven. The truly humble conuers
familiarly with thee, and thy Saints; They presuming nothing of themselves can
do all things in thee who strengthnest them. And thou art so chary, and tender
of the humble, that what concerns them, thou esteemest to concern thy own
self, and even thy own heart; And they thinking they do nothing, do by thee do
all things. Many unknown to the world^ and of no esteem wi^h it, shall before
thee have the honor, and mer^t in the next world, of that which no^ other men
boast of, and attribute to themselves For the humble living still in their own
nothing, give all glory to thee, by whom only all good is performed, in the
mean while thou enriching them of thy mere Mercy with thy Merits. O happy
exchange, thin^ for ours, dirt for the most pure gold What is all we can do?
Verily nothing. Enrich me therefore poor beggar with somewhat of thine; At the
feet I lay whatsoever thou give, o^ have given me: Give, or take away (...)
thou please, so thou do not blot m^ out of the book of life. Open to me
knocking at the door of thy Mercy. I have been five and twenty years (this
signifies her age at the, writing heerof, as that she was then five and twenty
years old) in my infirmity of most loathsome sins; behold my misery, and
take pity upon me Son of David! I defiled that ^oul that was made to thy
own Image, and liknes; have compassion on her, who has no other friend, or
comforter, but thy self the only desired of my heart. For thy own sake be
propitious to my sin for it is much. Nothing that I have done can I alleadg to
thee, which has deserved any reward in thine eyes; Only desires, of which
many burn in hell, they being little without good works. Give her to drink who
withers away for want of thee the fountain of al sweetness. I will power out my
soul before thee, that at least I may comfort my self with relating to thee my
sins, and miseries. Behold all my ennemies triumph over me, of whom most
easily in all temptations they get ^he victory. Fight for me; or else I know not
what will become of me; give me true Humility by which all things are easily
overcome, and all thou exactest, most perfectly accompl^shed by us thy
Majesty's poor creatures. Give thy self to me^ who has nothing of her own to
offer thee; and if thou give me thy self, I am as rich as I desire to be; and
if thou should besto^ upon me all thou have, or can create, it would be
little to me, unless I possessed thee. By thy felf I Praise thee, whose name
does not be-seeme the mouth of a sinner. O let me Love, or not live! I give my
self to thee, whom alone I wish for, and desire with all the forces of my
heart, and soul. O my God, how near thou art to us, ready to hear and receive
our prayers and petitions? Behold thy s^ee^ providence shows it self in all
things! O how long shall my God be thus ^orgotten by creatures! When will thou
by Love be by all sought after, as thou ought to be by us?

THE XXII. CONFESSION.
O My Lord, let all things praise thee! Let thy just will be our law. Let
subjects humbly obey in, and for thee. For inferiors contending, and
withstanding their Superiors in that thou would have them obey in,
is most odious in thine eyes, and nothing they can do will please thee, unless
they will hear thy voice as well by others, as from thy self. For it is not so
much the greatness of the action that thou regardest, as the being don by us in
that manner thou would have it don by us, and in nothing can we obey thee as
we ought to do, unless we first regard, and intend thee in that which by us is
accomplished; and a Superior reflecting on his own authority, rather then on
what in thy behalf he ought to exact; in that case or cases, and rather on what
by his power he can command, then on what according to thy pleasure were best
to be done, rath^r governs in his own power then in thine, and the effect
(unless it be very straight and right between his subiect^ hearts, and thee)
will consequently be more human then divine; and the Superiors while sensible
of their honor abusing the power given by thee, do yet loose what they would
have. For their subjects often looking upon rather what is defective in the
Superior, then upon their own duty, both of them fail in their duties to thy
dishonor, who so sweetly have disposed of all things, if we did not pervert
thine order, with seeking, not thee, and thine honor, but our own, and our
selves, from which misery bless us, I beseech thee for thine own sake, that
thou mais^ be glorified both in the Commanders, and the Obeyers.

THE XXIII. CONFESSION.
O How happy are those thou instructest in thy Law, and in whom it goes
straight between their souls and thet. For their only care is to please and
praise thee in all things. These humbly obey for thee, and see how dangerous it
is to resist thy will in any thing how little soever. But very much must we
strive to humble our selves, if we desire to know, and stand unto the things
that are exacted of us by thee. For nothing is able to inlighten our blindness,
but thy Grace shining in an humble soul. If we knew never so much and could do
wonders, if we had never so great guifs of nature and grace,
yet could we not thereby become pleasing to thee, unless withal we were
diligent in the exercise of true Humility. O give me this Gift! For none of
himsef is able to attain to it. My God, make me truly humble that I may be
wholly thine. Let me by Love adhere to thee, that all impediments may be removed
between my soul, and thee. Let all created things be to me as if they were not,
as to their becoming any impediment between my poor soul, and thy Godnes, that
so I may not be hindered by any thing from being united to thee. For this thou
maidst our souls, that by thy Grace we might return to thee, whom by sin we
had straied from, and that humbly seeking to Love thee, and using all things
created only to this end, that we may at last find, and possess ^hee, who only
art able to satiate us; and therefore miserable are we, when we seek any things
beside thee, from which doing I beseech thee defend us. Amen.

THE XXIV. CONFESSION.
NOn in solo pane viuit homo, sed in omni verbo quod procedit de ore Dei. Math.
4. 4.
These are thine o^^ words, my Lord, which I rehears before thee (to whom ^
power out my heart and my soul) ^ith unspeakable joy, hoping that ^hy word shall
be a light unto my feet, that I may avoid the ginnes and snares, which the
world, the ^^esh, and the devil do lay to catch and entrap my sinful, and
weak ^oul. Thy words indeed are sweet because thou speak Peace to the heart,
and give by them strength ^o the soul. It is well known to thee why I do thus
dilate my self in speaking and writing to thee, my Lord and my God, rehearsing
to thee, to whom all things are manifest, the desires, intentions, and
afflictions, or comforts of my heart. For as thou ^ell know, if I should not
when ^ enjoy some more interior light set down in writing some thiugs which I
may peruse at other times that ^re of obsurity, I should be apt to forget to
praise thee,
yea and eue^ wither away with the grief and anguish which by thy sweet
permission ouerwhelmeth my soul; be th^^ blessed for all; who take away (...)
beseech thee, or give, as it best plea^seth thee, from thy poor seruant^ only
deprive me not of thy Grace^ So I may Love thee, I care not wha^ happens to
me. Let thy will be done for time, and eternity. Roo^ out of my soul that pride
which makes me so far from being tha^ thou would have me to be. My desire
is great to Praise, love, honor, and truly serve thee; but my power is so
little, that none has been less faithful to thee, then I; But where does the
liberality of thy infinite merc^ extend it self more willingly, the^ where
there is greatest poverty an^ misery? Though I be poor yet m^ Lord is rich;
though I be in all blindness, as to the discerning of trut^ yet my Lord is
light it self. To him therefore I will approach, that in his light I may see
light. I will beg of thee, that I may become capable of gloriyng in thy
riches, and then nothing shall be wanting to me, see^ng my Lord possesses in
himself all good things. Be thou my Lord what ^hou art, and I a miserable
sinner casting mine eyes upon the earth do cry to thee to be merciful to my
sins. I sitting here in the ^hadowe of death, morn, and lament, that I have
made no more have to conclude an everlasting ^eague and peace with my Lord God,
to whom now my soul does aspire day and night without ceasing. O my Lord when I
remember what ^hou have done for me, I faint and fail to see how ungrateful
for it I have been and am to thee! What did thou mean to help me, and
^ecall me from my sins, when I least thought of thee? And not content with
that, R. F. Baker
thou did also by means of a faithful servant of thine, make my state which
was so heavy ^ burden to me through my fault, and ignorance, to become so
delightful to me, that I may and do truly acknowledge, that thy yoke of
Religion is sweet above all the de^lights, and pleasures of the world, and thy
burden so light, that crosses pains, afflictions internal, and ex^ternal
born, as thy burden are most light and easy, and cause more true peace to my
heart, then I can expres, which be it said to thy honor: and grant me to humble
my self in all, that I may grow still more and more pleasing to thee, who art the
only desire of my heart, and comfort of my soul.
Let his instructions of whom I speak to thee, according to his desire still
more and more inflame my love unto thee. Be thou all in all, and above all,
unto me. If thou teach not my soul to love, in vain is the endeavor of man
speaking and preaching to me. Let me ^eare thee by him, and let me not so
harken to him without; that I grow deaf to thee who art within. Thy words are
works. Either speak by others for our good, or by t^y self in the most interior
of our soul. O happiness, that there should be such a capacity in us of having
relation to thee in all things! Al things created may fail us; but thou who
only can fatiat our hearts, can never change or alter, but art still the
same, and thy years shall not fail. Thou teach a soul true Humility and
solid virtue. In thee nothing is neglected; thou art the Maiester of
Perfection. Thou teach the simple, humble, and loving soul thy ways and
give her hidden Manna, in the strength of which she may walk even to the house
of her God where she shall praise him for ever and ever. Qui ambulat
simpliciter, ambulat confidenter; who walks simply, walks confidently; if
we love thee, all will cooperat to good, which grant to thy own Praise. Amen.

THE XXV. CONFESSION.
Io. 8. 2
OMnis populus venit ad Iesum, and sedens docebat eos. All the people came
Jesus, and he sitting taught them. Can I hear and consider these words
written by thy best beloved Disciple, and not even melt into tears of joy? If
indeed any had been by thee my Lord rejected, I might have feared, and that
most justly, remembering my past, and present sins. But to put me out of
fear, and doubt, thy holy Evangelist says, Omnis all. To thee therefore I will
fly, and of thee I will learn, how I may Please, Praise, and love thee, and how
by true Humility, I may dye to my self and all created things: Hereby wholly to
live to thee my all, and only good. Thou know that my soul without ceasing
does long after thee, and to see itself free from all that which is a
hindrance to my perfectly loving thee. O^ Love of my Lord God, how forcible art
thou in a pure soul? O who will give thee to me, that my heart may be purged,
and purified, thereby to become a pleasing habitation for my God? O Lord, who
art Goodness it self; can there be found any joy, comfort, or true content in
any thing but thee? Can there I say? for as for me; far has it been from thee
to permit any thing but thy self to be sweet to me. O all ye that think it a
burden to be obliged by your Profession to tend to great Perfection, and fear
the punishment of our doing the contrary, raise up your hearts,
and remember what it is that our Lord exacteth of you by this your Profession!
and this as it may seem at first a severe exaction, so remember well, and
consider (I say) what it is, and your hearts will rejoice, that fear our Lord.
It is, O it is, to love, without bounds or measure; It is to leave your self,
that you may find God; It is to fly from the world that you may hear our Lord
speaking peace to your soul; It is to submit, and subject your self wholly to
him whose will none can resist, but as they are permitted by him; It is to be
subject to every living creature for him, who submitted himsef to the death of
the Cross, that we might become capable of enjoying him! This is that he
exacteth of us, who have dedicated our souls wholly to him; This is that he
requires, which though at first it seem a burden to perform, yet that which
seems so, is indeed quite otherwise,
as we shall find in effect, if we perform that out of love, which out of his
love to us, he exacteth of us. For what is sweeter then to love? Yea and to
love him, whom the more we love the more it becomes delightful to us to love;
the more strict our obligation is to him the lighter is our burden we have to
bear; For he doing all that he has done for us to bring us into this state to
oblige us to love, does also, if we be not the hindrance, oblige himself to
give us this Divine love of his, which is able to unite a poor contemptible
creature to his Divine Majesty, whom we are not worthy to name. O sweet and
most desirable yoke! well may thou be said to be sweet, thou bringing true
and perfect liberty. For love makes light all burdens, and sweetneth al
labors; and to them that love, it is easy to suffer any adversities for their
loueds sake! O let me being obliged by thee to love, let me, I say, through thy
mercy obtain this love of three, which makes a soul in all things grateful, and
faithful to thee! Let me not offend thee in my miseries, and then come as many
as pleases thee; for I account that only a misery, to wit, to offend thee. Let
all things praise thee, and let me in all praise thy Divine Majesty, with them
that love thee. Behold, Fire, Sea, Snow, Thunder, Lightning, Hail, and ^he
Spirits of storms do thy will; and yet I in all contradict it, who am capable
of thy love, and am invited to love so many ways by thee my God. O let this thy
love wholly posses my soul, that all that is within me may bless thy holy Name!
I renounce into thy hands all that is in me contrary to this thy love; Let it
wholly consume me that I may be wholly turned into love, and that nothing else may
be desired by me. Let me be drowned, and swallowed up in that of Divine love,
in which my soul may swim for all eternity, never more by sin to be separated
from thee. O when will this day come, that I may return to thee my beginning!
When will thy Glory appear? When shall death be swalowed up in victory, that I
may without ceasing Praise thee my God, whose name I write with no small
comfort, though otherwise I be so dry, that I can scarce think upon thee. To
hear th^e named, or to write to, or of thee, refreshes my soul in all her
misery, and to it I fly from the thoughts, fears, and cares which as thou
know often oppres me for my humiliation, who for my pride deserve justly to
be rejected for ever by thee; But in such case I hope both living and dying,
that thou my Lord art my God, my Mercy; and what is wanting to me, I shall
abundantly posses, if I confide only in thee, which grant that I may not fail
to do, who only art to be Adored for all eternity. Amen.

THE XXVI. CONFESSION.
ERant appropinquantes ad Iesum Publicani, Luk 1.1.
and peccatores, vt audirent illum? There were sinners and Publicans
approaching to Jesus that they might hear him. This is writ in the Gospel of
this day my Lord, which does much comfort my sinful soul, flying to thee for
help, and succor in the necessities wherein I daily languish. For none did
thou ever reject, neither sick, as witness the Leapers, and diverse others which
were abhorred by men for their loathsome diseases, nor the deformed, nor the
blind, nor the lame, nor the poor and contemptible, no nor the sinners whose
loathsome sins made their souls much more deformed in thy pure eyes, then any
discase could make a body in the eyes of the beholders. But why do I presume to
speak to my God in this simple manner? verily my Lord, only presuming of the
most abundant fountain of thy mercies, do I thus refresh my soul with
recounting these things before thee because these places in the Ghospel which
treat so particularly of thy receiving, and forgiving sinners does particularly
appartain to me, who having among them found grace in this kind before thee, I
do likewise in these things I read, find that which puts me in hope of the
continuance of thy Mercy. Behold I desire now to convert my heart wholly to thee,
and to become totally in all things subject to thy Divine Majesty. Let thy Grace
affist me. For it is not any thing I can do, can save me. The Angel that has
care of me, praise thee for me, and assist me with his intercession for me. Thy
Mother has been indeed a Mother to me (for which be she honored for all
eternity, as it beseems so great an humility to be) she vouchsafing to take
pity on me poor miserable sinner, for all which Praise be to thee my God and
All, for all eternity. Amen.

THE XXVII. CONFESSION.
PAtientia pauperum non peribit in finem. Ps. 9. 19.
The patience of the poor shall not perish in the end. O Lord, my God, seeing
the way of the Cross is the way that al in this life must walk, of what state,
or dignity soever they be; none exempted from suffering, some in body by
pains, and sickness; some by poverty, and want of necessaries; some by loss of
friends; some by the disloialty of such whom they confided in;
some by loss of their goods by fire, wars, and the like, and some by their own
indiscretion, vnwarines, and want of foresight falling into disgrace; some by
setting their affection where it is rejected, grow desperate mad; and some
thereby living in perpetual discomfort become woeful murderers of themselves;
some fortune frowning upon them, have al things go contrary to their desire;
and in fine, no place, no person, nor any condition can be free from suffering
in this miserable life. But shall we think this was ordained to be thus by thee,
by chance, or because thou do not love what thou have made? No, God forbid we
should ever think so; but that which made thee ordain it so, was only to the
end that we being proved or tried^ as gold in the furnace, should thereby
become capable of thy pure love; the which if we could obtain, easy would it be
to suffer any thing which thou permittedst to happen unto us. For as for some
of the Crosses, which happen in this life, we are the cause of them our selves;
and by them we not only suffer pain, but also detriment in our souls; because
they proceed from our yiedling to sin. and giving way to our passions, and in
ordinat affections, thereby becoming a slave to sensuality; over which we should
be absolute masters, if we did, as we ought, concur with thy grace. And
verily, my God, to whom I speak and write with much content to my soul, thou by
this means inlightning me with that divine truth which leads in some sort to
thy self, and much inflameth my heart with a most ardent desire of thee the only
desire of my soul, to whom I1 aspire day and night, without ceasing, in my
simple man^r: Verily I say that I am ignorant how it is possible to proceed
with any confidence, or comfort in any thing, if our foundation be not founded
in thee by a sincere intention. For til I resolved, what difficulties soever
there by I endured, to make thy will mine own and thy Disposition, my
consolation, I found no stability in any thing,
or exercise whatsoever;
and since that time I have found certeinty and quiet in all the uncertainty of
contrary occurrence. For if thou be intended in all our actions, what should we
fear^ For we only intending and desiring thy honor in all things, how can we
doubt but that this by thee in all things will be accomplished, seeing that which
thou do desire and will we should seek, and intend (to wit they honor) which
is only aimed at by us? Can we imagine thou will sail on thy part, we desiring
to do what lies in us? No, No, but con^idently we may hope, that nothing shall
be wanting to us; and thou kwnowst, my Lord God, that when any thing happens,
which seems so to derogate from thy divine honor, that it greiueth my heart,
thou presently quietest me with these words saying to my soul. Psalm. ^5 ^1.
Vacate and videte quoniam ego sum Deus, exaltabor in gentibus, and exaltabor
in terra. Be quiet, and see that I am God: I shall be exalted among the
Gentiles, and shall be exalted in the earth. With these words, I say, thou
comfortest my soul. For though I have desired to make an exchange with ^hee,
that I may take only care to seek thy honor in all things, committing the care
of my welfare to ^h^e, yet in those things, which happen as I think contrary to
thy honor,
I ought to conform my will to thy sweet disposition, or permission, and not
disquiet my soul under any pretense whatsoever. For the quiet and humble heart
is the place where thou delightest to dwell. Thou who art the God of Peace,
give me that ^rue love of thee, which only brings true Peace, and bless this
thy little flock, and especially those in it ^ho are by their patience and
discretion helpers and furthers to true peace and concord in this poor Convent
of thine; My most dea^e Lady ^hy Mother, and mine by thy sweet Mercy, pray to
thee for this house of hers, as also our good Angels, ^ho have care of us. Saint
Michael ^ho was so zealous of his honor, Saint Raphael who guides us in the
way of thy Law, Sanit Gabriel, who brought us the happy tidings of thy coming
into this world, to reconcile us sinners to thy heavenly Father, Our most holy
Father S. Benedict, our Mother S. Scholastica, as also S. Joseph, S. John, S.
Thomas, and S. Gertrude, in whose heart ^hou did delight to dwell; and also my
beloved Father S. Augustine, whom thou have given me in a particular manner, to
be a help to me in doubts and fears, and an incouradgement by his books to
hope for pardon for my innumerable sins, and as a fire are al his words to
inflame me to seek after and aspire to thy divine love, and to wish only, that
that may wholly posses my soul, which grant for his sake, as also thine own,
who art Blessed for ever. Amen.

THE XXVIII. CONFESSION.
INCINA cor meum Deus in testimonia tua; Psalm. 118.
Ecce concupui mandata tua; in aequitate tua viuifica me-Incline, my God, my
heart to thy testimonies, and in thy truth quicken my soul. For behold my soul
does exceedingly covet to perform thy law. For thy law is truth, and the
effect thereof is Justice, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. When I
remember how I have strayed from thee by sin, I become ashamed before th^e. But
when I consider thy Mercy I hope still (notwithstanding what is past) to become
through thy grace, which so sweetly prevented me, pleasing to thy Divine
Majesty. O Lord, inlighten my soul obscured^ by sin and ill customs; inlighten
it that I may walk the way of Justice, and Truth, which is the way whereof thou
speak by Esaie the Prophet, Esaio 35. 8.
in which a fool cannot err, as he affirmeth^ O let me by true Humility become
a fool according to his meaning, let me become as a bittle child, that I may be
capable of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven! Certainly we ought to live so
subject to thee, that we have no election of any thing, as pretending our
selves, for time, or eternity; And also we ought to have in our soul such a
relation to thee, that in thy lig^t, in thy truth, and wholly according to thy
will, we perform all we do, and out of that respect omit what we omit.
O my God, let me, I say, walk this way of Love which knows not how to seck
itself in any t^ing whatsoever! Let this Love wholly posses my soul, and heart;
which I beseech thee may live, and move only in, and out of a pure, and sincere
love to thee, who above all ought to be loved and desired. Let this fire, which
thou camst into this world to send, and willedst it should burn, consume me
wholly into it self, that forgetful of my self, and al created things, I may be
mindful of thee, my Lord, and my God. It is thy p^omise, that where sin ^ath
abounded, gra^e shall superbound, that the riches of thy Merry may appear and
show itself to the Glory of thy holy Name; which Mercy, I beseech thee, extend
itself ^o me, that I may praise thee for ever and ever. O that thy pure love
were ^o grounded and established in my heart, that I might sigh, and pant
without ceasing, after thee, and be ^ble in the strength of this thy Love, ^o
live without al^ comfort and con^olation, human, or divine, thereby ^o become
the more conformable to ^hee, the beloved of my soul! O how ^appy are they that
truly love t^ee? ^ertainly, whatsoever they suffer, it ^^ very tolerable to
them, be^aus he or whose love they suffer, is their hel^er; Indeed, my Lord,
thou art a hiden God; but yet not so hidden from ^ur soul, but that in some
sort we ^aue therein according to our poor ^apacities, not only a taste, but also
sight of thee; for as even thou thy self have said; Mat. 5. 8.
Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. O sight to be wished,
desired, and longed for^ because once to have seen thee is to have learnt al
things. Nothing can bring us to this sight, but love. But what love must it be?
Not a sensible love only, a childish love, a love which seeks itself, more
then the beloved. No, but it must b^ an ardent love, a pure love, a couradgious
love,
a love of Charity, an^ humble love, and a constant love, not worn out with
labors, no^ daunted with any difficulties. O Lord give this love unto my soul,
that ^ may never more live, nor breath bu^ out of a most pure love of thee, my
All and only Good! let me love thee for thy self, and nothing else, but in an^
for thee. Let me love nothing in stee^ of thee. Cant. 1. 8.
For to give al for love is ^^ most sweet bargain; for Love is as stron^ as
death. O that this thy love might flo^ in such abundance into the har^ of al
capable thereof, that the son^ of thy love, and Praise might conti^nually be
heard through out all the earth! O what do we do loving vanity, and seeking a
lie? What do ^^e abusing the most noble capacity of our souls by desiring that
which passes away like smoke? What do ^^e loving that which is more changeable
then the Moon? Can any thing satiate our hearts but our God? Can we find true
repose out of him? ^s any thing worthy of our love, but that Goodness which is
love itself, and whom the more we love, the more we ^re able to love; because
for love, he made us capable of love? But alas, my God, my soul was in honor,
and I knew not it; I was compared ^o beasts, and by sin became like to them, or
worse then they. Is this my equital for all thy love? Is this ex^usable that my
soul made by thee ^o be delighted with the food of ^ngels (which is love)
should delight ^^-self with the bread of swine? O is ^y heart able to rehears
this before ^^ee and not through excessive grief ^reak in sunder? Could I in my
nature not abide to be di^loyall to one whom I found to be a faithful friend to
me? and can I endure to remember my disloyalty to my God? Could I with joy
undergo for my friend,
disgrace, and difficulty, and can I endure nothing for my God? Was the absence
of a dear friend intolerable to me, and can I abide to see my self cease at
any time to sigh and long after my God? O no my God, let that be far from me, I
here renounce before heaven and earth al inordinate affections to cre^tures
Place with thy own hands t^^ love in their room^ that it expelling thence al
that now is therein d^^pleasing to t^ine eyes, thou ma^^ thy sel^ wholly posses
me giving and distributing my affections, and disposing the passions of my ha^^
according to thy sweet will, which only is just, only holy and true i^ itself.
C how sinceare then are o^ affections, when we love our neig^^bour only in, and
for thee? The^^ we pity not one, and are hard hearted to another according to
the inclination of our perverse nature, but behold thee in all, and consequently
willingly serve and assist al for thy love; then we do not show our seues meek
only to our friends; but also to those by whom we suffer most contradiction,
and gladly upon all occasions extend our charity. For there is no true
friendship but that which is founded upon thee, and which is maintained without
impediment to thy love.
This is only the love of Charity: which Charity knows not how to repine, to
be angry, to be exceptious, to be inconstant, to be troublesome, to be
suspicious, or jealous; for it regards thee in all, and desires thee above
al; It takes al in good part; it wondreth not to see men exceed in words,
finding itself, so often to offend in deeds; it bears al things, it hops
al things, and it confideth in thee above al things; it wishes only that thy
will may be performed in all and by all creatures; by which means it retains
true peace in all that happens. O give me this ^hy love which works such
wonderful effects in an humble soul! Give it to me, and I will ask thee no
more. Let it posses my soul, that nothing but thy self may be loved, or desired
by me. Can thy Goodness find in thy heart to see me thus languishing for want of
thy love, seeking my self in all things, and not being able out of true love to
suffer any thing? It is true tho^ have made my soul to loath all created
things, and have showed me most plainly that all is vanity and affliction of
spirit, save to love thee, and that nothing is permanent under the Sun, ^and
that vain and inconstan^ is every creature living, so that (...) cannot, me
thinks if I would (so am I held by thee) desire the friendship, or favor of
any creature; but this is not sufficient for me; an^ therefore take pity on me
begging and beseeching grace, and mercy o^ thee; It suffiseth not me that my
sou^ refuses to be comforted, but I mus^ also remember my God, that with his
love my soul may be inflamed. Art thou ignorant that my soul having had through
thy sweet Mercy, a taste of thee, cannot find comfort in any thing but in
inioying of thee? O no, this is as al other things are, most manifest to thee;
and if thou would not have had me thus for love to importune thee, thou
would not have made me incapable of being satisfied without thee; This which
I say, I do not speak of presumption, but out of the urgent desir of my heart,
which has resolved to convert it self wholly to thee; thou who did bid me to
ask, have promised I shall re^eaue; thou who did bid me knock, ^ast promised
it shall in time con^enient be opened to me^ which ^owre, O my Lord, when shall
it be, that without ceasing I may praise ^hee, and never any more offend thee?
^Til which be granted me, I will sigh after thee, and in my heart in the
bit^ernes of my soul, I will call upon ^hee; and sometimes I will also being
enabled, and invited thereunto by thee, sing love songs to my well-beloued, who
is ever within the hearing of me^ For thou art not like the lovers o^ this
world (upon whom that love yet which is only due to thee is often bestowed)
here to day and ^ far off to morrow: No, no, thus i^ is not between thee and
thy lovers. For though thou triest them, that their love may become more pure,
ye^ thou, seeing them begin to fail vn^der their burden, do quickly ca^^
thine eyes upon them, and with t^^ sweet dew of thy Grace refreshe^ them, that
by these changes their love may grow more strong, and b^ firmly established in
thee, who ar^ that only thing which is only neces^sary for me, and which only I
re^quire of thee. Let this thy love wor^ in and by me, because thou rewarde^ no
works but thine own, and let m^ love thee, as thou would be belou^ by me, I
cannot tell how much lo^^ I would have of thee, because I would love thee beyond
all that can be ima^gined, or desired by me; be thou in this as in all other
things, my chooser for me, who art my only choice, most dear to me; Pas. 86. 3.
Glorious things are said of thee my Lord and God, the most absolute, and
amiable beawty; the more I shall love thee, the more will my soul desire thee,
and to suffer for thee. Let me love thee for thy self, and not any thing
instead of thee; and let my whole substance by thy love, and Praise be consumed
in me, that I may return pure unto thee, who be by all in Heaven, and Earth
blessed and loved fer ever and ever. Amen.

THE XXIX. CONFESSION.
O My God, my only beloved; me thinks I hear thee sweetly checking my soul
with these words; (when under what pretense soever) I pretend by my care, or
unreasonable solicitude, that more then One thing is necessary to my soul,
thereby falling into that multiplicity which is so apt to dim, and obscure our
soul, and so contrary to a pure tending to Thee our only good, and to a
removing of al impediments between our souls and thee by transcending al
created things whatsoever) these words I say) thou often speak to my heart;
Luk 24..
Quem quaeris mulier, viuentem cum mortuis? Whom do thou seek woman, one
living amongst the dead? But Lord I answer t^ee now in all desir, and hum^lity
of heart, that I seek nothing but thy felf, no gift, no comfort, or sweetness;
no friends but thy self, and thy heavenly Cittezens; no power but of wishing
that thy will may be my law; no honor but thine? no consolation but that I may
in solitude, and silence all the days of my li^e be able to live without all
consolation human, or divine, no recreation by conversation, or other business,
or employments, but so far as it is nec^ssar^ to bear up my spirit to attend
unto t^ee more seriously at convenient times, and rather let al necessary
distraction, by help of thy Grace serve, as a mere cessation; then by the
least affection to them, or comfort in them, they should become an impediment
to my aspiring to thee. For this is a rule thou know has been g^uen me by a
faithful servant of thy divine Majesty, R. F. Baker
who indeed gave me most general i^structions, that we might not be ^yed to
him, or any other creature, but might being left more free to thee, fly the
more freely with wings of Divine love,
which carries a soul even in human flesh above all that is not thy very self;
of such force is thy Grace concurring with our will, which is by nature capable
of an ^nfinite extent toward thee, when as it neither seeks, intends,
desires, wills, nor rests in any ^hing^, but the^; T^is (I say) was his
general rule that if we did not do things with affection, they would cause us
no hurtful distraction, which grant may be so unto me I beseech thee,
who am not able without much, and often diuerting my ind to indifferent
things, to attend to thee in my soul at other fitting times, and this by reason
of my great weakness of body and head. Let all this imperfection in me, humble
me and let it be no impediment to my truly loving, serving, praising thee, and
adhering only to thee, which is my only desire by all I do^ or omit. Let not my
gre^uous sins past, or present too much deiect, or trouble me; but let them
serve to humble my soul, and be a means totally to subect it to thee and al
others, so far as it is thy will it should be. Let me praise thee in all, whose
providence, and care has been so infinite great toward me thy most
contemptible creature, the which verily I may, and must confess, and
acknowledge to thee most particularly in this, that thou have so particularly,
and plainly as thou have done for my humiliation, discovered my sins unto me,
whereby I might know and confess my^ obligation to thee; and ^ith al compassion
on the sins, and imperfections of others, which they also are permitted to
fall into, that rising up, their love may be the great^r, when they remember it
before thee; And this I may add to thy greater glory, that thou did reserve
this kno^ledg of my sin^ul, and miserable state from me till by means of thy
said servant, V. F Baker
I was put into the way of love, and aspiring to thee; for else it would have
wholly dejected, and overwhelmed me be thou by all glorified and Praised for thy
Mercies to me. Amen.

THE XXX. CONFESSION.
O My Lord God, to and before whom only, I desire to power out my heart, and the
desires, affec^tions, and afflictions thereof! For thy own sake forsake not me
who desires to leave al for thee. If thou will thou can^t save me. Though I
have never to my knowledge done any thing that deserves any grace, or favor
before thee, yet merely out of thine own goodness forgive me my sins, and
have mercy on me. Let thy Mercy which without any desert of mine prevented me,
bring me to thee. Let nothing for time, or eternity but thy felf be desired by
me. Let not my soul loose, itself by resting in any thing but thee. Let me
take comfort in hearing of thee; and let al inordinate love to creatures be
rooted out of my heart by thee. Thou know for that which is past, I am heartily
sorry, and it often draws tears from mine eyes to think that their love
should have been more strong and powerful in me, then that sweet love of thine
is now, which challenges so full, and whole possession of my heart; and soul by
so many titles which none can deny to thee. Take it now therefore wholly to
thy-self, and ler me rather cease to be, then to give any part to any, but as
it shall be distributed by thine own sef; thy friends only shall be mine, that
in fine I may have only thee for my friend above all friends; take from me of
them thou give me as it best pleases thee. For so I shall come to love al in
thee,
and yet they will be, as if they were not, as to any impediment to my being
united to thee. Let me without ceasing aspire by love unto thee that I may be
lifted above my self and all created things, so to be pure, and free unto thee.
Amen.

THE XXXI. CONFESSION.
O My Lord, when I remember my innumerable sins, it seems not much to me
that I sustain these things both without and within. But yet my dear God I may
speak to thee (in the bitterness of my soul) who art my only refuge, and comfort
in affliction, and say, that thou seem to me to shut up al hope of means to
help my self, by some things which I already do, and more am like hereafter to
sustain; Of whom should I beg help but of thee, or strength to bear this to
thy honor with con^ormity to thy blessed will? Who can bestow this on me but
thy-self? Thou know that since I gave my-sef to a serious tending to thee,
I never desired the friendship or favor of any creature living. Nay, (to thy
honor I speak it) thou many times, and several ways showed me so plainly the
vncertain^y, instability, and changeablenes of al created things, that my soul
even loatheth the favor of any how good soever, neither do I wonder to see
those whom to day upon occasion I am resolute I may be confident in, to morrow
be in an humor of interpreting al I have done, or said in another sense then
indeed I meant it. This indeed thou permittest to the end we may trust in thee
alone, adhere to thee alone, and for to purge our souls of the interest, which
nature gets even in the actions which we do with best intention. Thou know^t
I neither desire nor pretend any thing, but do wish with all my soul that thy
Will be perfectly accomplished, and take this answer from thee (which I shall
anon recite) when I am too ^olicitous of my own good, or too much troubled
with the prejudice, or affliction of those thy sernants with whom I (most
vn^orthy ^inner) live, who are in thee al without exception most dearly beloved
by me, with this answer following of thine, I am (I say) put in mind of my
dury, where thou say; Quid ad ^e? tu me sequere; Io 21. 22.
What is that to thee, do thou follow me; And I answer thee my Lord, that as
for me, it is good for me to adhere to thee, who art that One thing, which is
only necessary. Thou alone suffisest me, and al things bu^ thy-self shall be to
me, as if they were not, that I may ^ind and enjoy thee, after whom my soul
does pant and sigh without ceasing, longing after t^ee with all my forces, who
art my al and only good. No rhirst in any though never so weary and tired, can
be so great for want of that which naturally quenches our thirst when we pant,
and are dry with heat and thirst, as is the thirst which my soul does sustain
sighing, and panting after thee the living fountain, which yet I cannot enjoy,
til my soul be set free from this corruptible flesh, but the more I sigh, the
more I am delighted to sigh after thee, whom^ I would so fain enjoy, The more I
love, the more I am yet able farther to love thee; the more I deny my-self, the
more sweet it be. comes to me to suffer for thee the only beloved of my soul.
Woe is me that ever I offended such a good^nes as art thou my God! Certainly my
sins deserve to be punished in an extraordinary manner, because I committed them
more wilfully then ordinary. Such was the carefulnes of thy servant my natural
father, who was so careful that I should be kept out of al occasions of sin,
that I might (considering the nature also which thou gave me) have lived very
innocently; But what through my greater fault, and negligence is due to me for
my sins, be, it supplied by the superaboundance of thy Mercy, which I will
from hence^orth with all my forces extol; and I beseech thee remember thy true
servant my said Father, who through his care prevented my further evil; V. F.
Baker
and also I offer to ^hee him whose happy instructions has made thy yoke s^
s^eet, and thy burden so light to me, who as thou know found it so greiuous
and heavy before I took my instructions from him, that I was weary of the yoke,
and despaired ever to bear thy burden with any comfort or quiet, whereas
afterward being put into a course of Prayer and Mortificatio^ by him, my
greatest obligations seemed to be most most desirable burdens, for all thy
benefits be thou by all praised for ever. Amen.

THE XXXII. CONFESSION.
MAy I ask thy Majesty this question, being not worthy so much as to name or
think upon thee; May I (I say) ask thee, how it is possible that thou can
find in thy heart thus to heap benefits upon the most unworthy, vngreatful, and
contemptible of al thy creatures? Is there any sin that I have not committed, at
least by my will? Yea verily so great, and numberles do my ^ins, and
imperfections appear to me that I never read, or heard of any, whose sins
(for one reason, or other) could be compared to mine. Shall not therefore my soul
praise my God? Can any wonder to see me in all occasions fly to thee, and speak
to thee, wh^ have without any the least desert on my part thus sweetly with thy
Grace pr^uented me, and not only auerted my will from all that displeases thee,
but also drawn me so forcible to desire only thee, that my soul even loatheth
all that may any way hinder it from truly adhering to thee; and such an
inclination has my will continually toward th^e, that it cannot endure to rest
in any thing but thee alone; I would have thee alone; I desir to love; and
seek thee, esteeming al gifts,
and graces so much, and no more, as they may and do enable me to rest only in
the^ which grant I may ever do for thy own sake, who art Godnes it self, and
who be ever blessed; Amen.

THE XXXIII. CONFESSION.
O Thou who despisest not any in grief, and misery flying to thee; hear and
help me in that which is sustained by me, to whom should I fly but to thee? If
I had or desired to have any friends besides thee, thou might bid me go unto
them, and speak to them to help me, But as it is, al having forsaken me, and I
al for th^e; behold I come unto thee, not as one, who thinks herself any way
to deserve to be beheld, or heard of thee, but as one who has no other refuge
besides thee. Thy mercy, which infinity surpasses my sins, inuiteth me howrly
to come confidently to thee; These therefore are thy words, with which thou art
most willing to be challenged by thy poor servants, who by reason of their
great frailty and weakness may alleadg them in their necessities and want of
help in which they are, to thee I say who speake^^ them for our help and
comfort; No^ vos relinquam orpha^os; Petite and ac^pietis, vt gaudium vestrum
sit plenu^ Paraclitus docebit vos omnia. Io 14. 18.
Si quis ^i^ligit me, sermonem meum seruabit, and ^at^r meus diliget eum, and
ad cum v^niemus, and mansionem apud eum fac^mus. I will not leave you orphans;
A^ and you shall receive, that your joy may ^ful. The Holy Ghost will teach you ^
things. If any love me he will keep m^ word, and my Father will love him, and ^
will come to him, and will make our mansion with him: If thou will be our Father
what cause have we to complain though we be despised, and forsaken, yea and
traoden down by the whole world? But as for me I shall never be weary of saying;
it is good to adhere to my Lord God; This I will ask; this I will beg even for
thy own Jake, that thou will be my helper, defender, and refuge in all my
necessities, and do not for ever ^orsak her who is so poor, and frail of
her-sef, that she has nothing of her own doing, or suffering wherein she can
glory, or confide. If thou will not forsake me, I shall be sa^e; If thou leave
me to my-self, nothing can I expect, but utterly to perish. Let me observe al
thou exacteth of me, out of pure and sincere love neither desiring,
no nor so much, as reflecting upon other reward, then that I may be so happy,
as in all things to be conformable to thy holy will. It is a sufficient comfort
even of itself, to be tied, and bound to thee by the obligation of vows, and
to serve thee for love, and to endeauourin al to be so subject to thee, as if
it were not in our power to will, or desire any thing whatsoever. In this lies
hidden a most sweet, and peaceable life, even amidst the various changes and
alterations which this our banishment daily experienceth, which is truly
termed a warfare; in which sometimes we overcome by thy assisting grace, and
sometimes we are vanquished by our enemies the world^ the flesh, and the devil,
the which gives us occasion to acknowledge justly before thee daily our
exceeding great frailty. But this in my daily combats is my comfor^, that my
Lord and love, my only beloved and most dearly desired Lord my God, after whom
I thirst, and languish, sees and beholds me, and is nee^ to be called upon
in this my necessity. For as he loves those that fight with great couradg, and
strength, so he despises not his little children, to whom gnats and flies seem
so great enemies (for so I may term my little sufferings if I compare them to
those of his strong and faihful servants, which without changing their
countenance they most couradgiously endure, yea even before my face) that we
weep and hide our faces in his boosom, to avoid the biting, and stinging of so
small adversities. This, my God, is my case; help, and assist me that I may be
daily more strengthened, and confirmed in thee, that at last I may be that in all things thou would have me ^o be. Amen.

THE XXXIV. CONFESSION.
BEatus homo quem tu erudieris Domine, and de lege tua docueris eum. Psalm. 93
1^, 17.
Nisi quia Dominus adiuuit me, paulo minus habitasset in inferno anima mea.
Blessed is the man, whom thou shall teach O Lord, and shall instruct him in thy
law? Unless God had helped me within very little my soul had dwelt in hell. This
is my solace in sorrows, and my refreshment in labors to call upon my God and
to write unto him, so that when my soul grows more heavy, and dull, I may in
that case read in my own writing^ as in a book, the mercies of my Lord showed
unto me, thereby to raise up my soul to a sweeter remembrance of him, whom my
heart desire thin al and above al to love, and enjoy. We may I confess being
taught this my lesson by thee, that if thou had not most powerfully helped
and delivered me my soul had dwelt in hel^ where it might most justly have no^
been, if thy mere Mercy had not hitherto delivered me, which continue to do,
my Lord, I most humbly beseech thee. For as it is said in the Psalm, unless
thou O Lord, keep my soul, in vain is my labor in defending it. Who therefore
can blame me flying unto thee, or for having in all things relation to my God my
mercy so that if I at any time grow slack in flying to him, or in calling upon
hi^ in my doubts and miseries, this which I now write lying by me, and often
being looked upon by me, may be a means to put me in mind of his former mercy,
which has been so great to me, that it cannot po^^ibly be expressed; and
whatsoever hereafter becomes of me, be the fault wholly attributed to me; for
nothing has my Lord God left undone, which might win me wholly to himself, and
make me despise my self and al created things for his love. For when I sinned,
he recalled me, and forsook me not in that my misery of offending such an
infinite goodness, so shamefully, and that also after my entry into Religion, the
happiness and worth whereof I did not yet know by which means I grew weary of
bearing therein his sweet yoke and light burden, the which is heavy only
through our fault, and not of itself. Through which default, and ignorance of
mine it grew so greiuous and intolerable to me, that I wished often it might
have been shaken of lawfully by me, pretending it was so incompatible with my
good, that I could scarsly work my salvation in this my state and Profession.
This, my God thou art witness of is true,
and so it did continue with me above two years after I had in show forsaken
the world, and the world, indeed forsaken me, but did my Lord in these biter
afflictions forsake me? No, no, but he provided such a help for me by means of
a faithful servant of his that quikly was my sorrow turned into joy, yea into
such an unspeakable joy, that it has sweetened all the sorrows which since that
time have befaln me. For as soon as my soul was set in a way of tending to my
God by Prayer, and Ab^egation, I found al my miseries pre^ently disperse
themselves and come to nothing; yea even in five weeks my soul became so
enamoured with the yoke of this my dear Lord, that if I must have made not
only four, but four thousands vows to have become wholly dedicated to him,
I should have embraced this state with more joy, and content, then ever I did
find in obtaining that which ever I most of al wished, or desired; yea and as
thou know my God, by my souls being put into a course of prayer, I seemed to
have now found a true means whereby I might love without end, or measure, and
that without any peril, or danger. For who can love thee,
my God, too much? O let me melt wholly into love, to record these thy most
abundant Mercies? Let me never be weary of singing thy Praise, who thus have
invited and drawn me (even whither I would or no) to a perfect contempt of al
created things, that I may adhere to thee above al gifts whatsoever. This I do
so particularly write down, because my frailty is so great, that I may perhaps
grow unmindful of thee, notwithstanding all this that thou have done for me,
which I beseech thee for thine own sake never permit me to be, that I may
praise and love thee without ceasing, who art my God blessed for ever and ever.
Amen.

THE XXXV. CONFESSION.
Io. 3. 21.
QVi facit veritatem^ venit ad lucem, vt manifestentur opera eius quae in Deo
sunt facta. O Lord what is more amiable, and desirable then Truth. That is it
which powerfully prevails in all things, and no wonder, seeing thou art
Truth. Well may Truth be oppressed,
thou permitting it, but suppressed itself can never be, because as thou
say, heaven and earth shall fail; but thy word shall not fail. He that loves
verity, and does desi^ to live to thee comes to the light? And what is this
light? Is it not thy-self my God? Yes verily. For in thy light only can we see
light. By faith we are made capable, or disposed for this light. For as thou
say; My just lives by faith. Romans 1.17.
By this light we are strengthened in hope, and inflamed in charity, and by
appr^aching to the^, who artour true light and life, we obtain a light which
teaches us to do our works in thee, and for thee. In his light we discover our
own nothing, and perceive we are poor, and frail of ^ur-selues above al we can
imagine, ^ conceive; and by it we plainly ^^rceaue, that whatsoever is well ^one
by us, is as truly to be attribu^ed to thee, as if it had been don without any
concurrence of ours ^ith thee; and that it is as just our ^ill should in all
things obey thee, and that without any challenging ^f reward ^or it of thee
(but only so ^r as it is due by thy mere promised ^ercy) as it is certain,
that without ^ee we could neither live, nor be. ^lso in this lig^t we see in
some sort as it were in a looking glass) how ^reat, and good a God we have,
and ^^at he is more present to us then ^e are to our selves, which makes ^y
soul exult and rejoice amidst ^^e troubles, tumults, and various ^hanges which
the difficulty of pas^ons, and cross actions, and the ^^stability of ^uman,
and transi^ory things daily and howrly cause (...) my soul. For who can mourn
for want of a friend, who has her only friend always present with her?
who can choose but hope seeing he is her helper, for whose love, she fights
against flesh and blood, yea and against the power of darkness? But how does she
fight? Not as one confiding in her own strength, but in his help, whose love
has made her proclaim war with all that would hinder her from being true to
this her only beloved. To those that love, what can be wanting, seeing love is
able to sweeten al labors, and lighten al burdens? As for me therefore I will
sing without ceasing in my heart; It is good for me to adhere to my God, and to
put my whole trust in him, Psalm. 72.
For vain is the help of man. After him I will sigh; to him I will sing. For my
offenses I will weep, and humble my self at the feet of al creatures, because
nothing pleases him so well, as humibity; and I will approach to my God, and
walk solicitous with him; Of him I will write, and I will not depart from him^
least darkness, and the shadow of death do apprehend my sinful foul. He shall be
my God, who am his unworthiest creature, that so no evil may have power over
me. I will long, my Lord, to be dissolved, and that I may more fully, and
perfectly enjoy the^, and never any more offend thee, who art so worthy of al
Praise, Glory, Honor, and Adoration for ever. Amen.

THE XXXVI. CONFESSION.
O My Lord, to thee I will speak, to whom yet the secrets of my heart are
otherwise most clearly, manifest; To thee I will speak, and upon thee I will call.
If thou will my Lord thou can save me. This day my Lord God; it is read of
thee in the holy Church, Mat. 9.3.
that thou did heal the man sick of the Palsy. Let me also find grace
before thee, that my diseases may by thee be cured, that so I may become
pleasing to thee. For the diseases of the mind in which I languish are much
more grievous then those of the body. For these make us but vngratful to men,
but the other make us displeasing in thine eyes. But thy goodness as it is seen
in this example together with the cure of the one, did also use to grant pardon
for the other. For thou did say to him; Thy sins are fo^giuen thee; by which
he became cured in body, and soul. This thy mercy I remember with great joy,
and comfort, and falling down at thy feet my Lord, I beg of thee, that thou will be merciful to me a sinner for thy own sake, and say unto my soul; Thy
sins are forgiven t^ee; and grant that I may now begin to live to thee, that
so by thy grace al impediments may be removed, which hinder me from loving
thee, as thou would be loved by me, which is al I wish, or desire. To this
end, I fly to thee; to this end I sigh after thee, only wishing and desiirng
that in all things, thy holy will may be perfectly^ accomplished in me for time,
and eternity. If I should not howrly approach to thee, who art the only true
light, darkness, and the shadow of death would ouerwhelm me, and make me
incapable of this thy light, which leads to the true love of thee. O how
happy were I, if I could truly say; Anima mea in manibus meis semper, My soul
in my hands always, that so my soul might truly hear, and follow what my Lord
speaks to my heart For thy words ate works! O give me a true contempt of
my^sef, that I may die to all that the world esteems, or desires! For I find
where I seek my self, there I am caught as it were in a snare, and where I
for^ake my self, there I become more, and more capable of that true liberty of
spirit, which carries the soul above it self and al created things, that i^
may more perfectly be united to thee. For this is thy will, that by true
Abnegation in all things both external, and internal, and by a total subjection
to thee, both as concerning our selves and al others in any thing that can be
wished by us, we should enjoy a certain divine heavenly peace amidst the
crosses, passios, contradictions, andmutabilities which are incident to our
life in this warfare of ours. For the more sound a soul is in the practice of
this doctrine of thine,
of denying herself in all, and following thee by proposing no other end to her
self in any thing, but thy self alone,
the more she gets, as I may say, her soul into her hands, and the less she
is moved in all things that happen either without her, or within her. For she
sees, and knows that such have ever been thy practice, and permissions about
crosses, and difficulties falling upon souls, which was and is, with and for
this intention of thine, that they of necessity must suffer, and thereby become
disposed and in some sort worthy for to enter into thy Kingdom; Neither does
the soul that attends to thee wonder at cross accidents nor at the ways, or
means by which they fall upon her, but in all of them she confideth in thee,
that they shall al turn to her greatest good. And as for the faults which she
comitteth, she humbles herself, hoping still more and more in thy merci^ful
forgiveness, and assistance. It is not strange to her to see so many and
different opinions of al men concerning the use of matters and things that of
themselves are indifferent; but remembering that as S. Paul says; Romans 1 ^^. 5.
Every man abounds in his own sense, she adhereth to thee, who art still the
same, and has relation to thee in all she does or omitteth; By which means
thou teach her (seeking simply thine honor in all things) where, when, in
what manner,
and of whom she shall ask in doubtful cases. For it is al one to her, O my God
(If thou require it) to be resolved by another, or by thy^self; But indeed in
the way of Abnegation questions are rare,
and to go forth questioning without thy sending, is but a mere
immortification, and does entangle the soul, and bring her into inconveniences
incomprehensible; and for such doing, when we so do, we cannot pass without a
bitter check for it in our int^rior by thy divine Majesty, as thou know, my
good Lord, my soul has experienced. For those souls that thou leadest by the
way of love of them I say, thou exactest, that they should make their moan,
only to thee, thou having as it were given them a pledge that thou will become
al in all, and above al to them, if they will but remain faith^ul to thee. Also
they so little desire or esteem any graces, comforts, or favors which can be
granted,
or bestowed upon them (but only so far as they are merely necessary to
maintain them in grace, and favor in thee, and only as they are thought fit
for them by thee ( whom they desire to be gratful to for all thy benefits) that
they never desire them, but wish rather to adhere to thee by pure faith,
that they may become thereby the more dear and pleasing to thee. For a as, my
Lord God, what is al thou can give to a loving soul who sigheth and pants
after thee alone, and esteems al things as dung, that she may gain thee? What
is al, I say, whilst thou give not thy-f^lf, who art that one thing which is
only necessary and which alone can satisfy our souls. Was it any comfort to St
Mary Magdalen, when she sought the^, to find two Angels, which presented
themselves instead of tbee? verily, I cannot think it was any joy unto her. For
that soul that has set her whole love and desire on thee, can never find any
true satisfaction, but only in thee. Yea comforts granted by thee make the soul
become afraid, least that by them she should the less ^a thfully serve thee;
and so far as it may stand with thy will, considering my extraordinary frailty,
I had rather serve thee without consolation, then to find, or feel that which
may make me esteem any thing of my self, or hinder me from resting only in
thee, who ar^ my God, and al my desire for ever. Amen.

THE XXXVII. CONFESSION.
THis day, my Lord, it is read in the Gospel of our Office, that thou did
send thy servants into the lanes for the poor, lame, blind, and deformed, to
co^pel them to en^ter and taste of thy supper, the which thy Mercy did so
particularly extend it self to me, that with great joy and comfort I hear it
read, and with exceeding desire of gratitude, I recount it here in the sight of
thy divine Majesty. For first, who could be more deformed in body and soul then
I? and yet thou did not despise me; and Secondly, who could have less desir
to enter into holy Religion, which is the place where we may most abundantly
taste and see, how sweet our Lord is, then my frozen and stupid soul? And yet
thy Goodness compelled me to enter. O who will give me power, and ability
sufficiently to extol thy most a boundant Mercy, which in this and al other
things thy sweet Goodness has showed toward me! Blessed infinitely be my Lord
by all his creatures, My only study shall be to praise thee, and my only desir
that I may be faithful in all crosses, and miseries to thee my only beloved. Let
thy Grace flow I beseech thee upon thy servant, who with so much care, pains,
and solicitud, for thy sake endeavored to win my heart wholly to thee. Remember
him unto good according to al he has done for me; V F. Baker
He has truly made me to see and feel (though through my great fault, and
ignorance I before thought otherwise) that thy yoke is sweet and thy burden
light, which now I shall al^o being convinced by experience, acknowledge before
heaven and earth to thine honor and my confusion, who durst presume to think
otherwise. Pardon, I beseech thee therefore for thin^ own sake, this my sin
among the rest which are innumerable; and let me hereafter be a true servant
and child of thine, ^ho be blessed by all, for ever, and ever. Amen.

THE XXXVIII. CONFESSION
1 These. 5. 17.
SEmper gaudete, sine intermissione orate. Always rejoice, Pray without
ceasing. O my Lord and my God; They that truly love thee, may indeed justly
always rejoice, and without intermission praise thee! But I that daily and
^owrly offend thy diuino Majesty ought to weep and lament my sins bitterly,
sitting solitary and making my moan to thee my God, who art only able to help
and comfort me in this misery.

O when shall I become truly humble! Teach me Humility, Obedience, and Patience,
enlighten my soul, obscured by my pride, and other sins, that I may love thy
Law, and humbly embrace thy blessed will in all things. O let me be truly subject
to thee, as thou would have me, and even to al others also^ as it is exacted
by thee of me! Woe be to my soul, if daily it become not more and more obedient
to t^ee, and to others for thee. Give me true Discretion. For no virtue has
more of virtue in it, then it partaketh o^ this divine virtue. Give me true
Wisdom, which makes souls so pleasing to thee, and which thou impartest to
the humble, and those that serve thee for love, and that seek thee above al
gifts and created things whatsoever. O love, love, flow into my soul, that I
may sigh and pant after my God alone, and praise this my beloved for all
eternity. Amen.

THE XXXIX. CONFESSION.
O Deus meus, quis similis tibi! O my God who is like to thee! Who will give m^
that without ceasing^ may adhere to thee, and with an amourous aspect, regard
thee in all things, not seeking my-self nor the pleasing of any creature for it
self, in any thing I, do or omit?

Ier. 12 11.
Desolatione desolata est omnis terra; quia nullus est qui recogiter cord.
With desolation all the land is made desolate, Because there is none who
considers in the heart. O my God, what wonder is it that we live in blindness,
if we come not to thee who art the only true lig^t? What do we with souls, and
hearts capable of love, if we do not by them aspire to thee, with all our
strength, and adhere to thee, the only true and perfect good? What is sweet,
what is to be desired, but thee, my Lord, who art beawty it self? What could
thou do more then make out souls to thine own image and liknes, and able ^o be
satisfied with nothing but thy self? O misery, of al miseries the greatest,
that thou should be offended, and forgotten by us, and that any thing should
posses our souls besides thy love, which only can make us happy, and pleasing in
thine eyes. Woe is me, who have straied from the fountain of living water, by
which my ^oul is dried up, and even withers away in thirst after transitory
things. Change this my thirst by thy ^weet grace and Mercy to a thirsting after
thee my God, the glory of my heart, and the peace and comfort of my soul. O let
me love, or not live; and let me in all, by all, and above al praise thee, who
art ble^sed for all eternity. Amen.

THE XL. CONFESSION.
MY soul bless thou our Lord, and al things within me his holy name. Psalm.
102. 1.
Al spirits praise my God, for ever and ever magnify him.

I will declare to thee my God in all things, how it stands with me, that I may
hope and be strengthened in and by thee. I will beg what is nece^sary for me to
please and serve thee. For what can thou deny to them, who have no hope or
comfort, but only in thee. He who gives himself, gives al; and when thou
deniest what we ask, it is that thou may give t^^ own self more fully to us
thy poor servants, and that impediments may be the more truly removed between
our souls and thee.

Simplify my soul that it may return to thee; adorn me with ^^ine own merits,
that I may not appear naked of good before thee, and supply my defect in
praising and lou^ng thee. To thee my God, al my interior powers shall aspire
day, and night without ceasing. Let me draw no breath but thereby to sigh and
pant after thee the living fountain. Let al actions which by Obedience, or
necessity be imposed on me, be undertaken, and done by me with an in^erior
regard of thee, that I may truly in them obey and seek thee, the most amiable
beloved of my heart and soul; let them be as a cessation, or pausing for the
time, that I may afterward with the more force and savor at times convenient
attend to thee in the bottom of my soul, and therein praise thee. Amen.

THE XLI. CONFESSION.
COme al ye that have vowed your bodies, and souls to our Lord, Come let us
love. Let us give al not only once, but every moment to him, that made us to
bestow on us himself. Let us not only love, but be wholly transformed into the
^iuine love. Let us live to him ^lone, leaving al others for his sake only. Let
us charitably interpret the words and deeds of those with whom we live; and if
any fa^l in that which he ought to perform, give us grace, my God,
to remembe^ how weak human nature is for good, and how great is our frailty as
to a sin, and how soon we also (if thou did not protect us) might fail in a
more shameful manner. O my God, thou have commanded us to love our neighbor as
our self, and behold we either, love them inordinatly to our impediment of
loving thee, or else we are short toward them of ^rue Charity. From both these
errors deliver the soul of thy poor servant, and grant me to love al as t^ou
would have me. Let no difficulties they cause to me, make me in them the less
to behold and consider thee. Verily, if there were no other reward to be given
to those who for thy sake requite evil with good, then the true peace which
they find in their souls by it, it were most worthy our labor. But thou, my
Lord, reseruest great reward in the next life for those, who for bitterness
caused to them by others, do return sweetness unto them; yea nothing is more
pleasing, and acceptable to thee, then that we by humility and patience do
pacify those who are offended with us. But alas my God, I will speak, and will
not be silent in the ears of my Lord, and with tears in mine eyes will bewail
my sins, and offenses. I ^now there is no more true love in our souls to our
neighbors, then we are dead to our selves, and live unto thee. What therefore
can I think of my poor soul, so barrein of al true virtue? If I love thy
very-self so little, as indeed I do, where will thou ^ind in me, that Charity
which by thy law I owe for thee toward them? Verily, when I consider how
destitute I am of all that might make, me pleasing in thine eyes, I cannot but
tremble, and fear. Yet again taking heart, remembering thy Mercy toward me, I
find I have cause of hope, thou being goodness itself, whose nature is to desir
to impart itself; which if thou will be pleased to do to my poor soul, I shall
notwithstanding al my sins become yet in thee and by thee most happy; toward
which I beseech thee grant me grace to dispose my-self for thy only honor, who
be Blessed for ever. Amen.

THE XLII. CONFESSION.
O Lord my God, what Mercy art thou pleased to show to my sinful soul? Is it
possible after so many abominable offenses that thou shoudst thus particularly
favor me? If it were ever possible to be lawful for thy creatures to exclaim
against thee and tax thee o^ injustice, it might be admitted them in this thou
have done and do ^or me, the most sinnful and most contemptible of al thy
Majesty's creatures. If ^ had ever done any good they perhaps would not wonder
at the^; but as it is, the^ cannot but at least admire thy infinite sweetness and
Mercy. For what sin is there I have not committed, at least by my will. But the
greater thy Merc^ the more I hope the honor and praise will be which thy
seruan^ will yield to t^ee for it^; and do th^^ thy self, I beseech the^, supply
ou^ defect in this and al other things, so that perfect praise may be yielded
to thee in all and by all for ever and ever. Amen.

THE XLIII. CONFESSION.
LOrd, with great joy I desir to celebrat this divine Solemnity of thy
Resurrection. Thou have showed thy-self in all forms, so that the weakest
capacities might in some sort apprehend thee who art incomprehensible. Thou
appearedst a child, that thy little ones might conceive more easily some things
that might move them to love thee, and being as it is were astonished at t^y
love toward us, and at thy infinite humility, we might thirst after thy
example, and love only thee. For all thou have done, or said, is for our comfort
and instruction. What have thou left undone, which might any way further our
good, if we would but concur with thy Grace; But we streying from thee, how can
we choose but be blind. For only in thy light can we see and discern that which
only imports us to see and know, to wit, to know thee, thereby to love thee,
and to know our-selues, thereby to hum^ble us in all things before thy Divine
Majesty. For nothing but true Humility can make us gracious in thine eyes. So
much as we truly humble our selves, so much, and no more, do we increase in our
love to thee. O how peaceful amidst al storms is the souls of the humble? how
favored by thee, though they be despised by the whole world. They are indeed
often neglected by men; but most conversant with thee and thine Angels and
Saints in heaven. Never was there ever such acquaintance, love, and friendship,
between any in this world, as there is between thy Goodness and an humble soul,
that seeks thee above al graces and gifts whatsoever, and transcendeth al
created things, that she may adhere to thee in the bottom of her soul. Verily
it is so strange, that it puttet^ the heauently Court into admiration, that we
that have dedicated our souls wholly to thee, should love, seek, or desir any
thing besides thee. But alas human frailty, as they well know, is very great, and
therefore they also cannot choos but pity and pray for us; and especially we
women, silly to all things that this ^orld admires, and therefore most
contemptible of al creatures, if we do not labor for the love of thee, ^ the
which to do, thou do as willingly enable us as thou do the wise of the
world, if we hinder not thy grace who despisest not any thing thou have made.
How much are we to be therefore blamed and condemned if we labor not, I say,
for thy love?
Yea to show thy power thou have been pleased many times to bring a silly
woman, loving thee, to that wisdom that no creature by wit or industry could
attain to the same. But where my Lord have these thy Spouses in these days
placed there hearts? Where, I say, seeing they seek, and desir so much the
^auour and praise of the world, to have the friendship of men, and by letters
and to^ens to draw their hearts from thee unto them, notwithstanding (as good
reason) it prospers not with us in such doing; for they by this means seeing
our defect in loving thee, cannot confide in them, who are not true to thee;
but contrary compare us to those, who profer love to al, and yet, as we ought
for thee, love none. O Lord remove these scandals from thy Church; Let us,
though we cannot serve thee, in great matters, yet let us, I say, have no ^arts
but to love thee, no tongues but to praise thee, nor eyes but to behold thy
creatures, as things inuiting our souls to loue^ sigh, pant, and ^uen languish
after t^ee; No ears but to hear what is thy will; and in fine not to live but
in, and for t^ee, and for thy love to be subject to every human creature, as
far as it is exacted of us by thee. Give that humility^ which by thy blessed
Apostle Saint Paul thou requirest in us, that I may willingly submit my-self to
the power of Superiors set over me by ^hee. It is true I see and hear daily,
that scandals, what discorders, and that confusions arise in Communities for
want o^ due submission in subjects to their Superiors; but alas, my God
certainly a chief cause thereof is (at least in many who have good wills) because
thy are not taught to obey t^ee interiorly in their souls, out of which it
would prove easy to them to obey exteriorly, whereas now it semes a burden
intolerable; and forsooth under pretense of greater perfection,
we often fall in^ to open rebellion. Surely this was not the practice of
Saints, who yet sound often great opposition and mortification by means of
Supe^iors, which they bearing patiently and obeying still out of an internal
^egard of thee in their souls, al turned to their greater advancement in ^hy
love; and their Superiors at last ^y thy help concurred to that which ^hey
desired, so far as it was thy will, who, have disposed of al things in order and
justice, and nothing can be well done but that we do out of an internal light
from thee and out of obedience to thee, to whom obedience is due in all things
whatsoever. Thou have set an order in all things, and every thing as it is
ordained by thee, will concur to a most heavenly harmony; but corrupting thy
meaning, al things are out of order, and peace on al sides is disturbed. O how
happy are they, whose souls are in a right way to hear and follow thy will, and
who do nothing without consulting with thee in their soul, giving that to God
which is only Gods own, and to Caesar that which is due to Caesar for God? for
both these obediences are necessary to make a true spiritual life. For in vain
do we give to thee, if we deny Obedience to them who are set over us by thee;
and also in vain is it to please and have the favor of our Superiors, if we
internally neglec^ to have in all things relation to thee; from both these
errors deliver me,
I beseech thee, that my soul may be a peaceful habitation for thee. Let me
humbly behave my-self toward al; and let me not measure my case before thee by
the opinion my Superiors and Sisters have of me, for they may applaud me, and
yet it may stand il with me before thee; and they may take al in another worser
sense then thou know I meant it, and that justly, and yet it may go well
between thy goodness and me through thy abound Mercy.

THE XLIV. CONFESSION.
O How happy are those souls who love nothing but thee? Verily there is so
little stability in all things but in thee, that it is a strange thing that we
should live so miserable lives thou offering us a most peaceful and quiet life,
if we would but seek thee alone, who art more present to us, then we are to our
selves; and by thee our soul does live, more then our body does by our soul;
Those that posses thee have al things, and those who want thee, if they had all the world can afford, do yet indeed posses nothing. If we desire to love where
our love may not be lost, what shall we love but thee, wh^ have said; Io. 15. 9.
Sicut dilexit me Pater, and ego dilexi vos; As my Father loved me, so have I
loved you; Do we not therefore well deserve to live in all perplexity and misery,
if we do not leave to love al other things to set our whole loves upon thee,
^ho have made us such sweet promises; yea let us hear what thou do further
add; Io. 15. 5.
Qui mane^ in me, and ego in eo, hic fert fructum multum. Who remains in me,
and I in him, brings forth much fr^ict. O let me be remain in thee, and then
let all the world be against me! I desir not, my God, by any particular favors
in this life to be more certain of thee; But I do beg of thee, that by true
Humility, Obedience, and Patience, I may be more confirmed in thee by true
love, only in simple faith;
in all desolations, crosses, pains, disgraces, miseries adhering to thee the
only desire of my soul, and not resting in any gift or grace of thine
whatsoever, that I may at last for thy o^n sake find favor in the eyes of thy
Divine Majesty, notwirhstanding my sins and ignorances, in which I have
hitherto lived; for whieh thy mercy o^ forgiving them me, be thou for ever
blessed and praised by all thy creatures. Amen. Amen.

THE XLV. CONFESSION.
O Lord, my God, to whom upon al occasions, I (most unworthy) with thy leave
presume to speak, and ask questions in my simple manner. Open the eyes of my
soul, that I may know and understand thy Will and Law, and Grace to perform them
to thine honor. Thou my God, who art more mine, then I am mine own, do not
reject me speaking and writing to thee. For what do I desir, or wish but thee?
Or what are al things to me without thee? Surely, nothing. For thou have showed
me through thy sweet mercy^ and grace without any desert of mine own, that al
things are vanity but to love and please thee, which I beseech thee that I may
do with all the forces of my heart, and soul. For truly there is no true peace,
or comfort out of thee. Let me therefore know my-self and know thee, that in all
I may praise and please thee. Amen.

THE XLVI. CONFESSION.
Io. 20.
LORD it is read to day of thee that Saint Mary Magdalen approaching to kis thy
feet, it would not be admitted her by thee. If it may please thee, I will humbly
ask of thee the meaning of this. For I am somewhat amazed at it. For when she
came to thy feet laden with many and greiuous sins, thou admitted^^ her most
easily; and when she had a long time been trained up in thy happy school of
Perfection, and had accompanied thee in thy Passion, and mourned for thee at
thy tomb, taking no rest til thou her beloved returned to her again; and besides
she offered to have taken thee away from all the world, if they would have but
told her where they had laid thee; and yet do thou now deny her to touch and
kis thy blessed feet. What, shall we think she loved thee less now then when she
first desired to love thee? Or shall we think, that as her love grew more, and
more to thee, thine grew less and less to her? No, God forbid I should ever
admit of such a thought; But, O my Lord, thou being ^isedom itself, intendedst
to bring this great and ardent lover to a love more spiritual, then that with
which she loved thee when t^ou conuersedst with her before thy death and
Passion. For it is thy custom with great mildnes to receive sinners, and when
they grow more strong in love thou seem to treat them with more severity,
that they at first may hope in thee, and go forward in thy love and service,
and that after being a little strengthened with light and comfort from thee, thou
may try them many ways, least they should attribut that which they have done
to their own forces, and that favor which they have receaed, to their own
labors, and deserts; which thou know we are very apt to do, if thou did
not through permitting us to fall into temptation, show us our own frailty. But
this blessed Saint (whose intercession I most humbly implore for thy sake, whom
now none can deprive her of) did not think that by denying her to touch t^y
feet she received wrong. For her humble soul thought itself too unworthy of
such a favor, when thou did put her in mind, that she was to conuers with
thee in a more spiritual manner then before; neither did she reflect on the
labor, pain and grief she had sustained. For, as thou know, love feels no
labor, nor complains of any burden. For only to have seen thee alive again,
was sufficient to make her forget al former afflictions. For her sake, and for all their sakes that love thee, be merciful to my sins, and bring me by true
love to be united to thee with them, where for ever without ceasing I may
praise thee my only beloved. Amen.

THE XLVII. CONFESSION.
O LORD, my God; I will speak to thee again, and again I will call upon thee the
entierly beloved of my heart I will melt away in thy praises, and I will inuit al
thy spouses to to seek thee alone above al thy gi^ts and above al creatures.
For in thee alone is true peaee, and comfort to be found, and enjoyed. O how
happy should I esteem my self, if I were able to praise thee without ceasing,
or be any cause that any should more and more languish with thy love. What
should I do being born down with the weight of mortal flesh, and diverse
internal afflictions, so that I can many times scarsly think on thee? What
should I do (I say^ but li^t up my heart, with my hands as it were by main
force, sometimes by words, and sometimes by writing unto thee, which I do not
do as to one that is far of from me,
but as to one who is more near to me then I am to my-self, and of whose
Goodness, whose Wisdom, whose Beawty, whose Mercy, and most absolut and
incomparable greatness, I am more assured of, then I am of any thing I see with
my corporal eyes. O who would not love this Go^nes, this Majesty, and submit
themselves ^o this most amiable beloved o^ our souls? If any comfort, or
happiness were to be found out of him, we were something excusable in neg^ecting
and forgetting our chief good; ^ut seeing we cannot even in this mortal li^e
find any content, but by loving, praising, and truly seeking and serving him,
we are too miserable and too blame for loosing our-selues by resting with love
and inordinat affection in transitory and visible things? O far be it from thy
spouses to set their affection upon any thing b^^ thee, or to bereave thee of
the affection which from al is to thee only due. All that we, are and have, is
too little for thee; Let us not therefore of that little we have, take from
thee! O let us love thee above al, and al others in and ^or thee. I do bemoan
this misery above al miseries, yt those who have dedicated themselves to thee,
should seek the love and favor of others, to their own and the others
impediment in thy love and service. O^tentimes we comply and correspond under
pretense to get temporal means, the while neglecting thee,
who feedest the birds and clothest the beasts of the earth, who neither sow,
not reap, neither are they solicitous of any thing but depend of thy mere
providence, and yet thou prouidest for them Can we think thou will have less
care of us that have left all the world for thee, then of the vnreasonnable
creatues made only for our services? Have not thou said by the Spirit of al
truth, that first seek for the Kingdom of God, and his justice, al things else
s^al be added to you? Mat. 6.33.
O let us therefore leave al things truly, that we may confide in thee, casting
our care upon thee, who wilt nouris^ our souls, and bodies, if we will but
faithfully and constantly adhere unto thee our supreme and only Good. Let us
leave pretending any thing, but thee. For often even under the pretense of
getting prayers of others, we pour out our-selues, in the mean time,
neglecting to have relation to thee, who would more willingly give, then we
could ask, if we would but truly, and faithfully adhere to thee, and not stray
out of our selves, hindering both our selves, and others from adhering to thee,
to whom we owe al we are, and can do, and and therefore are greatly to blame,
when we do not endeavor to love thee with all our soul, with all our mind and al
our strength, which grant for thy own sake we may endeavor to do, to thy
honor and glory, who be praised, loved, and adored for all eternity. Amen.

THE XLVIII. CONFESSION.
SHALL not my soul be subject to God? O my Lord, far be it from me to will, or
desire any thing but according to thy divine will, which is only holy; Let me
never resist thy will, signified to me by any means whatsoever. Let my soul be
wholly turned into a flame of divine love, that I may aspire and tend to nothing
else but thy-self alone; Blot out my sins that my soul may return to thee by
love, from whom by sin it has strayed! O let nothing but this desir of thee,
my God, posses my heart; Let that be my solace in labors, pains, temptations,
desolations, and al afflictions of body, or mind! Let not my heart (drawn by
thee to seek after nothing but love) be so base as to covet, desir, and rest in
any thing but thee. Thou art my life, my choice, and my only beloved. When I
hear the^ but named, my Lord God, it forcible draws me into my-self, that I
may attend unto thee, forgetting my-self, and whatsoever else besides thee, for
which benefit be thou in^initly prais^d. Amen.

THE XLIX. CONFESSION.
Psalm. 150.
OMNIS ^piritus l^udet Dominum. Bonedicite omnia opera Domini Domino; Dan. 3.37.
laudate and super exaltate eum in saeoula. Let every spirit praise our Lord;
Bless our Lord all the works of o^^ Lord, praise and exalt him for ever. O my
God that I were able with a pure soul and loving heart to extol thy praise. But
alas, Eccli. 15. 9.
thy praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner. But shall I for this hold my
peace? If I do, yet permit me this comfort for thine own sake, yt I may inuit
others more worthy, to sing and set forth the praise of thy divine Majesty,
with whom yet as the last, and least, my soul shall ioin in the praise of thee
our dear Creator; and in that which is so worthily possessed by thy sweet
Goodnes^ I will rejoice with all the forces of my heart and soul! O my holy and
dear delight, what a most harmonious melody would refound over all the earth,
if thy will, and just disposition took place in all things. Behold al thy works
praise thee, every one in their kind; only man for whose help and comfort al
other things on ^arth were created)^ peruerteth the order of thy Justice, by
mi^u^ing that noble free will, which thou gave him, to choose, and love thee
with! O what could thou have done more, then with such a noble gift to have
endued us! Certainly if we would intend thee in all, and have relation to thee
in all, who art more present to our souls, then we are to our selves, we should
hear thee giving answers, sometimes by others, sometimes by thy self, and
sometimes by the words of holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers; and subjects
would be tractable to Superiors rather governing by thee then by themselves;
what tho^ would command, they would commend; and in all not seeking their own
glory or exaltation, would glory in thee, not in their own power^ and what were
done by thee, they would then account only well done^ but what they did o^
themselves they would account little profitable,
as to the advancement o^ souls Then they would be able to se wha^ were fit for
every soul vnde^ their chardg, and when thou permitted^ this not to be so clear
to them, the^ would humble themselves acknow^ledging it happened for their
vn^wo^thines, beseeching thee to do tha^ by thy-self which could not be done by
them; and if thon should perhaps let another (though their subject) to see
and discern what were fit in that case, or cases though he were but the last
and lowest, and of the least esteem in the Convent, yet certainly such
Superiors would not account it to derogate from their authorit^, that such an
one should supply their place, and Offifice upon occasions; because they seek
thy honor, and not their own; and though thou had given them power to
command, yet no otherwise would they use it, then according to such manner and
in such cases as thou do require they should; In this manner governing with
relation to thee and regard of thy will, and with indifferency what thou will do
by them, what by others, and what by thy-self, whose spirit breaths where it
pleases. Io. 3. 8.
Then the sensual love, and friendship between the Superiors and their subjects
would cease; then sincerity, and reason would take place both in the commander,
and in the obeyer, both thinking al their love and labor to be too little for
thy Godnes; then would be peace on al sids,
and the imperfections of al, would turn to the advancement, not to the
prejudice of any; then as they desired the friendship, or favor of none, but
in all things willingly and gladly depending of thy providence, so they would be
friends with all thy friends, and pity, and pray for (from the bottom of their
souls) those that are thine enemies, amongst which they ^ould verrly believe
they should have been the greatest; if thou of thy sweet Mercy had not
prevented them. Also inferiors that truly live to thee and desiring nothing else
but thee, though thou did teach, and instruct them about the use of
indifferent things by an internal lig^t which discerns between custom and
true reason, between their natural desirs and thy true Justice, which only
ought to take place in all things, yet they accounting themselves wholly unworthy
of being instructed by thee, most willingly hear thy will and commands, not
only from Superiors, but from any creature whatsoever, accounting it sufficient
for them that it was signified to them, that it was thy will, the which we ought
to follow as does a shadow the the body, or else of little worth is any thing
we do. For thou rewardest no works but thine own. O if al creatures would serve
thee according to their capacities and ^tates, what a resemblance would this
life have with heaven! No person, no state can pretend to be excused from being
able to serve and plea^e thee, who have made our heart for thy-self, and it can
never have true rest and repose but in thee the Center o^ our souls. What
creature is so little or contemptible that does not in some sort inuit us in
its kind to love and praise thee my Lord God? If we would l^ue thee, they would
not fail to serve us, til we could serve thee without them. But alas as it is
affirmed, and that most truly, tha^ order is the life of things, so man being
out of order by seeking himself more then thee, and by doing that which may
redound rather to his own honor then to thine, has made al thy other
creatures refuse that obedience which they owed to man, if tat he were truly
obedient to thee. Our defect in this toward thee puts al out of order. For how
can subjects be pliable to the will of Superiors, if first they be not in the
way of obeying thee wit^ relation of their obediences to man as to thee and
merely for an according to thy ^il? And how can we b^ at peace with others, i^
first we b^ not by true resignation in a way t^ have peace with thee in our own
souls^ Where is the Obedience due to thee and others for ^hee, since oftentime^
out of blindness we give Caesar tha^ which was Gods, and deny to him that which
was due to him by the (...) of God? As also if Superiors an^ Priests should
stand upon points v^ surping that to themselves which thou have reserved to thy
self; what shall become of subjects? Certainly they will not well know what to do
unless it be very right between them and thee. But alas, Mat. 3. 15.
Si sal euanuerit in quo salietur? If the salt loose its virtue in what shall it
be salted? Happy are they that light upon a good Superior; but much more happy
are they, who by true light in Humility and Abnegation are instructed by thee,
who art the only true teacher of Humility, true obedience and perfect Pryer. O
my Lord, when shall it be said, that the multitude of beleiuers are of one heart
and soul? When shall al be united in the bonds of true peace? Never til our
Charity beginning in thee do spread it self to al others for thee. For there is
no true friendship but that which thou knittest between such as love al in and
for thee, and thee above all that can be imagined or desired. O when shall thy
Justice and Truth in all things take place,
that the earth may breath forth nothing but thy Praise? Then we should be in
pain, and not seem to suffer^ so sweet or pleasing would the pai^ be; we
should live on earth, (no^ as being strangers) in heaven; and living here
should more live wit^ thee our beloved, then where we of necessity lived. For
then thy will being done in earth as in heaven; the earth would resemble heaven,
whereby the pain and grief of our banishment would be sweetened with ^ comfort
almost heavenly, and tha^ together with resigning our selves to thy holy will to
be contented to be denied for a time til thy will might thereby be wholly
accomplished^ and after that come to see thy glorious face and enjoy thee as
thou an^ in thy-self, who is our only happiness the expectation w^erof would
mak^ this world tolerable to us, and w^ should then seek thy glory and the
fulfilling of thy justice in all things and not our own comfort, an^ honor.
Verily, al thy disposition are so just, that al things would happen to our
greatest good, i^ we with humility and confidence in thee would proceed in all
things; And not any state, condition, or corporal complexion is there, wherein
thou have not been served in a perfect manner by some, or other. And if we run
through al degrees from the Pope to the simple Religious, and from the greatest
Monarc^ to the poorest beggar, in all we shall find some that have faitfully
served and praised thee. And as for natur^l co^plexions, or dispositions, the
most wicked have brought forth children proving Saints; and others who have
lived (as to al manner of sins^ so i^, that whole Contreys have fared the worse
for them, and diverse souls perished by their means, yet by humility have become
so pleasing to thee, O Lord, that thou madst them thy boosom friends; And no
trade nor occupation, i^ it be lawful, but has o^ it Saints, to the end to
show thou despisest nothing that thou ha^t made, how contemptible soever it
seem in the eyes of men. Why therefore do we not love thee, seeing al things on
thy part concur to this end? We may pret^nd what excuse we will; but nothing will
excuse us before thee, who had no other end in creating us, but that we should
be partakers of that glory which thou prepared for those that truly love thee;
and in that country of al happiness, we s^al receive al good things, and above
al shall enjoy thee the beginning and fountain of al good, without whom al
things are as nothing as to the contenting and satisfying of our souls. And
seeing merely thou cr^atedst us for ou^ good, thou being infinitely happy of
thy-self before thou createdst any thing, why shall we lay the fault of our not
profiting or everlasting perishing upon the^? If there had bee^ any thing
wanting of thy part, w^ might justly complain to thee; an^ if there were any
thing yet merely necessary, we requiring it humbl^ of th^e. thou could not
^so infin^^ good art thou) deny it us. But seein^ thou createdst man in the
state of innocence, and after his ^al redeemedst him with the precious Blood of
thy ouly begotten Son, and have given us a Law under which we are to walk,
and by means of our holy Mother the Church have and do determine of al
things as certainly as if that thou thy-self were still corporally present to
give answers in all things necessary to salvation, how worthily are we to be
condemned if we do not correspond and satisfy such thy most gracious will and
provision about us? Besides we have thee within us, to have recourse unto upon
al occasions, the which that we may do with the les impediments thou have
ordained the ouerlooking and solicitude over us of the Superiors thy
Vicegerents, who govern us here by ^hy appointment, and whom to resist in any
thing so it do not derog^te from thy own authority immediately to thy-self) were
highly to offend and displease thee. For by these thy Substituts thou do
judge, and determine of Spirits and of the verity and goodness of them and of
their exercises, and doings; as whether they proceed from thee and thy motions,
or no; and by them declarest what in general is to be done, or omitted; and in
particular as there is occasion, in seculars partly by seculars powers, and in
Religious by their Pastors and Superiors, that thus being in some certeinty
of subordination, and good exterior order, we may freely attend to thee in our
souls, without going forth but of mere necessity.

THE L. CONFESSION.
O WHO would seek, or love any thing but thee my God, who art exceeding great,
and of thy goodness, there is no end? Who would loose thee for nothing, and
depa^t from the fountain of life, for to drink out of a Cestern, that is ^ul of
filthy, and muddy water! What are al things, but thy self, for the satisfying
of our souls? If thou diedst as thou diedst for us, that we might live ouly to
thee, can we think it much, if heavens, earth, sea, and al contained in them,
rise up against us forgetting and neglecting thy Mercy? O let us love thee, and
al things will be at peace with us, and we at peace with our selves. Is it not a
shame for us to see the birds praise thee, and al creatures in their kind to
give the honor, and yet we only capable of thy love forgetful and ungrateful
to thee? What is there is this world but it calls upon us to seek thee in
sincerity of heart, and to live to thee alone, and to make use of them every one
in their kind, to the end we may concur with them to the praise of thee our
Lord, and Creator, to whom al love and honor is only due? The Angels most
humbly assist us, and pity us offending thee, which willingly to do is so
heinous a thing in their eyes that they are amazed to see us stray from true
reason. But alas man was in honor, and knew it not; he was compared to beasts
and becam^ like unto them. In this my misery I sigh and groan to my God, who
in this my affliction is only able to help and comfort m^. O how can we find in
our heart to offend thee? That, and that alone is to be esteemed truly a misery.
But yet are we sinners without comfort? No, no, my God, seeing thou can
forgive more then we can offend, and it will redound to thine honor and praise
for ever and ever, that thou have pardoned so many and greiuous sins and
sinners. In which thy glory I ^xult from ^he bottom of my soul; because seeing I
have offended, for which I am heartily sorry, yet will my God be extolled by all
creatures for forgiving it, for all eternity. O thou ^ho art thine own praise
supply in this and in all other things, the defect that is in all us thy
creatures to praise thee as thy iu^tice requires thou so should be magnifyed
by us al, who without thee are nothing but a sack full of filth, and the map of
al misery.

THE LI. CONFESSION.
O Lord, my dear God, if we that are created to mine own image and liknes, and
whose happiness does consist in loving, pleasing, praising, and enjoying thee!
If we (I say)^ did seek and desir only thee, how well would it go in this world?
If we were faithful to thee, al things would be so to us. When I see any of thy
creatures abuse the nobility of their soul by straying from thee, or at least
by loosing their time which is so precious, in laboring and taking great pains
to obtain the favor of men, or something else as little to the purpose how can
it but wound my very heart? seeing thou art neglected, and they take great pains
for what they cannot possible obtain; in the mean time forgetting to seek
after thy sweet love, which might be obtained even for nothing, in comparison
of what they sustain by laboring for that which perhaps if they do get, or
obtain, they are farther from being satisfied then they were before. It is true
the more we love thee, the more we desire to love thee; And the more we love,
the more able we are to love, and the more easy it is to love; and love making
al pains, confusions, difficulties, and afflictions sweet, what is there left
to suffer? Only indeed the hiding of thy face and denying us fully to enjoy
thee; this only remains to pearce our hearts with, if we truly love;
and yet thy just will is a consolation even in the greatest extremity of this
difficulty. Who would therefore not love thee, wholly forgetting themselves and
their own profit, and commodity either for time or eternity? Certainly the
Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins that loved thee more then their
lives found torments, bannishments, imprisonments, and persecutions sweeter by
reason of their love to thee, and of their desiring to be faithful to thy
amiable Majesty, then all the pleasures, contentments, riches honors, and glory
of the world did ever yet yeald to those that have most abounded therewith
since the beginning of the world. O if we could ask Solomon (for all the
abundance he lived in) and S. Francis in his poverty, or S. Laurence upon his
Gridiron; and certainly both by his acknowledgment and theirs, their poverty,
and pain through love, were sweeter then al his delights even in this world;
yea even Job sitting upon the Dunghill and saying; God gave, and God has taken
away, as it pleases our Lord so let it be, his name be blessed for ever
enjoyed more comfort and true peace in soul, then all the comforts and pleasures
of this world could give, or have caused to him. For only submission to thee,
my dear God, brings true comfort to our souls! O if we did truly humble ou^
selves, how greatly would thy goodness be exalted in our souls? If we did seek
thee, not thy gifts, graces, and comforts, how then should we go out of our
selves and thereby enter into thee? O if we were rruly humble, how much would
thou be pleased to be served by us? and how many do fare the better for thy
humble ones, though they be hidden and unknown for such to the world^ Certainly
the humble are so dear to thee,
that thou seem not willing, or able to do any thing without them For while
unmindful of al but thee, they forget themselves, thou in ^ the mean time
enrichest them with thine own works, that they may merit more grace, glory and
favor before t^ee in all things thou do or permittest, to which to the
uttermost of their power they concur by humble resignation, if they can do no
more, which is sufficient to satisfy thee, who need not our works, or
labors; but it is our hearts, souls, and loves that thou requirest, and by
which thou will do good to us, or by us. What thou think meet for us to do,
or to be able to do, ought to be indifferent to us, who should have no will but
thine, nor any election but of thee. Well may it be said, that where Humility
is, there is also Wisdom. For the truly humble being guided by thy interior
Truth and Justice more then by human wisdom, surpass the weakness of their own
folly; for so al wisdom may be esteemed, that is not from thee and in thy
light, by which light only we can discern the glorious truth and not by the
natural light of our weak understanding,
that is not able without a beam of thy Grace to discover such truth, so blind
is our soul of itself without t^ee; and it is only true humility that makes
us capable of this thy light. And yet if a soul had been with S. Paul in the
third Heaven, if she should leave the way of Humility, she would return to her
former blindness, and the more she by usurping thy gifts and graces to herself
did puff up her self, the more al true light and discretion would depart from
her soul, and the more het folly would appear to heaven, and earth to her
great confusion both in this life and in the next if she did not return and
come to know her own nothing. For as it is truly said; The corruption of the
best, is the worst. O Lord deliver al from this accursed sin of pride, which
turned Angels into most ugly devils, and has been the ca^se of the separation
of so many souls (created by thee to enjoy eternal felicity) from thee my God;
But especially deliver those from this most odious vice who have had the means
by the mercy of thy sweet Goodness, to come to some true knowledge of thee and
themselves. For if we knew al, and could discourse with all the wit and
eloquence of the Philosophers,
Orators, and Divines of the causes and effects of al natural and supernatural
things, yet if we did not know thee by endeavoring truly to love thee, we
might truly be said to know nothing. For only by loving thee and knowing our
selves is true Wisdom obtained. And how can it but pervert al true Justice,
that thou art by so few (in comparison of the whole world) sought with a pure
intention? If we being almost to death benumed with cold should for remedy go
forth into the blustering and far colder wind, or in the scortching heat of
summer should for mitigation thereof to our body go to an hot flaming fire, who
would not judge us even out of our wits for our so doing? Even so we when
wanting supernatural light that is true light and necessary for the guidance of
us in the way toward thee, we in lieu of seeking after that light and of
taking the means to come by it,
do betake us on^y to our natural light, the which as to the said supernatural
end is but mere blindness, and darkness, and thus proceeding in assuming for our
means the contrary o^ that w^ should, we prosper both in our practice and in
our end accordingly. The things which we practice as virtues being indeed no
true virtues for want of the discretion that it necessary for the perfection of
them and the which discretion is but the self same as the light had from thee,
whereby oftentimes our pretended virtues come to have more of vices then of
true virtues in them, such defect proceeding out of this, that indeed in our
in^ard and secret consciences we think that we are able to do that which is
right and pro^itable of our own selves and without light, and ability for it
from thee. And when harm falls to us, or to others by such our blind
proceedings we lay the fault of it upon thee where it is not^ and not upon our
selves, where indeed it is. O ler this folly also be far from us! for thou art
just, O my Lord, and thy judgments are equity, how hidden soever thy meaning in
them be to our souls. I for my part desire to adore thee in all thou disposest,
and do most gladly acknowledge, that al thou have made is good, if it be put for
that use ^or which thou madst it. Do not we see that even Spiders, and Serpents
do draw the venom from the earth both for the purging it, and also for a
farther use that man thereof maks, and yet these to our seeming are of the least
worth as to good among thy creatures. But it is our mis vsing^ abusing, and
mis-applying thy creatures that makes the world turn vpside down. The hail
thunder storms, rain, and snow, did the three Children in the furnace inuit to
praise thee as good in themselves being made by thee. But nothing is so good in
this world, but it may be perverted and abused. For if man whose soul was made
by thee in such purity, by sin becomes so foul, how can this choose but breed
disorder in the world, al things therein being given by thee to be disposed by
him, and used by him as ^^lp^ to ^^rue thee while we live here? But o my God, I
will speak to thee, and I will call upon thee who art Wised^m itself; If thou
smile at my folly. yet behold me sinner, and instruct me in thy Law, which is
sweet above al delights of the world; and to serve thee for love, is that which
I only desire. In all my miseries and afflictions of body and soul thou
despis^st not any soul flying to thee, and dilating my-self to thee, I do
comfort and strengthen my heart, which aspireth to nothing, as thou know by
this my speaking to t^ee, but to ease my soul by begging help of thee, and
declaring to thee my only friend, my sins and miseries. For if we fly from t^ee
whither go we, but out o^ one darkness into another? Who can discover our wounds
to us, but thy-f^lf, who when we acknowledge them, do also cure the
languishing diseases of our very souls? O in thy light let me see light, that
so al imp^diments may be removed between thy Godnes and my sou^? My ^oul can
never return to thee, til it ^e purged and purifyed by thy grace and Mercy. Of
my-self I can do nothing. Thou therefore that madst and redeemedst me, save me,
who every moment should perish, if I were not assisted by thee. I see nothing,
or hear any thing, but it gives me new cause to praise thee, and to seek thee
above al gifts, graces, and creatures; Grant me therefore to serve thee in that
manner thou would be served by me^ For I am not able to do any thing good of
my self. Let me by Humility and tru^ obedience return to thee, from whom for my
sins I deserve to be separated with the devils eternally; but thy Mercy, which
is above al thy works, pardon me, and give me Grace to live better hereafter. O
my God, me thinks some times I have so lively a feeling of my own nothing, and
see so plainly that we depend wholly of thy grace, and Mercy, that I wonder how
it is possible I should an^ more be able to presume of my-self in any thing
whatsoever. But alas this passes away;
and like dust carried away with the wind, so is my soul with vanity; In which
my sin, and misery I groan to thee from the bottom of my soul, who art my
helper and my deliverer from al mine enemies, whereof the greatest is my self;
and to thee I declare my iniquities which are without end, or measure, to the
end I may glorify thee the more who show mercy to me, and reiectest not the
most disloyal of al thy Majesty's servants. For which let heaven, and earth
praise thee, seeing I am not able by any thing to show gratitude to thee. For I
ca^ do nothing but declare thy Mercy, and beseech thys^lf to supply my defect
in praising thee. For thou only can do it, as I desire it should be done. The
very Seraphins are too short of being able according to thy worth to praise
thee and al thy Angels and ^aints account themselves, as dumb in comparison of
thy deserts from them For all thy sweet Mercy be thou there^ for by all, not as
able, but as willing to praise t^ee, magnifyed for ever and ever. Amen.

THE XLII. CONFESSION.
O My Lord, and my God; If none have much forgiven them, but those that love
much, what will become of me? This day we read in our Office, that Saint Marie
Magdalen coming to thy feet (which she watered with her reares) heard that
comfortable answer from thee, to wit; Go in peace, thy sins are forgiven
thee; Luk 9. ^5.
but it was out of this regard that she loved much. This answer thou madst to
her (whose heart in silence spoak unto thee) does much comfort my sinful soul.
But yet when I remember how void I am of that which was the necessary
disposition for her soul to hear those comfortable words, thy sins are forgiven
thee, go in peace, it draws tears from mine eyes to see how far my soul is
destitute of that pure love which prevails with thy divine Majesty. What shall
I say? What shall I do? Or wherein shall I hope? I am not fit to plead for
my-self, my sins, indeed are so many and so great; and as for the love which
only thou desire, behold my soul is destitute of it. For if I have any
toward thee, my God it is but a sensible, childish love, which is a love
little beseeming the bestowing upon such a God, who is al Good, Beawty,
Wisdom, yea even Goodness and Love itself; to whom is due a love which is able
to suffer al things for this love is a strong love, more strong then death
itself, the which kind of love is far from me, who am blown down with the
least blast of temptation, and cannot endure any disgrace, desolation, or
difficulty whatsoever, as it beseems a true lover of his. But notwithstanding
my poue^ty, and misery, yet I will hope in him and will approach to his feet, who
is Mercy itself. There, my Lord, and my God, I will in filence sigh and weep
both for my sins and for my defect in loving thee, who art worthy of al love
and Praise whatsoever. There I will beg this love so much to be desired. There I
will wish and long for it^ and from thy feet I will not depart til thou denounce
to me; thy sins are forgiven thee, and say to my soul, go in peace. This
voice I long to hear in my heart, that I may with the voice of exaltation praise
thee for ever. Amen.

THE LIII. CONFESSION.
AMen, Amen, dico vobis; quia receperunt mercedem suam. (Math. 6., Amen, Amen I
say unto you they have received their reward. These thy words my Lord and my
God come into my mind so often as my thoughts dare to think of having deserved
any reward at t^y hands, and serve as a motive to subject my soul totally to
thy divine Majesty, before whom now I do profess, and acknowledge that my
desirs, and endeauours are so defective in comparison of what is to thee due
from me; that I may, and do even say to my soul; Peace; be humble and subject
in all to thy God, whom thou art not worthy so much as to name with thy defiled
mouth. Indeed my Lord, whose power and Majesty prostrate I acknowledge and
adore^ with all mine heart and soul; if I should, neither in this, nor in the
next world,
receive any other reward but what already thou have bestowed on me, which I
have (I must needs con^esse) received gratis of thy Mercy without any desert of
mine own, She dyed presently heerevpon.
yet that which t^ou have so already done for me, is sufficient to declare to
Heaven, and earth the superaboundance of thy mercy and clemency to a sinful,
and contemp^tible creature. I will there for sing unto thee mercy, and judgment
all the days of my life, wishing always that thy will, which is Justice it-sel^^
may be wholly and perfectly accom^plish^d in me, thy sinful servant Let me live
as-long as it pleases thee, or die in the very beginning of these my desires to
love; send sickness, or health; sudden or lingering death; poverty, or
abundance, good fame or that I be by all the world despised; and in fine in all
do with me as it is most for thine honor. For in this I pla^e al my comfort
and happiness, faithfully to serve thee, and to be little or great in thine
eyes, as seems best to thee. For I account it a sufficient reward for all that
ever I shall be able to do, or suffer, that thou have admitted me unworthy
wretch, into a place of living where I may know and even see with mine eyes how
to serve and please thee; this (I say) is more then can be deserved by me For
to serve thee is an honor above all that can be imagined by me; yet without any
regard of recompense it is due to thee, that I serve, and love thee with all the
forces of my body and soul, which grant I may now begin to do and persevere
therein til my end, that I may for thy own sake obtain the happiness eternally to
praise thee. O remove al impediments between my soul and thee; Let me die to al
created things that I may live alone to thee^ O let al creatures be to me, as
if they were not, to the end I may more fully attend to thee in the bottom of
my soul, where I will in silence harken to thee! Speak Peace to my soul, that I
may be capable of thy voice more sweet then al things whatsoever. Speak to my
heart; but speak so as I may hear thee. Teach me how to practice to thy honor
those divine virtues which make souls so pleasing to thee; to wit Charity,
Humility, Obedience, Patience, and Discretion, which judges between custom
and true reason; between opinion and thy true Justice, which manifests it
self to those souls, who seek only to love and praise thee.

THIS pious soul having written thus far went no farther, being surprised with
a bodily indisposition upon the 29. or 30. of July 1633. which proved to be her
last sickness that brought her to a happy death upon the 17. of August
following. The last of these Confessions save one, she began (as there
appears) upon S. Mary Magdalens day, being the 22. of July next before her
death.

HERE FOLLOVV SOME other Sentences, and Sayings of the same pious Soul found
in some others papers of hers.
THE interior, or Spiritual disposition os man, is of that great, and infinite
worth, and moment; that so it be well, al other matters will also go well, and be
in good plight. And the good state of the interior (and thereby also of the
exterior) proceeds from the harkning to and following of the Divine interior
Call, or inspiration, the which to a ^oul capable of an internal life is, or
ought to be as al in all. And woe to such a soul who overcome by threats or
perswa^ions from without, or by temptations within her, or, other occasions
whatsoever, g^ueth over her prosecution of Mental prayer, by means whereof only
is she capable of discerning and following the divine will, and Call. And
therefore o you souls that are capable of internal prayer, do you accordingly
prosecute it, and be grateful to God for the grace of it. For it causes the
greatest happiness that is to be gotten in this li^e, and an answarable happiness
in the future. For by it in this life one passes through al things how hard,
and paineful soever they be. By it we become familiar even with God him-self,
and to have our conversation in Heaven. By it al impediments will be removed
between God and the soul^: By it you shall receive light and grace for all that
God would do by you, By it we shall come to regard God in all things, and
profitably neglect our selves. By it we shall know how to converse on earth
without pr^iudice to our souls: And in fine by it we shall praise God, and
become so united to him, that nothing shall be able to separate us for time, or
eternity from his sweet Goodness. And let him be al in all to us, who only can
satisfy our souls. He is his own Praise, i^ which and by which we are infinitely
happy, though of our selves we a^e able to praise and love him, but in a very
poor manner. who can say (that desire nothing but to love and praise him) that
they are poor, seeing he who is more theirs then they are their own, is so
rich, and to whom nothing is wanting that should make him an infinite happiness?
in this let us joy, in this iet us glory without intermission. when we are not
able to attend unto him and praise him as we would, let us commend our heart and
soul to the Saints in H^auen, who without ceasing praise our Lord: Let us do
that by them, which we are not able to do by our selves: yea let us desire him,
who is his own praise, and only is able to do it as he d^serue^h to have it
done, to supply what he desire^h we should wish him. Let us s^ek no other
co^fo^t but to be able without al comfort to be true to him, Let us rest in him
alone, and and not in any thing that is or can be crea^ted. Let us not se^ke
the gist, but the giver. O hoW little is all the love we can give him, in
comparison of that he deserves from us? where, theref^r shall th^re be room for
any created thing in out souls? Let us wish and desire. and (as far as it lies
in us) procure that al love be given to him. Let him have al Glory, al Honor,
and al Praise, Let us desire the favor of none, but him alone, to whose free
disposition, let us stand for time and eternity, as absolutely by ou^ will, as if
we never had any other freedom of w^l in us. Nothing we do or suffer, let us
este^me great: for our sins deserve much more. Let our whole care tend to the
magnifying of him. Let his honor b^ ours, and let us seek nothing, but to be
whoiy his, who is most worthy to be that that he is If it is his delight be to
be with the children of men, what should comfort us, but to praise and love
him? Those that seek him shall find him With all their heart, O who would seek
any thing besides him, see^ng he is not more willing to give us any thing, then
his own self, here by grace, and hereafter in Heaven by glory Let us adore him
in spirit and truth. Al w^ can give him is nothing, unless we entierly give him
onr selves, and that also cannot add to his greatness, and glory: yet if we do
this, so much does his divine Majesty esteem of this gift, that for it and in
requital of it, he will give us his own self: al his gifts, and graces are a
means for the preparing of us for this end, if we use their rightly with
Humility, and according to the just will of Almighty God. Let us extend our will
to serve, love, praise, please, and magnify our Lord to the uttermost we are
able, ^ea wthout al limits or bounds. Le^ us ^esire his honor, til such time
as we may be swallowed up in the bottomless Ocean of al love, and praise God in
himself, in whom and by and in whom only, we can praise him as we ought. Let us
love him as far as we ar^ possible able, without regard of our selves, either
for time, or eternity. This is the humble love that feels no burden. This is
the love that knows not how to attribute any thing it does or suffers, to
itself. It chooses not wherein God sh^l make use of her, but accommodateth
her-self in all things to his divine pleasure. If it were his will to hau^ it so,
she would rather for ever be picking up chips or straws, then out of her own
election, to be doing that which is most admired, or might seem to her to
procure her the greatest reward. O you souls that God bestows his love upon,
think it not much to bear the burden, not only of your selves, but also of all that you live with: for God bears you up in all, more then you can conceive or
imagine, Beware above al things of pride, For that cast even Angels out of
heaven. A soul of prayer as-long as she keeps Humility,
is in no peril of going out of her way.

It is certainly true, that God gives himself to them, who forsake al: I say,
al and not by halfs,
with reserving what we please to our selves, but to all that forsake al, he
gives himself, without exception of persons, and he that pleases our Lord
ne^deth nor fear all the devils in hell.

It is a wonderful thing to see the variety of opinions that are, or may be
about the best use of those things that of themselves are indifferent, or at
least are not evil, one holding this, and another that, every man according to
his fancy, and (as Saint Paul says) abounding in his ^wn sense. Romans 4 3.
No wonder then that those that liu^, and converse with others, and namely in a
Religious Community, do easily fall into occasion of iars, and differences with
others, whilst every one pretends the truth, and the best to be of her side,
howsoever it be indeed; and therefore ones nature will easily take occasion of
iarring with others, if it be not mort^fyed by restraint from what it is
inclining to by such occasions. It is only the diui^e virtue of true discretion
that is able to discern and judge for ones own practice what is good, better, or
best of al in the use of those indifferent things. The more truly mortifyed the
^oul is, the cleerer is such light of discretion in her, and will incre^se in
her, if she be still solicitous more and more to live to God in her interior,
and to die to her-self, and to al created things by simply regarding God in all
she does, o^ omitteth, and intending him alone in all ^^^ngs.

It is a true proverb that it is an easier matter to corrupt the mind of one,
then of a great many. Wherefor we must remember that it is a good, and happy
thing for Brethren to dwell in One, or rather (by true love and charity) in that
One Which is truly necessary,
to wit, in God. For no love is true, but that which is in him, and for him,
and without impediment to his love. Al other loves are false, slippery,
perverse and vain, as not being founded in God the ground of al true, and
happy love, nor being referred to him and his love. But the true love, which is
the divine, will make al others dear unto us for his sake, and none dear but
in him and for him. It will make us in capable of accounting any to be our
enemies how hardly soever they treat us, because in all things we will regard
God, that permits such difficulties to happen to us, to the end our fidelity
to him may thereby be tried and so not rega^d (with any auersion) the party who
afflicts us: And it will be sufficient for us toward the pacification of our
soul upon the hard, or bitter vsadge offered us, that we remember that he has
suffered it to happen to us for our good, who only knows what is best for the
humbling of us and the abating of our pride, the which must be done if will be
pleasing to God, to whom now, and ever I commit my-self. Amen.

Vnum sit mihi ^o^um, id est, omnia in omnibus. Let one be al to to me, that
is, Al in All. This was a Poesy bestowed on me and my Parteners by another, the
truth whereof I pray God may an^werably be in the hearts, and loves of us, and of
al other souls whatsoever.

The simple ex^rc^se of the will being faithfully and perse^era^^, prosec^ted
(through Gods concurring g^^ce) remoueth in time al impediments be^ween our
soul and God;
and the soul by love comes so to transcend al created things, y^a even her
own self, that al creatures are to her as if they were not, as to any hurtful
distraction they cause to her, or as to any other impediment between her and
God, the which can be only by inordinate adhering in affection to those
creatures.

A true spiritual internal life is so private and secret between God and the
soul, that others cannot easily dis^erne it, no not by by the external effects
of it.
For in her exterior cariadge ^he is common, and general as hating singularity;
by means w^erof, she euoideth much occasion of pride, and walks the more
se^urly between God and her.

Those that live an internal life do so wi^hdraw al natural inordinate
affection from creatures, that they often therefore are censured by superiors and
equals to neglect others out of pride. But they abhorring to have special
interest in any, do proceed so far as they can, according to true charity, and
mind not what others judge of them, they desiring only in all to dischardg their
duty to God, whom they regard in all things; and as they have interest in none,
so not any has interest in them. In that which they propose to Supe^iors they
proceed (as in all things else) with all sincerity, de^esting the contrary
practice even with those that are most adverse, and contrary to them, much more
with Superiors; and whatsoever they desire to do, they do it with such an
indifferency, that what event soever come of it, they remain in peace,
embracing it as Gods will, whose will is their law. If that which they propose,
either for the common good and peace of the house, or for their own g^od^ do
not seem fit in true Justice, or reason to Super^ors to be granted, they
impo^tune no farther, nor desire the favor of being condescended to in their
motion. ^ut rather (remaining themselves indifferent) that they determine and
p^oceed in it, to whom it apperta^neth.

A Superior has great reason to take heed of putting a soul from the exercise
of her internal Prayer, or so ouerchardging her with labourss, or solicitudes,
that she cannot not become r^collected ^n her daily prayer, it being a soul
that has aptnes in her to make spiritual progress by prayer, and the other
exercises of a Contemplative life; yea not only the soul her-self will feel the
unspeakable damage that w^l come to her thereby, but also the Superior himself
in the Obedtence which he expects, and is due to him from her, will see the
harm and loosse that come h by such be^ reauing of the soul of her prayer. For
she who would by discreet, prosecuting a course of mental prayer have become
subject (i^ it were necessary) even to the creature tha^ is of the least
esteem, or worth in the world, becomes now for want of that str^ng^h and help
which is gotten by such prayer; to be almost impossible to be ruled by ^he
w^sest man in the world. For living in Religion (as I can speak by experience^
if one be not in a right course of prayer and other exercis^s, between God and
our soul, ones nature grows much worse then ever it would have been if she
had lived in the world. For pride and self-loue, which are rooted in our soul
by sin, finds means to strengthen it self exceed^ngly in one in Religion,
if she be not in a cours^ that may teach her and procure her tru^ Humility. For
by the corrections and contradictions of the will (which cannot by any be
avoided, but will be, living in a Religious Community) I found my heart grown, as
I may say, as hard as a stone, and nothing would have been able to have
mollified it, but by being put into a course of prayer, by which a soul tends
toward Go^, and learneth of him the lesson of truly humbling, herself; In
which course being placed, and ever tending to the increase of Humility, even
the defects and errors she commits either out of frailty or ignorance, ^o
turn to her gain, as giving her occasion of the greater humbling of her-self
to and under God; and Humility, and the love of God (wherein al her good
consists) do each of them increase the one the other, f^r they are
inseparable companions.

It is the grace of God and tending to him by way of love, that only can so
enable a soul, that no difficulty, or disgrace can happen, which she is not
prepared for, and therefore is able willingly to embrace the same. Verily I can
affirm this by mine own experience, that a cross word, or slight reprehension
before I got into th^s spiritual course, was more insupportable to me, and did
more disquiet my mind, then all the difficul^ies or disgraces, which since have
fallen upon me, have done. For now me thinks though I be neglected by all the
world, yet by flying to our Lord he eases ^e of al my burden; and as I have
desired to have no other friend, or comforter but him so it pleases him
neither in doubts, fe^^es, pains, disgraces, nor in any other miseries
(whereunto this life of ours is so subject) to reject me; Only he exacts of me
that in all the contradictions of w^l he sends me, or permits to fall on me, I
will humble my-self and be confident in his help; Of Which, if I do so, I shall
be much more sure, then if in mine own hands I had a most absolut power.

None are able to presecute the way of the Divine Love, but they who are
resolved to to deny themselves in all things, and who willingly and wittingly
adhere to no created thing; For if the soul do willingly retain an affection to
any such thing, she is at a stop, and can go no farther. For God must be sought
and loved wholly, if we desire to arrive to Perfection.

She speaking of the Sanctity of the old Orders in old time, when they were in
their best case, or in the Prime of their good Spirits, writes and says as
as follows, viz.
THEN only the honor of God was sincearly, without intermingling of human
ends, or interests, intended and sought, and al Orders with one consent of heart
did concur to the advancement of that alone, they then applied themselves to
several exercises in the exterior every one according to his Institute, some
more easy and some more strict, some of more action, and some of less; yet
interiorly their principal end was al one, and that was to find and enjoy God
in their souls; and out of that perfect Charity which esp^^cially by those
their internal ex^rcises did gro^ in them, they did eue^y one as God did
require and enable them, employ part of their time in gaining, or doing good to
other souls. Th^n there was no great care or solicitude about temporall^ties,
God taking care, and being as it were solicitous to them; Th^n there was indeed
al sincere and real proceedings between them; Then there was perfect amity
without proper interest or fond affection to the impediment of the^r loving and
seeking after God alone; who is that One thing which only is necessary; Then
there was no acceptance of persons, but they were contented, so Gods honor
were advanced, not caring though it were done by any other Order as well as by
themselves. O Lord my God, if this Spirit might be revived again, how much
would my soul rejoice? If Saint Benets his, S. Francis h.s, S. Ig^atius his,
etc. children were perfectly, as this life will permit, united together, and
with one heart, and consent seek and labor to advance thy honor and praise, as
our founders do in Heaven, which if we did then would the S^irit of the
primitive Church flourish, and thy torn and mangled members be healed and
perfectly set again together; Then heretics and sinners would easily be
converted by them to thee; Then there would be another learning, then now there
does flourish in our Order; and thou by them would speak, who make the
tongues of infants eloquent; Wis. 10
Then they by prayer conuersing in a familiar and tender manner with thee, would
speak so, that none would be able to resist thee in them, Then their judgment
would be so cleared that they would understand most hidden myste^ies; Then an
hour of prayer would instruct them more fully, then fifty years study can do,
they having by the mean of such prayer (in all things) relation to thee the
only true wisdom, and in whose light only is true light to be seen. By loving
thee and dying to themselves in all things they would become masters of
themselves, and all the world would then nothing move them, nor would any thing
affright them, because thou would be their stay and comfort in all things.

If we will do as we ought and as is best for us, we must be subject to the will
of God in all things without exception; And this is the be^efit of an internal
life, that it makes one capable of seeing and knowing Gods will, and ^lso most
ready to perform it, Which way soever he signify it to them; which makes them
obey as readily, and willingly (merely for Gods sake and out of obedience to
him) a simple or imperfect Superior, as they would an Angel, or the Wisest
creature in the world; yea if it were possible that a worm, or any other
creature were ordained by God to rule over them, ^hey would with all their hearts
embrace his will by them. For without this total subiect^on to God, it is
impossible to become truly Spiritual. For if we resist his will in our
Superiors; in vain do we pretend to please him? This virtue therefore of
Obedience, we must learn of him the which must be grounded upon true' Humility,
that must be our stay in all things. And those two virtues of Humility and
Obedience, together with the divine virtue of Discretion, he will teach us, if
we do our parts in seeking to become more and more humble, and subject to him.
For seeing it is his will we should obey and become truly Humble, how can we
doubt but he will give us the grace, if we Humbly and perseuerantly beg it of
Him, and practice those virtues upon occasions as well as we can? For he himself
has sa^d; Luk 11.12.
when we ask our father bread, he does not give a stone, nor if we ask him
fish, will he give a serpent; much less will he deny us what is necessary to
make us pleasing to him, and we seeking, or desiring nothing but by true love
to be faithful to him. O Prayer, prayer, able to obtain al things! O how
comes it to pass my Lord, that this O^^ipotent thing ^as some of thy dear
servants term it) prayer should be so unknown, yea and even to them whom thou
tearmest the Salt of the earth contemned, (I mean Mental prayer) at least for
the practice of poor simple women, for whom they hold it above al things most
dangerous, even to my own knowledge, as I have known affirmed by Superiors of
several Orders!
O misery to be truly lamented by all that have or may have taste i^ prayer, and
by the effect thereof know how sweet a thing it is to attend only, and wholly to
the praise, and love of Go^. Surely the want of the wisdom,
which by prayer the Saints did gain, is the cause why custom and opinion do
take place for the most part in this world of true reason. Surely never was the
world reformed of its sins and errors; but it must be by the wisdom which
comes from God, and is far different From that which is accounted Wisdom by
the world, which as S. Paul says; 1. Cor. 3.19.
is folly before God.

CERTAIN OTHER DEVOtions of the same deuot Soul D. Gertrude More, which she
left written in her Breuiary.
In the fore part of her Breuiary she had framed and written the ensuing prayer
for her due performance of the divine Office, viz:

Al you that bless our Lord, exalt him al you can; for he is greater then al
your praises.

OMNIS SPIRITVS LAVDET Dominum. Let every spirit praise the Lord.
AND I ^hy poor creature, who am not worthy to name thee (my Lord my God, and
al my good) do here in the pre^sence of al thy Celestial Court desire (...)
pe^form this my Office with all diligen^^ and with an amourous affections
toward thee my ^o^, who have impos^d this sweet and most to be desired
obligation upon me sinner, who does not deserve any such honor, or comfort
from thee as to be admitted to join my cold and frozen praises with all those
who praise thee either on earth or in heaven where al to my comfort do without
ceasin^ continually praise thee. And for what is wanting in me for the
performance thereof, as I should and ought to do, supply it out of the
superaboundance of the merits and merc^; I desire to say it with all my heart
according to the intention of our holy Mother the Catholic Church; of which I
desire through thy grace to live, and die a true member; be thou according to
her desir, Adored, Blessed, Magnified, and supreamly Superexalted by ^t; Let it
be to the honor of thy al Immacula^e Mother the Lady and Queen of Angels, and
Saints, to these in a particular manner; ^ viz) to my good Angel, our most holy
Father S. Benet, S. Scholastica, S Joseph, S. Peter and S. Paul, S. John
Enangelist, S. John Baptist, S. Thomas, and my dear S. Augustine, S. Mary
Magdalen, S. Gertrude; and in fine, all that are in Heaven have by it to them
exhibited by thee what thou, willest and desire should be; I beseech thee
also that I may by it pray to thee! or al afflicted, pained, tempted, and
troubled, that they may please and praise thee in those their miseries and
overcome them to their comfort and thy glory; I also offer to thy sweet Mercy
al those souls who by deadly sin are enemies to thee, which is inde^d the
misery of miseries; O let them return to thee w^o art our beginning and the
true Center of our souls, from whom to be separated by sin ^s a most greiuous
hell, and to whom to be united by grace is a most sweet Heaven; Convert therefore
and recall those souls to thee for whom ^hou spa^edst not ^hy most precious
Blood, shedding it to the very last drop for us finners; I offer thee also my
Parents, who have placed me here in thy house, where here I may even hear and
see how to serve thee, and where I may night, and day attend to thee and praise
thee my amiable and most to be desired beloved, whom to serve and to be obliged
to love, is the only happiness in this world, and to whom to be tied by vows,
and other obligations of Religion is a most sweet servitude and yo^e, and so
sweet that no liberty is to it to be compared; I offer thee also our holy
Congregation^ and all that ever, or shall desire my poor unworthy prayers; and
above al I offer thee al those in earth, or Purgatory which thy divine Majesty
would have me pray for to thee, beseeching thee that t^y Divine will, and
pleasure may be perfectly accomplished in all creatures, and last of al though
not with the least affection, I offer to thee this thy Convent, whereof though
very unworthy of such a favor as to live in such a happy company I am a poor
imperfect member, The Benedictin Nouns at Ca^bray.
beseeching thee for thy ow^e sake, and by the love thou bear to al such as
truly seek to please thee alone, that thou will mercifully enrich their souls
with the most abundant gifts of thy grace, so that their whole study may be to
please, praise, and worship thee in spirit and truth, and especially I offer
thee those therein, that have done, do or shall hereafter, by their patience in
supporting the defects of their Sisters,
and helping them by that means to bear their burden, and by their giving
good example in Humility, Obedience, and other virtues, be a mean or help to
the maintaining of Peace in this thy house; toward which thou have showed so
much Providence, that if we cast not our whole care both for body and soul upon
thee, we shall not deserve the fau^urs thou have showed to us. We are thy little
flock; keep thou ever possession of us; let us be of one mind, and of one
heart, and let us al and every one with one consent according to thy grace given
us simply intend, and regard ^hee in all we do, t^ink, speak, or desire: thou
have called us and gathered us together, send us a good life, and a happy
death, to thy Praise, Honor and Glory, who art God of al things, and to whom
now and for ever be given al Laud and Praise by all creatures. Amen. Amen.

Delicta iuuentutis meae, and ignorantias meas ne memineris Domine.

Ab o^cultis meis munda me Domine, and ab alienis parce seruo tuo.

O Domine Spes mea; delicta quis entelligit?

O my God, my dear delight and al my h^ppines: Thou know I groan in spirit
against my-self, to think that I made no more have to couclude an everlasting
league and peace with thee my God!

O teach me to love, or let me not live, thou only can do al things, and I,
as t^ou well know, can do nothing. Behold I desire to leave al to find thee,
and to die to al created things, to the end I may live only in, and to thee. I
desire only thee, and to re^urn to thee the beginning of al creatures and the
supreme beloved of al chaste souls?

O how powerful is thy true love in a pure soul? O purify my heart and soul, so
that nothing but thy love may live in me!

O when shall I see my soul united to thee?

O when by true love shall my soul languish for thee?

O when shall I be wholly turned into the love of thee?

O that I might do in all things that which is pleasing to thee?

O when shall my soul by transcending al created things become capable by
Charity of embracing thee in the bottom of my poor soul?

O love, love, love; what wonderful effects do t^ou work in a soul? Thy love,
my God does sweeten al mi^eri^s, and makes light al burdens, and labors.

Verily nothing in the w^rld is so delight^ful to them that love it, and have
as much of it as they can desire, and enjoy all the pleasures and contents
thereof, as it is to a loving soul, that sincerely seeks thee, to suffer for
thy love.

O my God, what do we loose even in this life, when we wish for, love, or
desire any thing besides thee. It is only love that draws thee down to us, and
eleuateth us up to thee!

O who would not suffer any thing to ob^ain this love.

Nothing can comfort or satisfy my soul but to love thee.

When will thou replenish my heart with thy pure love, that rests in thee
above thy gifts, that my soul may truly adore thee in spirit and truth?

Thou know that no grass does so wither for want of water, as does my poor
sinful soul for want of ^hy love.

O that without ceasing I could praise thee!

As the s^ag, or heart beiug tired with pursuit does thirst and pant after a
sweet Spring, so does my soul after thee, it having been much more tired with
streying from thee then the poor heart can be by being chaced by his enem^es, by
as much more as it is more greiuous to be hurt by ones self, then to have it
done by others.

O when shall I in all things do thy will, that my actions may be just, and
pl^asing to thee?

O when shall I so humble my-self that I may be worthy in some sort to praise
thee whom now for my pride I am not fit to name?

Jesus Son of David have mercy on me, and of thy great pity, and Charity
remember me among the Whelps that expect and beg under thy table for one crum
of grace from thee.

Where but under the shadow of thy wings shall I repose from the heat of al
inordinate pa^^ions and desires, and from that midday Sun that parcheth and
withers away the new spriggs, or leaves of my new sown desir of loving,
praising, and pleasing thee alone, my Lord and my God? Who but thy self by thy
sw^et grace can preserve m^ from f^lling into my old sins, and sorrows? Thou
therefore art my only Ref^ge in this day of my tribulation, and amidst the
storms of this world, to thee I reveal my cause, be thou my strength and my
Glory, that I may at last laying down the burden of this mortal flesh, be
admitted into that place, where I may Praise thee for ever and ever. Amen.

O my God, when shall that time come, that I shall never more offend thee? This
is the m^sery wherein I languish, and which makes this world tedious to me:
This only is truly to be termed an affliction and misery, and nothing is truly
to be accounted misery, but to displease thy divine Majesty, Jesus Son of David
have mercy on my sinful soul.

O how happy are those that love thee? O love, love, love of my God, how far is
my sinful soul from the happiness of enjoying thee, as my soul desires?

Nothing is sweet to a heart that desires to love her God, but to sigh, long,
and pant after him.

O who will give me the wings of a Dove, that I may fly into the open wounds of
my beloved?

O my God, my only desire, how long shall I thus be estranged from thee the God
of my heart, and my portion for ever?

O the most dearly beloved of my soul, how long, shall I by inordinatly adhering
to created things b^ so far from loving thee, as I ought to do? O thou who only
deserves our love, my God and my al!

Lord my God who alone art good and just, shall I any longer love uanity, and
seek after a lie? How long shall thy dispositions and most righteous ordinances
be d^spleasing to thy poor servant? How long shall I resist thy divine will?

Verily my God, in this my misery I sigh unto thee, who art my hope from my
you^h, and am displeased with my-self for having been so ungrateful to thy
sweet mercy, acknowledging before Heaven and earth, that nothing is just, but
that which thou disposest, and nothing is well done, save so far as it is done
by thee, so much as any thing I do or say is only of mine own will and desire,
so far it justly deserves punishment, to thee be al gl^ry.

In nothing is true Peace, but in seek^ng after God a^one, and in resting ^n
him above al his gi^ts.

O my God, when shall I be able to say: Quis me separabit a Charitate Dei? Who
shall separate me, from the Charity of God? O when shall I by true love become
united to thee the only desire of my heart and soul? Vsquequo Domine
obliuisceris me in finem? Vsquequo auertis faciem tuam a me? How long will thou
forget me unto the end? H^w long does thou turn away thy face from me? will thou for ever be angry with thy poor servant? Behold thou know I desire no
other comfort upon earth, then to be able without offending thee to live
without al comfort human, or divine.

O how little to be esteemed is all the solaces this world can afford: The
wicked have been telling me of their delights, but they are not like those of
thy Law. What comfort can any creature l^uing afford a soul that sigheth, and
longs after thee alone my God, and is bannished from the beloned of her soul?

Verily my God, it is only thy-self that can rejoice and comfort such a soul,
thou only art sweet, and al things compared to thee are as nothing, and less
then nothing.

O my Lord, and my God, tell me, is there any thing in Heaven or on Earth that
can satisfy my soul besides thee? No certainly. Why then do thou permit me
thus to wander from thee, who art only worthy to be desired and beloved by my
soul?

O my most dear God, who can comprehend the misery that soul suffers, that
takes comfort or desires any comfort from any creature?

O how long shall I be subject to this mysery of inord^natly loving thy
creatures, so that it is an impediment to the loving of thee my Creator, who
art the supreme Good? To thee alone is al love due, and we do steal from thee,
when our affection is willingly carried to any thing else whatsoever.

O my God, my Mercy, let us love thee as thy divine Majesty, who art Lord of al
things and in whose power al things do stand, let me (I say) love thee as thou
would be beloved by me.

O my Lord, as-long as the peace of my soul depends of men, I can never
repose in thee, or ^ind thee in the bottom of my soul!

What came I into Religion ^or, but to love and praise my God, my Lord, and al
my good?

O when shall I as I desire, love thee and please thee my God and al my desire?

O my God, how comes it to pass that thou whose mercies are super omnia opera
eius, Above al his works, should be now termed to be terrible, and hard to
be pleased? Verily I am a sinner and the greatest of al sinners, and yet I have
found thee so good and easily pleased, that nothing is more pleasant then to
serve thee for love and to bear thy yoke from our youth: The yoke of sin is
heavy, but thine is sweet above a the cont^ntments, and pleasures of this world.

Let those that seek not thee, and that desire any thing willingly but thee,
fear, and return to the^, but let the hearts of them that love thee rejoice, O
Lord. But can I say I love? Verily not I. But shall I for this feare^ No my God,
at least not so as to loose confidence, which has in it a great remuneration,
For seeing by thy grace I desire to love, and to leave al for love, I will hop^
in thy Merc^, let it assist my extreme frailty an^ poverty: Of my-self I am
nothing, but in thy power I shall be able to do al things.

Thou know that I desire to leave al for thy sake, and that if I knew any
thing that I loved to the impediment ^of my truly serving thee, it would be so
great a g^eif to my soul, that nothing in Heaven or earth could comfor^ me til
I see my-self freed from that miserable bondage, by thy a^^isting Grace^ which
I implore from the bottom of my soul: Set me free, I mos^ humbly beseech thee
by the multitude o^ thy Mercies from the sins into which I daily fall through
my frailty, remove al imped^ments between my soul and thee, for I am frail
above al measure; Let me live to thee, dying to al other things whatsoever. Let
me find and possess thee in the bottom of my soul:
Let al creatures be ^ilent that thou alone may be heard by me: And I will not
trouble my-self with them without, who are puffing and blowing, and thereby
raising up the dust of multiplicity, into their own and others eyes.

Let me enter into the most retired place of my soul, and sing love songs to
thee, my Al and only Good, regarding thee with the simple eye of my soul, and
sighing out certa^n vnspeakabe groans in this pilgrimage of mine into the ears
o^ the only beloved of my heart and soul: woe is me, that ever I offended such a
God! Be propitious, O Lord unto my sin, for it is great! O Mercy, which has
neither end, nor measure, have pity on me, and forgive me my sins. Amen.

O Lo^d my God! Let thy Truth, and not the blindness of my own ignorance, speak
to me: Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, or at least desires to hear thee.

Behold I set open the ears of my soul, that I mny hear my beloved speak
Justice and Peace to my heart. For thy voice is sweet and thy face comely, and
there is none like unto th^e in Beawty and wisdom.

Thou my God, the repose of my labor, the joy of my soul, and the comfort of
my heart: Be to me al in all, and above al, which can be enjoyed ot desired: Let
me, O let me, rest in thee and in no created thing whatsoever!

Simplify my soul that it may be able to adhere to thee my God, transcending al
created things. O when shall my soul forget al, and only be mindful of thee, the
most pure spirit, resting in thee above al thy Graces and Gifts!

O when shall I be by profound Humility reduced to the nothing,
which only makes a a soul capable of thee, who art al good things, who art
that simple good, in which nothing is wanting?

How long shall I glory in any created thing, and seek my-self to the dishonor
of him, with out whom I could neither have life nor being, much lesse^ to be
able without him to do any thing meriting grace and Salvation?

O my God, when will thou set me free, that I may glory in thee alone, and not
by pride exalt dust and ashes, which is blown aw^y with every wind, and has no
stability in it, but so far as it is helped by thy mere Mercy. What flesh
dare^h glory in itself, or presume it is able to do any good? Verily my God, if
I had most courageously undergone all the temptations, miseries, and afflictions
that have been, or ever shall be by all thy servants together, I ought not to
think my-self able to suffer the least that can be imagined as of my-self, but
justly ought to fear mine own frailty. Let them that glory therefore glory in
thee, and not in themselves.

O that some little spark of that true light, which true Humility causes,
would enter into my soul, and never depart out of it, til I were wholly
trasformed into that love which gives thee al, and itself nothing, saving its
own defectuousnes. Thou only art Just, thou only Holy, and I the most vile and
contemptible of al thy creatutes in thine eyes, who discerns most clearly how
it stands with me for my pride and other my abominable sins. Wash me in thy
Blood, and I shall yet become whiter then snow.

What would it avail me, if I were never so great in the eyes of men, yea even
as great as I most unworthy am in mine own? Could they save me, or justify me
in thy sight? Is it not affirmed by the Spirit of al Truth, Vanitas omnis homo
viuens. Al living man is vanity, without any exception of persons? Verily my
God, we are indeed but as we are in thy sight, who iudgest according to the
Humility of our heart which is hidden from the sense of man. Man may judge that
to be Humility which indeed is pride, and there is no pride so great as that
which clotheth itself under he color of Humility, but thou can not be
deceived by any. O happy soul that only desires thee to be a witness of her
desirs, endeauours, and intentions!

Happy they that are approved by thee my God, though he^r they be despised,
neglected, and contemned by the whole world.

With what face can my soul tell my God, I desire to love him, if I do it not
more willingly, then I do, undergo the hard censures of men? Shall I desire that
which I do or say may be well thought of by others since my God him-self, was
thought to do al he did in the power of Beelzebub. Shall she who has done
nothing that is good, be in esteem, when as her beloved who is goodness and
Justice itself, was despised and contemned? O my God, far be this disloyalty
from my heart. Let me suffer for my sins, that I may become pleasing in thy
sight, which is al my soul desires.

O my God, when shall I find and possess thee in the bottom of my soul? When
shall the eyes of my body be so closed from beholding al vanity, that the eyes
of my soul may be cleared by thee to the discerning of truth? Truly thou art a
hidden God and none can walk in thy light, but the peaceful Humble, patient,
and clean of heart.

O if we did but once see in thy light of truth how little we are able to do,
or suffer of our selves, we would tremble to think we were able to do any thing
that were good, or to attribute any thing to our own endeauours, Psalm. 126.
Nisi Dominus aedificauerit domum, in vanum laborauerunt qui aedificant eam:
Nisi Dominus custodierit ciuitaetem fru^tra vigilat qui custodit eam. Unless God
build the house in vain do they la^our who build it. Unless God guard the City
in vain do they watch who guard it. It is in vain for you to rise before
light!

O light shine in my soul, and let not the darkness of mine own ignorance
ouerwhelme me, any longer!

Let my soul love, that it may live in and to thee alone my Lord God.

When will thou give me the gra^e of true Humility, which is so much spoken
of, and so hard to be known what it is indeed?

O we can never while we l^ue in this world, be secure from falling into the
cursed sin of pride which makes souls more odious to thee, then any other sin
whatsoever. O my God help me out of this snare, which lays open the way to
al other sins.

O who dare though he had been rapt into the third Heavens with S. Paul,
attribute any gift, or grace to his own desert? What have we that we have not
received? and if we have ^eceaued it, whereof should we glory? O how soon do we
loose the the labor of many years in one moment by pride? God protecteth us
and directs us if we remain humble; but in our pride he leaves us to our
selves, til we see, and feel to our cost our own weakness and misery.

O how plain does it appear to those who are now secure for all eternity in
thy Heavenly Kingdom, that if thou had with drawn thy grace from them while
they lived here, their case would have been most miserable? O how far are they
from attributing any thing to their own metits, save so far as they were merely
enabled thereto by thy grace? And how far short do they esteem their deserts to
be of the Glory, and Honor they receive from thy Merciful and bountiful hand?
What pains, what labors, what suffering of disgraces can deserve to enjoy
thee, and see thee ^ace to face ^or ever and ever? Certainly those who enjoy
this happiness, have received it by the merits of thy most bitter death and
Passion, which ( God grant) may bring me wretch also to Salvation. Amen.

O Love, love, love, when shall nothing else live in me but thy true love my
God? how long shall I remain divided from thee? When shall I by pure and perfect
love be united to my God, al impediments being removed?

When shall no created thing be able to divert my soul from attending to my Lord
God? When shall I be able to suffer without offending my God, or being weary
thereof.

O how little true peace does that soul enjoy who cares for the praises of
men, or fears their dispraises; Nothing more slippery, nothing more
unconstant, nothing more uncertain then the favor, or friendship of man, who
to day will be thy friend and extol thee to the skies; to morrow none will have
thee less in esteem then he; and what a misery then is it to place happiness
or security in the favor of man? And this o my soul, thy God permits thee to
see, to the end thou should adhere to him alone, and not to that which is
subject to fail. Desire the friendship of God alone, and then his friends both
in Heaven and earth shall be ready to serve thee for thy advancement in his love
and service. What can any man diminish of thy good by his speaking, or thinking
il of thee? Or what can he add to thee indeed by highly esteeming of thee?

Remember that al Praise is due unto God, but to thee confusion of face for thy
abominable sins. Give al Glory unto him, with out whom thou could not so much
as-haue a being. My God, be thou Adored and Exalted by all, who art Blessed for
ever and ever. Amen.

Thou, O sweet Jesus, have pronounced with thine own blessed mouth, these words?
Consueor tibi Pater Domine Caeli and terrae, quia abscondisti haec a
sapientibus and prudentibus, and re^elas^ti ^ae par^ulis; Ita Paeter, quoniam
sic placitum fuit ante te. I confess to thee Father Lord of Heaven and Earth,
that thou have hid these from the wise and prud^nt and reuealod them to little
ones. Yea Father for so it well pleased thee. These are the souls to whom thy
yoke is sweet and thy burden light these observe and see in the light of thy
truth that al thou do, or ordainest is just and true, and that it is our sin
and ignorance only that peruerteth the order of thy Justice. O let us cry out
to thee, and prepare our souls that in thy light we may see light. For it is
not human wisdom, or knowledge that will serve our turn to find out thee in the
bottom of our soul, for which we were created, and for which our soul has
such a capacity, that the very Angels are amazed to see so great an honor and
favor to be offered and bestowed upon so poor and frail a creature, and yet
that we should turn a deaf ear to our beloved, who says, his delight is to
be with the children of men. O how pitifully does this most sweet and merci^ul
God of ours lament our loss
and misery of loosing that happiness of enjoying him in our souls in an
ex^raordinary manner, yea even in this life^ if we did not cast away our love
and affect on upon created things, neglecting and forgetting the noble capacity
wherewith the has most bountifully endued our souls: Hear therefore what he
says by his Prophet; Ier. 2. 13.
Be ye astonished, O Heavens upon this, and the gates thereof, be ye extremely
desolate upon it; for two evils has my people done, (viz.) They have left and
forsaken me the Fountain of living water, and have dug for themselves
cesternes: Cesterns that are broken, that are not able to hold waters. O woe is
me my God, that I should thus have ^orsaken thee; Wha^ means this thy great
Mercy? I should have lamented m^ne own misery (of not only neglecting to seek
after thee alone, but also of most miserably offending thee infinite wa^es) and
thou bemoanedst my case as if some prejudice were thereby to come to thee! O
what would or could thou loose by my not being so happy as truly to seek
after thy love? truly nothing, seeing thy Glory cannot be added to or
diminish^d by my misery. But thy infinite Charity which brought ^hee into the
world to suffer and die for me, is the reason of thy mer^fful calling upon my
poor soul, to which thou have said; I will not the the death of a sinner, but
rather that he be converted and live. In the hope of this promise I fly to
thee: Thou who art able to do al things, help me that can do nothing: Thou
know I have placed al my hope and comfort in thee alone, and that I de^est all that is in me which is displeasing in thine eyes. Far be it from me to have any
other intention in any thing I do or omit, but simply to please thee. I
renounce al inordinate affection to al created things whatsoever, and
whatsoever I do that is not done sincearly for thy love and honor, I most
willingly submit my-self to any punishment thy just and Merciful Justice shall
lay upon me. Give what ^hou commandst, and then exact what thou please. O my
God is it much I serve thee whom all the world is bound to serve?
O what is more sweet then to serve thee for love, without any pretense of our
own commodity for time, or eternity? Truly in this lies hidden the greatest
comfort that a soul banished from thee is capable of receiving: To ^hee who art
the supreme and only true Good, by all creatures be al Praise eternally given.
Amen.

This which next of al follows she there writ, as taken out of S. Augustine,
(viz.) I was not acquainted with that true interior Justice, which judges not
by custom but by the righteous Law of Almighty God.
O My God, ap^d te est fons vi^ae, and in lumine tuo videbimus lumen; Qui
sequitur me, non ambulat in tenebris. With thee is the fountain of life, in thy
light we shall see light, who follows me walks not in darkness, and they that
walk not in thy light can never judge of things according to thy justice, but
judge according to custom, or their own sense. This true light is thy gift,
and Grace, which thou only impartest in abundance to the meek and humble of
heart, and to those who endeavor to regard and seek thee alone in all their
actions in simplicity, and sincerity of heart, and who intend thee only in all
they do or omit.

(Underneath the picture there annexed of saint William Duke of Aquitain, she
had written as follows, viz.
O my God through the me^its and intercession of this most glorious Saint, be
merciful to me sinner, and give me grace to love, and praise thee with all my
soul and strength, and neither for time, or eternity to seek or desire any
thing, but only thy-self alone simply, and purely by sincere and perfect love,
resting in thee my God above al gifts and creatures, and Adoring thee who art
God Blessed for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

Man's life on earth is a continual warfar, and living but a short time, he is
replenished with many miseries. VVatch therefore and pray that you enter not
into temptation. By Humility and Prayer we shall be able to pass through any
difficulties.

(To the image of death there annexed together with other ensei^nes of death,
she added these following words, viz.)

O how little to be esteemed, or desired is all that passes away with time.

( Thus far of her Devotions written by her in her Breuiary within ihe year
before she dyed.]

HERE FOLLOVV SOME other Devotions of the same pious soul D. Gertrude More.
A short Oblation of this small work by the writer gatherer thereof to our most
sweet and Merciful God.
MT GOD to thee I dedicate
This simple work of mine,
And also with it heart and soul;
To be for ever thine.
No other motive will I have,
Then by it thee to praise.
And stir up my poor frozen soul
By love itself to raise.
O I desir neither tongue, nor pen
But to extol Gods praise,
In which exces ^le melt away
Ten thousand thousand ways^
And as one that is sick with love
Engraues on every Tree
The Name and Praise of him she loves
So shall it be with me.
IF the glorious light of thy Church Saint Augustine, whose heart was so inflamed
with love, that the whole world was a witness thereof (and ever will be to thine
honor from whom proceeds al good.) If he (I say) stood need of gathering out
of thy Soly Scriptures and the writings of holy Saints, somewhat that might
eleuate his mind to thee, when he grew more cold by reason of humain frailty
(as he professes before his Manuel) whose words I will hereafter bring in as
being most sweet to me) wha^ need then has my poor soul to gather together
certain devout and amou^rous words, who scarsely in the reading thereof can
lift up my heart to thee; but my hope is in thy Metcy, which is above al thy
works, and out of which thou have said by thy Prophet, Psalm. 35.
Men and beasts thou will save. To this Mercy I fly, in this Mercy is al my
comfort and consolation, I cast my-self into the arms of this thy Mercy and
Pity, I have nothing wherein I can trust. Some have suffered for thee in their
body, others in their mind, others in both; Some for thee have taken great
pains, and undergone great labors and austerities, others by couradgiously
^upporting disgraces and miseries, have become thereby most dear to thee,
others while they were afflicted and persecuted, prayed to thee for their
enemies, and thereby procured pardon for their own sins. But ala^ my God, as for
me, when I cast back mine eyes upon my life past, I can find nothing done or
suffered by me wherein I can hope, wherein I can trust. Al those things which I
behold others daily to practice, are, far fromme, I have lived in this house,
(of whom I may truly say; Psalm. 23.
Haec est generatio quaerentium faciem Dei Jacob. This is the generation of
those that seek the face of the God of Jacob) unmindful and ungrateful to the
God of Jacob; yea my whole life has been full of sin and iniquity, and without
end or measure have my offenses been against thee; yea justly may thou
condemn me to the bo^tomlesse pity of hell. But yet I will hope in thee. I am
sorry from the very bottom of my heart that ever I offended thee, or straied
from thee. Behold I now consecrate my-selfa new body and soul to thee, take
away from my soul what therein displeases thee. Al thy Angels, and Saints be
intercessors for me, especially thy dear Mother, the faithful helper and
Advocate of us sinners.

TO OUR BLESSED LADY the Advocate of sinners.
AL hail, O Virgin, crowned with stars,
and M one under thy feet,
Obtain us pardon of our sins
of Christ our Savior sweet.
For though thou art Mother of my God,
yet thy Humility
Disdaineth not this simple wretch,
that flies for help to thee.
Thou know thou art more dear to me,
^hen any can expres^e,
And that I do congratulate
with joy thy happiness;
Who art the Queen of Heaven and earth,
thy helping hand me lend,
That I may love and praise my God,
and have a happy end.
And though my sins me terrify,
yet hoping still in ^hee
I find my soul refreshed much
when I unto thee fly.
For thou most willingly to God
p^titions do present,
And do obtain much grace for us
in this our ba^nishment.
The honor and the glorious praise
by all be given ^o thee,
Which Jesus t^y beloved Son
or^aind e^ern^lly
For thee, whom he exalts in heaven
above the Ange^s al,
And whom we find a Patroness,
when unto thee we c^l.
Amen.
O Matter Dei,
^e ^ento mei. Amen.
As also my good Angel, S. Joseph. Saint John Evangelist, S. Martin, S.
Augustine, S. Thomas of Aquin, and thou my most holy Father S. Benet.

To our most Holy Father Saint BENEDICT.
MOst glorious Father in whose School,
I live and hope to dye,
God grant I may observe thy Rule,
for in that al does lie.
For no perfection can be named,
which us it does not teach.
O happy she, who in her soul,
the sense thereof does reach!
But many praise Obedience`
and thy humility,
And yet conceive not as they should,
what either of them be.
The simple humble loving souls
only the sense find out
Of any discret obedient Rule,
and these are void of doubt.
Yea under shadow of thy wings
they up to heauen^ fly,
And taste here in this veil of tears
what perfect peace does lie,
Hid in perform^nce of thy Rule
that leads unto heaven;
O happy souls who it perform,
the ways so sweet and even!
By Prayer and Patience its fulfilled,
Charity, Obedience,
By seeking after God alone,
and giving none offense.
The more I look upon thy Rule,
the more in it I find,
O do to me the sense unfold,
For letter makes us blind!
And blessed, yea a thousand times,
Be thou who it have writ,
And thy sweet blessing give to them,
who truly perform it.
For those are they which will conserve
this house in perfect peace,
Without which al we do, is lost,
and al that's good will cease.
And praised be our glorious God,
who gave to thee such grace,
Not only him thy-self to seek,
but also out to trace
A way so easy and secure,
if we will but thee hear,
To have relation to our God,
who is to us so near,
For at this thou do chiefly aim,
that God our souls do teach.
O if we did truly obey,
he would by all things preach
His will to us by every thing
that did to us befall;
And then as thou desirst it should
he would be al in all-
O pray dear Father that he ever be,
our only love and al eternally. Amen.
Saint Scholastica, S. Gertrude, and in fine al in heaven, or on earth that are
pleasing to thee, be pleased to make me partaker of their merits and prayers;
and above al wash me in thy precious Blood, one drop whereof had been
sufficient to have redeemed a thousand worlds. In this is my hope and
confidence, by this I hope to be enriched with all that is wanting in me: For,
in that thou art and possessest, I more rejoice and exult, then if I had
whatsoever in earth, or in heaven I could desire at my command. In this joy I
cry out withal my heart, with all my soul, and with all my strengh: O how much
good, and happiness do I possess, seeing my God, (who is more my-self then I
my-self am) does possess so infinite Glory, Majesty, and so infinite good
things: for indeed I have, and hold him more mine own, then any thing that ever
I had, or held heertofore. This is the comfott of my poverty and the repose of
my labor. This my most delightful, most amiable, most bright and beawtiful,
and most Glorious God, is always present with me, to hear my praises and
receive my petitions. In him I am rich, though in my felf I am poor and
contemptible. To him my most loving God, be given now and ever al Laud and
Praise, and Glory, by all in heaven and earth for ever and ever. Amen.

These Collections once more I offer to thee my God, and those that in perusing
thereof are moved thereby to love and praise thee, be they my ( Go^) mindful of
me in their holy prayers, which are most pleasing to thee. And I also desire
that some will out of their Ch^rity read these things to me which hereafter
follow, when sick to death^ shall be becompassed with those fears and terrors
which ordinarily accompany that dreadful hour; at which time, as al other, be
thou my helper and Protector^ and in the Bowels of thy Mercy Good Father,
rem^mber me poor beggar, and from heaven send me now and at my departure thy
Grace which may bring me to thee where I may with all thy Elect, Praise^ Adore
and worship thee for ever and ever.

An act of Contrition, partly taken ou^ of the words of blessed S. Augustine.
1. O LORD I confess I have sinned above the sands of the Sea in number, yet
such is the grief which I take thereat, that I will not refuse to suffer any
kind of pun^shment for the same. O Jesus, whatsoever thy will shall be that I
should do, I desire to perform it according to thy holy will. I have nothing to
offer unto thee, but a heart willing to do whatsoever thou ^ouldst have me.

2. H^er I offer my-self bound both hand, and foot, and I lie prostrate at thy
feet craving pardon for my abominable sins and offenses.

3. I fly not away, I appeal not from thy sentence, o^herwise then from thy
Justice to thy Mercy which we sinners do daily experience to be above al thy
works.

4. I do not plead to be released of any punishment, but rather that thou may
judge me according to thine own Blessed will, only let me not be separated from
thee.

O thou thy-self do say to us:
Thou will not sinners death,
But that we do convert and live
even while our souls have breath,
And no more then to cease to be
can thou (O God) refuse
To pardon humble penitents
that do themselves accuse,
Being no accepter of persons
al having cost thee dear,
Yea even thy very life; itself
how can I therefore fear?
If ever yet he did disdain
sinners that fled to him,
Then had I little cause of hope,
but this was never seen.
For if they do return to thee,
thy heart thou will not close,
As witness can my wretched soul,
who was so like to lose
Al grace and goodness (if thou had
not me with help prevented)
By sins that would with bloody tears,
be while I live lamented,
If I as grateful were to thee,
as thou deseruest I should,
Or as another in my case
vuto thy mercy would.
But thou whiles that thou liuedst here,
by tokens plain did show,
That none should be refused by thee,
who do in mercy flow.
And that my wicked heart did prove,
who after ^ins so many
Has found much favor in thine eyes,
without deserving any.
O blessed ever be my God,
for this preventing grace,
Which I vnwor^^y have receaud
in this most happy place.
I fled from thee by many sins,
and thou did follow me,
As if my ruin would have causd
some detriment to thee.
How can this choose but wound my heart,
when I remember it,
And ever serve to humble me,
while at thy feet I sit?
From whence my Lord, my God, and al,
permit me not to rise,
til I do love thee as thou would,
the which does al comprise.
5. I know thou wilst not the death of a sinner, but rather that I be converted
and live.

6. Be pacified therefore I beseech thee for thine own sa^e, and receive me into
thy favor, look upon thine own wounds, and let them plead my pardon; do not
for ever blot me out of ^he book of life, but rather give me grace, faithfully
hereafter to serve and please thee.

7. I know it is reason, that one who has been so ungrateful to thy Supreme
Majesty, as I have been should humbled, despise and willingly abase himself
even at the feet of al creatures, which thy sweet Goodness grant me to do, that
I may hereafter find savor in thine eyes, who be blessed and praised by all for
ever. Amen.

O sweet Jesus to whom nothing is impossible but not to be merciful to the
miserable; forgive me mine offense; I am sorry from the bottom of my heart that
ever I offended thee, or contradicted thy holy will; but I know thou can
forgive more then I can offend, which makes me confident of being received
into thy favor, though thy most abundant Mercy; to whom my God be given al
Laud. Honor, and Praise, by all creatures in heaven and in earth for ever and
euer^ Amen.

O amiable Jesus behold al thy creatures do inuit and exhort me to yeald th^e
praises for all thy benefits, which have been (I must ackowledg) without end or
measure toward me thy unworthy creature. Every creature does in their kind
sing and set forth thy great Goodness, inuiting me to love only thee; and yet
behold how cold and dull I am in Loving, Praising, and Exalting thee! O what
shall I say? but cry out to thee, who art my hope, my help, my Love, my life and
Al; yea my Father, my Spouse, and my God, to grant thy Grace may not be void in
me after so many infinite benefits! O be thou hereafter the only desire and joy
of my soul. Let me look after nothing but thee, love nothing but thee, let me
night and day sigh and long after thee my beloved. Let it suffice me to have my
inteutions and proceedings only approved by thee. O let me honor, and respect
al for thy sake, howsoever they treat me; for my ingratitude has been so
great to thee, that al creatures as well go^d as bad, may justly despise me, and
do thee great honor thereby. I offer thee therefore thine own merits seeing I
have none of mine own, for those that shall any way revenge thy quarrel by
afflicting her, who deserves nothing but hell for having so often offended thee.

After something which she had collected out of the following of Christ
concerning Prayer. she writ as follows.
O MY Lord God, how much do thy Saints praise and commend the holy Exercise of
Prayer. O how happy are those that have no other study, or care, then how to
extol, and praise thy Divine Majesty, and in Humility of heart to make their
necessities known unto thee, who art the Father of Mercies, and Dius totius
consolationis, qui consolatur nos in omni tribulatione nostra. And the God of
al consolation, who comforts us in all our tribulation. To whom should we
sinners fly, but to thee my God? who did thou ever reject that lamented and
was sorry for their sins? Nay did not publicans, and harlots find thee more
willing to forgive, the^ they could be to ask for pardon? Thou who forgauest
S. Peter, S. Mary Magdalen, S. Augustine and infinite others their sins and
offenses, be merciful to me, who groaneth in spirit against my-self, to see,
and remember that I have made no more have to conclude an everlasting peace and
league with thee, O my God!

To thee now all the powers of my scattered, defiled, and deformed soul, does
aspire.

Behold I do extol now thy dear service to the sky; professing and protesting
that there is no liberty so sweet, as to be bound and obliged by vows to serve
thee for love.

Thou true and most blessed God, how did thou with a most sweet and severe
kind of Mercy, receive, chek, and convince me, straying, and flying from thee,
by shamefully seeking that in thy creatures, which is only to be found in thee,
to wit, comfort, and peace?

O Lord, I am thy servant; say unto my soul, I am thy Salvation, and all that is
within me shall say; Quis similis tibi, Deus meus. Who is like unto thee my
Lord God.

Behold, I have had an auersion from all that which thou love, and an
inclination to al which thou hate: But thou have broken my bands, and I will
offer thee a Sacrifice of Praise, submitting henceforth my stifneck to thine
easy yoke, and my shoulders to thy light but then.

Underneath a picture of B. John de Cruce, she writ as follows, viz.
O Blessed and pure Saint, pray for me sinful wretch, who am not worthy to call
upon thee, yet coafiding in thine inflamed charity, I commit and commend
my-self to thy sweet protection now and at the dreadful hour of my death,
remember me I beseech thee. Amen.

(To some Collections which she drew out of S. Augustins Confessions, she added
as follows.)
Good God be merciful to mine iniquities for this dear Saints sake of thine,
whose Humility does so astonish me, that I cannot choose but cry with a loud
voice in my heart, O how admirable art thou in thy Saints? What are his whole
Books of Confessions, but a profound acknowledgment of his sins, whieh he
does not only confess to thee, but to all the world, to the end that al may
perpetually praise thy Mercy? But O my God for this Humility of his, thou have
highly exalted him: for which be thou eternally magnified and praised by all
creatures. He was one of those sinners for whose conversation, There was more
joy in Heaven, then upon ninty nine Just; and not without great cause, seeing
he was to be a chief pillar in thy Church, and one who might and did draw
infinite sinners by his words and writings out of the mire and dreggs of sin,
and taught them to submit themselves to thiue easy yoke, and to se^ue thee for
love, and to glory in nothing but thee. Yea what is wanting in his words, that
may inuit our souls to love thee with all our hearts, with all our strengths, and
our neighbor as our selves? Who can spea^e in the words of thine own Oracles
more comfortably to sinners then he has done? ^n fine h^s words are so
amorously sweet in thy Praises, that even my frozen soul had been melted there^
by into thy praise. He for thy sake be an Advocate and Intercessor to thee for
me, the most sinful, and contemptible of al the servants, he I say, to whom
many sins were forgiven, because he loved much, whom I desire together with all the Celestial Court, to Adore, and Praise thee for me, who am not worthy to
name thee who be ever blessed. Amen.

In a Collection which she was making out of the Book of Psalms, she added to
some verses as follows.
Psalm. 23. verse. 6.
THis is the generation of them that seek him: of them that seek the face of
the God of Jacob (I pray God it may prove so with us to his Honor and Glory)

^s^l. 31. ve^s. ^0.
I will give thee understanding: and will instruct thee in the way that thou
shall go, I w^l fasten mine eyes upon thee. (who is not wholly inflamed with a
desire to seek after God alone, to hear such a promise from his own
mellifluous mouth.)

Psalm. 35. verse. 10.
Because with thee is the fountain of life: and in thy light we shall see light.
(I beseech al those devout souls that shall peruse this book, to labor
carefully for that light which the Prophet here speaks of; which proceeds
from love,
and not from human wisdom. This light, (by which we shall discern truth from
falsehood) is gotten by conuer^ing with Almighty God, and humbling our selves
under his mighty hand. This light has taught many their way to God, that could
neither write nor read. Sweet Jesus make us of the number of these little ones
to whom this light is revealed which is hidden from the wise and prudent; which
is bestowed upon those that faithfully adhere to God, and not on those that
glory rather in themselves them in him. He be Blessed and Praised by all, for
ever and ever. Amen.

Psalm. 86. verse. 5.
Reveal thy way to our Lord and hope in him: and he will do it. (A comfortable
saying for those that God permits still to remain (do wh^t they can) in their
imperfections.

v. 7. Have no emulation in him that appears in his way: v. 6. Be subject to
our Lord and pray him. (Note this well.)

v. 11. The meek shall inherit the land: and shall be delighted in multitude of
peace. (If we truly labor for his peace, (which is in much Patience) the God
of Peace will be amongst us.)

v. 25. When he shall fall he shall not be bruised, because our Lord puts his
hand under. (O what an incouradgment is this to a poor frail soul; Let us
notwithstanding our imperfections, confidently, and amo^ously when we fail,
hope in his Mercy, and then He will heal and help us, who makes us so many
sweet promises. Who be blessed by all creatutes for ever and ever. Amen.

v. 26. I have been young (for I am old) and I have not seen the just forsaken,
nor his seed seeking bread. (Why do we distruct then, who have dedicated our
selves wholly to God, fearing to depend only of his divine Prouiden^e,
which is the greatest happiness in this world, and so much to be desired if we
had so much love, and couradge as we should.

Psalm. 38 v. 8.
Doubtless al things are vanity every man living. O my poor soul, take good
notice of this verse; Adhere to our Lord whose years never fail, and whose
help is always at hand Give that to God that is Gods, and that to Caesar that
is Caesar's: mark what the Prophet faith in the same Psalm, viz. And now what
is my Expectation, is it not our Lord? and my substance is with thee.

Psalm. 39. verse. 15.
But thou O Lord make not thy considerations far from me: thy Mercy and thy
truth have always received me. (O be thou ever blessed for it by all creatures,
my God and Al. Amen.

Psalm. 40. verse. 1.
Blessed is the man that understands concerning the needy and the poor: in
the evil day our Lord will deliver him. (O my poor soul, though thou have not
where with to relieve the poor in the i^ hunger and thirst; yet despair not to
gain this blessing that our Lord will prot^ct thee in the evil day, which thou
stand so much need off. For, to pray for those that afflict thee, and render
good for evil to those that molest thee, and being a comfort in all thou can
imagine, to those that are afflicted either in body or in m^nd without exception
of persons, is included in the gaining of that most to be desired promise.
Remember with joy, and imitate the best thou art able, the happy example of
the late blessed Bishop of Geneua, of whom it is reported, that one in his
diocese exce^dinly molesting, afflict^ng, and persecuting this holy Saint, yet
he used him with all love, gentleness, and respect; yea more then any other
person. At which patient proceeding of his one of his subjects wondr^ng at, and
speaking to him of it, asked him how he could use that man so mildly, who never
requited him with other then il turns for all the grace he showed him, being as
it were top full of bitterness against him To which the Saint humbly answ^ered, O
^a^th he, if he should put out one of mine eyes I woul smile upon him w^h the
other. I beseech thee my God for thy own sake, grant thy unworthiest servant
grace to imi^ate this example; though to speak truly, none can do her an
injury, who deserves so much in punishment for her sins.

Psalm. 41. verse 6. and 7.
VVby art thou sorrowful my soul? and why do thon trouble me? Hope in God;
because yet I will confess to him: the salvation of my coun^^nance, and my God.
(O my soul, hope in thy God, who can do al things! O blessed Hope and
Confidence, which is able to obtain al things, and overcome al things.

v. 11. In the day our Lord has commanded his Merey: and in the night a song
of him. Do thou not hear my soul, t^y Lord does require of thee? Mercy
toward thy even Christian, for that he shows to thee. And that night and day
thou w^lt sing his Praise. But Lord thou know that thy Praise is not seemly
in the mouth of a sinner. What then shall I do? O, hope in thy Mercy!

Certain ^omfortable sayings, taken out of the holy Scripture; for the
encouradgment of those that desire with all their hearts to Love and please our
most merciful God, and first out of the Prophet Isaie.
Chap. the first.
Verse 16.
VVASH you, be clean: take away the evil of your cogitations from mine eyes:
C^ase to do peruersly.

17. Learn to do good: Seek judgment, succor the oppressed, judge for pupil,
defend the widow. And come, and accuse me, says our Lord.

18. If your sins shall be as scarlet, they shall be made as whit as snow: and if
they be as red as vermilion, they shall be whit as wool.

19. If you be willing: and will hear me, you shall eat the good things of the
earth.

22. Thy silver is turned into dross: thy wine is mingled with water. (But
hear what follows, O my soul, and therefore be not discomforted though al thou
do and suffer be very imperfect; yet behold what he promises who can do
al things. If he will, he can make thee clean. If he command, the wind and sea
will be still, and there will e^sue a calm. Commit thy ^elf to him, and he will
help thee when he thinks fit. O God, thy will be done therefore in me for ever
and ever. Amen.

25. I will turn my hand to thee. and boil out thy dr^ss^ ^il it be pure: and
will take away al thy tin^e.

26. After these things thou shall be called the Just, a faithful City.

(Shall I fear to be forsaken by thee my God, after al these sweet promises?
No, I will hope in the multitude of thy Mercies. Though I have hitherto sinued
against Heaven and before thee, so that I am not worthy to be called thy child;
yet let me eat of the crumes which fall from my Masters table, that I may grow
stronger hereafter in resisting that which makes me displeasing in thy pure
eyes. Hear, my Lord the voice of a sinner, which would feign love t^ee, and
with her heart and soul as greatly please the as ever she bath offended thee.
Let me either love, or not li^e. I know thy Merci^s are so great, that t^ou
have admitted those to eat of the bread of Angels, which hertofore fed of
Husks like swine; yea S. Gertrude says, that the more base, vile, and
contemptible the creature is to whom thou show mercy, the more extolled art
t^ou by all thine Angels, and Saints in Heaven. I will therefore hope in thee,
and beseech al t^y Saints to pray for me, and praise t^ee for taking pity of
me, who am not worthy to cast vp`mine eyes to Heaven much les to think upon,
or praise t^ee. To thee O my God and al my desire be given perpetual Praise and
Adoration for all eternity by all creatures! Amen.

CHAP. II.
Verse 3.
COme let us go up to the Mount of our Lord, and to the house of the G^d of
Jacob: and he will teach us his ways and we shall walk in his ^athes.

5. Hou^e of Jacob come ye: and let us walk in the light of our Lord. (O my
God, happy are they that walk in this light. In this light none walk but the
Humble and clean of heart, and those that serve thee for love, whose joy thou
thy-self art, and who sing with the Prophet: Rennit consolari anima mea. My
soul refused to be comfor^ed. These do in some sort more or less as thou
please, find how sweet and happy a thing it is to seek, and sigh after thee
alone. Return, my soul, to thy beloved; return, seek for no consolation, but
put thy hope in God. Commit thy-self unto God, and let him do with thee what
pleases him. Never seek thine own glory; never desire thy will may be done:
but in all things intend, love, and prefer the Glory and will of God. If any
come unto him, he shall not return empty, because he willngly gives water to
the thirsty. In the bowels of thy Mercy my God, remember me poor beggar, born
and living in blindness. Grant me that I may see and walk in ^hy light, that my
soul may become truly pleasing to thee, O my Lord God, whom only I desire to
love, serve and praise, make me in all things conformable to thy holy will, who
be blessed for ever and ever. Amen. Amen. Amen^

Scio cui credidi, and certus sum^ I know whom I have trusted and am secure,
says S. Paul. O glorious S. Augustine my dear Patron, whom from my infancy (in
my poor mauer) I have honored in a particular manner, and who have been always
ready to assist me in calling upon thee, I beseech thee for the love of him, by
whose love thy heart was so inflamed, to assist me at the hour of my death, and
obtain for me of our Lord, that living and dying I may be wholly conformable to
his Blessed will; neither desiting for time, or eternity any other thing, then
that his divine pleasure be perfectly accomplished in me, his unworthy, and
ungrateful creature. And in that dreadful hour of my death, obtain for me
wretched sinner, confidence in his Mercies which are (as thou know) above al
his works. I am not worthy to love: but he is worthy of al love and Adoration.
I cannot without great joy remember these following words of the Prophet I
say; hoping his Goodness will for his own sake give me leave to apply them to me
poor and sinful soul, though I desetu^ nothing of my-self; never having done
him any faithful service in all my life.

Chap 43. v. 1. And now thus says our Lord that created thee and formed thee:
Fear not, because I have redeemed thee, and called thee by thy name, Thou art
mine.

2. When thou shall pass through the waters I will be with thee, and the floods
shall not cover thee: when thou shall walk in fire, thou shall not be ^u^ned,
and the flame shall not ^urn in^ thee. (O blessed Saint make intercession for
me, that I may be confident in him, who thus abounds with Mercy. Amen.)

3. Because I am the Lord thy God the Holy one of Israel thy Savior.

4. Since thou becamest honorable in mine eyes and glorious I have loved thee.

5. Fear not, because I am with thee.

6. And every one that inuocateth my name for my glory I have created him,
formed him, and made him.

8. Bring forth the blind people, and having eyes, the deaf and he that ^ath
ears:

9. Let them give their witness and be justified.

10. In very deed you are my witness says our Lord, and my servants whom I have
chosen, that you may know and believe me and understand that I my self am.

11. I am, I am the Lord, and there is no Savior beside me, and there is not
that can deliver out of my hand.

16. Thou says our Lord that gave away in the Sea, and a pa^h in the v^h^men^
waters.

18. Remember not former things, and look not on things of old. I am he that
takes clean away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and I will not remember
thy sins.

26. Bring me into remembrance, and let us be judged together. Tell me if thou
^aue any thing that may be justified.

Hethertho the words of the Prophet I say.

S. John 2. v. 12. I writ to you little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his name. And now my children abid in him, that when he shall appear we
may have confidence and not be confounded of him in his coming. My dearest
believe not every spirit; and every spirit that dissolueth Jesus is not of God.

Fear is not Charity, but perfect Charity casts out fear. Let us therefore
love God: because God loved us. This is the Charity of God that we keep his
Commandments: and his Commandments are not beauty.

O infinite Goodness, who art Charity itself, power thy Grace abundantly into
my poor foul. I inuoke thee my God, by the merits, and intercession of al thy
Saints in Heaven, and servants on earth; to have mercy on me now in this my
last extremity. Al I desire is, that in life and death I may be disposed of
according to the multitude of t^y most abundant Mercies a fountain never drawn
dry^ Al my joy is in that thou art, my God, and that I am at thy disposing.
Though I am poor in all vertnes, yet I am confident to be partaker of thy
Merits, o sweet Jesus which thou liberally bestowest, according to thy will and
pleasure! O be thou blessed in all thou disposest! O my God, who art al I
desire. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, who art blessed for ever. Amen.

The most learned of D. S. Augustine says.

Ai^ eruditissimus Doctorum Augustinus.
O eternal Truth, and true Charity, and
O aeterna veritas and vera Charitas,
Dear Eternity. Thou art my God to thee
and chara Eteruitas. Tu es Deus meus,
I suspire day and night! This is that subliue
Tibi suspiro die ac nocte. Hic est sublimis ille.
Contemplative Augustine.
Contemplator Augustinus.
Cuius cor Charitas Christi vulnerauera^: whose heart the Charity of Christ had
wounded. O my dear Sa^nt, whose great Humility, I can never to much praise and
admire: pray for her to whom thou have been in her greatest afflictions and
mi^eries even as a Father and Mother; for which be exhibited honouur to thee by
the most sweet heart of JESUS our Savior, the Son of the living God: by which
and from which does most abundant sweetness flow to all the elect. In the power
that he gave thee, being one by whom he bound, and loosed sinners, give an
abundant benediction to thy poor servant, and beg of my God that I may never
seek or intend any thing for time or eternity, but his honor and Glory and
that I may so humble and subject myself under his mighty hand, tha^ for his
love I may will^ngly submit my-self in what manner he pleases to al creatures.
Let me commit, and commend my-self to thy protection, who art a careful
receauer of al my petitions, and who art one who in a most particular manner
God^ has given me confidence in, in all ^he necessities wherein my soul does
stand need of an Aduocat and friend. O happy change to leave al friends on
earth to find the more certaiu and assured friends and Intercessors in Heaven,
who are never absent, never uncertain, nor ever do they fail as those in this
world are subject to do! Be therefore mindful of me I beseech thee, in my life
and also in my last extremity; and remember, that when affrighted with the
multitude and greiuoushes of my sins and imperfections, I durst scarsely cast
up mine eyes to Heaven, or call upon God and his Blessed Mother, who might
justly disdain so ungrateful and contemptible a creature; Yet by thy means,
and being incouradged by thy example, and reading thy life and books so full of
Con^idence and sweetnes^ I found my heart lightened, and my spirit refreshed, and
my soul exceedingly comforted, finding in thee and by thee expressed, what a
good God we have, and that as his Mercies are above al his works, so he is able
to forgive more then we can offend. Thou know, thy very name, when I am sad
and afflicted, does refresh me to behold it, and seems to smile upon me in my
miseries, assuring me of ^hy help in all my soul stands need of thee, in this
my pilgrimage and ban shment from my God, who is my only love, life, desire,
and al my happiness. T^ whom for ever be al Glory, Honor, an^ Ado^ation, by all
as well on earth, as in Hea^en^ and whom, by his sweet Mercy and thy
intercession, I desire and hope to love, and s^rue for ever and ever, Amen.

Omnes qui habebant infir^os ducebant illes ad Iesum, and sanaba^^ur. Luk 4.40.
All that had diseased brought them to Jesus, and they were cured^ To whom
therefore should I fly in my manifold infirmities, but to thee my Jesus, my Go^,
and my Savior? Who is worthy o^ our loves, our thoughts, our hearts, and our
souls, but thy own self my Lord, who made us for this alone, that by true
sincer^ affection we should adhere to thee, the chief and supreme Good? O woe
is me, i^ for any intention, or for any creatures sake whatsoever; I should do
any thing with other intention willingly, then to please and become inwardly in
the bottom of my sou^ united to thee, here by grace, and in Heaven for all
eternity. Al things and creatures fail, only t^y-self art constant, thou art
alwaye^ present, always willing to help thy poor servants, and ever ready ^o
cure our wounds^ which through human frailty by sin we daily cause in our souls.

Let us who have been greiuous sinners, and do so abundantly experience thy
Mercy, give great and continual praise to thee our God, who has sweetly
redeemed us to thy-self in the Blood of Jesus thy Son the immaculate Lamb,
giving us thereby hope of remission of our innumerable sins. Great art thou O
Lord, and exceeding worthy of al Praise. O let al things Adore and Exalt my
God, with all their soul, and strength. What other study, what other endeauour^
or what other desire, shall possess my soul willingly day, or night; but that I
may in all, and above al things, praise, and love my God. As nothing is superior
to a soul but thy self, so nothing but thou can satisfy and satiat our souls in
Heaven o^ earth; nothing I say but thy-self, to whom ouly let my heart ^ende,
and only in all things intend. Thou being the only true and proper Center of our
heart and soul, what can make this miserable banishment (where to my grief I
daily offend thee) tolerable to me, but only to aspire to thee by sighs,
desires, and unspeakable groans, in my heart and soul? O let true love unite me
to thee, who art by all Adored and Praised for all eternity in thy Heavenly
country. Amen.

Some speeches of heathen Consuls and Philosophers, which show Christians their
duty and also their happiness in knowing how to make good use of their knowledge
to their Salvation, in which those Heathens perished, beca^s they did not
believe and acknowledge our Lord God; but vanish away in their own cogitations,
by seeking only fame, honor, and applause of the people, etc. which yet in
their wisdom they saw to be but an uncertain vanity.
AND first. The answer of one of the greatest and wi^est of them; when he wa^
offered power, and honor, and sacrifice, according to their custom of using
such as for wisdom nobility, and couradg deserved it in their eyes.

The more (says he) I conside^ with myself of things done both in old and
later times, the more the uncertainties and vanities of fortune in all moral
affairs o^cur^e to my rememhrance, and the more plainly does their vanity
appear unto me. (O my God, what a de^inition is here of a heathen, which did
not so much as know thee, or for what end this uncertainty was in them
permitted by thee. What a shame is it, if we who are not only Christians but
religious should esteem or seek after any thing but thee, in whom alone is
stabili^y to be found and enjoyed? One hing is necessary.
Let chance, fortun, and power (where it is given by thee) d^spose of al things
as they will, as for me, I w^l sing in all occurrences; It is good for me to
adhere to my Lord God, the only desire and beloved of my soul and heart. I will
hau^ no care or study, but how I may in all chances spend my whole forc^s and
strength in his Praise, who be Adored prostrat by all creatures for ever and
ever, Amen. Amen.

ANOTHER SAID.
Such as stand in fear, are irresolute in all their determinations. (He spoake
it of those who out of fear to displease, and desire to please for human
respects, became ^hereby a slave to every ones humor, and keept not their
freedom and liberty, which was got by suppressing of natural passions.

Another speaking in a controversy where one was to be judge of two accusing on
another,
and defending themselves before the Senate, says, The truth or thing
believed, and wrested to the worst, are easi^y to be discerned by one judge if
he be vise, upright, and just, and not interrested in neither side.

Also another said. That the disloyal are odious even to those whose
instruments they are: Of a little beginning, comes often great inconvenience,
which might be prevented by doing as one of the Heathens d^d, who excelled most
of his time in Nobi^ity, wisdom and al moral virtues, who had so great temper
over his affections and passions, that neither for honor (as being offered to
be made a King) nor for gain,
would he be false to his P^i^ce, who yet favored him ^o little by reason he
was so much honored by all the common wealth^ that he gave way to have him
poisoned at thirty years of age, he being also his own father that was Caesar.
He was so just, that in mat^ers of the greatest controversy he always did true
Justice, and his enemy whom he knew sought his death, he honored as his
Partner, being yet in nobility much his inferior, but boar rule with him at
Caesar's command. This enemy being once at a ba^quet with him where most of the
Nobility were present, he uttered such disgraceful words and speeches of him to
his face, that al were amazed to see him not so much as change his coun^enance
at him. And after this, hearing he was in distress at Sea, he sent his own
Conuoy to deliver him from drowning, though he knew his journey was to accuse
him to Caesar and the Senate, and also to plot his death, which indeed heat last
achiued, being both at one Bancquet not long after: which example shows us
how amiable virtue is even in the very Heathens, in whom it was but moral, ^how
much ought we to practice it, in whom by Charity it becomes Divine? O how
truly glorious are they my God, who indeed posses thy love, which so worthily by
holy Scripture is termed, most Honorable wisdom? But alas to humain frailty
it is hard to put up injuries, much more to do good for evil, at least nature
suggesteth to us, that it is unpleasant, and therefore urges us,
not to put up this, or that, least those who are contrary to us do add
difficulty upon difficulty, seeing we put it up so quietly. But this pretense
of nature is so falls, and often, even in humain respects, so inconvenient, whilst
we by disputing, resisting or in the like manner requiting, do draw grater
inco^^eniences upon our selves, where as quietly ^erting it pass, it would
soon come to nothing. Nayfarther I will speak and add this to the honor of my
Lord God, whose way of virtue and the Cross is so sweet in comparison of the
way of sin, and yealding to our passions^ that if he had never intended other
reward for those that Humbly practice virtue, and go the way of Resignation,
but that they receive in this life; he could not have been taxed of too
slightly rewarding their labor. For certainly the peace that follows doing
good^ for evil, and yielding sweet, (for bitter, and passing al difficulties
humbly and patiently over, is much more pleasant, then by having full power to
do upon such occasions the quite contrary. Such is the very nature of al his
exactions and ordinations, that even the very effect of them, makes the^
worthy to be loved desired, and practiced. For who can consider of al virtues,
^ad not see how great a happiness lies hid in the true practice of the^ even
in this life? As for example, Justice, Patience, Benigni^y, Longanimity,
Charity, and true Discretion accompanied with unfeigned humility, who does not
see that these and the like virtues, make us pleasing to Go^, and man, and that
the not practicing the^ does make us troublesome to others, and above al to ou^
selves? Give us, O my God, al those v^rtues which make souls so pleasing in thy
divine eyes! Let not the very Infidels and Heathen, be our accusers, who
practiced that out of the light of nature which we omit in this happy time of
Grace. Shall they contemn the world, and shall we desire the base pleasures and
co^tentments thereof? Shall they fly into dens, and caves to get wisdom and
learning, and shall nor we be contented to be forgotten by all the world? Shall
they do good for evil, and we do evil for good, and put up nothing for love of
thee? Shall they subdue their passions and affections to become masters of
their souls, and shall not we do it^ who by it may come to have the freer
access to thee in our souls? O no, far be it from us, my Lord and my God^ but
rather let our souls draw no brea^^ but to aspire to thee by true love. Let us
adhere to thee, and to no created thing whatsoever, that we may for ever and
ever be united to thee, who created us for that end, for w^h be thou Blessed
and Praised eternally. Amen.

Thus wrote our pious soul D. C^rtrude More, upon these sayings and doings of
those Hea^hen Philosophers.

FINIS. LAVS DEO.

