(...):

A PEARL IN AN Oyster-shel: OR, Precious Treasure put in perishing Vessels.

The Sum or Substance of two Sermons Preached at Withall-Chappel in
Worcestershire.

Wherein is set forth the Mightiness of the Gospel, the meanness of its
ministration.

Together with a Character of Mr. Thomas Hall, His Holy LIFE and DEATH.

By Richard Moore, a willing, though a most unworthy Servant of God in the
Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ.

London: Printed by A. M. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns,
near Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside. 1675.

To my much-honoured Friend Thomas Jolly, Esquire, High Sheriff for the County
of Stafford, Justice of the Peace for Worcestershire, and Captain of the
Trainband in the same.
Worthy Sir,
THE Dedication of Books to Persons of Integrity and Authority, has been of
ancient account in the Church of Christ. Saint Luke had his Theophilus, a man
of Luke 1. Acts 1.
power and pre-eminence, whose Name he prescribes to his Books of the New
Testament. Indeed few such Stars have remained fixed in the Churches Firmament;
Piety being often overborn by State Policy: too many are of Gallio's mind, they
care not to intermeddle with these things; or as the King of Navar said, They
will go no further in this Sea than they can come safe to Land. Hence not many
Wise, not 1 Cor. 1. 26. Mr. Bolton.
many Noble are called; And some great by Birth, and Noble by Blood are a
notorious blemish to an honorable House. Like Sepulchers they are painted
without, Tacitus, l. 1. c. 10.
yet have putrefaction within; or like the Apothecaries Pills, are gilded
Nobilitas Heroica est Eminentia quaedam notabilis, etc. per quam homo fit per
adoptionem Filius Dei, Sponsa Christi, Templum Spiritus Sancti, Gres. Tract. de
Nobil. Joh. 1.33. Mr. Bolton in his Sermon of this Subject, p. 214
on the outside, but have poison within. Intus Nero, foris Cato, Loquitur hic
ut Piso, vivit ut Galonius.

That is ever the best in this kind, when God is the top of the kin, Religion
the Root, the holy Scriptures the Rule: when the person is made by Adoption the
Son of God, the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the Holy Ghost; this is that
Heroica Nobilitas, without which all other is little worth. It is not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of Man, but of God. Hence it was that Beatus
Laudovicus, would be called Lodovicus de Pisciato, rather than to take greater
Titles to himself; Why? there he became a Christian; and for this cause the
Bereans are said to be more Noble than the Men of Thessalonica, better born,
more Gentlemen, more Noble by birth or blood: this was not by Act. 17.11. (...)
generosiores, Beza.
reason of Naturals or Morals, but for their spiritual Regeneration, readiness
to receive the Gospel, and their searchings into the Scriptures daily.

Now (Noble Sir) the Kings Majesty has conferred a double Honor upon you in
making you his High Sheriff of his Counties of Worcester and Stafford for two
years together. It put me in mind of what was said concerning Mordecai; What
shall be done to the man that the King Hesth. 6.6.
delights to honor? Since therefore Promotion comes not by Purchase, but by
Psalm. 75.6.
Providence; and all Dignity conferred by God, calls for Duty from Man; Go on,
Sir, to do worthily in Euphratah, and be famous in Bethlehem; like a true plant
of Renown growing in the Ruth 4.11.
Church's Garden, and gathering strength by being incorporated into this Body,
and by receiving nourishment from the true Root; walking in the fear of God,
growing in favor with your Prince, and getting further friendship with his
People, by your readiness to do good, and by being rich in good works, willing
to communicate; thereby, laying up for your self a good 1 Timothy 6. 18.
foundation for time to come; And in a word, improve your power against
Impostors, who go about to impugn and oppose the Divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures.

Antisthenes the Philosopher, was wont to say, that a man should lay up such
provisions as in a shipwreck might swim Plut.
out with him, such Treasures as may pass and be current in another world, and
will follow a man thither: So treasure up the Word of God containing precepts,
promises and prohibitions in the table of your heart, that you may with that
good Householder bring forth out of your treasury things new and old.

And this was one end I proposed to Mat. 13. 52
my self, in the Dedication of these my mean first fruits to you; which come
abroad, not so much by a voluntary choice, as by a kind of necessity to midwife
(I may so speak) a poor Embrion, that otherwise would have lien as dead in its
Mothers womb; As also to stir up your pure mind, to a serious search and
enquiry into the Holy Scriptures. which are the invariable Canon of Truth, the
Cubit of the Sanctuary, (...), Irenaeus.
the wise man's Star to lead to Christ.

Basil says, the Bible is a Physicians (...). Athanasius In the life of Basil.
Shop of Preservatives against poisonous Heresies, a pattern of profitable Laws
against rebellious Spirits, a Treasure of costly Jewels against beggarly
Elements, and a Fountain of most pure water springing up unto Everlasting Life.

Men of Noblest Birth and Royal Blood, recorded in History Sacred or Civil,
have highly prized the Word, and preferred it before their outward Privileges
and Possessions.

King David counted it more to be desired than refined Gold, and Honey Psalm.
19. 10 Psalm. 119. 72. Job 23. 12
from the Honeycomb. Job the greatest man of the East, esteemed it more than
his daily Bread and bodily Food. Our King Edward the Sixth, when he was
Crowned, they put three Swords into his Hand; he said, there was one yet
wanting, the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit.

Charles the Great, was said, to set his Crown upon the Bible. Theodosius the
Elder, to write the New Testament with his own hand, which he counted a choice
Jewel. Theodosius the Younger, learned much of the Scripture by heart; as also
the Lord Thomas Cromwell did. Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, kissed the
Bible presented to her, and laid Speeds Chron. c. 24. p. 838.
it to her breasts, and said, it had ever been her delight, show would frame
her Government according to it. The Lady Jane Gray in her Letter that she left
her Sister Katharine, says of the Greek Testament, this is a Book which though
it be not garnished with Gold, yet it was See her Letter. Acts and Monum.
in wardly more precious than Rubies; It is the Law of the Lord, the Testament
left to us wretches, which will lead you in the paths of eternal Life, etc.

Time would fail me, if I should go about to show you what account the Fathers,
Confessors and Martyrs of Jesus Sacrae Scripturae tui sunt sanctae deliciae
mei, Augustine.
Christ made of the Scriptures; As also our famous Orthodox, Modern Divines;
Dr. Prideaux left these Verses behind him, written upon his Bible.

This sacred Volume in whose precious leaves
The Mysteries of Heaven in treasures lie;
The Object and the Subject of each Christian eye,
Who lives by this, by death shall never die.
Here shines the Sun of grace diffusing wide,
His quickening rays on all from side to side.
Here God and Man do both embrace each other,
Met in one Person, Heaven and Earth do kiss.
Here a pure Virgin does become a Mother,
Who bore that Son, who the worlds Father is.
Here true bliss comes flying from on high,
To hawl Man out of Hells dark Empiry.
John a Wigord.

Take one taste of those few among the many famous verses written by Mr. Clark.
See his Divine Poem or Poetical Meditation, p. 622. In his Mirror.


This Book, these Sentences, these Lines,
Each Word and Letter,
To me is better,
Than Chains of Pearl and golden Mines.
It Is Heaven transcribed and glory penned,
Gods Truth no doubt
Was copied out,
When he this Gift to man did send,
J. C.

You see, Sir, with what a Cloud of Witnesses you are compassed about, for your
conduct and encouragement in your way toward Canaan your heavenly Country,
that you may taste of the hidden Mannah, and read and rumina^^ upon this Bread
of Life, and Food (...) your Faith: And as by much porin^ and pondering upon
the Statute-Law^ of the Land you may become a wise an^ able Justiciary; so
hereby a true an^ intelligent Christian, and the better acquainted with your
own heart: For the Scriptures are so penned (as Athanasiu^ says) that every
man may think the^ speak, de se in re sua, of him in hi^ Affairs. Indeed there
is little good ^^ be got by reading the Scriptures cursorily and carelessly, but
if you do it duel^ and diligently with attention, affection and supplication,
they will have such a^ influence upon the Soul, and such a^ Erasmus in his
Preface upon Luke.
efficacy, as is to be received from no other Book that can be named: hereb^
how has the proud heart been humbled the hard heart softened, those boisterou^
and predominant passions and affection subdued, and every thought captivate^
into the Obedience of Christ; so tha^ the Man has become of a Lion a Lamb^ of
a Leopard a Lamb, of a Swine ^ Sheep.

Who sees not at this day, that the nauseating of this Bread of Life has
brought many men to spiritual leanness, set them upon dangerous precipices of
pride, till they have fallen into the dead sea of practical Atheism; whereas a
serious searching out of the Will of God revealed in his Word, is an effectual
Dr. Stillingfleet in his Epist. to Origin. Sacrae.
means for the maintaining a powerful sense of Religion in the souls of men. Be
sure therefore to make a diligent search into the mind of God, as it is here
manifested; For the dignity of the Scriptures, and the Majesty of Christ, who
is the Author and the matter of them, mutually look one upon another as the Sun
does on the Stars, and the Stars on the Sun: for as the excellency of the Sun
appears by the glory of the Stars, to which it gives light; so the Majesty of
Christ is manifest in the Scriptures, to which he gives credit: And as the
Pearl by the often beating of the Sunbeams upon it, becomes glorious; so we by
beholding, as in this Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory. 2 Cor. 3. 18.


It happily may be expected from some, according to the Custom of such 2 Cor.
9. 10, 11, 13.
Dedications, that I should speak of your personal worth; but I well know your
modesty would by this means be (...) ^o the blush, and some disaffected persons
might count me a parasite: I shall therefore turn such Praises into Prayers,
that he who is able to make all grace abound in every good Work, would multiply
your Seed, and increase the Fruits of your Righteousness, that others may
glorify God for your professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ; this is,
Sir, and shall be the hearty Prayer of

Your Servant in the same Savior, Richard Moore.
Wetherock-hill November. 4th 1674.
To the Candid, Christian Reader.
WIse Solomon says, There is no end in making Books. In Eccles. 12. 12.
this Case, Covetousness and Ambition, like the two Daughters of the
Horseleech, never say it is enough; and in Polemical Discourses Men are endless
in their Answers and Arguments; so that the Reader after a curious inspection,
will find many things impertinent, acted in passion, and utterly to fail his
expectation; like the hungry Dog gnawing upon a Flint-stone, wherewith he may
as soon (as we say in the Proverb) break his Neck as his Fast; Which made
Erasmus so ironically to pass his Censure of such; Multi mei similes (says he)
hoc Morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nesciunt, a scribendo tamen temperare non
possunt. And lest any man should say unto me, Physician heal thy self; Know,
good Reader, that the Subject Matter of this small Piece, is not Controversial,
but truly Christian; you have here an Impartial Narrative of a Man of God, a
Godly Divine, who was illustrious in his generation, one that thundered in his
Doctrine, and lightened in his life; who was a holy President to his Flock, and
left many wholesome Precepts behind him when he died.

He was conscious that Examples do more affect or infect, than Rule; that
Practice does obviate Precept, and that our life is a continual imitation, and
that we are one another pattorns and temptations; that most men go the way
that is gone, not the way that must be gone; and are carried by the gale of
Custom, rather than by the guide of Conscience; he chose therefore to go before
his Charge, in all manner of Conversation and Godliness.

He was one that was high in Parts, holy and lowly in Heart, the more he knew
the As Nazianzen of Athanasius.
more he perceived his own ignorance: as Boughs loaded with Fruit, and full
Ears with Corn, and bow down the head, and bend toward the Earth.

As for such, who have the highest natural Endowments, without grace, they are
but glittering Glowworms in the dark; or as Toads which (they say) have a
Pearl in the head, and poison in their whole body. The Devil desires to be
adorned with these counterfeit Pearls and Bristoll-stones. But this renowned
Worthy had a good inside and outside, clean hands, a learned head, and a loyal
heart to Jesus Christ.

It were to be wished, that such who are Justin Martyr. non in verbis sed in
factis res Religionis dependet. Hesiod.
so ready to strive about words, would strive to imitate him in good works: to
imitate Virtue, is a Virtue to be imitated; and herein that is truly excellent
wherein we strive to excel (...), follow him, as he follows Christ.

Now give me leave to acquaint thee (good Reader) with the occasion of this my
undertaking, I was desired by some Friends to write what I knew concerning the
Life of Mr. Hall, which I did with some unwillingness, and happily no less
waywardness; and no wonder, for besides my personal knowledge of him, and what I
gathered out of his own Works, I could be informed little of him by his
Friends, except about the manner of his Death; I could neither procure to see
the several Occurrences of his Life written by his own hand, nor a sight of the
Sermon preached at his Funeral: and hearing that his Life written by himself
was lost, and being lost that one so well deserving of the Church of God,
should not be more publicly spoken of, I was persuaded to print these plain
Sermons, together with his Character, Life and Death; wherein happily I may
expect to meet with some morose reception from the malevolent; but it matters
not, contra sycophantarum morsus non est remedium. As touching me, it is a
small matter for me to be judged (...) of 1 Cor. 4.3. August. cont. Fass. l.
22. c. 34.
man's day. Non curo illos Censores, qui non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel
reprehendendo, non intelligunt: My Comfort is this, That how mean soever the
undertaking is, yet the intenton of the Author is to bring honor to God and
imitation to Men. Go and do like to him.

Ibeg of thee (Courteous Reader) to pardon my boldness in this my undertaking,
and where thou meetest with any Errata's, correct them with thy Pen, or cover
them with a Mantle of love, considering with thy self, Humanum est errare,
errare possum, haereticum nolo esse; Mistakes may be occasioned by my distance
from the Press, or through the Printers being unacquainted with my hand. Farewell

Horace his Epistle.
-- Si quid novisti rectius istis Candidus imperti, si non his utere me-
Thine in the dearest Lord. Richard Moore.

SERMON I.
2 COR. 4. 7. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels.
THe great Apostle of the Gentiles, begins the Chapter with v. 1.
a Remonstrance of Gods mere Mercy in calling him to the Ministry; in the
faithful discharge of which, though afflicted, he will go forward without fear
or fainting; and in this Case he commends himself and his Colleagues to the
Corinthians Conscience; and hereby takes away all suspicion v. 2.
of arrogance, in that they sought not their own Gain, their own Glory, but v.
5.
2 Cor. 1. 24.
Christ's; not to rule over their Faith, but to relieve their Joy.

And here he seems to wipe off an Aspersion of the false Teachers, tending to
the contempt of his Person, and the discredit of his Preaching: They seem
charge him as if he had not light and 2 Cor. 10. 10.
sight to fit and qualify him for the dispensation of the Gospel. To this St.
Paul answers;

1. By way of Assertion; God has v. 6.
shined into our hearts, and given us out of his rich Treasure, Wisdom and
Knowledge.

2. By a Concession; he yields, that (...).
he, and others, who were authorized by Christ to preach the Gospel, and to
represent his Person, were Earthen Vessels.

In the words you have these Parts: 1. A Precious Pearl dispensed, viz. The
Gospel. 2. The Stewards entrusted with it; The Apostles and all Faithful
Pastors. We have it. 3. The great Proprietor that communicates it; God who
causes Light to shine out of Darkness. 4. The Pots or Pipes wherein this Pearl
is put; (...), in Earthen Vessels. 5. The End intended in it; that the
Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us.


Herein the Apostle alludes to earthly Calvin in loc.
Pearls which usually are not put into a costly Cabinet, but into a vile
Vessel: so the Lord is pleased to make use of frail miserable men to be his
Ministers to bring their brethren to Christ, that his Power hereby may be the
more apparent.

As the Text has reference to the foregoing Verse, it seems to be a Metaphor
taken from Lanthorns; and so the Apostles did not hide their Light, that shined
into them, but let it out to enlighten others: but according to the Original
Word, it may be rendered Vessels made of Oyster-Shells, by an allusion (...).
to the Precious Pearl that is found in Shellfish.

Hence you may observe:

Doct. That the Gospel is a Pearl of Price, a choice Treasure. 2. Christ
Ambassadors are Earthen Vessels entrusted with this Treasure. 3. The Gospel
should not be in less esteem with you, because it is dispensed from, or in
Earthen Vessels.
In the handling the first Point, I shall show what a Treasure is, what kinds
of Treasures there are; What a Treasure the Gospel is; the Reasons why it is
so; and the Causes why worldly men do not so account it.

1. A Treasure is something of Price, and of account, laid up closely and
charily, for future use in Chests or Cabinets, in peace, from the pilfering of
Thieves, and in War, from the plundering of Soldiers.

And it is either,

1. An Earthly Treasure, as Gold and Silver, Pearls, and precious Stones, Jam.
5. 3.
which worldly men heap up for the last day, wherein they place their chief
happiness; yet which shall be as fuel to put on fire the Wrath of God against
them. These have their Names written Jer. 17.13. c. 41. 8.
in the Earth, and their Conversation; only their Treasure is in the Field.

2. A Heavenly Treasure, viz. Christ; the Graces of the Spirit and the Gospel,
which Believers hide and hoard up in their hearts, and lay out as the Merchant
Luke 12.33
upon Exchange does his Money that he may receive it with advantage in another
Country; so Christians that are trading in, and traveling toward Phil. 1.27.
c. 3.20.
another Country, are laying up and laying out for that, where they have (...)
their Burgess-ship, they live by the Laws of that Country which is Psalm. 119.
11.
Heavenly, and hide them in their hearts; Thy Word (says the Prophet) have I
hid in my heart. This is the Treasure I am now to treat of. More to be desired
Psalm. 19.10
than gold, yea than much fine gold. More precious than jewels; the price of it
is Job 28.16, 17, 18.
above rubies.

The Gospel is that Treasure hid in the Field, which cannot be too far Mat. 13,
44
fetched, or too dear bought.

1. It is a precious Treasure to be preferred before thousands of gold and
silver; Psalm. 119. 72.
it is better than precious Stones; Prove. 8.11. M. Bolton Job 28. 15, 16.
all the Pleasures, nay all the Treasures in the world are not to be compared
to it, though the Mountains were Pearl, and the whole Globe a shining
Chrysolite.

2. It is a heaped Treasure, containing Multum in minimo, in parvulo; I will
not compare it to Homers Iliads in a Nut-shel, but prefer it before all other
Books, Humane or Divine: since it Ephesians. 3.10. (...).
comprehends totum hominis and bonum hominis; it contains in it abundance of
curious variety of the manifold Wisdom of God; as a Ring that has many Jewels
in it, and a Treasure that is compacted of many precious Things; for commonly a
single Commodity does does not make a Treasure but Many.

3. The Gospel is a hoarded and hidden Treasure; for it contains in it those
Col 2. 3.
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge which are hidden from the wise and prudent
men of the world, who have principium laesum, a cracked brain, that they cannot
perceive things spiritual. 1 Co. 2.14.
Jewels are not used to be put in places where they may be seen of every eye.
What Job speaks concerning Wisdom is true of the Mysteries of wisdom and
knowledge in the Gospel; The Depth Job 28. 12, 14.
says, it is not in me, the Sea it is not in me. Such who are able to search
into the secrets of nature, and can fathom the depth of Arts and Sciences, yet
are many times mere strangers to it, they know not how to dig for, or to draw
out this Treasure.

4. The Gospel has an attractive virtue in it, when preached in the power of
the Holy Ghost, to penetrate the heart, and to draw it after Christ: As the
Loadstone has a natural force to draw Iron, and the Sun to draw up Vapors; so
the Sun of the Gospel by the agency of the Spirit to attract the Heart. As the
men of the world who have Treasures hid in the Earth, they count them their
chief happiness, and their hearts are drawn after them; so the godly, who make
the Gospel their Treasure, and their hearts are fixed to it, they will forsake
all to follow it. Where your Treasure is there will your hearts be also. Veniat
Verbum Domini Mat. 6.21.
and submittemus sexcenta si nobis fuissent Colla, said a Dutch Divine.

Reas. 1. Because the Gospel reveals the unsearchable Riches of the Grace of
God in Christ, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,
whereby the Saints are enabled to lay up 1 Timothy 6. 19.
a good Foundation for themselves, to lay up their Treasure in Heaven, and to
Phil. 2.16.
lay hold of eternal Life. 1 Timothy 3.9 Tit. 1. 9.


2. All things or persons that excel others in their kind, and are of greatest
rate for their rarity or preciousness, these are counted Treasures; but such is
the Gospel: as amongst Fishes, The Leviathan; and in Birds, the Eagle; and a
among Beasts, the Lion; and Princes and Potentates among Men, they are valued
of more worth than thousands of an inferior rank: So in Books, those which are
rare and fetched from far; As 2 Samuel 18. 3.
it is said, That Plato gave for three choice Books 30000 Florens; How much
more is the Gospel to be prized since it came from Heaven, in whose sacred
Leaves the Mysteries of Heaven in Treasures lie! Dr. Prideaux.


The Object and the Subject of each Christian eye;
Who lives by this, by death shall never die.
3. All other Creatures, how excellent soever, consume in time. Gold and Silver
is subject to the rust and Jam. 5. 3.
canker; the most princely Ornaments, even Crowns beset with Pearls, and
precious Diamonds, perish in time; the best Books are worm-eaten; But the Word
of our God, shall stand for ever. Isa. 40. 8.


4. The Saints have ever esteemed it so; for they have been content to part
with all for it.

That Is a man's Treasure, which he prefers before all other things, and will
part with all rather than this; As a man will part with all he has to save his
life: Job 2. 4.
He counts Life his chief Treasure.

Alphonsus King of Arragon professed, he would lose his Jewels, rather than his
Books; So a Child of God will part with all, rather than the Gospel; as that
Dutch Divine said, as before.

5. That is a man's Treasure, which he counts he cannot live without. Some count
Riches their Treasure; for if they are robbed of them, their life is
unravelled, their heart and their hopes break at once, they die in the nest as
did Nabal. Some count Pleasures their Treasure; for if they be deprived once of
them, they cry out with Adrian, They shall never be merry more. Some count
Children their Treasure; and therefore cry out with Rachel, Give me Children or
else I die. But a Child Genesis 30.1.
of God makes the Gospel his Treasure, for he thinks he cannot live comfortably
without it. It was a remarkable Passage of Luther, who said, He could not live
without the Word in Paradise, but with it, he could, even in Hell it self.

Object. But if the Word be so choice a Treasure, What may be the Reason why
the World does not so esteem it?

Answ. The Causes of this I conceive may be either in respect of the Organ, or
of the Object.

1. In respect of the Organ: The Prince of the World has cast a mist before
the eyes of these men, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Image of God, shines not in their 2 Cor. 4. 4.
hearts: As for Example, The Sun is a glorious Body, full of light and luster,
yet blind eyes perceive it not; So the Gospel is a Light shining in darkness,
but the blind and brutish world discern it not, but prefer with the Cock in
the Fable, a Corn of Barley before it. As one that looked intently on a curious
Picture, was asked the cause why he did so? answered, If thou had my
Nicostrates.
eye thou would no less admire it than I do; So had the world but an
illuminated eye, they would judge of the Word as the Saints do.

2. In respect of the Object. They make not the Word of GOD, but the World the
matter of their choice; Their Treasures are in their Fields and in their Flocks
and Herds; And thus they heap up Treasures for the Jam. 5.3.
last day. He that holds the World his Portion, will prefer it before any
other. A godly Man esteems the Word of God as his Heritage for ever; and Psalm.
119. 11.
therefore takes it for a greater Treasure than Chains of Pearl and Mines of
Gold.

Use 1. Serves to refute the folly of a generation of Men, who are wiser for
Luke 16.8.
the World than for Heaven, and hoard up Treasures for themselves here in the
place of their pilgrimage, and are not rich toward God: Is the Word such a
Luke 12.21.
Treasure? Why do you prefer the dirt and dung of this World? The Pleasures of
Sin, and the Profits that result from your Purchases and Possessions before
this Pearl of Price? Could I but acquaint these men where they might buy a
cheap Piece of Ground, or where Gold and Silver, and precious Jewels lay hid in
the Earth, though it were a great way off, and hard to get, Would they not
hearken to me? Oh how would they run or ride, dig and delve in the bowels of
the Earth to get them! Bu^ I acquaint you with a more precious Purchase, with a
far more enduring Substance, and tell you it is nigh unto you, where it is hid,
and how easy Romans 10. 8
it is to be had, yet I cannot prevail with you for my life, to take a little
pains to get it, or to part with a little of that which you cannot long keep,
though it were to gain that you can never lose. Well, your Treasure you are
for, and your Treasure (without true repentance) you will have, such Psalm. 140.
10.
as it is, such as you have laid in, and laid up for your selves, even
Treasures of Wrath against the day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of Romans 2. 5.
God.

Use 2. Which that you may avoid, let me prevail with you to make the Gospel
your Choice; count it your chief Good below God and Christ. It is a Legacy left
you by your dearest Lord, sealed with his precious blood; herein you have a
promise of the Pardon of Sins, of Adoption of Sons, whereby (if you are not
wanting to your selves) you may become Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with
Christ, and Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints; And will you not read
it? Will you not heed it? at least, with as much care as a Child would his
Fathers Will, to know what he has left him; to see whether some one or other
have not a Title before him to the chief Treasure. Alas beloved, Do we see it,
and is it not our shame, that those Terrae-Filii Sons of the Earth, can even
sweat for Silver, forbear Pleasures that they may get Profit, dig deep in Mines
for Precious Mettle, and choice Jewels, storm dangers and difficulties by Land
Omnis cupiditas in illum tendatur.
and Sea; The Merchant, the Mariner, the Mathematician, the Mechanic, the
Soldier, and he that studies the Philosophers-stone? And will you not take as
much care, be at as much cost, use as much courage in Christianity at least, in
searching into those golden Mines of the Gospel wherein are discovered Joh.
5.39.
those hidden Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in Christ.

St. Chrysostom says to this purpose, In his Homil. Super Orat. Annae.
Such as dig Treasures out of the Earth, though they get infinite Wealth, yet
give not over till they have drawn the Mine dry; for this is their chief care,
not to get out much, but to leave none behind. How much more should we
endeavor to know the Read the Lady Jane Grays Letter written to her Sister.
whole mind of Christ contained in the Gospel, lay out our selves about it, and
labor in it day and night.

The Gospel is a pure Treasure, very pure, purity it self, free from all dross.
Such as dig in Mines for Gold and other Psalm. 119. 140.
precious Metals are willing to work hard, though the Oar has much dross and
dirt that cleaves to it, till it be refined; but this is a pure and proved
Word, pure as Silver, tried in a Furnace of Earth fined sevenfold. Psalm. 12.6.


2. It is a perfect Treasure in all parts without mixture of any other alloy:
nothing must be put to it or ought be taken from it. Those precious things that
are taken out of the Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
Earth, even all Metals have their mixture, which does somewhat debase them;
but the Word of Christ is perfect Psalm. 19.7.
of it self, and complete without the additions or traditions of men; He that
adds to, or diminishes any thing Rev. 22. 18, 19.
from it, shall have no part in the Book o^ life, but shall partake of the
plagues that are written it. Oh how inexcusable are the Papists, who count it
imperfect, and pollute it with the mud and Mine of their vain inventions; and
carnal-Gospellers, who profane it, who take not pains to read it, who heed it
not, neither hoard it in their hearts!

3. It is a precious Treasure; Gold, Silver and Jewels, are precious things,
and yet they are but as the Offal and Excrements of the Earth; a man may have
much of them, and yet be miserable, and say with Caesar, Omnia fui and nihil
profuit; I have been all things and never the better; but the price of Job 28.
Psalm. 119. 72, 127.
this is above rubies, to be esteemed as gold, nay, above fine gold, even above
thousands of gold and silver. Had the Lord thought these things a fit portion
for his people, he would not have given them to his enemies; the barbarous
Indians have much more of these than you.

4. It is a profitable Treasure; to teach, to convince; profitable for all 2 Timothy 3. 16.
things, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness. Gregory calls it the
heart and soul of God. Athanasius, the food of the Soul. St. Augustine, the
Fortress (...).
against Errors. Irenaeus, the invariable Rule of Truth. In a few words, it
teaches true godliness, which is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. for
all persons whether in a public or private capacity. 2 Timothy 3. 17.


It is profitable for men in all Duties, in all Estates and Conditions, which
respect their active or passive obedience: It teaches men what they ought, and
what they ought not do; how to live, and how to die; and how to suffer, and how
to carry themselves in prosperity and adversity. The Apostle had never taken
out that Lesson, had he not learnt it here, viz. to be content in every estate,
to know how Phil. 4. 11.
to want, and how to abound; and as one that had nothing, yet possessing all 2
Cor. 6. 10.
things. A strange hyperbolical Speech, a Riddle to the world.

5. It is a pleasant Treasure, sweeter than Honey, yea, than the droppings
Psalm. 19. 10 Psalm. 119. 103. Hos. 13.15.
of the Honey-combs. Ephraim who was a pleasant Child in Gods account, Jer. 31.
20. yet he had the Treasure of all his pleasant things spoiled: but here is a
sweetness, wherewith, as the Soul of man shall never be satiated, so neither
shall it ever be satisfied till it come to Heaven.

It is a lasting Treasure, an everlasting Sweetness: I might add, what I before
said, The Gospel is a heaped, a hoarded, a hidden and a heavenly Treasure.

Use 3. And now you Sons of Pleasure, and Daughters of the Horsleach, who are
so ready to cry, Give, and are never satisfied; Tell me what you would have?
And where you are like to mend your selves? You are for Profit, here is Gold
for you; you are for Pleasure, and here is Honey for you. Oh how well might you
be without these Earthly-sweets! Would you but drink of this Well of living
Waters, where only it is the deeper the sweeter. I cannot but wonder that Men
that have Reason, and are in their right wits can hear these things, and not be
(at the least) convinced, if not converted. Oh that the god of this World [the
Devil] should be able, in things so clear and perspicuous, to put a Blind upon
your Understandings, and Bribe your Judgments! Truly, if the Gospel in these
Halcyon-days, be a hidden Treasure to you, it is so only to such as are lost,
etc. 2 Cor. 4.4


3. Beg of God by frequent and fervent Prayer, that he would give you
enlightened understanding, so as you Psalm. 119. 18.
may see a singular virtue in, and may set a superlative value upon this
excellent Treasure, the Gospel; which is a manifestation of Gods Mind, the
mystery of his Will and Wisdom, a Copy of his Truth, a transcript of Heaven,
and Happiness to the Heirs of Glory. What Aeneas Sylvius says of Moral Virtue,
may much more truly be said of the Gospel; If moral Virtue could Aeneas Sylv.
in his Epist. to Sigismond.
be beheld with mortal eyes, it would work a strange admiration in the
Beholders. But behold here you have Divine Virtue pointed out to the life
Majesty and Mercy, Virtue and Verity, Righteousness and Peace kissing each
other; a far greater Treasure than the Ishmaelitish Merchants had of Joseph
Psalm. 85. 10
who became Lord-Treasurer of Egypt; and blessed be the Lord that we should be
born to behold with our eyes the things that many Prophets and Mat. 13 17.
righteous men desired to see, and have not seen them; Paulum in Ore, Christum
in Carne revelatum, were two of St. Augustin's great wishes: To see Paul in the
Pulpit and Christ Incarnate, etc. The Queen of Sheba came from far to see
Solomon and to hear his Wisdom, and parted with much precious Treasure for
this: But behold a greater than Solomon; the great Lord-Treasurer of the whole
world has sent his Ambassadors to publish the glad-tidings of Peace, and to
sing that Evangelical Hymn, Glory to God in the highest, on Earth Peace, good
will toward Luke 2.14.
Men. And yet this Treasure sticks upon our hand, and is vilely valued by the
blind world, who see not their want, and know not the worth of a Christ.

Wisdom utters her Voice, and proclaims her precious Wares, and says, How
long ye simple ones, will you Prove. 1. 21*
love simplicity, and ye scorners delight in scorning! etc. yet the
Staple-treasure of the Gospel will not off; Men make light of it, who have
their Treasures Mat. 22. 5.
in the Fields, and will hardly step over their thresholds to gather this
Mannah.

Could we but once persuade you to get enlightened understandings, you would see
with other eyes, and hear with other ears than you now do, and walk with other
feet, and work with other hands; you would no longer lie down with the
sluggard, and say, O utinam boc esset laborare! Oh that this were to labor!
you would not with the hungry man barely long for this food, but labor for it;
you would not only thirst as the Covetous Man does after Wealth, but you would
work to get it; you would wait at the Pool, and at the beautiful Gates Acts 3.
2, 10.
of the Temple, and your main request to Christ would be that of the blind Man,
Lord, only that mine eyes might be Mark 10. 51.
opened, says he.

Use 4. With what Joy should we embrace the Gospel? Men use to rejoice when
they get Treasures. The Marriage-day upon this account, is called a Merry-day,
because the Man expects a Treasure; for on what he sets his heart and
affections, that is his Treasure: Shall carnal Men rejoice when they find
Jewels? And shall not Christians, who have a Treasure made up Psalm. 119. 14.
of Jewels in the Gospel rejoice even more than in all riches? We read in the
Occurrences of the Low Countries, That a day of Festivity was kept some time
for joy, that the Scriptures. were translated. But this joy lasted but for a
season, like unto that of John Baptist John 5. 35.
his Hearers. And indeed, what Reverend Moulin says of his Countrymen, we have
cause to say of ours; Time was Moul. Theoph. 2. 278.
(says he) That whiles they burnt us for reading the Scriptures, we burnt with
zeal to be reading of them. Now with our liberty is b^ed a neglect of the Word
of God; and so it is with us as in some parts of the World, where there are
great store of Pearls and other precious Things, the people will part with
them, for such things that we here count trifles; So the Gospel is looked upon
by many, as Mannah was with the Israelites but common Meat. Surely, were it to
be sent to such as have not heard it, they would hear it more, believe it more,
rejoice in it more than we do. Alas for this poor Nation, it surfeits upon the
glorious Gospel! And hence it is, so few with Joy receive it, with Faith
believe it, with their Heart embrace it. But let all that are Gods Jewels
rejoice in it more than in Corn and Wine, and all earthly Comforts.

Use 5. Let us come to the Preaching of the Gospel as unto a Treasury and
Storehouse of all good things, Isa. 55. 1.
the Common Mart and Market of all spiritual Provision, even Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge; Here is Bread for the hungry, Water for the thirsty, Milk
for Babes, strong Meat for 1 Cor. 3.2. Psalm. 104. 15.
Men, Wine to make glad the Heart and Oil to make his face shine: Her^ you may
have Gold to enrich you, (...) Rev. 3.18.
Garment to cloth you; here are Ornaments for your head, Bracelets for your
neck and arms, Pendents for you^ ears, Eye Salve for your eyes, a Gird^^ for
your loins, Brest-plates for you^ hearts, and Signets for your hand^ You have
here a Cornucopia for Plenty a Catholicon for Cures; an Armory for Weapons
against spiritual Wickednesses; a Library for Books, and Treasury for Jewels.
What would you have? What are your Wants* Here you may have a Supply from Jesus
Christ, In whom does all fullness dwell; and from whose fullness we receive Grace
for Col. 1.19. Joh. 1.14.
Grace.

Are you poor in spirit? here are durable Prove. 8.10.
Riches for you; sick? here is Physic for you; sorrowful? here is Comfort for
you; tempted? here is sufficient Strength for you; Are you in 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Bonds? here is Bale for you: Are you broken for sin? here is a precious Balm for
you: Have you a hard heart? here is a suppling and a softning Oil for you: Are
you subject to fears and doubts? here Faith is begotten for you: Are you sullen
or silent, and cannot pray? here you have the Spirits Promise to help your
Infirmities: Would you Romans 8.26. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
know how to behave your selves in the House of God? in your own Houses, as
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants? Come Isa. 55. 1.
^o this public Treasury where these things are to be had: but you must know
this, that these Treasures are not to be attained without digging and Christian
Diligence in the use of means. It is a hard work to dig for Gold, and you must
make heart-work of it. The Job 3. 21.
Apostle minds young Timothy of this, Eccles. 1. 13.
who had made it his trade from his youth, Meditate of these things, and give
thy 1 Timothy 4. 15.
self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear. And Solomon says, If thou
seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid Treasure; Then shall
thou understand Prove. 2.4, 5.
the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Quest. But what further means must we use to get this Treasure?

Answ. You must be sure to seek it Nihil quaeritur nisi per viam suam.
in Gods ways, and in the use of the good means he has appointed. As,

1. You must mix the Word with Faith in your hearts when you read it or when
you hear it; for such as bring not Faith along with them, depart from the Word
without Fruit; The Gospel Heb. 4. 2.
preached, profits not them that hear it, who mix it not with Faith. Faith in
the heart is like the sweet confection of Ointment poured upon Christ his Head;
it casts a sweet scent and savor into all the parts and powers of the Soul: it
is Oil to these wheels, and makes them go with agility in the ways of God.

2. Pray unto God that he would Psalm. 119. 18.
pour upon you the eye salve of the Spirit; for this Treasure lies deep, and
our shallow capacities cannot comprehend it, our understandings being not only
blind, but blindness it self. Ephesians. 1.18. Domine velamen amove, Volumen evolve.
Pray therefore that your understandings may be unvailed, that the Truths of
Christ may be revealed, that neither the Organ may be dim, nor the Object dark;
But of this I spoke before.

3. Live under a godly Ministry, where the Word drops like precious dew from
Sion into the fertile valleys: This is the Indies where this Treasure lies;
These Preachers lips preserve knowledge, and you must seek the Law at Cant. 1.8.
their mouths, feeding your kids besides the shepherds Tents. Such who are used
to dig in Mines, know by the color of the Sands, and by the taste of the
Waters, that run from the Mountains where the true Treasure lies; So you may
guess where, and from what sort of Men, you may get the Pearl of Price, even
from such who wear the Brestplate of Science and Conscience, whose care is (as
it was said of Chrysostom) In vita Christ.
Non aures titillare, sed corda pungere; not to tickle the ears of the Hearers,
but to prick and pierce their Hearts; into whose hearts the true Light has
shined.

4. Be diligent in season and out of season, and by frequent hearing of Sermons
be searching for this hid Treasure: This is the means that God has promised to
bless when we lie with the lame man waiting at the Pool. Men John 5. 3.
use to omit no opportunity to get gain; the love of Gold makes many a man not
mind his meat or his sleep, but he will toil even and take pains when he should
rest, and refresh nature; So he that would get this Jewel, must with the
Prophets blessed man, meditate in the Psalm. 1. 2.
Law of God day and night.

5. Such who would get skill in searching for Earthly Treasures, must confer
with others to know where the right Vein for Silver is; what tedious Job 28. 1.
Horace his Epistle.
Travels have been undertaken for this, Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad
Indos; So such as would have this precious Pearl must read and run from one
Dan. 12. 4. Amos 8. 12.
Sermon to another, inquire and retire into themselves and converse with
others, Luke 24. 17.

Lastly, Learn from hence to prefer the Gospel before the most precious things
in the world, since it affords a truer Pleasure, a more enduring Treasure. Gold
is got out of the basest element the Earth, and admired only by men of earthy
minds; who make it their God, and sell their Souls to the Devil for it. Oh! the
misery, the mischief that the Love of it has wrought in the world: For this
cause Crates the Philosopher is said to cast his Gold into the Sea, with these
words, Ego vos mergam, ne ipse Solinus, c. 68.
mergar a vobis: It was never true to any that trusted in it. But the Gospel
though it come from Earthen Vessels, yet it is pure and most precious, sure and
certain, established for ever in Heaven: Psalm. 119. 89. Mat. 6. 19.
Lay not up therefore for your selves a Treasure on the Earth, where rust and
canker do corrupt, but lay up for your selves a Treasure in Heaven, etc.

But I proceed to the Pot into which this Treasure is put; Earthen Vessels.

SERMON II.
2 COR. 4. 7. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels.
WE have this Treasure, Non pretio sed promisso; not by debt but by dowry; not
by purchase but by Promise. I might observe other things hence, but I must
proceed.

Doct. 2. That Christ's Ambassadors are Earthly Vessels.

A Vessel is an Instrument of use in which we do keep or carry any necessary 2 Timothy 2. 20.
Commodity that concerns life's good.

And by a Metaphor it is transferred to men, who are so called, because they
are Heirs:

1. Either of Gods Election; 2. Or of his Rejection.

1. Of his Grace and Glory; Or 2ly. Romans 9. 21.
of his Anger and Indignation; For, the Potter has power over the Clay to make
one Vessel to honor, and another to dishonor.

1. Vessels of Wood and stones, and such as are hypocrites in the visible v. 22.
Church.

2. Vessels of Gold and Silver, viz. v. 23.
The Elect.

Moreover, the Word is used in a general signification for any one that God 2 Timothy ^. 22
designs to do him service in a public or private capacity; As Cyrus,
Nebuchadnezzar, etc. in a subserviency to his providence.

And in this sense it is put for the Ministers of the Gospel; and thus our
Apostle Acts 9.15.
is called a chosen Vessel, to bear the Name of Christ among the Gentiles. And
they may be here called Earthly Vessels.

1. In respect of their Creation and Constitution, and the base matter of Genesis
3.19. 1 Cor. 15. 47.
their making: Adam of Adamah, red Earth; The first man was of the Earth,
earthly.

2. In respect of their Corruption that cleaves to them whiles they remain in
the earthly house of this their Tabernacle; 2 Cor. 5.1. Acts 14. 15.
being subject to many perturbations and passions, and infirmities of flesh and
blood; you may see it in Elias, 2 King. 15. 14.
Jam. 5. 17. in Jonah; in Peter and the rest of the Apostles: So Ministers in
this sense are Earthen Vessels, and Satan is sensible of this; and therefore
will sift them to the bran: Can he Luke 22. 31.
but get such as they to side with him in the promotion of his works of
darkness, it makes much for the advancement of his Interest; As Luther said of
-- a great Scholar, Cupit a te ornari Diabolus.

3. They are Earthen Vessels, in respect of their resolution and dissolution,
subject to the stroke of death as well as others, Za^. 1. 5.
like water spilt upon the ground; or like Earthen Pitchers that are carried
often to the Water, but are come broken home at last; Eadem condition
mortalitatis, and simili condition; vobiscum, humanitatis afficiuntur. Budaeus:


4. They are obnoxious to crosses and changes in their outward estate in the
world; they pass from prosperity to adversity; they suffer imprisonment,
banishment, Psalm. 123: 3, 4.
contempt and scorn, and are counted the very scum and offscouring of all
things. God is pleased many 1 Cor. 4. 13.
times to empty these Vessels, and to pour them forth as Wine out of a Jer.
48.11.
Cask; and they are vilely esteemed of men, as Vessels of no value.

The Reasons are such as these:

They have here many times to do with men of earthly minds, to plant Isa. 51.
16.
a Heaven, and to found a Earth, or rather that God may do it, by their
Ministry, as our Translators render the Words. Now what Vessels are fitter for
the Lords use, to call home the Vessels Deuteronomy. 5. 24, 25.
of Mercy than men like themselves? The Israelites would not hear of it that
Exodus 20. 19.
God should speak unto them immediately from Heaven, but by the Ministry of
Moses, a man like themselves: So men of like passion, are men of more
compassion; such as can truly say with the Apostle, Who is weak, and I am not 2
Cor. 11. 29.
weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? Likeness breeds liking, and our own
weakness, feebleness, afflictions, stir up affection, as it did in Calvin; of
whom it is said, He was no otherwise affected toward the Churches, than if he
Beza in vit. Calv.
had born them upon his shoulders.

2. The great Shepherd of his Sheep will have it so, to humble us; that when we
take notice of the Treasure we 2 Cor. 12. 7.
are entrusted with, we may seem low, and little in our own eyes, and esteem of
our selves Coniah, a Vessel wherein is Isa. 13. 3. Jer. 22.28.
no pleasure. Flesh and blood is apt to boast in parts, in gifts, wherein
happily we may esteem to excel other men: But did we but consider our own
brittle imbecility, and from whom our sufficiency comes, We would no more
boast than of a borrowed Suit, or the Man of his Hatchet; Alas, Master, It was
borrowed. 2 Kings 6. 5.


3. The Lord does so ordain, that, this precious Treasure should pass to you
through Earthen Vessels.

1. That you should not cast Contempt upon this holy and honorable Calling of
the Ministry, because of the meanness of men's persons, parts, parentage,
trials, or temptations; since Gods Prophets, and even Christ and his Apostles
were liable to the like.

Amos was neither a Prophet, nor the Amos 1.1.
Son of a Prophet, but a Herd-man of Tekoah. Jesus Christ before he entered upon
his Ministry, served in the mean employment of a Carpenter, his Apopostles Mark
6. 3.
were many of them, poor Fishermen; And the Apostle Paul was sometime a
Tent-maker, though indeed brought Acts 18.3.
up at the feet of learned Gamaliel; and yet for all the trials and temptations
that he endured, the Galatians were nothing the less indeared to him; you know,
says he, How that through the infirmity of the Gal. 4. 13, 14.
flesh I preached the Gospel, and the trials of me which was in my flesh, ye
despised not, neither abhorred.

2. The Lord will have it so, that, you should not have Ministers persons in
admiration for any elegancy of Wit, Jude 16.
excellency of Learning, strength of Memory, etc. Since they are but Men, and
of like passions, and the Lord is pleased Acts 14. 15.
many times to hide the great mysteries Mat. 11.25 1 Cor. 1. 26.
of his Kingdom from the wise and prudent of the world; few of such are called.
I know well, that God distributes his Gifts variously, to some, a greater
measure than to other men; and such are worthy of double honor, especially if
they labor in the Word and Doctrine: 1 Timothy 5. 17.
But though you ow them reverence, yet you must not have them in admiration;
For this was the Original of the various Sects at Corinth, I am of Paul, and I
am of Apollos, and I of Cephas: 1 Cor. 1. 12.
and the Apostle is afraid, lest any one should think o him above that he sees
in him, and will rather glory in his infirmities 2 Cor. 12. 5, 6.
for this very cause.

3. That the Grace of regeneration may be ascribed, not to the preaching of
Men, but to the power of God; so in the Text, and by the operation of his
Spirit.

4. The Lords intent in this dispensation may be to puzzle and perplex the
great Wits of the world, who rest, and rely upon their carnal wisdom, and
think thereby to fathom the depth of these 1 Cor. 3. 18.
Mysteries; but such must empty their Vessels of this Earthly Treasure, and
count it trash, before they be capable of Phil. 3. 7.
conceiving of, or receiving in the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in Christ;
for, Intus existens prohibet alienum; If any man among you seem to be wise in
this world, let him become a fool 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19.
that he may be wise.

Use 1. Admire the goodness and gracious condescension of God, who might have
delivered his mind to you by the ministration of Angels, and in terrible
things; as at the Tradition of the Law upon Mount Sinai, with Exodus 20. 18.
thunder, lightning, and sound of a Trumpet, the Mountain burning, and covered
with blackness, darkness Heb. 12.18.
and tempest, so full of terror, that, not only the People, but, even Moses
himself Exodus 19. 16.
trembled: But God was pleased to deliver his will to you, by men formed of the
same clay, cut out of the same Job 33.6, 7.
lump with your selves, Earthen Vessels. Well may we say with the Psalmist,
Lord, What is man, sorry, sickly, mortal, miserable Psalm. 8. 4.
man, that thou should be thus mindful of him? to leave thy mind to us, and
Heb. 1. 1.
deliver it by the Ministry of Men, As the Disciples said!

Use 2. If the Apostle who was so eminent an Instrument of Christ, and labored
more abundantly than the rest; 1 Cor. 15. 10.
yet makes himself equal with others, as an Earthen Vessel; nay, in some sense
inferior, the least of Saints, the last of Apostles, How does this reprehend
the Ephesians. 3.8.
Pride of the Pope, who takes to him the most magnificent Titles, such as no
mere man, without the highest blasphemy may arrogate to himself; such as that
Pastor of the Catholic Church, which he blasphemously calls his own Ceremon.
b. ^. sect. 2. 2 These. 2.3 Bellarm. de Sum. Pont. l. 2. 23.
Spouse; nay, arrogates to himself the Title of God, and sets himself above
Princes who are petty gods, and so proves himself to be the Antichrist: and
though he pretends his power from Peter, yet follows not his Precepts, 1 Pet.
5. 3. and assimilates him in nothing, except in denying his Master.

3. What an excellent pattern of humility have we here, who are the Pastors of
Christ's Flock, not to lord it over 1 Pet. 5. 3.
them, but to allure them by love; showing Tit. 3. 2.
meekness to all men, and instructing those that oppose themselves to be very 2 Timothy 2. 25.
tender of them, and apt to compassionate them in their sorrows and sufferings,
since we are of the like frailty our selves! This should make us say with
Moses, Who am I? If there be any Heavenly Treasure in us, it is Christ's Gift,
he gave it, and let him have the glory of it; Not I, but the Grace of God which
is 1 Cor. 15. 10.
in me. The more any man beholds the Suns body, the less he sees, when he looks
to the Earth; So we beholding the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
should ascribe the excellency of the power to God, and not to our Psalm. 115. 1.
selves; Non nobis Domine, non nobis; sed nomini tuo da gloriam.

4. You should not value the Gospel the less vertually, but rather have it in
the greater veneration, because it comes to you in or through Earthen Vessels.
We are very apt, naturally, to look at the outward appearance of things or
persons, and accordingly to prize and prefer them. For this St. James taxes
his Hearers, who in their Assemblies had respect to him that had on a Gold
Ring, and gay clothing: So ordinarily, Jam. 2. 3.
men show esteem to such things that are gorgeous and glorious in the eye of
the world, and to such Men, such Ministers, as show forth in their Sermons much
humane Learning and Eloquence; and in the mean time, neglect, and slight the
godly simplicity of the Gospel, and such as preach it in the power of the
Holy Ghost; This is partiality in the Apostles account: Not that I speak
against Learning, which is an excellent Handmaid to Divinity; but the abuse of
it when men darken the Truth through the mists of Philosophical speculations,
and preach, Magis ut Col. 2. 8. St. Aug. Multi propter arborem scientiae
amittunt arborem vitae.
placerent, quam docerent; to please, rather than to profit. If men set such a
price upon Earthly Treasures; dug out of the bowels of the Earth, and
delivered with dirty hands; How much more should you value the Gospel though it
come from Instruments that are Earthen Vessels?

Observe the Exhortation of the Apostle, We beseech you, Brethren, know them 2
These. 5. 13.
that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and
have them in singular love, for their works sake. Though there be no worthiness
in the person, yet, it is a worthy work, it is high and honorable, divine and
heavenly; the preparation to it, the execution of it is so, if you consider 1 Timothy 3. 1
the worth of a precious soul, by the price that was paid to purchase it; not
Gold nor Silver, but the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, and the Reward that 1
Pet. 1. 18, 18.
will be given to such as are Instrumental in the work; the saving a soul from
death, and the hiding a multitude of sins; and how mean soever they appear Jam.
5.20.
in the Flesh, yet hereafter they shall shine as the Stars in the Kingdom of
their Father for evermore. Dan. 12.3.


5. Admire the depth of Divine Wisdom in this; That the Lord should make use of
our weakness and unworthiness, for the manifestation of his mighty Power in
bringing sinners from Satan's Kingdom, and their sinful courses, to accept of
Salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. Well may the A^ostle say, Who is
sufficient for these 2 Cor. 2. 16.
things? We are not sufficient of our selves to conceive, to perceive, what is
our Duty, what is the Dignity of the 2 Cor. 3.5.
Ministry, much less the depth of the Mysteries of Salvation, we are to
dispense: Our sufficiency, and your proficiency, is of God; we are poor, frail,
Earthen Pitchers, appointed by God, to bear this precious Treasure; if he blow
upon us, How soon shall we become broken Pot-sheards? Who am I (says) meek
Moses? And who am I, 1 Samuel 18. 18.
and what is my life (says) holy David? So who am I? and what is my life? a
breath, a bubble, a vapor; How unworthy to bear a Pitcher, a Lamp within the
Pitcher! To blow the Trumpet, Judge. 7. 16
Isa. 58, 1. To say, not (as they) for the Lord, and for Gideon; but for the
Lord, and for Jesus Christ. Oh the depth Romans 11. 33.
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! Here is a depth indeed, wherein a man
might dwell. As Chrysostom discoursing about the Love of God in Christ, says,
Oh I am like a man digging in a deep Spring; I stand here, and the water rises
upon me, and there, and still it rises upon me: We are not of Gods Cabinet
Counsel; we have not David's Key to open this Secret, and it is not safe to be
prying into this Ark; Mirari Rev. 3. 7. Mallem ignorare sine crimine quam scire
cum discrimine, Euclidis.
potius quam rimari, sapientia nostra. Let us admire, what we cannot
understand; only this, What cannot God do, that is not sinful, if it please
him? who makes his Power appear in our weakness, and gives you this Treasure in
Earthen Vessels.

Use 6. Endeavor to do all the good you can by, and to receive all the good,
that is tendered you in the dispensation of the Gospel, since your Ministers
are frail, mortal Creatures, Earthen Vessels, that will soon be broken.

It will not be long before a period be put to my preaching, your hearing; to
all our prayers, repentance and preparations for death, and for judgment; there
will be no longer pardon tendered, or graces to be attained; no knowledge, no
wisdom in the grave whither we Eccl. 9.7, 10.
are going. There will be no Accounts cast up, no Counsel given or taken; no
doing of work, but a receiving of wages, according to our work done. Work John
9. 4.
therefore while it is day; whiles you have life, and light, and health, and
strength, and time and talents; before dim eyes, and sailing hands, and feeble
feet, and sainting hearts, through the infirmities of old age, come upon you.
You are called Laborers, and must not loyter; Soldiers, and must fight;
seafaring Men, and must hoise up Sails, whiles the wind sits; Husbandmen, and
must plow up your fallow ground; Stewards, and must give an account: You have
your task set, and have played the truants too long already; and if you do not
hasten, you will hardly have done your work before the Lord comes; Therefore
while it is called to day barden not your hearts. Be not like little children
that consume their Candle in play and Psalm. 95.8. Heb. 3.8.
sport, and are forced to go to bed* the dark.

7. Now since both the Text and the Time, leads me to it, I cannot but take
notice of two Occurences of Divine Providence that have happened to the
Inhabitants of this Parish and to my self, as concerned herein this present
Month of April.

1. The first was the Lords gracious goodness, and the Kings Royal Indulgence
in restoring me to my Ministry at this place, who w^^ before civilly dead; and
here I have continued a year complete, with the love, and good liking of my
He^^ers (not without the opposition and contradiction of some who are envious
at my preaching, and cast contumelies upon my person) but none of Acts 20. 23,
24.
these things move me, Homo sum, nihil haec a me aliena puto; Only the fruits
of the affliction, and the success of my service; Oh that I could see more of
this! that I might not complain of running in vain; nor you of dry breasts, or a
miscarrying womb. My preaching I well know, has been in much weakness, and in
fear and trembling; 1 Cor. 2.3.
For, as that grave Father told Libanius the Rhetorician, Non Oratorum filii
sumus, sed Piscatorum; we are not the sons of Orators, but of Fishermen. It is
a sufficient excuse, to say what you have heard, came to you through an Earthen
Vessel; and therefore pray unto God who made man's mouth, the dumb to speak, and
the blind to see, that he would cause this light to shine out of darkness into
your hearts; that so the excellency of the power may appear to be of God, and
not of Man.

2. The second Occurrence; this Month is likewise memorable, for the Death of
Reverend Mr. Hall, some-time a Preacher in this Place, but a faithful Pastor in
the Parish where he served (as he said) a double Apprenticeship; of whom,
though I have said something heretofore, yet I can never say enough. His Life
was a Transcript of his Teaching; and his Soul was stored with a Treasure of
many Divine Graces and Gifts which he hid not in a Napkin, or put under a
Bushel, but expended for the public good: Yet having this Treasure in an
Earthen Vessel, the Lamp of his Life went out by enlightening others; yet
without waste; for the savor of this Ointment has yielded a sweet perfume in
the CHURCH of GOD.

The End of the Second Sermon.
His CHARACTER.
HE was a man of middle Stature, his Hair blackish, which he wore very short,
scarce to cover his ears; his Face pale, and somewhat long; his Spirit brisk
and lively, active and able to bear the brunt of business; and was seldom or
never known to be cast down with discouragements, though often menaced and
imprisoned by Soldiers, and pestered with Sectaries of all sorts: His Eyes
were sparkling, especially when he was intent upon the delivery of matters of
worth and weight: The clothes he wore, were rather coarse than costly; his
carriage and behavior, courteous and attractive; his temper and consti^ution
inclined him to choler, and he would break out sometimes into passion; ^ut
would soon recall himself, and that, ^or the future, he might not sin in his
^nger, he would resolve to be angry ^or nothing but Sin. One thing has been
observed in him, he would be over-credulous, say some, in receiving Reports
upon trust, without examining the Truth of what was told him, especially when
it came from such as he had a good opinion of for Godliness; which I impute not
so much to his weakness, as to the sincerity and simple plainness of his own
heart, his own words being the issues of his upright heart, he judged so of
other men. For his judgment (however it was in the matters of the world) yet
doubtless it was deep in the search, and discovery of the Mysteries of the
Gospel and of Godliness; which he got by frequent Communion with God, and
walking in his fear all the day long, and the secret of the Lord is with such
as Psalm, 25. 14
fear him. He could see more in these sacred Riddles by Prayer, than by his
Learning, and much labor in Reading.

For his Judgment about Discipline, he was of the Presbyterian Persuasion; and
happily he was held too rigid by his Brethren, that dissented from him in this:
and though more more mildness and moderation was desirable especially toward
Dissenters, who serve the same God, and seek jointly to advance the Interest of
Jesus Christ, in the power and purity of his Ordinances; yet doubtless what he
did, was out of a zeal for the Truth, which he took this to be. And to my
knowledge he I can witness that he gave a Legacy at his death to one who was of
a contrary judgment to him in Discipline and Church Order.
had a Catholic Charity for all such in whose hearts he perceived the Seed of
true Grace to be sown, though they differed far from him in Judgment: for his
love to the Saints, was not grounded upon an identity of Opinion, but on a
sweet suitableness and harmoniousness in Grace; and whoever he found to have in
him aliquid Christi, was the Object of his Love: and though he had a hatred
toward the sins of all (were they never so great in place), yet, not to their
persons, which he would pity and pray for, and reprove: And as he was jealous
over this household of God, with godly jealousy; so Prove. 4.23.
in particular, over his own heart, which he kept above all other keepings with
much Christian caution; well knowing, that, if the Spring were clear, the
streams would soon clear themselves; and lest the flesh should wax wanton, and
kick, he would keep it down by severe mortification and abstinence, giving
himself much to private prayer and fasting. Indeed he was at all times
temperate in the use of the Creature; even at Feasts he would feed very
sparingly upon a few Dishes, and would commonly rise from the Table before
others had half-dined. But of all other things, he was most spare of his time,
which he esteemed a choice Treasure, and the loss of it irreparable; and what
shreds of it he could scrape together from a double public employment he had,
he spent in writing Books: In composing of which, he studied very hard and sat
up late; for he had this happiness above many other men (as he said), he found
himself best when he was most strongly employed; his Work was to him instead of
Physic, and he chose rather to spend himself in Labor, than to consume with
rust and sickness. See more in his following Life.

ABEL REDIVIVVS; OR THE DEAD SPEAKER.

The Substance of an Anniversary SERMON, Preached at Withal, April 26. 1674.

Whereunto is annexed certain dying Speeches of many Modern DIVINES, especially
of Mr. THOMAS HALL, late Pastor of Kings-Norton.

HEB. 11. 4. And by it he, being Dead, yet speaks. LONDON: Printed by A. M.
for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns, near Mercers-Chappel in
Cheapside. 1674.

To my much esteemed Friend, Mr. William Turton of Aulderways in Staffordshire.
Worthy Sir;
YOU may wonder at my boldness, in presuming to prepose your Name to this
popular Sermon, and imperfect draught of the Life and Death of Mr. HALL, who
may seem a stranger to you: and indeed I do not remember that I saw your Face,
since the time, that the Lord (who sets the bounds of our habitations) had cast
our Lot together in a pleasant place, in a time of Jacob's troubles; where we
only heard the Voice of Christ's Turtle-Dove, and had not those dreadful
Allarums of War, under which other parts of the Kingdom trembled, and the very
pillars of it tottered.

That which now encourages me to this Attempt, is, that I took notice of your
constant attendance upon the Ordinances of Christ, and your readiness to
sympathize with the sufferings of Sion, and the respect you had to the godly
Pastors of the Church; in particular to the person spoken of in the ensuing
Narrative, betwixt whom and your self, it is said, there was a near alliance;
but doubtless, there was an intimate friendship and alose familiarity
contracted; the remembrance of which, I hope, still lives in your heart,
happily no less than Jonathans did in the breast of David's, or Basils in
Nazianzens.

As therefore Epaminondas defended the body of his fast Friend Plutarch.
Pelopidas, whom he supposed was slain and saw lying upon a heap of dead men:
so I supposed you would be ready to defend this poor Piece written concerning
your deceased Friend, of whom, though I have said somewhat, yet not the one
half that I might. Tou would not think me to be partial, should I say of him
what Nazianzen did of Basil aforesaid; Antiqua probitate, simplicitateque
praeditus and eruditis pietate, and piis erudition is laud antecellens; Some
that were more eminent for Learning, he excelled in Piety; and some that were
more See Mr. Leys Epistle to his Com. upon 2 Timothy as also Mr. Calamy 's Epistle.
famous for Piety, he excelled in Learning: And indeed, he was held to be by
such as well knew him, and were able to judge of men's parts and piety, both
learned and religious.

I have no more to say concerning him in this place; I only beg your pardon and
Patronage, together with a share in your prayers, that what is said in the
ensuing Leaves, may find acceptance with God, and favor in the eyes of his
people.

And my earnest desire and prayer to God for you, is, that he who holds your
soul in life, and has lined it out to or beyond David's span, would give you
much joy and peace in believing; That whilst your Body is descending toward
the Common Mother the Earth, your Soul may ascend as toward the top of Pisgah,
to descry the Holy Land; that the nearer you come to the pit of corruption, the
more prepared you may be for that place of perfection; and like a Tree planted
in the Courts of Gods House, you may bring forth Fruit even in old Age; This,
(I say) Sir, shall be the prayer of

Your Servant in our dearest Savior and Redeemer, Richard Moore.

SERMON III.
HEB. 11. 4. And by it he, being dead, yet speaks.
IN the former Chapter the Apostle presses the Hebrews to perseverance in the
Faith; and here in this, by a Digression, he demonstrates the nature of this
Grace, from the Effects.

1. You have the Mysteries that it contains.

2. The Histories that hold it forth.

1. The effects that declare the Properties of Faith are three.

1. It begets a sure and certain Hope of the accomplishment of Gods Promises.
v. 1.


1. In the substance of them: though the thing promised have no present
existence or being, yet Faith makes them obvious and evident to the Believer;
for it is the (...), the ground or confidence by putting that which is hoped
for, as if we had it in hand, and things invisible for such as are conceived by
sense.

2. The Effect of Faith is drawn from a demonstration of the Elders, that by it
received an excellent Testimonial that they pleased God* and were blessed
partakers of the benefits of the v. 2.
Messiah only by believing.

3. A third Fruit of Faith is, that by it we understand things incredible to
Reason as the Creation of the World, which v. 3.
was formed and fashioned by the Word of God, without appearance of a
preexisting matter; yet hereby having respect to Gods Omnipotency, we believe
it that so it was.

And this is instanced and exemplified in the following Cloud of Witnesses.

1. Of such as lived before. 2. In such as were after the Flood.

The first sort of Witnesses were, Enoch, Noah, and Abel here in my Text; v.
5.7.
who was the Proto-Martyr of the world, as Cain was the first Murderer. Adam
indeed slew all his Posterity, in a spiritual sense; but Cain his Brother
bodily and bloodily: And as Adam the common Parent of mankind, was deceived in
the Fruit of Paradise: So here he, and especially Eve was in the Fruit of Genesis
4. 1. c. 3. 15.
the Promise.

For though the name Cain signifies a Possession, and notwithstanding he built
a City; yet was he of the wicked One, and was no Heir of that City, whose
Builder and Maker was God: And his Mother sensible of the deception in Genesis 4.
2.
the Firstborn when she brought forth the second Son, gave him a name suitable
hereunto; for the Word Abel written with the Letter Aleph, imports mourning;
but with He, Vanity, one Josephus Antiq. b. 1. c. 2.
humbled in mind, and holding such Possessions Vanity.

Here then you have two Men the only Heirs of the World offering Sacrifice to
God with different Success: For,

1. Abel's Offering was more acceptable than Cain's.

2. The Cause of this; not in respect of Sacrifice it self or the matter of it;
for the Fruit of the ground might have pleased God, as well as the Firstlings
of the Flock; but it was Faith that made the difference.

1. God had respect to Abels person justified by Faith, and so to his
performance Genesis 4. 4.
and to his Sacrifice as a Fruit of his Faith; testifying of his Gifts, by
Levit. 9. 24.
some token of his favor and confirmation in his Faith, probably by Fire
falling Judge. 6. 21.
upon the Sacrifice; but he had not so to Cains, which was all the ground 1
King. 18. 3.
of the grudge he had against him.

This Faith of Abels is further illustrated:

1. By the Evidence of it; he obtained witness that he was righteous.

2. By the recompense of it; he was rewarded and regarded of God by his Faith;
the Lord took care of him, avenged Calvin upon the Text.
his Death, reputed him among his Saints, whose death is precious in his sight;
His Blood cried to God, and Psalm. 72. 14 Genesis 4. 10.
the ground that received it, uttered a Voice, and was clamorous against the
Murderer; (...), by it he, being dead, yet speaks; or rather, as the Learned
Critics translate it, is yet spoken of, Nempe in Scriptura, says Beza.
Wherever Abels Faith is spoken of, whether in the Scripture, or preached of
and published to the world, though since he were dead; yet still there shall be
a memorial of him, as if he were yet alive, as was said of that Woman in the
Gospel by our Lord and Savior, Wherever this Gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, Mat. 26.13
there shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of
her.

Doct. That the renowned fame of the Saints, who lived by, and died in the
Faith, shall be recorded as well as recompensed and rewarded after their death.

The righteous shall be had in everlasting Psalm. 112.6
remembrance; their good name and renown shall not only be lasting when they
shall be laid asleep in the dust, but it shall be for an everlasting
remembrance. Wise Solomon makes out the proof of this, by Contraries; Contraria
juxta se posita magis elucescunt: The memory of the just is blessed, and the
Name of the wicked shall not. Prove. 10.7.


Abels Sacrifice shall have a savor of acceptance Mary's Ointment shall smell
sweet in the Nostrils of God and good Men, and Demetrius shall have a John 3.
good report of all, and even of the Truth it self. When Cains Murder* Judas
his monstrous Treason, and Absoloms Rebellion shall be an everlasting
abomination. See for the further opening of the Point.

1. What it is to live by the Faith of Jesus Christ? 2. Who they are that do
so? 3. How a Believer is said to speak not only living but dead? 4. Why a Saint
is said so to do?
1. The just man is said to live by his Faith. Hab. 2. 4.


Thus the holy Apostle Paul, dead by the Law, revived by the Gospel; from the
time of his Conversion to the time of his Dissolution; whilst he abode in the
body of Flesh, he lived by the Faith of the Son of God; and being dead, yet
Gal. 2. 2.
speaks in the lively Oracles of the Word of Life.

In allusion to this speech of the Apostle; Behold! (says Reverend Dr. Rivet,
upon his Death bed) I am dead, I am risen again; I live no more in my self, but
I live in the life of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

2. To live by Faith is to seed upon a Hab. 3. 17.
Promise, in the failure of outward provision, and to draw out from thence
supports and supplies to bear up the spirit Heb. 10. 38. 11. 38.
of life in a Believer. When there is no visible appearance in the Creature, no
blossom on the Fig Tree, nor fruit in the Vine, then Christ must be the
Christians life, breath and bread; he will interest himself in a Promise of the
Word, as his present portion and provision, Heb. 11.39
though he have not yet received the things promised in hand, but only has it
in hope.

And were we to pass sentence who is a rich Man, we would not so much look into
his Purse to see how much Gold he has, but into his Chest to see what Deeds
and Indentures, what Bonds and Evidences he has: So if you would see whether
you are Rich and Righteous toward God, be sure search what Promises you have
treasured up in your hearts; For as he is a rich Man who is rich in Bonds; so
the Believer that can plead the Promise in prayer and put these Bonds in suit.

3. As the true Believer lives to God, so he has laid up for him a goodly
heritage; and though for the present he be but as the Heir under age, yet he is
Psalm. 16.6. Gal. 4. 1.
sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of the
Inheritance Ephesians. 1. 14.
until the Redemption of the purchased Possession. Every Believer is an Heir of
God, and a joint-heir with Christ, and Romans 8. 17
has an assurance of the heavenly Inheritance here: 1. By Purchase. 2. By
Promise. 3. And in the first fruits of the Spirit, which is a part of the
whole, as an Earnest is a part of payment for the Purchase.

3. A Believer is said to speak not only living but dead; 1. By his Blood. 2.
By his Example. 3. By his Precept.

1. By his Blood; And in this sense the Blood of Christ is said to speak better
things than the blood of Abel: it Heb. 12. 24
speaks peace, pardon, remission and reconciliation with God; but the Blood
Genesis 4. 10.
of Abel cries and calls for punishment, revenge and vengeance.

The glorified Saints cannot be said Rev. 6. 10. Romans 12. 19.
thus to speak properly; they seek not revenge, but leave it to God, whose
Prerogative it is; it is meant only of the provocation of their suffering.

2. Believers may be said to speak by their Example for the worlds imitation
and admonition; not only living but 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. Jam. 5.10.
dead. So the Apostle, Take my Brethren the Prophets for an ensample in
suffering, who have spoken to you in the Name of the Lord. The Prophets were
now dead. yet they had left such renowned Presidents and Examples of Patience
behind them, that they even speak yet to us by their heroic and impregnable
Faith and Fortitude, in bearing injuries, and forbearing enemies, in taking
patiently the spoiling of their Goods, knowing this, that they had in Heaven a
more enduring substance.

3. Believers may be said to speak, not only living and dying, but even when
dead, by the lively Precepts they left behind, after they went off the stage of
this world, and were buried with their Fathers. thus they are said to speak
with us at this very day.

Faith has this mighty force and efficacy in it, that it works wonders Isa.
26. 19.
in Heaven and Earth, and in the Grave; by virtue of it many received Heb. 11.
35.
their dead to life again; as the Widow of Sarepta, the Sbunamite, and the
Friends of Lazarus. Faith has a force to remove Mountains, and true justifying
Faith is not beneath Miracles. Jesus Christ is the Prince and Principle of
Life, and his People are the only Heirs together of the Grace of Life, and all
1 Pet. 3. 7.
such as believe in him, though they were dead, yet shall they live; nay, John
11. 25, 26.
they shall never die; and if they shall never die, they shall ever speak; for
Life is the Principle of Speech. I shall not need to tell you how great things
have been done this way by Art, if we might believe what is said in History of
Mnemons Statue, recorded by Mnemonis Saxea Effigies vocalem sonum reddit.
Tacitus. It is sufficient what we receive here from the Divine Oracles of the
Word. Abel here, though dead so many hundred years ago, yet his Faith makes him
a speaking Doctor to the Church, even to this day. Learn by his Example how to
make all your Persons, Duties and Services acceptable to God, even by mixing
them with Faith in the Blood of Christ.

1. Your Prayers will never prevail at the Throne of Grace, if you do Mat. 21.
22.
not ask in Faith. 2. You cannot profit by the Word preached, except you mix it
with Heb. 4.2.
Faith in your hearts. 3. The Sacramen is received without 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Faith are unfruitful. Cyprian was used to call upon those that went to the
Lords Table, Non parare fauces sed fidem; Not to sharpen their Teeth, but to
quicken their Faith.
Use 1. It serves to show forth the miserable state of all such who live after
the flesh, and not by the Faith of the Son of God; such indeed are dead whilst
they live, and are detestable when dead: they live undesired, and die
unlamented; and as their sensual Genesis 16.4.
lives did bespeak them brutish; so their death shall be abominable, and their
Psalm. 9. 6.
memorial perish with them, as that of the Beasts: and as their life was not
worth a prayer, so their death shall not be worthy of a tear: As was said of
Jehoiakim, None shall take up a lamentation for them, saying, Ah, my Brother,
or ah, Jer. 22. 18, 19.
my Sister; ah, Lord, or ah, his Glory; but they shall be buried with the
burial of an Ass; and if there be any mention at all made of them, it is in
contempt and detestation. Lo, this is the man, now the Monster to be pointed
at; once so Psalm. 52.4.
mighty, now so miserable; that made not God his strength, but trusted in the
v. 7.
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

Oh! that such would consider this, who are sensual in their lives, and who
feast themselves without fear, and make it their main care to cater for their
carcasses, or to lay up for themselves treasures upon the Earth, and to build
stately Tombs to be a memorial of them when they are dead. Alas, these
Sepulchers will be opened, and your rottenness will be discovered before God,
Angels and Men; not so much by the show of your Countenances, as by the light
of your Consciences: the guilt of which you will be no more able to abide or
avoid, than Cain was the Cry of his brothers Genesis 4.10, 14.
blood.

2. As you desire to leave a renowned Fame behind you in the places where you
live, and a sweet perfume to your Names when you die; live much by Faith in
this life. The Lord reckons of our life, by our belief; and so much we are
said to live to God, as we believe in Christ, and no more, when we rely upon
him in the use of lawful means, or in the want of Creature Comforts. Hab. 3.17.


Oh! that the blind and brutish world were convinced once of the truth of
this, who are apt to think that they live by their Lands, and by their Labors
in their lawful Callings, and will trust God no further than they have his
present pawn.

Oh! that the profane and unclean crew who live as they list, after their own
wills, and ways and works, in the lusts of the flesh, and in the pleasures of
sin, would but be persuaded that they are dead even whiles they live; as the
prodigal and her that lived in pleasure, Luke 15. 24.
are said to be.

The debauched Adulterer and your swinish swiller are deceived by Satan, to
believe they have the finest life of it, because they know no better. Were you
but once brought over to Jesus Christ by believing, you would never desire to
turn again to your former vomit. Ah, How could you be without these bitter
sweets, that have a sting in the tail of them!

You that live by your wits, and make no conscience of cozening and deceit in
your Calling, in your buying and selling, lending or borrowing; alas, if you
were once acquainted what it is to live by Faith, how contentedly would you
acquiesce under Gods providential dispensations, without murmuring or seeking
after unlawful means!

A Believer will live upon God when he has nothing else to subsist by; and
believe him upon his bare word of promise, without sight of present provision.
If there be but a little Meal in the Barrel, and a little Oil in the Cruise,
when he has only the gleaning of the Vintage, here and there a Cluster upon
the upeprmost boughs or branches; nay* when the Figtree blossometh not, nor the
Vine does not yield her fruit, and the labor of the Olive fail, etc.

For this Abraham was honored with God and Man; he for this cause was called,
The Father of the Faithful. The Genesis 23.
Hittites counted him a Prince of God and Jacob likewise was one that had
princely power with God; and our Savior Mat. 8. 10.
not only admires and wonders at, but even commends the Faith of the Centurion,
and that of the Woman o^ Canaan; Mat. 15. 28.
Oh woman, Great is thy Faith These and many more that is mentioned in the
Gospel, and in particular in thi^ Chapter, whence I take my Text, les^ a good
report behind them in that they lived by Faith.

Faith is as a sweet savor that refreshes the Soul in which it is seated,
more than Musk or Civet do the senses, amidst the stench of evil courses and
companies: It is as a sweet smell to such as live by it in the midst of walking
dunghils; it chears up the mind in the midst of discouragements, and clears the
Conscience and comforts it; and makes men as merry as the Martyrs were under
their Bonds; it even fatteneth the bones: Upon this account Demetrius had a
good report of all men, and of the Prove. 15. 30. 3 John 12.
Truth it self.

Fabrianus the Martyr said, first bitter and then sweet; first battle and then
victory; every drop of my blood shall preach Christ and set forth his praise.

I know (says Mr. Bilny) by Sense, and Philosophy, That Fire is hot and
burning, is painful; but by Faith, that it shall only waste the stubble of my
body, and purge my Spirit of its corruption.

One seeing a weak woman go cheerfully to prison, said; Oh you have never
tasted the bitterness of death: No, (says she) nor never shall; For Christ
bath promised, that they that keep his sayings shall never see death. A
Believer may feel the stroke, but not the sting of death.

Ignatius going to suffer Martyrdom, triumphed in this, that his blood should
be found among the mighty Worthies; and that the Lord when he makes
inquisition for blood, will recount from the blood of righteous Abel; not only
to the blood of Zacharias, but also to the blood of mean Ignatius.

It was a sweet saying of holy Mr. Hall in time of his health; That the sweet
rescent of a well-spent life, would be matter of singular comfort, at a dying
day.

He would have his Hearers, learn to know, and know to do; do to die, and die
to live.

In his sickness, he said, I am now going where I shall have rest from Sin,
Satan, and from all fear, weariness, watching, and from all the evils and
errors of a wicked world; for I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at Job 19. 26.
the last day upon the earth, etc.

Oh let my life be nothing but prayer and praises, since God had dealt
bountifully with me! and even whiles he was breathing out his last breath, he
spoke thus; All the joys of this life are nothing; nothing to the joys that are
in Jesus Christ, Come Lord Jesus.

And though he be now dead, yet he speaks to you, not by his Words, but by his
Works; by Precept and by President. Oh labor to lead his life, that you may
die his death; for if you tread in the footsteps of his Faith, though death
bring your body to Corruption, yet shall it never bring your souls to
Condemnation.

I am now closing up the second year of my Ministry among you; And Lord, what
have I been doing here all this while, that so few of this Congregation have
been brought from death to life, to embrace Christ by Faith, and to lead a holy
life, and to live to him? Shall I say with the Prophet, I have spent my
strength in vain, and labored for a thing of naught? I hope better things of
you; and I am persuaded better of some of you, and that I may the better
prevail with you to live by Faith, Remember who it is that speaks to you,
viz. one that is esteemed as dead, And will you not credit such a Witness?

It was the request of Dives to Abraham, Luke 16. 30, 31.
that dead Lazarus might be sent unto his five Brethren; he thought that if one
came to them from the dead, they would believe and repent.

Such a sight or report indeed might work upon the fancy; but it is the Gospel
preached that must work upon the affections: For my own part, I do believe the
Truth of the Gospel upon surer Grounds and upon better Authority, than if I had
received it from one raised from the dead.

For such a Testimony, if it be only Humane, can beget but a humane Faith; and
should it be more than this, we might see cause to question whether it were
Divine or Diabolical; for even Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
Light. Therefore be building up your selves daily in your holy Faith, by
Arguments drawn from the Doctrine of your Salvation, that more sure Word of
Prophecy; and so your Faith will stand not on the Wisdom of Men, but on the
Power of GOD. 1 Cor. 2. 5


The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Hall, who died April 13. Anno Dom. 1665.
THomas Hall was born in St. Andrews in the City of Worcester, about July 22.
An. Dom. 1610. His Father was Mr. Richard Hall, a Cloathier in that City, of a
competent Estate, his Mother was Mrs. Elizabeth Bonner, descended of an ancient
Family; but that which truly ennobled her was with the Bereans, she Acts 17. 11.
diligently searched the Scriptures. These two lived together many years, God
giving them a plentiful Progeny of Sons and Daughters: three of which Sons were
brought up Scholars, and afterward proved godly Preachers: The Mother being to
them (as an Eunice to Timothy, or Monica to Augustine) 1 Timothy 2.5.
a careful Instructor in their Youth and lived to reap the Fruit of her
endeavors in her old age (Magnum est Dei beneficium pios nancisci Parents, ac
praesertim Matrem qua pene tota filiorum A lapide.
educatio dependet), like another Bathsheba she did bathe them with her Tears
and Instructions, and with her Prove. 31. 2
warm and melting Supplications.

This Thomas was first set to the Grammar School under Mr. Bright, and thence
sent to the University of Oxford, and admitted into Bayliole College; whence
(through the neglect of his Tutor) he removed to Pembroke, and became Pupil to
Dr. Lushington, a good Scholar; but whose Principles As Plato says of him.
were so poisonous, that he might have boasted with Protagoras, that he had
spent many years in corrupting of youth.

Having taken his Degrees, he returned into the Country, and for a while
preached and taught a private School, at the Chapels belonging to
Kings-Norton. But as yet he was a Foe and no Friend to Gods Truth and People,
whom he opposed under the notion o^ Puritans. But as it was with St. Augustine
(who before was vicious in manners and erroneous in judgment) going to hear the
Eloquence of Ambrose, was reduced from his Errors: so it fared with him, being
about that time a diligent frequenter of the learned Lectures of sundry
Orthodox Divines at Burmingham; he had here a sure and safe foundation laid of
the true Religion; and from that time, he favored the sincere Milk of the Word
of God, and entirely loved those that were born and begotten unto God thereby.

Not long after he was called to supply the Cure at Kings-norton, under his
Brother Mr. John Hall, who had it annexed to the Vicarage of Bromsgrove, and a
while after gave it franckly to him; the Free School was also added to it, for
his further encouragement; (for though it were a large Parish, yet the great
Tyths being impropriate) he had but a small Sallary, and could scarcely have
subsisted, had he not embraced a single life for this cause chiefly as he said.
Yet after God had set a seal to his Ministry, this great people were much upon
his heart (who ever sought Work rather than Wages) that he would never be
persuaded to leave them, though solicited with a promise of far greater
preferment, and was in the time of War often accused, cursed, threatened* with
death, plundered many times, and five times imprisoned at the least.

He was a very hard Student, though of a cold rheumatick Constitution; he would
impallescere Chartis, even hazard his life to get Learning and the choice
Observations he met with in good Authors, he inserted into his Commonplace
Book, and by his great industry he acquired a good measure of knowledge in Arts
and Sciences, especially in Divinity; of God and his Word, and Works; of
himself and his Duty; Plin. Sec. de Avunculo suo Epist. l. 3.
Perire omne tempus arbitrabatur quod studiis non impertiretur.

He took great pains in his Pastoral Charge, and would not offer to God that
which cost him nothing: he constantly preached twice on the Lords day, and kept
Lectures in other places; besides his Exposition of Scripture, and Catechizing,
which last he used when the days were of any length, and always before the
Sacrament; and many of his Hearers sent in their Children and Servants to be
instructed: To which he added private Admonition, Prayer and Examination to
many that were willing to partake of that Ordinance, yet were unwilling to
appear in public: by all which means he did much good, and laid such a
foundation that few of his Hearers were levened with the loose opinions of
those times.

And so great was his repute amongst the godly, that many came to hear him from
far, and not a few desired his advice in their fears, doubts and temptations;
and several persons of Quality sent their Sons to table in the house with him,
that they might partake of his prayers and precepts for the orderly regulating
of their lives and seasoning their tender years; especially such as intended
them for the Ministry, to the intent that they might get Learning, a right
Method in their Studies, and learn to divide the Word of Truth aright; whose
pains has been to so good purpose, that many of his Scholars have proved able
Ministers of the Gospel.

Neither was his Good confined to a particular Congregation; for he seemed with
the Apostle to have a care of all the Churches; and it might be said of him, as
of Calvin, That he was no otherwise affected toward the Churches of Christ
though remote, than if he bore them upon his shoulders. How pathetically would
he pray for the Churches abroad, and sympathize with them in their sorrows and
sufferings! and when he heard good news from far of any Church of Christ
planted, the Gospel propagated any-where, How would he rejoice and praise God!
and even particular Churches at home in many places have tasted of his good
will, by his preaching and prayers.

But to speak of him more expressly and particularly.

1. He was a man of great integrity and single-heartedness in his Ministry,
especially, wherein he had no worldly or base affection, no carnal design or
selfinterest, mainly seeking the glory of God, the good of his Flock,
preferring always this, before any earthly gain or advantage whatsoever: in
simplicity and godly sincerity he had his Conversation in this present world.
He 2 Cor. 4.
earnestly coveted the best things; and if any worldly thing, it was Books; as
Dr. Smith would say merrily of himself, Nullius rei preterquam Librorum avarus;
he coveted nothing but Books: and not Books neither so much for himself, He
made not himself the center of his actions.
as for the public good: Witness the Library at Burmingham and Kingsnorton:
The Latter of which that he might procure the Parish to Build, he gave his
Study of Books to it in his lifetime: to the former he was a good Benefactor,
and gave several Volumes that he bought, and prevailed with many of his
Brethren to do the like.

2. He was of a free and liberal heart, never thinking the things that he
possessed Acts 2.44.
were his own, or that he was born for himself, but for his Country and the
Church of God. In his lifetime he made his own hands his Executors; like Noble
Arawna he would give like a King, or as the Macedonians, according to his
power; yea, even 2 Cor. 8.3.
beyond his power; and always he gave his Heart with the Gift: if he beheld a
poor man that wanted Clothes for himself and his Family, How would his very
bowels yearn toward them! and T. H. His true Christian Charity.
he he has been seen to pluck the very Coat off his own back to cloth such.

And though he usually denied not such as asked an Alms of him in the As it was
said of Mr. Fox.
Name of Christ, yet the nearer any were to God, the more they tasted of his
bounty; knowing it was his duty to do good to all, especially to the household
Gal. 6.10.
of Faith.

3. He was a just man, and lived much by Faith when outward Comforts Heb. 10.
38.
failed; for when he had expended most he had upon charitable uses, his usual
saying was, enough; enough: And in his last sickness, when he had but six pence
in his Purse, and a Friend offered to lend him Money, he refused it; and not
long after God so enlarged the hearts of his people toward him, that he had
several sealed Papers of Money sent him, as I am credibly informed, he knew not
from whence; So that he had enough indeed, and to spare. Esau could say he had
enough, but Jacob had more, or had all, because God was his Portion; he had
enough to give Legacies to certain Friends after his Burial. It fared with him,
as with Pithias a Merchant of Ithaca, who had compassion upon an aged Man taken
by Pirates, and redeemed him, and bought the Commodities they had taken from
him; the old Man saw that out of mere pity and charity he had done this, he
discovered a great Mass of Money hidden amongst certain Barrels of Pitch, that
he had bought of these Pirates, insomuch as the Merchant became very rich: So
this our spiritual Merchant lost not but gained by laying up his Treasure in
Heaven; he thought that depositum better in Gods hand than in his own. As the
Widows Meal in the Barrel and Oil in the Cruise wasted not, but increased by
feeding the Prophet; so he casting his Bread upon the Waters, received it after
many days.

4. He was a Man of an holy and unblamable life; so that Malice it self, though
it might bark at him, yet could not fasten her Teeth upon him. He was not like
some Preachers now-adays, who bid the people do as they say, but not as they
do: For what he imposed on the people as a Duty, he made it his study and
endeavor to practice. That Holiness that he so excellently displayed See his
beauty of Holiness.
from the Pulpit, was not simply notional but affective, and had an influence
into his life; you who were of his Charge are Witnesses, and God also; 1 These.
2. 10, 11, 12.
how holily and justly, and unblamably he behaved himself amongst you, how he
exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one as a Father does his Children,
that you would walk worthy of him that has called you: And when the Book for
Sports and Recreations on the Lords Day came forth, though enjoined to be read
by public Authority in the several Churches throughout the Land, he deeming it
a great profanation of the Sabbath, and contrary to the Word of God, refused
to read it, Mat. 22. 4.
though he was threatened for it: for which he supposed he had our Savior his
Precept, and his Apostles Practice Acts 5.29.
in such a case to obey God rather than Man. And what Erasmus said of Luther,
Acts 4. 19.
was true of him; Non leve prejudicium est, tantam esse Morum integritatem, ut
ne hosts reperiant quod calumnientur; His life was so unblameable that his
greatest Enemies could not blemish him.

5. He was of an humble deportment and carriage, easy of access, and easy to
be entreated: he had not respect to the rich, because of their riches, nor
despised the poor, because of his poverty; but his doors and ears were open to
them, and he would be an Advocate for them, and plead their cause with such as
were mightier than they; and the meanest Inhabitant of the Parish should as soon
have his request granted, if lawful and in his power, as the greatest. He
sought not after great things for himself, but was content with mean fare and
coarse clothing; and would often use that saying of Mr. Greenham, brown Bread
and the Gospel is good fare; and if his Landlady had provided any Dish that he
thought superfluous, he could hardly be persuaded to taste of it, but would
blame her for it: And it seemed to import his deep humility, he gave order
after his decease, That his Body should neither be laid in the Church nor
Chapel, but in the Churchyard among the meanest of his neighbors.

6. He was a great lover of peace; and for peace sake has often parted with
his own right, never looking exactly after Decimations, but leaving it to the
people many times to do as they pleased, and made compositions with them upon
easy terms to their good liking: and when he heard of Contentions in the
Parish, he would preach against them, and persuade his Hearers to follow after
the things that made for peace: And when any litigious actions have been
brought in their own Court, he has endeavored to stop such procedures,
showing the parties that contended, how unchristian a Course it was for them
who were brethren to fall out amongst themselves; Esteeming it much better to
buy Love than Law, since Mr. Dod.
they might buy much Love for a little, but could not have a little Law for a
great deal; yea though he prized peace at so high a rate, he would not part
with purity to purchase it.

7. His preaching was plain, but profitable and powerful, not in the enticing
words of man's wisdom; and he spoke not Phalerata, but fortia, in the evidence 1
Cor. 2. 1.
and demonstration of the Spirit; never respecting the persons of men, whether
rich or poor, but reproved sin in whomsoever he saw it.

8. He was one that was much in Communion with God in public and in private,
according to his duty; and as the Churches necessity called for it, observing
many days of Humiliation and Prayer with his own Congregation and other private
Christians, Genesis 18.17
wherein he would reverently pour out his soul into the bosom of his Heavenly
Father, and had much of Gods Psalm. 25. 14.
mind made known to him; So that he did foretell what would befall this and our
Neighbor Kingdoms for our hating to be reformed; and in particular, that
desolation of London by Plague and Fire, before God set up those Comers as
Intelligencers to forewarn the Nation. See what he writ in his Epistle Before
his Samaria's Downfall.
to that famous City: Sin (says he) has brought down greater Cities than
yours; as they had their time of rising, so of ruining; as of building, so of
bruning; Witness Nineveh, Noe, Tyrus, Babylon and Jerusalem; Sin has made them
all a desolation. I shall never expect (says he) that City or State shall
prosper, or that your houses should continue when Gods House lies wast; all our
Buildings will be but Nods and Babels, unsettlement and confusion till Gods
House be settled and exalted.

9. He was abundant in thanksgiving to God, for calling him to the knowledge of
his Will, and for giving him ^ heart to embrace the Truth in the love of it,
who walked before as other Gentiles, whom God has passed by, though greater in
Wealth, outward Worth, Wisdom, Learning; etc. and that he had called him to the
work of the Ministry, in a place according to his own heart, and among such a
people as bore good will to his person, and acknowledging this to be the mere
good pleasure of God, he endeavored to quicken himself and his Flock to a
grateful Consideration of the love of God in this respect.

10. He was very careful how he spent his time, which he never did in idleness,
unnecessary journeys, or complemental visits, but whithersoever he went, his
intention was either to do or receive good: that time that he could spare from
his Pastoral Employment, he spent mostly in visiting of Learned men and in
writing Books; Thirteen of which he printed in his lifetime, besides what he
left for the Press after his Death.

Concerning that Commentary of his upon the Second of Timothy, Mr. Ley a very
Learned, Godly Man writes; That it is the better half (not in quantity only,
but in quality) of the best Expository Treatises that he had seen upon that
Scripture; And does believe for Congruity of the Truth with the holy Text,
pertinency and fullness of profitable matter, (deducted from it or consonant to
it) is the best that hitherto has been Extant in the Church of Christ.

I am now arrived at the last Scene of his Life, and the beginning of his
Sickness; no part of which he acted amiss, admitting of common frailties, which
are incident to the best of Saints, who should be denominated secundu n
meliorem partem, with some Grains of allowance; (As Dr. Fuller says,) A
Pomegranate without any Core, must necessarily be planted in Paradise; And as
the Swan is said to sing most sweetly when he is dying and exchanging life
Aristotle.
for death; Of which Bird Martial has this Epigram:

Dulcia defecta modulatur Carmina lingua,
Cantator Cygnus funeris ipse sui.
Sweet strains he chanteth out with his dying tongue,
And is the Singer of his Funeral Song.
So this Saint and Servant of Jesus Christ, as he was profitable in his life;
so he was peaceable and pleasant in his sickness, singing and making melody in
his heart unto the Lord.

In the year 1664, about the beginning of September, before his last sickness,
as he was going up the stairs to his Study, he was smitten as if one had struck
him with a Dagger on his back; insomuch that he was not satisfied, till they
that were near him looked to see whether there were any visible here; he was
nigh fainting upon it, and continued weak: before this he had been visited with
a Quartain Ague, the Dregs of which Disease being not wrought out by Physic,
brought a lingering Scorbute, and he felt an extreme pain in his back, and had a
Flux of Blood issuing from him, which brought him very weak; yet he was strong
in the Lord and in the power of his might, and did mightily admire the free
Grace of God in Christ, in separating him from his Mothers womb, calling him by
his grace, and setting him apart for the work of the Ministry, though unworthy
of that high and holy Calling; so many that walked worthy of their profession,
and received with the heart the form of Doctrine delivered to them. And in his
Sickness, though sometimes he might be heard to groan, yet never to grumble;
but would always justify God, and condemn himself; and soon silence any
mutinous and murmuring thoughts that might seem to arise in his heart, upon
their first sallying forth; In the words of the Prophet, Shall a man receive
good from the hands of the Lord, and not evil? He counted his sickness and his
sufferings light and momentany, the glory to come, weighty, great, and so
joyous, as too big to enter into the soul, that the soul must enter into it;
often mentioning that passage of the Apostle; For our light affliction which is
but for a moment, works 2 Cor. 4. 17.
unto us a far more exceeding weight of glory.

March 22. 1665, his dear sister Mrs. Eleanor Smith came to visit him, and
attended upon him to the very day of his death, and wrote down in her Book the
most remarkable passages that she heard from him: Many of which you will have
wound up in the ensuing Discourse.

(He said) he had done his work (meaning that he had run the course of his
Ministry, and accomplished that last Work of his upon the seventy-first Psalm)
and now longed for his Dissolution, Psalm. 71.
and to rest with his dear Lord Jesus; And though he rejoiced much that he had
completed his former Works, yet this was the quintessence of all, that he was
going to receive his Reward; and counted not his life dear unto him, since he
should shortly see the lovely face of his dear Savior. And as St. Augustine,
when he meditated of that passage of God to Moses, Thou shall not see my face
and live; Lord (says he) then Tunc moriar ut te videam.
let me die that I may see thy face: So this serious and sincere Servant of
Jesus Christ, having seen him by the eye of Faith, was now ready to sing old
Simeons Nunc Dimittis; Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace.
Nothing troubled him so much, as that he was going to a place where he was to
have so great Wages for so little Work. And he not only at the last (as it was
said to be the Speech of Bellarmine) upon his Deathbed, Tutissimam est iter ad
Coelum per merita Christi; but he wholly in his health and sickness, relied on
Christ for Justification, Life and Salvation, freely by Faith in his Blood.
Romans 3.24.


He told Mrs. Smith, he much rejoiced at her kind coming to him, especially at
the hopes he had of her continuance with him to the last; which might be a
means to free him from all scandals that might be cast upon him by the Papists
or Quakers, who he knew would spare him no less at his Death, than they had
done in his life: he thought they would not stick to say, he died raging, an
Atheist, or a Papist, or cast the like Calumnies upon him, as they did upon
Luther or Calvin; But (said he) being now in perfect memory, I do declare, I
die a sincere Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, and do detest from the bottom
of my heart, all their erroneous Opinions and Practices.

(He said) he thought he had been under as much contest with Satan, the World,
and the Flesh, as ever any man for his time; of which he had left a particular
testimony to be printed with his other works. This was (I conceive) his Life
written by his own hand, which I never had the happiness to see, though I much
sought after it, for the completing of this his Narrative.

He often did reflect upon the evil of the times, the reigning sins, whereby
God was dishonored; viz. Profaneness, Atheism, Idolatry, etc. were very
grievous to him: and he took it as a choice Mercy, that God would take him out
of the world (in such a time as this); Lord, (said he) what am I, that thou
should think on me, and give me rest in such an evil day?

He much desi^ed to wait upon the Lord without distraction and diffidence,
knowing that his time was the best; but rather if it were the Lords will and
pleasure, he desired to be out of the body, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life; he would say; O Lord, how long, holy and just, why drive the
Chariot-wheels on so heavily? I long Lord, to come unto thee!

And as he was comfortable in his Sickness; so he gave much sweet counsel and
encouragement to Ministers and private Christians that came to visit him,
especially to such as he had begotten to God by his Ministry, or had fitted for
the service of God in his Church. A reverend Doctor coming to see him, and
speaking comfortable words to him; he told him he was going to his rest, and
hoped the Church of God would have rest; and that God would raise up and
refresh his faithful Servants in the Ministry; and though there might be a
sharp storm coming, he conceived that it would be but short. He advised his
Visitants to stand fast in the Faith and not to shrink, though a trying time
should come, he would have them to continue constant to their Christian
calling, and not to be carried away with the error of the wicked to forsake
their stedfastness, but to grow in grace, etc. prepare for death and judgment.

A young Minister coming to see him, he exhorted him to adorn his Ministry with
a holy life; which if he did not, he might do more harm by his Example, than by
all the Sermons he should preach.

He called for the four Youths in the Family under his inspection, and gave
them wholesome instruction, viz. to remember their Creator in the days of their
Eccl. 12.1.
youth; he warned them to keep Gods watch, to abstain from youthful lusts, to
observe the Lords Day strictly, and to be obedient to their Parents; which if
they did, it would be well with them, and they should be a blessing to
Posterity, and bid them remember these were the words of their dying Master,
and so he blessed them particularly in the Name of the Lord.

Ordinarily such of his Parish that came to see him, he would caution them not
to procrastinate their repentance, but to be serious in the matters of God and
his Service, to break off all delays, and to embrace the tenders of grace, the
motions of the Holy Spirit, and set upon the practice of good works, and to do
nothing that might interrupt the peace of a good conscience, which would
witness for them or against them, testifying that what he had taught them, was
the Truth of Christ.

When some came to see him, that he conceived were addicted to scandalous sins,
he would endeavor their Conviction, by pertinent Texts of Scripture; as I
heard him say to one, Remember to take heed of Covetousness: and so he would
say of other sins, telling them, that it was the Counsel of their dying
Minister.

I think I shall never forget his valediction and benediction to my self and my
dear Brother, with his hearty Prayers and Precepts: it put me in mind when I
saw him in that posture, of good old Jacob rearing himself upon his Pillow,
Genesis 47. 31.
or leaning upon a Staff to bless his Children; Oh with what gravity and
authority did he speak, as if he were already in the Suburbs of Heaven.

When he perceived some to go away sad from him, as lamenting his loss; he
would say, I am now going where I shall have rest from Sin and Satan, from all
fear, weariness, watching, and from all the evils and errors of a wicked world;
even so (said he) Come Lord Jesus; for I long for thy Coming.

When his pains grew greater, he often prayed that God would help him to wait
upon him without sin.

He was abundant in praises to God, that he was pleased to take him away in
that opportunity of time; as to the same purpose a little varied; he said, If
God had put a Pen into my hand, and had bid me write the time I would die, I
should have wrote for this, before feebleness and disability of old age took
hold upon me; now my work is done, and to die in peace is a great mercy.

Come Lord (said he), come away; for my desires are wholly for thee, and the
remembrance of thy Name: I am going to keep an everlasting holy day to the
Lord, a year of Jubilee is at hand; and here he fell into such an ecstasy of
joy, and such seraphical expressions he spoke (as were those that the Apostle
heard in his rapture) which were hardly to be written, (his Sister said) they
were 2 Cor. 12.
beyond her Pen.

He lay after this very meekly under his weakness, his body decaying apace;
April 20.
and he said, he felt the symptoms of death, and then cried, when Lord, when
will thou come?

Having some intermission from pain, he affirmed Satan said to him, What do
thou think to escape above all others? but (said he) I prayed the Lord to
rebuke him, and so heard no more of him.

And when his Physician would have given him hopes that God might restore him
to health, he would not hear of that, but gave him good Counsel, and said, He
loved him much for the grace he saw in him, and for his care he had of him, and
bid him prepare for a storm, and keep his integrity for Christ, and he would
keep him in the hour of temptation.

(He said) I bless God, I am going to better friends, to a better place, and
better employment; I long to be in it; When will it once be, Lord? not my time,
but thine.

After this, there came a Neighbour-Minister unto him, and said, The Church of
God would be a great loser by his Death; he answered, he had done his Work, and
God had better to raise up in his stead; and counted himself happy that he was
going to his rest, and should see none of the evils that were coming; yet was
content that God should serve himself upon him, and then let him depart in
peace, as David that served his generation faithfully according Acts 13.36
to the will of God, slept with his Fathers.

Being asked what he thought of the Church of God, he answered, God was in the
midst of her, she should not be moved; God would keeep her, and that right
early.

When a friend asked him, how he did (he said) never better; for I am going to
God, but never worse as to the outward man: and his Sister offering him a
Cordial, he refused it, saying, Give no more now; for it is not fit that I
should be feasting my body when I should be continnally in Communion with
Christ, and waiting with my Lamp ready trimmed; God feeds me with better food
than the world can afford me with.

He begged much that God would take him to keep an everlasting Sabbath with
himself; I know (says he) that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand Job
19. 25, 26.
at the last day upon the earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh. Oh let my life be nothing but prayer and
praises, since God has dealt so tenderly with me. He often comforted himself
with the glorious estate he had in hope, and that he had a company of Angels
round about him to keep and guard him to his Fathers House.

Come Lord, (says he) carry me out of this weary house of clay, which is so
burdensome to me; When, when will thou come, Lord?

He was as full of heavenly comfort as his heart could hold; yet not without
some intervals of assaults, and Satan's buffettings; for he said, Sister,
Sister, Did not I abhor the Mass? Oh yes, said she, let not Satan tell you
otherwise; for you have prayed and preached, and wrote against it, and now
abhor it: to which he answered, I do, and do abhor it.

A little after, he said, God was coming to do wonders by the operation of his
Spirit, it will be, it will be, go tell it.

Now (said he) I have nothing to do, but to die; and even whiles he lay with
death-pangs upon him, he spoke this; All the joys of this life are (...)
nothing to the joy I have in Jesus Christ. He closed up his Life, and breathed
out his last breath, with these words; Come, Lord Jesus.

He died April 13. 1665. at 4 of the Clock in the Evening.

The Names of the Thirteen Books he Printed in his lifetime, viz.
1. THE Pulpit guarded, in quarto. 2. The Font guarded, 4 to. 3. The Schools
guarded, or a Defense of H. L. 4. The Beauty of Holiness, 8 vo. 5. A Treatise
against long Hair. 6. Wisdoms Conquest, a Transl. of the 13th Book of Ovids
Metamorphosis, 8 vo. 7. Phaetons Folly, a Translation of the 2d Book of Ovids
Metamorphosis, 8 vo. 8. Hometius Enervatus; or a Treatise against the
Millenaries. 9. Sal Terrae; or a guard to the Ministers and their Maintenance.
10. An Exposition by way of Supplement, (...) 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, chapters of the
Prophecy of Amos. 11. Samaria's Downfall; or a Commentary by way of Supplement,
on the 5 last verses of Hosea 13. 12. The Beauty of Magistracy, in an
Exposition of Psalm 82. Wherein is set forth the necessity, utility, dignity,
duty and morality of Magistrates. 13. A Practical and Polemical Commentary, or
Exposition upon the 3d and 4th Chapters of the Latter Epistle of St Paul to
Timothy.
There is also Treatise a of his against May-poles.

An Elegy upon the Death of that humble and holy Man of God, Mr. Thomas Hall.
WHat ayl'd pale Death in have to Hall away
Our reverend Pastor to a bed of Clay! Tell me (blessed Saint) in sooth, how
could So great a Master in Divinity?
Could not (at least) our sighs, our prayers thou die
Prevail, that thou might live old Nestors and tears
Injurious Fate! because thou could not get years?
The Pearl, Would therefore spoil the Cabinet?
What will thou put no difference 'twixt faces?
Not spare the Saints for their transcendent graces?
Sure thou art neither blear'd, nor bribed, nor blind,
Thou take the best and leave the worst behind.
T'should seem from Death there is no prescription then,
The Preacher dies as well as other men.
Had I but tears to spare, that are not spent
Upon my sins! I would give Sorrow vent;
I Would drench the earth wherein his body lies,
And fill the air with Lamentable cries!
I Would wet his Coffin, and would wash his Tomb,
Till I another Niobe become!
But stay (my Muse) what means this Lamentation?
Sure his was not a Death but a translation;
H'walk'd with God, and he has took him hence,
Not to his loss, but to his recompense:
And yet he lives, methinks I see him still,
In's doing good, eschewing what is ill;
'Specially in the works he has left behind,
The pious product of's Prophetic mind.
London look to it, he foretold thy burning,
Thy Plague and poverty for not returning;
If Gods House be not built within the Nation,
Yours, and ours will be desolation.
Seeing those City-Comets that God sent,
As in fiery Chariot to Heaven he went:
Were It not Ambition, I could wish that he,
Had laid the lap of's Mantle on me.
Richard Moore.

An Epitaph upon Mr. Thomas Hall.
WIthin the period of David's Span,
Behold the Sepulture of this Grave man;
Who whiles he lived, feared not th'face of any
Good counsel living, dying, gave to many;
And though he chastely led a single life,
Held his School's Children, and his Church his Wife:
To which he did impart most liberally,
His Books in's life unto her Library;
The residue almost of what he had,
He gave the poor to make their faces glade.
The heaven born Jewel's gone; the Grave contains,
Within her womb, only those few remains,
Which though entombed now, abide they may,
Unto the last resurrection day;
The Soul will then again resume this dust
To the habitation of the Just.
R. M.

Upon the Death of that dear Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Thomas Hall.
THou need'st no Trophies to adorn thy Hearse,
Thy virtues serve to imbalm thy Name in Verse;
And this I Will say, since death has stopped thy breath,
Thy life was Priest-like, Prince-like was thy Death.
In Truths defense thou wast a brazen wall,
Against execrable heresies a Mawl:
Witness thy Guards, which still unrouted stand
Against Tom Collier, and that sooty band:
What Guard the Font, the Schools, and Pulpit too,
Which of your Mothers Sons have done like you?
But yet thy Comments writ on sacred story,
Most justly may deserve the greater Glory;
On the Prophets those thy Lucubrations,
And those on Paul Doctor of the Nations
Live, and thy other works of Charity,
Now thou art dead, and with God, follow thee.
Those thou have begot, cry out, my Father!
Which by Sage advice to God did gather,
Some of all sorts of these, it does them ease,
To trail a tear at thy sad Obsequies.
With blubred cheeks and countenance wan,
They sit and sing this Epicedium:
Let sad April cease her wonted showers,
And mornful May forbear t'yield its flowers,
Since this fair Flower's cropped, and with dry eye,
So many do slight this sad Destiny.
Richard Moore.

Upon the much-lamented Death of Mr. John Ley, who was Chairman of the
Assembly of Divines, and late Rector of Solyhull. His Character.
THe grace of God which in thy name did shine,
Was a Divine Spark, like generous Wine,
Which was infused in thee without assuage,
Into thy heart and parts even in old age;
Which shows to all impartial Judges how,
That thou have kept the good wine until now.
How many Learned within the Nation,
Like Conduits run wine at the Coronation,
Whose parts soon flag, grow flat, and faint, and wast,
Whilst thine like wine on the LEE, when old do last.
Like M^ason an old Disciple's, rather
Like Moses was this Reverend Father;
For in old age, he had a Sp'rit like him,
His strength did not abate, nor's eyes wax dim;
His Pentateuch in the tipes was partly sealed,
Till by this Pen unvailed, the truth revealed.
The Christian Sabbath was by him maintained
Against all sorts, who would have it profaned.
A learned Schoolman, much for moderation,
One able to give Laws for disputation;
He was skilled in the Tongues, curious at his Pen,
A most just Censor, both of Books and Men:
He was a Lodestone in's lovely Carri'ge,
An Adamant for unconquered courage:
He Would speak the truth where ere he had bin,
And loved the person but reproved the sin:
More than most are, from passion h' was free,
More moved to pity, than most are was he.
He weekly made provision for the Poor,
That constantly attended at his Door:
He Would sympathize with such as were in bonds,
And had great skill in setting broken bones:
A rare Casuist, and has been sent for far
Toth'sick, to see what their distemperswere,
And how to heal them, by his heavenly Art
H'hath powered balm to many a broken heart:
And that which crowns the rest, is yet behind, (...)

H' was high in parts, and lowly in his mind.
Like God he had respect to men,
After the Good he saw in them;
This was the chief ingredient for which,
He prized any person poor or rich;
And such as these, if they had need of them;
Should have his heart, his horse his purse, his pen.
I wish no worse to's Successor than he,
Just such another Rector there may be.
Richard Moore.

Upon the much-lamented Death of Mr. Burdal, Minister of the Gospel at Walshall
in Staffordshire.
WHat art thou dead too, another Burgess, a healing Barnabas, and Bo'nerges;
Who could convert thy self to every form
Of sp'rit and speech, thy flock to reform?
When Rhet'rick and Metaphysics would not do it,
Thou sought'st by sound words, to woo them to it:
Thy Speech was above Books or humane Art,
Thou melt'st the stone in many frozen heart,
More hard than that thou fear'dst would thee torment,
Till thy last sand was run and breath was spent.
These pains did not prevent thy powr'ful Preaching,
Or travel of thy mind in the constant teaching;
And as thou trad'st with God in prayers and tears,
He gave thee a return above thy fears.
Thou dy'd'st in the fiftieth year, with little pain,
And an eternal Life in Heaven did gain.
Richard Moore.

Upon the Death of that humble and holy Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Henry
Field, born at Kings-norton, bred up under Mr. Thomas Hall, and sent to
Pembroke-Colledg in Oxford, and from thence removed to Christs-Colledg in
Cambridg, where he was Fellow, and so preferred by the Honorable Earl of
Manchester to be Pastor of Uttington in Lincolnshire.
GReat was the Jewel hid within this field,
A Pearl more precious, than the earth does yield;
One grace surpasses Gold and Gems as far,
As the Sun shining does the brighter Star.
This parti-colour'd coat wrought such debate,
And caused thy brethrens envy, and their hate:
That from thy place and people thou wast sent,
To suffer sharp and severe 'prisonment:
Far worse than that of Joseph in the pit,
Who afterward was sold to the Ishmaelite;
And by that Merchant-man, who came from far,
To the Kings Provost-Martial Potiphar;
Where he was prosperous, yet by the wile
Of her, who would by sin his soul defile,
Was stripped of's coat, to keep his conscience*
His feet were fettr'd for his continence.
Tell me (blessed Saint) what, was not this thy fate,
If thou wast not far more unfortunate?
For in his bonds, good Joseph was more free,
Who favor found, and was loosed honorably
But't was otherwise with thee (dear brother)
Who wast sent from one prison to the other,
'Till death by a Habeas Corpus did remove
Thy flesh to the earth, thy soul to heaven above.
In those thy bonds thou wast so comfortable
As made adversity amiable;
For Divine Truth was girdle to thy loins,
And uprightness the breast plate of thy reins;
A Faith most firm, a shield of thy defense,
And an incomparable patience:
Hope was the only helmet of thy head,
The Gospels peace did light thee to thy bed.
Thy feet thus shod, thou fear no surprise,
But could defend thy self against injuries.
Thou having gotten these to good degree,
Obtain'st a conquest over Calamity.
Sore were thy life's troubles, sweet thy rest,
Thy smel's as of a Field that God has blessed.
Richard Moore.

Upon the Death of many Reverend Ministers since Bartholomew, 1662.
IF passion be a spur to poetry,
Sure it should teach me for to verify,
Were there but Sympathy, who can but weep,
To see so many Pastors laid to sleep?
What shall the poor Sheep do, now these are dead,
But dread likewise they shall be scattered?
The Lord has smitten many Cedars tall,
How should poor poplars choose but fear a fall?
Are Isreal's chariots and horsemen gone?
How should we choose but weep, and make great moan?
Old Ash foreseeing what a dearth would be,
Of Sions Seers, fell, fell down suddenly?
Although it proved his death, yet would he grieve,
And buried was on Barthol'mew Eve.
As father Ely bowed his aged head,
First when the news came, thy two sons are dead:
But when he heard once that the Ark was lost,
It brake his heart, his neck, his life it cost.
Vines, Naulton, Cawdry, Calamy went hence,
Like Nard and Camphire, trees of Frankincense;
Still sending forth their aromatic scent,
Till twice extinct from us, to Heaven they went:
Learned Vines went away as in a sleep,
And Zealous Naulton, who was wont to weep;
Calamy for London he loved so well,
When in the Fire he heard her Passing Bell.
Cawdry crowded on, Caryl, White and Strong,
Gouge, Gataker, Hill, whitaker and Young,
Gravely, judicious Burges and Hall,
Who was Tom-tell-troth, Baker and Burdall;
Pale death, why do thou make such haste,
And the true Churches Treasure waste?
Tell me in truth, what is there no reprieve,
That such renowned Worthies might survive?
See that a Supersedeas thou grant,
That such the Clergies benefit may not want:
Though thou accostest them with swiftest wing,
I Am well assured thou have lost thy sting;
They Are now made more than conquerors since dead,
And are triumphant, who were conquered:
Their Captain Christ has got the Victory,
And soon (O Death) will make an end of thee;
In the mean time, thou can not surely kill
A Child of God, but cure him of his ill:
His Soul's above thy reach, and in a trice
When once dismissed shall mount to Paradise,
Nor hurt the Body, only lay't to bed
In the Grave or Coffin, where it is buried.
RICHARD MOORE.

De Immortalitate.
BRight Marble, nor the gilded Monunuments
Of valiant Heroes, nor the rare Contents
Of wealthy Monarchs shall out-last thy fame,
Immortal Scholar of eternal name:
Neither shall time, thy praises ever divide,
As learned yet as ever was on our side.
Fierce Mars his Sword may Statues overturn,
And wealthy Cities into Ashes burn,
Spoil and deface the works of costly plates,
High Spires and Temples prized at dear rates;
Yet cannot blur, nor these thy Works o'return
Immortal Hall, who sleep in thine Urn:
Art dead, do speak by Books thou'st left behind,
Sight to the faithful, eyes unto the blind,
Bright Orient Pearls, to light through misty vales,
Over gloomy Mountains, and obscurest dales.
When Kingdoms are o'return'd like Troys sad Town,
The brightest Gem thy lofty front shall crown,
Posterity Halls learned Name shall boast*
When this our Isle and Europe quite is lost.
Aeternitati Comparatum omne tempus breve. Popham Gardener.

An Epitaph on the never-to-be-forgotten Divine Mr. Thomas Hall.
STay Passenger in this cold dusty Urn,
Read carefully, in reading see thou learn
Life's brevity, the shortness of man's days,
How soon his glory fades and decays;
How soon his honor's brought unto the Grave,
How soon the worms their satisfaction have:
What does his Learning him at all avail,
When once his vital Spirits dying fail.
If literature could free learned Men from death,
This Golgotha and dormentorious earth,
Halls Skeleton should never yet have found,
Who did with copious works so well abound:
Genius of art, thy loss we do lament,
Mellifluous Orator who still time spent
In reading, seeking, hearing sapience;
But now alas from us he is snatched hence:
That makes us weep, weeping we do deplore,
Tears blur our writings, we can write no more.
(...). Life's Shortness.
Life's a bubble
Full of trouble,
And a vapor
Or a tapour:
Life's a flower
Lasts an hour,
Soon it blasteth
Sooner wastes.
Then think how soon Man's pleasures fly away,
Since all his life-times but a winters day;
Like to the flower that with the Suns uprise
His bud unfolds, and in the evening dies;
His swift concurrent motions like the Sun
With winged paces suddenly are gone.
Then think on God, on grisly death's strong hand,
How thy poor soul at Gods just bar must stand;
Therefore prepare, his aid see thou implore,
When that thou come his bar to stand before.
(...), Solon.
Have God in mind, him serve with filial fear,
And think how soon thy dying time is near;
Lord shall my soul when body it does die
Lord-liking climb the heavens Canopie?
Then farewell Earth,
Place of my Birth,
Adieu vain Pleasures,
Heaven yields Treasures,
Far better than this tottring Stage does yield,
Where we cannot act, but presently are killed.
O grisly pale-fac't death why so unkind,
To take him hence, and leave me here behind;
Because I am not ripe, too green of years
To full this Corn-field of destroying tares;
If to were not so, thou would take me hence
To Heaven above, thy dear's ones recompense;
Where Saints do triumph when the prize they have won,
When this my body may outshine the Sun,
When Moses-like I view the three in one.
FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
In Folio.
SErmons upon the whole Epistle o^ St. Paul to the Colossians. By Mr. John
Daille, translated into English by F. S. 2. An Exposition of Temptation, on
Mat. 4, v. 1, to the end of the 11 v. A practical Exposition on the third
Chapter of the first Epistle of St Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's
Choice, on Psalm. 4. v. 6, 7, 8. By Anthony Burgess. Forty six Sermons upon the
whole Eight Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Romans. 8 Sermons
upon the whole fourth Psalm. 10 Sermons upon the whole forty second Psalm. 19
Sermons upon the whole 51 Psalm. 9 Sermons upon the whole 83 Psalm. All Five;
by Tho. Horton, D. D. Left perfected for the Press under his own Hand a little
before his Death. XXVI Sermons upon several Texts of Scriptures. By the Learned
and Reverend John Done, D. D.
Quarto's.
The Morning-Exercise against Popery, or the principal Errors of the Church of
Rome Detected and Confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached lately in Southwark.
By several Ministers of the Gospel in or near London. Mediocria, or the most
natural and plain understanding according to the Scripture of the great
Doctrines of Election, Redemption, Justification, the Covenants, the Law and
Gospel, and of Perfection.
Large Octavo.
Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; or the Misery of
graceless Sinners, and their Recovery by Christ their Savior. By Tho.
Doolittel. The Faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events
of his Word; or a second Part of the fulfilling of Scripture. By the same
Author. Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Looking Glass, in which the Admirers of
Mr. Sherlock may behold the Man, as to his Accuracy, Judgment, Orthodoxy. The
Child's Delight, together with an English Grammar. The true way of reading and
spelling English. Both by Tho. Lie.
Small Octavo.
A Religious Family; or a Treatise, in which is, 1. The Beauty and Excellency
of a pious and well-ordered Family described. 2. The single Man's Family-Book
faithfully prescribed. By Phil. Lamb. Index Biblicus Multijugus; or a Table to
the Holy Scripture, wherein each of its Books, Chapters and diverse Matters are
distinguished and epitomized. The almost-Christian Discovered; or the
False-Professor tried and cast. By Matthew. Mead. The Godly Man's Ark; or the City
of Refuge in the Day of his Distress, with Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven. By
Edm. Calamy. The true Bounds of Christian-Freedom. By S. Bolton. The sinfulness
of Sin and the Fullness of Christ. By Will. Bridge. A Discourse against
Transubstantiation; or an Answer to the ordinary Question, whether a Man may be
saved in the Roman Catholic Religion. By I. C. D. D.

