THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable Sir John Moore, Knight, AT GUILD HALL,
September. 29 th. 1681. When He was ELECTED Lord Mayor of London.
Together, with some Passages of his Deportment on the Twenty-Fourth of June,
1682. and before, in Relation to the Election of Sheriffs for the said City,
and County of Middlesex.
Gentlemen, and Worthy Citizens;
I Give you all my hearty thanks for the great Honor you have done me this
Day, in choosing me your chief Magistrate for the Year ensuing.

It is a very great Trust you have reposed in me, and a high and Honorable
Employment to which you have called me. It shall be my great Care, to the
uttermost of my Power, with God's Blessing, and your Assistance, to discharge
it faithfully. It is a Work I never did, and requires that Strength I never
had, which I hope the Lord will grant me. God by you has called me to it, and
I trust will carry me through it.

Magistracy is an Ordinance set up by Divine Authority* and Government is
appointed for the Good of Mankind, to keep the World in Order, to which is due
great Reverence and Obedience: I wish all Men did their Duty.

I am sorry to hear and see such great Divisions amongst us; certainly they are
in a great Error that are Promoters of them. It Is the Design of Rome to divide
us; it will be the Wisdom of Protestants to prevent and disappoint them, by
living together as Brethren in Unity amongst themselves. And my Request to you
all is, to exercise Christian Charity; to forbear Reproaching and Backbiting
one another; to study Quietness among your selves; to discourage Sin and
Wickedness; to promote Piety and Godliness: which will bring Glory to God,
Honor to the King and His Government, Peace, Happiness and Prosperity to this
City; which God Almighty grant; and let all the People say, Amen.

His Deportment about the Election of Sheriffs.
AT the Bridge-House-Feast, the Eighteenth day of May, 1682, His Lordship was
pleased to Drink to Mr. Dudley North; which Ceremony of the Lord Mayors
Drinking to a Man at that time, though it be generally taken to signify no more
than that such a Man is put in Nomination, or is judged fit by the Lord Mayor
to be One of the Sheriffs, in Case he be Elected by the Common Hall; yet some
time before the Day of Election, his Lord and Court of Aldermen, took Mr.
North's Bond to Hold Sheriff, merely upon His Lordships having Drunk to him, as
aforesaid. And accordingly, in Order to the Constituting of him Sheriff, His
Lordship was pleased the Nineteenth Day of June, 1682, to issue his Precept to
the several Companies in the unaccustomed form following:

THese are to require you, That on Midsummer-day next, being the Day appointed,
as well for Confirmation of the Person, who has been by Me Chosen, according
to the Ancient Custom, and Constitution of this City; to be One of the Sheriffs
of this City, and County of Middlesex, for the Year ensuing; as for the
Election of the Other of the said Sheriffs, and other Officers: You cause the
Livery of Your Company, to Meet together at Your Common Hall, early in the
Morning; and from thence, to come together Decently and Orderly, in their
Gowns, to Guild Hall, there to Make the said Confirmation and Election.

On Midsummer-day, Mr. North, Papillion, Dubois, and Box, being named as
Candidates for the Election, upon View of the Hands, the Election was declared
to fall upon Papillion, and Dubois; who were judged to have the Majority of
Hands by a Thousand, or Twelve Hundred. Whereupon Mr. North's, and Mr. Box's
Friends demanding a Poll, it was granted. But they finding that the Poll was
likely to be carried for Papillion and Dubois, some of them went to the Lord
Mayor, and by false Suggestions, prevailed with him to go the Council Chamger;
and, being there, he sent for the Sheriffs to attend Him: but they desiring his
Lordship's Excuse till the Poll was over, he went to the Polling-place, and
seemed to forbid any further Proceeding in the Poll: And though they gave him
Reasons, why they ought to proceed in the Poll, (being then, as they said, in
the Legal Discharge of their Office) yet his Lordship not being satisfied
therewith, and they con^^nuing to Poll; He, with a few Aldermen, went to the
Hastings about Seven ^n the Evening, (while the Sheriffs were Polling in the
Yard) and the Common Crier, by his Lordship's Direction, spoke to the
Promiscuous Company in the Hall, to the Effect following, All you that were
Summoned to appear here this Day, are required to depart; and to give your
Attendance on Tuesday, at Nine of the Clock in the Morning. As soon as the
Crier had said thus, his Lordship, and the Aldermen rose, and went away.

Now, though I am confident his Lordship is not ignorant, that many Persons
have severely reflected on the New Tenor of his Precept aforesaid, and his
insisting on his Right of Choosing One of the Sheriffs, contrary to the
generally received Opinion, grounded (as they tell us) on the known Laws,
undoubted Privileges, and uninterrupted Customs, and Usages of the City; which
impowers the Commoners to Choose Two Sheriffs; adding, That this is their Right
by Prescription, as well as Charter. And though they further reflect on Him,
for Adjourning the Court the Twenty-Fourth of June last, and for pretending a
Right in managing the Poll, which (they say) belongs solely to the Sheriffs,
and that his Lordship knows it to be so; with much more to this purpose: Yet,
for my part, I shall neither mention any of his Lordship's Proceedings, since
the Twenty-Fourth of June; nor determine how far his Speech and Actions
aforesaid, do agree, or differ; but shall leave that entirely to the
Consideration of his Lordship, and the Impartial Readers.

The Speech is Printed from that Copy of it, Published by Jonathan Robinson;
and the Account of those Passages referring to the Election of Sheriffs, is
Extracted out of a Paper Published by L. Curtis.

LONDON, Printed for R. Read, 1682.


