The Maids Chastity that is troubled in mind,
Against young-Mens inconstancy, who proves unkind:
She gives warning to all Maidens that are in the Row,
To take heed of false Young Men wheresoere they go.
To a pleasant new Tune.




YOu young maids that would live chary,
And live single and not marry,
Nor contract your selves to none,
For the Maid is the best that lies alone.
Cupid, Cupid, thou have done me wrong,
I have been thy servant now too long;
My heart was never free from care,
Since I was entangled in thy snare.
In thy snare I have been fettered,
And often have my business let,
In following after Venus train
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
Young men they will cog and lie,
Maidens they may weep and cry
Truth and Conscience they use none,
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
In this breast a heart I bear,
It Is none of mine I wish it were
Once it was mine, if I could have kept it,
But now where it is, it is not respected.
Now I hope to have my heart again,
And keep it fast from Venus Chain,
Lock it in this Breast of my own
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
When I have gained it safe again
Then I am free from all young men,
And never like to make this moan,
But live a single Maid alone.
Love is a torment who can abide it,
Who better knows then them that has tried
I count her but for a mad woman still,
That seeks to humor a young man's will.


YOung men they be much blinded,
Only to know a maidensmind
Maids do not believe them if they swear
Least after they leave you in a snare.
But try their hearts if that you can
Before that you love any man:
Love is fond and fickle still
Then do not humor a young man's will.
If a Lover be humored in his condition,
Then he does plead with a strong commission
To get his intention if he can
The maid is the best that lies alone.
For in lying alone there is no harm taken,
And being of an unconstant Love forsaken,
Its better then Gold or Silver store,
If that she does never see him more.
A maid that lives in an honest carriage
Must be careful in her marriage
Young men are so deceitful grown,
The Maid is the best that lies alone.
True Lovers Knot may soon be tied,
And a maid too soon may be made a Bride,
That Is not all in conclusion shown
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
There is many things for to consider
If a man and a woman go together:
If Love be wanting between them twain
She had better still to lie alone.
When they come to a maid a wooing
They make no conscience of their doing
But use all the deceit they can
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
There are false young men in my mind
Some proves cross, and some proves kind
I will not condemn them all for one
The Maids are best that lie alone.
Therefore I advise you consider my Song
I write to maids, I Will do them no wrong
And still I do tell you every one
The Maid is the best that lies alone.
Printed for R. H. and J Williamson in Cannon street and at the Bible on
London Bridge.


