AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ATHEISM, OR An Appeal to the Natural Faculties of the
Mind of Man, whether there be not a GOD.

By HENRY MORE Fellow of Christ College in CAMBRIDGE.

(...). Trismegist. (...). Aristot. LONDON* Printed by ROGER DANIEL, at
Lovell's Inn in Paternoster Row. Anno 1653.

To the Honorable, the Lady ANNE CONWAY.
MADAME,
THe high opinion or rather certain knowledge I have of your singular Wit and
Virtues, has emboldened, or to speak more properly, commanded me to make choice
of none other then yourself for a Patroness of this present Treatise. For
besides that I do your Ladyship that Right as also this present Age and
succeeding Posterity, as to be a witness to the World of such eminent
Accomplishments and transcendent Worth; so I do not a little please my self,
while I find my self assured in my own conceit that Cebes his mysterious and
judicious Piece of Morality hung up in the Temple of Saturn, which was done in
way of Divine Honor to the Wisdom of the Deity, was not more safely and
suteably placed then this careful Draught of Natural Theology or Metaphysics,
which I have dedicated to so noble, so wise, and so pious a Personage. And for
my own part it seems to me as real a point of Religious worship to honor the
Virtuous as to relieve the Necessitous, which Christianity terms no less then a
Sacrifice. Nor is there any thing here of Hyperbolisme or high-flow'n Language,
it being agreed upon by all sides, by Prophets, Apostles, and ancient
Philosophers, that holy and good Men are the Temples of the Living God. And
verily the Residence of Divinity is so conspicuous in that Heroical Pulchritude
of your noble Person, that Plato if he were alive again might find his
timorous Supposition brought into absolute Act, and to the enravishment of his
amazed Soul might behold Virtue become visible to his outward sight. And truly
Madame, I must confess that so Divine a Constitution as this, wants no
Preservative, being both devoid and incapable of Infection; and that if the
rest of the World had attained but to the least Degree of this sound Complexion
and generous frame of Mind, nay if they were but brought to an aequilibrious
Indifferency, and, as they say, stood but Neutralls, that is, If as many as are
supposed to have no love of God, nor any knowledge or experience of the Divine
life, did not out of a base ignorant fear irreconcilably hate him, assuredly
this Antidote of mine would either prove needless and superfluous, or, if
Occasion ever called for it, a most certain Cure. For this Truth of the
Existence of God being as clearly demonstrable as any Theorem in Mathematics,
it would not fail of winning as firm and as universal Assent, did not the fear
of a sad After-clap pervert men's Understandings, and Prejudice and Interest
pretend uncertainty and obscurity in so plain a matter. But considering the
state of things as they are, I cannot but pronounce, that there is more
necessity of this my Antidote then I could wish there were. But if there were
less or none at all, yet the pleasure that may be reaped in perusal of this
Treatise, (even by such as by an holy Faith and divine Sense are ever held fast
in a full assent to the Conclusion I drive at) will sufficiently compensate the
pains in the penning thereof. For as the best Eyes and most able to behold the
pure Light do not unwillingly turn their backs of the Sun to view his refracted
Beauty in the delightful colors of the Rainbow; so the perfectest Minds and
the most lively possessed of the Divine Image, cannot but take contentment and
pleasure in observing the glorious Wisdom and Goodness of God so fairly drawn
out and skilfully variegated in the sundry Objects of external Nature. Which
delight though it redound to all, yet not so much to any as to those that are
of a more Philosophical and Contemplative constitution; and therefore Madame,
most of all to Yourself, whose Genius I know to be so speculative, and Wit so
penetrant, that in the knowledge of things as well Natural as Divine you have
not only out gone all of your own Sex, but even of that other also, whose
ages have not given them overmuch the start of you. And assuredly your
Ladiship's Wisdom and Judgment can never be highly enough commended, that
makes the best use that may be of those ample Fortunes that Divine Providence
has bestowed upon you. For the best result of Riches, I mean in reference to
ourselves, is, that we finding ourselves already well provided for, we may be
fully Masters of our own time: and the best improvement of this time is the
Contemplation of God and Nature, wherein if these present Labors of mine may
prove so grateful unto you and serviceable, as I have been bold to presage,
next to the winning of Souls from Atheism, it is the sweetest Fruit they can
ever yield to

Your Ladyships humbly devoted Servant HENRY MORE.

THE PREFACE.
Atheism and Enthusiasme though they seem so extremely opposite one to
another, yet in many things they do very nearly agree. For to say nothing of
their joint conspiracy against the true knowledge of God and Religion, they are
commonly entertained, though successively, in the same Complexion. For that
temper that disposes a man to listen to the Magisteriall dictates of an
over-bearing fancy, more then to the calm and cautious insinuations of free
Reason, is a subject that by turns does very easily lodge and give harbor to
these mischievous Guests.

For as dreams are the fancies of those that sleep, so fancies are but the
dreams of men awake. And these fancies by day, as those dreams by night, will
vary and change with the weather and present Temper of the body. So that those
that have only a fiery Enthusiastic acknowledgement of God; change of diet,
feculent old Age, or some present dampes of Melancholy will as confidently
represent to their fancy that there is no God, as ever it was represented that
there is one; and then having lost the use of their more noble faculties of
Reason and Understanding, they must according to the course of Nature, be as
bold Atheists now, as they were before confident Enthusiasts.

Nor do these two unruly Guests only serve themselves by turns on the same
party, but also send mutual supplies one to another; being lodged in several
persons. For the Atheist's pretense to wit and natural reason (though the
foulness of his mind makes him fumble very dotingly in the use thereof) makes
the Enthusiast ^^cure that reason is no Guide to God. And the Enthusiast's
boldy dictating the careless ravings of his own tumultuous fancy for
undeniable principles of divine knowledge, confirms the Atheists that the whole
buisinesse of religion and notion of a God, is nothing but a troublesome fit of
overcurious Melancholy. Therefore, I thought I should not be wanting to
Religion and to the Public, if I attempted, some way, to make this fansifull
Theosophy or Theomagy, as it is very ridiculous in it self, so also to appear
to the world, and if it were possible, to the very favorers of it; it being
the most effectual means in my judgment, to remove this dangerous evil out of
the minds of men, and to keep it off from theirs that are as yet untainted.

And this I endeavored in those two late Pamphlets I wrote, namely my
Observations and my Reply. In both which I putting my self upon the merry pin
(as you see it was necessary so to do) and being finely warmed with Anger and
Indignation against the mischief I had in design to remove, if I may seem
after the manner of men to have transgressed in any niceties, yet the ingenuous
cannot but be very favorable in their censure, it being very hard to come off
so clearly well, in the acting of so humorous a part; there scarce being any
certain Judge of humors, but the humor of every man that judges.

And I am very well aware that some passages cannot but seem harsh to sad and
weakly Spirits, as sick men love no noise nor din, and take offense at but the
smell of such meats, as are the most pleasant and strengthening nourishment of
those that are well. But as for my self I can truly pronounce that what I did,
I did in reason and judgment, not at all offending that Life that dwells in
me. For there was that Tonicall exertion, and steady Tension of my Spirits,
that every chord went off with a clear and smart sound, as in a well-tuned
Instrument set at a high Pitch, and was good Music to my self that thoroughly
understood the meaning of it. And my agile and swift Motion from one thing to
another, even of those that were of very different natures, was no harsh
harmony at all to me, I having the art to stop the humming of the last stroke,
as a skillful Harper on his Irish Harp, and so to render the following chord
clean, without the mixing or interfaring of any tremulous murmurs, from the
strings that were touched immediately before.

And I did the more willingly indulge to my self this freedom and mirth, in
respect of the Libertines whom I was severely and sharply to reprove, and so
made my self as freely merry as I might, and not desert the realities of
Soberness, that thereby they might know, that no Superstitious Sneaksby, or
moped Legallist (as they would be ready to fancy every body that bore no
resemblance at all with themselves) did rebuke them or speak to them, but one
that had in some measure attained to the truth of that Liberty, that they were
in a false sent after. Thus was I content to become a Spectacle to the world,
in any way or disguise whatsoever, that I might thereby possibly by any means
gain some souls out of this dirty and dizzy whirle-poole of the Flesh, into the
Rest and Peace of God; and to seem a fool my self to provoke others to become
truly and seriously wise.

And as I thought to win upon the Libertine by my mirth and freeness, so I
thought to gain ground upon the Enthusiast, by suffering my self to be carried
into such high Triumphs and Exaltations of Spirit as I did. In all which
(though the unskilful cannot distinguish betwixt vainglory and Divine joy or
Christian gloriation) I do really nothing but highly magni^y the simplicity of
the life of Christ above all Magic, Miracles, Power of Nature, Opinions,
Prophecies, and what ever else humane nature is so giddily and furiously
carried after, even to the neglecting of that which is the sublimest pitch of
happiness that the soul of man can arrive to.

Wherefore many of those expressions in my Reply that seem so turgent are to be
interpreted with allusion to what this Divine life does deservedly triumph
over, and particularly what Magicians boast they can do: As in that passage
which seems most enormous page 49th. I still the raging of the Sea etc. Which
is the very same that Medea vaunts of in Ovid, -- Concussaque sisto,
Stantia concutio cantu freta, nubila pello.


And for the rest that has fallen from me in those free heats, I Am sure there
is neither Expression nor Meaning that I cannot not only make good by reason,
but warrant and countenance also by some thing plainly parallel thereto, in
Scripture, Philosophers and Fathers, especially Origin, whom I account more
profoundly learned and no less pious then any of them.

But as I said the Drift and Scope of all was, vigourously to witness to this
buisy and inquisitive Age, that the Simplicity of the life of Christ, though it
be run over by most and taken no notice of, that is, that perfect Humility and
divine Love, whence is a free command over a man's passions and a warrantable
Guidance of them, with all Serenity, becoming Prudence, and Equity; that these
are above all the glory of the World, curiosity of Opinions, and all power of
Nature whatsoever.

And if the sense of this so plain a truth with all it is power and loveliness
did so vehemently possess my soul, that it caused for the present some
sensible mutations and tumults in my very Animal Spirits and my body, the
matter being of so great Importance, it was but an obvious piece of prudence to
record those Circumstances, that professing my self so very much moved, others
might be the more effectually moved thereby; according to that of the Poet --
si vis me flere, dolendum est
Primum ipsi tibi.


And I am no more to be esteemed an Enthusiast for such passages as these, then
those wise and circumspect Philosophers, Plato and Plotinus, who upon the more
then ordinary sensible visits of the divine Love and Beauty descending into
their enravish'd souls, profess themselves no less moved, then what the
sense of such expressions as these will bear, (...) or (...). And to such
Enthusiasme as is but the Triumph of the soul of man, inebriated as it were,
with the delicious sense of the Divine life, that blessed Root, and Original of
all holy wisdom and virtue, I am as much a friend, as I am to the vulgar
fanaticall Enthusiasme a professed enemy. And eternal shame stop his mouth,
that will dare to deny, but that the fervent love of God and of the pulchritude
of Virtue will afford the spirit of man more joy and triumph, then ever was
tasted in any lustful pleasure, which the pen of unclean Wits do so highly
magnify both in verse and prose.

Thus much I thought fit to premise concerning my two late Pamphlets, which I
have done in way of Civility to the world, to whom I hold my self accountable,
especially for any public Actions, who now I hope will not deem those
unexpected Motions of mine so strange and uncouth, they so plainly perceiving
what Music they were measured to.

But as for this present Discourse against Atheism, as there is no humor at
all in it, so I hope there is less hazard of Censure. For here is nothing to
give offense, unless we be so weak-sighted, that the pure light of Reason and
Nature will offend us. Here Is no lavish Mirth, no Satyricall Sharpness, no
Writhing or Distorting the genuine frame and composure of mine own mind, to set
out the deformity of another, no Rapture, no Poetry, no Enthusiasme, no more
then there is in Euclid's Elements, or Hippocrates his Aphorisms. But though I
have been so bold as to recite what there is not in this present Discourse, yet
I had rather leave it to the Quick-sightednesse of the Reader to spy out what
there is, then be put upon so much Immodesty my self, as to speak any thing
that may seem to give it any precellency above what is already extant in the
world about the same matter. Only I may say thus much, that I did on purpose
abstain from reading any Treatises concerning this subject, that I might the
more undisturbedly write the easy Emanations of mine own mind, and not be
carried off from what should naturally fall from my self, by prepossessing my
thoughts by the inventions of others.

I have writ therefore after no Copy but the Eternal Characters of the mind of
man, and the known Phenomenon of Nature. And all men consulting with these that
endeavor to write sense, though it be not done alike by all men, it could not
happen but I should touch upon the same heads that others have, that have wrote
before me* Who though they merit very high commendation for their learned
atcheivements, yet I hope my endeavors have been such, that though they may
not deserve to be corrivalls or partners in their praise and credit, yet I do
not distrust but they may do their share toward that public good, that such
performances usually pretend to aim at.

For that which did embolden me to publish this present Treatise, was not, as I
said before, because I flatte^'d my self in a Conceit that it was better or
more plausible, then what is already in the hands of men: but that it was of a
different sort, and has it is peculiar serviceablenesse and advantages apart and
distinct from others; whose proper preeminences it may aloof off admire, but
dare not in any wise compare with. So that there is no Tau^ology committed in
recommending what I have written to the public view, nor any lessening the
labors of others by thus offering the fruit of mine own. For considering there
are such several Complexions and Tempers of men in the world, I do not
distrust but that as what others have done, has been very acceptable and
profitable to many, so this of mine may be well rellish'd of some or other, and
so seem not to have been writ in vain.

For though I cannot promise my Reader that I shall entertain him with so much
winning Rhetoric and pleasant Philology, as he may find else where, yet I
hope he will acknowledge, if his mind be unpreiudic'd, that he meets with
sound and plain Reason, and an easy and clear Method.

And though I cannot furnish him with that copious variety of Arguments that
others have done, yet the frugall carfulness and safenesse of choice that I
have made in them, may compensate their paucity.

For I appeal to any man, whether the proposal of such as will easily admit
of Evasions (though they have this peculiar advantage that they make for
greater pomp and at first sight seem more formidable for their multitude) does
not embolden the Atheist and make him fancy, that because he can so easily turn
the edge of these, that the rest have no more solidity then the former; but
that if he thought good, and had leisure, he could with like facility
enervate them all.

Wherefore I have endeavored to insist upon such alone, as are not only true
in themselves, but are unavoidable to my Adversary, unless he will cast down
his shield, forsake the free use of the natural facultyes of his mind, and
profess himself a mere puzzled Sceptick. But if he will with us but admit of
this one Postulate or Hypothesis, that Our Faculties are true, though I have
spoke modestly in the Discourse it self, yet I think I may here without vanity
or boasting, freely profess that I have no less then demonstrated that ^here
is a God. And by how much more any man shall seriously endeavor to resist the
strength of my Arguments, by so much the more strong he shall find them; as he
that presses his weak finger against a wall of Marble; and that they can appear
slight to none but those that carelessly and slightly consider them. For I
borrowed them not from books, but fetched them from the very nature of the
thing it self and indelible Ideas of the Soul of Man.

And I found that keeping my self within so narrow compass as not to affect
any reasonings but such as had very clear affinity and close connection with the
subject in hand, that I naturally hit upon what ever was material to my
purpose, and so contenting my self with my own, received nothing from the great
store and riches of others. And what I might easily remember of others, I could
not let pass if in my own Judgment it was obnoxious to evasion. For I
intended not to impose upon the Atheist, but really to convince him. And
therefore Descartes, whose Mechanical wit I can never highly enough admire,
might be no Master of Metaphysics to me. Whence it is that I make use but of
his first Argument only, if I may not rather call it the Schools or mine own.
For I think I have managed it in such sort and every way so propp'd it and
strengthened it, that I may challenge in it as much interest as any.

But as for his following reasons, that suppose the Objective Reality of the
Idea of God does exceed the efficiency of the mind of man, and that the mind of
man, were it not from another, would have conferred all that perfection upon it
self, that it has the Idea of, and lastly, that it having no power to conserve
it self, and the present and future time having no dependence one of another,
that it is continually reproduc'd, that is conserved by some higher cause,
which must be God; these grounds, I say, being so easily evaded by the Atheist,
I durst not trust to them, unless I had the Authors wit to defend them, who
was handsomely able to make good any thing. But they seem to me to be liable to
such evasions as I can give no stop to.

For the mind of man, as the Atheist will readily reply, may be able of her
self to frame such an actual Idea of God, as is there disp^^ed of, which Idea
will be but the present modification of her, as other notions are, and an
effect of her essence, and power, and that power a radical property of her
essence. So that there is no excess of an effect above the efficiency of the
cause, though we look no further then the mind it self, for she frames this
notion of God as naturally and as much without the help of an higher Cause, as
she does any thing else whatsoever.

And as for the mind's contributing those perfections on her self, she has an
Idea of; if she had been of her self, the Atheist will say, it implies a
contradiction, and supposes that a thing before it exists, may consult about
the advantages of its own existence. But if the mind be of it self, it is what
it finds it self to be, and can be no otherwise.

And therefore lastly if the mind find it self to exist, it can no more destroy
it self, then produce it self, nor needs any thing to continue its being,
provided that there be nothing in Nature that can act against it and destroy
it; for what ever is, continues so to be, unless there be some cause to change
it.

So likewise from those Arguments I fetched from external Nature, as well as
in these from the innate propertyes of the mind of man, my careful choice made
very large defalcations, insisting rather upon such things as might be
otherwise, and yet are far better as they are, then upon such as were
necessary and could not be otherwise. As for example; When I considered the
distance of the Sun, I did not conceive that his not being placed so low as the
Moon, or so high as the fixed Stars, was any great argument of Providence,
because it might be replied that it was necessary it should be betwixt those
two distances, else the Earth had not been habitable, and so mankind might have
waited for a being, till the agitation of the Matter had wrought things into a
more tolerable fitness or posture for their production.

Nor simply is the Motion of the Sun or rather of the Earth, any argument of
divine Providence, but as necessary as a piece of wood's being carried down the
stream, or straws about a whirle-poole. But the Laws of her Motion are such,
that they very manifestly convince us of a Providence, and therefore I was fain
to let go the former, and insist more largely upon the latter.

Nor thought I it fit, to Rhetoricate in proposing the great variety of things,
and praecellency one above another, but to press close upon the design and
subordination of one thing to another, showing that whereas the rude motions of
the matter a thousand to one might have cast it otherwise, yet the productions
of things are such as our own Reason cannot but approve to be best, or as we
our selves would have designed them.

And so in the consideration of Animalls, I do not so much urge my Reasons from
their diversity and subsistence, (though the framing of matter into the bare
subsistence of an Animal is an effect of no less cause then what has some
skill and counsel) But what I drive at, is the exquisite contrivance of their
parts, and that their structure is far more perfect, then will merely serve
for their bare existence and continuance in the world; Which is an undeniable
demonstration that they are the effects of wisdom, not the results of Fortune
or fermented Matter.

Lastly when I descend to the History of things miraculous and above the
ordinary course of Nature, for the proving that there are Spirits, that the
Atheist thereby may the easier be induced to believe there is a God, I am so
cautious and circumspect, that I make use of no Narrations that either the
avarice of the Priest, or the credulity and fansifullnesse of the Melancholist
may render suspected.

Nor could I abstain from that Subject, it being so pat and pertinent unto my
purpose, though I am well aware how ridiculous a thing it seems to those I have
to deal with. But their confident ignorance shall never dash me out of
countenance with my well-grounded knowledge: For I have been no careless
Inquirer into these things, and from my childhood to this very day, have had
more reasons to believe the Existence of God and a Divine Providence, then is
reasonable for me to make particular profession of.

In this History of things Miraculous or Super-naturall, I might have recited
those notable Prodigies that happened, after the birth, in the life, and at the
death of Christ; As the star that led the Wise men to the young Infant; Voices
from heaven testifying Christ to be the Son of God; and lastly that
miraculous Eclipse of the Sun, made, not by interposition of the Moon, for she
was then opposite to him, but by the Interpos^^ion or total Involution, if you
will, of those scummy spots that ever more or less are spread upon his face,
but now over-flowed him with such thickness and so universally, that daylight
was suddenly intercepted from the astonished eyes of the Inhabitants of the
Earth. To which direful Symptoms though the Sun has been in some measure
at several times obnoxious, yet that those latent Causes should so suddenly
step out and surprise him, and so enormously at the passion of the Messiah, he
whose mind is not more prodigiously darkened then the Sun was then Eclips^d,
cannot but at first sight acknowledge it a special designement of Providence.

But I did not insist upon any sacred History, partly because it is so well and
so ordinarily known, that it seemed less need^ull; but mainly because I know
the Atheist will boggle more at whatever is fetched from established Religion,
and fly away from it, like a wild Colt in a Pasture at the sight of a bridle or
an halter, snuffing up the Air and smelling a Plot afar off, as he
foolishly fancies.

But that he might not be shy of me, I have conformed my self as near his own
Garb as I might, without partaking of his folly or wickedness, that is, I
appear now in the plain shape of a mere Naturalist, that I might vanquish
Atheism; as I did heretofore affectedly symbolize in careless Mirth and
freedom with the Libertines, to circumvent Libertinisme.

For he that will lend his hand to help another fallen into a ditch, must
himself though not fall, yet stoop and incline his body: And he that converses
with a Barbarian, must discourse to him in his own language: So he that would
gain upon the more weak and sunk minds of sensual mortals, is to
accommodate himself to their capacity, who like the Bat and Owl can see no
where so well as in the shady glimmerings of their own Twilight.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ATHEISM.
CHAP. I.
The seasonable usefulness of the present Discourse, or the Motives that put
the Author upon these endeavors of demonstrating that there is a God.
THe grand truth which we are now to be employed about, is the proving that
there is a God; And I made choice of this subject as very seasonable for the
times we are in, and are coming on, wherein Divine Providence granting a more
large release from Superstition, and permitting a freer perusal of matters of
Religion, then in former Ages, the Temp^er would take advantage where he may,
to carry men captive out of one dark prison into another, out of Superstition
into Atheism it self. Which is a thing feasible enough for him to bring about
in such men as have adhered to Religion in a mere external way, either for
fashion sake, or in a blind obedience to the Authority of a Church. For when
this external frame of godliness shall break about their ears, they being
really at the bottom devoyd of the true fear and love of God, and destitute
of a more free and unprejudiced use of their facultyes, by reason of the
sinfullnesse and corruption of their natures; it will be an easy thing to
allure them to an assent to that, which seems so much for their present
Interest; and so being imboldned by the tottering and falling of what they took
for Religion before, they will gladly in their conceit cast down also the very
Object of that Religious Worship after it, and conclude that there is as well
no God as no Religion; That is, they have a mind there should be none, that
they may be free from all wringings of conscience, trouble of correcting their
lives, and fear of being accountable before that great Tribunal.

Wherefore for the reclayming of these if it were possible, at least for the
succouring and extricating of those in whom a greater measure of the love of
God does dwell, (who may probably by some darkening cloud of Melancholy or some
more then ordinary importunity of the Tempter be dissettled and entangled in
their thoughts concerning this weighty matter) I held it sit to bestow mine
endeavors upon this so useful and seasonable an Enterprise, a^ to demonstrate
that there is a God.

CHAP. II.
What is meant by demonstrating there is a God, and that the mind of man,
unless he do violence to his facul^ies, will fully ^ssent or dissent from that
which notwithstanding may have a bare possibility of being otherwise.
BUt when I speak of demonstrating there is a God, I would not be suspected of
so much vanity and ostentation as to be thought I mean to bring no Arguments,
but such as are so convictive, that a man's understanding shall be forced to
confess that is is impossible to be otherwise then I have concluded. For for
mine own part I am pro^e to believe, that there is nothing at all to be so
demonstrated. For it is possible that Mathematical evidence it self, may be
but a constant undiscoverable delusion, which our nature is necessarily and
perpetually obnoxious unto, and that either fatally or fortuitously there has
been in the world time out of mind such a Being as we call Man, whose essential
property it is to be then most of all mistaken, when he conceives a thing most
evidently true. And why may not this be as well as any thing else, if you will
have all things fatal or casual without a God? For there can be no cu^be to
this wild conceit, but by the supposing that we our selves exist from some
higher Principle that is absolutely good and wise, which is all one as to
acknowledge that there is a God.

Wherefore when I say that I will demonstrate that there is a God, ^ do not
promi^e that I will always produce such arguments, that the Reader shall
acknowledge so strong as he shall be forced to confess that it is utterly
unpossible that it should be otherwise. But they shall be such as shall deserve
full assent and win full assent from any unprejudiced mind.

For I conceive that we may give full assent to that which notwithstanding may
possibly be otherwise: which I shall illustrate by several examples. Suppose
two men got to the top of mount Athos, and there viewing a stone in the form of
an Altar with ashes on it, and the footsteps of men on those ashes, or some
words if you will, as Optimo Maximo, or, (...) or the like, written or scralled
out upon the Ashes; and one of them should cry out, Assuredly here have been
some men here that have done this: But the other more nice then wise should
reply, Nay it may possibly by otherwise. For this stone may have naturally
grown into this very shape, and the seeming ashes may be no ashes, that is no
remainders of any fuel burnt there, but some unexplicable and imperceptible
Motions of the Air, or other particles of this fluid Matter that is active
every where, have wrought some parts of the Matter into the form and nature of
ashes, and have fridg'd and played about so, that they have also figured those
intelligible Characters in the same. But would not any body deem it a piece of
weakness no less then dotage for the other man one whit to recede from his
former apprehension, but as fully as ever to agree with what he pronounced
first, notwithstanding this bare possibility of being otherwise?

So of Anchors that have been dug up, either in plain fields or mountainous
places, as also the Roman Vrnes with ashes and inscriptions, as Severianus,
Full: Linus and the like, or Roman Coins, with the effigies and names of the
Caesar's on them; or that which is more ordinary, the Sculls of men in every
Churchyard, with the right figure, and all those necessary perforations for
the passing of the vessels, besides those conspicuous hollowes for the Eyes
and rows of teeth, the Os Styloeides, Ethoeides, and what not? if a man will
say of them, that the Motion of the particles of the Matter, or some hidden
Spermatick power has gendred these both Anchors, Vrnes, Coins, and Sculls in
the ground, he does but pronounce that which humane reason must admit as
possible: Nor can any man ever so demonstrate that those Coins, Anchors, and
Vrnes, were once the Artifice of men, or that this or that Scull was once a
part of a living man, that he shall force an acknowledgment that it is
impossible that it should be otherwise. But yet I do not think that any man,
without doing manifest violence to his facultyes, can at all suspend his
assent, but freely and fully agree that this or that Scull was once part of a
living man, and that these Anchors, Vrnes and Coins, were certainly once made
by humane artifice, notwithstanding the possibility of being otherwise.

And what I have said of Assent is also true in Dissent. For the mind of man
not crazed nor prejudiced will fully and unreconcileably disagree, by it is own
natural fagacity, where notwithstanding the thing that it does thus resolvedly
and undoubtingly reject, no wit of man can prove impossible to be true. As if
we should make such a fiction as this, that Archimedes with the same
individual body that he had when the Soldiers slew him, is now safely intent
upon his Geometrical figures under ground, at the Center of the Earth, far
from the noise and din of this world that might disturb his Meditations, or
distract him in his curious delineations he makes with his rod upon the dust;
which no man living can prove impossible: Yet if any man does not as
unreconcileably dissent from such a fable as this, as from any falsehood
imagineable, assuredly that man is next door to madness or dotage, or does
enormous violence to the free use of his Facultyes.

Wherefore it is manifest that there may be a very firm and unwavering assent
or dissent, when as yet the thing we thus assent to may be possibly otherwise;
or that which we thus dissent from, cannot be proved impossible to be true.

Which point I have thus long and thus variously sported my self in, for making
the better impression upon my Reader, it being of no small use and consequence,
as well for the advertising of him, that the Arguments which I shall produce,
though I do not bestow that ostentative term of Demonstration upon them, yet
they may be as effectual for winning a firm and unshaken assent, as if they
were in the strictest Notion such; as also to reminde him that if they be so
strong and so pa^ly fitted and suitable with the facultyes of man's mind, that
he has nothing to reply, but only that for all this, it may possibly be
otherwise, that he should give a free and full assent to the Conclusion. And
if he do not, that he is to suspect himself rather of some distemper,
prejudice, or weakness, then the Arguments of want of strength. But if the
Atheist shall contrariwise pervert my candor and fair dealing, and phan^y that
he has got some advantage from my free confession, that the arguments that I
shall use are not so convictive, but that they leave a possibility of the thing
being otherwise, let him but compute his supposed gains by adding the
limitation of this possibility ( viz. that it is no more possible, then that
the clearest Mathematical evidence may be false (which is impossible if our
facultyes be true) or in the second place, then that the Roman Vrnes and Coins
above mentioned may prove to be the works of Nature, not the Artifice of man,
which our facultyes admit to be so little probable, that it is impossible for
them not fully to assent to the contrary) and when he has cast up his account,
it will be evident that it can be nothing but his gross ignorance in this kind
of Arithmetic that shall embolden him to write himself down gainer and not me.

CHAP. III.
An attempt toward the finding out the true Notion or Definition of God, and a
clear Conviction that there is an indelible Idea of a Being absolutely perfect
in the mind of Man.
ANd now having premised thus much, I shall come on nearer to my present
design. In prosecution whereof it will be requisite for me, first to define
what God is, before I proceed to demonstration that he is. For it is obvious
for Man's reason to find arguments for the imp^ssibility, possibility,
probability, or necessity of the Existence of a thing, from the explication of
the Essence thereof.

And now I am come hither, I demand of any Atheist that denies there is a God,
or of any that doubts whether there be one or no, what Idea or Notion they
frame of that they deny or doubt of. If they will prove nice and squeamish, and
profess they can frame no notion of any such thing, I would gladly ask them,
why they will then deny or doubt of they know not what. For it is necessary
that he that would rationally doubt or deny a thing, should have some settled
Notion of the thing he doubts of or denies. But if they profess that this is
the very ground of their denying or doubting whether there be a God, because
they can frame no Notion of him, I shall forthwith take away that Allegation by
offering them such a Notion as is as proper to God as any Notion is proper to
any thing else in the world.

I define God therefore thus, An Essence or Being fully and absolutely perfect.
I say fully and absolutely perfect, in counterdistinction to such perfection as
is not full and absolute, but the perfection of this or that Species or Kind of
finite Beings, suppose of a Lion, Horse or Tree. But to be fully and absolutely
perfect is to be at least as perfect as the apprehension of a Man can
conceive, without a Contradiction. But what is inconceivable or contradictious
is nothing at all to us, for we are not now to wagg one Atome beyond our
facultyes. But what I have propounded is so far from being beyond our
facultyes, that I dare appeal to any Atheist that has yet any command of
Sense and Reason left in him, if it be not very easy and intelligible at the
first sight, and that if there be a God, he is to be deemed of us, such as
this Idea or Notion sets forth.

But if he will sullingly deny that this is the proper Notion of God, let him
enjoy his own humor; this yet remains undeniable that there is in Man, an Idea
of a Being absolutely and fully perfect, which we frame out by attributing all
conceivable perfection to it whatsoever, that implies no Contradiction. And
this Notion is Natural and Essential to the Soul of Man, and can not be
washed out, nor conveyed away by any force or trick of wit what^oever, so
long as the Mind of man is not crazed, but has the ordinary use of her own
facultyes.

Nor will that prove any thing to the purpose, when as it shall be alleged
that this Notion is not so connaturall and Essential to the Soul, because she
framed it from some occasions from without. For all those undeniable
conclusions in Geometry which might be helped and occasioned from some thing
without, are so Natural notwithstanding and Essential to the Soul, that you
may as soon un-soul the Soul, as divide her from perpetual assent to those
Mathematical truths, supposing no distemper nor violence offered to her
Facultyes. As for example, she cannot but acknowledge in her self the Several
distinct Ideas of the five Regular Bodies, as also, that it is impossible that
there should be any more then five. And this Idea of a Being absolutely
perfect is as distinct and indelible an Idea in the Soul, as the Idea of the
five Regular Bodies, or any other Idea whatsoever.

It remains therefore undeniable, that there is an inseparable Idea of a Being
absolutely perfect ever residing, though not always acting, in the Soul of Man.

CHAP. IV.
What Notions are more particularly comprised in the Idea of a Being absolutely
perfect. That the difficulty of framing the conception of a thing ought to be
no argument against the existence thereof: the nature of corporeal Matter
being so perplexed and intricate, which yet all men acknowledge to exist. That
the Idea of a Spirit is as easy a Notion as of any other substance what ever.
What powers and propertyes are containd in the Notion of a Spirit. That
Eternity and Infinity, if God were not, would be cast upon something else; so
that Atheism cannot free the mind from such Intricacyes. Goodness, Knowledge
and Power, Notions of highest perfection, and therefore necessarily included in
the Idea of a Being absolutely perfect.
BUt now to lay out more particularly the perfections comprehended in this
Notion of a Being absolutely and fully perfect, I think I may securely nominate
these; Self-subsistency, Immateriality, Infinity as well of Duration as
Essence, Immensity of Goodness, Omnisciency, Omnipotency, and Necessity of
Existence. Let this therefore be the description of a being absolutely
perfect, that it is a Spirit, Eternal, Infinite in Essence and Goodness,
Omniscient, Omnipotent, and of it self necessarily existent. All which
Attributes being Attributes of the highest perfection, that falls under the
apprehension of man, and having no discoverable imperfection interwoven with
them, must of necessity be attributed to that which we conceive absolutely and
fully perfect. And if any one will say that this is but to dress up a Notion
out of my own fancy, which I would afterward ssily insinuate to be the Notion
of a God; I answer, that no man can discourse and reason of any thing without
recourse to settled notions decyphered in his own mind. And that such an
exception as this implies the most contradictious absurdities imaginable, to
wit, as if a man should reason from something that never entered into his mind,
or that is utterly out of the ken of his own facultyes. But such groundless
allegations as these discover nothing but an unwillingnesse to find themselves
able to entertain any conception of God, and a heavy propension to sink down
into an utter oblivion of him, and to become as stupid and senseless in divine
things as the very beasts.

But others it may be will not look on this Notion as contemptible for the
easy composure thereof out of familiar conceptions which the mind of man
ordinarily figures it self into, but reject it rather for some unintelligible
hard terms in it, such as Spirit, Eternal, and Infinite, for they do profess
they can frame no Notion of Spirit, and that anything should be Eternal or
Infinite, they do not know how to set their mind in a posture to apprehend, and
therefore some would have no such thing as a Spirit in the world.

But if the difficulty of framing a conception of a thing must take away the
existence of the thing it self, there will be no such thing as a Body left in
the world, and then will all be Spirit or nothing. For who can frame so safe a
notion of a Body, as to free himself from the intanglements* that the extension
thereof will bring along with it. For this extended matter consists of either
indivisible points, or of particles divisible in infinitum. Take which of these
two you will, and you can find no third) you will be wound into the most
notorious absurdityes that may be. For if you say it consists of points, from
this position I can necessarily demonstrate, that every Spear or Spire-Steeple
or what long body you will is as thick as it is long; that the tallest Cedar is
not so high as the lowest Mushrome; and that the Moon and the Earth are so
near one another, that the thickness of your hand will not go betwixt; that
Rounds and Squares are all one figure; that Even and Odd Numbers are Equal
one with another; and that the clearest Day is as dark as the blackest Night.
And if you make choice of the other Member of the disjunction, your fancy will
be little better at ease. For nothing can be divisible into parts it has not:
therefore if a body be divisible into infinite parts, it has infinite extended
parts: and if it has an infinite number of extended parts, it cannot be but a
hard mystery to the Imagination of Man, that infinite extended parts should not
amount to one whole infinite extension. And thus a grain of Mustard Seed would
be as well infinitely extended, as the whole Matter of the Universe; and a
thousandth part of that grain as well as the grain it self. Which things are
more unconceivable then any thing in the Notion of a Spirit. Therefore we are
not scornfully and contemptuously to reject any Notion, for seeming at first to
be clouded and obscured with some difficulties and intricacies of conception;
since that, of whose being we seem most assured, is the most entangled and
perplexed in the conceiving, of any thing that can be propounded to the
apprehension of a Man. But here you will reply that our senses are struck by so
manifest impressions from the Matter, that though the nature of it be
difficult to conceive, yet the Existence is palpable to us, by what it acts
upon us. Why, then all that I desire is this, that when you shall be reminded
of some actions and operations that arrive to the notice of your sense or
understanding, which unless we do violence to our faculties we can never
attribute to Matter or Body, that then you would not be so nice and averse from
the admitting of such a substance as is called a Spirit, though you fancy some
difficulty in the conceiving thereof.

But for mine own part I think the nature of a Spirit is as conceivable, and
easy to be defined as the nature of anything else. For as for the very Essence
or bare Substance of any thing whatsoever, he is a very Novice in speculation
that does not acknowledge that utterly unknowable. But for the Essential and
Inseparable properties, they are as intelligible and explicable in a Spirit as
in any other subject whatever. As for example, I conceive the entire Idea of a
Spirit in general, or at least of all finite created and subordinate Spirits*
to consist of these several powers or properties, viz. Self-penetration.
Self-Motion, Self-contraction and Dilatation, and Indivisibility; and these are
those that I reckon more absolute; I will add also what has relation to
another, and that is the power of Penetrating, Moving and Altering the Matter.
These properties and powers put together make up the Notion and Idea of a
Spirit, whereby it is plainly distinguished from a Body, whose parts cannot
penetrate one another, is not Self-moveable, nor can contract nor dilate it
self, is divisible and separable one part from another; But the parts of a
Spirit can be no more separated, though they be dilated, then you can cut off
the Rays of the Sun by a pair of Scissors made of pellucide Crystal. And
this will serve for the settling of the Notion of a Spirit; the proof of it is
Existence belongs not unto this place. And out of this description it is plain
that a Spirit is a notion of more perfection then a Body, and therefore the
more fit to be an Attribute of what is absolutely perfect, then a Body is.

But now for the other two hard terms of Eternal and Infinite, if any one
would excuse himself from asse^^g to the Notion of a God, by reason of the
Incomprehensiblenesse of those attributes, let him consider, that he shall
whether he will or no be forced to acknowledge something Eternal, either God or
the World, and the Intricacy is alike in either. And though he would shuffle
off the trouble of apprehending an Infinite De^ty, yet he will never extricate
himself out of the intanglements of an Infinite Space; which Notion will stick
as closely to his Soul, as her power of Imagination.

Now that Goodness, Knowledge and Power, which are the three following
Attributes, are Attributes of perfection, if a man consult his own Facultyes,
it will be undoubtedly concluded, and I know nothing else he can consult with.
At least this will be returned as infallibly true, that a Being absolutely
perfect has these, or what supereminently contains these. And that Knowledge
or something like it is in God, is manifest, because without animadversion in
some sense or other, it is impossible to be Happy. But that a Being should be
absolutely perfect, and yet not happy, is as impossible. But Knowledge without
Goodness is but dry Subtilty, or mischievous Craft; and Goodness with
Knowledge devoyd of Power is but lame and ineffectuall: Wherefore what ever is
absolutely perfect, is Infinitely both Good, Wise and Powerful.

And lastly it is more perfection that all this be Stable, Immutable and
Necessary, then Contingent or but Possible. Therefore the Idea of a Being
absolutely perfect represents to our minds, that that of which it is the Idea
is necessarily to exist. And that which of its own nature does necessarily
exist, must never fail to be. And whether the Atheist will call this absolute
perfect Being, God or not, it is all one; I list not to contend about words.
But I think any man else at the first sight will say that we have found out
the true Idea of God.

CHAP. V.
That the soul of man is not Abrasa Tabula, and in what sense she might be
said ever to have had the actual knowledge of eternal truths in her.
ANd now we have found out this Idea of a Being absolutely perfect, that the
use which we shall hereafter make of it, may take the better effect, it will
not be amiss by way of further preparation, briefly to touch upon that notable
point in Philosophy, whether the Soul of man be Abrasa Tabula, a Table book in
which nothing is writ; or whether she have some innate Notions and Ideas in
her self. For so it is that she having taken first occasion of thinking from
external objects, it has so imposed upon some men's judgments, that they have
conceited that the Soul has no Knowledge nor Notion, but what is in a Passive
way impressed, or delineated upon her from the objects of Sense; They not
warily enough distinguishing betwixt extrinsecall occasions and the adaequate
or principal causes of things. But the mind of man more free and better
excercised in the close observations of its own operations and nature, cannot
but discover, that there is an active and actual Knowledge in a man, of which
these outward objects are rather the reminders then the first begetters or
implanters. And when I say actual Knowledge, I do not mean that there is a
certain number of Ideas flaring and shining to the Animadversive faculty like
so many Torches or Stars in the Firmament to our outward sight* or that there
are any figures that take their distinct places, and are legibly writ there
like the Red letters or Astronomical Characters in an Almanac; but I
understand thereby an active sagacity in the Soul, or quick recollection as it
were, whereby some small business being hinted unto her, she runs out
presently into a more clear and larger conception. And I cannot better describe
her condition then thus; Suppose a skilful Musician fallen asleep in the field
upon the grass, during which time he shall not so much as dream any thing
concerning his musical faculty, so that in one sense there is no actual skill
or Notion nor representation of any thing musical in him, but his friend
sitting by him that cannot sing at all himself, jogs him and awakes him, and
desires him to sing this or the other song, telling him two or three words of
the beginning of the long, he presently takes it out of his mouth, and sings
the whole song upon so slight and slender intimation: So the Mind of man being
jogged and awakened by the impulses of outward objects is stirred up into a
more full and clear conception of what was but imperfectly hinted to her from
external occasions; and this faculty I venture to call actual Knowledge in
such a sense as the sleeping Musicians skill might be called actual skill when
he thought nothing of it.

CHAP. 6.
That the Soul of Man has of her self actual Knowledge in her, made good by
sundry Instances and Arguments.
ANd that this is the condition of the Soul is discoverable by sundry
observations. As for example, Exhibit to the Soul through the outward senses
the figure of a Circle, she acknowledges presently this to be one kind of
figure, and can add forthwith that if it be perfect, all the lines from some
one point of it drawn to the Perimeter, must be exactly Equal. In like manner
show her a Triangle, she will straightway pronounce that if that be the right
figure it makes toward, the Angles must be closed in indivisible points. But
this accuracy either in the Circle or the Triangle cannot be set out in any
material subject, therefore it remains that she has a more full and exquisite
knowledge of things in her self, then the Matter can lay open before her, Let
us cast in a third Instance, let some body now demonstrate this Triangle
described in the Matter to have it is three Angles equal to two right ones: Why
yes says the Soul this is true, and not only in this particular Triangle but
in all plain Triangles that can possibly be described in the Matter. And thus
you see the Soul sings out the whole song upon the first hint, as knowing it
very well before.

Besides this, there are a multitude of Relative Notions or Ideas in the Mind
of Man, as well Mathematical as Logical, which if we prove cannot be the
impresses of any material object from without, it will necessarily follow,
that they are from the Soul her self within, and are the natural furniture of
humane understanding. Such as are ^hese, Cause, Effect, Whole and Part, Like
and Unlike, and the rest. So Equality and Inequality, (...) and (...)
Proportion and Analogy* Symmetry and Asymmetry, and such like: All which
Relative Ideas I shall easily prove to be no material impresses from without
upon the Soul, but her own active conception proceeding from her self whilst
she takes notice of external Objects. For that these Ideas can make no
Impresses upon the outward senses is plain from hence; because they are no
sensible nor Physical affections of the Matter. And how can that, that is no
Physical affection of the Matter affect our corporeal Organs of Sense? But
now that these Relative Ideas, whether Logical or Mathematical be no
Physical, affections of the Matter is manifest from these two arguments. First
they may be produced when there has been no Physical Motion nor alteration in
the Subject to which they belong, nay indeed when there has been nothing at
all done to the Subject to which they do accrue. As for example, suppose one
side of a Room whitened the other not touched or meddled with, this other has
thus become unlike, and has the Notion of Dissimile necessarily belonging to
it, although there has nothing at all been done thereunto. So suppose two
Pounds of Lead, which therefore are two Equal Pieces of that Metal; cut away
half from one of them, the other Pound, nothing at all being done unto it, has
lost it is Notion of Equal, and has acquired a new one of Double unto the
other. Nor is it to any purpose to answer, that though there was nothing done
to this Pound of Lead, yet there was to the other; For that does not at all
enervate the Reason, but shows that the Notion of Sub ^double which accrued to
that Lead which had half cut away, is but our Mode of conceiving, as well as
the other, and not any Physical affection that strikes the corporeal Organs
of the Body, as Hot and Cold, Hard and Soft, White and Black, and the like do.
Wherefore the Ideas of Equal and Unequal, Double and Sub-double, Like and
Unlike, with the rest, are no external Impresses upon the Senses, but the
Souls own active manner of conceiving those things which are discovered by the
outward Senses.

The second argument is, that one and the same part of the Matter is capable at
one and the same time, wholly and entirely of two contrary Ideas of this kind.
As for Example, any piece of Matter that is a Middle proportional betwixt two
other pieces, is Double, suppose, and Sub-double, or Tripple and Sub-tripple,
at once. Which is a manifest sign that these Ideas are no affections of the
Matter, and therefore do not affect our senses, else they would affect the
senses of Beasts, and they might also grow good Geometricians and
Arithmeticians. And they not affecting our senses, it is plain that we have
some Ideas that we are not beholding to our senses for, but are the mere
exertions of the Mind occasionally awakened, by the Appulses of the outward
objects; Which the out-ward Senses do no more teach us, then he that awakened
the Musician to sing taught him his skill.

And now in the third and last place it is manifest, besides these single Ideas
I have proved to be in the mind, that there are also several complex Notions
in the same, such as are these; The whole is bigger then the part: If you take
Equal from Equal, the Remainders are Equal: Every number is either Even or
Odd; which are true to the soul at the very first proposal; as any one that is
in his wits does plainly perceive.

CHAP. VII.
The mind of man being not unfurnished of Innate Truth, that we are with
confidence to attend to her natural and unprejudiced Dictates and Suggestions.
That some Notions and Truths are at least naturally and unavoydably assented
unto by the soul, whether she have of her self Actual Knowledge in her or
not. And that the definition of a Being absolutely perfect is such. And that
this absolutely perfect Being is God, the Creator and Contriver of all things.
ANd now we see so evidently the Soul is not unfurnished for the dictating of
Truth unto us, I demand of any man, why under a pretense that she having
nothing of her own but may be molded into an assent to any thing, or that she
does arbitrariously and fortuirously compose the several Impresses she
receives from without, he will be still so squeamish or timorous, as to be
afraid to close with his own facultyes, and receive the Natural Emanations of
his own mind, as faithful Guides.

But if this seem, though it be not, too subtle which I contend for, viz; That
the Soul has actual knowledge in her self, in that sense which I have
explained, yet surely this at least will be confessed to be true, that the
nature of the Soul is such, that she will certainly and fully assent to some
conclusions, how ever she came to the knowledge of them, unless she do
manifest violence to her own Faculties. Which truths must therefore be
concluded not fortuitous or arbitrarious* but Natural so the Soul: such as I
have already named, as that every Finite number is either even or odd. If you
add equal to equal, the wholes are equal; and such as are not so simple as
these, but yet stick as close to the Soul once apprehended, as that The three
angles in a Triangle are equal to two right ones: That there are just five
regular Bodies neither more nor less, and the like, which we will pronounce
necessarily true according to the light of Nature.

Wherefore now to reassume what we have for a while laid aside, the Idea of a
Being absolutely perfect above proposed, it being in such sort let forth that a
man cannot rid his mind of it, but he must needs acknowledge it to be indeed
the Idea of such a Being; it will follow that it is no arbitrarious nor
fortuitous conceit, but necessary and therefore natural to the Soul at least
if no^ ever actually there.

Wherefore it is manifest, that we consulting with our own natural light
concerning the Notion of a Being absolutely perfect, that this Oracle tells us,
that it is A spiritual Substance, Eternal, Infinite in Essence and Goodness,
Omnipotent, Omniscient, and of it self necessarily existent.

For this answer is such, that if we understand the sense thereon, we cannot
tell how to deny it, and therefore it is true according to the light of Nature.
But it is manifest that that which is Self-subsistent, infinitely Good,
Omniscient and Omnipotent, is the Root and Original of all things. For
Omnipotency signifies a Power that can effect any thing that implies no
contradiction to be effected; and Creation implies no contradiction: Therefore
this perfect Being can create all things. But if it found the Matter or other
Substances existing aforehand of themselves, this Omnipotency and Power of
Creation will be in vain, which the free and unprejudiced Faculties of the
Mind of man do not admit of. Therefore the natural notion of a Being
absolutely perfect, implies that the same Being is Lord and Maker of all
things. And according to Natural light that which is thus, is to be adored and
worshipped of all that has the knowledge of it, with all humility and
thankfulness; and what is this but to be acknowledged to be God?

Wherefore I conceive I have sufficiently demonstrated, that the Notion or Idea
of God is as Natural, Necessary and Essential to the Soul of Man, as any
other Notion or Idea whatsoever, and is no more arbitrarious or fictitious then
the Notion of a Cube or Terraedrum, or any other of the Regular Bodies in
Geometry: Which are not devised at our own pleasure (for such figments and
Chimaras are infinite,) but for these it is demonstrable that there can be no
more then five of them. Which shows that their Notion is necessary, not an
arbit^arious compilement of what we please.

And thus having fully made good the Notion of God, What he is, I proceed now
to the next point, which is to prove, that He is.

CHAP. VIII.
The first Argument for the Existence of God taken from the Idea of God as it
is representative of his Nature and Perfection: From whence also it is
undeniably demonstrated that there can be no more Gods then One.
ANd now verily casting my eyes upon the true Idea of God which we have found
out I seem to my self to have struck further into this business then I was
aware of. For if this Idea or Notion of God be true, as I have undenyably
proved, it is also undeniably true that he does exist; For this Idea of God
being no a^bitrarious Figment taken up at pleasure, but the necessary and
natural Emanation of the mind of Man, if it signifies to us that the Notion
and Nature of God implies in it necessary Existence as we have shown it does,
unless we will wink against our own natural light, we are without any
further Scruple to acknowledge that God does exist. Nor is it sufficient
grounds to diffide to the strength of this Argument, because our fancy can
shuffle in this Abater, viz. That indeed this Idea of God, supposing God did
exist, shows us that his Existence is necessary, but it does not show us that
he does necessarily exist. For he that answers thus, does not observe out of
what prejudice he is enabled to make this Answer, which is this: He being
accustomed to fancy the Nature or Notion of every thing else without Existence,
and so ever easily separating Essence and Existence in them, here unawares he
takes the same liberty, and divides Existence from that Essence to which
Existence it self is essential. And that is the witty fallacy his unwariness
has entangled him in.

Again when as we contend that the true Idea of God represents him as a Being
necessarily Existent, and therefore that he does exist; and you to avoid the
edge of the Argument reply, If he did at all exist; by this answer you involve
your self in a manifest contradiction. For first you say with us, that the
nature of God is such, that in its very Notion it implies its Necessary
Existence, and then again you unsay it by intimating that notwithstanding this
true Idea and Notion* God may not exist, and so acknowledge that what is
absolutely necessary according to the free Emanation of our Facultyes, yet may
be otherwise: Which is a palpable Contradiction as much as respects us and our
Facultyes, and we have nothing more inward and immediate then these to steer
our selves by.

And to make this yet plainer at least if not stronger when we say that the
Existence of God is Necessary, we are to take notice that Necessity is a
Logical Term, and signifies so firm a Connection betwixt the Subject and
Praedicate (as they call them) that it is impossible that they should be
dissevered, or should not hold together, and therefore if they be affirmed one
of the other, that they make Axioma Necessarium, an Axiom that is necessary,
or eternally true. Wherefore there being a Necessary Connection betwixt God and
Existence; this Axiom, God does Exist, is an Axiom Necessarily and Eternally
true. Which we shall yet more clearly understand, if we compare Necessity and
Contingency together; For as Contingency signifies not only the Manner of
Existence in that which is contingent according to its Idea, but does intimate
also a Possibility of Actual Existence, (so to make up the true and easy
Analogy) Necessity does not only signify the Manner of Existence in that which
is Necessary, but also that it does actually Exist, and could never possibly do
otherwise. For (...) and (...) Necessity of Being and Impossibility of
Not-being, are all one with Aristotle, and the rest of the Logicians. But the
Atheist and the Enthusiast, are usually such professed Enemies against Logic;
the one merely out of Dotage upon outward gross sense, the other in a dear
regard to his stiff and untamed fancy, that shop of Mysteryes and fine things.

Thirdly, we may further add, that whereas we must needs attribute to the
Idea of God either Contingency, Impossibility, or Necessity of Actual
Existence, (some one of these belonging to every Idea imaginable) and that
Contingency is incompetible to an Idea of a B^ing absolutely perfect, much more
Impossibility, the Idea of God being compiled of no Notions but such as are
possible according to the light of Nature, to which we now appeal: It remains
therefore that Necessity of Actual Existence be unavoidably cast upon the
Idea of God, and that therefore God does actually Exist.

But fourthly and lastly, if this seem more subtle, though it be no less
true for it, I shall now propound that which is so palpable, that it is
impossible for any one that has the use of his wits for to deny it. I say
therefore, that either God or this corporeal and sensible world must of it
self necessarily exist. Or thus, Either God or Matter or both do of themselves
necessarily exist. If both, we have what we would drive at, the existency of
God.

But yet to acknowledge the necessary existence of the Matter of it self, is
not so congruous and suitable to the light of Nature. For if any thing can
exist independently of God, all things may; so that not only the Omnipotency
of God might be in vain, but beside there would be a letting in from hence of
all confusion and disorder imaginable; Nay of some grand Devil of equal Power
and of as large Command as God himself: Or if you will of six thousand Millions
of such monstrous Gigantick Spirits, fraught with various and mischievous
Passions, as well as armed with immense power, who in anger or humor appearing
in huge shapes* might take the Planets up in their prodigious Clutches, and
pelt one another with them as boys are wont to do with snowbals; And that this
has not yet happened will be resolved only into this, that the humor has not
yet taken them. But the frame of Nature and the generation of things would be
still liable to this ruin and disorder. So dangerous a thing it is to slight
the natural dependencyes and correspondencyes of our innate Ideas and
conceptions.

Nor is there any Refuge in such a Reply as this, that the full and perfect
Infinitude of the power of God, is able easily to overmaster these six thousand
Millions of Monsters, and to stay their hands. For I say that six or fewer, may
equallize the infinite power of God. For if any thing may be self-essentiated
besides God, why may not a Spirit of just six times less power then God exist
of it self? and then six such will equallize him, a seventh will overpower him.
But such a rabble of self-essentiated and divided Deities, does not only
hazard the pulling the world in pieces, but plainly takes away the Existence
of the true God. For if there be any power or perfection whatsoever, which has
its original from any other then God, it manifestly demonstrates that God is
not God, that is, is not a Being absolutely and fully perfect, because we see
some power in the world that is not his, that is, that is not from him. But
what is fully and wholly from him, is very truly and properly his, as the
thought of my mind is rather my minds, then my thoughts.

And this is the only way that I know to demonstrate that it is impossible that
there should be any more then one true God in the world; For if we did admit
another beside him, this other must be also self-originated; and so neither of
them would be God. For the Idea of God swallows up into it self all power and
perfection conceivable, and therefore necessarily implies that whatever has
any Being, derives it from him.

But if you say the Matter does only exist and not God, then this Matter does
necessarily exist of it self, and so we give that Attribute unto the Matter
which our Natural Light taught us to be contained in the Essential conception
of no other thing besides God. Wherefore to deny that of God, which is so
necessarily comprehended in the true Idea of him, and to acknowledge it in that
in whose Idea it is not at all contained (for necessary Existence is not
contained in the Idea of any thing but of a Being absolutely perfect) is to
pronounce contrary to our Natural light, and to do manifest violence to our
Faculties.

Nor can this be excused by saying that the Corporeal Matter is palpable and
sensible unto us, but God is not, and therefore we pronounce confidently that
it is, though God be not, and also that it is necessary of it self, since that
which is without the help of another must necessarily be and eternally.

For I demand of you then since you profess your selves to believe nothing but
sense, how could sense ever help you to that truth you acknowledged last, viz
That that which exists without the help of another, is necessary and eternal?
For Necessity and Eternity are no sensible Qualities, and therefore are not the
objects of any sense; And I have ready very plentifully proved, that there is
other knowledge and perception in the Soul besides that of Sense. Wherefore it
is very unreasonable, when as we have other faculties of knowledge besides the
senses, that we should consult with the senses alone about matters of
knowledge, and exclude those facultyes that penetrate beyond Sense. A thing
that the professed Atheists themselves will not do when they are in the humor
of Philosophising, for their principle of Ato^es is a business that does not
fall under Sense, as Lucretius at large confesses.

But now seeing it is so manifest that the Soul of man has other cognoscitive
faculties besides that of Sense (which I have clearly above demonstrated) it is
as incongruous to deny there is a God, because God is not an object fitted to
the Senses, as it were to deny there is Matter or a Body, because that Body or
Matter, in the imaginative Notion thereof, lies so unevenly and troublesomly in
our fancy and reason.

In the contemplation whereof our understanding discovers such contradictious
incoherencies, that were it not that the notion is sustained by the confident
dictates of Sense, Reason appealing to those more crasse Representations of
Fansy, would by her shrewd Dilemma's be able to argue it quite out of the
world. But our Reason being well aware that corporeal matter is the proper
object of the sensitive faculty, she gives full belief to the information of
Sense in her own sphere, slighting the puzzling objections of perplexed Fancy,
and freely admits the existence of Matter, notwithstanding the intanglements of
Imagination, as she does also the existence of God, from the contemplation of
his Idea in our soul, notwithstanding the silence of the senses therein. For
indeed it were an unexcusable piece of folly and madness in a man, when as he
has cognoscitive faculties reaching to the knowledge of God, and has a certain
and unalterable Idea of God in his soul, which he can by no device wipe out,
as well as he has the knowledge of Sense that reaches to the discovery of the
Matter; to give necessary Self-existence to the Matter, no Faculty at all
informing him so; and to take necessary Existence from God, though the natural
notion of God in the Soul inform him to the contrary; and only upon this
pretense, because God does not immediately fall under the Knowledge of the
Senses; Thus partially siding with one kind of Faculty only of the Soul, and
proscribing all the rest. Which is as humoursomely and foolishly done, as if a
Man should make a faction amongst the Senses themselves, and resolve to believe
nothing to be but what he could see with his Eyes, and so confidently pronounce
that there is no such thing as the Element of Air nor Winds nor Music nor
Thunder. And the reason forsooth must be because he can see none of these
things with his Eyes, and that is the sole sense that he intends to believe.

CHAP. IX.
The second Argument from the Idea of God as it is Subjected in our Souls, and
is the fittest Natural means imaginable to bring us to the knowledge of our
Maker. That bare possibility ought to have no power upon the mind, to either
hasten or hinder it is assent in any thing. We being dealt with in all points as
if there were a God, that naturally we are to conclude there is one.
ANd hitherto I have argued from the natural Notion or Idea of God as it
respects that of which it is the Idea or Notion. I shall now try what advantage
may be made of it, from the respect it bears unto our Souls, the Subject
thereof, wherein, it does reside.

I demand therefore who put this Indelible Character of God upon our Souls? why
and to what purpose is it there? Nor do not think to shuffle me off by saying,
We must take things as we find them, and not inquire of the final Cause of any
thing; for things are necessarily as they are of themselves, whose guidance and
contrivance is from no principle of Wisdom or Counsel, but every substance is
now and ever was of what nature and capacity it is found; having it is Original
from none other then it self; and all those changes and varieties we see in the
World, are but the result of an Eternal Scuffle of coordinate Causes, bearing
up as well as they can, to continue themselves in the present state they ever
are, and acting and being acted upon by others, these varieties of things
appear in the world, but every particular Substance with the Essential
Properties thereof is self-originated, and independent of any other.

For to this I answer, that the very best that can be made of all this is but
thus much; that it is merely and barely possible* nay if we consult our own
faculties, and the Idea of God, utterly impossible: but admit it possible; this
bare possibility is so laxe, so weak, and so undeterminate a consideration,
that it ought to have no power to move the mind this way or that way that has
any tolerable use of her own Reason, more then the faint breathings of the
loose Air have to shake a Mountain of brass. For if bare possibility may at
all entangle our assent or dissent in things, we cannot fully mis-believe the
absurdest Fable in Aesop or Ovid, or the most ridiculous figments that can be
imagined; As suppose that Ears of Corn in the field hear the whistling of the
wind and chirping of the Birds; that the stones in the street are grinded with
pain when the Carts go over them: that the Heliotrope eyes the Sun and really
sees him as well as turns round about with him: that the Pulp of the Wall-nut,
as bearing the signature of the brain, is endued with Imagination and Reason. I
say no man can fully mis-believe any of these fooleries, if bare possibility
may have the least power of turning the Scales this way or that way. For none
of these nor a thousand more such like as these imply a perfect and palpable
Contradiction, and therefore will put in for their right of being deemed
possible. But we are not to attend to what is simply possible, but to what our
natural faculties do direct and determine us to. As for Example, Suppose the
Question were, whether the Stones in the Street have sense or no, we are not to
leave the point as indifferent, or that may be held either way, because it is
possible and implies no palpable Contradiction, that they may have sense and
that a painful sense too. But we are to consult with our natural faculties,
and see whither they propend: and they do plainly determinate the Controversy
by telling us, that what has sense and is capable of pain, ought to have also
progressive Motion, to be able to avoid what is hurtful and painful, and we
see it is so in all Beings that have any considerable share of Sense. And
Aristotle who was no doater on a Deity, yet frequently does assume this
principle (...), That Nature does nothing in vain. Which is either an
acknowledgment of a God, or an appeal to our own Rational Faculties. And I am
indifferent which, for I have what I would out of either, for if we appeal to
the natural suggestions of our own faculties, they will assuredly tell us
there is a God.

I therefore again demand and I desire to be answered without prejudice, or any
restraint laid upon our natural faculties, to what purpose is this indelible
Image or Idea of God in us, if there be no such thing as God existent in the
world? or who sealed so deep an Impression of that Character upon our Minds?

If we were travailing in a desolate wilderness, where we could discover
neither Man nor house, and should meet with Herds of Cattle or Flocks of Sheep
upon whose bodies there were branded certain Marks or Letters, we should
without any hesitancy conclude that these have all been under the hand of some
man or other that has set his name upon them. And verily when we see writ in
our Souls in such legible Characters the Name or rather the Nature and Idea of
God, why should we be so slow and backward from making the like reasonable
inference? Assuredly he whose Character is signed upon our Souls, has been
here, and has thus marked us that we and all may know to whom we belong. That
it is he that has made us, and not we our selves; that we are his people and
the sheep of his Pasture. And it is evidently plain from the Idea of God, which
includes omnipotency in it, that we can be made from none other then he; as I
have before demonstrated. And therefore there was no better way then by sealing
us with this Image to make us acknowledge our selves to be his, and to do that
worship and adoration to him that is due to our mighty Maker and Creator, that
is to our God.

Wherefore things complying thus naturally, and easily together, according to
the free Suggestions of our natural Faculties, it is as perverse and forced a
buisinesse to suspend assent, as to doubt whether those Roman Vrnes and Coins
I spoke of dug out of the Earth be the works of Nature or the Artifice of
Men.

But if we cannot yet for all this give free assent to this Position* that God
does Exist, Let us at least have the Patience a while to suppose it. I demand
therefore supposing God did Exist, what can the Mind of Man imagine that this
God should do better or more effectual for the making himself known to such a
Creature as Man, endued with such and such faculties, then we find really
already done? For God being a Spirit and Infinite, cannot ever make himself
known Necessarily, and Adaequa^ely by any appearance to our outward Senses. For
if he should manifest himself in any outward figures or shapes, portending
either love or wrath, terror or protection, our faculties could not assure us
that this were God, but some particular Genius good or bad: and besides such
dazeling and affrightfull external forces are neither becoming the divine
Nature, nor suitable with the Condition of the Soul of Man, whose better
faculties and more free God meddles with, does not force nor amaze us by a more
course and oppressing power upon our weak and brutish senses. What remains
therefore but that he should manifest himself to our Inward Man? And what way
imaginable is more fit then the indelible Impression of the Idea of himself,
which is (not divine life and sense* for that is an higher prise laid up for
them that can win it, but) a natural representation of the Godhead and a
Notion of his Essence, whereby the Soul of Man could no otherwise conceive of
him, then an Eternal Spirit, Infinite in goodness, Omnipotent, Omniscient and
Necessarily of himself Existent. But this, as I have fully proved, we find de
facto done in us, wherefore we being every way dealt with as if there were a
God Existing, and no faculty discovering any thing to the contrary, what should
hinder us from the concluding that he does really Exist?

CHAP* X.
Natural Conscience, and Religious Veneration, arguments of the Existence of
God.
HItherto we have argued for the Existency of the Godhead from the natural
Idea of God, inseparably and immutably risiding in the Soul of Man. There are
also other arguments may be drawn from what we may observe to stick very close
to man's nature, and such is Natural remorse of Conscience, and a fear and
disturbance from the committing of such things as notwithstanding are not
punishable by men: As also a natural hope of being prosperous and successful
in doing those things which are conceived by us to be good and righteous; And
lastly Religious Veneration or Divine worship; All which are fruits unforcedly
and easily growing out of the nature of man; and if we rightly know the meaning
of them, they all intimate that there is a God.

And first of Natural Conscience it is plain that it is a fear and confusion
of Mind arising from the presage of some mischief that may be^all a man beside
the ordinary course of Nature, or the usual occurrences of affairs, because
he has done thus or thus. Not that what is supernatural or absolutely
extraordinary must needs fall upon him, but that at least the ordinary
calamityes and misfortunes, which are in the world, will be directed and
levelled at him sometime or other, because he has done this or that Evil
against his Conscience. And men do naturally in some heavy Adversity, mighty
Tempest on the Sea or dreadful Thunder on the Land (though these be but from
Natural Causes) reflect upon themselves and their actions, and so are invaded
with fear, or are unterrifide, accordingly as they condemn or acquit
themselves in their own Consciences. And from this supposall is that
magnificent Expression of the Poet concercerning the just man Nec fulminant is
magna Jovis manus,

That he is not affrayd of the darting down of Thunder and Lightening from
Heaven. But this fear, that one should be struck rather then the rest, or at
this time rather then another time, because a man has done thus or thus, is a
natural acknowledgment that these things are guided and directed from some
discerning principle, which is all one as to confess that there is a God. Nor
is it material that some allege that Marmers curse and swear the lowdest when
the storm is the greatest, for it is because the usualnesse of such dangers
have made them loose the sense of the danger, not the sense of a God.

It is also very natural for a man that follows honestly the dictates of his
own Conscience, to be full of good hopes, and much at ease, and secure that all
things at home and abroad will go successfully with him, though his actions or
sincere motions of his Mind act nothing upon Nature or the course of the world
to change them any way: wherefore it implies that there is a Superintendent
Principle over Nature, and the material frame of the world, that looks to it
so that nothing shall come to pass, but what is consistent with the good and
welfare of honest and conscientious Men. And if it does not happen to them
according to their expectations in this world, it does naturally bring in a
belief of a world to come.

Nor does it at all enervate the strength of this Argument that some men have
lost the sense and difference betwixt good and evil, if there be any so fully
degenerate; but let us suppose it, this is a monster, and I suspect of his own
making. But this is no more prejudice to what I aim at, who argue from the
Natural constitution of a Man the Existency of a God; then if because
Democritus put out his Eyes, some are born blind, others drink out their Eyes
and cannot see, that therefore you should conclude that there is neither Light
nor Colors: For if there were, then every one would see them, but Democritus
and some others do not see them. But the reason is plain, there has been
force done to their Natural Facultyes and they have put out their sight.

Wherefore I conclude from natural Conscience in a Man that puts him upon hope
and fear of Good and Evil from what he does or omits, though those actions and
omissions do nothing to the change of the course of Nature or the affairs of
the world, that there is an Intelligent Principle over universal Nature that
takes notice of the Actions of Men* that is that there is a God; for else this
Natural Faculty would be false and vain.

Now for Adoration or Religious Worship it is as universal as mankind, there
being no Nation under the Cope of heaven that does not do divine worship to
something or other, and in it to God as they conceive; wherefore according to
the ordinary natural light that is in all men, there is a God.

Nor can the force of this Argument be avoided, by saying it is but an
universal Tradition that has been time out of mind spread among the Nations of
the world. For if it were so (which yet cannot at all be proved) in that it is
universally received, it is manifest that it is according to the light of
Nature to acknowledge there is a God. For that which all men admit as true,
though upon the proposal of another, is undoubtedly to be termed true
according to the light of Nature. As many hundreds of Geometrical
Demonstrations that were first the inventions of some one man, have passed
undeniable through all ages and places for true, according to the light of
Nature, with them that were but Learners not Inventours of them. And it is
sufficient to make a thing true according to the light of Nature, that no man
upon a perception of what is propounded and the reasons of it (if it be not
clear at the first sight and need ^easons to back it) will ever stick to
acknowledge for a Truth. And therefore if there were any Nations that were
destitute of the knowledge of a God, as they may be it is likely of the
Rudiments of Geometry, so long as they will admit of the knowledge of one as
well as of the other, upon due and ^it proposal; the acknowledgment of a God
is as well to be said to be according to the light of Nature, as the knowledge
of Geometry which they thus receive.

But if it be here objected that a thing may be universally received of all
Nations and yet be so far from being true according to the light of Nature,
that it is not true at all* As for example that the Sun moves about the Earth,
and that the Earth stands still as the fixed Center of the world, which the
best of Astronomers and the profoundest of Philosophers pronounce to be false:
I answer that in some sense it does stand still, if you understand by Motion
the translation of a body out of the vicinity of other bodies. But suppose it
did not stand still, this comes not home to our Case; For this is but the just
victory of Reason over the general prejudice of Sense; and every one will
acknowledge that Reason may correct the Impresses of Sense, otherwise we should
admit the Sun and Moon to be no wider then a Sive, and the bodies of the Stars
to be no bigger then the ordinary flame of a Candle. Therefore you see here is
a clashing of the faculties one against another, and the stronger carries it.
But there is no faculty that can be pretended to clash with the judgment of
Reason and natural Sagacity that so easily either concludes or presages that
there is a God: wherefore that may well go for a Truth according to the light
of Nature that is universally received of men, be it by what faculty it will
they receive it, no other faculty appearing that can evidence to the contrary.
And such is the universal acknowledgment that there is a God.

Nor is it much more material to reply, That though there be indeed a
Religious Worship excercised in all Nations upon the face of the Earth, yet
they worship many of them but stocks and stones, or some particular piece of
Nature, as the Sun, Moon, or Stars; For I answer, That first it is very hard
to prove that they worship any Image or Statue, without reference to some
Spirit at least, if not to the omnipotent God. So that we shall hence at least
win thus much, that there are in the Universe some more subtle and Immateriall
Substances that take notice of the affairs of Men, and this is as ill to a slow
Atheist, as to believe that there is a God.

And for that adoration some of them do to the Sun and Moon, I cannot believe
they do it to them under the Notion of mere Inanimate Bodies, but they take
them to be the habitation of some Intellectual Beings, as that verse does
plainly intimate to us,

(...). The Sun that hears and sees all things; and this is very near the true
Notion of a God.

But be this universal Religious Worship what it will, as absurd as you please
to fancy it, yet it will not fail to reach very far for the proving of a
Deity. For there is no natural Faculties in things that have not their object
in the world; as there is meat as well as mouths, sounds as well as hearing,
colors as well as sight, dangers as well as fear, and the like. So there
ought in like manner to be a God as well as a natural propension in men to
Religious Worship, God alone being the proper Object thereof.

Nor does it abate the strength of the Argument that this so deeply radicated
property of Religion in Man, that cannot be lost, does so ineptly and
ridiculously display it self in Manking.

For as the plying of a Dogs ^eet in this sleep, as if there were some game
before him, and the butting of a young lamb before he has yet either horns or
Enemies to encounter, would not be in Nature, were there not such a thing as a
Hare to be coursed, and an horned Enemy to be incountred with horns: So there
would not be so universal an Exercise of Religious Worship in the world,
though it be done never so ineptly and foolishly, were there not really a due
Object of this worship, and a capacity in Man for the right performance
thereof; which could not be unless there were a God.

But the Truth is, Man's Soul in this drunken drowsy condition she is in has
fallen asleep in the body, and like one in a dream talks to the bed-posts,
embraces her pillow instead of her friend, falls down before statues in stead
of adoring the Eternal and Invisible God, prays to stocks and stones instead
of speaking to him that by his word created all things.

I but you will reply that a young Lamb has at length both his weapon and an
Enemy to encounter, and the dreaming Dog did once and may again pursue some
real game; And so he that talks in his sleep did once confer with men awake,
and may do so again; But whole Nations for many successions of Ages have been
very stupid Idolaters, and do so continue to this day. But I answer that this
rather informs us of another great mystery, then at all enervates the present
argument or obscures the grand truth we strive for. For this does plainly
insinuate thus much, that Mankind is in a lapsed condition, like one fallen
down in the fit of an Epilepsy, whose limbs by force of the convulsion are
moved very incomposedly and illfavourdly; but we know that he that does for the
present move the members of his Body so rudely and fortuitously, did before
command the use of his Muscles in a decent exercise of his progressive faculty,
and that when the fit is over he will do so again.

This therefore rather implies that these poor barbarous Souls had once the
true knowledge of God, and of his worship, and by some hidden providence may be
recovered into it again; then that this propension to Religious Worship, that
so conspicuously appears in them, should be utterly in vain: As it would be
both in them and in all men else if there were no God.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Nature of the Soul of Man, whether she be a mere Modification of the
Body, or a Substance really distinct, and then whether corporeal or
incorporeall.
WE have done with all those more obvious faculties in the Soul of Man, that
naturally tend to the discovery of the Existence of a God. Let us briefly,
before we loose from our selves and lanch out into the vast Ocean of the
External Phenomenon of Nature, consider the Essence of the Soul her self, what
it is, whether a mere Modification of the Body or Substance distinct therefrom;
and then whether corporeal or incorporeall. For upon the clearing of this
point we may happily be convinced that there is a Spiritual Substance* really
distinct from the Matter. Which who so does acknowledge will be easilier
induced to believe there is a God.

First therefore if we say that the Soul is a mere Modification of the Body,
the Soul then is but one universal Faculty of the Body, or a many Facultyes
put together, and those operations which are usually attributed unto the Soul,
must of necessity be attributed unto the Body. I demand therefore to what in
the body will you attribute Spontaneous Motion? I understand thereby a power in
our selves of wagging or holding still most of the parts of our Body, as our
hand suppose or little finger. If you will lay that it is nothing but the
immission of the Spirits into such and such Muscles, I would gladly know what
does immit these Spirits and direct them so curiously. Is it themselves, or the
Brain, or that particular piece of the Brain they call the Co^arion or
Pine-ker^ell? whatever it be, that which does thus immit them and direct them
must have Animadversion and the same that has Animadversion has Memory also and
Reason. Now I would know whether the Spirits themselves be capable of
Animadversion, Memory and Reason: for it indeed seems altogether impossible.
For these animal Spirits are nothing else, but Matter very thin and liquid,
whose nature consists in this, that all the particles of it be in Motion, and
being loose from one another fridge and play up and down according to the
measure and manner of agitation in them.

I therefore now demand which of the particles in these so many loosely moving
one from another, has Animadversion in it? If you say that they all put
together have, I appeal to him that thus answers how unlikely it is that that
should have Animadversion that is so utterly incapable of Memory, and
consequently of Reason. For it is as impossible to conceive Memory competible
to such a subject, as it is, how to write Characters in the water or in the
wind.

If you say the Brain immits and directs these Spirits, how can that so freely
and spontaneously move it self or another that has no Muscles? besides
Anatomists tell us that though the Brain be the Instrument of sense, yet it has
no sense at all of it self; how then can that that has no sense, direct thus
spontaneously and arbitrariously the animal Spirits into any part of the Body?
an act that plainly requires determinate sense and perception. But let the
Anatomists conclude what they will, I think I shall little less then
demonstrate that the Brains have no Sense. For the same thing in us that has
Sense has likewise Animadversion, and that which has Animadversion in us has
also a faculty of free and arbitrarious Fansy and of Reason.

Let us now consider the nature of the Brain, and see how competible those
operations are to such a Subject. Verily if we take a right view of this laxe
pith or marrow in Man's head, neither our sense nor understanding can discover
any thing more in this substance that can pretend to such noble operations as
free Imagination and sagacious collections of Reason, then we can discern in a
Cake of Sewer or a bowl of Curds. For this loose Pulp, that is thus wrapped up
within our Cranium is but a spongy and porous body, and pervious not only to
the Animal Spirits but also to more gross Juice and Liquor, else it could not
well be nourished, at least it could not be so soft and moistened by
drunkenness and excess as to make the understanding inept and sottish in its
operations. Wherefore I now demand in this soft substance which we call the
Brain, whose softness implies that it is in some measure liquid, and liquidity
implies a several Motion of loosned parts; in what part or parcel thereof
does Fancy, Reason and Animadversion lie? In this laxe consistence that lies
like a Net all on heaps in the water, I demand in what knot, loop, or Intervall
thereof does this faculty of free Fancy and active Reason reside? I believe you
will be ashamed to assign me any: and if you will say in all together, you
must say that the whole brain is figured into this or that representation,
which would cancel Memory and take away all capacity of there being any
distinct Notes and places for the several Species of things there represented.
But if you will say there is in Every part of the brain this power of
Animadversion and Fansy, you are to remember that the brain is in some measure
a liquid body, and we must inquire how these loose parts understand one
another several Animadversions and Notions: And if they could (which is yet
very inconceivable) yet if they could from hence do any thing toward the
immission and direction of the Animal Spirits into this or or that part of the
Body, they must do it by knowing one another minds, and by a joint contention
of strength, as when many men at once, the word being given, lift or tugge
together for the moving of some so masty a body that the single strength of one
could not deal with. But this is to make the several particles of the brain so
many Individual persons; A fitter object for laughter then the least measure
of belief.

Besides how come these many animadversions to seem but one to us, our mind
being these, as is supposed? Or why if the figuration of one part of the brain
be communicated to all the rest, does not the same object seem situated both
behind us and before us, above and beneath, on the right hand and on the left,
and every way as the Impresse of the object is reflected against all the parts
of the brains? But there appearing to us but one animadversion and one site of
things, it is a sufficient Argument that there is but one, or if there be many,
that they are not mutually communicated from the parts one to another, and
therefore there can be no such joint endeavor toward one design, whence it is
manifest that the Brains cannot immit nor direct these Animal Spirits into
what part of the Body they please.

Moreover that the Brain has no Sense, and therefore cannot impresse
spontaneously any motion on the Animal Spirits, it is no slight Argument in
that some being dissected have been found without Brains, and Fontanus tells
us of a boy at Amsterdam that had nothing but limpid water in his head in stead
of Brains; and the Brains generally are easily dissolvable into a watery
consistence, which agrees with what I intimated before. Now I appeal to any
free Judge how likely these liquid particles are to approve themselves of that
nature and power as to be able by erecting and knitting themselves together
for a moment of time, to bear themselves so as with one joint contention of
strength to cause an arbitrarious ablegation of the Spirits into this or that
determinate part of the Body. But the absurdity of this I have sufficiently
insinuated already.

Lastly the Nerves, I mean the Marrow of them which is of the self same
substance with the Brain, have no Sense as is demonstrable from a Catalepsis
or Catochus: but I will not accumulate Arguments in a Matter so palpable.

As for that little sprunt piece of the Brain which they call the Conarion,
that this should be the very substance whose natural faculty it is to move it
self, and by it is Motions and Nods to determinate the course of the Spirits
into this or that part of the Body, seems to me no less foolish and fabulous
then the story of hi^ that could change the wind as he pleased by setting his
Cap on this or that side of his head.

If you heard but the magnificent stories that are told of this little lurking
Mushrome, how it does not only hear and see, but imagines, reasons, commands
the whole fabric of the Body more dexterously then an Indian boy does an
Elephant, what an acute Logician, subtle Geometrician, prudent Statesman,
skillfull Physician and profound Philosopher he is, and then afterward by
dissection you discover this worker of Miracles to be nothing but a poor silly
contemptible Knobb or Protuberancy consisting of a thin Membrane containing a
little pulpous Matter much of the same nature with the rest of the Brain,
Spectatum admissirisum teneatis amici?

Would not you sooner laugh at it then go about to confute it? And truly I may
the better laugh at it now, having already confuted it in what I have before
argued concerning the rest of the brain.

I shall therefore make bold to conclude that the Impresse of Spontaneous
Motion is neither from the Animal Spirits nor from the Brain, and therefore
that those operations that are usually attributed unto the Soul are really
incompetible to any part of the Body; and therefore that the Soul is not a mere
Modification of the Body, but a Substance distinct therefrom.

Now we are to enquire whether this Substance distinct from what ordinarily we
call the Body, be also it self a Corporeal Substance, or whether it be
Incorporeall. If you say that it is a Corporeal Substance, you can understand
no other then Matter more subtle and tenuious then the Animal Spirits
themselves, mingled with them and dispersed through the vessels and Porosities
of the Body, for there can be no Penetration of Dimensions. But I need no new
Arguments to confute this fond conceit, for what I said of the Animal Spirits
before, is applicable with all ease and fitness to this present case. And let
it be sufficient that I advertise you so much, and so be excused from the
repeating of the same things over again.

It remains therefore that we conclude that that which impresses Spontaneous
Motion upon the Body, or more immediately upon the Animal Spirits, that which
imagines, remembers, and reasons, is an Immateriall Substance distinct from the
Body, which uses the Animal Spirits and the Brains for Instruments in such
and such Operations: and thus we have found a Spirit in a proper Notion and
signification that has apparently these faculties in it; it can both understand
and move Corporeal Matter.

And now this prize that we have won will prove for our design of very great
Consequence. For it is obvious here to observe that the Soul of man is as it
were (...) a Compendious Statue of the Deity. Her substance is a solid Effigies
of God. And therefore as with ease we consider the Substance and Motion of the
vast Heavens on a little Sphere or Globe, so we may with like facility
contemplate the nature of the All-mighty in this little Meddall of God, the
Soul of Man, enlarging to Infinity what we observe in our selves when we
transfer it unto God; as we do imagine those Circles which we view on the
Globea to be vastly bigger while we fancy them as described in the Heavens.

Wherefore we being assured of this that there is a Spiritual Substance in our
selves in which both these properties do resid, eviz. of understanding and of
moving Corporeal Matter, let us but enlarge our Minds so, as to conceive as
well as we can of a spiritual Substance that is able to move and actuate all
Matter whatsoever never ^o far extended, and after what way and manner soever
it please, and that it has not the knowledge only of this or that particular
thing, but a distinct and plenary Cognoscence of all things; and we have indeed
a very competent apprehension of the Nature of the Eternal and Invisible God,
who like the Soul of Man, does not indeed fall under sense, but does every
where operate so, that his presence is easily to be gathered from what is
discovered by our outward senses.

CHAP. I.
The Universal Matter of the World be it homogeneall or heterogeneall, self
moved or resting of it self, that it can never be contrived into that Order it
is without the Super-intendency of a God.
THE last thing I insisted upon was the Specific nature of the Soul of Man,
how it is an immateriall substance endued with these two eminent Properties, of
Understanding and Power of moving corporeal Matter. Which truth I cleared, to
the intent that when we shall discover such Motions and Contrivances in the
largely extended Matter of the world as imply Wisdom and Providence we may the
easilier come off to the acknowledgment of that Eternal Spiritual Essence
that has framed Heaven and Earth, and is the Author and Maker of all visible
and invisible Beings.

Wherefore we being now so well furnished for the voyage, I would have my
Atheist to take Shipping with me, and loosing from this particular Speculation
of our own inward nature to lanch out into that vast Ocean, as I said, of the
External Phenomenon of universal Nature, or walk with me a while on the wide
Theater of this Outward world, and diligently to attend to those many and most
manifest marks and signs that I shall point him to in this outward frame of
things that naturally signify unto us that there is a God.

And now first to begin with what is most general, I say that the Phenomenon
of Day and Night, Winter and Summer, Springtime and Harvest, that the manner
of rising and setting of the Sun, Moon and Stars, that all these are signs
and tokens unto us that there is a God, that is, that things are so framed that
they naturally imply a principle of Wisdom and Counsel in the Author of
them. And if the^e be such an Author of external Nature, there is a God.

But here it will be replied* that mere Motion of the universal Matter will
at last necessarily grind it self into those more rude and general
Delineations of Nature that are observed in the Circuits of the Sun, Moon
and S^arres, and the general Consequences of them. But if the mind of man g^ow
so bold as to conceit any such thing, let him examine his Faculties what they
naturally conceive of the Notion of Matter. And verily the great Master of this
Mechanical Hypothesis does not suppose not admit of any Specificall
difference in this universal Matter, out of which this outward frame of the
World should arise. Neither do I think that any Man else will easily imagine
but that all the Matter of the world is of one kind for its very Substance or
Essence.

Now therefore I demand concerning this universal uniform Matter, whether
naturally Motion or Rest belongs unto it. If Motion it being acknowledged
uniforme, it must be alike moved in every part or particle imaginable of it.
For this Motion bring natural and essential to the Matter is alike every
where in it, and therefore has loosened every Atome of it to the utmost
capacity, so that every particle is alike, and moved alike, And therefore there
being no prevalency at all in any one Atome above another in biggnesse or
motion, it is manifest that this universal Matter, to whom motion is so
essential and intrinsecall, will be ineffectu^ll ^or the producing of any
varity of appearances in Nature, and so^o Suns, nor Stars no^ Earths, nor
Vortic^s (...) ever arise out of this infinitely thin and still Matter, which
most thus eternally remain unperceptible to any of (...), were our Senses ten
thousand Millions of times (...) then they are* Indeed there could not be any
such thing as either Man or Sense in the world. But we see this Matter shows
it self to us, in abundance of varieti^^^^^ appearance; therefore there must be
another principle besides the Matter to order the Motion of it so, as may make
these varieties to appear: And what will that prove but a God?

But if you will say that Motion is not of the nature of Matter (as indeed it is
very hard to conceive it, the matter supposed homogeneall) but that it is inert
and stupid of it self; then it must be moved from some other, and thus of
necessity we shall be cast upon a God, or at least a Spiritual substance
actuating the Matter* which the Atheists are as much afraid of, as children
are of Spirits, or themselves of a God.

But men that are much degenerate know not the natural Emanations of their own
Minds, but think of all things confusedly, and therefore it may be will not
stick to affirm, that either the parts of the Matter are Specifically
different, or though they be not, yet some are Moveable of themselves, others
inclinable to Rest, and was ever so; for it happened so to be, though there be
no reason for it in the thing it self; which is to wound our Faculties with so
wide a gap, that after this they will let in any thing, and take away all
pretense to any principles of Knowledge.

But to scuffle and combat with them in their own dark C^verns, let the
universal Matter be a heterogeneall Chaos of Confusion, variously moved and as
it happens: I say there is no likelihood that this mad Motion would ever amount
to so wise a Contrivance as is discernable even in the general Delineations of
Nature. Nay it will not amount to a natural appearance of what we see and is
conceived most easy thus to come to pass, to wit, a round (...), Moon, and
Earth. For it is shrewdly to be suspected that if there were no Superintendent
over the Motions of those Aetheriall Whirle-pooles, which the French Philosophy
supposes, that the form of the Sun and the rest of the Stars would be oblong
not round, because the Matter recedes all along the Axis of a Vortex, as well
as from the Center, and therefore naturally the Space that is left for the
finest and subtilest Element of all, of which the Sun and Stars are to
consist, will be Long not Round. Wherefore this Round Figure we see them in,
must proceed from some higher principle then the mere Agitation of the Matter:
But whether simply Spermaticall, or Sensitive also and Intellectual, I Will
leave to the disquisition of others who are more at leisure to meddle with such
Curiosities.

The Business that lies me in hand to make good is this, that taking that for
granted which these great Naturallists would have allowed, to wit, that the
Earth moves about the Sun, I say the laws of its Motion are such, that if
they had been imposed on her by humane Reason and Counsel, they would have
been no other then they are. So that appealing to our own faculties, we are to
confess that the Motion of the Sun and Stars, or of the Earth, as our
Naturallists would have it, is from a knowing Principle, or at least has passed
the Approbation and Allowance of such a Principle.

For as Art takes what Nature will afford for her purpose, and makes up the
rest her self; So the Eternal Mind (that put the universal Matter upon
Motion, as I conceive most reasonable, or if the Matter be confusedly moved of
its self, as the Atheist wilfully contends) this Eternal Mind, I say, takes
the easy and natural results of this general Impresse of Motion, where they
are for his purpose, where they are not he rectifies and compleats them.

And verily it is far more suitable to Reason that God making the Matter of
that nature that it can by mere Motion produce something, that it should go on
so far as that single advantage could naturally carry it, that so the wit of
Man, whom God has made to contemplate the Phenomenon of Nature, may have a more
fit object to exercise it self upon. For thus is the understanding of Man very
highly gratified, when the works of God and there manner of production are made
intelligible unto him by a natural deduction of one thing from another: which
would not have been if God had on purpose avoided what the Matter upon Motion
naturally afforded, and cancelled the laws thereof in every thing. Besides to
have altered or added any thing further where there was no need, had been to
Multiply Entities to no purpose.

Thus it is therefore with Divine Providence; what that one single Impresse of
Motion upon the Universal Matter will afford that is useful and good, it does
allow and take in; what it might have miscarried in, or could not amount to, it
directs or supplies. As in little pieces of wood naturally bowed like a Man's
Elbow, the Carver does not unbow it, but carves an hand at the one end of it,
and shapes it into the complete figure of a Man's Arm.

That therefore that I contend for is this, that be the Matter moved how it
will, the Appearances of things are such as do manifestly intimate that they
are either appointed all of them, or at least approved by an universal
Principle of Wisdom and Counsel.

CHAP. II.
The perpetual Parallelisme of the Axis of the Earth and its due proportion of
Inclination, as also the course of the Moon crossing the Ecliptic, evident
arguments that the fluid Matter is guided by a divine Providence. The Atheists
Sophisme of arguing from some petty inconsiderable Effects of the Motion of the
Matter, that the said Motion is cause of all things, seasonably detected and
deservedly derided.
NOw therefore to admit the Motion of the Earth, and to talk with the
Naturallists in their own Dialect, I demand whether it be better to have the
Axis of the Earth steady, and perpetually parrallell with its self, or to have
it carelessly tumble this way and that way as it happens, or at least very
variously and intricately. And you cannot but answer me that it is better to
have it steady and parallel: For in this lies the necessary Foundation of the
Art of Navigation and Dialling. For that steady stream of Particles which is
supposed to keep the Axis of the Earth parallel to it self, affords the Mariner
both his Cynosura and his Compass. The Lodestone and the Load-star depend
both on this. And Dialling could not be at all without it. But both of these
Arts are pleasant, and the one especially of mighty importance to Mankind. For
thus there is an orderly measuring of Time for our affairs at home, and an
opportunity of Traffic abroad, with the most remote Nations of the world, and
so there is a mutual supply of the several commodities of all Countries,
besides the enlarging of our understanding by so ample Experience we get of
both men and things. Wherefore if we were rationally to consult, whether the
Axis of the Earth is to be held steady and parallel to it self, or to be left
at random, we would conclude that it ought to be steady. And so we find it de
facto, though the Earth move floating in the liquid Heavens. So that appealing
to our own Facultyes, we are to affirm that the constant direction of the Axis
o^ the Earth was established by a principle of Wisedom^ and Counsel* or at
least approved of it.

Again, there being several Post^^es of this steady direction of the Axis of
the Earth, v^z, either Perpendicular to a Plane going through the Center of the
Sun, or Coincident or Incl^ning, I demand which of all these Reason and
Knowledge would make choice of. Not of a Perpendicular posture, For both the
pleasant variety and great convenience of Summer and Winter, Spring^ time and
Harvest would be lost; and for want of accession of the Sun, these parts of the
Earth that bring forth fruit now and are habitable, would be i^ an incapacity
of ever bringing forth any, and consequently could entertain no Inhabitants;
and those Parts that the full h^at of the Sun could reach, he plying them
always alike without any annual recession or intermission, would at last grow
tired and exhausted. And besides consulting with our own facultyes we observe,
that an orderly vicissitude of things, is most pleasant unto us, and does much
more gratify the contemplative property in Man.

And now in the second place* nor would reason make choice of a Coincident
position of the Axis of the Earth. For if the Axis thus lay in a Plane that
goes through the Center of the Sun, the Ecliptic would like a Colure or one of
the Meridians pass through the Poles of the Earth, which would put the
Inhabitants of the World into a pitiful Condition. For they that escape best
in the Temperate Zone, would be accloy'd with very tedious long Nights, no
less then forty days long, and they that now have their Night never above
four and twenty hours, as Friseland, Iseland, the further parts of Russia and
Norway, would be deprived of the Sun above a hundred and thirty days together,
our selves in England and the rest of the same Clime would be closed up in
darkness no less then an hundred or eighty continual days, and so
proportionably of the rest both in and out of the Temperate Zones. And as for
Summer and Winter, though those vicissitudes would be, yet it could not but
cause very raging diseases, to have the Sun stay so long describing his little
Circles near the Poles and lying so hot upon the Inhabitants that had been in
so long extremity of Darkness and Cold before.

It remains therefore that the posture of the Axis of the Earth be Inclining,
not Coincident nor Perpendicular to the forenamed Plane. And verily it is not
only inclining, but in so fit proportion, that there can be no fitter
excogi^ated, to make it to the utmost capacity as well pleasant as habitable.
For though the course of the Sun be curbed within the compass of the Tropicks
and so makes those parts very hot, yet the constantgales of wind from the East
(to say nothing of the nature and fit length of their nights) make the Torrid
Zone not only habitable but pleasant.

Now this best posture which our Reason would make choice of, we see really
established in Nature, and therefore, if we be not perverse and willful, we are
to infer that it was established by a Principle that has in it Knowledge and
Counsel, not from a blind fortuitous jumbling of the parts of the Matter one
against another, especially having found before in ourselves a knowing
Spiritual Substance that is also able to move and alter the Matter. Wherefore I
say we should more naturally conclude, that there is some such universal
knowing Principle, that has power to move and direct the Matter; then to fancy
that a confused justling of the Parts of the Matter should contrive themselves
into such a condition, as if they had in them Reason and Counsel, and could
direct themselves. But this directing Principle what could it be but God?

But to speak the same thing more briefly and yet more intelligibly, to those
that are only acquainted with the Ptolemaicall Hypothesis: I say that being it
might have happened that the annual course of the Sun should have been through
the Poles of the world, and that the Axis of the Heavens might have been very
troublesomely and disorderly moveable, from whence all those inconveniences
would arise which I have above mentioned; and yet they are not but are so
ordered as our own Reason must approve of as best; it is Natural for a man to
conceive, that they are really ordered by a Principle of Reason and Counsel,
that is, that they are made by an all wise and all-powerful God.

I will only add one or two observables more, concerning the Axis of the Earth
and the course of the Moon, and so I will pass to other things.

It cannot but be acknowledged that if the Axis of the Earth were perpendicular
to the Plane of the Sun's Ecliptic, that her Motion would be more easy and
natural, and yet for the conveniences before mentioned we see it is made to
stand in an inclining posture. So in all likelihood it would be more easy and
natural for that handmaid of the Earth the Moon, to finish her Monthly
courses in the Aequinoctiall Line, but we see like the Sun she crosses it and
expatiates some degrees further then the Sun him self, that her exalted light
might be more comfortable to those that live very much North, in their long
Nights.

Wherefore I conclude that though it were possible, that the confused agitation
of the parts of the Matter might make a round hard heap like the Earth, and
more thin and liquid bodies like the Ether, and Sun, and that the Earth may
swim in this liquid Ether like a roasted Apple in a great bowl of wine, and
be carried about like straws or grass cast upon a whirle-poole, yet that it is
Motion and Posture should be so directed and attemper'd as we our selves that
have Reason upon due consideration would have it to be; and yet not to be from
that which is Knowing and in some sense Reasonable; is to our faculties, if
they discern any thing at all, as absonous and absurd as any thing can be. For
when it had been easier to have been otherwise, why should it be thus, if some
Superintendent Cause did not oversee and direct the Motions of the Matter,
allowing nothing therein but what our Reason will confess to be to very good
purpose?

But because so many Bullets joggled together in a Man's Hat will settle to such
a determinate figure, or because the Frost and the Wind will draw upon doors
and Glasse-windows pretty uncouth streaks like feathers, and other fooleries
which are to no use or purpose, to infer thence that all the Contrivances
that are in Nature, even the frame of the bodies both of Men and Beasts, are
from no other principle but the jumbling together of the Matter, and so because
that this does naturally effect something that it is the cause of all things,
seems to me, to be a reasoning in the same Mood and Figure with that wise
Market-mans, who going down a Hill, and carrying his Cheeses under his Arms,
one of them falling and trundling down the Hill very fast, let the other go
after it, appointing them all to meet him at his house at Gotham, not doubting
but they beginning so hopefully would be able to make good the whole journey.
Or like another of the same Town, who perceiving that his Iron Trevet he had
bought had three feet, and could stand, expected also that it should walk too
and save him the labor of the Carriage. So our profound Atheists and
Epicureans according to the same pitch of Wisdom do not stick to infe^^e,
because this confused Motion of the parts of the Master may amount to a rude
delineation of hard and soft, rigid and fluid, and the like; that therefore it
will go on further and reach to the disposing of the Matter in such order as
does naturally imply a Principle* that someway or other contains in it exact
Wisdom and Counsel. A position more beseeming the Wisemen above mentioned,
then any one that has the least command of his natural wit and faculties.

Wherefore we having sufficiently detected the ridiculous folly of this present
Sophisme, let us attending heedfully to the natural emanations of unprejudiced
reason conclude, that the Rising and Setting of the lights of Heaven, the
vicissitude of Day and Night, Winter and Summer, being so ordered and guided,
as if they had been settled by exquisite consultation, and by clearest
knowledge; that therefore that which did thus ordain them is a knowing
Principle, able to move, alter and guide the Matter according to his own will
and providence, that is to say, that there is a God.

And verily I do not at all doubt but that I shall evidently trace the visible
footsteps of this Divine Counsel and Providence, even in all things
discoverable in the world. But I will pass through them as lightly and briefly
as I can.

CHAP. III.
That Rivers, Quarries of stone, Timber-Wood, Metalls, Mineralls, and the
Magnet, considering the nature of Man, what use he can make of them, are
manifest signs that the rude Motion of the Matter is not left to it self, but
is under the guidance and Super-intendency of an all-wise God.
LEt us therefore swiftly course over the Valleys and Mountains, sound the
depth of the Sea, range the Woods and Forests, dig into the Entrails of the
Earth, and let the Atheist tell me which of all these places are silent and say
nothing of a God. Those that are most dumb will at least compromize with the
rest, that all things are by the guidance and determination (let the Matter
move as it will) or at least by the allowance, and approbation of a Knowing
Principle: as a Mason that makes a wall, sometimes meets with a stone that
wants no cutting, and so only approving of it he places it in his work. And a
piece of Timber may happen to be cracked in the very place where the Carpenter
would cleave it, and he need not close it first that he may cleave it asunder
afterward; wherefore it the mee^ Motion of the Matter can do any rude general
thing of good consequence, let it stand as allowable; but we shall find out
also those things which do so manifestly ^avour of Design and Counsel, that
we cannot naturally withhold our assent, but must say there is a God.

And now let us betake out selves to the search, and see if all things be not
so as our Reason would desire them. And to begin at the Top first, even those
rudely scattered Mountains, that seem but so many Wens and unnatural
Protu^erancies upon the face of the Earth, if you consider but of what
consequence they are, thus reconciled you may deem them ornaments as well as
useful.

For these are Natures Stillatories in whose hollow Cavernes the ascending
vapors are congealed to that universal Aqua vitae, that good fresh water, the
liquor of life, that sustaines all the living Creatures in the world, being
carried along in all parts of the Earth in the winding Channels of Brooks and
Rivers. Geography would make it good by a large induction. I will only
instance in three or four: Ana and Tagus run from Sierra Molina in Spain,
Rhenus, Padus and Rhodanus from the Alps, Tenats from the Riphean, Garumna
from the Pyrene^n Mountains, Achelous from Pindus, Hebrus from Rhodope, Tigris
from Niphates, Or^ntes from Libanus, and Euphraetes from the Mountains of
Armenia, and so in the rest. But I will not insist upon this, I will now betake
my self to what does more forcibly declare an Eye of Providence, directing and
determining as well as approving of the results of the supposed agitation of
the parts of the Matter.

And that you may the better feel the strength of my Argument, let us first
briefly consider the nature of Man, what faculties he has, and in what order he
is in respect of the rest of the Creatures. And indeed though his body he but
weak and disarmed, yet his inward abilities of Reason and Artificial
contrivance is admirable. He is much given to Contemplation, and the viewing of
this Theater of the world, to trafick and commerce with foreign Nations, to the
building of Houses and Ships, to the making curious instruments of Silver,
Brass or Steel, and the like. In a word he is the flower and chief of all the
products of Nature upon this Globe of the Earth. Now if I can show that there
are designs laid even in the lowest and vilest products of Nature that respect
Man the highest of all, you cannot deny but that there is an Eye of Providence
that respects all things, and passes very swiftly from the Top to the
Bottom, disposing all things wisely.

I therefore now demand, Man being of this nature that he is, whether these
noble faculties of his would not be lost and frustrate were there not
Materials to exercise them on. And in the second place I desire to know,
whether the rude confused Agitation of the particles of the Matter do certainly
produce any such Materials fit for Man to exercise his skill on or no; That is
to say, whether there were any Necessity that could infallibly produce Quarries
of Stone in the Earth which are the chief Materials of all the Magnificent
Structures of building in the world; And the same of Iron and Steel, without
which there had been no use of these stones; And then of Sea-Coal and other
necessary Fuel, fit for the working or melting of these Metalls; and also of
Timber Trees, for all might have been as well brush-wood and shrubs; And then
assuredly there had been no such convenient shipping, what ever had become of
other buildings; And so of the Lodestone that great help to Navigation,
whether it might not have lain so low in the Earth as never to have been
reached by the Industry of Man; and the same may be said also of other Stones
and Metalls, that they being heaviest might have lain lowest. Assuredly the
Agitated Matter, unless there were some special over-powering guidance over
it, might as well have over-slipt these necessary useful things, as hit upon
them: But if there had not been such a Creature as Man, these very things
themselves had been useless, for none of the bruit beasts make use of such
commodities, Wherefore unless a man will do enormous violence to his
faculties, he must conclude that there is a contrivance of Providence and
Counsel in all those things, which reaches from the beginning to the end, and
orders all things sweetly. And that Providence foreseeing what a kind of
Creature she would make Man, provided him with materials from whence he might
be able to adorn his present Age, and furnish History with the Records of
egregious exploits both of Art and Valor. But without the provision of the
forenamed Materials, the Glory and Pomp both of war and Peace had been
lost. For men instead of those magnificent buildings which are seen in the
world, could have had no better kind of dwellings, then a bigger sort of
Bee-hives or Birds-nests made of contemptible sticks and straws and durty
mo^ter. And instead of the usual pomp and bravery of war, wherein is heard
the solemn sound of the hoarse Trumpett, the courageous beating of the Drumm,
the neighing and pransing of the Horses, clattering of Armor, and the terrible
thunder of Cannons, to say nothing of the glittering of the Sword and Spear*
the waving and fluttering of displayed Colors, the gallantry of Charges upon
their well managed Steeds and the like: I say had it not been for the forenamed
provision of Iron, Steel and Brass, and such like necessary Materials,
instead of all this glory and solemnity, there had been nothing but howlings
and showtings of poor naked men belabouring one another with snag'd sticks, or
dully falling together by the ears at Fi^ti-cuffs. Besides this, Beasts being
naturally armed, and men naturally unarmed with any thing save their Reason,
and Reason being ineffectuall having no materials to work upon, it is plain
that that which made Men, Beasts and Metalls, knew what it did, and did not
forget it self in leaving Man destitute of natural Armature, having provided
Materials, and giving him wit and abilityes to arm himself, and so to be able
to make his party good against the most fierce and stoutest of all living
Creatures whatsoever, nay indeed left him unarmed on purpose that he might arm
himself and exercise his natural wit and industry.

CHAP. IV.
A further proof of divine Providence taken from the Sea, and the large train
of Causes laid together in reference to Navigation.
HAving thus passed over the Hills and through the Woods and hollow Entrails
of the Earth, let us now view the wide Sea also, and see whether that do not
inform us that there is a God, that is, whether things be not there in such
sort as a rational Principle would either order or approve, when as yet
notwithstanding they might have been otherwise. And now we are come to view
those Campos natantes as Lucretius calls them, that vast Champian of water the
Ocean, I demand first whether it might not have been wider then it is, even so
large as to overspread the face of the whole Earth, and so to have taken away
the habitation of Men and Beasts. For the wet particles might have easily ever
mingled with the dry, and so all had either been Sea or Quag-mire. Secondly
though this distinction of Land and Sea be made, whether this watery Element
might not have fallen out to be of so thin a consistency as that it would not
bear Shipping; For it is so far from impossibility, as there be de facto in
Nature such waters, as the river Silas for example in India. And the waters of
B^risthenes are so thin and light, that they are said to swim upon the top of
the Stream of the river Hypanis. And we know there is some kind of wood so
heavy, that it will sink in any ordinary kind of water.

Thirdly and lastly, I appeal to any man's reason, whether it be not better
that there should be a distinction of Land and Sea, then that all should be
mire or water; and whether it be not better that the Timber Trees afford wood
so light that it swim on the water, or the water be so heavy that it will bear
up the wood, then the Contrary. That therefore which might have been otherwise,
and yet is settled according to our own hearts wish who are knowing and
rational Creatures, ought to be deemed by us as established by Counsel and
Reason. And the closer we look into the buisinesse we shall discern more
evident footsteps of Providence in it. For the two maine properties of Man
being contemplation and sociablenesse or love of converse, there could nothing
so highly gratify his nature as power of Navigation, whereby he riding on the
back of the waves of the Sea, views the wonders of the Deep, and by reason of
the gl^bnesse of that Element, is able in a competent time to prove the truth
of those sagacious suggestions of his own mind, that is, whether the Earth be
every way round, and whether there be any Antipodes, and the like; and by
cutting the Aequinoctiall line decides that controversy of the habitablenesse
of the Torrid Zone, or rather wipes out that blot that lay upon divine
Providence, as if so great a share of the world had been lost by reason of
unfitness for habitation.

Besides the falling upon strange Coasts and discovering Men of so great a
diversity of manners from our selves, cannot but be a thing of infinite
pleasure and advantage to the enlargement of our thoughts from what we observe
in their conversation, parts, and Poli^y. Add unto this the sundry rarities of
Nature, and commodities proper to several Countries, which they that stay at
home enjoy by the travailes of those that go abroad, and they that travail
grow rich for their adventure.

Now therefore Navigation being of so great consequence, to the delight and
convenience* of humane life, and there being both wit and courage in Man to
attempt the Seas, were he but ^itted with right Materials and other advantages
requisite; when we see there is so pat a provision made for him to this
pu^pose, in large Timber for the building of his Ship, in a thick Seawater
sufficient to bear the Ships burden, in the Magnet or Lodestone for his
Compass, in the steady and parallel direction of the Axis of the Earth for
his Cynosura; and then observing his natural wit and courage to make use of
them, and how that ingenit desire of knowledge an^ converse, and of the
improving of his own parts and happiness stir him up to so notable a
design; we cannot but conclude from such a train of Causes so ^ittly and
congruously complying together, that it was really the counsel of a^
universal and eternal Mind that has the overseeing and guidance of the whole
frame of Nature, that laid these causes so carefully and wisely together, that
is, we cannot but conclude that there is a God.

And if we have got so fast foot-hold already in this truth by the
consideration of such Phenomenon in the world that seem more rude and
general, what will the contemplation of the more particular and more polished
pieces of Nature afford in Vegetables, Animalls and the Body of Man?

CHAP. V.
Though the mere motion of the Matter may do something, yet it will not amount
to the production of Plants and Animalls. That it is no Botch in Nature that
some Phenomenon be the results of Motion, others of Substantial Forms. That
Beauty is not a mere Fancy; and that the Beauty of Plants is an argument that
they are from an Intellectual Principle.
HItherto we have only considered the more rude and careless strokes and
delineaments of divine Providence in the world, set out in those more large
Phenomenon of Day and Night, Winter and Summer, Land and Sea, Rivers,
Mountains* Metalls and the like; we now come to a closer view of God and Nature
in Vegetables, Animalls, and Man.

And first of Vegetables, where I shall touch only these four heads, their
Form and Beauty, their Seed, their Signatures and their great Use as well for
Medicine as Sustenance. And that we may the better understand the advantage we
have in this closer Contemplation of the works of Nature, we are in the first
place to take notice of the condition of that Substance which we call Matter,
how fluid and slippery and undeterminate it is of it self: or if it be hard,
how unfit it is to be changed into any thing else. And therefore all things rot
into a moisture before any thing can be generated of them, as we soften the wax
before we set on the Seal.

Now therefore, unless we will be so foolish, as because the uniforme motion
of the Air, or some more subtle corporeal Element, may so equally compresse
or bear against the parts of a little vapourous moisture as to form it into
round drops (as we see in the Dew and other Experiments) and therefore because
this more rude and general Motion can do something, to conclude that it does
all things; we must in all Reason confess that there is an Eternal Mind, in
virtue whereof the Matter is thus usefully formed and changed.

But mere rude and undirected Motion, because naturally it will have some kind
of Results, that therefore it will reach to such as plainly imply a wise
contrivance of Counsel, is so ridiculous a Sophisme, as I have already
intimated, that it is more fit to impose upon the inconsiderate Souls of Fools
and Children then upon men of mature Reason and well exercised in Philosophy.
Admit that Rain and Snow and Wind and Hail and Ice and such like Meteors may
be the products of Heat and Cold, or of the Motion and Rest of certain small
particles of the Matter; yet that the useful and beautiful contrivance of the
branches, flowers and fruits of Plants should be so too (to say nothing yet of
the bodies of Birds, Fishes, Beasts and Men) is as ridiculous and supine a
Collection, as to infer that because mere Heat and Cold does soften and
harden wax and puts it into some shape or other, that therefore this mere Heat
and Cold or Motion and Rest, without any art or direction made the Silver Seal
too, and graved upon it so curiously some Coat of Arms, or the shape of some
Birds or Beasts, as an Eagle, a Lion and the like. Nay indeed this inference is
more tolerable far then the other, these effects of Art being more easy and
less noble then those others of Nature.

Nor is it any botch or gap at all in the works of Nature that some particular
Phenomenon be but the easy results of that general Motion communicated unto
the Matter from God, others the effects of more curious contrivance or of the
divine Art or Reason (for such are the (...) the Rations Seminales)
incorporated in the Matter, especially the Matter it self being in some sort
vital, else it would not continue the Motion that it is put upon when it is
occasionally this or the other way moved; and besides, the Nature of God being
the most perfect fulness of life that is possibly conceivable, it is very
congruous that this outmost and remotest shadow of himself be some way though
but ob^curely vital. Wherefore things falling off by degrees from the highest
perfection, it will be no uneven or unproportionable step, if descending from
the Top of this outward Creation, Man, in whom there is a principle of more
fine and reflexive Reason, which hangs on, though not in that manner in the
more perfect kind of Brutes, as sense also, loath to be curbed within too narrow
a compass, lays hold upon some kinds of Plants, as in those sundry sorts of
Zoophyta, but in the rest there are no further footsteps discovered of an
animadversive form abiding in them, yet there be the effects of an inadvertent
form ((...)) of materiated or incorporated Art or Seminall Reason: I say it is
no uneven jot, to pass from the more faint and obscure examples of
Spermaticall life, to the more considerable effects of general Motion, in
Mineralls, Metalls and sundry Meteors, whose easy and rude shapes have no need
of any particular principle of life or Spermaticall form distinct from the
Rest or Motion of the particles of the Matter.

But there is that Curiosity of form and beauty in the more noble kind of
Plants bearing such a sutablenesse and harmony with the more refined ^ense and
sagacity of the Soul of Man, that he cannot chose (his Intellectual Touch
being so sweetly gratifide by what it deprehends in such like Objects but
acknowledge that some hidden Cause much a kin to his own nature, that is
intellectual, is the contriver and perfecter of these so pleasant spectacles
in the world.

Nor is it all to the purpose to object, that this buisinesse of Beauty and
comeliness of proportion is but a conceit, because some men acknowledge no
such thing, and all things are alike handsome to them, who yet notwithstanding
have the use of their Eyes as well as other folks. For I say this rather makes
for what we a yme at, that pulchritude is conveyed indeed by the outward Senses
unto the Soul, but a more intellectual faculty is that which relishes it; as a
Geometrical Scheme is let in by the Eyes, but the demonstration is discerned
by Reason. And therefore it is more rational to affirm that some Intellectual
Principle was the Author of this Pulchritude of things, then that they should
be thus fashioned without the help of that Principle. And to say that there is
no such thing as Pulchritude, because some men's Souls are so dull and stupid
that they relish all objects alike in that respect, is as absurd and
groundless as to conclude there is no such thing as Reason and Demonstration,
because a natural Fool cannot reach unto it. But that there is such a thing as
Beauty, and that it is acknowledged by the whole generations of Men to be in
Trees, Flowers and Fruits; the adorning and beautifying of Buildings in all
Ages is an ample and undeniable Testimony. For what is more ordinary with them
then the taking in flowers and fruitage for the garnishing of their work?
Besides I appeal to any man that is not sunk into so forlorn a pitch of
Degeneracy, that he is as stupid of these things as the ba^est of Beasts*
whether for Example a rightly cut Tetraedrum, Cube or Icosaedrum have no more
pulchritude in them, then any rude broken stone lying in the field or high
ways; or to name other solid Figures which though they be not Regular properly
so called, yet have a settled Idea and Nature, as a Cone, Sphere or Cylinder,
whether the ^ight of these do not gratify the minds of men more, and pretend
to more elegancy of shape, then those rude cuttings or ch^ppings of free stone
that fall from the Masons hands and serve for nothing but to fill up the middle
of the Wall, and so to be hid from the Eyes of Man for their ^glinesse. And it
is observable that if Nature shape any thing near this Geometrical accuracy,
that we take notice of it with much content and pleasure; As if it be but
exactly round (as there are abundance of such stones found betwixt^two hills in
Cuba an Island or America) or ordinatly Quinquangular, or have the sides but
Parallel, though the Angles be unequal, as is seen in some little stones, and
in a kind of Alabaster found here in England; these stones I say gratify our
sight, as having a nearer cognation with the Soul of man, that is rational and
intellectual; and therefore is well pleased when it meets with any outward
object that fits and agrees with those conge^it Ideas her own nature is
furnished with. For Symmetry, Equality, and Correspondency of parts is the
discernment of Reason, not the object of Sense, as I have heretofore proved.

Now therefore it being evident that there is such a thing as Beauty, Symmetry
and Comeliness of Proportion (to say nothing of the delightful mixture of
colors) and that this is the proper Object of the Understanding and Reason
(for these things be not taken notice of by the Beasts) I think I may safely
infer that whatever is the first and principal cause of changing the fluid
and undeterminated Matter into shapes so comely and symmetricall, as we see in
Flowers and Trees, is an understanding Principle, and knows both the nature of
man and of those objects he offers to his sight in this outward and visible
world. For these things cannot come by chance or by a multi^arious attempt of
the parts of the matter upon themselves, for then it were likely that the
Species of things (though some might hit right, yet most) would be maym'd and
ridiculous; but now there is not any ineptitude in any thing which is a sign
that the fluidnesse of the Matter is guided and determined by the overpowering
counsel of an Eternal Mind, that is, of a God.

If it were not needless I might now instance in sundry kinds of flowers,
herbs and trees ^ but these objects being so obvious and every man's Fancy
being branched with the remembrance of Roses, Marigolds, Gillyflowers, Pionyes,
Tulips, Pa^sies, Primroses, the leaves and clusters of the Vine, and a thousand
such like, of all which they cannot but confess, that there is in them beauty
and symmetry and grateful proportion, I hold it superfluous to weary you with
any longer induction, but shall pass on to the three considerations behind, of
their Seed, Signatures and Usefulness, and shall pass through them very
briefly, the Observables being very ordinary and easily intelligible.

CHAP. VI.
The Seeds and Signatures of Plants, arguments of a divine Providence.
I Say therefore in that every Plant* has its Seed, it is an evident sign of
divine Providence. For it being no necessary Result of the Motion of the
Matter, as the whole contrivance of the Plant indeed is not, and it being of so
great consequence that they have Seed for the continuance and propagation of
their own Species, and for the gartifying of man's Art also, industry and
necessityes, (for much of husbandry and gradening lies in this) it cannot but
be an Act of Counsel to furnish the several kinds of Plants with their Seeds,
especially the Earth being of such a nature, that though at first for a while
it might bring forth all manner of Plants, (as some will have it also to have
brought forth all kinds of Animalls) yet at last it would grow so sluggish,
that without the advantage of those small compendious Principles of generation,
the grains of Seed, it would yield no such births; no more then a Pump grown
dry will yield any water, unless you pour a little water into it first, and
then for one Bason-full you may fetch up so many Soe-fulls.

Nor is it material to object that stinking weeds, and poisonous Plants bear
seed too as well as the most pleasant and most useful, For even those stinking
weeds and poisonous Plants have their use. For first the Industry of Man is
excercised by them to weed them out where they are hurtful. Which reason if it
seem slight, let us but consider that if humane Industry had nothing to
conflict and struggle with, the fire of man's Spirit would be half extinguished
in the flesh, and then we shall acknowledge that that which I have alleged is
not so contemptible nor invalid.

But secondly who knows but it is so with poisonous Plants, as vulgarly is
phansied concerning Toads and other poisonous Serpents, that they lick the
venom from off the Earth? so poisonous plants may well draw to them all the
malign juice and nourishment that the other may be more pure and defaecate, as
there are Receptacles in the body of Man and Emunctories to draine them of
superfluous Choler, Melancholy and the like.

But lastly it is very well known by them that know any thing in Nature and
Physic, that those herbs that the rude and ignorant would call weeds are the
Materials of very sovereign Medicines, that Aconitum hyemale or Winter wolfes
bane, that otherwise is rank poison, is reported to prevail mightily against
the bitings of vipers and scorpions, which Crollius assenteth unto. And that
that plant that bears death in the very name of it, Solanum Laethiferum,
prevents death by procuring sleep, if it be rightly applied in a fever. Nor
are those things to be deemed unprofitable whose use we know not yet, for all
is not to be known at once, that succeeding Ages may ever have something left
to gratify themselves in their own discoveries.

We come now to the Signatures of Plants, which seems no less Argument that
the highest original of the works of Nature is some understanding Principle,
then that so careful provision of their seed. Nay indeed this respects us more
properly and adaequare^y then the other, and is a certain Key to enter Man
into the knowledge and use of the Treasures of Nature. I demand therefore
whether it be not a very easy and genuine inference from the observing that
several herbs are marked with some mark or sign that intimates their virtue,
what they are good for; and there being such a creature as Man in the world
that can read and understand these signs and characters, hence to collect that
the Author both of Man and them knew the nature of them both; For it is like
the inscriptions upon Apothecaries Boxes that the Master of the Shop (...) on*
that the Apprentise may read them; nay it is better, for here is in herbs
inscribed the very nature and use of them* not the mere name. Nor is there any
necessity that all should be thus signed, though some be; for the rarity of it
is the delight; for otherwise it had been dull and cloying, too much harping
upon the same string. And besides divine Providence would only initiate and
enter mankind into the useful knowledge of her Treasures, leaving the rest to
employ our industry that we might not live like idle Loyterers and Truants. For
the Theater of the world is an exercise of Man's wit, not a lazy Polyanthea or
book of Common places. And therefore all things are in some measure obscure and
intricate, that the sedulity of that divine Spark the Soul of Man, may have
matter of conquest and triumph when he has done bravely by a superadvenient
assistance of his God.

But that there be some Plants that bear a very evident Signature of their
nature and use, I shall fully make good by these following instances.

Capillus Vener^, Polytrichon or M^ydenhaire, the lie in which it is sodden or
in^us'd, is good to wash the head and make the hair grow in those places that
are more thin and bare.

And the decoction of Quinces, which are a downy and hairy fruit, is accounted
good for the fetching again hair that has fallen by the French Pox.

The leaf of Balm and of Alleluia or Wood-Sorrell, as also the Roots of
Anthora represent the heart in figure and are Cardiacall.

Wall nuts bear the whole signature of the head. The outward green Cortex
answers to the Pericranium, and a salt made of it is singularly good for wounds
in that part, as the kernel is good for the brains which it resembles.

Vmbilicus Veneris is powerful to provoke lust as Di^scorides affirms. As
also your several sorts of Satyrions which have the evident resemblance of the
genitall parts upon them: Aron especially, and all your Orchisses, that they
have given names unto from some beasts or other, as Cynosorchis, Orchis Myodes,
Tragorchis and the like. The last whereof, notorious also for its goatish smell
and tufts not unlike the beard of that lecherous Animal, is of all the rest
the most powerful Incentive to Lust.

The leaves of Hypericon, are very thick pricked, or pinck'd with little holes,
and it is a singular good woundherb, as useful also for deobstructing the
pores of the body.

Scorpioides, Echium, or Scorpion-grasse is like the crooked tail of a
Scorpion, and Ophioglossum or Adders-tongue has a very plain and perfect
resemblance of the tongue of a Serpent, as also Ophioscorodon of the entire
head and upper parts of the body, and these are all held very good against
poison and the biting of Serpents. And generally all such plants as are
speckled with spots like the skins of vipers or other venomous creatures, are
known to be good against the stings or bitings of them, and are powerful
Antidotes against Poison.

Thus did divine Providence by natural Hieroglyphics read short Physic
lectures to the rude wit of man, that being a little entered and engaged he
might by his own industry and endeavors search out the rest himself, it being
very reasonable that other herbs that had not such signatures* might be very
good for Medicinal uses, as well as they that had.

But if any here object that some herbs have the resemblance of such things as
cannot in any likelihood refer to Physic, as Geranium, Cruciata, Bursa
Pastoris, and the like; I say they answer themselves in the very proposal of
their Objection: For this is a sign that they were intended only for
ludicrous ornaments of Nature, like the flourishes about a great letter that
signify nothing but are made only to delight the Eye. And it is so far from
being any inconvenience to our first progenitors if this intimation of
signatures did fail, that it cast them with more courage upon attempting the
virtue of those that had no such signatures at all; it being obvious for them
to reason thus, Why may not those herbs have medicinal virtue in them that
have no signatures, as well as they that have signatures have no virtue
answerable to the signs they bear? which was a further confirmation to them
of the former conclusion.

And it was sufficient that those that were of so present and great consequence
as to be Antidotes against poison that so quickly would have dispatched poor
rude and naked Antiquity, or to help on the small beginnings of the world by
quickening and actuating their phlegmatic Natures to more frequent and
effectual Venery (for their long lives show they were not very fiery) I say it
was sufficient that herbs of this kind were so legibly signed with Characters
that so plainly bewrai'd their useful virtues, as is manifest in your
Satyrions, Ophioglossum, and the like. But I have dwelt too long upon this
Theory, we will betake our selves to what follows.

CHAP. VII.
Arguments of divine Providence drawn from the Usefulness of Plants.
WE are at length come to the fourth and last consideration of Plants, viz.
their Use and Profitablenesse. And to say nothing now of those greater Trees
that are fit for Timber, and are the requisite Materials for the building of
Ships and magnificent Houses, to adorn the Earth, and make the life of Man
more splendid and delectable; as also for the erecting of those holy Structures
consecrated to divine Worship amongst which we are not to forget that famous
Aedifice, that glorious Temple at Jerusalem consecrated to the great God of
Heaven and Earth: As indeed it was most fit that he whose Guidance and
Providence permitted not the strength of the Earth to spend it self in base
gravel and pebbles instead of Quarries of Stones, nor in briars and brush-wood
instead of Pines, Cedars and Oaks, that he should at some time or other have
the most stately magnificent Temples erected to him, that the wit and industry
of Man and the best of those materials could afford. It being the most suitable
acknowledgment of thanks for that piece of Providence that can be invented. And
it is the very consideration that moved that pious King David to design the
building of a Temple to the God of Israel; See now, says he, I dwell in a
house of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within Curtains. But as I said I
will add nothing concerning these things being contented with what I have
glanced upon heretofore.

We will now briefly take notice of the profitablenesse of Plants for Physic
and Food, and then paste on to the consideration of Animalls. And as for their
Medicinal uses, the large Herballs that are every where to be had are so ample
Testimonies thereof, that I have said enough in but reminding you of them. That
which is most observable here is this, that brute Beasts have some share in
their virtue as well as Men. For the Toad being overcharged with the poison of
the Spider, as is ordinary believed, has recourse to the Plantane leaf. The
Weasel when she is to encounter the Serpent, arms her self with eating of Rue.
The Dog when he is sick at the stomach, knows his Cure, falls to his Grass,
vomits, and is well. The Swallows make use of Celandine; the Linnet of
Euphragia for the repairing of their sight. And the Ass when he is oppressed
with Melancholy, eats of the herb Asplenium or Miltwaste, and so eases himself
of the swelling of the Spleen. And Virgill reports of the Dictamnum Cretense
or Cretian Dittany, that the wild Goats eat it when they are shot with darts
or arrows, for that herb has the virtue to work them out of their body and to
heal up the wound. -- non illa feris incognita Capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres h^esere sagitt^e.


Which things I conceive no obscure indigitation of Providence; For they doing
that by instinct and nature, which men who have free Reason cannot but
acknowledge to be very pertinent and fitting, nay such that the skillfullest
Physician will approve and allow; and these Creatures having no such reason and
skill themselves, as to turn Physicians; it must needs be concluded that they
are enabled to do these things by virtue of that Principle that contrived them,
and made them of that nature they are, and that that Principle therefore must
have skill and knowledge, that is, that it must be God.

We come now to the consideration of Plants as they afford Food both to Man and
Beasts. And here we may observe that as there was a general provision of water
by setting the Mountains and Hills a broche, from whence through the
Spring-heads and continued Rivulets drawn together (that caused afterward
greater Rivers with the long winding distributions of them) all the Creatures
of the Earth quench their thirst: So divine Providence has spread her Table
every where, not with a juicelesse green Carpet, but with succulent Herbage and
nourishing Grass, upon which most of the beasts of the field do feed. And
they that feed not on it, feed on those that eat it, and so the generations of
them all are continued.

But this seeming rather necessary then of choice, I will not insist upon it.
For I grant that Counsel most properly is there implyde where we discern a
variety and possibility of being otherwise, and yet the best is made choice of.
Therefore I will only intimate thus much, that though it were necessary that
some such thing as grass should be, if there were such and such Creatures in
the world, yet it was not at all necessary that grass and herbs should have
that color which they have, for they might have been red or white, o^ some
such color which would have been very offensive and hurtful to our sight. But
I will not insist upon these things; let us now consider the Fruits of Trees,
where I think it will appear very manifestly, that there was one and the same
Author both of Man and them, and that assuredly he knew what he did when he
made them. For could Apples, and Oranges, and Grapes, and Apricocks, and such
like fruit, be intended for Beasts that hold their heads downward and can
scarce look up at them, much less know how to reach them? When we feed our
dogs, we set the dish or trencher on the ground, nor on the Table. But you will
say that at last these fruits will fall down, and then the beasts may come at
them: But one thing is, there are not many that desire them, and so they would
rot upon the ground before they be spent, or be squandered away in a moment of
time, as it might easily fare with the most precious of Plants the Vine. But
Man who knows the worth of the Grape knows to preserve it a long season (for
it is both eaten and drunk some years after the vintage) as he does also
gather the rest of the fruits of the Earth, and lays up both for himself and
his Cattle: Wherefore it is plainly discoverable that Man's coming into the
world, is not a thing of Chance or Necessity, but a Design, as the bringing of
worthy Guests to a well furnished Table.

And what I have intimated concerning the Vine is as eminently, if not more
eminently, observable in the ordinary kinds of Grain, as Wheat and Barley, and
the like, which also like the Vine are made either Edible or Potable by Man's
Art and Industry; But that is not the thing that I care so much to observe. That
which I drive at now is this: That Bread-corne that brings so considerable
increase by tillage and husbandry would scarce be at all without it: for that
which grows wildly of it self is worth nothing: But it being so wholesome and
strengthening a food, that it should yield so plentiful increase, and that this
should not be without humane Art and Industry, does plainly insinuate, that
there is a divine Providence that intended to exercise the wit of Man in
Husbandry and Tillage: Which we may the more firmly assure our selves of, if we
add unto this the careful provision of Instruments so exactly fitted out for
this employment, viz. the laborious Ox, and the stout but easily manageable
Horse; Iron for the plough-share, and Ropes for the horse-geares to pull by.
And it is very seasonable to take notice of this last, it belonging to this
consideration of the profitablenesse of Plants. And I appeal to any body that
will but take the pains a while to consider of what great use and consequence
Cordage is in the affairs of Men, whether it was not a palpable Act of
Providence to send out such plants out of the Earth which would afford it. For
we can discover no necessity in Nature that there must needs be such Plants as
Hemp and Flax. Wherefore if we will but follow the easy suggestions of free
Reason, we muust cast it upon Providence, which has provided Mankind of such a
Commodity, that no less affairs depend upon, then all the Tackling of Ships,
their Sails and Cable-ropes, and what not? and so consequently all foreign
Traffic, and then the transportation of wood and stone, and other necessary
materials for building; or the carriage of them by land in Waines and Carts,
besides the ordinary use of Pulleyes or other Engines for the lifting up of
heavy weights which the strength of Man without these helps would not easily
master; besides what I hinted before concerning the use of Cordage in
Husbandry, in plowing and carrying home the fruits of the Earth. The uses
indeed of the forenamed Plants are so universal, and take place so in every
affair of Man, that if it were lawful to be a little merry in so serious a
matter, a man might not unfittingly apply that verse of the Poet to this so
general a commodity; Omnia sunt homini tenui pendentia filo.

That all the businesses of Men do very much depend upon these little long
fleaks or threads of Hemp and Flax* Or if you will say, that there may some
scambling shift be made without them in long chains of Iron, or sails of
Woollen and the like; yet we seeing our seives provided for infinitely better,
are in all reason to judge it to proceed from no worse a Principle then divine
Providence.

I might now reach out to Exotic Plants, such as the Cinnamon-tree, the
Balsame-tree, the Tree that bears the Nutmegge invelloped with the Mace, as
also the famous Indian Nut-tree, which at once almost affords all the
Necessaries of life. For if they cut but the twiggs at Evening, there is a
plentiful and pleasant Juice comes out, which they receive into Bottles and
drink instead of Wine, and out of which they extract such an Aqu^vitae as is
very sovereign against all manner of sicknesses. The branches and boughs they
make their Houses of; and the body of the Tree being very spongy within, though
hard without, they easily contrive into the frame and use of their Canoes or
boats. The kernel of the Nut serves them for Bread and Meat, and the shells
for Cups to drink in, and indeed they are not mere empty Cups, for there is
found a delicious cooling Milk in them: Besides there is a kind of Hemp that
incloses the Nut, of which they make Ropes and Cables, and of the finest of it
Sails for their ships; and the leaves are so hard and sharpe-pointed, that
they easily make needles or bodkins of them, for stitching their Sails and for
other necessary purposes. And that Providence may show her self benign as well
as wise, this so notable a Plant is not restrained to one Coast of the world,
as suppose the East Indies, but is found also in some parts of Africa, and in
all the Islands of the West Indies, as Hispaniola Cuba, as also upon the
Continent of Carthagena, in Panama, Norembega, and several others parts of the
newfound world.

But I thought fit not to insist upon these things, but to contain my self
within the compass of such Objects as are familiarly and ordinarily before out
eyes, that we may the better take occasion from thence to return thanks to him
who is the bountiful Author of all the supports of life.

CHAP. VIII.
The Usefullnesse of Animalls an Argument of divine Providence.
WE are now come to take a view of the nature of Animalls: In the contemplation
whereof we shall use much what the same Method we did in that of Plants, for we
shall consider in them also, their Beauty, their Birth, their Make and Fabric
of body, and Vsefullnesse to Mankind. And to dispatch this last first. It is
wonderful easy and natural to conceive, that as almost all are made in some
sort or other for humane uses, so some so notoriously and evidently, that
without maine violence done to our faculties we can in no wise deny it. As to
instance in those things that are most obvious and familiar; when we see in the
solitary fields a Shepherd, his Flock, and his Dog, how well they are fitted
together; when we knock at a Farmers door, and the first that answers shall be
his vigilant Mastiffe, whom from his use and office he ordinarily names Keeper,
and I remember Theophrastus in his Character (...) tells us, that his Master
when he has let the stranger in (...) taking his Dog by the snout will relate
long stories of his usefullnesse and his services he does to the house and them
in it. (...). This is he that keeps the yard, the house and them within.
Lastly when we view in the open Champian a brace of swift Greyhounds coursing
a good stout and well-breathed Hare, or a pack of well tuned Hounds, and
Huntsmen on their horsebacks with pleasure and alacrity pursuing their game, or
hear them winding their Horns near a wood side, so that the whole wood rings
with the Echo of that Music and cheerful yelping of the eager Dogs: to say
nothing of Duck-hunting, of Foxe-hunting, of Otter-hunting, and a hundred more
such like sports and pastimes, that are all performed by this one kind of
Animal; I say when we consider this so multifarious congruity and fitness of
things in reference to our selves, how can we withhold from inferring, that
that which made both Dogs and Ducks and Hares and Sheep, made them with a
reference to us, and knew what it did when it made them? And though it be
possible to be otherwise, yet it is highly improbable that the flesh of Sheep
should not be designed for food for men; and that Dogs that are such a familiar
and domestic Creature, to Man, amongst other pretty feats that they do for
him, should not be intended to supply the place of a servitour too, and to take
away the bones and scraps that nothing might be lost. And unless we should
expect that Nature should make Jerkins and Stockings grow out of the ground,
what could she do better then afford us so fit materials for clothing as the
Wool of the Sheep, there being in Man Wit and Art to make use of it? To say
nothing of the Silkworme that seems to come into the world for no other
purpose* then to furnish man with more costly clothing, and to spin away her
very entrails to make him fine without.

Agains when we view those large Bodies of Oxen, what can ^e better conceit
them to be then so many living and walking powdring Tubbs and that they have
animam pro Sale, as Philo speaks of Fishes, that their life is but for Salt to
keep them sweet till we shall have need to eat them? Besides their Hides
afford us Leather for Shoes and Boots. as the skins of other beasts also serve
for other uses. And indeed Man seems to be brought into the world on purpose
that the rest of the Creation might be improved to the utmost usefulness and
advantage; For were it not better that the hides of Beasts and their flesh
should be made so considerable use of as to feed and cloth Men, then that they
should rot and stink upon the ground, and fall short of so noble an improvement
as to be matter for the exercise of the wit of Man, and to afford him the
necessary conveniences of life? For if Man did not make use of them, they would
either dye of Age, or be torn apieces by more cruel Masters. Wherefore we
plainly see that it is an Act of Reason and Counsel to have made Man that he
might be a Lord over the rest of the Creation* and keep good quarter among them.

And being furnished with fit Materials to make himself weapons, as well as
with natural wit and valor, he did bid battle to the very fiercest of them,
and either chased them away into Solitudes and Deserts, or else brought them
under his subjection and gave laws unto them; Under which they live more
peaceably, and are better provided for (or at least might be, if Men were good)
then they could be when they were left to the mercy of the Lion Bear or Tiger.
And what it he do occasionally and orderly kill some of them for food? their
dispatch is quick and so less dolorous then the paw of the Bear or the teeth
of the Lion, or tedious Melancholy and sadness of old Age, which would first
torture them, and then kill them and let them srot upon the ground stinking and
useless.

Besides, all the wit and Philosophy in the world can never demonstrate, that
the killing and slaughtering of a Beast is any more then the striking of a bush
where a birds Nest is, where you fray away the Bird and then seize upon the
empty Nest. So that if we could pierce to the utmost Catastrophe of things, all
might prove but a Tragick-Comedy.

But as for those Rebels that have fled into the Mountains and Deserts, they
are to us a very pleasant subject of natural History besides we serve our
selves of them as much as is to our purpose. And they are not only for
ornaments of the Universe, but a continual Exercise of Man's Wit and Valor
when he pleases to encounter. But to expect and wish that there were nothing
but such dull tame things in the world, that will neither bite nor scratch, is
as groundless and childish as to wish there were no choler in the body nor
fire in the universal compass of Nature.

I cannot insist upon the whole result of this war, nor must forget how that
generous Animal the Horse, had at last the wit to yield himself up, to his own
great advantage and ours. And verily he is so fitly made for us, that we wight
justly claim a peculiar right in him above all other Creatures. When we observe
his patient service he does us at the Plough, Cart, or under the Pack-saddle,
his speed upon the high way in matters of importance, his dociblenesse and
desire of glory and praise, and consequently his notable achievements in war,
where he will knap the Spears a pieces with his teeth, and pull his Riders
Enemy out of the Saddle; and then that he might be able to perform all this
labor with more Ease, that his hoofs are made so fit for the Art of the Smith,
and that round armature of Iron he puts upon them; it is a very hard thing not
to acknowledge, that this so congruous contrivance of things was really from a
Principle of Wisdom and Counsel. There is also another consideration of
Ani^alls and their usefulness, in removing those Evils we are pestered with
by reason of the abundance of some other hurtful Animalls, such as are Mice
and Rats and the like; and to this end the Cat is very serviceable. And there
is in the West Indies a beast in the form of a Bear which Cardan calls Vrsus
Formicarius, whose very business it is to eat up all the Ants which some
parts of that Quarter of the World are sometimes excessively plagued withal.

We might add also sundry Examples of living Creatures that not only bear a
singular good affection to Mankind, but are also fierce Enemies to those that
are very hurtful and cruel to Man; and such are the Lizard, an Enemy to the
Serpent; the Dolphin to the Crocodile; the Horse to the Bear; the Elephant to
the Dragon, etc. but I list not to insist upon these things.

CHAP. IX.
Arguments of divine Providence fetched from the Pulchritude of Animalls, as
also from the manner of their Propagation.
I Return now to what I proposed first, the Beauty of living Creatures; which
though the coarse-spirited Atheist will not take notice of, as relishing
nothing but what is subservient to his Tyranny or Lust: yet I think it
undeniable, but that there is comely Symmetry and Beautifulness in sundry
living Creatures, a tolerable useful Proportion of parts in all. For neither
are all men and women exquisitly handsome, indeed very few, that they that are
may raise the greater admiration in the minds of Men, and quicken their natural
abilities to brave adventures either of Valor or Poetry. But as for the brute
Creatures though some of them be of an hateful aspect, as the Toad, the Swine
and the Ra^; yet these are but like discords in Music to make the succeeding
chord go off more pleasantly, as indeed most of those momentany inconveniences
that the life of Man ever and anon meets withal they but put a greater edge
and vigor upon his Enioyments.

But it is not hard to find very many Creatures, that are either (...) or (...)
as the Philosopher distinguishes, that are either very goodly things and
beautiful, or at least elegant and pretty; as most of your Birds are. But for
Stateliness and Majesty what is comparable to a Horse? whether you look upon
him single, with his Mane and his Tail waving in the wind, and hear him
coursing and neighing in the pastures; or whether you see him with some gallant
Heroes on his back, performing gracefully his useful postures, and practicing
his exploits of war; who can withhold from concluding that a providence
brought these two together, that are fitted so well to each other that they
seem but one complete Spectacle of Nature? which imposed upon the rude people
near Thessaly, and gave the occasion of the fabulous Centaurs, as if they had
been one living Creature made up of Horse and Man.

That which I drive at is this, there being that Goodlinesse in the bodies of
Animalls, as in the Ox, Greyhound and Stagge; or that Majesty and
Stateliness, as in the Lion, the Horse, the Eagle and Cock; or that grave
Awfullnesse, as in your best breed of Mastives; or Elegancy and Prettiness, as
in your lesser Dogs, and most sorts of Birds, all which are several Modes or
Beauty, and Beauty being an intellectual Object, as Symmetry and Proportion is
(which I proved sufficiently in what I spoke concerning the beauty of Plants)
that which naturally follows from all this is, that the Author or Original
of these Creatures, which are deemed beautiful, must himself be intellectual,
he having contrived so grateful objects to the Mind or Intellect of Man.

After their Beauty let us touch upon their Birth or manner of Propagation. And
here I appeal to any man whether the contrivance of Male and Female in living
Creatures be not a genuine effect of Wisdom and Counsel; for it is
notoriously obvious that these are made one for the other, and both for the
continuation of the Species. For though we should admit with Cardan and other
Naturallists, that the Earth at first brought forth all manner of Animalls as
well as Plants, and that they might be fastened by the Navell to their common
Mother the Earth, as they are now to the Female in the Womb; yet we see she is
grown steril and barren, and her births of Animalis are now very
inconsiderable. Wherefore what can it be but a Providence, that whiles she did
bear she sent out Male and Female, that when her own Prolifick virtue was
wasted* yet she might be a dry-Nurse or an officious Grandmother to thousands
of generations? And I say it is Providence, not Chance nor Necessity, for what
is there imaginable in the parts of the Matter that they should necessarily
fall into the structure of so much as an Animal, much less into so careful a
provision of difference of Sexes for their continual propagation?

Nor was it the frequent attempts of the moved Matter that first light on
Animalls, which perpetually were suddenly extinct for want of the difference
of Sexes, but afterward by chance differenced their Sexes also, from whence
their kinds have continued. For what is perpetual, is not by chance; and the
births that now are by putrefaction show that it is perpetual. For the Earth
still constantly brings forth Male and Female.

Nor is it any thing to the purpose to reply (if you will make so large a skip
as to cast your self from the land into the water to dive for Objections) that
the Eele, though it be (...), an Animal so perfect as to have blood in it, yet
that it has no distinction of Sex: For if it have not, there is good reason
for it, that creature arising out of such kind of Matter as will never fail
generation. For there will be such like mud as will serve this end so long as
there be Rivers and longer too, and Rivers will not fail so long as there is a
Sea. Wherefore this rather makes for discriminative Providence that knew before
the nature and course of all things, and made therefore her contrivances
accordingly, doing nothing superfluously or in vain.

But in other Generations that are more hazardous, though they be sometimes by
putrefaction, yet she makes them Male and Female, as it is plain in Frogs and
Mice. Nor are we to be scandalized at it, that there such careful provision
made for such contemptible Vermin as we conceive them: For this only comes
out of pride and ignorance, or a haughty presumption that because we are
encouraged to believe that in some sense all things are made for Man, that
therefore they are not made at all for themselves. But he that pronounces thus,
is ignorant of the nature of God and the knowledge of things. For if a good man
be merciful to his beast, then surely a good God is bountiful and benign,
and takes pleasure that all his Creatures enjoy themselves that have life and
sense and are capable of any enjoyment. So that the swarms of little Vermin,
and of Flies, and innumerable such like diminutive Creatures, we should rather
congratulate their coming into Being, then murmr sullenly and scornfully
against their Existence; for they find nourishment in the world, which would be
lost if they were nor, and are again convenient nourishment themselves to
others that prey upon them.

But besides, life being individuated into such infinite numbers that have
their distinct sense and pleasure and are sufficiently ^itted with
contentments, those little Souls are in a manner as much considerable for the
taking off or carrying away to themselves the overflowing benignity of the
first Original of all things, as the Ox the Elephant or Whale. For it is
sense, nor bulk that makes things capable of enjoyments.

Wherefore it was fit that there should be a safe provision made for the
propagation and continuance of all the kinds of living Creatures, not only of
those that are good, but of those also that we rashly and inconsiderately call
evil. For they are at least good to enjoy themselves and to partake of the
bounty of their Creator. But if they grow noisome and troublesome to us, we
have both power and right to curb them: For there is no question but we are
more worth then they or any of the brute Creatures.

But to return to the present point in hand; there are also other manifest
footsteps of Providence which the Generation of living Creatures will discover
to us, as for Example, the manner of Procreation of Fishes and Birds. For there
being that notable difference in Animalls that some of them are Oviparous,
others Viviparous, that the (...) (as Philo comprehends them by that general
term) that Fishes and Birds should be Oviparous is a plain sign of Counsel
and Providence. For though it will be granted that their Species might continue
and subsist, though they had been Viviparous, yet it would have brought their
Individualls to very small numbers.

For as for Fishes, since grass and herbs are no fruit of the Sea, it was
necessary that they should feed one upon another, and therefore that they
should multiply in very great plenty, which they could not have done any thing
near to that fulness they now do, if they had been Viviparous as four-footed
beasts are: but being now Oviparous, and the lesser kinds of them so many at
first, and sending forth such infinite numbers of Spawn, their generations are
neither extinct nor scanted, but are as plentiful as any Creatures on the Land.

And the reason why Birds are Oviparous and lay Eggs but do not bring forth
their young alive, is because there might be moreplenty of them also, and that
neither the Birds of prey, the Serpent nor the Fowler should straiten their
generations too much. For if they had been Viviparous, the burden of their
womb, if they had brought forth any competent number at a time, had been so
big and heavy, that their wings would have failed them, and so every body would
have had the wit to catch the Old one. Or if they brought but one or two at a
time, they would have been troubled all the year long with feeding their young,
or bearing them in their womb; besides there had been a necessity of too
frequent. Venery, which had been very prejudicial to their dry carcases. It
was very reasonable therefore that Birds should propagate by laying of Eggs.

But this is not all the advantage we shall make of this consideration. I
demand further what is it that makes the Bird to prepare her Nest with that
Artifice, to sit upon her Eggs when she has laid them, and to distinguish
betwixt these and her useless Excrement? Did she learn it of her Mother
before her? or rather does she not do she knows not what, but yet what ought to
be done by the appointment of the most exquisite knowledge that is? Wherefore
something else has knowledge for her, which is the Maker and Contriver of all
things, the Omniscient and Omipotent God.

And though you may reply that the Hatching of their Eggs be necessary else
their generations would cease; yet I answer that all the Circumstances and
Curiosities of Brooding them are not necessary. For they might have ma^e shift
on the ground in the grass, and not made themselves such curious and safe
Nests in Bushes and Trees. Besides if all things were left to Chance, it is far
easier to conceive that there should have been no such things as Birds, then
that the blind Matter should ever have slumbled on such lucky instincts as they
that seem but barely necessary.

But you will object that the Ostrich lays Eggs and hatches them not, ^o that
these things are rather by Chance then Providence. But this rather argues a
more exquisite discerning Providence then is any Argument against it. For the
heat of the ground (like those Ovens in Egypt, Diodorus speaks of) whereon she
lays them, proves effectual for the production of her young. So Nature ties
not the Female to this tedious service where it is needless and useless; as
in Fishes also, who when they have spawned are discharged of any further
trouble: which is a most manifest discovery of a very curious and watchful Eye
of Providence which suffers nothing to be done ineptly and in vain.

I will only make one advantage more of this Speculation of the Birth of
Animalls, and then pass on to what remains. It is observed by those that are
more attentive watchers of the works of Nature, that the foetus is framed out
of some homogeneall liquour or moisture, in which there is no variety of parts
of Matter to be contrived into bones and flesh; but, as in an Egg for Example,
about the third day the Hen has sat on it, in that part where Nature begins
to set upon her work of efformation, all is turned into a Crystalline liquid
substance about her, as also several Insects are bred of little drops of dew:
So in all Generations besides it is supposed by them, the Nature does as it
were wipe clean the Tablebooke first, and then pourtray upon it what she
pleases. And if thus be her course to corrupt the subject Matter into as
perfect Privation of Form as she may, that is, to make it as homogeneall as she
can, but liquid and pliable to her Art and Skill; it is to me very highly
probable, if not necessary, that there should be something besides this fluid
Matter, that must change it, alter and guide it into that wise contrivance of
parts that afterward we find it. For how should the parts of this liquid
Matter ever come into this exquisite Fabric of themselves? And this may
convince any Atheist that there is a Substance besides corporeal Matter, which
he is as loath to admit of as that there is a God.

For there being nothing else in Nature but Substantia or Modus, this power of
contriving the liquid Matter into such order and shape as it is, being
incompetible to the liquid Matter it self, it must be the Modus of some other
substance latitant in the fluid Matter, and really distinguishable from it,
which it either the Soul or some seminall From or Archeus, as the Chemists call
it, and they are all alike indifferent to me at this time. I aiming here only
at a Substance besides the Matter, that thence the Atheist may be the more
easily brought off to the acknowledgment of the existence of a God.

Nor can the force of this Argument be eluded by saying the Matter is touched
and infected by the life of the Female whiles she bore the Egg, or that her
Phansy gets down into her womb.

For what life or Phansy has the Earth, which as they say gendred at first all
Animalls, some still? and what similitude is there betwixt a Be and an Ox, or
a Waspe and an Horse, the those Insects should arise out of the putrifide
bodies of these Creatures? It is but some rude and general congruity of vital
preparation that sets this Archeus on work rather then another. As mere Choler
engages the Phansy to dream of fiering of Gunns, and fighting of Armies:
Sanguine figures the imagintion into the representation of fair Women, and
beautiful Children: Phlegm transforms her into Water and Fishes; and the
shadowy Melancholy intangles her in colluctation with old Hagges and
Hobgoblins, and frights her with dead men's faces in the dark. But I have dwelt
on this subject longer then I intended.

CHAP. X.
The Frame or Fabric of the Bodies of Animalls plainly argue that there is a
God.
I Come now to the last consideration of Animalls, the outward Shape and
Fabric of their Bodies, which when I have showed you that they might have been
otherwise, and yet are made according to the most exquisite pitch of Reason
that the wit of Man can conceive of, it will naturally ^ollow that they were
really made by Wisdom and Providence, and consequently that there is a God.
And I dem^nd first in general concerning all those Creatures that have Eyes
and Ears, whether they might not have had only one Eye and one Ear a piece;
and to make the supposition more tolerable, had the Eye on one side the head,
and the Ear on the other, or the Ear on the Crown of the head, the Eye in the
Forehead for they might have lived and subsisted though they had been no better
provided for then thus. But it is evident that their having two Eyes and two
Ears, so placed as they are, is more safe, more sightly, and more useful.
Therefore that being made so constantly choice of, which our own Reason deemeth
best, we are to infer that that choice proceeded from Reason and Counsel.

Again I desire to know why there be no three-footed Beasts, (when I speak
thus, I do not mean Monsters, but a constant Species of kind of Animalls) for
such a Creature as that would make a limping shift to live as well as they that
have four. Or why have not some beasts more then foure-feet, suppose six and
the two middlemost shorter then the rest, hanging like the two legs of a Man
a horseback by the horse sides? For it is no harder a thing for Nature to make
such frames of Bodies then others that are more elegant and useful. But the
works of Nature being neither useless nor inept, she must either be wise her
self, or be guided by some higher Principle of Knowledge: As that Man that does
nothing foolishly all the days of his life, is either wise himself, or
consults with them that are so.

And then again for the armature of Beasts, who taught them the use of their
weapons? The Lion will not kick with his Feet, but he will strike such a stroke
with his Tail, that he will break the back of his Encounterer with it. The
Horse will not use his Tail unless against the busy flies, but kicks with his
Feet with that force that he lays his Enemy on the ground. The Bull and Ram
know the use of their Horns as well as the Horse of his Hoofes. So the Be and
Serpent know their Stings, and the Bear the use of his Paw. Which things they
know merely by natural instinct, as the Male knows the use of the Female. For
they gather not this skill by observation and experience, but the frame of
their nature carries them to it, as it is manifest in young Lambs that will
butt before they have horns. Therefore it is some higher Providence that has
made them of this nature they are. And this is evident also in Birds that will
flutter with their wings, when there is but a little Down upon them, and they
are as yet utterly unusefull for flying.

And now I have fallen upon the mention of this kind of Creature, let me make
my advantage of that general structure observable in them. The form of their
Heads being narrow and sharp, that they may the better cut the Air in their
swift flight, and the spreading of their Tails parallel to the Horizon for
the better bearing up their Body; for they might have been perpendicular as the
Tails of Fishes in the water. Nor is it any thing that the Owl has so broad a
face, for her flight was not to be so swift nor so frequent.

And as for Fishes and the bladder of wind found in their Bodies, who can say
it is conveyed thither by chance, but is contrived for their more easy
swimming, as also the manner of their finnes, which consist of a number of
gristly bones long and slender like pinnes and needles, and a kind of a skin
betwixt, which is for the more exactness and makes them thin and flat like
Oars. Which perfect artifice and accuracy might have been omitted and yet they
have made a shift to move up and down in the water.

But I have fallen upon a subject that is infinite and inexhaustible, therefore
that I be not too tedious I will confine my self to some few observations in
ordinary Beasts and Birds (that which is most known and obvious being most of
all to our purpose,) and then I shall come to the contemplation of Man.

And indeed what is more obvious and ordinary then a Mole, and yet what more
palpable Argument of Providence then she? The members of her body are so
exactly fitted to her nature and manner of life: For her dwelling being under
ground where nothing is to be seen, Nature has so obscurely fitted her with
Eyes, that Naturalists can scarce agree whither she have any sight at all or
no. Bu^ for amends, what she is capable of for her defense and warning of
danger, she has very eminently conferred upon her: for she is exceeding quick
of hearing. And then her short Tail and short Legs, but broad Fore-feet armed
with sharp Claws, we see by the event to what purpose they are, she so
swiftly working her self under ground and making her way so fast in the Earth,
as they that behold it cannot but admire it. Her Legs therefore are short that
she need dig no more then will serve the merethicknesse of her Body. And her
Fore-feet are broad, that she may scoup away much Earth at a time. And little
or no Tail she has, because she courses it not on the ground like the Rat or
Mouse of whose kindred she is, but lives under the Earth and is fain to dig her
self a dwelling there: And she making her way through so thick an Element,
which will not yield easily as the Air or the Water, it had been dangerous to
have drawn so long a train behind her: for her Enemy might fall upon her Rear
and fetch her out before she had completed or had got full possession of her
works.

Cardan is so much taken with this contemplation, that though I find him often
staggering, yet here he does very fully and finnely profess that the
contrivance of all things is from Wisdom and Counsel: his words are so
generous and significant that I hold them worth the transcribing. Palam est
igitur, Naturam in cunctis sollicitam mirum in modum fuisse, nec ^biter sed ex
sententia omnia praevidisse, hominesque quibus hoc beneficium Deus largitus
est, ut Causam rerum primam inveniant, participes esse illius prim^ Naturae,
neque alterius esse generis Naturam quae haec constituit, ab illorum mente, qui
causam eorum cur ita facta sint plene assequi potuerunt. Thus forcibly has the
due contemplation of Nature carried him beyond Nature and himself, and made him
write like a Man raped into a divine Exstasy.

But there are as manifest footsteps of divine Providence in other Creatures
as in the Mole. As for Example; the Hare, whose temper and frame of body are
plainly fitted on purpose for her Condition.

For why is she made so full of Fear and Vigilance ever re^ring up and
listening whiles she is feeding? and why is she so exceeding swift of foot, and
has her Eyes so prominent, and placed so that she can see better behind her
then before her? but that her flight is her only safety, and it was needful
for her perpetually to eye her pursuing enemy, against whom she durst never
stand at the Bay, having nothing but her long soft limber Ears to defend her.
Wherefore he that made the Hare made the Dog also, and guarded her with these
Properties from her eager foe, that she might not be too easy a booty for him,
and so never be able to save her self, or afford the Spectatour any
considerable Pastime. And that the Hare might not always get away from the
Gray hound, see how exquisitely his shape is fitted for the Course: For the
narrowness and slenderness of his parts are made for speed; and that seeming
impertinent long Appendix of his body, his Tail, is made for more nimble
turning.

There are other Animalls also whose particular Fabric of Body does manifestly
appear the Effect of Providence and Counsel, though Naturallists cannot agree
whether it be in the behalf of the Beast thus framed or of Man. And such is
that Creature which though it be Exotic yet is ordinarily known by the name of
a Camel: For why are those bunches on his back, but that they may be instead
of a ^ack-saddle to receive the burden? And why has he four knees and all his
Legs bending inwards, like the fore-feet of other beasts, and a Protuber^anoy
under his Breast to lean on, but that being a tall Creature he might with ease
kneel down and so might the more gainly be laden?

But Cardan will by no means have this the design of Nature, but that this
frame of the Camell's body is thus made for his own convenience: For he being a
Creature that lives and seeks his food in waste and dry deserts, those Bunches
he would have Receptacles of redundant Moisture, from whence the rest of his
body is to be supplied in a hard and tedious time of drought, and that his
legs being very long, he ought to have knees behind and a knob beneath, to
rest his weary limbs in the wilderness, by sitting or kneeling in that
posture he does, for he could not so conveniently lie along as the Horse or
Ass or other Creatures. But I should not determine this to either alone, but
take in both Causes, and acknowledge therein a richer design of Providence,
that by this Frame and Artifice has gratifide both the Camel and his Master.

CHAP. XI.
The particular Frames of the Bodies of Fowls or Birds palpable signs of
Divine Providence.
WE pass on now to the consideration of Fowls or Birds: where omitting the
more general Properties of having two Ventricles, and picking up stones to
conveigh them into their second Ventricle, the Gizzerne, (which provision and
instinct is a supply for the want of teeth) as also their having no Paps as
Beasts have, their young ones being nourished so long in the Shell, that they
are presently fit to be fed by the mouths of the old ones (which Observations
plainly signify that Nature does nothing ineptly and foolishly, and that
therefore there is a Providence) I s^all content my self in taking notice only
of some few kinds of this Creature that familiarly come into our sight, such as
the Cock, the Duck, the Swan and the like. I demand therefore concerning the
Cock, why he has Spurs at all, or having them how they come to be so
fittingly placed. For he might have had none* or so misplaced that they had
been utterly useless, and so his courage and pleasure in fighting had been to
no purpose. Nor are his Comb and his Wattles in vain, for they are an
Ornament becoming his Martial Spirit, yea an Armature too, for the t^gging of
those often excuses the more useful parts of his head from harm. Thus fittingly
does Nature gratify all Creatures with accommodations suitable to their temper,
and nothing is in vain. Nor are we to cavil at the red pugger'd attire of the
Turkey, and the long Excrescency that hangs down over his Bill, when he swells
with pride and anger; for it may be a Receptacle for his heated blood, that has
such free recourse to his head, or he may please himself in it as the rude
Indians, whose Jewels hang dangling at their Noses. And if the bird be
pleasur'd we are not to be displeased, being always mindful that Creatures
are made to enjoy themselves, as well as to serve us, and it is a gross piece
of Ignorance and Rusticity to think otherwise.

Now for Swannes and Ducks and such like Birds of the Water, it is obvious to
take notice how well they are fitted for that manner of life. For those that
swim their Feet are framed for it like a pair of Oars, their Claws being
connected with a pretty broad Membrane, and their Necks are long that they may
dive deep enough into the water. As also the Neck of the Herne and such like
Fowl who live of Fishes and are fain to frequent their Element, who walk on
long stilts also like the people that dwell in the Marshes; but their Claws
have no such Membranes, for they had been but a hindrance to those kind of
birds that only wade in the water and do not swim. It is also observable how
Nature has fitted other Birds of Prey, who spy their booty from aloft in the
Air, and see best at that distance, scarce see at all near at hand. So they
are both the Archer and shaft, taking aim afar off, and then shooting
themselves directly upon the desired Mark, they seize upon the prey having hit
it. The works of Providence are infinite, I will close all with the description
of that strange bird of Paradise, for the strangeness has made it notorious.

There is a Bird that falls down out of the Air dead, and is found sometimes
in the Molucco Islands* that has no Feet at all no more then an ordinary Fish.
The bigness of her Body and Bill, as likewise the form of them, is much what
as a Swallows; but the spreading out of her Wings and Tail has no less
compass then an Eagles. She lives and breeds in the Air, comes not near the
Earth but for her burial, for the largeness and lightness of her Wings and
Tail sustain her without lassitude. And the laying of her Eggs and brooding
of her young is upon the back of the Male which is made hollow, as also the
breast of the Female for the more easy incubation. Whether she live merely of
the dew of Heaven or of Flies and such like Insects, I leave to others to
dispute; but Cardan professes he saw the Bird no less then thrice, and
describes it accordingly. Nor does Scaliger cavil with any thing but the
bigness of the Wings and littleness of the Body, which he undertakes to
correct from one of his own which was sent him by Orvesanus from Java. Now that
such contrivances as these should be without divine Providence, is as
improbable to me as that the Copper Ring with the Greek inscription upon it
found about the Neck of an overgrown Pike, should be the effect of unknowing
Nature, not the Artifice and Skill of Man.

CHAP. XII.
Unavoidable Arguments for divine Providence taken from the accurate Structure
of Man's Body, from the Passions of his Mind, and fitness of the whole Man to
be an Inhabiter of the Universe.
BUt we needed not to have rambled so far out into the works of Nature, to
seek out Arguments to prove a God, we being so plentifully furnished with that,
at home which we took the pains to seek for abroad. For there can be no more
ample testimony of a God and a Providence then the frame and structure of our
own Bodies. The admirable Artifice whereof Galen, though a mere Naturallist,
was so taken with, that he could not but adjudge the honor of a hymn to the
wise Creator of it. The contrivance of the whole and every particular is so
evident an argument of exquisite skill in the Maker, that if I should pursue
all that suites to my purpose, it would amount to an entire Volume. I shall
therefore only hint at some few things, leaving the rest to be supplied by
Anatomists. And I think there is no man that has any skill in that Art, but
will confess the more diligently and accurately the frame of our Body is
examined, it is found the more exquisitely conformable to our own Reason,
Judgment, and Desire. So that supposing the same matter that our bodies are
made of, if it had been in our own power to have made our selves, we should
have framed our selves no otherwise then we are. To instance in some
particular. As in our Eyes, the number, the situation, the fabric of them is
such that we can excogitate nothing to be added thereto, or to be altered
either for their beauty, safety or usefulness. But as for their Beauty I will
leave it rather to the delicate wit and Pen of Poets and amorous persons, then
venture upon so tender and nice a subject with my severer style. I will only
note how sa^^ly they are guarded, and fitly framed out for that use they are
intended. The Brow and the Nose saves them from harder strokes: but such a
curious part as the Eye being necessarily liable to mischief from smaller
matters, the sweat of the Forehead is fenced off by those two wreaths of hair
which we call the Eyebrows; and the Eyelids are fortified with little stiff
bristles as with Palisadoes, against the assault of Flies and Gnats, and such
like bold Animalcula. Besides the upper-lid presently claps down and is as good
a fence, as a Portcullis against the importunity of the Enemy: Which is done
also every night, whether there be any present assault or no, as if Nature kept
garrison in this Acropolis of Man's body the Head and looked that such laws
should be duly observed, as were most for his safety.

And now for the Use of the Eye which is Sight, it is evident that this Organ
is so exquisitely framed for that purpose, that not the least curiosity can be
added. For first the Humor and Tunicles are purely Transparent, to let in
light and colors unfoul'd and unsophisticated by any inward tincture. And then
again the parts of the Eye are made Unequal, that there might be a direction of
many rays coming from one point of the Object unto one point answerable in the
bottom of the Eye; to which purpose the Crystalline Humor is of great Moment,
and without which the sight would be very obscure and weak. Thirdly the Tunica
Wea has a Musculous power, and can dilate and contract that round hole in it
which is called the Pupil of the Eye, for the better moderating the
transmission of light. Fourthly the inside of the Wea is black'd like the walls
of a Tennis-court, that the rays falling upon the Retina* may not, by being
rebounded thence upon the Wea, be returned from the Wea upon the Retina
again, for such a repercussion would make the sight more confused. Fifthly the
Tunica Arachnoides, which invellops the Crystalline Humor by virtue of its
Processus Ciliares can thrust forward or draw back that precious useful part
of the Eye, as the neernesse or distance of the Object shall require. Sixthly
and lastly the Tunica Retina is white, for the better and more true reception
of the species of things (as they ordinarily call them) as a white paper is
fittest to receive those Images into a dark room. If the wit of Man had been
to contrive this Organ for himself, what could he have possibly excogitated
more accurate? Therefore to think that mere Motion of the Matter, or any other
blind Cause could have hit so punctually (for Creatures might have subsisted
without this accurate provision) is to be either mad or sottish.

And the Eye is already so perfect, that I believe the Reason of Man would have
easily rested here, and admired at it is own contrivance: for he being able to
move his whole head upward and downward and on every side, might have unawares
thought himself sufficiently well provided for. But Nature has added Muscles
also to the Eyes, that no Perfection might be wanting; For we have often occasion
to move our Eyes, our Head being unmoved, as in reading and viewing more
particularly any Object set before us: and that this may be done with more ease
and accuracy, she has furnished that Organ with no less then six several
Muscles. And indeed this framing of Muscles not only in the Eye but in the
whole Body is admirable; For is it not a wonder that even all our flesh should
be so handsomely contrived into distinct pieces, whose Rise and Insertions
should be with such advantage that they do serve to move some part of the Body
or other; and that the parts of our Body are not moved only so conveniently as
will serve us to walk and subsist by, but that they are able to move every way
imaginable that will advantage us? For we can fling our Legs and Arms upwards
and downwards, backwards, forwards and round, as they that spin, or would
spread a Mol^hill with their feet. To say nothing of Respiration, the
constriction of the Diaphragme for the keeping down the Guts and so enlarging
the Thorax that the Lungs may have play, and the assistance of the inward
Intercostall Muscles in deep Suspirations, when we take more large gulps of
Air to cool our heart overcharged with Love or Sorrow. Nor of the curious
fabric of the Larynx so well fitted with muscles for the modulation of the
Voice, tunable Speech, and delicious Singing. You may add to these the notable
contrivance of the Heart, it is two Ventricles and it is many Valvulae, so framed
and situated as is most fit for the reception and transmission of the blood,
which comes about through the Heart, and is sent thence away warm to comfort
and cherish the rest of the Body: For which purpose also the Valvulae in the
Veins are made.

But I will rather insist upon such things as are easy and intelligible even to
Idiots, who if they can but tell the Joints of their Hands or know the use of
their Teeth, they may easily discover it was Counsel, not Chance, that created
them. For why have we three Joints in our Legs and Arms as also in our
Fingers, but that it was much better then having but two or four? And why are
our fore-Teeth sharp like cheesells to cut, but our inward-Teeth broad to
grind, but that this is more exquisite then having them all sharp or all broad,
or the fore-Teeth broad and the other sharp? But we might have made a hard
shift to have lived though in that worser condition. Again why are the Teeth so
luckily placed, or rather why are there not Teeth in other bones as well as in
the jaw-bones? for they might have been as capable as these. But the reason is,
Nothing is done foolishly nor in vain, that is, there is a divine Providence
that orders all things. Again to say nothing of the inward curiosity of the
Ear, why is that outward frame of it, but that it is certainly known, that it
is for the bettering of our Hearing?

I might add to these that Nature has made the hind-most parts of our body
which we sit upon most fleshy, is providing for our Ease and making us a
natural Cushion, as well as for instruments of Motion for our Thighs and
Legs. She has made the hinder-part of the Head more strong, as being
otherwise unfenced against falls and other casualties. She has made the
Backbone of several Vertebrae, as being more fit to bend, more tough and
less in danger of breaking then if they were all one entire bone without those
gristly Junctures. She has strengthened our Fingers and Toes with Nails, whereas
she might have sent out that substance at the end of the first or second joint,
which had not been so handsome ^or useful, nay rather somewhat troublesome and
hurtful. And lastly she has made all the Bones devoid of sense, because they
were to bear the weight of themselves and of the whole Body. And therefore if
they had had sense, our life had been painful continually and dolorous.

And what she has done for us, she has done proportionably in the contrivance
of all other Creatures; so that it is manifest that a divine Providence strikes
through all things.

And therefore things being contrived with such exquisite Curiosity as if the
most watchful wisdom imaginable did attend them, to say they are thus framed
without the assistance of some Principle that has Wisdom in it, and that they
come to pass from Chance or some other blind unknowing Original, is sullenly
and humorously to assert a thing, because we will assert it, and under pretense
of avoiding Superstition, to fall into that which is the only thing that makes
Superstition it self hateful or ridiculous, that is, a wilful and groundless
adhering to conceits without any support of Reason.

And now I have considered the fitness of the parts of Man's Body for the good
of the whole, let me but consider briefly the fitness of the Passions of his
Mind, whether proper, or common to him with the rest of Animalis, as also the
fitness of the whole Man as he is part of the Universe, and then I shall
conclude.

And it is manifest that Anger does so actuate the Spirits and heightens the
Courage of men and beasts that it makes them with more ease break through the
difficulties they encounter. Fear also is for the avoiding of danger, and Hope
is a pleasant praemeditation of enjoyment, as when a Dog expects till his
Master has done picking of the bone. But there is neither Hope, nor Fear, nor
Hate, nor any peculiar Passion or Instinct in Brutes that is in vain; why
should we then think that Nature should miscarry more in us then in any other
Creature, or should be so careful in the Fabric of our Body, and yet so
forgetful or unlucky in the framing of the faculties of our Souls; that that
Fear that is so peculiarly natural to us, viz. the fear of a Deity, should
be in vain, and that pleasant Hope and Heavenly Joys of the mind which man is
naturally capable of, with the earnest direction of his Spirit toward God,
should have no real Object in the world? And so Religious affection which
Nature has so plainly implanted in the Soul of Man should be to no use* but
either to make him ridiculous or miserable: Whenas we find no Passion or
Affection in Brutes either common or peculiar but what is for their good and
welfare.

For it is not for nothing that the Hare is so fearful of the Dog, and the
Sheep of the Wolf; and it there be either Fear or Enmity in some Creatures for
which we cannot easily discern any reason in respect of themselves, yet we may
well allow of it as reasonable in regard of us, and to be to good purpose. But
I think it is manifest that Sympathy and Antipathy, Love and Enmity,
Aversation, Fear, and the like, that they are notable whetters and quickners
of the Spirit of life in all Animalls, and that their being obnoxious to
dangers and encounters does more closely knit together the vital Powers, and
makes them more sensibly relish their present safety, and they are more pleased
with an Escape then if they had never met with any Danger. Their greedy
assaults also one upon another while there is hope of Victory highly gratifies
them both. And if one be conquered and slain, the Conqueror enjoyes a fresh
improvement of the pleasure of life, the Triumph over his Enemy. Which things
seem to me to be contrived even in the behalf of these Creatures themselves,
that their vital heat and moisture may not always only simber in one
sluggish tenor, but some times boil up higher and sees over, the fire of
life being more then ordinarily kindled upon some emergent occasion.

But it is without Controversy that these peculiar Passions of Animalls many of
them are useful to Men* (as that of the Lizards enmity against the Serpent)
all of them highly gratify his contemplative faculty, some seem on purpose
contrived to make his Worship merry; For what could Nature intend else in that
Antipathy betwixt the Ape and Snayle, that that Beast that seems so boldly to
claim kindred of Man from the resemblance of his outward shape, should have so
little Wit or Courage as to run away from a Snayl, and very ^ufully and
frightfully to look back, as being afraid she would follow him as Erasmus more
largely and pleasantly tells the whole story?

But that Nature should implant in Man such a strong Propension to Religion,
which is the Reverence of a Deity, there being neither God nor Angel nor
Spirit in the world, is such a Slurre committed by her as there can be in no
wise excogitated any Excuse. For if there were a higher Species of things to
laugh at us as we do a^ the Ape, it might seem more tolerable. But there can
be no End neither ludicrous nor serious of this Religious property in Man,
unless there be something of an hig^er Nature then himself in the world.
Wherefore Religion being convenient to no other Species of things besides Man,
it ought to be convenient at least for himself: But supposing there were no
God, there can be nothing worse for Man then Religion.

For whether we look at the External Effects thereof, such as are bloody
Massacres, the disturbance and subversion of Commonweals, Kingdoms and
Empires, most salvage Tortures of particular persons, the extirpating and
dispossessing of whole Nations, as it has happened in America, where the
remorselesse Spaniards in pretense of being educated in a better Religion then
the Americans, vilifyed the poor Natives so much, that they made nothing of
knocking them oth' head merely to feed their dogs with them, with many such
unheard of crueltyes. Or whether we consider the great affliction that that
severe Governess of the life of Man brings upon those Souls she seizes on* by
affrighting horrors of Conscience, by puzzeling and befooling them in the free
use of their Reason, and putting a bar to more large searches into the
pleasing knowledge of Nature, by anxious cares and disquieting fears
concerning their state in the life to come, by curbing them in their natural
and kindly enjoyments of the life present, and making bitter all the pleasures
and contentments of it, by some checks of Conscience and suspicions that they
do something now that they may rue eternally hereafter; Besides thosse
ineffable Agonies of mind that they undergo that are more generously Religious,
and contend after the participation of the divine Nature, they being willing,
though with unspeakeable pain, to be torn from themselves to become one with
that Universal Spirit that ought to have the guidance of all things, and by an
unsatiable desire after that just and decorous temper of mind (whereby all
Arrogance should utterly cease in us, and that which is due to God, that is,
all that we have or can do, should be lively and sensibly attributed to him,
and we fully and heartily acknowledge ourselves to be nothing, that is, be as
little elated, or no more relish the glory and praise of Men, then if we had
done nothing or were not at all in being) do plunge themselves into such damps
and deadness of Spirit, that to be buried quick were less torture by far,
then such dark privations of all the joys of life, then such sad and
heart-sinking Mortifications: I say, whether we consider these inward pangs of
the Soul, or the external outrages caused by Religion (and Religious pretense
will animate men to the committing such violences, as bare Reason and the
single passions of the Mind unback'd with the fury of Superstition will never
venture upon) it is manifest that if there were no God, no Spirit, no Life to
come, it were far better that there were no such Religious propensions in
Mankind, as we see universally there is.

For the fear of the Civil Magistrate, the convenience of mutual aid and
support, and the natural scourge and plague of diseases would contain men in
such bounds of Justice, Humanity and Temperance, as would make them more
clearly and undisturbedly happy, then they are now capable of being, from any
advantage Religion does to either Public State or private person, supposing
there were no God.

Wherefore this Religious affection which Nature has implanted, and as strongly
rooted in Man as the fear of death or the love of women, would be the most
enormous slip or bungle she could commit, so that she would so shamefully fail
in the last Act, in this contrivance of the nature of Man that instead of a
Plaudite she would deserve to be hissed off the Stage.

But she having done all things else so wisely, let us rather suspect our own
ignorance then reproach her, and expect that which is allowed in well approved
Comedies, (...), for nothing can unlose this knot but a Deity. And then we
acknowledging Man to dwell as it were in the borders of the spiritual and
material world (for he is utriusque mundi nexus, as Scaliger truly calls him)
we shall not wonder that there is such tugging and pulling this way and that
way, upward and downward, and such broken disorder of things; those that dwell
in the confines of two kingdoms, being most subject to disquiet and confusion.
And hitherto of the Passions of the mind of Man, as well those that tie him
down to the Body, as those that lift him up toward God. Now briefly of the
whole Man as he is part of the Universe.

It is true if we had not been here in the world, we could not then have missed
our selves; but now we find our selves in being and able to examine the
reasonableness of things, we cannot but conclude that our Creation was an Act
of very exquisite Reason and Counsel. For there being so many notable Objects
in the world, to entertain such faculties as Reason and inquisitive
Admiration* there ought to be such a member of this visible Creation as Man,
that those things might not be in vain: And if Man were out of the world, who
were then left to view the face of Heaven, to wonder at the transcursion of
Comets, to calculate Tables for the Motions of the Planets and Fixed Stars,
and to take their Heights and Distances with Mathematical Instruments, to
invent convenient Cycles for the computation of time, and consider the several
forms of Years, to take notice of the Directions, Stations and Repedations of
those Erratick lights* and from thence most convincingly to inform himself of
that pleasant and true Paradox of the Annual Motion of the Earth, to view the
asperityes of the Moon through a Di^ptrick-glasse, and venture at the
Proportion of her Hills by their shadows, to behold the beauty of the
Rainbow, the Halo* Parelii and other Meteors, to search out the causes of the
Flux and Reflux of the Sea, and the hidden virtue of the Magnet, to inquire
into the usefullnesse of Plants, and to observe the variety of the wisdom of
the first Cause in framing their bodies, and giving sundry observable instincts
to Fishes* Birds and Beasts? And lastly as there are particular Priests amongst
Men, so the whole Species of Mankind being endued with Reason and a power of
finding out God, there is yet one singular end more discoverable of his
Creation, viz. that he may be a Priest in this magnificent Temple of the
Universe, and send up prayers and praises to the great Creator of all things
in behalf of the rest of the Creatures. Thus we see all filled up and fitted
without any defect or useless superfluity.

Wherefore the whole Creation in general and every part thereof being so
ordered as if the most exquisite Reason and Knowledge had contrived them, it is
as natural to conclude that all this is the work of a wise God, as at the
first sight to acknowledge that those inscribed Vrnes and Coins dug out of
the Earth were not the Products of unknowing Nature, but the Artifice of Man.

CHAP. I.
That, good men not always faring best in this world, the great examples of
Divine Vengeance upon wicked and blasphemous Persons are not so convincing to
the obstinate Atheist. The irreligious Jeares and Sacrileges of Dionysius of
Syracuse. That there have been true Miracles in the world as well as false, and
what are the best and safest ways to distinguish them that we may not be
imposed upon by History.
HItherto I have insisted upon such Arguments for the proving of the Existence
of God, as were taken from the ordinary and known Phenomenon of Nature; For
such is the History of Plants, Animalls and Man. I shall come now to such
effects discovered in the World as are not deemed natural, but extraordinary
and miraculous. I do not mean unexpected discoveries of Murders, a conspicuous
Vengeance upon proud and blasphemous Persons, such as Nicanor, Antiochus, Herod
and the like, of which all Histories, as well Sacred as Profane are very full,
and all which tend to the impressing of this divine Precept, in the Poet, upon
the minds of Men, Discite Justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos.

For though these Examples cannot but move indifferent men to an acknowledgment
of divine Providence, and a superior Power above and different from the
Matter; yet I having now to do with the obstinate and refractory Atheist, who,
because himself a known contemner of the Deity he finds to be safe and well at
ease, will shuffle all these things off, by asking such a Question as he did,
to whom the Priest of Neptune showed the many D^naria hung up in his Temple by
his Votaries saved from shipwreck, and therefore vaunted much of the Power of
that God of the Sea; But what is become of all those, says he, that
notwithstanding their vows have been lost? So I say, the Atheist to evade the
force of this Argument will whisper within himself; But how many proud
blasphemous Atheistical men like my self have escaped, and those that have
been accounted good have dyed untimely deaths?

Such as Aesop and Socrates, the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, with sundry
other wise and good men in all Ages and Places, who yet being not so well aware
of the ill condition and restinesse of this wicked World, of which they have
truly professed themselves no Citizens, but Strangers, have suffered the
greatest mischiefs that can happen to humane Nature, by their innocent meaning
and intermedling in Aliena Republica; It having usually been more safe,
craftily and cautiously to undermine the honor of God, then plainly and
honestly to seek the good and welfare of Men.

Nay outrageous affronts done on purpose to Religion, will the Atheist further
reply, have not only past applauded by the World, but unpunished by divine
Justice: As is notorious in that Sacrilegious Wit, Dionysius of Syracuse, who
spoiling Jupiter Olympius of his costly Robe very stiff and ponderous with
Gold, added this Apologetical jear to his Sacrilege, that this golden Vestment
was too heavy for the Summer, and too cold for the Winter, but one of wool
would fit both Seasons.

So at Epidaurus he commanded the golden Beard of Aesculapius to be cut off and
carried away, alleging that it was very unfit that the Son should wear a Beard
when as his Father Apollo wore none.

That also was not inferior to any of his Sacrilegious jests, when taking away
the golden Cups and Crowns held forth by the hands of the Images of the Gods,
he excused himself, saying, that he received but what they of their own accord
gave him; adding that it were a gross piece of foolishness, when as we pray to
the Gods for all good things, not to take them when they so freely offer them
with their own hands.

These and other such like irreligious Pranks did this Dionysius play, who
notwithstanding fared no worse then the most demure and innocent, dying no
other death then what usually other Mortals do: as if in those Ages there had
been as great a lack of Wit, as there was here in England once of Latin, and
that he escaped a more severe Sentence by the benefit of his Clergy. But others
think that he was paid home and punished in his Son that succeeded him. But
that, will the Atheist reply, is but to whip the absent, as Aristotle wittily
said to him that told him that such an one did unmercifully traduce him behind
his back.

Wherefore I hold it more convenient to omit such Arguments as may entangle us
in such endless Altercations, and to bring only those that cannot be resolved
into any Natural causes, or be phansyed to come by Chance, but are so
Miraculous, that they do imply the presence of some free subtle understanding
essence distinct from the brute Matter, and ordinary power of Nature.

And these Miraculous effects, as there is nothing more cogent if they could be
believed; so there is nothing more hard to the Atheist to believe then they
are. For Religionists having for pious purposes, as they pretend, forged so
many false miracles to gull and spoil the credulous people, they have thereby
with the Atheist taken away all belief of those which are true. And the
childish and superstitious fear of Spirits in Melancholic persons who cre^te
strange Monsters to themselves and terrible Apparitions in the dark, has also
helped them with a further evasion, to impute all Specter and strange
Apparitions to mere Melancholy and disturbed Phansy. But that there should be
so universal a fame, and fear of that, which never was, nor is, nor can be
ever in the world, is to me the greatest Miracle of all.

For if there had not been at some time or other true Miracles (as indeed there
ought to be, if the faculties of Man, who so easily listens to and allows of
such things, be not in vain) it is very improbable that Priests and cunning
Deluders of the people would have ever been able so easily to impose upon them
by their false. As the Alchymist would never go about to sophisticate Metalls,
and then put them off for true Gold and Silver, but that it is acknowledged
that there is such a thing as true Gold and Silver in the world. In like manner
therefore as there is an endeavor of deluding the people with false Miracles,
so it is a sign there have been and may be those that are true.

But you will say there is a Touchstone whereby we may d^scerne the truth of
Metalls, but that there is nothing whereby we may discover the truth of
Miracles recorded every where in History. But I answer there is; and it is this.

First if what is recorded was avouched by such persons who had no end nor
interest in avouching such things.

Secondly if there were many Eyewitnesses of the same Matter.

Thirdly and lastly if these things which are so strange and miraculous leave
any sensible effect behind them.

Though I will not acknowledge that all those stories are ^alse that want these
conditions, yet I dare affirm that it is mere humor and sullenness in a man
to reject the (...) of those that have them; For it is to believe nothing but
what he sees himself: From whence it will follow that he is to read nothing of
History, for there is neither pleasu^e nor any usefullnesse of it, if it
deserve no belief.

CHAP. II.
The Moving of a Sieve by a Charm. Coskinomancy. A Magical cure of an Horse.
The Charming of Serpents. A strange Example of one Death-strucken as he walked
the Streets. A story of a sudden wind that had like to have thrown down the
Gallows at the hanging of two Witches.
ANd now that I have premised thus much I will b^iefly recite some of few those
many miraculous passages we meet with in Writers, beginning first with the bare
and simple effects of Spirits, as I will aforehand adventure to pronounce them,
and then afterward we shall come to the Apparitions of Spirits themselves.

And of those bare effects we will not care to name what may seem slightest
first. Bodinus relates how himself and several others at Paris saw a young man
with a Charm in French, move a Sieve up and down. And that ordinary way of
Divination which they call Coskinomancy or finding who stole or spoiled this or
that thing, by the Sieve and Sheares, Pictorius Vigillanus professes he made
use of thrice, and it was with success.

A friend of mine told me this story concerning Charms, that himself had an
Horse, which if he had stood sound had been of a good value. His servants
carried him to several Farriers but none of them had the skill to cure him. At
last unknown to their Master, they led him to a Farrier, that had, it should
seem, some tricks more then ordinary, and dealt in Charms, or Spells, and such
like Ceremoni^s: in virtue of these he made the Horse sound.

The Owner of him after he had observed how well his Horse was, asked his
servants, how they got him cured, Whence understanding the whole matter, and
observing also that there was an S. branded on his buttock, which he conceited
stood for Satan, chid his servants very roughly, as having done that which was
unwarrantable and impious. Upon this profession of his dislike of the fact, the
Horse forthwith ^ell as ill as ever he was, in so much that for his
unserviceablenes he was feign to be turned up loose in the pasture. But a
kinsman of the Owners coming to his house and after chanceing to see the Horse
in the Grounds took the adva^tage of a low price for so fair a gelding and
bought him. The Horse had no sooner changed his Master but presently changed
his plight of body also and became as sound as ever.

Charming also of Serpents is above the power of Nature. And Wierus tells us
this story of a Charmer at Saltzburg, that when in the sight of the people he
had charmed all the Serpents into a ditch and killed them, at last there came
one huge one far bigger then the rest, that leapt upon him, and winded about
his wast like a girdle, and pulled him into the ditch, and so killed the
Charmer himself in the conclusion.

That also I will adventure to refer to the effects of Spirits which I heard
lately from one Mrs. Dark of Westminster concerning her own Husband; who being
in the flower of his Age, well in health and very cheerful, going out of his
house in the morning with an intent to return to dinner, was, as he walked the
streets, sensibly struck upon the thigh by an invisible hand, for he could see
no man near him to strike him. He returned home indeed about dinnertime, but
could eat nothing, only he complained of the sad Accident that befell him, and
grew forthwith so mortally sick, that he dyed within three days. After he was
dead there was found upon the place where he was struck, the perfect figure of
a man's hand, the four fingers palm and thumb black and sunk into the flesh,
as if one should clap his hand upon a lump of dow.

And hitherto there is nothing related which will not abide the exactest trial
and be cleared from all suspicion of either Fraud or Melancholy. But I shall
propound things more strange, and yet as free from that suspicion as the former.

And to say nothing of Winds sold to Merchants by Laplanders, and the danger
of losing the Third knot (which was very frequent as Olaus affirms before
those parts of the world were converted to Christianity) ^ shall content my
self for the present with a true story Which I heard from an eyewitness
concerning these preternatural Winds. At Cambridge in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth there was two Witches to be executed, the Mother and Daughter. The
Mother when she was called upon to repent and forsake the Devil, she said,
there was no reason for that, for he had been faithful to her these threescore
years, and she would be so to him so long as she lived; and thus she died in
this obstinacy. But she hanging thus upon the Gallows, her Daughter being of a
contrary mind renounced the Devil, was very earnest in prayer and penitence;
which by the effect, the people conceived the Devil to take very heinously. For
there came such a sudden blast of Wind (when as all was calm before) that it
drove the Mothers body against the ladder so violently, that it had like to
have overturned it, and shook the Gallows with such force, that they were feign
to hold the posts for fear of all being fung down to the ground.

CHAP. III.
That Winds and Tempests are raised upon mere Ceremonies or forms of words
proved by sundry Examples. Margaret Warine discharged upon an Oak at a
Thunderclap. Amantius and Rotarius cast headlong out of a Cloud upon a house
top. The VVitch of Constance seen by the Shepherds to ride through the Air.
VVIerus that industrious Advocate of Witches recites several Ceremonies that
they use for the raising of Tempests, and does acknowledge that Tempests do
follow the performance of those Ceremonies, but that they had come to pass
nevertheless without them: which the Devil foreseeing, excites the deluded
Women to use those Magic Rites, that they may be the better persuaded of his
power. But whether there be any causall connection betwixt those Ceremonies and
the ensuing Tempests I will not curiously decide. But that the connection of
them is supernatural is plain at first sight. For what is casting of
Flint-Stones behind their backs toward the West, or flinging a little Sand in
the Air, or striking a River with a Broom, and so sprinkling the Wet of it
toward Heaven, the stirring of Urine or Water with their finger in a Hole in
the ground, or boiling of Hogs Bristles in a Pot? What are these fooleries
available of themselves to gather Clouds and cover the Air with Darkness, and
then to make the g^ound smoke with peales of Hail and Rain, and to make the
Air terrible with frequent Lightnings and Thunder? Certainly nothing at all.
Therefore the ensuing of these Tempests after such like Ceremonies must be
either from the prevision of the Devil (as Wierus would have it) who set the
Witches on work, or else from the power of the Devil which he has in his
Kingdom of the Air. And it seems strange to me that Wierus should doubt this
power, when he gives him a greater; For what is the transporting of vapors or
driving them together, to the carrying of Men and Cattle in the Air, (of which
he is a confident Asserter) unless it require larger Devils or greater
numbers? And that there are sufficient numbers of such Spirits will seem to any
body as credible, as that there are any at all. But now for the truth of this,
that certain Words or Ceremonies do seem at least to cause an alteration in the
Air and to raise Tempests; Remigius writes that he had it witnessed to him by
the free confession of near two hundred men that he examined: Where he adds a
story or two in which there being neither Fraud, nor Melancholy to be
suspected, I think them worth the mentioning. The one is of a Witch, who to
satisfy the curiosity of them that had power to punish her, was set free that
she might give a proof of that power she professed she had to rai^e Tempests.
She therefor being let go* presently betakes her self to a place thick set
with Trees, scrapes a Hole with her hands fills it with Urine, and stirs it
about so long, that she caused at last a thick dark Cloud charged with Thunder
and Lightning to the terror and affrightment of the beholders. But she bade
them be of good courage* for she would command the^ Cloud to discharge upon
what place they would appoint her, which she made good in the sight of the
Spectatours.

The other Story is of a young Girl, who to pleasure her Father complaining of
a drought, by the guidance and help of that ill Master her Mother had devoted
and consecrated her unto, raised a Cloud, and watered her Father's ground only,
all the rest continuing dry as before.

Let us add to these the Story of Cuinus and Margaret Warine. While this Cuinus
was busy at his Hay-making, there arose suddenly great Thunder and Lightning,
which made him run homeward, and forsake his work, for he saw six Oaks hard
by him overturned from the very Roots, and a seventh also shattered and torn a
pieces: he was fain to lose his hat and leave his fork or rake for have; which
was not so fast but another crack overtakes him and rattles about his Ears;
upon which Thunderclap, he presently espied this Margaret Warm a reputed
Witch upon the top of an Oak, whom he began to chide. She desired his secrecy,
and she would promise that never any injury or harm should come to him from her
at any time.

This Cuinus deposed upon Oath before the Magistrate, and Margaret Warine
acknowledged the truth of it, without any force done unto her, several times
before her death, and at her death. [See Remigius Daemonolatr. lib. 1. cap.
29.] Remigius conceives she was discharged upon the top of the Oak at that
last Thunder clap and there hung amongst the boughs; which he is induced to
believe from two Stories he tells afterward. The one is of a Tempest of
Thunder and Lightning that the Herdsmen tending their Cattle on the brow of
the Hill Alman in the field of Guicuria were f^ighted with, who running into
the Woods for shelter suddenly saw two country men on the top of the Trees,
which were next them, so durty, and in such a pickle, and so out of breath, as
if they had been dragged up and down through thorns and miry places; but when
they had well eyed them, they were gone in a moment out of their sight they
knew not how nor whither. These Herdsmen talked of the business, but the
certainty of it came out not long after. For the free confessions of those two
men they then saw, being so exactly agreeing with what the Herdsmen had
related, made the whole matter clear and undoubted.

The other Story is of the same Persons, known afterward by their names, viz.
Amantius and his partner Rotarius, who having coursed it aloft again in the
Air, and being cast headlong out of a cloud upon an house, the later of them
being but a Novice and unexperienced in those supernatural exploites, was much
astonished and afraid at the strangeness of the matter, but Amantius being
used to those feats from his youth, his Parents having devoted him from his
childhood to the Devil, made but a sport of it, and laughing at his friend
called him Fool for his fear, and bad him be of good courage; for their
Master, in whose power they were, would safely carry them through greater
dangers than those. And no sooner had he said these words, but a Whirlwinde
took them, and set them both safe upon the ground: but the house they were
carried from, so shook, as if it would have been overturned from the very
foundations. This, both those men examined apart, confessed in the same words,
not varying their Story at all; whose confessions exactly agreed in all
circumstances with what was observed by the country people concerning the time
and the manner of the Tempest and shaking of the House.

I will only add one Story more of this nature, and that is of a Witch of
Constance, who being vexed that all her neighbors in the Village where she
lived were invited to the wedding, and so were drinking and dancing and making
merry, and she solitary and neglected, got the Devil to transport her through
the Air, in the midst of day, to a Hill hard by the Village: where she
digging a hole and putting Urine into it, raised a great Tempest of Hail, and
directed it so, that it fell only upon the Village, and pelted them that were
dancing with that violence, that they were forced to leave off their sport.
When she had done her exploite she returned to the Village, and being spied was
suspected to have raised the Tempest, which the Shepherds in the field that
saw her riding in the Air knew well before, who bringing in their witness
against her, she confessed the fact. I might be infinite in such narrations,
but I will moderate my self.

CHAP. IV.
Supernatural Effects observed in them that are Bewitched and Possessed. The
famous Story of Magdalena Crucia.
WE will now pass to those supernatural effects which are observed in them
that are bewitched or possessed. And such are; Foretelling things to come,
Telling what such and such persons speak or do as exactly as if they were by
them, when the party possessed is at one end of the town and sitting in a house
within doors, and those parties that act and confer together are without at
the other end of the town; to be able to see some and not others; to play at
Cards with one certain person and not to discern any body else at the table
besides him* to act and talk and go up and down and tell what will become of
things, and what happens in those fitts of possession, and then so soon as the
possessed or bewitched party is out of them, to remember nothing at all, but to
enquire concerning the welfare of those whose faces they seemed to look upon
but just before, when they were in their fitts. All which can be no symptoms
nor signs of any thing else but of the Devil got into the body of a man, and
holding all the operations of his Soul, and then acting and speaking and
sporting as he pleases, in the miserable Tenement he has crowded himself into,
making use of the Organs of the body at his own pleasure for the performing of
^uch pranks and fears as are far above the capacity* st^ength or agility of
the party thus bewitched or possessed.

All these things are fully made good by long and tedious observations recorded
in the discovery of the Witches of Warbois in Huntingtonshire Anno 1594. The
memory whereof is still kept fresh by an Anniversary Sermon preached at
Huntington by some of the Fellows of Queens College in Cambridge.

There is al^o lately come forth a Narration how one Mrs. Muschamp's children
were handled in Cumberland* which is very like this of Mr. Throckmorton's
children of Warbois.

That which is generally observed in them both is this, that in their fitts
they are as if they had no Soul at all in their Bodies, and that whatsoever
operations of sense, reason or motion there seems to be in them, it is not any
thing at all to them, but is wholly that stranger's, that has got into them.
For so soon as their fitts are over, they are as if they had been in so
profound a sleep, that they did not so much as dream, and so remember nothing
at all of what they either said, or did, or where they had been; as is manifest
by an infinite number of examples in the forenamed relations. Of the truth of
which passages here at home we being very well ascertained, we may with the
more confidence venture upon what is recorded concerning others abroad. As for
example* The possession of the Religious Virgins in the Monastery of Werts,
others in Hessimont, others also not far from Xantes, and in other places,
where there were Eyewitnesses enough to take notice how strangely they were
handled, being flung up from the ground higher then a man's head, and falling
down again without harm, swarming upon trees as nimbly as Cats, and hanging
upon the boughs, having their flesh ^orne off from their bodies without any
visible hand or instrument, and many other mad prankes which is not so fit to
name, but they that have a mind may read at large in Wierus.

I would pass now to other effects of Witchcraft, as the conveying of knives,
balls of hair, and nails into the bodies of them that are bewitched; but that
the mention of these Nuns puts me in mind of that famous story in Wierus of
Magdalena Crucia, first a Nun, and then an Abbatesse of a Nunnery in Corduba
in Spain. Those things which were miraculous in her were these; that she could
tell almost at any distance how the affairs of the world went, what
consultations or transactions there were in all the nations of Christendom,
from whence she got to her self the reputation of a very Holy woman and a great
Prophetess. But other things came to pass by her or for her sake, no less
strange and miraculous; as that at the celebrating of the holy Encharist, the
Priest should always want one of his round wafers, which was secretly
conveyed to Magdalen, by the administration of Angels, as was supposed, and
she receiving of it into her mouth a^e it, in the view of the people, to their
great astonishment and high reverence of the Saint. At the elevation of the
Host Magdalen being near at hand, but yet a wall betwixt, that the wall was
conceived to open and to exhibit Magdalen to the view of them in the chapel,
and that thus she partaked of the consecrated bread. When this Abbatesse came
into the chapel her self upon some special day, that she would set off the
solemnity of the day by some notable and conspicuous miracle: For she would
sometimes be lifted up above the ground three or four cubits high; other
sometimes bearing the Image of Christ in her arms, weeping sa^ou^ly, she would
make her hair to increase to that length and largeness that it would come to
her heels, and cover her all over and the Image of Christ in her arms, which
anon notwithstanding would shrink up again to its usual size; with a many such
specious though ^nprofitable miracles.

But you will say that the narration of these things is not true, but they are
feigned for the advantage of the Roman Religion, and so it was profitable for
the Church to forge them and record them to posterity. A man that is unwilling
to admit of any thing supernatural would please himself with this general
shuffle and put-off. But when we come to the Catastrophe of the story he will
find it quite otherwise; for this Saint at last began to be suspected for a
Sorceresse as it is thought, and she being conscious, did of her own accord, to
save her self, make confession of her wickedness to the Visiters of the Order,
as they are called, viz. That for thirty years she had been married to the
Devil in the shape of an Ethiopian; that another Devil ^ervant to this, when
his Master was at dalliance with her in her cell, supplied her place amongst
the Nuns at their public Devotions; that by virtue of this contract she made
with this Spirit, she had done all those miracles she did. Upon this confession
she was committed, and while she was in durance, yet she appeared in her devout
postures praying in the chapel as before at their set hours of prayer; which
being told to the Visiters by the Nuns, there was a strict watch over her
that she should not stir out. Nevertheless she appeared in the chapel as
before, though she were really in the prison.

Now what credit or advantage there can be to the Roman Religion by this story,
let any man judge. Wherefore it is no figment of the Priests or Religious
persons, nor Melancholy, nor any such matter (for how could so many spectatours
at once be deluded by Melancholy?) but it ought to be deemed a real Truth: And
this Magdalena Crucia appearing in two several places at once, it is manifest
that there is such a thing as Apparitions of Spirits. But I must abstain as
yet from touching that argument, I having not dispatched what I propounded
concerning the vomiting up of Nails, the conveying of Knives and pieces of
VVood into the Bodies of Men, and the like. Which things are so palpable and
incapable of delusion, that I think it worth the while to insist a little upon
them.

CHAP. V.
Examples of Bewitched Persons that have had Balls of Hair, Nails, Knives,
Wood stuck with Pinns, pieces of Cloth, and such like trash conveyed into
their Bodies, with examples also of other Supernatural Effects.
I Will begin with that memorable true Story that Langius tells of one Vlricus
Neusesser who being grievously tormented with a pain in his side, suddenly felt
under his skin, which yet was whole, an iron Nail as he thought. And so it
proved when the Surgeon had cut it out: But nevertheless his great torments
continued, which enraged him so, that he cut his own Throat. The third day when
he was carried out to be buried, Eucharius Rosenbader, and Joannes ab
Ettenstet, a great company of people standing about them, dissected the Corpse,
and ripping up the Vent^icle, found a round piece of wood of a good length,
four knives, some even and sharp, others indeated like a Saw, with other two
rough pieces of Iron a span long. There was also a ball of Hair. This happened
at Fugenstall* 1539.

VVierus tells also a story of one that was possessed, of which himself was an
Eyewitness, that vomited up pieces of cloth with pins stuck in them, nails,
needles and such like stuff: which he contends does not come from the stomach,
but by a prestigious slight of the Devil is only ingested into the mouth.

Antonius Benivenius also witnesses of his own knowledge, that a woman his
Patient, after a great deal of torture, and disquiet, and staring distraction,
and extraordinary swelling of her belly, at last fell a vomiting of long
crooked Nails, Pinns, and a clue of Hair and Wax, and so great a Crust of
Bread as no man's swallow could ever get down. Then she fell a prophesying and
raging in such sort as those that are bewitched or possessed, so that the
Physician was forced to leave her to the cure of the Church.

Meinerus Clatsius his Servant, when he was bewitched, his throat was so
swelled that his face became blew again with it, and therefore his Mistress,
Judith a devout Mat^on, fearing he would be choked, betook her self to her
prayers with the rest of her Family. William in the mean time (for so was his
name) begins to discharge at the mouth, and sends out of his throat the
forepart of the Shepherds Breeches, whole Flints and their fragments, clues of
Yarne, besides long Locks of Women's Hair, Needles, a piece of the lining of a
Boys Coat, a Peacocks feather which he had pulled out of the tail of it eight
days before, with other more slight stuff.

Cardan tells a story also of a good simple country fellow and a friend of
his, that had been a long time troubled with vomiting up Glass, Iron, N^iles
and Hair, and that at that time he told Cardan of it he was not so perfectly
restored but that something yet crash'd in his belly as if there we^e a Bag of
Glass in it.

I might add seasonably hereunto what is so credibly reported of Mrs.
Muschamp's Child, that it was seen to vomit up pieces of VVood with Pinns stuck
in it.

But I will conclude all with that Story of about thirty Children that were so
strangely handled at Amsterdam 1566. of the truth whereof VVierus professes
himself very well assured. They were tortured very much, and cast violently
upon the ground, but when they arose out of their fit knew nothing but thought
they had been only asleep. For the remedying of this mischief they got the
help of Physicians, VVizards and Exorcists, but without success* Only while
the Exorcists were reading, the Children vomited up Needles, Thimbles, shreds
of Cloth, pieces of Pots, Glass* Hair, and other things of the like nature.

Now the advantage I would make of these stories is this, that these effects
extraordinary and supernatural being so palpable and permanent, they are not
at all liable to such Subterfuges as Atheists usually betake themselves to, as
of Melancholy, and disturbance of Phansy in those that profess they see such
strange things, or any Fraud or Impost^re in those that act.

All that can with any show of reason be alleged is this, That such parties in
their ^itts of distraction may devour such things as they vomit up, or at
least put them into their mouths. But they that are by might easily see that,
distracted people doing things carelessly and openly. And these things happen
to those that are thus handled against their wills; and as they are not
discovered to do any such things, of themselves, so neither do they confess
afterward that they did it, when they are come to their right senses; and
ordinarily it is found out that some Woman or other by Sorcery or VVitchcraft
was the Author of it.

Besides it is evident that there can be no mistake at all in some of these
passages; For how can an iron Nail get betwixt the skin and the flesh, the
skin not at all ripped or touched? Or how is it possible for any body to
swallow down Knives and pieces of Iron a span long? which besides that story of
Vlricus Neusesser, is made good in another of a young Wench, who when she had
made clean a pair of shoes with a Knife, which she put in her bosom, she
after seeking for it, it could not be found any where, till at length it began
to discover it self in a swelling on her left side, and at last was pulled out
thence by the Surgeon. You may read the whole story in VVierus, lib. 4. It
was done at Levensteet in the Dukedom of Brunswick 1562. An old Women had come
to the house in the morning, and a strange black Dog was found under the table.

There are also other miraculous and supernatural effects, as in that maid of
Saxonies speaking of Greek; and in another in Italy telling what was the best
verse in all Virgill.

In another whom Caelius Rhodiginus professed he saw that spoke from betwixt
her legs. Another at Paris whom Dr. Picard and other Divines would have
dispossessed, whom one Hollerius a Physician deriding, as if it had been nothing
but Melancholy in the Woman and Ignorance in those Divines, was after convinced
of the contrary, when he saw her standing betwixt two other women and crying
out of a sudden, discerning her hands to be so fast bound that there was no
loosing of them without cutting the string. There was not the appearance of any
thing to any body but to the possessed only, who said she saw then a white
cloud come near her when she was bound.

CHAP. VI.
The Apparition Eckerken. The Story of the pyed Piper. A Triton or Sea-God seen
on the banks of Rubicon. Of the Imps of Witches, and whether those old women be
guilty of so much dotage as the Atheist fancies them. That such things pass
betwixt them and their Imps as are impossible to be imputed to Melancholy. The
examination of John Winnick of Molesworth. The reason of Sealing Covenants with
the Devil.
BUt it is now high time to clear up this more dim and cloudy discovery of
Spirits into more distinct and articulate Apparitions, according as I did at
first propound. And these I shall cast into two ranks: Such as appear near to
us on the Ground, or such as are seen afarr off, above in the Air. And here
again to begin with small things first. Near Elton a Village half a mile
distant from Embrica in the Dukedom of Cleve, there was a thing had its haunt,
they called it Eckerken; there appeared never more then the shape of an Hand,
but ^t would beat travelers, pull them off from their horses, and overturn
carriages. This could be no Phansy, there following so real Effects.

The story of the pyed Piper, that first by his pipe gathered together all the
Rats and Mice, and drowned them in the River, and afterward, being defrauded of
his reward, which the Town promised him if he could deliver them from the
plague of those Vermin, took his opportunity, and by the same pipe made the
Children of the town follow him, and leading them into a Hill that opened,
buried them there all alive; has so evident proof of it in the town of Hammel
where it was done, that it ought not at all to be discredited. For the fact is
very Religiously kept amongst their ancient Records, painted out also in their
Church-windowes, and is an Epoche joined with the year of our Lord in their
Bills and Indentures and other Law^nstruments.

That also seems to me beyond all exception and evasion which Suetonius relates
of a Spectrum appearing on the b^nks of the River Rubicon: which was thus, Julius
Caesar having marched with his Army to this River, which divides Gall^a
Citerior from Italy, and being very doubtful with himself whither he should
pass over into Italy or not, there was seen on the River side a Man of a
prodigious stature and form playing on a Reed. The strangeness of his person as
well as the pleasantness of his Music had drawn several of the Shepherds
unto him, as also many of the Soldiers, amongst whom were some Trumpeters;
which this (...) (as Melanchthon ventures to call him) or Sea God well
ob^erving nimbly snatches away one of the Trumpets ou^ of their hands, leaps
forthwith into the River, and (...) a March with that strength and violence,
that he seemed to ^end the Heavens, and made the Air ring again with the
m^ghty fo^cibleness of the Blast, in this manner he p^ssed over to the other
side of the River. Whereupon Caesar taking the Omen, leaves off all further
dispute with himself carries over his Army enters Italy, secure of success from
so manifest tokens of the favor of the Gods.

To confirm this truth of Apparitions, if we would but admit the free
confessions of Witches concerning their Impes, whom they so frequently see and
converse withal, know them by their names, and do obeisance to them; the point
would be put quite out of all doubt, and their proofs would be so many, that no
volume would be large enough to contain them. But forsooth these must be all
Melancholy old^women that dote and bring themselves into danger by their own
Phansyes and Conceits. But that they do net dote, I am better assured of, then
of their not doting, that say they do. For to satisfy my own curiosity I have
examined several of them, and they have discoursed as cunningly as any of
their quality and education. But by what I have read and observed I discern
they serve a very perfidious Master, who plays wreaks many times on purpose to
betray them. But that is only by the by.

I demand concerning these Witches who confess their contract and frequent
converse with the Devil; some with him in one shape, others in another; whether
mere Melancholy and Imagination can put Powders, Rods, Ointments, and such like
things into their hands, and tell them the use of them, can impresse Marks
upon their bodies* so deep as to take away all sense in that place, can put
Silver and Gold into their hands, which afterward commonly proves but either
Counters, Leaves* or Shells, or some such like useless matter? These real
effects cannot be by mere Melancholy. For if a man receive any thing into his
hand, be it what it will be, there was some body that gave it him. And
therefore the VVitch receiving some real thing from this or that other shape
that appeared unto her, it is an evident sign, that it was an external thing
that she saw, not a mere figuration of her melancholy Phansy. There are
innumerable examples of this kind, but the thing is so trivial and ordinary
that it wants no instances. I will only for down one, wherein there is the
apparition of three Spirits.

John VV^nnick of Molsew^rth in Huntington-shire being examined 11. April
1646. confessed as follows. Having lost his purse with seven shillings in it,
for which he suspected one in the family where he lived, he says, that on a
Friday while he was making hay bottles in the barn, and swore and cursed and
raged, and wished to himself that some wise body would help him to his purse and
money again, there appeared unto him a Spirit in the shape of a Bear but not
so big as a Coney, who promised upon condition that he would fall down and
worship him, he would help him to his purse. He assented to it, and the Spirit
told him to morrow about this time he should find his purse upon the floor
where he made bottles, and that he would then come himself also; which was done
accordingly: and thus at the time appointed recovering his purse he fell down
upon his knees to the Spirit, and said, My Lord and God I thank you. This
Spirit brought then with him two other, in the shape the one of a white Cat,
the other of a Coney, which at the command of the Beare-Spirit he worshipped
also. The Beare-Spirit told him he must have his Soul when he dyed, that he
must suck of his body, that he must have some of his Blood to seal the
Covenant. To all which he agreed, and so the Beare-Spirit leaping up to his
shoulder, pricked him on the head, and thence took blood. After that, they all
three vanished, but ever since came to him once every twenty four hours, and
sucked on his body, where the marks are found. And that they had continually
done thus for this twenty nine years together. That all these things should be
a mere dream is a conceit more slight and foolish than any dream possibly can
be. For that receiving of his purse was a palpable and sensible pledge of the
truth of all the rest. And it is incredible that such a series of circumstances
backed with twenty nine years experience of being sucked and visited daily,
sometimes in the day time, most commonly by night, by the same three Familiars,
should be nothing but the hanging together of so many Melancholy Conceits and
Phansies.

Nor does the sealing of Covenants and writing with Blood make such stories as
these more to be suspected: For it is not at all unreasonable that such
Ceremonies should pass betwixt a Spirit and a Man, when the like palpable
Rites are used for the more firmly tying of Man to God. For whatsoever is
crasse and external leaves a stronger Impresse upon the Phansy, and the
remembrance of it strikes the mind with more efficacy. So that assuredly the
Devil has the greater hanck upon the Soul of a Witch or Wizard, that has been
persuaded to complete their Contract with him in such a gross sensible way,
and keeps them more fast from revolting from him, than if they had only
contracted in bare words.

CHAP. VII.
The nocturnall Conventicles of Witches; that they have often dissolved and
disappeared at the naming of the Name of God or Jesus Christ; and that the
party thus speaking has found himself alone in the fields many miles from home.
The Dancing of Men, Women and cloven-footed Satyrs at midday; John Michaell
piping from the bough of an Oak, etc.
BUt I shall now add further stories that ought to gain credit for the
conspicuous effects recited in them. As that which Paulus Grillandus reports of
one not far from Rome, who at the persuasion of his wife anointing himself, as
she had done before him, was carried away in the air to a great Assembly of
Wizards and Witches, where they were feasting under a Nut-Tree. But this
stranger not relishing his cheer without Salt, at last the Salt coming, and he
blessing of God for it, at that Name the whole Assembly disappeared, and he
poor man was left alone naked an hundred miles off from home; whither when he
had got he accused his wife, she confessed the fact, discovering also her
companions, who were therefore burnt with her.

The same Author writes a like story of a young girl thirteen years old in
the Dukedom of Spalatto, who being brought into the like company and admiring
the strangeness of the thing, and crying out Blessed God, what is here to do!
made the whole assembly vanish, was left herself in the field alone, and
wandering up and down was found by a country man to whom she told the whole
matter.

So the Husband of the Witch of Lochiae, whom she brought into the like
Assembly, by saying O my God where are we? made all to vanish, and found
himself naked alone in the field fifteen days journey from home.

Several other stories to this purpose Bodinus sets down, which these sensible
effects of being so far distant from home and being found naked in the fields,
show to be no freakes of Melancholy but certain truth. But that the Devil in
these junquetings appears to the Guests in the form of a Satyr, black Goat, or
else sometimes in the shape of an ill-favored black man, is the ordinary
confession of Witches, by this way discovered and convicted.

Of his appearance in the shape of a man in black at least, if not a black man,
a young woman committed for the suspicion of VVitchcraft, at the castle in
Cambridge told my learned friend Dr. Cudworth and my self this story. How one
Lendall-wife, who afterward at Cambridge suffered for a Witch, made a motion
to her of procuring her a husband; she accepted of it. The day and hour
appointted, her Sweetheart met her at Lendall's house. He brake the business
to her; but in the middle of the conference she did but turn her head aside
and he was vanished, and instead of a good proper Yeomanlike Man there was
found in the chair, where he did sit, nothing but a young Whelp lying on the
cushion.

She told us also how upon a time when she dwelt with a Dame in a little town
near Cambridge, and was sent into the fields to gather sticks, that
Lendall-wife did meet her there and urged the old business again, and because
she would not consent to it, that she beat her unmercifully, pulled off all
her clothes, and left her naked and in a manner dead upon the ground, and that
she thought, if her Dame had not come to seek her, and had not found her, she
had died no other death.

She told us also how at another time the door being shut and she going to bed,
that her Sweetheart came to her himself, earnestly desiring that the Match
might go on: which she as resolutely refusing, he grew very angry, and asked
her if she would make a fool of him, and gave her such a parting blow upon her
thigh that it was black and blew a good while after. But that which I aim at
happened sometime betwixt these passages I have already related.

While this marriage was driving on, the Wench was again invited to
Lendall-wife's house, where she might meet with her Sweetheart at a supper.
She told us, when she was come, that she waited ^ great while below, and
marvelled that there was neither fire nor rost-meat nor any thing else that
could promise any such entertainment as was expected, nor did she see any thing
brought into the house all the while she was there, and yet notwithstanding,
that at supper time the table was well furnished as well with guests as meat.
He that did sit at the upper end of the table was all in black, to whom the
rest gave very much respect, bowing themselves with a great deal of reverence
whenever they spoke to him. But what the wench seemed most of all affected
with, was that the company spoke such a Language as she understood not; and
Lendall-wife whom at other times, she said, she could understand very well,
when she spoke then at table she could not understand at all. Old Stranguidge
(of whom there has been reported ever since I came to the Universitie that he
was carried over Shelford Steeple upon a black Hog and tore his breeches upon
the weathercock) was one of the company. I do not remember any other she told
us of that we knew; but there were several that she her self knew not. It was
dark when they went to supper, and yet there was neither candle nor
candlestick on the board, but a moveable light hovered over them, that waf^ed
it self this way and that way in the air betwixt the seeling and the table.
Under this glimmering lamp they ate their victuals and entertained discourse in
that unknown Dialect. She amazed at the strangeness of the business and weary
of attending of so uncouth a company, as she said, slunck away from them and
left them.

As for my own part, I should have looked upon this whole Narration as a mere
idle fancy or sick man's dream, had it not been that my belief was so much
enlarged by that palpable satisfaction I received from what we heard from
four or five Witches which we lately examined before: And yet what I heard
was but such matters as are ordinarily acknowledged by such Witches as will
confess. And therefore I shall rather leave my Reader to wait the like
opportunity, then trouble my self with setting down any further examinations of
my own.

I will only add a Story or two out of Remigius concerning these Conventicles
of Witches, and then I will proceed to some other proofs.

John of Hembach was carried by his Mother being a Witch to one of these
Conventicles, and because he had learnt to play on the Pipe, was commanded by
her to exercise his faculty and to get up into a Tree, that they might the
better hear his Music. Which he doing, and looking upon the Dancers, how
uncouth and ridiculous they were in their Motions and Gestures, being struck
with admiration at the novelty of the matter, suddenly burst out into these
words, Good God, what a mad company have we here! Which was no sooner said, but
down came John, Pipe and all, and hurt his shoulder with the tumbling cast, who
when he called to the company to help him, found himself alone, for they had
all vanished, John of Hembach told the story, but people knew not what to make
of it, till some of that mad Crew that danced to his pipe, were apprehended
upon other suspicions, as Catharina Praevotia, Kelvers Orilla, and others, who
made good every whit what John had before told (though they knew nothing of
what he told before) adding also more particularly that the place where he
pip'd to them was Maybuch.

The other memorable Story that I shall relate out of Remigius is this. One
Nicolea Langbernhard, while she was going toward Assenunturia along a hedge
side, spied in the next field (it was about Noon-time of day) a company of men
and women dancing in a ring; and the posture of their bodies being uncouth and
unusual made her view them more attentively, whereby she discerned some of
them to have cloven feet, like Oxen or Goats (it should seem they were Spirits
in the shape of lusty Satyrs) she being astonished with fear cries out, Jesus
help me and send me well home. She had no sooner said so, but they all vanished
saving only one Peter Grospetter, whom a little afterward she saw snatched up
into the air and to let fall his Maulkin (a stick that they make clean ovens
withal) and her self was also driven so forcibly with the wind, that it made
her almost loose her breath. She was feign to keep her bed three days after.

This Peter (though at first he would have followed the Law on Nicolea for
slandring him, yet) afterward freely confessed and discovered others of his
companions, as Barbelia the wife of Joannes Latomus, Mayetta the wife of
Laurentius, who confessed she danced with those clovenfooted Creatures at what
time Peter was amongst them. And for further evidence of the business John
Michaell, Herds-man, did confess, that while they thus danced, he played upon
his Crooked staff, and struck upon it with his fingers, as if it had been a
Pipe, sitting upon an high bough of an Oak; and that so soon as Nicolea called
upon the name of Jesus, he tumbled down headlong to the ground, but was
presently caught up again with a whirldwind, and carried to Weiller Meadows,
where he had left his Herds a little before.

Add unto all this, that there was found in the place where they danced a
round Circle wherein there was the manifest ma^kes of the treading of cloven
feet, which were seen from the day after Nicolea had discovered the business,
till the next Winter that the plough cut them out. These things happened in the
year 1590.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Fairy Circles. A larger discussion of those Controversies betwixt Bodinus
and Remigius, viz. whether the Bodies of Witches be really transformed into the
shape of Wolves and other Creatures; whether the Souls of Witches be not
sometimes at those nocturnall Conventicles, their bodies being left at home; as
also whether they leav^ not their bodies in those Ecstasies they put themselves
in when they promise to fetch certain news from remote places in a very short
time.
IT might be here very seasonable, upon the foregoing story, to enquire into
the nature of those large dark Rings in the grass, which they call Fairy
Circles, whether they be the Rendezv^^z of Witches, or the da^cing places of
those little puppet-Spirits which they call Elves or Fairies. But these
curios^ties I leave to more busy Wits. I am only intent now upon my serious
purpose of proving there are Spirits; which I think I have made a pretty good
progress in already, and have produced such narrations that cannot but gain
credit with such as are not perversely and wi^lfully incredulous.

There is another more profitable question started, if it could be decided,
concerning these Night-revellings of Witches, whether they be not sometimes
there, their bodies lying at home, as sundry Stories seem to favor that
opinion: Bodinus is for it, Remigius is against it.

It is the same question, whether when Witches or VVizards profess they will
tell what is done within so many miles compass, and afterward to give a proof
of their skill first anoint their bodies and then fall down dead in a manner,
and so lie a competent time senseless, whether, I say, their souls go out of
their bodies, or all be but represented to their Imagination.

We may add a third, which may happily better fetch off the other two; And that
is concerning your (...) (which the Germans call Were-VVolff; the French Loups
garous) Men transformed into Wolves: and there is much what the same reason of
other Transformations. I shall not trouble you with any Histories of them,
though I might produce many. But as well those that hold it is but a delusion
of the Devil and mere Tragedies in Dreams, as they that say they are real
Transactions, do acknowledge, that those parties that have confessed themselves
thus transformed have been weary and sore with running, have been wounded and
the like. Bodinus here also is deserted of Remigius, who is of the same mind
with VVierus, that sly, smooth Physician, and faithful Patron of Witches, who
will be sure to load the Devil as much as he can, his shoulders being more
able to bear it, and so to ease the Haggs.

But for mine own part, though I will not undertake to decide the controversy,
yet I think it not a^^isse to declare, that Bodinus may very well make good
his own, notwithstanding any thing those do allege to the contrary. For that
which Wierus and Remigius seem so much to stand upon, that it is too great a
power for the Devil and too great indignity to Man, that he should be able
thus to transform him; are in my mind but slight Rhe^orications, no sound
Arguments.

For what is that outward mis^apement of Body to the inward deformity of their
Souls, which he helps on so notoriously? And they having given themselves over
to him so wholly, why may he not use them thus here, when they shall be worse
used by him hereafter? And for the changeing of the species of things, if that
were a power too big to be granted the Devil, yet it is no more done here,
when he thus transforms a Man into a Wolf, then when he transforms himself
into the shape of a Man. For this Wolf is still a Man, and that Man is still a
Devil. For it is so as the Poet says it was in Ulysses his companions which
Circe turned into Hoggs, They had the Head, the Voice, the Body and Bristles of
Hoggs; -- (...). But their Understanding was unchanged, they had the Mind and
Memory of a Man as before. As Petrus Bourgotus professes that when his
companion Michael Verdung had a^ointed his body and transformed him into a
Wolf, when he looked upon his hairy feet he was at first afraid of himself.

Now therefore it being plain that nothing material is alleged to the
contrary, and that men confess they are turned into Wolves, and acknowledge
the salvage cruelties they then committed upon Children, Women and Sheep, that
they find themselves exceeding weary, and sometimes wounded; it is more
natural to conclude they were really thus transformed, then that it was a mere
Delusion of Phansy.

For I conceive the Devil gets into their body, and by his subtle substance,
more operative and searching than any fire or putrefying liquour, melts the
yielding Compages of the body to such a consistency, and so much of it as is
fit for his purpose, and makes it pliable to his imagination: and then it is
as easy for him to work it into what Shape he pleases, as it is to work the
Air into such forms and figures as he ordinarily does. Nor is it any more
difficulty for him to mollify what is hard, then it is to harden what is so
soft and fluid as the Air.

And he that has this power, we can never stick to give him that which is
less, viz. to instruct men how they shall for a time forsake their Bodies, and
come in again. For can it be a hard thing for him, that can thus melt and take
a pieces the particles of the Body, to have the skill and power to loosen the
Soul, a substance really distinct from the Body and separable from it; which at
last is done by the easy course of Nature, at that final dissolution of Soul
and Body which we call Death? But no course of Nature ever transforms the body
of Man into the shape of a Wolf; so that this is more hard and exo^bitant from
the order of Nature then the other.

I but you will say the greatness and incrediblenesse of the Miracle is this;
That there should be an actual separation of Soul and Body and yet no Death.
But this is not at all strange if we consider that Death is properly a
disjunction of the Soul from the Body by reason of the Body's unfitness any
longer to entertain the Soul, which may be caused by extremity of Diseases,
outward Violence or Age; And if the Devil could restore such bodies as these
to life, it were a miracle indeed. But this is not such a miracle, nor is the
Body properly dead, though the Soul be out of it. For the life of the Body is
nothing else but that fitness to be actuated by the Soul. The conservation
whereof is helped, as I conceive, by the anointing of the Body before the
Ecstasy; which ointment filling the pores keeps out the cold and keeps in the
heat and Spirits, that the frame and temper of the Body may continue in fit
case to entertain the Soul again at her return. So the vital streams of the
carcass being not yet spent, the prist^ne operations of life are presently
again kindled, as a candle new blown out and as yet reeking, suddenly catches
fire from the flame of another, though at some distance, the light gliding down
along the smoke.

Wherefore there being nothing in the nature of the thing that should make us
incredulous, these Sorceresses so confidently pronouncing that they are out of
their Bodies at such times, and see and do such and such things, meet one
another, bring messages, discover secrets and the like, it is more natural and
easy to conclude they be really out of their Bodies, then in them. Which we
should the more easily be induced to believe, if we could give credit to that
Story Wierus tells of a Soldier out of whose mouth whilst he was asleep a
thing in in the shape of a Wesell came, which nudd^^ng along in the grass and
at last coming to a brook side, very busily attempting to get over* but not
being able, some one of the standers by that saw it, made a bridge for it of
his sword* which it passed over by, and coming back made use of the same
passage, and then entered into the Soldier's mouth again, many looking on: when
he waked he told how he dreamed he had gone over an iron Bridge, and other
particulars answerable to what the spectatours had seen aforehand. Wierus
acknowledges the truth of the story, but will by all means have it to be the
Devil, not the Soul of the Man; which he does in a tender regard to the
Witches, that from such a truth as this they might not be made so obnoxious to
suspicion that their Ecstasies are not mere Dreams and Delusions of the Devil,
but are accompanied with real effects.

I will not take upon me to decide so nice a controversy, only I will make bold
to in^ermeddle thus far as to pronounce Bodinus his opinion, not at all
unworthy of a rational and sagacious man. And that though by his being much
addicted to such like speculations he might attribute some natural effects to
the ministry of Spirits, when there was no need so to do, yet his judgment in
other things of th^s kind is no more to be slighted for that, then Cartesius,
that stupendous Mechanical Wit, is to be disallowed in those excellent
inventions of the causes of those more general Phenomenon of Nature, because
by his success in those he was imboldned to enlarge his Principles too far,
and to assert that A^imalls themselves were mere Machina's: like Aristoxenus
the Musician that made the Soul nothing else but an Harmony; of whom Tully
pleasantly observes, Quod non recessit ab art sua.

Every Genius and Temper, as the sundry sorts of Beasts and living Creatures,
have their proper excrement: and it is the part of a wise man to take notice of
it, and to choose what is profitable, as well as to abandon what is useless and
excrementitious.

CHAP. IX.
The Coldness of those bodies that Spirits appear in witnessed by the
experience of Cardan and Bourgotus. The natural Reason of this Coldness. That
the Devil does really lie with Witches. That the very substance of Spirits is
not fire. Spirits skirmishing on the ground. Field- fights and Sea- fights seen
in the Air.
BUt to return into the way, I might add other stories of your Daemones
Metallici, your Guardian Genii, such as that of Socrates, and that other of
which Bodinus tells an ample story, which he received from him who had the
society and assistance of such an Angel or Genius, which for my own part I
give as much credit to as to any story in Livy or Plutarch: Your Lares
familiares, as also those that haunt and vex families appearing to many and
leaving very sensible effects of their appearings. But I will not so far tire
either my self or my Reader. I will only name one or two stories more, rather
then recite them. As that of Cardan, who writes as you may see in Otho
Melander, that a Spirit that familiarly was seen in the house of a friend of
his, one night laid his hand upon his brow which felt intolerably cold. And so
Petrus Bourgotus confessed that when the Devil gave him his hand to kiss, it
felt cold. And many more examples there be to this purpose.

And indeed it stands to very good reason that the bodies of Devils being
nothing but coagulated Air should be cold, as well as coagulated Water, which
is Snow or Ice and that it should have a more keen and piercing cold, it
consisting of more subtle particles, than those of water, and therefore more
fit to insinuate, and more accurately and stingingly* to affect and touch the
nerves.

Wherefore Witches confessing so frequently as they do, that the Devil lies
with them, and withal complaining of his tedious and offensive coldness, it
is a shrewd presumption that he does lie with them indeed, and that it is not a
mere Dream, as their friend Wierus would have it.

Hence we may also discover the folly of that opinion that makes the very
essence of Spirits to be fire: for how unfit that would be to coagulate the
air is plain at first sight. It would rather melt and dissolve these
consistencies then constringe them and freeze them in a manner. But it is
rather manifest that the essence of Spirits is a substance specifically
distinct from all corporeal matter whatsoever. But my intent is not to
Philosophize concerning the nature of Spirits, but only to prove their
Existence. Which the story of the Spectre at Ephesus may be a further argument
of. For that old man which Apollonius told the Ephesians was the walking plague
of the city, when they stoned him and uncovered the heap, appeared in the shape
of an huge black dog as big as the biggest Lion. This could be no imposture of
Melanchly nor ^raud of any Priest. And the learned Grotius, a man far from all
Levity and vain Credulity, is so secure of the truth of Ty^neus his Miracles,
that he does not stick to term him impudent, that has the face to deny them.

Our English Chronicles also tell us of Apparitions; armed men, foot and horse,
fighting upon the ground in the North part of England and in Ireland for many
Evenings together, seen by many hundreds of men at once, and that the grass
was trodden down in the places where they were seen to fight their Battles:
which agrees with Nicolea Langbernhard her Story of the cloven-footed Dancers,
that left the print of their hoofs in the ring they trod down, for a long time
after.

But this skirmishing upon the Earth puts me in mind of the last part of this
argument, and bids me look up into the Air. Where omitting all other Prodigies
I shall only take notice of what is most notorious, and of which there can by
no means be given any other account, then that it is the effect of Spirits.
And this is the appearance of armed men fighting and encountering one another in
the Sky. There are so many examples of these Prodigies in Historians, that it
were superfluous to instance in any. That before the great slaughter of no
less than fourscore thousand made by Antiochus in Jerusalem recorded in the
second of Maccabees chap. 5. is famous. The Historian there writes that through
all the city for the space almost of forty days there were seen Horsemen
running in the air, in cloth of Gold, and Armed with Lances, like a band of
Soldiers, and Troops of Horsemen in array encountering and running one against
another, with shaking of shields, and multitudes of pi^^es, and drawing of
swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of golden ornaments, and harness
of all sorts. And Josephus writes also concerning the like Prodigies, that
happened before the destruction of the City by Titus* prefacing first, that
they were incredible, were it not that they were recorded by those that were
Eyewitnesses of them.

The like Apparitions were seen before the civil wars of Marius and Sylla.
And Melanchthon affirms that a world of such Prodigies were seen all over
Germany from 1524 to 1548. S^ellius amongst other places does particularize in
A^^rtsfort, where these fightings were seen not much higher then the house
tops; as also in Amsterdam where there was a Sea Fight appearing in the air
for an hour or two together, many thousands of men looking on. And to say
nothing of what has been seen in England not long ago, there is lately a
punctual narration of such a Sea Fight seen by certain Hollanders, and sent
over hither into England, but a Lion appearing alone at the end of that
Apparition, though it may be true for ought I know, yet it makes it obnoxious
to Suspicion and evasion and so unprofitable for my purpose. But the Phenomenon
of this kind, whose reports cannot be suspected to be in subserviency to any
Politic design, ought in reason to be held true, when there have been many
professed Eyewitnesses of them. And they being resolvable into no natural
causes, it is evident that we must acknowledge supernatural ones, such as
Spirits, Intelligences or Angels, term them what you please.

CHAP. X.
A very memorable story of a certain pious man, who had the continual Society
of a Guardian Genius.
I Had here ended all my Stories, were I not tempted by that remarkable one in
Bodinus, to our-run my Method. I but named it heretofore, I shall tell it now
more at large. I am the more willingly drawn to relate it, such examples of the
consociation of good Spirits being very scarce in History. The main reason
whereof, as I conceive, is because so very few men are heartily and sincerely
good. The Narration is more considerable in that he that writes it, had it from
the man's own mouth whom it concerns; and is as follows.

This Party, a holy and pious man, as it should seem, and an acquaintance of
Bodinus's, freely told him, how that he had a certain Spirit that did
perpetually accompany him, which he was then first aware of, when he had
attained to about thirty seven years of Age, but conceived that the said Spirit
had been present with him all his life time, as he gathered from certain
Monitory Dreams and Visions, whereby he was forewarned as well of several
dangers as vices. That this Spirit discovered himself to him after he had for a
whole year together earnestly prayed to God to ^end a good Angel to him, to be
the Guide and Governer of his life and actions; adding also, that before and
after Prayer he used to spend two or three hours in meditation and reading the
Scriptures, diligently enquiring with himself, what Religion, amongst those
many that are controverted in the world, might be best, beseeching God that he
would be pleased to direct him to it. And that he did not allow of their way,
that at all adventures pray to God to confirm them in that opinion they have
already preconceived, be it right or wrong. That while he was thus busy with
himself in matters of Religion, that he light on a passage in Philo Judaeus in
his Book De Sacrificiis, where he writes, that a good and holy Man can offer no
greater nor more acceptable Sacrifice to God, then the Oblation of himself, and
therefore following Philo's counsel, that he offered his Soul to God. And that
after that, amongst many other divine Dreams and Visions, he once in his sleep
seemed to hear the voice of God saying to him, I will save thy Soul, I am he
that before appeared unto thee. Afterward that the Spirit every day would
knock at the door about three or four a clock in the morning, though he rising
and opening the door could see no body, but that the Spirit persisted in this
course, and unless he did rise, would thus rouse him up.

This trouble and boisterousnesse made him begin to conceit that it was some
evil Spirit that thus haunted him, and therefore he daily prayed earnestly
unto God, that he would be pleased to send a good Angel to him, and often also
sung Psalms, having most of them by heart.

Wherefore the Spirit afterward knocked more gently at the door, and one day
discovered himself to him waking, which was the first time that he was assured
by his senses that it was he; for he often touched and stirred a Drinkingglasse
that stood in his chamber, which did not a little amaze him.

Two days after when he entertained at supper a certain f^^end of his,
Secretary to the King, that this friend of his was much abashed while he heard
the Spirit thumping on the bench hard by him, and was stricken with fear, but
he ^ad him be of good courage, there was no hurt toward; and the better to
assure him of it, told him the truth of the whole Matter.

Wherefore from that time, ^aith Bodinus, he did affirm that this Spirit was
always with him, and by some sensible sign did ever advertize him of things:
as by striking his right ear if he did any thing amiss; if otherwise, his
left. If any body came to circumvent him* that his right ear was st^uck, but
his left ear, if a good man and to good ends accosted him. If he was about to
eat or drink any thing that would hurt him, or intended or purposed with
himself to do any thing that would prove ill, that he was inhibited by a sign,
and if he delaid to follow his business, that he was quickened by a ^^gne
given him.

When he began to praise God in Psalms and to declare his marveilous Acts,
that he was presently raised and strengthened with a spiritual and
supernatural power.

That he daily begged of God that he would teach him his Will, his Law and his
Truth; And that he set one day of the week apart for reading the Scripture and
Meditation, with singing of Psalms, and that he did not (...) out of his house
all that day; But that in his ordinary conversation he was sufficiently merry
and of a cheerful mind, and he cited that saying for it, Vidi facies
Sanctorum laetas. But in his conversing with others* if he had talked vainly
and indiscreetly, or had some days together neglected his Devotions, that he
was forthwith admonished thereof by a Dream. That he was also admonished to
rise betimes in the Morning, and that about four of the clock a voice would
come to him while he was asleep, saying, Who gets up first to pray?

He told Bodinus also how he was often admonished to give Alms, and that (...)
more Charity he bestowed, the more prosperous he was. And that on a time when
his enemies sought after his life, and knew that he was to go by water, that
his Father in a Dream brought two Horses to him, the one white, the other bay;
and that therefore he bid his servant hire him two horses, and though he told
him nothing of the colors, that yet he brought him a white one and a bay one.

That in all difficulties, journeyings and what other enterprises soever, he
used to ask counsel of God, and that one night, when he had begged his
blessing, while he slept he saw a Vision wherein his Father seemed to bless
him.

At another time, when he was in very great Danger, and was newly gone to bed,
he said that the Spirit would not let him alone till he had raised him again,
wherefore he watched and prayed all that night. The day after he escaped the
hands of his Persecuters in a wonderful manner; which being done, in his next
sleep he heard a voice saying, Now sing, Quisedet in latibulo Altissi^^.

A great many other passages this Party told Bodinus, so many indeed, that he
thought it an endless labor to recite them all. But what remains of those he
has recited, I will not stick to take the pains of transcribing them.

Bodinus asked him why he would not speak to the Spirit for the gaining of the
more plain and familiar converse with it. He answered that he once attempted
it, but the Spirit instantly struck the door with that vehemence, as if he had
knocked upon it with an hammer, whereby he gathered his dislike of the matter.

But though the Spirit would not talk with him, yet he could make use of his
judgment in the reading of books and moderating his studies. For if he took an
ill book into his hands and fell a reading, the Spirit would strike it, that he
might lay it down, and would also sundry times, be the books what they would,
hinder him from reading and writing overmuch, that his mind might rest, and
silently meditate with it self. He added also, that very often while he was
awake, a small, subtle, inarticulate sound would come unto his ears.

Bodinus further enquiring whether he ever see the Shape and Form of the
Spirit, he told him that while he was awake he never see any thing but a
certain light very bright and clear and of a round Compass and Figure; But
that once, being in great jeopardy of his life, and having heartily prayed to
God that he would be pleased to provide for his safety, about break of day,
amidst his slumberings and wakings, he espyde on his bed where he lay a young
Boy clad in a white Garment tinctured somewhat with a touch of purple, and of a
visage admirably lovely and beautiful to behold. This he confidently affirmed
to Bodinus for a certain truth.

CHAP. XI.
Certain Enquiries upon the preceding Story; as, What these Guardian Genii may
be. Whether one or more of them be allotted to every man, or to some none. What
may be the reason of Spirits so seldom appearing; And whether they have any
settled Shape or no. What their manner is of assisting men in either Devotion
or Prophecy. Whether every man's complexion is capable of the Society of a good
Genius. And lastly whether it be lawful to pray to God to send such a Genius
or Angel to one or no.
IT is beside my present scope, as I have already professed, to enter into any
more particular and more curious Disquisitions concerning the nature of
Spirits, my aim being now only to demonstrate their Existence by those
strange Effects recorded every where in History. But this last Narration is so
extraordinarily remarkable, that it were a piece of disrespect done to it, to
dismiss it without some Enquiries at least into such Problems as it naturally
affords to our consideration, though it may well seem plainly beyond the power
of humane Wit, or laws of Modesty to determine any thing therein.

In the first place therefore, it cannot but amuse a man's mind to think what
these officious Spirits should be, that so willingly sometimes offer themselves
to consociate with a man; whether they may be Angels incapable of incorporation
into humane Bodies, which vulgarly is conceived: Or whether the Souls of the
deceased, they having more affinity with mortality and humane frailty then the
other, and so more sensible of our necessities and infirmities, having once
felt them themselves; a reason alleged for the Incarnation of Christ by the
Author to the Hebrews: Which opinion has no worse Favorers then Plutarch,
Maximus Tyrius, and other Platonists: Or lastly, whether there may not be of
both sorts. For separate Souls being (...), in a condition not unlike the
Angels themselves, it is easy to conceive that they may very well undergo the
like Offices.

Secondly we are invited to enquire, whether every man have his Guardian Genius
or no. That Witches have many, such as they are, their own confessions testify.
The Pythagorea^s were of opinion that every man has two Genii, a good one and a
bad one. Which Mahomet has taken into his Religion, adding also, that they sit
on Men's shoulders with table-books in their hands, and that the one writes down
all the good, the other all the evil a man does. But such expressions as those
I look upon as Symbolicall rather then Natural. And I think it more reasonable
that a man changing the frame of his mind changes his Genius withal: Or
rather, unless a man be very sincere and single-hearted that he is left to
common Providence, as well as if he be not desperately wicked or deplorably
miserable, scarce any particular evil Spirit interposes or offers himself a
perpetual Assistent in his affairs and fortunes. But extreme Poverty, irksome
old Age, want of Friends, the Contempt, Injury and Hardheartednesse of evil
Neighbors, working upon a Soul low sunk into the body and wholly devoid of the
Divine life, does sometimes kindle so sharp, so eager, and so piercing a desire
of Satisfaction and Revenge, that the shreeks of men while they are a
murdering, the howling of a Wolf in the fields in the night, or the squeaking
and roaring of tortured Beasts do not ^o certainly call to them those of their
own kind, as this powerful Magic of a pensive and complaining soul in the
bitterness of it is affliction attracts the aid of these over-officious
Spirits. So that it is most probable that they that are the forwardest to ^ang
Witches are the first that made them, and have no more goodness nor true piety
then these they so willingly prosecute, but are as wicked as they, though with
better luck or more discretion, offending no further then the Law will permit
them, and therefore they securely starve the poor helpless man, though with a
great deal of clamor of justice* they will revenge the death of their Hogg, or
Cow.

Thirdly it were worth our disquisition, why Spirits so seldom now adays
appear, especially those that are good; whether it be not the wickedness of
the present Age, as I have already hinted; or the general prejudice men have
against all Spirits that appear, that they must be straightwayes Devils; or
the frailty of humane nature that is not usually able to bear the appearance of
a Spirit, no more then other Animalls are, for into what agonies Horses and
Dogs are cast upon their approach, is in every ones mouth, and is a good
circumstance to distinguish a real Apparition from our own Imaginations; or
lastly whether it be the condition of Spirits themselves, who, it may be,
without some violence done to their own nature cannot become visible, it being
happily as troublesome a thing to them, to keep themselves in one steady
visible consistency in the air, as it is for men that dive, to hold their
breath in the water.

Fourthly it may deserve our search, whether Spirits have any settled form or
shape. Angels are commonly pictured like good plump cher^y-cheek'd Lads. Which
is no wond^r, the boldness of the same Artists not sticking to picture God
Almighty in the shape of an old man. In both it is as it pleases the Painter.
But this story seems rather to favor their opinion, that say that Angels and
separate S^uls have no settled form but what they please to give themselves
upon occasion, by the power of their own Phansy. Ficinu^, as I remember,
somewhere calls them Aereall Stars. And the good Genii seem to me to be as
the benign Eyes of God running to and fro in the world with love and pity
beholding the innocent endeavors of harmless and single-hearted men, ever
ready to do them good and to help them.

What I conceive of separate Souls and Spirits, I cannot better express then
I have already in my Poem of the Pr^existency of the Soul. And I hope it will
be no sin to be better then my word, who in my Preface have promissed no Poetry
at all, but I shall not think much to offer to your view these two Stanzas out
of the forenamed Poem.

Like to a light fast locked in Lanthorn dark,
Whereby by Night our wary steps we guide
In slabby streets, and dirty Channels mark;
Some w^aker rays from the black top do glide,
And flusher streams perhaps through the horny side.
But when we have past the peril of the way,
Arrived at home, and laid that case aside,
The naked light how clearly does it ray,
And spread its joyful beams as bright as Summer's day?
Even so the Soul in this contracted state,
Confined to these straight Instruments of Sense,
More dull and narrowly does operate;
At this hole hears, the Sight must ray from thence,
Here tastes, there smells; But when she is gone from hence,
Like naked Lamp she is one shining Sphere,
And round about has perfect cognoscence
What ere in her Horizon does appear;
She is one Orb of sense, all Eye, all airy Eear.
And what I speak there of the condition of the Soul out of the Body, I think
is easily applicable to other Gen^i, or Spirits.

The fifth Enquiry may be, how these good Gen^i become serviceable to men, for
either heightening their Devotions or inabling them to Prophecy; whether it can
be by any other way then by descending into their bodies and possessing the
heart and brain. For the Euchites, who affected the gift of Prophecy by
familiarity with evil Spirits, did utterly obliterate in their Souls the
(...), the Principles of Goodness and Honesty (as you may see in Psellus
(...)) that the evil Spirits might come into their bodies, whom those sparks
of virtue, as they said, would drive away, but those being extinguished they
could come in and possess them and enable them to pr^phecy. And that the Imps
of Witches do sometimes enter their own bodies as well as their's to whom they
send them, is plain in the Story of the Witches of Warbois. It is also the
opinion of Trismegist, that these Spirits get into the Veins and Arteries both
of men and beasts.

Wherefore concerning the Dreams and Visions of this holy man that so freely
imparted himself to Bodinus, it may be conceived reasonable that the good
Genius insinuated himself into his very Body, as well as the bad into the
bodies of the wicked, and that residing in his brain and figuring of it, by
thinking of this or that Object, as we ourselves figure it when we think, the
external senses being laid asleep, those figurations would easily be
represented to the Common sense; and that Memory recovering them when he
awaked, they could not but seem to him as other Dreams did saving that they
were better, they ever signifying some thing of importance unto him.

But those Raptures of Devotion by day, might be by the Spirits kindling a
purer kind of Love-flame in his heart, as well as by fortifying and raising
his Imagination. And how far a man shall be carried beyond himself by this
redoubled soul in him, none, I think, can well conceive unless they had the
experience of it.

And if this be their manner of communion, it may well be enquired into, in the
sixth place, whether all men be capable of consociation with these good Genii.
Cardan somewhere intimates that their approaches are deprehensible by certain
sweet smells they cast. From whence it may seem not improbable, that those
bodies that smell sweet themselves, where the mind does not stink with pride
and hypocrisy, have some natural advantage for the gaining their society. But
if there be any peculiar c^^plexion or natural condition required, it will
prove less hopeful for every one to obtain their acquaintance. Yet
Regeneration come to it is due pitch, though it can not be without much pain
and anguish, may well rectify all uncleanness of nature; so that no singularly
good and sincere man can reasonably despair of their Familiarity. For he that
is so highly in favor with the Prince, it is no wonder he is taken notice of
by his Courtiers.

But the last and most considerable question is, whether it be lawful to pray
to God for such a good Genius or Angel. For the Example in the foregoing story
seems a sufficient warrant. But I conceive Faith and Desire ought to be
full-sayle to make such Voiages prosperous, and our end and purpose pure and
sincere, But if Pride, Conceitedness^* or Affectation of some peculiar
privilege above other Mortals, spur a man up to so bold an Enterprise, his
Devotions will no more move either God or the Good Geni^, then the whining
voice of a Counterfeit will stir the affection of the discreetly Charitable.
Nay this high Presumption may invite some real Fiends to put a worse jest upon
him then was put upon that tattered Rogue Guzman, by those Mock-Spirits, for
his so impudently pretending Kindred, and so boldly intruding himself into the
knowledge and acquaintance, of the Gentry and Nobility of Genoa.

But the safest Magic is the sincere consecrating a man's Soul to God, and the
aspiring to nothing but so profound a pitch of Humility as not to be conscious
to ourselves of being at all touched with the praise and applause of men; and
to such a free and universal sense of Charity as to be delighted with the
welfare of another as much as our own. They that solely have their eye upon
these will find coming in what ever their heart can desire. But they that put
forth their hand to catch at high things, as they phansy, and neglect these,
prove at last but a lague to themselves, and a Laughing Stock to the world.

These are the several Speculations that the foregoing Narration would
naturally beget in the minds of the curious. But methinks I hear the Atheist
replying to all this, That I have run a long division upon very uncertain
grounds, and asking me not without some scorn and anger, whether I believe that
multifarious Fable I have rehearsed out of Bodinus and so much descanted upon.
To which I answer, That I will not take my oath that the most likely passage in
all Plutarch's Lives, or Livies History is assuredly true. But however that I
am not ashamed to profess, that I am as well assured in my own judgment of
the existence of Spirits, as that I have met with men in Westminster Hall, or
seen Beasts in Smithfield.

CHAP. XII.
That whether the Species of things have been from all Eternity, or whether
they rose out of the Earth by degrees in Time, the Frame of them is such, that
against all the Evasions of the Atheist they naturally imply that there is a
God.
THus have we gone through the many and manifold effects represented to our
senses on this wide Theater of the World. The faintest and obscurest whereof
are Arguments full enough to prove the existence of a Deity. But some being
more palpable then other some, and more accommodate to awaken the dull and slow
belief of the Atheist into the acknowledgement of a God, it will not be amiss
to take notice of what Evasions he attempts to make for the extricating himself
out of those that he pharisees the most sensibly to entangle him, and the most
strongly to hinder his escape.

And such are especially these two last I insisted upon, the curious frame of
Man's body, and Apparitions. And the force of the former some endeavor to evade
thus; That there has ever been Man and Woman and other Species in the world,
and so it is no wonder that like should propagate its like, and therefore that
there is no want of any other invisible or material cause but the species of
things themselves: And so these admirable contrivances in Nature must imply no
divine VVisdome nor Counsel or any such thing.

But here I demand whether there were ever any Man that was not mortal, and
whether there be any mortal that had not a beginning, and if he had, it must
be either by Generation or Creation. If by Creation, there is a God. If by
aequivocall Generation, as rising out of the Earth, our argument will hold good
still notwithstanding this evasion, But if you will say there was never any man
in the world but was born of a Woman, this must amount but to thus much* that
there has been an infinite number of successions of births. If there be meant
by it any thing more then thus, it will not prove sense.

For though our Phansy cannot run through an infinite series of Effects, yet
our Reason is assured there is no Effect without a Cause, and be the Progress
of Causes and Effects as infinite as it will, at last we resolve it naturally
into some First; and he that denies this, seems to me w^llfully to wink
against the light of Nature, and do violence to the faculties of his mind. And
therefore of necessity there must be at least one first Man and Woman which
are first ordine Naturae, though infinity of time reckoning from the present
causes a confusion and obscurity in our apprehensions. And these which are
thus first in order of Nature or Causality must also exist first before there
can be any other Men or Women in the World. And therefore concerning these
first it being manifest that they were born of no Parents, it follows they were
Created or rose out of the Earth, and so the Evasion will be frustrated.

Besides if you affirm that there was never any Man in the world but who was
born of a Woman, and so grew to Man's estate by degrees, it will fall to some
man's share to be a Babe and a Man at once, or to be both Father and Child, For
so soon as Mankind was (let it be from Aeternity, and beyond Aeternity is
nothing) those that then existed were begot of some body, and there was nothing
before them to beget them, therefore they begot themselves.

But that they should at once then have been perfect men, their substances
being of alterable and passive matter, that is wrought diversely and by degrees
into that frame it has, is as rash, as if they should say that Boots, and
Shoes, and Stockins, and Pyes, and Peels, and Ovens have been together with
all Aeternity: when as it is manifest there ought to be an orderly intervall of
time before these things can be, wherein must precede the killing of Oxen, and
flaying of them, as also of Sheep, tanning, spinning, cutting, and many more
such like circumstances. So that it is enormously ridiculous to say that
Mankind might have been at once from all Aeternity, unless the Omnipotency of
a God, who can do what ever we can imagine and more, should by his unresistable
Fiat cause such a thing in a moment so soon as himself was, which was ever, and
he was never to seek for either power or skill.

But that the fluid Matter of it self should have been thus raised up from all
Aeternity into such complete Species of things, is very groundless and
irrational. I say, that there ever should be such a thing as this in the
world, a man at once existing of himself in this corporeal frame that we see,
who notwithstanding did afterward dye like other mortals; is a fable above
all Poetical Figments whatsoever, and more incredible then the hardest Article
that any Religion ever offered to the Atheist's belief.

Others therefore deserting this way of Evasion betake themselves to another,
which, though it seem more plausible at first view, is fully as frivolous. They
say that all the Species of things, Man himself not excepted, came first ^ut of
the Earth by the omnifarious attempt of the particles of the Matter upon one
another, which at last light on so lucky a construction and fabric of the
Bodies of Creatures as we see, and that having an infinite series of time to
try all tricks in, they would of necessity at last come to this they are.

But I answer, that these particles might commit infini^e Tautologies in their
strokes and motions, and that therefore there was no such n^cessi^y at all of
falling into those forms and shapes that appea^e in the world.

Again, there is that excellent contrivance in the Body, suppose, of a Man, as
^ have heretofore instanced, that it cannot but be the effect of very accurate
Knowledge and Counsel.

And lastly this concourse of Atoms they being left without a guide, it is a
miracle above all apprehension, that they should produce no in^pt Species of
things, such as should of their own nature have but three Legs, and one Eye,
or but one Ear, rows of Teeth along the Vertebrae of their Backs, and the
like, as I have above intimated, these In^ptitudes being more easy to hit upon,
than such accurate and irreprehensible frames of Creatures.

But to ^lude the force of this Argument against the fortuitous concourse of
Atoms* they will excog^ta^e th^s mad evasion; That Nature did indeed at first
bring forth such ill-favored and ill-appointed Monsters, as well as those that
are of a more exquisite frame; but those that were more pe^fect fell upon those
other and killed them, and devoured then, they being not so well provided of
either limbs or senses as the other, and so were never able to hop fast enough
from them, or maturely to discover the approaching d^ngers that ever and anon
were coming upon them. But this unjust and audacious calumny cast upon God and
Nature will be easily discovered and convicted of fa^shood if we do but
consider,

First that Trees, Harbs, and Flowers, that do not stine from their places, or
exercise such fierce cruelty one upon another, that they all in their several
kinds are handsome, and elegant, and have no ineptitude or defect in them.

Secondly that all Creatures born of putrefaction, as Mice* and Froggs and the
like, as those many hundreds of Insects, as Grasshoppers, Flies, Spiders and
such other, that these also have a most accurate contrivance of parts, and that
there is nothing framed rashly or ineptly in any of them.

Lastly in more perfect Creatures, as in the Scotch Barnacles, which Historians
write of, of which if there be any doubt, yet Gerard relates that of his own
knowledge, which is as admirable, and as much to our purpose, that there is a
kind of Foul which in Lancashire are called Tree Geese, they are bred out of
rotten pieces of broken ships and ^^unks of Trees cast upon a little Island in
Lancashire they call the Pile of Foulders; the same Author says he has found
the like also in other parts of this Kingdom: Those Fowls in all respects,
though bred thus of putrefaction, (and that they are thus bred is undeniably
true as any man if he please may satisfy himself by consulting Gerard the very
last page of his History of Plants) are of as an exact Fabric of Body, and as
fitly contrived for the functions of such a kind of living Creature, as any of
those that are produced by propagation. Nay the^e kind of Fowls themselves do
also propagate, which has imposed so upon the foolishness of some, that they
(...) denied that other way of their generation, wh^^ as (...) being generated
one way does not exclude the (...) seen in Froggs and Mice.

Where^ore those productions out of the (...) Putrefaction being thus perfect
and accurate in (...) well as others, it is a manifest discovery that (...)
never frame any species of things ineptly and (...) that therefore she was ever
guided by Counsel and (...) that is, that Nature her self is the effect of an
allknowing God.

Nor does this consideration only take away this present Evasion, but does
more palpably and intelligibly enervate the former. For what boots it them to
fly unto an infinite propagation of Individualls in the same aeternall Species,
as they imagine, that they might be able always to assign a Cause answerable
to the Effect; when as there are such Effects as these, and Products of
Putrefaction, where Wisdom and Counsel are as truly conspicuous as in
others? For thus are they nevertheless necessarily illaqueated in that
inconvenience which they thought to have escaped by so quaint a subtilty.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Evasions of Atheists against Apparitions are so weak and silly, that
it is an evident Argument that they are convinced in their own Judgments of
the Truth of these kinds of Phenomenon, which forces them to answer as well as
they can, though they be so ill provided.
NOw for their Evasions whereby they would elude the force of that Argument for
Spirits, which is drawn from Apparitions, they are so weak and silly, that a
man may be almost sure they were convinced in their judgment of the truth of
such like Stories, else it had been better flatly to have denied them, then to
feign such idle and vain reasons of them.

For first they say they are nothing but Imaginations, and that there is
nothing real without us in such Apparitions.

But being beaten off from this slight account, for that many see the same
thing at once, then they fly to so miraculous a power of Phansy, as if it were
able to change the Air into a real shape and form, so that others may behold
it, as well as he that framed it by the power of his Phansy.

Now I demand of any man, whether this be not a harder Mystery and more
unconceivable then all the Magical Metamorphoses of Devils or Witches. For it
is far easyer to conceive that some knowing thing in the Air should thus
transform the Air into this or that shape, being in that part of the Air it
does thus transform, then that the Imagination of man, which is but a
Modification of his own mind, should be able at a distance to change it into
such like Appearances, But suppose it could, can it animate the Air that it
does thus metamorphize, and make it speak, and answer to questions, and put
things into men's hands, and the like? O the credulity of besotted Atheism! How
intoxicated and infatuated are they in their conceits, being given up to
sensuality, and having lost the free use of the natural faculties of their
mind!

But shall this force of Imagination reach as high as the Clouds also, and make
Men fight pitched Battails in the Air, running and charging one against the
other?

Here the same bold pretender to Wit and Philosophy Caesar Vaninus (who
cunningly and jugglingly endeavors to infuse the poison of Atheism into the
mind of his Reader on every occasion) has recourse to those old cast rags of
Epicurus his. School, the Exuvious Effluxes of things; and attempts to salve
these Phenomenon thus; That the vapors of men's bodies and it seems of Horses
too, are carried up into the Air and fall into a certain proportionable
posture of parts, and so imitate the figures of them aloft among the clouds.

But I demand how the vapors of the Horses find the vapors of their Riders:
and when and how long are they coming together: and whether they appear not
before there be any Armies in the Field to send up such vapors: and whether
Harness and Weapons send up vapors too, as Swords, Pikes, and Shields: and
how they come to light so happily into the hands of those Aeriall men of war,
especially the vapors of Metalls (if they have any) being heavier in all
likelihood then the recke of A^^malls and Men: and lastly how they come to
discharge at one another and to fight, there being neither life nor soul in
them: and whether Sounds also have their Exuviae that are reserved till these
solemnities; for at Alborough in Suffolk 1642 were heard in the Air very loud
beatings of Drums* shooting of Muskets, and Ordinance* as also in other such
like P^odigies there has been heard the sounding of Trumpets, as Snellius
w^ites. And Pliny also makes mention of the sounding of ^rumpets and clashing
of Armor heard out of the Heavens about the Cymbr^ck Wars, and often before.
But here at Alborough all was concluded with a melodious noise of Musical
^nstruments.

The Ex^viae (...) Fiddles it seems ^ly up into the Air too, or were those
Musical Accen^s frozen there for a time, and at the heat and firing of the
Canons the air ^elenting and thawing became so harmoniously vocal? With what
vain concei^s are men intoxicated, that wilfully wink ^g^inst the light of
Nature, and are ^stranged from the true knowledge and acknowledgment of a God!

But there is another Evasion which the same se^ulous Insinuatour of A^heisme
would make use of in case this should not hold, which seems more sober but no
less false. And that is this: That these sigh^i^gs and skirmishings in the
Air are only the (...) of some real Battle on the Earth. But this in Nature
is plainly impossible. For of necessity these Armies thus fighting, being at
such a distance from the Spectatours that the same of the Battle never arrives
to their ears, their eyes can never behold it by any re^lexion from the
clouds. For besides that reflection makes the images more dim then direct sight,
such a distance from the Army to the clouds, and then from the clouds to our
eye, will lessen the Species so exceedingly that they will not at all be
visible.

Or if we could imag^ne that there might be some times such an advantage in the
figure of these clouds as might in some sort remedy this lessening of the
Species, yet their surfaces are so exceeding rudely polished, and Reflection
which, as I said, is ever dim enough of it self* is here so extraordinarily
imperfect* that they can never be able, according to the course of Nature, to
return the Species of Terrestrial Objects back again to our sight, it being
so evident that they are unfit for what is of far less difficulty. For we
never find them able to reflect the image of a Starr when as not only glass,
but every troubled pool or durty plash of water in the Highway does usually do
it.

But that it is far easier for a Star, then for any of these Objects here upon
Earth to be reflected to our Eyes by those rude natural Looking-glasses placed
among the clouds, sundry reasons will sufficiently inform us.

For first, The Stars do not abate at all of their usual magnitude in which
they ordinarily appear to us, by this refl^ction; the difference of many
hundreds of Leagues making no difference of magnitude in them, for indeed the
distance of the Diameter of the Orbite of the Earth makes none, as must be
acknowledged by all those that admit of the annual motion thereof. But a very
few miles do exceedingly diminish the usual biggnesse of the Species of an
Horse or Man, even to that littleness, that they grow invisible. What then
will become of his Sword, Shield, or Spear? And in these cases we now speak
of, how great a journey the Species have from the Earth to the cloud that
reflects them, I have intimated before.

Secondly it is manifest, that a Star has the pre-eminence above these
Terrestiall Objects, in that it is as pure a light as the Sun, though not so
bigg, but they but opake colored bodies, and that therefore there is no
comparison betwixt the vigor and strength of the Species of a Star and of
them.

Thirdly in the Nightime, the Eye being placed in the shadow of the earth,
those reflections of a Starr will be yet more easily visible; whenas the great
light of the Sun by Day, must needs much debilitate these reflected Images of
the Objects upon the Earth, his beams striking our Eyes with so strong
vibrations.

Fourthly and lastly, there being Stars all over the Firmament, so as there
is, it should seem a hundred times more ^asie for natural Causes to hit upon a
Paraster or Parastron (for let Analogy ^mbolden me so to call these seldom or
never seen Phenomenon, the image of a single Star or whole Constellation
reflected from the clouds) then upon a Parclios or Paraselenc. But now the
story of these is more then an hundred times more frequent then that of the
Paraster. For it is so seldom discovered that it is doubted whither it be or
no, or rather acknowledged not to be, of which there can be no reason, but that
the clouds are so ill-polished that they are not able to reflect so
considerable a light as a Star. From whence I th^nk, we may safely gather*
that it is therefore impossible that they should reflect so debile Species as
the Colors, and Shapes of Beasts and Men, and that so accurately, as that we
may see their swords, helmets, shields, spears, and the like.

Wherefore it is plain that these Apparitions on high in the Air, are no
Reflections of any Objects upon Earth; or if it were imaginable that they were,
that some supernatural cause must assist to conglaciate and polish the
Surfaces of the clouds to such an extraordinary accuracy of figure and
smoothness, as will suffice for such prodigious Reflections.

And that these Spirits that rule in the Air may not act upon the Materials
there, as well as Men here upon the Earth work upon the parts thereof, as also
upon the neighboring Elements so far as they can reach, shaping, perfecting,
and directing things, according to their own purpose and pleasure, I know no
reason at all in Nature or Philosophy, for any man to deny. For that the help
of some o^ficious Gen^ is employed in such like Prodigies as these, the
seasonablenesse of their appearance seems no contemptible argument, they being
according to the observation of Historians, the Forerunners of Commotions and
Troubles in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Yet nevertheless as good Artificers as I here suppose* they working upon
nature must be bounded by the Laws of Nature. And Reflection will have its
limits as well as Refractio^, whither for conveiance of Species or kindling of
hea^; the Laws and bounds whereof that discerning Wit Cartesius being well
aware of, does generously and judiciously pronounce; That a burning-Glasse, the
distance of whose focus from the Glass does not bear a less proportion to
the Diameter thereof, then the distance of the Earth from the Sun to the
Diameter of the Sun, will burn no more vehemently then the direct rays of the
Sun will do without it, though in other respects this Glass were as exactly
shaped and curiously polished, as could be exspected from the hand of an Angel.

I have now completed this present Treatise against Atheism in all the three
parts thereof: upon which while I cast mine eye and view that clear and
irrefutable evidence of the cause I have undertaken, the external Appearances
of things in the world so faithfully seconding the undeniable dictates of the
innate Principles of our own minds, I cannot but with confidence aver, That
there is not any one Notion in all Philosophy more certain and demonstrable
then that there is a God.

And verily I think I have ransacked all the corners of every kind of
Philosophy that can pretend to bear any stroke in this Controversy, with that
diligence, that I may safely pronounce, that it is mere brutish Ignorance or
Impudence, no Skill in Nature or the Knowledge of things, that can encourage
any man to pro^esse Atheism, or to embrace it at the proposal of those that
make profession of it.

But so I conceive it is, that at first some famously learned men being not so
indiscreetly zealous and superstitious as others, have been mistaken by Idiots
and traduced for Atheists, and then ever after some one vainglorious Fool or
other, has affected with what safety he could to seem Atheistical, that he
might thereby forsooth be reputed the more learned, or the profounder
Naturallist.

But I dare assure any man, that if he do but search into the bottom of this
enormous Disease of the Soul, as Trismegist truly calls it, he will find
nothing to be the cause thereof, but either Vanity of mind, or brutish
Sensuali^y, and an untamed desire of satisfying a man's own will in every thing,
an obnoxious Conscience, and a base Fear of divine vengeance, Ignorance of the
scantness and insufficiency of second causes, a jumbled Feculencie and
Incomposednesse of the spirits by reason of perpetual Intemperance and
Luxury, or else a dark bedeading Melancholy that so starves and kills the
apprehension of the Soul in divine matters especially, that it makes a man as
inept for such Contemplations, as if his head was filled with cold Earth, or
dry Grave-moulds.

And to such slow Constitutions as these, I shall not wonder, (...) as the
first Part of my discourse must seem marvelous subtle, so the last appear
ridiculously incredible. But they are to remember that I do not here appeal to
the Complexional humors or peculiar Relishes of men, that arise out of the
temper of the body, but to the known and unalterable Idea's of the mind, to the
Phenomenon of Nature and Records of History. Upon the last whereof if I have
something more fully insisted, it is not to be imputed to any vain Credulity of
mine, or that I take a pleasure in telling strange stories, b^t that I thought
sit to fortify and strengthen the Faith of others as much as I could; being
well assured that a contemptuous misbelief of such like Narrations concerning
Spirits, and an endeavor of making them all ridiculous and incredible, is a
dangerous Prelude to Atheism it self, or else a more close and cra^ty
Profession or Insinuation of it. For assuredly that Saying was nothing so true
in Politics, No Bishop, no King; as this is in M^taphysicks, No Spirit, no God.

A Table of the Chapters of each BOOK.
BOOK I.
I. THe seasonable usefulness of the present Discourse, or the Motives that put
the Author upon these endeavors of demonstrating that there is a God. (...)
page 1 II. What is meant by demonstrating there is a God, and that the mind of
men, unless he do vi^lence to his faculties, will fully assent or dissent from
that which notwithstanding may have a bare possibility of being otherwise. 2
III. An attempt toward the finding out the true Notion or Definition of God,
and a clear Conviction that there is an indelible Idea of a Being absolutely
perfect in the mind of Man. 6 IV. What Notions are more particularly comprised
in the Idea of a Being absolutely perfect. That the difficulty of framing the
conception of a thing ought to be no argument against the existence thereof:
the nature of corporeal Matter being so perplexed and intricate, which yet all
men acknowledge to exist. That the Idea of a Spirit is as easy a Notion as of
any other substance what ever. What powers and properties are contained in the
Notion of a Spirit. That Eternity and Infinity, if God were not* would be cast
upon something else; so that Atheism cannot free the mind from such
Intricacies. Goodness, Knowledge and Power, Notions of highest perfection, and
therefore necessarily included in the Idea of a Being absolutely perfect. 8 V.
That the Soul of Man is not Abrasa Tabula, and in what sense she might be said
ever to have had the actual knowledge of eternal truths in her. 13 VI. That
the Soul of Man has of herself actual Knowledge in her, made good by sundry
Instances and Arguments. 14 VII. The mind of man being not unfurnished of
Innate Truth, that we are with confidence to attend to her natural and
unprejudiced Dictates and Suggestions. That some Notions and Truths are at
least naturally and unavoidably assented unto by the soul, whether she have of
her self Actual Knowledge in her or not. And that the definition of a Being
absolutely perfect is such. And that this absolutely perfect Being is God, the
Creator and Contriver of all things. 17 VIII. The first Argument for the
Existence of God taken from the Idea of God as it is representative of his
Nature and Perfection. From whence also it is undeniably demonstrated that
there can be no more Gods then One. 19 IX. The second Argument from the Idea of
God as it is Subjected in our Souls, and is the fittest Natural means
imaginable to bring us to the knowledge of our Maker. That bare possibility
ought to have no power upon the mind, to either hasten or hinder it is assent in
any thing. We being dealt with in all points as if there were a God, that
naturally we are to conclude there is one. 25 X. Natural Conscience, and
Religious Veneration, arguments of the Existence of God. 29 XI. Of the Nature
of the Soul of Man, whether she be a mere Modification of the Body, or a
Substance really distinct, and then whether corporeal or incorporeal. 35
The Second Book.
I. The Universal Matter of the World be it homogeneall or heterogeneall,
self-mov'd or resting of it self, that it can never be contrived into that
Order it is without the Super-in^endency of a God. 43 II. The perpetual
Parallelisme of the Axis of the Earth and its due proportion of Inclination, as
also the course of the Moon crossing the Ecliptic, evident arguments that the
fluid Matter is guided by a divine Providence. The Atheists Sophisme of arguing
from some petty inconsiderable Effects of the Motion of the Matter, that the
said Motion is the cause of all things, seasonably detected and deservedly
derided. 47 III. That Rivers, Quarries of stone, Timber-Wood, Metalls,
Mineralls, and the Magnet, considering the nature of Man, what use he can make
of them, are manifest signs that the rude Motion of the Matter is not left to
it self, but is under the guidance and Super-intendency of an allwise God. 53
IV. A further proof of Divine Providence taken from the Sea, and the large
train of Causes laid together in reference to Navigation. 56 V. Though the mere
motion of the Matter may do something, yet it will not amount to the production
of Plants and Animalls. That it is no Botch in Nature that some Phenomenon be
the results of Motion, others of Substantial Forms. That Beauty is not a mere
Phansy: and that the Beauty of Plants is an argument that they are from an
Intellectual Principle. 59 VI. The Seeds and Signatures of Plants, arguments
of a divine Providence. 64 VII. Arguments of divine Providence drawn from the
Usefulness of Plants. 69 VIII. The Usefulness of Animalls an argument of
divine Providence. 74 IX. Arguments of divine Providence fetched from the
Pulchritude of Animalls, as also from the manner of their Propagation. 78 X.
The Frame or Fabric of the Bodies of Animalls plainly argue that there is a
God. 86 XI. The particular Frames of the Bodies of Fowls or Birds palpable
signs of Divine Providence. 91 XII. Unavoidable Arguments for divine
Providence taken from the accurate Structure of Man's Body, from the Passions of
his Mind, and fitness of the whole Man to be an Inhabiter of the Universe. 93
The Third Book.
I. That, good m^n not always faring best in this world, the great examples of
Divine Vengeance upon wicked and blasphemous Persons are not so convincing to
the obstinate Atheist. The irreligious Jeares and Sacrileges of Dionys^us of
Syracuse. That there have been true Miracles in the world as well as false, and
what are the best and safest ways to distinguish them that we may not be
imposed upon by History. 105 II. The Moving of a Sieve by a Charm.
Coskinom^ncy. A Magical cure of an Horse. The Charming of Serpents. A strange
Example of one Death-strucken as he walked the Streets. A story of a sudden
wind that had like to have thrown down the Gallows at the hanging of two
Witches. 109 III. That Winds and Tempests are raised upon mere Ceremonies or
forms of words proved by sundry Examples. Margaret War^e discharged upon an
Oak at a Thunderclap. Amantius and Rotarius cast headlong out of a Cloud upon
a house top. ^he Witch of Constance seen by the Shepherds to ride through the
Air. III IV. Super^atural Effects observed in them that are Bewitched and
Possessed. The famous Story of Magdalena Crucia. 115 V. Examples of Bewitched
Persons that have had Balls of Hair, Nails, Knives, Wood stuck with Pinns,
pieces of Cloth, and such like trash conveyed into their Bodies, with
examples also of other Supernatural Effects. 119 VI. The Apparition Eckerken.
The Story of the pyed Piper. A Triton or Sea-God seen on the banks of Rub^con.
Of the Imps of Witches, and whether those old women be guilty of so much do^age
as the Atheist fancies them. That such things pass betwixt them and their Imps
as are impossible to be imputed to Melancholy. The examination of John Winnick
of Molesworth. The reason of Scaling Covenants with the Diveil. 123 VII. The
nocturnal Conven^^les of Witches; that they have often d^ssolved and
disappeared at the naming of the Name of God or Jesus Christ; and that the
party thus speaking has found himself alone in the fields many miles from home.
The Dancing of Men, Women and cloven-footed Satyrs at midday; John Michaell
piping from the bough of an Oak, etc. 127 VIII. Of Fairy Circles. A larger
discussion of those Controversies betwixt Bodinus and Remigius, viz. whether
the Bodies of Witches be really transformed into the shape of Wolves and other
Creatures; whether the Souls of Witches be not sometimes at those nocturnall
Conventicles, their Bodies being left at home; as also whether they leav^ not
their bodies in those Ecstasies they put themselves in, when they promise to
fetch certain news from remote places in a very short time. 132 IX. The
Coldness of those bodies that Spirits appear i^ witnessed by the experience of
Cardan and Bourgotus. The natural Reason of this Coldness. That the Devil
does really lie with Witches. That the very substance of Spirits is not fire.
Spirits skirmishing on the ground. Field sights and Sea Fights seen in the
Air. 137 X. A very memorable story of a certain pious man, who had the
continual Society of a Guardian Genius. 140 XI. Certain Enquiries upon the
preceding Story; as, What these Guardian Genii may be. Whether one or more of
them be allotted to every man, or to some none. What may be the reason of
Spirits so seldom appearing; And whether they have any settled Shape or no.
What their manner is of assisting men in either Devotion or Prophecy. Whether
every man's complexion is capable of the Society of a good Genius. And lastly
whether it be lawful to pray to God to send such a Genius or Angel to one or
no. 144 XII. That whether the Species of things have been from all Eternity, or
whether they rose out of the Earth by degrees in Time, the Frame of them is
such, that against all the Evasions of the Atheist they naturally imply that
there is a God. 151 XIII. That the Evasions of the Atheists against Apparitions
are so weak and silly, that it is an evident argument that they are convinced
in their own judgments of the truth of these kinds of Phenomenon, which forces
them to answer as well as they can, though they be so ill provided. 158
FINIS.

