AN HEAVENLY WONDER OR, A Christian clothed with CHRIST.

Purposely penned to comfort CHRIST'S Sin-sick-SPOUSE.

By SAM: MOORE, Minister of the Gospel of God sometimes at Brides in
Fleet-streete, LONDON.

There appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a woman Clothed with the Sun, and
the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars, Rev. 12.
1. Thy beauty is perfect through my comeliness which I have put upon thee,
Ezekiel. 16. 14. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1650.

To the truly Honorable, and my very well beloved friends in Christ, and
quondam Auditors; Col. Anthony Stapley, Col. Herbert Morley, Col. John Downs,
Mr. Will. Hay, Mr. Francis Allen, Alderman of the famous City of London; and Mr.
Henry Herbert, Esquires, Members of the Right Honorable the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
Honorable Sirs,
SIn has an ill name all the Scriptures over, and it has not its name for
naught; it never had a good look from God, God does as it were strive for
comparisons, to set out the vileness thereof: its ^zek, 16.6. ^h. 24. 11, 12.
^om. 3. 13. ^zek. 16.8.
compared to the blood, and pollutions of Infants, to the c^rruption of rotten
Sepulchers, to the scum of a seething pot, and what not? all which are but
shadows of its deformity, the substance thereof is beyond compare: yet lays
^ex jubet, gra^^ ju^at, praeci^^ Deus quod ^e praestat.
Christ his skirt over the uncomly sinner, to make him an heavenly beauty,
never asking ought with him, but what he has promised to work in him; and
this is the fruit of his crucifixion, resurrection, ascension, and reign, the
acceptance of the person, and ablation of the sin; does not this make us
wonder? why cry we not out, who made us to differ? Lord! How 'ist that thou
show thy self to us, and not unto the world? That was a good ^hn 14. 22.
^^zianzen. ^^rist has ^ ubera as ^ll as his ^bera, ways ^ consolati^^, as well
as ^^rection.
saying, Lord, I am an Instrument for thee to touch; but our steeled hearts,
till touched with this Loadstone, are neither drawn nor driven: Christ
appears, Lawyer-like, in Heaven, for his own Clients, to nonsuit all the
Devils accusations, and make his darts dintles: who is the great Master of
Requests there, but he, who is near us in incarnation? and can he know us at a
distance, in the business of intercession? this is that Jesus, who gave both
virtue, and value to his own death, both to satisfy, sanctify, and save; this
is he, of whom we may well say, as writers of the Jasper; its easier to admire,
then Serm^ non va let exprimere, experimento opus est. Chrysostom.
declare it, and far more easy to say what he is not, then what he is; and
truly, there shall be a succession of Christ's name and fame, till he has given
up to his father, his all at last, with behold here I am, and the children thou
Heb. 2. 13. Amor Dei est ecstaticu^ sui nec se sinit esse juris. Propter te
domine, propterte. Quicquid agas, propter Deum agas, do all for Gods sake. Qui
misit unigenitum, immisit vultum, quid tandem tibi negaturus est? Bern.
have given me; O! that his love would beget its own likeness, that many
might have an aptness of reception, for the heavenly influence, image, and
impresse; if we give not him our affections, are not all for God, our actions
will be abortive, still borne.

What! that the flesh should be clothed with the Spirit, and sin covered with
grace, does not this attract love? what will do it then? besides this, after
once Christ is ours, we are armed against all crosses, outward or inward.
Credit God should we then, who giving great things, gives, in those gifts, a
grant of the less; we may take his bare word, and trust him, and that against
sense, ^oh. 6.35, 36. Hic credere est ^dere. August-Nunquam con^usi Deo
consisi. Deuteronomy, 32.36.
in things invisible, and against reason, in things incredible; for true trust
in this Trustee, is a remedy before the remedy comes; that being brought, and
made present to faith, which is distant, and as it were lost to sense; Thus
Abraham, and others saw afar off, what by faith they embraced as it were at
hand. No such Midwife as faith; it has delivered, even graves of their The
Word is ^ompared to ^oney, who is nature it is to ^urge green ^ounds, though it
^ause pain to ^he exulce^are parts. ^ul^era purgat, (...) mordet, ^^ex. Aph^o
problem.
dead, and gathered one contrary out of another, Honey out of the Rock. Hence
absent joys are present, wants are plenitudes, and calamity is beguiled; as
good society, deals with the time. Nazianzen rejoiced that he had something of
value (viz. his Athenian learning) to loose for Christ. Anexagoras, being asked
wherefore he was borne, replied, Ut Coelum contemplar, that I might busy my
thoughts about Heaven; Hierome to comfort an afflicted Hermit, wished him to
take a few turns in Paradise, by meditation, In Paradiso mente d'eambulare tam
di^ in ^remo non eris. Fox, act san^ mon p. 1484.
and assured him, so long as he had that in mind, he should not be sensible
that he was solitary, and alone. This day, said Master Bradford Martyr; I
think, Hearty Hooper, Trusty Tailor, and Sincere Saunders, end their course,
and receive their crowns; the next am I, which hourly wait for the Porter to
open me the gates, after them to enter into that rest; God forgive me my great
unthankefulnesse, for that exceeding great mercy. Thus like Rivers, all saints
run into the Sea, Jesus Christ, their Ocean sweetness, even into him, who is
savourest to the saints in deepest distress, and helps men forsaken of hope:
it is he that made Martyrs go as merrily to dye, as ever they did to dine; who
then can turn his back on sweet Christ's bleeding embracements, and kick at his
naked bowels?

But this, even this alas! is the Cordolium (hearts grief) of the gracious,
that this Lamb is prized only of a few, the most are but pictures of Piety;
There Is something more I would (...) ad ^stias, Christi^ ^os ad Leoner, ^d
ignem, ad ^nem, said. ^e primitive ^ersecutors, ^ertullian and now the ^apists.
^mnis Christi^us crucianus. ^uther. ^eb. 2. 10. ^omentaneum ^^ quod cruciat
^ternum quod ^electat. ^elch. Adam-^appy was ^^at tongue ^^ the primi^^ve time,
that ^ould som^d ^^t aliquid ^avidicu^, any^^ing of Da^ds doing, ^uch more
^^ppy is he (...) speaks ^t, aliquid ^hristi, any ^^ing of christ from
^^perience.
mind you of, ab^a^ion of sin sweetens our sufferings, prompts and heartens us
to bear them; every Christian is a Crucian, Grace is in continual conflict
with corruption, only glory makes a total conquest; this Captain of
Salvation was made perfect through suffering for sin, that he might bring many
sons to that glory: sufferings hurt not when there is an assurance our sins are
Sepultur'd in the Saviors wounds. Master Knox a little before his death, rose
out of his bed, and being asked wherefore, he, being then so sick as he was,
would do so? he replied, that he had sweet meditations of the resurrection of
Christ that night before, and now he would go into the Pulpit, and impart that
to others, he had felt in his own soul. The nearer any thing is to its
center, the stronger and swifter it moves; the wine of the spirit of God, and
the water of life is strongest in Saints, when drawing to an end. Spiritual
motions are quickest, when natural ones are slowest; most sensible are they
when the body begins to be sense less, most lively when Saints lie dyeing, the
Sun shines most amiable toward the descent; and rivers, the nearer they run
to the Sea, the sooner are they met with the tide; O it is wondrous sweet to
ponder the doings and sufferings of Christ, by which he has made some
sinlesse, all fair and comely in his own ornaments. Truly Saints should rise
with their Savior, and think on their own country, their fathers house, and
meditate the heavenly mansions above, more then inferior good; This world's
but their place Fugiendum es^ clarissimam patriam, ibi pater, ibi omnia.
Plotinus. Discupio solvi tecumque O Christ manner. Portio fac reg ni sim
quota* cunque tui. Pareus a little before his death. Vlterius was the Emblem of
Charles the Fifth.
of commoration, heaven's their place of conversation, that has foundations,
but earth hangs on nothing, as Job has said; and a sanctified fancy climbes
upon creatures as on a Ladder to Heaven; Saints have Heaven aforehand, in
praetio, in promisso, in primitiis. Some, have their non ultra, are not winged
for heaven, but the gracious have their ulterius, still on, on, farther yet;
and their sublimius, yet higher still, their profundius, still deeper, and the
deeper, the sweeter, if we dive in the Ocean Christ; and a Christians motto
should be, None but Christ, none but Christ, as said ^amberts ^cts and mon.
the Martyr, when he held up such hands as he had, with his fingers ends
flaming (...) the more pain, the more gain, said Ignatius, I had rather be a
Martyr, then a Monarch, its to my loss if you bate me any thing of my
sufferings said Gordius; ^emporalia Dei ^^vis im^ensa ^n pereunt, sed
^rturiunt. ^ishop of ^illaine. ^oh. Manlij. ^^. com. p. 539. ^ist holy war.
things laid out for God do not perish, but flourish, our dyeing comforts are
alive in Christ our life and theirs. The passion-dayes of Martyrs were called,
Natalitia salutis, salvation birth-dayes, the day break of eternal brightness.

The next thing is that we lissen and comply with the motions of the gracious
spirit, and withdraw our consent ^ Saint in the ^ays of sin ^il, nisi coa^^us
agit, does nothing with ^ good will.
from reiteration of sin interceded for and by us forsaken; a sin which is
directly against the son, though it is true in depraved nature, the act and
consent go both to evil, the stubborn voice whereof is, I do evil and will
do it, yet in grace, though the act go sometimes to sin, the consent is absent,
and its mournful voice is, the evil which I would not that do I; in Glory,
the act and consent go both to good, and all good, and neither of them to any
evil, the triumphant voice of which, is, the evil which I would not, I do
not, and the good which I would, that do I.

Sirs, We live in an age wherein there is a succession of raw and unconcocted
conjectures, and conceptions, Sinceritas serenitatis matter. Rev. 3.4.
of good and evil; be you instant and constant with God, for soundness of
judgment, and sincerity, which is the Mother of serenity; now alas!
Pseudo-Christ*s have brought forth Pseudo-Christians, yet happy is the man that
defiles not his garments, he shall walk with God in white, for he is worthy.

Let fallen brothers be restored in the Spirit of meekness, set in joint
again, as the Greek word is; as Chyrurgions Gal. 6.1.
and bone-setters, who handle their patients tenderly, from whom this metaphor
^e hodie, and ^go cras, he ^ll to day, ^ may I to ^^orrow. Bern. ^ Tim. 2.8.
^antillum tan ^llum adhuc ^usillum, christ will ^me ere ^ng.
is taken; some, says the Apostle, have erred concerning the truth, or as the
word is, have missed the mark, like unskill full Archers, or inconsiderate
Mariners, by mis-reckoning of one point, have missed the Haven, and run on the
Rocks; airie contestors, and empty strivers, that have not only cumbred, but
almost covered, this part of the earth; but stand you fast, quit your selves
like men, be strong, hold fast what you have received of the Lord, let no man
take your crown, and pray ^uando Chri^^s Magister ^ am cito dici^r quod
doce^r. August.
you may ever lie and live under the dew of Christ's lips.

Honorable Sirs, You have honored God, and God has honored you; I hope
Theodosius his opinion is yours, ^eronimus. ^^r, laudat a^lator, sed non ^
verus ama.
who would rather be Membru^ Christi, then Caput Imperii, a member of Christ,
then the head of the Empire. Suis quisque laudibus favet, I think not true of
your Honors, Sine blanditia dico, I flatter not, but I am ambitious to animate
your courage and candor for God.

I bless God, I judge it a greater mercy to imitate, then to encomionize
virtue; many future generations will better express the worth of such worthies
works, than can the extentions of my Pen, when the History of commonwealths
Patriots, shall be made extant.

Finally, You have here stamped the impresse of my obliged respects; to allow
Phil. 1.7. Sanctior est copula cordis quam corporis. Illi linguarum ego aurium
Dominus. Tacit. fie on a Zoilus he will carpe at an Homer. Quem in intimis
visceribus habeo ad convivendum, and commoriendum, said Bradford. in a Letter
to Lawrence Saunders his fellow Martyr, Act. and Mon. fol. 1483.
an oblivion of your love to me, and the truth, would be ingratitude in the
highest degree; I have you in my heart, and that not without cause; nor do I
forget how you held your selves concerned in all my sufferings, under the lash
of lewd tongues, neither that encouragement which in the course of my Ministry
I received from you; truly, thankfulness is not measured of God, or good men,
by the weight, but by the will of the retributor: I assure my self that a
public acknowledgement of your public favors toward me, will be as kindly
taken as given; And if by these labors, which are not unto lassitude, you may
reap a yet farther profit, from your very humble servant, and loving friend
and debtor, you will glad his spirit who is,

And resolves to be, through the strength of God, an unfeigned friend to you*
and all the members of mystical Christ, until days are lost in the ancient of
days.

Sam. Moor.

Errata's in the Epistle to the Reader.
Line 34. r. (...) l. 67. r. giddie heads with a comma.

Errata's in the Book.
Page 12. line 3. dele for all, and r. man. p. 13. l. 3. dele a, p. 20. l. 4.
r. the l. 5. r. the, p. 55. l. 16. r. where is, and l. 27. dele in, and in the
margent r. (...) p. 67. l. 18. r. Lenis. p. 68. l. 9. r. her, p. 69. l. 2. r.
(...) l. 15. r. (...), and l. 23. r. fates, p. 70. l. 1. r. begging, p. 71. l.
10. r. put, p. 74. in marg. r. Lachrimas.

Some other lesser faults there be, as mis-pointing, and mis-joyning of words
and sentences, which the Printer desires the Reader to reform with his Pen.

To the pious Reader.
THE sense of Christ's love so swells and ascends; that the Spouse in her
Canticles is not Master of her words, in telling his worth: every word is like
a Mountain. If thou come to his person, nature, offices, honors; Myrrh,
Aloes, Cinnamon, Frankincence, all the powders of Merchants, that ever Africa,
Egypt, or other Countries had and have, are but short, poor shadows, and
hungry generals to him; he is all abstractive sweetness, all loves, Cant. 5.
16.
all desires, and all of him, every piece of him, is love and loveliness it
self: yet when all is said that can be, Spouse like, may we say, he stands
behind our Cant. 2. 9.
wall, q. d. the veil of our flesh: and as he cannot seeeme, so neither can
we see, the half of what he is, ^ill this veil is taken off, and we have
entered the veil of heaven. And as he is, so is his love, ineffable, not
conceptible. Christ's love gets the better of all souls that go to heaven; for
what is great Heaven, but an house full of vanquished Captives to Christ's
drawing love. It Is sweet swimming in those waters where sweet Christ casts his
Net. We may, like the fish, be caught by the food or pleasure of this Fisher
of men; his baits take with the eye and taste too. Could Paul, being crafty,
catch ((...), pia fraud) with an holy guide; how much more 2 Cor. 12. 16.
Christ: he, with one cast of his countenance, can view all in heaven, and all
on earth; giving out his heart full of burning love, East, West, North, and
South; and gather into himself all who are given him. O the fulness of love,
joy, peace, prosperity, and pleasures! the first fruits of that land, which
lies beyond time, and death, must needs be above expression. In the interim,
these things make a marvel, that God is kind to the unthankful and Luke 6.
35. Romans 4. 5. Matthew. 5. 45 Romans 12. 2^
evil; justifies the ungodly; lets his sun shine on the unjust; overcomes
evil with good; and speaks well of such as deserved ill: this, even this, is
the subject of the following discourse. In which wonder, thou have somewhat
more then a taste of the true sense in which Christ's Spouse is spotless, all
fair; and how sin is, and is not charged on Saints; What sins they commit
not; in what sense they are sinlesle; how far so, by Sonship, and Saint-ship;
and the fruit that all Eo nomine Considered as Saints.
such Gods gracious doings and dealings should have in pardoned and purged
sinners. I make no plea for the Press; Let the fruits of my former Labors
extant, rid me of the toil. I am weary, and almost wildred in waiting for the
result of extremes, though a glimps of their nature I have had Some load the
head with what is the members; others the members with what appertains to the
head: if my fault, it is against my will, this Treatise tells thee. Does thy fancy
want food, this is not for thee; quaintness in discourses of Christ, like
painting in windows, does more darken the light then adorn it. Giddy heads
question, sick reach after little but words; and question satis vexata is the
best fruit of their intelligence. Such want not mercenary medlers to match
them, whose food, at the best, is but piety ad extra, the superficies of
Goodness. It Is a comfort to some, that airy notions nourish them not. All are
not Chamelions; some cannot live only on Sunt qui perhibent Chamae^eonta
victitare ^aere solo.
air; every thing is not bread for every soul: the sincere, immixed milk of
Gods word best answers the appetite of the empty. All wine, milk, honey, and
fatted Calves killed, together with all choicest edibles, are but imperfect
pictures, and painted nourishments, if compared to Christ's glorious
Gospel-dainties. Oh! when precious Christ lets out to the soul the sweet smell
of ointments powered forth of his death and wounds, it is a rare feast then, and
not till then, does the soul see, smell, and taste apples of love, free grace,
satisfied justice, and propagated mercy; and then such rarities raise the
wonder to inform the judgment, and raise the affections; for Christ, and
toward him, is most in my eye. Oh mortals I has Mammon your hearts, and the
heart of your love and life? what shall Messiah have? O munde immunde, as he,
in an holy indignation, said of this world; how fastens our purest substance on
thy pollutions? why seeks it rest in that whose composition is all of tumults?
Nusquam inveni requiem nisi in Christo.

To conclude; if thy thirst's like his in his flight, thou may perhaps in
this wonder, find, what to thirst may afford, if not sweetness; yet savor.

Give God the glory, reap thou the good; and I have, what I hope, I aimed at,
in penning this small piece.

The Lord lead thee into all truth, and me into thy mind, when thou seek,
and meetest him in his way.

Thine in the Lords welbeloved: his Christ, the Saints Jesus, SAM: MOOR.

AN Heavenly Wonder. OR, A Christian clothed with Christ.
Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
CHAP. 1.
SECT. 1. All Fair.
ALl Christ's Encomium's Psalm. 45. 11. (...) Vnde nomen, Joppa a pulchritudine
and Elegantia, a (...) derivatur Leigh. Crit. sacr.
are sweetly empharicall, beautiful; not only in color, but comely
proportion and Elegancy; attractive beauty, such as draws love and liking, is
the import of this word: and it is a word of double form, to note out double, q.
d. very excellent beauty, and augment the signification. The righteous is more
excellent Prove. 12. 26.
then his neighbor, why? he fulfils all righteousness? that is his
comeliness; it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness said Christ: but
Matthew. 3. 15.
the next neighbor to a righteous man fulfills but some righteous things
only, therefore not so excellent. Beautiful, in thy graces, the ornaments I
have given thee; thou art comely through my comeliness Ezekiel. 16. 14.
which I have put upon thee: thou art my Spouse; but I am thy beauty: thine
own is not, has lost its being. Where Is room for vain boasting, glorying in
the flesh? Vxor fulget radijs Mariti Velut inter Stellas Lund Minores.
the Spouse shines out indeed, but it is in the rich rays of her husbands
beauty. Christ's luster shines out in Christians, as the Moon among the lesser
Stars, and their glory's but the sparklings forth of his spotless nature, in
them; Christ's beauty fills all the corners and concavities of the widest desires
of souls. Thou O Lord art Psalm. 3. 3.
my glory, said David the King: we hold all things in Capite tenure from
Christ, thence let us take our name: will you mind that satisfying saying? that
you may be filled Ephesians. 3. 19.
with all the fullness of God, filled with God, a full expression, with the
fullness of God, that is more; yet higher, with all the fullness of God. Beauty
in God is the amenity and loveliness of his nature, and all infinite
perfections, as they offer themselves to his own understanding, and to the
understanding of men and Angels in their pleasantness; and this, even this, is
the All of a Christians beauty. Is It queri'd how this can be, that Christ and
Christians share in beauties? We answer,

SECT. 2.
It Is 1. by regeneration and that into the union and samenesse of Christ's
nature: the Spouse of the first Adam came from his own side or loins, so did
the wife of the second; see how sweetly divine favors hang together: the
Father opened his bosom, and the Son opened his side, to make the chief of
sinners, the chief of Saints; the Spouse opens too; I opened to my beloved
said she; when once sweet Christ was opened in Paul's Ministry, Acts 16. 14.
Lydia's heart opened too, that she took in her husband and all his sayings;
there is no love lost be twixt head and members you see. Cor. 7. 1.
We are made partakers of the divine nature, and he is partaker of humane
nature. Christ and Christians are Copartners in natures divine, humane. Such
souls are truly (...) superterrestrial, and the soul ^eb. 2. 16.
of such souls, i. e. Christ their life is so too. Christ matches with those of
his own Stock, and Tribe, Husband and Spouse have but one and the same
Father: the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Christ has begotten us again, says the Scriptures. Christ's a Christians
near Kinsman, yea brother as well as Husband; go tell my brethren I ascend to
my Father, and your John 20. 17.
Father, to my God, and your God. Sweet is the dew of such sweet lips, which
lips, like Lillies, drop Cant. 5. 13.
such sweet smelling Myrrh.

SECT. 3.
2. BY Transnomination, the change of their names. To have a samenesse of name
from the samenesse of nature with Christ, beautifies believers bountifully.
When the match is made up between Christ and the soul, that soul bears her
Sovereign's name. The Spouse of the first Adam and her husband had both one
name, God called their name Adam in Genesis 5. 2.
the day that he made them: so the Spouse of the second Adam, in the change of
her condition from a single, to a married estate with Christ, the Lamb, had a
change of her name, the head is called Christ, Cor. 12. 12. ^^put and cor^^s
unus est ^hristus, Aug. ^al. 3. 16. ^rap in Locum. ^cts 9. 4. ^salm 24. 6.
Chron: 22.9 ^iodate on ^ant. 6. 13. ^insworth on ^^e same.
and the members are called Christ. Why persecutest thou me, i. e. mystical
Christ, my body. And God is called Jacob in the Psalms; Christ is Solomon, in
this sweet song, in Hebrew Sholomoh of peace; and his Church is called
Shulamite by her Bride-groomes name; and therefore the forming of the word is
rather active then passive; Christ and Christians are homonymon, of the same
name; he is called the fairest among men, she the fairest among ^sal. 45. 2.
^ant. 1. 8. 5.
women. Believers, these are sweets we speak of, Christ is called your
fullness; of his fullness have we received: and ye are called his ^ohn 1. 16.
fullness; his body is the fullness of ^phes. 1. 23.
him that fills all in all. It Is one branch of the new Covenant, that God
would give his people a new Isa. 62. 2.
name, yea a better name then is that of sons and daughters. Beauty is a
taking thing, can do much with Christ, thou have ravished my heart, carried,
snatched away my heart, my Spouse, and God will do much for his names sake,
it is a coercive* cogent argument, which takes with God, when nothing else will;
Thou O Lord art in the mids of us, Jer. 14.9.
and we are called by thy name, leave us not, leave us not for thy names sake;
Christ and Christians are name-sakes, have but one name.

SECT. 4.
3. BY hereditation or birthright. Children of men are not all Heirs borne;
but all Gods Children are first-bornes: great is the comfort of such; every
Spouse of Christ is a lawful borne Heir of all Christ's Ornaments, goodness,
they are heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heires with Christ; words like
Mountains of Pearls: Christians, Christ's beauti's your birthright, you are
black, but comely; black in your selves, but comely in Christ; Loathsome in
your selves, but lovely in this Son of love, and the life of your Luster is
laid up in him; that when he appears, you also may appear with him in glory. A
^oloss. 3. 4.
believer (my friends) is very rich and very honorable; say he were a beggar on
a dunghill, for Christ's not poor, and he is joynt-heire with Christ; a
Lazarus full of running sores, and bowed to reception of relief from dogs and
clothing of Rags; he is all (...) ^till, nor is his body like a Leopards that
cannot change his skin. Pearls are pearls, though in midst of puddle. The
Father of Christ has begotten his Spouse to an inheritance incorruptible, and
Pet. 1. 4.
that fades not away, in which place of Peter, the Holy Ghost expresses their
inheritance by two most fit words; the one is (...) Flos qui nunquammarcescit,
dictus inde immortalis ab a and (...). Plin. lib. 21. cap. 11.
the name of a precious Stone, which, though cast into fire and soyled, cannot
be blemished; but is the more brightened; the other is (...), the name of a
flower, which, Writers tell us, may be kept continually fresh and green; all
Saints are high born Children, of a Princely seed, bloud-royall; they are Lords
of the Higher Luke 22. 30.
House, divide the throne with Christ by birthright, they are Christ's
assessors, and fellow-Peers, to judge the world with him; yea to judge Angels
beauties; their birthright, inheritance, heritage. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.


SECT. 5.
4. BY propagation* Christ's beautie's of a spreading nature, there is a vastness
in its extentions, it goes far and wide, and it is the covering of the
uncomelinesse of all his Lineage; sinful deformity can go a great way, it can
stain all externalls, internalls too: yet Christ's beauty out-vies, out-runs,
and out-lives it, will spread all over the black Spouse, till she is comely
without and within. Sprincklings of Christ's blood spreading inwardly, being
first shead abroad, will fetch out all sinful spots and stains, 'twill make a
man shine like the Sun in the kingdom of his father; this heavenly Pelican,
revives his dead young ones with scattering Revel. 1. 5.
his own hearts blood among them; and when wrath burnt about them, cast himself
into the midst thereof to quench it, all this from the appearance of Christ in
them; He appeared to put away sin, viz. in the same sense the Laws are said to
be made void, when they loose their (...). Heb. 9. 26.
power and force. Art thou Christ's Spouse? sin shall never so spread in thee,
so as to cover and overpower all that's good in thee, make it life-lesse,
love-lesse, if once precious Christ lays his skirt over thee, the shame of thy
nakedness, which is thy deformity will, be invisible: Light from Heaven will
first or last, shine round about thee, and then darkest night will be lightest
day, then thou will see no corner in thy heart, where Christ's beauty has not
been: this ocean of glory has his rivers running out from him, which, when they
have cleansed hearts, return into him again. Let sweet Christ load thee with
fetters of Love, that thou may sink deep, even down to the bottom of
this Sea of grace, if not a bottomless, fathomlesse one. The brightness of
pearls is from the frequent beatings of the Suns beams upon them, thence
become they radiant; every Christian, is Christ's pearl, and all his beauty, is
beaten in by beams of Christ's beauty.

SECT. 6.
5. BY paction comes beauty too, Thou shall not be for another, Hosea 3. 3.
for all, so also will I be for thee. Christ keeps himself and gives himself
for Christians; they do the like for Christ: when he bestows himself on a
soul, he brings his Dowry with him. Christians, do you note this? in the
league of Christ with the soul, there are exchanges made of glory for shame,
beauty for deformity; sweet Christ makes such matches as never man made; gives
gold for dirt, clothes earth with Heaven, gives glory for shame, a massy
Crown for a massy Cross, takes off a poor souls rags, and returns
robes; and gets nothing with us, but a burden of sins, as heavy as a
mountain of iron, as hell it self; a burden which he must bear and bury;
yet we poor souls can be shie of this Suitor, and often say him nay. Ah
Lord! what a wonder is this, will no body take it up, stand arnazed and amused
in earnest! a Christian being married to Christ, in 1 Cor. 3. 21. Psalm. 37. 11.
League with Christ, makes all things thine by paction; art thou hungry? all
the bread 'ith world's thy fathers; art thou in a Ship at Sea? thou' art in thy
fathers waters; art thou in the fields? they are thy redeemers, thy husbands,
and what see thou which is not his? all the Woods, Trees, Flowers, Corn,
Cattle, and birds in every bush, call thy God father, and they are all thine,
not in possession, but in a choice, freehold Heritage; thou have the best
income of all, and thy Land is named all things; the worst things are thine by
way of reduction, Rev. 21. 7.
and the best things are thine in way of reversion; Tanquam haeres ex ass;
There Is a sweet communication of all Christ's beauty, goods, and goodness, to
the wife of his bosom: and it is he that heads all her glory, Crowns all her
comforts, and converts all her crosses into contentments; his presence is her
Paradise, his victory her safety. O! Christ, is a condition sweetning Husband,
he makes our sour herbs, and bitter pills sweet, our rough ways smooth, and
does plain all mountains that intervene twixt us and him, our souls, and his
blessed bosom; and all this, to strengthen our motion that way. Christians by
Covenant, are coupled to Christ; the Tabernacle Col. 3. 14.
Curtains had their juncture by Loopes; Christ and his members their juncture
by Love, the bond of perfection or couple thereof. (...).


SECT. 7.
6. BY Speculation Spiritual, or Contemplation of the same kind: Roses,
Lillies, Meadows, Gardens; and all things fair and pleasant, ravish the sight
first; and then woo and win the heart next, and so take rooting there; sights
of Christ's beauty, if clear, are transforming, Colamus huncdeum reverenter
donec a spead speciem transeamus.
and the more the eye receives that light, the more is its strength of sight,
Christ's beauty being more quickening then killing to the optic nerves and
powers; believers do contemplate, by faith, the glorious Light of God, his
mercy, truth, and goodness in the Gospells Glass, thence they receive his
impresse, Image, and likeness; We, with open face, beholding 2 Cor. 3. 18.
the Lords glory, are changed into the same Image: Where, the Apostle Diodate
on the place.
intimates a likeness, or samenesse of Glory, coming in by holy speculation;
and a graduall likeness too from glory to glory. i. e. say some, from grace to
grace: for fulness of grace is the best thing in Trap. in locum.
glory, next to its Author; other things, as joy, peace, and love, are but the
shinings forth of this fulness of grace, in glory. The parts of vision are
precede^t to the parts of action, hence the right eye is preferred before the
right hand, God himself although he had neither accession nor intermission of
delight, yet by way of Emphasis to usward seems to give his vidit the
precedence of his fiat. q. d. he Rein. Pass. and facul. p. 204.
joyed not so much in that he had given the Creatures their natures, as in
that he saw their goodness. Hence, say some, the day of his rest was more
holy than the day of his labor, that being appointed for Contemplation, as the
other for production of his Creatures. Holy Speculation and Contemplation of
Christ, has a great hand in letting in the light of the beauty and Glory of
Christ. He that studies Moses his Optickes, and has a Patriarchs eye, makes
the best choice by the sight of the invisible Essence; an elegant
contradiction, seeing him who is invisible. Christ's Heb. 11. 27.
Spouse is all fair, in what sense and sort you have seen.

There is no spot in thee.
CHAP. 2.
SECT. 1.
ITs the good will of him that dwelt in the bush to call things Dent. 33. 16.
Romans 4. 17.
which are not as though they were: Holiest Majesty pleases to overlooke
greatest impuritie; sins of Saints are superlative, as acted under the
received Soveraigntie of Christ their King: yet behold a wonder, Saints sin,
and do not sin, have spots, and are spotless; Exodus 15. 11.
its his saying who is wonderful in Pro. 10. 12.
holiness. There Is a sin-covering Love, which has covered and conquered
corruptions of Saints, yea, multitudes by multiplied pardons; her sins which
were many are forgiven Luke 7. 47.
her; this bids the godly Be of good cheer. Saints sins are ever before them,
yet cast behind their God; My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51. 3.
says the soul in Languor, and then makes melody with her fathers love; Thou
in love to my soul ^sa, 38. ^7.
have cast all my sins behind thy back. Their Crimson sins have lost their
color, and had their Sepulture in their Saviors wounds, their foul sins
are lost in this open fountain, to whom themselves are a fountain sealed; yea
Zech. 13. 1.
his fountain of purest springs and fairest gardens. Thus speaks he, whose
lips, like Lillies, drop sweet Cant. 4.12. 15
smelling Myrrh,

There Is no spot in thee. Cant. 5. 13.
The word, in the Originals of three Languages, imports any out-ward blemish in
the body, as blind, lame, or deformed in any limb or Levit. 21. 18. 21. Deuteronomy.
15. 21. and 17. 1. Rev. 14. 1. 5. (...) unde (...), and the Chaldee, Mum^: quo
verbo L^x. illud frequenter reddunt Macula, ^^abes, vitium.
part, and is here fitly applied, by the Holy Ghost, to blemishes in the soul,
h. e. sins, vices, and spots of the inward man. Christ, when he wooes his
Bride; to win her, works over those miracles on her soul, which he was wont
to work upon bodies of old; makes the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the
dumb to speak, the lame to walk, and the dead to live again, sets all to
rights where he comes to cohabite. Christ is (...), spotless, and a Christian
is (...) too, they are both immaculate, their union grounds it; so in the Text,
the Spouse is said to have no spot in 1 Pet. 1. 19. Ephesians. 5. 27. V^^ij expers,
irreprehensibilis; in quibus, nec momos invenit quod carpat. Cornelius a Lapide.
her too. That place, in the first of John, the third and ninth verse, gives
you a light into the opening of this phrase of speech; He that is borne of God
does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is borne of God; he sins not, viz. unto death, as some will; he sins
not, viz. he resists sin, as others; he sins not, viz. as a servant, or subject
of sin, say a third sort: Proprie significat rem aliquam certis qualitatibus
orno dicitur enim a nomine (...) qualis. Leig. C^^r. Sac.
the Greek is very emphaticall, and signifies so to sin, as to make a trade
of sin, to make it ones work and business, (...), q. d. he does not act the
sin; does not sin artificially, as do others; has no art in sinning; though
he act it, he does not art it, does not (...), make much of sin, not curiously
and industriously adorn and set it forth with all art and skill, as the word
properly imports. One place more in he eight of John, and the thirty fourth
verse, where the same word is used, (...), Whosoever commits sin, is the
servant of sin; but the best of men commit sin, even of them who are Christ's
own servants, freed from sin: the meaning then of that place is this, he sins
as a servant of sin, who makes sin, makes a trade of sinning. So in the Romans,
that which our translation has, Fulfill not the lusts of the ^om. 13. 14.
flesh; the Greek has it, Do not make (...) etc.
the lusts of the flesh. He that commits sin is of the Devil, says the
Scripture, that is, that creates sin, for sin is the Devils Creature, his
workmanship; and his Children, his John 3. 8.
works they will do, said Christ to the boasting Jews. There Is no spot in
thee, some spots are not the childrens, we will show which they are next, in what
sense they are spoken spotless, how and why so called.

SECT. 2.
1. UNpardonable spots are not the Spouses; she cannot out-sin pardons, she
may sin away the comforts of her body, but can she sin away her soul? an
unpardonable sin is a sin unto death; such killing crimes she perpetrates not,
sins against the Father and sins against the Son may be forgiven, but sins
against the Spirit shall never be forgiven, she is on the other side the grave
of the last sin mentioned; she has no sin that God has not pardoned, hence her
sin is not now, iniquities of Israel are sought for, and there are none, and
Judahs Jer. 50. 20. Mr. Caryll on Job Chap. 7. v. 21. p. 717.
sins shall not be found, because pardoned, as was promised, as Jeremiah has
it; pardon of sin destroys sin: as to forgive a debt is to make it no debt; so
a pardoned sin is in Gods account no sin; pardon of sin is our acquittance from
sin, our quietus est, sealed in the blood of the Lamb; all proscesse at Law,
is to to such, staid, prohibited, as to them; They have a Propitiator; and
he is their propitiation, says John; in Hebrew, Copher, he coffers up, as 1 John 2. 2.
it were, and covers all their sins; he is their covering: the Apostle seems
to speak him so, in allusion to the Arc, covering the two Tables within it;
The mercy-seate covering the Arc, and the Cherubims covering the mercy-seate,
and one another: so Christ has covered a Christians sins, all his sins, and the
curse, sins demerit, and him has the Father set forth for the remission ^om. 3.
25.
of their sins; set forth, (...), pointing out the same thing, even with the
finger, as the word is for remission, (...), for the relaxion ^ioda^e.
or releasement of sin, as of bonds or fetters, as the Greek has it; Christ's
Love cannot sin an unpardonable sin; O Spouse! speak thou, ^ full descrip^^on
of the sin against the ^oly Ghost.
can thou do despite to the Spirit of grace, persecute the known truth, and
the Author thereof, sinning wilfully? what, can thou, after Heavenly
illumination, partnership in the Spirit, tastes of Heavenly gifts, with the good
word of God, and the Powers of the world to come, decline Father, Son, and
Spirit, prove an Apostate, fall away, and sin remorslesse? thou can not sweet
Lamb, is never Bride of his served him so, had such straightened bowels toward
him; such sinners cannot be renewed by repentance, shall never have pardon in
this world, nor that which is to come; it is the saying of Christ the Judge, and
why? for thou actest afresh Crucification of Christ to thy self, art a
Caitife, shame-Christ, fresh-kil-Christ, Quasi dicat, Christ was alive to thee,
and in thee, not only in patefaction and manifestation, but in operation: but
now, he that lives in himself, and to others, is dead to thee, and with the
life of Christ, have thou lost the life of all that's good for thy better part,
how will he quicken thee no more, never entreat, woo, or beseech thee any
more, never will heavenly gales of the Spirit reach thy heart more. Who reads
these lines that trembles at truth, and is void of regret, now all ordinances,
duties, services are life-lesse, love-lesse to such a soul, who will cry when
too late as he, I wretched in my self dying, Nil misero vivit moriente mihi.
nothing is alive to me. But I fear sometimes may a loyal soul say, this is
my spot, and I have find in this very kind; I would feign know the worst by my
self: an universal hardness of heart attends it. There Is a twofold hardness
of heart, one in those who never did or can sin in so high a measure; the other
in them who are flagitious in this highest degree of sinning; hardness of
heart in the first sort is like the hardness of water congealed, an Isicle or
Icie hardness which is such as that for some season it may bear burdens of
weight and bulk; but when once the Sun with its lasting heat of rays and
beams smiles upon it, dissolves, melts away into its own liquid moisture, as
at first: so here, poor soul, thou criest out I have a hard heart, O what
shall I do, I reap no good from the word or works of God, thrive not under
thriving means, and sometimes say thou have sinned this sin. Consider, sad
soul, thou art hardened but by fits; thy winter lasts not long, thy summers Sun
is coming, and brings along with it the Sabbath of those thoughts, Jesus Christ
will shine out unto thee with a continued smile, and then thy hardness will
loose it nature, mercy can mollify such in a matchless manner. Peter Math.
26. 70. ad sinem. Luke 22. 54. to 63.
a good man, yet had he a very hard heart for a time, an unworthy, unkind
serva^t to his Master, the while; when sweet Christ was had to the high Priests
Hall, he would not own him, was ashamed of him, followed him a far off, and
when he had entered the House, den^'d him, did it thrice, bound his sayings with
an oath and a curse, to prove he knew not the man, yet for all this, kind
Christ, by one look of Love, thawed his frozen, hard heart, that it melted like
wax in the sight of the Sun, he wept bitterly, not without cause.

But secondly, hardness in such as have sinned this sin is such as is the
hardness of a Stone, a stony hardness, which the more it has of the Sun, the
more its hardened still, such wax worse and worse, and after the hardness of
their hearts, heap up the reward of misdeeds; hence the same Sun that softens
wax, hardens clay, makes the soft iron hard, and the hard steel soft, the hot
fire cool, and the cold water warm; Have such their hearts broken by
judgments? the hardness remains still; save that it is dispersed into
several parts, and broken parcells: as a stone, that's broken all to pieces, is
a stone still, retains its hardness in the least of its parts, as truly, as
when 'twas united, and in the whole thereof. There hardness is Homogeneous,
Homogeneum est quod constat^ ex partibus, idem nomen cun^ to^o habentibus,
Keck. System* Log. l. 1. c. 22*
like that of a stone, each small portion retaining the nature and name of the
whole; Quaelibet pars aqua est aquae, every drop of water is water, and every
spark of fire is fire; so is such hardness, though dispersed, divided, taken
in pieces, such may have their legal fractions, but strangers they will be to
all evangelicall contrition; and spider-like, suck they poison from the same
flower the Be sucks honey.

2. Loss of feeling, and alienation from the life of God, as Paul to the
Ephesians speaks, darkness Ephesians. 4. 18, 19*
of understanding, and blindness of heart, Greek (...), hardness,
brawninesse, a hoof upon their Collum obductum, Trap.
hearts, brawny breasts, horny heartstrings; a metaphor taken from hardest hands
of hardest laborers; under a dead and dedolent disposition, (...) De^olentes,
Desperantes. Mo^tanus.
desperately sinful, and remorslesse, fearelesse of the Majesty of God, to
which is added a cauteriz'd conscience, like Devils, having nothing to do
with God, loath to be tormented before their time, and a contracted hardness
through custom in sin, so as neither Ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor
mercy, can molifie their hearts, being dry, stiff, inflexible, and senseless,
impenitent, having a lifelesse frame as to the use of means, being bereft of
all and singular checks of conscience, sinning unsmitten, and not at all
wounded in Christ his wounds, the last degree and fulness of that sad
alienation from the light and life of God. Men, when so sick that their
excrementalls pass through them insensibly, are then mortally sick: we say
so, such can think, speak, and act any thing, all lasciviousnes, and
uncleanness, and that with greediness, void of all sense and feeling, which
argues they have the initium, pregustion, beginning, and Vide Mat. 13. 13, 14,
15.
first taste of spiritual and eternal death already; hence matter of holy and
heavenly Melody is to them Simulata sanctitas, est duplex iniquitas.
as Music in a dead man's ears, or language to a stock or stone, which
penetrates not. That the Quondam high flowne, but now ^ouly and low fallen
professors, of this age, be not of this number, faxit deus; it is my desire, if
to God it seem good; O foolish and unkind! can looseness of life speak out
your love to the Lord? blush you not at all when you look on the Lamb that
was slain? must he indeed be twice slain? what, by you? is Iscariot alive
still? can you like Caveatur osculum Iscarioticum.
that, kill Christ, kiss and kill together? what again and again? were not
his wounds widened before, can thou add afflictions to his bonds, who owned
and relieved thee in Chains, sought thee out and refreshed thy bowels? Can
thou, thou that did once cry up Christ, be vicious, when he is gracious?
avertat deus. Sipio, when an Harlot was offered, Vellem si non essem imperator.
him could say, I would, if I were not a General: say thou, if I were not a
Christian; will some do so much for their honor, and can thou do less for
thy God?

SECT. 3.
2. THe spot of presumptuous sin is not the Spouses, that is the great
transgression David feared Psalm. 19. 13.
to commit, prayed to be freed from; Keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins; Let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright, and I
shall be innocent from the great transgression. To sin this sin, is to sin
contu^^aciously, pertinaciously, maliciously, industriously, with the highest
hand, on purpose, as some will, to affront Gods good motions of grace, proudly;
I Will give my opinion, it is a sin that looks like Hell, it has no home but Hell;
Nifallor; all sin seems to be the Devils Creature, he was the first that made
sin; but this sin seems to have been that which made him, Satan, a Devil,
and to have transformed him from an Angel of light into a Prince of darkness:
This spot is not the Spouses. But behold another draught of this sin, it is so
to sin, as that a man propounds pardon to himself before the act of sinning,
it is to venture upon any sin, any uncleanness, on this ground, because God has
mercy to forgive it, it is to multiply sins, because God can multiply pardons,
it is to sin that grace may abound; And shall we sin that grace may abound,
said holy Paul? what, we Christians? we on whom Christ's Love has laid all
obligations? we who sinned immensely, before we knew him, and yet found mercy
with him? O God forbid; How can we that are dead to sin Romans 6. 1, 2
do so, we cannot, we cannot. q. d. that were unreasonable, and to an
ingenuous heart impossible. To reason, from grace to sin, is the Logic of the
old Serpent, Satan. To apply that saying in John, That if 1 John 2. 1.
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, who is a propitiation for
sins: to apply it, I say before the sin is committed, and to venture on sin
upon that very ground is exceeding dangerous; but after, to the remorsefull
exceeding cordial. It Is a certain Maxim, that to have a pardoning Master, and
pitying Majesty, is a comfort under the fruits of sin, affliction; but no
encouragement to the works of sin, rebellion. The spot of presumptuous sin is
not the Spouses.

SECT. 4.
3. THe spot of the reigning sin is not the Spouses; Sin shall not have
dominion over you; for Romans 6. 14.
you are not under the Law, viz. sins Law, but under grace, viz. the Laws and
Commands of grace, neither sins power of damning, nor domineering Destituitur
peccatum potentia damnandi and dominandi, as they say, Manet peccatum, dejectum
quidem; sed non ejectum, evulsum non expulsum tamen. Bern. Psalm. 19. 10.
has its throne there; rebel it may, but reign it does not, its in them, but
rules not over them, they know no Lord but King Jesus; sin is not in them King,
but tyrant. Sin has a strong heart, is put to death with much a do: yet done
it is in them, and to them; its kept under though not cast out, irradicated
though not wholly expeld. It fares with sin, in Saints, as with those Beasts
in Daniel, their dominion was taken from them; yet their Dan. 7. 12.
lives were prolonged for a season and a time: so God may suffer sins of Saints
that have lost their dominion and domina^ion to survive he may let thee fall,
to try what is in thy heart. q. d. that thou may try and know it, and thy want
of his power to subdue it; yet it is but for a season and a time, and then the
King of Glory will come, and fill all the corners of thy heart with light,
life, and liberty. Sweet Lord! shall thy Kingdom come into our hearts? shall
thy will be done in our vile hearts, as it is done in thy pure heavens? What in
ours, O Spouse, only thy Husband has his dominium forte, mighty rule, his
strong Lordship, his Empire in thy soul, sed suave, but it is a sweet one,
blessed art thou under his principality. Germanicus reigned in the Romans
hearts, Tiberius but in the Provinces; so it is with Saints, sin may reign in
their members, externalls, but Christ reigns in their minds, internalls;
sin in Saints is dejected from its regencie, though not ejected from its
inherencie: whilst they are here, the spot of the reigning sin is not the
Spouses.

SECT. 5.
4. She does not sin longing, wishing there were no Law forbidding sin, no
God to punish sin; the fools heart says there is no God. i. e. wishes it were
so, that he might sin unsmitten; masterlesse Monsters send Messages after
Christ, saying, We will not that this man reign over us, longing to live
without Law, lawless. Some have as many Lords as lusts, aut faciendum aut
patiendum, such as will not be his throne, must be his footstool; its a prison
to sinners to be held in by Law, but it is a paradise to Saints: a good man is
thankful for every curb of corruption, the smitings of the righteous Psalm.
141. 5.
are kindnesses to him, an excellent oil; he dreads Ephraims case, to be let
alone, sinning; Lex, Lux, said Solomon the wise, the Law's a light, and Lamp,
for manifestation of Pro. 6. 23.
sin, and manuduction of the soul to her Savior; Saints sin not, wishing
there were no Law forbidding the evil thereof, yea, and which is more, they
bless God when crossed in an evil course; Blessed be the Lord God of Israel
which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be
thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging
my self with mine own hand; for indeed the Lord God lives which has kept me
from hurting of thee, said David to Abigail, he blesses God, the advice, the
woman, every thing that gave curb to his corruptions; gracious spirits think
it a mercy to have the course of sin stopped, love the means that effects
it; to be given up to hearts lusts, is the greatest plague of all; they long
not that there were no Law, but love it; O how I love thy Law, said the
sensible Psalm. 119. 97.
Prophet, it is my meditation all the day, and I delight in the Law after the
^om. 7. 22.
inner man, said holy Paul; this is not the spot of Christ's Spouse. A gracious
Spirit does with great attention hear this Law-make^, as those in Luke, who
were so attentive to Luke 19. 48.
his doctrine, that the Rulers found not what to do; the people ^anged on him,
says the Greek word; (...).
all Christians hang on Christ's lips, as the Be does on the flower, the babe
on the breast, and the little bird on the bill of her dam, that they may receive
the Law from his Mal. 2. 7.
mouth.

SECT. 6.
5. THe spot of a beloved sin is not the spouses; her sin is by her loathed,
but not beloved; the evil I do, I hate, says the Apostle; she has as bad
conceits of sin Romans 7. 15.
as ever she had, though once pleased in the act, her affections are crucified
to corruption, so is corruption to them, they are dead to each other; sin in
Saints is, 1. Dead judicially, dead in sentence, they adjudge it to death,
resolve it shall die; they sin not with an esteem of sin, their judgement's
against it, they have laid hatred to the root of sin, which will be the death
out. ^. It Is in them Civiliter mortuus, civilly dead; a man is dead, says the
Civil Law, when he is in subjection to another, is not acted and animated by
the power of his own will, but by the will of him that rules over him; so
here, sin in Saints has not its own will, is not its own Master, is in
subjection to them, because their love thereof, its life, is withdrawn, better
be stowed, laid out. 3. Sin in them as loathed, not loved, is naturally dead:
things are naturally dead two ways, inchoate, consummate; inchoate, as when a
tree is smote at the roore with an Axe, which is an omen it will wither, die,
be fruitless, for future; though for present it have leaves and fruit upon it:
hence it is said to be dead, because it has received its deadly blow: so a man
is said to be a dead man, when he has received a deadly wound, though he may
stir, struggle, strive, and live a while after, to do some hurt to him that
did the deed; so a man alive in Christ, by virtue of his union with him, has a
deadly blow given to the root of his sin, not only in the judgment, having
lost its repute there, but in the affections also; it shall never any more
^oost and root there, never recover its strength again; and though it have a
little life for a while, and may be injurious to the subject where it is, yet
cannot last long and bring forth as before, but withers, grows less and
less, till quite exhausted, wasted, notwithstanding its show of leaves. 2. A
sin not beloved has a death consummate, and it is so dead by this sign, viz.
when it brings not forth in its season. i. e. when advantages and opportunities
of sinning, occur, accord, agree, and come together. In winter, Trees and
Plants seem as dead, but if in the spring, we see neither Doct. Sib^
fruit nor leaves, we then say they are dead indeed; so when a Christian has an
advantage, an opportunity to fall into sin, may do it, yet not work himself
into outward blame and shame, and sin does not then bear fruit and bring forth
in that fit season, it is dead indeed; for what the season of the spring is to
trees and plants, the same, or the like, is an occasion of sinning unto sin.
Joseph's case, and his carriage Genesis 39. 7. to 13.
in that case, cleeres this well; he had an advantage, an opportunity, all
advantages, and a fit season to sin in, a wanton Mistress, who woed him often,
saying, Lie with me, a continuation of her suit, she did it day by day, her
actual assault, she caught him by his garment, would have no nay, a place of
privacie, there was none of the men of the House within, no likelihood of
accruing shame, or blame, in public; and himself an high Officer, a man of
credit, able to have crushed a rumor and bruit in the birth; yet sin in him was
then dead, it could not live being loathed; He hearkened not unto her to lie
by her, or to be with her, says the Text; he shunned and hated both the sin,
and the occasion, Vitanda est glacies, si nolis Cadere.
with the appearances thereof, would not lie by her, would not be with her; a
good pattern of piety for others: he shunned the sin as cross to God, not
men; How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? yet then in,
that case, his lust was life-lesse, brought not forth; Christ's Spouse sins not
with a love of sin, the evil she does, she hates; There Is no spot in thee.

SECT. 7.
6. THey sin not with the whole man, their fall is not Toti a toto in totum,
they sin not with a clear freedom and full consent of the will, there is still
some reluctance, giving out, drawing back of some of the inward powers, they
sin not with all their strength, greedily, with both their hands; not
earnestly, as the Prophet speaks; Micah 7. 3.
their conflicts with sin, when falling thereinto, are an attestation of this:
the mind, or soul, we say, is the man; but the mind sins not, With my mind
I serve Christ, and Romans 7. 5. 19, 20.
the evil I would not, that do I, says the Apostle, they sin against their
wills, cannot will sin; they nill and null, in the strength of Christ, all
sinful thoughts, words, and works. And if I do that I would not, it is no Ver.
20.
more I: Quasi dicat, there was a time, when I willed what I acted, and did
what I would and could in sin; but now I am not the man, I am not I, it is no
more I that sin, sin is in me, but against my will, I cannot will to sin,
choose to sin might I gain a world for so doing. Christ's Spouse sins not, viz.
not with clear freedom, and full consent of will. Hence is said to be
spotless, not to sin: for as to will Note.
sin, is to commit sin in the account of Justice; so to nill sin, is not to
commit sin in the account, of mercy. Man in the first Adam, when he Matthew. 5.
28.
stood in the glory of his best perfection, the image of the invisible God,
made out but a mutable will, a will he had to stand or fall which he pleased;
and hence did he will his fall freely; but a man in the second Adam has a
better standing, greater strength, and a better and more accomplished will;
hence no man in Christ can will his fall, will wandering from God, and a
wavering heart, in the sense before asserted, viz. with the wills clear
freedom and full consent, so that Capell Tempt. page 36.
God imputes no more to us, then is approved and allowed by us.

You have now seen what spots the Saints have not, what sins they commit not:
But have Saints no sins? does Saint-ship and Sonship make sinlesse? No; If we
say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1. 8.
and the truth's not in us, says John; he that, Donatus-like, says, I have
no sin for Christ to cleanse me Non habeo Domine quod ignoscas.
from, has no truth in him, is like to his father, who lied ab origin, from
the beginning.

1. Christ's purest Spouse, has the tincture of sin in her self, it has
befallen Christians, in this case, as it fares with a man who has fallen into a
ditch, notwithstanding he has bin washed from the mud, yet may we smell he
has been defiled: Christ's time of suffering was the Disciples time of sinning.

But secondly, a Christian as he injoyes himself in Christ, and so far forth
as he lives in Christ, he is sin-lesse, and his sin is not imputed to him,
he is all fair, has no spot in him.

CHAP. 3.
SECT. 1.
Arguments are these;

1. EVery man is, and every man does, in Gospel account; that which he is most
active in; but a Spouse of Christ is most active in good, least of all active
in evil, therefore said not to sin. David had many failings, yet was he most
in the practice of good, and least in the practice of evil; his heart, as well
as hand, was more in the ways of grace, than in those of sin; for he sinned
only by accident, if I mistake not; mind that most singular Encomium that is
given him; he was a man after Gods own heart; he did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, all the days of his life, and turned not aside from any
thing the Lord commanded him, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite. 1
Kings 15.5.
There Is but one sin mentioned, and that one is not, because pardoned; he was
eyed, deemed, and prized according unto that he was most active in; so that in
the account of mercy he had no spot in him: a gracious heart is active, most
active in good, but passive, most passive in evil; he suffers, when he sins,
then most of all; evils of suffering pinch him not so much, as evils of
sinning* the one being but as a scar in the flesh, the other a wound in the
heart, for such souls are most wounded in Christ's wounds; as the loyal wife
is most wounded in the wounds of her husband. Let complaints of Saints come
forth, and they will give evidence to this truth; many are judgement-sad, but few
sin-sad; Christ's spouse is one of those few, sin is more her burden then is
suffering, she is a sensible sin-sick soul. On the contrary, a graceless heart
is passive, most passive, only in good; suffers most, whilst it does well, and
esteems it not so much peace, as perplexity to walk with God, is active in
goodness by accident, most active in evil, therefore a sinner, no Saint by
nature or name, as Christ wills for one. Christians, consider, it is not your
starting into duties, your exact performance of them, or your fastening on
goodness only by fits, that adds a beauty, a comeliness to you, but it is
that the hearts most in, that the hands most in, that your strength, all your
strength is laid out upon, which shows what you are, in Gospel account: mark, O
man, the bent of thy mind, the* might of thy motions, thy constancy of
continuation in the service of Christ, that thou may be all fair, spotless
by imputation.

ARGUMENT 2. SECT. 2.
EVery man is, and does, in Gospel account, what he sincerely endeavors to
do, but a Spouse does not endeavor to sin, does not put forth her might in
sin, does not strenuously perpetrate sin: Hence is said, not to sin; to be void
of the spot of sin; to have no sin. Holy men, in Scripture, are said to have
humbled themselves, and to have purged themselves, though the Lord knows the
creatures insufficiency in such respects, and does the work himself; yet
because they sincerely endeavored to do it in his strength, they are said, in
the account of mercy, to have performed it; and indeed the Scriptures are no
way wanting in producing presidents for proof; Manasseh, Josiah, Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. and 32.26. and 34.27. Psalm. 35. 13. 1 John 3.3.
David, and many others, are said to have humbled themselves; and he that has
that hope, purges himself as God is pure, says John.

It Is the good will of God, to crown imperfect actions of Saints with
approbation, acceptance, to take a sincere will, and willing mind, for the
deed it self: every man is, in the account of God, what he heartily endeavors
to be, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
in good or evil; but a godly man's heart is not in sin, not set to sin; he does
not press on that way, but he presses on to the way of escape from it, even
the Lamb of God that takes away sin; I Press toward the Phil. 3. 14.
mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, (...), I
persecute the mark; its the same word that is used in the Acts, where Paul
speaks to Agrippa, that he compeld men to blaspheme, and Acts 26.11.
was exceedingly mad against Saints; did persecute them into strange Cities.
Paul resolved, as he had been the chief of sinners, now to strive, if possible,
to be the chief of Saints; now to excel in grace, as much, yea, much more,
then before he had exceeded in sin; hence that saying in the Corinthians
imports 2 Cor. 5. 12, 13. Paulus* in omnia praeceps, nil actum oredens cum
quid* superesset* agendum de Caesare. Lucan 2 Phar.
as much; Whether we be besides our selves, it is to God, or whether we be
sober, it is for your sakes; for the love of God constrains us. Paul sets
before them the coming of Christ, and their appearance before his judgment
seat, with greatest intention of Spirit, and contention of speech. It Is said of
Origin, that he was ever earnest, but never more then, when he spoke of Jesus
Christ.

ARGUMENT 3. SECT. 3.
THat which gives the denomination to persons, or things, is the predominant
quality in those persons, and in those things, but grace, in the gracious, is
the predominant quality, though there be other ingredients in the compound;
hence they are called Saints, not sinners; and are eyed in him that sanctifies,
as sinlesse; no action denominates the efficient, but predominant qualities
give appellation to the subject; Vna actio non denominat.
particular actions prove not the soundness or unsoundnesse of the affections;
for a good man may do an evil action, and an evil man a good action; but
predominant qualities are the fairest and truest Characters of what our minds
be, and such as our minds, and their objects be even such are we; grace rules
in Saints, sin in sinners: on the contrary, the predominant quality in sinners
is sin, hence they have the name Sinners; 'twas Paul's comfort, that his mind
was Christ's servant, though his flesh was the servant of sin, his mind had the
mastery, was predominant; it is here, as in things natural; water's our
instance, which consists of many elements; but because moistnes and coldness are
the principal predominant qualities in the compound, thence it has its
denomination, 1 Kin. 15. 14.
is called water. Asa removed not the high places, did evil in many things,
nevertheless his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days; uprightness
and integrity of heart were predominant in his heart, therefore it was a perfect
heart, and so called, mercy was the cause, would it should be so.

ARCUM. 4. SECT. 4
EVery man is, and every man does, in the account of the Gospel, that which he
is, and does, when he is most himself, but a gracious man, when he is himself
least of all, when he is most himself, selfrenued, can he fall into sin? hence
may be said not to sin. Man, when he sins, is not apud se, in his right mind,
but does ex se ire, go out of himself; and therefore repentance, which is the
change of the mind and man, by which he comes from a depraved to a renewed
self, is expressed by (...), a word that imports recovering of wits, lost wits,
and is of some translated, after-wisedome; the parable of the lost son conduces
to the clearing Luke 15. 17. A man in ^uch a pang ^f passion, is ^id by an
un^suall phrase, ^on esse apud ^, and as 't ^ssen's, ad se ^diisse, to re^rn to
him^^lfe.
of this; he craves his portion, takes it, leaves his home, and fathers bosom,
travels, goes far, as far as he could, spends his substance on his lusts,
living loosely; but want makes him a servant, and brings him to live on husks,
could he get them; but all this while, he was not himself: but having received
a sense of sin, next a sight of the means of escape from it, which was Gods
way of striving to bring life again into his dead child, he breathes after
home, not being judged, according to what he was before, but according to what
he was, when he came to himself, ver. 17. which appears by the sequel, from the
29. ver. to the end of the Chapter; for when his brother accused him to his
father, for what he had been and done, no notice is taken of such things, nor
answer given as was expected, but words of grace and favor are in the reply;
Thy brother that was dead, is now alive, he that was lost, is now found; q. d.
He Is now another manner of man; there is a truth in what thou say, and I know
it very well; but he was mad when he did those things, was not himself, was
dead; but the case is altered: tell me not what he was, and did, but what he
now is, and does; thou would have me kick, and kill, but I Will kiss; it is my
live child, my found child, he is now come to himself: there is a time when God
does, and will make it out to his children, that their former sins shall not
be reviewed; it is that they are, and shall be, which his eye is upon, his heart
most in: Is not God a good Father? he is all bowels, very pitiful. and of
tender Jam. 5.11. (...). Jer. 31.34.
mercy; one of many commiserations says the Greek word; I Will forgive their
iniquities, and will remember their sins no more. God does Hanc veniam
^etimusque da^usque viois^im.
forget as well as forgive, and forget all he forgives. Christians, this God
does for you, what do you for each other? we ask pardon, let us give it.

ARGUM. 5. SECT. 5.
EVery man is, and does, in Gospel account, that which he is, and does in sins
consummation, in the finishing of sin; but the espoused of Christ does not
consummate ^^m. 1. 15. (...)
sin, finish sin, therefore are they said not to sin, Sin when it is finished
brings forth death, viz. When full, perfect, complete, thoroughly and exactly
made an end of, as the word is; but no sins of Saints do thus terminate, are
thus mortal, can thus kill them; sins of Saints were crucified in Christ's
crucifixion, can never so revive in them again, as to bring this death upon
them. They do not crown sin, the end crowns and proves the action good or
evil, Exitus acta probat, and end imports Finis coron^^ opus.
perfection, i. e. an exact performance of the action; sins, in Saints, are
broken, uncocted, evils not digested into full groath, and full strength; hence
are they said to be mortified, washed, cleansed: take an instance, Passion
flowing thence 1 Cor. 6.11.
where the grace of Patience is not whole but broken, wounded and maimed, not
perfect passion, it is not commander, but commanded; not in them, as in others,
they have but their pangs and fits of such furies, do but start and startle
into sin, it is not long lived in them, and that little dying breath it has, is
as soon expired as inspired, as soon out as in, they are not constant in sin: sed
contra, some do something about sin, little against sin. Peccata saepe
radiuntur, sed non irradicantur is most true of some.
These are not such; sin in them has its deadly wound, the axe is laid to the
root on it, ruined it is, or will be.

ARGUM. 6, SECT. 6.
EVery gracious man, is in the account of God, and his Gospel, that which he
shall be in the state of perfection, hereafter; but men of grace, when men of
glory, in perfect state, shall be spotless, have no more power to spot
themselves; hence are they deemed spotless here, by imputation, I mean. God,
faith the Apostle, calls things which are not as though they were: it is granted,
hee'^ not that he shall be, in fullness; but he is Romans 4.17. Non quoad to^um,
sed quoad ^r^dus. ^ John 3.2.
that he shall be, in truth; Christ minds not so much what we are, as what we
shall be; We are now sons, says John, and children have their spots, as the
Scriptures speak, but it appears not what we shall be, for we shall be like
him, and as Christ is, 1 John 4. 17.
so are we in this world; he minds not so much, what image we have marred, as
what of God unto us he is made; he is made holy, and holiness to us, comely,
and comeliness to us; he is said to forgive, and forget sin, not to mind, to
remember it no more; he has a greater memory of his peoples virtues, then
vices; thinks more on their future then present state.

The first borne heir of a rich man, is in the account of his father, wealthy,
say he has nothing but necessaries; because, Though he has little in
possession, he has much in reversion, if he lives to it. So here, a Christians
comeliness is not so much in possession, as in reversion; not so much in his
own, as in Christ's own hands; yea, the life of his luster and grace, though in
his own possession, yet the means of preservation is not within, but without
him, in Christ his head, from which well of Life he draws all his waters that
are living in himself: dying things absent and far from us, are made present
and nigh to us by imputation, and fidei mendica manu; promises afar off, were
seen and embraced Heb. 11.3.
by Abraham, where the Greek has it, he saluted them, kissed (...) ab a (...)
and (...).
Christ in the promise, and was interchangeably kissed of him, when Christ was
then afar off and not incarnate; yet were they drawn together by mutual
neernesse, and dearnesse of love, as the word in the original, imports; Christ
considers, accounts, and concludes them, as under the enjoyment of their
distant, and absent as well as present beauty, and purity. Sweet Christ can
kiss them, as eyeing them in their comelines, which is to come; when it shall
be their glory, to be lost in his glory, and their throne, that he has his
throne, and their greatest joy, to live with him the joy-maker; such heads are
destinated unto the Diadem: you have seen in Tertul.
what sense Saints are sinlesse, in what sense not; the Lord make these things
advantage to you, godly gain.

CHAP. 4.
SECT. 1.
1. WAtch thy way-ward heart that thou make not God a liar; every sin is a
lie, it is called in Scripture a lying vanity, Jonah 2.8.
and for a man to observe it, is to forsake his own mercies. Saints sinning
give God the lie; Infidelity is a lie, and gives God the lie, and which is
more, makes God a liar; he that believes not God has 1 John 5.10.
made him a liar; and he that sai's he has not sinned makes God a liar: 1 John
1.10.
be not slow of heart to believe; does Christ account thee all fair? make not
thy self all ^oule; does he say thou art sinlesse? and will thou, can thou
sin senslesly?

It Is true, corruption, edged with a temptation, gets, as it were, the hill and
the wind, and upon such advantages too often prevails; we can stay no more from
sinning, then the heart from panting, and the pulse from beating; our lives we
may fear, abound more with sins then the firmament with stars, or the furnace
with Sparks, which caused that saying, Libera me Domine a malo homine meipso;
Lord, free me from that evil man mine own self: in our hearts our sins are
voluminous, in our lives, our errata's are in a sense infinite; it is not falling
into the water that drowns, but lying in it; so falling into sin sinks not thy
soul, but living in it; and although sins of Saints are not in the account of
God, because pardoned, yet when Trap.
they see the sins of others, have they cause to say with the good Martyr,
(...) Whether or why am not I such? whether M. Bradford.
or no has God cleansed me, and if so, why has God done this for me? What am
I more then they, Domine non sum dignus quem tu diligas. Augustine.
that God should thus love me, charge no sin upon me? make not God a liar,
though thou can not escape sin whilst in the body, yet do not make sin, make
a trade of sin, not art it, not sin artificially, presumptuously, delightfully,
willingly, with the whole man, industriously, that were to damme up the way of
donations divine.

SECT. 2.
2. RUminate sensibly what this Lamb suffered to take away sin, and make thee
spotless; he himself was made sin for us, who knew no sin, nor did sin,
neither was gui^e found in his mouth, and when he was reviled, he reviled not
again, when he suffered, he threatened not, who his own self bear our si^s, in
his own Cor. 2 5. ^^. ^ Pet. 2. ^1, 22, 23.
body on the tre^, says the Scripture, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him; he was a sinner, not only by imputation, Heb.
12.2. Luke 23.5.11.
but by reputation, he was numbered among the transgressors; he it is that did
drink hell dry to the bottom, has left no hell behind for thee; He was
slighted, set at naught (...) made no body, derided, (...) they blew their
noses at him; he was railed on, buffeted, scourged, had his agonies, his bloody
sweating (...) clottie blood issued through his flesh and skin, in an abundant
measure, and that without any external violence, Sanguinem congellatum quasi
extruserit.
merely by the force of his own saddest thoughts within him; was strongly
accused, (...) with great intention of Spirit, and Mark. 8. 12. Expletur,
Lachrimis egeriturque dolor. Phil. 2.7.
great contention of speech; he sighed deeply, (...) had a straightned heart,
and made himself of no reputation (...) did exhaust, Evacuavit se ex omni
gloria and aequalitate cum Patre, Zanch.
exanimate, evacuate, annihilate, and empty himself of his all, for a season,
he was (...) and (...) price, and counter-price for lost undone souls, and at
last had his decease (...) his exodus, his departure out of that Egypt and
Egyptian bondage; a coercive, cogent Ex omni ad nihil seipsum redegit. Beza. 1 Timothy 2.13. Luk 9.31. Esaias 52.14.
consideration, to cause compliance with Christ. O Saints! in Sion behold your
King; First, as weeping for, and over you; his face was foul with weeping, and
his visage marred more then any man's; yea, then any of the sons of men: O what
a sweetness of strength attractive there is in the sight of a Jesus! as
standing and knocking at the hearts door, with a tear in his eye, crying, Open
unto me, even unto me, my Sister; I am thy Brother, not a stranger; and my
locks are wet with the* dew and drops of the night: shall sweet Christ put his
hand to the hole of the door, and thy bowels not move for him? shall no drops
of Myrrh, sweet smelling Myrrh, fall from thy hands and fingers, when thou
layest hold on the handles of the lock? Secondly, Look Cant. 5.4.5.
wishly on Christ as bleeding; for, in thee, in drawing thy soul, he drew till
the blood came, clottie blood; Luke 22.44.
he then was begging strength, to bear the rod for sins, that were not his own;
Messiah was cut off, but not for himself, says Daniel; my sins, and thy
sins, squeesed the blood out of his blessed sides, hands, and feet, and
pierced him in the most nervous, tender parts; such foes were we to this good
friend; yet Jesus Christ is burnt up with love to poor sinners, to make them
rich Saints; and will thou cast water on this fire, by resistance? Can thou
then? have thou bowels of iron, and suckedst a Tiger when thou wast young?
Thirdly, Cast thine eye on Christ, as dying; on a crucified Christ, Christ on
the Cross, now, even now stretching out his arms, holding out his breast,
opening his bosom, and heart, crying out, who will, whosoever will come, let
him come and lodge in this heart of mine; John 7.37.
the sower cross, was sweet Christ's deathbed, there he made his last will,
and which is more then other dying friends can do, he dyed, drawing, pulling
sinners into his own heart: O saints, and sinners! M. Rutherford.
it is a most vile thing to meet dying Christ with disdain: Christ dying leaped
for joy, that by dying he could keep sons alive. Now tell me, O my friend, when
thou see him set a full cup of wrath, death, and hell to his head, and see
him sigh, sing, and smile; for thy good; can thou break that cup of trembling
on his fair face, and not have thy heart fettered with Christ's silken
love-cords, which are softer then oil? sure, his love applied to thy heart
heartily, will make thee ingenuous, free, thankful, respectfull. Solomon's
honey, and Sampsons Dalilah are sweet drinks, that swell some, who are after
glad to vomit them up again, and are pained with sickness at the remembrance
of them; but it is not so here, that love that Christ has from us is better
bestowed; and stout-hearted sinners, I Will tell you your doom; Christ's love comes
near you, but you fly from it, you will need mountains to fall upon you, and
hide you from his presence, sweet Lamb, that he is; that's an hell-like La^ere,
erit impossible, apparere, intolerabile. Anselmus.
sorrow, yet must be suffered, when to hide twill be impossible, and to appear
intolerable: O think on the day of Christ's appearance, when he will speak with a
voice like thunder; I am he, behold the man whom ye have crucified, the sides
that you Ego sum, ecce hominem quem crucifixisti^, ecce latus quod pugugistis,
ecce vulnera quae in fiaeistis. Rev. 1.7.
have pierced, my hands and feet; lo, see the wounds you made, and this will he
say when he comes with clouds; every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; They
shall look Iisdem quibus videmus oculis flemus.
and lament; then a good conscience toward God will more bestead, then all the
treasures in the world.

SECT. 3.
3* LOve him, and live to him, who Plus valebit conscientia pura quam marsupia
plena. Bern.
accounts thee lovely; truly, without halting, wholly, without halving; let
Christ's love be thy pattern; a Sea of love has a bottom, an Heaven of love,
a brim; but infinite love is limit-lesse, such is his; the infinite love of God
in Christ, moves in a circle of life; Christ's heart is the spring and fountain
there; all rivers and streams of love meet as a congregation of all good, and
there is the Ocean, the Sea of love and loveliness: Christ's Chariot runs on
wheels of love, and the pace is easy and sweet, and he breath's with Probatio
dilectionis exhibitio est operis. Greg in Evang. Hom. 30. Mat. 22. 37.
his Aura levis, his gentle gales, that are cheering, that thou may breath
like him: Christ's love is an Elixar, which by contaction, if there beany
disposition of goodness in the same metal, twill render't of the same property
it self is; it is a rarity, a great one, and a merveilous Lenocinium, inticer
of desires. Luke 8.4.7. Melancthon.
One conflicted under the pangs of death, and at last comforted, breathed out
her thoughts thus; now, and not till now, understand I the meaning of those
words, Thy sins are forgiven thee; then, and not till then, it should seem, was
heart raised and ravished with unspeakable love, to this lovely Lamb, which
love is the fruit of remission of sin; it is a sad thing to have a selfish,
circular love, that has no center but self, ascends no higher, goes no
farther. Among the Romans, they who were saved, were wont to crown him that
saved them, and to honor him as a father, all their days; so Christians
should take the Crown of glory, of all their salvations, and good ^uot verba
^^ absurda.
actions, and set it on Christ's head, who best becomes it; he that speaks of
himself seeks his own glory, said Christ; selfe-seekers, and Thrasos boasters
of your selves, where is your esteem of Christ? is this your best (...) example
you give? 1 Timothy 4. 12. Magno conatu magnas agere nugas. Magni nugatores. 1 Timothy 6.4.
does this make the stamp on your coin? then it is not current with Christ.
Some are in Paul's language, proud (...), blown, and swollen up, knowing nothing
aright, and as they ought to know; a tumor in the body, is a symptom sad
enough, in the soul, saddest of all, doters on questions and strife of words,
(...), question-sick, the best success whereof will be languor in the end;
such must be withdrawn from us; (...), stand off, keep at a distance from
such, knowledge Socrates.
without love, is like rain in the middle region; that was a grave speech, I
know that I know nothing. Some get the tree of knowledge but loose the tree of
life, says one; Apostates from first love frown on your faces; some are at
first warm, next lukewarm, of a middle temper, but at last freezing could in
affection to Christ.

SECT. 4.
4 Follow thy husband, begin Principlum fervet, medium ^epet, exitus* ulget.
Hymnus evangelisisslmus.
with thanksgiving, sing to this Jesus the Canticle most evangelicall; as thou
did put no bounds to thy self sinning, being now saved from it, put no bounds
to thy thanksgiving: Ingratitude, say some, is a Monster in nature, a Solecisme
Let thy modus be sine modo. Bern. Luke 1.68. Arbor honore^ur, cujus nos unbra
tuetur.
in manners, a Paradox in grace, damming up the course of donations divine and
humane. We respect the tree; who is shade's, our defense; Thanksgiving was
Luthers Sancti crapula, the stomach should be full out, and then there is no
ease or rest, till the heart's unladen in Christ: has God let thee see you are
sinlesse, that he has put away thy sin? then cover 1 That thou may do, and
suffer as much, and more, now sin is pardoned, as thou would have done and
suffered for a particular knowledge of it; before thou had it, then thou wast
all action to have it, nothing was irksome which was a leading means to it; O
then, what running to God, and the godly, for information? what praying,
hearing, reading and enquiring was there then? then thou thought it more
worth then are worlds, and what is the mercy the less, because out of Christ's
hand into thine own? 2 Be active in sanctification, because formerly thou wast
passive in regeneration, and in Gods the Agent, man's the Patient then. 2 Cor.
7.1.
making satisfaction for the transgression, having through great and precious
promises, received the divine nature; where is the clensing from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit? 3 Spend, and end all thy days in meditation and
admitation of what the Lord thy God has done for thee, who was once under the
curse, the law, the lash; cry as the Prophet, O who is a God like to our God,
that parclons iniquity, transgressions and sins, Micha 7.18, 19.
who delights in mercy, and casts our sins into the depths of the Sea, wonder
thou art not so vile as the vilest in Gods esteem, that he bears thee any
good will, gives thee one good word, can speak so well, and thou deservest so
ill, that thy name does not stink with God, what but free grace, full grace,
rich grace, has put a difference 'twixt thee and other men; lay then the blame
of future sufferings upon thy sinning, and let every unkindnesse in carriage
toward Christ, be killing to thy very heart, and ponder his great goodness
till all time be lost in eternity.

SECT. 5.
5. TAke thy stand in Christ. Motion has no rest till in a fit place, nor
thou, Chrstian, till quieted in Christ; no bird will prune her self, and sing,
till she has taken a stand that is pleasing; Mat. 9, 27. adult.
do thou suffer for Christ? thou may afford it, thou gettest and gainest
well by it, thou may lay out ones for him, lend him ones, and he will retaliate
hundreds, an hundred fould, and better; God lets us suffer, not to abuse us,
but to use us, make the best use of us; yea, he has already done, and suffered
Non ad exi^ium sed ad exercitium.
more for thee then thou ever did, or can do for him: Believers, in this
strange land, may you hang up your Harps upon the willowes; yet sing your
Hebrew songs, and songs of Sion to your King; but by Physic is the way to
health, and to joy, you pass through sorrow, you have but your seed-time here,
your harvest hereafter; may sow in tears, but shall reap in joy; Fructus est
ipse in semine, and even the fruit it self is in the root; not to be
afflicted, is not to be affected; to cover the Altar with tears is not so
comely, as to Bern. in Psalm. 90. Sermon. 17, Mal. 2. 13. Hosea 14.^.
do it with the calves of our lips; every bird can sing in the Spring; but Birds
of Paradize, heavenly ones should sing in Autumn, waters of wels are warmest in
Winter, so should thy heart be with joy, in sorrrow; there is a mirth of
mourning, Paul and Silas sang Psalms in the stocks, and had pleasure in
contemptible, comfortless Peter Martyr, in 2 Samuel 24.
chains, Luctus gaudio mixtus, mourning with mirth mixed, best becomes Martyrs;
some can weep, singing for joy of heart, in frowning Habet and lacryinagna
voluptas Seneca. Ipse dolor voluptas est, Aug. Confess. l. c. 2.
days. Spouse, consider thy Husband; the fountain of joy it self did not, in
the days of his flesh, seem a man of much joy, yet rejoiced in spirit; the
wine of the grapes of the Canaan above, and the water of life, with the
immortal bread, is sufficient to make man heartily hardy, in greatest
hardships under the Cross of Christ: Such as gather Simples, take herbs in the
Spring, flowers in Summer, fruit in Autumn, roots in winter; and why Roots in
Winter? because the sap is then gone down, is most in the root, when least in
the branch, most under ground, when least above it; the richest vains of oar
lie deepest; do thou miss the sap of sweetness in thy self a branch?
Christ is thy Vine, thy Root, and secures it for thee; gather thy scattered
comforts into Christ, enjoy him, and them in him, and thou choosest the better
part, wilt find losses for Christ, clear gain; being eased of thy sin, the
greatest work is done, the greatest trouble is over; God shootes his arrow, as
Jonathan, not so much to harm as to warn thee.

SECT. 6.
6. STay thy marvel, that so many mind earth, and so few mind heaven, they are
not married to the Lamb, else would they live, lie down, and rise with him;
such Terriginae fratres are written in the earth; O Lord, they that depart Jer.
17.18.
from thee shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken thee, the
fountain of living waters; these, Grashopper-like, breed, live and dye, in the
same ground; and though winged they are in some measure for higher things, yet
fly they do not; sometime they hop heavenward a little, but fall to the ground
again, and at last their earthly womb they make their heavenly Tomb, moyling
like muck-wormes, clogging themselves with thick cley, till in judgment thei'r
cloi'd; men of the first Adam, only from the earth, of Homo ab humo.
an earthly breed, and hence are they strangers to this second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven: Poor souls, what is the world? it is but a Cipher in Gods sight;
look, even in the profits and pleasures, they are but as smoke, which wrings
tears from the eyes, and then becomes nothing; and all the joys of life are
but seeming ones unto what is future; all seen things are sweeter in the
ambition, than in the fruition; they are too too cloying upon a review, we in
time loath what we have formerly loved, as Amnon served Tamor; Desideria dilata
crescunt at cito data vilescunt.
we love our food when it is meat, but loath it when it is excrement; prize it
when we take it into us, despise it when it passes through us: all secular and
sublunary delights are like Sodom's Apples, Quae contacta cinerescunt.
the inside of whoe's beauty is but ashes.

SECT. 7.
7. LEt all go whether twill, that Christ may come where, and when he will;
let all Aut pax, aut pactio, when Christ comes.
go for him where ere you find him; he is the only Peacemaker, and
peace-matter, who alone under his father, can turn Golgotha into ^abatha;
Moses could loose a fructill Egypt for Christ, a place where Nilus over-flowes,
and seed, being sown, yields four rich harvests in less then four months,
to the owners thereof. Origin chose rather to be a poor Ephesians. 2. 13. to 17.
Sic certaminis Moderatur. Plotinus. Phil. 3.8. (...)
Catechist in Alexandria, than, denying Christ, to be with his fellow Pupils in
great authority and favor. And all Paul's gain was left, deemed loss, dross,
dunge, and dogs meat for Christ; such Quis non patiatur, ut potiatur.
things if in competition with Christ, are, to such souls, objects of loathing,
not of love; and such great loosers for Christ, are greatest gainers, who
repent they knew not the commodity sooner; Deity rewards the devout.

SECT. 8.
8 TAke comfort, and be of good cheer, that Christ accounts thee sinles; thou
art not such as the world would make thee, thy worth is hid from their eyes;
when they would mind nothing but thy failings, let this refresh thy spirits for
ever, that thou art arrayed with Christ, in Christ's attire; thy nakedness is
not, the shame and blame thereof is not, thy sin is not; but thy God is. O
heart! open wide and well, that Christ may fill thee; now that which sought the
life of thy glory, beauty and comfort is dead, now may thou return from the
wilderness of sorrow, and solitariness, and dwell in thine own City, not
made with hands. Now Christ is thy life, and death will be thy gain, now may
thou sing triumphing, O death, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. In Christ says the
Apostle (...) super superamus, we do, over overcome. Romans 8.37.
where is thy sling? O grave where is thy victory? and give thanks to the
father, who has made thee victor through Christ his son; yea, more then
Conqueror, for thou have over overcome, as the word is in the original; now
to die, is no more to thee, but repatriasse, to reverse home, go to heaven
again; now may thou joy in affliction, stand in temptation, be perfect in
action, and go freely to Bern.
the full breasts of consolation in Christ. O Spousel speak well of thy husband,
where ere thou go, commend him to all, both friends and enemies, and since
the Peacemaker has spoken peace-matter, return no more to folly.

Dixi. Laus Deo.
FINIS.

