Caledons complaint against infamous Libells, etc.
What raging fury, Guest of horrid night,
Comes armed with flames and shaikes against the Light,
Loosed, from the chains of darkness, to disturb
The sons of unity, borne vice to curb?
By Law, not force, we move, not tumult make,
We Justice plead, Sedition do forsake:
None with rebellion our attempts will brand
But who themselves to crush Religion band
By act, or by intent. Fair Virtue shines,
Reflecting every where from our designs;
That whither forced, to arm, or to entreat,
Our mildness, our Submission to be great
None can deny. For, so with Truth, sweet peace
(Which in our chief desires, has chiefest place)
Joined hands; and did from Heaven salute this Land,
Who could the excess of his joy command?
Who would not fall before his sacred Feet,
Whom royal Virtues make a Prince compleete,
And Arms lay down, or at his will employ,
Lift Him to honor, and his foes destroy:
Who equal with his life his peoples good,
Would value, were they rightly understood?
But, by Religions overthrow, to gain
Dishonorable ease, with Conscience stain;
That truth be underminde by Policy,
For Peace shoud we dispense; Who can deny
This cursed peace, this ignominious ease,
Were high rebellion, would the Lord displease.
MOst sacred SOVEREIGN honor of this Age,
Thy Justice we appeal, brought on the Stage
By close Camelions; (foes who friends appear)
Abusing our indulgence and thine Ear,
Deserving on the parchment of their back,
The hang-mans whips, should in characters black,
Draw out each passage of those wicked arts,
They used, to wound thy grievous Subjects hearts,
And kindle in thy royal Breast a fire
Which never can be quenched, till thy just ire
Their blood do expiate, till vengeance fall
And from the heavens confound those firebrarnds all.
Lo! braine-sicke Cherelus dare brave our State,
As at his fancy thy displeasures spaite
Were ready to break forth. Darre he repine
That Light, throughout this glorious Isle does shine,
For which, too narrow Europ shall be found,
Before the work be with the issue crowned.
Base lies now vents he, now with malice stings
Those honored Heralds of the King of Kings,
Chaifes, that from among our honey-bees we drive,
Those Wasps, whose venom had infect'd the hyve.
That we, those limbs of Antichrist abjure,
Unmitring monsters that did court the Whorre
Of Rome, this Land adventuring to defile,
And make through their abominations vile.
Now, to our charge disloyalty is laid,
That (Parricids) we dare the Throne invade,
Rob Caesar of his due, disclaim our head,
And limits of alleadgeance do exceed.
O hight of hate! O hellish impudence!
To think, that men of honor could dispense
With conscience, with their duty to a King,
So good, so just, so wisely governing.
Whose Love, as of a Fathers, found we have,
As of a Master we his favor crave,
His Aid as of a Lord; since Fathers love,
And Sons obedience, hand in hand do move
To homage, and protection, mutually
Since true relation Prince and people tie.
THy countries heart does bleed, her grieves art great
Both fraud and force conspire against her State.
Her native liberties encroach'd on are,
Which, gained with honor, honorably were
From time to time maintained, against the pride,
And power, of all that durst against her side.
Her violated Laws,; the civil Right
Of Subjects shaken; Justice, marred by might,
Religion vexed and wronged; (that sacred Band
Of Amity, and Union of the Land,
The solid Pillar which the State sustaines,
By which cemented, firm each piece remains;)
Christ's cause, yea Crown in question; by the bands
Of duty, by the power put in thy hands
(The regal Scepter, Diadem, and Sword,
In Faith's defense, entrusted by thy LORD)
Conjure Thee, while the lowering Skies portend
A Tempest, to the danger to attend,
And wisely to His interest advert,
Who count will crave how acted is thy part.
Those, whom eclipses, more than Sun-light please
(The birds of prey, which gape for gain) Those flies
Which feed upon infection and stink,
Our Camels; which but troubled streams can drink,
Divisions Cataracts would open keep,
And kindle quarrels which lie buried deep,
That Brethren, Pillars of the royal Throne,
By GOD and Nature, under Thee, made one,
One bundell of united shafts; a Band
Not easy to be brash'd by strangers hand,
May (thus) be weakened, and receive a wound,
Endangering both, which shall not soon be sound.
But ah! to think, that Thou whose aid we call,
The peoples Parent; Watchman on our wall;
The Geometrick point, with eaven Aspect,
Bound all thy bounding Borders to respect;
The Head, the Heart of the Republicke, made
A God, a Judge, set over good and bade;
That Thou thy royal Banners should display,
By Justice Sword, to make thy passion way,
Against a Nation, from defection free,
Who heavens dare face, for their integrity;
O depth of woe! O hight of passing grief!
That Thine, who supplicate by Thee relief,
Must arm: and at uncertain bloods expense,
Be forced, unto an innocent defense.
Dread Sovereign, Son of Mars, if arm thou will,
No drop of blood let be in Britain spilt.
March, and all Europe shall be put in fray,
The Alps, the Perinees, shall make Thee way.
Thy neighboring state, with Olives shall attend,
Thy rights decision while thou do suspend.
The Rhine, whose streams are swollen with tears, shall smile
And fears of longer servitude exile.
Romes walls shall tremble, proud Madrid shall quaik,
When with joynt-forces thou the fields shall take,
With warriors, more then men, thy Britanies bold
Attended; who for fear nor force will fold.
Thy sea-wall'd world, huge colonies shall spair
For peopling kingdoms which usurped are,
By Tyrants bold and blind, the foes of Truth.
Yea, Thou shall lead, with Albions choicest youth.
(The worthies and the wits of either land)
Our Archimeds, who with industrious hand
Reach Natures depths, reviving Dedals arts.
Thy Scots, with Giants hands and Lions hearts
Shall gallantly go on, who whiles they arm
(...)
