DIVINE DIALOGUES, Containing sundry Disquisitions and Instructions Concerning
the Attributes and Providence of God.

The Three First DIALOGUES, treating of The Attributes of God, and his
Providence at large.

Collected and compiled by the Care and Industry of F. P.

Thy Wisdom, O Lord, reaches from one end to another mightily; and sweetly
does she order all things. Wisdom 8. 1.

LONDON, Printed by James ^l^sher, Anno Dom. 1668.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
THough it may well seem needless to preface any thing in particular touching
these^ Three First Dialogues, we being in so great a measure prevented by what
is already noted in general in the Palaeopolite's Epistle to his Friend; yet
because (...) other two went not out of my hands without something a larger
Preamble, (...) have thought it not amiss to preface (...) little in way of
commendation of these. (...) then, the subject of the First (...) these Three
Dialogues is the Attri^utes of God; of the Two latter, the Adjusting of the
Phenomenon of the World to the Goodness of his Providence. Arguments that will
easily allure the Attention of the Curious, and I think handled with that
plainness, that full comprehension and careful circumspection, that they will
also satisfy the Ingenuous. But they that have a mind to find flaws will
easily fancy they see them even there where they are not. The main Scope of
the Author in the handling of the Attributes of God seems to be, to cut his
way with that Caution and Judgment, as neither to lessen the Majesty of the
Godhead by a pretense of making his Nature so universally intelligible to all
Capacities whatsoever, (for it is well known how dull and short-sighted some
are) nor yet on the other side to make his Existence incredible, by puzzling
and confounding even the best understandings with highflown Notions and hard
Repugnancies, yea perfect Contradictions, upon pretense of magnifying the
Nature of God the more thereby. As if the more perplexed and self-inconsistent
the Nature of God were, it were the more glorious and adorable; and that were
not a Reprehension of our Savior to the Samaritans, but an Encomium, where he
says, John 4. 22.
Ye worship ye know not what. Which yet is the condition of all those that
dress up the Deity with repugnant Attributes, and an Invitation to the
Atheistically-given to quit both the Deity and his Worship at once.

Which consideration I conceive made the Author of these Dialogues not only
with sound Reason to beat down, but also with a due and becoming
Contemptuousness to explode that new fond Opinion of the Nullubists, who,
forsooth, imagine themselves so superlatively intellectual above other men, in
declaring that God is nowhere, though they cannot deny but that he is. In
which lofty adventure though they boast themselves as so safely elevated above
the Region of Imagination, yet I do not doubt but this high Lift of their
thoughts will be found at last to be but as a tumid Bubble on troubled waters,
and that the Levity and Puffiness of their Spirits has carried their
conceptions (if they have any of the thing they pronounce of) above the level
of common Sense and Reason.

In his adjusting of the phenomenon of the Universe to the Divine Goodness, it
is considerable that he has declined no Difficulties the wit of man can imagine
or invent, but brought them all into view, or at least the hardest of all, and
such Specimina of all kinds, that in all likelihood, whatever new Instances
may occur to men, or they may on set purpose excogitate, will be easily
satisfied by the Solution of these foregoing Examples.

That also is not to be pretermitted, how he has fitted Solutions and
Hypotheses to the several degrees and capacities of the minds of men, that
the Argument may not be too big for some, and too little for others. To say
nothing how in the representing of the gross Barbarities of the Manners and
Religions in the Vnciviliz'd parts of the World, he does by not an unpleasant
Satyricalness dexterously endeavor the quickening of the Civilized parts into
a sense and abhorrence of the least shadow or resemblance of those execrable
Barbarities.

And that again, methinks, is very sober and humane, in that in the setting out
these Genius's of several sorts and sizes, as I even now intimated, there is
nothing of reproach cast upon any, but he that has not the Fate to be a
Philotheus or a Bathynous, is notwithstanding allowed to be a Sophron. All
which Dispensations in their kind are laudable and honorable; and it is
certainly want of Judgment or Good nature that makes them contemn one another.
For those that are arrived to any due measure of real Piety and Virtue find so
great a Perfection in that, that those whom they see arrived to the like degree
there with themselves, let their other Capacities be what they will, they will
easily give them the right hand of Fellowship, and acknowledge them their
equals. But for those whose either Knowledge or Ignorance is accompanied with
so high a pitch of Rudeness and Immorality, as that they contemn and reproach
all that are not of their own size in either, it is but just if they find
themselves lightly perstringed in the Parable of those two loudsinging
Nightingales of Arcadia that so rudely awakened Bathynous out of his Divine
Dream.

Lastly, For the observation of Decorum of Persons, though it be not neglected
or transgressed in any part of all the Five Dialogues, yet it is more full and
articulate in these Three; whenas the peculiar Character of Hylobares had no
occasion distinctly to show it self in the Two last. But the Characters of all
the others are more or less discernible in all Five, but most of all that of
Cuphophron. In the Character of which Person the Dramatist seems to have been
judicious even to Physiognomonicall Curiosity, ^e intimating him to be one of
so little a Stature. Which comports excellently well with that gaiety of
Manners, that versatility of Wit, and lightsomeness of Humor, that discovers
it self all along from the beginning to the end in the person of Cuphophron.
For this qualification of Manners is most incident, according to the rules of
Physiognomie, to men of a little stature, their Heat and Spirits being
something over-proportionated to the bigness of their Body; which makes them
quick and cheerful, and of a sudden apprehension, obnoxious to Raptures and
exalted Resveries, though reaching short, or else shooting over, and not easily
hitting the Truth. Which therefore agrees well with the Platonicalness of
Cuphophron's Genius. Besides that it may be the Author may have some regard to
the littleness of Descartes his Stature, of whose Wisdom Cuphophron is
introduced such an excessive Admirer. As if the lesser-sized Bodies were the
fittest Sheath or Case for a Cartesian Wit. Not to note farther, that Plato
also was of no procere Stature.

Several such like Prettinesses accompany the nervose prosecution of the main
Subject of these Dialogues: wherein to the free and ingenuous I think the
Author will not easily seem to have over-shot himself in any thing, unless in
his over-plain and open opposing that so-much-admired Ph^losopher Renatus
Descartes, on whom persons well versed in Philosophical Speculations have
bestowed so high Encomiums, especially a Writer of our own, who, besides the
many Commendations he up and down in his Writings adorns him with, compares him
(in his Appendix to the Defense of his Philosophical Cabbala) to Bezaliel and
Aholiab, as if he were inspired from above with a Wit so curiously Mechanical,
as to frame so consistent a Contexture of Mechanical Philosophy as he did. And
the late learned Author of Philosophia Scripturae Interpres, after an operose,
subtle and copious endeavor of evincing that Philosophy is the best
Interpreter of Scripture, as if all that pains had been intended in the behalf
of Descartes, to set him in the infallible chair, he concludes all at last
with a very high and unparalled Elogie of the Cartesian Philosophy. Wherefore
it may very well be questioned whether it was so advisedly done of the Writer
of these Dialogues, to adventure the exposing of his own Credit, by so openly
opposing and oppugning the great Name and Authority of so very famous and
eminent a Philosopher as Cartesius.

But for my part, I must confess, the more he may have exposed himself by this
freedom, (provided that he be in the right, which the impartial Reader must
judge of) the Points that are controverted are of such great consequence, that
I think it is in him the more conspicuous Act of Virtue, and that that very
ground upon which this Imputation of Over-shooting himself is raised is a
Principle to be abhorred by all good and generous Spirits; namely, As if it
were a point of Imprudence to be less tender of a man's own private Credit then
of the Glory of God and the public Good; or, As if any one ought to lose any
esteem by doing what is r^ally ^orthy and laudable.

Besides, he does but follow the Pattern of that very Author that is observed
so highly to have commended Descartes, most of the Allegations against his
Philosophy being more fully pursued in that Encomiast's Writings. And in that
very Epistle to V. C. where he makes it his business to apologize for him, and
to extol him and magnify him to the skies, yet he does plainly and apertly
declare, That it is a kind of vile and abject (...), or superstitious
idolizing of Matter, to pretend that all the Phenomenon of the Universe will
arise out of it by mere Mechanical Motion. And yet in the same Epistle he seems
to acknowledge that there may be some few effects purely Mechanical. Which I
believe was from his overgreat desire of making Descartes seem as
considerable as he could with any judgment and Conscience. But for my part,
upon my more seriously considering what occurrs in these Dialogues, I am
abundantly assured that there is no purely-Mechanicall Phenomenon in the whole
Universe.

Nor ought that Author so to be understood in the comparing Cartesius with
Bezaliel and Aholiab, as if he did really believe he was supernaturally
inspired. For with what face can any one put that sense upon such an high-flown
Complement, whenas he does as well up and down in his Works plainly and
zealously confute Descartes, where he finds him faulty in things of any
concern, as praise him and commend him where he deserves it? Which is a plain
indication he did not take him to be infallibly inspired. And it may be the
right Exegesis of Bezaliel and Aholiab's being filled with the Spirit of God,
Exodus 35. 35.
is but their being filled with wisdom of heart for those Mechanical
Curiosities of Work; as it is signified toward the end of that Chapter, That
they had a special and extraordinary Genius that way, which was the gift of God
in Nature. Besides that every great thing in Nature according to the Hebrew
Idiom has its denomination from God. Exodus 35. 31.
And therefore to be filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom and
understanding, etc. is to have a great measure of Wisdom and Understanding in
such and such things. As without question Descartes had a great deal of Wit
and Sagacity to find out the most credible Material Causes of the Phenomenon
of the World, and to order them into the most specious Contexture that the
thing is capable of, to make up a Mechanical Philosophy. But that these things
can neither arise nor hold together without an higher Principle that must
superintend and guide them, this great Encomiast of his does as plainly declare
in Antidot. ^^b. 2. (...). 2. sect. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. ^. 12. sect.
1, 2, ^, etc. Immortality of the Soul, lib. 3. 6. 12, 13.
several places, as the Contriver of these present Dialogues does.

But as for the Author of Philosophia Scripturae Interpres, I must confess I
do much admire, that after he has labored so much to make good his Argument,
he should pitch upon Descartes his Philosophy as such a safe Oracle to consult
about the meaning of Scripture. It is true, that several strokes of it are
very fitly applicable to a Philosophical sense of the Six days Creation: but
those are such as are comprehended in the Pythagorick frame of the Universe,
and correspond with the ancient Cabbala; are no new Inventions of the Cartesian
Wit. And the truth is, that which makes Descartes his Philosophy look so
augustly on it is, in that he has interwoven into it that noble System of the
World according to the Tradition of Pythagoras and his Followers, or, if you
will, of the most ancient Cabbala of Moses. But the rest of his Philosophy is
rather pretty then great, and in that sense that he drives at, of pure
Mechanism, enormously and ridiculously false.

But now for those Principles or Passages in his Philosophy that are more
peculiarly his own, there is nothing more estranged from the Genius of the
Scripture and the service of Theology then they. For fuller satisfaction, and
for the suavity of the Co^ceit's sake, let us make trial in some few. It is a
grand Principle with him, that wherever we cannot but conceive an Extension
or Expansion, we must likewise necessarily conceive there is Matter. And
therefore because we cannot but conceive an indefinite Space round about us
extended, we cannot but conceive Matter all along extended. Which plainly
implies, we cannot but conceive there is Matter, whatever else there is.
Whence it follows, that its existence is necessary of it self and independent
of God, because in its very Notion or Idea it cannot but ^e conceived to be; we
being not able otherwise to conceive but that there is an indefinite Extension
round about us. How this will comport with the absolute Perfection of God, or
how sound a sense it will render of the first Verse in Genesis, I leave to any
one to conjecture.

Again, It is as confessed a Principle with him, that Matter alone with such a
degree of Motion as is supposed now in the Universe will produce all the
Phenomenon of the World, Sun, Moon, and Stars, Air, Water, Earth, Plants,
Animals, and the Bodies of Men, in such order and organization as they are
found. Which Principle in his Philosophy certainly must prove a very inept
Interpreter of Romans 1. 19, 20. where the eternal Power and Godhead is said
clearly to be seen by the things that are made; insomuch that the Gentiles
became thereby unexcusable. But if the Cartesian Philosophy be true, it was
their ignorance they could not excuse themselves. For they might have said,
That all these things might come to pass by Matter and mere Mechanical Motion;
and that Matter excludes Motion in its own Idea no more then it includes Rest:
so that it might have Motion of it self as well as its Existence, according to
the former Implication. See also how fit a Gloss this Principle will afford
upon Acts 14. 17. and how well that Text agrees with the first Section of the
first Chapter of Descartes his Meteors.

A third peculiar property of his Philosophy is, Princip. ^ part. 1. Artic. 28.
A seeming Modesty in declining all search into the Final causes of the
Phenomenon of the World: as if, forsooth, that were too great a presumption of
humane wit, to pry into the Ends of God's Creation; whenas indeed his
Philosophy is of that nature, that it prevents all such Researches; things
coming to pass, according to it, as if God were not at all the Creator and
Contriver of the World, but that mere Matter Mechanically swung about by such a
measure of Motion fell necessarily, without any more to do, into this Frame of
things we see, and could have been no otherwise then they are; and that
therefore all the particular Vsefulnesses of the Creation are not the Results
of Wisdom or Counsel, but the blind issues of mere Material and Mechanical
Necessity. And things being so, it is indeed very consistent to cast the
consideration of the Final Cause out of the Mechanical Philosophy. But in the
mean time how fit an Interpreter of Scripture this Philosophy will be in such
places as that of the Psalmist, O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom
have thou made them all, I understand not. For, according to this Philosophy,
he has made no^e of them so. Let the zealous Cartesian read the whole 144
Psalm, and tune it in this point, if he can, to his Master's Philosophy. Let
him see also what sense he can make of the first to the Corinthians, Chapter I. v.
21.

Fourthly, The Apparitions of Horsemen and Armies encountering one another in
the Air, 2 Macch. 5. let him consider how illustrable that passage is from the
last Section of the 7. Chapter of Descartes his Meteors, and from the
conclusion of that whole Treatise.

Fifthly, Isai. 1. 3.
That of the Prophet, The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib;
as also that of Solomon, The righteous man regards the life of his Beast,
Pro. 12. 10.
but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel: what an excellent Gloss that
Conceit of Descartes his, of Brutes being senseless Machina's, will produce
upon these Texts, any one may easily foresee.

And, lastly, Gal. 5. 17. where that Enmity and conflict betwixt the Flesh and
the Spirit is mentioned, (and is indeed as serious and solemn an Argument as
any occurrs in all Theology) what light the Cartesian Philosophy will
contribute for the more (...) this so important Mystery, may easily be
conjectured from the 47th Article of his Treatise of the Passions, where the
Combat betwixt the superior and inferior part of the Soul, the Flesh and the
Spirit, as they are termed in Scripture and Divinity, is at last resolved into
the ridiculous Noddings and Ioggings of a small glandulous Button in the midst
of the Brain encountered by the animal Spirits rudely flurting against it. This
little sprunt Champion, called the Conarion, (or Nux pinea) within which the
Soul is entirely cooped up, acts the part of the Spirit, as the animal Spirits
of the Flesh. And thus by the Soul thus ingarrison'd in this Pine-kernell, and
bearing herself against the Arietations or Iurrings of the Spirits in the
Ventricles of the Brain, must that solemn Combat be performed, which the holy
Apostle calls the War betwixt the Law of our Members and the Law of our Mind.
Romans 7. 23.
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis, ami^i? Would not so trivial and Iudicrous an
account of Temptation and Sin occasion Bod^nus his ^^lack-smith to raise as
derisorious a Proverb touching actual Sin, as he did touching original, and
make them say, What ado is there about the wagging of a Nut, as well as he did
about the eating of the Apple? Besides, if this Conflict be not a Combat
betwixt two contrary Lives seated in the Soul her self, but this that opposes
the Soul be merely the Spirits in such an Organized body, (as Cartesius
expressly affirms;) the Souls of the wicked and of the godly in the other state
are equally freed from the importunities of Sin.

These few Tastes may suffice to satisfy us how savoury an Interpreter the
Cartesian Philosophy would prove of Holy Scripture and Theological Mysteries.
So that Religion can suffer nothing by the lessening of the Repute of
Cartesianism, the Notions that are peculiar thereto having so little tendency
to that service. Indeed if Cartesius had as well demonstrated as affirmed that
Matter cannot think, he had directly deserved well of Religion it self. But
how-ever Providence has so ordered things, that in an oblique way his
Philosophy becomes serviceable to Religion, whether he intended it or no, or
rather, that of it that was most against his intention, namely the Flaws and
Defects so plainly discoverable in it. For the unsuccessfulness of his Wit and
Industry in the Mechanical Philosophy has abundantly assured the sagacious,
that the Phenomenon of the Universe must be entitled to an higher and more
Divine Principle then mere Matter and Mechanical Motion. Which is the main
reason that his greatest Encomiast does so affectionately recommend the reading
of the Cartesian Philosophy: Sect. 14, 15.
as you may see in the Preface to his Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul.

These things, I think, duly considered will easily clear the Author of these
Dialogues from all imputation of Imprudence, in opposing the renowned
Philosopher in such things as it is of so great concern thus freely to oppose
him, especially he going very little farther then his highest Encomiasts have
led the way before him.

Nor can I bethink me of any else that may have any colorable Pretense of a
just Complaint against him, unless the Platonists, who happily may judge it an
unfit thing that so Divine a Philosophy should be so much slurred by
introducing Cuphophron, a Platonist, uttering such tipsie and temulent Raptures
and Rhetorical Apologies, as he does in the Second and Third Dialogues, for
the extenuating the hideousness of Sin; besides the ill Tendency of such loose
and lusorious Oratorie. And yet the judicious, I believe, will find those
passages as pertinent and useful as those that bear the face of more Severity
and Reservedness; and will easily remember that the Character of Cuphophron is
not simply a Platonist, but an aiery-minded one, (as indeed both the danger and
indecorum of Light^ mindedness or overmuch Levity of spirit is both
represented and perstringed all along in his person;) which therefore does not
redound to the discredit of Platonism as such, but to the discovery of the
hazard of that Philosophy, if it meet not with a mind that is sober and well
ballasted. And for the ill Tendency of his rapturous Eloquence, that fear is
altogether groundless; since of all the force of Reason and Rhetoric he
produces, there is so perfect and convictive a Confutation, that there is not
the least color left to palliate Immorality; for as much as it is so clear^y
evidenced that Sin and Vice are no^, as Cuphophron's Sophistry (...) only
pursuances of a (...) things in themselves absolutely (...), and perfectly
contrary to the ^ill and nature of God.

But it was a matter of no small moment to bring into view all that could
plausibly be said in the behalf of so pleasing a Monster, that it being all
enervated and demonstrated to be weak and frivolous, the Mind of man might be
the more firmly radicated and es^^blished in what is good: and that ev^l men
also might take notice, tha^ the more-severely vert^ous are not (...) of the
wi^tiest Pleas and (...) they can frame for their adherence to Sin, nor at all
at a loss how utterly to de^eat them. And that therefore those that are
cordially good are not so out of simplicity and ignorance, (as the
falsely-deemed Wits foolishly conceit them) but out of a clear and rational
discernment what is best, and out of an holy sense and relish of the Divi^^^st
things. To the latter whereof as those conceited Wits lay no claim; so is it as
manifest that they have as little right or title to the former, no man
willingly continuing in Wickedness but out of a base Stupidity of mind and
Imbecility of Reason.

But these things, Reader, thou will best understand by perusing the Dialogues
themselves, from which I have too long detained thee by an over-tedious
Preface; which I must entreat thee to impute rather to my desire that thou
might reap a clear satisfaction without the least Scruple or Disgust, then
that I have any suspicion of either thy Candor or Judgment.

Farewell. G.C.

THE EPISTLE Of Fr. Euistor, the Palaeopolite, to a Noble Friend of his,
touching the ensuing Dialogues.
Honored Sir,
IT is now well-nigh two years ago since I gave you Intelligence touching that
notable Meeting I had the good hap to be at in Cuphophron's renowned Arbor:
Wherein I signified to you the great satisfaction Philopolis received in those
Conferences, and how excessively Hylobares was transported with Philotheus his
Converse, being made thereby so firm a Convert to the belief of Spiritual
Beings, and of the Accuracy of that Divine Providence that has the Government
of the World. But though the Hints I gave then of the several Days Discourses
made you so passionately desirous of having the whole matter of those
Disceptations more fully communicated to you, and all the Five Days Conferences
recovered, if it were possible, into so many Dialogues: yet, for all the care
and industry I could use, I could not till now bring about what you so
earnestly requested.

But now, partly out of my own Records I made to my self there a-nights after
every Day's Discourse, and partly by communicating since that time either by
Letters or word of mouth with those that were there present, (especially
Sophron, a man of a very firm memory as well as of an able judgment) I think I
have at length recovered all that passed in every Day's Conference, even to the
minutest Humors and Circumstances of our Converse: Which I have done with that
faithfulness, that I have not omitted such passages as may seem to redound to
my own discredit; as being more then once not over-handsomely abused by our
young Friend Hylobares, who, you know, is free enough in that kind with his
familiar Acquaintances. Which made him fly upon Cuphophron so frequently as he
did, even to the admiration, and offense sometimes, of my worthy Patron
Philopolis.

These two, I mean Hylobares and Cuphophron, are, as it were, the small Mean
and Treble in this Heptachordon or Instrument of seven Strings. And indeed they
are all along (especially in the Three first Dialogues) as acute and canorous
as two stridulous Swallows on the top of a Chimney. The rest you will find
grave enough, and my self some degrees below Gravity, that is to say, pretty
solemnly and authentickly dull. How ever, I served to supply the place of an
Historian to them; as I do to you in the rehearsal of the whole matter.
Wherein I recording the Humors and Passions of men as well as their
Reasonings, if any thing be faulty in any phrase of speech or Comportment of
the young men, yet you are to consider that it had been a Fault in me to have
omitted it; esp^cially the Blemishes of the less perfect being so discernible
in the company of those more-accomplished persons, and therefore the more
likely to beget a disrelish and aversation in the Reader to such Miscarriages.
Which is the main Scope of all Moral Writings, whether Poetry or History.

But what may seem more harsh in those youthful persons, compared with the
discreet and unexceptionable demeanor of those of more mature age, will yet be
found very suitable and harmonious to the Persons themselves, if you have but
recourse to the particular Characters in the Page before the Book; which
briefly represents the Genius of every Actour. Which if you firmly fix in your
mind, and carry with you all along as you read, you will at least be assured
that I am not altogether an unskilful Dramatist, how-ever you may doubt
whether I be so exact an Historian.

Farewell From Palaeopolis, November. 29. 1666. Yours to command, Fr. Euistor.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Three first DIALOGUES.
I. THE Preference of Virtue and assurance of an happy Immortality before the
Pleasures and Grandeur of this present World. 1. II. The Description of
Hylobares his Genius, and of Cuphophron's Entertainments in his Philosophical
Bower. 4. III. Philopolis his Quere's touching the Kingdom of God, together
with his sincere purpose of proposing them. 13. IV. Hylobares his Interposall
of his Quere's: first, touching the Existence of God, and Divine Providence.
18. V. The Existence of God argued from the orderly Designs discoverable in the
Phenomenon of Nature. 20. VI. Several Instances of that general Argument. 22.
VII. That necessary Causality in the blind Matter can do as little toward the
orderly Effects in Nature, as the fortuitous Iumbles thereof. 28. VIII. That
there is no Phenomenon in Nature purely Mechanical. 31. IX. That there is no
Levitation or Gravitation of the Ether or of the vulgar Elements in their
proper places. Whence it is plain that Matter's Motion is moderated from some
Diviner Principle. 33. X. That the Primordialls of the World are not
Mechanical, but Vital. 36. XI. Instances of some simple Phenomenon quite
contrary to the Laws of Mechanics. 39. XII. The fond and indiscreet hankering
after the impossible Pretensions of solving all Phenomenon Mechanically, freely
and justly perstringed. 43. XIII. The Existence of God argued from the Consent
of Nations, from Miracles and Prophecies, from his Works in Nature, and from
his Idea. 49. XIV. The Obscurity of the Nature of God, and the Intricacy of
Providence; with preparatory Cautions for the better satisfaction in these
Points. 54. XV. The Attribute^ of Eternity. 57. XVI. An Objection against the
All-comprehension of Eternity, with the Answer thereto. 66. XVII. Another
Objection, with its Answer. 71. XVIII. The Attribute of Immutability. 73. XIX.
Of the Deity's acting ad extra. 78. XX. The Attribute of Omnisciency. 80. XXI.
The Attribute of Spirituality, and that God cannot be Material. 87. XXII. The
false Notion of a Spirit. 90. XXIII. That there is an Spiritual Being in the
World. 92. XXIV. That Extension and Matter are not reciprocal. 93. XXV. That
there is an Extension intrins^call to Motion. 96. XXVI. That there is an
immovable Extension distinct from that of movable Matter. 101. XXVII. That this
Extension distinct from Matter is not imaginary, but real. 104. XXVIII. A fresh
Appeal touching the truth of that Point to Reason, Sense, and Imagination. 111.
XXIX. The essential Properties of Matter. 118. XXX. The true Notion of a
Spirit. 124. XXXI. The Attribute of Omnipresency. 132. XXXII. Cuphophron's
Paradox of God's being nowhere. 135. XXXIII. The Confutation of that Paradox.
139. XXXIV. That all Spirits are some-where. 142. XXXV. The Grounds of
Cuphophron's Paradox (that Spirits are no-wh^re) produced and examined. 151.
XXXVI. That God is essentially present everywhere. 157. XXXVII. The Arborists
affected liberty of dissenting in unnecessary Opinions, and friendly
Abusiveness of one another in their Philosophical Meetings. 160. XXXVIII. The
Conclusion. 164.
The Second Dialogue.
I. THE Introduction, containing Philopolis his Thanks for the last day's
Discourse; with a touch by the bye of Inspiration, and of the Difficulty of the
present Subject. 168. II. The two main Heads of Objections against Providence,
with certain Laws to be observed in disputing thereof. 172. III. Evils in
general how consistent with the Goodness of God. 175. IV. The Arguments of
Lucretius against Providence. 181. V. Providence argued against from the
promiscuous falling of the Rain, and undiscriminating discharges of
Thunderclaps. 187. VI. An Answer to Lucretius his Arguments. 198. VII. Of
Death, how consistent with the Goodness of Providence. 211. VIII. Of Diseases.
217. IX. Of War, Famine, Pestilence, and Earthquakes. 220. X. Of ill Accidents
happening to brute Creatures, whereby their life's become miserable. 226. XI. Of
the Cruelty and Rapacity of Animals. 232. XII. Of the Rage of the Elements, the
Poison of Serpents, and Wrath of wild Beasts. 239. XIII. Of Monstrosities in
Nature. 244. XIV. Of Fools, Madmen, and men irreclamably Wicked from their
very birth. 252. XV. The best Use to be made of the saddest Scene of the things
of this World. 262. XVI. How the Entrance of Sin into the World can consist
with the Goodness of Providence. 264. XVII. Cuphophron's L^natick Apology
whereby he would extenuate the Hainousness of Sin. 268. XVIII. A solid Answer
to the foregoing Apology, though ushered in with something ludicrous Preamble.
281. XIX. A more sober Enquiry into that Dif^culty, How the Permission of Sin
in the World can consi^t with the Goodnes^ of God. 29^. XX. The first Attempt
of satisfying the Di^ficulty, from that Stoicall Position of (...) invincible
Freedom of Man's Will. 29^. XXI. The second Attempt, from the consid^ration of
some high Abuses of a vincib^ Freedom, as also from the nature of this
Freedom it self. 299. XXII. The third and last, from the Questionableness
whether in compute of the whole there does not as much good redound to the
Universe by God's Permission of Sin, as there would by his forcible keeping it
out. 308. XXIII. How consistent it is with the Goodness of Providence, that God
does not suddenly make men holy so soon as they have an hearty mind to it.
314. XXIV. The Parable of the Eremite and the Angel. 320. XXV. That the
Adversity of the Good, and the Prosperity and Impunity of the Wicked in this
Life, are no Arguments against the Accuracy of Providence. 329. XXVI. A civil,
but merry-conceited, bout of drinking in Cuphophron's Arbor. 338. XXVII. The
mavelous Conjuncture in Hylobares of an outward Levity and inward Soberness
at once. 343. XXVIII. His serious Song of Divine Providence. 345. XXIX. The
breaking up of the Meeting. 348.
The Third Dialogue.
I. COnjectures touching the Causes of that Mirth that the Meeting of some
persons naturally excites in one another. 350. II. Hylobares his Relapse into
Dissettlemen^ of mind touching Providence, with the cause thereof. 355. III.
Paucity of Philosophers no blemish to Divine Providence. 357. IV. Reasons in
general of the gross Deformity in the Religions and Customs of the Savage
Nations, as also of the variety of this Deformity in Manners and Customs. 361.
V. Of the barbarous Custom of going naked. 366. VI. Of the ridiculous Deckings
and Adornings of the Barbarians. 369. VII. The Lawlesness of the Barbarians and
their gross Extravagancies touching Wedlock apologized for by Cuphophron,
Advocate-General for the Paynims. 376. VIII. Of the (...), and the men of
Arcladam that lie in Childbed for their Wives. 383. IX. Of the Pagans Cruelty
to their Enemies, and inhumane Humanity to their Friends. 385. X. Their killing
men at Funerals to accompany the dead. 388. XI. The Caraiamites murdering good
men to seize on their Virtues. 391. XII. Of the Anthropophagi or Cannibals.
393. XIII. Of the Atheism and the Polytheism of the Barbarians. 398. XIV. Of
their Men-Sacrifices. 402. XV. Of their worshipping the Devil. 404. XVI. Of
their sacrificing men to the Devil. 408. XVII Of Self-Sacrificers. 416. XVIII.
The meaning of Providence in permitting such horrid Vsages in the World. 419.
XIX. The Madness of the Priests of the Pagans. 421. XX. Of their Religious
Methods of living in order to future Happiness. 430. XXI. Of their Opinions
touching the other State. 433. XXII. The Vnsuccessfulness of Cuphophron's
Advocateship hitherto in reference to the ease of Hylobares his Perplexities.
437. XXIII. Several Considerations to make us hope that the state of the World
may not be so bad as Melancholy or History may represent it. 440. The first
Consideration. 442. The second Consideration. 445. The third Consideration.
450. The fourth Consideration. ibid. The fifth Consideration. 451. The sixth
Consideration. 452. The seventh Consideration. 453. The eighth Consideration.
454. XIV. Excellent Instances of Morality even in the most barbarous Nations.
455. The ninth Consideration. 461. The tenth Consideration. 462. The last
Consideration. 463. XXV. Cuphophron's rapturous Reasons why God does not
dissolve the World, notwithstanding the gross Miscarriages in it; with
Hylobares and Sophron's solid Animadversions thereon. 464. XXVI. Hylobares as
yet unsatisfied touching the Goodness of Providence, by reason of the sad Scene
of things in the World. 470. XXVII. An Hypothesis that will secure the Goodness
of Providence, were the Scene of things on this Earth ten times worse then it
is. 473. XXVIII. Bathynous his Dream of the two Keys of Providence, containing
the abovementioned Hypothesis. 480. XXIX. His being so rudely and forcibly
awaked out of so Divine a Dream, how consistent with the Accuracy of
Providence. 492. XXX. That that Divine Personage that appeared to Bathynous was
rather a Favourer of Pythagorism, then Cartesianism. 496. XXXI. The Application
of the Hypothesis in the Golden-Key-Paper, for the clearing all Difficulties
touching the Moral Evils in the World. 502. XXXII. Several Objections against
Providence fetched from Defects, answered partly out of the Golden, partly out
of the Silver-Key-Paper. 514. XXXIII. Difficulties touching the Extent of the
Universe. 520. XXXIV. Difficulties touching the Habitableness or
Unhabitableness of the Planets. 523. XXXV. That though the World was created
but about six thousand years ago, yet, for ought we know, it was created as
soon as it could be. 536. XXXVI. Hylobares his excess of Joy and high
Satisfaction touching Providence, from the Discourse of Philotheus. 549.
XXXVII. The Philosopher's Devotion. 552. XXXVIII. The Hazard and Success of the
foregoing Discourse. 556. XXXIX. The Preference of Intellectual Joy before that
which is Sensual. 557. XL. That there is an ever-anticipative Eternity and
inexterminable Amplitude that are proper to the Deity only. 559.
Errata.
Page-75. lin. 2. read Ac -- Aq. p. 151. l. 24. r. Res cogitantes. p. 213. l.
16. r. as in. p. 278. l. 18. r. (...) p. 339. l. 13. r. neighbor P^ilothe^s.
p. 340. l. 4. r. Philoth. p. 345. l. ul^. r. bear. p. 441. l. 14. for have, r.
hear. p. 457. l. 20. r. Hathney and the Brasilian.

The proper Characters of the Persons in the ensuing Dialogues, with some
Allusion to their Names.
Philotheus, A zealous and sincere Lover of God and Christ, and of the whole
Creation. Bathynous, The Deeply-thoughtfull or profoundly-thinking man.
Sophron, The Sober and wary man. Philopolis, The pious and loyal Politician.
Euistor, A man of Criticism, Philologie and History. Hylobares, A young, witty,
and well-moralized Materialist. Cuphophron, A zealous, but Airie-minded,
Platonist and Cartesian, or Mechanist.
The general Character.
All free spirits, mutually permitting one another the liberty of
Philosophizing without any breach of Friendship.
DIVINE DIALOGVES, CONTAINING Several Disquisitions and Instructions touching
the ATTRIBUTES OF GOD AND HIS PROVIDENCE IN THE WORLD.
THE FIRST DIALOGUE.
Philotheus, Bathynous, Sophron, Philopolis, Euistor, Hylobares, Cuphophron.
Cuph. THrice welcome, The Preference of Virtue and assurance of an happy
Immortality before the Pleasures and Gra^deur of thi^ present world.
O I.
Philotheus, who have brought along with you two such desirable Associates as
Bathynous and Sophron. Will you please to make a step up into the Garden?


Philoth. With all our hearts. There ^s nothing more pleasant these Summer
Evenings then the cool open Air. And I Will assure you it is very fresh here, and
the Prospect very delightsome.


Cuph. Methinks I envy Greatness for nothing so much as their magnificent
Houses, and their large Gardens and Walks, their Quarters contrived into
elegant Knots adorned with the most beautiful Flowers, their Fountains,
Cascades and Statues; that I might be in a more splendid capacity of
entertaining my Friends. This would be to me no small prelibation of the Joys
of Paradise here upon Earth.


Philoth. For my part, Cuphophron, I think he need envy no body who has his
Heart full fraught with the Love of God, and his Mind established in a firm
belief of that unspeakable Happiness that the virtuous and pious Soul enjoys in
the other State amongst the spirits of just men made perfect. The firm belief
of this in an innocent Soul is so high a prelibation of those eternal Joys,
that it equalizes such an one's Happiness, if he have but the ordinary
Conveniences of life, to that of the greatest Potentates. Their difference in
external Fortune is as little considerable as a Semidiameter of the Earth in
two measures of the highest Heaven, the one taken from the Surface of the
Earth, the other from its Center: The disproportion you know is just nothing.


Cuph. It is so.


Philoth. And for gratifying your Friends; They that are in a capacity of being
truly such, are as fully well satisfied with your ordinary Entertainment, as if
you were Master of the Fortunes of Princes. Besides that it would be hazardous
to your self to live in that affected Splendor you speak of, as it is not
altogether safe to affect it. For both the desire and enjoyment of external
Pomp does naturally blind the eyes of the Mind, and attempts the stifling of
her higher and more heavenly Operations, engages the Thoughts here below, and
hinders those Meditations that carry the Soul to an anticipatory view of those
eternal Glories above.


Cuph. What you say, Philotheus, may be, and may not be: These things are as
they are used. But I must confess I think worldly Fortunes are most frequently
abused, and that there is a danger in them: which makes me the more contented
with the state I am in.


Philoth. And so you well may be, Cuphophron: for though you will not admit you
live splendidly, yet it cannot be denied but that you live neatly and
elegantly. For such are the Beds and Alleys of this little spot of Ground: and
such also that Arbor, if the Inside be as neat as the Outside.


Cuph. That you may quickly see, Philotheus.


Philoth. All very handsome, II.
Table, Cushions, (...) his Genius, and of Cuphophro^'s Entertainments in his
Philosophical Bower.
Seats and all.


Cuph. Here I love to entertain my Friends with a frug^l Collation, a cup of
Wine, a dish of Fruit and a Manchet: The rest they make up with free Discourses
in Philosophy. And this will prove your greatest Entertainment now, Philotheus,
if Philopolis, Euistor and Hylobares were come.


Sophr. No Entertainment better any-where then a frugal Table, and free and
ingenuous Discourse. But I pray you, Cuphophron, who is that Hylobares? Is it
he who is so much famed for holding That there is nothing but Body or Matter in
the world; That there is nothing Just or Unjust in its own nature; That all
Pleasures are alike honest, though it be never so unaccountable a satisfaction
of either a man's Cruelty or his Lust?


Cuph. O no, it is not he. For I verily believe I know who you mean, though it
never was yet my fortune to be in his company, and I least of all desire it
now. For he is a person very inconversable, and, as they say, an imperious
Dictatour of the Principles of Vice, and impatient of all dispute and
contradiction. But this Hylobares is quite of another Genius and extraction;
one that is as great a Moralist on this side rigor and severity of life, as he
is a Materialist, and of a kind and friendly nature.


Bath. That is not incredible: For I see no reason why a Soul that is
infortunately immersed into this material or corporeal Dispensation may not in
the main be as solid a Moralist as a Mathematician. For the chief Points of
Morality are no less demonstrable then Mathematics; nor is the Subtilty
greater in Moral Theorems then in Mathematical.


Sophr. In my mind it is a sign of a great deal of natural Integrity and inbred
Nobleness of spirit, that maugre the heaviness of his Complexion that thus
strongly bears him down from apprehending so concerning Metaphysicall Truths,
yet he retains so vivid r^sentments of the more solid Morality.


Philoth. That will redound to his greater Joy and Happiness, whenever it shall
please God to recover his Soul into a clearer knowledge of himself. For even
Moral Honesty it self is part of the Law of God, and an adumbration of the
Divine life. So that when Regeneration has more thoroughly illuminated his
Understanding, I doubt not but that he will fall into that pious admiration and
speech of the ancient Patriarch, Genesis 28. 16
Verily God was in this place, and I knew not of it. Wherefore those that are
the true lovers of God must be friendly and lovingly disposed toward all his
Appearances, and bid a kind welcome to the first dawnings of that Diviner
Light.


Cuph. But besides the goodness of his Disposition, he has a very smart Wit,
and is a very shrewd Disputant in those Points himself seems most puzzled in,
and is therein very dexterous in puzzling others, if they be not through-paced
Speculatours in those great Theories.


Sophr. If he have so much Wit added to his Sincerity, his case is the more
hopeful.


Cuph. What he has of either you will now suddenly have the opportunity to
experience your selves: for I see Philopolis and the rest coming up into the
Garden. I will meet them, and bring them to you. Gentlemen, you are all three
welcome at once, but most of all Philopolis, as being the greatest Stranger.


Philop. I pray you, Cuphophron, is Philotheus and the rest of his Company come?


Cuph. That you shall straightways see, when you come to the Arbor.


Philop. Gentlemen, we are very well met. I am afraid we have made you stay for
us.


Philoth. It was more fitting that we should stay for Philopolis, then he for
us. But we have been here but a little while.


Cuph. A very little while indeed; but now our Company is doubled, so little
will be twice as little again. I am very much transported to see my little
Arbor scored with such choice Guests. But that mine own Worthlesness spoils
the conceit, I could think our Company parallel to the Seven wise men of Greece.


Hyl. I warrant the Septenary will be henceforth much more sacred to Cuphophron
for this day's Meeting.


Cuph. The Senary at least.


Hyl. You are so transported with the pleasure of the presence of your Friends,
O Cuphophron, that you forget to tell them how welcome they are.


Cuph. That is soon recounted. I sent into my Arbor just before Philotheus
came this dish of Fruit, and this Wine, the best, I hope, in all Athens; and I
begin to Philopolis, and bid you now all welcome at once.


Hyl. You was very early in your provision, Cuphophron.


Cuph. I did early provide for our privacy, that there might be no need of any
body's coming here but our selves.


Hyl. A large Entertainment.


Cuph. I keep touch both with my promise to Philopolis and with my own usual
Frugality in these kind of Collations: And yet, Hylobares, you have no cause to
complain; you have to gratify all your five Senses. Here is another Glass,
taste this Wine.


Hyl. It is very good, Cuphophron, and has an excellent flavor.


Cuph. There Is to gratify your Taste then, Hylobares, besides the delicacy of
these ripe Fruit, which recreate also the Nostrils with their Aromatic sent;
as also does the sweet smell of the Eglantines and Hony-suckles that cover my
Arbor.


Hyl. But what is there to gratify the Touch, Cuphophron?


Cuph. Is there any thing more delicious to the Touch then the soft cool
Evening-Air, that fans it self through the leaves of the Arbor, and cools our
blood, which youth and the season of the year have overmuch heated?


Hyl. Nothing that I know of: nor any thing more pleasant to the Sight then the
Faces of so many ingenuous Friends met together, whose Candor and Faithfulness
is conspicuous in their very Eyes and Countenances.


Cuph. Shame take you, Hylobares, you have prevented me: It is the very Conceit
and due Complement I was ready to utter and bestow upon this excellent Company.


Hyl. It seems good wits jump, and mine the nimbler of the two. But what have
you to gratify the Ear, Cuphophron?


Cuph. Do you not hear the pleasant Notes of the Birds both in the Garden and
on the Bower? And if you think meanly of this Music, I Pray you give us a cast
of your skill, and play us a Lesson on your Flagellet.


Hyl. Upon condition you will dance to it.


Sophr. I dare say Philopolis thinks us Athenians very merry Souls.


Philop. Mirth and Cheerfulness, O Sophron, are but the due reward of Innocence
of life; which, if anywhere, I believe is to be found in your manner of living,
who do not quit the World out of any Hypocrisy, Sullenness, or Superstition,
but out of a sincere love of true Knowledge and Virtue. But as for the pretty
warbling of the Birds, or that greater skill of Hylobares on the Flagellet, I
must take the liberty to profess, that it is not that kind of Music that will
gain my Attention at this time, when I see so many able and knowing persons met
together; but the pursuance of some instructive Argument freely and
indifferently managed for the finding out of the Truth. Nothing so musical to
my ears as this.


Cuph. Nor, I dare say, to any of this Company, Philopolis.


Philop. But I am the more eager, because I would not lose so excellent an
opportunity of improving my Knowledge. For I never met with the like advantage
before, nor am likely again to meet with it, unless I meet with the same
Company.


Cuph. We are much obliged to you for your good opinion of us,


Philopolis. But you full little think that you must be the Beginner of the
Discourse your self.


Philop. Why so, III.
Cuphophron?


Cuph. For it is an ancient and unalterable Custom of this place, Philopolis
his Quere's touching the Kingdom of God, together with his sincere purpose of
proposing them.
that in our Philosophical Meetings he that is the greatest Stranger must
propound the Argument. Whether this Custom was begun by our Ancestors out of
an ambition of showing their extemporary ability of speaking upon any Subject,
or whether out of mere civility to the Stranger, I know not.


Philop. I believe it was the latter, I am so sensible of the advantage
thereof, and do not only embrace, but, if need were, should claim the
privilege, now I know it; but shall use it with that modesty, as to excuse the
choice of my Argument, if it shall appear rather a Point of Religion then
Philosophy. For Religion is the Interest of all, but Philosophy of those only
that are at leisure and vacant from the affairs of the world.


Philoth. Let not that trouble you, Philopolis: For, for my part, I look upon
the Christian Religion rightly understood to be the deepest and the choicest
piece of Philosophy that is.


Philop. I am glad to hear you say so, Philotheus; for then I hope the Argument
I shall pitch upon will not appear over-unsuitable. It is touching the Kingdom
of God.


Cuph. Philopolis has both gratified Philotheus, and most exquisitely fitted
himself in the choice of his Argument, his Genius and Affairs being so notedly
Political. It must be a very comprehensive Argument, in which Religion,
Philosophy and Policy do so plainly conspire.


Philoth. It must, indeed. But what are the Quere's you would propose touching
the Kingdom of God, O Philopolis?


Philop. They are chiefly these. First, What the Kingdom of God is. Secondly,
When it began, and where it has been or is now to be found. Thirdly, What
Progress it has made hitherto in the world. Lastly, What Success it is likely
to have to the End of all things.


Philoth. These are grand Questions indeed, Philopolis, insomuch that I am
mightily surprised that so weighty and profound Quere's should come from a
person that is so continuedly taken up with affairs of the World.


Cuph. I dare pawn my life that the noise of the fifth Monarchy, or the late
plausible sound of setting Jesus Christ in his Throne, did first excite
Philopolis to search after these Mysteries.


Philoth. I am not so curious to enquire into the first occasions of Philopolis
his search after these things, as solicitous for what end he now so eagerly
enquires after them. For it is a great and general error in mankind, that they
think all their Acquisitions are of right for themselves, whether it be Power,
or Riches, or Wisdom, and conceit they are no farther obliged then to fortify
or adorn themselves with them: whenas they are in truth mere Depositum's, put
into their hands by Providence for the common good; so that it were better they
had them not, then not to use them faithfully and conscienciously to that end:
for they bring the greater snare upon their own heads by such acquired
Abilities, and make themselves obnoxious to the greater condemnation, unless
they use them, as I said, as the Depositum's of God, not to their own Pride or
Lust, but to the common good of the Church, of their Prince, and of their
Country.


Philop. I acknowledge that to be exceeding true, Philotheus. And next to those
are they obnoxious that craftily decline the acquisition of any Power or
Knowledge, that they may not run the risques of Fortune in witnessing to the
Truth, or assisting the public Concern: which Hypocrisy I being aware of, am
so far from being discouraged, that my Zeal is the more enkindled after
important Truths, that I may the more faithfully and effectually serve God and
my Prince in my Generation, though with the hazard of all that I have.


Euist. Which he has once already more then hazarded in the Cause of his
Sovereign, besides the hazard of his life in five or six bloody Battles. But I
hope he will never have the occasion of running that hazard again.


Philoth. O admired Philopolis, you are of a right faithful and upright
spirit; verily I have not discovered more true Virtue and Nobleness, no not in
the most famous Philosophical Societies.


Philop. I love to feel my self of an express and settled Judgment and
Affection in things of the greatest moment; and nothing, I think, can be of
greater then the Affairs of the Kingdom of God, to know who are more properly
and peculiarly his People, that my Heart may be joined with them, wherever
they are discoverable in the world, and my Hand may relieve them to the utmost
extent of the activity of my narrow sphere. For it seems to me both a very
ignoble and tedious condition, to be blown about with every wind of Doctrine
or transitory Interest, and not to stick to that wherein a man's loss proves
his greatest gain, and Death it self a translation into eternal Life and glory.


Hyl. This were an excellent Temper in Philopolis indeed, IV.
to be thus resolved, Hylobares interpos all of his Quere's: first, touching
the Existence of God, and Divine Providence
if he were sure not to fall short in his account.


Sophr. But suppose he was not sure, seeing he ventures so little for so great
a stake, I think his Temper is still very singularly excellent and commendable.


Philoth. But what needs any such supposition, O Sophron? for as sure as there
is a God and a Providence, such a single-minded soul as Philopolis will after
this life prove a glorious Citizen of Heaven.


Hyl. I am fully of your opinion, O Philotheus, that Philopolis his future
Happiness is as sure as the Existence of God and Divine Providence. But the
assurance of these has hitherto seemed to me very uncertain and obscure:
whence, according to right Method, we should clear that Point first. For there
can be no Kingdom of God, if God himself be not, or if his Providence reach
not to the Government of the Universe, but things be left to blind Chance or
Fate.


Philop. For my part, Gentlemen, I could never yet call such Truths into doubt,
though Hylobares has diverse times attempted to dissettle me at my House near
the other Athens, where sometimes he gives me the honor of a Visit. But all
his Reasonings have seemed to me Sophistical Knots or Tricks of Legerdemain,
which though they might a little amuse me, yet they could not move me at ^ll
from my settled Faith in God and ^is Providence.


Philoth. So great a firmitude is there ^n Life against all the subtle attaques
^f shifting Reason. This farther con^^rms me in an Observation I have made a
long time ago, That there is a kind of Sanctity of Soul and Body that is of
more efficacy for the receiving or retaining of Divine Truths, then the
greatest pretenses to Discursive Demonstration.


Philop. But though I want nothing to confirm me in these Points, yet if
Philotheus could convince Hylobares of the truth of them, and beat him at his
own weapon, it would be to me a pleasant spectacle; provided he come to my
proposed Theme at the last.


Philoth. It is a great wonder to me that a person so ingenious as Hylobares, V.
and so much conversant in Philosophy, The Existence of God argued from (...)
^^derly Desig^s discoverable (...) the Ph^^nomena ^f (...).
should at all doubt of the Existence of the Deity, any more then he does of
Philopolis his Existence or my own; for we cannot so audibly or intelligibly
converse with him as God does with a Philosopher in the ordinary Phenomenon of
Nature. For tell me, O Hylobares, whether if so brief a Treatise as that of
Archimedes de Sphaera and Cylindro had been found by chance, with the
delineations of all the Figures suitable for the design, and short Characters
(such as they now use in specious Arithmetic and Algebra) for the setting down
of the Demonstrations of the orderly-disposed Propositions, could you or any
else imagine that the delineating and fitting these things together was by
Chance, and not from a knowing and designing Principle, I mean from a power
Intellectual?


Hyl. I must confess I think it in a manner impossible that any one that
understood the purpose of those Figures and the adnexed Demonstrations should
doubt but that the Description of them was by some intelligent Being.


Philoth. But why do you think so, Hylobares?


Hyl. Because it is the property of that which is Intelligent to lay several
things together orderly and advantageously for a proposed Design. Which is done
so constantly and repeatedly in that Treatise, and so methodically, that it is
impossible to doubt but that it is the effect of some Intellectual Agent.


Philoth. Wherefore wherever we find frequent and repeated Indications of
pursuing skilfully a Design, we must acknowledge some Intelligent Being the
cause thereof.


Hyl. We must so.


Philoth. But what a small Scroll and how few Instances of pursuing a Design is
there in that Treatise of Archimedes, in comparison of the whole Volume of
Nature, wherein, as in Archimedes every leading Demonstration to the main
upshot of all (which is the Proportion betwixt the Sphere and Cylinder) is a
pledge of the Wit and Reason of that Mathematician, so the several subordinate
Natures in the world (which are in a manner infinite) bear conspicuously in
them a Design for the best, VI.
and therefore are a cloud of Witnesses that there is a Divine and Intellectual
Principle under all? (...)



Hyl. This is better understood by Instances, Philotheus.


Philoth. It is. And I will instance in the meanest first, I mean in the most
loose and general strokes of the Skill of that great Geometrician, as Plutarch
some-where calls the Deity. As in the nature of Gravity, which precipitates
thick terrestrial parts downward through both Air and Water, without which
power no Beasts nor Fowls could live upon the Earth or in the Air, dirt and
filth would so flow into their mouths and stop their breath; nor could Fishes
subsist in the Water. 2. In that strong tug against overmuch baring the
subtilest Matter in these lower Regions, that thinner Element being
disproportionated to the Lungs of either Birds or Beasts; as is to be more
fully understood in those excellent Experiments of the Airpump. 3. In the
Parallelism and the due-proportionated Inclination of the Axis of the Earth,
and the Latitude of the Moon from the Equator.


Hyl. I cannot deny but that these Laws are better then if things had been
otherwise.


Philoth. 4. The contrivance of the Earth into Hills and Springs and Rivers,
into Quarries of Stone and Metal: is not all this for the best?


Hyl. I conceive it is.


Philoth. And what think you of Land and Sea, whenas all might have been a
Quagmire?


Hyl. That also is for the best. For on it depends the pleasure and profit of
Navigation. Besides that the Sea is the fountain of Moisture that administers
to the Springs underneath, as the Springs supply the Rivers above-ground, and
so imitate the Circulation of the Blood in man's Body.


Philoth. Cast your eye also upon the variety of Herbs and Trees, their Beauty,
their Virtue and manifold Usefulness, the contrivance of their Seed for
propagation; and consider if all be not for the best.


Hyl. It would require an Age to pursue these things.


Philoth. Well then, let us for brevity sake consider only the several kinds
of Animals: which, beside the Usefulness of some of them especially and more
appropriately to mankind, (as the Dog and the Horse for Services, and Oxen and
Sheep for his Food) their external Shapes are notoriously accommodated to that
Law or guise of life that Nature has designed them; as in general the Birds for
flying, the Fish for swimming, and the Beasts for running on the ground; the
external frame and covering of their Bodies are exquisitely fitted for these
purposes. Besides what also is very general, that contrivance of Male and
Female for Propagation, and that notable difference of Fishes and Birds being
oviparous, that there might be the more full supply for th^^ great Havoc that
would be necessarily made upon those kind of Creatures by their devouring
enemies. To these you may add the instinct of Birds in building their Nests and
sitting on their Eggs; the due number and position of the Organs of Sense and
peculiar Armatures of Creatures, with the instinct of using them: That those
Fowls that frequent the Waters, and only wade, have as well long Legs as long
Necks; and those that are made for swimming have Feet like Oars: and that no
Birds have Paps, as Beasts have. All which things, and infinite more, do
plainly argue the accuracy of Design in their framing.


Hyl. Things are, I must confess, as if they were plainly designed to be so.


Philoth. But to put an end to these Instances, which, as you said, a whole Age
would not suffice to enumerate; the inward Anatomy and use of Parts in many
thousand kinds of Animals is as sure a demonstration of a very-curiously
contrived Design in each of these Animals Bodies, as the several Figures and
Demonstrations in the abovenamed Book of Archimedes are of the Writer's
purpose of concluding the Truth of each Proposition to which they appertain.
That in Man's Body is notorious. The fabric of the Eye, its safe and useful
situation, the superaddition of Muscles, and the admirable contrivance of the
Flesh of the whole Body in a manner into that useful Organization; those of
the Larynx for Speech and Singing; the industrious perforation of the Tendons
of the second Joints both of Fingers and Toes, and the drawing of the Tendons
of the third Joints through them; the Ventricles of the Heart and their
Valvulae, as also the Valvulae of the Veins; the fabric of these, and the
apparently-designed Use of them, and of a thousand more, not only in Man, but
analogically in the rest of Animals, are as certain a pledge of the Existence
of a God, as any Voice or Writing that contains such Specimens of Reason as are
in Archimedes his Treatise are an Argument of the existence of some man or
Angel that must be the Author of them.


Hyl. The weight of Reason and the vehemence of Philotheus his Zeal does for
the present bear me down into this belief whether I will or no. For I easily
feel the force of his arguing from these few Hints, having perused the latest
Treatises of this Subject, and being sufficiently versed in Anatomicall
History; which, I must confess, urges upon me, more effectually then any thing,
the Existence of God.


Philoth. Which belief, methinks, you should never be able to stagger in, if
you consider that in these infinite kinds of living Creatures, none of them are
made foolishly or ineptly, no not so much as those that are gendered of
Putrefaction. So that you have infinite examples of a steady and peremptory
acting according to Skill and Design, and abundant assurance that these things
cannot come to pass by the fortuitous Jumbling of the parts of the Matter. VII.
That necessary (...) in the bli^d M^tte^ (...) do



Hyl. No, Philotheus, they cannot. But though they be not the results of such
Fortuitous causes, as little toward the orderly effects in Nature as the
fortuitous Iumbles thereof.
why may they not be the effects of Necessary ones, I mean, of the necessary
Mechanical Law of the Motion of Matter? As a Line proportionally cut, if the
greater Segment subtends an Isosceles whose Crura each of them are equal to the
whole Line, each Angle at the Basis will necessarily be double to that of the
Vertex. And this will be the necessary Property of this Triangle.


Philoth. But what does this prove, whenas there is no necessity in the matter
that any Line should be so cut, or, if it were, that any two Lines of equal
length with the whole should clap in with the greater Segment to make such a
Triangle, much less to inscribe a Quinquangle into a Circle, or that the motion
of the matter should frame an exact Icosaedrum or Dodecaedrum, whose fabric
much depends on this proportional section of a Line, as you may see in Euclide?
And yet there is a more multifarious Artifice in the structure of the meanest
Animal. I tell thee, Hylobares, there is nothing necessarily in Matter that
looks like an Intellectual Contrivance. For why should blind Necessity do more
in this kind then fluctuating Chance? or what can be the motion of blind
Necessity but peremptory and perpetual Fluctuation? No, the necessary and
immutable property of such a Triangle as thou have described, with such a Basis
and such Crura, is in thy own Mind or Intellect, which cannot but conceive
every Triangle so made to have such a propriety of Angles, because thy Mind is
the Image of the eternal and immutable Intellect of God. But the matter is
lubricous and fluid, and has no such intellectual and immutable Laws in it at
all, but is to be guided and governed by that which is Intellectual.


Hyl. I mean as Cartesius means and Professes, that the Mechanical Deduction
of Causes in the explication of the Phenomenon of the world is as close and
necessary as Mathematical Sequels.


Philoth. Nay, I add farther, that he conceives his own Mechanical Deductions
to be such. And I must confess I think they are as much such as any will be;
and so excellent a Wit failing so palpably, makes me abundantly confident, that
the pretense of salving the Phenomenon by mere Mechanical Principles is a
design that will never prove successful.


Hyl. Why? VIII.
where does Cartesius fail, O Philotheus? That there is no Phenomenon in
Nature purely mechanical.



Philoth. Nay, rather tell me, O Hylobares, where he does not; or rather
instance in any one Phenomenon that is purely Mechanical.


Hyl. The Earth's being carried about in this our Vortex round the Sun.


Philoth. That is very judiciously pitched upon, if the Deferent of the Earth,
I mean the Vortex, were the result of mere Mechanical Principles.


Hyl. Why? is it not? what can Mechanical motion do, if not produce that
simple Phenomenon of Liquidity?


Philoth. The matter of the Vortex is not simple enough, not to need the
assistence of an higher Principle to keep it in that consistence it is.


Hyl. Why so, Philotheus?


Philoth. Because Disunity is the natural property of Matter, which of it self
is nothing else but an infinite Congeries of Physical Monads.


Hyl. I understand you, Philotheus. And indeed there is nothing so
unconceivable to me as the holding together of the parts of Matter; which has
so confounded me when I have more seriously thought upon it, that I have been
prone to conclude with my self, that the Gimmers of the World hold together not
so much by Geometry as some natural Magic, if I knew what it was.


Philoth. You may do in due time. But in the mean while it is worth our noting,
that there is another great flaw in this most hopeful Instance you produce of
pure Mechanism. For the Earth never got into this Orbit it is now moved in by
virtue of those Mechanical Laws Cartesius describes, nor is still detained
here by them.


Hyl. Why not?


Philoth. For if the Earth had been bandied out of one Vortex into another, as
is supposed, all that looser and lighter matter that hung about it had been
stripped from it long before it came hither: (as if a man should fling out of his
hand Feathers, Chafe and a Bullet together, the solidity of the Bullet will
carry it from the Chafe and Feathers, and leave them behind) and so the
Matter of the third Region of the Earth had been lost, whereby it had become
utterly unhabitable.


Hyl. I never thought of this before.


Philoth. And then the descending of the Earth to this Orbit is not upon that
Mechanical account Cartesius pretends, That there is no Levitation or
Gravitation of the Ether or of the vulgar Elements in their proper places.
namely the strong swing of the more solid Globuli that overflow it. For if
there were such an actual tug of the Globuli of the Vortex from the Center
toward the Circumference, Whence it is plain that Matter's motion is moderated
from some diviner Principle.
the Pressure would be intolerable, and they would even mash themselves and all
things else apieces.


Hyl. I am again surprised, Philotheus, but I must ingenuously confess, I think
so.


Philoth. But there being no such hard Pressure, no Levitation or Gravitation
(as is also manifest in the Elements vulgarly so called) in locis propriis, is
it not a manifest Argument that all is not carried according to Mechanical
Necessity, but that there is a Principle that has a Prospection for the best,
that rules all?


Hyl. It is very manifest, in that neither the Celestial matter of the Vortices
nor the Air nor Water are pressitant in their proper places, that it is for the
best. Else how could any creatures live in the Air or Water? the weight of
these Elements would press them to death.


Philoth. Must not then some diviner Principle be at the bottom, that thus
cancells the Mechanical Laws for the common good?


Hyl. It should seem so; and that the motion of Matter is not guided by Matter,
but by something else.


Philoth. That seems very evident from light things that rise up in water. As
for example in a deep Bucket of water, where we will suppose a thin round Board
forced to the bottom, of almost the same wideness that the Bucket is: the water
of the Bucket we will suppose so heavy, that scarce two men shall be able to
bear it. Now tell me, Hylobares, how this thin Board does get to the top, so
massy a weight lying on it. The whole water that lies upon it does actually
press downward, and therefore rather presses it down, then helps it up.


Hyl. It may be the weight of the water gets by the sides under it, and so
bears it up by its own sinking.


Philoth. That is ingeniously attempted, Hylobares. But you must consider that
the water that lies upon the Board to press it down is, it may be, forty times
more then that which you conceive to press betwixt the rim of the round Board
and the Vessel.


Hyl. I am convinced that the rising of the round Board is not Mechanical. X.
But I pray you deal freely with me, That the Primordialls of the World are not
mechanical, but vital.
Philotheus, for I perceive you are cunninger then I in that Philosophy; has
Descartes truly solved no Phenomenon in Nature mechanically?


Philoth. He thinks he has solved all mechanically he treats of. But, to deal
freely, I find none of his Solutions will hold by mere Mechanics: not his
formation of Suns, Stars nor Planets; not the Generation nor Motion of the
Magnetic particles; not his Hypothesis of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; not
the figure and colors of the Rainbow; not the Winds, nor Clouds, nor Rain, nor
Thunder: neither of these, nor of any other Phenomenon, has he given sufficient
Mechanical causes. Nay, I will add at once, That that simplest and first
Hypothesis of his, Princip. Philos. part. 3. sect. 46, 47.
That all the Matter of the Universe was first cast into small parts equal in
motion and magnitude, and that hence the Suns or Stars and Vortices arose in
the distinction of the Matter (by the mutual fridging of those Particles one
against another) into the first and second Element, I will add, I say, That
this first Original of things is most grossly repugnant to the actual proportion
of these Elements one to another. For from this Mechanical way, so stated as
he has declared, it will follow that the Sun overflows the Orbit of Saturn no
less then ten millions four hundred eighty four thousand Semidiameters of the
Earth: which one would think were intimation sufficient to give us to
understand, that the Primordialls of the World are not Mechanical, but
Spermaticall or Vital; not made by rubbing and filing and turning and shaving,
as in a Turner's or Blacksmith's Shop, but from some universal Principle of
inward Life and Motion containing in it the seminal forms of all things, which
therefore the Platonists and Pythagoreans call the great (...) of the World.


Hyl. This is admirable: and it would be a great pleasure to me to see these
things made out by Reason, that I might the more clearly understand how much
that great Wit has fallen short in his account.


Philop. I prithee, dear Hylobares, deny thy self that pleasure at this time:
for I fear all the time of my abode here in the Town will not suf^ice for such
a Task.


Philoth. It would, I must confess, be something too copious a digression.


Cuph. And the more needless, forasmuch as it cannot be denied but that
Des-Cartes's Deductions are not always so mathematically or mechanically
certain as he took them to be. But however, though he fails in his attempt, yet
the Mechanical Philosophy may stand firm still. It is not the error of the
Art, but of the Artist.


Philoth. But it is a shrewd presumption, O Cuphophron, that when so
transcendent a Wit as Descartes, and so peculiarly Mechanical, fails so
palpably even in the general strokes of Nature, of giving any such necessary
Mechanical Reasons of her Phenomenon, it is too palpable a presumption, I say,
that the pretense it self is rash and frivolous, and that it is not the true
and genuine mode of Philosophizing.


Philop. What Philotheus says seems to me infinitely credible, though I be no
pretender to Philosophy.


Philoth. But if we produce even among the more general Phenomenon of Nature
such Instances as plainly thwart the acknowledged Laws of Mechanics, XI.
let Cuphophron tell me then what will become of his pure and universal
Mechanism he pretends to run through the whole frame of the World. Instances of
some simple Phenomenon quite contrary to the Laws of Mechanics.



Cuph. I will tell you, when you have produced them.


Philoth. But tell me first whether you do not firmly believe the motion of the
Earth Annual and Diurnal.


Cuph. I do, and every one else I think that has any skill in Philosophy.


Philoth. Why then you must necessarily hold a Vortex of Aethereall matter
running round the Sun, which carries the Earth about with it.


Cuph. I must.


Philoth. And being so great a Mechanist as you are, That the Particles that
have swallowed down the Earth thus far into our Vortex, that even those that
are near the Earth, so many of them as answer to the magnitude of the Earth,
are at least as solid as it.


Cuph. They are so.


Philoth. And that therefore they move from the Center with a very strong
effort.


Cuph. They do so.


Philoth. And so do the Vortices that bear against our Vortex.


Cuph. No question, or else our Vortex would overrun them, and carry them away
with it self.


Philoth. Do you or any else either here or under the Line at midday or
midnight feel any such mighty Pressure as this Hypothesis inferrs?


Cuph. I believe, not.


Philoth. There is one thrust at your pure pretended Mechanism.


Cuph. Well, at it again; I will see if I can lie at a closer Ward.


Philoth. The Phenomenon of Gravity, is it not perfectly repugnant to that
known mechanical Principle, That what is moved will continue its motion in a
right line, if nothing hinder? whence it will follow that a Bullet flung up
into the Air must never return back to the Earth, it being in so rapid a motion
with that of the Earth's.


Cuph. I understand what you mean; you thrust at the Mechanical Philosophy
before, you have now shot at it.


Philoth. I and hit the mark too, I trow: so that it is needless to add that
of the great weight hanging at the Sucker of the Air-pump, and drawn up thereby
beyond all the accounts of Mechanic Philosophy, with other things of the like
nature.


Hyl. I expected these Instances of Philotheus, and understand the force of
them thoroughly out of a late Dr. More's Antidote, lib. 2. chapter 2. Immort. lib.
3. chapter 12, 13.
Author, and must ingenuously confess that they seem to me such as contain
little less then a Demonstration, that all things in Nature are not carried on
by Principles merely Mechanical.


Cuph. If they be so good, I pray you let us hear some more of them, Philotheus.


Philoth. When I have heard your answer to these.


Cuph. My answer is, O Philotheus, that these Instances seem for the present
demonstrative and unanswerable; so far Hylobares and I concur. But I hope I
may without offense profess that I think the cause of the Mechanic Philosophy
is not therefore quite desperate, but that when our active and searching Wits
have made farther Inquiry into things, they may find out the pure Mechanical
causes of that puzzling Phenomenon of Gravity.


Philoth. I but Hylobares may take notice, that the Author he mentions does
not only confute the false Solutions of that Phenomenon, but demonstrates all
Mechanical Solutions of it impossible, it being so manifestly repugnant to the
confessed Laws of Mechanics.


Hyl. It is very true.


Cuph. That may seem a Demonstration for the present, which to posterity will
appear a mere Sophistical Knot, and they will easily see to loose it.


Bath. I believe by the help of some new-improved Microscopes.


Philop. Nay but in good earnest, XII.
O Cuphophron, The fond and indiscreet hankering after the impossible
pretensions of solving all Phenomenon Mechanically, freely and justly
perstringed.
(if you will excuse my freedom of speech) though I have not that competency
of judgment in Philosophical matters, yet I cannot but deem you an
over-partial Mechanist, that are so devoted to the Cause, as not to believe
Demonstration against it till Mechanics be farther improved by posterity. It
is as if one would not believe the first Book of Euclide till he had read him
all over, and all other Mathematical Writers besides. For this Phenomenon of
Gravity is one of the simplest that is, as the first Book of Euclide one of the
easiest. Not to add what a blemish it is to a person otherwise so moral and
virtuous, to seem to have a greater zeal for the ostentation of the Mechanical
wit of men, then for the manifestation of the Wisdom of God in Nature.


Sophr. Excellently well spoken, O Philopolis. Prove. 27. 19.
As in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. You have spoken
according to the most inward sense and touch of my very Soul concerning this
matter. For I have very much wondered at the devotedness of some men's spirits to
the pretense of pure Mechanism in the solving of the Phenomenon of the
Universe, who yet otherwise have not been of less Pretensions to Piety and
Virtue. Of which Mechanic pronity I do not see any good tendency at all. For
it looks more like an itch of magnifying their own or other men's wit, then any
desire of glorifying God in his wise and benign Contrivances in the works of
Nature, and cuts off the most powerful and most popular Arguments for the
Existence of a Deity, if the rude career of agitated Matter would at last
necessarily fall into such a Structure of things. Indeed if such a Mechanical
Necessity in the nature of Matter were really discoverable, there were no help
for it: And the Almighty seeks no honor from any Man's Lie. But their attempts
being so frustraneous, and the Demonstrations to the contrary so perspicuous,
it is a marvel to me, that any men that are virtuously and piously disposed
should be so partially and zealously affected in a Cause that has neither Truth
nor any honest Usefulness in it.


Cuph. O Sophron, Sophron, full little do you consider what a wonderful
pleasure it is to see the plain Mechanical sequels of Causes in the
explication of the Phenomenon of the World as necessarily and closely coherent
as Mathematical Demonstration it self.


Sophr. Certainly, O Cuphophron, you are much transported with the imagination
of such fine Spectacles, that your mere desire should thus confidently present
them to you before they are. But for my part, I conceive there is far more
pleasure in clearly and demonstratively discovering that they are not, then
there would be if it were discoverable that they are. And that way of
Philosophizing that presses the Final cause, (...)
the (...), as Aristotle calls it, seems to me far more pleasing and delicious
then this haughty pretense of discovering that the Frame of the World owes
nothing to the Wisdom of God.


Bath. All things must out, O Sophron, in the promiscuous ferments and
ebulliencies of the spirits of men in this Age, that that Wisdom which is the
genuine fruit or flower of the Divine Life may in succession of time triumph
over the most strutting attempts or performances of the highest natural Wits.


Cuph. What wisdom is that which flows out of the Divine Life, O Bathynous?


Bath. That which leads to it; which the Mechanical Philosophy does not, but
rather leads from God, or obstructs the way to him, by prescinding all pretense
of finding his Footsteps in the works of the Creation, excluding the Final
cause of things, and making us believe that all comes to pass by a blind, but
necessary, Jumble of the Matter.


Cuph. Well, be the future Fate of things what it will, I doubt not but
Cartesius will be admired to all posterity.


Bath. Undoubtedly, O Cuphophron; for he will appear to men a person of the
most eminent wit and folly that ever yet trod the stage of this Earth.


Cuph. Why of wit and folly, Bathynous?


Bath. Of wit, for the extraordinary handsome semblance he makes of deducing
all the Phenomenon he has handled, necessarily and Mechanically, and for
hitting on the more immediate material Causes of things to a very high
probability.


Cuph. This at least is true, Bathynous. But why of folly?


Bath. Because he is so credulous, as not only to believe that he has
necessarily and purely Mechanically solved all the Phenomenon he has treated of
in his Philosophy and Meteors, but also that all things else may be so solved,
the Bodies of Plants and Animals not excepted.


Cuph. Posterity will be best able to judge of that.


Philop. Cuphophron is very constantly zealous in the behalf of the Mechanic
Philosophy, though with the hazard of losing those more notable Arguments
deducible from the Phenomenon of Nature for the proving the Existence of a God:
And yet I dare say he is far from being in the least measure smutted with the
soil of Atheism.


Cuph. I hope so.


Philop. Wherefore, XIII.
O Cuphophron, The Existence of God argued from the Consent of Nations, from
Miracles and Prophecies, from his Works in Nature, and from his Idea.
let me beg the liberty of asking you what other inducements you have to
believe there is a God. Is it the Authority of the Catholic Church? or what is
it?


Cuph. I have a very venerable respect for the Church, O Philopolis, which
makes me the more sorry when I consider how much they have wronged or defaced
their Authority in obtruding things palpably impossible, and most wretchedly
blasphemous, with equal assurance and severity as they do the belief of a God.


Euist. I conceive Cuphophron reflects upon their barbarous butchering of men
for their denying the Article of Transubstantiation.


Cuph. It may be so. Who can believe men upon their own Authority that are once
deprehended in so gross and impious an Imposture?


Euist. But these are not the Church Catholic, but only a
something-more-numerous Faction of men. But not only these, but the whole
Church, and indeed all Nations, believe that there is a God.


Cuph. Indeed Tully says, Nulla gens tam barbara, etc.


Euist. It is consent of Nations therefore, O Cuphophron, that you chiefly
establish your belief of a Deity upon.


Cuph. That is a plausible Argument, Euistor.


Euist. But the History of Mircacles and Prophecies, with their Completion, a
far greater.


Cuph. They are very strong Arguments that there are invisible Powers that
superintend the affairs of mankind, that have a greater Virtue and
comprehension of Knowledge then our selves.


Bath. And so may be able to bring to pass what themselves predict in long
succession of Ages. As if the Government of the World and the affairs of
mankind were entrusted into the hands of Angels.


Sophr. But some Miracles are so great, and Predictions of so vast a compass of
time, that none but God can rationally be thought to be the Author of them.


Bath. Most assuredly God himself superintends and acts through all.


Philop. Is this then the Basis of Cuphophron's Belief.


Cuph. I will tell you, O Philopolis, because I see you so hugely desirous,
what is the main Philosophical Basis of my belief of a God.


Philop. What is it?


Cuph. The innate Idea of God in my mind: the arguings from thence seem to me
undeniable Demonstrations.


Philop. I believe they are the more prevalent with you because they are
Descartes his.


Cuph. It may be so. And they are so convictive, that I do very securely
disregard all that other way of arguing from the Phenomenon of Nature.


Philop. I have read those Reasonings of Descartes, but they seem to me hugely
high and Metaphysicall, and I meet with many men that look upon them as
Sophistical; most men some of them, others all. But it is the privilege of you
high and exalted Wits to understand the force of one another's Notions the best.


Cuph. I must confess, O Philopolis, there is an extraordinary and peculiar
congruity of spirit betwixt me and Descartes.


Philop. I but we ought to consult the common good, O Cuphophron, and not decry
the more vulgar intelligible Arguments, or affect such a Philosophy as will
exclude all from laying hold of God but such as can soar so high as you raised
Wits can. Arguments from the Phenomenon of the World are far more accommodate
to a popular understanding.


Cuph. Wherefore I talk at this rate only in our free Philosophical Meetings.


Philop. It is discreetly done of you.


Hyl. Well, Cuphophron, you may hug your self in your high Metaphysicall
Acropolis as much as you will, and deem those Arguments fetched from the frame
of Nature mean and popular: but for my part, I look upon them as the most sound
and solid Philosophical Arguments that are for the proving the Existence of a
God. And I wonder you do not observe that mighty force that Philotheus his
comparing of the Volume of Nature and Archimedes his Book of the Sphere and
Cylinder together has for the evincing some Intellectual Principle to be the
Framer of the World. For those Figures and Characters annexed to each
Proposition with an effectual subserviency to the Demonstration of them is not
a more manifest indication of an Intellectual Agent, then an hundred thousand
single fabrics of Matter here in the world are of the like Agency; the parts
being so disposed to one End, as the management of the Demonstration to one
Conclusion, and the subordination of several Conclusions to one Final and
ultimate one: Which Subordinations of things are also most evidently and
repeatedly conspicuous in Nature.


Philop. On my word, Philotheus, you have not spent your labor in vain on
Hylobares, that does thus judiciously and resentingly recapitulate your main
Reasonings from Nature for the Existence of a God. I hope now, Hylobares,
Philotheus may proceed to treat of God's Kingdom, we being all so well assured
of his Existence.


Hyl. I must confess, XIV.
while I am in this Company, (...)
I am like Saul amongst the Prophets. Philotheus his Zeal and smartness of
arguing carries me away captive, whether I will or no, into an assent to the
Conclusion. And indeed when at first I set my eyes on this side of things,
there shines from them such an intellectual fulgor, that methinks the very
Glory of the Deity becomes visible through them. But when I would more fully
comprehend his Nature, and approach more nigh him, the same Glory, that
recreated mine eyes before, strikes me blind, and I lose the sight of him by
adventuring to look too near him. This is one entanglement and confusion of
mind, that I understand not the Nature of God. And the second thing is this,
The obscurity and Intricacy of the ways of Providence.


Sophr. Is it not consonant to the transcendency of so high a Nature as that of
God, Hylobares, that it be acknowledged Incomprehensible, as also to his
infinite Wisdom, that his ways be past finding out?


Bath. This is excellently well spoken, O Sophron, if it be rightly understood:
otherwise, to give no other account of the Nature of God and his ways then that
they are unintelligible, is to encourage the Atheist, and yield him the day;
for that is the thing he does chiefly applaud himself in, that he is secure
there is neither head nor foot in the Mysteries of Religion, and that the very
Notion of a God implies a contradiction to our Faculties.


Hyl. I desire only so to understand God, that nothing be attributed to him
repugnant to my Understanding, nor any thing found in the world repugnant to
his Attributes.


Bath. I believe Philotheus will make this good, that nothing is truly
attributed to God but what is most certainly existent in the world, whether we
understand it or not; and that there is nothing in the world truly in such
circumstances as are repugnant to the Attributes of God.


Philoth. I conceive Bathynous means this, that unless we will entangle our
selves with making good some fictitious Attributes of God, or defend his
Providence upon false suppositions and circumstances, there will be no greater
entanglements touching the Notion of God and his Providence, then there would
be in the nature of those things we are sure do exist, though there were no God
in the world. Wherefore, Hylobares, let me advise you to this, since you have
such fast and certain hold of the Existence of the Deity by the repeated
effects thereof in Nature, not to let that hold go upon any grounds that are
uncertain or false. For the Scripture declares nothing contradictious touching
the Nature of God: nor is there any humane Authority that has any right to be
believed when it propounds Contradictions: nor are we bound to burden the
Notion of a Deity with any thing we are not assured implies Perfection. These
Cautions if we use, no man, I think, need be much entangled in his thoughts
touching the Nature of the Deity.


Hyl. This is a hopeful Preamble, XV.
Philotheus, The Attribute of Eternity.
and therefore I will the more cheerfully propound my Difficulties, which are
drawn from these five Heads; from the Eternity of God, from his Immutability,
from his Omnisciency, his Spirituality, and his Omnipresencie. For, to my
understanding, the very Notion of Eternity implies a Contradiction, as some
describe it, namely, That it is an essential presence of all things with God,
as well of things past, present, as to come; and that the Duration of God is
all of it, as it were, in one steady and permanent (...) or Instant at once. If
there cannot be a God, but he must be in such a sense as this eternal, the
Contemplation of his Idea will more forcibly pull a man back from the belief of
his Existence, then his effects in Nature draw a man to it. For what can be
more contradictious, then that all things should have been really and
essentially with God from all Eternity at once, and yet be born in time and
succession? For the reality and essence of corporeal things is corporeal; and
those very individual Trees and Animals that are said to be generated, and are
seen to grow from very little Principles, were always, it seems, in their full
form and growth: which is a perfect repugnancy to my Understanding. For it
implies that the same thing that is already ready in being may,
notwithstanding, while it is, be produced of a-fresh. That eternal duration
should be at once, is also to me utterly unconceivable, and that one permanent
Instant should be commensurate, or rather equal, to all successions of Ages.
Besides, if the Duration of God be all at once, since no Agent acts but within
the compass of its own Duration, God must both create and destroy the World at
once. Whence it seems impossible that eternal Duration should be indistant to
it self, or without continuation of Intervalls.


Philoth. You argue shrewdly, Hylobares, against that Notion of Eternity that
some have rashly pitched upon, but without the least prejudice to the belief of
God's Existence, if you have but recourse to those Cautions I intimated at
first, That we are not bound to believe Contradictions upon any man's account.
These are oversublime reaches of some high-soaring Wits, that think they never
fly high enough till they fly out of the sight of common Sense and Reason. If
we may charitably guess at what they would be at in this so lofty a Notion, it
may be it is only this, That the whole Evolution of Times and Ages from
everlasting to everlasting is so collectedly and presentifickly represented to
God at once, as if all things and Actions which ever were, are, or shall be,
were at this very Instant, and so always, really present and existent before
him: Which is no wonder, the Animadversion and intellectual Comprehension of
God being absolutely infinite according to the truth of his Idea.


Hyl. This, I must confess, is a far more easy and passable Notion then the
other.


Philoth. Yes surely; and not harder to conceive how Continuity of Duration is
also competible to the Divine Existence, as well as Eternity or Life eternal,
which comprehends the Idea's of all Things and Ages at once in the Intellect of
God. For it is as a vast Globe wholly moved on a Plane, and carried on in one
exile Line at once: or like the Permanency of a steady Rock by which a River
slides; the standing of the Rock, as well as the sliding of the River, has a
Continuity of Duration. And no other way can Eternity be commensurate to Time
then so; that is to say, the Comprehension of the Evolution of all Times,
Things and Transactions is permanently exhibited to God in every moment of the
succession of Ages.


Hyl. What makes the Schools then so earnest in obtruding upon us the belief,
that nothing but nunc permanens is competible to the Divine Existence?


Philoth. It may be out of this conceit, as if that whose Existence was
successive would necessarily break off, or at least may hazard to fail, one
part of successive Duration having no dependence on another. But it is a mere
Panick fear: For the continuation of Duration is necessary where the Existence
of the thing is so. And such is manifestly the Existence of God from his own
Idea.


Bath. And this necessary Existence of God I conceive to be the most
substantial Notion of his eternal Duration: which cannot well be said to be
successive properly and formally, but only virtually and applicatively; that
is to say, it contains in it virtually all the successive Duration imaginable,
and is perpetually applicable to the succeeding parts thereof, as being always
present thereto, as the Chanel of a River to all the water that passes through
it; but the Chanel is in no such successive defluxion, though the water be.
Such is the steady and permanent Duration of the necessary Existence of God in
respect of all successive Durations whatsoever.


Philoth. I do not yet so thoroughly understand you, Bathynous.


Bath. I say that successive Duration properly so called is incompetible to
God, as being an Essence necessarily existent, and therefore without beginning:
but the most infinite successive Duration that you can imagine will be found to
have a beginning. For whatever is past was sometime present: And therefore
there being nothing of all this infinite Succession but was sometime present,
the most-infinitely-remote moment thereof was sometime present: Which
most-in^initely-remote moment was the Terminus terminans thereof, which plainly
shows it had a beginning.


Philoth. You say true, Bathynous. There must be a most-remote Moment in
Succession, and a most-infinitely-remote one in infinite Succession. But being
the most-infinitely-remote Moment cannot be Terminus copulans, there being
nothing for it to couple with future Succession, and therefore it being
Terminus terminans, and of necessity having been once present, it is plain that
at that present was the term or beginning of this infinite supposed Succession.

Or briefly thus, to prevent all possible Exceptions against the
most-infinitely-remote Moment in an infinite Succession, as if they were (...),
I would rather argue on this manner; viz. That forasmuch as all the Moments
past in infinite Succession were sometime present, it thence plainly follows
that all the Moments in this infinite Succession, or at least all but one, were
sometime to come. And if either all these Moments, or all but one, were
sometime to come, it is manifest that the whole Succession (or at least the
whole bating but one Moment) was sometime to come, and therefore had a
beginning. I understand the strength of your reasoning very well. And therefore
when I spoke of the successive Duration of God, I did not mean Succession in
that proper and formal sense, but only a virtual, applicative or relative
Succession; as you might gather from some passages or expressions in my
speaking thereof. The Duration of God is like that of a Rock, but the Duration
of natural things like that of a River; their Succession passes (...), as
Heraclitus speaks. And therefore they that give successive Duration properly so
called to the steady Permanency of a necessary Self-existence, seem like those
that fancy the Shore to move by reason of the motion of the Ship. Provehimur
portu, terraeque urbesque recedunt.


We apply our own fluid successive Duration to the steady Permanency of the
eternal Duration of God: whose Duration, though steady and permanent, and
without all defluxion and succession, (as being indeed nothing else but his
necessary Self-existence) is notwithstanding such as the most infinite
successive Duration past can never reach beyond, nor future ever exhaust.
Whence it is plain, that though the eternal Duration of God be really
permanent, yet it is impossible to be an indivisible Instant, and to be
perfectly and in all regards indistant to it self, and not to comprehend all
possible successive Evolutions that are.

Hyl. This is very well, XVI.
Philotheus: but yet there are some Scruples still behind. An Objection
against the All-comprehension of Eternity, with the Answer thereto.
I must acknowledge that Eternity in your sense bears along with it no palpable
Contradiction; but methinks it is not altogether free from a mavelous strange
Incredibility.


Philoth. What Is that?


Hyl. That all the Noises and Cryings, and Houlings and Shreekings, and
Knockings and Hammerings, and Cursings and Swearings, and Prayings and
Praisings, that all the Voices of men, the Squawlings of children, the Notes of
Birds, and Roarings and Squeekings of Beasts, that ever were or shall be, have
ever been in the ears of God at once: And so all the Turnings and Toyings of
every visible Object, all the Dispersions, Motions and Postures of Hairs, and
Leaves, and Straws, and Feathers, and Dust, in fine, all the little and
inconsiderable Changes of the ever-agitated Matter which have been, are, or
ever shall be, are, and ever were, and ever shall be in the sight of God at
once. This seems to me (though not an impossible, yet) a very incredible
Privilege of all-comprehending Eternity.


Philoth. This is a wild, unexpected fetch of yours, Hylobares, and as madly
expressed. But if you will answer me soberly to a question or two, you shall
see the difficulty will vanish of it self.


Hyl. I will.


Philoth. Whether do you think, O Hylobares, that this Privilege, as you call
it, is really a Privilege, that is, a Perfection, of the Divine Nature, or no?


Hyl. I cannot tell.


Euist. Those Philosophers in Maimonides, which I do not well remember whether
he calls the Sect of the Loquentes, would tell us roundly that it is not; they
presuming God's Providence reaches no farther then the Species of things, but
that he little concerns himself in Individuals.


Bath. I suppose then that they hold that he has concredited the Administration
of his more particular Providence to several Orders of Angels, and in some
sort to Men and all intelligent Creatures, in whom he has implanted a Law for
the rightly ordering Individuals.


Euist. It may be so.


Bath. Which if they could order as well as if God himself looked on, as it is
no addition to God's Happiness to have made the World or to meddle with it; so
it would be no detriment to the World if he were conceived to be wholly rapt
into the contemplation of his own Divine Excellencies.


Euist. This, I must confess, is not much abhorrent from the Aristotelean
Theology.


Bath. But it is intolerably false, if the frame of the Creation be not such as
that the standing Spirits hugely exceed the number of the lapsed.


Euist. They need do so. Besides, what a ridiculous thing were it to offer
sacrifice or pray to God, if he were always so rapt into himself that he never
were at leisure to hear us?


Bath. That is most pertinently observed, Euistor: And all pious men must
acknowledge that they draw power and influence by their earnest Devotions to
the Deity.


Hyl. And therefore I easily acknowledge that all things in present Succession
lie open to the eyes of God. But whether all Voices and Sights whatsoever from
everlasting to everlasting be represented continually to him at once, for all
that this short Sally of Bathynous and Euistor has given me some time to think
of it, yet I must still profess I cannot tell.


Philoth. Well then, Hylobares, in such a case as this you know the
abovementioned Rule, That you are not to let go your hold of those solid and
certain Grounds of the Existence of a God, for what is either false or
uncertain.


Hyl. You say very true. Nor does this at all shake my belief.


Philoth. But farther to corroborate it, answer me but this one question,
Hylobares. Is it not necessary that that part of the representation you made of
Eternity be either a Perfection, or an Imperfection, or a thing of Indifferency?


Hyl. That cannot be denied.


Philoth. If it be an Imperfection, it is to be removed, and so the Difficulty
is removed therewith: If an Indifferency, it is in different whether you remove
it or not: If a Perfection, being that it is not impossible, as you cannot but
acknowledge, no man need hesitate, nay he ought not, but to attribute it to
God. So that be your fate what it will in the determination of your assent to
any of these three parts, it can be no impediment to the belief of God's
Existence. This is the thing that made your Objection seem so considerable to
you, that you did not consider, that though all those Voices and Sights are
perceived in the Divine Being at once, yet they are per^eived in the same
distances and distinctnesses that they are found in in the very succession of
Ages. For infinite Comprehension admits, or rather implies, this.


Hyl. You are a man, XVII.
O Philotheus, Another Objection, with its Answer.
of the most dexterous art in facilitating our adherence to the belief of a
Deity that ever I met with in my life. I have but one Scruple more touching
God's Eternity, and I will pass to the next Attribute. The eternal succession
of God's Existence seems to imply a Contradiction. For unless every denominated
part be infinite, the whole cannot be infinite. And if every denominated part,
suppose the tenth, the hundredth, the thousandth, be infinite, there are so
many Infinites.


Philoth. I understand you very well. But you must consider that either God has
been ab aeterno, or the World has been so. Wherefore something being so
certainly eternal, it is no repugnancy that God be so. So that you see there
is no more perplexity or difficulty on the account of God's being, then if he
were not in the world, according to the last of my preliminary Advertisements.
Nay, indeed, the most inextricable Perplexity of all would be to admit a World
ab aeterno without God. For an eternal Flux of Motion of the Matter would be
eternal Succession properly so called; which Bathynous shrewdly suggested to
be impossible. And if it ever rested, and afterward was moved, there must be a
first Mover distinct from the Matter. Which seems necessarily to infer there
is a God; and the rather, because if Matter was of it self, it must eternally
have rested before it moved.


Hyl. This Difficulty has vanished so of a sudden, that I am half ashamed I
ever propounded it.


Philoth. I have met with not a few that this would have seemed no small
Difficulty to; so that it was not unworthy the propounding.


Philop. But I pray you proceed to the next Attribute, Hylobares: for I am
hugely pleased to see the succesfulness of Philotheus.


Hyl. The next is Immutability, XVIII.
which seems to me a necessary Attribute of God, The Attribute of Immutability.
forasmuch as Mutability implies Imperfection. But here humane understanding
does seem to be caught in this Dilemma; That either we must acknowledge a
mutable God, or an immutable one: If the former, he is not properly God;
because God excludes all Imperfection in his nature: If the latter, he is not
to be worshipped; for all the good that was to come will come without our
worshipping him; and none of the evil can be kept off by all our Services,
because he is immutable. Wherefore we must either grant an imperfect God, or a
God not to be worshipped: either of which is so absurd, that it seems forcibly
to suggest that there is no God at all.


Philoth. This seems a smart Dilemma at first, Hylobares; yet I think neither
Horn is strong enough to push us off from our belief of the Existence of a God.
But for my part, I will bear the push of the former of them, and grant that God
is mutable; but deny that all Mutability implies Imperfection, though some
does, as that Vacillancy in humane Souls, and such Mutations as are found in
corporeal matter. But such a Mutability as whose absence implies an impotency
to or incapacity of the most noble acts imaginable, such as the Creation of the
World, and the administration of Justice to men and Angels, is so far from
being any Defect, that it is a very high Perfection. For this power in God to
act upon the Creature in time, to succor or chastise it, does not at all
discompose or distract him from what he is in himself in the blessed calmness
and stilness of his allcomprehensive Eternity, his Animadversion being
absolutely free and infinite. So that they that would account this power of
acting in time an imminution to the Perfection of God ^re, I think, as much out
in their account as if one should contend that A c ^ A q. is less then A c.
alone.


Hyl. This is convincing.


Bath. And that you may be the more thoroughly convinced of the weakness of your
Biaion, I will bear the push of the latter Horn, and deny that the Immutability
of God would imply that he is not to be worshipped. For what is the Worshipping
of God but the acknowledging those supereminent and Divine Excellencies in him
to which the World owes its Conservation and Subsistence, and from which is
that beautiful Order and wise Contrivance of things in the Universe? It is
therefore a piece of indispensable Justice to acknowledge this rich Fountain
and Original of all Good, and not the less, because he is so perfectly good,
that he cannot be nor act otherwise, but is immutably such. Besides that this
Praise and Adoration done to him are actions perfective of our own Souls, and
in our approches to him he is made nearer to us; as the opening of our Eyes is
the letting in of the light of the Sun.


Hyl. What you say, Bathynous, I must confess will hold good in that part of
Worship which consists in Praising of God: but I do not see how his
Immutability will well consist with our Praying to him. For things will be or
will not be whether we pray unto him or no.


Bath. But you do not consider, that though this were, yet our Praying to him
is an acknowledgment of his being the great Benefactour of mankind; and it is
like Children asking their Fathers Blessing, who yet would pray to God to bless
them whether they ask it or no. Besides that while we pray to God for internal
good things, for Grace, Wisdom and Virtue, we do ipso facto open our Souls to
receive the Divine Influence, which flows into our Hearts according to the
measure of the depth and earnestness of our Devotion. Which is, as I said, like
the opening of our Eyes to receive the light of the Sun. Nor do we alter or
change the will of God in this, because it is the permanent and immutable will
of God, that as many as make their due Addresses to him shall receive
proportionable Comfort and Influence from him. And, lastly, for external good
things, though we should imagine God still resting in the immutable Sabbatism
of his own ever-blessed Eternity, and that nothing is done in this world ad
extra but by either natural or free created Agents, either good men or those
more high and holy orders of Angels, that are as the Ears and Eyes and Arms of
God, as Philo somewhere insinuates, and who are so steddily and fully actuated
by the Spirit of God, that they will do the very same things that God himself
would do if he were to act ad extra in the affairs of the world: upon this
Hypothesis of things, notwithstanding the Immutability of God, it implies no
incongruity to pray unto him. For he does not only hear and behold all things
at once, but has eternally and immutably laid such trains of Causes in the
world, and so rules the good Powers and overrules the bad, that no man that
prays unto him as he ought shall fail of obtaining what is best for him, even
in external matters.


Hyl. This is a consideration I never thought of before. But it seems to me not
altogether irrational.


Euist. But, XIX.
methinks, something needless, Of the D^ity's acting ad extra.
because the Divine Records do testify, that the very Deity sometimes steps
out into external Action; as in our Savior Christ's feeding the multitude
with five loaves and two fishes, in his raising the dead, and in that great
execution he is to do on the Globe of the Earth at the last Day.


Bath. The Deity indeed does act here ad extra, but not the bare Deity, as I
may so speak, but the Divine Magic of the exalted Soul of the Messiah.


Euist. But what will you say to those passages in the Old Testament,
Bathynous, such as the dividing of the Red sea, the making of the Sun and Moon
stand still, the keeping of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed^ego harmless in the
fiery Furnace, and the like? did not the bare Deity, as you called it, step
out then into external Action?


Bath. You know, Euistor, there was a mighty East-winde that blew all night,
and divided the Sea; and that there appeared a fourth man in the fiery furnace
like unto the Son of God. And, in brief, all the Miracles that were done by
Moses or any way else among or upon the people of the Jews were done by virtue
of the presence of the same Christ, who was the Conductour of the Israelites
into the Land of Canaan, and the Residentiary Guardian of that People.


Euist. Indeed I remember some such opinion of some of the ancient Fathers, but
I looked upon it as one of their Extravagancies.


Sophr. And I upon the Hypothesis of Bathynous as a very high reach of wit; but
methought Philotheus had fully satisfied Hylobares his Dilemma before.


Hyl. I must ingenuously confess, XX.
that I think neither of the Solutions so weak but that they sufficiently
enervate my Argument touching the Immutability of God: The Attribute of
Omnisciency.
and therefore I willingly pass on to his Omnisciency.


Philoth. What is it that pinches you there, Hylobares?


Hyl. A certain and determinate Prescience of things contingent, free and
uncertain. For it seems otherwise to take away the Liberty of Will and the
nature of Sin: For Sin seems not to be Sin, unless it be voluntary.


Philoth. It may be not, Hylobares. But why do you then attribute such a
Prescience to God as is involved in such dangerous Inconveniences?


Hyl. Because it is a greater Perfection in God to foresee all things that are
to come to pass certainly and determinately, then the contrary.


Philoth. And would it not be a greater Perfection in the Omnipotency of God to
be able to do all things, even those that imply a Contradiction, then not to
be able to do them?


Hyl. It would. But because they imply a Contradiction to be done, no body
thinks the Omnipotency of God maimed or blemished in that it reaches not to
such things.


Philoth. Why then, Hylobares, if certain Prescience of uncertain things or
events imply a Contradiction, it seems it may be struck out of the Omnisciency
of God, and leave no scar nor blemish behind; for God will nevertheless be as
omniscient as he is omnipotent. But if it imply no Contradiction, what hinders
but we may attribute it to him?


Hyl. But it seems necessary to attribute it to him: else how can he manage the
affairs of the World?


Philoth. O Hylobares, take you no care for that. For that eternal Mind that
knows all things possible to be known, comprehends all things that are possible
to be done, and so has laid such trains of Causes as shall most certainly meet
every one in due time in judgment and righteousness, let him take what way he
will.


Hyl. I understand you, Philotheus.


Philoth. And you may farther understand that, according to some, what you
would attribute to God as a Perfection sounds more like an Imperfection, if
well considered.


Hyl. Why so, Philotheus?


Philoth. Is it not the perfection of Knowledge to know things as they are in
their own nature?


Hyl. It is so.


Philoth. Wherefore to know a free Agent, which is undeterminate to either
part, to be so undeterminate, and that he may choose which part he will, is the
most perfect knowledge of such an Agent and of his Action, till he be perfectly
determinate and has made his choice.


Hyl. It seems so.


Philoth. Therefore to know him determined before he be determined, or while he
is free, is an Imperfection of Knowledge, or rather no Knowl^dge at all, but a
Mistake and Error: and indeed is a contradiction to the Nature of God, who can
understand nothing but according to the distinct Idea's of things in his own
mind. And the Idea of a free Agent is Vndeterminateness to one part before he
has made choice. Whence to foresee that a free Agent will pitch upon such a
part in his choice, with knowledge certain and infallible, is to foresee a
thing as certain even then when it is uncertain; which is a plain Contradiction
or gross Mistake.


Hyl. You do more then satisfy me in this, Philotheus, That to conceive things
undeterminate determinately, or that they will be certainly this way while they
may be either this way or that way, is an Imperfection or contradiction to the
Truth. But there is yet this piece of perplexity behind, that this pretense of
perfection of Knowledge will necessarily infer an imperfection or inability of
Predicting future Actions of free Agents, and take away Divine Inspiration and
Propheci^.


Philoth. That is shrewdly urged and seasonably. But you are to understand,
that so much Liberty as is in Man will leave room enough for millions of
certain Predictions, if God thought fit to communicate them so throngly to the
world. For though I question not but that the Souls of men are in some sense
free; yet I do as little doubt but there are or may be infinite numbers of
Actions wherein they are as certainly determined as the brute Beasts. And such
are the Actions of all those that are deeply lapsed into Corruption, and of
those few that are grown to a more Heroical state of Goodness: It is certainly
foreknowable what they will do in such and such circumstances. Not to add,
that the Divine Decrees, when they find not men sitting Tools, make them so,
where Prophecies are peremptory or unconditionate.


Bath. What Philotheus has hitherto argued for the reconciling of the Divine
Omniscience with the Notion of Man's Free will and the nature of Sin, bears
along with it a commendable plainness and plausibleness for its easiness to the
understanding. But in my apprehension, for all it looks so repugnantly that
there should be a certain foreknowledge of what is free and uncertain, yet it
seems more safe to allow that Privilege to the infinite Understanding of God,
then to venture at all to circumscribe his Omniscience. For though it may
safely be said, that he does not know any thing that really implies a
Contradiction to be known; yet we are not assured but that may seem a
Contradiction to us that is not so really in it self. As for example, To our
finite Understanding a Quadrate whose Diagonial is commensurate to one of the
Sides is a plain Contradiction, and we conceit we can demonstrate it to be so,
that is to say, that the Ratio of the one to the other is unconceivable and
undefinable. But dare any one be so bold as to ^ffirm that the Divine Intellect
it self, whose Comprehension is infinite, cannot define to it self the Ratio of
a Diagonial Line in a Quadrate to the Side thereof? The Application is very
obvious.


Philoth. It is so, Bathynous. For I suppose in brief you mean this; That as
the Diagonial Line and Side of a Quadrate, which to our apprehension are
incommensurate, are yet commensurable to the infinite Comprehension of the
Divine Intellect; so a certain and infallible Prescience of uncertain
Futurities, that seems inconsistent to us, may notwithstanding be deprehended
abundantly consistent by the all-comprehensive Understanding of God. A very
safe and sober Solution of the present Difficulty. I am very well contented it
should be so, Bathynous, and that what I have offered at therein should pass as
spoken by way of Essay rather then of Dogmatizing, and according to the sense
of others rather then mine own.


Philop. I never saw that saying so much verified any-where, that Wisdom is
easy to him that understands, as in Bathynous and Philotheus's discourses. Are
you not thoroughly satisfied hitherto, Hylobares?


Hyl. I must confess I am. But now I come to the most confounding Point, and
which is such as that I fear it is fatal to me never to be satisfied in.


Philoth. What is that, Hylobares?


Hyl. The Spirituality of God. XXI.
It is the proper Disease of my mind, The Attribute of Spirituality, and that
God cannot be Material.
not to be able to conceive any thing that is not material or corporeal. But I
hope it is not a Disease unto death.


Philoth. God forbid it should be, Hylobares, so long as it is no impediment to
the belief of the Existence of God, and of all those Attributes that are
requisite for the engaging a man's Soul in the pursuit of true Piety and
Virtue. God will at last bring such an one to the true knowledge of himself,
whatever his Ignorance may be for the present. And for my part, I am not fond
of the Notion of Spirituality nor any Notion else, but so far forth as they are
subservient to Life and Godliness; that there may be as much Happiness in this
life as humane affairs are capable of, and that we may be eternally happy in
the life to come. Otherwise I have no such great solicitude, that any should be
such trim and precise Speculators of things, as not to err an hair's breadth
in matters of great perplexity and obscurity.


Euist. I read that some of the Fathers have been of opinon that God is a
kind of pure subtle Body.


Bath. That may very well be. But then they had not that true and precise
Notion of a subtle Body that most Philosophers have in this Age: but it is
likely they understood no more thereby, then that it was a subtle extended
Substance; which, for my part, I conceive in the general may be true. But to
say it is properly a subtle Body, is to acknowledge it a Congeries of very
little Atoms ^oying and playing one by another, which is too mean a conception
of the Majesty of God. Besides that it is unconceivable how these loose Atoms,
which are so independent of one another, should join together to make up the
Godhead; or how they do conspire to keep together, that there is not a
dissolution of the Divinity. Or thus: If this multitude of Divine Atoms be God,
be they interspersed amongst all the matter of the World? or do they keep
together? If they be dispersed, God is less one then any thing else in the
World, and is rather an infinite number of Deities then one God or any God; and
this infinite number in an incapacity of conferring notes to contrive so wise a
frame of the Universe as we see. But if there be one Congeries of Divine Atoms
that keep together, in which of those infinite numbers of Vortices is it
seated, or amongst which? or how can it order the matter of those Vortices from
which it is so far distant? or how again do these Atoms, though not
interspersed, communicate Notions one with another for one Design? Do they talk
or discourse with one another? or what do they do? And then again --


Hyl. Nay forbear, Bathynous, to go any farther, for you have put me quite out
of conceit with a Material Deity already, the more my grief and pain. For to
make a Material Deity, I must confess, seems extremely ridiculous; and to make
a Spiritual one, impossible: So that I am in greater streights then ever I was.


Philoth. Why, XXII.
Hylobares, The fa^se Notion of a Spirit.
what conceit have you of a Spirit, that you should think it a thing impossible?


Hyl. Is it not infinitely incredible, Philotheus, if not impossible, that some
thousands of Spirits may dance or march on a Needle's point at once?


Cuph. I, and that booted and spurred too.


Hyl. And that in one instant of time they can fly from one Pole of the world
to the other?


Philoth. These things, I must confess, seem very incredible.


Hyl. And that the Spirit of man, which we usually call his Soul, is wholly,
without flitting, in his Toe, and wholly in his Head, at once? If the whole
Soul be in the Toe, there is nothing left to be in the Head. Therefore the
Notion of a Spirit is perfectly impossible: or else all things are alike true:
for nothing seems more impossible then this.


Philoth. But whose description of a Spirit is this, Hylobares?


Hyl. It is, Philotheus, the description of the venerable Schools.


Philoth. But did I not preadvertise you, that no humane Authority has any
right of being believed when they propound Contradictions? Wherefore their rash
description of a Spirit ought to be no prejudice to the truth of its Existence.
And though the true Notion of a Spirit were incomprehensible, yet that would be
no solid Argument against the Reality of it; as you may observe in the nature
of eternal Succession, which we cannot deny to be, though we be not able to
comprehend it.


Hyl. That is very true indeed, XXIII.
and very well worth the noting. That there is a Spiritual Being in the World.
But how shall we be so well assured of the Existence of a Spirit, while the
comprehension of its Nature is taken for desperate?


Philoth. That there is some Intellectual Principle in the World, you were
abundantly convinced from the works of Nature, as much as that Archimedes his
Treatise De Sphaera and Cylindro was from a Rational Agent: and even now it
seemed ridiculous to you beyond all measure, that a Congeries of Atoms should
be Divine and Intellectual: Wherefore there is something that is not Matter
that is Intellectual, which must be a substance Immaterial or Incorporeal, that
is in a word, a Spirit.


Hyl. I am, I must confess, very strongly urged to believe there is a Spirit as
well as an eternal Duration, though I can comprehend neither.


Philoth. And that you may be farther corroborate^ in your belief, consider the
manifold Stories of Apparitions, and how many Specter have been seen or felt
to wrestle, pull or tug with a man: which, if they were a mere Congeries of
Atoms, were impossible. How could an arm of mere Air or Ether pull at another
man's hand or arm, but it would easily part in the pulling? Admit it might use
the motion of Pulsion, yet it could never that of Attraction.


Hyl. This indeed were a palpable demonstration that there must be some other
substance in these Specter of Air or Ether, if the Histories were true.


Euist. We read such things happening even in all Ages and places of the
world; and there are modern and fresh examples every day: so that no man need
doubt of the truth.


Hyl. These Experiments indeed strike very strongly on the Imagination and
Senses, XXIV.
but there is a subtle Reason that presently unlooses all again. That
Extension and Matter are not reciprocal.
And now methinks I could wish the nature of a Spirit were more unknown to me
then it is, that I might believe its Existence without meddling at all with its
Essence. But I cannot but know thus much of it, whether I will or no, that it
is either extended, or not extended; I mean, it has either some Amplitude of
Essence, or else none at all. If it has no Amplitude or Extension, the
ridiculous Hypothesis of the Schools will get up again, and millions of
Spirits, for ought I know, may dance on a Needle's point, or rather, they,
having no Amplitude, would be nothing. If they have any Amplitude or Extension,
they will not be Spirits, but mere Body or Matter. For, as that admired Wit
Descartes solidly concludes, Extension is the very essence of Matter. This is
one of the greatest Arguments that fatally bear me off from a cheerful closing
with the belief of Spirits properly so called.


Philoth. It is much, Hylobares, that you should give such an adamantine Assent
to so weak and precarious an Assertion as this of Descartes. For though it be
wittily supposed by him, for a ground of more certain and Mathematical
after-Deductions in his Philosophy; yet it is not at all proved, that Matter
and Extension are reciprocally the same, as well every extended thing Matter,
as all Matter extended. This is but an upstart conceit of this present Age. The
ancient Atomical Philosophers were as much for a Vacuum as for Atoms. And
certainly the world has hitherto been very idle, that have made so many
Disputes and tried so many Experiments whether there be any Vacuum or no, if it
be so demonstratively concludible, as Descartes would bear us in hand, that it
implies a Contradiction there should be any. The ground of the Demonstration
lies so shallow and is so obvious, that none could have missed of it, if they
could have thought there had been any force in it.


Hyl. It is true, this might in reason abate a man's confidence a little,
Philotheus; but the apprehension is so deeply rivetted into my mind, that such
Rhetorical Flourishes cannot at all loosen or brush it out.


Philoth. Well then, XXV.
give me leave, That there is an Extension intrinsecall to Motion.
Hylobares, to attaque you some other way. Did you not say even now, that
whatever has no Extension or Amplitude is nothing?


Hyl. I did, and do not repent me of so saying. For I doubt not but that it is
true.


Philoth. Wherefore Extension or Amplitude is an intrinsecall or essential
Property of Ens quatenus Ens, as the Metaphysicians phrase it.


Hyl. It is so.


Philoth. And what is an intrinsecall or essential Attribute of a thing, is in
the thing it self.


Hyl. Where should it be else?


Philoth. Therefore there is Extension in every thing or Entity.


Hyl. It cannot be denied.


Philoth. And it can as little be denied but that Motion is an Entity, I mean a
Physical Entity.


Hyl. It cannot.


Philoth. Therefore Extension is an intrinsecall property of Motion.


Hyl. It must be acknowledged; what then?


Philoth. What then? Do you not yet see, Hylobares, how weak an Assertion that
of Des-Carte ^ is, That Extension and Matter are reciprocal? for you plainly
see that Extension is intrinsecall to Motion, and yet Motion is not Matter.


Hyl. Motion is not Ens, but Modu^ Entis.


Philo^h. Nay, by your favor, Hylobares, Motion is Ens, though in some sense
it may be said to be Modus corporis.


Hyl. Methinks I am, I know not how, Philotheus, illaqueated, but not truly
captivated into an assent to your Conclusion.


Philoth. That is because you are already held captive in that inured Conceit
of Descartes, that makes you suspect solid Reason for a Sophism.


Hyl. If Motion were a thing that was loose or exemptitious from Matter, then I
could not but be convinced that it had Extension of its own; but being it is a
mere Mode of Matter, that cannot pass from it into another Subject, it has no
other Extension then that of the Matter it self it is in.


Philoth. But if it have another Essence from the Matter it self, by your own
concession it must however have another Extension. Besides, you seem mistaken
in what I mean by Motion. For I mean not simply the Translation, but the vis
agitans that pervades the whole body that is moved. Which both Regius and
Descartes acknowledge exemptitious and loose, so that it may pass from one
part of Matter to another.


Hyl. But what is that to me, if I do not?


Philoth. It is at least thus much to you, that you may take notice how rashly
and groundlesly both Descartes and Regius assert Extension and Matter to be
reciprocal, while in the mean time they affirm that which according to your
own judgment does plainly and convincingly infer that Extension is more
general then Matter.


Hyl. It is, (...) must confess, a sign that the apprehensions of men are very
humoursome and lubricous.


Philoth. And therefore we must take heed, Hylobares, how we let our minds
cleave to the Opinion of any man out of admiration of his Person.


Hyl. That is good advice, and of great consequence (if it be given betimes)
for the keeping out of Error and Falsehood. But when a Fancy is once engrafted
in the Mind, how shall one get it out?


Philoth. I must confess I marvel much, Hylobares, that you being so fully
convinced that every real and Physical Entity has an intrinsecall Extension of
its own, and that Motion is a Physical Entity different from Matter, you
should not be presently convinced that Motion has also an intrinsecall
Extension of its own. To which you might add, that the manner of the Extension
of Matter is different from the nature of the Extension in Motion: the former
being one sing^^ Extension, not to be lessened nor increased without the
lessening and increase of the Matter it self; but the other a gradual
Extension, to be lessened or augmented without any lessening or augmenting the
Matter. Whence again it is a sign that it has an Extension of its own,
reduplicative into it self, or reducible to thinner or weaker degrees; while
the Extension of the Matter remains still single and the same.


Hyl. I must confess, Philotheus, that I am brought to these streights, that I
must either renounce that Principle, That every Physical Entity has an
intrinsecall Extension of its own, as much as it has an intrinsecall Essence of
its own, (which I know not how to do;) or else I must acknowledge that
something besides Matter is extended. But I must take time to consider of it. I
am something staggered in my judgment.


Philoth. Give me leave then, (...)
Hylobares, That there is an immovable Extension distinct from that of movable
Matter.
to follow my blow with one stroke more, and see if I cannot strike your
Opinion to the ground.


Hyl. Do, Philotheus. I will stand the shock of it.


Philoth. Place your self then under the Aequinoctial Line, Hylobares.


Hyl. Is it not better being in this cool Arbor?


Philoth. I hope the mere Imagination of the Torrid Zone will not heat you. But
you may place your self in a more Temperate Clime, if you please.


Hyl. What then, Philotheus?


Philoth. Shoot up an Arrow perpendicularly from the Earth; the Arrow, you
know, will return to your foot again.


Hyl. If the wind hinder not. But what does this Arrow aim at?


Philoth. This Arrow has described only right Lines with its point, upwards
and downwards, in the Air; but yet, holding the motion of the Earth, it must
also have described in some sense a circular or curvilinear Line.


Hyl. It must so.


Philoth. But if you be so impatient of the heat abroad, neither your body nor
your fancy need step out of this cool Bower. Consider the round Trencher that
Glass stands upon; it is a kind of short Cylinder, which you may easily
imagine a foot longer, if you will.


Hyl. Very easily, Philotheus.


Philoth. And as easily phansy a Line drawn from the top of the Axis of that
Cylinder to the Peripherie of the Bas^s.


Hyl. Every jot as easily.


Philoth. Now imagine this Cylinder turned round on its Axis. Does not that
Line from the top of the Axis to the Peripherie of the Basis necessarily
describe a Conicum in one Circumvolution?


Hyl. It does so, Philotheus.


Philoth. But it describes no such Figure in the wooden Cylinder it self: As
the Arrow in the aereal or material Aequinoctial Circle describes not any line
but a right one. In what therefore does the one describe, suppose, a circular
Line, the other a Conicum?


Hyl. As I live, Philotheus, I am struck as it were with Lightning from this
surprising consideration.


Philoth. I hope, Hylobares, you are pierced with some measure of Illumination.


Hyl. I am so.


Philoth. And that you are convinced, that whether you live or no, that there
ever was, is, and ever will be an immovable Extension distinct from that of
movable Matter.


Hyl. This evidently demonstrates the existence of the ancient Democritish
Vacuum, and withal that Extension and Matter are not convertible terms; for
which yet Cartesius so much contends. This Conceit is struck quite dead with
the point of the Arrow describing a curvilinear Line in the steady Aequinoctial
Circle. And if it should ever offer to flame out again into life in my
thoughts, I would use the Conicum as an Extinguisher to smother it.


Philop. What a cheerful thing the apprehension of Truth is, that it makes
Hylobares so pleasant and so witty?


Cuph. But methinks he claps his wings before the Victory, XXVII.
or rather s^bmits before he be overcome. That this Exte^sion distinct from
Matter is not imaginary, but real.
For it may be seasonably suggested, that it is real Extension and Matter that
are terms convertible; but that Extension wherein the Arrow-head describes a
curvilinear Line is only imaginary.


Hyl. But it is so imaginary, that it cannot possibly be dis-imagined by humane
understanding. Which methinks should be no small earnest that there is more
then an imaginary Being there. Diog. Laert. in vi^^ ^picuri
And the ancient Atomists called this ^ acuum (...), the intangible nature;
which is a sign they thought it some real thing. Which appears farther from
their declaring, that this and Atoms were the only true things, but that the
rest were mere Appearances. And Aristotle somewhere in his Physics expressly
declares of the Pythagoreans, that they held there was a Vacuum, from an
infinite spirit that pervades Heaven or the Universe, as living and breathing
in virtue thereof.


Euist. I remember the passage very well: it is in the fourth Book and the
sixth Chapter. (...).


Bath. As if this Pythagorick Vacuum were that to the Universe which the Air
is to particular Animals, that wherein and whereby they live and breathe.
Whence it is manifest the Pythagoreans held it no imaginary Being.


Hyl. And lastly, O Cuphophron, unless you will flinch from the Dic^ates of
your so highly-admired Descartes, forasmuch as this Vacuum is extended, and
measurable, and the like, it must be a Reality; because Non entis nulla est
Affectio, according to the Reasonings of your beloved Master. From whence it
seems evident that there is an extended Substance far more subtle then Body,
that pervades the whole Matter of the Universe.


Bath. Excellently well argued, O Hylobares! Thou art become not only a
Disciple, but a very able Champion for the Truth of Immaterial Beings, and
therefore art not far off from the right apprehension of the Nature of God. Of
whose Essence I must confess I have always been prone to think this subtle
Extension (which a man cannot dis-imagine but must needs be) to be a more
obscure shadow or adumbration, or to be a more general and confused
apprehension of the Divine Amplitude. For this will be necessarily, though all
Matter were annihilated out of the World. Nay indeed this is antecedent to all
Matter, forasmuch as no Matter nor any Being else can be conceived to be but in
this. In this are all things necessarily apprehended to live and move and have
their being.


Sophr. Lord, Psalm. 90. 1. 2.
thou have been our dewlling place in all generations. Before the Mountains
were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth or the World: even from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God.


Bath. Whence the Cabbalists have not vainly attributed those Titles of (...)
and (...) unto God, who is the Immovable Mover, Receptacle and Sustainer of all
things. Answerable to what Hylobares noted of the Opinion of the Phythagoreans,
who have a great affinity with the ancient Cabbalists.


Cuph. What Mysterious conceits has Bathynous of what can be but a mere Vacuum
at best?


Bath. It is an Extension plainly distinct from that of Matter, and more
necessarily to be imagined in this distinctness then that Extension of Matter,
and therefore a ground infinitely more certain of the Existence of an infinite
Spirit then the other of indefinite Matter. For while that Extension which
Cartesius would build his Matter on is conceived movable, this Spirit is
necessarily supposed in which it moves, as appears from Philotheus his
Instances. So that this is the Extension only which must imply the necessity
of the existence of some real Being thereunto appertaining; which therefore
must be coincident with the Essence of God, and cannot but be a Spirit, because
it pervades the Matter of the Universe.


Cuph. It is only the Capacity of Matter, Bathynous.


Bath. What do you mean by Capacity, Cuphophron? Matter in potentia?


Cuph. Yes.


Bath. But we conceive this Extension loosly distinct from that of Matter: that
of Matter being movable, this immovable; that of Matter discerpible, this
indiscerpible. For if it were discerpible, it would be also movable, and so
ipso facto distinguish it self from the indiscerpible and immovable Extension.
But when Ens potentia is once made Ens actu, they are one and the same
undivided Essence actually existent, nor can possibly be loose from one another
while they are: As your Metaphysicall wit cannot but easily apprehend.


Cuph. I cannot so easily apprehend it in this case, Bathynous, who must, with
Descartes, make Extension and Matter reciprocal. For I am certain I am
illaqueated with a mere Sophism, forasmuch as I easily conceive that, if God
were exterminated as well as Matter out of the World, yet this Extension you
talk so magnificently of would to my deluded fancy seem necessarily to remain.
But if there were no God nor Matter, there would be nothing. Which is a plain
sign that this remaining Extension is the Extension of nothing, and therefore
that it self is nothing but our Imagination.


Bath. This is cunningly fetched about, O Cuphophron. But if you well consider
things, this Fetch of yours, which seems to be against me, is really for me.
For in that you acknowledge that while you conceive God exterminated out of the
World, this Extension does notwithstanding remain, it is but an Indication of
what is true, that the conception of God's being exterminated out of the World
implies a Contradiction, as most certainly it does. For no Essence that is
exterminable can be the Essence of God, forasmuch as his Essence implies
necessary Existence. Wherefore that God which you did exterminate, that is to
say, conceived exterminable, was a figment of your own: but that Extension
which remains to you whether you will or no, is really and indentifically
coincident with the Amplitude of the Essence of God. Whence we may see not
only the folly, but the impiety, of the other Position, which would transplant
that main Prerogative of God, I mean his necessary Existence, upon Matter, upon
pretense that whatever is extended must be such; and withal necessarily
exterminate God out of the Universe with as many as cannot conceive any thing
to be but what is extended, that is to say, has some kind of Amplitude or
other.


Hyl. And therefore it had been my inevitable fate to have been an Atheist,
XXVIII.
had not Philotheus so fortunately ^reed me from so mischievous a conceit by
those Instances of the Co^icum and Arrow. A fresh Appeal touching the truth of
that Point to Reason, Sense and Imagination.
For I do most immutably apprehend thereby, that there is an Extension distinct
from that of Matter, which though we should admit to be imaginary, yet this at
least will result therefrom, That Extension being thus necessarily applicable
as well to imaginary things as to real, it is rather a Logical Notion then a
Physical, and consequently is applicable to all Objects as well Metaphysicall
as Physical.


Cuph. As well Fantastical or Imaginary as Physical, you should say,
Hylobares. For if any real thing be extended, it is ipso facto Matter, as that
Oracle of Philosophy has concluded, I mean Renatus Descartes.


Hyl. That is again spitefully interposed, Cuphophron, (but not at all proved)
and yet repugnantly to your own admired Oracle, who has declared, as I told you
before, that Nihili nulla east affectio. Wherefore there being a measurable
Extension distinct from that of Matter, there is also a Substance distinct from
Matter, which therefore must be immaterial, and consequently Metaphysicall. But
that there is an Extension distinct from Matter, is apparent in that Instance
of the Conicum.


Cuph. There is no real description of a Conicum, Hylobares, nor in any
Extension but that of the wooden Cylinder it self. These are Whims and turnings
of our Fancy only: and then we make grave Theological Inferences, and Uses
of Reproof, as if we carried all before us.


Hyl. Answer me but with patience, Cuphophron, and I doubt not but I shall
quickly convince you, that there is more then Fancy in those arguings. I will
appeal to your Reason, your Imagination, and your Sense. What therefore is it,
O Cuphophron, to describe a Figure, as the Mathematicians speak, but to draw
some Extensum or some point of it through the parts of some other Extensum, so
that the parts are passed through of that Extensum in which the Figure is said
to be described?


Cuph. Right, Hylobares, that is plain at first sight.


Hyl. This to gratify your Reason. But farther too to caress your Sense and
Fancy, let us imagine for that wooden Cylinder a glass one, with a red Line in
it for its Axis, and from the top of this Axis, another red Line drawn down to
the Peripherie of the Basis; which Lines would be visible to your very sight
through the transparent Glass.


Cuph. A fine thing to play with, Hylobares; what then?


Hyl. I would have you play with such a thing, O Cuphophron, but in such sort,
as to make it turn swiftly upon its Axis. And there will appear to your very
sight a red Conicum, like the usual shape of an Extinguisher. If the Line were
blew, it would be like it something in color as well as figure. This I
conceive (for I never tried it, nor thought of it before now) you might
distinctly see in the Glass.


Cuph. A goodly sight: but what of all this?


Hyl. I demand in what Extensum this Conicum is described.


Cuph. In the same it is seen, namely in the Glass, Hylobares.


Hyl. You answer what is impossible, Cuphophron, and against your first
concession. For the red Line does not pass through the parts of the Glass, but
is carried along with them, and therefore cannot describe the Conicum in it.
But there is a Conicum described even to your very ^ense. In what Extensum
therefore is ^^scribed?


Cuph. In an imaginary Extensum.


Hyl. But what is imaginary, Cuphophron, is a Figment made at pleasure by us:
But this Extensum we cannot dis-imagine, as I told you before, but it is
whether we will or no: For no Figure can be drawn but through the parts of some
Extensum.


Cuph. I am cast upon the same Answers again that I was before: Then it is the
Idea of a possible Extensum, which indeed the glass-Cylinder actually is.


Hyl. That is to say, It is the particular or individual possible Idea of that
Extensum which the glass-Cylinder is actually.


Cuph. It is that, or else I confess I know not what it is. It is a mockery of
the mind, it is a troublesome Fallacy.


Hyl. But you do not mean any Idea in our Brain by this possible Idea. For the
red Line that describes the Conicum is in the Glass, not in our Brain.


Cuph. Therefore I must mean the Object of that Idea.


Hyl. But is not the actual describing of a Figure in a mere possible Extensum
like sense to the writing of an actual Epistle in a possible sheet of Paper?
Besides, this particular or individual possible Idea of the Extensum which this
particular Cylinder is ac^ually is an immovable Extensum, but this Cylinder
removable from it even while it does exist. How can it then be that particular
possible Extensum which the Cylinder is actually? But admit it could be, and
let this Cylinder be removed from this possible immovable Extensum, and another
Cylinder of the same bigness succeed into its place. Now this second Cylinder
is actually that particular Extensum which still the same individual possible
Extensum is or was potentially. And so both the first and second Cylinders are
one and the same individual Cylinder: For one individual Possibility can afford
no more then one individual Actuality in the world. And therefore one and the
same Cylinder is in two distant places at once.


Sophr. This makes Cuphophron rub his temples. I believe he is confounded in
the midst of this hot and hasty Career he has taken afresh in the behalf of
Descartes. Let me help him a little. It may be that immovable possible
Cylindricall Extensum is the Genus of the two other Cylinders, and, as I
remember, Pri^^. Philos. p^r.
Descartes intimates some such thing.


Hyl. But how can that which is immovable, 2. sect. 10, 11.
O Sophron, be the Genus of those things that are movable? And we will suppose
both these Cylinders removed from this possible Cylindricall Extensum, and thus
the Genus will be deserted of its Species, and the Species destitute of their
Genus. Which can be good in no Logic but Cuphophron's or Des-Cartes's. But if
by Genus you mean a mere Logical Notion, that is only in the Brain, which the
red Line is not, but in the Glass.


Sophr. Nay, I perceive there is no dealing with Hylobares when his wit is once
awakened. I am presently forced to sound a retreat. And yet I care not to cast
this one conceit more at him before I run away. What if I should say it is
only spatium imaginarium, Hylobares?


Hyl. Then you would only say but what in effect Cuphophron has said twice
already. But I tell you, Sophron, that the Extension of this Space which you
call imaginary is real. For whatsoever is a real Affection or Attribute
any-where, (and you know Extension is so in Matter) is everywhere real where it
is deprehended to be independently on our imagination. And that this Extension
is actual, necessary and independent on our imagination, is plainly
discoverable in those Instances of the Arrow and Conicu^.


Philoth. You are an excellent Proficient, Hylobares, that can thus vary,
improve and maintain things from so few and slender hints. I never spoke with
better success to any one in all my life touching these matters.


Hyl. I find my self hugely at ease since your freeing me, XXIX.
O Philotheus, The essential Proper^ies of Matter.
from that prejudice, that whatsoever is extended must be Matter. Whence I can
now easily admit the Existence of Spirits; but have therefore the greater
Curiosity, and find my self finely at leisure, to be more punctually instructed
concerning the nature of them.


Philoth. I dare say, Hylobares, you will be able abundantly to instruct your
self touching that Point, if we do but first carefully settle the Notion of
Matter, whose essence I conceive consists chiefly in these three Attributes,
Self-disunity, Self-impenetrability, and Self-inactivity.


Hyl. But I desire, O Philotheus, to know the distinct meaning of every one of
these terms.


Philoth. By Self-disunity I understand nothing else but that Matter has no
Vinculum of its own to hold it together, so that of it self it would be
disunited into a Congeries of mere Physical Monads, that is, into so little
particles, that is, implies a Contradiction they should be less.


Hyl. I understand the Notion well enough. But what makes you attribute
Disunity to Matter rather then firm Union of parts, especially you attributing
Self-inactivity thereto?


Philoth. Because there is no Vinculum imaginable in Matter to hold the parts
together. For you know they are impenetrable, and therefore touch one another
as it were in smooth Superficies's. How therefore can they hold together? what
is the Principle of their Union?


Cuph. O, that is very clear, Philotheus; that s^upendious Wit Descartes
plainly tells us that it is Rest.


Philoth. But I pray do you tell me, Cuphrophron, what is Rest?


Cuph. That is easily understood from Motion, which Descartes intimates to be
the Separation or translation of one part of Matter from the other.


Philoth. And so Rest is the Union or Vnseparateness of one part of Matter from
another.


Cuph. I can imagine nothing else by it. For if a whole mass of Matter move
together in one hard piece, the whole is moved; but the parts in respect of one
another, because they do not separate one from another, are said to rest. And
on this account Motion is said to be reciprocal, because indeed Separation is
so.


Philoth. Then Rest and Vnseparateness of parts are all one.


Cuph. It seems so.


Philoth. And Vnseparateness and Union all one.


Cuph. The very same, I think.


Philoth. Why then, Rest and Union is all one, and so the Principle of the
Union of the parts of Matter is the Union of their parts.


Hyl. That is, they have no Principle of Union at all, and therefore of
themselves are disunited.


Philoth. And there is great reason they should have none, forasmuch as they
are to be bound together in such forms and measures as some more Divine cause
shall order.


Cuph. I think in my heart Philotheus and Hylobares have both plotted a
conspiracy together against that Prince of Philosophers, our admired Descartes.


Hyl. Philotheus and I have conspired in nothing, O Cuphophron, but what so
noble a Philosopher would commend us for, that is, the free searching out of
truth: In which I conceive we are not unsuccessfull. For I must confess I am
convinced that this first Attribute of (...), as Philotheus has explained (...)
true. And for Self-impenetra^^^^^y* it is acknowledged of all sides. but what
do you mean, O Philotheus, by ^^^finactivity?


Philoth. I mean that Matter does not move nor actuate it self, but is or has
been always excited by some other, and cannot modifie the motion it is excited
into, but moves directly so as it is first excited, unless some external cause
hinder.


Hyl. This I understand, and doubt not of the truth thereof.


Cuph. This is no more then Descartes himself allows of.


Bath. And good reason, O Cuphophron, he should do so. For there being no
Medium betwixt Self-activity and Self-inactivity, nor betwixt Self-union and
Self-disunity, nor any immediate Genus to these distributions, as Cogitation
and Figure are to the kinds or modes under them, it is necessary that one of
the twain, and (...) an indifferency to either, should (...) the innate
Property of so simple an Essence as Matter: and that therefore Self-inactivity
and Self-disunity should be the Properties thereof, it being a passive
Principle, and wholly to be guided by another.


Philoth. You say right, Bathynous; and the Consectary from all this will be,
That Sympathy cannot immediately belong to Matter.


Hyl. Very likely.


Philoth. We are fully agreed then touching the right Notion or nature of
Matter, Hylobares.


Hyl. We are so, Philotheus.


Philoth. Can you then miss of the true Notion of a Spirit? XXX.
The true Notion of a Spirit.



Hyl. Methinks I find my self able to define it by the rule of Contraries. For
if Self-disunity, Self-inactivity, Self-impenetrability, be the essential
Attributes of Matter or Body; then the Attributes of the opposite species, viz.
of Spirit, must be Self-unity, Self-activity, Self-penetrability.


Philoth. Very right. And have you not as distinct a Notion of every one of
these Attributes as of the other?


Hyl. I will try. By the Self-unity of a Spirit I understand a Spirit to be
immediately and essentially one, and to want no other Vinculum to hold the
parts together but its own essence and existence; whence it is of its own
nature indiscerpible.


Philoth. Excellently well defined.


Hyl. This I am carried to by my Reason. But methinks my Imagination boggles
and starts back, and brings me into a suspicion that it is the Notion of a
thing that cannot be. For how can an extended Substance be indivisible or
indiscerpible? For quatenus extended it must be divisible.


Philoth. It is true, it is intellectually divisible, but Physically
indiscerpible. Therefore this is the fallacy your Fancy puts upon you, that
you make Indivisibility and Indiscerpibility all one. What is intellectually
divisible may be Physicall^ indivisible or indiscerpible: as it is manifest in
the nature of God, whose very Idea implies Indiscerpibility, the contrary being
so plain an Imperfection. For whatsoever is discerpible is also movable: But
nothing is movable but must be conceived to move in that which is a necessary
and immovable Essence, and which will necessarily be, though there were nothing
else in the world: which therefore must be the holy Essence of God, as
Bathynous has very well noted already, and seems to have light upon the true
(...), which Aristotle sought for above the Heavens, but Bathynous has rightly
found to be everywhere. Wherefore at length to make our Inference; If it imply
a Contradiction, Hylobares, that the Divine Extension should be discerpible,
extended Essence quatenus extended cannot imply Physical Divisibility.


Hyl. It is very true, Philotheus.


Philoth. What hinders then but Spirit quatenus Spirit, according to the right
Idea thereof, be immediately or essentially one, that is to say, indiscerpible?
For what is immediately and essentially one, and not instrumentally, or one by
virtue of some other, is necessarily and immutably one, and it implies a
Contradiction to be otherwise, while it at all is, and therefore is
indiscerpible.


Cuph. Why, Philotheus? cannot the Omnipotence of God himself discerp a Spirit,
if he has a mind to it?


Philoth. He may annihilate a Spirit, if he will. But if a Spirit be
immediately and essentially one, he can no more discerp it, then he can
separate that Property, of having the power of the Hypotenusa equal to the
powers of both the Basis and Cathetus, from a rectangle-Triangle.


Cuph. You know, Philotheus, Descartes asserts that God might change this
Property of a rectangle-Triangle, if he would.


Philoth. He does indeed say so, but by way of a slim jear to their ignorance,
as he deems it, that are not aware of his supposed mechanical necessity of the
result of all the Phenomenon of the World from the mere motion of the Matter.
This piece of wit I suspect in this Paradox of that great Philosopher. However,
I will not contend with you, Cuphophron: Let but a Spirit be no more
discerpible then that Property of a rectangle-Triangle is separable from it,
and then we are agreed.


Cuph. I am well pleased that we can agree in any thing that is compliable with
the Dictates of the noble Descartes.


Philoth. So I dare say should we all, O Cuphophron: But I must pursue my
purpose with Hylobares. What do you understand by Self-activity in a Spirit,
Hylobares?


Hyl. I understand an active power in a Spirit, whereby it either modifies it
self according to its own nature, or moves the Matter regularly according to
some certain Modifications it impresses upon it, uniting the Physical Monads
into particles of such magnitude and figure, and guiding them in such Motions
as answer the end of the spiritual Agent, either conceived by it or
incorporated into it. Whence there appears, as was said, the reason why both
Disunity and Inactivity should belong to Matter.


Philoth. Very accurately and succinctly answered, Hylobares. You are so nimble
at it, that certainly you have thought of these Notions before now.


Hyl. I have read something of them. But your dexterous defining the Attributes
of Matter might of it self make me a little more cheerfully nimble at defining
those of a Spirit, especially now I can close with the belief of its Existence,
which I could never do heartily before. And for the last Attribute, which
seemed to me the most puzzling, I mean that of Self-penetrability, it is now to
me as easy a Notion as any: and I understand nothing else by it, but that
different Spirits may be in the same space, or that one and the same may draw
its Extension into a lesser compass, and so have one part of its essence lie in
the same space with some others: By which power it is able to dilate or
contract it self. This I easily conceive may be a Property of any created and
finite Spirit, because the Extension of no Spirit is corporeal.


Philoth. Very true. But did you not observe, Hylobares, how I removed Sympathy
from the Capacity of Matter?


Hyl. I did, Phi^^theus; and thereby I cannot but collect that it is seated in
the Spiritual or Incorporeall Nature. And I understand by this Sympathy, not a
mere Compassivity, but rather a Coactivity of the Spirit in which it does
reside: which I conceive to be of great use in all perceptive Spirits. For in
virtue of this Attribute, however or in whatever circumstances they are
affected in one part, they are after the same manner affected in all. So that
if there were a perceptive Spirit of an infinite Amplitude and of an infinite
exaltedness of Sympathy, wherever any perceptive Energie emerges in this
infinite Spirit, it is suddenly and necessarily in all of it at once. For I
must confess, Philotheus, I have often thought of these Notions heretofore, but
could never attribute them to a Spirit, because I could not believe there was
any such thing as a Spirit, forasmuch as all Extension seemed to me to be
corporeal. But your Aequinoctial Arrow has quite struck that Error out of my
mind. For the more I think of it, the more unavoidable it seems to me, that
that Exten^^on in the Aequinoctial Circle wherein the Arrow is carried in a
curvilinear motion is not only an Extension distinct from that of the Aereall
Circle, but that it is an Extension of something real and independent of our
Imagination. Because the Arrow is really carried in such a curvilinear line,
and we not being able to dis-imagine it otherwise, we have as great a certainty
for this as we have for any thing. For it is as certainly true as our Faculties
are true: And we have no greater certainty then that of our Faculties. And thus
was the sole obstacle that kept me off from admitting the Existence of Spirits
demolished at once by the skillful assaults of Philotheus.


Philop. I am exceeding glad of it, Hylobares, and must owe Philotheus many
thanks for his successful pains. The Spirituality of God then is not the least
prejudice to your belief of his Existence.


Hyl. Not the least, Phi^opolis. The Notion of a Spirit is now to me as easy
and comprehensible as that of Matter; and the Attributes of a Spirit infinitely
more easy then the competibleness of such Properties as they must be forced to
give to Matter who deny there is any such thing as a Spirit in the world.


Philop. Why then, you may without any more ado proceed to the last Attribute
of God which you propounded.


Hyl. I will, XXXI.
Philopolis. It was Omnipresency, The Attribute of Omnipresency.
I mean the essential Omnipresency of God. For attending to the infinite
Perfection of God according to his Idea, I cannot but acknowledge his Essence
to be infinite, and therefore that he is essentially present everywhere. And
for those that would circumscribe the Divine Essence, I would ask them, how
they can make his Essence finite, and his Attributes infinite; or to what
extent they conceive him circumscribed. To confine him to a Point were
intolerably ridiculous. And to pretend that the amplifying of his Essence
beyond this were any advantage or Perfection, were plainly to acknowledge that
the taking away his essential Omnipresency is to attribute to him an infinite
Imperfection. For any Circumscription implies an infinite Defect. These
considerations, O Philopolis, force me to believe that God is essentially
Omnipresent, and that he pervades all things, even to all infinite imaginable
spaces. But when I have thus concluded with my self, I am cast off again with a
very rude and importune check, as if this were to draw down the Divinity into
miry Lakes and Ditches and worse-sented places, and to be as unmannerly in our
thoughts to the true God as Orpheus is in his expressions to the Pagan Jupiter,
(...).


Euist. It is the very verse that Gregory Nazianzen quotes in his Invectives
against Julian the Apostate, and does severely reproach the Poet for the
Slovenliness and Unmannerliness of his style.


Cuph. And well he may, Euistor.


Euist. But how shall we redeem our Imagination from this Captivity into such
sordid conceits?


Cuph. I can tell, Euistor, and I am very glad of the opportunity of the
showing the usefulness of a peculiar Notion I have of the Omnipresency of God,
to solve such Difficulties as this of Hylobares.


Hyl. For the love of the truth, good Cuphophron, declare it.


Cuph. But it is so sublime, so subtle and so elevated, O Hylobares, (though
not the less solid) that I question whether it will be discretion to commit it
to unprepared ears.


Hyl. Why? you see, Cuphophron, that I am not altogether an undocible Auditour
of Metaphysics, by Philotheus his success upon me. Besides, it is against the
professed freedom of Philosophizing in these our Meetings to suppress any
thing, and the more injurious, in that you have set our mouths a-watering by
the mentioning of so excellent a Notion, and so serviceable for the solving
this present Difficulty touching the Divine Omnipresence.


Cuph. Well, Hylobares, because you do thus forcibly extort it, I will not
suppress my judgment concerning this matter.


Hyl. What is it then, dear Cuphophron?


Cuph. That God is nowhere: XXXII.
and therefore neither in miry Lakes nor dirty Ponds, Cuphophron 's Paradox of
God's being nowhere.
nor any other sordid places.


Hyl. Ha ha he. Cuphophron, this is a subtle Solution, indeed, to come from one
that does, I think, as firmly adhere to the belief of a God as any one in the
whole Company. If all the Atheists in Italy, in England, in Europe, should hear
this pious Solution of thine, they would assuredly with one voice cry out,
Amen, venerable Cuphophron.


Cuph. It Is much, Hylobares, the Atheists should be so universally devout.


Philop. This Solution seems to me point blank against the very words of
Scripture; If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there; if I descend to the
bottom of the Sea, thou art there also; and the like. And again, In him we live
and move and have our being. If we have all this in him, we have it nowhere,
if he be nowhere, nor are we any-where our selves.


Philoth. I suppose that Cuphophron's meaning is, that God is nowhere
circumscriptive.


Cuph. I mean he is nowhere essentially, Philotheus.


Philoth. Monster of Opinions!


Sophr. The Pythagoreans and Platonists, and all the established Religions of
the Civilized parts of the world, are for the essential Omnipresence of God:
only Aristotle places him on the Primum mobile; whom Pomponatius, Cardan and
Vani^us follow. Nor do I know any other Opinion, nor could I imagine any more
Divisions touching God's Presence, but of those that would place him at least
some-where, or else of those that would declare him everywhere. But now we are
come from everywhere to some-where, and from some-where to nowhere at all.
This is a strain of wit, I suppose, peculiar to this present Age.


Cuph. It may be so, O Sophron. For I think no Age within the Records of
History has produced more elevated Wits then this present Age has done.


Bath. I suspect this new Conceit, O Cuphophron, of God's being nowhere, is
the waggish suggestion of some sly and sculking Atheists, (with which sort of
people this present Age abounds) who, upon pretense of extolling the Nature of
God above the capacity of being so much debased as to be present with any thing
that is extended, have thus stretched their wits to the utmost extent to lift
the Deity quite out of the Universe, they insinuating that which cannot but
imply as much in their own judgments. For it is evident that that which is
nowhere is not at all. Wherefore it must needs make fine flearing sport with
these elevated wits, while they see their ill-intended Raillery so devoutly
taken up for choicest and sublimest pieces of natural Theologic by
well-meaning, but less cautious, Contemplators of Philosophical matters.


Euist. Is not this something inhospitall for us all to fall upon Cuphophron
thus in his own Arbor at once?


Cuph. No, Euistor, there is nothing committed against the laws of Hospitality,
but all transacted accor^ing to that Liberty that is given and often made use
of in these our Philosophical Meetings. They are not at all uncivil, though
you be extremely much a Gentleman, Euistor, and it may be a more favorable
Estimatour of my distressed Opinion then the rest.


Euist. I must confess I think none can conceive better of your Person,
Cuphophron, then my self; but your Assertion of God's being nowhere is the
most odd and unexpected Assertion that ever I heard in my life; and, but that
you are so very well known for your Piety otherwise, I should have thought to
have been the voice of a downright Atheist. You will pardon this liberty.


Cuph. I told you at first, Euistor, that the Notion was more then ordinarily
subtle and sublime: These things are not apprehended in an instant.


Hyl. I but a man may in almost less then an Instant discover the Assertion to
be impossible, XXXIII.
supposing God has any Essence at all, The Confutation of that Pararadox.
as Philotheus or Bathynous could quickly convince you.


Philoth. The Cause is in a very good hand; I pray you proceed, Hylobares.


Hyl. Tell me then first, O Cuphophron, whether God be not as essentially
present everywhere as he is any-where.


Cuph. That I must not deny, Hylobares: He is.


Hyl. And whether his essential Attributes be not in his Essence, not out of it.


Cuph. Who can imagine to the contrary?


Hyl. And whether Omnipotency, wherein is contained the power of moving the
Matter, be not an essential Attribute of God.


Cuph. That is univ^rsally acknowledged.


Hyl. And that he does or did sometime move at least some part of the Matter.


Cuph. That Descartes himself asserts, with whom I am resolved to stand and
fall.


Hyl. Now I demand, if it be possible for the Matter to be moved by the Power
of God, unless there be an Application of God's Power to the Matter.


Cuph. It is not possible, Hylobares.


Hyl. Nor the Power, being only in the Essence, not out of it, to be applied
without the Application or presence of the Essence to that part of the Matter
the Power acts upon.


Cuph. I am surprised.


Hyl. And therefore there being a necessity that the Essence of God should be
present to some part of the Matter at least, according to your own concession,
it is present to all.


Cuph. And so I believe you will infer, Hylobares, that the Divine Essence is
in some sense extended.


Hyl. That indeed, Cuphophron, might be inferred, if need were, that there is
an Amplitude of the Divine Essence.


Bath. It might; but this in the mean time most seasonably noted: How that that
Atheistical Plot laid against the Existence of God in that bold Assertion,
[That there can be no Extension or Amplitude, but it must necessarily be
Matter] being defeated by the Notion of the essential Omnipresence of God, to
make sure work, and to baffle the Truth, they raised this sublime and elevated
Fiction, that in stead of God's being everywhere, according to the universal
Opinion of all sober men, that his Nature is such that he can be nowhere:
without which far-fetched Subterfuge they could never have born two faces under
one hood, and played the Atheist and Deist at once, professing God was
nowhere, and yet that he was.


Cuph. Is this your Sagacity or deep Melancholy, Bathynous, that makes you
surmize such Plots against the Deity? For I have no more Plot against God, then
against my own Soul, which I hold to be a Spirit. And I hold God to be
nowhere, not as he is God, but as he is an Intellectual Spirit: for I hold of
all Spirits, that they are now-where.


Hyl. It seems then, Cuphophron, that the Plot aims farther then we thought on,
not only to exclude God, but all the Orders of Spirits that are, out of the
world.


Cuph. I know not what you call excluding out of the world, Hylobares; I am
sure I do not mean any excluding out of Being.


Hyl. That is mercifully meant, XXXIV.
O Cuphophron; That all Spirits are some-where
but we cannot conceive they are, if they may not be upon any other terms then
you conceit them. And it is a wonder to me, that you do not easily discern your
own Soul to be some-where, if you can distinctly discern her to be at all.


Cuph. I do most intimately and distinctly perceive my own Soul or Mind to be,
and that I am it, and yet without being any-where at all.


Hyl. But cannot you also think of two things at once, O Cuphophron?


Cuph. Every man can do that that can compare two things or two Idea's one
with the other: For if he do not think of them at once, how can he compare them?


Hyl. Let not go therefore this perception you have of your self, but raise up
also the Idea or Remembrance of the indefinitely-extended Matter of the
Universe, which is discontinued nowhere, but reaches from your self to
infinite spaces round about you, or is continued from infinite spaces round
about till it reach your thinking Selfship. Can you be surrounded by all this,
and yet be nowhere? Or can you compare your distinct Selfship with this
immense compass, and yet not conceive your self surrounded?


Cuph. I compare what is nowhere with that which is everywhere, and find
them to be (...).


Hyl. You suppose your Mind or Soul nowhere first, or rather say so, though
you cannot conceive it, and then you cry out that the Universe and she are
(...). Which error, if you were unprejudiced, this Consideration would
convince you of, especially backed with what palpably falls under sense.


Cuph. What Is that, Hylobares?


Hyl. The Soul's being touched and transfixed, as it were, from real Objects ab
extra round about, from above and beneath and from every side* Which would be
notoriously perceptible to you, if you could perch your self, as a Bird, on
the top of some high Steeple.


Cuph. It is more safe to suppose the Experiment, then to try it. But what
then, Hylobares?


Hyl. There being from above and beneath and from every side round from those
external Objects (suppose of Sight) Motion transmitted to the perceptive Soul
her self through the Air and Organs of her Body, and she palpably perceiving
her self thus affected from things round about her, it is manifest from thence
that she is in the midst of them, according as she plainly feels her self to
be, and that consequently she is some-where.


Cuph. That which is nowhere cannot be in the midst of any things. It is only
the Body that is in the midst of those Objects, which obtrudes this mistake
upon the Soul, whiles she thinks herself to be in the midst of them, whenas
indeed she is not.


Hyl. But the Body with all its Organs, and those more external Media betwixt
the Body and the Objects, are but the Instruments whereby the Soul perceives
those distant Objects round about. Wherefore she herself must needs be where
the lines of Motion through these continued Instruments of her Perception do
concentre. Nay indeed the transmission of any single Motion through Matter that
affects the Soul is a palpable argument that she is some-where. For how can
that which is some-where, as Matter and Motion are, reach that which is
nowhere? How can they come at it, or it at them? Princ. part. 1. Artic. 71.
Not to add, that Descartes himself expressly admits that those Objects the
Soul sees and flies from or pursues are without her. Wherefore many of these in
a compass must needs surround her, and therefore they being without her, she
must be within them, and so of necessity be some-where.


Cuph. The Philosopher, it may be, there slips into the ordinary Conceit of the
Vulgar.


Hyl. Again, Cuphophron, if the Souls of men be nowhere, they are as much in
one man's Body as another's, and one man's Soul may move another man's Body as
well as his own, and at whatever distance that man is from them: which seems
impossible for any finite Spirit to do, nor are there any examples of their
doing so.


Cuph. You give the reason your self, Hylobares, why they cannot act at any
distance; namely, because their power is finite.


Hyl. And you, Cuphophron, acknowledge Souls to be nearer and farther off, in
that you acknowledge they cannot act at any distance. But that which is nearer
and farther off is some-where, at least definitive.


Cuph. And that one man's Soul does not move another man's Body, is because it
is vitally united only to one.


Hyl. Is it then united to the inside of the Body, Cuphophron, or to the
outside?


Cuph. That is a captious question. For whether I say to the inside or to the
outside, you will infer the Soul to be some-where. But that which is nowhere
cannot be united to either side.


Hyl. And therefore is not united at all.


Cuph. These things will not fall into every man's capacity.


Hyl. Again, Cuphophron, is the Soul united to the Body by its Essence, or by
some essential Attribute of the Soul?


Cuph. There is another Caption, Hylobares: For I foresee your Sophistry, that
if I say the Essence of the Soul is united with the Body, then the Soul must be
where the Body is. But if I say by an essential Attribute, the Soul must be
where the essential Attribute is, and consequently where the Body is: so that
it will come all to one.


Hyl. Or thus, Cuphophron, Does not the So^l move the Body?


Cuph. What moves the Bodies of Brutes, Hylobares? Is not their Soul mere
Mechanical motion, according to that admirable Philosopher?


Hyl. But I ask you, does not the Rational Soul by the power of its Will move
the Body?


Cuph. Else there were no exercise of Free Will in external Actions.


Hyl. Is then the power of moving the Body thus by her Will in the Soul, or out
of the Soul?


Cuph. In the Soul, Hylobares.


Hyl. How then can this power be exerted on the Body to move it, unless the
Soul be essentially present to the Body to exert it upon it?


Cuph. By a certain emanative Efficacy that comes from the Soul.


Hyl. And flows like a Streamer in the air betwixt the Soul and the Body.


Cuph. You run always into these extensional Phantasms, Hylobares, the busy
importunities of which, when I am rapt up into my Metaphysicall Sublimities, I
look as contemptuously down upon, as upon the quick wrigglings up and down of
Pismires and Earwigs upon the extended surface of the Earth.


Hyl. You have a very ele^ated Soul, I must confess, O Cuphophron. But I pray
you look down a little lower and closer on this emanative Energy of the Soul
upon the Body, and pursue it from the Body to the source of it, the Soul, where
ends it, Cuphophron?


Cuph. In the Soul, Hylobares.


Hyl. But where is then the Soul?


Cuph. Nowhere.


Hyl. Why then it ends nowhere, and began from nowhere.


Cuph. That must needs be, because the Soul is nowhere.


Hyl. But this is marvellously mysterious, O Cuphophron, that there should be a
continued Emanation betwixt two things, whereof one is some-where, and yet the
other nowhere; the intermediate Emanation also proceeding but to a finite
distance.


Cuph. Metaphysics were not Metaphysics, Hylobares, if they were not
mysterious.


Hyl. Had you not better admit of an Immaterial or Metaphysicall Extension with
Philotheus and my self, then to harbor such unconceivable Notions, that lie so
unevenly in every man's mind but your own?


Cuph. I am not alone of this mind, Hylobares. And as for Philotheus his
opinion and yours, (since you have adopted it) I have heard what has been said
all this while, and have thought of these things over and over again, but your
Reasons move me nothing at all.


Hyl. Tell me then I pray you, XXXV.
Cuphophron, The Grounds of Cuphophron's Paradox (that Spirits are nowhere)
produced and examined.
what is it chiefly that moved you to be of the Opinion that you are, That no
Spirit can be any-where, or that the Soul of man is nowhere?


Cuph. O Hylobares, there be convincing Reasons of this seeming Paradox, if
they meet with a mind capable of them: but the chief are these two. First, In
that the Mind of man thinks of such things as are nowhere, as of many Moral,
Logical and Mathematical Truths, which being of the nature to be nowhere,
the Mind that conceives them must be necessarily nowhere also. The second, In
that Cogitation, as Cogitation, is ipso facto exempted or prescinded from all
Extension. For though we doubt whether there be any Matter or any Extended
thing in the world, yet we are even then assured that we are Recogitantes.
Which shows that Cogitation has nothing at all to do with Extension, nor has
any Applicability to it; forasmuch as we perceive our selves to think, when we
have not the least thought of any thing extended. Wherefore our Thoughts having
no Relation or Applicability to Extension, they have no Applicability to Place,
and consequently neither they nor our Minds are any-where.


Hyl. I partly understand what you would be at, Cuphophron, but not so fully as
to discover any strength at all in your Reasonings. The weakness of the first
Ground you may understand from hence; That it will as well follow, that the
Soul or Mind of man is some-where, because it thinks of things that are
some-where, as that it is nowhere, because it thinks of things that are
nowhere. Besides that those things which you say are nowhere are some-where,
I mean those Moral, Logical and Mathematical Truths. For they are in the
Mind or Soul; and the Soul I before demonstrated, I think, to any unprejudiced
Auditour, to be in the Body, and the Body you cannot deny but to be some-where.
It is true, some of those Truths, it may be, as they are Representations,
respect neither Time nor Place; but as they are Operations or Modes of a
Subject or Substance, they cannot but be conceived to be in that Substance. And
forasmuch as there is no Substance but has at least an essential Amplitude,
they are in a Substance that is in some sort extended, and so by virtue of
their Subject must necessarily be conceived to be some-where. For the Mode of a
thing is inseparate from the Thing it self.


Cuph. But here you run away with that, Hylobares, which I will not allow you
to assume, viz. That there is a Substance of the Mind or Soul didistinct from
Cogitation. I say that Cogitation it self is the very Substance of the Soul,
and therefore the Soul is as much nowhere as if it had no substance at all.


Hyl. But observe, Cuphophron, that in your saying that Cogitation it self is
the very Substance of the Soul, you affirm the Soul is a Substance. And so my
Argument returns again upon you; though the saying the very Operation is the
Substance is a manifest falsehood. For the Operations of the Soul are
specifically distinct, and such specifically distinct Operations succeeding one
another must be, according to your account, so many specifical Substances
succeeding one another. So that your Soul would not be always the same
specifical Substance, much less the same individual; then which nothing can be
more wild and extravagant. Again, the Soul is accounted a permanent thing by
all men, but her Operations are in flux and succession: How then can the
Operations be the Soul her self? or what will become of Memory? There is
therefore, O Cuphophron, a substance of the Soul as distinct from its
Operations or succeeding Cogitations, as the Matter is from the Figures and
Motions that succeed in it.


Cuph. I am not yet convinced of that.


Hyl. And now for your second Ground, which would infer from our being assured
we think, while we doubt whether there be any extended thing in the World, or,
it may be, think of no Extension, that therefore our Minds have no relation or
applicability to any Extension whatsoever; The weakness of this Reasoning you
may easily discover, if you will but consider, That Intension of Heat or Motion
is considered without any relation to Extension, and yet it is related to a
Subject extended, suppose to a burning-hot Iron. And we think without at all
thinking of Time or of the course of the Sun; and yet our Thought is applicable
to Time, and by the motion of the Sun may definitively be said not to have
commenced till such a minute of an hour, and to have ceased by such a minute.
And there is the same reason of Place as of Time, that is to say, such a man's
Thoughts may be said definitively to have been conceived in such a place, as
well as within such a time. And, to conclude, it seems a mere Sophism, to argue
from the precision of our Thoughts, that the Things themselves are really
prescinded one from another; and it is yet far worse, to infer they have not
any relation or applicability one to another. If they were so unrelated indeed
in the full and adequate apprehension of them, as well circumstantial as
essential, then I confess the Inference might be sound: But when the Mind is
so set on the Metaphysicall rack as to pull those things asunder that are found
together in nature, and then to say they have no relation to one another, or to
leave out by inadvertency what cannot be excluded from the perfect Idea of such
or such a Being; all Conclusions from such Principles must be like the
Principles themselves, defective or distorted. And therefore, being so little
satisfied with Cuphophron's Solution of the present Difficulty touching the
Divine Omnipresence, I foresee that Philotheus must have the sole honor of
fully easing and settling my mind in a right and rational apprehension of all
the Attributes of God.


Philoth. The honor of that satisfaction is due to God alone, Hylobares who
has given you so quick an apprehension, and so impartial a love of the Truth,
wherever it is found.


Hyl. That honor I do unfeignedly render to God that is his peculiar due; and
yet I think there is a civil Gratitude due also to those that he vouchsafes to
make Instruments of his Goodness and Bounty, as he has at this time made you,
Philotheus. And therefore you having had so excellent success hitherto, I
desire you would proceed to the Solution of this last Difficulty, touching the
Divine Omnipresence.


Philoth. I will, XXXVI.
Hylobares, That God is essentially present everywhere.
and I believe you will find it one of the easiest you have propounded, though
I must confess it may seem odd at the first sight, as it has done to very
famous Critics in Points of Theology, who mainly from this consideration,
that the foul and ill-sented places of the Earth are an unfit Receptacle of the
Divine Presence, have made bold to confine the Godhead to the Heavens. Which
opinion of theirs is rather to be imputed to the nicety of their Sense then to
the sagacity of their Wit. For all those things that seem so foul and
disagreeable in nature are not really so in themselves, but only relatively;
and what is one Creature's poison is the delight and food of another, and what
is the death of the one is the life of the other. So that we may easily
conceive, though God has an apprehension of whatever is, that yet there is no
necessity at all that he should be disaffected, disgusted, or any way annoyed
by being present with any thing: nay rather, that it is impossible he should,
every thing that implies Imperfection being incompetible to the Divine Essence;
so that he need not withdraw himself from it, he suffering nothing by
immediately residing in it, no more then he can be wounded with a sword or
pricked with a thorn; and there is the like reason for any other ungrateful
Sense. For all is to be resolved into the motion and figure of the particles of
the Matter variously impressed upon the Organs of our Bodies: And what
Unholiness or absolute Defilement can there be in any either motion, figure, or
exi^^ty of such particles? Wherefore the frame of all natural things
whatsoever, nothing at all excepted, is no less inoffensive, no less holy, no
less agreeable to the Eternal Mind, then the lines of a Picture or Statue are
to a Limner or Statuary, no part whereof gives him the least disgust or
aversation from the matter he has thus shaped or figured; for Art and Skill and
Reason runs through all. Whence it appears that this exception against the
Omnipresence of God is nothing but a fallacy put upon our own inadvertent
thoughts, while we fancy God liable to the same inconveniences that we our
selves are by reason of our weak and passive Senses.


Philop. This seems to me, though less versed in Philosophy, a very plain,
solid and intelligible Solution of the present Difficulty. But Cuphophron's
Hypothesis is, I must confess, to my slower apprehension infinitely
Paradoxicall, and methought was very intelligibly confuted by Hylobares, though
with some circumstances that to me seemed not so becoming toward so worthy and
obliging a person as Cuphophron.


Cuph. I thank you, XXXVII.
Philopolis, The Arborist's affected liberty of dissenting in unnecessary
Opinions and friendly Abusiveness of one another in their Philosophical
^eeti^gs.
for your sensibleness on my behalf. But in contest he ordinarily looks as if
he were abused who is thought to be overcome. Besides, it is an usual thing in
our Meetings, and to which we are much inured who are so familiarly acquainted,
to abuse one another into the Truth, by showing the ridiculousness of the
Error, and intimating from what disproportion of temper of mind it may arise.
For this subderisorious mirth is so far from giving any offense to us who
understand one another, that it is rather a pleasant Condiment of our
Conversation, and makes our serious Discourses the less tedious to our selves,
and, I think, sometimes not the more ungrateful to Strangers, when they
understand that there is not the least enmity under it.


Philoth. That solicitude, Philopolis, which you seem to have for the excusing
of Hylobares, we on the other side, I think, ought to have in the behalf of
Cuphophron, who was not at all behind-hand with him in any jocant wit or humor.


Cuph. I confess it, in that sense I have already explained unto Philopolis.


Philop. You pass away your time in a mavelous way of pleasant^y and
innocence, O Cuphophron, while those things which may seem blemishes elsewhere
are truly the badges of Virtue and good nature amongst you. But it is much
that, there being so great consent of Affection and Friendship amongst you,
there is not likewise the same consent of Opinion.


Cuph. That is a thing we do not so much as affect, unless it be in those
things that are necessary for proficiency in Piety and Virtue.


Philop. Are then the Opinions of God's being nowhere and of his being
everywhere alike conducive to Virtue and Piety?


Cuph. Yes, Philopolis, if they be rightly understood. For he that says that
God is nowhere, holds notwithstanding that his Providence and protective
Presence is everywhere. So that it is no discouragement to Virtue and true
Piety. Wherefore the case stands thus betwixt Hylobares and my self. He has a
great zeal against my Opinion of God's being nowhere, for fear it should be
thence inferred that there is no God at all: And I have as great a zeal for my
Opinion, because if I acknowledge God any-where, I must acknowledge him
extended, and to me it is all one to acknowledge an extended God, and no God at
all. For whatever is extended, is either Matter, or as incapable of Cogitation
or Perception as Matter it self. For if any entire thing, any Form or Figure be
perceived by what is extended, nothing in the extended Percipient perceives the
whole, but only part. Which is a sign that our own Souls are not extended,
much less the Essence of God. But I will not renew the Dispute.


Philop. I am surprised with an unexpected Subtilty of. Cuphophron's: how will
you rescue me, Hylobares?


Hyl. Very easily. Do you not remember the Notion of Sympathy, Philopolis, in
virtue whereof whatever the least real point of the Essence of the Perceptive
part of the Soul, suppose, does perceive, every real point of the Perceptive
must perceive at once?


Philop. I partly understand you, Hylobares: but now I see you so good at these
Notions, we will discourse some time more fully of them at my house. In the
mean time I think you cannot but be fully satisfied with Philotheus his
Solution of this last Difficulty touching the Divine Omnipresence.


Hyl. Very fully.


Philop. And I am abundantly pleased with the consideration, that the
widely-different Apprehensions betwixt you and Cuphophron touching God's
Omnipresence, meet together and join so strongly in one common zealous design
of turning off whatever may seem to supplant his Existence.


Hyl. I believe it is a great satisfaction to us both.


Philop. But I triumph in nothing so much as that Philotheus has so thoroughly
convinced you, XXXVIII.
that there is nothing in all the Divine Attributes so intricate as to hinder
your closing heartily with the belief of a God. The Con^^sion.



Hyl. There is nothing, I thank God and Philotheus, in all those Attributes we
have hitherto considered that seems not extremely much more easy then any
other Hypothesis that ever yet came into my mind. But there is a main
Attribute behind, which is the Goodness of God, the Notion whereof though it
be not hard to conceive, yet to make the Phenomenon of the World and the
passages of Providence constantly to comport with it, I foresee may prove a
very great Difficulty.


Philop. This therefore is the second Obstacle, Hylobares, you at Sect. 14.
first mentioned.


Hyl. It is so.


Philoth. And I fear will be too copious a Subject to be entered upon at this
time.


Philop. I conceive so too. And besides, I have some Letters to dispatch by the
Post this night, which I must not neglect. For we may rectify our inward
thoughts so soon as we find our Error; but if any error or neglect be
committed in outward affairs, though the error be discovered, the loss is many
times irrecoverable, and the inconvenience incorrigible.


Cuph. That is very true. But, according to the ancient custom of Athens, you
have a right, Philopolis, as well of putting an end to as beginning the Dispute.


Philop. This Law was undoubtedly an intended Civility by your Ancestors, O
Cuphophron, but in this circumstance of things I look upon it as a piece of
Cruelty; that I must do execution upon my self, and by mine own act deprive my
self of that ingenuous Converse which I could enjoy with pleasure even to break
of Day.


Cuph. It is the common loss of us all, especially mine, who enjoy myself
nowhere so well as in so excellent Company. But it is in your hand,
Philopolis, to remedy this: For you have the right of appointing the time of
our meeting again, as well as of dissolving this present Meeting.


Philop. Have I so? This makes amends for the other misfortune, which I will
repair by a more timely appointment. I adjourn therefore this Meeting till
tomorrow at five a clock in the afternoon, if Philotheus and the rest be
agreed.


Philoth. Agreed.


The End of the First Dialogue.
THE SECOND DIALOGUE.
Philotheus, Bathynous, Sophron, Philopolis, Euistor, Hylobares, Cuphophron.
Philop. YEsterday's performance, I.
O Philotheus, The Introduction, containing Philopolis his Thanks for the last
day's Discourse; with a (...) by the by of Inspiration, and of the difficulty
of the present Subject.
has indeared to me the memory of that day, of this place, (this sacred Arbor
wherein we are again so happily met) and of your excellent self and the rest of
this worthy Company, for ever. I never reaped so much pleasure in so few hours
in all my life. In which notwithstanding the chiefest Satisfaction was, that my
dear friend Hylobares was so fully satisfied touching those most intricate
Theories concerning the Nature of God and his Attributes. It rema^ns now,
Philotheus, that with the like happy success you clear his mind of those
manifold Scrupulosities and Difficulties it seems laden wit^ touching the
Providence of God.


Philoth. Your extraordinary kind resentment, O Philopolis, of my former
endeavors is no small obligation upon me to do the best I can in this present
Task. But I cannot omit to take notice, that your over-proportionate
propensions toward my self makes you seem not so just to others, who bore
their part in whatever contributed either to your own delight or Hylobares his
satisfaction. Nor can I alone sustain this day's Province, but must implore the
help of others, especially in so copious and various a Subject.


Cuph. Yes, Philotheus, that is supposed. Euistor, Bathynous and the rest will
assist; nor shall I fail to put in for one, when occasion requires, and I find
my mind moved thereunto.


Euist. Cuphophron expresses himself in such phrase, as if it were hopeful
that he will speak by Inspiration.


Hylob. He seems to me, Euistor, so to do sometimes: Of which some passages of
yesterday's discourse are fresh Instances. For he was several times so highly
rapt and divinely inspired, that I profess I think no humane understanding
could reach his meaning.


Sophr. Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia. So I think close and cautious
Reason in a calm and pure spirit is the best Inspiration now-adays in matters
of Contemplation, as well as Prudence in the common Practices of life.


Cuph. I am as much for illuminated Reason, O Sophron, as any man living can be.


Hyl. So am I, Cuphophron; provided the Illumination be not so bright and
fulgent as to obscure or extinguish all perceptibility of the Reason.


Sophr. I always thought right Reason it self to be the Illumination or Light
of the Mind, and that all other Light is rather that of the Eye then of the
Understanding.


Hyl. Let Cuphophron look to that, O Sophron, and defend his own magnificent
style.


Philop. But be you pleased in the mean time, O Hylobares, according to the
purpose of our present meeting, to propound your Difficulties to Philotheus
touching Divine Providence, and to the rest of this judicious Company.


Sophr. How becomingly does Philopolis exercise his office, and seasonably
commit the Opponent with the Respondent, like a long-practised Moderatour? I
wish Philotheus no worse success then he had yesterday. But I cannot ominate so
well touching this Congress. I fear such a Storm will be raised as all the Wits
in Europe will not be able to allay. So intricate, so anfractuous, so
unsearchable are the ways of Providence.


Cuph. I wonder whence Sophron took this ill Omen, Hylobares.


Hyl. I suppose from our two sporting together, which he looked upon as the
playing of two Sea-calves before a Storm.


Sophr. I wish, Hylobares, you prove Calf enough to bring no Objections but
what Philotheus or some of us may sufficiently answer.


Philop. I earnestly with Philotheus assistence enough and ability from above,
that he may with satisfaction answer the greatest Difficulties that either
Hylobares or any one else can produce touching Divine Providence.


Sophr. That indeed is the more desirable of the two, and my heart and vote
goes along with yours, O Philopolis.


Philop. Begin then, if you please, O Hylobares.


Hyl. I have in my mind such a crowd and cloud of Difficulties, that I know
not where to begin, or when I shall make an end.


Sophr. Did not I tell you so, II.
Philopolis? The two main H^ads of Objections against Providence, with (...)



Hyl. But I believe they are mainly reducible to these three Heads, or rather,
if you will, to these two more general ones, The Evils that are in the World,
and The defect of Good. For when you have senced as well as you can,
Philotheus, and pretty well satisfied us that all things here upon Earth are at
least well enough, and that there is no such Evil discoverable as implies the
first Principle of all things not to be the Sovereign Goodness; there is yet
this Difficulty behind, How it can consist with the Goodness of God, that this
good Scene of things should begin no sooner or spread no farther, that is to
say, that there should be no more Earths then one, or that this one or all
should have been but six thousand years ago or thereabout.


Sophr. This very last Difficulty, Philopolis, is able to confound any mortal
living.


Philoth. Dear Sophron, be not so dismayed; I dare pass my word that nothing
that is holy or sacred shall suffer any detriment by this conflict, when I have
declared the Laws of the Combat, and what Weapons we must be confined to,
namely to mere Reason and Philosophy. In which Field I must notwithstanding
confess that I suspect Hylobares will prove a stout Champion. But it is much if
we be not all able to deal with him. And forasmuch as it is so plainly evident
from a world of Phenomenon, that there is a Principle that acts out of Wisdom
and Counsel, as was abundantly evidenced by yesterday's discourse, and as
roundly acknowledged; it shall be severely expected and exacted of Hylobares,
That he do not oppose false or uncertain Hypotheses, or popular Mistakes and
Surmizes, or vagrant and fictious Stories, against certain Truth, such as is
discoverable every day before our eyes.


Philop. That is very equitable and reasonable.


Philoth. And if he cannot keep his Philosophical fingers from meddling with
the Holy Writ, that he do not handle it so ineptly, as to draw expressions
accommodated to the capacity of the Vulgar into a Philosophical Argument, or
to infer a Negation from the preterition of such or such a Subject.


Euist. It is incredible that Hylobares, professing himself a Philosopher,
should betake himself to such Nugacities as are exploded even by the Theologers
themselves, who notwithstanding spend their main study on the Holy Scriptures.


Hyl. These Laws, O Philotheus, I accept as just and right.


Philoth. And if they be kept to, III.
Hylobares, Evils in general how consistent with the Good^ess of God.
as stout a Retiarius as you are, you shall never be able to catch me in your
Net, or entangle me in any of your Intricacies touching Divine Providence. For
as for that which you have proposed in general touching the Evils in the World,
whether they be those that seem more Tragical, or else lesser Miscarriages in
the Manners of men or the Accidents of Fortune, if such things were not, where
were the Objects of Sighs and Tears, of Smiles and Laughter? So that what you
bring as an Argument against Providence, is in my apprehension a very palpable
Argument for it. For it is plain that that Power that made the World foresaw
the Evils in it, in that he has so exquisitely fitted us with Passions
correspondent thereto.


Hyl. This is ingeniously inferred, O Philotheus, so far as it will reach,
namely, to prove there is a Providence or Foresight of God: but you seem to
forget the main Question in hand, which is, Whether the measure of his
Providence be his Goodness, and that nothing is transacted against that
Attribute. But your concession seems to imply that he knowingly and wittingly
brought Evil into the World; which seems therefore the more grossly repugnant
to his Goodness.


Sophr. Methinks, Gentlemen, you are both already agreed in a Point of so great
concernment, namely, That there is a Divine Providence, that if there were any
modesty in mortal men they might be content with that bare discovery, without
so strictly examining or searching into the Laws or Measures thereof, but apply
themselves to the Law of Life which God has written in their hearts, or
expressed in the Holy Writ, that it may go well with them in the Conclusion.


Philop. That is very piously and judiciously noted, O Sophron.


Bath. So it is indeed, O Philopolis: But yet I humbly conceive that it is not
always an itch of searching into, but sometimes a necessity of more punctually
knowing, the truth of the Mysteries of God, that drives some men's spirits into
a more close and anxious meditation of so profound matters. As it may well do
here in this present Point touching the Measure of God's Providence, namely,
Whether the Rule thereof be his pure Goodness, or his mere Will and
Sovereignty. For if it be his Goodness, all free Agents have all the reason in
the world to apply themselves to that Law of Life which Sophron mentions,
because their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, as the Apostle speaks.
But if the measure of his Providence be his mere Power, Will or Sovereignty, no
man living can tell what to expect in the conclusion. All true Believers may be
turned into Hell, and the wicked only and the Blasphemer ascend into the
Regions of Bliss. For what can give any stop to this but God's Justice, which
is a branch or mode of his Goodness?


Philop. Methinks, Bathynous, that you both have reason, both Sophron and your
self; nor do I desire Philotheus to desist from the present Subject, though I
much long, I confess, to hear him discourse of the Affairs of the Kingdom of
God.


Philoth. That shall be done in due time, Philopolis. In the mean while I dare
avow to Hylobares, that there are no Evils in the World that God foresaw (and
he foresaw all that were to be) which will not consist with this Principle,
That God's Goodness is the Measure of his Providence. For the nature of things
is such, that some Particulars or Individuals must of necessity suffer for the
greater good of the Whole; besides the manifold Incompossibilities and
Lubricities of Matter, that cannot have the same conveniences and fitnesses in
any shape or modification, nor would be fit for any thing, if its shapes and
modifications were not in a manner infinitely varied.


Hyl. I partly understand you, Philotheus; I pray you go on.


Philoth. Wherefore I infer, That still the Measure of God's Providence is his
Goodness: Forasmuch as those Incompossibilities in Matter are unavoidable; and
whatever designed or permitted Evil there seems in Providence, it is for a far
greater good, and therefore is not properly in the summary compute of the whole
affairs of the Universe to be reputed evil, the loss in particulars being so
vast a gain to the Whole. It is therefore our Ignorance, O Hylobares, of the
true Law of Goodness (who are so much immersed into the Life of Selfishness,
which is that low Life of Plants and Animals) that makes us such incompetent
judges of what is or is not carried on according to the Law of that Love or
Goodness which is truly Divine: whose Tenderness and Benignity was so great as
to provide us of Sighs and Tears, to meet those particular Evils with which she
foresaw would necessarily emerge in the World; and whose Gayety and Festivity
is also so conspicuous in endowing us with that passion or property of
Laughter, to entertain those lighter miscarriages with, whether in manners or
fortune: As if Providence looked upon her bringing Man into the World as a
Spectatour of a Tragick-Comedy. And yet in this which seems so ludicrous, see,
Hylobares, what a serious design of good there is. For Compassion, the mother
of Tears, is not always a mere idle Spectatour, but an Helper oftentimes of
those particular Evils that happen in the World; and the Tears again of them
that suffer, oftentimes the mother of Compassion in the Spectatours, and extort
their help. And the news of but one ridiculous Miscarriage age fills the mouths
of a thousand men with Mirth and Laughter; and their being so liable
universally to be laughed at makes every man more careful in his manners, and
more cautious in his affairs, especially where his path is more slippery.


Hyl. I perceive by these beginnings, that you are likely to prove a mavelous
Mysta of Divine Providence, O Philotheus.


Sophr. I wish with all my heart, Philopolis, that Philotheus may come off so
cleverly in the particular Difficulties that will be proposed, as he has done
in this general one. For there are infinite unexpected Puzzles that it is likely
a busy searching Wit, such as Hylobares, may unluckily hit upon.


Euist. What, IV.
do you think any harder or greater, The Arguments of Lucretius against
Providence.
O Sophron, then are comprised in those elegant, though impious, Verses of
Lucretius?


Sophr. What Verses do you mean, Euistor?


Euist. Those in his fifth Book Dererum rerum Natura, where he proposes this
Conclusion to himself to be proved, viz. Nequaquam nobis divinitus esse paratam
Naturam rerum --



Sophr. And by what Arguments, I beseech you, does he pretend to infer so
impious a Conclusion?


Euist. The Argument in general is the Culpability of Nature, -- Tanta stat
praedita culpa and that therefore it cannot be the work of God: and I think he
brings in at least half a score Instances of this Faultiness, as he phansies it.


Sophr. Lucretius is esteemed so great a Wit, that it were worth the while,
Euistor, if you thought fitting, to give your self the trouble of recounting
those Instances.


Philop. A very good motion, and such, O Sophron, as whereby you may easily
guess whether Philotheus has undertaken so desperate a Province as you imagine.
For it is likely that so great and elegant a Wit as Lucretius would, out of
those many, pick the most choice and most confounding Puzzles (as you call
them) that the Epicurean Cause could afford him. And therefore if these should
not prove such invincible Arguments against the Goodness of Providence, it may
be the better hoped that there are none absolutely such.


Sophr. You say well, Philopolis, and that makes me the more desirous to hear
them.


Euist. And that you shall, Sophron, upon the condition you will answer them.


Sophr. Either I or Philotheus or some of us will do our best.


Euist. I will not repeat the Verses themselves, for I should do that but
brokenly; but I believe there are very few of the particular Instances in them
but I remember firmly enough. As first, That so much of the Earth is taken away
from us by the Barrenness of Mountains and Rocks, by the inaccessibleness of
large Woods inhabited by wild Beasts, by the overspreading of the Seas, and by
huge vast Marshes: Besides that the Torrid and Frigid Zones are unhabitable,
the one by reason of the excess of Heat, the other by reason of the extremity
of Cold: That that part of the Earth that is inhabited by men is of so perverse
a nature, that if it were not for Man's industry and hard labor, it would be
all overrun with Thorns and Brambles: That when with much toil he has made the
ground fruitful, and all things look green and flourishing, often all this
hope is quashed by either excess of Heat and Drought, or violence of Rain and
Storms, or keenness of Frosts. To which he adds the infestation of wild
Beasts, that are so terrible and hurtful to mankind both by land and by sea;
the Morbidness of the Seasons of the year, and the frequentness of untimely
Death; and, lastly, the deplorableness of our Infancy and first circumstances
of entering into life; which he sets off so pathetically, that I cannot but
remember those Verses whether I will (...)


Sophr. I dare say they are very good ones then, if you like them so, Euistor:
I pray you let us hear them, if it be no trouble to you to repeat them.


Euist. No, it is not Sophron. The Verses are these: Tum porro puer, ut s^^vis
project us ab undis
Navita, nudus humi jacet, infans, indigus omni
Vitai anxilio, cum primum in luminis or as
Nixibus ex alvo matris Natura profudit,
Vagit^uque locum lugubri complet, ut aequum est,
Quoi tantum in vita restat transfire malorum.



Cuph. They are a very empassionating strain of Poetry, Hylobares; methinks I
could have fallen a-weeping while Euistor repeated them. I remember them very
well. But is there not something in the following Verses about Childrens
Rattles? For these are not all.


Hyl. Let me entreat you of all friendship, Euistor, to repeat to Cuphophron
the Rattle-verses, to keep him from crying.


Euist. They are these that Cuphophron means, and immediately follow the
former: At variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque,
Nec crepitacula eis opu' sunt, nec quoiquam adhibenda est
Almae nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela,
Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore Coeli.
What think you of these Instances, O Sophron?


Sophr. I must ingenuously confess that if Lucretius have no better Arguments
against Providence then these, nor Hylobares then Lucretius, their force will
not seem so formidable to me as I suspected; but I must on the contrary
suspect, that they are ordinarily very small motives that precipitate those
into Atheism and Epicurism that have of themselves an inward propension
thereunto.


Philoth. Are these the same Arguments, Hylobares, that you intended to invade
me withal?


Hyl. These are only of one sort of them referrible to the Classis of Natural
Evils, V.
and but few of those neither. Providence argued against from the promiscuous
falling of the Rain, and undiscriminating discharges of Thunderclaps.
But to speak the truth, Philotheus, I had not so dinumerately and articulately
mustered up or shaped out the particular Arguments I would urge you with,
though I felt my mind charged with multifarious thoughts; and that pressed the
forwardest that had left the latest impression on my mind on the Rode as we rid
hither to this City, upon our being overtaken with so great a Storm of Thunder,
Hail, and a mighty dash of Rain, that we were wellnigh wet to the skin. For I
began to think with my self how consistent those kind of Accidents could be
with so good and exact a Providence as men imagine. For the High-waie^ yield no
Crop; nor do we our selves grow by being liquored without-side, but within:
besides the wetting of all our Clothes, and the indangering the catching of an
Ague or a Fever. Wherefore if Providence were so exact, the Rain would be
always directed to such places as are benefited thereby, not to such as it
does no good to, but trouble and mischief to those that are found there.


Philoth. Your meaning is then, Hylobares, that it is a Flaw in Providence that
the Rain is not restrained from falling on the Highways. But in the mean time
you do not consider how intolerably du^ty they would be, especially in Summer,
and how constant a mischief that would prove and troublesome both to horse and
man.


Hyl. I but it rains as much on the Highways in Wintertime as Summertime,
be they never so deep in wet and mire already: which methinks is not consistent
with so accurate a Providence as you contend for.


Philoth. And this, Hylobares, I warrant, you take to be an impregnable
Argument, a stout Instance indeed, in that you place it thus in the front of
the Battle. But if it be sounded to the bottom, it will be found to stand upon
a ground no less ridiculous then that Comicall conceit in Aristophanes, of
Jupiter's pissing through a Sieve as often as it rains: or what is a more
cleanly and unexceptionable expression, that the descending of Rain is like the
watering of a Garden with a Watering-pot by some free Agents; where they do not
water the Walks of the Garden, but only the Beds or Knots wherein the Flowers
grow. Which is the most Idiotick and unphilosophicall Conceit, Hylobares, that
could ever fall into the mind of any man of your Parts. For the committing of
all the motions of the natural Phenomenon, as they are called, to any free
Agents, were the utter abolishing of all natural Philosophy, and indeed of
Nature it self; and there would be no Object left of Speculation in these
things, but either Metaphysicall or Moral. And by the same reason that you
require that the Rain should only fall upon such plats of the Earth as are
destined for Grass, for Corn, for Trees, and the like, you must require also
that the Sun should not shine on the Highways for fear of infesting us with
dust, and that it should divert its beams from the faces of tender Beauties;
that the Shadow of the Earth should withdraw to those that travel in the night;
that Fire should not burn either an useful building or an innocent man; that
the Air should not transmit the voice of him that would tell a Lie, nor the
Rope hang together that would strangle the guiltless, nor the Sword of the
violent, be it never so sharp, be able to enter the flesh of the just. These
and many millions more of such sequels would follow in Analogy to this rash
demand.


Hyl. I must confess, Philotheus, that what you urge makes so great an impress
upon me, that it has almost dashed me out of conceit with this first Instance,
which I thought not so contemptible. But though with but a broken confidence,
yet I must persist, and demand, if Providence would not be more exact, if all
things were carried thus as my Instance implies they should be, then it is now
as they are.


Philoth. No, by no means, Hylobares. For the Scene of the World then would be
such a languid flat thing, that it would disgrace the great Dramatist that
contrived it. For there would be no compass or circuit of any Plot or Intrigue,
but every thing so shallow or sudden, so simple and obvious, that no man's Wit
or Virtue would find any Game to exercise themselves in. And assure your self,
it is one fundamental point of the Divine Counsel, and that laid deep in his
Wisdom and Goodness, that at least on this terrestrial Stage there should be
sufficient difficulty and hardship for all Sensible and Intellectual Creatures
to grapple and contest with, that an ignoble and corruptive torpour may not
seize their bodies and spirits, and make their life languid and their Faculties
useless, and find nothing to do in the world but to eat and drink and sleep.
For there are very few men given to Contemplation, and yet fewer successful in
it. That therefore that I contend for is this, That in these general, but
constant and peremptory, strokes of Nature there is an exact Providence of God;
and that which you account a Defect is indeed a Perfection and a surer pledge
of a Divine Foresight, that does thus manifestly in the compute of things
defalcate either useless or hurtful super^^uities; as this guideance of the
Rain from the Highways in Winter. For has he not given man wit and art to make
a supply by good waxed Boots, oil'd Coats and Hoods, and eyes in his head to
choose his way, if one be better then another; or if all be intolerable,
political wit to make Laws and Orders for the mending of the Highways? For
thus are men honestly employed for their own and the common good. And judge you
what a ridiculous thing it were, that the Sun should so miraculously turn off
his beams from every fair Face, whenas the same End is so easily served by the
invention of Masks; or that the continued Shadow of the Earth should be broken
by sudden miraculous eruptions or disclusions of light, to prevent the Art and
officiousness of the Lantern-maker and the Link-boy; or lastly, that the Air
should not resound a Lie, nor the point of a Sword pierce the skin of the
innocent. For this were an exprobration to the Wisdom of God, as if he had
mistook himself in creating of free Agents, and by an After-device thus
forcibly ever defeated their free Actings, by denying them the ordinary
assistences of Nature. This would be such a force and stop upon the first
spring of Motion, that the greatest trialls of men's spirits and the most
pompous external solemnities would be stifled thereby, or utterly prevented;
and all Political Prudence, Sagacity, Justice and Courage would want their
Objects. Wherefore this indifferent and indiscriminating constancy of Nature
ought to be; it being reckoned upon in those Faculties God has endowed both men
and other Animals with, whereby they are able to close with the more usual
advantages of these standing Laws of Nature, and have sense and foresight to
decline or provide against any dangerous circumstances of them; and that with
at least as much certainty as is proportionable to the considerableness of the
safety of such an individual Creature as cannot live always, nor was ever
intended to live long upon Earth.


Hyl. I partly understand what you would be at, Philotheus, and indeed so far,
that I am almost disheartened from propounding the remainder of the Meditations
that met me on the Rode touching the Hail also and the Thunder. For methought
Nature seemed very unkind to pelt a young Foal so rudely with so big
Hailstones, and give him so harsh a welcome into the world.


Philoth. Tush, Hylobares, that was but a sportfull passage of Nature, to try
how tight and tinnient her new workmanship was; which if it were not able to
bear such small Fillips, it would be a sign that things hung very crazily and
unsoundly together. Wherefore Nature does but justify the accuracy of her own
Artifice, in exposing her works to a number of such trialls and hardships. This
is but a slight Scruple, Hylobares; but surely some profound conceit surprised
your mind in your meditations touching the Thunder.


Hyl. The main thing was this, That if Providence were so exact as some
pretend, those Thunderclaps that do any execution should ever pick out some
notoriously-wicked fellow to make him an example, and not strike an heedless
Goat brouzing on the side of a Rock, or rend some old Oak in a Forest.


Philoth. This indeed is more shrewdly urged. But are you sure, Hylobares, that
this were the most perfect way that Nature could pitch upon?


Hyl. So it seems to me.


Philoth. I suppose then it is because you take this to be the most effectual
way to make men good.


Hyl. Why not, Philotheus?


Philoth. But suppose a mighty, if not an almighty, Arm out of the Clouds
should pull men by the ears as often as they offered to offend, would not that
be more effectual?


Hyl. One would think so.


Philoth. Wherefore upon this ground you should require that also, Hylobares.


Hyl. But that would be too great a force upon free Agents, O Philotheus.


Philoth. And how do you know, Hylobares, but that other would be so likewise?


Hyl. I must confess, Philotheus, it is an hard matter to define what measure
of force is to be used by Providence to keep men from Sin.


Philoth. And therefore a rash thing to prescribe laws or ways to Providence in
so obscure a matter. Besides, there are so many notoriously wicked, that there
would be such thundering and rattling, especially over great Cities, that we
should be never quiet night nor day. And those that escaped would be forward to
fancy themselves Thunder-proof; and others, that there was no Judgment to
come, because Vengeance was taken so exactly in this life. Besides that you
seem to forget that the strokes of Nature level not at particulars. For she is
an unperceptive Principle, and cannot act pro re nata, or suspend her self from
acting; and that the end of Thunder is not to forestall the last Day of
Judgment, but for clearing the Air, and sending more fattening showrs into the
bosom of the Earth.


Hyl. But do Thunderbolts conduce any thing to that, Philotheus?


Philoth. Those are very seldom, Hylobares; and I deny not but they may have
their moral use: but best so moderated as they are, not so constantly vibrated
as your Curiosity would have them. For if every perjured or notoriously-wicked
person is to be pelted from Heaven with Thunderbolts, people will presume them
innocent whenever they die without this solemn Vengeance done upon them.


Hyl. Well, I perceive I must produce new Objections, and such as I have
thought on more deliberately. For these Philotheus easily blows away.


Philop. We will give you some little time of respite to consider, VI.
Hylobares. For I believe Euistor and his Lucretius will think themselves
slighted if no man vouchsafes those Lucretian Instances any Answer. (...)



Fuist. If Philotheus thinks his hands will be full enough other-waies, I pray
you, Philopolis, let Sophron play the Philotheus as well as I have played the
Hylobares.


Sophr. Why truly Philotheus his discourse is able to make us all
Philotheusses. And methinks, following his footsteps, it is no such difficult
business to answer all those Instances of Lucretius. I shall willingly attempt
some of them my self. As that Complaint of the Earth's being run over with
Thorns and Thistles, if man by his hand-labour did not cultivate it. For
besides that we know that Curse that came upon the Fall, it is fit that we in
this life should have something to grapple with, to keep us from Idleness, the
Mother of Mischief. And that the Husband-man's pains are sometimes lost by Ill
weather, overmuch Heat, or Wet, or the like; he is taught thereby not to
sacrifice to his own Net, but to depend upon God, and to give him the praise
when he is successful, as also to be frugal and provident, and to lay up for
an hard year. But for that imputation of so much of the Earth's being
unhabitable by reason of extremity of Heat or Cold, we find by experience that
it is mostly a mere calumny of Nature. For the Torrid Zone is habitable, and a
considerable part of the Frigid: and that which is not is so little, that it is
inconsiderable. And to speak briefly and at once: The Inclination of the Axis
of the Earth is so duly proportionated for the making it as habitable as it
can be, that the wit of man cannot imagine any posture better. Now for those
Allegations, That Rocks and Mountains and Woods and the Sea take up so great a
part; whatever elegancy there may be in Lucretius his Poetry, the Philosophy
of such Objections, I am sure, lies very shallow. For it is as unskilfully
alleged against Nature that all the Earth is not soft molds, as it would be
that any Animal is not all Flesh, but that there is Blood also and Bones. The
Rocks therefore, beside other uses for conveying the subterraneous Water, may
serve also for consolidating the Earth. And it is manifest that the Hills are
usually the Promptuaries of Rivers and Springs, as Geographers make good by
infinite examples. Not to add what a treasury they are of Minerals and
Metalls, and wholesome Pasturage for Sheep, as the Rocks delight the Goats and
the Coneys. But the Poet seems to speak so unskilfully, as if he expected all
the face of the Earth should be nothing else but rank green Meadow; whenas to
exclude the Sea, would be like the draining of an Animal of its Heartbloud. Or
if things could be so contrived as that all the Surface of the Earth should be
rich Meadow, and the World thereby thick inhabited by men, the Air, in all
likelihood, would become so unwholesome, that Plagues and Death would ever and
anon sweep away all. Wherefore long Tracts of dry and barren places are the
security of so much Health as we enjoy: Which is of more consequence then to
have the Earth pestered so with Inhabitants, and ever and anon to have all to
stink with Noisomeness, Pestilence and Death.


Bath. And it is questionable, Sophron, whether these places that seem mere
forlorn Solitudes be not inhabited by at least as considerable Creatures as Men.


Cuph. I Will pawn my life, Bathynous means some Aereall Demons or Spirits.


Bath. And why not, Cuphophron?


Cuph. Nay, I know nothing to the contrary.


Hyl. But I do.


Cuph. What Is that, Hylobares?


Hyl. Why, I pray you tell me, Cuphophron, how can a Spirit, that is nowhere,
be in dry and barren places more then in Meadow-pastures.


Cuph. Away, Hylobares, you are a very Wag. I perceive you will break your
brown study at any time to reach me a rap upon the thumbs.


Euist. Gentlemen, I know not whether you be in earnest or in jest touching
these Aereall Genii in remote Solitudes. But this I can assure you, that
besides the usual and frequent fame of the dancing of Fairies in Woods and
desolate places, Olaus and other Historians make frequent mention of these
things; and that there are Daemones Metallici, that haunt the very inside of
Mountains, and are seen to work there when men dig in the Mines. What merriment
they also make on the outside of vast and remote Hills, that one Story of Mount
Athos may give us an Instance of, Polyhist. c. 37.
as the matter is described in Solinus. The impression of the passage sticks
still fresh in my memory even to the very words. Silet per diem universus, nec
sine horrore secretus est: lucet nocturnis ignibus, choris Aegipanum undique
personatur; audiuntur and ca^tus tibiarum and tinnitus cymbalorum per oram
maritimam. But of a more dreadful hue is that Desert described by Paulus
Venetus, Lib. 1. c. 4^*
near the City Lop, as I take it, in the Dominions of the great Cham. This
Wilderness, says he, is very mountainous and barren, and therefore not fit so
much as to harbor a wild Beast, but both by day and (especially) by night
there are heard and seen several Illusions and Impostures of wicked Spirits.
For which cause Travelers must have a great care to keep together. For if by
lagging behind a man chance to lose the sight of his company amongst the Rocks
and Mountains, he will be called out of his way by these busy Deceivers, who
saluting him by his own name, and feigning the voice of some of his
Fellow-travellers that are gone before, will lead him aside to his utter
destruction. There is heard also in this Solitude sometimes the sound of Drums
and Musical Instruments, which is like to those noises in the night on Mount
Athos described by Solinus. Wherefore such things as these so frequently
occurring in History make Bathynous his Conceit to look not at all
extravagantly on it.


Sophr. Our Savior's mentioning Spirits that haunt dry places, gives some
countenance also to this Conceit of Bathynous.


Euist. And so does the very Hebrew word (...), whose Notation is from the
field. But all these must be lapsed Spirits therefore.


Bath. I, as sure as men themselves are lapsed, then which nothing is more,
Euistor.


Euist. And so lapsed Spirits and lapsed men divide the Earth amongst them. And
why not the Sea too, Bathynous?


Bath. You mean the Air over the surface of the Sea: For the Sea is
sufficiently well peopled with Fishes.


Euist. It Is true.


Sophr. If this were not as Poetical as Lucretius his Poetry it self, his
Arguments against Providence were very weak indeed. But this is to bring in
again the Nereides and Oreades of the Pagans.


Euist. And if so, why not also the Hamadryades and other Spirits of the Woods,
that the vast Woods Lucretius complains of may not be left to wild Beasts
only, no more then the Sea to the Fishes?


Sophr. In my apprehension Lucretius seems mightily at a loss for Arguments
against Providence, while he is forced thus to fetch them from the Woods.


Cuph. Because you think, Sophron, that no Arguments can be brought from thence
but wooden ones.


Sophr. Indeed, Cuphophron, I was not so witty: But because the plentiful
provision of Wood and Timber is such a substantial pledge of Divine Providence,
the greatest Conveniences of life depending thereupon.


Euist. That is so plain a case, that it is not to be insisted upon. And yet it
is not altogether so devoid of difficulty, in that the great Woods are such
Coverts for wild Beasts to garrison in.


Bath. But you do not consider what a fine harbor they are also for the
harmless Birds. But this is the Ignorance and rude Immorality of Lucretius,
that out of a streight-lac'd Self-love he phansies all the World so made for
Man, that nothing else should have any share therein; whenas all Unregenerate
persons are as arrant brute Animals as these very Animals they thus vilify and
contemn.


Sophr. I thank you for that, Bathynous; for from hence, methinks, an Answer is
easily framed against his Objection from Man's being liable to be infested by
horrible and hurtful Beasts. For considering the general Mass of Mankind was
grown such an Herd of wicked Animals, that is, Beasts, what repugnancy to
Providence is it that one Beast invades another for their private advantage?
But yet Providence sent in such secret supplies to these Beasts in humane
shape, that seemed otherwise worse appointed for fight then their savage
enemies armed with cruel Teeth, and Stings, and Horns, and Hoofs, and Claws,
(which she did partly by endowing them with such Agility of body and Nimbleness
in swarming of trees, as Apes and Monkeys have now, but chiefly by giving them
so great a share of Wit and Craft and combining Policy) that Lucretius has no
reason to complain against Nature for producing these Objects that do but
exercise men's Policy and Courage, and have given them an opportunity of so
successful a Victory, as we see they have obtained in a manner throughout the
whole World at this very day. And lastly, for that lamentable Story of the
circumstances of the entrance of Infants into this life, it is (...), it is
mere poetical Smoke or Fume, that vanishes in the very uttering of it, and is
so far from being a just Subject of Lucretius his complaining Rhetoric against
Providence, that it is a pregnant Instance of the exactness and goodness of
Providence in Nature. For there being so much wit and care and contrivance in
Mankind, both Male and Female, the weakness and destituteness of the Infant is
a grateful Object to entertain both the skill and compassion of that tenderer
Sex, both Mother, Midwife, Nurse, or what other Assistents: Though perhaps
there has come in a greater debility in Nature by our own defaults. But
how-ever, that Body that was to be an Habitacle for so sensible a Spirit as the
humane Soul, ought to be more tender and delicate then that of brute Beasts,
according to that Physiognomonicall Aphorism of Aristotle, (...). Nor is the
crying of the Infant so much a presage of the future Evils of life, as a
begging of aid against the present from them about him, by this natural
Rhetoric which Providence has so seasonably furnished him with. And for Lambs,
and Calves, and Cubs of Foxes, they are not so properly said to need no
Rattles, as not to be capable of them, they having not so excellent a spirit in
them as to be taken up with the admiration of any thing. For the Child's
amusement at the Rattle is but the effect of that Passion which is the Mother
of Reason and all Philosophy. And for that last of all, That mankind clothe
themselves according to the Seasons of the year, it is their Privilege, not
their Defect: For brute Beasts, when it is cold, willingly apply themselves to
the Fire. But thus silly are ordinarily the Reasonings of those men that have a
mind there should be no God.


Euist. I promise you, Sophron, you have laid about you very notably, I think;
and though I am something taken with the Elegancy of the Poet, yet I must
confess I cannot but be convinced that his Reasonings are very weak.


Sophr. I have answered as well as I could thus extemporarily; and if I have
omitted any of the Objections, Hylobares, if he see it worth the while, will
resume them, and propose them to Philotheus, who is more exercised in these
Speculations.


Philoth. None more able in this kind then your self, O Sophron: And I cannot
but commend your caution and discretion, that you intimate, that the Fullness
and Solidness of the Cause we contend for is not to be measured from what we
utter thus extemporarily in the defense thereof; as if we in a moment could
find out all the richness of that Divine Wisdom that is couched in the
Contrivance of Nature and in the ordering of the World. It is sufficient that
we show, that even to our present thought such Reasons occurr as are able to
stop the mouths of them that are not partially affected, and to give a taste how
that, if they would search farther into the Reasons of things without
prejudice, they will still find Nature less faulty, or rather more and more
perfect at the bottom.


Philop. I think it is not without a special Providence, VII.
O Hylobares, that you are fallen into the company of so many skillful and
successful defenders of Providence; Of Death* how consistent with the Goodness
of Providence.
and therefore I desire you would produce the most considerable Scruples that
ever diseased your mind. For if any-where, you will here find a Cure.


Hyl. I shall produce all, Philopolis, and consequently the most considerable,
but in such order as they occurr to my memory. And for the present these are
those that swim uppermost in my thoughts; viz. Diseases, War, Famine,
Pestilence, Earthquakes, and Death it self, the sad effect of so affrightfull
causes. These, methinks, do not so well consist with that benignity of
Providence that Philotheus contends for.


Philoth. These are indeed sad and terrible Names, Hylobares; but I hope to
make it appear, that the World in general are more scared then hurt by these
affrightfull Bug-bears. I will begin with that which is accounted the most
horrid, I mean, Death it self. For why should mankind complain of this Decree
of God and Nature, which is so necessary and just? I mean not only in
reference to our Lapsed condition, which incurred the penalty of Death; but
that there is a becoming Sweetness in this Severity, in respect both of the
Soul it self, as it is so timely released from this bondage of Vanity, and also
in regard of our peccaminous terrestrial Personalities here. For I hold it an
Economy more befitting the Goodness of God, to communicate life to a
succeeding Series of terrestrial persons, then that one constant number of
them should monopolize all the good of the world, and so stifle and forestall
all succeeding Generations.


Hyl. I do not understand that, Philotheus. Why may not a set sufficient number
of men, equal to the largest number of the Succession, be as meet an Object of
the Divine Goodness, as a continual Succession of them? For there is an equal
communication of good in the one case and in the other.


Philoth. If there be this equality, it argues an indifferency whether way it
be; and therefore it is no flaw in Providence whatever way it is. But yet I
say that way that is taken is the best: because that in this terrestrial
condition there would be a satiety of the enjoyments of this life; and
therefore it is fit that, as well-saturated Guests, we should at length
willingly recede from the Table.


Euist. I believe Philotheus alludes to that of Lucretius, where he brings in
Nature arguing excellently well against the ^ond Complaints of Mankind: Quid
tibi tantopere est, mortalis, quod nimis aegris
Luctibus indulges? quid mortem congemis ac fles?
Nam si grata fuit tibi vita ante acta pri^rque,
Et non omnia, pertusum congesta quasi in vas,
Commoda perfluxere atque ingrata interiere,
Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis?



Philoth. But my eye was most upon the following Verses: Nam tibi praeterea
quod machiner inveniamque
Quod placeat nihil est, eadem sunt omnia semper.
Si tibi non annis corpus jam marcet? and artus
Confecti languent, eadem tamen omnia restant,
Omnia si pergas vivendo vincere secla.
From whence I would infer, That there is more joy and pleasure arises to men
in this way of Succession of mankind, then if there were the same men always.
And the Theater of the World is better varied and made more delightful to the
invisible Spectatours of it, as also the Records of History to them that read
them. For it were a dull thing to have always the same Actours upon the Stage.
Besides that the varieties of men's Ages would be lost, and the prettinesses of
their Passions, and the difference of Sexes, which afford their peculiar
pleasures and delights one to another. And there is the same reason for Brutes,
who when they die, though they find not themselves in the other State, as we
do, yet they no more miss themselves after Death then they sought themselves
before they were born.


Hyl. I must confess, Philotheus, that the case is at least so disputable, that
a man cannot lay any just charge against Providence from this Topic.


Philoth. Besides, Hylobares, it seems to be of the very nature of terrestrial
Animals to be mortal, and that without the force of a Miracle they cannot
endure for ever. What therefore could Providence do better, then to make their
Species immortal by a continued Propagation and Succession? For that is the
infirmity of our particular nature to dote upon Individuals: But the Divine
Goodness, which is Universal, is of a more released and large nature; and since
Individuals will be thus fading and mortal, concerns her self only in the
Conservation of the Species. To all which you may add, That unless you could
secure this terrestrial World from Sin and sense of Grief and Pain, not to be
able to die, to the generality of men oppressed and tormented by the Tyranny
and Wickedness of others, might prove the greatest Infelicity that could befall
them. Immortality, Hylobares, joined with Pride and Ambition, would easily
bring the World to this pass: And men now, though mortal, yet conceive immortal
Enmities one against another.


Hyl. That Is shrewdly suggested, VIII.
Philotheus. But admit the necessity of dying, Of Diseases.
what necessity or convenience of the frequentness of Diseases? Which is an
Head in Lucretius which Sophron forgot to speak to.


Philoth. As for Diseases in general, Hylobares, they are as necessary Sequels
of the terrestrial Nature as Death it self. But as Death would visit us more
slowly, so would Diseases less fiercely and frequently, if it were not for our
own Intemperance and irregular Passions; which we are to blame for what we
find most intolerable, and not to tax Providence, which has contrived all for
the best, and has let nothing pass without mature judgment and deliberation.
For Diseases themselves, though the natural sequels of a mortal Constitution,
may well be approved of by the Divine Wisdom for sundry Reasons. As first,
While they are inflicted they better the mind in those that are good, and are
but a just Scourge to them that are evil; and the pleasure of Recovery does
ordinarily more then compensate the over-past misery in both. So little cause
have either to complain of the neglect of Providence in such visitations.


Bath. Nay, indeed, I think that mankind have so little reason to complain,
that they have rather a very high obligation to admire and extol that
Providence that suffers so many outward Evils, as they are called, to rove in
the World. For where they hit, they frequently put us into such capacities of
seriously bethinking our selves of the duties of Piety and Virtue as we should
never meet with, for all the boasts of our Free will, unless these heavy
weights were cast into the balance to poize against our propensions to follow
the Lusts and Pleasures of life, and the ordinary Allurements of the World.


Philoth. That is excellently well observed indeed, Bathynous.


Hyl. But I pray you proceed, Phi^otheus.


Philoth. I was observing in the second place, That the sick being a spectacle
to them that are well, make them more sensible of their own Health, and should
stir up in them thankful Devotion toward God their Preserver, and engage them
to employ their Health to the best purposes. And lastly, That Diseases are a
notable Object of man's art and industry and skill in Medicine: The exercise
whereof does very highly gratify them that are either lovers of Mankind or of
Money. That therefore that does naturally accrue to the condition of a
terrestrial Creature, why should God interpose his Omnipotency to disjoin it,
especially it bringing along with it such considerable Conveniences? Nor must
we think much that sometimes a Disease is invincible: For thereby Sickness
becomes more formidable to the Patient, without which it would not prove so
good Physic to his Soul; and general success would lessen the estimate of the
Cure, and the pleasure of escaping the danger of the Disease; as likewise it
would diminish the Joys and Congratulations of Friends and officious Visitants.
For it is fit that things should be set home upon our Passions, that our
Delights thereby may become more poinant and triumphant.


Hyl. You come off jollily, IX.
methinks, Philotheus, Of War, Famine, Pestilence, and Earthquakes.
apologizing thus in the general. But if you will more closely view the
particular grim countenances of those more horrid Disasters of mankind, War,
Famine, Pestilence, and Earthquakes, which I intimated before, these one would
think should abate your courage.


Philoth. Concerning these, Hylobares, I answer, first in general, That it is
worth our taking noti^e of, how Divine Providence has counted upon this
extraordinary expense of man's blood and life, the Generations of men being not
considerably scanted for all these four greedy devourers of them. And therefore
we ought to consider what a testimony of the Perfection of the works of God in
Nature the greatest Disasters of the world are. For if they did not appear, we
should think it liable to none, but that it stood wholly on its own legs. But
we now seeing it liable to so great ones, and yet such as are perpetually
triumphed over by that Wisdom and Counsel of God that is so peremptorily
carried on in the nature of things, we are thereby manifestly convinced of a
Providence even from such things as at first sight seem most to contradict it.
To which you may add that eminent use of the Calamitousness of this Scene of
things, if we must needs think it so, namely the serious seeking after a
Portion in those Regions that are not subject to such horrid Disasters, those
Seeds quietae, as your Lucretius calls them, Hylobares, and in imitation of
Homer, that more religious Poet, describes them very elegantly. I believe
Euistor could recite the Verses.


Euist. I remember them very well, Philotheus. Apparet Divum numen, sedesque
quietae,
Quas neque concutiunt venti, nec nu^ila nimbis
Aspergunt, neque nix acri concreta pruina
Cana cadens violat, semperque innubilus Ether
Integit, and large diffuso lumine ridet.



Hyl. But I do not intend to be thus put off with an old Song, Philotheus: I
desire to hear your account of those four more dismal Particulars I proposed.


Philoth. Why, that is no such hard Province, Hylobares. For as for War and its
effects, it is not to be cast upon God, but on our selves, whose untamed Lusts,
having shaken off the yoke of Reason, make us mad after Dominion and Rule over
others, and our Pride and Haughtiness impatient of the least Affront or Injury.
And for Famine, it is ordinarily rather the effect of War then the defect of
the Soil or unkindliness of the Season; which if it were, men's Providence and
Frugality might easily prevent any more direful ill consequences thereof; and
present necessities set men's wits on work. And there is also that Communication
betwixt Nations and Countries, that Supplies are usually made in such like
Exigencies. I confess Plagues and Pestilences would seem more justly chargeable
upon God, did we not pull them down upon our selves as deserved Scourges for
our Disobedience. And though whole Cities be sometimes swept away with them, as
that of Athens and Constantinople, yet we are to consider that such acute
Diseases make quick dispatch; which makes Earthquakes in like manner the more
tolerable. For whether they be Islands or Cities that are thus swallowed into
the ground or sunk into the Sea, it is a present Death and more speedy Burial.
Thus perished those two famous Cities of Achaia, Helice and Buris; as also,
according to Plato and some others, an ancient Atlantic Island sunk into the
Sea. But what more then ordinary mischief came to the Inhabitants? For the
Souls of the good, having once left their Bodies, would easily find way through
the Crannies of the Earth or depth of the Sea, and so pass to those Ethereall
Seats and mansions of the Blessed. And for the Souls of the bad, what advantage
the Atheist can make to himself by inquiring after them I know not. If a man's
phancie therefore be not suddenly snatched away, these things are nothing so
terrible as they seem at first sight; nay, such as we of our own accord imitate
in Sea Fights, which have sunk I know not how many thousands of floating
Islands thick inhabited, by the thunder and battery of murtherous Cannons. But
it is the skill of the great Dramatist to enrich the History of the World with
such Tragical transactions. For were it not for bloody fightings of Battles
and dearly-bought Victories, the strange Changes and Subversions of Kingdoms
and Empires, the horrible Narrations of Countries depopulated by devouring
Plague and Famine, of whole Cities swallowed down by unexpected Earthquakes,
and entire Continents drowned by sudden Inundations, the Spectatours of this
terrestrial Stage Play would even nod for want of something more then
ordinarily notorious to engage and hold on their attention. Wherefore these
things are not at all amiss for the adorning of the History of Time, and
recommending of this Theater of the World to those that are contemplative of
Nature and Providence. For the Records of these fore-past Miseries of other
Ages and Places naturally engender a pious Fear in the well-disposed, and make
all that hear thereof more sensibly relish their present tranquillity and
happiness. And, which is ever to be considered, the unexhaustible stock of the
Universe will very easily bear the expense of all these so-amusing Pomps and
Solemnities: which therefore give the more ample witness to the Wisdom and
Power of the Deity.


Hyl. But we seek more ample witnesses of his Goodness, O Philotheus.


Philoth. Why, it is one part of his Goodness thus to display before us his
Wisdom and Power, to perfect our Natures, and bring us into admiration and
love of himself. For you see all these things have their Usefulness, that is,
their advantageous regard to us. For God wants nothing.


Hyl. Nay, X.
I see you will make every thing out, Philotheus. ^f ill Accidents happ^ni^g to
brute Creatur^s, whereby their (...) become miserable.
Nor dare I adventure to propose to you the Murrain of Cattle or Rots of Sheep,
whenas you have already suggested that touching the mortality of men which you
will expect should stop my mouth. And I confess you may add, that they may be
swept away sometimes for the Wickedness or Trial of their Owners. And
therefore I will not so much insist upon the death of dumb Creatures, as upon
such Accidents as may make their life's more lingringly miserable; as the
putting some Limb out of joint, the breaking of a Bone, or the like. For why
does not that invisible Power that invigilates over all things prevent such sad
Accidents? it being as easy for him that made them to keep them from harm, as
it was to make them; he being able to do all things without any trouble or
disturbance to himself, and being so good and benign as to despise none of his
innocent Creatures.


Philoth. This is pertinently urged, Hylobares. But I answer, That God has made
the World as a complete Automation, a Machina that is to move upon its own
Spring and Wheels, without the frequent recourse of the Artificer; for that
were but a Bungle. Wherefore that the Divine Art or Skill incorporate into
Matter might be manifest, absolute Power does not interpose, but the condition
of every thing is according to the best Contrivance this terrene Matter is
capable of. Wherefore these ill Accidents that happen to living Creatures
testify that there is nothing but the ordinary Divine Artifice modifying the
Matter that keeps up the Creature in its natural condition and happiness.
Whereby the Wisdom of God is more clearly and wonderfully set out to us; that
notwithstanding the frailty of the Matter, yet the careful Organization of the
Parts of a Creature does so defend it from mischief, that it very seldom
happens that it falls into such harms and casualties as you specify. But if an
immediate extraordinary and absolute Power did always interpose for the safety
of the Creature, the efficacy of that Intellectual Contrivance of the Matter
into such Organs and Parts would be necessarily hid from our knowledge, and the
greatest pleasure of natural Philosophy come to nothing. Which is of more
concernment then the perpetual security of the Limbs of every Beast;
especially it happening so very seldom that any of them are either strained or
broken, unless it be long of us, and then Providence is acquitted.


Hyl. How long of us, Philotheus? For these mischances are incident to more
Creatures then we ride on, or make to draw at either Plough, Coach, or Cart.


Philoth. As for example, when one shoots at a flock of Pigeons or a flush of
Ducks, do you expect that Divine Providence should so guide the shot that it
should hit none but what it killed outright, and not send any away with a
broken leg? By the same reason neither should it be in our power to break the
leg of a Bird, if she were in our hands. And, which is of greater moment, the
Judge should be struck dumb so soon as he began to give Sentence against the
Innocent; the Sword should fall out of the hand of him that maintains an unjust
Quarrel; the lips of the Priest should be miraculously sealed up so soon as he
began to vent false Doctrines, and delude the people with Lies; and the
dangerous Physic of either an unskilful or villainous Physician should never
be able to find the way to the mouth of the credulous Patient. The sense of
which would be, That God should make man a free Creature, and yet violently
determine him to one part. Which would make useless the sundry Faculties of the
Soul, prevent the variety of Orders of men, silence these busy Actours on this
Stage of the Earth, and by this palpable Interposall, as it were, bring Christ
to Judgment before the time. Thus would the Ignorance and Impatience of the
unskilful raise the Theater before the Play be half done, the intricacy of the
Plot making the Spectacle tedious to them that understand it not. But let the
Atheist know there will be a (...), Christ coming in the Clouds, that shall
salve up all, whom he shall see at length to his own sorrow and confusion.


Philop. Excellently good indeed, Philotheus!


Hyl. And it is well it is so, Philopolis, for otherwise it were intoler^ble.
For he repeats but what he said before upon my first Objection. But (...).


Philop. I pray you, Philotheus, proceed.


Philoth. In the mean time God has not left us without excuse, having given us
the admirable works of Nature and the holy Oracles to exercise our Faith and
Reason. But so frequent and palpable Interpellations in humane affairs would
take away the Usefulness of both, and violently compel, not persuade, the free
Creature. And thus would our Intellectuals lose their most proper and pleasant
Game, the seeking out God by his footsteps in the Creation. For this were to
thrust himself upon us whether we would or no, not to give us the pleasure and
exercise of searching after him in the tracts of Nature; in which there is this
surprising Delight, that if we meet with any thing that seems less agreeable at
first sight, let us use the greatest wit we can to alter it, upon farther
trial we shall find that we have but made it worse by our tampering with it.
So that we always find that whatever Evil there is in the World, it is to be
charged upon the incapability of the Creature, not the envy or over-sig^t of
the Creator. For did things proceed from such a Principle as want^d either
Skill or Goodness, that were not God.


Hyl. That is acknowledged on both sides. XI.
But this is the thing we sweat at, of the Cruelty and Rapacity of Animals.
to make the Phaenome^a of the World correspond with so excellent a Principle.
Which, methinks, nothing does so harshly grate against as that Law of Cruelty
and Rapine, which God himself seems to have implanted in Nature amongst
ravenous Birds and Beasts. For things are there as he has made them, and it is
plain in the Talons, Beaks, Paws and Teeth of these Creatures, that they are
armed fittingly for that Tragical design. Besides that Commission that man
has over the lives of them all.


Cuph. I am heartily glad to see this puzzling Objection brought upon the
Stage; not that I would have the cause of Providence any way entangled or
prejudiced, but that there is so fit an opportunity of showing the unparalled
usefulness (in the greatest exigencies) of the peculiar Notions of that
stupendous Wit Descartes: amongst which that touching Brutes being mere
Machina's is very notorious.


Philop. So it is indeed, O Cuphophron.


Cuph. And the usefulness here as notorious. For it takes away all that
conceived hardship and misery that brute Creatures undergo, either by our rigid
Dominion over them, or by their fierce Cruelty one upon another. This new
Hypothesis sweeps away all these Difficulties at one stroke.


Hyl. This is a subtle invention indeed, Cuphophron, to exclude brute Creatures
always from Life, that they may never cease to live.


Cuph. You mistake me, Hylobares; I exclude them from life, that they may never
die with Pain.


Hyl. Why, few men but die so, Cuphophron, and yet scarce any man but thinks it
worth the while to have lived, though he must die at last in such
circumstances. And there not being that Reflexiveness nor so comprehensive and
presagient an Anxiety or present deep Resentment in Brutes in their suffering
as in rational Creatures, that short Pain they undergo when they are devoured
by one another cannot be considerable nor bear the thousandth proportion to
that Pleasure they have reaped in their life. So that it is above a thousand
times better that they should be animated with sensitive life, then be but mere
Machina's.


Philop. Truly, methinks Hylobares argues very demonstratively against you,
Cuphophron; and that therefore the Cartesian Hypothesis in this case is so far
from helping out any Difficulty in Divine Providence, that it were the greatest
Demonstration in the world against the Goodness thereof, if it were true;
namely, That such an infinite number of Animals, as we call them, capable of
being so truly, and of enjoying a vital happiness, should be made but mere
senseless Puppets, and devoid of all the joys and pleasure of life.


Hyl. I expect a better Answer from Philotheus, or else I shall be very much
left in the dark.


Philoth. My Answer in brief is this: That this is the Sport that the Divine
Wisdom affords the Contemplative in the speculation of her works, in that she
puzzles them at the first sight even to the making of her self suspected of
some Oversight, and that she has committed some offense against the sacred
nature of God, which is Goodness and Justice it self; which yet they afterward
more accurately scanning find most of all agreeable to that Rule. As certainly
it is here. For what is so just as that Aphorism of Pythagoras his School,
(...), that the worse is made for the better? And what so good wisdom, as to
contrive things for the highest enjoyment of all? For I say, as I said before,
That Divine Providence in the generations of Fishes, Birds and Beasts, cast up
in her account the Supernumeraries that were to be meat for the rest. And
Hylobares is to prove whether so many Individuals of them could come into the
World and continue so in succession, if they were not to be lessened by this
seeming cruel Law of feeding one upon another. And besides, we see sundry
Species of living Creatures this way the most pleasantly and transportingly
provided for. For how delightful a thing it is for them by their craft and
agility of body to become masters of their Prey, men that make to themselves a
fortune by their own wit, policy and valor, let them be Judges. Where
something of consequence is in chase, it makes the pleasure of the Game more
solid, fills the Faculties with more vigor and alacrity, and makes the Victory
more savoury and valuable. As running for a wager makes a man feel his limbs
with more courage and speed, and find himself more pleased that he has
overcome his Antagonist. Wherefore the Animal life in Beasts and Birds (and
they were never intended for any thing higher) is highly gratified by this
exercise of their strength and craft, and yet the Species of all things very
copiously preserved. But to complain that some certain numbers are to be lopped
off, which notwithstanding must at last die, and if they lived and propagated
without any such curb, would be a burden to the Earth and to themselves for
want of food, it is but the Cavil of our own Softness and ignorant Effeminacy,
no just charge against God or Nature. For the Divine Wisdom freely and
generously having provided for the whole, does not, as Man, dote on this or
that Particular, but willingly lets them go for a more solid and more Universal
good. And as for Beeves and Sheep, the more ordinary food of Man, how often is
the Countryman at a loss for Grass and Fodder for them? Judge then what this
foolish pity of ever sparing them would bring upon them. They would multiply so
fast, that they would die for famine and want of food.


Hyl. What you say, Philotheus, I must confess is not immaterial. But yet,
methinks, it looks very harshly and cruelly, that one living Creature should
fall upon another and slay him, when he has done him no wrong.


Philoth. Why, Hylobares, though I highly commend this good nature in you, yet
I must tell you it is the Idioticalness of your phancie that makes you thus
puzzled in this case. For you fancy Brutes as if they were Men: whenas they
have no other Law then the common Law of Nature, which is the Law of Self-love,
the cravings of which they will satisfy, whatever is incommodated thereby. As
the Fire will burn if it take hold, though to the consumption of a whole
Forest, notwithstanding the Wood never did the Fire any hurt, that it should
use it so: so every Animal would satisfy its own craving appetite, though it
were by the devouring of all the world beside. This every Sparrow, Titmouse or
Swallow would do. So that if you will indulge to that fancy, they are all
wicked alike; and therefore it need not seem so harsh that the Devourers are
also to be devoured. But it is the most true and Philosophical apprehension,
to impute no more wickedness to devouring Brutes then to swallowing Gulfs of
the Sea or devouring Fire.


Hyl. Why, XII.
Philotheus, that is the thing I was going to object in the next place; Of the
Rage of the Element^, the Poison of Serpents, and Wrath of wild Beasts.
I mean, as well the Rage of the Elements, as the Wrath of wild Beasts, and
several Monstrosities of Creatures that occurr, whether whole Species or single
Individuals. For do not these discover some malignancy in the Principles of the
World, inconsistent with so lovely and benign an Author as we seek after?


Euist. I can tell you an Hypothesis, Hylobares, that will sufficiently solve
this Objection, if you and I could close with it.


Hyl. I warrant you mean the Behmenicall, the corruption of the Divine
Sal-nitre by the Rebellion of Lucifer against his Maker. These things I admire
at a distance, Euistor, but, as you say, I have not an heart to close with
them. For I cannot believe that there is any might or counsel that can prevail
against God; or that he can overshoot himself so far, as to give the staff out
of his own hands in such a measure as is taught in that Hypothesis. Wherefore,
Philotheus, I desire a more credible account of these things from you.


Philoth. I shall offer you, Hylobares, a very easy and intelligible
Supposition.


Hyl. I pray you what is it, Philotheus? I long to hear it.


Philoth. Only this; That this Stage of the Earth and the comprehension of its
Atmosphere is one of the meanest, the least glorious and least happy Mansions
in the Creation; and that God may make one part of the Creation less noble then
another, nay it may be his Wisdom requires it should be so at length in
process of time; as the Art of Painting requires dark Colors as well as those
more bright and florid in well-drawn Pictures. Therefore I say the nature of
things, even of all of them, Sin only excepted, is but less good here, not
truly evil or malignant.


Hyl. How does that appear, Philotheus?


Philoth. It is manifest, for example, that there is no such malignant heat as
is supposed in Fire, but all is sound and sacred, if it be in due measure and
in right circumstances applied. For it is well known that the gentle and
comfortable Rays of the Sun may be so crowded together in one point by the
artifice of Glasses, that they will be so furiously hot as to melt hard
metalline bodies. And little question is to be made but that there are certain
particles, good store, in Nature, of a form long and flexible, that the
ordinary heat of the Sun raising into a Vapor, and he or some higher Principle
still more strongly agitating them, will cause mighty Winds and Tempests, and
these Tempests vehemently toss the Sea, and make it rage and roar. But that
Sea-voiages become dangerous by this means, is but the exercise of the wit and
observation of man, and has occasioned a more accurate Art of Navigation. And
if some Ships notwithstanding be cast away, it ever makes the Passenger that
has any Piety in him pay his Vows at Land with greater religion and devotion.
And for the Wrath of Beasts, it has nothing more diabolical in it then natural
Choler and the flames of Fire, which do no more hurt then the pure beams of the
Sun passing through a pure Glass, whose figure only makes them burn. But the
power of God indeed seems more barely set out in these fierce Beasts of prey,
such as the Lion, Bear, and Tiger, and is yet more terrible in huge scaled
Dragons and Serpents. But if these kind of Creatures bear any mischief or
poison in their teeth or tails or their whole body, that poison is nothing but
disproportionality of particles to the particles of our own or other Animals
bodies. And Nature has armed us with caution, flight and abhorrency from such
dreadful Spectacles. But we must not make our abhorrency the measure and true
estimate of others Natures. For those poisonous Creatures are not poisonous to
their own kind, and are so far from mutual abhorrency, that they are joined in
the nearest link of love that can be, whereby they propagate their Species.
Wherefore these Objects of so terrible an aspect are not evil in themselves,
but being capable of the delights of the Animal life as well as any other, and
being so egregiously direful to behold, as living Symbols of that Attribute of
Power unqualified with Goodness, they were rightly brought into Being in this
Region of Sin, as ready Instruments of Divine Wrath, notorious Ornaments of the
Theater of the World, and a great enrichment of the History of Nature, which
would be defective, did it not run from one extreme to another. For even
variety of sweet things cloy, and there is no remedy so good as the mixture of
sharp, bitter and sour.

And therefore those more sacred and congruous Laws of Nature are sometimes
violated by her own Prerogative, XIII.
as is manifest in the birth of Monsters; Of Monstrositi^s i^ Nature.
which I look upon as but a piece of Sportfulness in the order of things, as
when a well-favoured Boy makes a wry mouth out of wantonness, whereupon the
sudden composure of his countenance into its natural frame seems the more
lovely and amiable. But for these prodigious Deviations, they are not many. For
it is the rarity of them that invites the people to look after them. And it is
a plain argument they are well pleased with these novel Spectacles, they so
willingly parting with their moneys to have the sight of them. For these
diversities of Objects in the World variously touch the minds of men, playing
upon their several Affections and Faculties as a Musician on the sundry Keys
of an Organ or Virginals. And that Stop which is a Discord of it self, yet not
being too long stood upon, makes the succeeding Harmony more sweet. And so it
is in that which is uglily defective or misshapen, it quickens the sense of
that due Shape and Elegancy we see ordinarily in other things. But that there
are whole Nations absolutely monstrous or misshapen, such as the Cynocephali,
Acephali, Monoculi, Monocoli, and the like, it will be then time enough to
answer to that Difficulty, when the truth of the Story is cleared. The
probability of which I think Euistor is as able to judge of as most men, he
taking so special a felicity in reading of Histories.


Euist. That there are such monstrous Nations mentioned in History, O
Philotheus, it cannot be dissembled. But for the credibility of the Story or
pertinency to this Subject, that is not so clear. For in my apprehension
Historians do very much betray their vanity in the very circumstances of what
they relate. As in the Monocoli of Tartarie, which, they say, have but one Arm
as well as but one Leg; but they add, that they run so swift on that single
Hand and Foot, that no Horse can keep pace with them. Which if it were true,
what great charge could be laid against Nature for making so admirable and
useful a Fabric? There is also a People near California, called Enoticoeti,
which they say have long Ears that reach to the very ground, but withal so
large and thin and limber, that they hang like a Skarf behind or before them;
which they spread and lie in a-nights on the ground, (if any be so foolish as
to believe it:) from whence they are called Enoticoeti, as having their Ears
for Sheets to lie in. So that when they travel they may in utramque aurem
dormire, and be afraid of no contagion but what they carry with them.


Cuph. This is a pretty privilege, Euistor. But I would be very loath to be so
liable to be lugg'd by the Ears up and down as they are, for all their security
of wholesome Sheets.


Euist. For my part, I must confess, I look upon it as a very Fable; as I do
also upon those several Stories of the Monoculi. And Sr John Mandevill, to
outbid the mendacity of all his predecessors, thought it not enough to feign
Nations with one Eye in their heads only, but also such as had none at all,
but only two Holes like empty Sockets where the lights should be placed. But
to give you my conjecture, I think the first occasion of this fable of the
Monoculi was raised from the Scythian Arimaspi, which were famed to be such,
and indeed have their name from thence, as Eustathius notes upon Dionysius
Afer, (...).


Philop. What Is that, Euistor?


Euist. (...) in the Scythian language is as much as one, and (...) as much as
to say an Eye. So that Arimaspus signifies as much as one-ey'd. And Aeschylus
in the same Author calls them (...), the one-ey'd Army, as being
excellently-well-exercised Archers, and having by frequent winking on one eye
lessened it so much as in a manner to have lost the use of it. I believe there
is no more in it then this; and can hardly conclude with Eustathius, that in
process of time they begot Children quite deprived of one of their Eyes. But be
that how it will, that was no fail of Nature, but a fault of their own. But
surely from such slight hints as these might so many loud Lies be spread abroad
in the world. And when they had once brought it to one Eye, they might then
place it according to the easiness of their fancy, not on one side of the
Nose, but, as Pliny does those of the Arimaspi, Hist. Not. l. 7. c. 2.
in the midst of their forehead.

And as for the Acephali, they might be nothing but some strong hutchback'd
people, that having their Heads very low and their Shoulders high, men in
humor and derision might say that they had their Mouths in their Breasts and
their Eyes in their Shoulders. For men love to express themselves so as to
raise admiration.

And lastly, for the Cynocephali, it is a thing incredible, and betrays the
falseness by the circumstances of the Report. As that they understand one
another by Barking and Howling, and partly by Signs with their hands and
fingers; that they have long Tails like Dogs, and that they engender as Dogs
do, and that the humane way is by them, forsooth, accounted more shameful and
dishonest. I believe the truth of the existence of those Apes that are called
Cynocephali gave the first ground to this amplify'd Fable; ^ist. Not. l. 5. c.
15.
which you may see more enlarged in Eusebius Neirimbergius, but rejected even
by him as a vain Report.

And as the Cynocephali are but Brutes, so I conceive those terrible men with
Horns beyond Cathay, and those humane shapes with long Tails that straggle on
the mountainous parts of the Island Borneo, with other sportfull Variations and
Deviations from the usual Figure of Man, were but so many several kinds of
Satyrs, Monkeys and Baboons, that are of a middle nature betwixt Men and
Beasts, as the sundry sorts of Plant-animals are betwixt Beasts and Trees. And
as the perfectest of Plant-animals come very near an absolute Animal, as the
Boranetz not far from the Caspian Sea amongst the Tartars; so the perfectest of
Satyrs and Apes may very well come so near Mankind that they may be suspected
to be of humane Race. But that they can ever be improved to the accomplishment
of a Man, I think as little probable, as the turning of a Zoophyton into a
perfect Animal.


Philop. On my word, Hylobares, Euistor has laid about him more then ordinary
in this point.


Hyl. I must confess, Philopolis, that Euistor has spoke so probably touching
these Stories of humane Monstrosities, that I cannot have the face upon so
uncertain Reports to lay a charge against Providence, whose exactness is so
conspicuous in things of assured and certain knowledge. And therefore I would
now pass from this Classis of natural Evils, if that three more of this kind
(if I may call them all natural) did not forcibly detain me. For indeed they
are such as do more amuze me and dissettle me then any I have yet proposed.


Philoth. I pray, what are those, Hylobares?


Hyl. That sad Spectacle of natural Fools, XIV.
of Madmen, and of men from their very childhood irreclamably Wicked. Of
Fools, Madmen, and men irreclamably Wicked from their very birth.
I cannot devise how such Phenomenon as these can well comport with so benign a
Providence as you seem to plead for. To me, Philotheus, they are the most
dismal sights in the world.


Philoth. And, to deal ingenuously with you, Hylobares, there is nothing does
more contristate and melancholize my spirit then any reflections upon such
Objects. But yet I cannot conclude but that God may be exactly Good and Just in
his dealings with men for all this. For we must consider that Mankind by their
Fall are lapsed into a parallel condition with that of Beasts in a manner, and,
by their being invested with these terrestrial Induments, do put themselves
into all those hazards that the Brutal life is obnoxious to, that is to say,
not only the Diseases of the Body, but the Maladies also of those better
Faculties of Perception and Imagination, of natural Wit and Sagacity, and of
natural Humor and Disposition. The distemper of any of these seizes the Soul,
if it meet with so ill a fitted Body. For we see that some Beasts are
egregiously more sottish and slow then others of their own kind, and more
mischievous and unmanageable, as is observable in Dogs and Horses. And several
Brutes are capable of becoming mad. These mischiefs follow this terrestrial
Fate of things, which none can be secure from but those that inhabit not in
these houses of clay. And who knows but he that is born a natural Fool, if he
had had natural Wit, would have become an arrant Knave? which is an hundred
times worse. And to have been in a capacity of being good, and yet to range out
into all manner of Wickedness, is more horrible then to have ever had a
senselesness of what is pious and virtuous uninterruptedly from the very birth.
And as for Madmen, it is notoriously known that the greatest cause is
ordinarily Immorality, Pride, the want of Faith in God, or inordinate love of
some outward Object. But no Madness but that which is purely a Disease is to be
charged upon Providence: for which there is the like Apologi^ as for other
Diseases; which if we should admit they did not always good to the afflicted,
yet it cannot be denied but that they do very naturally tend to the bettering
of the Spectatours, as this sad Object of Madness ought to do; to make men
humble and modest, and masters of their Passions, and studious of purification
of Soul and Body, and close adherers to the Deity, that so horrid a distemper
may never be able to seize them; to keep down the ferocity of Desire, and to be
wholly resigned to the Will of God in all things, and not to seek a man's self
no more then if he were not at all; not to love the Praise of men, nor the
Pride of the world, nor the Pleasures of life, but to make it his entire
pleasure to be of one Will with his Maker, nor to covet any thing but the
accomplishment of his will in all things.


Hyl. This Divine Madness, you will say, Philotheus, will extinguish all
natural Madness, as the pure light of the Sun does any course terrestrial Fire.


Philoth. This Divine Sobriety, Hylobares, will keep our animal spirits safe
and sober.


Bath. I conceive, Philotheus, that Hylobares may not call that excellent state
of the Soul a Divine Madness out of any reproach to it, but for the
significancy of the expression. For Madness is nothing else but an
Ecstaticalness of the Soul, or an Emotion of the Mind, so that a man is said
not to be himself, or to be beside himself. The misery of which in natural
Madness is, that he being thus unhindged, he roves and is flung off at random
whither it happens, or locked into some extravagant fancy or humor that is to
no purpose, or else to ill purpose. But Divine Madness is, when a man by
studiously and devotionally quitting himself and his own animal desires through
an entire purification of his spirit, being thus loosened from himself, is laid
fast hold on by the Spirit of God, who guides this faithful and well-fitted
Instrument, not according to the ignorant or vicious modes of the World, but
his motions keep time to that Music which is truly holy, Seraphicall and
Divine, I mean, to the measures of sound Reason and pure Intellect.


Hyl. I meant no worse, Bathynous, then you intimate; but you have apologized
more floridly and Rhetorically for me then I could have done for my self. And
therefore this rub being removed, I beseech you, Philotheus, proceed in your
well-begun Apology touching those Difficulties in Providence which I last
propounded.


Philoth. I will add therefore these two considerations. First, That this Life
is short, and that no more is required of these ill-appointed persons for
Wisdom and Virtue then proportionally to the Talent committed to them. So that
their danger is diminished according to the lessening of the measure of their
Capacities. Secondly, That it is our Phancie rather then our Reason that makes
us imagine these Objects so much more sad and deplorable, then what we see in
the ordinary sort of men. For, as I was intimating before, which of these two
is the more deplorable state, to be a Fool by Fate or upon choice? And are not
all things Toies and Fools-baubles and the pleasures of Children or Beasts,
excepting what is truly Moral and Intellectual? And how few, I pray you,
amongst many thousands do seriously spend their studies in any thing weightily
Moral or Intellectual, but fiddle away their time as idly as those tha^ pill
Straws or tie knots on Rushes in a fit of Deliration or Lunacy? The Wits of
this Age contend very much for this Paradox, That there is no other Happiness
then Content; but it is the Happiness of natural Fools, to find their Content
more easily and certainly then these very Wits. And there is in this case much
the same reason of Madmen as of Fools. And what is the gaudiness of Fools
Coats but the gallantry of these Wits, though not altogether so authentickly in
fashion? Besides, this may excuse Providence something, that the generality of
men do usually flock after Fools and Madmen, and show themselves delighted
with the Object.


Bath. They are pleased, it may be, to see some more mad and sottish then
themselves, and so congratulate to themselves the advantage and preeminency, as
they fancy, of their own condition.


Hyl. It may be they approach to them as to alluring Looking-glasses, wherein
they may so lively discern their own Visages.


Philoth. You may have spoken more truly in that, Hylobares, then you are aware
of, saving that generally men are more foolish and mad then these
Looking-glasses can represent them. Nihil tam absurd dici potest quod non
dicatur ab aliquo Philosophorum, is a saying of Cicero. And if the Philosophers
themselves be such fools, what are the Plebeians? Could ever any thing more
sottish or extravagant fall into the mind of either natural Fool or Madman,
then, That the eternal God is of a corporeal nature and shape; That the World
and all the parts of it, the organized Bodies of men and beasts not excepted,
are the result of a blind Iumble of mere Matter and Motion without any other
guide? What more phrantick then the figment of Transubstantiation, and of
infallible Lust, Ambition, and Covetousness? Or what more outrageous specimen
of Madness, then the killing and slaying for the Non-belief of such things? A
man is accounted a natural Fool for preferring his Bauble before a bag of Gold;
but is not he a thousand times more foolish that preferrs a bag of Gold, a puff
of Honor, a fit of transient Pleasure, before the everlasting Riches, Glory
and Joys of the Kingdom of Heaven? No man wonders that a Madman unadvisedly
kills another; and if he did it advisedly and of set purpose, yet it being
causelessly and disadvantageously to himself, he is reputed no less mad. How
notoriously mad then are those that, to their own eternal damnation,
depopulate Countries, sack Cities, subvert Kingdoms, and not only martyr the
bodies of the pious and righteous, but murder the Souls of others, whom by
fraud or violence they pollute with Idolatrous and impious practices; and all
this for that gaudy Bauble of Ambition, and a high Conceit of one Universal
Spiritual Monarch, that ought to wallow in Wealth, and tumble in all the
fleshly and sensual Delights of this present World? Wherefore, to speak my
judgment freely, Hylobares, seeing that there would be such abundance of men
mad and foolish and wicked according to the ordinary guize of the world, it
does not misbeseem the Goodness of Providence to anticipate this growing
degeneracy in some few, by making them Fools and Madmen as it were by birth or
fate: that Folly and Madness being represented to the sons of men in a more
unusual disguise, by hooting at it, they may do that piece of justice as to
reproach themselves thereby, who are upon their own cost and charges more
reprehensibly wicked then they that never came within any capacity of being
virtuous, (if there be any such) and more outrageously mad and abominably
sottish in the eyes of him that can judge rightly, then any natural Fool or
Bedlam; or rather, that using that seasonable reflection which Plato somewhere
commends upon the consideration of the ill carriage of others, (...), they may
find by such analogies as I have hinted at, that they are far worse Fools and
Madmen then are hooted at in the Streets, and so for very shame amend their
lives, and become truly wise and virtuous. For what can be more effectual for
the raising an horror and detestation of what is ugly and dishonest in our
selves, then the reflection, that what we so abhor in others is more in our
selves both as to degrees and other circumstances; and that whereas others may
seem an Object of pity, our selves deserve the highest reproof and scorn?

So that you see, XV.
Hylobares, The best Use to be made of the saddest Seen of the things of this
World.
that even in these pieces of Providence that seem most forlorn, most dark and
desperate, a very comfortable account of the Divine Goodness does unexpectedly
emerge and shine forth. Which would still clear up into a more full
satisfaction, the more leisure and ability we had to search into things. But if
you cannot keep your Eye from being fixed on the black side of Providence
rather then on the bright side thereof, and must ruminate on the particular
Evils of Plagues and Pestilences, of War and Famine, of devouring Earthquakes,
of that cruel and savage custom of both Birds, Beasts and Fishes, in preying
and feeding one upon another, which is a shadow of the most outrageous Violence
and Iniquity imaginable; if you will melancholize your Phancie with the
remembrance of the groans of the maimed and sick, the dread of ravenous Beasts
and poisonous Serpents, the destroying Rage of the Elements, the outrageousness
of the Distracted, and the forlornness and desolateness of that forsaken
Habitacle, the Body of a natural Fool, (whom therefore we most usually call a
mere Body;) this consideration also has its grand use, and it is fit that so
sunk a condition of mankind as this terrestrial life is should be charged
with such a competency of Tragical Fatalities as to make the considerate
seriously to bethink himself of a better state, and recount with himself if he
be not, as they say, in a wrong box, if he be not strayed from his native
Country, and therefore, as the Platonists exhort, (...), if he ought not
seriously to meditate a return, and to die betimes to this World, that Death at
last striking off the Fetters of this mortal Body, the Soul may emerge far
above the steam of this Region of Misery and Sin. O praeclarum diem, cum ad
divinum illud Animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, cumque ex hac turba ac
colluvione discedam!


Euist. It is part of that excellent Speech of Cato to Scipio and Laelius. What
say you now, Hylobares, to Philotheus his assoiling these your last and most
puzzling and confounding Difficulties about natural Evils?


Hyl. I say Philotheus discourses excellently well, XVI.
Euistor, How the Entrance of Si^ i^to the ^orld can consist with the Goodness
of Pro^ide^ce.
and beyond my expectation. And I cannot deny but that there being such a
Lapsed state of mankind, that Providence upon this supposition does manage
things to the best even in those Phenomenon we call natural Evils; and that the
frame of things, taking them in their full comprehension, could scarce be
better, so far as my understanding reaches, then it is. But the greatest
Difficulty of all remains touching this sinful Lapse, (which is the second
Head of Evils I had in my thoughts to propose to Philotheus) That Providence
should ever suffer so abominable, so diabolical and destructive a thing as Sin
ever to appear on this Stage of the Universe: a thing that has brought in such
a Tragical train of Miseries upon us, and is in it self so detestable and
hateful both to God and man. I know not how to make sense of these things.


Cuph. I am even glad at heart to see Hylobares so much puzzled with this
Difficulty, it giving me the opportunity, with Philotheus his leave, to raise
him into as high a pleasure by the agreeableness and perspicuity of the
Solution. And, methinks, I find upon me a very great impetus of spirit to do
him this friendly office.


Philoth. I pray you proceed then, Cuphophron; I hope your success will be the
better.


Cuph. That I shall do right willingly: For I hold it a matter of great
importance, that mankind have a right understanding of one another's actions
and manners, and that they be not over-harshly censorious, and think every
thing Infernal and Diabolical that is not in so high a degree Good as the
rest. For my purpose is, O Philopolis, to clear unto the world such Principles
as may sweeten the Passions of men, or excite in them only the sweet Passions,
and take off all Anger, Hatred, and Indignation against their mutual
carriages; that seeing so little hurt done or meant, they may live quietly and
neighbourly one with another.


Philop. That is an excellent Plot, O Cuphophron, and very advantageous to as
many of us Justices of Peace as desire to get as much time as we can to bestow
upon the more profitable parts of Philosophy. But I would rightly understand
this Plot of yours.


Cuph. I perceive Hylobares (which is a symptom of his great sense of Virtue)
looks upon that which we ordinarily call Sin or Wickedness to have such an
essential and infernal Poison and hellish Perverseness in it, so abominable and
detestable, and so contrary and repugnant to the nature of God, that it seems a
Contradiction that they should both coexist in the world together, but that the
wrath of the Almighty ought to have thunderstruck or stifled so horrid a
Monster in the very birth, not only by reason of those natural Evils it
unavoidably brings upon mankind, but even for its own diabolical Vgliness and
Detestableness. But for my part, Gentlemen, I commend his zeal more then his
judgment, in his adhering to so groundless an imagination.


Sophr. I wish, Cuphophron, you beginning so daringly, that your judgment do
not prove as little as your zeal. You are such an extoller of the sweet
Passions, and so professed an enemy to those more grim and severe ones, that I
fear, to bid adieu to them for the milder repose of our minds, you would
persuade us to shake hands and be friends with Sin it self.


Cuph. You know not what I would, Sophron, nor I scarce my self; but something
I am very big of, and desire your Assistence or Patience in my delivering of my
self of it.


Hyl. I pray you let it be neatly then, and a cleanly conveiance, O Cuphophron.


Cuph. It shall be very dry and clean. XVII.
For it shall be only a disquisition touching the mere nature of Sin and
Wickedness, Cuphophron's Lunatic Apologic whereby he would extenuate the
^ainous^^ss of Si^.
in what it consists: Whence we shall make the duest estimate of the Poison of
its condition. And I wish my breath may be as grateful and agreeable to your
ears, as this fresh Evening-aire, wafted through the sides of my Arbor, and
steeped in the cooling beams of the moist Moon, (whose strained light through
the shadow of the Leaves begins to cast a tremulous Chequer-work on the Table,
our Clothes and Faces) is delightful and comfortable to my heated Temples.


Philop. It begins indeed to be late of the Night, Cuphophron, but it is not
the less pleasant to continue our discourse in this checkered Moonshine,
especially you having thus raised our expectations. Wherefore I pray you
proceed.


Cuph. In my judgment no man has so luckily pointed at the true nature of
Wickedness as Mercurius Trismegistus, in that short saying, (...), That
Wickedness is connate or natural to Beasts. Which yet I am so far from
believing in that sense the words sound in, that I hold it incompetible to
them. But rather, as that mirror of Wisdom, Moses, has defined in his Law,
when the Leprosy is all over a man, no part untainted, that he is to be
reputed as clean; so Brutes, who are constituted only of Sense and the Animal
Affections, without any participation of an higher Principle, they are
incapable of Sin. And if there were any Rational Animals, be they in what shape
they will, from the sight of whose minds that higher Principle was ever
excluded fatally and naturally, they would be as the Mosaicall Leper, or rather
as an ordinary Brute, devoid both of Sin and Conscience, relishing only the
Laws of the Animal Life: wherein when we have considered how much there is of
the Divine Wisdom and Goodness that contrived them, we shall not have so
venomous a conceit concerning the Creation of God, or be cast upon Manicheism
or Gnosticism, phansying the sign of the Devil's paw, or senting the Sulphur of
Hell in every thing as strongly as the Bishop's foot in milk burnt to the
Skillet bottom.

Nay, I may say that those mysterious depths of Satan which the Theosophers so
diligently discover, such as are Ipseity, Egoity, or Selfishness, it is nothing
else but that sovereign or radical Principle in the Animal life, which is
Self-love. Of which if there be no necessity in Nature that it should be, (as
indeed we see sometimes the Affections of Creatures to be carried out so to
others that they forget themselves) yet it was fit for Divine Providence to
settle this Principle in them all, That every thing should love it self very
heartily and provide for it self; as the Roots of Trees without all scruple
draw to themselves all the nourishment they are capable of, not regarding what
Tree withers, so they flourish, in which notwithstanding there is nothing of
either Devil or Sin.

But now that Providence did very well in implanting so smart a Self-love in
every Animal, is manifest. For those more notable Functions of the Animal life,
such as depend on Strength and Agility, Craft and Sagacity, could not be
exercised to any considerable degree without this Principle. A Crow would not
have the heart to pick at a Worm, nor a Swallow to snatch at a Fly. And there
is the same reason for those more notable and industrious Insidiations of other
stronger and more crafty Creatures that hunt after their prey. Besides, every
Animal in respect of it self has in some sense or measure a resemblance of that
Divine Attribute of Omnipresence; for be it where it will, it cannot leave it
self behind. Wherefore it is fit it should be endued with this great Love and
care of it self, being in a more constant readiness to pleasure, help and
provide for it self then for another. Lastly, it is a thing unimaginable,
unless Brutes were indu'd with intellectual Faculties, (and then they would be
no longer Brutes) that they should be able to have so free and reflexive
Cogitations as to seek the emprovement and live in the sense of the public
good. And if their thoughts and phancies were always taken up or gadding after
the welfare of others, the height of life and joy in every one would much be
diminished and obscured. For Fancy is far weaker then the present sense of the
body: And if you would have it any thing strong, how calamitous must the lives
of these Animals be, who must die, must be maimed and suffer mischief, as often
as any of their Fellow-animals suffer any of these things? Wherefore it is
better for the whole generations of brute Animals, that every one love and
regard it self, then that they be all distracted and tortured with ineffectual
thoughts concerning the welfare of others. We see therefore, O Philopolis, the
Wisdom and Benignity of Providence, that has so firmly engrafted this
Principle of Self-love, the root of undisturbed Joy and of Self-preservation,
in the Animal life. From whence is also in Animals that eminent love of their
young, and their kindness and tameness to them that feed them. And for those
Passions in Animals that look more grimly and infernally on it, or at least seem
to have a more nauseous and abominable aspect, as Wrath, Envy, Pride, Lust, and
the like, they are but the branches or modifications of this one primitive and
fundamental Passion, Self-love. For what is Wrath, but Self-love edged and
strengthened for the fending off the assaults of evil? What Envy, but Self-love
grieved at the sense of its own Want, discovered and aggravated by the fullness
of another's enjoyment? What Pride, but Self-love partly desiring to be the
best or to be approved for the best, and partly triumphing and glorying that it
is now become none of the meanest? And, lastly, what is Lust, but Self-love
seeking its own high delight and satisfaction in the use of Venery?

These are the main misshapen Spawn of that monstrous Fiend, that
deeply-couched Dragon of Hell, Self-love; which if we eye more accurately, we
shall find as necessary and useful in the Animal Life as the Mother that bears
them. For as for Wrath, and also Craft, (which I forgot to mention before) it
is plain they are as unblameable in Beasts as Prudence and Valor in men. And
for Pride and Gloriation, it is but a natural Spur to quicken their Animal
Powers, or but the overflowing of that tickling sense they have of those
perfections Nature has bestowed upon them; and shows how mightily well-pleased
they are with them, and what thankful witnesses they are of that Goodness and
Wisdom that framed them. And for Lust, who dare blame it in the brute
Creature, there being distinction of Sexes, fitness of Organs, and sufficiency
of Spirits prepared by the Divine Wisdom in Nature for it? Besides that it is
one of the most important Acts, as well as accompanied with the greatest and
most enravishing Joy that the Animal Life will afford. A matter of that
consequence, that the Generations of living Creatures would cease to be without
it; and the Sun and Moon be constrained once again to shine on an empty Earth;
and the shadows of the Trees to shelter nothing but either the Trees
themselves, or the neighboring Herbs and Flowers. That which looks most like a
Fury of all this litter is Envy; which as bad as it is, yet methinks Aristotle
slanders it, whiles he would make it such a Passion as was not raised from the
sense of our own Want, but merely out of the sense of another's good, without
reference to our selves; which for my part I look upon to be such a Monster as
I suspect is scarce to be found in the Regions of Hell.


Philop. That Is a mavelous charitable conceit of yours, Cuphophron.


Cuph. But that Envy that is, O Philopolis, is a genuine result of the Animal
Life, and more usually in a passive melancholic Spirit, and is a Grief arising
from the sense of our Want discovered, as I said, and set off more stingingly
to us by the more flush and full representations of another's Happiness. But
that there should be any more wickedness in Grief then in Joy, or in Pain then
in Pleasure, is a thing my understanding cannot reach to. For then Repentance
it self would be a Sin.


Sophr. It Is well you pass so favorable a censure on those more sour Passions,
O Cuphophron; I thought you had been only for the sweet Affections.


Cuph. It is in virtue of the sweet Affections, O Sophron, that I speak so
favorably of the sour. But to tell you the truth, I had rather give them good
words at a distance, then to receive them into my house, or entertain any more
inward familiarity with them. To my peculiar temper they are but harsh Guests.


Sophr. I have but interrupted you, Cuphophron, I pray you go on.


Cuph. Wherefore we conclude that no branch of the Animal Life is simply
sinful, poisonous or diabolical, they being really the Contrivances of the
good and wise God in the frame of Nature, or else the necessary sequels of such
Contrivances. And that therefore those men that are so strongly enveagled in
the Pleasures and allurements of this lower life are rather lapsed into that
which is less good, then detained in that which is absolutely evil. And it is
but a perpetual gullery and mistake, while they are so hugely taken with so
small matters, they being in the condition, as I may so say, of Children and
Fools, of whom it is observed, That a small thing will please them: though it
be a doubt whether these things be so small and contemptible, if that be true
that the Divinest of Philosophers have asserted, That the whole World and the
parts thereof are but so many Symbols and Sacraments of the Deity; every thing
being either (...), some more perfect image, or at least some picture, shadow,
or footstep of the Divinity. Upon which if our eyes be stayed and our
Affections entangled, as it is a real testimony of our approvement of the
excellency of the Archetype, so are we in some meaner sort religious, we
adoring thus and doting upon these congruous Gratifications we receive from
these particular Shadows of that perfect Good, until we are called up to an
higher participation of him. But that even those that seem to fly from God
seek after him in some sort, is apparently necessary, there being nothing but
Himself, or what is from Him, in the World: otherwise he could not be that
absolutely-perfect Good, whose Goodness, Wisdom and Power fills all things.
And I think there is no perceptive Being in the whole Universe so estranged
from its Original, but it is either courting or enjoying these or some of these
Attributes in some rank and measure or other, they ever trying and proving what
they can do in matters of either Pleasure, Wit, or Dominion. And the sincere
and undistracted fruition of any one part of any of these has so mightily taken
up the minds of some men in complexion fitly framed for such delights, that
they have sacrificed even their Lives, Liberties and Fortunes, to these
slighter glimpses of the great Godhead, whom they thus unwittingly and
unskilfully seek to adore, and so become in a sort religious Martyrs for a
part, which they that make profession of their love and honor of the entire
Deity seldom are persuaded to undergo.

Now since it is something of God that the minds of all Spirits (even of those
that seem to be in actual Rebellion against him) are set after, it is a very
hard thing to find out how he should look upon himself as disesteemed, whenas
all the Creatures are mad after something or other of His, most religiously
prizing it even above their own Beings. For it is only their ridiculous
mistake to cleave to that which is of less worth and moment, and therefore
deserves laughter and pity more then fury and revenge. Not to add what a
childish and idiotick conceit it is, to fancy God in the similitude of some
Aged tetricall person, impatient of and obnoxious to Affronts and Injuries;
when neither any can be really done him, nor any is intended against him; but
men out of a debasing Modesty or Laziness of spirit take up with smaller good
things, when they may be more welcome to greater. Which Solution as it may well
satisfy Hylobares touching his Querie, why God Almighty did not at the first
appearance of Sin straightway with sulphurous Thunderbolts strike it dead upon
the spot; so it may be also an excellent Antidote against the rage of the more
grim and severe Passions, mitigate the harshnesses of several Disgusts in
humane life, and generally sweeten the Conversation of men one with another.


Hyl. Sweet Cuphophron and mellifluous, XVIII.
young Nestor in Eloquence, that have conceived such raised Notions from the
wafts of the Evening-air and the chequered Moonshine, A solid Answer to the
foregoing Apology, though ushered in with somethi^g a ludicrous Preamble.
whose Tongue is thus bedewed with bewitching Speech from the roscid Lips and
nectarine Kisses of thy silver-faced Cynthia! But do thou think thus to drown
our sense of solid Reason by the rapid stream or torrent of thy turgid
Eloquence? No, Cuphophron, no: one touch of right Reason will so prick the
tumor of thy Brain thus blown up by the percribrated influence of thy moist
Mistress, the Moon, that these Notions that look now so fair and plump, shall
appear as lank and scrannell as a Calf that sucks his Dam through an hurdle;
and all thy pretenses to right Ratiocination shall be discovered as vain and
frivolous as the idlest Dream of Endymion.


Sophr. In the name of God, what do you mean, Hylobares, to answer so
phantastically in so serious a cause?


Hyl. Did not he begin thus, O Sophron? I only answer my fantastic Friend
according to his own Phantastry. Which yet you may observe I have done very
hobblingly, it being out of my rode. But yet the sense is very serious and in
earnest, viz. That it is a kind of Lunacy, not Reason, that reigns thus
turgidly in Cuphophron's copious Harangue; that is, in brief, He seems in this
Rapture, be it from what influence it will, to be wittily and eloque^tly ^ad.


Sophr. Nay, if you mean no otherwise then so, it is well enough; but it
beginning to be late, it had been better expressed in shorter terms. And I pray
you, Hylobares, since you think Cuphophron mad, make him sober by discovering
to him his Deliration.


Hyl. I hope I shall very briefly discover it to the rest, but I know not how
far he may be in love with his own Lunacy. That there is no Poison or harm in
any of the Animal Functions or Passions, I easily grant him, and it may be the
least in the sweetest. For I was before convinced by Philotheus that there is
nothing substantially evil in the World. But it is immensely manifest, that
those things that are good in themselves, yet by misapplication or
disproportion may cause that which is unsufferably naught. As in a Musical
Instrument whose Strings are good and the Stick good, yet if they be touched
upon when they are out of tune, what more harsh and intolerable? And so may the
exercise of the Animal Functions or Passions, though good in themselves, yet if
they be either set too high, or exercised upon undue Objects or in unfitting
circumstances, become very nauseously evil. To spit is one of the Animal
Functions, good and useful in it self, and to spit into the mouth of a Dog and
clap him on the back for encouragement, is not indecorous for the man, and
grateful also to the Dog: But if any one had gone about to spit into
Cuphophron's mouth, and clap him on the back to encourage him in that rapturous
Oration he made, he would have thought it an intolerable absurd thing, and by
no means to be suffered.


Cuph. Why, so far as I see, Hylobares, that was needless; you making as if
Dame Cynthia, alias Diana, had spit into my mouth already, and clapped me on the
back, as one of her Hunting-dogs, and so put me into this loose Rhetorical
career.


Hyl. Something like it, Cuphophron, it may be. But now you are out of this
career, how do you like this Instance of the exercise of the Animal Functions,
That men and women should stale and dung (like Mares and Horses in a Stable) in
any room or company they came into? It is something a course Question,
Cuphophron, but very substantially to our purpose.


Cuph. That Is stinkingly naught, Hylobares.


Hyl. But they then but exercise their Animal Functions. And were that quicker
sense revived in us whereby we discern Moral good and evil; Adultery,
Drunkenness, Murder, Fraud, Extortion, Perfidiousness, and the like, all these
would have infinitely a worse Sent to our Souls, then this which you say is so
stinkingly evil can have to our Noses. And yet in all these things there is
nothing but an undue Use of the Animal Faculties. And forasmuch as Order and
Proportion and the right Congruity of things are those things in the world
which are the most Intellectual and Divine, the confounding and opposing of
these must be the greatest Opposition and Contradiction that can be made or
devised against the Divine Intellect or Eternal Godhead. For although the
Faculties of the Soul of man be but gradually differenced as to Goodness, that
is to say, that some of them are better then other some, others only less
good: yet the Incongruity and Disproportionateness of the Use of them are
diametrically opposite to the Congruity and Proportionateness of their Use, and
have the greatest Contrariety that can be betwixt Good and Evil; and are really
such, the one good, the other evil, not a less good only.


Sophr. Excellently well argued, Hylobares I and it was as seasonably intimated
at first, That there is a sense in a man, if it were awakened, to which these
moral inc^ngruities are as harsh and displeasing as any incongruous Object, be
it never so nauseous, is to the outward Senses. But a mere Notional or
Imaginary Apprehension or Conception of these Moral Congruities and
Incongruities does not reach that due Antipathy we ought to have against Sin
and Wickedness: whereby also we do more lively understand how contrary and
repugnant they are to the Will of God. But besides this fallacy in general,
Hylobares, there were several particular Passages, in my mind, very rash and
unsound; but especially that, which makes our inordinate Adhesion to some parts
of the Creation a Religious Worship or Service of God.


Bath. There may be some show of wit in such like conceits and expressions; but
undoubtedly, O Sophron, such exorbitant Adhesions to the Creature is so far
from being the due Worship of God, that it is downright Idolatry. For neither
the whole Creature nor part is God himself. And therefore to love them more
highly and affect them more devoutly then the pure Godhead, that is to say, to
love them most of all, is to do that honor to them which is only due to God.
Which is to play the Idolater.


Sophr. That is very true, Bathynous, and the same that the Apostle glances at,
when he calls Covetousness Idolatry.


Bath. That also, O Sophron, is very perversely and un-Platonically done of
Cuphophron, that, whereas the Platonists from that Notion of things having some
Similitude or at least some Shadow of the Divinity in them, would draw men off
from the doting on these meaner Objects, that they might approach nearer the
pure and essential Fountain of these more minute Delights, and enjoy them there
more fully and beatifically; he by a strange rapturous Rhetoric and perverted
Ratiocination would charm them in the present enjoyment of these smaller
perfections, and fix them down to that, which ought only to be a Footstool to
stand upon to reach higher.


Philop. Gentlemen, although the wit and eloquence of Cuphophron's Harangue is
indeed notable, and your opposing so diligently the ill Consequences of his
Enthusiastic Rhetoric very commendable: yet I must crave leave to profess,
that I take his Sophistry to be so conspicuous, that I think it not needful
for any body more operosely to confute it. I believe it was only a sudden
Rapture, a blast that came with this Evening-Aire, and will be blown over again
with the Morning-winde, and this influence of the Moon dried quite up by the
greater heat and warmth of the next meridian Sun.


Cuph. Indeed, Philopolis, it was a very sweet waft, and smelt wonderful
odoriferously of the Eglantines and Honey-suckles. But if it be not so
salutiferous, I wholly submit it to your severer judgments.


Hyl. In the mean time I am quite at a loss for satisfaction touching the
weightiest Difficulty I have yet propounded, XIX.
viz. A more sober Enquiry into that Difficulty, How the Permission of Sin in
the World can consist with the Goodness of God.
How it can be consistent with the Nature of God, who is Goodness it self, to
permit Sin in the World, if it be so real an Evil, and not only a less good,
as Cuphophron's inspired Muse, like a bird of Athens, has so loudly sung to us
this Moonshine night.


Philop. I pray you, Hylobares, make your address to Philotheus: you know how
successful he has been hitherto.


Philoth. If that would quiet your mind, Hylobares, I could indulge to you so
far as to give you leave to think that, although Sin be in it self absolutely
evil, (as being an Incongruity or Disproportionality only betwixt Things, not
the things themselves, for all things are good in their degree) yet the
Motions, Ends or Objects of sinful Actions are at least some lesser good:
which I charitably conceive may be all that Cuphophron aimed at in that
Enthusiastic Hurricane he was carried away with, and all that he will stand to
upon more deliberate thoughts with himself.


Cuph. Yes, I believe it will be thereabout to morrow morning, after I have
slept upon it. And I return you many thanks, Philotheus, for your candid
Interpretation.


Philoth. But methinks the Question is in a manner as nice, Why God should
suffer any Creature to choose the less good for the greater, as permit him to
sin. For this seems not according to the exactness of a perfectly-benign
Providence.


Hyl. You say right, Philotheus; and therefore if you could but clear that
Point, I believe it will go far for the clearing all.


Philoth. Why, this Scruple, Hylobares, concerning the Souls of men, is
much-what the same (if not something easier) with that concerning the Bodies of
both men and beasts. For the Omnipotency of God could keep them from diseases
and death it self, if need were. Why therefore are they subject to Diseases,
but that the Wisdom of God in the contrivance of their Bodies will act only
according to the capacity of corporeal matter; and that he intends the World
should be an Automaton, a self-moving Machina or Engine, that he will not
perpetually tamper with by his absolute power, but leave things to run on
according to that course which he has put in Nature? For it is also the
perfection of his Work to be in some sort like its Artificer, independent;
which is a greater Specimen of his Wisdom.


Hyl. But you should also show that his Goodness was not excluded the
Consultation, XX.
O Philotheus. The first Attempt of satisfying the Difficulty, from that
Stoicall Position of the invincible Freedom of Man's Will.



Philoth. No more is it, so far as there is a Capacity of its coming in, for
any thing that humane reason can assure it self to the contrary. For let me
first puzzle you, Hylobares, with that Position of the Stoics, That the mind
of Man is as free as Jupiter himself, as they rant it in their language, and
that he cannot compel our Will to any thing, but whatever we take to must be
from our own free Principle, nothing being able to deal with us without our
selves: As a man that is fallen into a deep Ditch, if he will not so much as
give his fellow his hand, he cannot pull him out. Nor may this seem more
incongruous or inconsistent with the Omnipotency of God, then that he cannot
make a Square whose Diagonial is commensurate to the Side, or a finite Body
that has no figure at all. For these are either the very Essence or the
ess^ntial Consequences of the things spoken of, and it implies a contradiction
they should exist without them. So we will for dispute sake affirm, that
Liberty of Will is an essential Property of the Soul of Man, and can no more be
taken from her, then the proper Affections of a Geometrical Figure from the
Figure; unless she once determine, or entangle her self in Fate, which she
cannot do but of her self, or else fix herself above Fate, and fully
incorporate with the simple Good. For, to speak Pythagorically, the Spirits of
men and of all the fallen Angels are as an Isosceles betwixt the Isopleuron and
Scalenum, not so ordinate a Figure as the one, nor so inordinate as the other;
so these Spiri^s of men and Angels are a middle betwixt the more pure and
Intellectual Spirits incapable of falling from, and the Souls of Beasts
incapable of rising to the participation of Divine Happiness. Wherefore if you
take away this vertible Principle in Man, you would make him therewithal of
another Species, either a perfect Beast, or a pure Intellect.


Hyl. This Opinion of the Stoics is worth our farther considering of. But in
the mean time why might not Man have been made a pure Intelligence at first?


Philoth. Why should he so, Hyloares, since the Creation of this middle Order
makes the numbers of the pure Intellectual Orders never the fewer? Not to add,
that your demand is as absurd as if you should ask why every Fly is not made a
Swallow, every Swallow an Eagle, and every Eagle an Angel, because an Angel is
better then any of the other Creatures I named. There is a gradual descension
of the Divine Fecunditie in the Creation of the World.


Hyl. This is notable, Philotheus, and unexpected. But were it not better that
God Almighty should annihilate the Individuals of this middle vertible Order,
as you call it, so soon as they lapse into Sin, then let such an ugly Deformity
emerge in the Creation?


Philoth. This is a weighty Question, Hylobares; but yet such as, I hope, we
both may ease our selves of, if we consider how unbecoming it would be to the
Wisdom of God to be so over-shot in the Contrivance of the Creation, as that
he must be ever and anon enforced to annihilate some part of it, as being at a
loss what else to do, and if they should all lapse, to annihilate them all.


Hyl. Why? he might create new in a moment, Philotheus.


Philoth. But how-ever these would be very violent and harsh, though but short,
Chasma's in the standing Creation of God. I appeal to your own sense,
Hylobares, would that look handsomely?


Hyl. I know not what to think of it. Besides, if that were true that some
Philosophers contend for, That all the whole Creation, as well particular Souls
and Spirits as the Matter and Universal Spirit of the World, be from God by
necessary Emanation, this middle vertible Order can never be turned out of
Being. But that the Stability of God's Nature and Actions should not be
according to the most exquisite Wisdom and Goodness, would be to me the
greatest Paradox of all.


Philoth. Why, who knows but that it is better for them to exist, though in
this Lapsed state, and better also for the Universe, that so they may be left
to toy and revell in the slightest and obscurest shadows of the Divine fullness,
then to be suddenly annihilated upon their first Lapse or Transgression? For to
be taken up with a less good is better then to be exiled out of Being, and to
enjoy no good at all.


Hyl. That it is better for them is plain according to the opinion of all
Metaphysicians: but how is it better for the Universe, Philotheus?


Philoth. How do you know but that it is as good for the Universe, computing
all respects, if it be not better? And that is sufficient. For Man is betwixt
the Intellectual Orders and the Beasts, as a Zoophyton betwixt the Beasts (...)
the Plants. I demand therefo^^, if the Zoophyta some of them (...) degenerate
into mere Plants, while others emerge into the condition of Animals, and so
they should ever and anon be ascending and descending, what great hurt were
done: what contradiction to the Divine Goodness would there be in this?


Hyl. I confess, Philotheus, I see no great hurt in that.


Philoth. Man therefore being of such a mixed nature, and of so invincible a
Freeness, that he may either associate himself with Angels, or sort himself
with Apes and Baboons or Satyrs of the Wood, what more hurt is there, he so
doing, then that there are Apes and Baboons already? and who can tell just how
many there ought to be of any of those Orders; or why there must be just so
many Orders of Apes or Satyrs, and no more?


Hyl. I must confess it were a rash charge against Providence on this account,
and hard to prove but that it is indifferent, as touching Individuals of this
or that Order, to have some thousands more or some thousands less, it may be
Myriads, and yet the good of the Universe much-what alike concerned in either
Number. And there is the same reason proportionally touching the number of the
Orders themselves. Such variations as these, it is likely, may not bear so great
stress with them, as to force God to betake himself to that extremest of
Remedies, Annihilation.


Philoth. But now in the second XXI.
place, The second Attempt, from the Consideration of some high Abu^^s of a
vincible Freedom, as also from the nature of this Freedom it ^elf.
Hylobares, supposing mankind of a vincible Freeness or Liberty of Will; what,
would you have God administer some such powerful Philtrum to all of them, that
he might even force their Affections toward those more precious emanations of
himself which are more properly called Divine?


Hyl. Yes, Philotheus, I would.


Philoth. But I much question how this will always consist with the Divine
Justice. For I think it as incongruous that the Divine Goodness should always
act according to the Simplicity of its own nature; as it is unnatural for the
Beams of the Sun to be reverberated to our eyes from several Bodies variously
surfaced in the same form of Light, and not to put on the face of diverse
Colors, such as yellow, green, red, purple, and the like. For as the various
Superficies of Bodies naturally causes such a diversification of pure Light,
and changes it into the form of this or that Color; so the variety of Objects
the Divine Goodness looks upon does rightfully require a certain modification
and figuration of her self into sundry forms and shapes, (as I may so call
them) of Vengeance, of Severity, of Justice, of Mercy, and the like. This
therefore is the thing I contend for, That free Agents, such as Men and Angels,
may so behave themselves in the sight of God, that they will become such
Objects of his Goodness, that it cannot be duly and rightfully expected that
it should act according to its pure and proper benign form, dealing gently and
kindly with all the Tenderness that may be with the party it acts upon; but it
must step forth in some of those more fierce and grim forms, (I speak after the
manner of men) such as Vengeance and Justice. And I will now put a Case very
accommodately to our own Faculties. Suppose some Virtuous and Beautiful
Virgin, royally descended and Princely attired, who, venturing too far into the
solitary Fields or Woods, should be light upon by some rude Wretch, who, first
having satisfied his Lustful desires upon her by a beastly Rape, should
afterward most barbarously and despightfully use her, haling her up and down
by the Hair of the head, soiling her sacred Body by dragging her through miry
Ditches and dirty Plashes of water, and tearing her tender Skin upon Briars and
Brambles, whiles in the mean time some Knight Errant or Man of Honor and
Virtue (but of as much Benignity of spirit as God can communicate to humane
nature without Hypostaticall Union) is passing by that way, and discerns with
his astonished eyes this abhorred Spectacle: I now appeal to your own sense and
reason, Hylobares, whether it be enough for that Heroes to rescue this
distressed Virgin from the abominable injury of this Villain, and to secure her
from any farther harm; or whether there ought not to be added also some
exquisite Torture and shameful Punishment worthy so heinous a fact, and
proportionable to the just indignation any noble spirit would conceive against
so villainous a Crime, though neither the wronged person nor punished party
were at all bettered by it.


Hyl. For my part, Philotheus, I should be in so high a rage against the
Villain, if I were on the spot, that I should scarce have the discretion how to
deliberate to punish him so exquisitely as he deserved; but in my present fury
should hew him a-pieces as small as Herbs to the pot. I should cut him all into
mammocks, Philotheus.


Philoth. Wherefore, Hylobares, you cannot but confess that Goodness it self in
some circumstances may very justly and becomingly be sharpened into Revenge:
Which must be still the less incongruous, in that the Revenge is in the behalf
of injured Goodness, though she get nothing thereby but that she is revenged.


Euist. To this case that Notion of Punishment appertains which the Greeks call
(...), Noct. At. l. 6. c. 14.
as Gellius observes; which nothing concerns the Reformation or amendment of
the punished, but only the Honor of the injured or offended.


Philoth. Right, Euistor. But in the mean time it is manifest from hence, as I
was making inference to Hylobares, That the Divine Goodness may step forth into
Anger and Revenge, and yet the Principle of such Actions may be the very
Goodness it self. Which therefore we contend is still (notwithstanding that
evil which may seem to be in the World) the measure of all God's works of
Providence, even when Sin is punished with Sin, and Men are suffered to
degenerate into Baboons and Beasts.


Hyl. I grant to you, Philotheus, that a man may behave himself so, as that all
that you affirm may be true, and that even the highest Severity may have no
other Fountain then Goodness. But where Goodness is Omnipotent, as it is in
God, how can it consist therewith not to prevent all occasions of Severity and
Revenge, by keeping his Creature within the bounds of his own Laws, and by
communicating to all men and Angels such an irresistible measure of Grace, that
they could never have possibly been disobedient to him?


Philoth. To this, Hylobares, I answer, That God having made a free Creature,
(and it is impossible to prove he did amiss in making it) Omnipotency it self
(if I may speak it with reverence) is not able to keep off certain unavoidable
respects or congruities it bears to the Divine Attributes: As it is a thing
utterly unimaginable that even the eternal Intellect of God should be able to
produce a finite Number that did not bear a certain proportion to some other
finite Number first given. This free Creature therefore now made, necessarily
faces the several Attributes of God with sundry respects. And this native
Freedom in it challenges of his Wisdom, that she show her best skill in
dealing with a Creature that is free with as little violence done to its nature
as may be. Which we see the Wisdom of God has practiced upon Matter, as I
noted awhile ago. And yet the defacement of rightly-organized Matter is as
real an entrenchment upon or opposition of what is Intellectual or Divine, (I
mean the Divine Idea's themselves) as Vice or Immorality. As the Divine
Wisdom therefore forces not the terrestrial Matter beyond the bounds of its
own natural capacity, to fend all Animals Bodies from Diseases and Death; no
more should the Divine Goodness universally in all free Creatures irresistibly
prevent the use of their own nature. And therefore being free, they ought,
according to the congruity of their condition, be put to the trial what they
will do. And if the miscarriage be upon very strong Temptations that did even
almost overpower the strength of the free Creature, this state of the case is
a meet Object of the Mercy of God. But if it have strength enough, and has been
often and earnestly invited to keep close to and to pursue after those things
that are best, and yet perpetually slights them and shuffles them off, the
party thus offending is a congruous object of the Divine Slight and Scorn; and
it is but just that such an one be left to follow his own swindge, and to find
such a fate as attends such wild courses. For it seems a kind of
disparagement, to pin Virtue and divine Grace upon the sleeves of them that are
unwilling to receive it. It would be as unseemly as the forcing of a rich,
beautiful and virtuous Bride upon some poor slouching Clown, whether he would
or no.


Hyl. But God may make them willing.


Philoth. That is, Hylobares, you may give the Clown a Philtrum or Love-potion.
But is not this still a great disparagement to the Bride? Wherefore for the
general it is fit, that God should deal with free Creatures according to the
freedom of their nature: But yet, rather then all should go to ruin, I do not
see any incongruity but that God may as it were lay violent hands upon some,
and pull them out of the fire, and make them potent, though not irresistible,
Instruments of pulling others out also. This is that Election of God for whom
it was impossible for others that have arrived to a due pitch of the Divine
Life. But for those that still voluntarily persist to run on in a rebellious
way against God and the Light that is set before them, and at last grow so
crusted in their Wickedness, that they turn professed enemies of God and
Goodness, scoff at Divine Providence, riot and Lord it in the world, with the
contempt of Religion and the abuse and persecution of them that profess it;
that out of the stubborn Blindness of their own hearts, being given up to
Covetousness, Pride and Sensuality, vex and afflict the conscientious with
abominable Tyranny and Cruelty; I think it is plain that these are a very
suitable Object for Divine Fury and Vengeance, that sharp and severe
Modification of the Divine Goodness, to act upon.


Hyl. Truly this is very handsome, Philotheus, and pertinent, if not cogent.


Philoth. XXII.
But lastly, The third and last, from the Questionableness whether in comp^t^
of the whole there does not as much good r^dound to the Universe by God's
Pe^mission of Si^, as ^here would ^y his forcible keepi^g it out.
Hylobares, though we should admit that the whole design of Divine Providence
is nothing else but the mere disburthening of his overflowing Goodness upon the
whole Creation, and that he does not stand upon the terms of Justice and
Congruity, or any such punctilio's, (as some may be ready here to call them)
but makes his pure Goodness the measure of his dealing with both Men and
Angels; yet I say that it does not at all contradict, but that God may permit
Sin in the World, he having the privilege of bringing Light out of Darkness,
and the nature of things being such, that the lessening of Happiness in one is
the advancement of it in another: As it is in the Motion of Bodies, what
agitation one loses, is transferred upon another; or like the Beams of the Sun,
that retunded from this Body are received by another, and nothing is lost. So
that in gross the Goodness of God may be as fully derived upon the Creation,
though not so equally distributed to particular Creatures, upon his permitting
Sin in the World, as if he did forcibly, and against the nature of free
Creatures, perpetually keep it out. This is that therefore that I would say,
that the Vices of the wicked intend and exercise the Virtues of the just.

What would become of that noble Indignation of mind that holy men conceive
against wicked and blasphemous people, if there were neither Wickedness nor
Blasphemy in the world? What would become of those enravishing Virtues of
Humility, Meekness, Patience and Forbearance, if there were no Injuries amongst
men? What had the Godly whereupon to employ their Wit and Abilities, if they
had no enemies to grapple with? How would their Faith be tried, if all things
here below had been carried on in Peace and Righteousness and in the Fear of
God? How would their Charity and Sedulity be discovered in endeavoring to gain
men to the true Knowledge of God, if they were always found so to their hands?
Terrestrial Goodness would even grow sluggish and lethargicall, if it were not
sharpened and quickened by the Antiperistasis of the general Malignity of the
World.

There are no generous Spirits but would even desire to encounter with Dangers
and Difficulties, to testify their love to the parties they are much endeared
to; and it is an exceeding great accession to their enjoyments, that they have
suffered so much for them. But if the World were not generally wicked for a
time, no Soul of man could meet with any such adventure, and the History of
Ages would be but a flat Story. Day it self upon this Earth would be tiresome,
if it were always Day, and we should lose those cheerful Salutes of the
emerging Light, the cool breathings and the pleasing aspects of the Rosy
Morning. The Joys and Solemnities of Victories and Triumphs could never be, if
there were no Enemies to conflict with, to conquer and triumph over. And the
stupendous undertakings of the Savior of Mankind, and the admirable windings
of Providence in her Dramatick Plot which has been acting on this Stage of the
Earth from the beginning of the World, had been all of them stopped and
prevented, if the Souls of men had not been lapsed into Sin. And the sweetest
and most enravishing Musical touches upon the melancholized Passions (so far
as I know) of both men and Angels had never sounded in the consort of the
Universe, if the Orders of free Agents had never played out of tune.

Nothing therefore of the Divine Goodness seems to be lost, whenas the very
Corruption of it, as in a grain of Corn cast into the ground, makes for its
increase; and what of it is rejected by some, is by the Wisdom of God so
unavoidably conveyed upon others. But that it is best that all should partake
alike of the Overflowings of God, will, I think, be no less difficult to prove,
then that all Subordination of estates and conditions in the world should be
taken away, and that God should not have created any of the more vile and
contemptible kind of Creatures, such as the Worm, the Fly, the Frog, and the
Mouse. Wherefore it being so disputable a Point, whether it be not in it self
as good that there should be those that are rightly called evil and wicked in
the World, as that there should be such and such viler or more mischievous
Creatures on the face of the Earth, it is an unexcusable piece of Rashness to
conclude, that the Permission of Sin is any such Argument against the Goodness
of that Providence that guides all things. For why should she generally force
or certainly determine the Faculties of men that are naturally free, and so
perpetually keep them off from acting of Sin, whenas Sin it self is so
pompously led captive by the power of Righteousness, and by the admirable
Wisdom of God serves for the equal advancement of his intended Goodness?


Hyl. Your Reason, or your zealous Eloquence, or both of them jointly, strike
so strongly upon my mind, O Philotheus* that I am, whether I will or no,
constrained to look upon it as a desperate Doubt or Difficulty, and such as I
never hope to be resolved of, Whether, considering the comprehension of all,
God's permission of Sin be more becoming his Goodness, or his perpetual
forcible hindering thereof. And therefore the Goodness of Divine Providence
being so conspicuous in other things, I think I ought not to call it into
question from matters that be so obscure, but to surmize the best.


Sophr. Excellently well inferred, Hylobares.


Hyl. But there are yet two Scruples behind touching the Circumstances of this
Permission that something gaul my mind, which if Philotheus please to free me
of, I shall sleep the quieter this night.


Philoth. What are those Scruples, Hylobares?


Hyl. XXIII.
The one is, How co^sistent it is with the Goodness of Providence, that God
does not suddenly make men holy so soon as they have (...) hearty mi^d to it.
Why, though it may not prove worth the while for Divine Omnipotency to prevent
all Sin in the World by absolutely determining the humane Faculties to the best
Objects, that yet, when these Faculties of men are determined to the best
Objects, there should not appear a more palpable assistence of the Deity to
make the ways of Religion and Godliness more easy and passable to poor toiling
Mortals, who are so pitifully tired and wearied out in their pious
Prosecutions, that they often forfeit not only the Health of their Bodies, but
even the Soundness of their Minds, and are given over either to miserable
Mopedness or Distraction. The other in brief is, The external Adversity of
the Just, and Prosperity of the Wicked. For in this God does not seem to assist
the converted Wills of men so favorably as he may.


Philoth. That it is an hard thing for us Mortals, whose abode is in houses of
Clay, to arrive to any due pitch of Purity and Goodness, experience does so
frequently witness, that it cannot be denied. But that this is no real blemish
to the benignity of Providence, if a man look more narrowly into the nature of
the things he may easily satisfy himself from manifold reasons. For, first, If
we had any Modesty in us, we may very well suspect that the Pain and torture we
undergo in the process of our Regeneration is but a just punishment of our
former Sins, in which they that stay the longest come out with the greatest
Sorrow and di^^iculty. 2. Besides, In other things we hold it not indecorous,
that matters of greatest price should be purchased with answerable pains. For
what has God given us several Faculties for, but to employ them to the
emprovement of our own good? 3. Again, By this means of God's acting according
to our nature, not by his absolute power in some mighty and over-bearing
miraculous way, the Acquisition of the Holy life becomes a Mystery, and men to
the great gratification of one another record the Method and, as I may so say,
the artifical Process thereof. A thing of greater moment then the finding out
the most sovereign Elixir or the Philosopher's Stone. 4. The tiresomeness of
the Fight makes the Victory more pleasant and sensible, and the continuance of
the Quarrel fixes more deeply upon our spirits an Antipathy against Sin; and
the hardness we find in winding our selves out of the bondage of Wickedness
will more strongly establish us in the Kindgdome of Virtue. 5. It is a meet
trial of our Faith and Sincerity, and entire Affection to God. For when we
perceive our selves hold on notwithstanding all these Combats and Encumbrances,
we are assured in our selves that we are in good earnest, and that we shall at
last obtain, if we faint not. 6. And that therefore we ought rather to examine
our own Sincerity, then accuse Providence. For if our love to Goodness be
sincere, and not lazy and fantastical, it will hold out with patience; which
Virtue is exercised and increased by these present Trialls. 7. We are also to
examine our Faith and opinion concerning God's will and power, whether we think
him as well willing as able to help all those that sincerely seek after him;
which is essentially congruous to the Divine Nature and Goodness; and whether
we believe that through his power we may be enabled to get the conquest over
all the Enormities of the Animal Life. And if we think God is not so good to
his Creature, let us consider whether we could serve the Creature so, if we
were in God's stead. If we could, it is the wickedness of our own Nature that
has thus infected the Notion of God in us, and so our own evil spirit is our
Fury and Devil that at last may chance to drive us into Madness. If we could
not deal thus our selves, how foolish a thing is it not presently to collect,
that we cannot be more benign then God, and that therefore the fault is in our
selves that we are no better? Moreover we are to consider, that Clearness and
Serenity of Mind is not to be had without the forsaking all manner of Sin; and
that if we hope otherwise, it is an Indication of our own Hypocrisy, that we
would hold a League with both Light and Darkness at once. And therefore we see
as touching religious Distraction, that we our selves may be the causes of it,
and that it is but the just result of our own Insincerity. But for down
right-Madness proceeding from Melancholy, it is natural Disease, and respects
the Physician rather then either the Philosopher or Divine. 8. and lastly, The
great Desertions, dark Privations, desperate Temptations, Enfeeblements of
Mind and Body, or whatever other Inconveniences, as they seem to be, occurr
in this process toward the due pitch of Regeneration and Newness of life, they
very effectually and naturally make for that most precious and truest piece of
Piety, I mean Humility; whereby the Soul is so affected, that she very
feelingly and sensibly acknowledges that all the good she does or knows is
wholly from God her Maker, and that she is nothing of her self. Wherefore she
is just to God, in attributing all to him; and mild and meek-hearted toward
men, even to those that are yet out of the way, being conscious to her self,
that the ordering of her ways is not from herself, but that God is her strength
and the light of her paths. Wherefore there being such genuine advantages in
this slow process of them that move toward what is truly good, and that
congruity to our Faculties, and to the nature of the things we seek after, it
seems to me as unreasonable that God should use his absolute Omnipotency in
making men good in a moment, so soon as they have a mind to be so, as to
expect he should make the Flowers suddenly start out of the Earth in Winter, or
load the Trees with Autumnall fruit in Spring.


Euist. XXIV.
There Is nothing can stand against the power of Philotheus his Reasonings. The
Parable of the Eremite and the Angel.
This first was by far the more difficult Problem of the two, and how easily
has he solved it? The other, which is the more ordinary, never seemed to me to
have the least force in it, since I met with the Story of the Eremite and the
Angel.


Philop. I pray you what Story is that, Euistor?


Euist. I hope, Philopolis, you would not have me to interrupt Philotheus, by
reciting of it.


Philoth. By all means let us hear it, Euistor. I shall not proceed quietly till
you have told it. It will at least give me some respite, who have spoken so
much already, and it is likely may save me the labor of proceeding any farther
on that Subject.


Euist. I will not tell it, O Philotheus, but upon condition that you will
afterward proceed as copiously as if I had said nothing.


Philop. I will undertake he shall, Euistor.


Euist. The Story then in brief is this. That a certain Eremite having
conceived great jealousies touching the due Administration of Divine Providence
in external occurrences in the World, in this anxiety of mind was resolved to
leave his Cell, and travel abroad, to see with his own eyes how things went
abroad in the World. He had not gone half a day's journey, but a young man
overtook him and joined company with him, and insinuated himself so far into
the Eremite's affection, that he thought himself very happy in that he had got
so agreeable a Companion. Wherefore resolving to take their fortunes together,
they always lodged in the same house. Some few days travels had over-past
before the Eremite took notice of any thing remarkable. But at last he observed
that his Fellow-traveller, with whom he had contracted so intimate a
Friendship, in a house where they were extraordinary well treated stole away a
gilt Cup from the Gentleman of the house, and carried it away with him. The
Eremite was very much astonished with what he saw done by so fair and agreeable
a person as he conceived him to be, but thought not yet fit to speak to him or
seem to take notice of it. And therefore they travel fairly on together as
aforetimes, till Night forced them to seek Lodging. But they light upon such an
house as had a very unhospitable Owner, who shut them out into the outward
Court, and exposed them all night to the injury of the open weather, which
chanced then to be very rainy. But the Eremite's Fellow-traveller unexpectedly
compensated his Host's ill entertainment with no meaner a reward then the gilt
Cup he had carried away from the former place, thrusting it in at the Window
when they departed. This the Eremite thought was very pretty, and that it was
not Covetousness, but Humor, that made him take it away from its first Owner.
The next night, where they lodged, they were treated again with a deal of
Kindness and Civility: but the Eremite observed with horror that his
Fellow-traveller for an ill requital strangled privately a young Child of
their so courteous Host in the Cradle. This perplexed the mind of the poor
Eremite very much; but in sadness and patience forbearing to speak, he
traveled another day's journey with the young man, and at Evening took up in a
place where they were more made of then anywhere hitherto. And because the way
they were to travel the next morning was not so easy to find, the Master of
the house commanded one of the Servants to go part of the way to direct them;
whom, while they were passing over a Stonebridge, the Eremite's
Fellow-traveller caught suddenly betwixt the legs and pitched him headlong from
off the Bridge into the River, and drowned him. Here the Eremite could have no
longer patience, but flew bitterly upon his Fellow-traveller for these
barbarous Actions, and renounced all Friendship with him, and would travel with
him no longer nor keep him company. Whereupon the young man smiling at the
honest zeal of the Eremite, and putting off his mortal disguise, appeared as he
was, in the form and luster of an Angel of God, and told him that he was sent
to ease his mind of the great Anxiety it was encumbered with touching the
Divine Providence. In which, said he, nothing can occurr more perplexing and
paradoxicall then what you have been offended at since we two traveled
together. But yet I will demonstrate to you, said he, that all that I have done
is very just and right. For as for that first man from whom I took the gilded
Cup, it was a real Compensation indeed of his Hospitality; that Cup being so
forcible an occasion of the good man's Distempering himself, and of hazarding
his Health and Life, which would be a great loss to his poor neighbors, he
being of so good and charitable a nature. But I put it into the window of that
harsh and unhospitable man that used us so ill, not as a Booty to him, but as a
Plague and Scourge to him, and for an ease to his oppressed Neighbors, that he
may fall into Intemperance, Diseases, and Death it self. For I knew very well
that there was that Enchantment in this Cup, that they that had it would be
thus bewitched with it. And as for that civil person whose Child I strangled
in the Cradle, it was in great mercy to him, and no real hurt to the Child,
who is now with God. But if that Child had lived, whereas this Gentleman
hitherto had been piously, charitably and devoutly given, his Mind, I saw,
would have unavoidably sunk into the love of the World, out of love to his
Child, ^he having had none before, and doting so hugely on it; and therefore I
took away this momentanie life from the Body of the Child, that the Soul of
the Father might live for ever. And for this last fact, which you so much
abhor, it was the most faithful piece of Gratitude I could do to one that
had used us so humanely and kindly as that Gentleman did. For this man, who by
the appointment of his Master was so officious to us as to show us the way,
intended this very night ensuing to let in a company of Rogues into his
Master's house, to rob him of all that he had, if not to murder him and his
Family. And having said thus, he vanished. But the poor Eremite, transported
with Joy and Amazement, lift up his hands and eyes to Heaven, and gave glory to
God, who had thus unexpectedly delivered him from any farther Anxiety touching
the ways of his Providence; and thus returned with cheerfulness to his forsaken
Cell, and spent the residue of his days there in Piety and Peace.


Philoth. It is an excellent good Story indeed, Euistor, and so much to the
purpose, that it is plainly superfluous to add any more words touching this
Theme.


Philop. But I believe, Philotheus, that neither Euistor nor Hylobares will be
so satisfied.


Euist. For my part, I challenge the performance of your promise, O Philopolis,
that the condition upon which I told the Story may be made good to me, namely,
That Philotheus be never the briefer in his Satisfaction to Hylobares for my
unseasonable Interpellation by this Parabolicall Story.


Hyl. And I am of that childish humor, that I do not relish any drink so well
as that out of mine own usual Sucking-bottle; wherefore I expect farther
refreshment, Philotheus, from your more nervous Eloquence.


Philop. My credit also, Philotheus, is at the stake, if you do not utter your
Sentiments upon this Subject.


Philoth. But in the mean while, Philopolis, it does me good to observe what
fine sense Hylobares speaks in so unmeet a demand, as if strong meat were for
babes.


Hyl. But strong drink may be for them; for some give such to Children so soon
as they be born.


Philop. Nay he is even with you there, Philotheus; you had better have fallen
directly upon the matter without these delays.


Philoth. Well then, Philopolis, I will do so, because you urge me so much
(...) it, though in my own judgment I think it needless. The Difficulty
propounded always seemed to me one of the easiest to be solved, though the
most ordinarily complained of, I mean, the Impunity and Prosperity of the
Wicked, and the Affliction and Adversity of the Good.

For first, XXV.
What is alleged concerning the Impunity of the Wicked is not only false, but
impossible. That the Adversity of the Good, and the Prosperity and Impunity of
the wicked in this Life, are ^o Arguments ag^i^st the Accuracy of Providence.
For how can the Wicked escape Punishment, when Wickedness it self is one of
the greatest Penalties? or how can they be said to be prosperous, who have
nothing succeed according to their own scope and meaning? For every man means
well, as Socrates wisely determines; but it is the perpetual unhappiness of
the Wicked that he does that which is ill. So great is his Ignorance and
Impotency, that he cannot reach the mark he aims at; but wishing the best to
himself, as all other men do, yet notwithstanding he really prosecutes that
which is worst. And therefore with the wise he can be no Object of Envy, but of
Pity. And it is an unmeet thing that any sentence concerning Divine Providence
should be carried by the Votes of Fools. When a Drunken man breaks
Glass-windows, ravishes women, stabs men in the streets, and does many such
Villainies as these, I appeal to you, Hylobares, what Privilege or Prosperity
is there in this, (though he were not to be punished by the Magistrate) having
done that which indeed he had no true mind to do, but did heartily detest and
abhor when he was sober? This is the true state of all Wicked men whatsoever;
let their power be never so high, they act like Drunkards or men in a Dream,
such things as they will be ashamed of so soon as they are sober or awakened.


Sophr. This is the very Philosophy of the Apostle, O Philotheus, What fruit
have ye then of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? ^om. 6. ^1.



Philoth. Now as it is evident, Hylobares, that they are punished in the
forfeiture of that high Happiness that consists in the peace and joy of a
purified Mind, wherein resides the true Knowledge of God, and a living sense
of the Comeliness and Pulchritude of Grace and Virtue; so likewise there is an
Infliction of internal Pain to their very Senses. For what Torture can there
be greater then that Rack of Pride, those Scorpion-stripes of Envy, those
insatiable scorching Flames and Torches of Furies, untamed Lust? what then
strangling Cares, then the severe Sentences of their own prejudging Fears? what
Dungeon more noisome, horrid or dismal, then their suspicious Ignorance, and
oppressing loads of surprising Grief and Melancholy?

Again, it is farther manifest that the Wicked are plagued even in this life;
for they are a mutual plague and scourge one to another, and take the office of
Executioners and Hangmen by turns. For all the noise of Injury and Injustice in
the World is ordinarily nothing else but a complaint that wicked men abuse one
another. Wherefore why should it be expected that Divine Providence should
forthwith take vengeance of the Executioners of his own Justice?

But for those few Righteous that are in the World, they are bettered by those
things that seem to the Idiot and unskilful the only Evils that Mortals can
fall into. But the Infelicity of the Godly is commonly this, that they will
scramble with the men of this World for such things as are the most proper
Happiness of those that are wicked. For they fighting with them thus as with
Cocks on their own Dunghill, it is no marvel they come by the worst; for this
is their hour and the power of Darkness.

Thirdly, It is manifest that the Peace and Impunity of the Wicked is very
serviceable for the exercising of the Virtues of the Righteous, whereby they
may discern their own Sincerity or Hypocrisy, and discover whether it be the
pure Love of Piety that puts them in such a garb, or the desire of the Praise
and Countenance of men; whether the profession of their Faith in God and of
future Happiness be formal, or real. For if it be real, what will not they be
able to undergo? and what an high Cordial must it be unto them, to have an
unfeigned sense and belief of that great Compensation they are to receive in
the World to come? Not to mention what a great satisfaction the consciousness
of constant Sincerity is to the Soul of a man even in this life also. Wherefore
the strokes of the Confusion and unrighteous Disorder in the World do in a
manner miss the Righteous, and hit heavy only there where they should do,
upon the Ungodly themselves. But what reaches those that are deemed more just,
they are in all reason and modesty to look upon it as either a Punishment of
some Relics of Vices in them, or as an Exercise of their Virtues, that God
may be glorified in them. Wherefore if any thing harsh happen to a good man, he
will forthwith examine himself if his heart be clean: which if it be not, he is
to look upon it as a Chastisement; if it be, he will bear it and embrace it as
a Trial from God, and as an occasion whereby he may glorify the Power of God
in him. But if he do not thus, it is a sign his heart is not clean, and
therefore why should he grumble that he is punished?

Fourthly, That Tyranny, Murder, Perjurie, Blasphemy and exorbitant Lust has
been notoriously and exemplarily punished by a kind of Divine Vengeance, and
above all the expectation of men, even in this Life, in several persons, is so
noted in History, that I need name no Instances. But to pursue every
Monstrositie of Wickedness with present Punishment here in this World, were not
to make men good, but to hinder the wicked from mischieving and scourging one
another, and from exercising the Virtues of the righteous.

Fifthly, In that Wickedness is not so constantly and adequately punished in
this Life, there is also this Convenience in it, That it is a shrewd Argument
to any indifferent person that understands the Nature and Attributes of God,
that there is a Reward to come hereafter in the other Life.

To all which I add in the last place, that the affairs of this World are like
a curious, but intricately-contrived, Comedy, and that we cannot judge of the
tendency of what is past or acting at present before the entrance of the last
Act, which shall bring in Righteousness in triumph: who though she has abided
many a brunt, and has been very cruelly and despightfully used hitherto in the
World, yet at last, according to our desires, we shall see the Knight overcome
the Giant. And then I appeal to you, Hylobares, whether all things have not
been carried on according to the natural Relish of your own Faculties. For what
is the reason we are so much pleased with the reading Romances and the Fictions
of Poets, but that here, as Aristotle says, things are set down as they should
be, but in the true History hitherto of the World things are recorded indeed as
they are, but it is but a Testimony that they have not been as they should be?
Wherefore in the upshot of all, if we shall see that come to pass that so
mightily pleases us in the reading the most ingenious Plays and Heroic Poems,
that long afflicted Virtue at last comes to the Crown, the mouth of all
Unbelievers must be for ever stopped. And for my own part, I doubt not but that
it will so come to pass in the last Close of the World. But impatiently to call
for Vengeance upon every Enormity before that time, is rudely to overturn the
Stage before the entrance into the fifth Act, out of Ignorance of the Plot of
the Comedy, and to prevent the solemnity of the general Judgment by more petty
and particular Executions. These are briefly the six Heads, Hylobares, which I
might have insisted upon to clear Providence from this last Allegation, had
there been any great Difficulty in the matter.


Hyl. What you have already intimated, Philotheus, from these six Heads, and
Euistor suggested by that handsome Parable, has, I must confess, so fully
satisfied me in this last Point, that it makes the Difficulty look as if it had
been none at all.


Philop. In this last Point, Hylobares? that is but one Point. But I pray you
ingenuously declare how much at ease you find your self touching the other
Difficulties you propounded.


Hyl. Very much, I Will assure you, Philopolis, touching all of them for the
present. But what dark clouds may again overcast my mind by our next meeting,
I cannot divine aforehand. But you shall be sure to hear of it, if any thing
occurr that dissettles me. In the mean time I am sure I find my self in a very
gay and cheerful condition.


Philop. We may then very seasonably adjourn this Meeting, O Cuphophron, to six
a clock to morrow in the afternoon.


Cuph. I shall then be again very happy, XXVI.
O Philopolis, A civil, but merry-conceited, bout of Drinking in Cuphophron's
Arbor.
in my enjoyment of so excellent Company. In the mean time my Service to you in
this Glass of Wine; for I think neither you nor any one else has drunk since
they came hither, they have been so intent upon the Discourse.


Philop. It is utterly needless this Summertime, O Cuphophron.


Cuph. It is very convenient to drink one Glass, to correct the Crudities of
the nocturnall Air and Vapors. This therefore is truly to your Good health, O
Philopolis.


Philop. Well, since it must be so, I thank you kindly, Cuphophron.


Hyl. Nay, Gentlemen, if you fall a-drinking, I may well fall a-whistling on my
Flagellet.


Cuph. What, do you mean to make us all Horses, to whistle us while we are
a-drinking?


Hyl. Nay, Cuphophron, I whistle that you may drink, and all little enough to
make Philotheus, Bathynous and Sophron to take off their Glasses.


Bath. I believe Hylobares his Whistling may have a more symbolicall meaning in
it then we are aware of, and intimate to us that Eating and Drinking are acts
common to us with the Beasts.


Philop. Be if so, Bathynous, yet these acts are sometimes necessary for men
also. Nor is it inconvenient to drink to my next neighbor Philotheus, not
only to fortify him against the nocturnall Vapors, but likewise to recruit
his Spirits, which he may have overmuch expended in his long and learned
discourses.


Philoth. The fresh Air, Philopolis, moistened with the Moonshine, as
Cuphophron noted, is as effectual to that purpose, if I had been at any such
expense.


Philop. But this Glass of Wine will help to correct the Crudity of that
moisture: wherefore my Service to you, Philotheus.


Philoth. I thank you heartily, Philopolis, I will pledge you.


Philop. It is very good Wine.


Philoth. I shall commend it the more willingly to Bathynous, a little to warm
and cheer his thoughtfull Melancholy. Bathynous, my Service to you.


Bath. Your Servant thanks you, Philotheus.


Philoth. I perceive Philopolis has a very judicious Taste.


Bath. It is ordinarily the pure effect of Temperance to have so. But yet my
palate is something more surd and jacent. However I will try. I promise you it
seems to me very good, Philotheus, and such as Cato himself would not refuse a
Cup of: which makes me with the more assurance drink to my next neighbor, even
to Sophron, to cheer him after his conceived Fears and Affrights touching the
Success of this Dispute concerning Providence.


Sophr. The good Success, Bathynous, chears me more then all the Wine in Athens
can do. And therefore not so much to be cheared, as out of my present
Cheerfulness, I will, readily pledge you one cup. For Sobriety is not in
drinking no Wine at all, but in drinking it moderately.


Bath. Well, my Service to you then, Sophron.


Sophr. I thank you, Bathynous.


Euist. But certainly, if my memory fail me not, Cato, as grave as he was,
would drink more Cups of Wine then one at a time.


Sophr. Nor do I think that moderate Drinking consists in one Cup, but in
drinking no more then is for the Health of both Soul and Body. And one Glass
will serve me for that end at this time.


Euist. Your Definition is very safe and useful, I think, O Sophron.


Sophr. And therefore my singular respects to you, Euistor, in this single
Glass of Wine.


Cuph. See the virtue of good Canarie, the mere steam of whose volatile Atoms
has so raised Sophron's phancie, that it has made him seem for to offer to
quibble before the Glass has touched his lips.


Sophr. It is mavelous good Wine indeed. I warrant you, Euistor, this will
rub up your memory to the purpose, if the recalling how many Cups grave Cato
would take off at a time, may warrant our drinking at any time more then is
needful or convenient. I pray you taste it.


Euist. I thank you, Sophron, I should willingly pledge you, though it were in
worse liquour. They have all of them had each man his Glass but Hylobares, but
have excogitated such pretty pretenses to accost them they drank to, that I
find I need to have my wit rubbed up as well as my memory, to hold on this
ingenious humor.


Cuph. Do not you observe, Euistor, how studiously Hylobares has played the
Piper all this time? Take your Cue from thence.


Euist. Hylobares, not to interrupt you, my humble Service to you in a Glass of
Canarie, to wet your whistle.


Hyl. I thank you kindly, Euistor; but I profess I was scarce aware what I did,
or whether I whistled or no.


Philop. Methinks those Airs and that Instrument, XXVII.
Hylobares, seem too light for the serious Discourse we have had so many hours
together. The mavelous Conjuncture in Hylobares of an outward Levity and
inward Soberness at once.



Hyl. But I Will assure you, Philopolis, my thoughts were never more serious then
while I was piping these easy Airs on my Flagellet. For they are so familiar
to me, that I had no need to attend them, and my mind indeed was wholly taken
up with Objects suitable to our late Theme. And even then when I was playing
these light Tunes, was I recovering into my memory, as well as I could, some
part of a Philosophic Song that once I had by rote, (both words and tune and
all) which has no small affinity with the Matters of this day's Discourse.


Philop. It is much, Hylobares, you should be able to attend to such contrary
things, so light and so serious, at one and the same time.


Hyl. That Is no more, Philopolis, then Euistor did in his Story of the Angel
and the Eremite. For I look upon the twisting of a man's Mustachio's to be as
slight and trivial a thing as the playing on the Flagellet. And yet I believe
he was at it at least twenty times with his forefinger and his thumb in his
rehearsing that excellent Parable, though his Mind, I saw, was so taken up
with the weightiness of the sense, that his aspect seemed as devout as that of
the Eremite, who was the chief Subject of the Story.


Euist. I pray you, Hylobares, take this Glass of Wine for a reward of your
abusing your Friend so handsomely to excuse your self, and see if it be so good
for the rubbing up the memory as Sophron avouches it. For then I hope we shall
hear you sing as attentively as you have regardlesly whistled all this time.


Hyl. The Wine is very good, Euistor, if it be as good for the Memory. But I
believe I had already recalled more of those Verses to mind then what is
convenient to repeat at this time.


Philop. I prithee, Hylobares, repeat but them you have recalled to memory; it
will be both a farther ratification of this unthought-of Experiment, and a
suitable Close of the whole day's Discourse.


Hyl. Your desire is to me a command, Philopolis; and therefore for your sake I
will hazard the credit of my Voice and Memory at once.

Where Is now the Objects of thy Fears, XXVIII.

Needless Sighs and fruitless Tears? His serious Song of Divine Pr^vidence.

They be all gone like idle Dream
Suggested from the Body's steam.
O Cave of Horror black as pitch!
Dark Den of Specter that bewitch
The weakened Fancy sore affright
With the grim shades of grisly Night!
What Is Plague and Prison, loss of Friends,
War, Dearth, and Death that all things ends?
Mere Buglears for the childish mind,
Pure Panick Terrors of the blind.
Collect thy Soul into one Sphere
Of Light, and 'bove the Earth it bear*
Those wild scattered Thoughts, that erst
Lay loosely in the World dispersed,
Call in; thy Spirit thus knit in one
Fair lucid Orb, those Fears be gone,
Like vain Impostures of the Night,
That fly before the Morning bright.
Then with pure eyes thou shall behold
How the First Goodness does infold
All things in loving tender Arms;
That deemed Mischiefs are no Harms,
But sovereign Salves, and skillful Cures
Of greater Woes the World endures;
That Man's stout Soul may win a state
Far raised above the reach of Fate.
Power, Wisdom, Goodness sure did frame
This Universe, and still guide the same.
But thoughts from Passions sprung deceive
Vain mortals. No man can contrive
A better course then what is been run
Since the first Circuit of the Sun.
He that beholds all from an high
Knows better what to do then I.
I Am not mine own: should I repine
If he dispose of what is not mine?
Purge but thy Soul of blind Self-will,
Thou straight shall see God does no ill.
The World he fills with the bright Rays
Of his free Goodness. He displays
Himself throughout: Like common Air
That Spirit of Life through all does fare,
Sucked in by them as vital breath
Who willingly embrace not Death.
But those that with that living Law
Be unacquainted, Cares do gnaw;
Mistrusts of Providence do vex
Their Souls and puzzled minds perplex.
These Rhythms were in my mind, Philopolis, when the Flagellet was at my mouth.


Philop. They have an excellent sense in them, and very pertinent to this day's
Disquisitions. I pray you whose Lines are they, Hylobares?


Hyl. They are the Lines of a certain Philosophical Poet, who writes almost as
hobblingly as Lucretius himself; but I have met with Strains here and there in
him that have infinitely pleased me; and these, in some humors, amongst the
rest. But I was never so sensible of the weightiness of their meaning as since
this day's discourse with Philotheus.


Philop. Well, Hylobares, if you ruminate on no worse things then these while
you play on your Flagellet, it will be an unpardonable fault in me ever
hereafter to disparage your Music.


Euist. I think we must hire Hylobares to pipe us to our Lodgings, XXIX.
else we shall not find the way out of Cuphophron's Bower this Night, The
breaking up of the Meeting.
as bright as it is.


Hyl. That I could do willingly, Euistor, without hire, it is so pleasing a
divertisement to me to play on my Pipe in the silent Moonlight.


Philop. Well, we must abruptly take leave of you, Cuphophron, and bid you Good
night: Hylobares is got out of the Arbor already, and we must all dance after
his Pipe.


Cuph. That would be a juvenile act for your Age, Philopolis.


Philop. I mean, we must follow his example, and betake our selves homewards;
for it is now very late. Was it a delusion of my sight? or did there a Star
shoot obliquely as I put my head out of the Arbor?


Bath. If the Dog Star had been in view, one would have thought him in danger
from Hylobares his charming Whistle.


Euist. No Hags of Thessaly could ever whistle the celestial Dog out of the
Sky, Bathynous.


Cuph. How sublimely witty is Euistor with one single Glass?


Euist. Good night to you, dear Cuphophron.


Cuph. Nay, I will wait on you to your Lodgings.


Philop. By no means, Cuphophron; we will leave you here in your own house;
unless you will give us the trouble of coming back again with you.


Cuph. Good night to you then, Gentlemen, all at once.


Philop. Good night to Cuphophron.


The End of the Second Dialogue.
THE THIRD DIALOGUE.
Philotheus, Bathynous, Sophron, Philopolis, Euistor, Hylobares, Cuphophron.
Sophr. WHat tall Instrument is this, I.
O Cuphophron, Conjectures touching the Causes of that Mirth that the Meeting
of some persons naturally excite in one another.
that you have got thus unexpectedly into your Arbor?


Cuph. The tallness discovers what it is, a Theorboe. I observing yesternight
how musically given the Company was, in stead of Hylobares his Whistle, (which
is more usually played upon before Bears or dancing Dogs then before
Philosophers or Persons of any quality) have provided this more grave and
gentile Instrument for them that have a mind to play and sing to it, that so
they may, according to the manner of Pythagoras, after our Philosophical
Dissertations, with a solemn Fit of Music dismiss our composed minds to rest.


Sophr. You abound in all manner of Civilities, Cuphophron: But do not you play
on this Instrument your self?


Cuph. No, alas! it is too tall for me, my Fingers will not reach the Frets.
But sometimes with a careless stroke I brush the Gittar, and please my self
with that more easy Melody.


Hyl. And it would please any one living to see Cuphophron at that graceful
Exercise, so as I have sometimes taken him; He is so like the Sign at the other
end of the Street.


Cuph. This Wag Hylobares, I dare say, means the Sign of the Ape and the
Fiddle. This is in revenge for the disparagement I did his beloved Syrinx, the
Arcadian Nymph.


Philop. I never heard that Hylobares had any Mistress before.


Hyl. This is nothing, Philopolis, but the exaltedness of Cuphophron's fancy
and expression; a Poetical Periphrasis of my Flagellet, which in disparagement
before he called a Whistle.


Philop. But your imagination has been more then even with him, if he interpret
you aright. Let me entreat you of all love, Hylobares, to suppress such light
and ludicrous Phancies in so serious a Meeting.


Hyl. I shall endeavor to observe your commands for the future; O Philopolis,
but I suspect there is some strange reek or efflux of Atoms or Particles.


(Cuph. Of Particles, by all means, Hylobares, for that term is more Cartesian.)


Hyl. Which fume out of Cuphophron's body, and infect the air with mirth,
though all be not alike subject to the Contagion. But for my self, I must
profess, that merely by being in Cuphophron's presence I find my self extremely
prone to Mirth, even to Ridiculousness.


Philop. As young men became disposed to Virtue and Wisdom merely by being in
the company of Socrates, though he said nothing unto them.


Cuph. And I must also profess that Hylobares is not much behinde-hand with me.
For I can never meet him, but it makes me merry about the mouth, and my heart
is inwardly tickled with a secret joy. Which, for the credit of Des-Cartes's
Philosophy, I easily acknowledge may be from the mutual recourse and mixture
of our exhaled Atoms, or rather Particles, as Cartesius more judiciously calls
them: for these Particles are not indivisible. Some also are ready to quarrel
one another at the first meeting, as well as Hylobares and I to be merry: and
you know some Chymicall Liquours, though quiet and cool separate, yet mingled
together will be in such a ragefull Fermentation, that the Glass will grow hot
to the very touch of our Fingers.


Euist. This is learnedly descanted on by Cuphophron: but, by the favor of so
great a Philosopher, I should rather resolve the Problem into some Reason
analogous to that of those Seeds which Solinus says the Thracians at their
Feasts cast into the fire, Polyhist. c. 15.
the fume whereof so exhilarated their spirits, that they were no less merry
then if they had drank liberally of the strongest Wines.


Hyl. Pomponius Mela also relates the same of them. ^e situ Orbis l. 2. c. 2.
But nothing, methinks, illustrates the nature of this Phenomenon better then
that Experiment of a certain Ptarmicon, (Seed or Powder, I do not well
remember) which cast secretly into the fire will unexpectedly set the company
asneezing. Suoh I conceive to be the hidden Effluvia of Cuphophron's
Complexion, which thus suddenly excites these ridiculous Flashes of my
ungovernable Fancy, to the just scandal of the more grave and sober: Which
Extravagance I must confess is so much the more unpardonable to my self, by how
much my own mind has been since our last Meeting more heavy-laden with the
most Tragical Scenes that are exhibited on this terrestrial Globe; which
endeavor to bear against all those ponderous Reasons, those dexterous
Solutions and solid Instructions which Philotheus yesterday so skilfully
produced in the behalf of Providence.


Philop. Why, what remains of Difficulty, Hylobares, either touching the
Natural or Moral Evils in the World?


Hyl. Touching the Natural Evils, II.
Philopolis, I rest still pretty well satisfied; Hylobares his Relapse into
Dissettlement of mind touching Providence, with the cause thereof.
and in that general way that Philotheus answered touching Moral Evils, his
Solutions seemed to my Reason firm enough: but when in solitude I recounted
with my self more particularly the enormous Deformities and Defects that
everywhere are conspicuous in the Nations of the Earth, my Fancy was soon born
down into a diffidence and suspicion, that there is no such accurate Providence
(as Philotheus contends for) which does superintend the affairs of Mankind.


Bath. That is to say, Hylobares, After that more then ordinary Cheerfulness
raised in your spirits by your re-acquaintance with those many and most noble
Truths that Philotheus recovered into your mind, (by his wise discourse) at
which the Soul of man, at her first meeting with them again, is as much
transported, as when two ancient friends unexpectedly meet one another in a
strange Country, as Iamblichus somewhere has noted, I say, after this more
then usual transport of Joy, your spirits did afterward as much sink and flag,
and so Melancholy imposed upon your Fancy. But there is no fear, things having
succeeded so well hitherto, but Philotheus will revive you, and dissipate these
Clouds that seem so dark and dismal to your Melancholized Imagination.


Hyl. I believe you will more confidently conclude it Melancholy, Bathynous,
when you have heard what an affrightfull puzzle one thing then seemed to me.


Bath. I pray you, Hylobares, propound it to Philotheus.


Hyl. Well, III.
I shall, Bathynous, and it is briefly this; Paucity of Philosophers no blemish
to Divine Providence.
How squalid and forlorn the World seemed to me by reason there are so very few
Philosophers in it. For the rest of Mankind seemed to me little to differ from
Baboons or Beasts.


Cuph. O Hylobares, how dearly could I hug thee for this meditation! This is a
Consideration framed after the Sentiments of my own heart. It is a thing I have
often in secret bewailed the World for even with tears, I mean, for the paucity
of Philosophers; and then most of all, that amongst these few there should be
so very few pure and thorough-paced Cartesians. These serious thoughts in
private have afflicted my heart very sore.


Philoth. I pray you, Cuphophron, be of good comfort, and you, Hylobares, let
not this Scene seem so Tragical to you. For it is a great question, whether
the Philosophers be not more ridiculous, then they, that are accounted none,
deplorable or contemptible. Besides, why is this to be charged upon Providence,
that there are so few? The Book of Nature lies open to all, and the generality
of men have wit for observation: But it is their own fault, that they had
rather please their Senses then exercise and improve their Reason. But admit
that few are born to Philosophy, yet all in a manner are born to far better
matters: that is to say, It is in the power of every man to be Religious, Just,
and Virtuous, and to enjoy the wholesome Pleasures of the Animal life in a
pious and rational way. Wherefore there being so short a cut everywhere to
Prudence and Religion, (if a man be sincere and faithful,) I see not how any
one is excluded from the most substantial Happiness humane Nature is capable
of. But for other Knowledge, if it were every man's, it were scarce the
enjoyment of any man. But the confident Ignorance of the rude and the
unexpected Paradoxicalness of the skillful do fitly furnish out the Stage of
things, and make more for the sport and pleasure of life, and enhance the price
and compensate the labor of finding out or apprehending the more abstruse
Theories in Philosophy.

But this peculiar Philosophical Happiness is but a very small accession to
that Moral Happiness which is common to all men, if they be not wanting to
themselves; as, To be loyal to a man's Prince, To be true to his Religion so
far as it is true, To deal faithfully with all men, To be kind to his
Neighbors, To relieve the oppressed, To be an hearty lover of God and of the
whole Creation. A man thus affected, and armed with so much Prudence as not to
deny or assert any thing beyond his clear comprehension and skill in
speculative matters, but to admire and adore the ineffable Wisdom of his
Creator, this man, I say, is a more complete, perfect and unexceptionable
person, and more solidly happy, then any Philosophers I know that have left
their Writings to the World as a lasting Testimony of their Wit, Descartes
himself not excepted; whose gross Extravagancies (such as making Brutes mere
Machina's, the making every Extension really the same with Matter, his averring
all the Phenomenon of the World to arise from mere Mechanical causes) will be
more stared upon and hooted at by impartial Posterity, then any other pieces of
wit he may have light on can be admired or applauded: Which hazard those that
adhere only to Virtue and true Piety are always secure from.


Hyl. What think you of this, Cuphophron?


Cuph. With Philotheus his leave, I think the Cartesian Philosophy a very fine
thing for all this. What think you, Hylobares?


Hyl. I think Philotheus has spoken in the main very solidly and home to the
purpose, and that the Prudent virtuous man is far a more noble and goodly
spectacle then any Philosophical Knight Errant whatsoever. If he can blow away
the rest of those Mists and Clouds that sit upon my mind with like facility, I
hope I shall be in an utter incapacity of raising the least doubt concerning
Providence for the future.


Philop. Try what Philotheus can do, Hylobares. Propound to him the rest of
your Difficulties.


Hyl. The rest of my Difficulties, IV.
O Philotheus, Reasons in gen^ral of the gross Deformity in the Religions and
Customs of the Savage Nations, as also of the variety of this Deformity in
Manners and Customs.
arise from the view of the Manners and Religions of the barbarous Nations,
such as they are described in History, and which indeed are such, so sordid and
ridiculous, so horrid and enormous, that they would even force a man's Fancy
into a distrust that in those Nations Divine Providence has quite forsaken the
Earth. For if she cast her eye upon them, why does she not either reform them,
or confound them and destroy them?


Philoth. That the face of things, in some parts of the barbarous Nations
especially, looks very durtily and dismally, I cannot but acknowledge: but the
Causes being found out, Admiration ought to cease. For that Mankind is in a
lapsed condition it cannot be denied, nor that a great part of the invisible
Powers are sunk into the Animal life with them. Now that which is the most high
and powerful in the Animal life will not let its hold go so long as it can
hang on. Whence the most Active Spirits in this Region get the Dominion over
the more Passive, and the Kingdom of the Prince of the Air has proved very
large over the Nations of the Earth, they being so deeply lapsed and immersed
into the Animal Nature. Wherefore we cannot expect but that both the Rulers and
the ruled having fallen from the holy Light and the Divine benignity of the
Aethereall nature, that the effects of that Government and the garb of their
Manners should be cruel, squalid, deformed and ridiculous; a judicious sense of
true Pulchritude and Decency not being able to reside in so dark and
distempered Complexions, and their envious Guardians caring more to tyrannize
over them and to make sport with them, then to spare them or to be true Guides
to them in any thing. All therefore that can be done is, to mitigate as well as
we can the sad horror and mad aspect of this strange Theater, which strikes
the Fancy so strongly and so harshly. For the wound, by your own proposal of
the Difficulty, Hylobares, I perceive reaches no farther then the Fancy; which
is an intimation the better parts of your Mind stand sound. And there is
another passage I noted, which I shall make use of for the cure of your Fancy
also, viz. That this squalid Face of things is only in those barbarous
Nations: wherein there is implied a tacit concession that the civilized parts
of the World are at least passable.


Hyl. I must confess it seems to import so much.


Philoth. And the Christian World most of all.


Hyl. One would think so, Philotheus.


Philoth. Wherefore to satisfy your Reason and quiet your Fancy, if any of us
shall show that either there is no great hurt in such Customs of the barbarous
Nations that seem strange and uncouth to us, or that we our selves have
something analogous to them, much of this surprising horror and astonishment
will be taken off.


Hyl. I hope so.


Philoth. In the mean time it is worthy the noting in general, That there being
this Lapse in mankind, it is far better that their Obliquities and Deformities
in Manners and Religion be very much varied, then that they should be
everywhere one and the same. For that would make Transgression look more like
a due and settled Law of Life and firm Reason: But now the freeness of the
internal spirit of man, that is so active and reflective, having broken the
Animal Life into such varieties of Fooleries and Vanities, whether National,
Provincial or Personal, we become a mutual Theater one to another, and are in a
better capacity of censuring what is evil in our selves by reflecting upon
others; the Deformities we epsy in others being nothing else but a
reprehensive Parable touching our selves. For the whole Mass of mankind is
like a company fallen asleep by the Fireside, whom some unlucky Wag has
smutted with his sooty and greazy fingers, and when they awake, every one
laughs at the false Beards and antic strokes in other men's Faces, not at all
thinking of his own. But assuredly it is a very easy intimation to him to
reflect upon himself, and to look into the Glass whether he be not smutted
also. Wherefore seeing there must be Faults in the world, methinks it is more
agreeable to Reason and Providence, that there be a Variation of them, though
the strangeness thereof surprises us, then that the Jar should be always on
the same String; that Folly and Wickedness may not seem familiar to us in every
place we meet with it, but that we may be astartled at the new and unexpected
guizes thereof in others, and thereby take occasion to examine if we have
nothing akin to it in our selves. This may be said in general, Hylobares, but
to particulars no answer can be returned, till you propound them.


Hyl. That I shall do as they occur to my mind; V.
but I must implore the aid of Fuistor where I am at a loss. Of the ^arbarous
Custom of g^ing naked.


The first brutish and barbarous Custom that occurrs is the going stark naked,
as some Nations do, if my memory fail me not.


Euist. The Inhabitants of the West Indies did so, as Americus Vesputius
reports. And Paulus Venetus relates the same of the Abraiamim in the Kingdom
of Lae. Again, in the West Indies particularly the Maids of Venesuella are said
to go as naked as they were born.


Philoth. I do not deny but that some Nations may go stark naked, as
questionless there may be many with little or no Covering on them, the parts of
Modesty excepted: but as to these latter, that this is any such Flaw in
Providence, I understand not. For the Clemency of the Clime under which these
people live, the goodly Structure of their Bodies, the true Shape and Symmetry
of Parts, their prodigious Agility, Strength, and Nimbleness in Running,
Swimming and Dancing, their freedom from care of providing, and the trouble of
putting on and putting off their Garments, their long Lives, unwrinkled Skins,
easy Childbirth, virgin-like Breasts, and unsophisticated Venery, the
imposture and gullery of fine Clothes, (like pernicious Sauce) never begetting
in them a false appetite, nor administering occasion of Lascivious phancies; I
say, these are so considerable Concomitants of the Nakedness of these people,
(which Historians jointly take notice of) that it may not only apologize for
this seeming Barbarity, but put us to a stand whether they be not either more
rational or more fortunate in this Point then the Civilized Nations. I am sure,
some Sects of the Civilized World look upon it as a piece of Perfection to
imitate them, if not to out-doe them, as the Adamites and such like. And those
two severer Sects of Philosophers, the Stoics and Cynicks, will abett them in
it, who contend there is no Turpitude in any thing but Sin; from which they
willingly acquit the works of God and Nature. That more general shame in
mankind, of having their more uncomely parts seen, is undoubtedly an
indication by God and Nature, that we are born to higher and more excellent
things then these corporeal pleasures. But to be ashamed to be naked, and yet
not to forbear those Sins that this Shame was intended a Bar to, such as
Whoredom, Adultery and Sodomie, is to turn their Clothing into Cloaks of
Hypocrisy, and to be but Apes and Satyrs still in green Coats. This is a taste
of what may be said touching such uncouth Spectacles. But it would be too
laborious a task for me, Hylobares, to answer every particular you may produce.
I had rather employ my thoughts, while you are proposing them to others, in
finding out some summary Answer to all, upon a ^uller view of your Allegations,
or Euistor's Relations.


Philop. Philotheus makes but a reasonable motion, Hylobares. Give him some
respite, and propound your Particulars in common to all, or any that are ready
to answer.


Cuph. A very good motion, Philopolis.


Hyl. The next then, VI.
Cuphophron, Of the ridiculous Deckings and Ado^nings of the Bar^^rians.
shall be touching the ridiculous Adornings or Deckings of the Barbarians. The
embroidering of their Skins with Flowers, Stars, Birds, and such like pleasant
Figures, this indeed has as little hurt in it as that kind of work in Women's
Petticoats. But the painting of their Skins with Serpents and ugly Beasts, as
the Virginians are said to do, how vilely must that needs look?


Cuph. That Is a slight business, Hylobares, if you consider the design, which I
suppose is to make them look more terrible of aspect; a thing that seems to be
affected in the Civilized parts of the World, many Families bearing Coats of
Arms wherein are seen as venomous and poisonous Monsters. Not to add how
general an Humor it is amongst men, to desire Power more then Goodness, and to
be feared rather then to be loved.


Euist. But what say you, Cuphophron, to the Gentry of Calecut, who stretch
their Ears as low as their Shoulders, that they may be large enough to be
laden with variety of rich Jewels?


Cuph. I say it is not so unhandsome, it may be, Euistor, as unsafe, unless
they be well guarded. It is a ^air invitation to have them effectually pulled
by the Ears, to the hazard of their Ears and Jewels at once.


Euist. Indeed I think so too, Cuphophron. But what shall we think of the
Tartars and Maldives cutting off all their Hair of the upper Lip?


Cuph. Why, Euistor, I think it an excellent way for the more cleanly drinking,
and supping of their Potage.


Euist. But is it not very ridiculous in the Virginians, to cut away half of
their upper and lower Beards, and leave the other half behind?


Cuph. It is not, I must confess, so sightly. But who knows but that there may
be some usefulness of it, as in the Amazons cutting off their right Breasts,
the better to draw their Bow and Arrow? It may be also, when they take Tobacco,
they slaver on the shorn side of their Chin.


Euist. But O the beauty of black Teeth, the affected Ornament of the
Inhabitants of Venesuella!


Cuph. And so it may be, for ought we know, as lovely as black Hair and black
Eyes and Eyebrows: a black Set of Teeth would fit excellently well with
these. For my part, I know not whether Jet or Ivory looks more pleasantly;
either, methinks, looks more handsomely then a row of Teeth as yellow as Box,
which is the more ordinary hue of our Europeans.


Euist. But the Laws of Miction amongst those of the West Indies is a pitch of
Slovenliness beyond all Cynicism, the men and women not sticking to let fly
their Urine even while they are conversing with you.


Cuph. That is very consequentially done, Euistor, to that simple Shamelesness
of being stark naked. For it is those Parts, rather then any Loathsomeness in
the liquour that proceeds from them, (which is both wholesome to be drunk in
sundry cases, and many times pleasant to the smell) that require secrecy in
that Evacuation. Wherefore there seems more of Judgment then Sottishness in
this Custom, unless in the other Exoneration they use the like Carelessness.


Euist. Cautious beyond all measure. No Miser hides his Bags of muck with more
care and secrecy then they endeavor to unload themselves of that Depositum of
Nature. They are very Essenes in this point of Cleanliness, O Cuphophron.


Cuph. Why, this makes amends for the former: I thought they would easily smell
out the difference.


Hyl. Methinks, Euistor, you ask a little out of order. The present Theme is
the Deckings of the barbarous Nations. But you see Cuphophron is excellently
well appointed for all.


Cuph. An universalized spirit, a Soul thoroughly reconciled to the Oeconomie of
the World, will not be at a loss for an Apology for any Phenomenon.


Euist. There are far harder then these to come, O Cuphophron. But I will only
give one step back touching Ornaments. Is not that Bravery which Americus
Vesputius records in his Voyage to the New-foundworld very ghastly tragical?
For he says sundry of those Nations had quite spoiled their Visages, by boring
of many great Holes in their Cheeks, in their Chaps, in their Noses, Lips and
Ears; and that he observed one man that had no le^s then seven Holes in his
Face, so big as would receive a Damask prune. In these they put blew Stone,
Crystal, Ivory, or such like Ornaments. Which I the easilier believe to be
true, having spoke with those my self that have seen Americans with pieces of
carved Wood stuck in their Cheeks.


Sophr. Cuphophron scratches his head as if he were something at a loss. In the
mean time, Euistor, take this ^ill Cuphophron has excogitated something better.
That which is rare (we know) is with all Nations precious, and what is precious
they love to appropriate and transferr upon themselves as near as they can:
whence rich men eat many times not what is wholesomest, but the hardest to be
got. So if there be any thing more costly then another, they will hang it on
their Bodies, though they cannot put it into their Bellies, such as their
Earrings and Jewels. But these Barbarians seem to exceed them in the
curiosity of their application of these Preciosities, they fully implanting
them into their very Flesh, as if they were part of their natural Body.


Hyl. Well, Sophron; but how rude and sottish are they in the mean time, that
they thus cruelly wound their poor Carcases to satisfy the folly of their
Pride and Fancy?


Sophr. But the boring of the Face and the slashing of the Skin I believe will
prove more tolerable, then the cutting and piercing of the Heart with Care and
Anxiety, which the Pride of more civilized places causes in men of high Spirits
and low Fortunes. Besides, Hylobares, it may be our ignorance to think they
undergo so much Pain in the prosecution of these fantastic humors. For
these Holes and Slashes may be made in their Bodies when they are young, like
Incisions on the Bark of a tree or a young Pumpion, that grow in bigness with
the growth of these Plants. And how safely and inoffensively such things may be
practiced on young Children, the wringing off the Tails of Puppets, and
Circumcision of Infants used by so many Nations, are sufficient examples.


Cuph. I thank you for this, Sophron; some such thing I was offering at, but
you have prevented me. Proceed, Euistor or Hylobares, whether of you will.


Hyl. I prithee, VII.
Euistor, T^^ Lawleness of the Barbarians and their gross Extravagancies
touching Wedlock apologized for by Cuphophron, Advocate-general for (...)
P^ynims.
puzzle Cuphophron, if you can, touching the Political Government of the
Barbarians.


Euist. Does not that seem mavelous brutish, O Cuphophron, that in some
places they had no Government at all, as in Cuba and New Spain, whose
Inhabitants went naked, acknowledged no Lord, but lived in common Liberty, as
Cosmographers witness?


Cuph. Is that so unreasonable or brutish, O Euistor, that those that are not
burdened with the encumbrance of Riches should neglect the use of Laws; the
chiefest Controversies amongst men arising concerning Honors and Wealth, those
two great incitements to Injustice? Wherefore those Barbarians seem so far from
any Degeneracy in this, that they rather resemble the Primevall Simplicity of
the Golden Age, where there was neither Judge nor Jailer, but common Liberty
prevented all occasions of Injury. Here Adultery was found impossible, there
being only difference of Sexes, no distinction of the married and unmarried
state, or appropriation of any single Female to one solitary Man. Which some
eminent Sages of Greece (to omit the suffrage of some of the more
spiritually-pretending Sectaries of this present Age) have looked upon as a
special part of the most perfect platform of a Commonwealth their wisdom could
excogitate. Assuredly the power of Nature is so wire-drawn through so many
ceremonious Circumstances, of Parentage, of Portion, of Alliances, and then so
fettered and confined by the religious tie of Marriage, whether the parties can
well hit it or no, that her vigor is very much broken, the Generations of men
weakened, and their days shortened, in most parts of the Civilized World: whenas
those Tenants in common you speak of seldom are sick, and ordinarily live to
an hundred and fifty years, as I have read in Historians. So that the
confinements of the Law of Marriage seem instituted for the good of the Soul
rather then the health and strength of the Body. But outward Laws not reaching
adulterous Affections, the Hypocrisy of the Civilized Nations has made them
too often forfeit the sincere good of both Grace and Nature at once.


Sophr. This is smartly, but madly and surprizingly, spoken, Cuphophron, and
more like a Poet or Philosopher then like a Christian.


Cuph. This is nothing against the Sanctity of the Laws of Christianity, which
undoubtedly are infinitely above not only the Lawlesness, but the best Laws of
other Nations. But forasmuch as I find my self as it were Advocate-general of
the Paynims, I must plead their Cause, and make their Case look as tolerable as
I can.


Bath. Which you do, Cuphophron, over-Lawyer-like, supporting your Clients
without any regard to the Truth, while you impute the Health and Longaevity of
these Barbarians to their promiscuous Venerie, rather then to their ranging
abroad in the open Air, to their Fastings and Huntings, and other Hardships of
life. But I have interrupted Euistor.


Euist. I pray you then, Mr. Advocate, what say you to that Custom of the
West-Indians, who offer their Wives or Daughters to a Stranger in token of
Friendship and Hospitality? Of the Bridegroom his not lying with his own Bride
the first night, but some other of the like quality? Of the King of Ca^ecut, in
the East Indies, his not lying with the Queen the first night, but one of the
Priests, who has five hundred Crowns for his Pains, as you may read in the
Voyage of Ludovicus Patritius? What to the Custom of the Province of Camul
belonging to the Great Cham, where the Master of the house, in an high strain
of Hospitality, commits his Wife and his whole Family to the Stranger, to use
his Wife and all he has with the same liberty himself does; and that his
Enjoyment may be entire, quits his house for the time, that the Stranger may
seem to have no Corrival? as Paulus Venetus relates.


Cuph. This is mavelous pretty, Euistor. But I conceive the Custom comes
from hence, in that they take Marriage to be no part of Religion, but of
Nature, and look upon their Wives merely as the best Chattel they have, and
therefore in an high strain of Friendship offer them to be enjoyed by their
Friends. In which kind Simplicity the Camulites seem to exceed all the rest.


Euist. But what think you of the Priest of Calecut, Cuphophron?


Cuph. I think that his lying with the Queen the first night pretends to an
auspicious Consecration of her Womb to future Fertility; and that his five
hundred Crowns are a reward of this religious performance.


Euist. But it is a strange act of Religion, to lie with another man's Wife.


Cuph. The direction of the Intention, Euistor, is all in all. The Priest does
not intend to commit Adultery, but to consecrate the Womb. But what blemish is
this in Providence, that Paynim-Priests are as crafty as some of the Christian,
who upon Spiritual Pretenses too often promote an Interest of the World and the
Flesh, as these Calecut-Priests seem to do, they both reaping the pleasure of
lying with the Queen, and strengthening the Interest of the Priesthood by
mingling the Sacerdotal with the Royal seed, the firstborn of the Queen being
in all likelihood as much the Son of a Priest as Heir to the Crown?


Philop. I thought Cuphophron had not been so nimble a Politician.


Hyl. His zeal, Philopolis, for the Paynims makes him more then ordinarily
quick-witted.


Euist. But what excuse will his wit find out for the other excess in
Matrimony, that, I mean, of the Tartars, who think Marriage so holy, that they
believe their God Natagai to have Wife and Children, and therefore if their
Sons or Daughters die before age, yet they celebrate a Marriage betwixt parties
thus deceased, that they may be Man and Wife in the other World?


Cuph. That they make Marriage so Sacramental a thing, need not seem strange to
us. But that they conceit God to have Wife and Children, is more extravagant,
and yet not much more then that opinion of the Anthropomorphites, who fancy
God in the form of a Man. Which Conceit certain Monks of Egypt were so mad
upon, that they forced the Bishop of Alexandria to subscribe it for fear of his
life.


Euist. I perceive no small matters will puzzle Cuphophron's invention: VIII.
and therefore though the (...), Of the (...), and the men of Arcladam that lie
in Childbed for their Mives.
and the men of Arcladam that lie forty days in Childbed for their Wives,
present themselves to my memory, yet I will pass them over.


Cuph. That Is a very odd thing of the men of Arcladam, Euistor: I pray you,
what is it?


Euist. When the Woman is delivered, she gets out of the Bed as soon as she
can, and follows the businesses of the house; but the Man lies in for so many
days, and does all the offices of a Mother to the Infant, saving the giving it
suck: and the Neighbors come a-gossiping to the Man lying thus in bed, as in
other Countries they do to the Woman. And they of Arcladam give this reason for
this Custom, because the Mother had a sufficient share of trouble in bearing
the Child and bringing him forth, and that therefore it is fit that the Man
should ease her now, and take off part of the care to himself, De Region.
Orient. l. 2. c. 41.
as Paulus Venetus reports.


Cuph. If the Men of the Country had had Milk in their Breasts, which several
men have had, according to the testimony of many credible Writers,
Philosophers, Physicians, and Anatomists, the Custom had been more plausible.
But such as it is, it has its reason, as you see, and it was not a pure piece
of Sottishness that carried them unto it. And for the (...), in that the Women
rule them, it is a sign that it is fit they should. For it is in virtue of
their Strength, Wit, or Beauty; and you know the Iambick, (...). They chose
their Kings of old from the Beauty of their form, as Lucretius notes. And why
do men rule the women, but upon account of more Strength or more Wisdom? But
where the women rule the men, it is a sign they have more Strength or Wit, and
therefore have a right to rule them. And indeed where do they not rule them?
insomuch that the whole World in a manner are of the (...). So that this is no
peculiar Disorder amongst the Barbarians, such as Mela and Diodorus Siculus
mention.


Hyl. The Women are much beholden to you, Cuphophron, for your so kind and
careful Patronage of them.


Cuph. I am of a large spirit, Hylobares; I love to be civil to all Sects,
Sexes, and Persons.


Hyl. Cuphophron swallows all down very glibly. IX.
But, Of the Pagans Cruelty to their Enemies, and inhumane Humanity to their
Friends.
as I remember, there are some direful Stories of the Pagans cruelty to their
Enemies, and inhumane Humanity to their Friends, that, methinks, should a
little turn his Stomach, Euistor.


Euist. There are very savage Customs recorded in Pomponius Mela touching the
Essedones, Axiacae and Geloni. The last clothe themselves and their Horses with
the Skins of their slain Enemies; with that part of the Skin that covers the
Head they make a Cap for themselves, with the rest they clothe their Horses.
The Essedones celebrate the Funerals of their Parents with great Feasting and
Joy, eating their Flesh minced and mingled with Mutton; (which is the manner of
their Burial of them) but tipping their Sculls with Gold they make
Drinking-cups of them: as the Axiacae quaffe in the Heads of their slain
Enemies, as well as drink their blood in the field. In Castella del Oro the
Inhabitants also eat their own dead. But in the Island Iava, as Ludovicus
Patritius reports, the Children do not, like the Essedones, eat their Parents,
but when they are old and useless, sell them to the Anthropophagi, as the
Parents do the Children, if desperately and irrecoverably sick in the judgment
of the Physician. For they hold it the noblest kind of Burial to be interred
in the Belly of a man, and not to be eaten by Worms: To which if any expose the
Body of his dead Friend, they hold it a crime not to be expiated by any
Sacrifice. The Laws also of the Sardoans and Berbiecae, which Aelian relates,
Var. Hist. l. 4. c. 1.
are very savage; the one commanding the Sons to knock the Fathers of the head
when they are come to Dotage, the other prohibiting any to live above seventy
years.


Hyl. Stop there, Euistor: let us hear what excuse the Advocate of the Paynims
can devise for these horrid Customs.


Cuph. Truly, Hylobares, these things must seem very harsh to any civil person,
especially at the first sight. But yet there seems, if we make farther search,
to be something commendable at the bottom of some of these. For the Parricide
that is committed by the Sardoans and Berbiccae seems to arise out of
Compassion to their Parents, they not enduring to see so sad a spectacle as
helpless and wearisome Old age, a heavy Disease, and yet uncurable by any thing
else but Death. And those of Iava, that sell, either the Parents their sick
Children, or the Children their aged Parents, to the Cannibals, it is both to
ease them of their pain, and procure them, as they think, the most honorable
Burial. And it is no small countenance to these barbarous Customs that S^
Tho. More's Vtopia allows painful and remediless Diseases to be shortened by
some easy way of death. Which seems to me another kind of Midwifery, to
facilitate the birth of the Soul into the other world, as Midwives do the
entrance of the Body into this. Which may be the reason why the Essedones are
so jocund at the Funerals of their Friends, they looking upon it as their
Birthday into the other State.


Euist. The Thracians do so indeed, X.
if we will believe Pomponius Mela, (...)
who adds, that their Wives contend who should be buried with their dead
Husbands. As also do the Indians. And Acosta reports that the Kings of Peru and
the Nobles of Mexico had their Wives, nearest Friends and Servants, killed at
their Funerals, to bear them company into the other World.


Cuph. This is harsh, I must confess, Euistor; but, it may be, not so silly and
unpolitick. For this Custom might be begun for the safeguard of Husbands and
Kings from being poisoned by their Wives, nearest Friends, and Servants.


Euist. But what a mad Solemnity was that of the Funeral of the Great Cham of
the Tartars, which Paulus Venetus describes, when his Body was carried to the
Mountain Alchai? De Region. Orient. l. 1. c. 54.
For they slew every one they met in the way, horse and man, saying these
words, Ite, and Domino nostro Regi servite in alteravita. It is thought no less
then twenty thousand men were slain thus on this occasion at the Funeral of the
Great Cham Mongu. There seems not in this so much as any Plot or Policy,
Cuphophron, but mere savage Barbarity.


Cuph. It is very wild indeed, Euistor: But the opinion of the Immortality of
the Soul and personal distinctness of the deceased in the other life is both
sober, religious, and Philosophical; and the Impression of the belief thereof
on the spirits of the People very useful and Political, for the making them
warlike and just; and this Solemnity of more force to impress this belief, then
all the subtle Ratiocinations of the Philosophers.


Euist. But it is so barbarously cruel, O Cuphophron.


Cuph. Who knows, Euistor, but most of these men were Volunteers, and had a
mind to serve the Great Cham in the other World? Otherwise they might have
kept out of the way. And the Ambition of living Princes sends more to Orcus
then this Superstition about the dead Cham of the Tartars, and, methinks, in
more uncouth Circumstances. For he that dies in the service of his living
Prince leaves him he serves, but he that dies in love to the deceased Cham goes
to the Prince he loves.


Euist. Very elegantly answered, Cuphophron.


Hyl. Cuphophron is such an Oedipus, that he will stick at the Solution of no
Riddle.


Euist. But I have one more to try his skill to the purpose, XI.
an accustomary Cruelty of the people of Caraiam, The Caraiamites murtheriag
good men to seize on their Virtues.
such as it is hard to say whether it be more ridiculous, or barbarous.


Cuph. I prithee, Euistor, what is it? I love to hear such Stories.


Euist. The forenamed Author tells us that the people in this Country, when a
Traveller from foreign Nations lodges with them, the man of the house, if he
perceive the Stranger to be one of an excellent carriage and virtuous
behavior, prudent and sober in his words and actions, and very eminent for his
Goodness and Honesty, he will be sure to get up at midnight and kill him,
conceiting that thereby he shall for ever detain the Prudence, Virtue and
Honesty, nay the very Soul, of this Traveller in his house, and that he will be
a perpetual Lodger there.


Bath. Surely Euistor plays the Wag with Cuphophron, and contrives a Story to
pose him.


Euist. In the word of a Gentleman, Bathynous, I relate no more then what I
read, and what any one else may read, in M. Paulus Venetus his History of the
Oriental Countries, in his second Book and the fortieth Chapter.


Cuph. I could easily suspect Hylobares of such a piece of Waggery, but I
believe Euistor will deal bona fide with me, and play no tricks; and therefore
I am glad Hylobares has committed this Province to him. But as for his Story of
the Inhabitants of Caraiam, I do not see that the Cause of the Paynims is much
detrimented thereby. It should seem these Pagans were as greedy after Virtue as
the civilized Nations after Money, who ordinarily murder the Owner to make
themselves masters of it. They therefore were more ignorant, but we more
wicked. But what farther Mystery there may be in the matter no man knows. It
may be they intended the deceased for some Lar familiaris, whose Soul they
would propitiate by some religious Ceremonies after they had trespassed so far
on his Body, which they had killed in honor and love to his Virtues, though
with small kindness to his Person. But whether it be more tolerable to murder
men out of love to their Virtues, or out of hatred to them, I leave, as a new
Disquisition, to more subtle Casuists. I am sure the Jews had no other cause
then that to kill our Savior, although they lived under the Institutes of no
less noble Lawgiver then Moses himself, and were then the choicest part of the
Civilized World.


Hyl. You do but play with Cuphophron. XII.
I pray you, Of the Anthropophagi or Cannibals.
Euistor, try what gusto he has for the Diet of the Cannibals.


Euist. Had not you better resume your Province, Hylobares, and assault him
your self?


Hyl. It cannot be in a better hand then yours, Euistor, who so particularly
remember Stories. Besides that Cuphophron is out of all jealousy of being
abused by you, which will make his Answers come off more glibly.


Euist. Well then, since it must be so, I will add to this single example of
slaying men to seize upon their Souls, that of murdering them to feed upon
their Bodies, a Villainy, Cuphophron, very frequently mentioned as well in
ancient as modern Historians: As of the Anthropophagi about the Nyssean
Mountains in India, which Eustathius notes; as also those of Scythia, noted by
Pomponius Mela. And Solinus takes notice not only of these Anthropophagi of
Scythia, but mentions also others in Aethiopia. The truth of which things later
discoveries seem to ratify. Christophorus Columbus tells us of Cannibals not
far from the Island Hispaniola, that eat Man's-flesh, and salt or souse it as
we do Beef, Pork, Bacon, and Brawn: That they geld those they take young, as we
do Capons, to make them eat more tender; and keep Women alive to breed on, as
we do Hens to lay Eggs. This Island of Cannibals is called Insula Crucis, of
which you may read more in the Voyage of Columbus. The men of Zipangai, (that
belongs to the Tartar) if they light on a Stranger, unless he can redeem
himself, kill him and eat him, calling their Friends and Kinsfolks to the
Feast. In Timaine, a Town of Castella del Oro, they sold Man's-flesh in the
Shambles, as Cosmographers write. As also that the Brasilians celebrate their
Festivals, making themselves m^rry over the body of a fat man cut into Collops;
and that the Enemies they take in War they roast and eat, dancing round about
them.


Cuph. Enough, Euistor, my stomach is surcharged already; nothing is more
nauseous then the Fancy of those things is to me. Nor can I devise what may be
said in the behalf of so high Barbarities. Only it is to be noted, That these
sad Objects are more a torment to the well-natur'd living then any farther
mischief to the dead: and that flaying of men of their Estates and Livelihood,
or taking away their Lives, is an harder Cruelty to the sufferer: and that it
is not so much the conscience of Decorum, as queaziness of stomach, that makes
our modern Europaeans abstain from their Enemies Carcasses. Besides, whether is
it more barbarous out of scorn and hatred to kill men to feed their Dogs
withal, as the Spaniards used the poor Indians, or for the Indians or other
Barbarians, out of an appetitious liking of Man's-flesh, more honorably to
bury it in their own bowels? a Funeral-solemnity that some of them use, and
think it the last good deed they can do for their deceased Friends. Wherefore
we can only make this deplorable Conclusion, That the unmercifulness of the
Europaeans is not less, but their Hypocrisy more, then that of the uncivilized
Indians. For that horror they profess and abhorrency from the Flesh of dead
men (which instinct, questionless, God and Nature has implanted in us as a bar
against all Cruelty to our kind) does not keep them off from doing all the ^eal
Cruelty that is committed by the Savage Nations. Whence they seem to me to be
self-condemned, while they boggle at the less kinds of Cruelty, and so
frequently practice ^he greater; straining at the Gnat, (as ^t is said) but in
the mean time swallowing down the Camel.


Sophr. I promise you, Cuphophron, I did not think you could have made ^o
passable work out of so crooked and knotty a matter. At least thus much I think
is true, That to them that make so light of War and Bloodshed and Murdering of
men to seize on what they have, to them, I say, to whom this substantial
Cruelty seems tolerable, these men should not think it intolerable in
Providence, that she permits those slighter and more innocuous shadows thereof.
For all those seeming Cruelties are but the flagellation of the absent, and
they take up and use at their pleasure only what he has left: but the killing
and murdering of a man is a present tormenting him, and forcible driving of
him out of all that he has. Which I speak to shame the civilized Nations, in
showing them that they frequently commit acts that are infinitely more cruel
and barbarous then those which they themselves judge the most horrid and
outrageous of all the acts of the Barbarians.


Cuph. I am glad, O Sophron, to see so grave a Judgment fall in with mine.


Sophr. I must confess, Cuphophron, that you have made a pretty shuffling show
of mitigating the harshness of the secular Barbarity of the Paynims, as you
call them: but I fear you will not have half the success in palliating the
gross Enormities of their Religions.


Hyl. And that, Sophron, is the very next thing that I would have Euistor to
exercise Mr. Advocate-general's Wit in.


Euist. In what, Hylobares?


Hyl. In finding any tolerable excuse for their gross Opinions touching XIII.
God, Of the Atheism and the Polytheism of the Barbarians.
for their Polytheism and Idolary, for their Men-Sacrifices, Devil^orship,
Sacrificing men to the Devil, and the like.


Euist. I understand you, Hylobares, and shall accordingly propound Instances
to Cuphophron. In the first place therefore, Cuphophron, I pray you, what do
you say to the Brasili^ns, that are reported to acknow^edge no God at all, and
yet to be so addicted to Divination, that they grow mad therewith?


Cuph. To this I answer, That in that they are so much addicted to Divination,
it is a suspicion that they do believe there is a God; and may be slandered as
Atheists, because they worship no Idols nor any visible Object.


Euist. That is very charitably surmized of you, Cuphophron.


Cuph. But suppose they be Atheists, how many thousands are there of such kind
of Cattle in the most civilized parts of Europe?


Euist. But others of the Indians, Cuphophron, to make amends, hold more Gods
then one. They of New England worshipped Kesan their Good God, and the Devil
beside, that he might not hurt them.


Cuph. And so by worshipping the Devil acknowledged two sovereign Powers or
Principles, a good one and (...) bad one: Which though it be a great Error,
yet is such as very great Wit^ have fallen into. For S^. Augustine himself,
before he became Christian was a Manichee. And Plutarch, in his Isis and
Osiris, entitles Plato to the like Error, (...) He tells us also that
Zoroaster was of the same Opinion; and that they named these two distinct
Principles Oromasdes and Areimanius; and that the Egyptian Osiris and Typhon
answer to them. So that it is not any sign of so great Sottishness, if the
Barbarian^ of America were lapsed into this strange mistake.


Euist. But your Paynims, O Cuphophron, seem to have made not only two, but
even two thousand Deities, while they worshipped Sun, Moon, Stars, Beasts and
Plants, Sea, Land, Wind, Thunder, Caves, Hills, the tallest and most spreading
Trees, nay whatever living Creature they met with first in a morning, as some
choose Valentines, or rather not choose them, but embrace the first they meet on
Valentine's-day.


Cuph. This cannot be denied, Euistor, but that the barbarous Nations did
religious Worship to innumerable Objects of this kind, but not as to the
supreme Power of all, (which was the primary or ultimate Object of all their
Adoration) but rather as to Images and Symbols of that ultimate Object. And how
great a part of the Civilized World, even of them that are called Christians,
contend that the worshipping of Images in such a sense as this is laudable and
right?


Euist. I think both much-what alike laudable.


Bath. I have thought often of this point, and that very impartially as well as
anxiously, and I cannot for my life find any excuse for those of the Roman
Church to clear them from Idolatry, but the same with better advantage may be
alleged for the Pagans, they having no written Law against worshipping Images
as the Romanists have, who acknowledge the Bible to be the Word of God.


Euist. That is very material. XIV.
But what mitigation can you find out, O Cuphophron, Of their Men-Sacrifices.
for that horrid and hideous way of worshipping these Objects, as that of the
Scythians about Taurica Chersonesus, who sacrificed Strangers to Diana, that
is, to the Moon?


Cuph. This is very harsh: but I pray you let me ask you this one question,
Euisior, Did never any man suffer in the civilized parts of Europe, for being
estranged from certain Religious Lunacies which bloody and Ty^anicall Obtruders
urged upon them under no less penalty then Death?


Euist. I must confess that History furnishes us with Instances of not only
many H^catombs, but several thousands of Holocausts of Man'sflesh butchered by
that bloody Church of Rome, and sacrificed to the honor and interest of their
great Diana. You know what I mean, Cuphophron.


Cuph. I do. And I pray you how much better is this then the Pagans sacrificing
of men to Diana Taurica?


Euist. Both exceeding bad: And yet I must propose to you other things as ill
or worse. As that barbarous Custom of the Ammonites, who sacrificed their
children to Molech or Milchom in the valley of Tophet, so called from the Drum
that was there beat to drown the lamentable Cries of the murdered Infants.


Cuph. This I must confess is exceeding barbarous, Euistor, to sacrifice though
but a single Son to that cruel Idol. But, methinks, it seems more destructive
to mankind, that those that either are or ought to be Patres Patriae, (I mean
great Princes and Emperors) unprovoked by any Injury, but merely out of a
desire of Dominion and Rule, are so lavish of the blood of their Subjects, as
to expose numerous Armies of them to the Slaughter; they smothering in the mean
time the groans of the dying and maimed by the sound of Drums and Trumpets, and
other clattering noises of War, while they thus sacrifice to the cruel Idol of
Ambition, as the Ammonites to Milchom in the valley of Tophet. And will History
acquit the civilized World of this piece of Barbarity, Euistor?


Euist. The Grand Seigniour is deeply guilty of this cruel kind of Idolatry:
and I wish it were not to be found too much in Christendom it self.


Cuph. So do I.


Euist. But, God be thanked, we are so clear from one horrid crime of the
Pagans, that we have nothing like it in Christendom.


Cuph. What Is that, XV.
Euistor? Of their worshi^ping the Devil.



Euist. Why, it is the worshipping the very Devil himself. Which that the
Pagans did, is manifest from their Temples and Images, from the madness of
their Priests, and from their Sacrifices. The Peruvians worshipped two carved
Idols, a black Goat and a long Serpent, both of them perfect Symbols of Satan,
and such as himself loves to appear in. In the City of Goa their Pagods or
Idols are of so detestable a form, that no man can imagine how ugly and
deformed they are: yet these they consult as Oracles, and by the power of the
Devil have Answers from them. The Chinois also worship a Devil-Idol standing on
an high, but something duskish, place of their Temples, having two huge Horns
on his Head, with a most terrible Countenance, with sharp Claws in stead of
Hands and Feet, and his Head uglily starting out from the midst of his Breast,
as Gotardus describes him. But the most horrible description of a Temple is
that of the King of Calecut's, where they worship his God Deumo: for the true
God Tamerani he serves not, because, though he made the World, yet he has given
up the Government of it, as they con^eit, to Deumo. This Temple has its
Entrance garnished with numbers of Devils made in Wood artificially turned and
carved. In the midst of the Chapel there is a Seat like a Throne of Brass,
with a brazen Devil sitting upon it, with a Crown on his Head, like that of the
Roman Pontife, (as Ludovicus Romanus describes it) out of which come three
Horns. There are four others also that turn in after such a manner, as that
they seem to support his Head. He has also four Teeth standing out of his foul
wide gaping Mouth, and a threatening Look, with terrible staring Eyes, and Hands
with crooked Nails like to Hooks; but his Feet not unlike to a Cock's. In every
corner of the Chapel is likewise placed a Devil made of Brass, with such art,
as that he seems to be in the midst of Flames wherein Souls are scorched in
most direful manner, whom the Devil also is devouring up, putting one Soul
into his mouth with his right hand, and reaching underneath at another with the
left.


Cuph. If there had been written upon the Walls of the Chapel, Primus in orb
Deos fecit timor, (as they say there is in Mahomet's Mosco's, Non est nisi Deus
unus) all had been complete.


Euist. Can there be any thing possibly parallel to this, Cuphophron, amongst
our Civilized Europaeans?


Cuph. I think nothing, unless it be the Religion of the Superlapsarians, the
Object whereof is Infinite Power unmodified by either Justice or Goodness:
which is that very Idol of Typhon or Arimanius I spoke of. For this Imagination
of O^nipotent Power and Will acting without any regard to Justice or Goodness,
is but an Idol, no real thing. If it were, it were more horrible then the
Indian Deumo, or any Devil that is. But it could not be God: For God is Love,
and every thing acts according to what it is.


Sophr. Very well argued, Cuphophron.


Philop. In many things Cuphophron seems to be on a more then or^inary good pin
to day.


Euist. But I believe he must stretch his wit to an higher pin them he has done
hitherto, to pretend to make any tolerable answer to what follows.


Cuph. Why, XVI.
what strange thing is that which follows, Of their sacrificing men to the
Devil.
Euistor?


Euist. The Sacrificing of men to the Devil. Those of Peru frequently sacrifice
their Children for the success of the affairs of their Ingua, for Health,
Victory, or the like. The Son was also frequently sacrificed for the health of
the Father. They of Mexico had a* Custom of sacrificing of their Captives.
Whence their Kings wore often stirred up by their Priests to make war upon
their neighbors, to get Captives to sacrifice to the Devil, they telling them
their Gods di^d for hunger, and that they should remember them. The Devil also
him^^lf is said to appear in Florida, and to complain that he is thirsty, that
humane blood may be presently ^hed to quench his thirst.


The solemnity of sacrificing Cap^ives to Vitziliputzly in Mexico within ^he
Palisado of dead men's Sculls is most horrid and direful: where the ^igh Priest
cut open their Breasts with a sharp Flint, and pulled out their reeking Hearts,
which he first ^hew'd to the Sun, to whom he offe^ed it, but then suddenly
turning to ^he Idol, cast it at his face; and with (...) kick of his foot
tumbled the Body from the Tarrass he stood upon down the Stairs of the Temple,
which were all embrew'd and defiled with blood. These Sacrifices also they ate,
and clothed themselves with the Skins of the slain.

Cuph. Now certainly this Custom of the Americans is very horrible and
abominable, thus bloudily to sacrifice men to that Enemy of Mankind, the
Devil. And therefore it were very happy if we had nothing in these Civilized
parts of the World that bore the least shadow of similitude with it.


Euist. Why? have we any thing, Cuphophron?


Cuph. Why? what is the greates^ horror that surprises you in this Custom,
Euistor?


Euist. To say the truth, Cuphophron* I do not find my self so subtle an^
distinct a Philosopher as explicitly t^ tell you what, but I think it is,
first, That mankind should worship so ugly and execrable an object as the
Devil* and then in the second place, Tha^ they should sacrifice so worthy an^
noble a thing as an humane Body* which is in capacity of becoming the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, to so de^estable an Idol.


Cuph. You have, I think, answered very right and understandingly, Euist^r, if
you rightly conceive what makes the Devil so detestable.


Euist. Surely his Pride, Cruelty and Malignity of nature, and in that all Love
and Goodness is extinct in him, which if he could recover, he would presently
become an Angel of Light.


^ath. Euistor has answered excellently well, and like a Mystical Theologer.


Euist. To tell you the truth, I had it out of them.


Cuph. But if he has answered right, Bathynous, it is a sad consideration, that
we have in the Civilized parts of the World those that profess a more odious
Religion then the Mexicans that sacrifice men to the Devil, I mean, the
Superlapsarians. For the Object of their Worship is a God-Idol of their own
framing, that acts merely according to Will and Power sequestered from all
respect to either Justice or Goodness, as I noted before, which is the genuine
Idea of a Devil. To which Idol they do not, as the Mexicans, sacrifice the mere
Bodies of men, but their very Souls also; not kicking them down a Tarrass, but
arbitrariously tumbling them down into the pit of Hell, there to be eternally
and unexpr^s^ibly tormented, for no other reason but because this their
dreadful Idol will have it so. Can any Religion be more horrid or blasphemous
then this?


Hyl. I perceive you begin to be drawn dry, O Cuphophron, you are fain so to
harp on the same string. This is but your Typhon and Areimanius you mentioned
before. I expected some more proper and adequate Parallelisms to Euistor's
fresh Instances, especially to that of sacrificing to the Idol Vitziliputzly.


Cuph. Do you think then, Hylobares, that it is so hard a thing to find
something in the Civilized World more peculiarly parallel to that dreadful
Ceremony? What think you of the Roman Pontif?


Euist. How madly does Cuphophron's fancy rove? and yet how luckily had he
hit, if he had but made use of the usual name Papa? For that is also the Title
of the high Priest of Mexico, who sacrifices men to Vitziliputzly, Hist. Ind.
lib. 5. c. 14.
as Josephus Acosta tells us.


Cuph. I thank you for that hint, Euistor: It seems then there will be a
consonancy betwixt the verbal Titles as well as an Analogy betwixt the things
themselves.


Hyl. I would gladly hear that Analogy, Cuphophron. Not that I should take any
such great pleasure in finding the Papacy so obnoxious, but that it pleases me
to observe the versatil sleights and unexpected turnings of your movable Fancy.


Cuph. Nor care I to tell you for either the one or the other, Hylobares, but
that I may adorn the Province I have undertaken in the behalf of the poor
Paynim. The Analogy therefore briefly is this: That as the high Priest of
Mexico with his Officers pulled out the Heart of the Captives, kicking down
their Bodies for the Assistents to eat their Flesh, and clothe themselves with
their Skins: so the Roman Pontif, by his cruel Inquisitors discovering the true
Religion of the faithful Servants of Christ, whom they hold in a forcible
Captivity, murdered them, and gave their Estates for a spoil to his cruel
Ministers and Assistents, to feed and clothe them. Does not this occurr often
enough in History, Euistor?


Euist. It cannot be denied, many thousands have been thus butchered.


Hyl. But to whom were they sacrificed, Cuphophron? You have omitted a
principal term that ought to have been in the Analogy.


Cuph. I would I knew what Vitziliputzly signified.


Euist. If that will do you any service, Hist. Ind. lib. 5. cap. 9.
I can tell you what it signifies expressly out of Josephus Acosta, viz. The
left hand of a shining Feather.


Cuph. Very good, very good: have patience then a little. Why may not then the
Sun easily signify the heavenly Glory, or the Glory of God; and this shining
Feather the vain and foolish Pomp and Glory of the World, or the Pride of Life?


Hyl. That is not much strained, C^phophron; but what then?


Cuph. Wherefore as the high Priest of Mexico pretends to sacrifice to the Sun,
showing him the smoking Heart of the Captive when he has plucked it out, but
presently turns about, and does really and substantially cast the Heart of the
sacrificed to the Idol Vitziliputzly: So the Roman high Priest, when he
murders holy and righteous men (under pretense of Heresy) for deny^ng such
Falsehoods and Blasphemies as are only held up for the supporting the Interest
of the Papal Sovereignty and Sublimity, pretends these Murders Sacrifices to
the Glory of God, and for the vindication of His Honor; whenas they are really
and truly bloody Oblations and cruel Holocausts Offered up to that Idol of
Abominations, Pride of Spirit, and vain Mundane Glory and Pomp, and a
remorseless Tyranny over the Souls and Bodies of men: which is such a
quintessential Lucifer, that it is that whereby Lucifer himself becomes a Devil.


Hyl. All this from Vitziliputzly signifying the left hand of a shining
Feather. Ha, ha, he. Wit and Fancy whether will thou go? How
merrily-conceited is Cuphophron, that can thus play with a Feather?


Sophr. I promise you, Hylobares, though the Fancy of Cuphophron may seem more
then ordinarily ^udibund and lightsomely sportfull, yet what he points at seems
to be overlamentably true, viz. That many thousands of innocent Souls have been
made Burnt-offerings to the Luciferian Pride of the Roman Hierarchy, and the
Sons of God (which is worse then the Mexicans case) thus cruelly and
perfidiously sacrificed to the firstborn of the Devil.


Euist. This is too true to contend against it.


Hyl. I wish it were not so. But in the mean time we can never take Cuphophron
at a loss.


Euist. So methinks, and I have but one kind more of Tragical Instances to
pose him with.


Cuph. What Is that, Euistor?


Euist. In some parts of the World they are their own Executioners; XVII.
as those of Narsinga and Bisnagar, Of Self-Sacrificers.
who cut their Flesh in pieces, and cast it on the Idol's face, or putting a
piece of their own Flesh on the pile of an Arrow, shoot it up into the Air in
honor to their Pagods, as Gotardus writes. After which Ceremony they cut their
own Throats, offering themselves a Sacrifice to their Idol. The King of
Quilacare, upon a silk Scaffold, in view of his people, after some solemn
Washings and Prayers, having first cut off his Nose, Ears, Lips, and other
parts, cuts his own Throat, as a Sacrifice to his Idol. Gotardus, as I
remember, adds, that the^e is loud Music sounding all the time. This is done
every Jubilee.


Cuph. Whether Satan put them upon this Slavery out of his scorn and hatred of
Mankind, or that he pleases himself in feeling his own Power, or in seeing
examples of the great affection and fidelity of his Vassals, (as imperious
Whores pride themselves in commanding their Lovers some signal Hardship or
Penance, as being a more sure testimony (if they perform it) of a more then
ordinary worth in themselves, that has engaged them in so perfect a Bondage) or
whether it be out of all these put together, is not so requisite to dispute.


Hyl. No more is it, Cuphophro^, it is so little to the present purpose.


Cuph. But I was coming to something which is more near to the purpose, namely,
That the nearest to these Self-Sacrificers to Satan are those sad Disciples of
certain Mystae* of dark and sour Dispen^ations, who, having no knowledge of a
Deity but such as is represented unto them in the dreadful shape of the Indian
Deumo above described, (that is, Will and Power disjoined* from all Justice and
Goodness) having first almost fr^tted a-pieces their very Heartstrings with
tormenting thoughts and anxious Suspicions, do at last either hang or drown
themselves, or else ^^t their own Throats, as a sad Sacri^^ce to that ghastly
Idol which their false Teachers had set up in their melancholi^ed Phancies. But
no Amulet against such diabolical Impostures comparable to that divine saying
of S. John, God is Love; and he that abides in love* abides in God, and God
in him.


Sophr. That is very profitably and seasonably noted, XVIII.
O Cuphophron: The meaning of Providence in permitting such horrid Usages in
the World.
and though my Judgment is not so curious as to criticize on the perpetual
exactness of your applications of the sad Miscarriages of the Civilized parts
of the World to those gross Disorders of the Barbarians; yet your comparisons
in the general have very much impressed that note of Philotheus upon my spirit,
That the more external and gross Enormities committed by the barbarous Nations
are as it were a reprehensive Satyr of the more fine and Hypocritical
Wickednesses of the Civilized Countries; that these civilized Sinners,
abominating those wilder Extravagancies, may withal give Sentence against
their own noless Wickedness, but only in a lesseugly dress. Whence it cannot
be so great wonder that Providence lets such horrid Usages emerge in the World,
that the more affrightfull face of Sin in some places might quite drive out all
similitude and appearance of it in others.


Bath. True, Sophron; but this also I conceive may be added, That Divine
Providence having the full comprehension of all the Periods of Ages, and the
Scenes of things succeeding in these Periods, in her mind, permitted at first
and afterward some parts of the lapsed Creation to plunge themselves into a
more palpable Darkness, that a more glorious Light might succeed and emerge.
The lovely splendor of which Divine Dispensation would not strike the beholder
so vigorously, did he not cast his eyes also upon that Region of Blackness and
sad Tyranny of the Devil in preceding Ages over deluded mankind^, such as
Euistor has so plentifully discovered. All these things therefore seem to have
been permitted in design to advance the Glory and adorn the Triumph of the
promi^ed Mess^as, the true Son of God and Savior of the World.


Sophr. That may very well be, Bathynous. Nor is it any Injustice or Severity
in God to make use of the Impenitency of Sinners to better purposes then either
themselves or wiser persons are many times aware of. But we interrupt Euistor
by this unseasonable descanting upon Cuphophron's performances.


Euist. I was only a-going to add something of the Madness of the Heathenish
Priests, XIX.
as the last Note of the Satanicalness of their Religion. The Madness of the
Priests of the Pagans.
But it is scarce worth the while.


Cuph. Nay by all means let us hear that also, Euistor.


Euist. That the Maenades, the Priests of Bacchus, were mad, appears in their
very Name, whose Notation is from that distemper. The Priest of the Samadees, a
People subject to the Muscovite, begins his holy things with howling, which he
continues till he grows mad with it, and then falling down dead, after orders
his Sacrifice, and finishes the Solemnity he was about. The Hoxiones also, or
Priests of China, when they consult their Oracles, cast themselves on the
ground, stretching out their hands and feet, another reading in a Book, to whom
are Responses made by some Assistents that sing and make a noise with Bells or
Cymbals. In the mean time the Spirit comes upon him that lies prostrate, who,
rising with staring eyes and distorted countenance, falls a-prophesying and
answering such Questions as the Bystanders demand.


Cuph. These are mad guizes of Religion indeed, and yet not an unfit
resemblance of as mischievous a Madness amongst too many of our more civilized
Religionists.


Euist. I believe you mean the howling Quakers, as uncivil as they are. For
they began in that tone at first, and fell down dead in Trances, and afterward
getting up fell a-prophe^ying, uttering out of their swollen breasts very dark
Oracles, declaring against all Ord^r and Ordinances, decrying all Reason as a
work of the Flesh, and pretending to an unaccountable Spirit, and to a Light
within that is invisible to all without who have not lost their spiritual
eyesight. None conceive they see it but such as are either blind or in the
dark.


Cuph. There are great and good things the Quakers pretend to, Euistor, but
they soil them by so wild a way of profession of them, and indeed in
particulars seem to contradict what with so loud a voice they in the general
extol. But that Madness I hinted at is more Epidemicall then this Sect, there
being more besides these that never think themselves Divinely-wise till they
grow so staringly mad that the eye of Reason seems to have quite started out of
their head, and Fumes and Phancies to be the sole guides of their Tongue.


Sophr. I suppose, Cuphophron, you perstringe that general Disease of
ungovernable Enthusias^ dispersed up and down in Christendom. And yet there is
another kind of religious Madness more spreading and no le^s mischievous then
this.


Cuph. I pray you what is that, Sophron?


Sophr. So fixed and fierce a belief in an infallible Priesthood, that what
they dictate for an Oracle, be it never so repugnant to all our outward Senses,
to all our internal Faculties of Imagination, Reason and Understanding, never
so contradictious to whatsoever is holy, virtuous, or humane, yet they embrace
and stick to it with that zeal and heat, that they fly in the faces and cut the
throats of not only them that gainsay, but even of those that will not profess
the same abominable Errors with themselves. If so enraged an Heat, kindled
upon so enormous a Mistake as never any Lunatic could think or speak more
contradictiously, joined with as high Outrages as ever madman did commit, for
all manner of Murder and Cruelty, if this temper or spirit be not the Spirit
of Ma^ness, and that of the highe^t strain, I know not what belongs to the
Spirit of Sobriety.


Cuph. Certainly it must be a great matter that thus transports Sophron, and
makes him something unlike his usual self.


Sophr. To tell you the truth, I had mine eye on the Artolatria of the
Romanists and their Article of Transubstantiation, with all the wild
Concomitants and Sequels thereof.


Cuph. You could not have pitched upon a greater reproach of the Civilized
World. I profess unto Sophron, though no man can have a greater aversation then
my self from slighting or reviling that which others embrace as the most sacred
and solemn Point of their Religion; yet amongst ourselves I cannot but declare,
that this Figment of Transubstantiation comprises in it such a bundle of
Barbarities, of unheard^ of Sottishnesses, and savage Cruelties, that there is
no one thing parallel to it in all Paganism. The manifold Impostures of the
Priests of the Pagans, their (...), ^hether it be the feeding ^n the Flesh of
Enemies, or entombing the bodies of their dead Friends in their own Bellies,
whether their gross Idolatries in the general, or their Sacrificing men to
their Idols, all these Abominations are as it were tied together in this
fictititious Fardel of Transubstantiation. For was there ever any Indian so
imposed upon by their Priests, as to believe they had a power by a certain form
of wo^ds to turn a Cake of Maize into a living Man, and that the Miracle is
done by them, though the Cake of Maize appear still to their Sight, to their
Touch, and all their other Senses, as perfect a Cake of Maize as before? And
how can these look upon the Indians as such a barbarous people, for either
feeding on their Enemies, or burying their dead Friends in their own Bowels,
whenas they themselves profess that they eat and grind a-pieces with their
teeth, not dead, but living Man's-flesh, and that not of an Enemy, but their
dear^st Friend and Savior? Can any thing ^eem more barbarous then this? And
then to uphold this Figment, (which seems invented only for the pomp and
vainglory of the Priest, that he may be accounted a stupendous Wonder-worker,
a Creator of his Creator) to maintain this Fiction, I say, by the murdering
many a thousand innocent Souls that could not comply with the Imposture, what
is this inferior to Sacrificing Captives to the Idol Vitziliputzly, as I
intimated before?


Sophr. I am glad to see you, Cuphophron, so heartily resent the unsufferable
Wickedness of that Point of the Roman Religion. I thought you had been so
high-flown a Philosopher, that you had taken no notice, no not so much as of
these grosser Miscarriages in the Religions of the World: which had been an
unpardonable neglect.


Cuph. If I flew higher then the strongest-winged Fowls are said to do in the
time of Pestilence, yet the sent and noisomeness of this crass and barbarous
Miscarriage could not but strike my nostrills very hotly, and detain my Sight.


Sophr. The truth is, Cuphophron, that no Phenomenon in all Providence has
more confoundingly astonished me and amazed me then this of Transubstantiation
in all its circumstances. If the Priests of Peru had thus imposed upon those
Savages, how should we either have bemoaned them or derided them! O poor
Peruvians! O sottish and witless Paynims, devoid of all Sense and Reason, that
are thus shamefully imposed upon by their deceitful Priests! Or else, O
miserable people, that must either profess what it is impossible for any one
entirely in his wits to believe, or else must be murdered by the grim Officers
of the Ingua, incensed against them by the Complaints of an imposturous and
bloody Priesthood! But this to be done in the most Civilized parts of the world!


Hyl. Nay, this consideration would make any one sigh deeply as well as your
self, but me especially. Does not this, O Sophron, subvert utterly all the
belief of Providence in the world?


Sophr. God forbid, Hylobares. No, it more strongly confirms it, there nothing
happening to degenerated Christendom in all this but what is expressly
predicted in the holy Oracles; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.
That in the time of the Man of Sin, God would send upon them that loved not
the truth strong Delusions, that they should believe ^a Lie; and particularly
pointing at this reproachful Figment of Transubstantiation, it is said of the
Beast, Apoc. 13. 6.
that he should blaspheme the Tabernacle of God, which, undoubtedly is the Body
of Christ; which, for the enhancing of the glory of the Priest, they thus
foully debase and abuse.


Hyl. These things neither Cuphophron, as I think, nor my self are so well
versed in as fully to judge of; but we presume much of your judgment and
gravity, O Sophron: which is no small ease to us for the present.


Cuph. In the mean time, Hylobares, I hope you have spent all your force
against me and my Paynims.


Hyl. Not all, XX.
but the chiefest, Of their Religious Methods of living in order to future
Happiness.
or rather in a manner all: for my other Remarks on the barbarous Nations
touching their Religions are more slight, and such as bear too obvious a
resemblance to the known Miscarriages of Christendom; such as the over-severe,
or over-loose, methods of living in reference to future Happiness. An example
of the latter whereof may be the Doctrine of the Bo^zii of Iapan, who teach the
people, that if they pray but to Amida and Zaca, two holy men that lived here,
and satisfied for the Sins of the World, though they do it but carelessly and
remissly, yet they shall not fail of everlasting Happiness.


Euist. But Gotardus taxes these Bouzii for a Religious Order of Atheists.


Cuph. And yet several Sects in Christendom that would be thought no
Athei^ts, as the Antinomians and Liber^ines, and others that would be loath to
be noted by those names, have too great an affinity with these Bouzii and their
Followers in their Life and Doctrine. But I spare them. But* what instances
have you of the over-severe method, Euistor?


Euist. There is an odd example of the Indian Abduti, who for a time lived very
rigidly and severely, but that Dispensation once being passed over, they gave
themselves up to all Dissoluteness, and conceited they might do so with
authority.


Cuph. That is very easy to parallel to the condition of some Spiritualists,
who, under pretense of having subdued the Flesh by more then ordinary
Austerities, and of having arrived to the Liberty of the Spirit, return again
to the gross Liberties of the Flesh, to the great grief and scandal of the more
sober Professors of Religion.


Euist. Some chaste Votaries of the Turks set a great Iron ring on their yard,
using themselves as we do our Mares that they may not take Horse. Those of
Mexico slit that member for the same devout purpose.


Cuph. This is a sign that these have Votaries are in good earnest. But to
pretend to undertake a Vow of Chastity more strong then iron or adamant, and
yet to lie with other men's Wives rather then to break it, is such a mysterious
Juggle or contradictious point of Hypocrisy, that the very Pagans would be
ashamed of it.


Euist. They might be so indeed, Cuphophron, nor does there any thing of
importance occurr to my mind that looks like a sullen piece of Severity in
Paganism, but the same may be produced in the very same terms in the present
Romanism; as long and tiresome Pilgrimages, voluntary Whippings and Scourgings,
immoderate Watchings and Fastings, and the like. These are the Exercises also
even of them that serve Idols and worship the Devil, as well as of them that
pretend to be the genuine Servants of the Lord Jesus.


Hyl. But is there nothing observable touching their Opinions of the other
State, XXI.
in order to which they may undergo these Hardships? Of their Opinions touching
the other State.



Euist. That is worth the noting, that most of the barbarous Nations have some
glimpse or surmize of the Soul's Immortality, and of a State after this Life.
But it is often mixed with very feat Conceits. As they of Peru hold that after
death men eat and drink and wantonize with Women.


Cuph. Who knows but that they may understand that mystically, as the Persians
expound like passages in Mahomet's Alcoran?


Bath. Besides, these Europaeans seem to me in some sort to Peruvianize, that
think they can by bargain and contract buy future Happiness with Money as we do
Fields and Orchards in this life; not considering that if Paradise be not
opened within us by virtue of true Regeneration into the Divine Life, all the
Wealth in the Indies will not purchase an entrance into the eternal ^aradise
in Heaven.


Euist. The Brammans also in the East Indies have a most ridiculous conceit
touching the Transmigration of Souls, namely, That the Reward of a virtuous
Soul is, that she may pass out of a Man's body into the body of a Cow.


Cuph. That Is ridiculous indeed, if the expression be not Symbolicall, and hint
not some more notable thing to us then we are aware of. For that the
Transmigration of men's Souls into the bodies of Beasts has a Mystical or Moral
meaning both Plato and some of his Followers have plainly enough intimated.


Euist. And Go^ardus expressly writes, that these Bra^^nan^ had the knowledge of
Pythagoras and of his Philosophy, then which nothing was more Symbolicall. I
will produce but one observable more, and then give Cup^ophron, or rather my
self, no farther trouble. For Cuphophron turns all off with sport and
pleasantry.


Cuph. You have produced nothing yet, Euistor, at all hard or trou^^esome.


Euist. Nor will I begin now: For it is only that they of S. Sebastian de la
Plat^ have neither Image nor Idol.


Cuph* It is a sign they are the more pure. Worshippers of the Deity.


Euist. If they be not Atheists: But that which I was going to add was that
fond imagination of theirs, that after Death they should come into a pleasant
place which they dreamed to be situated beyond certain Hills, which they could
point at with their fingers.


Cuph. It were a question worth the starting, whether this American Elysium or
the Scholastic Empyreum be the more likely Rendezvous of blessed Souls
departed this life.


Hyl. I pray you, what think you of that, Cuphophron?


Cuph. I think the Coelum Empyre^m of the Schools is a childish Figment. For
what ground is there that the first Heaven should be Cubicall, unless it be for
the young Angelick shapes to whip their Gigs on the flat and smooth floor
thereof? Wherefore the rude Indians, so far as I know, may come nearer the mark
then the subtle Schoolmen, though they both seem to me widely enough to miss it.


Hyl. But I am for the Empyreum of the Schools rather then for that ^ly^ium of
the Americans. For the American Elysium is somewhere, viz. beyond the Hills
that those of S. Seba^tian de la Plata use to point at. But if the Empyreum of
the Sch^ols be a mere childish Figment, it is nowhere.


Cuph. There Is a reason indeed, Hylobares; how can it then be the real
Rendezvous of separate Souls?


Hyl. Separate Souls are Spirits, Cuphophron, but Spirits are nowhere: where
can they therefore more fitly have their Rendezvous then in the Scholastic
Empyreum, which is nowhere also?


Cuph. Shame take you, Hylobares, have you hit on that piece of Waggery once
again? Is this all the thanks I have for bes^irring my ^elf so stoutly to ease
your aggrieved imagination, that was so oppressed and burdened with the
consideration of the sad Scence of affairs in the Pagan World and Ages?


Hyl. For that friendly Office I return you many thanks, XXII.
O Cuphophron, The u^successf^lsess of Cuphophron's Advocateship hitherto in
ref^rence to the ^as^ of Hylobares his P^rple^ities.
and must confess you have in your attempts shown a great deal of Versatility
of wit and nimbleness of fancy, and that not without the mixture of some
Solidity sometimes. But the less there had been of that, it had been the better.


Cuph. That Is a Paradox indeed: why so, I pray you, Hylobares?


Hyl. For your endeavor being perpetually to show that things were as ill in a
manner in the Civilized parts of the World as in the Barbarous, this was not to
ease me of my sad perplexing thoughts, but to redouble the burden, and make
the ways of Providence appear to me twice as dismal as before.


Cuph. This Hylobares has a mind to baffle me, and make me ridiculously
unsuccessfull in every thing I attempt. Did I not persist in the way that
Philotheus himself seemed to point at, viz. to undeceive your Fancy, that was
so horribly struck with the strange Enormities of the Pagan World, by
intimating that for the Civilized Nations, that you had a better conceit of,
that the Heathen were in a manner little worse in their Opinions and Practices
then they?


Hyl. Nay, I confess, Cuphophron, that that was pretty well levelled at my
Fancy. But in thus quieting my Fancy, you have roused up my Reason, to give
me a more lasting and invincible disquiet then I labored with before. For my
Reason tells me, that if the World be all over so bad in a manner as it is in
the barbarous Countries, I ought to be less satisfied with Providence now then
ever.


Cuph. Alas! Hylobares, I am sorry I have made your Sore worse, but you must
make your address to him who prescribed the Plaster. Philotheus was the
Physician, I but his Surgeon or Apothecary that administered the Physic
according to his prescript. He ought to set you right again by his greater
skill.


Philoth. I pray you deal freely and ingenuously, Hylobares, are you really
more pinched then before? or is it a counterfeit complaint and a piece of
sportfull Drollery with Cuphophron?


Hyl. To deal plainly with you, Philotheus, it is mixed. But I am very much
still dissettled, and therefore implore your farther help.


Philoth. Will not this consideration, Hylobares, both ease your Fancy and
gratify your Reason too, That upon the observation that there are some very
sottish Conceits and Practices even in the Civilized World, where all things
otherwise look so cheerfully and splendid, we may also conceive the like of the
barbarous Nations, and not immerse or defix our thoughts on those things only
which are so reprehensible and hideous amongst them, but think there may be
much also of natural gayety and jollity, and that that dark Scene does not
becloud all times, places, nor persons?


Hyl. That Is well suggested, Philotheus, and is accommodate to the relieving
one's Melancholy a little. Wherefore because you have begun so well, I pray you
hold on, and communicate to us the thoughts which your own silence all this
time and our discoursing may have occasioned you to pitch upon, in order to a
fuller and more perfect cure of my present Malady. For it is no more then you
promised, and I hope Philopolis will see that you keep your word.


Philop. There needs no other obligation, I dare say, for Philotheus to do
that office of friendship, then his own goodness and sincere zeal for the
Truth, and hearty desire of delivering Souls from the bondage of Ignorance and
the rack of Doubt and Anxiety in so great matters.


Philoth. I wish I were as able as I am willing in that kind, XXIII.
Philopolis. Several Considerations to make us hop^ that the state of the
World may not be so bad^ as Melancholy or History may represent it.
But I will attempt it, and that two ways. First, by showing that the World
may not be so enormously ill as Hylobares his Melancholy surmizes it: Secondly,
by hinting an Hypothesis which, if embraced, will plainly make good, that be
the World as bad as it will, yet it is not inconsistent with the Divine
Goodness (which we contend is the measure of his Providence) to permit it.


Hyl. I, that Second, Philotheus, were a Remedy indeed, such as would quite
eradicate all future possibility of such Diffidences as I labor under. But I
shall willingly have you treat of the First in the first place.


Philoth. Cuphophron with a great deal of dexterity of wit answered the
particular Instances that Euistor produced of the most ugly Usages amongst the
barbarous Nations. I shall only rehearse certain brief Heads that will serve
in general to break the force of such Arguments as either others offer or offer
themselves to our thoughts, to invalidate the belief of such an Exactness of
Providence as we plead for, and boldly pretend to infer, that if there were a
God, these things could not be permitted in the World; as you in the beginning
complained, Hylobares.


Hyl. That horrid Squalidity in the Usages of the barbarous Nations presses
hard toward that Conclusion, Philotheus; especially when a man is immersed in
Melancholy.


Philoth. But that you be not hereafter so easily imposed upon, let me desire
you to remember those Considerations that I was ever and anon thinking on all
this time you were discoursing. The First Consideration.
As First, That Historians may write things that are false, whether they
pretend to be Eyewitnesses themselves, or take thing up upon the reports of
others. Old men and Travelers may lie by authority, as it is said in the
Proverb. Wherefore either negligent enquiry, or the vanity and affectation of
telling strange things, may fill Histories with many false Narrations; and so
though Euistor did not intend to deceive Cuphophron, yet he may happily have
exercised his wit in several Objects that never had any existence but in the
pages of Historiographers. And therefore I could not but smile to see how
nimbly Cuphophron analyz'd the Politics of that Custom of the high-Priest's
lying with the King of Calecut's Bride the first night, as if it were a design
that the Son of a Priest and the Heir to the Crown should concur in one
person: whenas the Sons of the King do not succeed in the Kingdom, but his
Nephews on the Sister's side, as Aloysius Cadamustus tells us in his Navigation
to those parts.


Philop. That Is very strange, Philotheus. I pray you what may be the reason of
it?


Philoth. He says it is this; Because the Queens of Calecut are perpetually
attended by no less then ten Priests a-piece, (for, according to him, the King
has two Queens) and they are often compressed by them; which he is persuaded to
be for his honor so to be dealt with; but this mixed Of^spring not to be so fit
to succeed as Heirs to the Crown.


Philop. This quite spoils all the witty descant that Cuphophron made on that
supposed Custom, if Aloysius Cadamustus be a more credible Writer then
Ludovicus Patritius.


Euist. Which is a very hard thing to prove, Philopolis.


Philoth. But in the mean time Historians contradicting one another, or
differing so much in their Narrations, makes things so uncertain, that no wise
man will suffer himself to be born down by Stories into any Anxieties touching
Providence, before he be well assured of the truth of them. I am sure
Epicureans and Atheists are very circumspect how they believe any Stories about
Apparitions or Witches, though never so true, lest they should be disturbed in
their minds with over-urgent suspicions of the Existence of God. Why should
they then that believe there is a God from certain Indications of him, be cast
into Anxieties about Providence from Stories and Reports that are uncertain?


Hyl. That Is but a reasonable Caution, Philotheus: I pray you go on.


Philoth. And a Second is this; The Second Consideration.
That touching Ceremonies as well civil as religious, and most of all Opinions,
we are to consider, there may be laid down the narration of the Symbols
without any Key of Mythologie added thereto. Of which sort, for ought I know,
may be the Brammans transmitting the Souls of the best men into the body of a
Cow; a thing as likely as Jupiter's carrying Europa on his back through the Sea
in the form of a Bull. Which Palaephatus resolves only into an Homonymie in
words, and tells us that it was a man of Crete, (an Island peculiarly sacred to
Jupiter) whose name was Taurus, that carried Europa into Crete out of Tire, as
he had carried many other Maids captive thence before.


Hyl. But what is this Story of a Bull to that of the Cow the Brammans speak of?


Philoth. Very much, Hylobares. For I must confess I think it is such another
Homonymie of words, the same word signifying both a Cow or Ox, and a Cherub,
that is, an Angel, in the Oriental Tongues. Is it not so, Eui^^or?


Euist. The Critics do write of some such Etymologies.


Philoth. And therefore the wiser amongst the Brammans, unless they have lost
their Pythagorick Tradition, surely understand by this Transmission of good
men's Souls into the body of a Cow, the assecution of the Cherubick or Angelick
body, which is the greatest reward of the virtuous Soul that can be, and the
end of all the Pythagorick Purgations.


Hyl. This is an unexpected and surprising account of that seeming gross
Conceit of the Indian Brammans.


Cuph. I thought it was Symbolicall.


Philoth. They of Narsinga are Worshippers of the Sun and Moon.


Hyl. It may be so: A gross and sottish Religion.


Philoth. And they have a Tradition, that when either of them are eclipsed,
they are bit by the celestial Dragon.


Hyl. On my life their Priests are concealed Almanack-makers, and have turned
into a superstitious Parable (which the People understand not) the Philosophy
of Caput and Cauda Draconis.


Philoth. Then you see another real Truth wrapped up in the Homonymie of words;
and that this is no Sottishness in the Priests of narsinga, but our Ignorance
that understand not their Mythologie. Who knows therefore but that they may be
as subtle in their Worshipping the Sun and Moon, and pretend they worship not
them, but the Deity that is in them and in all things? as the Europaeans plead
for their worshipping Images, that they worship God or Christ in them.


Hyl. In this they may be both alike subtle or sottish.


Euist. But was there ever any conceit so silly as that of some of the
Americans, (though I have forgot the Country wherein they live,) who have this
Tradition amongst them That God shot a multitude of Arrows into the Ground,
from whence sprung Men and Women, and that thus the World was peopled?


Cuph. It may be it is a Riddle concerning the (...).


Hyl. What a youthful conceit has your Fancy slipped into, O Cuphophron?


Cuph. It Is good enough to allow amongst the Americans.


Hyl. What? then you have left off being Advocate-general for the Paynims.


Cuph. It were no wit to defend them in so slight a matter.


Bath. It may be the first Author of that Aenigma needs no defense, the
Parable bears so fair an Analogy to that passage somewhere in Plotinus, (...).


Cuph. Why, do you think, Bathynous, that Pythagoras or Plato ever traveled
into America?


Bath. No, but there may have been wise men in all parts of the Earth, for
ought I know, who in Symbols and Parables have insculped the memorials of their
Wisdom in the minds and memories of rude people; as some walking in solitary
Woods or Groves carve their Names in the Barks of Trees, which grow with the
growth of the Tree they are carved on. But it may be in a little time men know
as little of the meaning of these Parables, as the Stock or Bark of a Tree does
of the person whose name it bears. And to tell the rude people of the mystical
meaning of their Traditionall Allegories, as if the Story were but a Parable,
but the Mystery the Truth, would be as harsh to their minds, as it would be
hard to a Tree, if it had Sense, to have the true Effigies of the man whose
name it bears carved on it, in lieu of the Name which it has already, and which
has grown and spread in the Bark with the growth of the Tree. It would be as
dolorous to them as using the Incision-knife to carve their live flesh. And
therefore it would make them furiously oppose the manifestation of the Truth.


Hyl. What pretty unexpected fetches has the thoughtfull mind of Bathynous! But
I eagerly desire that Philotheus would hold on in his proposed Method.


Philoth. In the Third place therefore, The Third Consideration.
Hylobares, you are to consider, That the prejudice of Custom may so infect
our Phancies, that for matter of Ornaments of the body or other civil
Ceremonies, we may unawares tax those that are really as good as our own. There
is a great latitude in these things, and they vary even in the most Civilized
places from one extreme to another, and that very often in one Age: and the
Habits of our Fathers or Grandfathers seem as strange to us as those of
Strangers and Foreiners.


Hyl. This is a Point that least of all troubles me, Philotheus.


Philoth. But Fourthly, (...)
As for Moral Deformities and Extravagancies, it has been hinted already, that
there being Folly and Wickedness all over the World, it is better there should
be this variegation of it, then that it should be everywhere in the same
dress; that seeing it out of the more familiar habit, we may the more easily
discern the ugliness of it, and the more courageously hoot at it, and so at
last heartily detest it, be it in what mode or habit it will. Thus is Vanity
and Vileness laughed and jeared at even upon its own Stage, while it is in
acting, and in due time will, it may be, quite be hissed off the Stage by the
Spectatours; that is to say, they will be as much ashamed to frame dark and
dismal Idol-Imaginations of God, as to worship the Devil; and to live as if
there were no God in the World, as to profess openly they think there is none.


Sophr. I pray God hasten those Times, Philotheus.


Philop. Amen, I pray God.


Philoth. Fifthly, The Fifth Consideration.
you are to consider, Hylobares, That this Terrestrial Globe is the very Dregs
of the World, and the most proper Region of Evil; and that therefore to judge
of the full benignity of Divine Providence by what we find here, were to
measure the Happiness of some famously-flourishing and excellently-well-ordered
City by the condition of them that live in the Hospitals or Gaols. For,
according to the opinion of the ancient Philosophers, Philo, Plato and others,
there may be many Aereall and Aethereall Concamerations above this Earth and
lower Air well replenished with happy Souls or Spirits, such as are arrived to
that condition that Plutarch sets down in this Aenigma, That they are the
Citizens of that Region where the Inhabitants eat no Meat, nor do their Bodies
cast any Shadow.


Hyl. That Is a good and comfortable consideration to those that rejoice more in
the good of the Universe then their own.


Philoth. And those that are such curious Enquirers into Providence ought to be
so minded. (...)
But I proceed. Sixthly, therefore, consider, That whatsoever evil mankind
groans under, they have brought it on their own heads by their Disobedience and
revolting from the First Good, and by preferring the full swindge of the Animal
life before the orderly Pleasures and warrantable Joys of the Divine.


Sophr. And therefore, Philotheus, I think we have greater reason to magnify
the Mercy of God, when we see any sad Object in the World, that every man is
not in so ill a condition, (whenas we have all made our selves obnoxious
thereto) then to repine against Providence, because we see some are.


Philoth. You say very well, Sophron; and we may also add, That there are very
few in the world so miserable, but they would take it very hainously of any one
whom they understood to go about to take away their life.


Because (which is to be observed in the Seventh place) The Seve^th
Consideration.
the Lapse of Man (as touching Happiness) is but into lesser Enjoyments, out of
God's blessing (as the Proverb is) into the warm Sun; he catching at Good even
then, if we may believe Socrates, when he closes with that which we ought in
such circumstances of Defect or Obliquity to call by the name of Evil.

Sophr. And good reason too, Philotheus.


Philoth. Eighthly, The Eigh^h Consideration.
we are to take notice, That in the most disadvantageous parts of the World
there is a possibility of emerging out of the Wickedness and Ignorance of the
place, if a man be sincere: If he be not, his Hypocrisy is ipso facto
punished. For those that of late years have gone about to convert the Indians
to the Faith, have found them very capable, and not only so, but exceeding
witty and subtle, nothing infe^iour to the Civilized Nations, as I have heard
from them that have made observation. And I doubt not but if Euistor would make
it his business to set out the commendable things amongst the barbarous
Nations, as much as he has those things that look the most horridly and
reprochfully, it would alleviate Hylobares his melancholic Conceits of things
very much.


Euist. I must confess, XXIV.
Philotheus, E^ce^lent Instances of Morality even in the most barbarous Nations.
that I meet with such Specimina of Peace and Righteousness amongst the
barbarous Nations so called, that it were desirable we could find the like
amongst us Christians. The barbarous Americans themselves seek future Happiness
from these Principles; promising that Prize to the just and peaceful, and
adjudging the injurious, cruel and covetous to a dark, slippery and
disconsolate Pilgrimage after this life, where they shall cut their Feet with
hard Flints, and enjoy no comfort, rest, nor quiet in any thing. Whence
Hathney, a Peruvian Nobleman, would not be baptized, because he would not go
to the place where the cruel and covetous Spaniards went, though they called it
by the specious name of Heaven. I should think as much from fear of being in
like condition after this life with these bloody Manslayers, as out of
detestation of their accursed Company: whose insatiable desire after Gold made
them insufferably injurious, to the shame of all Christendom, as if they had no
other God but this; as a Brastlian upbraided to them, who took up a Wedge of
Gold, saying, Behold the God of the Christians.


Sophr. So easy a thing is it for one son of Wickedness to reproach another.


Euist. But if you read but the description of the Country of Mangi in the
East Indies, and of their King Fakfur, as Paulus Venetus sets things down, with
what Justice, Peacefulness and Kindness all affairs were administered, and with
what Security they lived, and how safely Strangers might travel night and day
through all parts of his large Kingdom, and that though Tradesmen left open
their Shops by night, no man would enter to steal any thing; you would bestow a
better title on these surely, O Sophron, then you did on the Spaniard or
Brasilian.


Sophr. They seem to deserve a better, Euistor.


Euist. The like character particularly does Ludovicus Patritius give of the
City Cambaia, averring that they keep most professedly to that royal Law, Quod
tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.


Hyl. But where find you any such examples in the West Indies, Euistor? For
that is the most notorious Region of Barbarity.


Euist. It cannot be denied. And yet you see they have a discrimination of Good
and Evil, by that Story of Hathney the Brasilian. And even that People which
Americus Vesputius describes in his first Voyage, to be as remote from all that
which we call Civility as can be, they being without Government, Laws, or
Clothing, yet their Humanity and Kindness to Strangers is said to exceed all
belief; they receiving them when they were landed with all expressions of Joy
and Gladness, with Songs and Dances, with Mirth and Junkettings, offering them
every thing they found pleasing to themselves, and doing all honor and respect
imaginable to them, inviting them by their Friendliness and Hospitality no less
then eighteen leagues into their Country, and entertaining them thus liberally
nine days from place to place. And as they waited on them in such numerous
companies, if they saw any of the Strangers wearied, they would of themselves
ease them by carrying them in their Hamocks, and were wonderfully officious in
conveying them over Rivers, by sleights and artifices they had, for both their
ease and safety. Happy he that had the opportunity of showing his Kindness to
any one of them, in getting him on his Back or Neck to swim over the River with
him. With these high, but natural, strains of real Civility and Humanity did
they conduct the Strangers also back again to their Ships. Where they having
entertained them for a day, and after given them notice that they were to go
away next morning, the Natives having sufficiently pleased themselves in
viewing and admiring the largeness and artificialness of their Vessels, they
very friendly took leave, and left them.


Cuph. It had been a pretty experiment to have shot off some of the Cannon
while these poor ignorant Paynims were in the midst of their astonishment and
admiration.


Euist. They did so, Cuphophron, having no design to experiment any thing, but
only to discharge a Gun or two according as is usual on such occasions. But it
had a ridiculous effect.


Cuph. I pray you tell what, Euistor.


Euist. Those that were on the Shore leapt into the Sea, and dived; as Frogs
affrighted at some sudden noise or disturbance leap from among the Grass or
Flags on the bank into the River.


Cuph. I understood before they were able Swimmers.


Euist. To admiration, Cuphophron.


Sophr. But that was not so well done of Americus and his Company, to terrify
them so with so sudden and dreadful a noise, after all their Civilities.


Euist. It scared them indeed, but they soon perceived the Strangers meant them
no hurt; and they had no grounds of fearing any Injury from them, being
conscious to themselves of meaning them none, and of having done all Kindness
to them they could.


Philoth. You see, Hylobares, how much of the Law of Reason and Goodness is
implanted even in those Nations that are to the utmost barbarous, they are
(...), Lovers of mankind, or (...).


Euist. Why may we not then add that which follows in Homer, -- (...)?


Philoth. That Is a very high expression, Euistor, for them; but not
unapplicable to the best sort of Christians. For our o^n Religion testifies
that God is Love, and that Love is the fulfilling of the Law.


Hyl. It is a cheerful consideration, that there is the emergency of so much
Good in a people that seemed in so squalid and forlorn a condition, and so
utterly hopeless.


Philoth. But imagine, The Ninth Consideration.
Hylobares, a Nation or Country in as squalid and forlorn a condition as you
will, this may also, in the Ninth place, ease your fancy, That though the
Succession of such a Nation continue for many Ages, yet the particular Souls
that make up this Succession in such a disadvantageous abode, their Stay is but
short, but their subsistence everlasting after this life. So that their stay
here is nothing in comparison of their duration hereafter.


Hyl. This indeed were something, Philotheus, if their quitting of this Life
were a release from all that evil that hangs about them here.


Philoth. Who knows, Hylobares, but the present Disadvantages to them that are
sincere may prove Advantages to them in the other state; and by how much more
forcibly they seemed to be born down to Evil here, that by the special
Providence of God, at the releasment of the Soul from the Body, there is the
more strong and peremptory Resiliency from this sordid Region of Misery and Sin?


Hyl. If that be, your Argument is not devoid of force, nor do I know how to
confute it. For I know you will say, that whatever Good does accrue to such
sincere Souls, it is in virtue of the miraculous Revelation of Jesus Christ to
them.


Philoth. You conjecture right.


Hyl. But what shall we think of those Barbarians in whom there never was any
thing of the Divine Life, nor any moral possibility of acquiring it?


Philoth. If this were, The Tenth Consideration.
which is hard to admit, I must confess I could not think so hardly of God, as
to imagine that they must answer for that Depositum that never was put into
their hands. And therefore it were the safest to conceive, which you may note
in the Tenth place, (nor can we define any thing more determinately therein)
That they will be committed to such a state after this Life as is most suitable
and proportionable to such a Creature. To which you may add in the last place,
The last Consideration.
That on the Stage of this Earth, a throughly-castigated Body, though it be the
fittest habitacle for the Divine Light and Heavenly Life to abide in, yet it is
more inept for the enjoyment of that more full and sensible Sweetness of the
Animal or Bestial; and that so Reflexive and Animadversive a Spirit as the Soul
of Man given up wholly to the pleasures of the Animal Life reaps an higher
measure of delight therefrom, and that with more punctual and pompous
Circumstances, then any Beast whatsoever. Son, remember that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, etc.


Cuph. I partly understand you, Philotheus, and cannot but applaud the felicity
of your Invention, that has hit upon so many and so pertinent Considerations to
bear up the mind of Hylobares from sinking into any Distrust of the Goodness
of Providence. But, XXV.
methinks, Cuphophron's ^apturous Reasons why God do^s not dissolve the World,
notwithstanding the gross Miscarriages in it; with Hylobares and Sophron's
solid A^imadversions thereon.
I could add one Consideration more, to make the number even, and such as will
meet with the most passionate expression in Hylobares his Complaint; as if God
should rather dissolve the World in an high indignation against the
Miscarriages of it, then suffer it to go on in such a wild course as it seems
to have done in the Manners and Religions of the most barbarous Pagans. My
Meditation, I must confess, is something Metaphysicall; but I hope it is not
above the capacity of Hylobares to understand it.


Philoth. That he will best know when you have delivered your self of it,
Cuphophron.


Cuph. The sum of it is to this purpose, (and I wish my self better success
then formerly, for I have been very unlucky in my delivering my self hitherto)
That the universal Object of Man's Understanding, Religion and Veneration, is
much-what according to that Inscription in the Temple of Isis or Minerva in
Sais, an ancient City of Egypt, (...), I am whatsoever was, is, or is to come,
and no mortal hitherto has ever uncovered my Veil. This I conceive is the
hidden Essence of the eternal God, who is all, and from whom all things are in
such sort, as that they may in some sense be said still to be him.


Hyl. This is Hypermetaphysicall, O Cuphophron, very highly turgent and
mysterious. What do you mean? That God is so the Essence and Substance of all
things, that they are but as dependent Accidents of him? If there were nothing
but Matter in the World, this Riddle would be easily intelligible in this
sense, and all Phenomenon whatever would be but the Modifications of this one
Substance. But for my own part, I was abundantly convinced by the first day's
discourse, That there is an Immovable Substance distinct from that of the
Moveable Matter: which distinction is so palpable, that nothing can be said to
be God in any good sense but God himself, at least no Material thing can.


Cuph. You have almost struck quite out of my thoughts what I was a-going to
say next, Hylobares.


Philop. Cuphophron seems to be full of something; I pray you give him leave to
vent himself.


Cuph. I have recovered it. Now I say, whatsoever is represented to the Soul is
not God himself, but some exterior manifestation: (...). And whatsoever is
more eminent and extraordinary, Nature from religious Complexions has easily
extorted veneration thereto, it being as it were a more sensible appearance or
visible stirring of that great Godhead that inhabits this august Temple of the
World. Wherefore God and his holy Temple filling all places, the passionate
Motions of all Creatures are a kind of Divine Worship, they everywhere seeking
and crouching to him to enjoy some Benediction of him, or else singing his
Praises in triumphant Accents, and in transporting expressions of their present
Enjoyments; some even wasting themselves in the complacency they take, though
in but smaller matters which he bestows on them, or rather permits them to take
them, though he could wish they would make choice of better. But these, though
small in themselves, seem great to them that are pleased with them; these
lesser communications of the embodied Excellencies of the Deity so filling
their pusillanimous spirits with Joy and Rapture, that they even willingly
forfeit all the rest, and turn as it were Martyrs and Self-sacrificers to but
so faint a Shadow or scant Resemblance of the first uncreated Perfection: whose
beautiful Nature is solidly born witness unto by so ready and constant a
Profession, (though many times with sad After-inconveniences) and by so
religious an adhesion to so slender and evanid Emanations thereof. Which
Mistakes therefore should in all likelihood move Pity rather then Vengeance in
the Deity, whose meaner gifts are so highly prized and received with such eager
Devotion. Wherefore as uglily disordered as the affairs of mankind seem,
Hylobares has no reason to conceit that God's Vengeance must be presently
poured down upon their heads, they not so much reproching him, as befooling
themselves, by their ill choice.


Hyl. What think you, Gentlemen? has not Cuphophron made a very rapturous
Harangue?


Sophr. If the full stream of his Fancy and Eloquence had not carried away his
Judgment, and miss-led it into such scandalous expressions as well as real
Mistakes, the Music of his words had been no offense to mine ears. But to me
it seems the remainder of yesternight's Resverie which he fell into when he had
so plentifully imbibed the Evening-Air impregnated with the moist Influence of
the Moon, which it seems has given him this second Intoxication. For though his
words pass the tongue very glibly, yet the sense of some passages seems very
unsound to me, and to be rather the wild fetches of Wit and Fancy, then the
suggestion of true Reason: As that they that make such an affectionate choice
of meaner good things, Pleasure, suppose, in stead of Virtue, seem
notwithstanding religiously to give glory to God, in that they so highly esteem
these lesser shadows of that Fullness and Perfection that is in Him; whenas
really it is a reproach to God, to have those things that are least like him
preferred by a rational Creature before those things that are most like him, as
true Virtue and the Divine Life most certainly is. This therefore is
extravagantly false and scandalous. Besides that it is a gross affront to the
Almighty, whenas he bids us make choice of one thing, that we will make choice
of another.


Hyl. You have said enough, O Sophron, to enervate all such slight pretensions.
These Moonshine Conceptions of Cuphophron are very abortive, and suddenly
vanish in so clear a Light. Besides, if there had been any force of Reason
mingled with his high-flown Eloquence, what makes it to the main Design, That
Providence has its Rule and Measure from the Divine Goodness?


Philop. You unmercifully fall upon the rear of those many Considerations which
Philotheus and Cuphophron have jointly offered you. XXVI.
But what think you of the whole Body, Hylobares as yet u^sati^fy'd touching
the Goodness of Providence, by reason of the sad Sce^e of things in the ^orld.
Hylobares? Is your Skepticism in this point so powerful as still to be able
to bear up against them?


Hyl. I must confess, O Philopolis, that many things have been suggested from
Philotheus that are very considerable, and much to the purpose they aim at: but
I am so in love with the Opinion, That the Goodness of God is the measure of
his Providence, that the desire I have `it should be true, it may be, makes the
Defense thereof seem weaker to me then it is. I must ingenuously confess, I do
not find my self so perfectly yet at ease in my mind touching this matter; and
Cuphophron's shrewd Reflections on the Analogies of the Miscarriages of the
Civilized Nations which they bear to those of the most barbarous in Manners and
Religion, have rather rankled the Sore then healed it, and have made it the
more incurable.


Cuph. Was ever man so unfortunate as I in my officiousness to serve my Friends
with that small pittance of Wisdom that God and Nature have bestowed upon me?
When I reason shrewdly, that is to say, solidly, then I fester the Sore; when
my Arguments naturally tend to mollify, soften and assuage the anguish of the
Sore, then they are weak, abortive, Moon-shine-Conceptions. Well, I see the
Fates cast the whole honor upon Philotheus of curing Hylobares his Malady. And
I wish him good Success therein.


Philoth. I thank you, Cuphophron. And I shall soon find out what my Success is
like to be, by asking Hylobares but one Question.


Hyl. I pray do, Philotheus: I shall answer you with all freedom.


Philoth. Tell me then, Hylobares, whether you do not think that some free
Agents, whether the Spirits of Angels or of Men, may not so misbehave
themselves, that if you saw the^ tumbling in stifling flames of Brimstone, and
heard them howling for extremity of Torture, and hideously blaspheming God out
of an impenitent vexation of mind and diabolical fixedness in that which is
evil, being committed to a State of Devils and of Hell; whether,
notwithstanding the dismalness of this Tragical sight, you cannot easily
conceive but that such a state of things, though it were all over the face of
the Earth, might consist with the Justice and Goodness of God?


Hyl. With that part of his Goodness which we call Justice, you mean,
Philotheus.


Philoth. Be it so, Hylobares.


Hyl. That I was convinced of yesterday, by your Parable of the defloured
Virgin, and the condign punishment of the Villain that defloured her and abused
her so barbarously; that, even in such Severity as tended not at all to the
Emendation of the punished, the infliction notwithstanding of the Punishment
might have its rise and take its reasons and measures from Goodness it self.


Philoth. Can you stick to this without any diff^dence, XXVII.
Hylobares, A^ Hypothesis that will secure the Goodness of Providence, were the
Scene of t^i^gs on this Earth ten times worse then it is.



Hyl. Yes surely, this seems to me a clear case.


Philoth. Why then, Hylobares, I have one single Catholicon, which, if you can
receive it, will quite purge out of your mind the lowest, the last, and the
least remaining dregs of Diffidence that you can have touching the Goodness of
Providence, though the Scene of things quite over the Earth were ten times
worse then Euistor has described them.


Hyl. I marry, Sir, this is something indeed, Philotheus. This is that which
will clear up my thoughts to the purpose, and set me at perfect ease. I thought
there was some great thing wanting still to the full satisfaction and quiet of
my Mind: I beseech you let me know it therefore, Philotheus.


Philoth. It is one of the Two famous Keys of Providence, even the Golden one.


Hyl. Why, are there just Two?


Philoth. Two main ones.


Hyl. And if the one be Gold, I pray you what is the other? a Silver-one?


Philoth. So they call it.


Hyl. O how I long to have these Keys delivered into my hand! I pray you,
Philotheus, produce them.


Philoth. Not while Bathynous is in the company.


Hyl. Why so, Philotheus? Bathynous seems one of the worthiest persons in the
whole Company to receive them.


Philoth. You would say so, if you knew all.


Hyl. I pray you conceal nothing from me.


Philoth. It was he that first received them, and that many years ago, when he
was scarce older then your self: And therefore none of us think it decorous to
take upon us to deliver these Keys to any one while he is in presence, we ever
reserving that honor to him that first received them.


Hyl. That Is an handsome Ceremony. O thrice happy Youth, whom the bright face
of Wisdom so early shined upon! But, I pray you, where did he receive these
Keys, Philotheus?


Philoth. In a Dream.


Hyl. What, has all my expectation then vanished into a Dream?


Euist. You know, Hylobares, what high strains of Philosophy are delivered in
Somnium Scipionis.


Hyl. You say right, I was but in jest, and expect no less Truth now, nor of
meaner importance, then before.


Euist. I pray you, Bathynous, what kind of Dream was it? For there are five
several sorts, according to Macrobius, namely, In Soma. Scip. lib. 1. cap. 3.
(...).


Bath. Truly, Euistor, I have not yet considered that so Critically, never
since I had it.


Euist. But you could easily tell me, did I but describe the natures of these
five several sorts of Dreams to you.


Hyl. O impertinent Euistor, that would cause such needless delays by
catching at this occasion of showing thy skill in Critical Trifles, whiles I in
the mean time am almost quite consumed with excess of desire to have so
important an Arcanum communicated unto me, for the establishing my Mind in
that great and fundamental Truth I so eagerly seek after!


Euist. Let me beg of you, Bathynous, to put Hylobares out of pain, for I see
he is highly impatient.


Bath. It is a Dream I had in my youth, of an Old man of a grave countenance
and comportment speaking unto me in a Wood.


Euist. That very intimation shows it to be that kind of Dream that the Greeks
call (...), the Latins Oraculum.


Hyl. A good Omen, Euistor, I thank you for that. I Will forgive thee all thy
Critical Impertinencies hereafter for this passage sake.


Euist. And I will jointly beg of Bathynous to tell us this Dream of his; for I
am almost as eager of it as your self. I would fain see how exquisite an
example it is of that kind of Dream which in English we should call an Oracle.


Bath. I profess, Gentlemen, I am much ashamed to seem so light-minded as to
tell my Dreams before Strangers, especially before so grave a person as
Philopolis.


Hyl. The proper term, Bathynous, is not a Dream, but an Oracle.


Bath. But I am more ashamed to pretend to speak Oracles then to tell my Dreams.


Cuph. You did not speak the Oracle, but the Oracle was spoke to you.


Bath. But if I had not spoke it afterward, Cuphophron, none of you had ever
heard it.


Philop. Call it a Dream, or an Oracle, or an Oracular Dream, it matters not,
Bathynous, so we may enjoy the hearing of it. For I am neither so unskilful
nor morose as to have the slighter conceit of any one for telling his Dream,
especially in such circumstances: nay, I think it is his duty rather so to do.


Bath. Well then, since it must be so, Gentlemen, upon the permission of
Philopolis and the importunity of Hylobares, I shall recite to you my Dream as
exquisitely and briefly as I can. You must know then, first, Philopolis, of
what an anxious and thoughtfull Genius I was from my very Childhood, and what a
deep and strong sense I had of the Existence of God, and what an early
Conscienciousness of approving my self to him; and how, when I had arrived to
riper years of Reason, and was imbued with some slender Rudiments of
Philosophy, I was not then content to think of God in the gross only, but
began to consider his Nature more distinctly and accurately, and to contemplate
and compare his Attributes; and how, partly from the natural Sentiments of my
own Mind, partly from the countenance and authority of holy Scripture, I did
confidently conclude that infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, that these
three were the chiefest and most comprehensive Attributes of the Divine Nature,
and that the sovereign of these was his Goodness, the Summity and Flower, as I
may so speak, of the Divinity, and that particularly whereby the Souls of men
become Divine; whenas the largest communication of the other, without this,
would not make them Divine, but Devils.

In the mean time, being versed in no other natural Philosophy nor Metaphysics
but the vulgar, and expecting the Laws of the external Creation, whether
visible or invisible, should be suitable to that excellent and lovely Idea of
the Godhead which with the most serious devotion and affection I entertained in
my own breast, my Mind was for a long time charged with inextricable Puzzles
and Difficulties, to make the Phenomenon of the World and vulgar Opinions of
men in any tolerable way to consort or suit with these two chiefest Attributes
of God, his Wisdom and his Goodness. These Meditations closed mine eyes at
night; these saluted my memory the first in the morning: These accompanied my
remote and solitary walks into Fields and Woods sometimes so early, as when
most of other mortals keep their Beds.

It came to pass therefore, XXVIII.
O Philopolis, Bathynous his Dream of the two Keys of Providence, containing
the abovementioned Hypothesis.
that one Summer-morning having rose much more early then ordinary, and having
walked so long in a certain Wood (which I had a good while frequented) that I
thought fit to rest my self on the ground, having spent my Spirits, partly by
long motion of my Body, but mainly by want of Sleep, and overanxious and
solicitous thinking of such Difficulties as Hylobares either has already, or,
as I descried at first, is likely to propose; I straight way reposed my weary
Limbs amongst the Grass and Flowers at the foot of a broad-spred flourishing
Oak, where the gentle fresh morning Air playing in the Shade on my heated
Temples, and with unexpressable pleasure refrigerating my blood and spirits,
and the industrious Bees busily humming round about me upon the dewy
Honey-suckles; to which nearer noise was most melodiously joined the distanced
Singings of the cheerful Birds reechoed from all parts of the Wood; these
Delights of Nature thus conspiring together, you may easily fancy, O
Philopolis, would quickly charm (...) wearied body into a profound Sleep. But
my Soul was then as much as ever awake, and, as it seems, did most vividly
dream that I was still walking in these solitary Woods with my thoughts more
eagerly intent upon those usual Difficulties of Providence then ever.

But while I was in this great Anxiety and earnestness of spirit, accompanied
(as frequently when I was awake) with vehement and devout Suspirations and
Ejaculations toward God, of a sudden there appeared at a distance a very grave
and venerable Person walking slowly toward me. His Statu^e was greater then
ordinary. He was clothed with a loose silk Garment of a purple color, much
like the Indian Gowns that are now in fashion, saving that the Sleeves were
something longer and wider; and it was tied about him with a Leviticall Girdle
also of Purple; and he wore a pair of Velvet Slippers of the same color, but
upon his Head a Montero of black Velvet, as if he were both a Traveller and an
Inhabitant of that place at once.


Cuph. I dare warrant you it was the Ghost of some of the worthy Ancestors of
that noble Family to whom these Woods did belong.


Hyl. You forget, Cuphophron, that Bathynous is telling of a Dream, as also
(this third time) that Ghosts, that is, Spirits, are nowhere, and therefore
cannot be met with in a Wood.


Philop. Enough of that, Hylobare^ I pray you proceed, Bathynous, a^^ describe
to us his Age and his Looks, as well as his Clothing.


Cuph. I pray you do, Bathynous: I love alife to hear such things as these
punctually related.


Bath. Did not the ruddiness of his Complexion and the vivacitie of his Looks
seem to gainsay it, the snowy whiteness of his Hair, and large Beard, and
certain senile strokes in his Countenance, seemed to intimate him to be about
sixscore years of age.


Sophr. There is no such contradiction in that, Bathynous: For Moses is said to
be an hundred and twenty when he died, Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
and yet his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. But, I pray you,
proceed.


Bath. While he was at any distance from me, I stood fearless and unmoved,
only, in reverence to so venerable a Personage, I put off my Hat, and held it
in my hand. But when he came up closer to me, the vivid fulgour of his Eyes,
that shone so piercingly bright from under the shadow of his black Montero, and
the whole Air of his Face, though joined with a wonderful deal of Mildness and
Sweetness, did so of a sudden astonish me, that I fell into an excessive
trembling, and had not been able to stand, if he had not laid his Hand upon my
Head, and spoken comfortably to me. Which he did in a Paternal manner, saying,
Blessed be thou of God, my Son, be of good courage, and fear not; for I am a
Messenger of God to thee for thy good. Thy serious Aspires and breathings after
the true Knowledge of thy Maker and the ways of his Providence (which is the
most becoming employment of every Rational Being) have ascended into the sight
of God; and I am appointed to give into thy hands the Two Keys of Providence,
that thou may thereby be able to open the Treasures of that Wisdom thou so
anxiously, and yet so piously, seek'st after. And therewithal he put his right
Hand into his left Sleeve, and pulled out two bright shining Keys, the one of
Silver, the other of Gold, tied together with a Sky-colored Ribbon of a pretty
breadth, and delivered them into my hands; which I received of him, making low
obeisance, and professing my thankfulness for so great a gift.

And now by this time I had recovered more then ordinary strength and courage,
which I perceived in a mavelous way communicated unto me by the laying of his
Hand upon my Head, so that I had acquired a kind of easy confidence and
familiarity to converse with him; and therefore, though with due Civility, yet
without all Fear, methought I said farther to him, These are a goodly pair of
Keys, O my Father, and very lovely to look upon: but where is the Treasure they
are to open? To which, smiling upon me, he straightway replied, The Treasures,
my Son, be in the Keys themselves. Then each Key, said I, O my Father, will
need a farther Key to open it. Each Key, said he, my Son, is a Key to it self;
and therewithal bad me take notice of the Letters embossed on the Silver Key,
and there was the like artifice in the Golden one. Which I closely viewing in
both, observed that the Keys consisted of a company of Rings closely committed
together, and that the whole Keys were all bespattered with Letters very
confusedly and disorderly.

Set the Letters of the Keys in right order, then said he, and then pull at
their Handles, and the Treasure will come out. And I took the Silver Key; but
though I could move the Rings by thrusting my Nails against the Letters, yet I
could not reduce the Letters into any order, so that they would all lie in
straight Lines, nor was there any Sense in any Line. Which when that aged
Personage saw, You must first know the Motto, said he, my Son: That is the Key
of the Key. I beseech you then, said I, O my Father, tell me the Motto. The
Motto, said he, my Son, is this, Claude fenestras, ut luceat domus. Having got
the Motto, I set to work again, and having reduced those Letters that made up
that Motto into a right Line, I, holding the lower part of the Key in my left
hand, pulled at the Handle with my right, and there came out a Silver Tube, in
which was a Scroll of thin Paper, as I thought, but as strong as any Vellum,
and as white as driven Snow.

Having got this Scroll, I took the boldness to open it. The Figure thereof was
perfectly square, with even Margins on all sides, drawn with Lines of a
sky-colored blew, very perfect and lovely. In the midst was described the
Figure of the Sun in blazing Gold: About the Sun were six Circles drawn with
Lines of the same-coloured blew. Two of these Circles were very near the body
of the Sun; the other four more remote both from him and from one another,
though not in equal distances. In every one of these Circles was there the
figure of a little Speck like a Globe, but of two distinct colors; the one
side toward the Sun shining like Silver, the other being of a duskish
discolored black. About those little Globes in the third and fifth Circle
there were also drawn lesser Circles of blew, one about the third, and four
about the fifth: and in each of these Circles was there also a small Globous
Speck, of a lesser size then those in the middle. Something there was also
about the Globe of the sixth Circle, but I cannot remember it so distinctly.
Beyond these Circles there was an innumerable company of Starlike Figures of
Gold, of the same hue with that of the Sun, but exceeding-much less, which
carelessly scattered, some were found a pretty distance from the Margin, others
toward the Margin; othersome were cut in two by the blew Line of the Margin,
as if it were intimated that we should understand, that there were still more
of those golden Stars to an indefinite extent. This Scheme entertained my
gazing eyes a good time; for I never had seen such before, and was resolved to
impress the Lines thereof perfectly in my memory, that I might afterward
discourse more readily thereof with this venerable Personage. For I knew the
purpose thereof by the Inscription on the upper Margin, which was, The true
Systeme of the World. Having thus satisfied my self, I rolled up the Scroll
again, and repositing it in the Silver Tube, easily thrust in the Tube into the
other part of the Key, and disordering the Line of Letters that contained the
Motto, all was locked up again safe as before.

Having pleased my self so well with opening this first Treasure, I had the
more eager desire to assay the other; and knowing all attempt to be vain
without the knowledge of the Motto or Key of the Key, I besought that Divine
Sage to impart it to me. That I shall do right willingly, said he, my Son: And
I pray you take special notice of it. It is, Amor Dei Lux Animae. An excellent
Motto indeed, said I; The Key is a Treasure it self. However I set me to work
as before, and reducing the Letters to such an order that a Line of them did
plainly contain this Motto, I pulled at both ends of the Golden Key, as I did
in the Silver one, and in a Golden Tube continued to the Handle of the Key
there was a Scroll of such Paper, if I may so call it, as in the other,
exceeding white and pure, and, though very thin, yet not at all transparent.
The Writing was also terminated with even Margins on all sides as before; only
it was more glorious, being adorned richly with Flower-work of Gold, Vermilion,
and blew. And I observed that twelve Sentences filled the whole Area, written
with Letters of Gold. The first was, The Measure of Providence is the Divine
Goodness, which has no bounds but it self, which is infinite. 2. The Thread of
Time and the Expansion of the Universe, the same Hand drew out the one and
spread out the other. 3. Darkness and the Abyss were before the Light, and the
Suns or Stars before any Opakeness or Shadow. 4. All Intellectual Spirits that
ever were, are, or ever shall be, sprung up with the Light, and rejoiced
together before God in the morning of the Creation. 5. In infinite Myriads of
free Agents which were the Framers of their own Fortunes, it had been a wonder
if they had all of them taken the same Path; and therefore Sin at the long run
shook hands with Opacity. 6. As much as the Light exceeds the Shadows, so much
do the Regions of Happiness those of Sin and Misery.

These six, Philopolis, I distinctly remember, XXIX.
but had cursorily and glancingly cast mine eye on all twelve. His being so
rudely and forcibly awaked out of so Diviac a Dream, ^ow co^^istent with the
Accuracy of Pr^vide^ce.
But afterward fixing my mind orderly upon them, to commit them all perfectly
to my memory, (for I did not expect that I might carry the Keys away with me
home) by that time I had got through the sixth Aphorism, there had come up two
Asses behind me out of the Wood, one on the one side of the Tree, and the
other on the other, that set abraying so rudely and so loudly, that they did
not only awake, but almost affright me into a discovery that I had all this
while been but in a Dream. For that aged grave Personage, the Silver and Golden
Keys, and glorious Parchment, were all suddenly vanished, and I found my self
sitting alone at the bottom of the same Oak where I fell asleep, betwixt two
rudely-braying Asses.


Euist. These are the usual Exploits, Bathynous, of this kind of Animal. Just
thus was the Nymph `Lotis, lying fast asleep on the Grass in a Moonshine-night,
awakened by the loud Braying of Silenus his Ass. Asses are as it were the
Trumpeters of the Forest, Bathynous, that awake careless men out of deep Sleeps.


Hyl. If your Memory did not far surpass your Fancy, Euistor, you would not be
so good an Historian as you are. Surely the Braying of an Ass is more like to
the blowing of a Neatherd's or Swineherd's Horn then to the sound of a Trumpet.
Besides, the Braying of Silenus his Ass was the saving of the Nymph's
Virginity: But this, O Euistor! O Bathynous! was there ever a more unfortunate
Mis-hap then this? This Story has quite undone me. It has wounded my belief of
Providence more then any thing I have yet taken notice of. That God should ever
permit two such dull Animals to disturb so Divine a Vision as it seems to me;
and that so mysterious, so heavenly and intellectual a Pleasure, and so certain
a Communication of such important Truths, should be thus blown aside by the
rude breath of an Ass. To what a glorious comprehension of things would this
Scene have proceeded! What accurate Information touching the Fabric of the
World! what punctually-satisfactory Solutions of every Puzzle touching Divine
Providence might you after have received in your intended Conference with this
venerable Personage, if these impertinent Animals by their unseasonable loud
Braying had not called your Ecstaticall Mind into the Body again, which is as
unfit for Divine Communication as themselves!


Bath. Do not take on so heavily, O Hylobares, nor be so rash a Censurer of
Providence, no not so much as in this Paradoxicall passage thereof. For how do
you know but all that which you fancy behind, had been too much to receive
at once? Old Vessels filled with new Wine will burst. And too large a Dosis of
Knowledge may so elate the Spirits, that it may hazard the Brain, that it may
destroy Life, and chase away Sobriety and Humility out of the Soul.


Sophr. This is very judiciously advertised of Bathynous, is it not, Hylobares?


Hyl. I cannot disown Truth whenever I meet with it.


Bath. But besides, though you should judge so extraordinary-charitably of me
at that age, Hylobares, as that I might have received all that behind, (which
you surmize was lost by that Accident) without any hazard to the Morality of my
Mind: yet I can tell you of a truth, that I take that Accident, that seems so
Paradoxicall to you, to be a particular Favor and Kindness done to me by
Providence, and that it fell out no otherwise then (could I have foreseen how
things would be) I my self should even then have desired it; that is to say, I
found my self more gratified afterward, things happening as they did, then if
that Divine Dream, if we may call it so, had gone on uninterruptedly to its
full Period. For it would but have put me into the possession of all that Truth
at once, which in virtue of this piece of the Dream I got afterward, with an
often-repeated and prolonged Pleasure, and more agreeable to humane Nature.


Hyl. I profess, XXX.
Bathynous, That that Divi^e Personage that appeared to Bathynous was rather a
Favou^er of P^thagorism, then Cartesianism.
this is not nothing that you say. Nay indeed, so much, as I must acknowledge
my exception against Providence in this Passage very much weakened. But what
use, could you make of the Silver Key, when that Divine Personage explained
nothing of it to you?


Bath. It was as it were a pointing of one to those Authors that conform the
Frame of the World to that Scheme; as Nicolaus Copernicus and those that follow
that Systeme. But it is nowhere drawn nearer to the Elegancy of the
Silver-Key-Paper then in Descartes his third part of his Principles.


Cuph. That Is notable indeed, Bathynous. This is a kind of Divine Testimony
to the truth of all DesCartes's Principles.


Bath. No, by no means, Cuphophron: For in the Golden-Key-Paper, in that
cursory Glance I gave upon all the Sentences or Aphorisms therein contained,
amongst the rest I espied one, of which part was writ in greater Letters, which
was to this sense, That the Primordials of the World are not Mechanical, but
Spermaticall or Vital; which is diametrically and fundamentally opposite to
Des-Cartes's Philosophy.


Cuph. There is great Uncertainty in Dreams.


Bath. But I must confess I think the thing true of it self. And if I had had
full Conference with that Divine Sage, I believe I should have found his
Philosophy more Pythagoricall or Platonicall, (I mean his Natural Philosophy,
Cuphophron) then Cartesian. For there was also mention of the Seminal Soul of
the World, which some modern Writers call the Spirit of Nature.


Cuph. So many men, so many minds.


Bath. But I doubt not but that it is demonstrable by Reason, that the
Primordials of the Universe are not purely Mechanical.


Cuph. So many men, so many Reasons, so many Demonstrations.


Hyl. I believe Cuphophron takes it very ill of you, Bathynous, that the old
grave Person you met with in the Wood was not a thorough-paced Cartesian, or
else he is in a very Scepticall mood: which I do not desire to be in,
especially in so weighty Points as these concerning Providence. And therefore
let me entreat you, Bathynous, to unlock that Difficulty I propounded last to
Philotheus, by virtue of your Golden Key.


Bath. You must excuse me there, Hylobares; I would not be so injurious to
Cuphophron as to make him a false Prophet, who so expressly foretold a while
ago, that the Fates had designed that honor solely for Philotheus.


Philoth. And it seems, in the like Complement to Cuphophron, I must again
resume my not unpleasant burden of serving Hylobares; which I shall do
according to the best skill I have.


Philop. I pray you do, Philotheus; for I am very ambitious you should work
upon Hylobares a perfect Cure.


Philoth. I shall endeavor it, Philopolis. But I must first take the liberty
to chafe the benumbed part, and soundly chide Hylobares that he is not cured
already, nor has been sufficiently sensible of that Clearness and Evidence for
the Unexceptionableness of Divine Providence which has been hitherto produced.
Which I must profess I think to be such, that those that have not some peculiar
humor or fancy, or labor not under the burden of their own Idiosyncrasie,
cannot but be fully satisfied with, without the flying to any such highswoln
Hypothesis as that Systeme of the World represented in the Silver-Key-Paper, or
Pre-existence of Souls, which is part of the Golden one. So that any farther
Solution of the present Difficulty, were it not for Hylobares his own fault,
and the peculiarity of his own Fancy that still molesteth him, were plainly
unnecessary and superfluous. How many thousands of sober and intelligent
persons have been fully satisfied touching the Accuracy of Divine Providence
without any such far-fetched Helps?


Sophr. Which is a shrewd Indication, that those Arguments, distinct from these
more aerie Hypotheses and finely-contrived Phancies, are the more natural
strength and arms, as it were, of humane Understanding, (by whose strokes it
bears it self up in these profound Mysteries from sinking into Infidelity or
Atheism;) but those more big and swelled Hypotheses, but as a bundle of
Bull-rushes or a couple of Bladders tied under the Arms of some young and
unskilful Swimmer.


Hyl. And I for my part, Gentlemen, do profess my self such a young and
unskilful Swimmer in these Depths, and therefore would gladly be supported by
the artificial use of these Bladders, that my Melancholy may never sink me to
the bottom.


Cuph. And I commend your wit, Hylobares, that you can so well provide for your
own safety. For I dare undertake that these Bladders are so big, so tough, and
so light, that if they be but well tied on, a Cow or Ox may securely swim on
them through the Hellespont, or rather through the main Ocean, and never fear
drowning.


Hyl. I thank you for that encouragement, Cuphophron, and shall therefore the
more earnestly beg of Philotheus, that he would use all the Art and Skill he
has to tie them on me as fast as possibly he can, (that of Preexistence
especially, the Reasons and Uses thereof) that the string may never slip nor
break, to my hazard of ducking to the bottom.


Philoth. That I will do, Hylobares^ but on this condition, that you ever
remember that what I do thus firmly fasten on you is yet but by way of
Hypothesis, and that you will no longer make use of these Bladders then till
you can safely swim without them.


Hyl. That I do faithfully promise you, Philotheus, in the word of a Gentleman.
Wherefore, without any farther Interruption, I pray you proceed.


Philoth. To begin therefore where we left. XXXI.
Do you still, (...)
Hylobares, adhere to that Truth, that free Agents may so hainously misbehave
themselves, that even according to the Laws of Divine Goodness they may be
detruded into the state of Devils and of Hell, and therefore far more easily
into a state less deplorable?


Hyl. That I said, and do still say, is to me a clear case, Philotheus.


Philoth. Let us then but assume out of the Golden-Key-Paper that which is so
clearly contained therein, the Preexistence of Humane Souls, and all these
black and dark Difficulties that thus over-cloud your Understanding will
instantly vanish.


Hyl. Why so, Philotheus?


Philoth. Because supposing Humane Souls were created in the Morning of the
World, and in such infinite Myriads, there has been time enough since that for
as many and more then hitherto have peopled the Earth, to have transgressed so
hainously before their entrance on this Stage, that by a just Nemesis measured
and modified by the Divine Goodness it self they may be contrived into the
worst and most horrid Circumstances, into the most ^qualid and disadvantageous
condition and state of living, that Euistor has produced any example of amongst
the most Barbarous Nations.


Hyl. This reaches the Point home indeed, Philotheus, and does perfectly pull
up by the roots all pretension to this last and greatest Scruple, if we were
assured of the truth of the Hypothesis.


Philoth. Why, did not your self call this Dream of Bathynous a Divine Dream,
before I came to make this important use of it? And every Divine Dream is a
true Dream. But you serve me just so as Cuphophron did Bathynous. Whiles it
seemed to serve his turn to credit Des-Cartes's Philosophy, so long it was a
Divine Testimony; but when it proved contrary, then there was little certainty
in Dreams. This seems a piece of Levity in you both.


Hyl. But I hope in my self the more pardonable, O Philotheus, by how much more
important a thing it is that the ground of a man's belief of the Goodness of
Divine Providence should be solid and unshaken, then that Des-Cartes's
Principles should be deemed a piece of such infallible Wisdom. Cuphophron's
vilification of the Dream proceeded out of a partial zeal in the behalf of the
Cartesian Philosophy: my distrust of it, out of an excess of desire it should
be true. For I must confess, if this one Point in it of Pre-existence appear to
me certainly true, all my Doubts and Difficulties touching the Moral Evils in
the World will suddenly melt into nothing. Nay, if I could believe Bathynous
his Dream to be a Divine Dream, the first Aphorism in the Golden-Key-Paper puts
all our Controversies to an end, it declaring the Measure of Providence to be
the Divine Goodness, which has no bounds but it self, which is infinite.
Wherefore it was the most calamitous Accident that could ever have befallen the
Philosophical Republic, that (...) two unlucky Asses so rudely broke off
Bathynous his Conference with that venerable Sage, who, I surmize, in that
intended Discourse would have communicated the Reasons and Grounds of these
Conclusions to Bathynous. For true Reason is so palpable and connatural to a
Man, that when he finds it, he feels himself fully satisfied and at ease.


Philoth. I commend your Caution, Hylobares, that you are so loath to build
great Conclusions upon weak or uncertain Principles. Wherefore let me offer to
your consideration a Point of which I presume you will acknowledge your self
more certain, that is, The Possibility of the Preexistence of the Soul; I
demand of you, if you be not very certain of that.


Hyl. Yes surely I am; I see no repugnancy at all in it.


Philoth. Then you are not certain but that the Soul does pre-exist.


Hyl. I confess it.


Philoth. And uncertain that it does not.


Hyl. That cannot be denied; it is the same, I think, I granted before.


Philoth. Therefore, Hylobares, you make your self obnoxious both to
Providence, and to my self. To Providence, in that you bring in uncertain
Allegations and Accusations against her, and so soil the beauty and perfection
of her ways, that are so justifiable where they are perfectly known, by
opposing Phancies and Conceits, such as you your self acknowledge you are not
certain of. To me, in that you covenanted with me at the first, never to
allege uncertain Hypotheses against known Truth.


Hyl. This is true, Philotheus; you make me half ashamed of my Inconstancy. But
in the mean time I do not find my self in that full ease I desire to be, while
as well the Pre-existence of the Soul as her Non-Preexistence is an uncertain
Hypothesis.


Philoth. If you cannot find Divine Providence perfect without it, it is your
own fault that, as to your self, to save you from sinking, you do not make use
of it as a true Hypothesis. And forasmuch as you find it so hard to discover
Divine Providence to be perfect without it, that is no small Argument that the
Hypothesis is true.


Hyl. I must confess I think it is a safer Argument then Bathynous his single
Dream.


Philoth. Nay, it were in it self, Hylobares, a solid Argument, supposing
Providence cannot well otherwise be salved; as it is for the Copernican
Hypothesis, that nothing else can give a tolerable account of the Motion of the
Planets. And I must tell you farther, Hylobares, that this Hypothesis of the
Soul's Pre-existence is not the single Dream of Bathynous sleeping in the
grass, but was deemed a Vision of Truth to the most awakened Souls in the world.


Hyl. That Is very good news, Philotheus; for I do not at all affect
Singularity, nor love to find my self alone.


Philoth. If the Dream of sleeping Bathynous be a mere Dream, the most
famously-wise in all Ages have dreamed waking. For that the Souls of men do
pre-exist before they come into the Body, was the Dream of those three famous
Philosophers, Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle; the Dream of the Egyptian
Gymnosophists, of the Indian Brachmans, and Persian Magi; the Dream of
Zoroafter, Epicharmus, and Empedocles; the Dream of Cebes, Euclide, and
Euripides; the Dream of Plotinus, Proclus, and Iamblichus; the Dream of Marcus
Cicero, of Virgil, Psellus, and Boethius; the Dream of Hippocrates, Galen, and
Fernelius; and, lastly, the constant and avowed Dream of Philo Iudaeus, and the
rest of the most learned of the Jews.


Cuph. I pray you let me cast in one more example, Philotheus.


Philoth. I pray you do, Cuphophron.


Cuph. The Dream of the Patriarch Jacob when he slept in Bethel, and dreamed he
saw Angels descending and ascending on a Ladder that reached from Earth to
Heaven; whereby was figured out the Descent of Humane Souls (...), and their
Return from thence to the Ethereal Regions.


Hyl. O egregious Cuphophron, how do I admire the unexpectedness of thy
Invention! This is your Dream of the mysterious Dream of the holy Patriarch.


Cuph. And who knows but a very lucky one?


Hyl. But I pray you tell me, Philotheus, did any of the old Fathers of the
Church dream any such Dream as this?


Sophr. This is a very becoming and commendable temper in Hylobares, that his
younger years will enquire after the Judgment of the ancient Fathers in the
Primitive Church touching so important a matter.


Cuph. Those Primitive Ages were the youngest Ages of the Church, but the Ages
of persons much the same now that were then.


Hyl. Notwithstanding this flurt of Cuphophron's wit, I beseech you,
Philotheus, satisfy me in the Question I propounded.


Philoth. This at least, Hylobares, is true, That the Primitive Fathers in the
most entire Ages of the Church dreamed not the least evil of this Dream of
Pre-existence; the Wisdom of Solomon, which expressly asserts it, being
appointed by them to be read in their public Assemblies. Nay, our Savior
himself, when he had a most signal occasion to have undeceived the Jews in that
Point, if it had been false or dangerous, in the Question touching the man that
was born blind, took not the least offense at the supposition. Whence you will
the less wonder that either St. Austin, Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen, were
^avourably affected touching the Opinion; or that Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin,
Synesius, Arnobius, and Prudentius, were express Assertors thereof.


Hyl. This truly, Philotheus, casts me into so great a security from any harm
in the Hypothesis, that if you hold on as you have begun, the power of your
speech will unavoidably charm me into the same Dream.


Philoth. You know the worst of it then, Hylobares, that your Mind will be at
perfect rest touching the present Difficulty concerning Providence. And if
Testimonies thus please you, be assured of this, That there was never any
Philosopher that held the Soul spiritual and immortal, but he held also that it
did pre-exist.


Hyl. That is very considerable.


Philoth. And do not you, Hylobares, hold the Soul of man to be an Incorporeal
indiscerpible Substance, a Spirit?


Hyl. I do, and I thank you that I do so, Philotheus.


Philoth. How then comes it to pass that you, being of so Philosophical a
Genius, should miss of the Pre-existence of the Soul? For there being no other
considerable Opinion in view but Creation, Traduction, and Pre-existence;
Creation of pure Souls, and the Infusion of them into impure Bodies, and in
such horridly-impure Circumstances as sometimes happens, is a repugnancy to the
Purity of God, who is supposed then to create them: but Traduction a derogation
and contradiction to the Spirituality and Indiscerpibility of the Soul it self.
Wherefore it necessarily remains, that these two being such absurd Opinions,
the third must take place, and that the Souls of men do pre-exist.


Hyl. O Philotheus, that venerable Sage in Bathynous his Sleep could not have
argued better then thus, if they had come to conference. I do not dream, but I
see with the eyes of my Mind wide open in broad day, the Reasonableness of
this Hypothesis, That the Souls of men did exist before they came into these
terrestrial Bodies.


Philoth. And in this Daylight, Hylobares, all your Difficulties do vanish
touching that part of Providence that respects the Moral Evils, whose hue
seemed so dismal to you out of History, and their permission so reproachful
to the Goodness of God.


Hyl. They are all vanished quite, and those touching Natural Evils too, so far
forth as they respect the Souls of Men.


Philop. This is a good hearing. We are infinitely obliged to Philotheus for
his pains. Are there any more Scruples behind touching Divine Providence,
Hylobares?


Hyl. Only those Objections fetched from Defects conceived to be in the
Administration of Providence. XXXII.
For though we be convinced that all things that are are rightly ordered;
Several Objections against Providence, fetched from Defects, answered partly
out of the Golden, partly out of the Silver-Key-Paper.
yet it may be demanded why there are no more of them, why no sooner, and the
like.


Sophr. Indeed, Hylobares, you seem to me hugely overcurious in such
Inquisitions as these. Is not the whole World the Almshouse of God Almighty,
which he had a right to build when he would, and to place us his eleemosynary
Creatures in it no sooner then he pleased? He does but utisuo jure in all this.
And it is an outrageous Presumption, to expect that he should not act according
to his own mind and will, but according to the groundless enlargements and
expansions of our wanton and busy Phancies. So long as we see that the things
that are are well and rightly administered, and according to the Laws of
Goodness and Justice, it is a mavelous piece of Capriciousness to complain,
that such things with the unexceptionable Oeconomie of them began no sooner,
nor reach no farther.


Bath. You speak very gravely and soberly, O Sophron, and that which has very
solid sense at the bottom, if rightly understood. For God has no obligation
from the Creatures to make them sooner, or more, or larger, and the like. So
that if he had made the World no larger then the vulgar phansy it, a thought
suppose above the Clouds, or had stayed the making of it till a year ago, or
had not made it yet, nor ever intended to make it; he did in all this but uti
suo jure, as you speak. But in that he has made it much larger and sooner, to
what leading Attribute in God is that to be imputed, O Sophron?


Sophr. Surely to his mere Goodness, Bathynous.


Bath. You acknowledge then his Goodness the leading Attribute in the Creation
of the World, and his Wisdom and Power to contrive and execute what his Will
actuated by his Goodness did intend.


Sophr. Speaking more humano, so it seems to be.


Bath. But this is a marvel of marvells to me, That the Goodness of God being
Infinite, the effects thereof should be so narrow and finite as commonly men
conceit, if there be no Incapacity in the things themselves that thus
streightens them. That one small share of the Divine Goodness should be active,
but that infinite Remainder thereof, as I may so speak, silent and inactive, is
a Riddle, a Miracle that does infinitely amaze me.


Sophr. O Bathynous, my very Heart Strings are fretted with fear and anxiety,
when you plunge us into such profound Disquisitions as these, out of which
there is never any hope to emerge. I pray you, Hylobares, ask modestly touching
these things. I wonder you are not thoroughly satisfied about Providence
already: I am sure I am.


Hyl. And I desire but to be so too, Sophron. What will satisfy one man will
not satisfy another.


Philoth. That is very true, Hylobares, which I perceiving, it forced me to
mention the Golden Key of Providence to you. For we do not wantonly and
ostentatively produce those Keys, but at a dead lift, when no other method will
sati^^ie him whose mind is anxious and solicitous touching the Ways of God;
that by these Hypotheses he may keep his Heart from sinking.


Hyl. It is a very laudable custom, Philotheus, and such as I find the benefit
of already. For I find the very first Difficulties of this last and present
Head I intended to propose, to melt away of themselves in virtue of that light
from the Golden Key, I mean that of Pre-existence. For I intended to have
propounded it as an Objection against the Goodness of Divine Providence, That,
whereas the Soul can live and subsist out of this terrestrial Body, (for so it
does after death) she should not be created before this terrestrial Mansion,
and enjoy her self before she come into the Body, as well as afterward. But
this Doctrine of Pre-existence has plainly prevented the Objection. Another
Objection also, touching the Messiah coming into the World so lately, is in my
own judgment much enervated by this Hypothesis. For who knows but the Demerits
of Humane Souls were such, that it was consonant enough to the Goodness of God,
not to communicate the best Religion to the World till that time it was
communicated?


Philoth. That is no inept consideration, Hylobares. But besides, it is a
strange Presumption to determine when it is just fit time for Providence to use
her strongest Effort for reclaiming of straying Souls: And to reclaim them as
soon as they have strayed, is next to the keeping them forcibly from ever
straying, which is to hinder a free Agent from ever acting freely. Wherefore
seeing the Souls of men were to use their own liberty, there were certain
pompous Scenes of affairs to proceed upon either supposition, whether they
stood or fell, and not all presently to be huddled up in an instant. And what
Light Providence brings out of the Darkness of Sin, I did more particularly
intimate unto you in our yesterday's discourse.


Hyl. I remember it, Philotheus, and rest very well satisfied.


Philop. To expect that the Messiah should have come into the World so soon as
Adam had fallen, is as incongruous as to expect the reaping of the Crop the
very same day the Corn is sown, or that Spring and Autumn should be crowded
into the same months of the year.


Hyl. This is abundantly plain. And another Difficulty also which I intended to
propose, touching the Plurality of Earths or Worlds, quite vanishes: while I
contemplate the Paradigm of the World's Systeme in the Silver-Key-Paper, that
bears me up as stoutly on the left hand from sinking as the other Hypothesis on
the right.


Bath. Do you not see, Sophron, that you are worse s^ar'd then hurt? Do you not
observe how these great and formidable Difficulties crumble away of themselves,
when a judicious eye has had once but a glance into the Truth?


Sophr. It Is well if all will come off so clear.


Hyl. But there are some little Scruples remaining, XXXIII.
Philotheus, Di^ficulties touching the Extent of the Uni^e^s^.
partly about the Extent of the Universe, partly about the Habitableness of the
Planets and Earths.


Sophr. I thought so.


Philoth. Propound them, if you please, Hylobares.


Hyl. Whether the Universe be Finite, or Infinite. For if it be Finite, it is
infinitely defectuous, if it may be Infinite.


Philoth. That Is well put in, If it may be; but try whether it may be or no,
Hylobares.


Hyl. How, Philotheus?


Philoth. Fancy it as Infinite as possibly you can.


Hyl. I fancy it absolutely infinite.


Philoth. Then every Part thereof is infinite.


Hyl. You mean every denominated Part, Philotheus; else the number of parts is
only infinite, not the parts.


Philoth. I mean the denominated Parts, a third, a fourth, a fifth, etc. But a
middle third part is bounded by the Extremes, and therefore the Extremes
themselves are boundable. And consequently when you have phansied the World as
infinite as you can, you must be enforced still to conclude it finite.


Hyl. It seems so, if it be not a Fallacy.


Philoth. Wherefore if the possibility of an Infinite World be unconceivable to
you, it can be no imputation to the Goodness of Providence if it be found
Finite.


Hyl. But is it found Finite, Philotheus?


Philoth. No Art nor Oracle that I know has declared it so. That not only the
Globe of the Earth but her very Orbit is but as a Point to the Circuit of the
nearest fixed Stars, offers rather toward a detection of the infinite Vastness
of the World then of the Finiteness thereof. How vastly distant then are those
little fixed Stars that show but as scattered Pin-dust in a frosty night? In
what immense removes are they one beyond another? O Israel, Bar. 3. 24, 25.
how great is the House of God! how large is the place of his possession!
Great, and has no end; high, and unmeasurable. They are the words of the
Prophet Baruch.


Hyl. It seems then that the Infiniteness of the World is declared by that
Oracle rather then the Finiteness thereof.


Philoth. It is so vastly big, Hylobares, that there is little doubt but that
it is as immense as it can be, and that is enough to show that the Dimensions
thereof take their measures from the Divine Goodness. Whence it is clear that
Providence is unexceptionable in this Point.


Hyl. It is so.


Sophr. I wish Philotheus come off so well in the other.


Philoth. Be courageous, O Sophron; we'll do our best, when Hylobares has
proposed it.


Hyl. That the Silver-Key-Systeme is the true Systeme of the World I am well
enough persuaded of, XXXIV.
and that consequently it were in vain to object the Solitude of this one Earth
in this immense liquid space of the World, Difficulties touching the
Habitableness or Unhabitableness of the Planets.
whenas this Systeme exhibits so many more to our view. For we can no sooner
discern our own Earth to be a Planet, but we must therewithal detect also that
the rest of the Planets are so many Earths, as indeed the Pythagoreans did
expressly call the Moon our (...) or opposite Earth. Arist. de Coelo, lib. 2. c.
13.
But the Difficulty I come to propound is touching the Habitableness of them,
which I suppose will not be denied; but then there is this Snare we are caught
in, That if we conceive them to be inhabited by mere Brutes only, there will
be a defect of men to keep good quarter amongst them; but if they be also
inhabited with Men, these men will want the means of Salvation; for that they
are in a lapsed state is supposed in their becoming terrestrial Creatures:
either of which is inconsistent with that exquisite Goodness of God that is
pleaded for.


Philoth. That Is a knotty Problem indeed, Hylobares.


Sophr. Why do you smile, Philotheus? methinks it is a very formidable Question.


Philoth. I smile at something that extraordinarily pleases me.


Sophr. I pray you what is it that pleases you so much, Philotheus? I would
gladly know it, that I might smile also for company.


Philoth. It is Sophron's honest and sober solicitude touching the Solution of
the present Difficulty, which so becomingly betrays it self in the very air of
his Countenance, and even then when there is least fear of miscarriage.


Sophr. That were good news, Philotheus, if it were true.


Philoth. It is a less Puzzle then that about the Salvation of them of the
Newfound World upon Earth, I mean those of America, who heard not the least
whisper of either Moses or of Christ till within this Age or two. In what
capacity of Salvation were they then, O Sophron, for some thousands of years
together, who yet are certainly of a lapsed race? (whenas whether all Souls
that enter into thicker Vehicles in any part of the Universe be lapsed, is
uncertain.) And we cannot deny but that vast Continent has been inhabited, as
also the adjacent Islands, all that time, though they heard as little of Christ
as they that live in Saturn or the Moon.


Sophr. That cannot be denied, Philotheus. But you know either your self or
some of us has answered this Point already, That those Americans that lived
sincerely according to the Light they had, God might impart more to them, and
finally in some extraordinary way or other communicate the knowledge of Christ
to them to their eternal Salvation. For you know a just and honest Creditour,
if the Debt be satisfied by a Friend, though unknown to the Debtour, yet he
will free him from all Suits at Law and Arrests, and whatever other Troubles
or Inconveniences attend a Debtour whose Debts are unsatisfied. Whence the
Passion and Atonement of Christ might take effect with the sincere Americans,
though they knew nothing of the History thereof. And therefore being reconciled
by the death of Christ, Romans 5. 10.
they should be much more saved by his life, as the Apostle speaks.


Philoth. It is very well and piously argued, O Sophron.


Hyl. I think so too, Philotheus.


Philoth. Had I not therefore reason to smile at Sophron, being so well
furnished to satisfy a greater Difficulty, to see him so hugely confounded at
the less?


Hyl. But why take you this to be the lesser Difficulty, Philotheus?


Philoth. Because there is more Elbow-room for framing of Answers to it. For
first, suppose we should affirm that all the Earths in the Universe, besides
this of ours, were inhabited merely with Brutes; That is no Argument at all
against the Divine Goodness, no more then it would be against the accuracy of
Policy in a great City to see all the Gaols therein devoid of Prisoners, and
that they were left to the sole possession of Bats and Cats, of Rats and Mice,
and such like Vermin. It were rather a sign of a more exquisite Government and
good disposition of the People, that there were now found no such Criminalls
amongst them. And for the pretense of having some rational Creatures amongst
them to keep good quarter; what rational Creatures are there that rule among
the scaly Nations of the vast Ocean?


Hyl. None, unless Tritons and SeaNymphs.


Philoth. You may as well fancy Fauns and Satyrs and other Sylvatick Genii to
range these Earths supposed destitute of humane kind, and to superintend their
brutish Inhabitants for their good, though at a more remote and careless
distance.


Hyl. As probable as the black Hunter ranging the Forest with his vocal, but
invisible, Hounds in Fountainbleau.


Euist. I remember the Story very well, it is recorded in the life of Henry the
fourth of France.


Hyl. But there being such an infinite number of Earths as there is of Stars or
Suns, it is incredible, Philotheus, that it should be the only Fate of this
Earth of ours to be inhabited with men.


Philoth. But how do you know, Hylobares, that there is such an infinite number
of Earths? For you covenanted at first not to bring in mere Suspicions and
Surmizes reproachfully to load Providence withal.


Hyl. But if that innumerable company of ^ixt Stars have no Planets dancing
about them, that is to say, habitable Earths, that will be a real reproach to
Providence indeed, as if Divine Goodness were infinitely defectuous in that
Point.


Philoth. Nay, that were rather an auspicious sign, Hylobares, that the
Intellectual Orders of Creatures are not so much, or rather so universally,
lapsed as they might be conceived to be, and that the Divine Goodness has a
more successful and effectual Dominion over the Universe then you imagined.
For as much as the Light exceeds the Shadows, so much do the Regions of
Happiness exceed those of Sin and Misery. It is an Aphorism of the
Golden-Key-Paper.


Hyl. I perceive you are prepared to meet one at every turn, Philotheus.


Philoth. It is but common Civility to meet him that makes toward one. But now
in the second place, Hylobares, let us suppose that all the Planets or Earths
be inhabited with rational Creatures, yet these rational Creatures may be as
specifically distinct as the Earths or Planets they inhabit, but agree all in
Rationality; as the sundry species of Dogs here on Earth agree in Latrability.
They having therefore no specific cognation with the Sons of Adam, what have
they to do with that Religion that the Sons of Adam are saved by? Nay, I add
farther, that these varieties of rational Creatures in the other Planets, as
they all agree with one another and with us in mere natural Reason, so they may
all disagree from us in this essential Property of being capable of true
Religion; no Properties but those either of the Animal or middle life being
essential to them. In virtue whereof they may be good Naturalists, good
Politicians, good Geometricians and Analysts, good Architects, build Cities and
frame Commonwealths, and rule over their brother-B^utes in those Planets, and
make as good use of them as we do; but be as incapable of the Divine Life, or
of being good Citizens of the Heavenly Kingdom, or genuine Sons of God, as the
very Brutes they rule over.


Cuph. O how do I flutter to be acquainted with this kind of People, Hylobares!
they are pure Philosophers, I Will pawn my life on it. O that the invention of the
Gansaws were once perfected, that I might make my first Visit to our Neighbors
in the Moon!


Hyl. But it would be pretty in the mean time if the Art of Telescopes were so
far perfected, that we might discern their shapes and persons distinctly,
Cuphophron, and see whether it were worth the while to make a Visit to them,
whether they be not a Nation of mere Apes and Baboons.


Cuph. I dare say, Hylobares, if we could but see these Apes and Baboons
through our Telescopes, we should sometimes find them as busily tooting
through their Tubes at us, as we at them.


Hyl. That were a rare hit indeed, Cuphophron, that the Sons of the Mechanic
Philosophy should be so lucky at Bo-peep, Descartes his Dioptr. cap. 1.
and be able to take a mutual interview of one another at such a distance. If
I could once hear this news, I should presently suspect that those pieces of
Ice that I. Metius is said to have contrived first into Telescopes tumbled out
of the Moon.


Cuph. Well, well, Hylobares, you jear all things; but you know not what Time
may bring forth.


Hyl. But in the mean time I am very serious in my conference with Philotheus,
which your Raptures have thus interrupted. The scope of whose Discourse on this
Point is, to show that these other Earths may not be inhabited by any other
Creatures then such as are essentially incapable of true Religion, though he
may happily allow them to do such Venerations (those in the Moon par^icularly)
to our Earth as the Cercopithecus and Elephant are said to do to the Moon, and
so may exercise a natural Idolatry, and that, it may be, in
magnificently-exstructed Templ^s, even in this utter incapacity of true
Religion, and consequently of Salvation; their condition in that respect being
much like that of Brutes. Which Hypothesis once admitted, (and it is such as it
is hard to demonstrate to be false) the present Difficulty I must confess does
quite vanish. But because from the prejudice of Custom, and habitual
experience of our own Earth's being inhabited by Men properly so called, we
have such an invincible propension to think the same thing comes to pass in all
other Earths or Planets; I beseech you, Philotheus, ease my thoughts touching
their means of Salvation in this state of the Question, if you can.


Philoth. Those that are saved of them are saved by the same means that the
Americans and the rest of the Pagan World, that never had the opportunity of
hearing of the History of Christ, were or are saved. The Ransom is paid into a
very righteous hand, that will not exact the Debt twice, as Sophron very
soberly and judiciously suggested.


Cuph. Who knows but the Passion of Christ was intimated to the Inhabitants of
those other Earths by the miraculous Eclipse that then happened, the Sun
win^ing to the rest of the World, to give them notice far and wide what was
transacting on the stage of the Earth in the behalf of all?


Hyl. You are a man of rare Devices, Cuphophron. How came then the Americans
not to lay hold on this opportunity? For they had no knowledge of the Suffering
of the Messiah, till such time as the Christians brought it thither, and
fetched away their Gold.


Cuph. You know it is night with them, Hylobares, when it is day with us; and
therefore they missed the information of that Miracle.


Hyl. But they might have taken hold then of the miraculous Eclipse of the
Moon, which was every whit as prodigious and conspicuous, these two Luminaries
being then in Opposition, and Christ was crucified about Noon.


Philoth. Cuphophron's conceit is witty, but over-slight and humourous for so
solemn and serious a matter. The sum of my Solution of this Difficulty,
Hylobares, is this: Lapsed Souls, wherever they are, that recover into
Sincerity, are saved as we are saved, (...), by the Divine Humanity, or Humane
Divinity, of the Son of God: which is the inmost and deepest Arcanum of our
Christian Religion. And it is the Privilege of the Christian World, that they
have this Mystery so plainly and distinctly communicated to them by the
preaching of the Gospel. But the efficacy of the said Mystery may be also
derived to them that never hear it sound externally and historically to their
outward ears. For the Spirit of the Lord passes through the whole Universe, and
communicates this Mystery to all Souls, wherever they are, that are fitted to
receive it, in a more hidden and miraculous way, such as himself and at what
time himself shall please to make use of. This I think the most sober Solution
of the present Difficulty, upon supposition that there are any Men properly so
called that inhabit those Planets or Earths you speak of. Which, whether there
be or no, is uncertain to us; and therefore the Allegation of such
Uncertainties against certain Testimonies for the exquisite Goodness of Divine
Providence, (as I have often intimated) ought to be esteemed of no value.


Hyl. I must confess it, XXXV.
Philotheus, That though the World was created but about six thousand years
ag^^, yet, for ought we know, it was created as soo^ as it could be.
and crave your pardon. But I find my very Impertinencies in my conference with
you successful and edifying. Let me propose to you but one Scruple more,
Philotheus, and then I shall give you no farther trouble.


Sophr. I am glad we are at length so near getting out of the Briars.


Philoth. I pray you, what is that Scruple, Hylobares?


Hyl. It is again about the Pre-existence of the Soul.


Sophr. Nay, if he go back, Philotheus, look to your self; he will come on
again with such a career, and give you such a push as you never felt yet.


Philoth. That cannot be helped, Sophron, I must bear the brunt of it as well
as I can. Speak out therefore, Hylobares, and tell your Scruple.


Hyl. My Scruple is only this, How it can consist with the infinite Goodness
of God, which you say is the Measure of his Providence, (since that Humane
Souls can pre-exist and enjoy themselves before they come into these
terrestrial Bodies) that they were created no sooner then cum Mundo condito,
which is not six thousand years ago; whenas they might have enjoyed themselves
infinite millions of thousands of years before.


Philoth. If we rightly understand the nature of the Soul, Hylobares, this is
no such hard Problem. For you must understand it may be an essential Property
of the Soul, either vitally to actuate some material Vehicle or other, or else
not to act at all. Wherefore it had been a frustraneous thing to create Souls
so infinite a space of time before the corporeal World was created, that
Hypothesis supposed.


Hyl. This may be true for ought I know, Philotheus: but admitting it so, it
casts me still into an equal perplexity touching the Divine Goodness, in that
she has not thought fit that the corporeal World should be created till within
six thousand years ago, whereas it might have been created an infinite time
before, and ought so to have been, that Humane Souls might so early come into
play, and live and act in their respective Vehicles.


Philoth. This is something indeed, Hylobares.


Sophr. Did not I tell you so, Philotheus? Our Ship is sunk in the very Haven,
when we were ready to land.


Philop. Your heart is sunk, O Sophron, pluck up your spirits, and be of good
cheer. Is this the utmost of your Difficulty, Hylobares?


Hyl. It is; cure me but of this Anxiety, Philotheus, and I shall declare my
self as sound as a fish, and perfectly freed from all Scruples touching Divine
Providence.


Philoth. But your self must assist me then in your own Cure. Tell me
therefore, Hylobares, why do you think that the World was not created till
about six thousand years ago?


Hyl. That Is plain from the Chronology of Holy Scripture.


Philoth. But have you no other Argument for it, Hylobares?


Hyl. None at all that I can tell of, Philotheus.


Philoth. Why then, Hylobares, the case stands thus. If you heartily adhere to
the truth of the Scripture, as you ought, I will declare you as sound as a
fish; and this intricate discourse about Providence might have been the less
needful. But if in a Philosophical Wantonness you will not concern your self
in the Letter of the Scripture touching Theorems of Philosophy, you have
already declared your self as sound as a Fish.


Hyl. You have caught me like a Fish in a Net, Philotheus: but I must freely
confess I do not perceive my own Soundness yet, unless I should be so unsound
as to quit the Scriptures.


Philoth. That you will never do, if you rightly understand them. For they are
most assuredly the Truth of God.


Hyl. But how does this Truth consort with his Goodness, whenas it declares to
us that the World has continued but about these six thousand years?


Philoth. This Earth and Heaven that the Conflagration is to pass upon
assuredly commenced no longer ago, Hylobares. But I pray you how high would you
have the Commencement of the World to begin, and in what order, that it may
fill out the measure of that Idea of Goodness which you would have its
Continuation stretched upon?


Hyl. I would have it begun no sooner then it was possible, which is infinite
Myriads of years sooner then it began.


Philoth. Well then, Hylobares, begin it as soon as you will in your
Philosophical way, and in what order you will, and see what will become of it.
You young men are marvellously wise.


Cuph. O that I had Hylobares his Province now! what rare work could I make of
it?


Hyl. I prithee, Cuphophron, take it. I know thou will manage it nimbly and
wittily.


Cuph. Cartesianly enough, I warrant thee, Hylobares; you shall see else if I
do not. And I will smartly say at first, That the World was to begin so soon as
God was, his Omnipotency being coeternall to himself; and therefore whatever
he could produce in any moment, he could produce as soon as he was, which was
from everlasting. Wherefore the Matter might have been created from
everlasting, and, having a due measure of Motion imparted to it, might within a
little time after have fallen into the contrivance of Vortices and Suns,
according to the description of the Cartesian Philosophy; that is, say I,
Mechanically, with Descartes, but Bathynous Spermatically, from an old
Pythagorick Dream in a Wood. But it is not material now which way it was. For
whether way soever, in process of time, after these Suns had shone through the
Universe with a ^ree Light, some of them being inveloped with Spots grew
perfectly opake, and being sucked in by their neighbor- Vortices became
Planets or Earths.


Euist. These are, Diog. Laert. in vita Parmen.
it may be, those extinct Suns or cold Suns that Parme^ides the Pythagorean
taught, adding also, that men were generated out of the Sun; meaning surely
these extinct or cold ones, that were turned into Earths or Planets.


Cuph. That Is a pretty Observation, Euistor.


Hyl. I, and an handsome confirmation also of Bathynous his Dream, that the
Rise of the World was not merely Mechanical, but Spermaticall or Vital; this
Parmenides being a Pythagorean. But this is not the present business. I pray
you return to your Province, Cuphophron, and bring things to a conclusion.


Cuph. The conclusion is manifest of it self: That if the World did not
commence so early as I have described, since it was possible it might do so,
(but infinite Myriads of years later,) that the infinite Goodness of God is not
the Measure of his Providence, but that he has been infinitely less good then
he might have been to the World and to humane Souls, if they have continued but
six thousand years.


Sophr. This is smart indeed, Cuphophron.


Cuph. I love what I take upon me, Sophron, to do it thoroughly and smartly.
What say you to this, Philotheus?


Philoth. I say you have charged stoutly and home, O Cuphophron; but I shall
make the force recoil again upon your own breast, if you will but freely and
ingenuously answer to what I demand.


Cuph. I shall, Philotheus.


Philoth. Was there not a first six thousand years of Duration from the
beginning of the World, supposing it began so timely as you have described?


Cuph. According to my Hypothesis it began from everlasting, and therefore the
numbering of years from this time to that will have no exitus. We shall never
come to the first six thousand years.


Philoth. That Is true, O Cuphophron; but you answer craftily, and yet you
plainly imply that there was a first six thousand years, though we cannot come
at them: but that is because we begin at the wrong end. By the same fallacy you
may conclude that there is not a last six thousand years, beginning your
account from everlasting, as you call it, because your numbering will find no
Exitus to us. And yet we are, suppose at this moment, in the last moment of the
last six thousand years; and so we shall be always of some last six thousand,
or at least have been so in such divisions.


Cuph. That cannot be denied.


Philoth. Wherefore, Cuphophron, pitch your animadversion on the right end,
that is to say, on the beginning of this infinite Duration, as you fancy it,
I mean, on that Intervall of time wherein all the whole Universe was either
lucid or transparent, there being nothing but Suns then according to your
Cartesian Hypothesis, no Earths or Planets: was that time infinite?


Cuph. I must confess it seems to me incredible that it was so. Methinks within
less then an infinite Series of time some of the Suns should be inveloped with
Spots, become Comets, and afterward Earths or Planets.


Philoth. Well then, if that Intervall of time was finite, it had a finite
number of six thousand years.


Cuph. Of six thousand years repeated, you mean, Philotheus.


Philoth. I mean so, and would from thence infer, that there is most evidently
therefore in that finite Intervall a first six thousand years as well as a last.


Cuph. It seems impossible to be otherwise. But well, what of all this,
Philotheus?


Philoth. Let us fancy now our selves, O Cuphophron, or any other rational
Beings, Philosophizing at the end of those first six thousand years immediately
succeeding the most early Commencement of the World that was possible, (for you
pitched as high as possibly you could) and entertaining themselves with the
very discourse we are now upon; would not they with your self notwithstanding
conclude, that the World might have been made an infinite Series of time sooner?


Cuph. Not if they knew it (as we suppose it) made as soon as possibly it could
be.


Hyl. Very well answered, Cupho^hron.


Sophr. It is too well answered. This Cuphophron has a mischievous wit with him
when he is set upon it.


Cuph. I told you, Sophron, I love to do all things smartly.


Philoth. I pray you do, Cuphophron, and tell me farther, whether the Ancient
of days was then but of six thousand years continuance; and whether those
Disputants we speak of, unless it had been told them by Divine Revelation that
the World began as soon as it could, would not confidently have conceived it
might have begun an infinite Series of time before; and, lastly, whether we
knowing by Divine Revelation that the World began about six thousand years ago,
it may not for all that have commenced as soon as possibly it could; and God,
who is Omnipotent, could as early create Planets as Suns or Stars, and order
all things as he is said to do in six days Creation, or as we find them to be
at this day.


Hyl. Answer, Cuphophron: why do you gape and stare, and scratch your head
where it itches not?


Cuph. I pray you, Hylobares, take your Province again, if you will, and manage
it your self: I have enough of it.


Hyl. Why, what is the matter, Cuphophron?


Cuph. I am confounded.


Hyl. I am convinced.


Cuph. Convinced aforehand, I warrant you, at all adventures, before
Philotheus has made any Conclusion. What would he infer from all this?


Philoth. That though with the Holy Scriptures we admit, as all Orthodox people
do, that the World was created but about six thousand years ago, yet, for ought
we know, it was created as soon as it could; and therefore Hylobares his
Allegation, of the Possibility of the World's being created an infinite Series
of time sooner, is of no validity against our Assertion of the exquisite
Goodness of Providence, which I have contended for all this time.


Hyl. I, and yours is the Victory, O admired Philotheus, XXXVI.
but mine the Triumph. Hylobares his excess of Joy and high Satisfaction
touching Providence, from the Discourse of Philotheus.
(...)!


Philop. What Is the matter with Hylobares, that he raps out Greek in this
unusual manner? What is it that he says, Euistor?


Euist. It is a broken Sentence of a transported Barbarian in Aristophanes. O
how am I pleased! how am I delighted! how am I rejoiced, and could even dance
for joy!


Philop. I suppose Hylobares speaks better Greek then you English, or else its
as barbarous and rude as the Barbarian himself.


Euist. I know what you mean, Philopolis, I humored it on purpose to the
Barbarian's Greek. I am rejoiced is as good English as (...) is Greek, if we
will believe the Critics.


Hyl. Euistor is got to his sapless Critics again; but I am brim-full of the
pleasure of important Things and Notions. O happy Philopolis, that brought us
to this Conference! O thrice-blessed Philotheus, that has so divine a Gift of
easing the minds of the serious in their anxious Perplexities about the most
concerning Matters!


Philop. I am glad Philotheus has wrought so great a Cure.


Hyl. A Cure, Philopolis? it is more then a Cure. I am not only at perfect
ease touching all Doubts about Divine Providence, but in an ineffable Joy and
Ecstasie, rapt into Paradise upon Earth, hear the Music of Heaven, while I
consider the Harmony of God, of Reason; and the Universe, so well accorded by
the skillful voice of Philotheus. How lightsome is my Heart, since my mind has
been eased of these Perplexities! how transported are my Spirits, how
triumphant and tripudiant, that I am ready even to skip out of my skin for Joy!


Cuph. If you be so dancingly merry, Hylobares, you would do well to call for
a fit of Music: I have provided an Instrument almost as high as your Raptures.
Music joined to this mood will put you upon a rare pin indeed.


Sophr. Hylobares wants no aid for the increase of his Joy, but rather for the
regulating of it. For in my apprehension he is in a very great Emotion of mind.


Philoth. Melancholic persons are sometimes in such a condition upon such like
occasions; Truth being to the eye of the Soul what Beauty is to that of the
Body, very transporting.


Sophr. I believe a solemn Lesson on the Theorbo would finely compose him, and
Bathynous I know has skill on that Instrument, and can sing to it.


Philoth. You say right, he can. I pray you, Bathynous, give us a cast of your
Skill.


Bath. I am a very sorry Musician, to venture to sing in such company. I sing
sometimes and play to my self in the dark some easy Songs and Lessons, but
have not the confidence to think others can be pleased with such mean Music.


Cuph. You may play and sing in the dark here too, Bathynous, if you will. The
Moon's light comes not so plentifully through the Leaves of the Arbor as to
discover whether you blush or no, in case you should be out. Come, I pray you,
be confident. I Will reach you the Theorbo.


Philop. I pray you, Bathynous, let us hear what you can do. I know it will be
grateful to Hylobares.


Hyl. I shall like a Song of Bathynous his choosing; I know it will not be
impertinent to our present purpose.


Bath. It Is an excellent Theorbo, Cuphophron: It deserves a more skillful Hand
to touch it then mine. How sweet and mellow, and yet how majestic, is the
Sound of it!


Hyl. O how that Flourish charms my Spirits! You have a very good Hand on the
Lute, Bathynous.


Bath. I Will sing you a good Song, Hylobares, though I have but a bad Hand, and
a worse Voice: and it shall be out of your own beloved hobbling Poet, The
Philosopher's Devotion.


Hyl. None better: I pray you let us hear it.


Bath. Sing aloud, XXXVII.
His Pr^^^e rese^rse
Who (...) m^^e the Vnivers^. (...)

He the boundless Heaven has spread,
All the vital Orbs has kn^d;
He that on Olympus high
Tends his Flocks with watchful Eye,
And this Eye has multiplied,
'Midst each Flock for to reside.
Thus as round about they stray,
Touches each with out-stretch'd Ray.
^imbly they hold on their way,
Sh^ping ^ut their Night and Day.
Summer, Winter, Autumn, Spring,
Their inclined Axes bring.
Never slack they, none respires,
Dancing round their Central Fires.
In due order as they move,
Echo's sweet be gently drove
Thorough Heaven's vast Hollo^ness,
Which unto all corners press;
Music that the heart of Jove
Moves to Joy and sportfull Love,
Fills the listening Sailors ears
Riding on the wandering Spears.
Neither Speech nor Language is
Where their voice is not transmiss.
God is good, is wise, is strong,
Witness all the Creature-throng;
Is confessed by every Tongue.
All things back from whence they
As the thankful Rivers pay (Sprung,
What they borrowed of the Sea.
Now my self I do resign:
T^ke me whole, I all am t^in^
Save me, God, from Self-desire,
Death's pit, dark Hell's raging Fire,
Envy, Hatred, Vengeance, Ire:
Let not Lust my Soul bemire.
Quit from these thy Praise I Will sing,
Loudly sweep the trembling String.
Bear a part, O Wisedom's Sons,
Freed from vain Religions.
Lo, from far I you salute,
Sweetly warbling on my Lute.
India, Egypt, Arabie,
Asia, Greece, and Tartarie,
Carmel- Tracts and Lebanon,
With the Mountains of the Moon,
From whence muddy Nile does run,
Or wherever else you wone,
Breathing in one vital Air,
One we are, though distant far.
Rise at once, let us sacrifice
Odours sweet, perfume the Skies.
See how Heavenly Lightning fires
Hearts inflamed with high Aspires!
All the substance of our Souls
Up in clouds of Incense rolls.
Leave we nothing to our selves,
Save a Voice; what need we else?
Or an Hand to wear and tire
On the thankful Lute or Lyre.
Sing aloud, His Praise rehearse
Who has made the Universe.

Hyl. Your Judgment is very sound, O Sophron; this solemn Lesson on the
Theorbo did not so much increase my Passion of Joy, as regulate, establish, and
fix it. Methought I was placed in the third Heaven all the while I heard so
sweet an Instrument, so lively a Voice, and so exalted Philosophy and Morality
joined together in one Harmony.


Cuph. You was a very great way off then, Hylobares, if you mean the Cartesian
third Heaven.


Hyl. I mean an higher Mystery, Cuphophron. A man may be in the Cartesian third
Heaven, and yet be as silly a fellow as I was before I conferred with
Philotheus.


Philop. You are the most rapturous and ecstaticall Company of people that ever
I met with in all my life; a kind of Divine Madness, I think, rules amongst
you, and the efficacy of your Converse is able to make others mad for Company.
I am sure when Philotheus comes to my beloved Theme, if he manage it with the
like success he has done this, it will hazard my being at least inwardly as
much transported as Hylobares. Which I would willingly try to morrow more
timely in the afternoon, betwixt three and four of the Clock, because my
occasions will call me next day out of Town.


Philoth. I am sorry to hear of your so sudden departure, Philopolis; but we
shall not fail at that time you appoint to give you the meeting here.


Sophr. And I hope Philotheus will manage your Theme, XXXVIII.
Philopolis, The Ha^^r^ and Success of the f^^egoing Dis^o^^se.
with a more steady and secure Success then that of Hylobares. For the truth
is, I have had many an aching Heart for you all in this doubtful Dispute; your
Hardiness seeming to me as reprovable as theirs who, when they may securely
stand on the firm Land, or safely pass over a strong-built Bridge, will choose
to commit themselves to some weather-beaten Cockboat, when the Wind is very
rough and the Waves high and tossing, only out of a careless Wantonness, or
desire to conflict with Danger. Methought ever and anon I saw the Boat r^ady to
^opple over, and your selves put to swim for your lives, or drown.


Philop. But Providence did marvellously assist her so earnest and affectionate
Advocate, O Sophron.


Sophr. She did, and I heartily congratulate your safe arrival to Land.


Cuph. But this is but a dry and ineffectual Congratulation, O Sophron. Come,
begin to them in a Glass of good Canarie, to comfort their chill hearts after
the peril of this Shipwreck and sad Sea-storm. Hold, I Will open the Bottle.


Hyl. Stay your hand, XXXIX.
O Cuphophron. The Preference of Intellectual Joy before tha^ which is Sensual.
There Is none so chill or cold at heart as you imagine. I am sure I am all Joy
and Warmth without the help of any such Liquour.


Cuph. It may be you are over-hot, Hylobares; Sack is good even in Fevers, and
it is not unlikely but that a Glass of it may cool you.


Hyl. All the heat that I have at this time, be it never so much, is so sacred
and divine, that I will not diminish it in the least degree upon any pretense.


Philop. I pray you, Cuphophron, keep your Bottle entire till another time. I
perceive it is now utterly needless, and your Liquour is too good to be cast
away in vain.


Philoth. We all overflow with such Joy, O Cuphophron, as no terrestrial Wine
can procure, nor increase, nor ought to diminish.


Euist. Indeed I think we do, Philotheus; I would not drink a Glass of Sack
now, no not for forty pounds.


Cuph. I have not the luck of it at this time to contribute to the pleasure of
this excellent Company in any thing, my Wine it self being as rejectaneous as
my Reasonings.


Hyl. O dear Cuphophron, be not you solicitous touching these things. I Will
assure you, your performance was mavelous noble, and worthy the great Parts
and Wit of Cuphophron.


Cuph. It Is a comfortable circumstance, that the censure of Hylobares is so
favorable, whose humor is to abuse in me whatever is or is not abuseable.
But I profess to thee, Hylobares, I was never so confounded in all my life as
in that point of the World's possibility of being created from everlasting. I
am perfectly puzzled in it to this very day.


Hyl. Why, I prithee, Cuphophron, how many hours, or rather minutes, is it
since that confusion first surprised thee?


Cuph. My mind has been so jumbled betwixt Time and Eternity, XL.
that I think I can speak sense in neither. That there is an everanticipative
Eternity and inexterminable Amplitude that are proper to the Deity only.
What a mavelous thing is this, that God, who was Omnipotent as soon as he
was, and who was from all Eternity, and could create Suns and Vortices within a
moment that he was Omnipotent, yet should not be able to create the World so
soon, but that there would be an Eternity of Duration necessarily conceivable
before the World's Creation?


Bath. Yes, Cuphophron, and this marvellously- anticipating Eternity is the
proper and necessary eternal Duration of God, which nothing can reach or
exhaust; as that inmost Extension or Amplitude which will necessarily remain
after we have imagined all Matter, or whatever else is removeable, removed or
extermina^^ out of the World, is to be looked (...) no as the permanent
Expansion or (...) of the radical Essentiality (...) God.


Cuph. This is obscurum per obscuriu^^ Bathynous; but doubtless it is an
highly-Metaphysicall Point, and a (...) ought to muster up all his
Metaphys^^call forces that would grapple with (...) This is a noble game for me
alone (...) my self to pursue in my Arbor.


Philop. Or on your Pillow, Cupho^^phron; for it is very late. And there^ fore,
courteous Cuphophron, we'll (...) you Good night.


Cuph. You say well, Philopolis, (...) will not be amiss to consult with one's
Pillow, as the Proverb is, and ^leep upon it.


Philop. Gentlemen, you will remember the appointed time to morrow.


Philoth. We will not fail you, Philopolis.


The end of the Third Dialogue.
FINIS.

