CERTAIN INSTRVCTIONS GIVEN BY THE L. MONTROSE, L. NAPPIER, Laerd of Keer and
Blackhall.

WITH A TRVE REPORT OF The Committee for this New Treason, that they had a
threefold Design.



LONDON,

Printed in the year 1641.

CERTAIN INSTRVCTIONS GIVEN BY THE L. Montrose, L. Nappier, Laerd of Keer and
Blackhall.
HOw necessary it is that R. come to R. King.
the Parliament.

To desire that H. be kept up till it H. Office.
be seen who deserves them best. That H. be not bestowed by advice of the
Elephant, for fear he crush the L.

To assure L. that R. and L. being granted, he will be powerful to crush the
Elephant.

Not to let L. drink water, except he promise not to cast it up again. That
is, not to reveal it to the Marquess.

To assure D. and T. that except they take Genero Duke Traq Montrose.
by the hand, they will be trod upon at home and made naked. G. Mont. R.
religion and L. liberty.


To assure L. D. that G. will take him by the hand and lead him throughout all
difficulties, R. and L. being granted.

Instructions from L. Traq to L. Colonel Steward.
To counsel L. his hom^ coming till they Duke Meat. Pap. Keer.
hear from D. or D. hear from thence to advertise C. withal diligence how...
are pleased with the Tablet. And if there be any particulars that they would
have the L. more special in.

That they be not moved with Reports of any Alteration, or any thing derogate
from the Tablet, except they hear from D.

Tablet Propositions for the King and his Majesty's answer.
That the word Moderation be explained to Genero annent Traq in a Letter from
the Duke.

That... strive to let the Town Wigton know how careful T. has been to get
him satisfaction, as my Lord of Roxborough can bear witness, and that they
may be confident of satisfaction.

It is thought most necessary that some... who will be least suspected come, or
if that cannot conveniently be, that the bearer return with all possible
diligence, and howsoever, he come up before.

That all means be used for trying the Information Argeil. E* Sefor^ Macha^.
against the Dromadary, and what further can be found of his carriage, with
Athol Magduffe or any other in these parts, wherein Sir Puritan and some of the
Redshankes friends can best inform and instruct.

To assure Sir Puritan that he will get satisfaction annent the Ward and
Marriage he desired, but that now it is a fit time to do it for him or any
other so disposed as he is.

To tell Genero, that so soon as Dick comes to Sr. Richard Greemes com^ to
Court.
the School, who is daily expected, he will by him hear from L.

To let... know how well L. takes their care and in the discreetest way to
inform your self of their desires, and particularly if Rick aim upward,
Smoke.
that its business goes right.

To try the summons against T. and to send up a double, that he may compare
them with that which he has gotten, and to assure... and all others, that he
shall clear himself of all these as clear as daylight.

That by all means they labor with the plantations, to let them know, the
Tablet being filled up, and made good, how much it concerns them to show
themselves affectionate.

That the Parliament be constitute of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Burrows.

That Religion be secured by confirming the Acts of the last general Assembly
holden at Edinburgh, and every thing done necessary there, annent which may
assure his Majesty's. Subjects that there shall be no innovation in Religion in
any time hereafter.

That the Subjects be governed in all time coming conformed to the Laws of
this Kingdom formerly established, and not otherwise.

This done, his Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects will maintain his
Majesty's honor and person and royal authority against all men, and will
suffer no innovation or Laws nor otherwise to be introduced against his
Majesty.

It is requisite his Majesty keep up his office of State, and other his
Majesty's royal favors, to be bestowed upon such as shall best de^erve at
Parliament, and elsewhere.

And that his Majesty be graciously pleased to be present there in person, for
countenancing his own Service, and his loyal and faithful Subjects.

His Majesty agrees to the first propositions, and upon assurance of
performance of the fourth, will so dispose of his affairs, as that he shall
God willing be at the Parliament in Scotland. And in the mean time will keep
up all places and offices of State, and other marks of his favor, of any
great moment undisposed, until such time as he may bestow them upon parties
according to their merit and deserving at the Parliament.

A true Report of the Committee for this new Treason, that they had a threefold
Design.
FIrst, to seize on the Tower, the Lieutenant to have twenty thousand pound,
his son to marry with Straffords daughter, with means to live on; Strafford
to be sent into Ireland to send an Army hither, and to go into France to
prepare an Army from thence. Secondly, To possess the Northern Armies with an
ill opinion of the House, and to make them advance to London. Thirdly, To
deliver Portsmouth into Iermines hands, to be a Randevowes for the French
Papists.
The Bishops to raise two thousand horse.

The Committee gave most of the great names in blanckes, and will report them
hereafter.

The Lord of Newcastle to be General of the Northern Army, and to have met
them with the Army at Nottingham.

FINIS.

