A SCRIPTURE-VVORD AGAINST ENCLOSURE; Viz: Such as do Un-People Towns, and
Un-Corne Fields. As also, Against all such, that daub over this black Sin
with untempered mortar.

By JOHN MOORE, Minister of the Church at Knaptoft in Leichestershire.

Isaiah 5. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good; and good, evil: that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. LONDON, Printed for Anthony Williamson, at the Queens Arms
in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

To his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
his most Honorable Council.
May it please your Highness,
IN this discourse I plead the cause of the Public and Poor of your
true-hearted County of Leicester, and the Counties adjacent. Else (had it been
any thing of private interest) my hand and heart would have trembled to have
put any thing into your hands, to turn off your eye but a few minutes, from the
wonderful weighty affairs of these three Nations; which are all Incumbents
upon your Highness and Council. The only wise, great, good God support you
with his own wisdom, counsel, and strength. Though the main of my business
is for souls, even to get out of them self, world, sin and Devil, and to
get in God, Christ, grace and the Gospel: Yet I have borrowed some weeks (which
by double pains, I bless God I have repayed) to wait upon Parliaments
formerly, Chari pare^ tes, chari liberi, chari quoque amici, sed omnes omnium
charitates comprehendit patria. Tullius de officiis.
and now upon your Highness and Council with Petitions, to prevent the ruin
of my Country (which is dear unto me) so endeavored and endangered by
self-ish men truly delineated in these Papers: whatsoever specious pretenses
may be made to the contrary of Regulated Enclosure, and of a may-be Enclosure,
without ruin either of Public or Poor. In these Inland Countyes woeful
experience tells us, It is not so. And that Enclosure is now making, is likely
to be in time as desolating as any, if not speedily prevented by your Highness
and Council. Such Incolsurists in the very making of them, having no respect
to the Public, or right in Law, or the Consciences of men. As in the several
Petitions from Leichestershire now before you it appears: which Petitions your
Highness (our hearts rejoice in you, and bless God for you) without delay
heard, and referred to your Council: which also they have read and committed
to the Lord Viscount Lisle, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Mr. Strickland, and Charles
Wolsley or any two of them, who are speedily to speak with the parties that
attend the business, and to consider of the matter therein contained, and to
offer to the Council what they shall conceive fit to be done thereupon. And as
your Leichestershire Petitioners have petitioned your Highness, and
Councell-men upon earth; so they daily Petition the High God of heaven to
incline your hearts to relieve the oppressed of these Inland Counties. And
truly God has set it upon my Spirit, That you are (Hester 4. 14.) Come to the
rule of this nation for such a time as this. And my soul wrestles with my God
that you may still be serviceable to God, and his Church, the Public and the
Poor, till you go away hence and shall be seen no more, and then be gathered
to our Christ, who then shall say, Mat. 25. 35, 36. etc. Come ye blessed of my
Father, receive a kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. I
was hungry and you gave me meat, thirsty and you gave me drink, naked and you
clothed me, etc. Amen says the soul of him who is

As your Highness most humble servant, so also the Churches, the Publiques,
and the Poors, John Moore.

An Advertisement of three things, to such Reader, who as he loves God, loves
his Neighbor also.
FIrst, if thou chance to meet with a Book, called [A Vindication of Regulated
Enclosure:] thou have very little reason to believe much in it. The man speaks
of what may be, and not of what usually is. He has fancyes, notions and dreams
of Innocent Enclosure both from Depopulation and Decay of Tillage. And for the
Towns he names to be free, they are grossly guilty either of the one, or of the
other, or of both.

Secondly, whereas that Book tells thee, That such desolations are Vitia
Personarum non rei, It is the fault of the Persons and not of the Thing. I must
confess with him they are vicious persons indeed that produce such Enclosure.
What better issue can we look for from such Parents? Enclosure, making of
hedges and ditches, is not a sin, but such enclosure that is destructive to
Public, and Poor is a crying sin. Lastly, I complain not of enclosure in
Kent or Essex, where they have other callings and trades to maintain their
Country by, or of places near the sea or City, but of enclosure in the Inland
Countries, which takes away Tillage, the only Trade general they have to live
on; and whereby they are so beneficial to the rest of the Nation, in times of
scarcity. Pray with me, God speed the Plough.

Thy Friend, if thou be so to the Public and the Poor, John Moore.

A Scripture-word against Enclosure, etc.
Amos, chapter 2. ver. 6, 7. Thus says the LORD, for three transgressions of
Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because
they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.

That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside
the way of the meek.


THe Lord assist me his poor under sheepherd with his own holy Spirit, that I
may deal as faithfully and plainly with England, as Amos an honest-hearted
heardsman, and GOD's Prophet dealt with Israel.

For England (especially Leichestershire, Viz: by such enclosure that does
un-people Towns, and uncorn Fields. For it will parallel the sin in the Text.
and the Counties round about) stands now as guilty in the sight of God of the
sins in the Text, as Israel did then: And therefore the Lord may justly say
to us,

For three transgressions, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, because etc. The Text contains Isreal's sin, and Isreal's punishment.
I shall first open the sins of Israel, and then tell me if England be not as
guilty as Israel; and if so, why should not she partake of the same punishment?
I entreat therefore, as I open the sins of Israel, bear in your mind the
Enclosure in the middle of England.

First then, what is meant by three transgressions, and for four? In plain
terms is meant, adding of sin to sin, Isa. 30. 1. and transgression to
transgression.

And so Tremellius expounds three and four transgressions, Tremellius upon this
Prophecy, id est, propter quam. plurimae numero finitus pro indefinito, etc.
that is says he, for very many. A finite number is put for an indefinite. And
then God seemed to speak thus, If Israel had had a moderation in sinning, I
would have turoed away their punishment, I would have been moderate in
punishing; but since to three sins they have added four, and to many they
daily add more, I am determined to perfect my judgments upon them, and to be
avenged on them once for all.

If we take three and four for seven: Know we seven is eminently in Scripture
put for a multitude. So 1 Samuel 2. 5. (says Hannab) The barren has born seven,
that is, many, and is become a mother of many children. Seven devils were cast
out of the woman, Luke 8. 2. that is, a multitude. The just falls seven times
a day, Prove. 24 16. that is, often: so the sense is, They multiply their
sins, and I will multiply my judgments.

Lastly, we may expound for three transgressions, and for four; by the twelfth
verse of this Chapter. Whereas here he complains of three transgressions, and
four; so there he complains, I am pressed under you as a cart is pressed with
sheaves: Now this is a plain Countrey-comparison: When we load a cart, we begin
with a few sheaves at the first, with two, or three, or four; and so go on to
lay on more sheaves one after another, till we over-load, and are ready to
press the cart into pieces. So Israel laid on one sheaf after another, one
sin after another, still burthening God with their sins, that he seems to
groan under the burden of them, as one that is weary to bear them any longer.
Isaiah 1. 24. they make him sigh. Ab, I will ease me of my adversaries, and
avenge me of mine enemies. I can hold my hands no longer for their multiplied
transgressions.

They sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes. If we
put that of our Prophet (Amos 8, 6.) to these words of selling the Righteous
that they may buy the Poor for silver, etc. They buy and sell the righteous
Poor for silver, that is, for the gain and profit, use them they do as they
use their beasts, keep them or put them off for their advantage. So long as
serviceable, drudge them, rack their rents, buy them to get by them, and then
sell them; yea, away with them out of house and harbor, town and field, take
away their calling, and livelihood that should maintain themselves, wives, and
children, etc. When lesser gain comes in by them; They sell them or buy them
upon that account as may serve their turns (Judas-like) to fill the bag, and
make no more account of them than a pair of shoes, yea old shoes that they
cast to the dunghill.

That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor. That pant
after the dust of the earth, Vid. The clear-spirited Expositor upon holy Writ
Mr. Caryll upon Job, c. 24. ver. 3.
That is, (says Mr. Caryll) exceedingly desire and long for it. As David
describes his holy desires, Psalm. 42. 1. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God: that is, I extremely desire
thy presence and communion with thee: even as the Heart being hunted and heated
desires the waters. Thus they panted after the dust of the earth, that is,
after those things which are but as the dust of the earth, or whose original
and matter is but the dust of the earth, gold, of silver. These are but the
refined dust of the earth. But whose dust did they pant after? It was the dust
upon the head of the poor. If they did but see a poor man to have gotten a
little about him, though only enough to keep life and soul together, to
preserve himself and his family from starving, or begging, they presently
panted after it: they were passionately desirous of it: they cast about how to
get it. They who are inflamed with covetousness are busy to find out, and
having found out, are greedy to pursue all advantages and occasions to enrich
themselves though it be with the ruin of the poor. They are glad to get
something even from them, who (according to common speech) have nothing. They
scrap't from them who have but scraps to live on. Thus sweetly has that
heavenly man interpreted these words to our hand.

And turn aside the way of the meek. That is, first they turn aside the way of
Justice and Equity, which is the means of recovering their right. They cannot
have that justice and right done them, which is due unto them. By reason of the
greatness of the estates and power of these men, they stop the current of
justice and equity, whereby these meek ones should be delivered from their
oppressors.

Secondly, they turn aside the way of the meek, that is, they take away the way
of their livelihood. We use commonly to ask this Question, How does such a man
live? And it is answered, He lives in a very good way, he has such a way of
living, such a trade, calling, or profession, that is his way. Thus to turn
aside the way of the meek, is to put them besides the way of getting their
bread, and maintaining themselves, wives, and children with necessary
provisions.

To take away the calling they live by, is a turning aside the way of the meek
to all purposes.

Thirdly, they turn aside the way of the meek. Why? what is the way of the
meek? The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 25. 9. it is Gods way, the meek he will
teach his way. Now these great ones either first force them to make shipwreck
of faith and a good conscience, or else undo them if they will not consent
unto them in their unjust and uncharitable designs. And so of necessity these
meek ones must be undone either in the inward, or outward man. Or else
secondly, they become tempters unto these meek ones by their often alluring
persuasions and ill egging, or else by their ill examples to turn them out of
Gods way.

Thus having explained the Text, I come to show, That England (especially
Leichestershire, and the Counties adjacent) is as guilty of the sins in the
Text now, as Israel was then: yea, especially in that aggregated sin of
Enclosure, viz: such as does un-people Towns, and un-corn Fields, which I
chiefly intend in this present discourse. And that principally, because there
are so many ready to make Helmets to save this great Goliath sin, harmless;
making this great sin a little sin, and so at last no sin at all. For
indeed, all the workmen of this occupation rise up together, crying, Great is
the Diana of Enclosure, because by this craft we have our wealth, Acts 19. 25.
And therefore to defend it they prate much, and print something: yet I never
heard of any so audaciously impious as to preach the lawfulness of such
Enclosure. But I shall show that this Enclosure is not a single sin, but will
admit for the aggravation of it all those sins, and black circumstances in
the Text: And then we may conclude, it is a transgression for which the Lord
will not turn away the punishment thereof. Now then it is my business to rip
up such Enclosure, and to manifest how many sins lie within the bowels of this
monster, etc. And for the proof I shall bring herein, it is undeniable. Such
enclosure shall be discovered by his bloody hands, and in the very Fact be
found guilty. If the Lord PROTECTOR his Highness; and most Honorable Council
should impannel a Jury of all the honest hearts in Leichestershire, and
North-hampton-shire, and Counties adjacent, they must bring therein a Verdict
against such Enclosure, guilty of Depopulation and decay of Tillage generally,
very few if any at all excepted. Our proof is De Facto: it is so. Behold it
with your eyes. Oh woeful experience! And that Enclosure is now about in
Leichestershire is like to be as sordid and base as any of the former, if not
worse: for, Depopulation comes by degrees; in the next generation, if not
present. Behold what desolation of houses and tillage of Farmers, Cottagers,
Menservants, Mayd-servants, etc. which all lived by the Plow.

But I hasten for the Conviction of such Enclosure to be guilty as asoresaid.
And for such conviction I shall follow the method of the Text, as those sins
lie in order there:

For three Transgressions of Israel and for four, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof. First, It cannot be denied that if such as make such
Enclosure be guilty of all the sins in the Text, then they are guilty of
three transgressions and of four, (that is, as has been opened) they add
sin to sin, they accumulate very many sins, they commit a multitude of
sins: To three sins they add four, they press God as a cart is pressed
with sheaves, Amos 2 12. laying on one sheafe after another, burthening God
with their sins, and make him serve with their sins. But the former is
true, Therefore they are guilty of three transgressions and of four. We shall
prove the former true in the ensuing particulars of the Text.

They sold the righteous for silver. That is, if we put to this selling of the
righteous for silver, the buying of the poor for silver, Amos 8. 6. they make
chaffer and merchandise of them for gain and profit: they use them as they do
their beasts, keep them or put them off for advantage: they buy them, and sell
them, as may best serve their turns to get by them. But what is that they thus
buy and sell the righteous for? For silver, that is, for advantage, profit,
gain. Oh base! And then why such Enclosure made I pray you? Is it not for
silver, advantage, gain? Does not silver, filthy lucre lie at the bottom? Do
they not call such Enclosure an Improvement of their lands? We shall gain by
it, we shall treble our rents. Hence those Heathenish speeches of theirs. May I
not make the best of mine own? May I not do what I list with mine own? Who
shall hinder us? And they say of their estate^, as he in Psalm. 12. 4. of his
tongue, Our estates are ours, Who is Lord over us? I answer, whereas thou
talkest of thine own: that although thou art a civil Owner, yet thou art a
spiritual Usurper. Thou must look whether thou have right in the Court of
Conscience, as well as in the Court of Law. Whether thou have right in the
Consistory of God, as well as in the Common pleas of men. What, may thou do
with thine own what thou listest? No: thou must do what God would have thee to
do with it. He is thy Sovereign Lord of whom thou hold all in chief. Thou
art but his Steward, and he has committed to thee all these Talents of thy
Estate, and one day thou must give an account of thy stewardship, viz: whether
thou have improved these talents, (not to thy own) but to thy heavenly Masters
advantage, even to the glory of his name, the good of all with whom thou
live, especially of the saints, and to thy own poor souls advantage. What,
may thou do with thy own what thou listest? No: He that is Lord over thee,
and has made thee rich, 1 Timothy 6. 17. and has given thee all things richly to
enjoy, has laid a charge upon thee (in the 17, 18, and 19 verses) what thou
should do with all he has given thee, even To do good, to be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up unto thy self a
sure foundation against the time to come, that thou may lay hold on eternal
life. Oh! what a sandy-foundation do these build on for eternal life, who
walk contrary to this charge? etc. What, may thou do with thine own what
thou listest, and improve it to thine own advantage? No: hear that complaint,
Phil. 2. 21. All seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ's. I tell
thee Jesus Christ must share with thee in land, house, food, clothing, ( Mat
25. 41. to the end of the Chap:) that is, in his members: or else, Depart from
me ye cursed must be your eternal doom. But may I not improve mine own
estate to my best advantage? No: thou must have a care of thy brothers also,
Phil. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others, even that they may thrive as thy self. But yet I have not
touched this sin in this particular to the quick. Thou must then ask this
Question, may I not improve mine own to the hurt and damage of others? But here
I know thou will startle, and say, Whose hurt? Whose damage? I will make it
appear, thou raisest thy own estate upon the ruin both of Public and Poor.
First, on the ruin of the Public, Thou take away Tillage, which is the
general Trade we live on in Leichestershire, and the Counties adjacent: By
which Trade or Tillage and Husbandry we have been as beneficial to the rest of
the Commonwealth of England as any Countyes whatsoever. We have fed them not
only with our wheat, corn, and malt, not only in plentiful years, but also
in times of famine and dearth, we being the only magazine for corn in the
middle of the Nation; But also we have fed them with fat mutton, and swines
flesh, yea also with victualling our ships by our pease and beans that come by
the plow. As our open-fields breed abundance of sheep, so the plow provides
abundance of the aforesaid provisions to feed them fat; yea, at such times when
no fat flesh is to be had elsewhere in the Nation. If the Tillage of these
inland Countyes be turned into grazing, the rest of the Nation must be in a
starving condition whenever the Lord shall slack his hand of this abundance
of corn, he seems of late years to have rained from heaven amongst us. Thus are
we as beneficial by our Trade of Tillage to other Countyes, as they to us by
other Manufactures which are so commodious, they lying near to the Sea and City
which we are so far from.

Yea, to show the Intolerablenesse of such Enclosure: Behold it takes away the
general Trade that all the Inhabitants of these Counties live on, except some
great ones and Tradesmen in Market Towns, etc. Can any deny but that the
Farmer lives of the plow, the Cottagers live of the plow, and the Children of
both brought up to the trade of the plow, and do not the Children of the poor
become Menservants and Mayd-servants to the Plowman? Does not that ancient,
honest, venerable, and profitable Trade of Husbandry maintain all these? Yea,
and all these lived as happily, plentifully, and richly of this Trade of
Tillage in these Countyes before so much Enclosure, as any in other Countyes
whatsoever, or of what other Trade soever they were of. What must become of
these thousands and ten thousands if such Enclosure be not speedily stopped? As
every honest heart prays GOD SPEED THE PLOW, so every every good Minister will
have a word to uphold it, and every good Magistrate make use of his power ^o
save it from ruin. What now, may thou do what what listest with thine
own, and advance thine own nest on high thus upon the ruin of the Public?
Why art thou not content with thine own? since especially thy lands in Common
are worth as much and more than ever thy forefathers purchased them at, or
thou of late have purchased thine at. If they that sold thy lands in Common had
had thy evil conscience to have improved them upon the ruins of the Public
and Poor, thou and thy Forefathers must have paid twice as much, if not thrice
as much more for them. But now these covetous wretches have got the trick of it
to buy lands in Common, and presently improve them, and so double if not treble
their money upon a Public account. These cruel ones care not how many they
ruin so they may be rich, nor how many they make Beggars so they may be
Gentlemen; Let them answer me this one Question, viz: How so many thousand
Families can subsist, when their Livelihood is taken away, to wit, their Trade
of Tillage? And how shall so many thousands of Children be disposed of from
starving, Vagrancy or thieving, since so much Enclosure has caused so many
Tradesmen already they cannot live one by another?

But it will be objected, some Books have been printed of late that prove
Enclosure both lawful and laudable. Surely my heart bleeds within me to see
some hands at such Books of whom I hoped better things, That they should daub
ore this black sin with such untempered mortar. Oh how men will scrabble for
gain! They would not have a spade called a spade. They would not (though they
are such) be called oppressors, unjust, unconscionable, uncharitable,
unmercifull. And surely such Books are stuffed so full of levity and untruths,
that the Authors of them deserve rather to be pitied than answered. I but these
Books say there may be an innocent Enclosure. What then? The Petitioner: to
Parliament formerly, and the Petitioners now to his Highness and Council seek
a redress against such Enclosure that does depopulate Towns and decay
Tillage. And such the authors of these books hold to be hateful to God and
man. Yes, but they say there may be an enclosure without decay of Tillage or
Depopulation. Surely they may make men as soon believe there is no sun in the
firmament as that usually depopulation and decay of Tillage will not follow
enclosure in our Inland Countyes. We see it with our eyes: It is so. De facto,
it is so. And we see the enclosure that they are so now about will be as sordid
or more then any formerly. They having not so much as one Covenant amongst them
to uphold Tillage. And then we know what follows in his time, even an utter
depopulation. It matters not what they pretend in their books, provision for
the poor, etc. In one place they speak of fourteen acres given to the poor,
what will this do when they have taken away their whole trade of maintenance
for themselves and familyes? Yet but they say they do not intend depopulation
and decay of Tillage. If in charity I could believe them, Yet I must answer, it
is finis operis, though not operantis: It is the end of the work, though not
of the workman, as every where appears. It is true indeed, Infant enclosure
may be somewhat in his nonage free from depopulation, but never from decay of
Tillage. Yet I know not where gray headed enclosure is free from depopulation
as well as decay of Tillage. If any where it is rare indeed. For they would
never enclose to keep Farmers, Tenants, Cottagers, Servants, teames etc. Yea,
but the books tell of some towns free from both Depopulation and decay of
Tillage. They scrabble up a few towns that are innocent (as they say) which
are just none at all in comparison of those many hundreds are guilty of both.
And these few they are forced to fish out of the County of Leicester, Warwick,
Northampton, etc. Let Us see what truth is in this. For I know two or three of
these places, because they are near unto me. They brag of the innocence of
Ashby magna, which has been enclosed above fifty years. The truth of this
business stands thus, The Lord of that place gave most of his Tenants Leases
for three Lives, and one and twenty years after, which are not yet expired. And
therefore the time of depopulation of that Town is not yet come. But they name
Misterton and Poultney as innocent also. I wonder they dare do so, since in
regard of depopulation there is no house at all lest in either of them but the
Ministers. And the Closes now are called by the Towns name that were anciently
there. And as for decay of Tillage in those places they have not been plowed in
the memory of man, except some part of them of late: And the Tenants that rent
them must plow them now but for Four years only. How dare they print such
Falsehoods? And as little credit I hear and believe is to be given to the
innocence of the rest of the Towns named.

I have one word to speak to men that have not put off humanity, natural
compassion toward their own flesh, and to Christians that love much, because
God has forgiven them much. Which is this. If you did but hear what
complaining and lamentation is made of Farmers that rented land turned out of
those Enclosed places, and of poor Cottagers together with them, that the one
cannot get no not at any excessive rate a little land to plow, whereby he might
keep his teame and cattle, that himself and family might be employed in
husbandry, to get a poor living by, but is constrained to sell all these to all
their utter undoings: That the other cannot get a house any where to harbor
himself and his poor babes.

Surely, it would make all Ministers and others, yea Ministers above others, to
ride and run, spend their pains and estate to petition, entreat, beg, wait,
and never cease to be importunate for relief for these oppressed
Fellow Creatures, and many of them Fellow citizens of heaven together with us.

Behold now the oppressions of Towns in open fields and Market Towns! for when
these Enclosures have made Farmers, Cottagers; and Cottagers, Beggars; no way
of livelihood being left them: These poor with their families are forced into
Market-townes, and open-fielded Towns, hoping they may find some employment
there to preserve them and theirs from perishing. Whereupon, these open-fielded
places are so laden with poor, that the Inhabitants are not able to relieve
them. I but these Book-men for Enclosure say they pay more Taxes. And truly
well they may, when they lay such burdens upon open fields that they are not
able to bear them; not only all those poor the Enclosure have beggered, but
all carriages the State has need of, free quarter, attendance at the assizes
and sessions, etc. The Enclosures got the gain, and have the ease; and poor
open fields pay the shot, and endure all the drudgery. What enemies to the
Public are these Enclosures? observe how few or no service-able men or horses
in these places, for the defenee of the Nation when need is: whereas before
they were enclosed there were twenty, thirty, forty, etc. of both kinds, now
scarce one or two. Yes, but one of the last Book-men for Enclosure tells us
they are jaded tired horses. Oh impudence! let the whole Country speak,
whether four or five of these open-fielded Towns (yea sometimes one of them
alone) are not able to raise a whole Troop of gallant Horses, and to set
valiant men on their backs too, in so formidable a manner, that they were able
to make the stoutest Troop to quake that opposed the Parliament formerly, and
his Highness the Lord Protector of late: yea, which they have done too, under
both Governments. Whereas such Enclosed places can (I believe) scarcely raise
one Troop either for men or horses, etc. Oh! let not these valiant spirited men
for the Public in Leichestershire, and their forces be trampled in the dirt
by such Enclosure, to raise a few private persons upon the ruin of the
strength of the Nation. Surely if a Jericho was again to be besieged, there
would be found good store of Rams horns, though but few persons to wind them
in these Enclosed places. But these Book-men for Enclosure say, that the common
fields cause many Law suits etc. I shall (God willing) answer all as I pass
through this Text of Scripture. First, there are offenders both within hedges
and without too, and loving hearts will pass by an offense.

Secondly, in common fields they live like loving neighbors together for the
most part, till the spirit of Enclosure enter into some rich Churles heart, who
do not only pry out but feign occasions too to go to law with their
neighbors, and no reconcilement to be made till they consent to Enclosure. For
this is the trick they fall together by the ears with their honest neighbors,
that they bring their design about. Yea, but there is so much stealing and
filching by the Poor. But thank Enclosure for that, which has filled
openfield Towns so full of Poor they cannot live one by another, For, Poverty
is a provoking argument to steal. And therefore Agur prays, Prove. 30. 8. Give
me not poverty, and why so? the ninth Verse tells us, lest I be poor and
steal. And thus Enclosure makes thieves, and then they cry out of thieves.

Because they sold the Righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
shoes. The Righteous: who are those? Not to stand upon the diverse acceptations
of the word [Righteous,] I Will show what is meant by a righteous man, viz: The
Evangelicall righteous man is one, who, as he has the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ imputed unto him, so he has in some measure the righteousness of
Christ imparted unto him, desiring and endeavoring to keep the Commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus, Rev. 14. 12. He is one that loves God above
all, and his neighbor as himself, Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39. He is one, 1 John 4 21.
who as he loves God, loves his neighbor also. Oh! how precious are these
Righteous ones in heaven? They are the Lords people, his portion, the lot of
his Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. They are the Lords own, his very jewels: All
the rest of a Town are but the rubbish amongst whom these his jewels lie and
live for a while. And to speak the truth (for truth must be spoken however it
be taken) if the Lord had not had two of these Righteous ones, or three of
these Jewels, that as they love God they love their neighbor also, in many
Towns of these Inland Counties, what desolations had there been made ere this
time by such Enclosure?

These inclosurists sell the Righteous for silver. What care they for Gods
jewels, his portion, his inheritance, so they may improve their own
inheritance? what cared Judas for Jesus Christ the Righteous, so he might get
thirty pieces of silver by him? What care these men for the tender consciences
of any of these Righteous ones, that dare not consent to such enclosure? They
will make them make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, or else estates
and liberties and all must be ruined by multiplicities of trivial Law suites
in common Law and Chancery, threatening they will not leave them a shift to
their backs, nor a cow to their payle. I could here give you a large Catalogue
of the unjust vexations of such Righteous ones, but because some of their
vexers pretend to religion, I will spare them, One of these two evils are
incident to such as dare not in conscience consent to such enclosure, viz.
Either to be undone in the inward, or el^e in the outward man, choose them
which. If they go against conscience in the inward man; if they will keep a
good conscience in the outward man, and here let the inclosurists of Cat thorpe
in Leichestershire tremble, to have no respect to the conscience of one of
these righteous men (their own consciences I believe judging him such a one)
nor to his vow to his God made upon good ground in the sight both of God and
good men, nor to his right in law, according to a petition that is now
depending before his Highness and his most Honorable Council, in which there
is made a good progress and good hopes (praised be God) of a happy issue. It
matters not what one of the Book-men for enclosure truly prattles to the
contrary. He makes but a Jeer of a good conscience in his Book. And as for his
right in Law, because it is but a little to their great deal, they may alter
the propriety of it as they list, without his consent, and set hedges and
ditches upon his common whether he will or no. I wonder who made these men
dividers of his common from theirs, when he has a right and propriety in every
foot of common in all their fields. Is there not the same right in Law to a
little as a great deal? etc.

And the poor for a pair of shoes. The Poor. Well may they sell the Poor
for a pair of shoes, when they sell the Righteous for silver. When Judas sold
his Master That Righteous one for silver (let Ministers remember Judas was a
Disciple) no wonder if he cared not for the Poor. But these inclosurists have
the poor much in their mouths, and how they provide for the poor. My
exhortation to them is 1 John 3. 18. My little children let us net love in word
neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. Saint James shows us that a few
words will not warm, nor feed, nor cloth poor people, James 2. 16. If one of
you say unto them, depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled, notwithstanding
you give them not these things which are needful to the body, what does it
profit? Alas, what will all their good words profit the poor, when they do
not only not give them those things which are needful for the body, but take
away at once all things that are needful for the body, even the Trade of
Tillage which should warm, cloth, feed them and their families. But these
book-men for enclosure have articles, yea, and acres for the Poor too. What
would these men be thought charitable men? Let Judas be thought so too. For he
would have the ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the Poor,
John 12. 5. Truth is, former Inclosurists have been very specious and
pretending for the poor in their Promises, Articles, Acres, when they were hot
upon their business of enclosure, to stop the mouths of Poor and Country
from clamours; and these enclosures of the last Edition which they are now
about are but sordid in respect of the former in that kind. But woeful
experience tells us, a short time forced all the Tenants and Cottagers out of
most of those places into the open fielded Towns to seek for a livelihood where
they can find it, to the great oppressions of those Towns.

That pant after the dust of the earth upon the head of the Poor. Pant, that
is, exceedingly desire it, and long for it. After the dust of the earth, that
is, after those things which are but as the dust of the earth, and whose
original and matter is but the dust of the earth. Oh the excessive desire
(after such Enclosure and the gain that comes by it) execeding the bounds of
piety, equity, charity, and humanity it self, as you have heard! Improvement of
estate is this man's bayte. And if any thing go about to hinder that, he is
like a Lion stirred up at the sight of his prey, and makes no conscience of
devouring men, women, and children that stand in his way.

The serpent feeds upon the dust of the earth: It feeds upon base and low
things, vile and venomous: so do covetous, merciless men. As the Serpent
licks the dust of the earth; so do they lick the dust of the earth, they feed
upon blood, upon oppression; They pant after the dust of the earth, they pant
after the estate and means that poor men have in Town or Field, and feed upon
it, to satisfy (if it were possible) their greedy appetites in sucking the
estates and crushing the bones of the poor. The Prophet Habakkuk has a woe
for these, Hab. 2. v. 6. Woe to him that increases that which is not his (to
wit, in the Court of Conscience as well as in the Court of the Law) and ladeth
himself with thick clay. Lutum site pictum, with gold and silver, the finest
dust and pieces of the earth, whereby all the rest of the commodities of the
earth are valued. This dust of the earth, this thick clay does but load and
burden their souls and consciences, and makes them drive heavily heavenward,
Gods glory ward, and their own salvation-ward. This thick clay does them no
more good than that gold and silver and embroydered cloth of arras a
sumpter-horse is burdened with all day, and at night is turned with the rest
of the Jades with a gauled and bruised back into the stable. Oh take heed of a
gauled conscience loaded and bruised with such hedges and ditches as hedge out
Public and Poor; lest at the night of Death thou be turned with the rest of
the Jades of worldlings, Dives-like, into the Devils stable.

Upon the head of the Poor. They pant after the dust of the earth, but upon
whose head? upon the head of the Poor. These beasts will be sure to go over
where the hedge is lowest. In any town where there is any rich men Public
spirited, and have bowels toward the Poor, there these greedy gripes dare not
meddle with their matches, and cannot force them to such enclosure, because
they are able to defend themselves. But on the contrary in any town where
there are merciful men, Public spirited men etc. That dare not in conscience
consent to such enclosure, If these be men but of mean estates, these
merciless wretches join purses, and make no more conscience to trample upon
these righteous poor, yea, upon their consciences, estates, liberties, and
whole families, then they do to trample upon the mire in the streets.

And turn aside the way of the meek. These incl^surists turn aside the way of
the meek these three ways. First, they turn aside the way of Justice and
Equity which is the means of keeping and recovering their right. A great purse
will make a good cause though it be stark naught. What say these Mammonists
when any cross them in such enclosure, their word is, I Will undo him if he
will not yield. And how is that? By suites in Law and Chancery. And have not
these men been as good as their words? I could here tell sad stories. But I
intend to name no man in this present discourse.

Secondly, they turn aside the way of the meek when they take away the way of
their livelihood. Now Tillage is the way, the calling, the profession which
most of the inhabitants of Inland Counties live of, as we have proved.

Thirdly, they turn aside the way of the meek: Why? What is the way of the
meek? The Psalmist tells us (Psalm. 25. 9.) it is Gods way. The meek he will
teach his way. They endeavor to turn them out of the way of faith and a good
conscience, in persuading them if that will not do, and compelling them to do
against conscience, or undo. But I conclude with the wise man's exhortation,
Prove 22. 22, 23. Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the
afflicted in the gate. For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
soul of those that spoiled their.

FINIS.

