AN APPENDIX To the late Antidote against IDOLATRY.

WHEREIN The true and adequate Notion or Definition of Idolatry is proposed.

Most Instances of Idolatry in the Roman Church thereby examined.

Sundry uses in the Church of England Cleared.

With some serious Monitions touching Spiritual Idolatry thereunto annexed.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishops-Head
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

Reader,
I Shall not wonder if thou be at a loss, what to impute this my so sudden
appearing in public again upon the same Subject, for I must confess, I my self
am in some sort at a loss what to impute it to. Whether to the excess of my
zeal in a cause of so great importance, or to my impatience to be freed from
these Polemical Engagements, which are not so suitable to my Genius. But so far
as I know my own meaning it is both. And therefore having since my last by
further converse with either books or men, discovered, as I conceive, the
utmost that can be said touching the point betwixt Me and my Antagonist, for
the more timely assisting so weighty a truth, and for the freeing my self from
any future trouble, I have here aforehand obviated whatever I can suspect he
may return as material, in answer to my Reply. This it may be, may save us both
any further labor, at least it will my self. For I profess my self to have
neither hope nor ability of satisfying others by any other evidences, than by
which I find my self so fully and clearly satisfied.

That I have vindicated some uses in our own Church from all suspicions of
Idolatry, is but what I owe to her, as a professed member of her body, and to
the honor and memory of our pious and judicious Reformers. That I have annexed
some few Monitions touching spiritual Idolatry, is for the rescuing my self
also from the imputation of an over Bigotical zeal against the external or
ritual. For I am abundantly aware how little the avoiding the outward or ritual
Idolatry will avail to salvation unless we also seriously endeavor to purify
our selves from the inward or spiritual, without which purity no man shall see
God. But in pretense of cleansing our selves from the inward, to make nothing
of the outward, is the fruit of that false spirit that appeared in the
Gnostics of old, and has expressly showed it self in these latter times,
amongst some high flown Enthusiasts, who have had the boldness to declare that
there is no such thing as external Idolatry. Which is spoken with as much
soundness of truth, as if they should declare, That there is no such thing
neither as outward Murder, Adultery, Perjurie, and Blasphemy. But our blessed
Savior, that infallible example of life, has taught us a better lesson of
fulfilling all righteousness. And they that will be externally wicked, what
have they but their own vain boast to witness their integrity? That God would
deliver thee and my self and all men, from all manner of Hypocrisy, that we
may enjoy God in the simplicity of Heart and a good Conscience, to our present
and everlasting comfort, is the earnest desire of

Thine in the love of the Truth, H. More.

Errata sic corrige.
PAge 23. Line 20. for chance, r. shame. p. 24. l. 6. for mind, r. mine, p 25.
l. 16. r. foully. p. 26. l. 17. r. real. p, 29. l. 22. r. it is. p. 32. l. 13.
r. be, commensurate. p. 37. l. 26. for mind r. mine. p. 38. l. 29. r. bis
bounty. p. 40. l. 28. for dispute, r. dispell. p. 45. l. 27. for a motion, r.
admotion. p. 48. l. 28. r. at the name. p. 54..l 24. r. live we as. p. 55. l.
penult. for they r. these. p. 59. l. 8. r. 1 John 5.20.21.

AN APPENDIX To the late Antidote against IDOLATRY.
I. A brief account of his proceeding in his Antidote against Idolatry.
I Have already, in my Antidote against Idolatry, with sufficient useful
evidence and certainty discovered what is and ought to be held to be idolatry
amongst Christians; but in such a way, that I only exhibited several cases or
instances of Idolatry, and proved them sometimes, rather by Testimony either
Divine, or the common suffrage of men, I mean such as are Christians, than from
the intrinsic general Notion of Idolatry, not at all intended to be proposed
in that Treatise; that method I then took, being sufficient for the use and
purpose then aimed at, which was to convince the World by plain and obvious
Arguments, what things professed and practiced in the Roman Church might justly
be esteemed Idolatrous.

II. The definition of Idolatry with the usefulness thereof.
But now for the greater satisfaction of the more curious and Philosophical
Genius, out of those several instances in the abovesaid Treatise, I shall draw
one common Notion or Definition, both true and adaequate, which will be a
certain measure whereby we may expeditely understand whatever is truly
Idolatry, and what not. For, it is plain, that to whatsoever the Definition
belongs, the thing defined belongs to the same, and to whatsoever the
Definition does not belong, the thing defined cannot belong to it. Of so great
importance is it therefore to propose a true and adaequate Definition of
Idolatry. Which I conceive is this; Cultus superstitiosus quo peculiaritates
Divinae violantur. Idolatry is a kind of superstitious worship, whereby the
peculiarities of the Godhead are violated. There is no kind nor act of Idolatry
which will not fall under this general Notion, nor any kind or act of Ritual
worship that falls under it, that is not Idolatry, as will more plainly appear
after our explication thereof.

III. The explication of the Definition.
As for the Term defined, Idolatry, there is no man so unskilful, (though
according to the Notation of the word, it signifies properly the worship of an
Image or Idol,) as to think that to be the adaequate sense of Idolatry, since
they that worship the Sun are acknowledged to be Idolaters, though they worship
him without an Image; And therefore that scruple passed over, nothing hinders
but that the Notion of Idolatry may be as large, as the proposed Definition,
which is, superstitious worship whereby the peculiarities of the Godhead are
violated. I add superstitious to worship, that the Genus may be the more
immediate; and by superstitious, I understand pseudoreligious, if I may so
speak, that is false, or depraved religious worship: And I name no object,
because I would not restrain it to any one kind of object, but be the pretense
of worshipping God, Saints, Angels, or what ever object else, when it is in
such a way, as that the Divine peculiarities are violated, that is Idolatry
according to this Definition. Superstitious worship therefore is the Genus of
the Definition, what remains, the difference, viz whereby the peculiarities of
the Godhead are violated. I am fain to make use of this more general and
abstract term, peculiarities, that it may comprehend whatever things are
peculiar to God, whether his Attributes or Rites chosen and appropriate to his
own worship, which his own choice is enough to make peculiar to him, though
closely looked into, they may have also a natural significancy of those
excellencies that are proper to the Godhead. Such are the having a Temple and a
Symbolical presence erected for invocation and worship, praying before that
Symbolical presence, having incense burnt before it, and Lamps or Candles light
up, etc. These and the like were the modes that God made choice of, to signify
the honor and worship due to himself, and therefore to use them to any else,
is a violation of his peculiarities. For by the violation of the peculiarities
of the Godhead, I understand any kind of profanation or vilification of them,
either by obscuring or lessening of them in himself, or else by communicating
of them to others. As to set up such a Symbolical presence to be worshipped
toward, as pretends to represent God, who is irrepresentable, as being
infinite in Majesty and Greatness, this were to lessen, obscure, or indeed to
abolish the infinite glorious Majesty of God, which is peculiar to him, and so
to make an Idol of him, and therefore were gross Idolatry. But to erect a
Symbolical presence to a Creature, that is Idolatry upon the other score, it
implying Omnipresence or Omnipercipience to be in that Creature.

IV. What a Symbolical presence is.
For, a Symbolical presence is nothing else but some figure or imagerie,
instituted or erected for the invoking of supplicating, or any way religiously
worshipping that invisible Power or Spirit for whom it is erected or made. So
that in brief, all Idolatry is such as either turns God into an Idol, or turns
an Idol, that is, the Creature we give religious worship to, in some respect,
into a God, in giveing it something which is peculiar unto him.

V. That that religious worship of Demons which was truly Idolatry, was really
Divine.
Whence for the utter taking away all litigiousness about terms, That religious
worship which misapplyed or given to any Creature constitutes Idolatry, may
rightly and truly be also called Divine; and is so, if it make the act
Idolatry: for that implies that it violates some peculiarity of the Godhead,
and attributes it to the Creature, which is, as to that respect, to make a God
of it. And such Divine worship as this was, that which the Heathens gave to
their Demons, though they took it to be only religious, and such as did not
appertain peculiarly to God himself; as is particularly observable in the
Platonists, whom yet neither St. Austin, nor any other serious Christian will
stick to conclude to have been Idolaters in their Daemon-worship. And
therefore, if we will but use just weights and measures, whatever Christians do
the like things to Saints and Angels, pretending it is not Divine worship, but
an inferior religious worship, they must be also judged to commit Idolatry.

VI. The way of convincing the Romanists of Idolatry in this Treatise.
And this was one way of convincing the Roman Church of their Idolatries. But
laying aside all these more exterior and obvious Arguments, we will deal now
more precisely and Philosophically, and argue only from the most intrinsecal
and essential Topic in all Logic, and examine the Roman Idolatries by the
inmost Notion and Definition of the Thing, showing that even that which seems
to be only by Divine Declaration Idolatry, is also, if more rationally
considered, Idolatry according to the proposed Definition.

VII. That the forbidding to worship God by an Image, is the natural sense of
the second Commandment.
As the worshipping God by an Image, is plainly declared Idolatry by God
himself in the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, etc. Thou shall not bow down to it, nor worship it, etc. The bowing down
to and worshipping a graven Image, though in pretense to worship God thereby,
is plainly prohibited by this Commandment. For the prohibition of worshipping
any other God, is sufficiently evident in the first Commandment, Thou shall
have no other Gods but me. Whereby he pronounces that he alone will be
worshipped: whence it naturally follows, that this next precept is at least
chiefly about the purity and congruity of his own worship, forbidding to
worship him by any Image, in bowing to it, or worshipping it, though in
reference to himself. This is the most natural, and indeed the necessary sense
of this precept, if we consider the extreme incredibility of any other senses,
that are offered, or can be offered.

VIII. All other senses plainly impossible and incredible.
For let us suppose first, that the sense is, Thou shall not bow down to, nor
worship the graven Image (that thou make and set up,) thou shall not
worship the Image it self instead of God or for God. It would be a prohibition
of a thing even impossible to humane Nature to do: that a Jew suppose should
worship an Image that himself has made of some log of wood or stone, instead of
or for the God that brought him out of the land of Egypt, and the house of
Bondage, and indeed that created the whole World, as if he could take the Image
for this God, and not worship it in reference to him. How nugatorious would
they make the Divine Lawgiver by such a prohibition, to interdict those things
which it is impossible for men to do? And now let us suppose the other sense
of the precept to be, (and I can neither meet with nor devise any more,) Thou
shall not make to thy self any Idol, that is to say, no Image of any Heathen
God or of any false God whatsoever; that this cannot be the chiefly intended
sense thereof is plain. First, from the apparent superfluity of this precept,
that being so strictly and apertly interdicted before, viz. That they should
have no Pagan gods, nor any gods whatever besides Jehovah. Which while they
hold to, it is impossible they should make to themselves any Images or Idols of
those gods to bow down to or worship. So that this prohibition would be
superfluous, if that was the only meaning of the commandment. And then in the
second place, this sense is incoherent with the words following; For I am a
jealous God. Which implies suspicion of some foul dealing betwixt any Member of
his Spouse, the Church, and Himself; that they may communicate any thing of
that which is peculiarly due to himself unto another. But if the Jews should
make an Idol, that is, the Image of some Pagan God, and worship it, the matter
would be past suspicion, they would apertly and professedly be found false to
Jehovah, and to commit Adultery with another God.

IX. The golden Calf no intended Image of Apis, but the Symbolical presence of
Jehovah.
To which you may add in the third place, that God himself has thus interpreted
this commandment, that he will not be worshipped by an Image, though erected
and worshipped in reference to himself; as is most undeniably plain in the
golden Calf which Aaron made, which was not intended for the Image of Apis the
Egyptian God, but was the Symbolical presence of Jehovah. Indeed St. Steven
says, Act. 7.39, 40. And in their hearts they turned back again into Egypt,
(it may be in the grossest sense if they could have brought Aaron to their
lure) saying unto Aaron, make us Gods to go before us. But it is most likely,
that this is only a reprehension of their AEgyptianizing in matters of
Religion, desiring to have some visible Object and Figure to sustain their
Faith, and spend their Devotion on, according to the mode of Egypt, who gave
Divine worship to Images. This mode of Religion their minds hanker'd after, as
their mouths elsewhere watered after the fleshpots of Egypt, for which they
are also taxed, Psalm. 106.19. They made a Calf in Horeb, and worshipped the
Molten Image. Thus they changed their glory, that is, the God of Israel, or his
Divine presence, into the Similitude of an Ox that eats grass. As if Jehovah
the Almighty, Infinite and Eternal God, that did such great things in Egypt,
wondrous works in the land of Ham, and fearful things by the Red Sea, could be
representable by any such figure. So that in this they quite forgot God their
Savior, both what an excellent being he is, and utterly irrepresentable by
Imagery, and forgot his commandment (which is one special and material way of
forgetting him) Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, thou shall
not bow down to it, nor worship it.

X. That the History of the golden Calf plainly implies that sense thereof.
But there is no place so convincing, that the golden Calf which Aaron made,
was made and worshipped in reference to Jehovah, as what occurres in the very
History. God had promised to the people, he would send an Angel before them to
keep them in the way, Exodus 23.10. This the People knowing and despairing of
Moses being found again, or impatient of his stay so long in the Mount, (which
St. Steven interprets a rejecting of Moses, or putting him from them, Act.
7.39. for that is spoken of Moses, not of God) they come to Aaron, ( Exodus 32.)
and say unto him, Up make us Gods which shall go before us, which Aaron
immediately assents to, and receiving their earrings, made a molten Calf of
them, whereupon they said, These are thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out
of the land of Egypt. And Aaron built an Altar before this Image which himself
had made, and made proclamation and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord,
that is, to Jehovah. And on the morrow, according to this proclamation, they
celebrate the Feast, and offered burnt offerings etc. to this Image. Now let
any unprejudiced man judge to whom this symbolical presence could be erected
but to Jehovah. Did not the Israelites ask of Aaron what God had promised? the
Angel in whom God would place his Name there? Did Aaron at all stick to fulfill
their desire? Do not the People say of this symbolical presence, These are thy
Gods O Israel, or which is all one, This is thy God O Israel, (as Nehemiah has
it Chap. 9. v. 18.) that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, which is
utterly impossible for them to understand of the golden Calf which was but
newly made, and therefore is necessarily understood of that God that brought
them out of Egypt, which is Jehovah, no Egyptian Deity, but he that brought
all those Plagues on Egypt and delivered his People with an high hand. And
lastly, is not an Altar built before the same symbolical presence, and a feast
proclaimed there to be celebrated to the Lord? What more perspicuous coherence
can be desired for the certainty of the sense of any passage of Scripture?

XI. The gross repugnancies impli'd in supposing the Calf to be the symbolical
presence of the God Apis.
All things run smooth on this Hypothesis. But supposing this Calf the
Symbolical Presence of Apis an Egyptian Deity, who had the form of an Ox,
(which might give some of the Ancients occasion, as I suppose, to think it was
so, they not considering that Cherub also signifies an Ox or Calf, and that one
of the Angelical forms in the Chariot of God is both an Ox, and is called a
Cherub, and that the Cherubins in the Ark were of this figure, which is a
symbol of the Angels, who are the Chariot of God, Psalm. 68* 17. The Chariots of
God are twenty thousands, even thousands of Angels, and the Lord among them as
in Sinai in the holy place, where this Chariot or Chariots (because it
consisted of four parts) was seen by Aaron, like that by Ezekiel, where one
part had the form of an Ox or Calf, and all four the feet of Oxen. So little
estranged is the form of an Ox or Calf from the use of representing the
presence of the God of Israel,) but suppose, I say, it is not the symbolical
presence of Jehovah, but of the Egyptian Apis, according to the conceit of
some out of the respect they bear to the Fathers, what an harsh and intolerable
reproach is it in the mean time to Gods High Priest, to affirm that he did thus
profanely and impiously make an Egyptian Idol for the People of God to
worship, and so assisted them in the grossly breaking of both the first and
second Commandment at once, and even then when the People did but desire the
promise to be made good to them, that the visible presence of God, or his Angel
in whom his Name was, might go along with them, and that Aaron notwithstanding
instead of this, should make the symbolical presence of a foreign God! Besides
that the people themselves had not this judgment of it, they declaring it to be
the symbolical presence of him that brought them out of the Land of Egypt. Nor
could they possibly believe the Egyptian Apis to have done so, to have
inflicted all those plagues on his own Land in the behalf of a foreign people.
Besides that they were all along declared by Moses to be done in the Name of
the God of Israel: to whom also Aaron builds an Altar before this Calf, and
proclaims a Feast to Jehovah, which, if by this Calf were meant the Egyptian
Apis, would be as repugnant, as to say, Apis and Jehovah are all one.

XII. The Certainty hence, that the second Commandment forbids the worshipping
God by an Image.
Wherefore we can be of nothing more sure than that this Golden Calf of Cherub
was erected by Aaron to Jehovah, and so understood by the People. The
worshipping whereof notwithstanding is agreed on all sides to have been
Idolatry. From whence it plainly follows, that the second Commandment forbids
the worshipping God by an Image, which was the thing to be proved Nor do I know
by what evasions those of the contrary opinion can escape the clearness of this
proof and precept. God so plainly interpreting the meaning of his own Law, by
his severe vengeance on the worshippers of the golden Calf, though erected to
himself.

XIII. Two evasions to shun this sense, The first from the Septuagints
Translation of Pesel proposed and answered.
The best and most ordinary evasions are these two. The first that the
Septuagint translating Pesel not (...), Sculptile, but Idolum, do plainly
enough insinuate, that an Image to the true God is not there forbid for worship
but Idols only, or Images, of the Heathen Gods, or any false Gods. But those
that argue thus do not consider that (...) in Greek is of as indifferent and
large a signification as Imago in Latin, or Image in English. Plotinus, when he
was desired to sit to have his Picture drawn, said, he would not have them give
themselves the trouble of making (...), an Image of an Image, or Shadow of a
Shadow. So that we way with better reason imagine the Septuagint to have chosen
this word as an universal Bar against not only Statue-worship, but even
Picture-worship also: Or to have made choice of Idolon, rather than (...),
Sculptile, because it signifies more determinately such Sculptilia as are
Images, or have Imagery on them, that they should not be bowed to in a
religious way; not forbidding to direct their worship toward every thing that
is carved, when it does not at all pretend to make God representable, as
Imagery does. So that there being these Reasons so obvious, why the Septuagint
might Translate Pesel Idolon, rather than (...), Sculptile, the inferring they
did it in reference to the Idols of the Heathen, is of no force.

And besides, suppose that Pesel signifies an Idol, in the sense of the adverse
party; what do they get by it, when as the text then will run thus, Thou shall
not make to thy self any Idol or Image of any Heathen God, nor the likeness of
any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them. It is manifest that yet for all this all manner
of Image Worship, or Picture-worship is forbidden; not only of the Heathen
Gods, but all whatsoever, and therefore they cannot be worshipped, no not in
reference to the true God himself. Or if you would understand the following
words, viz. Nor the likeness of any thing in Heaven above, etc. still of the
Heathen Gods Images, (which is perfectly illogical, and impossible for any one
that attends to reason to admit, the object of the precept being plainly here
distributed into two parts. The first part the Idols or Images of the Heathen
Gods, the other whatever other similitudes or Images besides:) Yet if these
words could be drawn to the same sense with the other, so that the Images of
the Heathen Gods, or any false Gods might be understood by them, and that the
whole prohibition were concerning such like Images or Idols, that would also
notwithstanding clash with the next words following, For I am a jealous God*
For in this case, as I noted above, the matter would be beyond jealousy, it
would be a confessed act of spiritual Adultery, which is Idolatry. But to Argue
from the mention of Gods jealousy, that the Image must be meant of some
strange God, (for what Husband would be jealous of his Wife, for honoring or
kissing his own picture?) that is no more than a witty sophism built upon a
false Hypothesis; as if the man's picture could as easily rob the man of what is
due to him from his Wife, as an Image rob God of what is due to him. For the
Image being visible, and God invisible, there is manifest danger of joining
ones devotion, which is all that God can have of us, to the garish Image, more
than to God, and the true Notion of him in our minds; and that by worshipping
Him in such a vile manner, we may be brought off afterward to worship other
Gods, as mean as we have made him by this sort of worship.

XIIII. The second evasion touching the Cherubins on the Mercy-seat, proposed
and answered.
The next evasion, which seems most considerable, is, in that they pretend that
God himself has interpreted his own Law to another sense than we would have, in
commanding golden Cherubins to be set on the Mercy-seat for his own worship.
This excuse is very trite amongst the Romanists, and the second Council of Nice
alleges the same, but it is plain that it falls exceeding short of the case.
For the scope of the second Commandment is not the forbidding all Image-work
in the places of worship, but the bowing to Images and worshipping them, which
the case of the Cherubins does not reach. For the people was never commanded to
bow down to or worship the golden Cherubins, nor do the Jews profess themselves
to have done so, but to have bowed down to and worshipped God alone. And
besides that they were not intended for an Object of the Peoples worship or
adoration is plain, in that they were carefully hid from their sight. And if
they could penetrate with their imagination through the vail, and make
themselves present hard by the Cherubins, their posture plainly shows they were
never intended to be worshipped, their faces not being turned toward the
People to receive their salutations, but toward one another. Indeed if they
were an object, that it was their declared duty to worship, when they saw them,
the same religious affection may be conceived to be directed toward them
through the vail. But formal adoration to a visible object while it is hid and
made invisible, is, methinks, as uncouth and unnatural, as the bowing to some
Person on the other side a brickwall, in which there is not the least loop-hole
to see thorough. Wherefore there being no precept to the people of the Jews, to
bow down to the golden Cherubins, and to worship them, nor it being any
professed practice of them, and the posture of the Cherubins being such as
intimates they were not made to be worshipped by them, and they being carefully
hid from the eyes of the people that they might not see them, (though they were
symbols of the special presence of God, and Notes or Instruments for the
directing their adoration thitherward to God in a special manner there present)
it is evident they were no object of the peoples worship, and that they were
neither to bow down to them, nor worship them, though they bowed toward them,
as a determinative circumstance of their worship of God. This is so plain, that
I believe no man that considers it can have the confidence to deny it. viz.
That the Cherubins were not the object of the Peoples worship, much less
intended so by God.

XV. A difficulty touching the High Priests bowing in the Holy of Holies
proposed.
But the great difficulty, as it seems to some, is, how the High Priest, when
he went into the Holy of Holies, (which he did once by the year,) and bowed as
they conceive before these Cherubins bare and open to his sight, could so
behave himself as not to be guilty of bowing to graven Images and worshipping
them. Which if he did, I must confess that the Romanists have no contemptible
plea for their interpretation of the second Commandment, as if it were not
against worshipping the true God by an Image. But to this difficulty I answer
these two ways.

XVI. The first way of answering it, by denying the fact, if it could not be
done without bowing toward the Cherubins as an object.
First, that if the High Priest when he was in the Holy of Holies, could not
bow to worship God by that gesture, but he must also bow toward the Cherubins
objectively, and not merely circumstantially, I do flatly deny that he did bovv
there. And they can never prove that he did, there being no mention thereof in
the Scripture, where his behavior in that place is described* Levit. 16. But
there being a plain prohibition in the second Commandment to bovv to graven
Images and to worship them, it is from hence demonstrable that the High Priest
in this case would not. For if to obey be better than sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. certainly the High Priest could not but see
that obedience to so plain and strict a commandment, as Thou shall not bow
down to any graven Images, nor worship them, etc. was better than the breaking
that command under pretense of worshipping God by bowing unto them, namely to
the Cherubins. Wherefore we may be certain that in this case he would not bow
toward them. But if he could bow toward them without incurring this danger,
the difficulty is taken away, and the true sense of the second Commandment
remains firm and inviolable; that God himself is not to be worshipped by an
Image, by bowing to it and worshipping it.

XVII. The second way by asserting that he might bow in such circumstances, as
that the Cherubins were no object of his worship.
But now besides this, in the second place, if any one think it so probable
that the High Priest did bow some time toward the Mercy Seat, when he was in
the Holy of Holyes, let us pitch upon that which is most likely, namely when he
made his nearer approach thereto, to besprinkle it with blood: it is manifest
there is no color of saying, that in these circumstances he bowed to or
worshipped the Cherubins.

1. Because the first thing that he was to do, when he was to enter within the
vail, was to take a censure full of burning coals of fire, and his hands full
of sweet incense beaten small, and to bring them within the vail, and to put
the incense on the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may
cover the Mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not. Levit.
16.12, 13. Which is a sign that he was not to dare so much as to look toward
the Mercy seat, much less to worship toward it, till all on the Mercy seat,
the golden Cherubins and all were hid in a cloud of incense, which is like the
hiding of them from the sight of the People by the vail. And that therefore
their golden luster was to be no object of worship, as being thus enveloped
with smoke, not to be seen at any distance.

2. But now, when the High Priest approaches up nearer to the Mercy seat, which
we have supposed the more likely time of worshipping, let us see what
possibility there is of his appearing guilty of worshipping the Cherubins,
though he should then bow toward the Throne of God, more than in that former
circumstance. For the two Cherubins were placed at the two ends of the Mercy
seat, and that with their faces one toward another, not to any that came up to
the Mercy seat, which is no fit posture to be worshipped in, if they could be
seen by any glimmerings in this thick Cloud of smoke. And if they could, they
would be only a direction to the High Priest, as well to overlook them, as to
give them a go by, in following that intimation God has given him in Exodus,
Chap. 25. And there will I meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
above the Mercy seat, from between the two Cherubins, which are upon the Ark of
the Testimony. And in the Psalms he is described sitting betwixt the two
Cherubins, Psalm 8.1. and 99.1. This is a plain case then, that the High Priest
could not but conceive that special presence of God to be seated betwixt the
two Cherubins, and therefore directing his devotion and gesture according to
that instruction, his bowing must be toward that presence, betwixt the two
Cherubins, from the Mercy seat upwards; as if the invisible Majesty was seated
there as on a Throne or Chair of state. The bowing to whom can no more concern
the Cherubins, than the bowing to a Prince on a wide Throne or Chair can
concern the imagery on the arms of the Chair adorned, suppose, with two Eagles
heads or the like. Can any one conceit any worship done to these two Eagles
heads, when the Parties bowing is directed to the face and Person of the Prince
above, and betwixt the Eagles heads; though the Eagles heads stand in a fairer
posture to be bowed to, than the faces of the Cherubins. It is therefore every
way plain and manifest, that as the People of the Jews did not, so neither did
their High Priest bow to, or in any sense worship the Cherubins in their bowing
thitherward, but only him that sat betwixt the Cherubins, which was the thing
to be demonstrated. And that therefore there is no evasion left to elude the
force of the second commandment, that so strictly prohibits the worship of the
true God by any graven Image, which therefore according to the sense of that
Commandment must be Idolatry.

XVIII. The Idolatry forbidden in the second Commandment, reduced to the
proposed definition of Idolatry.
It remains now that we reduce this kind of Idolatry, (as we in order shall
also do all the rest,) to our general definition of Idolatry, that it may
appear to be so, even according to the plain Nature and Notion of the thing,
namely, in that by worshipping God by an Image the peculiarities of the Godhead
are violated, which seems evident here upon a double score, both from making
the infinite irrepresentable Divine Majesty representable by an Animal-Figure,
which debases and vilifies the peculiar excellency of the Godhead, which is so
infinitely beyond any visible form whatsoever, and therefore no Animal Figure
can pretend to be the representative thereof; as also from the giving Divine
worship to these Animal Figures, or Symbolical presences, which is peculiar to
God.

XIX. No distinction betwixt Hieroglyphical and representative Images when
Divine worship is done to them.
Which Divine worship does plainly argue them representative Figures, not
merely Hieroglyphical, whether they that worship them will call them so or no.
As is apparent from the first of the Romans, where the Apostle plainly declares
of those wise men of the Heathen who knew God, yet were so foolishly subtle and
fantastical as to worship him in the Images of Men, Birds, four-footed Beasts
and creeping things, which they could not but know, were but at the best
Hieroglyphics of him, no personal representatives of his Godhead, yet
forasmuch as they worshipped those Figures, they are said to have changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into the Images of these corruptible Creatures.
For in worshipping these Images in reference to God, they naturally acknowledge
or suppose a fitness in them to represent the glory of God, or his Divine
presence, which therefore must needs be an unspeakable vilification of his
infinite glorious Majesty. And what pretense can there be for any Figure, or
Symbolical Presence to have divine worship done to it, or to be an object
thereof in any sense, if it were conceived to have no fitness to represent the
Divinity. And therefore the Psalmist according to this natural Notion, inferres
from the Israelites worshipping the Golden Calf, that they turned the glory of
God into that Creature, Psalm. 106.19. They made a Calf in Horeb, and
worshipped the Molten Image. Thus they changed their glory into the similitude
of an Ox that eats grass. Which answers very fitly to that of St. Paul, They
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to a
corruptible man, etc. Romans 1.23.

XX. That in worshipping these representative Images in reference to God,
divine worship is given unto them, as suppose to the Image of God the Father.
And that the worshipping of these representative Images in reference to God,
is the giving of Divine worship to them, is manifest out of Scripture, as Acts
7. And they made a Calf in those days and sacrificed to the Idol. To say it
was but sacrificium Relativum or Transitivum, that passed to God, not
Terminativum, that terminated in the Calf it self, is but School-cobvveb-stuff.
Sacrifice is a peculiar worship belonging to God, and by no distinction or
evasion can any thing else partake in it, so as to have it offered to it. This
is evident in this kind of Divine worship, and there is the same reason of
them all. They worshipped the Calf in Horeb, but in reference to Jehovah, as
plainly appears out of the History, and therefore with Latria relativa, or
transitiva not terminativa. But does this distinction of so subtle Texture
cover their chance? No certainly. If this distinction were good, and would
justify their act, why does either the Psalmist, or St. Steven find fault? It
is apparent therefore that Divine worship is so due to God alone, that it is
in no sense due to any thing else, but that even the mere natural or external
act must be to him only. And therefore he will not be worshipped by an Image,
that the Image may not in any sense partake of his worship; which yet it will
in the natural externality thereof, if we do it toward the visible Image. For
outwardly we behave our selves no otherwise toward the Image than toward God
himself, nor make any other external Application to the one than to the other.
As suppose there was an Image of God the Father in the shape of an Old man, and
one would make his adoration to God toward this Image, with that mind, with
that devout look, with that solemn and serious motion of the spirits in the
eyes, that is befitting the profound reverence we owe to God, this natural,
visible, and external act of worship passes plainly upon this Image, as well
and in such sort as on God himself, and is such as no greater nor more lively
expression of his highest devotion can be made by any suppliant. To whom then
but to God alone can this belong? And therefore to make these expressions to a
senseless stock and stone, is the foulest violation of the divine peculiarities
that can be, by communicating them to so unworthy a subject, as well as by
lessening, obscuring, or rather abolishing the infinite glorious Majesty of the
Godhead, by supposing him or implying him representable by a wretched Statue of
wood, metal or stone, as I noted before.

XXI. That there is the same reason concerning the Image of Christ.
And now for the Statue or Image of Christ, if it be worshipped toward with
such a religious look and devout cast of the eyes as before, significative of
the highest veneration that is due to God, or can by us be given to him, it is
apparent that this exterior ritual worship is done to this Image also; nor can
be any more doubted, than if kissing of this Image were the Ritual performance
and it were kissed, that this Image was the Object of the kissing with all the
exterior devotionalness used therein: and that therefore this Image thus
adored, though but relatively, partakes of divine worship. By which
communication the peculiarities of the Godhead are plainly violated, as well as
by burning Incense, or otherwise sacrificing to the Image; as St. Steven
complains of the Israelites sacrificing to the golden Calf, though in relation
to Jehovah, which cannot excuse the Idolatry.

XXII. That Relative Idolatry is as downright Idolatry as Relative Adultery
and Murder downright Murder and Adultery.
For let any one judge in common sense and reason, whether a foul unfit action
to an undue object can be excused by an intended relation to a fit one. Nothing
can be more enormously incongruous, than the giving divine worship which is
Latria to a carved stock or stone, ordinarily called Idolum, or Imago. And the
giving this Latria to this Idolum is that which is most properly Idololatria.
But if in giving Latria to this Idolum which is so hugely unfit an object, in
relation to a fit one, all is well, and the fact lawful, the short and the long
then is, That relative Idolatry is lawful, which is as good sense as to say,
That relative Murder, or relative Adultery is lawful. As if to kill the next
innocent man to wreak ones revenge on the nocent, that deserved to be killed,
would excuse that Act from downright Murder; or to lie with another Woman with
an intended kind remembrance of his own in her absence were not downright
adultery. Why then is not this relative Idolatry downright Idolatry, as well
as relative murder and adultery downright adultery and murder? and why is
relative murder and adultery still downright murder and adultery, but because
that intended reference or relation takes not away the Specific turpitude of
the Fact? How then can the intended relation in relative Idolatry take away the
Specific turpitude of that Fact? so that it remain not downright Idolatry
still.

XXIII. That relative Idolatry is real and proper Idolatry, even according to
the nice Notion of the Schools.
Which it does even in the nice Notion of the very Schools, the Latria in this
case being really not transitive or relative, quatenus Latria, but terminated
on the very Idol it self. For quatenus Latria, it can pass no further in truth
and reality but ends there; and in relation to God the act ceases to be Latria,
the honoring or worshipping of him, but changes its Species, and becomes an
act of contempt, reproach, and disobedience against him, and a foul
dishonouring of him. Nor can the intention of the Religionist alter the
specification of the Act, but that it will be a dishonouring of God, though the
Act cannot be avoided but it will have God for its Object, but he will be the
Object of this Act under this specification namely of dishonor: As in that
Physician that intended by such a Medicine to cure such a Patient, but does
really poison him thereby, the Patient notwithstanding the Physicians intention
is no Object of a real cure, but of the quite contrary of his poisoning him.
Wherefore no real Latria passing to God in this relative Idolatry, but only
dishonor and reproach, the Latria is in truth (let the intention be what it
will,) terminated in the Image or Idol, and therefore is Idolatry, in the most
proper and Scholastic sense. For one and the same Act, as it may have two
contrary Specifications, in respect of two several Objects, so it may have two
several terminations in respect of the same. As suppose one Person loves a
Rose, another has a great Antipathy against it, a third brings a basket of
Roses into the room; this one act is both a gratification and a displeasure; a
gratification to him that loves Roses, a displeasure to him that has an
Antipathy against them; the Act of gratification terminates in one of these
Objects, the Person that loves Roses, the Act of displeasure terminates on the
other. Just so the Act of Latria or Divine honor terminates on the Image or
Idol, the Act of dishonor and reproach on God, who is provoked and disobeyed.
What can be more plain? Wherefore the Divine honor terminating on the Image of
Christ, and not passing to him in reality and truth, but only in our fond
intention, it is manifest that the peculiarities of God are here violated, and
that it is proper Idolatry.

XXIV. Whether the doing Divine worship toward the Image of Christ violates
the irrepresentableness of the Godhead or no, as also toward the holy Ghosts.
But there is a more curious question whether the worshipping of the Image of
Christ with Divine worship does involve also the other violation of the
peculiarities of the Godhead in making it thus representable by an Image. For
Christ being Man as well as God seems to make the case different from that of
the Image of God the Father. But I answer the case is still the same, Christ
being the eternal, infinite, glorious Majesty of God, as well as he is Man, and
incapable of Divine worship but so far forth as he is that infinite Majesty.
Wherefore he that sets up an Image, and calls it the Image of Christ, and does
Divine worship toward it, does as palpably make the eternal infinite Majesty
of the Godhead representable by a carved stock or stone, as he that does Divine
worship toward such a carved Image of God the Father. For the Father and the
Son are equal, and therefore the Son equally irrepresentable as to that of him
which is capable of Divine worship, which this Image pretends to represent, in
pretending to be the Image of Christ, and therefore violates that peculiarity
of the infinite glorious Majesty of God, that makes it irrepresentable by any
bodily Figure. He that worships Christ, worships the very Godhead, and
therefore must not blaspheme his Majesty, by making him representable by any
corporeal Image. The Godhead indeed is hypostatically intempled in the humane
nature of Christ, but it is the the eternal and infinite divinity there that we
adore. So little scruple need either Jevv or Turk have to turn Christians, upon
any Idolatry we are guilty of in worshipping Christ.

And what I have said of the Images or Statues of the Father and the Son, the
same is to be said of the Image of the Holy Ghost. A Dove may be the
Hieroglyphick of him as that description of the Ancient of days in Daniel is
an Hieroglyphick of God the Father. But to do Divine worship toward such an
Image of a Dove, it is absolutely the same Idolatry that was in so doing to the
Image of God the Father, and of Christ.

XXV. That no symbolical presence but only the holy humanity of Christ is
capable of divine worship done toward it.
No symbolical presence therefore or consistent visible animal figure saving
the holy humanity of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is Hypostatically united with
the eternal Divinity, can have divine worship done toward it, but it is
Idolatry ipso facto. It the peculiar privilege of the holy humanity of Christ,
to be capable of having divine worship done toward it, because of its Union
with the Divinity, as it is the privilege of the Body of a wise and virtuous
Person, for the wisdom and virtues sake that resides only in his Soul, to have
that great reverence done toward it, by reason of the Soul with which it is
Hypostatically united. But the Soul once separate by Death, the Body according
to the common sense and practice of all men ceases to have that reverence done
toward it that it had before. So that there is naturally a peculiar middle
kind of honor, greater than any Creature besides has a capacity of, though
less than Divine, that accrews to Christ's humanity, in virtue of his being
Hypostatically united with the Godhead, which the Image of Christ is not. And
therefore besides that gross Idolatry above specified, in doing Divine worship
toward his Image, there is also a violation of the privilege of this holy
humanity of Christ, toward which living Symbolical presence of the Godhead
only it had been proper to do Divine worship, when he was visible here upon
Earth; upon a clear declaration of this Union. Which was more apertly, and more
seasonably manifested afterward by St. John. But considering the unexpressable
profound Humility of our Savior, who upon ones saying to him, Good Master,
straight way rebuked him, declaring there was none good but one, which is God,
Mark 10.17. it seems hugely probable, that if any would have done express
Divine worship toward his visible Humanity, as the Lycaonians would have
sacrificed to Paul and Barnabas, that he would have declined it. But this only
by the by.

XXVI. The necessity of the Romanists acknowledging of Latria relativa done to
Images relating to God.
Hitherto of Images relating to God, to which the second Nicene Council, (that
excellently learned and judicious Patriarch of Constantinople Photius being
Interpreter) assigned Latria relativa, which Azorius the Jesuit also
acknowledges to be the constant opinion of the Roman Theologers. And indeed it
seems necessary it should be so, to make the best sense of that kind of
Religion: for they burn incense to these Images which is a sacrifice. And they
putting up their prayers before them, and lifting up their eyes and hands
toward them, with compellations common to the Image and Prototype, this is
also the sacrifice of prayer offered to them, as much if not more direct and
express, than the sacrifices offered on the Altar before the Golden Calf were
to it; which yet because it was done on the Altar before that Image, St. Steven
full of the holy Ghost, declares, that they sacrificed unto the Idol.

Wherefore it being so evident, that in these Cases they are to acknowledge that
they give Latria to these Images, it seemed the wittiest and safest invention
to declare in general, that the Images relating to God are to have Latria done
to them, but not absoluta but relativa, which, they conceive, makes it an
inferior kind of Latria, since this Relative Latria (because of its
Relativeness) is incompetible to God. But how well this will do their business,
I have already noted.

But that this is the sense of their Church, even of the Council of Trent it
self, is noted and confessed by Azorius, and natural if not necessary for every
one to acknowledge, that is serious in the worship of these Images. For if it
were not Latria relativa, but such a worship as the Images were capable of, and
might be the ultimate Object of themselves, and it terminate there, how small
and mean, and how lovv a kind of Worship would this be! So that it would prove
to be a mere fooling or trifling with Images to no purpose, the worship of the
Image though relating to God not at all advancing our adoration of him, but
rather necessarily casting us (by restraining the worship to what the Image it
self is the ultimate object of,) into the faintest and meanest mode of
worshipping that can be expressed, if it be but what it should be commensurate
to so mean an Object. Wherefore it is altogether incredible, that this should
be the meaning of worshipping of Images relating to God, or that any of the
People that are taught to worship them, should not worship them with that
height of affection and veneration they use to God, for as much as the Image
relates to God, and that they are taught according to the very Council of
Trent, that by the Image of Christ which they worship, they worship Christ
himself. So plain is it, that the act of worship before an Image relating to
God, is an intended adoration of God himself, according the Council of Trent.

But for the occasional shuffles of any private Doctors of that Church, that
would have the worship of incurvation, and the signs of devotion accompanying
it, terminated on the Image it self, to make sure it may be in no sense Latria,
at what a loss will they be to answer touching the burning of incense, and
praying to God before these Images that relate to him. Besides that the second
commandment does plainly meet with such shufflers, which universally forbids
any bowing to, or worshipping Images relating to God, and will not be put
off by any evasion. For I am a jealous God, etc.

Nor was it unfit to give so forcible a stop, though less methodical to a
subterfuge so unnatural and irrational. I will add also so repugnant to the
Council of Trent, (which is the touchstone of their faith,) who in these
express words declare, Per Imaginem Christi Christum adoramus. And that
adoration which is done to Christ, is divine adoration and consequently Latria.

XXVII. The reduction of the worship of Saints and Angels, to the proposed
definition of Idolatry, and particularly their invocation and making of vows
to them.
We proceed now to the consideration of the Images, or Symbolical presences of
Saints and Angels, and to all the modes of their religious worship: of which,
Invocation is the most principal, and as it were the scope and foundation of
all the rest. Which worship of theirs I shall also plainly discover to be
Idolatrous, by manifest reduction to my proposed definition of Idolatry. Which
I will do with all brevity, there being no difficulty at all in the business.
And I will begin with Invocation, which as I have proved in my Antidote, can
belong to no invisible Power or Spirit, saving to God alone. Forasmuch as no
man can have any solid faith or assurance that they can hear our Invocation, or
that they have any Omnipresence, or Omnipercipience, no not so much as
Terrestrial. Whence it it plain, that in invokeing them one of the Divine
peculiarities is violated or profaned by being communicated to a Creature,
when of right it is only to be attributed to God; the Saints having no such
Omnipercipiency or Omnipresency in them, as Doctor Thorndike himself cannot
but confess, accordingly as I have noted at the end of my Reply.

But to invoke them or pray to them for such things as it is in Gods power only
to give, which all Papists do, as Dr. Thorndike plainly asserts, nor can it be
put off upon pretense of a figurative speech, (as I have proved in my Reply,)
this is double Idolatry, as violating two Divine peculiarities at once, both
the Omnipresence or Omnipercipience of God, and also his Omnipotence, they
giving that power to a Creature which is in God alone. But making Vows to any
Saint or Angel in such dangers as a Creature may have power to rid us from, is
but the same kind of Idolatry that simple Invocation, if they be both mental,
or both vocal.

XXVIII. The Idolatry of erecting Temples, Altars, Images, or Symbolical
presences to Saints, or Angels, reduced to the proposed definition.
And now for the erecting Temples, Altars, Images or Symbolical presences to
Saints or Angels, all which is manifestly done in reference to their
invocation, it is thence plain, that all this is done to an Idolatrous end, and
therefore upon this very consideration has the smut of Idolatry upon it. But
besides, more distinctly. God having appropriated these modes of being
worshipped to himself, and his judgment being so infallible, what befits him
and is most proper for him, when he will be worshipped in a more external and
ritual way, it is evident presumption and profanation of the peculiarities of
his Godhead, as to external worship, to communicate them to the Creature, as I
have proved in my Antidote. And lastly, the very nature of the thing
demonstrates the Idolatry, they being standing significations of the natural
peculiarities of God communicated to a Creature. For a Temple and Symbolical
presence is fitly and securely erected to God, because we are sure of Gods
residence and presence there, as (...) intimates the inhabitation of the
Divinity in it. Let there be as many Symbolical Presences and Temples as you
will, and at what distance you will, God is certainly at home in them all, as
being Omnipresent. But for a finite invisible Power or Spirit, though there
were but one erected thereto, there is no assurance of that Spirits residence
there, or if the effect of any Spirit be there, that it is not some other
Spirit than he to whom the Temple or Symbolical presence was erected, that it
is not one Angel or Saint for another, nay, a Devil instead of that Saint or
Angel. But those Temples and Symbolical presences being erected in several
distant places, it emplyes they are in several distant places at once, which is
the only peculiarity of the Godhead; as I have noted in my Reply. Which
incongruities are also to be observed in either one single Altar, or many in
distant places of the World, to the same Saint or Angel. And besides it has
that odious relation to a sacrifice, and imports that the Saints and Angels are
also sacrificed to, which is plain and confessed Idolatry.

XXIX. An Evasion obviated.
Nor is it any excuse, that the Temple and Altar is pretended to be erected and
dedicated to God only in a principal sense, but to the Saint in a secundarie
respect, as less principal. For besides that God is jealous and impatient of
any Partner, in the honors that are due to himself, (though they were only
(...) not (...)) their intention cannot change the natural signification of
building Temples and Altars to a finite Creature. Which as I have already
noted, implies its Omnipresence which is proper and peculiar only to God; And
therefore this communicating a peculiarity of the Godhead to a Creature is
Idolatry according to the plain definition thereof, let us intend what we will.

XXX. The Idolatry of bowing to the Images of Saints and Angels wherein it
consists.
As for their superstitious worship done toward the bare Symbolical presences,
or open Images of Saint or Angel, supposing it the very same they would do to
the Saint or Angel themselves if they were visible, that this implies them
representable is no Idolatry. For the making them representable by an Image,
does not at all violate the peculiarities of the Godhead. But the Idolatry is
in that the Act naturally supposes them certainly present, for it is not sense
to bow to an absent Person; and these Symbolical presences being many, and at
far distant places at once, that the Saint or Angel is in more places than one
at once, and in such sort ommipresent as none can be acknowledged but God
alone, and so that Divine peculiarity is violated by this bowing to the
Symbolical Presences or Images of Saint or Angel.

XXXI. The hazard of the vulgars doing that Devotion which is due to God in
their worshipping the Images of Saints and Angels.
And though there be no necessary connection betwixt the things, yet there is an
exceeding great hazard in the vulgar sort especially, when they bow to these
Images of Saint or Angel, or pray to them before the said Images, there is an
hazard of running into the highest Devotion, and reverential affection and
passion, that humane nature is excitable into or can express by his look or
mind, and profoundly devout motion of the spirits of his eyes, which passion
and signification thereof is due to God alone, and it is the most sordid
Idolatry imaginable to apply it to either Saint or Angel, much more to the very
images of them made of wood or stone, though never so well painted or gilt. It
is manifest I say, that by such a worship a special peculiarity of the Godhead
is violated, who alone is to be worshipped with that kind of Devotion. Which
yet I have seen simple folk to express to the Image of a Saint, as fully as I
could ever discern to be done by the devoutest man in his prayers to God. So
that this note is not made at random, without just occasion and ground. And if
this be done to the Image of a Saint, you may be sure it will not fail to be
done to Images that relate to God. But that is besides our present Scope.

XXXII. The reduction of burning of Incense and setting up lights before them.
As for the burning of Incense and setting up lights before the Symbolical
presences of Saints and Angels, it being so plainly an imitation of the burning
incense, and lighting up lamps before the Symbolical presence of Jehovah in the
Holy, it is plainly a violation of his peculiarities, so judged by his own
election and choice. And as for the incense, it is a sacrifice, and the most
noble and significant sacrifice, as I have noted in my Reply. And they may as
well depress the sacrificing of sheep and oxen into a lower ceremony, as this
of incense. For by the use and consent of Nations, the one is no more
restrained to the supreme God than the other. And the lamps and show bread seem
to indicate Jehovah to be the Father of lights, from whom proceeds every good
and perfect gift, and who feeds with bounty every living thing. And the lights
set up before the Images of Saints and Angels do at least intimate, that light
and comfort is to be expected from suppliants that make their addresses to them
at these Symbolical presences, as if they were there present to assist them
that invoke them, and implore their help. Which I have again and again
inculcated to be an implying and attributing an Omnipresency or Omnipercipiency
to these finite created spirits, and consequently a violation of the
Peculiari^ies of the Godhead. Thus easily are the various acts of Idolatry
observed in the Church of Rome, in their worshipping Saints and Angels,
reducible to the plain definition and true general Notion of Idolatry which we
have proposed. As for those high compellations, to the blessed Virgin
especially, such as plainly signify the peculiar excellencies of the Godhead,
they are so openly Idolatrous that they want no reduction.

XXXIII. That the pretended intricacies in the mystery of the holy Trinity,
cannot with any reason at all be alleged against the clear demonstrations that
the doctrine if Transubstantiation is false.
As neither their Artolatria does to them that are free and believe that which
is most certainly true, that the bread is not transubstatiated, as I have again
and again undeniably demonstrated it not to be in my Antidote against Idolatry,
and in my Reply. The clearness of which demonstrations, the pretended
intricacies in the mystery of the holy Trinity cannot obscure; there being so
vast a difference both betwixt the Objects themselves, and the faculties in
this case, and that. For in Transubstantiation the Object is Matter or body, a
substance finite and comprehensible both by our senses and reason. In the
mystery of the Trinity, the object is the infinite incomprehensible Deity, a
substance incorporeal, or spirit, which is quite out of the reach of our senses
in the lowest notion thereof; but the transcendency of the Triune Godhead above
our reason also, though not contrary unto it. And then our faculties conversant
about Transubstantiation, are all the five senses rightly circumstantiated, the
organ, distance and medium duly fitted and proportionated, and therefore the
senses necessarily capable of discerning what the object is, whether this body
or that, suppose whether the body of a man, or a piece of bread. And besides
this, not only the exterior reason, but that which the Greeks call (...)
(which contains the first and self-evident common Notions or Axioms, that are
without syllogism noematically true,) lays fast hold on the object in this
controversy. Transubstantiation being easily resolvible into a flat and
manifest contradiction to these, as I have abundantly shown in my Antidote and
Reply. But there is no contradiction at all, to either sensation or common
notion in the mystery of the Trinity, only exterior reason and imagination
raise some mists and obscurities about it. Which well exercised minds in
contemplation can easily discern, and dispute from this venerable mystery, so
far forth as it is exhibited to us in the ancient symbols of the Catholic
Church. Wherefore of two desperate cases it is the more hopeful, that the bread
being not tran^ubstantiated, and yet they taking it to be so, they may escape
being Idolaters, than that it is transubstantiated to save them from Idolatry.

XXXIV. That the believing the bread not to be there, does not all clear the
Romanists from downright Bread-worship which is Idolatry.
And I must confess I was once inclinable to this opinion my self, that in this
case they are not Idolaters (see my Idea of Antichristianisme, Book 1. Chap.
13. sect. 6.) before I had more closely and carefully considered the point. And
the Church of Rome does not want at this day witty Patrons, and of admirable
art and eloquence, to persuade the heedless into this security, That though the
bread should not prove transubstantiated, yet they cannot be bread-worshippers,
while they believe it is; for if they believe it is transubstantiated, they
believe it not to be there, namely within the Symbols or Species, and thence
they pretend it is demonstratively evident that they cannot worship it, but
only Christ, into whose substance it is believed to be transubstantiated. For
whatever is taken, say they, for an object of worship, the understanding must
affirm, (either truly or falsely,) that it is there whither the worship is
directed. Which arguing bears a smart plausibility with it. But I answer, That
what is made an object of worship through mistake, there is no need the
understanding affirm it is there, but rather the contrary. For it does not
think the undue object is there but the due one. Those that worshipped the Sun,
that is, that which we call the Sun, and understand thereby a flammeous body
devoid of sense and understanding, that appears alike to the sight of the
Sun-worshippers, and to ours, (as the species appear the same to those that
believe the bread transubstantiated, and to them that believe it not,) be it
called what it will, they did not believe that which we know to be the Sun, to
be there, but an intellectual Deity, which the Sun is not; and yet we all
acknowledge them for all that to have been Sun-worshippers and Idolaters.
Wherefore using just weights and measures, we must conclude the Romanists
Bread-worshippers and Idolaters, the bread not being transubstantiated, since
their worship then lights upon bread instead of Christ, as the Sun-worshippers
upon the Sun instead of an intelligent Deity. He that strikes his Friend in the
dusk of the Evening, thinking it is his Enemy, thinks his friend is not there,
who notwithstanding finds himself the Object of his stroke, and wishes he had
not been there. This Idolatry I must confess is committed through mistake, but
so is all Idolatry that is committed in good earnest, so that this cannot
excuse the fact from so grievous a crime. And that it is Idolatry is evident,
Divine worship being given to a piece of bread, which is a peculiarity of the
Godhead, and must be given to none but him. And the violation of any Divine
peculiarity is Idolatry by the proposed definition thereof.

XXXV. The application of the Heathen Idolatry to this definition, besides his
present scope.
By virtue of which we demonstratively have shown the sundry Idolatries of the
Church of Rome, in their worshipping the Image of Christ, in their worshipping
and invocating Saints and Angels, and in their adoration of the Eucharist. And
in virtue of the same Definition, the Idolatries of the Heathen might be as
clearly demonstrated in their worshipping the supreme God by Images, and in
their religious worship they did to Demons, which this definition would prove
to be Divine. But this would be quite besides my present purpose, and neither
useful nor suitable to the subject in hand.

XXXVI. The great difference betwixt religious respect and preference, and
Divine worship.
It remains now only that we free several Ceremonies used in our own Church
from the imputation of Idolatry, by application to this definition, as well as
we have evinced several of theirs to be Idolatrous by the same. Which will be a
no less useful, and it may be a more pleasant consideration to our own, to see
how little hold the adverse party can take of these small strings to pull us
back again into Popery. For if the definition of Idolatry be unapplicable to
them, it is manifest they cannot be Idolatrous. And the inapplicability is so
easily discoverable, that there will be no need to insist long on this matter.
In the general then we are to note what a vast difference there is betwixt
religious worship properly so called, which is the same with Divine worship,
and pious or religious affection and respect, or preference of one thing before
another, for its relation it has to the objects, or exercise of our Religion,
or Divine worship. It is but an homely Proverb, Love me and love my dog, but it
may be of no impertinent significancy in this place. For it is not understood
of the love of friendship, but of such a love as that inferior Creature is
capable of, and is fit to give him in relation to his Master, to whom we owe
the love of friendship. So they that have a real Divine reverence for God, it
is no wonder they find an inclination in themselves of bearing some reverence,
or having some respect to those things or persons, that in a special manner
relate to him. Whether it be Priest or Temple, or any holy utensil or the like.
Which reverence is quite different from that Divine worship or reverence that
is due to God himself, (more different than the love to ones Friend, and to his
Spaniel,) and therefore can be no peculiarity of the Godhead, and consequently
no violation of his peculiarities to give it to another. Which is the true
Notion of Idolatry.

XXXVII. The keeping our hats off in the Church, freed from Idolatry by this
Definition.
We will illustrate this with some few examples, and so conclude. They that
keep off their hats in the Church, and do it even then when Divine Service is
not a doing there, are not by any means conceived to do that Divine reverence
or worship which is peculiarly due to God, unto the fabric they are under, but
because this place is set apart for holy uses, and is of a different nature
from ordinary places that have no such relation to God and his Divine worship,
out of an habitual deep devoutness toward God they also express this more
inferior affection and reverence to the place of his worship, by way of
distinction and preference of it before other common places, be they never so
magnificently built. Which is not to give it a reverence any thing equal or of
the same kind with that we give to God, but only a greater and another sort of
reverence than we would give to any place that is not related to him. And this
is no more Idolatry than Moses his putting off his shoes, because the ground
was hallowed by the special presence of God there. And therefore it was not
unfit to show some reverence thereto in those circumstances, and not to
profane it and soil it by his dirty shoes. Nay, indeed necessary, having that
express command of God for it. Or if one should do so of himself in such a
meaning of reverence as I have intimated, though it might be superstitious
under Christianity, yet it could not be Idolatrous, no peculiarities of the
Godhead being violated thereby.

XXXVIII. As also kissing the Bible in the administration of Oaths.
Kissing the Bible also in the administration of Oaths, which is in use
amongst us, (and might according to the proper Notation of the Latin word, be
called Adoration, that word signifying properly either the a motion of our
mouth to the thing kissed, or the admotion of our own hand to our mouth, and so
by kissing it signifying chiefly our kindness and affection, but withal our
respect to the Person or thing we in this manner salute,) this Ceremony here is
only an expression of our love and value we have even for the material word of
God, as I may so speak, by reading whereof we find such Divine comforts and
refreshments, and which gives us to know the will of God, and that salvation
which is through Jesus Christ revealed in this book. And if a man after the
serious reading of a Chapter therein, his heart being full of joy and holy
consolation, should at the close of all kiss the Bible as he lays it down, out
of a pious affection unto the very instrument of communicating such grace and
comfort unto him, what more Idolatry were there in this, than in such an ones
hugging his Bible in the Pulpit before the People, to signify how dear it was
to himself, and should be to them all?

XXXIX. That bowing toward the Altar or Communion Table does not fall within
the verge of the true Notion or Definition of Idolatry.
And as for bowing toward the Altar, they that so do, questionless intend by
that action, adoration to God properly, or in the highest sense, so called, so
that it is one species of Latria. Which can be no Idolatry in it self, to be
directed toward a place, since it cannot be done at all, but it will be
directed toward some place or other. And if the Church for uniformity sake
appoint one place rather than another, so long as it is but toward it only, it
can be no Idolatry. For it is no more Idolatry to worship God toward a place,
than in a place: for both these are but Circumstances, not Objects of Divine
worship. But now it being concluded fitting to use adoration when we first come
into Gods house, as also for uniformity sake toward one certain place or part
thereof, and all the place being in some sort holy, but yet a preference of one
part before another, because of the more than ordinary devotion used there in
celebrating the most endearing Mysteries of our Religion, the death and passion
of our blessed Savior, and our union with him by participation of his Flesh
and Blood, that place where the symbols of this are exhibited, and these great
and endearing mysteries celebrated, it is no wonder if it have the preference
in our Religious affection and respect before all the places in the Church, to
be as it were the direct^ Eve instrument toward what part of the Church we
should do our adorations, namely that the Altar or Communion Table should be
this instrument of direction, and that this should be the peculiar Honor done
to it, to be so. In which sense it is bowed toward, as the Mercy seat of old
was by the Jews, and the Book of their Law under a Canopee in their Synagogues
now is, without the least show or suspicion of Idolatry.

For Divine worship is not at all done to that, in any of those cases, toward
which it is directed, but only to God himself; There being no Animal Figures
exposed to receive the worship as in the case of the Heathen, and the
Eucharistick bread being in no sense at all a Symbolical presence as well as
having no Imagery on it, but both Bread and Wine mere Tokens of the Body of
Christ slain, crucified or sacrificed, and of his blood shed for us. Which
therefore are not the Person of Christ, nor Hypostatically united to his Person
in this condition, and consequently the symbols thereof cannot be any
symbolical presence, as I have also noted in my Reply. The Altar therefore has
the honor of being a directive instrument whither, as the Church has where to
do divine worship. But the worship is no more done to the Altar, by being done
toward it, than it is done to the Church by being done in it. Forasmuch as
there is no Animal Figure thereon, as the Ancient Pagans conceived their Gods
to appear in several such shapes, and therefore worshipped them in them. For
this would be a personal representative, and so receptive of the worship done
toward it, according to the manifest sense of Scripture, and natural
interpretation of reason, but here being no such Statue or Image there erected
all is safe.

Wherefore all the honor the Altar receives in these adorations made toward
it is this, that it is used as a directive instrument for people to show which
way they are to set their faces, when they make these adorations to God, which
is far from giving any Divine worship to the Table or Altar, and therefore is
far out of the reach of our definition of Idolatry.

LX. Nor bowing to the name of Jesus.
And so whereas all the names and attributes of God are holy, and we have a
greater reverence for them, than for any words or names that do not relate to
God, (though we do not owe Divine worship or reverence to them, for as much as
they are not God, but words that pass away as other sounds do,) whereas I say,
all the names of God are holy, yet because the name Jesus exhibits to us the
manifestation of God in the most endearing circumstances; therefore as the
Mysteries celebrated on the Altar caused that preference of it before all other
parts of the Church for to do our worship toward, so this name of Jesus above
all other Names or words, that signify God or his attributes, may well be made
use of to determine the time and occasion when in Divine service we should more
exuberantly vent our devotion in the worshipping God our Savior, especially
the Scripture seeming to hint some such thing to us. And this is the honor
done to the Name of Jesus, that at the naming thereof we take occasion to do
profound reverence and Divine worship to our eternal Redeemer. Whence it is
plain, that that honor that accrews to the Name of Jesus, or to the Altar, by
bowing at the naming of the one, and toward the site of the other, is far from
any Divine honor, and that therefore the peculiarities of the Godhead are not
thereby violated, nor any Idolatry committed.

XLI. Nothing that has the least show of Idolatry required of our Church, in
celebrating the Lords Supper.
And now lastly, as for the Eucharist or holy Symbols of Bread and Wine, that
we kneel not to them I have sufficiently intimated in my Reply, but are in that
posture as being in devout ejaculations to God, our hearts breathing toward
him in the receiving this holy sacrament, and this is all the due reverence I
see required by the Rubric of our Church, or any direction thereof, for the
celebrating these holy mysteries. Chaitable constructions of some private
Doctors expressions.
And if any particular Doctors of the Church talk of worshipping the
Sacrament, if it be such affection and reverence as is expressed to the word of
God, that this is without any violation of the Divine peculiarities, I have
above noted, and that therefore it can be no Idolatry; and if they speak of
adoration properly so called, I charitably suspect they meant adoration done
toward the Symbols as I have above explained the doing of it toward the
Altar, that is, as using them as directive Instruments toward which we do our
adoration to Christ, but not to them as any Objects thereof. Which I should
think would be hard for any man to imagine, that is conscious to himself, what
a motion the Soul is in, when it does an act of real and sincere adoration, or
Divine worship, and considers what it is to be in any sense the Object thereof.
He would find it such horrid ill Syntax, to make any thing in any sense the
object of adoration besides God, that he would be utterly ashamed of it, and
find it more absonous and incongruous, more impertinent and troublesome, than
if one when he were to worship the visible Sun, should interpose a burning
rush-candle betwixt his eye and the Sun, and tie himself to worship that also,
as an object in reference to the Sun, while he pretends ultimately at the same
time to worship the Sun it self, it is plain it would be a distraction and
impediment to him.

XLII. The reason of some men's proneness to adoration of outward objects.
Which makes it suspicable that those that are so forward to have adoration
done to outward objects, are not eager enough to join their hearts and minds
with that eternal invisible power, which is best felt in the least distraction
of thoughts, but would stick in these outward things, and so lay Religion at
last as flat as the Earth, and suffer the Souls of men to grow stupid in
carnality. Wherefore I presume better of any particular Doctors of our Church,
than that they have any such meaning as to assert the lawfulness of adoration
or Divine worship to the Eucharistick Symbols, which is an undue object of that
worship, that it may pass to a due one, that is to Christ, for this I have
plainly proved above to be Idolatry.

XLIII. The sense of the Church not to be interpreted by the rash expressions
of any private Doctor.
But if any of our Church should speak so inconsiderately, what is that to the
Church herself, that contains herself far within this compass? And they that
are of the Church, are not tied to any particular men's opinions, but to the
general profession and practice of the Church. Which by these instances, that
yet are those that are most scrupled at, you may see how clear she is from the
least spot or soil of Idolatry, according to the true Notion and Definition
thereof, she using no rites of worship whereby the Peculiarities of the Godhead
are violated.

XLIV. The great Peril in leaving a more pure Church for an Idolatrous one.
And therefore I hope these brief pains of mine, in so freely and faithfully
examining the rites of the Roman Church and of our own, by this so intelligible
a Rule, will prove as well acceptable as seasonable to all that have any
serious care of their salvation, and they will take heed in this slippery Age,
how they leave a pure Church for a Church so plainly soiled with manifold spots
of Idolatry, but those in that soiled Church provide better for themselves, by
entering Communion with that Church that is more pure. And in the mean time I
hope they will excuse my more than ordinary zeal in a matter of so exceeding
great moment, and which so (...)early concerns our eternal happiness, it being
so expressly declared in Scripture, that no Idolater shall inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven.

XLV. Of Spiritual Idolatry, several instances thereof, as Covetousness, which
the Apostle calls Idolatry.
Which as it is undeniably true, and confessed on all sides, concerning this
external ritual Idolatry, so certainly is it no less true of the internal or
spiritual, if we do not sincerely endeavor to rid our selves of it. For there
are other sorts of Idolatry, than we have hitherto insisted on, and such as we
are as carefully to shun, as we tender our own salvation. Saint Paul expressly
names one of this kind, and calls it by the very name, Mortify therefore your
Members which are upon Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection,
evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which is Idolatry, Colos. 3.5. The word is
(...), the love of money, which I suppose the Apostle does not count Idolatry,
for the Imagery that ordinarily is upon Coins, but for the trust and repose
they put in uncertain Riches. And there is the same reason in any worldly
interest whatsoever, in power, friends, and what ever else. Those that trust in
these more than in the living God, do plainly commit Spiritual Idolatry. Trust
ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa.
26.4. The Lord is my Rock and my fortress, my God, my strength in whom I will
trust, Psalm 18.2. Yea, though he kill me, yet will I trust him, says Job, Job
13.15. And so must we do, whomever he should permit to kill us, or any ways
persecute us, being assured that nothing can come amiss to them that are his,
and put their trust in him. But if when visible comforts fail, our trust fails
in the invisible God, it is a sign we made the Creature the Rock of our
confidence, and gave that to it, which is a peculiarity of the Godhead, which
is plainly Idolatry.

XLVI. The harboring a false Idea of God, horrid and affrightful, another kind
of Spiritual Idolatry.
As is also to raise a false Idea of God, more horrid and affrightful than the
most terrible Idols of the Heathen, and to flatter this, and our selves as
special favorites of it, because we believe it to be such as we have falsely
imagined it, of adamantine severity or rather cruelty to infinitely the
greatest part of mankind inevitably to be damned to everlasting ineffable
torments, and our selves fatally and necessarily to be made happy out of a
partial fondness to our Persons, before the rest of the world, live as we list,
merely because he will have it so: and that this shall be the bottom of our
faith and trust; this certainly would be spiritual Idolatry also, and an
egregious violating that precious Divine Attribute, if not the very Nature of
God, whom Saint John has declared to be love, God is love, and he that abides
in love, abides in God, and God in him, John 4.16.

XLVII. That those Christians that persecute and kill one another for
conscientious difference in Religion, turn the God of the Christians into a
foul Heathen Idol.
In the law of Moses it is forbidden to offer strange incense or strange fire,
and it is as strictly forbidden in the Gospel of Christ. For when his Disciples
would have had him fetch fire down from Heaven, as Elias did, for an affront
done to their Lord and Master, he rebuked them saying, You know not of what
spirit you are, Luke 9.54. Bitter and destructive zeal (the Apostle calls it
(...)) is the strange fire or Incense not to be offered to the Lord under the
Gospel. For nothing is more estranged from the Spirit of the Gospel than it.
John 16.2. The time comes, says our Savior, when any one that kills you will
think he does (...) that he does God an acceptable piece of Divine worship or
service, as if he offered an Oblation or Sacrifice to him. And this is indeed
that strange Incense, fire and sacrifice that all Religionists offer to God,
(be they of what persuasion they will, Pontifician or Protestant) that
persecute and kill the one the other for conscientious difference in Religion,
as if they were the weapons of Christ's warfare. Who yet has so expressly said,
By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples if you love one another.
But in persecuting, killing, and sacrificing one another thus in a barbarous
zeal, thinking they do (...), make an oblation of Divine worship to God
thereby; they turn the living God of the Christians, which is Love it self,
into the foulest Idols of the Heathen, who used to be worshipped with the
bloody sacrificing of men; and therefore plainly commit spiritual Idolatry,
violating and defacing the peculiar character of the God of the Christians,
while they thus pretend to worship Him.

XLVIII. The laying out all the strength of our Bodies and Souls, for the
satisfaction of our own will, another instance of this Idolatry.
Saint Paul exhorts the Romans, Chap. 12. to present their bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which he calls (...), our reasonable
Latria, viz. that Divine worship which is most fit and reasonable to give to
God, namely, that we dedicate and devote all the powers and faculties of our
souls and bodies, (for in that it is called (...) a living sacrifice, the soul
is manifestly employed) unto his service. This is our reasonable and fitting
Latria we owe to God; and therefore if we employ all the powers of our mind and
strength of our body, to serve our selves, and our own carnal and worldly
desires, it is evident we make an Idol of our selves, and give that worship to
our selves, that is reasonable to give to God only.

XLIX. The letting out the fullness and entireness of our affection to any
Creature, another instance thereof.
And whenas it is written, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart
and all thy Soul, that is to say, the greatest strength and fullness of thy
affection shall be entirely carried out toward him, and other things be loved
only for his sake, God challenging this as his peculiar due, if we let this
height and entireness of affection go to any other person or thing, friend,
wife, child, repute, pleasure or whatever else, this peculiarity of God is
violated, and it is most certainly a kind of spiritual Idolatry. Which makes it
less to be wondered at, that people are so frequently crossed in those things or
persons that they so excessively love. And therefore it is our safety as well
as our duty to have our affections moderate to all things saving to God alone,
where there can be no danger of excess.

L. The making our selves the ultimate end of our actions and services of God,
an egregious instance of this spiritual Idolatry.
And lastly, (for this is an argument so copious that a man may easily lose
himself in it) It is well known and cannot be denied but that God is the
ultimate end of all. He is so in himself, and ought to be acknowledged so by us
both in our words and actions. Wherefore if we make our selves the ultimate end
of our actions, and our own Happiness as our own, and not as according to the
will and nature of God, so that we serve and worship God for our own sakes,
making as it were a crafty bargain with the all-wise God, and performing it too
(which is worst of all) no further than it stands with our own present ease,
security and interest, preferring these before his will and command, this also
is manifest Spiritual Idolatry, and we again make an Idol of our selves in
making our selves the ultimate end of our Actions. For there can be but one
ultimate end, which is the will of the Father, the light of the knowledge of God
in the face of Jesus Christ manifested in us, who is the brightness of his
glory and express Image of his person. Who declared in the flesh, he came not
to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him.

This therefore is the supreme Law and will of God touching the purity of his
worship, that we have no will nor end of our own. For as we are to have but one
God, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. so we are to have
but one will, even the will of the God whom we worship. Which we have not, if
we have any self-will, or self ends, unsubordinate to the will of God. Whose
Will and Law is the Law of an unself-interested Love that is ready to act, and
content to suffer any thing for the Good of the Creation of God, be it never so
bitter and painful, as was most exemplarily conspicuous in our blessed Savior.
And of this it is that that bosom friend of our Lord Jesus witnesses in the
close of his Epistle, John 5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and
has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true, and we are in
him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. Little Children, keep your
selves from Idols. Amen.

The End.

