Bread for the Poor. AND ADVANCEMENT OF THE English Nation. PROMISED By
Enclosure of the Wastes and Common Grounds of ENGLAND:

By Adam Moore, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for Nicholas Bourn, in Cornhill, at the
South entrance into the Royal Exchange, 1653.

THE PVBLISHER OF TAIS TREATISE To the Reader.
Whilst all the World is big and busy with inventions of helping Nature to
unlock her Cabinets, for a more liberal communicting of Her Treasures to
mankind in all kinds; one of the main lets of atteining the scope seems to
be that Epidemicall Error of seeking the Key still afar off, when it hangs at
our girdle, and trampling the present sure means in travel and search after
Remote Uncertainties. This is the very thing our Author in a Generous Zeal for
the good of his Country, worthily endeavors to convince all England of,
showing very plainly, That we need not go far, nor veuture upon
Improbabilities, much less Impossibilities, to enlarge and enrich this Nation
within it self, by the improvement of a most considerable portion of Ground
throughout the whole Land, with at least a fourfold Revenue, besides all manner
of advantagiousnesse thereby, for Rich and Poor, the State and Commons, if our
senses will but suffer themselves to be persuaded of what does lie within their
Ken, and vouchsafe only to stoop a little for taking up the Jewel.

The same thing we know, has often been hinted and wished for by many, and
likewise assayed and improved by some few here and there to great advantage;
but never yet (for any thing we could hear of) was it undertaken and handled so
professedly plainly and fully, in but a few leaves, by any other public Author
hitherto. And therefore, having by a special providence lighted upon him in
this small Treatise, hid in obscurity, since his penning thereof and personal
Decease, these thirty years (but we hope reserved unto a more improving
Season.) we durst not, in Duty to the Public, withhold him longer from the
view and use thereof, for the good and service of this Commonwealth: nothing
doubting but as he will soon make known his own worth by his own words; so he
will be entertained accordingly to the happy improvement of his right Christian
and Noble Aim, to relieve the poor in particular, and to advance the whole
Nation in general, which God bless.

To the most Illustrious, Most Honorable and Worthy Lords of the Wastes and
Common grounds, and of the Lands which have right of Common in them, within the
Commonwealth of England, and Dominion of Wales.
Most Honored,
THe vehement desires of the discreeter sort to proceed in this subject, having
been still crossed and cooled by the wilful opposition of vulgar Spirits,
moved me to conceive that it might be a fruitful work to contract the grounds
and reasons by which the difference might be compounded. That so the better
part being armed, and (as yet) the greater disspoiled of all defense, the
better may be made the greater, and the worst swallowed up in persuasion. The
particulars of this labor (being tendered to me by experimental observations)
I have here (in ragged weeds) bundled together: And ((...) they most concern
you) have humbly cast them down at the foot of your grave judgments. May you
please to pass by the rude composure, (for stuff and fashion are but
trivials) I know the silly Volume is sincere, and has set forth his reports
with modesty. And (though it promise matter of high consequence) yet will
Survey (I am assured) reprove me, for not giving the Subject its due I may not
presume to persuade, where so due respects of public good and government have
innated residence: only thus far; the Prize is great; the Breach discovered:
And though the main Battle join not to make a general surprise, yet may each
Regiment (that will) win his share. Who then will not arm? Or who will be so
unhappy, as not to come on to the assault, to fill up the Treasury of his own
and the public fortune? Be you good to the poor: and then blessed be your
enterprise, and the success happy: To which, and all your sacred and sage
designements (to your utmost Posterities) ever may great Jehovah grant his holy
Faxit, and continuance of happiness till his glorious coming.

Your humble Servant, Adam Moore.

To all Inhabitants, Tenants and Occupiers of Lands bordering on Wastes and
common grounds, and by right of Common interessed therein, within the
Commonwealth of England, and Dominion of Wales: And to the poorer sort
especially.
AN idle Member in a Commonwealth (as a droan in the Bee-live) is either
actually cast out by Justice, or at least suffers a divorce from the general
affection. By this motive have I been incited (in this little Treatise) to cast
my mite into the common Treasury, and by the same may you be moved to approve
my wishes, wherein, as each of you has particular interest, so will your
demeanor prove you either a Be or a droan. Neither may we account him a droan
only that sits still and is idle, but him also (and worse) that is busy in
hindering commodity. I have here made you a proposition, which has long hung in
the Balance to be determined, on the one side every man of discretion casting
in a voice for the work; on the other side, diverse (without ground) belching
out imprudent contradictions. The Balance has yet of this side been little
stirred by reason the virtues of the other have been silent. But may verity
present her self, it is hopeful the averse will forsake their vanity. You may
behold in this glass your own Country (England that bred you) complaining of
wrong by her own childrens oversight. Nay you may truly see your selves and
your children refusing and wanting the bread of comfort, that (as a good
mother) she is willing and ready to give you. Let me entreat you therefore, to
bestow the looking on it, but let it be with an honest heart, and an
unprejudicating censure, and then will you acknowledge that the Book speaks
truth, and that both England and your selves do suffer.

And let me thus a little reason with you.

Why should it seem strange to you to question customs that are evil? whether
does your Garden yield you more fruit by digging and dressing it, or by letting
it alone to bear fruit of it self? Or why should you love a desert more then a
garden? or prefer the comfortless Wilderness of Arabia, to the pleasant
fruitful fields of Canaan? and what are Commons and Enclosures with us but the
very like? whether is it a better spectacle without your doors to see a
confused Common fruitless, naked, and desolate, or fields and vales of plenty,
storing your houses and country with food and wealth? Or whether is it better
for you to confess, I have no peculiar property in it, nor can I sell or
dispose of it at my need; or the grant of my Tenement being expired, I am
excluded; Or to say this is mine, I can let, sell, or dispose it at my
pleasure, and so assure me a certain means and estate (out of nothing) wherein
others have not to do? Does not every man covet to have his own alone? Would
any man admit of a partaker in his house, his horse, his ox, or his wife, if
he could shun it? And why is it otherwise in land? But suppose you will say,
you are all incorporate, and become one body, and so do use your Common as an
inseparable spouse, to be your helper: why are you then so cuckolded by
Foreigners and strangers, and your Common used before your face, even as
commonly as by your selves? or indeed, (while you make it a common prostitute
to every lust) how can you help it? were it not better therefore and more
secure to take her home to your chamber, and keep her with a guard where she
cannot be abused? which you may do by distinguishing each ones part properly to
himself. But you will say, If our Commons should be divided, there will not be
enough to content us. But hark ye, I suppose your Lordship has a hundred
Acres of Common; if this should be stretched into four hundred Acres, I trust
you will confess it were much better: observe then in the Treatise, and you
shall find it probable enough, that one hundred improved is much more
profitable then four hundred in Common; where is the cause of your complaint
then? or how is it that you are so overseen? can you have more content in one
then in four? Or perhaps you will say, We shall never agree about parting it,
one will think another has too much, and he too little; ones part will be too
good, another too bad, another too near, and his too far off, etc. But I will
accomodate to your capacity a tale that may lead you to the better resolution
of this doubt. A certain man dying left behind him diverse sons, to whom he
bequeathed his Garden, (being his whole estate) to hold in common amongst them
all, shortly after an Artist by his skill had found that there was hidden in
this garden a treasure of good value, and calling the brothers together,
acquainted them with it, and told them, it might suffice to raise their low
estates to good fortunes, persuading them to go in hand for the finding of it;
one of them being more witty (or wicked) then the rest, had presently this
crochet in his pate: quoth he, None of you all can dig or break the land
without my consent; and therefore unless I may have my own demand in the
share, you shall have no treasure there; the rest were not so stupid, but they
had also presently got hold of the same shadow, and every one would have the
greatest share, or else, forsooth, his land should not be broken; and thus they
stoutly faced it out, till at length they wisely concluded, that in regard they
could not agree about the partition, they would let all alone, and there should
it rot ere they would fall out about it; and accordingly fools they lived, and
died beggars; now I pray what would you have done in this case? I dare answer
for you, that you would rather have taken any part then to have lost the whole.
Even the same case is now before you. Let us see your wisdom, and how well you
will construe such divisions. And to get the treasure each one take his part as
near and as conveniently it may be allotted.

Let me yet go a little further.

How often are you put to hard and chargeable shifts for fodder for your cattle
in long winters? yea, and sometimes starve them outright? and how fully will
that want be repaired by this direction?

How fearful and desperate is your want of bread upon the least defect of a
full Harvest, wherein you must either be a prey to the sharking engrosser, and
merciless hoarder, or tackle up to the Maritine parts for foreign musty corn,
to save your lives? whereby you also exhaust your Country of much money to
your further misery, nay should our sins of commission, or of rejecting Gods
gifts pull down the failing but of one Crop, what should, or what could you do
to be relieved? Verily, methinks you should so far rue your childrens cries,
and tears of the poor for bread, as it should bid you cease your trivial
arguments, and hasten the prevention of such distresses. Thus may Pharaoh dream
we be an Israel in want, and you a Joseph to provide for the seven years
famine. Thus may our honor, our wealth, our Nation be secured, and worthily
advanced, and what should let?

Will you be yet further persuaded.

Do but ferry over then to the next shore, and The Low Countries.
behold the little Be, whose thighs were empty, and fortunes leave within your
childs memory; now by her admirable industry and cheerful labors, so
abounding in provisions, as makes her wonderful to the world, and her wealth
unspeakable; she has so fully argued the happiness of enclosure, which she
has of late years effected, that she now imparteth of her store to us, that
might more amply have it of our own, if we would but practice her skill, and
imitate her providence.

But a fault must be known ere it can be reformed, and if when you have here
read your error with the many mischiefs, losses, and detriments that you have
long suffered, and see the much good promised, whereof every enclosure is a
sure warrant; I know you will be wise, and may conclusions accord with my
propositions on your behalf, so great will be your comfort and happiness in
it, as you will seriously repent for past neglects; but let the charmer charm
never so loud, the deafadder will not hear. As my self in such case have heard
one say (being confuted upon argument of this subject) (whose shame I show you)
that might enclosure prove never so happy to his Prince, his Country, or his
own particular, he would not consent. But let him go, if he had no more grace
toward his Prince and Country, nor wit for himself, we shall be sure to
find him a weak opposer; and I doubt not but the foolish stubbornness of a
few such will give the more luster, and commendation to those many, whom
judgment and discretion will direct aright. I will not feed you longer with
promises, I know you long to see your profit, and will no longer be idle, and
as your coherence herein will highly please God, and multiply his mercies on
your labors; so will your comfort be unspeakable, and the pains
over-satisfied with joy, of your unfainedly wel-wishing Author,

ADAM MOORE.

All these following Books Printed by Nicholas Bourne at the South entrance of
the Royal Exchange.
1 SIr Frances Drakes four Voyages to the West Indies, in 4o

2 Posthuma Fosteri, the description of a Ruler, on which is inscribed diverse
scales, and the uses thereof, with Propositions in Astronomy, Navigation, and
Dialling, by Samuel ^oster, Professor of Astronomy in Gresham- College. 4o.

3 Anatomy of play, a small Tract against gaiming. 8o.

4 A full discovery of a soul Concealment, by William Baywell and John
Brockedon. Discoverers and Plaintiffs against the Committee of Hartford, the
Treasurers and Paymasters there in the year 1643. Fol.

5 Popular Errors, or the errors of the people in matter of Physic, first
written in Latin by James Primerose Doctor in Physic; to which is added a
Treatise against the Antinomiall cup, translated into English by Robert Witty,
Doctor in Thysick. 8o.

6 The Phrygian Fabulist, or the fables of Aesop, entracted from the Latin
copy, and moralized by Leonard Willan, Cent. 8o.

7 A book of Use-money after the rate of six per Cent. also the discount of
Leases, Annuities, and Reversions, by John Clavill Accomptant. 8o.

8 An Introduction to Merchants Accounts, containing five distinct Questions,
which may serve as an Appendix to the Merchants Accounts that is lately
reprinted, compiled by John Collings Accomptant, and Studies in the
Mathematics. 8o.

Bread for the Poor: AND Advancement of the English NATION, BY Enclosure of the
Waste and Common GROUNDS.
IT was a right and proper speech of a Roman Bishop touching this Kingdom,
Innocent 4.
when he termed it vere hortus deliciarum, vere puteus inexhaustus. A very
Garden of delights, and a very Well that cannot be exhausted. And that expressed
with such confidence, that to each Attribute he gave a several vare, thereby
concluding that his commendation was grounded on sure and evident reason.

To search the foundation of which Attributes, we shall find it to be the
Eden-like blessing received at the Almighties hand in his first Creation; who
vouchsafed it so flourishing a sight, and garden-like condition, that therein
it surpasses others, and stands a Mirror to the worlds Nations, looking over
her walls to behold it.

The pleasure and plenty by this speech intimated, issue from the virtue of the
former Attribute Horius. For the nature of a Garden is to be the Nurcery of
Plenty as well as of Delights; and as a Garden of all other improvements has
the pre-eminence in either; so in this denomination of England to be vere
Hortus, it might be further concluded, a vere puteus inexhaustus.

Now it having pleased God to put us into this Garden, what may we conceive he
requires of our part to be performed? To dream of the Golden Age, and feed on
the Poets, Sponte sua Tell us? To carouse the Nectar, and not plant the Vine?
No, as Adam in Eden, so are we by that all-Creator placed in this Garden, To
keep it and dress it, Genesis 2. 25.
for the comfort, increase, and preservation of his people committed unto it,
which indeed has formerly been so well performed, that our Garden has not
only feasted her own family abundantly at home, but (to her honor and profit)
relieved the wants of her neighbour-friends abroad, so strengthening and
storing her self with life and wealth, that (when she enjoyed peace in her own
house) as the Imperial Lady of Europe's bounds, she ruled the Nations with an
high hand; and not the proudest suitor enamoured of her beauty, nor the
cruellest foe envying her fortunes, could ever execute the least attempt on her
worth; witness the late happy atonement of York and Lancaster, whose hands
conjoined, made so strong the arm of this Empire, that it has always since
(as in like case before) broken in pieces the highest head of power and
practice that urged her to strike.

But time producing alternities, and the many peaceful years of our Dread
Caesar's Protection, begetting such multitudes of souls in the Tribes of our
Israel, as former ages never saw: It now behooves us to survey and search the
angles of our Garden, and so to dress the desert and fruitless borders of it,
that our increased charge be not unprovided for, nor by our neglect the family
famished, that so late was the wonder of plenty to others: In which designement
we shall find those unblessed lands, the Wastes and Common grounds of this
Kingdom, extending themselves into so large a portion of our Garden, that they
are both a blemish in the beauty of it, and the reason of want and weakness in
our multiplied charge; and could the present abuse of them be discovered to the
utmost, and the fruit of their improvement foreshewed, no member (I presume) of
this State (nisi mentis inops, or Reipublicae inimicus) but would grieve at the
one, and with the utmost posse of his abilities labor the other.

But forasmuch as the state of them is of most men merely unconsidered; of
some, somewhat understood, and yet but in an imperiect apprehension; of few or
none at large or according to their certain condition: I have presumed (in zeal
to my Country) to collect the reasons that may lead us to some perfect
understanding of them; hoping that when the well featured portraicture of their
reformed body shall be more apparent to the judicious view of our Imperial
Gardener, and his Monarchical Family; it may please God to quicken it with the
breath of life, and a perfect creation, to the relief, power, and honor of
the whole Nation.

But to omit relation of the several natures of these Lands throughout England
particularly, (which vain tediousness (if not impossibility) may excuse,) I
will chiefly incircle my reports of Wastes (ad suum esse) within the limits of
the County of Somerset (my native soil) and some neighboring parts, where mine
eye and ear having been most conversant in observations of this subject, I can
presume of a true and sincere account of the state of those Wastes. And yet
shall I not be so punctually immured within the confines of that Country, but
that I may use of this discourse, the Mathematicians promise of their yearly
Almanacks: That it is calculated for the Meridian of Somerset, but may serve
indifferently through all England. And though I cut my pattern by the Wastes of
those parts only, yet may it please the Reader (observant of other wheresoever)
to make use of these assertions: I am well assured he shall in some or most
patts find them concurring with his own opinion, or gain reason of
encouragement to the work in question, beyond that which former passages have
occasioned him.

There has been a long observed rule with us, That people are no where more
penurious then such as border on Common Lands: And this poverty we may find
thrown down upon us by three main hands.

I.

The first of Gods displeasure, which indeed is the reason of the rest, and
has in it all disprofits, for how can we expect his blessing on that which our
own wilful idleness makes hateful to him? or why should he bless those that
wittingly retain the curse of sin in their dwellings?

II.

The second of our own blindness, That while penury steals upon us we are so
oculis capti, as not to see by what means it comes: but thus indeed we are
deceived. The surmised benefit which Commoners depend on to proceed from these
deserts falling short of their hopes, they sink insensibly in the vain opinion
thereof; for they suppose these profits a great part and member of their
living, according to which computation, they hoise sail into an higher Gale of
expense then their Ship can endure, and while they dream of Midas his thrift,
they starve in the delusions of their deceiving accounts, and the Eve-like help
which they imagine their Commons are to their Enclosures, betrayeth all into
the hands of beggary, as hereafter will further appear.

III.

The third of Idleness, and this indeed is so consequent, that for this
respect only, we may well enough presume that Wastes are more mischievous then
beneficial to the Republique. For our poorer people bordering on these Lands,
account it to be a sufficient Trade of living to be only a Borderer: and so
many Stratagems (forsooth) have they to get thrift here, that to seek other
mysteries of gaining, were to incur the danger of sweat, and a laborious life.







oversight and charge of whole. Herds of Cattle of the rich man's that dwells
farther of, only when some are missing, he uncharitably suspects that by our
birdings, or our seeking them (wittingly) where they are not, or our
carelessness, of many such means, they are lost. And this often times is the
thanks, that such ^lu^h-fists give us in recompense of our pains, may, can they
get but any reasonable evidence (such is their conscience) they will not stick
to call our very lives in question, whereby often ends the travel of a
nightwalker.

the poor borderers, that before you go about it, you shall scarce find one
of five of them worth a Duck-egge.

Well, I grant you, yet should a man wish you richer, I doubt not but you will
thank him for it, though you refuse his offer, I will therefore proceed to tell
you my opinion.

The Wastes of this Country (by which we take our aim) are in their natural
essence of two sorts. viz, Uplandish, and Marish. Two sorts of Wastes.


And first of the first.

The principal benefits of the uplandish Wastes Of the first.
are reaped in the breeding and feeding (or you may say starving) of Horses,
Neat and Sheep, and in cutting up Furze, Fernes, Heath, Bushments, and such
like for fuel.

I.

1. Horse.
As for the keeping of the horses on these upland Wastes, it is thus: He that
breeds a Colt, assigns him on these Commons to labor for his living, yet
so far is he from sweating in this work, that though he travels the whole day
for a course Sallet, he can hardly keep warmth enough to prevent death: And
sometimes extremity of weather or other casualties robs the poor man of the
sum and service, which he hoped his Colt (at time of growth) would have
yielded to his purse and affairs. And then (having skored on his own back the
reckoning of a peradventure-expense) his little back is sunk, and His poor
estate shipwrackt. But the disadvantage that this ill husbandry is to the great
State of our Nation, is a danger so fearful, that it craveth the best
resolution for remedy; for whereas our breed of horse should be (for the
service and safety of our State) large, strong, and able, these Commoners
raising their Colts in this manner (by cold and famine) bring them to so
unworthy and unserviceable a proportion, as they utterly disappoint the State
of all expectation this way; and beside, do so cousen their private master of
his right, that whereas three well-bred horses might perform his service and
husbandry, he must keep five or six of these in continual diet for those
uses, which is a Bosome-wolfe so gnawing his low estate, that his means are
transacted from his own and his families maintenance to the feeding of a
feeble, hungry, unprofitable Teem.

II.

2. Neat.
The like observation is of their Neat, for the Borderers (in the scrambling at
Thrift, to catch the most among their neighbors, they may turn out their young
Cattle to be nurtured in these Wastes, where if they also meet not death many
ways there walking) they likewise grow to such brockish and starved stature,
that instead of yielding the Owner his desired profit, they grieve his heart to
behold them, and albeit (with the nature of lean creatures) they devour as
much food as the greater Cattle, yet when they are brought to the Shambles to
lay down their principal duties, they deceive the Commonwealth also, in
yielding scarce half the measure that well bred Cattle do: The Kine then
(which should be the best Nurses of their Owners family) taking part (if not a
great, or the greatest part) Kine.
of their repast on these Lands, instead of feeding their Masters charge,
starve both it and themselves; insomuch that should Pharaoh arise to behold
these Herds, he would protest them to be the only breed and issue of his lean
Kine, that left not a fair one un-devoured.

III.

3. Sheep.
Their Sheep only find a little better entertainment then the greater Cattle,
by reason they naturally stand best in a thin sweet diet, yet through
extremities are also usually pincht, and restrained from yielding the profit
they would were their allowance better; and so much are their Flocks hindered
by abuse of these Lands, that where Wastes are, we have not the third part of
them we might, were the evils removed that so much shorten their feeding; and
therefore in behalf of this our Golden Cattle, that so courteously give us
food and raiment, and with their own wealth, purchase unto us from others their
more dainty commodities to content us: it were rather to be wished, that our
best and utmost care should be used in multiplying their flocks, then they
should want the least part of that relief which their true worth deserves; in
respect whereof I aim not this discourse at the rich Plains, only fit and
already proper for this use, otherwise then the discreet occupier may find way
to his further profit, (in this kind.)

IV.

4. Fuel.
Touching the Fuel aforesaid, which we sometimes or somewhere get from these
Lands, it is no great commodity in the worth of it; but so dearly purchased,
that we may grieve to see so many goodly fields (assigned by God to feed us)
burnt up and blasted into the ashes of abuse; for it is true that the greatest
part of many of these Wastes is overgrown with some, or most, or all of the
forementioned curses, as Furze, Heath, etc. (lying, as we may say, under the
Curse) insomuch Curses.
as the least part only serves to feed the Cattle committed unto them; for
where such a Waste is of the quantity of a thousand Acres, commonly eight
hundred (though one be too much) are overspread with such matter, from which
the fuel that is gotten may be worth (communibus annis) six pence an Acre, but
seldom more, and most where nothing at all; and what benefit these are in
respect of what may be according to the ensuing probabilities, let the Reader
judge.

V.

5 Stealing, etc.
Touching Stealing, Straying, Surcharging, and other abuses here frequent,
because they are more common in the Marish Wastes, I shall desire you to apply
them here, as in the Discourse of those other lands they shall be offered.

VI.

6. Boggs.
Some of these Wastes are also in some part Moorish and Boggy; so as by all
these inconveniences, even whole Countries (in many parts of this Nation) are
swallowed up in desolation, which though former ages have not been pressed to
look into by reason the ancient enclosures sufficed for their meaner charge,
yet the great increase of people in our days, (as we have said) cannot but
compel us (in duty to God and our selves) to make the best use of our
abilities for our relief and preservation. In consideration whereof (seeing
these lands may be the best and only means to yield us supply) we must
enquire what better course may be taken with them for this purpose.

Which to be done by common husbandry we may not expect; partly, for that the
nature of the vulgar (not so prompt to public, as their private benefit) will
never cohere in such an order; partly, for that the land cannot by any such
means be wrought to that perfection which private endeavors will effect.

The principal and only means then to ripen Enclosure, the means of
Reformation.
the fruit of new hopes is Enclosure, and distribution of the Lands to private
owners, which being appropriated to their particular uses, will then be
cleansed and purged of the former deformities, and so fully improved by their
careful industry, that it will undoubtedly yield them such advancement
thereby, and consequently relief to the Republike, as hereafter ensues.

I.

1. Increase of feeding.
First, (according to the general virtue of Enclosures) it will be an exceeding
increase of grass and feeding for Cattle, and that so good, as our breeds both
of Horse, Neat, and Sheep, will be large, fair, serviceable, and more abundant.

II.

2. Increase of Corn.
Secondly, An increase of Corn so great, as our Barns and Garners will rejoice
and be glad at the yearly store of provision, they shall receive beyond the
measure of former times, to the incomparable advancement of the wealth and
power of this Nation, as may be evidenced (for satisfaction of those that shall
desire a more particular account of these hopes) by the ensuing probabilities.

III.

Increase of Fuel.
Thirdly, The Hedge row of enclosures will beget (instead of the now supposed
benefit of Fuel) such a certain increase of good and substantial firing, as
both in quantity and quality our uses will be far better served then now, and
besides (by the Owners diligence, or a public Command) such an increase of
Timber (for building and other occasions) will out of the same in the future be
raised, as the great decay and spoil thereof made in the latter times, may
hereafter be well re-supplied and recovered.

Now (to proceed in the promised probabilities) if we compare the barrenness
of Common, with the benefit of Enclosure. or the worth of this, with the
unworthiness of the other, or will be judged by the many experiments which
late years have made, we may well conclude, that the A fourth part improved as
good as the whole.
fourth part of these Wastes enclosed, traveled, and husbanded (if not much
less) will fully countervail all benefit now received of them.

Let us admit then, that in England and Wales are Two Millions of Acres of such
Lands, whereof the fourth part answecing the present profit, there remains
fifteen hundred thousand Acres gained, which to be employed to Tillage, will
yield yearly fifteen hundred thousand quarters of corn, worth fifteen hundred
thousand pounds, all clearly improved to the Commonwealth. Profit.


As by the earths increase then, man is relieved, let us also conjecture what
number of people may be maintained and preserved by improvement of these Lands.

The judgment of our Parliament has conceived that four Acres of Land is
competent for the relief of a Cottagers charge, as may appear by the Act that
tolerateth the poor man to erect him a Cottage, in case he procure four Acres
of Land to be laid unto it for that purpose. Now the least charge he can have,
is himself and his wife (for seldom any man lives alone) so as albeit most
Cottagers have a charge of children, that pay double or treble this proportion:
Two persons to be maintained by four Acres is the least 750000 persons to be
maintained.
we can assign, by which computation only the fifteen hundred thousand Acres
gained as aforesaid, will maintain seven hundred and fifty thousand persons
more then now they do.

For the better credit of these conjectures, we may consider that though some
Countries have not their suitable proportion to make up this computation of
Acres, yet will others so far exceed, that the account in the general cannot
fail: nay, we shall assuredly find it will far exceed; for many Counties of
this Kingdom, witness their many vast and spacious Deserts, are able to show
you particularly two hundred thousand Acres of these Wastes, if not much more.

As for the conjectures of the fruit of Tillage and value of Granes, though
some Acres or some sorts may fall short, others surmounting will make the
supposition hold. And for the pre-supposed multitude of people that be thus
maintained, the account also has sufficient credit in grounding on the
judgment of the great and highest Court of this Commonwealth.

Some will here say, Is it possible or convenient that all these Lands should
be tilled: But I answer, that whether in Tillage or pasture (being improved,
and man's love afforded them in their continual manurance) they will be alike
in each beneficial for private and common wealth.

Another Question may be, by what means these Lands may be improved, as seeming
naturally barren, and not apt to fructify? to which I reply also, that who
well considers them in their particular natures, shall in the most part find
that God in his provident Creation, has appointed helps to man's industry for
their improvement; for out of their own bowels (or not far distant) most
commonly is to be had Marle, Chalk, Sand, Lime, Soil, Watercourse and such
like to be ministered: or should these happen to fail somewhere, yet by
removing the lets only shall we find a sufficient alteration to content us.
The experiments whereof have been such in all places as have produced very
happy effects, and the land from little or no worth, recovered to a perfect
goodness, and made comparable to the best worth of ancient enclosures, as
example would make a large discourse, if it were needful. But to assure you of
satisfaction in this point, I will refer you to be judged by your own eye as
you travel.


You shall often see the Wastes confining with enclosures in one and the same
Level, and the soil of one and the other (in the quality and seat of nature)
not distinguishable, but by reason of private husbandry, such is the disparity,
that the one shows the heaps of plenty, in a comely aspect, the other gulfes
of want and penury in a deformed visage: yea, you shall always observe
Enclosures, though on most barren and fruitless situations (by the good
husbands diligence) so blessed, as they exceed (in fructifying) the best
natures of the un-respected Wastes.

Let your patience permit me to make one step (not out of the way) into the
County of Devon, where by a little discourse, I may fill up all vacancy of your
affection touching this particular.

The soil of that Country is (in a great part) Industry of Devon.
naturally barren, and in it self of a fruitless and dead condition, whereby
the people being urged to labors, omit neither charge nor toil to redress
this imperfection. But their painful hand helping the earths weakness by
applying of the forementioned helps (albeit with unspeakable charge) it comes
to pass that out of a barren and dry land, they suck even the milk of Canaan,
with the fruition of such wealth, content and plenty, as I presume no people
have more. Neither may they be confined in this honor, but I dare further
avouch on their behalf that of such strength, spirit, and hardiness, are
these people (God, no doubt, thus blessing them in their constant labors) that
in any Martial action for their Countries service, they can endure and perform
as much or more then any people whatsoever, and so happy are they in those
labors, that thereby their poorest people (which else could not be relieved)
live well, and breed up their children in an honest, thriving, and commendable
sort; from whence I infer, that as the Upland-Wastes have in nature a near
sympathy with these Enclosures, and in quality of creation not differing; so
may they be traveled with like respect, they will produce as good effects. And
as this Country is interlaced with exceeding great quantities of this sort of
Wastes (I suppose to the number of diverse hundred thousand Acres) so might
there be a course of distribution for their better manurance, doubtless, this
people would so express their own worthiness, as they would breed an infinite
relief to poor people distressed, and lead the way so directly to these
improvements, as the wilfullest strayer would soon desire to walk after them.

Having drawn from hence a reason for this Enclosure, God assisting, a
resolution may ensue, for the needful accomplishment, the hope whereof guiding
my feet, now leads me down these large deserts into the lower valleys of the
Marish Wastes: through which (by heavens aid) I may so also travel, as my
steps may show the way to recover their goary sickness, to that health and
perfection which the giver of all goodness for his part has naturally
bestowed on them.

Marish Grounds.
The Marish Commons (which are indeed but the indigested moles of richest
meadows) are so infested with inconveniences (as hitherto they have been
abused) that instead of expected benefit, we fare by them, as did the
Philistines by the Arc, who looking into it were smitten with plagues and
confusion; and we using these in hope of profit (because we use them not
aright) are galled with so many mischiefs by them, that I have heard wise men
wish them swallowed of the Sea, rather then used to such detriment.

I.

First, They are generally subject to inundation, Inundation twofold.
which by a twofold inconvenience proves so hurtful, that they are utterly
deprived of their natural strength.



that (as nature in defect) it is delivered of nothing Bastards and Miscreants.
but Monsters and Abortives, as Sedge, Lavors, Rushes, Ruffets, Flags,
Hassakes, and Grass so weak and sower, as is neither wholesome nor competent
sustinance to the Cattle feeding on it.

II.

A second hinderance proceeds of the former, Trampling.
and that is the treading of Cattle on them at unseasonable times; for albeit
the land (by reason of inundation) be oftentimes of so squeazy and insolid
substance, that the least or lightest beast cannot step on it without a great
impression; yet such is the folly of the Commoners, that for the surmised
benefit of a little (ill gotten) food for their Cattle, they press them to
keep garrison in these Wastes, at such rotten times of rain and waters, that
each footstep stabbeth into the heart of the land; insomuch, that by this evil
custom, these Lands have rather the likeness of a noisome highway (such as
most that Country has) than of a fair and smooth-faced visage, as their
natural beauties require; whereby (as it were in despite) we trample the
gifts of God under the feet of beasts, nay, more truly may we say, under the
feet of men of a beastly condition: for were there in men (authors of this
violence) but the least acknowledgement or respect of Gods loving providence,
they would fear and abhor thus (by the feet of their beasts) to abuse his
goodness; and the rather, for that the best and most fertile lands take most
hurt by this injury.

III.

Such Labyrinths of straying are these Lands, Straying.
that in some of larger sort of them, Cattle (thither sent for relief) are as
hawks cast off to prey for themselves; which once out of the owners sight, are
in hazard whether ever to be seen or no; and sometimes such is the owners
fortune, that he has been as glad at the finding of half his strayed Cattle,
as the woman of her lost groat: and should the losses in this kind only be
accounted (both in worth of Cattle lost, and charge of seeking them) and
compared with the received benefits, I know the profit gotten by feeding would
(in this only inconvenience) to many men, come short of the value of their
hinderance.

IV.

Such Nurseries of Thieves and Horse-stealers, Stealing.
that a good beast cannot but be in continual danger of a new Master. For a
man here missing his horse or other Cattle, rather thinks they are strayed
then stolen, and while he spends his time in seeking and searching the plains
and angles of these moors, the wards and pounds of the Country about (with
many a sighing Oyez for his absent Beast) Sir Thief has made his market with
the supposed strayer, spent the money, and is casting a new bout for another
booty: and such are the continual plagues of stealing and straying out of
these Lands; that whosoever listeneth to the complaints of people frequent in this
kind, would wonder that any of discretion would adventure their goods on such
hazards, and many indeed have been so bitten and beaten by them (and the other
harms) and some (best husbands) so well foresee them, that they have utterly
refused all use of such entercommoning, and to feed their Cattle, have rather
chosen continually to farm Enclosures at dear rates. I will by the way tell
you of an accident credibly related.

A late great person in the County of Dorset Example. Viscount Bindon.
(no doubt upon information of the profitable feeding in these Wastes) was
pleased to commend to Kings-Sedgemoore (a very large Waste of this nature in
the County of Somerset) fourscore horse in one Summer: And the time being come
when he desired their return, and to see his Stables furnished with their
well-fed quarters, his Bayliffes (sent for their attachment) returned a non est
inventus upon every his four score Geldings: The price of this horse-meat not
well brookt, a renewed process with loud Proclamations was sent abroad for
apprehending these Banckerupts, by which means, and the expense of 30 or 40 li.
in searching far and near Territories; about 40 of them were at last brought
home; but the other 40 being (by all likelihood) preferred to new services, for
ever after renounced their old: To get direct intelligence of them, you must
enquire of a kind of Merchants, which trade in the privic conveyance of such
wares: One of which heretofore
condemned at an Assizes at Sarum, for such a malefact, confessed before his
execution, that himself had (for his part) stolen fourscore horses out of this
only Common. Yet welfare a grave Burgomaster of a Corporation, who affecting
this kind of Trade, and (after many years practice) brought to execution for
it, would not be so immodest to confess (or happily the old man's memory failed
him) how many of this sort had past through his purse. The hurt then that may
be done to many people by a multitude of this vermin haunting these places
(which indeed are begotten to this vilainie by facility and security of the
execution) cannot be esteemed of small value: and as great Commons suffer no
mean proportion of loss in this sort; so may we not doubt, but the lesser sort
bear their part in this discord, and other like disprosits consonant to their
quantities.

V.

Such Pest-houses of Diseases for Cattle, that Infection.
should the owner be in like danger of the Plague, as his beast of some deadly
infection, while he is here in ordinary, he would rather send them (with the
Gadarens Swine) to feed (or perish) in the Ocean, then ever to set foot on
these places. for as hither come the Poor, the Blind, Lame, Tired, Scabbed,
Mangie, Rotten, Murrainous, and all kinds uf diseased scurvie Cattle, to whom
the owners will not afford a bit of their worst Enclosures for entertainment:
so (for Morbida sola pecus inficit omnepecus) one of these may infect a
multitude, as the miserable losses of many poor people impoverished by such
casualty, may (too truly) approve. Moreove, the extremities of heat and
drought, want of water, and overmuch wet and foggie weather in summer-times,
are Seasons so contageous and breeding infections amongst the multitudes of
these cattle, that (though some men by chance escape better) many find it too
true, and have often affirmed it, that one year of seven (by death and
infection) quitteth the profit that the other six have yielded. And for the
multitudes of Sheep (especially) yearly murdered in these places, or taken in
their last gasp, our Winter-Markets (full furnished with twelve-penny rotten
Carcases) can give you in evidence.

VI.

So surcharged with the unlawful assemblies of ill husbands Cattle, that the
hope of benefit (begotten by a little Fair at some seasons) betrayeth no small
numbers to mere famine: and most true it is, that though scarcity of food
brings not immediate death, yet such an inbred hunger occupies their pined
maws, that (with the Uplandish Wastes) they foster only Brockes and Cattle of
little worth: and some by experience have found, that their horses (in want of
food) have with the very root of the grass so swallowed the earth, that in
short space the owners have been (as of bad debtors) satisfied with their
skins, and their Carcases ripped for the reason of their sudden deaths, the same
earth (clotted in their maws) was found to be the only cause thereof.

VII.

In the rank of these miseries may be mustered Geese and Swine.
the noisome troops of Geese and Swine pestering these Lands, which albeit our
Laws have banished hence for nasty and filthy creatures, and some sequestered
puddles might more properly entertain; yet such is the Commoners discretion,
that they appoint them continually to defile and dabble these fruitful plains
in such sort as would pity a Commonwealths-friend to behold, and so noisome
are they both to Land and Cattle, that I have seen good husbands displeased
and vexed at nothing more then at the view of this slovenly stuff (albeit
their own) in their feeding grounds.

To amend these evils have we no other means, Remedy.
but the same which is formerly prescribed for the other Wastes, whereby not
only the forementioned damages may be saved, but the ensuing commodities, and
the blessing attendant purchased.

In which course we shall find, that the very Dreyning.
ditches of Enclosure (without other charge or labor) will so Drain and
evacuate the malignant waters spoiling the land, that it will soon become dry,
warm, solid, and of a perfect condition; and not only disburthened of the
oppressing waters begetting the foresaid monstrous issues; but so consolated
with the Suns welcome influence, that we may say, The Valleys will laugh and
sing at the new purchase of the Almighties favors, and man will be glad and
joyful at the abundant fruit proceeding from them.

I.

I cannot here omit (for instance) the noble example Example.
of Allermoor in that County, in quantity I suppose about 2000 Acres; of which
credible report tells us, that within 100 years past it lay in Common as a
mere Stagnum, bog or puddle, worth to the Owners as much as nothing, but it
being enclosed, and appropriated to several and private uses, it shortly
became the richest, most goodly, and famous feeding of that Country; Let the
Court and Smithfield report the service of this place.
and now in one year yields more good to the Owners and Commonwealth, then
to have lain in his old Lethargy, it could have done to the worlds end. And in
like manner so certainly good have all such experiments (in all sorts of
Wastes) proved, that never any failed of their expected ends: and whether the
Tenants and occupiers of any new Enclosure will consent to reduce it again into
Common and the condition of Wastes, themselves will soon resolve you; whence we
may conclude, that like trial once made of the Wastes in question, they will
soon show us as fair and decent countenance, breed our Cattle generally to a
large and goodly proportion, in much greater abundance, and feed and fat them
in such plenteous measure, as our fare will be the better, great numbers of
people more relieved, and our purses return from the market with the less
damage.

II.

A second good to ensue by this enclosure; will be also in the great increase
of Fuel (now a miserable Fuel.
want in many Marish Countries) for by setting Willows in the banks of these
Enclosures, (a plant naturally agreeing with that soil) the noisome burning of
the Dung of Cattle, now scratcht from these Wastes for this purpose (which
would more properly be left to improve and strengthen the Land) will be better
supplied by the use of a sufficient sweet and kindly Fuel thus provided. And
whereas both grass and Cattle are now punished with the extremity of cold and
pinching winds, having no defense against them, such a warmth would these
Willows effect, that all would freely spring and prove together to the general
profit.

III.

Hence will also be occasioned a great increase Tillage.
of Tillage: For men finding in these improvements an abundant provision of the
best feeding for their Cattle, will dispose more of their Upland-grounds to
tillage, which they must now of necessity depast: And whereas many arables
(through want of soil and maintenance) do now fail in their natural strength,
and bring forth a small increase, the abundance of Hay yearly drawn out of
these enclosures, will so enlarge the poor man's Muck-hill (his Philosophers
stone) that Soil and Compast.
all his labors (in casting out this, and loading in his harvest) would be
turned to gold; and the fruits of Tillage hereby increased in no small measure.
And indeed so mutually will both these kind of lands accord in helping each
other in matters of this nature, as they will even emulate and strive to outdo
each other in storing the Commonwealth with their abundant fruits.

We may also conjecture, what number of people may be sustained by a general
improvement of these lands through the Nation; wherein I think we shall not
much err to suppose all Marish wastes to be of this nature. It is most
certain, that in this present state of confusion (though some perhaps may gain
somewhat) the great losses thereby sustained in the general, depriveth the
Republike of all received benefits; by which we may account, that these lands
improved may be wholly gained. Now the virtue of such lands enclosed with us is
such, that four Acres will sufficiently feed and keep two Kine in Winter and
Summer, whose profit in all respects will be at least 10 li. per annum; and for
three poor people a competent maintenance. Let us admit then, that England and
Wales has a Million of these Acres, (but we shall find much more) it
follows that their yearly benefit to the Republike, will be two millions and
a half in value, and seven hundred and fifty thousand persons may be fed by
the 750000 persons relieved.
same; and this number added to the former computation of the like number to be
relieved by the
Upland-Wastes, we find that the general improvement of the Wastes of this
Nation will suffice to maintain fifteen hundred thousand people more then now
they do, and increase the worth of this 1500000.
Nation yearly four Millions; And is not here 4 Millions yearly gained.
Bread for the Poor, and advancement of the English Nation?

Will you now ask me why Commons should be enclosed? Or shall I ask you why
they are not?

But you will say, We have not people enough to make use of this great
increase; surely if God continue his blessing of generation upon us, we may
have in short time, and in the mean time, can we not spare our overplus to
others abroad that want it, get their money and commodities for it, and save
our own, that we now export to buy theirs*

And touching employment for the poor (wherewith this Land so infinitely
abounds) Employment for the poor.
such means thereof would be for them in the manurance of each sort of these
Wastes enclosed, (as by Diking, Hedging, Fencing, Setting, Sowing, Reaping,
Gleaning, Mowing, Making hay, and what not? which is all Bread for the Poor)
that from the noisome and deboist courses of Begging, Filching, Robbing,
Roguing, Murdering, and whatsoever other Villainies their unexercised brains
and hands undertake, they would (even gladly) be reclaimed and refined to
loyal and laudable courses, as well for their own contenting relief, as the
unspeakable comfort and honor of the whole State, who now (as a wretched and
needy mother) is enforced to make continual Massacres of them, for those
misdoings which even their want of bread urges them to commit. And should we
search the bottom of our fault or fortune in this oversight, we may fear that
a greater contempt would be laid to our charge, then our best Oratory would be
able to excuse. For albeit, God has commanded man to increase and multiply,
and to fill the earth, ordaining Matrimony free and lawful to all: we
(supposing he has not given enough to feed us) though not by our command
verbally (yet by our act really) stop that issue of his blessing by preventing
the poor of needful habitations (whereby indeed their increase is much
hindered) and by this neglect of so great a portion of the earth which he has
given us to be also filled, what do we otherwise then repugne his Commandment,
while we suffer it to be unhabitable and desolate? And whereas God has of late
times brought us into other lands, whereby his Gospel and glory may be the
further spread, and our own arm the more strengthened; how much more able
might we be to accomplish those happy Plantations by the increase of people,
wealth and provisions, which the improvement of the Lands would yield us?

The credit of this design having stirred continual disputations for it,
howsoever unadvised opposers cannot but fail in the main, they have yet founded
themselves on some imaginary reasons to dissuade the work, amongst which, two
only (as I have observed) most valid, (believing 2 Objections.
that some particular satisfaction may be required) I thought fit not to pass
by unexamined. sanz nombre, and over all, shall hereby be curbed and limited to
a certain measure.

Sanz nombre being mistaken by the vulgar, they would maintain that where they
have such interest, they may charge their Cattle on the Common to a number
infinite, whereas indeed (though their right be of a number uncertain) yet does
the Law allow them Common for no more Cartell then are requisite for the
manurance of their Tenaments which have interest. And from this error is it,
that many wealthy people (dreaming of great riches to be found in Wastes) get
them a property in some poor Cottage interessed therein, under color of the
right whereof (and often by mere intrusion) they bring into the Common some
20, some 40, some (happily) 100 head of Cattle (of all sorts) whereas the
Tenement in whose right they do it, is unable lawfully to allow three, which
course being also (quoad posse) generally holden of the Borderers themselves,
commonly three or four rich persons in the Parish (possessing much Cattle)
surcharge the Commons, and usurp more to their shares then the whole Township
besides; which kinds of people also in any proposition for reforming the
abuses complained on, we shall find the only authors of the second Cavil, and
the Bellows that kindle the fire of contradiction in the hearts of the vulgar,
causing them with themselves to cry out, The poor will be undone, etc. And all
is proclaimed for the poor, when as by this stalking under the name of the
Poor, such as are poor indeed, and have scarce a beast to feed with them, are
by these Foxes devoured, and a poor modicum is it that the poor can get amongst
the surcharging multitudes of such persons Cattle. As for other Objections
(whereof some have already appeared unto you amongst the fruits of Idleness in
our first entrance) rather let them be cast out of the balance, then admitted
in comparison with the sound conclusions of a public welfare.

But be it that some or other reason may hold against this work, or that some
men may (happily) (either in right or profit) suffer some prejudice (for in a
matter so confuse and momentary, it can hardly be but the lot may to some fall
short) yet so many arguments (ab utili) pressing the Commonwealths advantage
in an unsuitable comparison, will decide the Question. And that ancient Maxim
of Law (Better is a mischiesefe than an inconvenience) can warrant the
preferment of a general good, before the respect of some few men's prejudice.

To prevent the great Question that will now arise (Quantum mihi?) I must
acknowledge that so various are the quantities of bordering Tenures; so
manifold the rights, bounds, privileges, conditions, etc. of the Wastes: So
different the state and quality of persons interessed, as my Jacobs Staff
(without Survey) has neither Art to admeasure, nor can have the hap to please
in such perplexities, and must therefore request the demandants so to rest
assured on the judicious and upright dimensions of such honorable and worthy
persons as may be charged therewith, A grand Committee for just proceeding. 4
sorts of people to be satisfied.
(whereof each County would have a grand Committee) that they quit their
thoughts of vain jealonsies, and expect the most just limitation for their
contents: Only in a general respect I conceive four sorts of people to be
considered.

I.

1 Lords.
The first are Lords of the Wastes and bordering Tenures, to whom (if new
reserved rents suffice not for content) a part of such Wastes may be added in
demean to poyse their rights. And as I wish them no less then a due measure,
so I hope their estates being already great and happy, they will be so
honorable in their desires as to crave no more.

II.

2 Able Tenants.
The second are able Tenants, who having sufficient to live without it, should
be only limited in a just moderation, which nevertheless will be so good an
addition to their estates, as in a while they will find their thrift better
increasing.

III.

3 Poor cottagers, etc.
The third, Poor Cottagers and others of the poorer sort of Tenants. And these
(having little or no other Inccour or substance to maintain them) should in
charity be so far tendered as (according to their several charges) a competent
quantity be assigned to redeem them from their ever-preendured penury: and
whereas Cottagers estates are now nothing but misery (in value not 3d.) their
portion by this course may be severally worth forty or fifty pound or more to
be sold, (a good man's estate.) And think you will this undo the poor?

IV.

4 Impotent poor.
The last Impotant poor, for the necessary relief of which sort a portion would
be allotted in each Lordship (where Commons will extend unto it) under yearly
disposure of the Churchwardens and overseers for their relief. And as this
apportienment will not only yield a more comfortable sustentation to them, then
the former coldness of their overseers charity (God wot) could afford by way
of rates: so will the whole Parish or Lordship find a perpetual ease and
quiet in ceasing their factious Assesments of each other to this purpose: and
the quantity that hence will be Means of amity.
required to this use will be most where so mean and little as the omitting of
the one to that end will have no equality in comparison with the manifold
comforts of the other. And where Wastes fall out so large, as each of these
sorts being competently satisfied a remainder may be left (as many where very
large ones will be,) what more happy and convenient use may be made of them,
then (by direction of worthy Committees) to distribute Harbor for the poor.
them in like private usage, for the maintenance and habitation of poor people
elsewhere harbourlesse, destitute, and distressed: But where they fall out so
little as not fit to be divided? let them be yet improved, and commended to a
common trust for defraying those impositions that shall be laid upon the
public of the Lordship.

Now that this prove not a snare to the poor Commoners, to draw their new
Tenures in time wholly into their Lords hands, leave them inworss case then we
find them, and bring a burden upon the Commonwealth that can never be born;
but rather that we may make them zealous to the work, and restless to improve
their new land to the best profit for the common and their own good: It may (I
hope with good conveniencie) be agreed unto, that under a yearly rent, and
fitting service to their Lords, they may hold their All distributions in
Free-Soccage.
several portions in Free-soccage to them and their heirs for ever. But should
the poor peoples estates be at any time determined (which they can never be
able to renew) we pluck the stool from under their feet, and throw them with
that weight on the shoulders of the Republique, as may endanger the utter spoil
of each other.

Wastes or Tenements to see their Lands and inheritances disposed perpetually
from their own possession into the tenure and occupation of other persons. buy
their own, for so they now account it, and this is their only main argument in
opposition. Wherefore there is no fear but the Lords in this allowance and
reservation may be so fully satisfied, as their augmented benefits will better
please them, then can their Countries hinderance, the neglect of their own
profit, and their Tenants perpetual penury; for as the case now stands,
little is the profit which any way arises out of these Wastes to their purses,
but their Tenants by right of Common, do and will perpetually hold both use and
Commodity of them.



I.



II.

it, and inhabit elsewhere; yet he must needs leave his land behind him, and
so little good will his new inheritance do him to be a non-resident to it. that
(for certain) he will be enforced to let or sell the same, to the same or some
other Tenant of that Lordship. And indeed abuse herein may be well enough
prevented by prescribing rules in that behalf: But I rather think (and so it
will prove) that such will be the love of Tenants to their old Tenures, for
their new improvements sake, that the mutual amity and contract of both
in filling their treasury, will press them to deponere ultimum, for
continuance of their happy conjunction.

We have now (as a Geographer from some few hills does a Province) from these
few heads discovered a new plantation in our own Continent, and that to so good
purpose, as for wealth and people, even another Kingdom would seem to be
gained unto us; what should hinder could never yet in reason be understood,
unless our many crying sins, which makes us incapable of so great a blessing?
But the Creators mercy is over all his works, and only he it is, by whose fiat
the effects must follow. To him if our hearts be lifted, and wills submitted, we
shall not want that happy unanimity that will beget so fair a body, nor the
fruit thereof perpetually showring into our bosoms,

1. We shall glory to behold our Nation infinitely State enriched.
supplied in Treasure, and strengthened by augmentation of Revenue,
Freeholders, and able Subjects.

2. Our improvident Drones (whom terror Poor and idle employed.
never yet could enure to travel) yea and all other sweet dews of grace in the
God-pleasing labors of their new Vineyards, and their estates (thus drawn to
perpetuity) toil in restless pains to try out the utmost dram of commodity
from the Mines of their possessions.

3. Increasing provisions in such abundance, Provisions increased.
as will satiate our selves, save the masses of wealth that others better
husbandry (to our shame and misery) yearly draws from us to supply our wilful
wants, and get their honey for our wax, that must now e converso take their wax
for out honey.

4. That our poorer people shall not want their People multiplied, and the
whole Nation in power advanced.
bread, nor our State advise to stop the fountain of their flowing issne; but
as a sound and complete body (whose head and members are (in their proper
places) fair and mighty) clad, fed, and suitably polished, may bear our port in
power and Majesty, above the highest Towering fronts of adverse confederates;
when the Tiger may hunger, and the Wolf houle, to lick of our crumbs, but will
lurk and tremble if the Lion roar; yea, the many sons of our multiplying
family (fed and fostered with the bread of strength, and the oil of gladness)
will be an Host so terrible to the thoughts of insulters, that they may admire
and envy our happiness, but will ever fear to provoke us: and as an happy
mother overjoyed in the glory of her issue, we may sing the Lullaby of a
constant requiem to our own Temples and our babes eyelids. When guarded with
security of Powers protection blessed from above) we may sweetly and safely
repose in the pleasing shadows, of our spreading Vines; and better to delight
us, walk in the wel-formed Rows of our Gardendainties, where we may sit on
beds of Roses, dressing our Frontlets with borders of Lillies, sucking the
Nestar of our sweet grapes, and feasting our appetites on milk and honey;
where from the lofty mounts garnish't with the full crop of Ceres presents, we
may behold the lower valleys richly clad in robes of beauty; graced with veins
of pleasant Rivers; all contracting Leagues of amity to enthrone our State in
highest Majesty, all concluding peace in plenty, And (to make all complete) all
bound for all, to sing Hymns of thanks to the highest Proteoctor and Author of
all.

FINIS.

