CRY OF BLOO^ AND OF A BROKEN COVENAN^ (...) out at first upon the sad Relation
o^ late SOVEREIGNS most treacherous an^ inhumane Murder.

Most humbly dedicated, and (then) purposd to have been Published and Presented
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, if so Providence had dispensed.

And now, how late soever, (...) all obstructions being removed adventured upon
his MAJESTY'S gracious acceptance and favor of all herein concernd: To remain
(at least) as a standing Testimony to posterity, of the Authors conceived
sense of duty, in Conscience to GOD, and alleagiance to lawful Sovereignty.

By Sir WILLIAM MOOKE of Rowallane Knight.

EDINBURGH, (...) by the He^^^s of GEORGE A^^^RSON, 1650.

TO THE ROYAL MAJESTY OF K. CHARLES THE II. KING of great Britain, France
and Ireland, etc.
FRee Access (Sir) the Muses plead. Repute
This boldness, as conceived to contribute
By Strong desires, that while all eyes observe
Your Motions, famisht hopes no more may starve.
God and your Kingdoms Call. The set tim's come
For Christ, in your Dominions to make rowme.
Beside our Violated Mariage-Band,
Blood cries for vengeance, against the Traytrous hand
Of impious Parricids. To plead the last,
And act for proper intr^sts, Christ's o'repast,
Or judg't but next in Order, (as a way
Prepostrous) your designs endanger may.
Go to, Brave Prince; by heavens thy Heart be gained,
Sealed for the Work, that (surety thus obtained)
Thy hand attesting, Thine, in Truths defense
Thy Standart may attend, with confidence.
This Solstice breeds amazement: How all eyes
Wait till thou mount thy Coach and climb the Skies,
That Influence and Virtue, issueing thence
Inferior Bodies, brought again to sense,
Long in the general death detained, may see
Day once more dawne, renewed by light from Thee.
Weigh with delays the consequences feared,
Remembering, that attempts which scarce have dared
Peep forth at first for their deformity,
Have gained, upon acquaintance of the eye.
And when to ripeness and full strength attained,
Smiles have alike and frowns been entertaind.
THE CRY of BLOOD, AND OF A BROKEN COVENANT.
WHat horrid Actings force unwilling ears
With worst of news? do fancies and fond fears
Mock troubled minds? or does a real blow
For preface pass to Albion's overthrow?
Have Parricids, professing Brotherhood, The traitorous murder of late King,
most justly to laid to heart, and duly sented.

Put hand in CAESAR? shed his Royal Blood,
Low in the dust this Islands Glory laid?
And, at one stroke, her Children Orphans made?
O Heavens! O Earth! here I must pause a space.
Griefs tide flows higher, then, in this sad case,
Can calmed be by expression: But, to speak,
Allegiance pleads. Men soberest, mind^ most meek,
Most free of passion, cannot but resent
This high Injustice; yea, in freedom vent
Their Thoughts, and what a dialect to use,
This bloody prelude speaks* Then freeborn Muse Treaties and parleyes o^
suspected, the parties being an unequal posture.

Tell Britain, tell the World, that hence, in vain
Words shall be heard of any milder strain
Then Martial eloquence. In trumpets sound
Be SCOTLANDS Music henceforth deeply drowned
Arms therefore necessary to be ordered and made use of, as the God of Arms
shall call for, and employ.
From Heavens th'alarme, attended Orders be,
All doubts discust, all judgments clear and free.
Let Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your swords.
1 Samuel 25.28. 2 Chr. 20.15
Arm Gallants, Arm. The Battle is the LORDS.
For our Watchmen, the faithful MINISTRY.
Dangers and duties to be laid forth and pressed from clear, just and convincing
grounds.
LIft up your voice, Cry Watchmen, cry aloud.
Religion suffers by Usurpers, proud,
Of success insolent. Now, Sions plea
In dispute is, the Glorious Liberty
From trampling on Religion.
Of Sacred Truth restrained, It Is beauty marred;
Prodigious Toleration boldly dared
To be maintained. How men upon them take
Despising of Dominion, ever^ing of lawful Government.
The groundwork of just Government to shake,
On Crowns to Trample, of due power deprive
All powers, from them that power do not derive?
From marring of Gods work, and shaming of the Covenant.
How languisheth the Work of GOD? His Cause
Discountenanced? Divine and Humane Laws
All violate? How a reproach become
Our solemn Covenant, abroad, at home?
What grounds for real fears? What snares contrived?
From fears of further attempts and proof of former snares; from practices
against Parliaments, and domineering over Gods Inheritante.
How are of Righteous Privilege deprived
The highest Justice Courts? The honest side,
Exposed, as preys, to avarice and pride?
Imprisoned, spoiled, effronted, put to flight,
Of lives and fortunes not secure one night.
Them whether fury's drive? at Christ's own Throne From displaying of (...)
against the Son of God, who^ enemies are our enemies, an^ with whose suffering
member we are bound to sympathise.

Strike not these Apostates? The Highest One
Engadg'd is in our quarrel. We, of l^te,
Conceived our losses and our sufferings great,
While over-awed by Arm's, till GOD arose,
Made bare his Arm, and Proudlings did oppose;
But Rods of Children, reck^ning, here, and there,
We, but the finger, they the loins do bear.
Where now our fellow-feeling, former zeal?
Shall in this exigent faith also fail?
To you bold freedom fitly does agree Joh. 8.32.33.

Whom Truth in former Trials has set free.
Take, take your Watch-towre, thence, around you view
As heavens give order, your Commission show,
Men of Gods Counsel. God, drives on designs And last, from Gods purposed
destruction of obstina^^ revolters against Truth an^ lawful Authority, howev^^
employed for our sins, as (...) ^ods of his just indignation.

(In which, his Justice and deep wisdom shines)
By men, whose wills his hand leads on to act
His holy will, and guilty of the fact
Them holds, as having biased from his ends,
By other motions turned then he intends,
And all for their just ruin. Whence, to fire
Shall Rods, when Gods commission does expire.
What stick we then? shall not the Lord bring down
Perfidious Traitors to Christ Jesus Crown?
As clouds evanish, as the morning dew,
As chafe, and chimney smok driven hence we view,
Shall not divine displeasure sweep away
From off the earth, those swarms that dimne our day?
Shall public Prayer, and the secret moan
Of Saints, unanswer'dly at Justice Throne?
To you the times is given to understand;
Show, if fit times do call, hand joined in hand
That all for God,, true valor to improve,
With Echoes of joint acclamations, move,
Let Colors fly, Drums beat, gird on your Swords,
Arm, Gallants, Arm; the Battle is the Lords.
For the States of Parliament.
The Muses freedom with the states of Parliament.
GODS worthies, in whose hand the Helm to guide
Of Government is given, set far a-side
Your private Intrests. Not to make you great,
Proud, Powerful, or Rich, the Trust of State
On you conferred is: for the Public Good,
Not goods, your actings would be understood.
On you are many eyes. Eyes, from above,
Below, within, without, pry how ye move,
How equally ye walk. But here I Will hold,
their pardon humbly pleaded.
And begs your pardon, if I have been bold.
Now, when our rent Republics Ship is tos't,
With growing storms; when things of greatest cost
And highest value, by this Isle enjoyed,
Endangered are. Our Sovereigns life destroyed,
Our Sovereigns dearest life; his Royal blood,
(To usher in a shameful servitude)
Poured forth; His Scepters to posterity,
Decern'd a Trophee of proud Tyranny;
These Kingdoms Heir exild (Our Sovereign Lord)
And almost all the Issue, at a word
To be led forth to death (a sacrifice,
In smoke whereof their glory to arise
Unto its highest point, as safest mean
By them, for their security foreseen,)
What pawse ye? Whence proceeds this silence deep? Silence not suitable to a
time of so evident danger, to Church and State, waking only in the full
ripeness and fit opportunity, for execution.

Your enemies (beleev't) are not a-sleep.
Shall men so desperately wicked, hold
Their hand, the Father of three Nations, bold
To put to death, and not with jealous eye
Look on the Children, tied to ask them why?
Where your Antcestors ready hands and hearts? The Gallantry of our Noble
Antcestors proposd for encouragement to resolution.

Associates look ye for, from foreign parts
As troubled at our stroke, and by our wound
Of Christian Kings the veins all opened found?
Or, dare not JUDAH war with EDOM wage The history of K. Amaziah, 2 Chr. 25.
for application.

Till EPHRAIM, not at one with GOD, engadge,
Till ISRAEL Arm; which, ordered to depart,
(By this conjunction, AMAZIAHS heart
Made haughty, and lift'd up,) turned discontent,
And JUDAH'S Cities spoiling, as they went,
Shed blood at will, and did no outrage spare
That (now-a-dayes) the basest villains dare.
But what? These gone, did EDOM gain the day?
Was JUDAH'S King delivered, as a prey,
For want of power? No. He, who stayed the Sun
On Gibeon; and in Ajalon the Moon,
Till on his foes avenged; by JUDAH'S hand
A victory most glorious did command
For JUDAH'S host. But grief does here arest
My trembling hand, appal'd to write the rest.
To EDOMS idols did thou turn aside
Wretch'd JUDAH, while their spoils thou did divide?
O Yes; from Truth, there, shamefully thou fell,
And justly turned thy back to Israel,
Which, made thy Rod, thy ruin quickly wrought,
Thy King to Perish, by the People, brought.
GOD, only wise, your heart with Counsel fill,
That, quitting of your selves like men of skill,
Fast what ye have ye hold, lest all cast down
Built heer-to-fore, ye lose a glorious Crown.
All ranks heartned to concurrence by the nearest Ties of duty to GOD, KING and
Country.
But leaving all on Him, in more and less,
Whose eye must guide you. Now, our Kings distress,
The cry of blood, shed by a murdering hand,
The infamy of a despised Land,
The fowlest of affronts; Call, yea conjure
All ranks, by all the Ties, known to secure
Religion, public Interests, private Rights,
Against open force, and undermining slights;
If Piety, Compassion; if the sense
Of deepest wrong, have weight or influence
On loyal Scottish hearts, in sight of Heaven
Your just resentment and offense made eaven,
As instruments of God join heart and hand
To raise the Glory of this slighted Land
Men calling to account, by whom is shed
The blood, that brethren has unbrothered.
The carrying on of the work put over confidently on God, from proof of past
mercies and former experiences of power and good will to His people.
The Task in hand, suppone the hazard great,
Yet neither ease, nor cure are desperate.
Faith to improve, the Oath of God you ties
Whose proof of Mercies mercy yet implies
Unto Believers, fears who dare outface,
And footsteps of preceding paths can trace.
Your ways on him devolve (sure) he will do,
To fight who taught your fingers hitherto.
Frogs, Flies, Dry bones, He, ere ye Armies want
Shall for you Arm, the Arm of flesh to daunt.
Let, Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your swords,
Arm Gallants, Arm. The Battle is the Lords.
For the Commanders in chief, and faithful Soldiery.
YE, Men of Valor, honorably bred
At arms; Whose Glory, deeply Registered
Stands to succeeding Times, as men of Trust,
Integrity, and tenderness, in Just
Defense of Truth, King, Country, Covenant, The calling of our deserving
Commanders, Officers in chief, and Soldiery, evidenced, from proof of constant
faithfulness in the Cause of God, as reserved for the ensueing work.

GOD calls anew. Behold, he will not want
Your Testimony. Never grounds more clear
For Noble action, did then now appear.
Have guarded been your hearts, your hands kept clean
In SCOTLANDS late Eclipse? how clear is seen From their witnessing against the
unlawful engagement, choosing rather to be without charge, then to charge
their consciences with a sinful compliance.

In this GODS special hand? While, not the least
In quality and number, were possessed
Of a Malignant Spirit, did ye stand
Free of Compliance; Order, or Command
Destructive to his Cause, and closely kept
At your first Principles? The hand that heapt
Upon them shame, did fix you in your sphere,
That yet his Standart, ye on high might rear.
Their peace of mind arising from the sense of mercy, supported against the
power of temptations from the Isle of Wight, and preserved from acting at
Mauchlin-mure, the prelude of an unlucky Tragedy.
How calm a Peace, what quietness of mind
I ask, enjoy ye (if a tongue can find
Words suitable) whom frown, nor favors smile,
Nor Hopes, nor Honors, from the fatal Isle
Whence were revived our woes, (Preferment, Place,
And Pension proof) enduc't not, charge to embrace
Saints blood to shed; while (witness to their zeal)
To some, death signed a pass; and some a seal
Bare hence; best suteing base Malignancy;
Men, whom unsound diseased Times did try.
Their concession to the late Kings removal from Newcastle objected and
answered,
But hark! a voice, past whispring in the ear
Calls for your vindication, how ye clear
Your Rendering in the power of Armed bands,
Your Rendered Prince, while power was in your hands?
But, (as professed, protested, and declard,
1. As proceeding from Trust to these manifold professions, protestations,
declarations, yea engagement of the public faith of the Kingdom, in order to a
safe, free and honorable Treaty, pretended between the King and Parliament.

2. From the foreseen danger to the Work of Reformation, and breach of the
peace of the Kingdoms, through his Ma. supposed purpose of address to
Scotland, being firm in judgment, and profestly standing for grounds solemnly
abjured by Us, and destructive to the Covenant.


Yea public faith empaund,) who have not heard
How, not a show pretended of intent,
Save (for a Treaty with the Parliament)
To serve his Royal Person for a guard,
Yet, of base acts they not the basest spared
Could serve their ends? And, what the consequence
Had (here) produced, (if by your conduct hence
He should have hither turned, while broiles and blood,
(Effects of factions and of tumults rude)
The Land did fill,) who lay aright to heart?
Yea, while his resolution not to part
With principles (expressed, by him, a Tie
Which Life and Crowns engadg't,) for Prelacy
And book of Prayer, so solemnly abjured:
While this His mind his Majesty assured,
Who could have (here) complied? Who, save these men
(Our Peace-disturbers) should have said Amen?
How (both within, and from without, renu'd)
Had not a bloody dispute thence ensued?
Us, Conscience of our League keep't firm. If they
Prevaricating, wickedly did stray
From Honor, Duty, Faith, then Grounds how Just
Thus offer, how this doubt may be discust? The ignoble carriage of those
perfidious Impostors (betrayers of Trust) a just motive for men of honor, so
fowly faild to, to call to account the Authors and accomplices of this impudent
Treachery.

All degrees, sensible of Gods and the Kingdoms dishonor, called to join with
the King, (owning the Cause and Covenant) in charging home, upon wicked
Covenant-breakers, this unexpiable injury.



How best your candor and ingenuous way
May as the Sun, appear at the Noonday,
Endeavoring (in due time) to Right a wrong,
Which heavens, though men should pass, shall judge ere long.
A broken Covenant, base perjury,
All, with their sin who stick not to comply,
Call to make ready, and for God to rise,
For King and Country, looked on as a prise
By men of bloods. Thus, shall fowl mouths be closde
Your straight proceedings to reproach disposde,
Thus SCOTLANDS glory grow, and thus made known
That Gedeons hundreds here, our God will own,
Lead forth, and fit, when he the word shall give
For him to Act; dead hearts who can revive,
Even prompt your hands and Spirits for these ends
On which the General Happiness depends,
The Prince and People acting (one in heart
In Will and Counsel) each, a gallant part,
Engadg'd in God; on which condition closde
Our Noble undertakings are supposde,
That all o^structions from the way removed
By uniforme consent may be approved
Let Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your swords,
Arm, Gallants, Arm. The Battle is the Lords.
For the People and Commonalty.
GODS precious People, Commons of the Land,
The People; owning their interest in the Promises, by reason of Christ's
donation with the Isles and ends of the e^^th, Psalm. 2. the prime motive of
their entering in Covenant, and acting for Christ.
Religions forward friends with Life in hand,
For Christ who have adventred, merely driven
By reason of his Right and Title given
To earths remotest ends; by whom enclinde
This Generation, seriously did mind
Their Intrest in the Promises to own
By Gospel Light made to Believers known,
Held forth unto the Church: from whence to heart
Was laid, (in special duty on our part)
For Christ, King, Country, into Covenant
To enter, and rich success never did want
While honestly, in Men and Angels view
We jointly moving, did joint ends pursue.
The work of Reformation being far advanced, and great difficulties overcome,
GOD has permitted men, for our sins, yet for a season, to obstruct the way.
And now, while after so much bloods expense,
Cost, Pains, and Prayers (in our Just Defense)
Our hopes were far advanced, Behold, the way
Obstructed is anew. Ludibrious Clay
Dare craule on borrowed legg's, and Heaven defy,
The Son of God take on its top, and try
His work to overturne, Himself dethrone,
And, in the hand of his Anointed One,
The Scepter break. What honest heart not bleeds,
What spirit's not on edge, at these misdeeds,
These unexampled Acts, that dim the glory
To these, and aftertimes, of Christian story?
Gods people encouraged upon solid grounds to stand to their duty.
But face they hitherward in Arms? what then?
Choose slaves to darkness, servants unto men,
To yield your selves or venture? yet a day
Does Christ (here) call for, on His Royal way
Of noble conquest, can it suit your mind,
Your spirits, by a Covenant refined
Not to attend His Orders, who in vain
You kept not hitherto, that ye remain
Till now unvanquish'd? set before your eyes
What, even what not, at stake in hazard lies,
And gathering from past practice, how have been
All your attempts for Christ successful seen,
Set foreward stoutly, in his strength stand to it,
Not bow nor shield, the LORDS Right Hand must do it,
Who, if our King He Isntrumental make, The Kings owning the work (when
stirred up for that end by the Lord) to be held for a token of good.

As Orderer of the Play, the stage to take
(In answer to our earn'st desires,) by all,
Be held a presage most auspicious shall,
For which we pray, yea hope; that grounds to none
Occur, of controversy against the Throne;
As of his Diadems the Royal Right
He would establish (in his foes despite)
To Christ committed, every way beside
GODS Way disclaimed; As on His part to fide,
Engage He would the powers of Earth and Heaven,
And, by His Order, may (for word) be given
Let Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your swords.
Arm, Gallants, Arm. The Battle is the LORDS.
For the KING.
The King honored by God above other Kings, as having committed to him the
Scepter of Government over lands gifted to Christ in special manner.
GReat Prince, whose honor does the honor stain
Of greatest Princes, Righteous Sovereign
The Scepter over Kingdoms set to swey,
That gifted are to Christ, in special way,
Where, while He Laws for Government does give,
And takes the Throne, has mad't Thy lot to live.
Three Crowns of Him thou hold'st, by long descent,
The improving of just power for the advantage of Christ's Interests, the surest
pillar ^or supporting of the Kings Thrones.
These, for advantage of the just extent
Of His prerogative, so Thou improve,
Thy thrones-establishments-best mean shall prove.
Christ to be acknowledged in His Royal Prerogative, and to be made use of in
all his Offices, as one by whom Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. and who removes and
sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21. at his pleasure.
Him to acknowledge Heavens thy heart incline
In all His Offices; thy duties line
That not transgressing, as engaged, He may
Employ for thee His power, May in the day
Of danger make thy peace, and wisdom give
Thy peoples dying hearts how to revive,
For bow before Him, as the meanest, must
The Most, and Mightiest of created dust.
His Threefold Scepter can no Rule admit,
Regal Power and Authority consistent with the absoluteness of Christ's
Sovereignty.
But such as does his absoluteness fit
Of Sovereignty, which most consistent stands
With Regal power, by Him put in thy hands,
For, who Himself the Lord JEHOVAH show,
Has said, to Caesar give what is Caesar's due.
Learn to submit, to Him betimes to flee,
The Kings heart a sit blank to put in Christ's hand to fill up, and in proof of
the reality of the offer the signing of the Covenant, in securing of Religion,
necessary.
That lifted up by Him thy head may be;
A blank put in His Hand; upon thy heart
The heads that he may fill, for either part,
Of an eternal League; In which to deal
Ingenuously that thou intends, thy Seal
Set to the holy Band, (A privilege
To every King not Common) for a pledge
Of faith engaged shall serve, and clear thy way
Of great obstructions, in thy Rising day.
Far-far be from thee, as thy judgments stroke, To ^alk in the counsel of the
wic^^d, and join in the yock of bad association, to be guarded against by the
King, in his tender years, as against a sure stroke of judgment.

To join thy shoulder in unequal yoke
Of bad associations, or to call
Unto thy counsel men of Beliall,
Who, in thy tender bosom, to infuse
The poison of bad principles will choose.
Grief fills our hearts so soon to see thy reign; Scotlands grief, and
Scotland^ joy.

Yet joy we ever, Sacred Sovereign,
That from thy Fathers loins, who Ruled of late,
Succeeds One, to fill the Chair of State,
From Race to Race, all whose Dominions may
Thy just commands most loyally obey.
Spare, Spare (we pray) to give thy Scotland ground
More deep and deadly, that may make her wound The prejudice of entertained
jealousies between the King and His Subjects.

By harboring, in a jealous heart, mistakes,
Of which the thought the very groundwork shakes
Of mutual confidence. O daign to hear
Their just desires, with thee who burden bear,
To stand and fall, to live and die with thee
In God, whose bands Inviolable be.
Thy judgment Heavens inform, and clear what tie
On Christian Subjects does convincing lie
Attempts to own, for which those men do move,
Who most unjustly thy just power improve,
And pleading for all crimes commission, stain
The tender honor of a Sovereign,
The duty of loyal Subjects as relating to Christ's absolute Sovereignty.
As tyrant turned. We humbly do deny,
These practices may pass for loyalty
To God, and thee in Him, our duties bound
To Sovereignty supreme relating found,
So that on us restraining bonds are laid,
Till surety for Religion be made,
Till Solemn League and Covenant be owned
By Thee, for CHRIST, in Truths defense, enthroned,
To which, while in suspense of thy consent,
Our hands are feeble, and our spirits faint.
These minding come, and put in exercise
Thy Regal power; of all Thine enemies
The necks be given Thee* to be trampled on,
Religion, Government, CHRIST'S and Thy Throne
Who dare oppose. O that thou may lay hold
And fasten grips upon these locks of Gold
Found on Times forehead, and from events learn
Of lingering Resolutions to discern
Sad successes. Thus Heavens Thy counsels bless,
And make Thy Throne a Throne of Righteousness.
As Monarch of thy Subjects hearts, for Thee
Thus many to the Throne of Grace shall flee,
And plead Thy cause, for whose just interests, all
Shall cordially cry, when GOD does call,
Let Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your swords,
Arm, Gallants, Arm. The Battle is the LORDS.
Grounds of Hope for Believers.
BUt smiles the Sectary? how with disdain,
Heard is the freedom of the Muses strain?
Us Adversaries brave on either hand, Dangers and difficulties arising on all
hands, grounds of confidence offered from the wor^ of truth in the subsequent
propositions.

These, on successful fates smooth conduct stand.
Grown desperate are others, whose disgrace
Through failing of attempts, leaves shame of face.
Both at advantagely. Shall this breed fear? When-and-wheresoever the Mystery
of Christ is broken up, and Reformation advanced, then and there shall the the
Church the ruin of many enemies, Zech. 13.1, 2, 3, etc. compared with Zech.
12.3. Revel. 3.10.

A people solemnly owned by God before the world, and sought out by his
standart, need not fear their falls brethren when God begins to appear, in
strength and fury, like himself, against them, Isa. 62.10 11, 12. compared with
Isa. 63.1, 2, 3, 4.

When Antichrist shall be fully revealed the Lord shall consume him, 2 Thessalonians.
2.7.8.

When Christ takes arms for his Churh, although the enemy should overflow, he
shall lift up his standard in vengeance against him. Isaiah. 59.17.18, 19.
Psalm. 18.



No: We a Chi^tain follow, who shall clear
Our way, and (in this sad temptations hour,
On travel, in the greatness of his power,
As gifted with Earths ends and Isles, where we,
Ruled by His Scepter, live) shall, the decree
Past in his favors erst (even Ours, by right
Of promise) see, for us fulfilled, in spite
Of opposition, on his word who rest,
Whose times, and ways of working are the best.
How-ever (often) persecuting foes
Saints blood have shed, yet (while this tempest blows)
Who not discern (unto its greatest hight
The throne of Antichrist attained, the light
Of many Gospel Truths begun to shine)
That, dressed in Arms for warfare (to refine
His Gold, and purge away the object Ore)
Christ is marchd forth (flames ushering him before)
In bloody Garments, through destruction did
Of Truths opposers, who shall prosperous ride
Christ having risen, after long silence and suffering, will so much the more
be active against his enemies. Isa: 42.13.14.
In Triumph, minding (hence) an active way
Before as silent, in his suffering day?
For (merely) Civil things did we contend
(As, in this case, Lands a Religious end
Professing, (nothing so,) deserv'dly, have
Been trampled on,) us might our hopes deceive.
But formally for Christ, in terms direct
We for his title stand, (all due respect
Had to our SOVEREIGNS intrests, in the right
Of all his Crowns.) Will CHRIST his quarrel slight,
Whoever assay to make void Christ's established yoke, Them shall Christ vex.
Psalm. 2.1.2, 3, 4, 5.

Where God has a vineyard of red wine settled, he will keep it lest any hurt
it. Isa. 27.2.3.

What God has done at the expense of his Saints blood, he will not easily
forgo. Psalm. 116.13.


Not vindicate His Honor? not maintain
The settled Order of his house, in vain
Else here (alone) established by his hand
At such expense of Means, throughout the Land,
Yea of his Peoples blood, dear in his sight?
Which Order (hitherto) against hellish slight
And brutish force, so tendered Providence,
That, not one dyat of his Church, has (thence)
Been marred from meeting; neither any part
If they have not gained ground, they shall not gain ground. Psalm. 129.2.5 so
Calvin.
Of all his work foes suffered to evert.
The choice place, where to dwell he does incline,
In beauty where his Ordinances shine,
Will he not care for, cover with his wing,
Bloody Covenant breakers* having had great success, shall not live long Ps.
55.19, 20, 23
And guard against those men, a meaner thing
Who counted have the Oath of GOD, and past
So lightly, from proud necks, his yoke to cast?
Profaners of the oath of God shall not prosper or escape. Ezekiel. 17.15, 18, 19.
evident in Uladistaus K. of Hungary beaten at Varna by Amurath the 6.
Will He, avenged who violated faith
In heathens favors, on his People has,
In favors of his People, from on high,
Let pass unplagued heathnish perfidie?
While some design, Christ next a King to place;
Or (thus disguisde) are found upon the chase
Of self-advantages, a cloak to draw
Of zeal, of duty of supremest Law.
Yea, while with Christ, denied to reign alone,
Their Dagon Others, his divided Throne
To share do offer, and with Christ to dwell
Have privileged all the powers of hell. Christ purposes to hold house where
he purges the sons of Levi, and there to come near to judgment for his
people. Mal. 3.1-3, 4, 5.

It is a Gospel-and-peaceable time, and a Token for good to his people when God
sends forth faithful and honest Ministers. Ier. 3.15, 18.

When the barren is made the mother of many children, and gets God for her
husband, there is large peace and privileges promised. Isa. 54.1.2.4.5.13, 14,
15, 17.

While a people do cleave to God, he is engadged to own them and do for them. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

God would reveal it to his servants if he purposed to destroy, who in this
case would not promise good. Amos. 3.7.

Christian walkers with God would not be altogether strangers to Gods purpose,
if he intended to destroy Job. 15, 15* Psalm. 25.14.

The hope of his people shall not make them a shamed having to do with
transgressors without a cause.

When Gods people are laid* low, he must recover them Deuteronomy. 32.36.



Is Christ, his house of purging at the pains
And planting men, by whom his Kingdom gains
(A Ministry according to his heart)
That bloody hands the Gospels spoils should part?
Or has our Lord a tender brood begot
Of children here, his weaklings to devote
To bloody hands, his youth; whose chiefest thing
Desirable, is to detain the King;
Yea, while on life and death resolved they have
Close to his Truth and Covenant to cleave?
In mouths of all the Prophets, whence arise
Our joys of success, speaks the Sprite of lies?
Or shall the Saints, to whom he does declare
His counsel, (friends, who on his secrets are)
With what he does acquainted, in this case,
(This case alone) for hopes have shame of face?
Brought low (indeed deserv'dly) we have been
And yet may low be laid, that every mean
In which we might conceat, abasde may be,
Even all our Glories pride staind we may see.
But, when in us all strength is spent and gone,
Turn and Repent him shall that Holy One;
The work which the Lord has begun and far prosecute, he will perfect. Deuteronomy.
32.4.

The rods of his people, tending to bring them under the bond of the Covenant,
will be the ruin of rebels. Ezekiel. 20.37.38.

God will always mind^ his Covenant, while his people stick by it. Psalm. 111.5.

The Throne of iniquity set up without God and maintained without him
decreeing mischief against God and Godliness, shall not have standing before
him. Psalm. 94.20.21.

When the child is come to the birth, and all done to a little, it were a day
of blasphemy if it were not brought forth. 2. Kings. 29.3. compared with Is.
66.9.

Though sin do abound God will not forsake his people, yea the holy seed shall
be the substance of the land. Ier. 51.5. Isa: 6.13.

If God smite a growing vine, he must debate with it in measure, suitable to
its being and well-being. Isa. 27.3, 6, 7, 8.


He, all whose ways his searchlesse wisdom suit,
And for his Works perfection contribute
Shall purge the Land, and Rebels plots supplant,
Unmindfull never of his Covenant:
Else with that Throne of sin should Christ partake
For framing mischief, which a Law does make.
May never dawne to us that horrid day,
(Day of rebuke and blasphemy,) on way
While brought the Child is to the place of birth,
That from the womb strength fails to bring forth.
For say, all means should fail, how great our shame
To doubt that Christ shall magnify His Name.
How ever here iniquity abound,
Yea sin on foot, to fill the Land be found,
Yet he, his People who does not foresake,
The Holy Seed shall for it is substance take,
And with his vine (provockt) if he debate,
The stroke in measure he shall moderate.
Then show we faces, foes let us defy,
While Jesus Christ his Standard rears on high.
Fall may who ripe are to receive the Crown,
Or rotten branches, fit for hewing down,
But fall who will, the Cause shall never fall,
While stick to him a seed, a Remnant shall.
For he, who comes in judgment, Lands to sift,
When God-comes near to Judgment against sorcerers, then will he swiftly judge
false swearers. Mal. 3.5.
Against the sorcerers, a witness swift,
Shall, clothed with vengeance, power contempt and shame
Upon false-swearers, by His Holy Name
Then Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your Swords.
Arm, Gallants, Arm. The Battle is the Lords.
Grounds of Comfort and Encouragement for the Secret Mourners of England (and
else where) resolving stedfastnes in the COVENANT.
BUt tym'st Thou, with deep sighs thy Song? do tears The lands called to mourning
and humiliation, in day of the Lords deep displeasure, Ezekiel. 9.

Their fountains force, sad Muse, while Britain hears
No language but Alarmes, no milder sounds
Then of engadgements, Tumults, Death and Wounds?
Weep, justly weep. Tears suit the season. This,
A day, in which God calls for mourning, is.
A gloomy day, in which the Child of Light Of our darkness, Isa. 50.10.

Sitt's in the shads of darkness, short of sight.
The day of Joseph's straits; of deep distress
To many a precious soul, chaisde (for redress) Of Joseph's affliction and
Sions trial in England and Ireland, under pressure of sectarian power.

Amos. 6.6. Heb. 6.18. Psalm. 90.19.



To him who is Mighty, on whom help is laid,
His suffering Members, by his Arm to aid,
(His Arm, that erst proud Rahab, and the snaike
In pieces cut, and way through waves did make)
That, yet made bare, it may awake, to wound
The Dragons Seed from principles unsound
Which poison spreading and dispersing snares The lively delineation of whose
tenets and course (drawn by the Holy Ghost) may be seen, in the 2 of the 2
Epistle of Peter and in the Epistle of Iud.

The simpler to surprise, by fraud or fears
Unstable souls seduce; from whence (the way
Of Truth blasphemed) are vexd, from day to day,
The souls of Saints; while men, who mischief frame,
Like raging waves, foame forth their filth and shame.
These the public enemy of England, and the rod upon the lot of the Righteous,
there.
The Public foe be These, O ENGLAND, These
Shall Tasks enjoyne, and straiten (as they please)
The cords of thy Captivity, at best
These, the covert enemy of Scotland, lying at advantage against the Lords
Inheritance, here.
The Rods are, on the Righteous-lot that rest.
How-ever bound in Conscience to resent
Their practices, whence does arise our Rent,
To you, for War, do not our Trumpets sound.
No message but of Peace to Christ's suffering members there.

Unanimity and Brotherly association to be entertained with them in order to
the League and Covenant, and prosecution of the ends thereof.


No. Your sad posture does our Spirits wound,
In order unto which resolved we have
With you, and for you, to our League to cleave,
With Charity to All, who pure and clean
To keep their Garments, upon guard have been,
And waiting are, Gods Way and Time to take,
The Yock of bondage from thrald necks to shake,
That both here and there, God may be feared and the King honored. 1 Pet.
2.17.
That, (as sweet fruits from these effects) may spring
The Fear of God, and Honor of the King.
In pursuence of these ends, England (in Gods opportunity) upon clear grounds
encouraged to duties.
Awake to duties then; Your eyes be fixed
Upon these ends. Become shall Ephraim (mixed
Among the the People) like an unturned Cake,
Or heartlesse Dove, discouraged, faint, and weak?
GOD (doubtless) for himself, airl'd (erst) in Thee
1. As a Land long ago arled and owned by Christ, so many faithful Martyrs
having laid down their lives for him, there.

2. As a Land which has revived the Bargan afresh with Christ, having sworn
his Covenant and sealed it with so many lives, sacrificed for it, there.


A Church O England, set from darkness free,
While at the stake, thy faithful Martyrs stood
A good Confession, sealing with their blood.
Yea, God the Bargan (yet again) renewd
When that espoused Land, with love pursud,
His Covenant did swear, and at low rate
Did value lives, that Jesus might be great.
Lo! God has wisely, and to purpose, brought God has in wisdom made the
enemy in that land be seen in their colors, has gathered together with arms
in their hands and permitted to stur (as he has set the bounds) for
manifesting his own Glory in his Churches deliverance, by their more speedy
overthrow, and his fuller execution of fury upon them.

God to be waited upon, as One who shall surely gather, and rejoice the sad
hearts of the scattered Remnants of that land, and else where, to whom the
reproach of his house is a burden, Zeph: 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

How-ever God has established there, for a season a prevailing enemy, for
Judgment, (even the ruin of that Malingant party that first took the sword
against him,) as also for our correction, Hab. 1.12. yet shall the vision
speak, and be heard in its appointed time. ibid. 2.3.

Friends, enemies, the work, Gods glory, as also conditional promiess (as
Levit. 26.41. 1 Kings 8.38) having all their appointed times, of advantage,
disadvantage, advancement, manifestation and accomplishment, till the times of
all the forsaids meet, none may grudge or complain of Gods delays.

It may suffice, that in his hands are the times of his elect, Psalm. 31.15. who
keeps the best time, and will help right airly. Psalm. 46.5.



His foes together, armed, for Arms who sought,
And let them out a link, that stir they may,
Yet so as no where, but as He gives way,
Thus shall He in one hour, or day, decide
What else some ages dispute might abide.
Wait on ye then, whose weight is Sions case;
Wait on that Holy One who hides his face
From Jacobs house; sure, He you gather shall,
And tenderly deal with his remnants small.
For our correction, and their overthrow
Who against him first ingadg'd, has God this foe
Raised up, but heard shall in its season be
The vision. Issued forth is the decree.
But friends their fit time, foes their fatal hour,
It Is time GODS Glory (from His acts of power)
Their times yea promises conditional
Have for accomplishment. The work withal
Its time of best advantage has. Assigned
To each the proper time is. Till we find
All in one point to meet, none may complain,
Nor of delays a jealous thought retain.
Let this suffice, your times are in his hand,
Who from the fire can pluck a kindled brand,
And like a mighty man, roused up from sleep,
Shall help right early, and the best time keep.
His Reckoning from Eternity he laid,
And times, and ways, and means harmonious made
To bring to pass His Ends; and did foresee
Delays, which arbitrary were and free,
To his deep wisdom, gainful. So though (now)
Ye know not what he does, ere-long to you
His Face he shall unvail. Then make no have,
Ye, who by faith, on promises can feast,
But patience show, till God shall give the word,
Which Heaven and Earth to publish shall accord,
Let Colors fly, Drums beat. Gird on your Swords,
Arm, Gallants Arm. The Battle is the LORDS.
Close.
BUt duties to enforce, since words are weak,
And grounds of hops, men's confidence to take,
Till God put to his hand; GREAT KING of Saints,
In whom for THINE nor power nor wisdom wants,
On Thee alone is left, That light divine
May by thy Spirit, to our Watchmen shine,
Keept free and faithful, Taught the times to know,
By them, that Counsel (seasonably) may flow.
May all our Rulers, singly seek the ends,
Proposd in Covenant with Thee; what tends
To Truths advantage (in their heart acquaint
With Christ,) to prosecute be their intent,
That (self-deny'd) all grounds of jealousies
May perish, (private ends far from their eyes)
And shoulders joining, unto duties prone,
The work may equally be carried on.
Be Soldiers like the Cause, and Spirit given
By God, unto their undertakings eaven.
Profannesse and oppression both be far
From all engadging in this holy War.
Know may aright all Ranks the quarrels spring,
Before him, in their Spirits floorishing,
Not shrinking at supplies, while all is laid,
And in decision, as the game is played.
May light break in upon our Sovereigns soul
All Counsel, not for good, that may control,
To lead him in this Maze, discovering snares,
That grounds are of his danger, of our fears.
That join he may, in heart, for God, and glad
The Land, our blessing, and our glory made.
Foes be reclaimed, for whom is purposd good,
Who Peace lay hold on purchased by blood,
But perish all, who principled from hell,
Hold on their way and proudly means repel.
O let thy peoples hearts, (confirmd in faith
Of much good will) rest cheerful underneath
Thy exercising hand, in confidence
Pursuing duties, that due glory thence
To Thee may rise, to whom all knees shall bow,
And wait with praises, to perform the Vow*
FINIS.

