Licensed,

Nov. 5th, 1693. D. P.

LETTERS ON Several Subjects, By the late Pious Dr. HENRY MORE.

WITH Several other Letters.

To which is added, by the Publisher, Two LETTERS, one to the Reverend Dr.
SHERLOCK, Dean of St. Paul's; and the other to the Reverend Mr. BENTLEY.

With other Discourses.

Published by the Reverend Mr. E. Elys.

LONDON: Printed by W. Only, for John Everingham, at the Star in
Ludgate Street, near St. Paul's. 1694.

THE Epistle Dedidatory TO Sir Thomas Pope Blunt, Baronet.
Honored SIR,
PRAISE given to the Descendants of Hero's, is due more to the Spring,
(generaly speaking) than to the Stream, whilst Personal Merits challenge it as
their own Right: But it is your Due, Sir, on both Accounts, for the Honor of
your Family, and your own Glory in the Republic of Letters, is known to the
whole World. The small REMAINS therefore of the Learned Dr. Henry More, cannot
meet with a fitter Patron, than the Learned Sir Thomas Pope Blunt. The Brave
and the Learned Sympathize with each other, so that you cannot be unwilling to
be the Living Protector of our Dead Hero. It Is confessed, that these Letters of
his are not so Accurate and Excellent as his more Elaborate Works; but then it
must be remembered, that they are Private, and Familiar Letters to his Friend,
the Reverend Mr. Elys, and therefore only designed easily to express his
Thoughts upon such Occurrences as occasioned their Writing; his Love for the
Reverend Divine they are directed to, and a Vein of Piety runs through 'em: and
it is not improbable that the Doctor did not think they would ever have been
Published. But his Friend, being highly sensible of the public Merit of the
Doctor, reasonably supposed that any thing of so great a Man would be
acceptable to his Friends and Admirers; that is, to all the Learned, who cannot
but admire him with Descartes; who in one of his Letters to him, declares, he
never Converst with any Man with greater Satisfaction. If we cut all away from
the Letters of Cicero and Pliny, that is not extraordinary, their number would
be much lessened: by which we find how well satisfied the World is with any
Thought or Word of a Great Man. But I Am sensible, Sir, this Apology for Dr.
More's LETTERS will be judged very superfluous; and therefore I Will not enlarge
the Impertinence on the account of the other Familiar Letters of this small
Volume, the Names of the Great Men who wrote 'em, will more than justify 'em.
And as for those Controversial Letters, written by the Reverend Mr. Elys,
you will grant, I Am sure, that they prove their Author both a Learned and a Pious
Man; Qualities that will recommend his Performances better to your Protection,
than what I can say, who have no share in the Present I make you, but the
Propriety in the Copy, given by my Friend Mr. Elys; and the Value I have for
the Author's concerned in it, because I could not hope any thing of my own
would be so worthy of your Patronage, who are so Celebrated and so Learned a
Critic, as your Works demonstrate. And this gains you the Esteem, whilst your
Generous Affability purchases the love of all Men, as well as of,

Sir, your Humble and Obedient Servant.

LETTERS On several SUBJECTS, By the late Pious Dr. HENRY MORE.
SIR,
YOUR very kind, and elegant Latin Letter, together with your pious and
well-stated Thesis, touching the extent of Grace and Salvation, I received by
Mr. D. -- a good while ago. You Will excuse my so long delay of returning you
thanks for that undeserved respect you have done me in them both: For my hands
being so full of business, and being of opinion, they might require a longer
and more ample Answer than I find now fit to under take, made me defer my
writing till now. For as for your Thesis, truly I think that you have hit the
mark therein, and have as perspicuously as briefly coined the Truth thereof;
tho it may be, I may be thought no competent Judge, who my self have publicly
declared, That besides the Elect in a Calvinistical sense, there be others also
in a capacity of Salvation, of whom, some I believe, obtain it, others fall
short of it, through their own fault. As for my part, I think you have made a
judicious choice of the Character of such, viz. They that believe that the
Gospel of Christ is true. For God has put into their hands such a Talent, and
is so ready to assist his own design, if they be not wanting to themselves,
that I do not doubt but the work of Salvation may go on in them also, and take
effect, tho they be not absolutely, and irresistibly determined thereto.

This is all that I think requisite to return touching your Thesis, and to your
extremely kind and complemental Letter, only that I am

SIR, Your really Affectionate Friend and Servant, C. C. C. December 10. 67.
Hen. More.

SIR,
I Have received yours of May 3d. 1668. but no other Letter before it since
mine to you. I am glad that any things of mine do you any service or pleasure,
and most of all that those that tend to the Sanctification of the Soul in the
Body. If we hold that such a Soul when she is out of the Body, or that Body is
dead, is in a state of Happiness, and Joy; it is very indifferent to me what
people think of the Modes and Circumstances thereof. That you keep so sincere a
Conscience as you describe; it is a constant Feast in the midst of any
bitternesses from without. Your free and sincere acknowledging of whatever Good
you meet with, is a right Dove-like temper in you, but your defying of the
contrary, because it may needlessly provoke, may have less of the Serpent in it,
than is lawful, or, it may be than commanded. Our Savior joins both. And it is
pity that so kind a heart should expose it self to any needless troubles: I am
heartily sorry to hear you are subject to Apoplectical Distempers. Observe a
constant care in Diet for Meats and Drinks, as to quantity and quality, that
they be moderate, and a guard upon your self, That you be not too much
transported in mind, which inflames the Spirits, and spends them, and so makes
Nature subject to flag, and makes the Principles of Life vapid: This caution I
conceive, is as material as can come from one that is no Physician. There was a
good generous Christian Strain in the Verses at the end of your Letter; and
there was another such chain of Verses, which Mr. D. -- sent to me as from you,
which was very good. For both which I thank you, and remain

Your Affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.
C. C. C. May 9th. 1668.
* DEO OPT. MAX. 1666.
1.
THe Paths thou leadst me in are those,
Which few, or none have trod before;
But though they are beset with Woes,
I Will never go back, I Will never deplore.
2.
But cheerfully I Will walk alone,
And trample on the World's proud Head:
He wants not a Companion,
Whom, GOD, the surest Guide, does lead.
SIR,
SINCE I received yours, I have been so unexpectedly busy, that I have not had
the opportunity before now to write an Answer. And I am even now upon a Journey,
and something streighten'd in-time; but so much I must take, as to signify to
you, how sensible I am of your Affection to my self; tho I have had no occasion
to oblige you, but that which is the main, to congratulate you, for that Grace
of God which he has showed you, in bringing you into so lively a sense of the
best things. There is nothing better than what you drive at in both your Greek
and English Poetry. Love or Charity, joined with Humility, is the most heavenly
Disposition that the Soul of Man is capable of: and the second, as it will
ballast the first well, and prevent all the danger of overmuch Rapturousness,
so it will direct the efficacy thereof to all useful services toward Mankind,
and especially such as are incumbent upon any Duty of Place, or Calling. Peter,
love thou me? feed my Sheep, etc. Which makes me conceive that Flock happy,
that have for their Pastor so excellent a Soul, so invigorated with that which
must needs stir up all men to do their utmost for the Salvation of others, and
to serve them in whatever good they can. I am abruptly taken off by company,
and have only time enough to tell you, That it is thought that one Mr.
Hallywell, once Fellow of our College, is the Author of Deus Justificatus.

This is all for the present, but that I am

Your Affectionate Friend and Servant, Hen. More.

SIR,
I received yours a week or two ago, tho I have had no time till now, to
signify so much to you. The last time I wrote to you, I wrote also to Mr. D.
-- but I have heard nothing since from him: I wish he be well. I superscrib'd
my Letter as heretofore. It Is pretty you should light on a Tetrastick in Greg.
Nazianzen, so like my (...): which upon receiving your Translation of my (...),
without Translating that, I one morning turned into English thus, as near as I
could.

Nor whence, nor who I am, poor wretch, know I:
Nor, O the blindness! whither I shall go;
But in the crooked Claws of Grief I lie,
And live (I think) thus tugged to, and fro.
Waking, and Dreams all one. O Father! I own
It Is rare, we Mortals live in the Clouds like Thee.
Lies, Toys, or some hid Fate us fix, or move:
All else being dark what is Life, I only see.
Your Youthful Poetical Fire, you see, transfuses a little warmth into my old
Blood. Your Translation, both Latin and English, is very well; and indeed, your
divine Solitude is Excellent. These Expressions, as they are the Emanations,
and transient Effluxes of a living Fountain in a man, are both the effects and
evidence of that divine happiness the Soul is capable of, even in this Life. I
am something solicitous that I hear nothing from Mr. D. -- that he should not
be well. When you write to him, I pray you tell him, That I writ to him the
last time I wrote to you, and send me word of his Health. I am

Yours Affectionately Hen. More.
C. C. C. Feb. 12.
Greg. Naz. (...).
(...).
(...):
(...).
(...),
(...).
Quis prius ipse fui, quis sum, quis eroque nec ipse
Novi, nec sophiae me quoque laud prior.
Sed vagor huc illuc caligine tectus opaca,
Nil horum, quae men's nostra requir it habens.
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Unde huc adveni, vel quo Miser ipse recedam,
Vel quis sim, diris tenebris men's obsita nescit.
Huc illuc Agitant vario fata horrida motu:
In vivis remanens vix possim cernere vitam.
Somnio sic Vigilans. O Iupeter! O Pater! Euge!
Sunt etiam Nebulae nobis Habitacula! Nugas,
Falsiloquos homines, and inania nomina rerum,
Haec solum in Vita memini vidisse misella.
I know not whence I came, nor what I am,
(O wretched blindness!) nor to what I tend,
But scratch't, and torn with Sorrow, Pain, and Shame,
I seem to live; a thousand woes me rend.
My waking thoughts are Dreams. O Father Jove
How brave is this! even we live in the clouds!
Lies, Fancies, Cheats, their strength in us do prove,
But all good things the Night of Error shrouds.
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Luminis Aeterni Radius de Culmine Coeli,
Elapsus Coelum (quanta haec sunt gaudia!) Spiro.
Flammigeris Alis rapide me tollit in Altum,
Sanctus amor: veraque animus Bonitate potitur.
Vanida diffugiunt cum tristi Somnia Nocte,
Et circumvolvit nos lux super Aethera fulgens.
Alma Fides, Sapiens, Fortis, Divina Voluptas,
Vita est: sed reliquis, Quantum est in rebus inane.
NOX and tenebrae, and nubila,
Confusa mundi, and turbida,
LUX intrat, albescit Polus,
CHRISTUS venit, discedite.
Prudentius Hymn. Mat.
Beam of eternal Light, from Heaven I came;
And (O the pleasure!) unto Heaven I go:
Now Love infolds me in its Towering Flame,
I truly live, my thoughts with joy o're-flow.
Farewell to Night and Dreams. The Eternal Sun
Does us surround; true uncreated Light:
Faith, Wisdom, Joy and Strength, our Race to run,
Is Life: but all things else are Death, and Night.
DIVINE SOLITUDE.
1.
Blessed Solitude! in thee I found
The only way to cure the Wound
Of my perplexed Heart.
Here I escaped the Worlds loud Noise
That drowns our Blessed Saviors Voice,
And makes him to depart.
2.
Whilst thus retired, I do attend
Toth' Words of my Eternal FRIEND,
How my Heart leaps for Joy!
Love and Rejoice, says he; but know,
There Is no such thing as Joy below,
The Pleasures there destroy.
3.
If thou will Creatures love, be sure
Thou keep thy* heart in me secure:
Know that I Am ALL IN ALL.
Then whatsoever those Creatures prove,
Thou never shall repent thy Love;
Thy Hopes shall never fall.
4.
Thou shall still have thy Hearts desire,
And sit down by the ETERNAL FIRE,
When e're thy Heart grows cold.
But when I see a Friends deep Grief,
I Am grieved methinks beyond Relief;
This Grief no Words unfold.
5.
If thy grieved Friend will love, says He,
In dark Affliction he shall see
The nearest way to Bliss.
But if he mind the Worlds fond Toys,
And take the Sport of Apes for Joys;
He Is not thine, you are not his.
6.
And thus we talk, my LORD, and I:
So do I live above the Sky,
Though here I move and breath.
And when this Vapors gone, I shall
Enjoy to the full my ALL IN ALL,
Not Die, but conquer Death.
SIR,
SInce my last to you, I have received four Letters, and a Book from you -- --
-- -- -- -- -- The other next to this, mentions the Divine Dialogues, and takes
occasion from those plain Hymns at the end of the Dialogues to fly aloft into
an higher strain of Poetry. I wish that Book may have so good effect as your
Muse Prognosticates. Your kind Letter dated in December, again mentions the
Divine Dialogues, and does more confidently challenge me for the Author of
them, than the former. And indeed, I am so generally suspected, that I am fain
to let it be so. I am glad they have so much gratified you in the reading; the
three first Dialogues are more universally accepted, but the two last bear too
much upon Prophecies, which are not according to the gust and mode of this
present Age. Whereas notwithstanding, they that complain of the uncertainty and
obscurity of that Subject, are too ordinarily drawn to give assent to such
things as have not any thing near the like coherence or evidence. But every
Creature will go in its own Tract. Your Reflections upon Humility and Rapture,
are very useful and judicious. And he that improves his sincerity to the utmost
will find his way through all without a Monitor. I am glad you are so well
satisfied with the Discourse of the grounds of Faith. I must confess, it seems
to my self firm, and solid. -- -- -- -- I suppose you received mine, wherein I
gave you an account of the Author of Deus Iustificatus. No more for the
present, but that I am,

Dear SIR, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you, Hen. More.

SIR,
I Received yours of Ian. 9. a pretty while ago, but had not leisure to return
Answer till now -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- in such cases it is most rational to
rest in the determination of Providence, and to keep a man's Affections free
from all things, and knit them only to that ONE, whose due they are, That what
a man's Arm is to his Body, that his whole Soul and all the Powers thereof may
be to the Sovereign Good, inseparably united thereto by a kind of (...), as the
Arm is to the Body, that not enduring to be disjoined from the Body, will let
its hold go from any thing rather than endure that Peril and Pain. So whatever
we lay hold on by our Affections in the things of this World, we are ever to be
free in that grasp, and not let them grow to the Object, but be in a readiness
to let go, and keep our own liberty entire for the only service of the
Sovereign Good: And in good earnest to endeavor to die to all things of this
world, and the allurements thereof, and to seek our satisfaction in that One
that is above all, and affords more pleasure than all the things of this world.
But if a man be not fully Master of his Body and Complexion, it is impossible
but it will show him many a slim Trick: For so far forth as we are subject to
the suggestions of the Body, we are captivated in Fate and Ignorance, and must
be exposed to the Impostures and Mockeries of this vain World, and fall so far
short of the desirable liberty of the Sons of God. Wherefore discreet Devotion,
and accurate and continued Temperance is necessary to all such as have a desire
to avoid these Snares. I am glad the Divine Dialogues proved so seasonable and
serviceable to you. It was a pretty Curiosity betwixt you and Mr. Baxter; but I
think you would do best not to trouble your mind with such Notions, as, though
true, are not necessary. But I on the other side, much wonder at those that are
so loath to admit, that the administration of Gods Providence is according to
what is best, unless they choose rather to reproach God than acknowledge their
Ignorance in the Excellencies of his Providence; but measure things according
to the shallowness and narrowness of our own Light or Thoughts. You intimate
some Exceptions of men against the Prophetic part of the Dialogues, which I
wonder not at; many having neither a Spirit nor competent patience to consider
such things: but if you think good in your next to send me their most
considerable Objections, and from what sort of men they are, it will not be
unacceptable. That you are so much concerned in the Doctrine of the Power to
become holy, etc. I am glad to hear it from you: Belief is but the first step;
and if men will not so much as embrace that, nothing will succeed. According to
thy Faith, so be it unto thee, says our Savior. It is the Hypocrisy of the
World, that they are loath to have the blame laid at their own doors, that
they are not so good as they should be. But they that have this Belief with
Sincerity, it is a great Cordial unto them, and will assuredly carry them very
effectually to perfect Holiness in the fear of God. In which Noble pursuit, I
wish you and all Men good Success, and abruptly take leave, and rest

Your Affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.

SIR,
THis is only to inform you, that I have since my last to you received your two
Books, one for Dr. Cudworth, and the other for my self. The Doctor will find
time, he says, to return you his thanks himself, as I do for mine, which I read
over with a good relish. I have also received your last Letter, and am glad
that you feel your self with that satisfaction settled in your own Element. Your
Resolutition of managing your Province, there is sober, christian, and
laudable, and you will find every day more and more the comfort of it. That God
would be pleased to confirm you and prosper you in so good a way, is the hearty
desire of

Dear SIR, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you, Hen. More.
C. C. C. June 7. 1681.
SIR,
I Suppose yours of August 16. was the last you wrote to me, which therefore
being above two months ago, and you hearing nothing from me all this time, you
may easily surmise your Letter miscarried, or that it is a miscarriage in me,
that I have been so long silent: But I have been so hurried from one thing to
another, that I knew not how the time went, and scarce believed this to be your
last Letter (when I sought it ought amongst many others) by reason of the
oldness of the Date. But having perused it again, I found it was the Letter I
had not yet answered. And it will not be easy to make an answer proportionable
to the kindness and seriousness thereof: That you find so much satisfaction and
pleasure in the reading my Writings, is no ungrateful News to me, it being the
only end (so far as I know) of writing them, to gratify others for their good.
All that I have writ being reducible to those grand Queries of the Wise man:
What is Man, and whereto serves he? What is his Good, and what is his Evil? As
I have particularly shown in my Proefatio Generalissima. And so few concern
themselves in this kind of Knowledge, that I cannot hope to have many perusers
of my Writings in haste. You show your Sincerity as well as Judgment, in giving
a due value to that useful point, touching Faith in the Power of Christ's
Spirit. There is nothing of more consequence than to be firmly fixed in that
Belief, that all sin, and corruption is conquerable through the might of the
Spirit of Christ; till one be persuaded of that, No man will set himself to
resist his Lusts to any purpose. And according to the weakness and smallness of
their Faith, such is their progress: As for what is past, and the Opinions of
Men, I think it most advisable not to trouble your self with them, but to press
on toward the mark of the high Calling, whereunto we are called: Nor to affect
high Raptures, or over-bearing inward Sensations, which may happen from too
great an inflammation of the Spirits, but to examine our ardour of Love to
Christ by what we do to his Members, according as Christ has signified to
Peter, Love thou me more than the rest? feed my sheep, etc. Which I do not
question, but you do perform in a good measure by what you intimate of the poor
Girl you often visited in her Sickness; and continuance in your seriousness
will carry your further, and further on in such good Offices. As for that Book
you mention, I cannot do any thing but pro re nata, and it is likely it will
fall in course to me to do that, or something like it e're long. But there are
many good Books in the world already, if men would with sincerity make good use
of them. I am glad you are settled in your weighty Employment, to be Guide of
Souls to Heaven: In which, wishing you all good Success, I commit you to God's
gracious Keeping, and rest

Yours, etc. Hen. More.
C. C. C. Nov. 5th. 1681.
Ad Authorem ENCHIRIDII METAPHYSICI.
NAturae Aspiciens vultum tu lumine claro
Cernis in hoc rerum, fervide amando, patrent
Illis se praebet solis Natura Videndam,
Diligere AUCTOREM qui Didicere suum.
De Vacuo tantas gaudens componere lites
Esse, quod Appellat Plebs Nihil, OMNE probas.
Scilicet Omnipotens Vacuo se complet in Ipso:
Namque hic ex Nihilo Rem sibi quamque dedit.
Ad Lectorum ENCHIRIDII ETHICI.
EXhibet in Parvis Liber hic tibi Maxima Chartis:
Hic Totum LATIUM, Totae Pinguntur ATHENAe.
Ad Eximium Virum, HENRICUM MORUM Cantabrigiensem 1676.
UT tantos Very causa tolerare Labores
Sustineas, Bonitas certe te summa replevit
Lumine Inexhausto, quo cuncta reducis ad unum,
Atque adeo Ingenti studio requiescis in Ipso.
Tot libris, Variis Vocum Complexibus, Illam
Simplicitatem Animi Foecundo Numine Pleni
Ex primis: Ideas tam Claro Pectore Rerum
Principio varias Sancte deducis ab UNO.
O quem te memorem! volitent tua scripta per orbem
Terrarum: Nusquam lateant haec Lumina: Et Alis
Angelicis homines Genius tuus excitet Omnes,
Ut tibi consimilis, Pennis adiutus Amoris,
Summum Quisque Bonum, Linquens Alia, usque Sequatur.
SIR,
SInce my last to you, I received your Tentamen Theologicum, which is a pretty
while ago, and perused it upon the receipt thereof, and return you my thanks
for it. I like the Air and Spirit in it well. There was one; it lying on my
Table, took it up, and read it over that very Afternoon, but said, That you
wrote like a Quaker. And. I told him, That if all the Church of England-men
were such Quakers, and all the Quakers such Church of England-men, the world
would be well amended with us. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- What you
intimated of the admitting Amplitude in Incorporeal Beings, I conceive you are
right in, and I find an usefulness, if not necessity in some, to have
immaterial Beings so represented; and the Schools themselves, though they speak
so Aenigmatically, do really at the bottom imply it -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
-- I am so much taken up with the transcribing of the first part of my
Enchiridion Metaphysicum, that you must excuse this brevity of mine, who am not
in many words, but in truth

Your Affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.

SIR,
I Have received your melancholy Letter, and am heartily sorry that there
should be that occasion thereof, viz. That the Young Lady should be so
irrecoverably ill, and that her death should be so hazardous to her
Affectionate Mother. But as for your desiring of me to suggest to you what I
conceive best for you to say to the Young Lady in your endeavors, to confirm
her in her willingness to die: I do not believe I can suggest to you any thing
but what either has, or will easily occur to your own mind. One thing is, she
dying of a Consumption, her Passage will be in all likelihood, very easy to
her, which ordinarily makes Death more terrible both to the dying Party, and
the Bystanders. When she is once got into the other World, she being an
innocent virtuous Young Lady, you may remind her, that there is nothing
pleasing to her in this life, but the enjoyment will be incomparably more in
the other. The Friendship and Society of amiable persons for feature and
converse, the beauty of persons of the other World insinitely excelling that in
this, as much as the purest Star does a durty clod of Earth: And these, whose
Persons and Aspects are so lovely, it is the genuine eradiation of the life of
their very Souls or Spirits, and they are as well assured of the Cordial
Kindness they have one for another, and this at the very first entrance, as if
they had been acquainted many years together; nor is the affection of any
Father or Mother to their only Child, more dear and sincere, than that of the
Holy Inhabitants of the other World toward good and innocent Souls, that pass
out of this earthly Body into the Condition of those heavenly Spirits, those
Angelical Ministers of the Divine Providence, who are ready about the Godly
when they die, to conduct their Souls to the happy place provided for them: As
our Savior himself has foretold us, In my Fathers House are many Mansions; if
it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if
I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there you may be also. This Scripture handsomely opened,
is apt to raise her affection to, and affiance in our Savior, who exhorts us
in these words, Ye believe in God, believe also in me, to have a confidence in
him, and his Promises. And for her dying Young, you know that Greek saying,
(...), Whom God loves, dies young. See the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 4. Vol. 10,
11, etc. The Vanity, Wickedness, and Miseries we are incident to in this Body
of Flesh, you cannot but think of. But if you could by cheerful persuasions of
the happiness of the departing into the other World, cause her to be pleased or
desirous to leave this: I know not but it may contribute (her mind being thus
cheered) to the bettering the state of her Body, and help on a Recovery, if she
be at all recoverable. But no doubt, but whatever shall happen from the
Providence of our gracious God will be for the best, to whose Guidance and
Assistance, I commend you, and rest,

Dear SIR, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.
C. C. C. March 13th. 1684.
An Epitaph on the Truly Virtuous L. M. F. who dyed May 10th. 1687.
MAid, Wife, and Widow, she did always show
Her Business was* to give to all their due:
To God, her Husband, and her Children dear,
She gave her Soul, her Love, her constant Care:
Her Husbands Death, of all her Children too,
And every thing that mortal Men can call Woe,
With Christian Patience she did undergo:
On Earth she met whatever could* molest,
To fit her Soul for everlasting rest.
In Solitudinem
Cui aliquot Mensibus assuevit priusquam sibi, innotuit Praestantissimum Virum,
Optimum amicorum, H. M. e Vita discessisse.

Scilicet Humani Generis consortia vito,
Angelico ut valeam me Sociare Choro:
Arctius Amplector te nunc, Coelestis Amice;
Nulla venit sine te Nox mihi, nulla dies.
In Somno Visa est Species Morientes Amici:
Ah quanto Exardent Pectora Amore mea!
Me placide aspiciens Flammantem hac voce repressit:
Irruat in Mentem Passio nulla Tuam.
-- -- POTERIS NEC MORTE REVELLI.
SIR,
YOurs of Feb. 29th. I have received, etc. There is no pleasure comparable to
the not being captivated by any external thing whatsoever, but to reserve
himself entire for the service of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Your Judgment
touching the drinking of Wine is true, and will stick with you the better,
since it is built upon experience. Amongst your other Verses, I more
particularly like that Distich: I do but think my Friends are Good, but know
My Love is good which I on them bestow.
That Faith and Belief in the Power of God to become holy, etc. it is the great
Gift of God to you, that you are to acknowledge with all Humility and
Thankfulness; for it is of main importance for the making a man good, and it is
a sign of a great measure of simplicity of Spirit, that a man will own such a
Doctrine; for it is a sign he seeks no Excuses for the Evil he commits, but
openly lays the fault at his own door, and exposes himself to the more severe
and envious Censures of other men. But here a man must be sure to attribute all
to the Power of God, and that not only rationally and verbally, but feelingly
and sincerely, and to confirm the truth of his Profession by a most profound
and exemplary Humility of mind and conversation. Whether it be in the Power of
all men to believe this so important Doctrine, is a Question more uncertain;
but the Belief thereof being of that great importance for holiness of Life, it
is very ill done of any Man to oppose it. I wrote to our Friend Mr. D. -- the
last time I wrote to you, and superscrib'd it according to his direction, but I
know not whether it carried my Letter to him; if you know whether he has
received it or no, and would give your self the trouble of sending me word
thereof in your next, you would thereby oblige

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Hen. More.
C. C. C. March 13th.
SIR,
YOur last Letter I have received, but your former long one, tho'I enquired
after it at the Post House, yet I cannot recover it. I am glad you and Mr. H.
-- are so well satisfied with my Expositions. I hope Mr. D. -- is well, tho you
have not heard from him of late. Your cheerful Paraphrase of my (...) were
enough to revive him. You have Translated it very well, saving your mistake in
(...), by which I intended; I truly Live, in Answer to (...) in the (...). If
you be so long in Translating one after the other, as I was in making of them,
it will be some years. For I wrote (...) when I was Undergraduate, but my (...)
after I was Master of Arts. My Enchiridion Ethicum, with the Translation of the
Greek, has been out these two Months at least. I am glad my pains are so well
accepted as you intimate: it is the only reward I am sensible*of. It is an
excellent Text your Friend chose out of Jeremiah, and very suitable to his
purpose. I am glad you have your Health so well, and that you do so well bestow
it. Your associating or not associating in the Circumstances you name, you must
your self be judge of according as you find your self in a capacity to do good
thereby, and receive no harm. A man must feel his way in such things. I see
nothing amiss in that Passage of your Divine Solitude. There Is a good lively
strain in both your Paraphrases; but the English seems the more easy, and
nearer to the Copy. I am much straightened in time, which has made me scribble so
fast, and leave off so soon, and have a line or two to write to Mr. D. -- to
see if he will speak to his and

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, H. More.
C. C. C. Jan. 8, 1669.
SIR,
THe Year is expired, and yet I have not answered yours of the 9th. of October,
which I hope you will excuse, especially I having now the opportunity of
wishing you a happy New Year. I am glad my Enchiridion Metaphysicum gave you
that satisfaction. The Poetical Heat it stirred up in you is sound and good,
and the Verses handsome: The other two parts of my Metaphysics will be less
needful, when my Writings are Translated into Latin. In the first part, I have
done what is most proper for me to do; in what follows, there would be but what
either others or my self have said already: but if I live to publish my second
Volume, viz. the Philosophical, no new thoughts touching this Metaphysical
Subject, shall be lost; but I will contrive them in some form or other to go
along with the Philosophical Volume. I am now altogether taken up with
Translating my Writings into Latin: If you see Dr. T. -- again, I pray you
remember my service to him. Dr. Barrow is a very worthy Person, and that
Discourse you mention, very good and christian. -- -- -- -- -- -- That saying
of yours, touching the eternity of the World, is as true as handsome, as my
judgment is now: but heretofore I thought so much of the goodness and power of
God, that I did not so much consider the incapacity of the Creature. -- If it
please God I live to finish the present Task I am taken up with, it is likely
enough I may write such a Practical Treatise in English, which I have long
since called the Safe Guide; but whatever becomes of me, I doubt not but God
will stir up those that will assist his true Church, and the main ends of
Religion. Nothing more for the present, but that I am

Dear SIR, Yours Affectionately Hen. More.
Jan. 2. 1671.
SIR,
I Have received yours of Nov. 10. I was so full of business that I was fain to
defer the answering of it till now. I told Dr. Cudworth what service his Sermon
did you on that place of Scripture you mention: That saying of Plotinus you
have picked out with Judgment, it is very significantly expressed; and that (...)
is that wherewith all men are in a manner always hurried; scarce any attending
to that which is more inward in the Soul her self, and truly Moral and Divine.
Plotinus is raised to a great price it seems; I bought one when I was Junior
Master for 16 shillings, and I think I was the first that had either the luck
or courage to buy him. As for my Latin Translation, my Theological Volume is
now in the Press, and I hope it will be finished within this year or
thereabout. When this is out, I intend, God willing, to set upon my
Philosophical Writings to Translate them, which wiil excuse me the going on in
my Enchiridion Metaphysicum. But I shall, I believe, in an Epistle give some
brief Account of what I should have done, if I had gone on, whereby nothing new
shall be lost. I pray return my affectionate service -- -- wishing you both a
cheerful Christmas, and an happy New Year: I take leave, and rest

Dear SIR, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you, Hen. More.
C. C. C. December. 27th. 1673.
SIR,
I Delivered your enclosed Book to Dr. Cudworth, after I had run it over my
self; he returns his thanks to you for it, who has also run it over, but has
not had leisure to observe things so closely and districtly, as to spy out
those points you intimate that you differ from him in. I think you would do
well, distinctly and expressly to signify them to him, or me. I asked him about
his Second Volume, but he says, He has so many, both College Occasions and
Domestic, that he cannot yet tell when he shall be in readiness to send the
Papers of his Second Volume to the Press. I wish you all good success in your
competition for your Lecturers place in St. Clements, and should be glad to
hear that you have sped. There Is good, pious, and useful sense in your Verses;
but that passage in which there is a Star, and refers to Gregory the Great, is
notwithstanding dark and obscure to me. Your Letter to the Chancellor of
Denmark, has things in it not unsuitable to his Condition, and fit to be
thought on in all Conditions: For he that makes it not his business to enlarge
his own Will and Desire, is a real Prisoner in his inward Man, though his outward
be free to go where he will. Whoever permits himself in any sin, or is
captivated with any thing but the love of God and true Virtue, is his own
Prison and Jailour. And in those things therefore every Man is sincerely and
impartially to examine himself, and forthwith to break the Bands and Cords of
whateverVanity he finds himself held with, and cast them from him, that he may
become the faithful Servant of Christ, whose service is perfect Freedom. Thus
with my kind respects -- committing you both to Gods gracious keeping, I take
leave, and rest

Your Affectionate Friend to serve you, Hen. More.
December 2d. 1678.
SIR,
I Beg your pardon that I have not returned my Thanks for your civil and pious
Letter at this time, it being almost a Quarter of a Year since I received it:
But I have been much taken up in business, and have but so much leisure as to
excuse my self. Your Citations out of Savanorola are pertinent and pious; and
certainly he was a ve-Holy Man: But Picus Mirandulanus has dressed up his Life,
so that it looks like one of the rest of the Roman Legends. He knew more than
those Times would bear, and 'twas his honesty and courage, that he would die in
what he knew to be true. I am glad you find so much benefit in being persuaded
of that main point of Faith, in the assistance of Christ's Spirit for the
subduing our Corruptions. There is little hope of any progress in the ways of
true Holiness without it. And they that have it possess a Jewel, if they make
right use of it, and not entertain it as a true Notion only, but as an
indispensable Principle of Life, that will remind us perpetually, That it is
long of our selves if we be not as we should be; for as much as we are assured,
there is in readiness so powerful a supply of Strength and Grace from Christ,
if we will sincerely set our selves to resist our Spiritual Enemies. As for the
Query you put to me, I think you are a little too early in forecasting about
such things: Let us speak what is true, and do what is just and righteous, and
make it our business to kill, and consume all remainders of Corruption in our
Souls and Bodies in that condition we are, and God will give us Wisdom when the
time of suffering comes, to do what is most behooffal. No man can give Advice
at such a distance either to himself or any one else (I am sure I cannot) what
he is to resolve of. But in general, the safest way is that in which there is
the greatest Self denial, and that no interest of his own stands in competition
with the interest of Christ's Church and Kingdom. Thus commending you to God's
gracious Guidance and Keeping, I take leave, and rest

Your Affectionate Friend and Servant Hen. More.
C. C. C. Feb. 2. 1681.
SIR,
YOurs of June 23d. came to Cambridge first, but in my absence from thence was
sent me to London, which I brought with me hither again; but I have been in
such an hurry of business both at London and here since my return, that I had
no leisure to look out your Letter, and peruse it till now. I am glad you are
so much gratified with my Philosophical Volumes. The Copies in Quires is my
Gift to you; but if you will indulge so much to your own proneness to lay out
your money that way, as to pay for the Binding, you may follow your own humor
in that, if you be so minded. The same party that you say declared to that
French Gentleman, that I wrote not satis terse, I have heard from other hands,
that he has much commended my Latin Style: So that these things are as men's
Humors take them, and searce one of a thousand that can make shift to
understand Latin are competent Judges of a Style, but measure things by the
scantness of their own skill in the Tongue: As Theophrastus his Character of a
Country man, in his (...), is, touching his receiving Money, that he would cry
out, (...), because he had not the skill to discern what was current and what
not. But for any little fidling (...), where any such occur, I leave the Reader
to mend, as I declare after the Syllabus Scriptorum, etc. to all the World. The
Employment you hug your self in, is a very noble and weighty Employment; and if
you see your Labor succeed in your hand, you need envy no man's Happiness,
that fancy themselves in an higher or more splendid Condition; besides that,
our stay here upon Earth is but for a moment: so that if men were not
intoxicated with the unwholesome Fumes of the World, they would be ashamed of
their so much stickling to get the most Counters, and Cherry-Cobs. These be
Seneca's Pueri Barbati: And to avoid that Sarcasm, one would think it were the
humor of the Age so universally to cut off their Beards, that such Stoics may
not pull them by them. How one should be Affected in Divine Worship, your
intimations are sound and right so far as I see; and your Study of
condescending to the capacity of meaner people, highly laudable. And if you can
engage Sir S. -- to read over with you that Manual you mention, and seriously
to consider it, I hope with God's Blessing, it may do him much good. Your
Poetry is handsome upon the Anagram of the Name of the Gentleman's Father: But
still I advise you to heat your self no more than needs must. With my
commendations -- committing you all to God's gracious keeping, I take leave,
and rest

Dear SIR, Your Affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More.
C. C. C. Aug. 10th. 1682. SIR,
I humbly thank you for your Accumulation of Favors. -- --



TO. SHARROCK.
THese following Verses I Present to all Pious Readers, particularly to those
who with me enjoyed the Friendship of these Excellent Men, whose Names shall be
esteemed amongst the Learned as better than Precious Ointment, through all
Generations.

Reflections on a Passage in some Printed Verses, Entitled; An Essay of
Friendship: Thy Contemplation yields more Joy
Than all the Transports of the winged Boy.


1.
WHere Souls indeed united are
Without the mixture of gross Sense;
No Time or Chance their Ioys* impair,
Advanced to Pure Intelligence.
2.
Wit, Learning, Beauty, Virtue, All
That comes from GOD they quickly spy;
Not only what Men here so call,
But what is such in Capacity.
3.
They who Immortal Souls can love,
Do All Created Beauty View:
Since beyond Time their Thoughts still move,
What they enjoy is always New:
4.
See, sprightly Youths, substantial Joy:
What you pursue is but a Sliade,
In Paradise your Thoughts employ,
There Love's Pure Flowers shall never Fade.
Upon my being Recovered out of a kind
Apoplectical Fit, by a spoonful of Cold
Water poured into my mouth, 1693.
BAPTISMAL WATER thus Revives
Souls that by Sin have lost their Lives.
My Soul and Body both Restored
To Life by the Almighty WORD:
In The use of Water I would be,
My JESUS, so Devote to Thee,
That from henceforth there be no Fire
In me, but that which does aspire
To Heaven above (from whence it came)
In One Pure Everlasting Flame.
Thus Water sprinkled on my Fire,
Shall make the Flame still mount the higher,
That the remainder of this Life may be
No stay on Earth, but an Ascent to Thee.
My Reverend Friend,
I Received yours (and that enclosed) by the last Post, and this comes (with my
love and respects) to return my Thanks. Though I know well enough that I have
many Accusers; it was in you the part of a Friend to let me know what Crimes
they lay to my charge. For my not visiting my Diocese, I have this to say: My
great Age and many Infirmities disable me personally to do it, being now
(within a few months) 82 years old. When I came to the Bishopric, I appointed
a Visitation, printed Articles, and sent them to the Archdeacons; but when I
should have set upon that work, I found that I was not able to take such large
Journies, and do the business which should have been done in them; so that upon
the sense of my own Disability and my Friends Advice, I appointed my Chancellor
and Commissioners to Visit for me that time, and writ a long Letter to my
Brethren the Clergy, containing Directions for their Studies and Conversation,
such, as (had I been able to have gone in person) I should have delivered to
them by word of mouth, in the Speeches I was to make in several places. I did
afterward Visit by my Chancellor and Commissioners once or twice. Then my
Archdeacons (of which I have 6 in my Diocese) Visiting twice a Year; I gave
them a charge, and directions diligently to do it; and if any dubious or
difficult business happened, which they could not so really reform: I required
them to bring it to me, that I might Auxiliis and consiliis, assist them: And
on this Account I have personally determined more Causes (especially Cases of
Conscience) than any of my Accusers ever did, or (may be) ever could. But
Innocence is no fence against a false Tongue; far better Men have been
calumniated; and I have no reason to expect freedom from what (all good Men
endure) Calumnies. However, I hope (by God's Blessing) to have so much Religion
and Christian Charity, as to pardon, and pray for my Enemies, and never (though
it were in my power) do, nor wish them any harm. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
--

I thank you for your Animadversions upon Dr. S. -- How he will be able to
justify those Propositions, or give any probable sense of them to free them
from Heresy (if not Blasphemy) I know not, Ipse viderit.

I am Your Affectionate Friend and Brother, Tho. Lincoln.
Buckdon, Sept. 1 st. 1688.
Reverend SIR, Sar. Aug. 24. 83.
I Congratulate to you the truth of what you learn by the Experience, That all
things work together for good to them that love God, even Crosses and
Afflictions sweetened with Joy in the Holy Ghost; and whilst you have That, you
may part with Sir Sandy's Fortescue as you did with your dearer Friend, not
with contentment only but comfort, whilst you live the life of Faith, and do
believe you shall go to them as well as after them. What you Transcribe out of
St. Chrysostom, is as comfortable, as it is true. God deals with us, as we with
our little ones sometimes, let us us fall gently, that we must cry to him for
help, and perfects us by Sufferings as well as the Captain of our Salvation;
afflicts, because he loves us, and fits us for himself by both.

My Latin Book you will have from Mr. Davis (whom I hope you have written to
for it) you will find as full of Typographical Errors as any Book of that bulk,
tho such as will not hinder a Man of your skill in the perusal. The main thing
you are to mark, is, Whether the Book does not justify the Title in
reconciling the Points, the most knotty, and least agreed on by Learned
Christians.

If a Copy of one or two Leases of Title Congres is necessary, as you say, it is
sufficient, it shall be sent. But if 'twill be sufficient to send a Certificate
under the hands of one or two Public Notaries, that such Leases there were and
are in our authentic Registers, of such and such Dates, Covenants, Conditions,
and Parties, etc. 'Twill save much Labor of Transcribing, which yet we will
not repine at, if it be needful. I know not who in Oxford may stand in need of
an Ingraver; but I will write and commend, and recommend Mr. Savage, whose
Father was a Learned Worthy Person, and his Mother a Noble one.

But I release you to your St. Chryfostom, from whose Conversation you must be
no longer detained by

Your very Affectionate humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.

Worthy SIR,
BEginning with that I am fullest of, my very hearty thanks to you for your
Epigrams in Greek, and your Latin Writings annexed, (whereby I see and applaud
your skill in both.) I am sorry I must tell you (and yet I must) that I am as
perfectly a stranger to the Books you point at, and the Author of them, as I am
to your person and to the place of your Abode: Of which as soon as you know the
Cause, you will give me your Pardon, if not your Pity. For it is not my fault
that I am President of a College, nor does so take me up with Business, and
wholly secular, That you mistake me very much if you believe me a Student, or
one who is acquainted with Modern Books as they come out. However, in pure
respect to you, Sir, I will as soon as I shall return from a long Journey I am
taking; (and I take very many, as I am Head of this House,) inquire after the
Author you do not name, and peruse the Books you direct me to, whose Passages
which you transcribe, do so surprise me, that I am apt to believe, he only says
such things by way of Objection to be answered, or Ex Sententia Adversariorum.
But I Will examine him at my Return, and with my very first leisure, and make
known what I find wheresoever it shall be found of most importance

Your Obligedly Affectionately and humble Servant Tho. Pierce.
M. C. Ox. June 5. 1670.
Worthy SIR,
THis is to thank you for your Anagram, and for the very great esteem which you
express of Dr. Iackson, whom whilst you admire, you commend your self too (tho
out of gratitude only to him, not of vanity in your self,) because of him it
may be said (as 'twas of Cicero by Quintilian,) Scias multum profecisse cui
Iacksonus valde placuit. Next I must thank you for your kindness and partiality
to my self, expressed by your most friendly Interpretation of my Employments,
and your Opinion of the Good you suppose me doing, as well as of the Good which
you think you may receive by my Prayers for you. You shall have them as
heartily as you ask them obligingly, That God will bless (with a good effect)
your designs and endeavors of disseminating Truth as far and wide as you are
able. And that we both may so live, as to give life to such Prayers, shall
again be the Prayer of

Your very Affectionate humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.
M. C. Aug. 26th. 1670.
Reverend SIR, M. C. Apr. 3. 1672.
MIne Eyes are grown so sore with the Damps of this place (which, with the love
I bear to Privacy, and greater Freedom from secular Cares, has been a chief
cause of my resigning this Dignity, and with it the best half of my whole
Revenue,) that it hurts me to write or read. Nor had I now written to you, but
to thank you for your Excerpta out of the excellent Dr. Iackson, which you have
clad in good Latin, I do not doubt (for mine Eyes are not yet in a condition
to peruse it) and with a very good zeal have made an Antidote against the
Socinian Poison, wherewith many Souls are of late infected. I am now leaving
Oxford, to try if I and mine only Son left, can find better Health upon
Gloucestershire, Cotswold, and after that upon Salusbury-Plain. One of the
first things I do, (for I have diverse and large ones, and some for the
Public,) shall be to read your whole Book, and particularly your two Letters
to Mr. Parker, a Rising Man (I assure you) and very much preferred already by
the Archbishop with whom he lives. So as in that you show your Courage, and
your Impartiality, and the No-Aims you have to rise by Lambeth. I think as you
do in the conclusion of your Letter, of the World's being distempered; and as
you pray, [Rapidos comprime Fluctus] so does he who is obligedly

Your affectionate humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.

Worthy SIR,
THis is to tell you I have received, and thoroughly read your Exclamation,
which gives me occasion to pay you thanks for the Piety, and the Zeal, the
Christian Courage and Indignation, which you express against the Folly and the
Profaneness now in fashion, amongst a sort of Carneadists, who think it below
them to be Religious, whom if your Public Reprehensions does not convert, it
will not condemn; and you will have freed your own Soul, whatever becomes of
other Men's, whom if Rebukes do not inrage, they do but commonly make merry;
and therefore if you find them Swine, you are not bound to cast more of your
Pearls before them; for they may tear and rend you; but you will never mend
them, or make them Ermyns. All you say is News to me, (who never read Mr.
Cowley,) and does surprise me so much the more. But Mr. Vaughan does write so
very much like a good Man, that I am sorry I should not have heard (as indeed I
did not) that there is any such Author extant, whom it seems I might have read
with equal Profit and delight: Nor in good earnest am I sure, whom you mean by
the Leviathan, Mr. Cowley publicly commended; Hobbs, or Cromwell. That you
will wonder at my ignorance of our lately printed Books, and possibly
compassionate my want of leisure to peruse them. But I rest satisfied in my
condition, as very much better than I desire. And so far I am from envying,
that I congratulate to others the enjoyment of Time for Contemplation and
Reading, which is denied to,

Your Affectionate humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.
M. C. Ian. 9. 1671. I have a Book in the Press which I intend to send to you
as soon as finished, but that will hardly be till my return to this place, from
which I am shortly to take a Journey for a Month.



Reverend SIR,
YOurs of the 17th. of the last month came to my hands on the 5th. of this, and
acquaints me with your Translation of my long Elegy into Latin, which it is
hard to do well, and so the more likely to commend your command of the Latin
Tongue, if the Poem does not loose very much in the Translation. I acknowledge
the great Authorities you allege for the practice and use of Poetry, and it is
laudable in all, who are so much above their proper Business, as to suffice
both for That, and their Recreations. Such were Nazianzen and Grotius; but the
most excellent Dr. Hammond and Bishop Sanderson, were none of that number, much
less am I: That you can discharge all the Duties of your Priesthood; to write
in Prose against the Errors of Iansenius; and to write Verses at the same time,
and the hardest of the kind too; a Latin Translation of arrant English gives
me occasion to say with Aristotle, (...). I grow in Indispositions as well as
Years, and am so much more modest, or more timorous, or more judicious than
when I was Younger (for I know not well what it is) that I can seldom do any
thing which I can readily approve of, and have contracted an averseness to
diverse things (such as Poetry and Music in special manner) wherein I formerly
most delighted, and thought I had the most skill in. But if you send me your
Translation (as you say you do intend) I will tell you what I think of it, as I
did diverse Friends what I thought of their Translations of my Sermon against
the Papists. The Thesis you held at Oxford was very modest, and very safe.
Justin Martyr does go much farther, who yet (you know) was too Primitive to be
a Pelagian. St. Augustine is cited by the Remonstrants and Antiremonstrants, as
a Patron of both those ways into which he was betrayed by the usual (...), in
his contrary disputes against the Pelagians and the Manichees; so that reckon
his Authority none at all in those Points, all things considered. And having
cloyed my self formerly with Disputes on that subject; I am grown averse to
that also: But you it seems have now that Youngness and Inclination which I had
then, and may with more plausibility oppose those Errors in Iansenius a Papist,
than I did in Calvin, Dr. Twiss, Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Barlow, Dr. Bernard, Mr.
Barloe, Mr. Whitfield, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Hickman, and some other Writers, who had
the advantage of being Protestants, which made my Writings ill resented by a
Protestant Party, tho well received by the most and best of Men amongst us,
yea, by a multitude of the Party I writ against, who have publicly thank't me
for their Conversions; if so, I may call their Change of Judgment. I think you
will do well to consider Mr. Sherlock (a stranger to me) before you condemn
him, because I perceive, he has the best Men's Approbation, and may be taken by
the wrong handle, as many Orthodox Men have been. They that quarrel Dr.
Hammonds Letters to Dr. Sanderson (whose longest Letter was to me, although I sent
it Dr. Hammond, in whose Friendship we long had met,) are hardly worth a wise
Man's Anger, and you need not purchase them yours.

Sir, the Sickliness you speak of, has invaded these parts too, and the share I
have lately had of it, does make this Employment the less in season to

Your Affectionate Brother and humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.
Sarum, Jan. 9. 1676.
Reverend SIR,
AT my return out of a Berkshire Visitation, I met with yours at Sarum of the
12th. of this month, wherein I read your Translations of Montross his Epitaph
on the King into good Greek Verse, and better Latin; These last being the
happiest I have yet seen of yours, and so the fitter to be the last too. For
you will never do better, and it is filthly to perform worse and worse, which
makes me fearful of ever more verfifying my self, and a dissuasor to other Men
who are grown in years, and have a greater as well as graver Vocation to
pursue. Your weekly or frequent Preaching, and your engaging in the
Quinquarticular Controversy, will require your whole man, whilst yet in health,
and be too hard for all your Faculties, when you grow valetudinary as you will
by much Study, do what you can in prevention of it. All your Iansenists and
Calvinifts are wellperforming Writers against Pelagius, and the Massibienses,
and so far useful only, they spoil the good they do, and make themselves more
obnoxious by their (...), which carried them into the contrary, and (in my
opinion) the worse extreme. We are led between both, by the Church of England,
and I congratulate to you the happiness of being one of her Sons. Such I hope I
shall die, as I have lived; and as such I subscribe my self

Your Affectionate Brother and humble Servant, Tho. Pierce.
Sarum, May 19th. 1676.
To Dr. SHERLOCK, 1691.
SIR,
I Have seen a Printed Paper, wheren I find your pretended Vindication of your
Error, in saying, That the Three Persons in the Holy Trinity are three infinite
Spirits: Tho I was the first, say you, who had made use of those Terms in such
a sense, yet I ought not to be reprehended: in opposition to such a Practice,
as you conceit to be so excusable, the Learned Isaac Casaubon produces these
most important Sayings of Plato, Epictetus, and Galen, Pl. (...). Epict. (...).
Gal. (...). Certainly, no Christian Scholar was ever guilty of a greater piece
of INSOLENCE than this, To use Terms in a Discourse concerning the Holy,
Blessed, and Glorious Trinity in such a sense, which they were never used in by
any other Man. Is not this to boast in your Singularity, in a conceit of a kind
of Superiority to the Communion of Saints? whose consent in this matter is
expressed in these words of Saint Augustine, Epist. 174. Spiritus est Deus; and
Pater Spiritus est, and Filius, and ipse Spiritus Sanctus; nec tamen tres
spiritus, sed unus spiritus, sicut non Tres Dii, sed unus Deus. I do not, say
you, reprove the use of the word Person; but it were to be wished that those
who first introduced this term into Divinity, had given us a clear and proper
notion of it. Answ. Their Notion of it plainly imports, That a Person is THAT,
or SOMEWHAT which has an Intelligent Being or Essence. Now it implies no
contradiction, that in the one absolutely infinite, and incomprehensible Being,
there should be the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; of each of which
Three, it may be said. He is THAT which has an infinite intelligent Essence.
But it may not be said, That the Father is the Son or the Holy Ghost, or that
the Son is the Father, etc. And yet we must acknowledge, that the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, have one Essence absolutely infinite, that is to
say, that these Three are the one true and eternal God. The Father is God, the
Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; and yet they are not three Gods but one
God. You say, that you have demonstrated, That tho three finite Spirits must
needs be three different Substances, yet it follows not that three infinite
Minds must be so. I answer, You never did, nor ever shall demonstrate, but that
it is the most palpable Contradiction that Words can express, to say, there are
three infinite Minds or Spirits: An infinite Spirit is a Being absolutely
infinite. To say then, that there are three infinite Spirits, is to say, there
are three Beings or Effences absolutely infinite, that is, there are THREE GODS.

I am Your Servant in the Vindication of the Truth, E. E.

To the Reverend Mr. RICHARD BENTLY.
Reverend SIR,
MY Reflections on the great Wit and Learning I find in your Sermons, make me
to hope, That you will with all Christian Candor, and Tranquillity of Mind,
peruse the Animadversions I shall here present you on some part of your Sermon,
on Acts 17, 27. p. 6. and 7. Such a radical Truth that God is, springing up
together with the Essence of the Soul, and previous to all other Thoughts, is
not pretended to by Religion. No such thing that I know of is affirmed, or
suggested by the Scriptures. Animadv. It Is said expressly, Genesis 1. 27. God
created Man in his own Image: Since God is a Spirit, most certainly the
principal part of Man must be a Spirit; man being created in the Image of God,
in a peculiar manner made partaker of the Eternal (...), the Image of the
Invisible God; So that the first Reflection that Man makes on his own Being,
must carry him immediately to the perception of the Divine Being, in which he
lives, and moves, and has his Being, unless his Intellect be obstructed in it is
operation by the Pravity of his Will. I wonder that you say, no such thing is
affirmed or suggested by the Scriptures. I shall entreat you to consider these
words of St. Basil, Epist. 399. (...). Ipsissima veritas Deus noster est,
Primum enim, and Principale Cognoscibile Deus est. Agreeable hereunto are these
words of that most excellent Metaphysitian, Dr. Thomas Barlow, late Bishop of
Lincoln, in his Fourth Exercitation, the Second Edition, page 125. Sicut
impossible est Tactum, quam diu est Tactus, non sentire Ignem esse Calidum, si
ei. admoveatur, cum illud sit objectum Tactus fortissime motivum: Sic dico
Intellectus, quam diu est Intellectus, non potest non judicare Deum esse, and
esse Colendum, cum hoc sit objectum ejus Primarium, and fortissime motivum, cum
sit Veritas Prima in Cordibus Inscripta and firmissime Radicata. If this will
not serve to convince you of your Error, yet I hope you will not stand out
against these plain words of the Holy Apostle, (Romans 2. 15.) speaking of the
Gentiles, Which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts. Does not the
Apostle mean the Law of God? Can there be any innate Notion or natural Sense of
the Law of God, without any apprehension of this Truth, that God is? I hope you
will not say again, that no such thing that you know of is affirmed, or
suggested by the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament: If our Apostle,
say you, had asserted such an Anticipating Principle, engraven upon our Souls
before all Exercise of Reason, what, did he talk of seeking the Lord, if happily
they might feel after him, and find him; seeing that the knowledge of him was
in that manner innate, and perpetual, there would be no occasion of seeking,
nor any hap or hazard in the finding? Such an Inscription would be Self-evident
without any Ratiocination, or Study, and could not fail constantly to exert its
Energy in their minds. Answ. The Holy Apostle in these words plainly shows,
That the way to find the LORD our GOD, is not to conceive as Idolaters do, that
He is far from us; but to consider, that IN Him we live, and move, and have our
Being, viz. That the Divine Essence comprehends, or eminently contains the
life, and every motion, or operation, and the nature or essence of every Man in
the whole World, and consequently the essence and operations of all other
Creatures; so that the LORD our GOD must be no other than a Being INFINITE in
all Perfection: And since he is IN ALL Creatures, and in a peculiar manner in
Rational Creatures, it must needs follow, That it is impossible that any
Rational Creature should not apprehend this Fountain of all Being in every
Regular, or Orderly Reflection it makes on it self [or its own Being.] -- --
Such an Inscription, say you, would be Self-evident without any Ratiocination,
or Study, and could not fail constantly to exert its Energy in their Minds. To
this I Answer, That it implies a contradiction, That it should be perceived by
the Soul without any Reflection on it: That there is such an Inscription on the
Rational Soul, you must at length grant, unless you will deny that those words
were written by Divine Inspiration, which show the Work of the Law written in
their Hearts. Not only the Admirable Structure of Animate Bodies, and such
other things as you speak of, but every thing in the whole Creation shows the
Existence of the one INFINITE Being. That any Man is Atheistical proceeds only
from the pravity of his Will, perverting His Understanding. Praesentem monstrat
quae libet Herba DEUM. I am unspeakably delighted with those words of the
excellent Ingenious and Learned Malebranche. De Inquirenda Veritate, Lib. 4.
Cap. 2. An difficile est agnoscere Deus existere? Quicquid Deus fecit, id
probat: Quicquid homines, and bruta faciunt, idem etiam probat. Quid plura?
Nihil est quod Existentiam Dei non probet, aut saltem quod ingeniis attentis,
and rerum omnium Authorem inquirentibus illam non possit probare. -- -- -- --
-- I wish you all Happiness, and remain

Your Servant in the Love of the Truth, EDMUND ELYS.

SIR,
I Humbly thank you for your Accumulation of Favors: Your New Present comes
only to put me in mind, that I am your debtor for the first: Quin fluctus in
ipso fluctu. I had scarce recovered from your first, when you pour out a new
stream of Poetry and Rhetoric upon me, (...), and it is confessedly (...), I
had almost like the unhappy Be, drowned my self in another Honey; but that I
found Finis before I wished it: And then I bethought my self, That you had
observed the Kings Rule, Solomon's I mean, Has thou found Honey, eat as much as
is sufficient; for you give it out by Doses, and measure your pieces by Us that
are to read them. I have sent your Book to Mr. Boil, and can assure you, That
he received your Letters, and had returned you an Answer, as his H. told me,
had he known how to have directed it to you. I know you have good Nature enough
to pardon this hasty Scrible, from

SIR, Your most humble Servant, TO. SHARROCK.
July 21. 1662.
In Obitum DOCTISSIMI Viri, FIDELISSIMI AMICI, THOMAe PIERCE, S. T. P. Decani
Sarisburiensis.
SAnctus Amor Mihi Te cum tot conjunxerit Annos,
Tu certe nec jam Morte Revulsus eris.
Morte mori vostra videor, T.P. H.M. S. T. Doctores.


Doctissimi Amici,
Hac ratione etiam (...).
1691.
GReat! Good! and Just! could I but rate, etc. Montross,
Iustitia, Bonitate ingens! Si quantus in imo
Cord Mihi Dolor est, Si Qualia Fata ferebas,
Aequo Animo possem Factis ostendere, Flerem
Quae Totum Obruerent Lachrymarum Flumina Mundum.
Sed cum suppetias poscat Vox Sanguinis Alta,
Non quas ARGI Oculi, sed quas praestare BRIAREI
Vis Manuum poterit, Cantus Tuba clara Sonabit
Funebres, Titulos Defuncti Sang^^^e Scribam.
A Letter to the Author of a Book, Entitled, An Enquiry into the Constitution,
Discipline, Unity, and Worship of the Primitive Church.
Reverende Domine,
QUis quis es, Erudite Vir, Mihi certe videris esse Rerum in Ecclesia
Novandarum Avidus. Nos Domini Nostri Jesu Christi Inimicum esse judicamus
istius modi hominem, qui cum Professus sit semetipsum esse Ecclesiae Anglicanae
Filium hominibus Anglicanis Persuadere Velit, ut animum inducant Credere non
adeo esse Necessarium Orationis Dominicae Usum, ut eum existimat Ecclesia
Anglicana. Si tu Mecum non Consentias in omnibus, quae in hac Dissertatiuncula
exaravi, Te rogo per istum, quem in Proefatione Tua Professus es, Candorem, ut
mittas mihi aliquam a Te Scriptam Oppositionem. Ex Collisione Adversantium
Sententiarum Veritas clarius Eluscesoet. Vale.

Reverende Domine,
DIssertatiunculam, quam mihi misisti, perlegi, ac in toto meo Libro me contra
Patres, quos citasti, aliquid soripsisse non memini, sed e contrario ad
probandum Dominicae Orationis usum eosdem Patres, aut saltem aliquos eorum in
testes adduxisse. Non sum, Domine, Domini Nostri Jesu Christi Inimicus,
Perfectioni Orationis Dominicae assentior, nec aliter rerum in Ecclesia
Novandarum avidus, nisi ut Lites Nostrae componantur, and Ecclesiae nostrae
Divisae unitas tandem reddatur. Hoc quidem nitar, and Deum Pacis semper
invocabo, ut det Pacem in diebus nostris, and ut caeptis Amorem, and Unitatem
quaerentium Benedicat. Vale.

Nov. 4th. 1692.
Honored SIR,
I Thank you for your Letter, in which you show so great Candor and Civility,
That I hope your Design is not so ill as I feared it was; tho I am very averse
from several of your Assertions, particularly that concerning the LORD'S
PRAYER, viz. that the Primitive Church did not always use it in their Solemn
Worship. -- To which I Answer, That it cannot be proved, That any Bishop of the
Primitive Church, or any one of the Inferior Clergy with the Allowance of his
Bishop, did ever undertake to perform the Public Worship of Almighty God,
without the Use of the LORD'S PRAYER. Some of the greatest Enemies of the
Church of Christ in this Kingdom, are those Men who pretend to be True
Ministers of the Gospel, without true ORDINATION, and in their Congregations
never use the LORD'S PRAYER.

I shall here recite some of my own Words (that have been published in two
several Papers:) -- It is most evident that those Men are guilty of Abominable
Iniquity, who endeavor to seduce any People from the Communion of the CHURCH
of ENGLAND, in which the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion are so
clearly and fully expressed, and those most important Expressions so frequently
repeated, That Persons of the lowest Intellectuals, who do not Rebel against
the Light in frequenting our Religious Assemblies, may more easily attain to
the Knowledge of All Things that are necessary to their Salvation, than by
Hearing or Reading the best Sermons that have been, or shall be preached by any
of the Nonconformists to the End of the World; which Assertion is as Evident as
it is, That any Illiterate Persons may more easily meditate on Truths plainly
expressed, and frequently suggested to their Remembrance, than Collect the same
Truths out of diverse large Discourses, if they were therein employed: So that it
can hardly be imagined, how any Man can be in any thing more serviceable to the
Destroyer of Souls, than by Teaching People to despise Our CATECHISM and COMMON
PRAYER.

SIR, If you sincerely desire the Peace of the Church, I beseech you by the
Meekness and Gentleness of our Lord Jesus Christ, That you would deeply
consider what I have here written in Conscience of my Duty at all Times, and in
all places, to love the Truth and Peace.

Your faithful Servant, E. E.
Nov. 26th. 1692.
SIR,
I Shall not give you the trouble of any Preface, to what I shall write in
Vindication of this most important Truth, That the Primitive Church in the
Public Worship of Almighty God, did always use a Liturgy, or Form of Sacred
Words, namely the LORD'S PRAYER, the PSALMS, and the GLORIA PATRI. You say,
That Origin prescribing a methed of Prayer, speaks not a Word of the LORD'S
PRAYER, De Oratione, Sect. 22. I Answer, That in the former part of his
Treatise, (...), He speaks very much of the LORD'S PRAYER, and plainly shows,
That 'twas used by all Christians in their Religious Assemblies. I Pray, SIR,
bestow your second THOUGHTS upon these Words, Page 66. (...)* page 8. (...), p.
132, 133. He plainly shows, That in what he speaks of the LORD'S PRAYER, he
would be understood to have Respect in a Special Manner to the PUPLICK WORSHIP.
(...). Lib. 4. Contra Celsam, Edit. Spenc. page 178. He speaks expressly of
COMMON PRAYERS, in which he certainly implies the LORD'S PRAYER, of which he
discourses so largely in his Book, (...). How great Regard the Primitive
Christians had to the Gloria Patri, is manifest by that Holy Aspiration of
Polycarpus, which you cite. (...), etc. And by those Words of Origin, (...),
Page 135. (...). You say, As to these prescribed FORMS, there is not the the
least mention of them in any of the Primitive Writings, nor the least Word nor
Syllable tending thereunto, that I can find, which is a most unaccountable
Silence, if ever such there were; but rather some Expressions intimating the
contrary, as that famous controverted place of Justin. Martyr, who describing
the manner of the PRAYER before the Celebration of the LORD'S SUPPER, says,
That the Bishop sent up Prayers and Praises to God with his utmost Ability,
(...), Apol. 2. that is, That he prayed with the best of his Abllities
Invention, Expression, Judgment, and the like.

Answ. This famous place of Justin Martyr is so far from favoring the Conceit,
That the Christians in those Days used Extemporary Prayers in their Religious
Worship, that it clearly demonstrates the contrary: For the Word (...), having
Reference to the Laity (of whom Justin Martyr speaks in these Words, (...),
plainly shows, That the Bishop did send forth, or pour out Pryers and
Thanksgivings in like manner as the Laity did, whose Words no Person of common
Sense will believe to be of their own composing: These Words (...), plainly
imimport the Reciting or Repeating of of Words formerly used in Prayer, and
Thanksgiving. Hesychius. (...).

(...), does not signify the utmost strength of his Faculty of framing
Extemporary Expressions, in the Way of Prayer and Thanksgiving, but the utmost
intention of his Heart and Mind in the Act of his Devotion. (...); here is the
same with (...), Luke 10. 27. And (...) in the same Apology: (...), etc. I pray
God to bless you, and to lead you by his Holy Spirit, into all truth.

Your Faithful Servant. E. E.
Jan. 6th. 1692.
January 28th, 92.
Reverend Sir,
YOur Letter of the 6th Instant I have received. I thank you for your pains to
inform me in any thing, wherein you imagine I have been mistaken, tho I think
that in some things you misapprehend my meaning.

You affirm in the first place, That the Primitive Church in the public Worship
of Almighty God, did always use a Liturgy, or Form of Sacred Words, namely, the
Lord's Prayer, the Psalms, and the Gloria Patri.

As for the Psalms, I say the same with you, and I think that I have proved it
beyond contradiction, page 5, 6. of my Book.

As for the Lord's Prayer, I say also, and have proved it, p. 36, 37, 38. That
it was ordinarily and commonly used, and no more; if so much can be collected
from those places, which you Cite out of Origin, in his Books (...), and contra
Celsum

As for the Gloria Patri, you never find it within the three first Centuries;
that which you cite of Origin and Polycarp, proves only this, That they
concluded their Prayers with Praise to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as I
think all Christians now do. Besides, by ascribing too great an Antiquity to
the present Gloria Patri, you put an Argument into the hands of the Socinians
or Unitarians, who will retort upon you, that you have changed that
Apostolical, or at least most Ancient Composure (as you affirm it to be) for
that: Whereas you now say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost; the Primitive Church, as in those very Passages, which you quote,
(not to mention any more) said, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy
Ghost, (...).

As for the (...) in Justin Martyr, I do not say that it excludes the Intention
and Fervency of the Heart and Mind, but that it includes that together with the
Exertion of his Personal Abilities. What you mean by Extemporary Prayers, I do
not well understand: if you mean a confused, immethodical Heap of Words, I
dislike that as much as you; as you may see page 40. But if you mean the
debarring of a Minister from the Exercise of his Invention, Judgment,
Expression, and such like Gifts in Prayer; I must therein disagree from you,
'till I see more satisfactory Proof. As sor your Descant upon the Word (...),
it is a good Criticism, that may please the Fancy, but not satisfy the
Judgment; and as for Justin Martyr's (...), it has not Reference to (...), but
to what Justin Martyr related in the precedent Page, which is the 97th of the
Edition I use, at Colen 1686; and in particular to the Eucharistical Prayer,
which the Bishop alone made, and the People only testified their Assent by
saying, Amen

Thus, Sir, I have briefly considered your Objections, and shall crave leave to
inform you in short of my Opinion, concerning the Custom of the Primitive
Church herein, that so you may not mistake me, viz. That they always used the
Psalms in their Public Worship, the Lord's Prayer commonly, and ordinarily, and
for other Prayers, the Ministers were left to their own Choice and Liberty: I
have one thing more to add, and that is, That you would not imagine every thing
to be my particular Opinion, which I have related in my Book, or that I thought
every thing necessary to be now used, which is contained therein: My Design, as
you may see in the Preface, was only nakedly to relate the Customs of the
Primitive Church, without giving my particular Sentiments in any one Point
whatsoever, unless it be in the Conclusion of the last Section of the Second
Part. How far we are to submit to the Authority of our Governors, and to
comply with the Peace of the Church, I neither there nor here determine. I beg
Almighty God to inspire our Governors, and People, with a Spirit of Peace and
Love, of Unity and Charity, and that instead of promoting fiery Disputations,
and rigid Impositions, we may join in mutual Condescension and Relaxations.

I thank you for all your Kindnesses, and beseech Almighty God to bless your
Studies, and make you instrumental for the Advance of his Glory and Honor. I
am,

Reverend Sir, Your Humble and Affectionate Servant.

Honored Sir,
I Give you most hearty thanks for your Letter: I shall have no farther
Controversy with you concerning the Gloria Patri, since you ackowledge that
the Primitive Christians concluded their Solemn Prayers with Praise to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. (...) in St. Polycarp's Doxology, is the same, as
if he had said (...), which sufficiently obviates the wrangling of a Socinian.

I suppose, upon second thoughts, you will not deny, but that the Word (...)
has reference to the Prayers of the Laity, of whom the Blessed Martyr speaks in
these Words, (...) -- (...).
-- (...), etc.


I fully Assent to All that our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the First says
concerning the Public Worship of Almighty God: I believe his Judgment is right
in this, as in his other Sentiments. (...) the First Edition, p. 141. I am not
against a grave, modest, discreet, and humble Use of Ministers Gifts, even in
Public, the better to fit, and excite their own, and the Peoples Affections to
the present Occasions. Oremus invicem ut salvemur.


Your Affectionate Servant, E. E.
Feb. 14. 92. Postscript.
I Shall make no other Reply to what you say of the Lord's Prayer in your
Letter, than only by repeating what I said in mine, viz. that it cannot be
proved, That any Bishop of the Primitive Church, or any one of the Inferior
Clergy, with the Allowance of his Bishop, did ever undertake to perform the
Public Worship of Almighty God, without the Use of the Lord's Prayer.

I do most confidently Aver, That the want of the Practical Understanding of
the Lord's Prayer, is the chief Cause of all the Sins and Errors in the
Christian World: Wherefore I earnestly beseech all those that have Named the
Name of Christ, to join with me in the daily Contemplation of the Divine Sense
of these Words delivered unto us by our Blessed SAVIOR, as a Complete
Directory for All Our Desires:

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hastowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our Daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.



A Vindication of the LITURGY of the Church of England.
THE Author of these Reflections most steadfastly resolves, by the Help of
Almighty GOD, to embrace Truth, and to reject Error wheresoever he finds it. He
desires, That the Friends of R. B. would take these Reflections into their
deepest consideration, with the same candor and benevolence to all Mankind,
with which he communicates them to the World.

I am glad to find these words, page 233, 234. I would not be understood as if
I intended the putting away of all set Times and Places to Worship; God forbid
I should think of such an Opinion: Nay, we are none of those that forsake the
Assembly of our selves together, but have even set Times and Places, in which
we carefully meet together to wait upon God, and worship him. These words
following in the same Page require our Animadversion. But the Limitation we
condemn, is, That whereas the Spirit of God should be the immediate Actor,
moreover, Perswader and Influencer of Man, in the particular Acts of Worship,
when the Saints are met together, this Spirit is limited in its Operations, by
setting up a particular Man, or Men, to preach and pray in Man's Will, and all
the rest are excluded from so much as believing, that they are to wait for
God's Spirit to move them in such things, and so they neglecting, that which
should quicken them in themselves, and not waiting to feel the pure Breathings
of God's Spirit, so as to obey them, are led merely to depend upon the
Preacher, and hear what he will say. Answ. I shall undertake, by God's
assistance, to vindicate the Use of the Liturgy of the Church of England, the
principal parts whereof are the Lord's Prayer and the Holy Psalms; I say, the
Psalms, for they are to be used in our Religious Assemblies, as the Means or
Instruments to lift up our Hearts unto God. I would here avoid all Disputes
concerning the Ordination of Ministers. In our Assemblies the People bear a
part with the Minister or Preacher, in using their Voice in worshipping Almighty
God: The Spirit cannot be limited in its Operations by any thing that is taught
or practiced according to any Order of the Church of England. We are taught not
to Pray in Man's Will, but according to the Will of GOD, which is our
Sanctification. We are taught to wait for God's Spirit to move us to the
performance of any thing He would have us to do; but we are taught also to
believe, that God's Spirit is always ready to assist the Sincere, those who
desire above all things to do His Will, to worship Him in Spirit and in Truth,
in Saying or Hearing the Words of our Liturgy in the Congregation. The very
moment that any Soul truly devout waits for or expects the assistance of the
Spirit of Christ, to help her to perform any known Duty toward GOD, or toward
Man, she never fails to receive it. Concerning the Psalms I shall speak
hereafter. It is the Duty of all Christians, at all times, and in all places,
to retain in their Hearts the Habit, Ground, or Principle of all those Holy
Desires which are expressed in the Lord's Prayer; this it is to pray continually.
When the words of this Prayer are recited in the Congregation, it is impossible
but those who have the Habit of those Holy Desires in their Hearts should
worship God in Spirit and in Truth, viz. in the act or exercise of those
Desires, by the inspiration of the Divine Spirit, whose operation never ceases,
but when Man in his own Will or Self-love does suppress or totally extinguish
such Holy Desires or Aspirations. I am very sorry to see so ingenious and
learned a person as R. B. err so grossly about the Lord's Prayer, in which he
shows himself tainted with that Impurity of Mind, for which Dr. Owen has been
so often corrected, p. 245. We know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, etc. Romans 8. 26. But says R.
B. If this Prayer had been such a prescribed Form of Prayer to the Church, that
had not been true, neither had they been ignorant what to pray; nor should they
have needed the help of the Spirit to teach them, p. 245. To this I answer,
That it is impossible that any man should actually know as they ought to know
the sense or meaning of any word in the Lord's Prayer, but by an actual
Influence of the Divine Spirit upon his Heart and Mind. I must therefore
proclaim to all the World, That it was the Spirit of Error which suggested
these words to R. B. If this Prayer had been such a prescribed Prayer to the
Church, that had not been true, neither had they been ignorant what to pray;
nor should they have needed the help of the Spirit to teach them. By what I
have already said, it appears, that if by these words, our Adversaries, etc. p.
264. he means all those who worship God according to the English Liturgy, he is
very Uncharitable: Our Adversaries, says he, whose Religion is all, for the
most part, outside, and such whose Acts are the mere product of Man's natural
Will and Abilities; as they can preach, so they can pray when they please, and
therefore have their set particular Prayers.

Answ. We acknowledge, that we can never pray as we ought, but by the
assistance of the Spirit of God, but his Assistance is always ready for us: If
at any time we fail of it, we our selves are the cause we have it not. As to
set particular Prayers, we own no Prayer but the Lord's Prayer, further than
the sense of it is implied in some part of that Complete Body of Vocal Prayer,
that Divine Summary or Breviary of the Expressions of all holy Desires, p. 266.
Because this outward Prayer depends upon the inward, as that which must follow
it, and cannot be acceptably performed, but as attended with a superadded
Influence and Motion of the Spirit: Therefore cannot we prefix set times to
pray outwardly, so as to lay a necessity to speak words at such and such times,
whether we feel this Heavenly Influence and Assistance or no, for that, we
judge, were a tempting of God, and a coming before him without due preparation.
To this I answer, That whatever feeling we have, or have not in the Sensitive
Powers or Faculties of our Souls, if our Heart, our Will, or Spiritual Appetite
be rightly affected toward God, our Prayers will most certainly be acceptable
unto Him: And His Holy Spirit is always ready to assist every man that
believes in Jesus, so to order and dispose his own Spirit, that it may comply
with the Will of God in all things. It cannot be a Tempting of God, to depend
upon him for his gracious Assistance to do his Will: And it is his Will, that
in our Religious Assemblies we should use Words in Prayer; When ye pray, say,
Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2. p. 268. To desire a man to fall to Prayer e're the
Spirit, in some measure, less or more, move him thereunto; is to desire a man
to see before he open his Eyes. That is an irreverent Expression, To fall to
Prayer; but most certainly it is our Duty to call upon all men, who profess
Christianity, to observe the Times of the Public Worship of Almighty God; and
to testify to them, that if they will sincerely trust in God for Christ's sake
to assist them by his holy Spirit, they shall never fail of his gracious
Assistance; He will help their Infirmities, and enable them to cry, Abba
Father, Romans 8. 15, 26. P. 275. As for the formal customary way of Singing, it
has in Scripture no foundation, nor any ground in true Christianity; yea*
besides, etc. Answ. If by the formal customary way of Singing, he mean that way
of Singing Psalms in Meter, or the reading of them in prose, which the Church
of England is accustomed unto. It is a gross Error to say, there is no
foundation for it in the Scripture; Have we not received a Precept from our
Blessed Lord, by his Apostle, to sing and make melody in our Hearts to the
Lord? And can there be any better means to do this, than what the Apostle
prescribes in these words, Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs? Can there be any better Psalms, etc. than those which were
most certainly and unquestionably composed by Divine Inspiration? Yea, says he,
besides all the Abuses incident to Prayer and Preaching, it has this more
peculiar, That oftentimes great and horrid Lies are said in the sight of God;
for all manner of wicked profane People take upon them to personate the
Experiences and Conditions of blessed David, which are not only false as to
them, but also as to some of more Sobriety, who utter them forth; as where they
will Sing sometimes; Psalm. 22. 14. My heart is like wax, it is melted in the
midst of my bowels. Ver. 15. My strength is dried up like a potsheard, and my
tongue cleaves to my jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death.
And, Psalm. 6. 6. I am weary with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to
swim; I water my couch with my tears. And many more, which those that speak
know to be false, as to them. To this I answer, That all the Prayers of wicked
profane People, that is, of those who persist in their Wickedness, whatever
words they use in Prayer, are an abomination to the Lord. What then? Must they
be forbid to pray? No surely: But in Praying they must cease to be wicked. And
indeed, it is impossible that any wicked man should cease to be wicked before
he begins to pray. Prayer has always that Priority to ceasing to be wicked,
which Logicians call Priority of Nature. Before any man can be justly esteemed
to be a Member of any Christian Assembly or Congregation, he must profess, that
he believes the Holy Scriptures were written by Divine Inspiration, and
consequently that they contain nothing but Truth. And also, that he resolves by
the help of God, to take the Truth therein contained to be the Rule of his Life
and Conversation. If he be Sincere in this Profession (and God only can judge
whether he be so, or no, unless he violate his Profession by some notorious
contrary Practice) then most certainly he has in his Heart those Holy Desires
which are expressed in the Lord's Prayer. And as for the Psalms, I pray God to
make all the Adversaries of the Church of England duly sensible of this most
important Truth, That though indeed there are many Passages in them, which none
of us can apply to himself, as to the Particularity of his own Person, yet
there is not one Passage in the whole Book, but what every true Christian may
and ought to apply to himself, upon account of the Communion of Saints, of the
relation He has to the Head, and to every Member of the Holy Catholic Church
which is in Heaven, or in Earth: So that every Expression in the Book of
Psalms, every sincere Christian (so far as it is intelligible unto him) may use
as the Means to stir him up to Sing and make Melody in his Heart to the Lord;
to form such Thoughts and Affections as shall be most acceptable to God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Certainly, every Man that is confirmed to the Image of
the Son of God, who was all his days here upon Earth, A man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with Grief. I say, every Sincere Christian does most certainly pour
out his Soul before the Lord, in such Affections as are here expressed in the
words of the Psalmist, My heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my
bowels, etc. I am highly delighted with many Passages in Robert Barclay's
Apology, particularly with this, p. 370. It is plain, that men that are taken
with Love, whether it be of a Woman, or any other thing, if it has taken a
deep place in the Heart, and possess the Mind, it will be hard for the man so
in Love to drive out of his Mind the person or thing so loved: Yea, in his
eating, drinking, and sleeping his Mind will always have a tendency that way;
and in Business, or Recreations, however intent he be in it, there will but a
very short time be permitted to pass, but the Mind will let some Ejaculations
forth toward its Beloved. And albeit such a one must be conversant in those
things that the Care of this Body and suchlike things call for, yet will he
avoid, as Death it self, to do those things that may offend the Party so
beloved, or cross his Design in obtaining the thing so earnestly desired, though
there may be some small use in them: The great Design, which is chiefly in his
Eye, will so balance him, that he will easily look over, and dispense with such
petty Necessities rather than endanger the loss of the greater by them. Now,
That Men ought to be thus in love with GOD and the Life to come, none will
deny; and the thing is apparent from these Scriptures, Mat. 6. 20. But lay up
for your selves treasures in Heaven: Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things
above. In the light of the sincere Love of God may be clearly seen how
abominable such Conceits are, which have been published of late by persons of
great Wit, professing Christianity, and received by many with great Applause,
namely this, That it may be esteemed a Noble Act for a Man to starve himself to
death. For this the Memory of Atticus is celebrated, as if he had performed an
Act of Heroic Virtue. But I shall take the confidence to say, That an Heathen
Poet had the Wit to scorn the Gallantry of Self-murder, however it comes to
pass that some of the Ingeniosi in this Age excuse it, and some others admire
it. Martial. Lib. 6. Ep. 28.
Sit Cato, dam Vivit, sane vel Caesare major:
Dum moritur, number quid major Othone fuit.
Let Cato's Life be more than Cesar's brave:
He dyed, like Otho, (Vice's Basest Slave.)


Let the Wits prate and scribble as they please; as long as the World stands
there shall be some men in it who will ever most steadfastly believe, that
there is nothing Noble but to follow the LORD of GLORY; there is no True
Pleasure, but to bear his Yoke, who says, Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your Souls.
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Animadversions On HOBBS, concerning the Thoughts of Man.
COncerning the Thoughts of Man, I will consider them first singly, and
afterward in Train, or Dependence upon one another: Singly, they are every one
a Representation, or Appearance of some Quality or other Accident of a Body
without us; which is commonly called an Object. Which Object works on the
Eyes, Ears, and other Parts of Man's Body, and by diversity of working,
produces diversity of Apparances.

The Original of them all, is that which we call SENSE (for there is no
Conception in a Man's Mind, which has not at first totally, or by parts, been
begotten upon the Organs of Sense): The rest are derived from that Original.

Chap. 3. A Man can have no Thought, representing any thing not subject to
Sense.

Here he lays the Foundation of all Sin, and Error: For certainly nothing can
more incrassate, and sensuallize the Intellect, than such an Opinion, that we
cannot have a Conception of any thing, but what is Sensible, or Corporeal: For
if this were true, it would necessarily follow, That we cannot have any
Conception, Notion, or Apprehension of GOD, viz. Of a Spirit, or Being
Incorporeal, Infinite in all Perfection. This Opinion, That a Man can have no
Thought representing any thing, but what has first made its Impression upon the
Organs of Sense) brought Gassendus to that Height of Madness, that he says in
plain Terms, That he is not able to think of GOD, but under some Corporeal Form:
He says also, That the Mind is wont to have a Conception of GOD, as of some
Venerable Old Man. "O curvae in Terris Animae, and Coelestium inanes!

Chap. 6. These Words of Good, and Evil, and Contemptible, are ever used with
relation to the Person that uses them: There being nothing simply, and
absolutely so; nor any common Rule of Good and Evil, to be taken from the
Nature of the Objects themselves, but from the Person of the Man (where there
is no Commonwealth, or in a Commonwealth, from the Person that represents
it; or from an Arbitrator, or Judge, whom, Men disagreeing, shall by Consent,
set up, and make his Sentence the Rule thereof.

Here Is a deep Stream of that Fountain of all Uncleanness, above discovered:
From this Supposition, That there can be no Conception, Notion, or Idea of a
Being Incorporeal, Infinite in all Perfection, it must needs follow, that there
can be no Conception, or Idea of any thing simply, and absolutely Good to every
Man: But on the contrary, he that apprehends the Existence of that most
Glorious Being, must needs appehend, or conceive, that the Enjoyment of HIM is
simply and absolutely Good, and that the being deprived of that Enjoyment, is
simply and absolutely Evil.

The Definition of the Will (says he in the same Chapter) given commonly by the
Schools, that it is a Rational Appetite, is not good; for if it were, then
could there be no Voluntary Act against Reason.

No wonder, that he who makes so plain a Profession that he knows not GOD,
discovers here so gross Ignorance of the Nature of the Will of Man, in respect
of which, it is written, That Man was made in the Image of GOD. As GOD alone is
his own Happiness, so GOD alone is the True Happiness of Man; that is to say,
is the True and Proper Satisfaction of his Will, or Rational Appetite. Finite
Objects affected, or inclined unto by the Will, unless in Reference to GOD are
All but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, even those that are most satisfactory to
the Sensitive Appetite. There be many that say, Who will show us any Good? LORD
lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us, Psalm. 4. v. 6. There is none
good but one, that is God, Mat. 19. 17.

Then could there be no Voluntary Act against Reason. The Consequence is a
Notorious Falsehood: For the Will is defined to be a Rational Appetite, not
that it always follows Reason, but that it is of such a Nature that it can
never be in any measure truly saissyed, but by the Acceptance of those Objects,
which by Reason, or the Understanding influenced, with the Truth, are
propounded unto it. All such Objects are no other than the various Modes, or
ways of enjoying God, who is All in All.

Chap. 10. Covetousness of great Riches and Ambition of great Honors are
Honorable, as signs of Power to obtain them.

Nor does it alter the Case of Honor, whether an Action, (so it be great, and
difficult, and consequently a sign of much Power, be just, or unjust; for
Honor consists only in the Opinion of Power. Therefore the Ancient Heathen
did not think they dishonored, but greatly honored the Gods, when they
introduced them in their Poems, committing Rapes, Thefts, and other great, but
unjust, or unclean Acts, insomuch, as nothing is so much celebrated in Jupiter,
as his Adulteries, etc.

Basest of Mortals! who endeavourest to fix the greatest Disgrace, even upon
the Name of Honor, which has been ever used by the best Orators, as one of the
strongest Inducements to Just and Noble Actions, (...), Aristot. Topic. 6. 'The
Ancient Heathen, etc. Was there ever such an impudent Sophister! Would he not
here insinuate into the Thoughts of his unwary Readers, that the generality of
some of the most considerable of the Learned Heathen, did show that their Souls
were fallen into that Mire, which His so long wallowed in? It Is true, some of
the Poets amongst the Heathen were as wanton and impure in their Imagination,
as lascivious and profane in their Writings, as T. Hobbs's Encomiast, Ab. C.
But were not the most Eminent of the Ancient Philosophers; yea, and many of the
Heathen Poets of another mind? Does not Aristotle say expressly, Ethic. Lib. 4.
Cap. 3. (...) (...). He can never be worthy of Honor, who is addicted to Vice;
for Honor is the Reward of Virtue, and is given to Good and Virtuous Men.
(...). A good Man is truly Honorable What says the Wisest of the Latin
Authors, M. T. Cicero, concerning the Reasons of the Honor they attributed to
Jupiter, (by which Name they signified the Maker of Heaven and Earth) Lib. 2.
de Natura Deorum: Ipse Jupiter, id est, Iuvans Pater, quem conversis casibus
appellamus a Iuvando Iovem, a Poetis, Pater Di^^^que Hominumque dicitur; a
Majoribus autem nostris, Optimus, Maximus; and quidem, ante Optimus, id est,
Beneficentissimus quam Maximus, quia majus est, certeque gratius, prodesse
omnibus, quam opes magnas habere. Jupiter was called by our Ancestors, the Most
Good, and the Most Great; and truly the Most Good, that is, the Most Gracious,
and Beneficient before the Most Great and Powerful, because it is More Great,
and certainly More Acceptable to do Good to all Men, than to have the fullness
of Wealth and Power. Could T. H. be ignorant of that Divine Saying of the Poet
Iuvenal? -- Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus.
Virtue's the only Nobility; that is to say, Is that for which only Men ought
to be Honored. Prima mihi debes animi bona: Sanctus haberi
Iustitiaeque tenax, factis, dictisque mereris
Agnosco Procerem. Juven. Sat. 8.


These and some of the preceding Verses are thus Traslated by my Learned Friend
Dr. Barten Holyday: Though in thy Hall Wax-Images we see,
Virtue's the only True Nobility.
Live like good Paulus, Cossus, Drusus; and
Before thy Statues let these Worthies stand:
Let these before thy Consuls Rods still go:
To me the Riches of the Mind first owe.
Deserve to be held pure, and just toward Men,
In Word, and Deed? I Will grant thee Noble then.


Is not the Word Turpe, i. e. Base and Dishonorable, the Epithet, which the
Ancient Heathen gave to Injustice and all other Vice? Honor, says he,
consists only in the Opinion of Power. Ans. Honor consists indeed in the
Esteem of true Power, but that is never separated from true Goodness, which
implies Justice, and all other Virtues. Go, ye Hobbists, and hide your heads
for shame, and never more appear in the Defense of so vile a Sophister; who
might have learnt from the Admirable Boethius (if his Pride had permitted him)
what Power is (which he saw but confusedly, as in a Dream) which is indeed the
Object of Honor. Lib. 4. de Consolatione Philosophiae: Bonorum quidem
Potentia, malorum vero minime dubit abilis apparet infirmitas, etc. Veramque
illam Platonis esse sententiam liquet, solos quod desiderent facere posse
sapientes: Improbos vero exercere quidem quodlibeat, quod vero desiderent,
explere non posse. Faciunt enim quaelibet, dum per ea, quibus delectantur, id
bonum, quod desiderant, se adepturos putant: sed minime adipiscuntur, quoniam
ad beatitudinem probra non veniunt? It is evident, That Good Men are always
powerful; that Wicked Men are most feeble and impotent. And the Truth of that
Saying of Plato cannot be doubted, That only Wise Men do what they desire; but
that the Wicked exercise their Lusts, but are never able to accomplish their
Desires; for they do whatsoever their Lusts prompt them unto, whilst by those
courses, by which they gratify their sensual Inclinations, they hope to attain
to that Good which they desire, but they never attain thereunto; for it is
impossible that Villainy should approach to True Happiness.

It is most evident, by T. H. his own words, Chap. 11. ( Felicity is a
continual Progress of the Desire from one Object to another, the attaining of
the former being still but the way to the latter) that he was one of those of
whom Plato spoke, when he said, The Wicked exercise their Lusts, but are never
able to accomplish their Desires.

Chap. 14. The Right of Nature, says T. H. which Writers commonly call Ius
Natural, is the Liberty each Man has to use his own Power as he will himself,
for the preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own Life; and
consequently of doing any thing which in his own Judgment and Reason he shall
conceive to be the aptest means thereunto.

Here he expresses a plain contempt of the words of our Blessed Savior, and
consequently before all the World renounces his Christianity. Luke 14. 26. If
any man will come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. It is manifest and unquestionable, that by a Man's hating his own
life, we are to understand his abhorring the Preservation of it by any Unlawful
Means: Whereas this Industrious Agent for the Kingdom of Darkness would have us
believe, that a man may do any thing by the Right of Nature, which he conceives
to be the aptest Means to preserve this transitory Life, which Heathens have
been willing to part with, rather than they would violate their Faith. What
would the brave Regulus have thought of this Philosopher, falsely so called? I
flame with Indignation against the Spirit and Genius of such an Enemy to
Christianity, that has named the Name of Christ, considering the many Excellent
and Christian-like Sentences I read in the Verses of some Heathens, as well as
in the Writings of the Stoics, and other Philosophers, particularly in his
Verses, who was so much taken with Regulus*s Fidelity to his most cruel Enemy.
How like a Christian does he write of a Good Man? Carm. Lib. 4. Ode 9. Duramque
callet Pauperiem pati,
Pejusque Letho flagitium timet;
Non ille pro charis Amicis,
Aut Patria timidus perire.
Which that Excellent Person Sir R. F. translates thus: If he know how hard
Want to bear,
And fear a Crime more than his End,
If for his Country, or his Friend,
To stake his Life he does not fear.


As for T. H. his Mad Conceits concerning Liberty and Necessity, his asserting,
That the HOLY ONE is the Cause of all Sinful Purposes, etc. since they are so
generally abhorred even by those Persons who assert such Propositions, from
which the same most execrable Conclusions may be inferred, I think it not
requisite that I should spend any time in animadverting on them in these
Papers. And as for those Propositions from which I say such black Conclusions
may be inferred, I think I have plainly refuted them by the Truth I have
demonstrated in my Latin Papers against Iansenius and Calvin, whose Followers,
I hope, will for the future be the more inclined to relinquish those wretched
Opinions, seeing them in the company of so many Hellish Conceits of that most
horrid Monster, the Father of the Leviathan. By his saying, That Men can have
no Passion nor Appetite to any thing, of which Appetite God's Will is not the
Cause, Chap. 21. he plainly gives the greatest Encouragement to the Workers of
Iniquity to entertain a favorable conceit of the grossest* Enormities of their
wicked Lives.

Chap. 34. He talks perfectly like one in Bethlehem: Apparitions, quoth he,
though no real Substances, but Accidents of the Brain, yet when God raises
them supernaturally to signify his Will they are not unproperly termed God's
Messengers; that is to say, his Angels.

What does he think of the Angel we read of 2 Kin. 19. 35. And it came to pass
that night that the angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in
the morning, behold, they were all dead corpse. This was a pretty stout Accident
of the Brain, that could slay in one night 185000 Men. No doubt there was an
Angel (an Evil one) in the Brain of T. H. without such an Assistant he could
hardly have hammered out so many Diabolical Imaginations. Near the Conclusion
of this Chapter he has a Lucid Interval: But, says he, the many places of the
New Testament, and our Savior's own words, and in such Texts wherein is no
suspicion of corruption of the Scripture, have extorted from my feeble Reason
an Acknowledgment and Belief, that there be also Angels substantial and
permanent. I pray, Reader, observe these words, Have extorted from my feeble
Reason; see how he discovers his Cross Humor and Averseness, from a due
compliance with the Judgment of the Church of God. He reproaches his Reason for
falling under the power of a Great Truth, which he had such a mind to oppose.
By these words in the same Chapter, -- Where by the Spirit of God is meant God
himself; he provides a Sophistical Evasion for himself and his Disciples, in
case he or they shall be charged with the Macedonian Heresy. That young
Students may not be imposed on by persons more likely to deceive them than T.
H. by their perverse Interpretations of Texts of Scripture, wherein there is
express mention of the Spirit of God, I shall most earnestly beseech them to
peruse these Books of the admirable Saint Basil, viz. Adversus Eunomium, and
Lib. de Spiritu Sancto; And I desire, that in all their Discourses concerning
the Nature and Operation of the Holy Ghost, they would be ever mindful of those
words with which he concludes his third Book against Eunomius, (...), etc.

As for that wicked stuff which he delivers Chap. 42. in a pretended defense of
his cursed Assertion, That we ought to deny our Savior before Men, if we be
commanded by our Lawful Prince; it has such a smell of Brimstone, that I abhor
to recite it, or say a word to any one that undertakes to vindicate him herein:
But the Lord rebuke thee. His calumniating of the Holy Martyrs makes their
Wounds as it were to bleed afresh; and this will make his Memory to look horrid
and ghastly to Posterity.

To his wicked Paradoxes concerning the word Church, and Power Ecclesiastical,
I shall oppose these words of the most Learned and Pious Mr. Herbert Thorndike,
(in his Review of his Discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian
state, p. 40.) Seeing that the Church is a Society, Community, Corporation, or
Spiritual Commonwealth, subsisting by the immediate Revelation and Appointment
of God, without dependence upon those Christian States, wherein it is
harbored, as to the Right by which it subsisteth, and the matter wherein it
communicates; it follows of necessity, that it is endowed with Rights
correspondent to those wherein the Sovereignty of States consists. The Power
of the Sword is the Principal of Rights into which the rest are resolved, when
they are enforced to have recourse unto it, for the execution of that, which
becomes requisite to make them available. And the Church has the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, which is used two manner of ways, as the
Sword is, either to subdue Strangers, or to cut off Malefactors.

Chap. 34. T. H. has these Mad Expressions: Substance and Body signify the
same thing; and therefore Substance incorporeal are words which when they are
joined together destroy one another, as if a Man should say an incorporeal
Body. But Chap. 25. he has a Lucid Interval: To worship God, says he, as
inanimating or inhabiting such an Image or Place, that is to say, an Infinite
Substance in a Finite Place, is Idolatry. Here he acknowledges, that God is a
Substance Infinite, and consequently Incorporeal. This Acknowledgment, the
force of so great a Truth, (to use his own words) extorted from his feeble
Reason. Haec est summa delicti nolentium recognoscere, quem ignorare non
possunt, Tert. Apol.

Chap. 46. He puts Hell and Purgatory together, as if the Existence of one were
no more credible than of the other: What is all the Legend, says he, of
Fictitious Miracles in the Lives of the Saints, and all the Histories of
Apparitions and Ghosts, alleged by the Doctors of the Church of Rome, to make
good their Doctrine of Hell and Purgatory, the power of Exorcism, and other
Doctrines, which have no warrant, neither in Reason nor Scripture. In the 44th
Chapter he has provided a comfortable state for the Reprobate, after the
Resurrection, instead of that state of ineffable Torments, which all true
Christians acknowledge to be signified by the Torments of Hell. The Reprobate,
says he, shall be in the estate that Adam and his Posterity were in after the
Sin committed. The Wicked, says he in the same Chapter, being left in the
estate they were in after Adam's Sin, may at the Resurrection live, as they
did, Marry, and give in Marriage, and have gross and corruptible Bodies, as all
Mankind now have, and consequently may engender perpetually after the
Resurrection, as they did before.

Are not these pleasant Conceits for that sort of Men, who would fain have the
Fear of Hell removed out of the way, whilst they turn every one to his course,
as the Horse rusheth into the Battle? But the fear of Death and Hell they shall
never be able to shake off, let them do what they can: -- Haeret lateri
lethalis arundo.


And now I doubt not but the ingenuous Reader will concur with me in the
Indignation I conceive against the most intolerable Impudence of a late Writer,
who pretends to set forth an History of the Life of T. H. He tells us, we are
all mistaken, the Black-Moor is exceeding White. Controversias quidem The
logicas, says he, p. 167. maxim aversatus est. Quicquid autem ad Pietatis
exercitia, au^ ^o^os Mores conferret, plurimi fecit. To adorn the Memory of
such a Man as T. H. what is it but to provide, that the Corpse of one that dyed
of the Plague may lie in state, that People coming to behold it may contract
the Infection? If this Author go on to publish any more Books to as ill
purposes as he has done this, whatever height of Learning and Eloquence he may
attain unto by the continuance of his Studies, he will certainly deserve no
better Character than that which was given by Velleius Paterculus to C. Curio,
Hist. lib. 2. Homo Ingeniosissime Nequam, and Facundus Malo Publico. Most just
is the severity of the Censure past upon this most Infamous Writer, by the most
Reverend Archbishop of Armagh: The catching of the Leviathan, Chap. 1. Thus we
have seen how the Hobbian Principles do destroy the Existence, the Simplicity,
the Ubiquity, Eternity, and Infiniteness of God, the Doctrine of the Blessed
Trinity, the Hypostatical Union, the Kingly, Sacerdotal, and Prophetical
Offices of Christ; the Being and Operation of the Holy Ghost, Heaven, Hell,
Angels, Devils, the Immortality of the Soul, the Catholic and all National
Churches, the Holy Scriptures, Holy Orders, the Holy Sacraments, the whole
Frame of Religion, and the Worship of God; the Laws of Nature, the Reality of
Goodness, Justice, Piety, Honesty, Conscience, and all that is sacred.

I shall most earnestly entreat those young Students in Divinity, who shall
cast an Eye on these Papers, that they would read all that has been written
against T. H. by this most Renowned Archbishop, and hy the Right Reverend
Father in God the late Bishop of Salisbury, and by the Reverend and Learned Dr.
H. More, Dr. Sharrock, and Dr. Cumberland. Other excellent Men have abundantly
confuted his Wicked Errors, but I have been chiefly conversant in the Writings
of those I have here mentioned. I cannot but recite a few Lines of my Lord
Bishop of Salisbury's excellent Sermon concerning the Sinfulness, Danger, and
Remedies of Infidelity, which T. H. would not acknowledge to be a Sin. The
Author of the Leviathan, Cap. 41. p. 286. tells us in plain terms, That we do
not read any where (in the Scriptures) that they which received not the Doctrine
of Christ did therein sin.

And again, That the Injunctions of Christ, and his Apostles, Men might refufe
without Sin. Now, concerning this Assertion, I cannot choose but say, that had I
not been acquainted with the Works of that Author, especially those relating to
Religion, I should exceedingly wonder at i^, because it supposes Men never to
look into their Bibles; which is the thing it would persuade.

In the 21st of Matthew our Savior asks the Jews this Question, Did ye never
read in the Scriptures such a thing? A Question which I must repeat to the
Asserters of this Doctrine: Did they never read in the Scriptures the
Sinfulness, the Danger, the Hainousness of Infidelity? Surely he that runs may
read it.

His Lordship's Exercitatio in Thomae Hobbii Philosophiam, printed at Oxford
1656. proved a most effectual Antidote against the Plague of the Hobbian
Errors, which at that time began to spread most dreadfully.

Since I had fitted these Animadversions for the Press, there came to my Hands
a Book, entitled, An Answer to a late Book published by Dr. Bramhal, late
Bishop of Derry, called, The Catching of the Leviathan. I wish some Learned Man
would publish a Reply to it, to vindicate the Honor of that most renowned
Prelate. If the Charge I have brought against T. H. in these Animadversions be
true, that Monument of his Reputation (which some may conceit to have been)
erected in this Book, will most certainly, in the Judgment of all Men, fall to
the Ground; the weakness whereof in one particular I shall here demonstrate.

He affirms, That Atheism is a Sin of Ignorance; and he conceits, that he
sufficiently exposes the most Reverend Archbishop by this pitiful Sophism.

If it be not a Sin of Ignorance it must be a Sin of Malice: Can a Man malice
that which he thinks has no Being?

Answ. To have an Aversion to the Notion or Conception of a Being Infinite in
all Perfection, is to Malice or Hate GOD: And such an Aversion is the grossest
Atheism. T. H. supposes that there is a GOD; and from this Supposition it must
needs follow (whether he would have it so or no) that all Rational Creatures
are capable of the foresaid Notion. So that an Aversion to it can proceed from
no other Cause, but only the Pravity of the Will perverting the Undertaking. T.
H. pretends to Believe the Holy Scriptures: Now it is written, This is the True
Light, that enlightneth every man that comes into the World. The True Light is
GOD: It is written, God is Light. If the True Light enlightneth every Man that
comes into the World, Atheism is not only the Not Seeing of Him, but an
Aversion to Him; no Sin of Ignorance, but of Malice. (...).

I shall not make any other Apology for the sharpness of my Style, but this:
That it is not enough not to Consent to the Hobbian Errors, but we must Hate
them with a perfect Hatred.

I have no more to do at present, but only to recite those words of the blessed
Psalmist, with reference to every one of the Disciples. of this most Impious
Sophister, which I used in public, with reference to him, not long before his
death: Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish men
blasphemeth thee daily. (...)


EPITAPHIUM R. SH. LL. Doctoris.
Hic Iacent
Reliquiae Viri Incomparabilis Roberti Sharrock,
Qui Iacentem Suscitavit
Philosophiam Practicam,
Atheismum Triumphantem Debellavit:
HOBBII, SPINOSAe, and caeterorum
Ejusdem furfuris homuncionum Placita,
Specie quadam Eruditionis insignis ostentata,
Quam sint Stolida; quam Improba
Clarissime Demonstravit.
Virtutum, and Vitiorum omnium
Veras, ac Vivas Effigies depingens
Horum Odia, Illarum Amores
In Animis Prudentium Lectorum
Flagrantissimos Accendit.
Striptis Varii Argumenti Elaboratissimis
Usque ad Consummationem Seculi
Apud Doctos, and Pios permansuris
Famae Suae
Exegit Monumentum
Aere perennius.
Clarissimi Viri Domini GEORGII MACKENZI Epitaphium, A. D. 1691.
Ingenio Magno, ac Vera Pietate refulget
Illius Egregii Candida Fama Viri.
Cum nihil Hic fuerit, Quo se ingens flamma foveret,
Ignea Men's Terras linquit, and Astra Petit.
A LETTER to the Author of a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Doctrine of the Trinity
Placed in its due Light.
Non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus.
SIR,
THO I acknowledge, That you deserve the Character of a Person Ingenious and
Learned; yet since you deny the Catholic Faith, whilst you pretend to be a True
Son of the Church of England, I must say, you do not deserve the Name of an
Honest Man. I doubt not but any Learned and Impartial Reader, that believes the
Holy Scriptures were written by Divine Inspiration, will readily grant, that in
two or three Lines. I destroy your Hypothesis, viz. That there is no other
Difference or Distinction betwixt the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, than there
is betwixt Infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and Power. It is most agreeable to the
Holy Scriptures, to say, That Infinite Goodness; is Infinite Wisdom, and Power,
and that Infinite Wisdom is Infinite Goodness and Power, and that Infinite
Power is Infinite Goodness and Wisdom: But it is most contrary to the Holy
Scriptures, to say, That the Father is the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and that
the Son is the Father, and the Holy Ghost; and that the Holy Ghost is the
Father and the Son. Your ridiculing the Heavenly Senniments of St. Augustine
concerning the Divine Beauty, is such an Abomination, that I cannot recite it
without an Horresco Referens as a Preface to the Recitation of such a
Blasphemous Harangue. P. 4. Let us seriously consider; How could Epicurus more
Graphically describe his Idle Voluptuous Deity, than by comparing him to a
Beautiful Lady, pleasing her self with the Image of her fair Face, reflected in
a bright smooth Glass? or, How could he give a better Account of his
regardlesness of the World, than by saying, his Life, his Glory, and his
Pleasure are all his Interest, and and these are determined to one another.

Now, I pray thee, Reader, what is all this to thee, or me, but a
Discouragement from hoping any good from such a God, and consequently from
paying him any Love, or Service? Be the Lady never so perfect in Beauty, her
Glass never so exactly clear, her Delight in it never so ravishing; what is
this to the well-ordering of her Family, but an hindrance? A Noble, Eloquent,
and Judicious Writer, in his Advice to a Daughter, tells her, That her
Servants will more value her Housekeeper than her Ladyship, if they find she
takes no care of them: And some will say, It is not so unreasonable to Worship
the Sun, who is the World's great Benefactor, as that Sun' s Creator, if he
leaves them without farther regard to their happiness.

Now I pray thee, Reader, What is all this to thee, or me? Is it nothing to me,
that my God is the Infinity of True Beauty, that He is all that I can desire,
all that deserves my Love? The Divine Beauty implies the Glory of infinite
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, and is all this nothing to me? It implies the
Glory of the Justice of the Divine Vengeance on Impenitent Sinners, as they are
Impenitent, and the Glory of Infinite Mercy toward Sinners, that repent, or
such, who, tho they do not truly repent, have not so hardened their hearts, but
that they are capable of Repentance: And is all this nothing to me? Is it
nothing to me, that the Divine Beauty being Infinite, is in all Things and
Events (Sin only excepted); so that whilst I sincerely believe in JESUS, all
the Objects of my Thoughts are Matter of Joy and Satisfaction unto me? The King
of Terrors ceases to be terrible, and becomes a most useful Subject to those
that obey the Royal Law of Liberty, and so become Kings, and More than
Conquerors over all their Enemies. This Happiness they attain unto by a true
Sense, or Practical Knowledge of the Divine Beauty, the Infinity of Light and
Love: And is all this nothing to me? Certainly the Divine Beauty is All Things
to me. One Glympse of it is enough to quench all such burning desires, which
torment the Souls of Covetous, Ambitious, and Voluptuous Men. This Beauty do I
see in the Image of the Invisible God, the Brightness of the Glory of the
Father of Lights, and the Express Image of his Person. Your kind Reflection upon
the Mahometans, p. 19. puts me in mind of that most Remarkable Passage in a
Learned Book, Entitled, A Discourse of Natural, and Revealed Religion. Chap.
26. Before (...) take my leave of Mahomet, it will not be amiss to Advertise my
Reader (if he be a Christian) of the Danger, both he, and all other Christian
are in of being reduced under the Slavery of this Mortal, and Common Enemy; so
that how prosperous soever the Christian Arms are, or have been, we are still
in greater danger than ever, of being ruined by the Legions of these Infidels,
not those of their Spahi's or Ianizaries, but by those of another Order, far
more mischievous; forasmuch as they fight under our Colors, and pretend to be
of our Party, such Enemies are ever looked upon as the most dangerous; for they
are rarely discovered, till they have given the Mortal Blow. Now these are the
Socinians, which, tho exploded the World above a Thousand Years ago, under the
Appellation of Arians, are in these our days, risen again from the Grave, and
like Spectrums appear every where in the dark.

P. 29. You say, That St. Gregory Nazianzen in his 35th Oration, makes the
Unity no other than p^cifical; wherein he agrees with his great Friend St.
Basil, as appears by the Letter sent him expressly upon this Subject by that
great Father.

Have you any Fear of God, or Shame of the World, who have the Impudence to
publish so Notorious a Lie! These are St. Gregory Nazianzen's Words, in his
38th Oration, and there is nothing in his 35th but what is fully agreeable to
them. (...).

This is the first Verse of one of his Hymns: (...):


That Unity cannot be Specifical, or under any Genus, which is above all being
Absolutely Infinite. There is not one Word in any one of St. Basil's Epistle to
St. Gregory Nazianzen, that might give any Man an Occasion to conceit. That he
thought the Unity no other then Specifical. Blush, and be confounded at the
reading of these Words of that Holy Father, wherein he expresses his Sense of
the Divine Unity: De Spiritu Sancto, Cap. 18. (...). Where the Unity is
Specifical, there are (Actually, or Potentially) more than one of the same Kind.

I shall now give you some of my Reflections upon the Conclusion of your
Sophistical Essay: Some, I hope, say you, will find satisfaction in the very
Doctrine, as now stated: Those that cannot fully grant their Assent and Consent
to the Doctrine for its own sake, may find some Ease, if not full Cure of their
Scruples, when they Conform to our Established Worship for Peace sake: The
former indeed is the best Fruit; but the later is not contemptible. If I obtain
either of them, I have already a sufficient Reward: Yet I hope for a greater
from that Lord, whom I have thus endeavored to serve, and who has said,
Blessed are the Peacemakers.

Here you plainly discover your Develish Design, to bring the Socinians into
the Communion of the Church of England, and consequently to Corrupt and Destroy
Her. I grant, That an Unlawful Petition in the Public Prayers, is no sufficient
Cause for any Man to separate himself from such a Religious Assembly, which
otherwise he should he obliged to frequent. But nothing can be more notoriously
repugnant to the Principles of Common Honesty, than for any Man to make the
most Solemn and Express Profession of believing that which indeed he does not
believe. Every one that professes himself to be a Member of the Church of
England, makes the most Solemn and Express Profession of Believing, that Our
Lord Jesus Christ is God of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God,
Begotten, not Made, being of One Substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made. Blessed are the Peacemakers, but Cursed are they that deny our Lord
Jesus Christ to be the True and Eternal God, whosoever thus detracts from Him
the Infinity of his Glory, he does not love Him: And it is known to all that
read or hear the Holy Scriptures, what the Apostle says: Is any love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran-atha. I am,

Your Servant, etc.

Walonis Messalini Sententiae DE Episcopis and Presbyteris Examen: Cui annexa
est, Animadversio in Davidem Blondellum.
Magna est Veritas, and Praevalebit.
Ad Lectorem AERLANUM.
TE Oro, and Obtestor, per eam, quam Professus es, Fidem Christianam, ut mente
pura, atque omnibus Praejudiciis vacua Pauca haec Scripta perlegere digneris.
Veritas non quaerit Angulos. In clara luce reponimus sententiam Nostram: nullis
Obumbrata est Rhetorices Coloribus, nullo Dialectices Affectato Acumine
impedita; sed Sermon simplici, and aperto explicata proponitur, ac defenditur
contra ejusmodi Adversarios, qui sane Ingenio pollent and eloquio. Facile potes
ipsam, quam Tractamus rem totam inspicere. Favorem tuum non petimus, sed Aequum
Iudicium. Opto te semper in Christo been Valere, Veritatem, ac Pacem amare.

Walo Messalinus in Dissertatione contra D. Petavium, p. 7. de se, Suisque
loquens haec verba habet: Nusquam negarunt antiqua etiam tempora discrimen
illud inter Episcopos, and Presbyteros agnovisse, qui sciunt rem esse
antiquissimam, ut duo hi Ordines in Ecclesia fuerint distincti, Episcoporum and
Presbyterorum, si excipiantur Apostolica tempora, quorum aevo, ut eorum scripta
testantur, nullam constat eorum Ordinum fuisse distinctionem.

Resp. An scripta Apostolica explicanda sint secundum Novatorum Commenta, vel
secundum Sensum Communem Sanctorum in Ecclesia primitiva, quorum Scripta adhuc
in Ecclesiae Aedificationem per providentiam divinam conservantur, Judicet
quispiam veritatis Evangelicae studiosus.

P. 12. Paulus in priore ad Timotheum, Cap. 3. postquam praecepta dedit
Episcopis, statim transit ad Diaconos, non alios agnoscens Presbyteros nisi qui
confuso cum Episcopis discrimine iidem haberentur. Nullus itaque inter eos
gradus interjectus, nec Apostolo agnitus.

Viri Apostolici, Ioannis Chrysostomi sententiam Apostolicam Walonis Messalini
sententiae adversam his verbis clarissime prolatam cernimus, Hom. 11. in 1 Timothy
(...)

Hom. 13. (...) Phrasis ista, (...) hac ratione explicanda esse videtur. Matt.
26. 64. (...) Gal. 2. 9. (...) Ut per Dextram Potentiae significatur Dextra,
per quam Exercitur Potentia: Et per Dextras Societatis significantur Dextrae
per quas Exercetur Mutuus Amor, seu Commune ((...)) sic etiam per Manus
Presbyterii significantur Manus per quas Exercetur Presbyterium, hoc est,
Presbyteri Praesidentis, seu Episcopi Officium.

P. 14. Cum vocat eos (...) ipse se (...) eorum appellat. Recte: Sed inde non
sequitur omnes quos vocat Presbyteros fuisse Apostolos, quia illos in eodem cum
seipso Apostolo Nomine conjungit, dum seipsum appellat Sympresbyterum; nec hinc
sequitur omnes fuisse Episcopos, seu in Potestate Ordinandi constitutos, qui
illo tempore vocati erant Episcopi.

P. 86, Cum Presbyteri omnes ex aequo vocarentur, and Episcopi pariter omnes,
nullum inter eos tum discrimen fuisse dignitatis ex eo comprobatur, quia nullum
esset appellationis.

Manifestum est temporibus Apostolicis magnum fuisse discrimen Dignitatis inter
Timotheum Presbyterum atque alios qui tum etiam appellati erant Presbyteri:
fuit ille ea dignitate praeditus, quam jam tota Ecclesia Episcopalem vocat,
quae Data est illi cum Impositione Manuum Presbyterii. Scilicet is
Iurisdictionem, in ipsos Presbyteros, atque Ordinandi Potestatem ab Apostolo
Paulo accepit, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Adversus Presbyterum accusationem noli recipere,
nisi sub duobus, aut tribus Testibus. V. 22. Manus cito ne cui imponito.

P. 117. Cum haec dicit Hieronymus, quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus,
quod Presbyter non faciat? Ad morem, jusque suae aetatis respexit. Sed non ita
se rem habuisse Apostolorum aevo intellexit. Eundem enim tunc fuisse
Presbyterum, and Episcopum in Commentariis ad Titum scripsit, and Presbyteros
quoque habuisse Ordinandi potestatem, quia Presbyteri id erant, quod Episcopi.
Idem est ergo, inquit, Presbyter, qui and Episcopus: -- and antequam Diaboli
instinctu studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli,
Ego Apollo, Ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae
gubernabantur. Tunc temporis, id est, Apostolorum aetate in commune Presbyteri
Ecclesiam regebant, pares omnes honor, ac potestate. Ab eo autem tempore, hoc
est, ex quo studia in Ecclesia facta sunt, Postquam unusquisque eos quos
Baptizaverat suos putabat esse, non Christi, in toto orb decretum est, ut unus
de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura
pertineret, and schismatum semina tollerentur. Post Apostolorum itaque tempore
hoc decretum in toto Orb factum est.

Resp. Nos minime negamus quin ad reprimenda Schismata necesse fuerit ut
Episcopi Plus Auctoritatis exercerent; atque inde distinctio Dignitatis
Episcopalis and Presbyteralis clarius apparuit. Communi Presbyterorum Consilio
Ecclesiae gubernabantur antequam inter ipsos Presbyteros orta sint Dissidia:
Tunc necesse erat ut ille Presbyter, qui Ordinandi* Potestatem habebat, atque
hac ratione Caeteris Praestabat, Jurisdictionem quandam exerceret ad reprimenda
Schismata. Notandum est, quod ipse agnoscat Heronymus inceptam fuisse hanc
consuetudinem temporibus Apostolorum; nempe cum diceretur in populis Ego sum
Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego autem Cephae. In hac ipsa Epistola in qua ista occurrunt
verba, Quid facit Excepta Ordinatione Episcopus, quod Presbyter non faciat, Sic
ille loquitur: Ut sciamus Traditione Apostolicas sumptas de Vetere Testamento,
quod Aaron. and Filii Ejus, atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt hoc sibi Episcopi,
and Presbyteri, and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. Hinc omnibus innotescat
quam*sit Veritati Inimicus Adversarius Noster, qui ausus est hanc voces
proferre? Ad morem, jusque suae aetatis respexit. Sed non ita rem habuisse
Apostolorum aevo intellexit. Post Apostolorum tempora hoc decretum in toto Orb
factum est. Quod spectat ad Commune Presbyterorum Consilium in Gubernanda
Ecclesia, de quo loquitur Hieronymus, usque adhuc Potestatem aliquam Iuri
Episcopali subordinatam tenere simplices Presbyteros quis non videt? Sed
nunquam suit iis concessa Ordinandi facultas. Qualemcunque dignitatem, seu
potestatem S. Hieronymus, vel S. Chrysostomus, vel alii Sancti Scriptores in
Ecclesia Primitiva iis tribuerint, semper Excepta est Ordinatio. Quam plenus,
ac perfectus sit Consensus Hieronymi and Chrysostomi haec verba Hieronymi
clarissime ostendunt. Ad Titum and Timotheum de Ordinatione dicitur: de
Presbyteris omnino reticetur, quia in Episcopo and Presbyter continetur.
Uterque loquitur quidem magnifice de Presbyteri dignitate sed uterque denegat
Presbytero, tribuit Episcopo Ordinandi facultatem. Ad Walonem revertamur, p.
123. Eadem est explicatio, inquit, Ambrosii, vel illius commentatoris, qui
nomen ejus ementitus est, in Epistolam ad Timotheum, Cap. 3. Post Episcopum,
inquit, Diaconi Ordinationem subjicit. Quare? Nisi quia Episcopi, and
Presbyteri una Ordinatio est. Uterque enim Sacerdos est. Sed Episcopus primus
est. Sui saeculi, inquit Walo, consuetudinem spectabat, cum haec scriberet, non
Apostolicorum temporum usum and morem. Per haec verba Una Ordinatio est nihil
aliud intelligere debemus quam quod ipse dicit Hieronymus, nempe in Episcopo
and Presbyterum con^ineri.

Certe evidentissimum est Eum spectasse Apostolicorum temporum usum, and morem.
Post Episcopum Di^coni Ordinationem subjicit. Quis subjicit, nisi ipse
Apostolus, qui Scripsit hanc Epistolam, cujus enarrationem hic Commentator
instituit?

P. 242. Inepte, and Imperite inscitiae carcinoma Loyoliticum verba illa Pauli
ab Hieronymo usurpata in eam traxit sententiam, quasi ex his inducere vellet,
ab eo tempore, quo ista jactabantur apud Corinthios sublatam fuisse inter Pre^b
teros aequalitatem, and unum omnibus impositum Episcopum.

Resp. Hieronymum sensisse temporibus Apostolicis sublatam fuisse inter
Presbyteros inaequalitatem, nempe unum caeteris fuisse superpositum,
evidentissime constat ex hisce Hieronymi verbis supra recitatis: Ut sciamus
Traditiones Apostolicas, etc. En ipse Agnoscit Hieronymus ex Apostolicis
Traditionibus clarescere Episcopum tam certo fuisse Presbyteris superiorem,
quam Aaronem Filiis suis, and Levitis. Walonis Messalini Garrulitatem veritati
Evidentissimae adversam Odio, ac contemptu magis, quam responsione aliqua
dignam, esse existimamus.

P. 389. Tertullianus, in libro de Baptismo, etiam discretionem Episcopalis
Ordinis, and Presbyterici sola auctoritate Ecclesiae introductam satis clare
innuit his verbis: Dandi quidem Baptismi jus habet sacerdos, qui est Episcopus.
De hinc Presbyteri, and Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi auctoritate propter
Ecclesiae honorem, Quo salvo salva pax est. Majorem Episcopi auctoritatem quam
Presbyteri e sola Ecclesiae constitutione and consuetudine descendere clare
dicit, cum ob Ecclesiae honorem id constitutum significat, quo salvo pacem
salvam esse ait. Simul etiam inducans eandem causam fecisse ut Episcopus
praeponeretur Presbyteris: quam and Hieronymus posuit. Ut Schismata nempe
tollerentur, and Pax conservaretur and amulatio removeretur, quae Schismatum
matter est. Ad jungendus igitur jam tibi Ambrosio, Hieronymo, and Augustino
Tertullianus, qui non minus quam illi diserte Episcopalis Ordinis, and
Presbyteralis differentiam humano instituto tribuit, id est, Ecclesiae
Auctoritati.

Resp. Episcopalis Ordinis, and Presbyterialis differentiam Institutio Plusquam
humano tribuit, qui asserit eam Ecclesiae auctoritate esse constitutam: Nam ab
ipso Christo, Domino, ac Deo Nostro ecclesiae derivata est auctoritas. An ulla
ratione Verisimile habeatur Tertulliani aetate, hoc est, Secundo post Apostolos
saeculo, constitutionem aliquam Non-apostolicam tanti fuisse apud omnes in toto
Orb Christianos, judicet quicunque verum dicere maluerit, quam hypothesi
servire. Utinam omnes qui prae se ferunt ultimam Schismatum aversationem, hoc
studio ducerentur, ut Episcopus ubique sit Presbyteris praepositus, quod olim
hanc ob rationem Constitutum fuisse vel ipsi Presbyteriani agnoscunt: Ut
Schismata nempe tollerentur, and Pax conservaretur, and Amulatio removeretur,
quae Schismatum matter est

P. 413. Bono finc institutum hoc fuisse nemo negat, cum optima ratio fuerit
ita instituendi. Nunc cum reipsa cognoscitur ex Episcopali Tyrannide certius in
Ecclesia malum, ac damnum majus oriri, quam quod ex aemulatione aequalium
metuebatur, quod bona de causa constitutum fuerat, meliore posse, imo and
debere abrogari quis non videt?

Quo Judice, qua Auctoritate id debet abrogari, quod a tota Ecclesia erat
constitutum ad Schismata tollenda, quibus nullum in Ecclesia majus malum oriri
possit? Omnium Haerese^n, atque actionum Iniquissimarum Origenes esse Schismata
quis non videt? Episcopalis Tyrannis, ubicunque sit, humilitate, ac patientia
populi Christiani arguenda, ac reprimenda est; non Armis, Phanaticis
concionibus, clamoribus, omnimodo furore miscenda sunt omnia in illis Regnis,
in quibus perhibentur Episcopi Tyrannidem exercere.

P. 442. Curationem solam habuerunt primi Episcopi, qui and iidem Presbyteri,
sine potestate, sine imperio, sine Jurisdictione.

Fals^ssimum est S. Scripturae manifest contrarium primos Episcopos nullam
habuisse Potestatem, nullam Jurisdictionem. Certo certius est aliquam illos
habere potestatem, quibus aliqua Debita est Obedientia, Heb. 13. 17. Obedite
praepositis vestris, inquit Apostolus.

Heu quantos errores, quot opinionum Portenta, Fomenta ista Scelerum in Orbem
Christianum induxit superbia literata quadam verbositate suffulta! Instabiles
Multorum Animi Flumini Verborum obstare nequeunt: Per insignem Multiloquii
violentiam rapiuntur in vastum errorum Gurgitem. Tristissimum hujus rei
exemplum cernimus in controversia istade distinctione Ordinis Episcopalis a
Presbyterali tam fervide agitata. Scilicet hanc Litem ad horrenda intereptos
Christianos (Pacificum Nomen) Certamina provexit non magna aliqua
Presbyterianorum Sententiae Verisimilitudo ad alliciendos hominum Mentes
idonea, sed convenientia ista, quae in illo dogmate est, cum Nativa generis
humani Nequitia, unde nimirum omnia oriuntur semina Pervicacitatis, ac
Superbiae, cujus indoles hujusmodi est, ut Auctoritati in Universum semper
Refragetur, praesertim Ecclesiasticae. Degeneres Animos arguit, homines
Generosos, Dignitate aliqua Saeculari praeditos, vel quoslibet Ingenio,
secundum suam opinionem praestantes, atque Artium Politicarum studiosos, licet
e Faece Plebis oriundos degeneres animos arguit istiusmodi Viros agnoscere
Ecclesiasticos auctoritatem aliquam seu potestatem habere. At, at, veniet
profecto Tempus, cito veniet, quo omnibus Adami Filiis clarissime innotescet
haec Veritas, Quicquid Agunt homines, Quicquid aliqua ratione extat in Tota
Rerum Natura, Nihil esse aestimandum, nisi in quantum spectat ad Ecclesiam. Qui
Gubernant Ecclesiam in auctoritate exercenda, humilitatem Vere Christianam
maxim conspicuam exhibeant ad reprimendam hujus Saeculi superbiam. Certe
auctoritatis a Christo derivatae nunquam poterint plenam exerere Efficaciam,
nisi cum seipsos Ostenderint MAGISTRI OPT. MAX. Sequaces, Qui dicit, Si quis
vult post Me venire, Abdicet semetipsum, and attollat Crucem suam quotidie, and
sequatur Me. (...)


D. BLONDELLUS in Apologia pro Sententia Hieronymi de Episcopis, and
Presbyteris, p. 3. haec verba habet.
COnsuetudo illa, non ex quo primum inter Corinthios auditum fuit, go sum
Pauli, etc. sed paulatim invaluit. Quod adversus eos diligentius notandum
venit, quos Hieronymianae phrase^s nudo cortici eo sine inhaerere mordicus
juvat, quo liberius a clarissimi scriptoris mente aberrare sinantur.

Resp. Eundem esse Sensum, quem nos asseremus, Hieronymianae phrase^s extra
omnem controversiam ponitur per haec ipsa Hieronymi verba in eadem Epistola ad
Evagrium, in qua phrasis ista occurrit: Ut sciamus Traditiones Apostolicas
sumptas de Vetere Testamento, quod Aaron, and Filii Ejus, atque Levitae in
Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, and Presbyteri, and Diaconi vendicent in
Ecclesia.

P. 4. Quoscunque Spiritus Sanctus Episcopos, pascere Ecclesiam, attendere
gregi, etc. Ii very nominis ac dicti (...) Episcopi consendi sunt; quid enim
aliud praestare suum putent, quos nunc (...) Episcopos vocamus?

(...) dicti (...) Episcopi est, ut sit in potestate Ordinandi constitutus,
quod ne quaquam Commune est illi cum aliis Presbyteris.

P. 8. Nihil Hieronymi seculo fecit Episcopus excepta ordinatione, quod non
faceret Presbyter. Manifestum est Sanctum Hieronymum in hisce verbis Excepta
Ordinatione, non sua tantum Tempora respexisse, sed etiam Apostolica: namque
asserit secundum Traditiones Apostolicas (ut constat ex verbis supra recitatis)
in Ecclesia Episcopum tam certo fuisse Presbytero Superiorem, quam in Templo
Aaronem Filiis suis, and Levitis.

P. 57. Licet Ecclesiastico jure non omnis Presbyter Episcopus sit, Episcopi,
and Presbyteri una ordinatio est, adeoque idem (...); sive enim per
ordinationem consecrationis ritum, and (...), sive munus ipsum ad quod (...)
destinatur consecratus, intelligere placeat, perinde est; siquidem quorum eadem
est generatio, seu actus, quo forma introducitur, eorum eadem est forma quae
dat esse rei quorum eadem est functio, eorum eadem est potestas (...) a forma
manans.

Resp. Quanquam isto respectu Episcopi and Presbyteri eadem Ordinatio est, quod
in Ordinatione Episcopi includatur Presbyteri Ordinatio, adeo ut in eum, qui in
Ordine Episcopali est constitutus, collata sit Potestas ea omnia faciendi quae
Presbyter faciat; hoc tamen respectu Diversa est eorum Ordinatio, quod per
Ordinationem Presbyteri non sit in ipsum collata Potestas alios Ordinandi, quae
soli reservatur Episcopo, semper excipienda* ab ea Potestate, quaecunque
Presbytero tribuitur. Proculdubio quorum eadem est Functio, eorum eadem est
Potestas; sed pernegamus eandem esse ex omni part Episcopi, and Presbyteri
Functionem.

P. 66. Interiacens Aetate Sua inter Sacerdotes (...) Chrysostomus ob oculos
habebat.

Resp. S. Chrysostomus hanc reddidi rationem cur Paulus Apostolus in Epistola
ad Timotheum nullam faceret mentionem simplicium Presbyterorum, sed immediate
Transiret ab Episcopis ad Diaconos nempe quia non alio dignitatis Discrimine
Episcopi Distabant a Presbyteris, nisi Sola Ordinandi Potestate. (...)
istiusmodi Sophistae qui Audet asserere S. Chrysostomum hoc in loco suam
tantum, non Apostolorum aetatem respexisse. Ejusdem farinae sunt ea omnia, quae
Ostentator iste Multifariae, and Immensae Lectionis ad Lassandum potius quam
Satiandum lectoris studium exprompsit. Scilicet is speciem ingentis literaturae
non falsam praefertur in opinionem falsam inducat quam plurimos eorum, qui
solent in famam Scriptoris potius quam in ipsam Rem Scriptam inquirere;
praesertim si Valde Velint, id Verum haberi, cui speciem Veritatis affingunt
celeberrimi Scriptores. Cum igitur in nullo versemur dubio, quin plurimos eorum
qui aussi sint asserere Presbyteros Potestatem habere Presbyteros Ordinandi in
errorem istum potius induxerint Perversae Voluntatis indomitae Vires, qnam
aliqua imbecillitas Intellectus, non tam opus est Verbis, ut cum iis apud
Homines Disputemus, quam perpetua, ac ferventissima apud Deum Oratione, ut*
istiusmodi hominum pectoribus suavitatem illam Non-Ennarrabilem infundat, quae
non est aliunde percipienda, nisi e Gustatis Fructibus Christianae Humilitatis,
atque obedientiae propter Christum istis Hominibus praestandae, quibus ille
aliquam in Nos Regendos Potestatem Dedit. PATER NOSTER, QUI ES IN COELIS,
VENIAT REGNUM TUUM.


A Letter to Mons. Dela Crose; together with some Reflections on the Letter to
Charles Blount Esquire, concerning Natural Religion, as opposed to Divine
Revelation: And also on that Infamous Book, entitled, The Naked Gospel.
(...)
SIR,
I AM heartily sorry that you have given so great Scandal not only to the
Socinians, by asserting that most detestable Conceit of the Three Infinite
Spirits, but also to the Deists, by denying, that Six of their Seven
Propositions may be known without external Revelation; whereas it is most
certain that they are all implied in the True Notion or Idea of God, whose
Existence, you grant, may be known without such a Revelation. I assert, That
the principal Motive that any man can have to believe, that the Holy Scriptures
were written by Divine Inspiration, is, That the sense of them is so agreeable
to that which the Only wise God has written in the Hearts of all Men.

The Lord give you Understanding in all things. So prays for you, and for all
Men, as he desires that all Sincere Christians should pray for him,

Your faithful Servant, in the love of the Truth, Edmund Elys.


Though I grant, that the Truth of those Seven Propositions may be known without
external Revelation, yet I assert, That it is Ten thousand times more casie to
come to that Knowledge by the Revelation which Almighty God has given us in the
Holy Scriptures than without it: And therefore we ought to give continual
Thanks to the God of Truth, for vouchsafing to us so great a Blessing. The
Seventh Proposition is this: That when we err from the Rules of our Duty, we
ought to repent, and trust in God's Mercy for Pardon. What it is to Repent no
Man shall ever practically or effectually understand, unless he be taught of
GOD: And it is Ten thousand times more likely that such a Man will be taught of
God, who with an honest Heart reads or hears the Holy Scriptures, than he who
is altogether ignorant of them, or who having read them will not believe that
they were written by Divine Inspiration. To Repent is to cease to live unto our
selves, and to live unto Him that died for us, and arose again; of which
Repentance we become capable only by the Death of Christ, whom the Holy
Scriptures call the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. The Apostle
says expressly, 2 Cor. 5. 15. That he died for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them and rose
again. In the Ninth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews are these words: If
the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the
unclean sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered up himself without spot
to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the livingood? From this
Concession of the Deists, That God is infinitely just and insinitely merciful,
I infer, That His Hatred to Sin, and his Love to Sinners, are both Infinite. I
suppose they will grant, that He is Infinite in Goodness, in Wisdom, in Power,
and in all Perfection. From hence I infer, That in His Infinite Wisdom he
hath-contriv'd some way by his Infinite Power to make a demonstration to
Sinners of his Infinite Love, Benevolence, or Communicativeness of the True
Good even to them, so far as they are capable of it: But it implies a
contradiction, that they should be capable of, or in a power to receive the
True Good or Intellectual Satisfaction, but only by Repentance, or turning of
their Will or Intellectual Appetite to God, as to its principal or ultimate
Object. It implies a contradiction to say, That Infinite Wisdom could contrive
a better way than this to bring Sinners to Repentance, viz. to demonstrate to
them, that though the Hatred which the great and good God has to every Sin is
Infinite, nevertheless his Love to every Sinner capable of Repentance is also
Infinite: And this demonstration of the Infinite Justice, and Infinite Mercy
and* Goodness of God those that believe the Gospel clearly perceive in the
sacrifice of the Death of Christ. Whatsoever we find in the Holy Scriptures
concerning the Death of Christ, and the Benefits which we receive thereby, is
most perfectly agreeable to all those notions of the Divine Justice and Mercy,
which are suggested unto us by the Innate Idea of God; to the contemplation
whereof I earnestly exhort all those Men who call themselves Deists, beseeching
Almighty God, the Father of Mercies and God of all Consolation, to lift up the
light of his countenance upon them, to give them the light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. I declare to all the World, that
I have not such Indignation to these Open Enemies, as I have to such Traitors
to the Church of Christ, as the Author of that most execrable Pamphlet,
entitled, The Naked Gospel. I shall here impart to the candid Reader some of
my Reflections on that Infamous Scribler, though it has been already sufficiently
confuted. I consider that Saying of the Wise Man, Prove. 10. 19. In the
multitude of words there wants not sin. And therefore I would rather choose to
be blamed by my best Friends for using so few words in any Theological
Controversy, than be ever guilty of publishing of any one Assertion,
especially concerning the Doctrine of the holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity,
which I should not be able to vindicate against a more subtle Sophister than
Socinus himself.

A strange Confidence it is in this Anti-trinitarian, to scoff at us for
saying, That the Doctrine of the Trinity is a Mystery: Does not the holy Apostle
say expressly, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness? God was manifest in the Flesh, etc. Is not the Nature of God
incomprehensible to any Finite Understanding? And shall any Man undertake to
determine how GOD could be made Man; how the Creator could assume a Created
Nature? But, that Christ is GOD and Man, is a Truth as certain and
unquestionable as it is that these Texts of Scripture were written by Divine
Inspiration, John 1. 1, 2, 3. Col. 1. 16, 17. Acts 20. 28. I shall here recite
some of the words of this Antitrinitarian, whom surely we may most justly call
Antichristian:

P. 48. To this Objection of the Romanists, and to others of the Unitarians, we
have found an Answer, That we must not infer from our own Nature to God's, for
that ours is Finite, and Gods is Infinite. Three Persons among Us are three
Men, because they agree in one common nature; but the Divine Nature is not a
common one, but a singular; and therefore three Persons do not make three Gods.
If you understand not this, you must not wonder, at least you must not gainsay
it, for it is a Mystery which Reason may not presume to fathom.

Is there any thing more reasonable than to conceive, that in God, the One
Infinite Essence, there may be a certain Trinity which cannot in any wise
appertain to any Three Persons of a Finite Nature? Can there ever be a more
impious Absurdity than this, to deny the Truth of that which the Almighty and
Incomprehensible GOD, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose Name we are
baptized, has revealed unto us concerning Himself, because we cannot find any
thing perfectly like it even amongst the best of his Creatures? To say, That we
ought not to believe any thing but what our Reason can fathom or comprehend, is
in effect to say, We ought not to believe there is a God, it being Essential to
the Deity to be infinitely beyond the comprehension of our Reason.

P. 40. The great Question concerning the Godhead of Christ is impertinent to
our Lord's Design. 2. Fruitless to the Contemplator's own purpose. 3. Dangerous.

P. 53. There is danger of Blasphemy in examining the silly Question concerning
the Eternity of the Godhead of Christ.

Answ. Certainly it was most pertinent to our Lord's design, that we should
worship the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as the Only True God; and this we
cannot do, unless we believe Him to be Eternal. To question the Godhead of our
Savior, is not only fruitless and dangerous, but diabolically impious and
pernicious. But nothing can more require the greatest ardency of our most
zealous Endeavors, than to suppress the confidence of those Men, who pretend
by their Reason to baffle the Divine Wisdom, and by the force of a little
Sophistry to eclipse the Eternal Brightness of the Glory of the Father of
Lights. It is fruitless to the Contemplator's own purpose, to consider, that He
whom he believes to be his Savior is a Person of Infinite Power and Majesty?
Will not the genuine force and efficacy of this consideration produce in a true
Believer the Fruit of the Spirit, viz. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance? Most certainly he is in great
danger of Hellfire that calls this Truth into question, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is the true and eternal God: But nothing can more conduce to our Safety
and Everlasting Consolation, than a firm adherence to this Assertion, That our
Savior is Almighty, which he could not be, if he were not the True and Eternal
God: For, as there is but One Eternal, so there is but One Almighty. I have
seen diverse Excellent Books, that have been written against this wicked
Pamphlet, therefore I shall say no more of it, but only this; That I wish its
being burnt may mind the Author of that Fire which shall never be quenched.

Since the writing hereof, I have read a Pamphlet with this fantastic Title,
The Antapology of the Melancholy Stander-by. In Page 41. I find such a
scandalous Objection against the Creed of St. Athanasius, that I think it my
Duty, with all possible speed, to publish my Answer to it, and Resentment of
it, as coming from one who professes himself to be a Son of the Church of
England: He recites these words of the Creed: The Father is eternal, the Son
eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal, and yet they are not Three eternals, but
One eternal: As also there are not Three Incomprehensibles; nor Three
Uncreated, but One Uncreated, and One Incomprehensible. Suppose now, says this
Anonymus, a Man should thus argue hence; If there are Three, yet not Three
Uncreated, but One Uncreated, then Two of the Three must be Created; for the
Three must be either Created or Uncreated; that is, eternally existent. I
affirm, That if any Man should thus argue, the Answer would be ready, That the
Epithets Incomprehensible and Uncreated, are attributed to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, as these Three are One, and have one Essence Uncreated, Infinite,
or Incomprehensible. It does no more follow, That if there are Three, yet not
Three Uncreated, but One Uncreated, and then Two of the Three must be Created;
than that if there are Three, yet not Three Gods, but One God, then Two of the
Three must not be God. Here the Anonymus plainly discovers the falseness of his
Heart; whatever he pretends, he is a Deserter of the Catholic Faith. As for his
most Impious Endeavors to make his Reader to disgust that most wholesome
Petition in the Litiny, which being rightly used, cures the Soul of all Sin and
Error, O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, Three Persons, and One God, have
mercy upon us miserable Sinners; I shall say no more at present but only this:
That if this Writer receive any Temporal Benefit, as a Priest of the Church of
England, he deserves the Character of a Thief and a Robber. And as I profess my
self to be a True Son of the Church of England, and consequently of the
Universal Church of Christ, I make my Appeal against him to the King of kings,
and Lord of lords, who is ready to judge both the Quick and the Dead. (...).


BOOKS Printed for John Evering^ at the Star in Ludgate Street
1. MIscellany Essays, by Monsieur De (...) mont, upon History, Philosophy
(...) Morality, Humanity, Gallantry, etc. (...) with a Character by a Person of
Hono^ (...) England; continued by Mr. Dryden.

2. A new Family-book; or, the true (...) of Families: Being Directions to Pa^
(...) Children, and to those who are inst^ad of (...) showing them their
several Duties, with (...) and Meditations: To which is annexed, (...) course
about the right way of improvin^ (...) Time; with a Preface by Dr. Horneck.

3. An Answer to the brief History of the (...) tarians, called also Socinians.
By William (...) Rector of St. Swithin, London.

4. An Enquiry into several remarkable (...) of Scripture in the Old and New
Testam^ which contain some difficulty in them; with (...) probable Resolution
of them: By John Edwar^ B. D. sometime Fellow of St. John's College in
Cambridge.

5. Moral Maxims of Reflections, in four Parts Written in French by the Duke of
Rochefoucault now made English.

6. The Gauger and Measurer's Companion being a compendious way of Gauging
Superfice and Solids, with the Reasons of most Multiplicators and Divisors used
in Measuration; all difficult Points made easy; with a way to Gauge all
Quantities under a Gallon; also a brief Description of the Gauge-point, with a
Direction to find the same; and the Content of a Circle in all its parts. The
exact Method of measuring Land, Board, Glass, Pavement, Stone, be it of what
form soever; together with a Globe and Round Timber; with a Table of Cylinders,
etc.

7. The Royal English School for Their Majesty's three Kingdoms; being a
Catalogue of all the Words in the Bible, with a Praxis in Prose and Verse, all
beginning with one Syllable, and proceeding by degrees to eight, divided and
not divided, whereby all Persons, both Young and Old, of the meanest Abilities,
may with little help be able to read the whole Bible over distinctly, easily,
and more speedily than in any other Method; with Directions to find out any
word; together with an Exposition on the Creed; and variety of Pictures. By
Tobias Ellis, late Minister of the Gospel.

8. Monarchia Microcosmi: The Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period of Vital
Government in Man, for a further discovery of Diseases incident to Human
Nature. By Edw. Maynwaring, M. D.

9. The Divine Art of Prayer, containing the most proper Rules to Pray well;
with diverse Meditations and Prayers suitable to the Necessity of Christians,
useful in every Family; with several Prayers for Soldiers, both in Their
Majesty's Army and Fleet. By Marius d' Assigney, B. D.

10. Phrascologia Generalis: A full, large, and general Phrase-book,
comprehending whatever is necessary and most useful in all other Phraseological
Books (hitherto here published) and methodically digested for the more speedy
and prosperous progress of Students in their Humanity-Studies. By William
Robertson, M. A.


