THE WELCHMENS IVBILEE: TO THE HONOR OF St. DAVID. SHOWING, THE MANNER OF THAT
SOLEMN Celebration, which the Welshmen annually hold in houour of St. DAVID.
DESCRIBING, LIKEWISE THE TRVE AND REA^^ Cause, why they wear that day a Leek on
their Hats. With an excellent merry Sonnet, annexed unto it.

Composed by T. MORGAN, Gent.

LONDON. Printed for I. Harrison.

THE WELCHMENS JVBILEE, In Honor of St. DAVID.
FAme, the Vicegerent of the Universe, is most to be applauded for her future
indulgencie to her sons: for whom she cherishes alive, she will not permit to
lie in the odious Sepulcher of Oblivion, nor suffer their names to be raced out
of the rolls of honor, but in an annual progression rather to blow their
names abroad with the trump of never dying glory. The explication of my
meaning, includes the customary observation of the Welchmen, who yearly
celebrate one day to the honor of St. David (once their Grand-Signior of
Chivalry) in great solemnity. He that was once the Pillar of their hopes, the
Glory and sole Fame of their Country, is now honored (although long since
interred) in the memory of his meritorious Name: He that esteemed not his
dearest blood sufficient to accomodate his Country, is eternized, or at least
solemnized by the same, and has moreover a respective remuneration for his
magnanimous puissance: He lastly, that once greatly honored Wales, is now
himself greatly honored by the same. To memorize any man, signifies not only
the general good opinion, and affection toward the same person, but likewise
declares his deserving virtues. Among the Greeks it was called a worthy thing
to be solemnized after death: The Romans likewise acknowledged it to be
gloriosum quid, a glorious thing to celebrate any day to the Honor of the
dead. And I ingenuously confess I cannot but highly extol the indulgent
sedulity of the Welchmen, in remembering their Saint with such annual devotion.
Polemon when he dyed at Athens was once in three years honored with a solemn
Celebraeion, and that was acledged to be a most famous deed. It was likewise
accounted an eminent act, when Cassiodorus was twice remembered solemnly after
his Funeral. But neither of these can be reputed to be so glorious, as that of
S. David; for his day is not only once every year duly observed, to the memory
of his immortal Fame: but successively continues without any praetermission.
Yet one thing I cannot omit, viz. their custom in wearing a green Leek on
their hats hn that day likewise: and here ( Gentle Reader) give me leave to
expatiate my self a while, to see whether I can scrutably, and in a credible
probability search out the meaning, and cause of the same: Some report, that
they wear this Leek, because of their general affection unto it: others affirm
the cause to be, because of the numerous multitude of Leekes that grow in
their: but either of these are fallible; for it is more credibly declared, that
S. David when he always went into the field, in Martial exercise, he carried
a Leek with him; and once being almost faint to death, he immediately remembered
himself of the Leek, and by that means not only preserved his life, but also
became victorious: hence is the Mythologie of the Leek derived, and hence it
was that they ever since continued respectively the investigation of the same,
to the sempiternal honor of their Champion St. David. There is also a common
Proverb in Wales, that St. David is as bright as the Moon; yet I confess, I
have oftentimes presumed to wonder at their similitude in comparing him to the
Moon, unless be the cause thereof, that the Moon was made of green Chief, at
whose bright splendour perhaps, they may have the courtesy to toste it. But be
more clement Reader, whosoever thou be, and think not that I speak this in a
ludibrious jeer, or abuse to the Country, for I speak altogether in praise and
commendation of it: yet however according to the Poet: Interpone tuis, interdum
gaudia curis.

If I have been barren in expressions for the honor of St. David, you must
excuse the brevitie of time, wherein it was composed: and what remains, I will
consummate in a merry Hymn, or Panygerick.

COme quaffe off your Sherry, and let us be merry,
All you that look to be saved:
Then t^sse of your bowls, and be merry souls
For this is the day of St. David.
This is a good week, when we wear a Leek,
And carouse in Bacchus fountains:
We had better be here, thou in poor small beer,
Or in our Country Mountains.
Then be merry boys, and leave off your toys
And care not for drossie wealth,
We'll swagger in Sack, till our purse-strings crack
To St. David I Will drink a health.
Let those that are civil, now go to the Devil,
Let us be as busy as Bees:
Those Rebels we will beat, that offer to eat
Our Leekes, or tosted Cheese.
A pox of all (...) cheeks pale,
Come let us be (...)
For that is very (...) the blood,
And for to strengthen the back.
Drink you to him, till both your brains swim,
In this Nectarian Liquor:
Let him drink to me, and I Will drink to thee,
'Twill make all our tongues run the quicker.
Come cast away grief, we need no relief,
We'll drink, we'll be merry, and play:
We'll sing, and we'll laugh, we'll our liquor quaffe;
For this is St. David's day.
FINIS.

