Imprimatur.

Sam. Parker, RRmo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Ex Aedibus Lambeth. December. 20.
1667.
Domino Gilberto Divina Providentia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, a Sacris
Domesticis.

THE TWO LAST DIALOGUES, Treating of the Kingdom of God Within us and Without
us, AND OF His special PROVIDENCE through CHRIST over His CHURCH from the
Beginning to the End of all Things.

Whereunto is annexed A brief Discourse of the true Grounds of the Certainty of
Faith in Points of Religion, together with some few plain Songs or Divine Hymns
on the Chief Holy Days of the Year.

LUKE 9.62. No man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit
for the Kingdom of God.

REVEL. 1.17. Fear not. I am the first and the last: I am he that lives and
was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of Hell
and of Death.

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher. 1668.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Believe thou will wonder at the preposterous Order of my publishing these
Two Dialogues before the Three first have seen the Light; and indeed, it may
be, most of all, why I publish them at all. If it were a matter of ordinary
intelligible Political Interest, or the Solution of some Algebraicall Problem,
or the Discovery of some quaint Experiment toward the perfecting of Natural
Philosophy, or the Decision of some notable Point in Polemicall Divinity,
Reason would that we should accept of your Performance, and have the patience
to peruse it. But to draw out a long tiresome Story of the Kingdom of God and
Fate of the Church, through I know not how many dark Types and obscure
Aenigmaticall Prophecies, where we can fix no sure footing in any thing, Quis
leget haec? -- The Gallio's of this Age care for no such things.

Well, admit the case to stand so, Reader, as thou suggestest; yet this could
be no just Impediment to either the Writing or Publishing these Dialogues. For
every genuine Minister of the Kingdom of God has a commission to preach in
season and out of season. 2 Timothy 4.2.
He that observes the Wind shall not sow, Eccles. 11.4.
and he that regards the Clouds shall not reap. If S. John's Apocalypse had
not been writ nor published before it would have been readily read and
understood, the date of those Visions had been at least fifteen hundred years
later then it was, and the Event of things had anticipated their Prediction.
And for the pretended Aenigmaticall Obscurity of the Types and Prophecies, the
endeavor of this Author has been that they should cease to be so any longer;
which I believe they do to them that look upon them with an impartial eye, and
are duly prepared to receive the Sense of them. For some Pollutions may hinder
them from seeing any thing; as they say it is in the looking into the Magic
Crystal or Shew-stone; Two looking into the same Crystal, but differently
prepared or predisposed, the one sees clearly a Scene of things to come, the
other nothing. Which though it be strange in that case, yet it seems far
stranger in this of the Prophecies, the main things aimed at being of as clear
Solution, the Postulata admitted, (that is to say, the truth of History and the
Sense of the Prophetic style, though no farther then the Scripture it self
interprets it) as any Problem in Algebra. As will certainly appear to the
intelligent from Mr Mede's Synchronisms, and the eight last Chapters of the
first Book of Synopsis Prophetica. And admit but that Joint-Exposition of these
two Chapters of the Apocalypse, the thirteenth and seventeenth, there will be
little Controversy of the Solution of the rest. And still the less upon the
Perusal of these Dialogues, which give light into the whole Apocalypse, and so
take away that Excuse from some that pretend they cannot safely promise
themselves they understand any part, unless they understand all.

This, Reader, is in return to thy false Surmize, as if the whole Dialogues
were stuffed with nothing but the recital of dark Prophecies: Whenas, besides
plain History, there are many useful moral Passages. As that Method of
regaining a due Divine temper of Body, which consists in a more ethereal
Purity of the Spirits, that we may possess our Vessel in a right measure of
Sanctity and Holiness, that it may be more meet to receive and retain Divine
Truths. As also the means of arriving to that state which is the Kingdom of
God within us. Which though it be not a matter of Political or Secular
Interest, yet it is so palpable an Interest of every man, as, methinks, there
should no man be such a Gallio as to slight it, unless he think it an
indifferent thing whether he be damned or saved. But believe it, if any one
have really attained to the Kingdom of God within him, it is then impossible
that he should be unconcerned for the Kingdom of God without him, he being so
certainly united with that Spirit, the Eternal Mind that superintends the
Affairs of the Universe, and of his own peculiar Kingdom and People in a more
special manner. He that has lost the sense of his own carnal and personal
Concerns is naturally, as I may so speak, seized upon and actuated by the
Spirit of God, and all his Affections of Love and Care and solicitous Foresight
are taken up with the Interest of that Communialty of which he is a living
Member under one Head Christ Jesus.

And therefore as it is supposed by the Poet that it was a great satisfaction
to Aeneas to be instructed by Anchises concerning the Fate and Success of his
Family and Posterity, their glorious Achievements and the Largeness of their
Empire, that they should Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 6.
-- super Garamantas and Indos
Proferre Imperium: --
so likewise they that once have got into a real Cognation and Spiritual
Consanguinity with the true Apostolic Church, as having derived upon them or
transfused into them from their Head that Divine Spirit that actuates the whole
Body of Christ, it cannot but be a transcendent Pleasure to them to understand
the overspreading Glory and Success which the Family of God, of which they are
part, I mean the true Apostolic Church, will have in the World before the
Consummation of all things. Which illustrious Scene of Futurities, though they
neither descend with Aeneas to get a view of them amongst the Shades below, nor
with S. John have the Heavens open upon them from above to exhibit those
Celestial Visions, yet they, casting the pure eyes of their Mind upon the
Scripture, see all those glorious Futurities, writ in Heaven, plainly reflected
to them from the Books of the Prophets, (as we see the Sky and Clouds, the Moon
and Stars, by looking on some River or Pool) to their ineffable pleasure and
satisfaction. Which may excuse this Author's so laborious a Ramble (as it may
seem to some) through so many dark Types and Prophecies, to find out this
future Glory of the Church of Christ upon Earth. For these are the proper Ioys
and Entertainments of those Souls who, being dead to all Self-interests, find
it the solace of their heart to behold the flourishing Interest and growing
Prosperity of the People of God.

I must confess that the Author of these Dialogues interprets Prophecies at an
high rate of Confidence in the behalf of Reformed Christendom against their
professed Adversaries: Which may seem to some the more wild and Ecstaticall,
the Discourse having been drawn up in such Circumstance of Affairs as every one
conceived to bode ill to the Reformed Party. And how busy and successful the
Romanists have been this present Age in proselyting people to their Church,
there is none but must take notice of from either Experience or common Fame.
But this could not discourage the Author from receiving those important Truths
which were so clearly reflected to him from the pure and infallible Word of
Prophecy. Which he steddily fixing his eyes on, did not at all regard the
ill-boding aspect of the Affairs of the World. For he that has not a due
measure of Faith in God and Fortitude of Spirit can neither be Prophet, More
Nevoch. part 2. cap. 38.
as Maimonides well observes, nor any good Interpreter of the Prophets.

I know the good news will not be alike acceptable to all nor alike credible,
but that very well-meaning people may be prone to imitate that of Abraham, Genesis
17.18.
[O that Ishmael may live before thee!] desponding in a manner of all such
seize as they find not a palpable Pledge of in the present Causality of
things. If Abraham be an hundred years old and Sarah ninety, he that prophesies
of an Isaak to be born will hardly escape being laughed at for his news by an
over-aged Sarah. Genesis 18.12.
But most of all, if he predict so sprightly and so illustrious an Issue to
spring out from a Stock so dead and withered. But they that receive the Message
cannot forbear to do the Errand they are sent upon, whatever may be their
Reception. Ezekiel. 43 10.
Thou son of man, show the House to the house of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the Pattern. To this end is
the Glory and Perfection of the future state of the Church set out unto us,
that we may know what to be at, and make as near and quick approches thereto as
we can. It is not therefore to reproach the present Condition of Reformed
Christendom, but to animate them and encourage them by these good Tidings to
use such means and to countenance such ways as lead the most directly to that
glorious state of the Church, which both the Holy Oracles of God do so plainly
set before our eyes, and ourselves so expressly pray for in our public
Devotions. It is no more a Reproach, then to tell a young Child that he is as
yet but a Child, but that he will live to come to the stature of a lusty
proper Man, only let him use a regular Diet and due Exercises of his growing
strength, which will conduce thereto. So harmless in the general and so useful
is the Design of these present Dialogues.

Nor can I divine what Particulars may any ways disgust any one that is
Christianly affected, unless the Behmenists, Cartesians and Platonists may
fancy themselves not so civilly dealt withal. The first, because their great
Author, Jacob Behmen, though acknowledged a pious and well-meaning Writer, and
not unusefull for the exciting of the Sentiments of sincere Piety in others, is
not allowed to be such an inspired Man, as that all that he dictates should go
for infallible Oracles. But it being so discernible to the intelligent that he
is an Enthusiast, there is no faithful Minister of the Kingdom of God will
ever stick to declare it, for fear of that great Dis-interest that would be
done to Religion, if those that are the most zealous Well-willers thereto
should not discover themselves to be of so sound a mind, as not to be imposed
upon by the highest Heats and strongest Surmises or Confidences of any man's
Melancholy, whenas the Prophaner wits are so prone to suspect that there is no
Religion but is such.

The other two may happily be offended at the Writer of these Dialogues for
introducing Cuphophron, who sustains the person of both a Cartesian and
Platonist at once, so unsettled and fickle and unconcerned in the great Points
of Christian Religion, as if Cartesianism and Platonism did necessarily incline
men to that unsound temper of mind. Which I am confident is not the opinion of
the Author of the Dialogues: But being aware how some Theorems in those
Philosophies may easily fill up and swell those Souls that are more
aiery-minded, and how this Anticipatory Self-fulness, joined, forsooth, with
the affectation of a strict Mathematical Evidence for every thing, (such as
Cartesius pretends to, but falls infinitely short of almost everywhere in his
Philosophy) he being aware, I say, that this may raise a Genius (in this
Philosophical Age) over-wanton and coy, and such as will keep aloof off from
being so heartily concerned in the Apostolic Truths of Christianity as they
ought, his foresightful Solicitude in the behalf of the Kingdom of God, and
for the preventing the growth or appearance of any such mischievous Monster,
stirred him up thus timely to set out the Contemptibleness and Ridiculousness
of that Dispensation, that it may never have the Confidence to appear upon the
Stage to the destruction of Souls and detriment of the Church of Christ. So
that how-ever harsh this may seem to some, yet it is excellent preventive
Physic, and the sound and judicious must acknowledge the purpose of him that
administers it to be sober and laudable. Thus well fitted every way are these
Dialogues to serve the Spiritual Interest of the Church of God.

And lastly, for that Interest, Reader, which thou call Political, they
have their Serviceableness in that regard also. As to instance in some few
Passages for many. One of the Principles whereby Reformed Christendom is
represented as reducible to this excellent State we speak of is a sincere and
unspotted Loyalty in the Protestants to their Lawful Sovereigns. Another, the
Countenancing or Allowing of that cheerful and effectual Doctrine for
promoting a good Life, I mean that of A Faith in the Power of the Spirit of
Christ for a signal vanquishing and subduing all manner of Sin in us, such as
Pride, Covetousness, Revengefulness, and the like. For there is nothing that
can tend more to the public Peace then this. The conscience of Religion in its
crude and raw estate is a thing very harsh and bitter (especially in an hot
Complexion) both to it self and others, like the state of Dentition in
Children, which makes them wrangling and froward and vexatious both to
themselves and the whole house. And for want of this Doctrine I speak of, few
or none of the seriously-Religious can well emerge out of this childish
condition. Whence the World is full of wrangling and vexation even about the
pettiest Points of Religion that are. Whereby men's minds must needs be
exulcerated, and the Government disturbed, and the Safety of the Church
hazarded. Which would not at all be if this wholesome searching Doctrine had
but place in the hearts of men. For it would so ripen their growth in
Christianity, that all their Harshness and Sourness would soon mellow into
Christian Love and Sweetness. For believe it, there is nothing more civil,
nothing more humane, nothing more gentle and governable, then a mature and
well-grown Christian. Again, in the Description of the Character of the Elias
to come, a main Note of him is, that he is a Reconciler of the Magistrate to
the People, and of the People to the Magistrate; that he is for Peace and Union
in the Church of God, and a declarer against Rents and Schisms. And lastly,
that great Point of all, That the Pope with his Clergy is that Antichrist, and
the Roman Church that City out of which God's People are bid to depart, as it
is most certainly true in it self, and of huge Consequence to be known upon the
account of a Spiritual Interest, so does it most manifestly also consolidate
the Secular Interest of all Protestant Princes and People against the
Pretensions of the Pope, and is a safe Cynosura to steer their Counsels by. For
I dare appeal even to the Pontificians themselves, upon supposition that the
Pope and his Clergy be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome that Babylon out of
which God's people are bid to depart, whether any thing in counsel that makes
toward the reduction of God's people nearer to that City, and the ensnaring
them again in their former Captivity, can be advisable for any Protestant
Magistrate either upon point of Piety or Policy, or (supposing a God in Heaven)
can promise any prosperous Success. Wherefore for any Protestant Subject so
persuaded to conceal so important a Truth, would be the greatest
Perfidiousness, even to his Terrestrial Sovereign, as any man can stand guilty
of.

These, I think, were sufficient Motives for the publishing these Dialogues.
But for the preposterous Order in publishing them, the plainest account is the
will of the Author: of which no worse Construction ought to be made, then
that, as it seems, he has a greater Concern for the Interest of Christianity
then for the Curiosities of Philosophy. For such is the Subject of the three
first Dialogues: Which, had he had as great a propension to gratify the
Curious as to edify the Church of Christ, he would not have failed to have
published at least as soon as these; the matter of them being both
Philosophical, as I said, and that concerning the most enticing Points in
Philosophy, and also intermixed with much Pleasantry and Humor; which, by
reason of the extraordinary Gravity of this present Subject, it was thought
fit, I suppose, the more strictly to abstain from.

But though I have no commission to publish the three first Dialogues
themselves, yet I thought fit, for the more punctually understanding these two
last, to publish the Arguments of those, they being sufficient for the
understanding any References or Reflections on them occurring in these.

And lastly, Reader, I have added, for thy farther Entertainment, by way of
Appendage, (though not altogether so necessary, I confess, yet suitable enough
to some Points in these Dialogues, if not to the whole Design) A brief
Discourse of the true Grounds of the Certainty of Faith in Points of Religion;
as also some few plain Songs or Divine Hymns on the chiefest Holy Days in the
Christian Calendar, agreeable enough with these Divine Dialogues both in
Purpose and Title. Wherein the Writer of them has observed always this Method,
to add to the Historical Narration an Application to the Emprovement of Life.
Which, whether in Verse or Prose, if it were diligently observed in the
handling of the Historical Articles of our Christian Faith, would be of so
great force for the making men good, that I doubt not but Philotheus, had he
thought of it, would have added this as a ninth Instruction tending to the
Acceleration of those happy Times of the Church which he presages.

These, Reader, if thou please heartily to accept for the present, it will be
the greater Obligation to the Author to let what still remains in his hands in
due time see the Light, and be as willing to condescend to gratify the
Philosophical Genius in those three first Dialogues, as he has been in these
ambitious to edify the Religious.

G. C.

The proper Characters of the Persons in the ensuing Dialogues, with some
Allusion to their Names.
Philotheus, A zealous and sincere Lover of God and Christ and of the whole
Creation. Bathynous, The Deeply-thoughtful or profoundly-thinking man. Sophron,
The Sober and wary man. Philopolis, The pious and loyal Politician. Euistor, A
man of Criticism, Philologie and History. Hylobares, A young, witty and
well-moralized Materialist. Cuphophron, A zealous, but Airy-minded, Platonist
and Cartesian, or Mechanist. Ocymo, Cuphophron's Boy, so called from his
Nimbleness.
DIVINE DIALOGVES CONTAINING Several Disquisitions and Instructions touching
the ATTRIBUTES of GOD AND HIS PROVIDENCE In the WORLD.
THE FOURTH DIALOGUE. Philotheus, Bathynous, Sophron, Philopolis, Euistor,
Hylobares, Cuphophron.
Philoth. OUr Conference hitherto, A brief Recapitulation of what has hitherto
passed in their discourse.
O Philopolis, has been spent either in proving briefly the Existence of God,
or in clearing of his Attributes, or in defending of his Providence: which was
but a necessary preparation to them that doubt of these things, for the due
understanding of the Mysteries of his Kingdom. For if there be no God nor any
Divine Providence, there can be no Kingdom of God upon Earth, as Hylobares
well noted at first. And indeed if the Providence of God be not everywhere, it
is a very suspicable business that it is in truth nowhere. Whence appears the
necessity of admitting such Hypotheses as will make sense of all occurrences
and appearances of things which we meet withal in whatever Nations of the
Earth or parts of the Universe. And such I conceive were those that were
suggested in our two last days Conferences: With which if Hylobares (who seemed
to be the only man dissettled touching these Points) be fully satisfied, I am
now ready to serve you, Philopolis, according to the best of my skill, touching
your demands concerning the Kingdom of God.


Philop. I humbly thank you, Philotheus, and my eager desire to hear you
discourse of so important a Theme, and my jealousy that we shall be much
straightened in time, makes me beg of you that, without any farther delay, you
would be pleased to fall upon the matter.


Hyl. Which Philotheus will do the more courageously, The great force of a
firm belief of a God and his Providence for the fixing a man's Faith in the
truth of Christianity.
O Philopolis, after I have briefly acknowledged my thanks for, and also have
declared the steady efficacy of, his yesterday's discourse. For though I was
highly exalted through the sense and power of his Reason, yet I do not now flag
again as the day before, but, having a full and comprehensive view of things, I
find in my self a permanent assent to Truth as well now I am cool and calm as
then when I was most transported; and, which is a wonderful accession to all
this, this firm and full satisfaction I have thus unexpectedly received
touching the Existence of God, and the unexceptionableness of his Providence,
draws in along with it a more hearty and settled belief of all the fundamental
Points of Christian Religion, so far forth as the Scripture has declared them.
So that that of Christianity, which hung more loosely and exteriourly in my
mind before, methinks I have now imbibed into the very center of my heart and
soul, and do without all hesitancy close with the truth thereof. Whence, I
hope, I shall be the more idoneous Auditour of this higher Discourse of yours,
O Philotheus, touching the Kingdom of God.


Philoth. I am exceeding glad, O Hylobares, that my former Discourses have had
this excellent effect upon you; though it be no more then I hoped for, and have
often experimented in others, and most feelingly in my self, who could never
doubt of Christianity when I had once satisfied my self of the truth of those
Points you profess your self now at length so fully satisfied in. Which I must
confess makes me prone to think, that those that either slight or misbelieve
Christianity, so far forth as the Scripture has declared the same, do not
seriously or settledly believe there is a God or a Divine Providence, but are
of a light, Skeptical, confounded and heedless spirit, and take more pleasure
to seem able to talk, then to find themselves of any determinate judgment,
though in things of the greatest moment.


Cuph. The greatest Wits of the World have been such persons as you seem so
freely to perstringe, The folly of Skepticism perstringed.
O Philotheus, that is to say, Skeptical or Aporetical. Witness not only the
whole Sect of the Academici, but that Miracle for wit and eloquence Plato
himself, Diog. Laert. in vita Platon.
that sweetly-singing Swan, as Socrates had him represented to him in a dream.
Is there any thing more pleasant then his mellifluous Dialogues? and yet
ordinarily nothing concluded but is a mere Skeptical or Aporetical chase of
wit, a game wherein nothing is taken or aimed at but mere ingenious pastime.


Philoth. Such wilde-goose chaces in matters of less moment, O Cuphophron, may
be more plausible or tolerable: but in Points of greater consequence to speak
eloquently on both sides, and then to be able to conclude nothing, nor, it may
be, so much as desirous thereof, is not so much like the famed melody of the
Swan's voice, as like the clapping of her wings one against another, and so
making a fluttering noise for a time, but after casting both behind her back,
not at all regarding whether the right or left wing were stronger.


Hyl. A flourish, O Cuphophron, that every Goose can make as well as a Swan.
But for my part, Philotheus, I desire nothing more then a settledness of mind
in matters of the highest consequence, such as the Existence of God, the
Immortality of the Soul, the benignity of Providence, and the like: and
therefore I think my self infinitely happy in that full satisfaction I have
received from your excellent Reasonings, I find them so firm and permanent.


Philoth. And I wish they may long so abide, Hylobares.


Hyl. Why, what can dissettle them, Philotheus?


Philoth. Nothing, That there is a Divine temper of Body requisite for the
easilier receiving and more firmly retaining Divine Truth, with the method of
obtaining it.
unless dissettledness of Life. If you fix in the Divine Life, which is fixable
nowhere but in the Divine Body, then the reasons of Divine Truth will take
root in this ground, and so prove permanent indeed. But if they grow not up
from this ground, they will be but as a Flower in your hand or a Feather in
your cap, and having no vital Cognation with the Subject they are in, they will
easily be blown away or wither.


Hyl. I had thought the Soul had been so Divine a thing of it self, that the
Cognation betwixt it and the reasons of Divine Truth had been sufficient, if
once received, firmly to retain them.


Philoth. O no, Hylobares: The Soul by sympathizing too much with this earthly
and brutish Body becomes brutish her self, and loses her Divinity; else all
would be alike capable of Divine Truth. But the recuperation of the Divine Body
by virtue of her true and real Regeneration is also the recovery of her
Divinity.


Hyl. But what do you mean by this Divine Body, O Philotheus?


Philoth. The same which the Pythagoreans mean by their (...), which is also
called Ethereal, or Heavenly.


Euist. That is no wonder, that the Heavenly Body and the Divine should be all
one, De Coelo, lib. 2. c. 3.
whenas Aristotle himself calls Heaven (...), the Divine body.


Hyl. But how shall we be able to attain to this Divine Body, O Philotheus, in
which, so far as I see, is the Root and Substance of Truth, forasmuch as the
Life is in it?


Philoth. Reason without this is but a dead (...) or umbratile Imagination, a
faint and ineffectual thing, evanid, fugitive and flitting: but Reasons
flourishing out of this stock are the immarcescible Flowers of the Paradise of
God.


Hyl. Wherefore, Philotheus, I am the more desirous to know how we may come by
this Divine or Paradisiacal Body.


Philoth. By a firm and lively Faith in the Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
whereby he is able to mortify and subdue all sin in us and extinguish all
Selfishness, so that we become utterly dead to our selves, and as little
concerned for our selves in any external gratification of worldly Honor,
carnal Pleasure, mundane Power, or any thing that is grateful to the mere
Animal Life, as if we were not at all in being. If we stand firm in this Faith,
and second it with constant and sincere Devotion, and inward breathings toward
the prize set before us, adding thereto a due and discreet Temperance and
circumspection in all our external deportments, that we neither act nor speak
any thing from the promptings of the Selfish Principle, or any way to gratify
our corrupt Animality; this method will in due time bring us to a perfect state
of Self-deadness: which death being finished, there does most certainly succeed
a spiritual Resurrection from the dead into the Life which is truly Divine, and
which is not found but in the Divine Body. So that by our sincere Devotions and
breathings toward God we imbibe both the Divine Life and the Divine Body at
once; which is the true spiritual Birth of Christ, Joh. 1.12.
whom as many as receive, they become the sons of God; as being born, 2 Cor.
4.16.
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God. And this also is that
inward man of which Paul professes that, though the outward perish, is yet (in
the true Saints of God) renewed day by day. Wherefore he that is arrived to
this Substantiality of life will be fixed in all useful Divine Truths, and the
Reasons that grow on such a Root will be found solid and permanent by him that
has the Root: but where they are merely verbal and imaginary, and float only
in the Brain, the Heart being animal and brutish, they may easily prove very
weak, fugitive, and vanishing. Not that they are so in themselves, but may
appear so to those who have only the Picture of the Flower in their Brain, not
the Root in their Heart, in which is the Pavilion of Life, and inmost
Tabernacle of God in the Soul. He that lives in this dispensation of life, O
Hylobares, can never be dissettled in his thoughts touching the Existence of
God, and his Providence, or the Immortality of the Soul. For he cannot be prone
to suspect the Soul's capacity of living separate from the Body, whiles he
perceives her to live at that distance and defiance with the Body already,
while she is in it; nor at all doubt of the Existence of God, whose power,
spirit, impulse and energie he so distinctly perceives in his own Soul. For
such is the nature of the Divine Life, that none that feels it but must confess
it not to belong to any creature as such, but to be the very Power and Spirit
of God actuating the Soul. How can he then doubt of Him, whose power and
presence he so sensibly feels? Wherefore this Dispensation of Life, Hylobares,
is all in all to him that desires to philosophize with steddiness and solidity.


Hyl. These are great and magnificent things which you declare, O Philotheus,
but yet such as seem to me neither incredible nor unimitable. And therefore,
God willing, I shall endeavor, as well as I can, to steer my course according
to the Rules you have intimated, and make it my main scope to attain to that
state which you call the Dispensation of Life: For I see all is very vain and
shadowy without it. But in the mean time I must crave pardon of Philopolis,
that I have occasioned Philotheus to mis-spend so much of that time that he
thought too little for his own design and for the present purpose in hand.


Philop. Philotheus speaks so favourly and edifyingly of every subject he is
put upon, that it is ever pity to interrupt him. But, since he has now desisted
of himself, if he please at length to enter upon the Subject I first of all
propounded, it will very much gratify my desires.


Hyl. It is therefore now, Philopolis, very seasonable to propound your Quere's
to him.


Philop. My First Quere, Philopolis his Quere's touching the Kingdom of God.
O Philotheus, was, What the Kingdom of God is; the Second, When it began, and
where it has been or is now to be found; the Third, What progress it has
hitherto made in the world; the Fourth and last, What success it is likely to
have to the end of all things. These are the Quere's, Philotheus, which I at
first propounded, concerning which if you please to instruct us plainly and
intelligibly, though not so accurately and scholastically, we shall think our
selves eternally obliged to you for your pains.


Philoth. I shall do my best I can to serve you herein, Philopolis, and that
as briefly and perspicuously as I can, with all plainness of speech, and
without any affectation of Scholastic Scrupulosities, being desirous only to
be understood and to convince. And the God of Heaven assist us in this our
discourse of his heavenly Kingdom, that we may so understand the Mysteries of
it, as that we may faithfully endeavor the promoting the Interest thereof both
in our selves and in all men, to the Glory of God and Salvation of the World.
Amen.


Philop. Amen, I pray God.


Philoth. What the Kingdom of God is in the general Nation thereof, with a
defense of the truth of the Nation.
Your first Quere, O Philopolis, though it be very short, yet is exceeding
comprehensive, and, by reason of the multisarious signification of the terms,
involves much matter in it at once; which yet I shall endeavor to comprise and
take in as well as I can by this brief Definition of the Kingdom of God in
general. The Kingdom of God is the Power of God enjoining, exciting,
commissioning, or permitting his creatures to act according to certain Laws,
which, considering all circumstances, or upon the compute of the whole, are for
the best.


Philop. I partly understand you, Philotheus, and conceive you intend such a
Definition of the Kingdom of God as takes in the Kingdom of Nature also, and
respects those Laws whereby both the brute Animals are guided and the senseless
Plants and dead Meteors and Elements, according to the extent of your defense
hitherto of Divine Providence running from the highest and most Intellectual
Order of things, even to those Material Beings which are framed and actuated by
the Spirit of Nature, or Seminal Soul of the World.


Sophr. Why, that is no more then the Scripture it self will warrant him to
do, Philopolis. The Psalmist is very frequent in such expressions. The Lord
has prepared his throne in Heaven, Psalm 103.19, 21, 22,
and his Kingdom rules over all. Bless ye the Lord, all his Hosts, ye
Ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord all his works in all
places of his dominion. Bless the Lord, O my Soul. This in the 103. Psalm. And
in the 148. Psalm he makes all the several degrees of the Creation from Heaven
to Earth, from Angels to Brutes, Plants and Meteors, the Hosts of God, and
exhorts them all to praise the name of the Lord: For he spoke the word, and
they were made; he commanded, and they were created: he has made them fast for
ever and ever; he has given them a Law which shall not be broken. And again in
the 119. Psalm, O Lord, thy word endures for ever in Heaven, thy Truth also
remains from one generation to another. Thou have laid the foundation of the
Earth, and it abides; they continue this day according to thy ordinance: for
all things serve thee. Whence it is plain that the Dominion of God and his
Kingdom reaches as far as the whole comprehension of the Creation.


Cuph. Why then, in some places, O Sophron, the Kingdom of God will be
coincident with the Kingdom of the Devil.


Bath. Why, Cuphophron, what greater inconvenience is there in that, then that
the Kingdom of Nature and the Kingdom of God should be coincident, which you
seem not to gainsay?


Cuph. Methinks it sounds very odly: and besides, we may conceive a
subordination betwixt the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Nature; but the
Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of the Devil seem to be in utter opposition
one to another, and therefore in no capacity of being parts of the same
Kingdom.


Bath. That is wittily urged, O Cuphophron, as to the exterior sound of the
words; but look into the intrinsecall nature of things, and set the Beasts of
the field and the Devils of Hell one by another, and tell me the difference
that uncapacitates the one from being the members of the Kingdom of God more
then the other. Is it because the Devils have more subtlety then the Beasts of
the field? This were reprochfully to intimate the Kingdom of God to be a City
of Fools. Is it because the one is Spiritual, the other Corporeal? This reason
would also exclude the good Angels, the choicest part of God's Kingdom. Is it
because the Devils are lapsed? Yet their Lapse is but into the Animal life,
whose deepest root and fountain is Self-love or Selfishness, which stands in
opposition to that other fountain or root of the Divine Life, which is the pure
Love of God, or of that which is simply and absolutely Good. But Self-love or
Selfishness is equally the Root of Life in Brutes as in Devils. Whence it seems
manifest, that in reality the Devils are as capable of being part of the
Kingdom of God as the Brutes.


Cuph. The difference, O Bathynous, seems to be this, That the Brutes retain
the integrity of their nature, but the Devils have degenerated from their first
condition, and forsook their station God had placed them in.


Bath. I confess, O Cuphophron, that the Lapse of the fallen Angels is great,
but yet they never sunk beneath the utmost Circuit of the Dominion of
Providence, or that Divine Nemesis that is continuedly interwoven into all the
degrees of the Creation. So that nothing that is not exterminated out of all
Being, but necessarily is subject to the Laws of some order or other of the
Creation it has cast it self into. As if some noble Family should by taking
ill courses lose all that Honor and Riches that were left them by their
Ancestors, and in process of time become mere Gally-slaves, they do not cease
to be still Subjects of the Prince of that Country in which they experience
these varieties of Fortune: so the Angels degenerating into Devils do not cease
to be under the Dominion of God, but find their Nemesis in his Dominion. Prove.
21.30.
For there is neither strength nor counsel against the Almighty, nor can any
one out-wit the reaches of his Providence. Gaolers and Prisoners and Hangmen,
and all manner of Executioners, are as well Subjects of the Prince as those men
of noble rank and quality.


Sophr. All instruments of the Wrath of God are part of his Dominion as well as
those of his Love: For, as the Son of Sirach tells us, Ecclesiastic. 39.28, etc.
There be spirits that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay on
sore strokes; in the time of Destruction they pour out their force, and appease
the wrath of him that made them. Fire and Hail and Famine and Death, all these
were created for vengeance: Teeth of wild Beasts and Scorpions, Serpents and
the Sword punishing the wicked to destruction: All these rejoice in his
commands, and are ready upon earth to execute his will, when need requires. To
this purpose he speaks, and methinks plainly insinuates that the Infernal
Powers themselves (of which these are many times but the external weapons) are
part of the Army of the Lord of Hosts.


Bath. It is impossible to be otherwise, O Sophron; for it is repugnant to the
Wisdom and Omnipotency of God, to suffer any thing to be that is in no wise
subject to his Power and Dominion.


Hyl. Gentlemen, methinks you are too-too solicitous in searching and setting
out the Extent or Boundaries of the Kingdom of God, whenas it were a more
curious Point, and no less pertinent to the present Quere, [ What the Kingdom
of God is,] to define what species of Dominion or Power it is that he thus
universally exercises over the Creation.


Cuph. It is not absolute and unlimited Sovereignty, Of the absolute
Sovereignty of God, and wherein it is grounded.
Hylobares, which we from the Greeks call Tyranny?


Sophr. No, by no means, Cuphophron. If you understood what Tyranny is, you
would find your Assertion as contradictious as blasphemous.


Euist. Sophron says very true, Hylobares; for Lib. 3. cap. 7.
Aristotle defines Tyranny (...) and elsewhere in his Politics describing it
more copiously, Politic. lib. 4. c. 10.
he says, it is such a Government in one person as, being unaccountable to
any, rules over his equals, or those that are better then himself, doing all
things for his own Interest, and not for the Interest of them that he rules.
Which things are utterly incompetible to God, who is infinitely better then all
the Creation, and is only capable of doing them good, but not of receiving any
good from them.


Cuph. I minded not how Tyranny is defined in your learned Authors, Euistor,
but looked upon the word as significative of such a Sovereignty as is absolute
and unlimited, and that in one person, who is tied to no Law, but acts merely
according to the suggestions and sentiments of his own heart.


Euist. And, to tell you the truth, the Critics, O Cuphophron, teach us that
the word (...) anciently signified no worse then so, that is to say, an
absolute Monarch, a person invested with absolute Sovereignty or Power.


Philoth. If Cuphophron meant no otherwise then so, Euistor, his meaning was
sound and good, though his expression not so warrantable. For it is very unsafe
and scandalous to apply ill-sounding words to the Divine Majesty, though lined
underneath with a tacit well-meaning. But to say that that species of Dominion
which God exercises over his Creatures is absolute Sovereignty, or a power of
doing all things according to the suggestions or sentiments of his own mind,
this is a sober and true declaration touching the Dominion of God.


Hyl. But I beseech you, Philotheus, wherein is this vast and unlimited
Sovereignty of God founded? in his Omnipotency, or in what is it? For some say
absolute and irresistible Power can do no wrong.


Philoth. That Is a thing, Hylobares, I could yet never understand, that the
most omnipotent Power that is imaginable can ever have a right to do what is
wrong, that is to say, to create any evil that is truly so upon the full
compute of all circumstances, or in the entire comprehension of the whole
Economy of the Universe, No Power, though never so omnipotent, can claim a
right to such an act, no more then any Intellect, never so omniscient, can
claim a right of authentickly thinking that true which is really false.

But in answer to your main question, wherein the Right of this absolute
Sovereignty in God is founded, I must tell you both distinctly and
compendiously at once, That to infinite, permanent and immutable Goodness of
right belongs as well Omnisciency as Omnipotency, the one as her Secretary, the
other as her Satellitium. But the infinitely-good God is not only of right,
but by nature, both Omniscient and Omnipotent. And from these three, his
infinite Goodness, Wisdom and Power, issue out all the Orders of the Creation
in the whole Universe. So that all the Creatures being his, and his Goodness
being so perfect, immutable and permanent, as never out of any humor, (as I
may so speak) vacillancy, or supine indifferency, to be carried otherwise then
to what is the best, and his Wisdom never at a loss to discern, nor his Power
to execute it; we see the clearest foundation imaginable of the Right of that
absolute Sovereignty we acknowledge in God. For is there not all reason, that
he that is so immutably Good, that it is repugnant that he should ever will any
thing but what is absolutely for the best, should have a full right of acting
merely according to the suggestions and sentiments of his own mind, it being
impossible but that they should be for the best, he having proportionable
Wisdom also and Power adjoined to this infinite Goodness, to contrive and
execute his holy, just and benign designs?


Philop. In my apprehension, Philotheus, this is marvellously plain, and such
as I wanted no instruction in. And therefore let me entreat you to draw nearer
to the main point in hand, which is the Kingdom of God properly so called.
For, methinks, we have done hitherto, as if some having a design to observe
more particularly some one Kingdom in the Map of the World, suppose England,
France, or Spain, should forget their intended purpose, and lose time in taking
a vagary through all Europe at least, if not all the four quarters of the
World. I desire, Philotheus, to understand what that Kingdom of God is that is
amongst Men, being less curious touching that part of his Dominion that he
exercises over Angels, whether lapsed or unlapsed, or that Power he exserts
upon the Kingdom of Nature, whether Animals or Plants or other inferior
creatures. Quae supranos nihil ad nos: and there is in some sense the like
reason concerning those things below us. I desire my prospect may be enlarged
only toward those things that are on the same level with my self: which I
press the more earnestly, because of the streightness of the time I fear we
shall be cast into.


Philoth. I commend your providence, Philopolis, and desire you to persist in
this freedom of calling us back to those subjects you have the greatest mind
to be satisfied in, as often as we stray: For this last Evening is wholly
dedicated to your service. But however, for all the haste I affect to enter
upon that Point you chiefly aim at, The Kingdom of God within us, what it is.
namely, What the Kingdom of God is signally so called, I must first mention a
Division, before I fall upon that Definition. For the Kingdom of God, as it
respects Men also, is either Internal or External; according as our Savior
has declared, Neither shall they say, Luke 17.21
Lo here, or, Lo there; for behold, the Kingdom of God is within you.


Cuph. I suppose this Kingdom is much-what the same with the Philosophical
Kingdom of the Stoics, who make their wise man a King and Emperor, and what
not? and count it their chief happiness to have a full dominion over their
Passions, especially the more grim and harsh ones, that they may enjoy
themselves in quiet.


Philoth. O no, Cuphophron, there is no sameness at all betwixt this Kingdom
of the Stoics and the Kingdom of God. For this Kingdom of the Stoics is the
Kingdom of Selfishness, and Self-love sways the Scepter there and wears the
Diadem: But in the Kingdom of God, God himself, who is that pure, free, and
perfectly- unselfed Love, has the full dominion of the Soul, and the ordering
and rule of all the Passions. It is a wonderful thing to consider how
multifarious the Impostures and false pretensions to this inward Kingdom are
discovered to be by those that are really possessed thereof; how one Passion
(as suppose Pride or Covetousness) subdues all the rest unto it self, and rules
in stead of the Divine Love; how all the Passions are brought into a demure
subjection to the sense of some external Interest, especially if it bear the
Title of Sacred or Holy; and how men may be disciplined or educated thereto, as
Setting-dogs for the Game, whenas the Soul in such a case has subdued all her
affections, only to surrender her self a more absolute slave to the will of
those men whose business it is to bring the World into blind obedience (by
studied Impostures and Hypocrisies) to such Laws as are made for their carnal
Interest, and, in stead of propagating the Kingdom of God, to plant the
Kingdom of the Devil or Antichrist amongst men. Let the Soul in such cases as
these have never so great a command over her affections, this is no Kingdom of
God, but a presumptuous and tyrannical Usurpation of some petty Masters against
the Right of his Kingdom. Unless this internal Kingdom be established in the
Love and Peace and Patience of the Lord Jesus, it is but the Reign of mere
self-seeking Nature, or the Kingdom of the Devil. The Kingdom of God in the
Soul is the Empire of the Divine Love, which equally affects the good of all
men, Romans 12.15.
rejoices with them that rejoice, and weeps with them that weep: It is that
state of the Soul whereby a man loves God with all his heart and all his soul,
Matt. 22.37.
and his neighbor as himself, Matt. 7.12.
and deals with others as himself would be dealt with; whereby a man earnestly
desires the common good of all men, and finds himself concerned in repelling or
preventing any public evil. To be brief, It is the Rule of the Spirit of God
in the Soul, who takes the rains of all our Powers, Faculties and Affections
into his own hand, and curbs them and excites them according to his own most
holy will, that is carried to no particular Self-interest, but ever directs to
that which is simply and absolutely the best. This also is the Kingdom of
Christ in the Inward man, Hebr. 7.2.
the mystical Melchizedek, who is first King of Righteousness, as the word
signifies, that is, of impartial Rectitude and Uprightness, without all
Self-respects, and then King of Salem, that is, Prince of Peace. Finally, it is
that Kingdom which consists not in external Superstitions, but, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 14.7.
in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.


Philop. This Internal Kingdom of God, The means of acquiring it.
O Philotheus, is so lovely and desirable, that I cannot but request you to
intimate the means of acquiring it, before you proceed to the External.


Philoth. O how I love you, Philopolis, for this motion, forasmuch as I
perceive that it cannot proceed from any vain curiosity, but from a sincere
desire of entering into life and holiness! The most effectual means in the
general is intimated up and down in the Gospels by our Blessed Savior. As
where he compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Treasure hid in the field, Matt.
13.44, 45.
and to a single Pearl of great price, for which one sells all that he has to
purchase it; and where he tells us that the Kingdom of God suffers violence,
Matt. 11.12.
and that the violent take it by force; and again, where he declares that he
that lays his hand to the plough, Luke 9.62.
and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God, and in like passages.
For all these signify thus much to us, That whosoever would acquire so
excellent a state of the Soul as this which we call the Kingdom of God, he
must forthwith quit all things else whatsoever that stand in competition with
it; That he must with all imaginable earnestness of spirit and with a kind of
holy violence reach at it, and endeavor the taking of it through all dangers,
hardships and resistences whatsoever, as he that would scale the walls of a
City to obtain the Crown; and, lastly, That this pursuit be without any
intermissions or lazy relapses into the power of the World or the Flesh again,
but that it be peremptory, constant and continued, till we have wone the prize,
and find all that fulfilled in us which we desired or expected; which is the
perfect subduing of all our corruptions, and the establishing of the Reign of
the true Melchizedek in us, the living Righteousness of God, and the
replenishing of our hearts with purity, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.


Philop. This is excellently good in the general, O Philotheus. But have you no
farther directions more particularly to recommend to us?


Philoth. Truth lies in a little room, especially that of it that is most
useful, O Philopolis. And therefore I will trouble you with no farther
instructions then what are comprised in these few Principles. As first, That we
have a firm and unshaken Faith in the Power of God, and in the assistence of
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, for the subduing all Envy, Pride, Lust, all
Worldliness and Selfishness, and whatever is contrary to the Kingdom of God
in us, that we may have a comfortable conquest over these and all like
corruptions through him that strengthens us. This is the first necessary
Principle we ought to be imbued with, if we mean seriously to set our selves to
the atchieving so great and weighty an enterprise: This, I say, is the first
necessary Principle, namely, A full and firm belief that the Achievement is
possible. The second is, That we believe it to be our duty to arrive to this
blessed state, and not to satisfy our selves with any condition on this side
of it, much less, out of any Antinomian Sophistry or Witchcraft, to fancy
our selves released from all obligation to any real and living Righteousness in
us; but to be entirely obedient to the voice of Wisdom and Truth, Matt. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; and to remember,
that it was the end of Christ's coming into the world, Matt. 15.13.
to pluck up every plant that was not of his Father's planting, and to raise
such a seed upon earth as have neither spot nor wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
nor any such thing, but are holy and without blemish. If either of these two
Principles be wanting, the defect will be notorious in the success. For who can
with any courage attempt such difficulties as he thinks either impossible to be
overmastered, or not his duty to grapple with. Wherefore being sound in these,
Philopolis, he must add Meditation, Circumspection, and Devotion. Meditation
in private especially. Circumspection in his dealing with external objects,
whether men or things, that he be not carried away unawares against those rules
and resolutions he made to himself in private, but ever stand upon his guard;
and if he be assaulted with any temptation, to call to Heaven for succor, and
to trust in the strength of God against the surprise. Which I think is the true
meaning of praying continually. But in a more particular manner, to add to
your private Meditation the fervency of Devotion, and earnestly to beg of God,
that he would every day more and more discover to you the ugliness of Sin, and
the amiableness of Righteousness, and that your hatred may be more keenly edged
against the one, and your love more highly inflamed toward the other; that the
work of the Heart may go on, and not those umbratile skirmishes of the Brain in
Phancie and exterior Reason, but that we may effectually feel the difference
of the contrary actings of the Powers of the Kingdom of Light and the Kingdom
of Darkness, charging one another in the field, Life against life, and
Substance against substance, till Hell and Death be absorpt into victory, and
the evil Nature be quite consumed into a glorious flame of Love and Triumph.
These all are the Mysteries of the Heart, O Philopolis, not of the Head, which,
in comparison, is but an outward Shop of Phancies and fine Pictures; but the
transactions of substantial life and Reality are in that other part, which is
the secret Tabernacle of God, and hidden Temple for most effectual Prayer. For
the Heart is the proper Pavilion of either the spirit of the World, or the
Spirit of God, which kindles there the holy desire and thirst after
Righteousness: Which vehement, sincere and cordial desire, the true gift and
fruit of the Spirit, is the very soul and substance of Prayer, and a certain
Divine Magic, that draws all the heavenly Powers into the center of our Souls,
imbibing the comfortable dews of Paradise, to the ineffable refreshing of the
Garden of God. Through this sluice is let in all the nourishment to the new
Birth, and it is the seat of the first living seed thereof. Whence the Center
of our Soul in the Heart requires more diligent observation then that more
peculiar one in the Head. For though this seems more peculiarly ours, yet the
other joins us with that which is more to us then we are to our selves, whether
it be the spirit of the world or of God, and makes us feelingly communicate
with Life and Substance; whenas the other without this would only lead us into
a field of Shadows and Dreams.

Wherefore, O Philopolis, he that is a Candidate for the Kingdom of God, let
him above all things cultivate the Heart; for through this only is the Inlet
into the Kingdom of Light. Matt. 5.6, 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be satisfied. I stretch
forth my hands unto thee; Psalm. 143.6.
my Soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty Land where no water is. Psalm 84.5, 6,
7.
And again, Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are
thy ways; Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a Well, and the rain
fills the pools with water. They go from strength to strength, till every one
of them appear before God in Sion. By which is intimated, that firm Faith and
holy desire brings us at last to the fruition of God and his Kingdom.

To all which I need not add, for a conclusion, the perpetual and constant
performance of whatever we find our selves able and bound in duty to perform.
For he that has this Faith and sincere desire can never sin against the Power
of God and the Dictates of his own Conscience. This, Philopolis, is a brief,
but faithful, direction for the obtaining that great prize, the Kingdom of
God within us.


Philop. And I am infinitely obliged to you, Philotheus, for your hearty and
serious Instructions in so important a Mystery. I hope they will never slip
out of my mind.


Cuph. I am sure his Indoctrinations touching the Center of the Soul in the
Heart stick so fast in mine, that I shall never forget them. But I beseech you,
Philotheus, what will become of that Center of the Soul in the other state,
when we have left our Hearts behind us?


Philoth. It is much, O Cuphophron, that your Philosophy should scruple at
this, unless you be also at a loss what will become of the other Center of the
Soul, because we leave our Brains behind us. They retain the same offices
still, the one to join us with the Spirit of the World, or else with the Spirit
of God, the other to be our common Percipient.


Philop. This is a Curiosity which I for my part took no notice of. The
external Kingdom of God properly so called, what it is.
And I pray you, Philotheus, be no farther engaged in the point, but proceed to
the external Kingdom of God, and declare to us what it is.


Philoth. The External Kingdom of God amongst men is much-what the same (in a
larger acception of the word) that the pure and true Church of God is: Which is
a body of such people as make profession of the only true God, the Maker and
Creator of all things, and the Supervisour of all the affairs of the Universe,
a Punisher of offenders, and a Rewarder of all those that seek him. This
profession of one God joined with the pure worship of him, devoid of all
Idolatry and gross Superstition, as also of all Cruelty and Barbarity, and of
all foul and unclean Customs, but, on the contrary, it being a declared Law
amongst them, That they ought to love this one and only true God with all
their heart, and all their Soul, and their neighbor (that is, all mankind) as
themselves, and to deal with others as themselves would be dealt withal, they
in the mean time living in no opposition or defiance to any
sufficiently-revealed Law of God, This profession, I say, does constitute any
Family, Country, Nation, or Kingdom, the Church of God or Kingdom of God. In
which description, O Philopolis, if you rest satisfied, it will be easy
according to the sense thereof to answer the first part of your second Quere,
namely, When the Kingdom of God began.


Philop. I am not so curious as not to rest satisfied in this description, When
this Kingdom of God began.
O Philotheus; and therefore I desire you to proceed to the second Quere.


Philoth. It is manifest therefore, O Philopolis, out of this description, that
the Kingdom of God began as timely as the first Family of the world, and was
continued in the succession of the Patriarchs before and after the Flood to
Moses, and through the Mosaic Polity (which some in a more peculiar manner
contend to be a Theocracy) to the coming of Christ.


Philop. But what shall we think in the mean time therefore of the ancient
Philosophers, which had nothing to do with either the Patriarchs or Moses, and
yet believed One only true God, the Author and Governor of the Universe, and
were singularly good and virtuous in their conversations? were they any part of
the Kingdom of God?


Philoth. That the Philosophers had nothing to do with Moses, and that their
wisdom derived not it self from that fountain, is more then I dare averr. But
if they were such as you describe for profession and life, and communicated not
with the Idolatries and pollutions of the Gentiles, I should look upon them as
very much akin to the (...), and dare not debarr them from being certain
scattered Appendages to the Kingdom of God.


Philop. If you think so favorably of them, Philotheus, for my part I cannot
be of so sour and severe a temper as to grudge them that honor. In the mean
while I am not only satisfied touching the so timely commencement of the
Kingdom of God or the Church, but of the succession of it to the coming of
Christ; which answers to the second part of my second Quere, Where it has been
to be found since its beginning. And truly, that God had his Church so timely,
seems to be intimated by that timely Martyrdom begun in it in the Murder of
Abel, Matt. 23.35.
from whose righteous blood Christ seems to begin the Martyrology in his
commination to that murtherous City, the carnal Jerusalem.


Bath. This is notably well observed of Philopolis, O Philotheus, and puts me
in mind of something a dark passage in the Apocalypse, which happily may receive
light from hence, namely, Apoc. 13.8.
there where it is said, That all would worship the Beast whose names are not
written in the Book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,
that is, a mundo condito. Which passage, I conceive, alludes to the murdering
of Abel, it being so early an example of the wicked martyring the good. And
therefore by the Lamb is here understood, according to the Prophetic style,
the whole succession of the holy ones or elect of God, spotless in life and
invincible in their patience, no persecution being able to subdue their minds
to evil, or to make them violate their Consciences. For there is no deceiving
or overcoming the Elect, whose Names are written in the Book of Life: which
Book is called the Book of the Lamb, or of the Elect of God, because their
names are enrolled there; and this Lamb said to be slain from the foundation of
the world, because the example of the wicked murdering the innocent and just
began so early in Cain's murdering of his brother Abel. But to understand by
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, the Lamb that was to be slain,
is so bold an abuse of all Grammar and Logic, that I must confess, till this
consideration came into my mind, the Text seemed to me to be of a desperate
obscurity; unless we should have taken the liberty to understand by this
slaying of the Lamb in the ordinary sense, (that is, of Christ,) the murdering
of his members, of which the earliest example is this of Abel: and Christ, you
know, Acts 9.4.
cried out to Saul, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? when he only
persecuted his Members.


Euist. O Bathynous, how kindly could I embrace thee for the great ease and
pleasure thou have done me in this Notion! I have been infinitely puzzled at
the Grammatical sense of this Passage, and could never be driven into the
allowance of false Greek for all the Authority of that great Critic Hugo
Grotius. I could never understand that (...) and (...) can be all one upon any
terms. And therefore I am highly delighted with the starting of this new Notion
or signification of the Lamb according to the Prophetic style. And even that
other sense you offered at is far more tolerable, then to make (...) have the
signification of futurity.


Bath. Of Christ 's appearing in humane shape to the Patriarchs before his
Incarnation.
It would be so indeed, Euistor, if the Soul of the Messiah had preexisted
before his Incarnation.


Euist. Why, the Fathers do expressly declare that it was Christ that appeared
to Abraham, to Moses, to Joshua, and to others, if that will help on the
credibility of the second sense.


Bath. But I believe that they may understand it of the Preexistence of the
Eternal Word, which they say was also employed in the ordering of the World at
the Creation, as well as in the superintending of the affairs of the ancient
Patriarchs and the people of Israel; appearing notwithstanding ever in humane
shape, as he did particularly to Joshua (and under the title of the Captain of
the Lord's Host, Josh. 5.13, 14.
) when there was close siege laid to Jericho.


Hyl. But when this Doctrine could pass so glibly with the ancient Fathers,
without the taking notice of the Preexistence of the Soul of the Messiah, how
glib, how easy and how natural would it have been upon this Hypothesis? and
how credible would that second sense be of the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world, he suffering so timely in his Members? But it is more harsh to
conceive that the pure Eternal Word can suffer any thing.


Euist. I confess, Hylobares, that the Word appearing so often in humane shape,
it were very natural in that regard to suppose also that it was joined with the
humane Soul of the Messiah. But that the humane Soul of the Messiah had ought
to do with the six days Creation, that again seems more hard and incredible.


Hyl. Why, Euistor, why should this seem so hard and incredible, that the same
Messiah that shall put a period to this stage of the Earth, (as at the
Conflagration) should be allowed to have been active at the ordering of the
Foundations thereof? that He, from whose mouth must proceed the last Pereat,
should have pronounced the first Fiat, he being also styled so frequently in
the Apoc. 1.8, and 11. Chapter 21.6. also 22.1
Apocalypse Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the
Last? Besides what is expressly said in the Epistle to the Hebrews in a complex
sense of the Messiah, not of the separate Word, Heb. 1.2.
God in these last days has spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed
heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds. And of the same Christ or
Messiah he cites that of the Psalmist, Heb. 1.10, 11, 12.
Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou remainest; and
they shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou fold them up,
and they shall be changed: But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.
Here both the Creation and the Conflagration of the World seems to be given to
the Messiah.


Philop. What strange and unexpected fluskering conceits fly up into the
youthful imagination of Hylobares upon his late persuasion of the Soul's
Preexistence! But what is this to our present purpose? or what use at all of
such Curiosities?


Sophr. The usefulness of this Theory, O Philopolis, I conceive is more
apparent then the truth thereof; because it conciliates more honor to the
Person of our Savior, and is a firm bar against the abhorred boldness of some
high-flown Enthusiasts, who once phansying themselves to be partakers of the
Divine Nature, though but in a moral sense, straightway set up for an equality
with Christ, and will be as much God as he; some of them more, and pretend
themselves the Beginners of a more holy Dispensation then the Son of God
himself brought into the world: whom they could not thus confront and vilify,
by either equalizing themselves to him, or preferring themselves before him, if
that of the Author to the Hebrews were understood in such a sense as Hylobares
drives at. But the ordinary recourse to the Communication of Idioms breaks the
force of all the Arguments he offers at, though I must confess it does not
destroy their Concinnity. Insomuch that I should think it hard for any one,
upon the concession of this double Hypothesis, namely, the Preexistence of
Souls and the continual Literal truth of the six days Creation, to stick at
the Conclusion Hylobares aims at. But I am too heavy to be haled into the
belief or concern of such needless Curiosities.


Philop. And so am I too, O Sophron; and therefore I must take the freedom to
give a stop to this digression, and hasten Philotheus again into the way.


Philoth. Thy Kingdom come, in what sense meant in our Savior's time and
afterward.
I have stood in it all this time, O Philopolis, expecting your commands. I have
carried on briefly the Succession of the Kingdom of God till our Savior's
time. What do you demand farther?


Philop. I pray you tell me, Philotheus, if the Kingdom of God was in the
world when Christ came into it, why did he teach his Disciples to pray, Thy
Kingdom come? Or why does he encourage his little flock, saying, Fear not,
Luke 12.32.
little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom?
Or why is he said to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mark 1.14, 15.
declaring that the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand? I
know not what Kingdom he means.


Philoth. You are to understand, O Philopolis, that the Kingdom of God in the
New Testament signifies variously. Sometimes Physically, as I may so speak, and
is the same with that external happiness we hope to enjoy in Heaven: sometimes
Morally, as where it is said to consist in righteousness and peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost: Romans 14.17.
and sometimes Politically; in which sense also I conceive it to be understood
in all those places you allege. And it is that very Kingdom upon Earth which
Daniel foretells of, Dan. 2.44.
and is also the Kingdom of Christ or of the Messiah, and is likewise styled
the Kingdom of Heaven, even in a Political sense, as where it is compared to
a Net, Matthew. 13. and elsewhere. This Kingdom of Christ is the Kingdom of God
in a more eminent and illustrious signification, not only for its holiness,
but also for the vast extent thereof, according to the Hebrew Idiom: For at
long run it is to take in all the Kingdoms of the Earth. But there is a more
particular occasion of the styling of it the Kingdom of God, from that passage
in Daniel, Dan. 2.44.
And in the days of those Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which
shall never be destroyed. From hence the Kingdom of Christ is called the
Kingdom of Heaven, and of God. Now this great and notable Kingdom of the Son
of man or the Messiah was not present in our Savior's days, though it was in a
near approach. And therefore the Disciples might very well be taught to pray,
Thy Kingdom come; and our Savior preach, that the Kingdom of God was at
hand; and encourage his little flock, his few Followers, in that at last the
Roman Empire would fall into their hands, as it did under Constantine the
Great, when Christianity became the Religion of the Empire. But in that he
says, Mar. 1.15.
The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand; that undoubtedly
relates to the Seventy weeks of Daniel, Dan. 9.
which were upon their expiration about that time that Christ preached the
Gospel of the Kingdom, that is, a little before his Suffering. ver. 25, 26.
For after seven weeks and threescore and two weeks (that is, sixty nine weeks)
the Messiah was to be cut off, and the people of the Jews cease to be God's
people any longer under the Mosaicall Dispensation, and the everlasting
Righteousness, ver. 24.
or the Eternal Law or Religion of Christ, to be brought in, and the Judicial
Sacrifices to cease, the Son of God being once made an Oblation upon the Cross
for the sins of the whole world. This is the Inchoation of the Kingdom of God
so much spoken of in the Gospel, which though it was at first but as a grain of
mustard seed, Matt. 13.31.
yet in a little time spread far and wide in the Roman Empire, and was at last
made Master thereof. For I must confess I understand that Parable of the
Mustard-tree in a Political sense, not in a Moral, and compare that which our
Savior adds by way of illustration of its greatness (so that the birds of the
air lodge in the branches thereof) with that prophetical expression in Daniel,
where Nebuchadnezzar's Kingdom is also resembled to a wide-spreading Tree,
Dan. 4.12.
(The Beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the Fowls of the Heaven
dwelt in the boughs thereof.) And thus was Christ's promise made good to his
little flock, to whom he had declared that it was his Father's good pleasure to
give them the Kingdom. Luke 12.32.



Philop. This is handsome, and to me not unsatisfactory, O Philotheus, so far
as it goes. But did not the Church of God both in Constantine's time and after
pray, Thy Kingdom come?


Philoth. I doubt it not, Philopolis, and it will never be unseasonable so to
pray, in the Moral sense, either for our selves or others; but hitherto it has
been also seasonable in the Political. For though the Church (where
uncorrupted with Idolatry and other gross Pollutions) has been the Kingdom of
God ever since it had a being, whether in prosperity or persecution: yet it has
been hitherto but Regnum Lapidis, not Regnum Montis; and therefore in a
Political sense they might ever pray that that might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the mouth of the Prophet Daniel, That the stone cut out without hands
might smite the Image upon the feet, Dan. 2.34, 35, 44.
and become a great Mountain, and fill the whole Earth, and be a Kingdom that
shall stand for ever, a Kingdom of God's setting up that shall never be
destroyed, that is to say, shall never relapse into Idolatrous practices, nor
be under their lash and subjection that do. No power shall be able to persecute
them for the purity of their Religion. For it is the Kingdom of God triumphant
and permanent that Daniel seems chiefly to point at, as if that short stay of
the Seventh King mentioned in the Apocalypse were scarce worth noting in these
more compendious Visions. Apoc. 17.10.


Which seeming omission in the Vision of the Statue is more palpably repeated
again in the Vision of the Four beasts. For though the Kingdom of the Son of
man was in the Reign of the Seventh King in a triumphant state; yet because it
was so short and unpermanent, the Prophecy seems to take no express notice of
it, but to begin the Inauguration of the Son of man into his Kingdom upon the
destruction of the little Horn, which destruction is not yet completed. When,
Dan. 7.21, 22.
because of the great words the Horn spoke, the Beast was slain, and his body
destroyed, and given to the burning flame, namely, the Beast with this little
Horn with eyes in it, (which little Horn is more fully and distinctly
represented in the Apocalypse under the figure of the Two-horned Beast,) then
Daniel saw in the night-Vision, and behold, one like the Son of man came with
the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him
near before him: And there was given him Dominion and Glory and a Kingdom,
that all people and Nations and languages should serve him. His Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed; which therefore is not so properly the Kingdom of God
under the Seventh King, but that Dominion of the Saints which emerges upon the
Beast that is not, and yet is, his going into perdition. Do you understand me,
Philopolis?


Philop. Very well, The Easiness of the Prophetic style.
and I think your Notion mainly solid. Nor do I find it any difficulty to
converse with men touching these Prophetical Mysteries, since I have pretty
well conn'd the Prophetic style: the knowledge whereof, in my mind, is as well
more easy as more useful and pleasant then Heraldry, which yet every ordinary
capacity is easily master of.


Philoth. I am exceeding glad to hear you say so, O Philopolis, and wish all
the Gentlemen in Christendom were of your mind. They would find such
Conviction in the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse, that I dare say we
should in a short time be all of one opinion in matters of Religion.


Philop. I wish with all my heart they would set themselves to this so easy
and pleasant kind of seriousness.


Bath. Sensuality, Levity and Profaneness of spirit makes holy things, though
of themselves very easy and pleasant, both unpleasant, hard and tedious to
such unmoralized minds. That is the great bar to the reception of Sacred Truths
with such kind of men; as Pride, Covetousness and Hypocrisy with others.


Philop. What you say I believe is too true, Bathynous; the more the pity. But
while we cannot change the minds of others, let us at least improve our own as
well as we can. And from what we have proceeded in hitherto, I am the more
desirous to hear an answer to the last part of my present Quere. Tell me
therefore, I beseech you, O Philotheus, Where the Kingdom of God now is. That
was the last Point in my Second Question, and methinks I am more puzzled in it
then ever.


Philoth. You are not so puzzled, Where the Kingdom of God now is.
Philopolis, but I believe you will easily extricate the difficulty your self,
and find out where God has, by first finding out where he has not, his
Kingdom. For I believe you will not say that the Kingdom of God is amongst
the mere Pagans, by reason of their Ignorance, Atheisticalness and Idolatry.


Philop. No sure, I did not so much as dream it was.


Philoth. Nor amongst the Jews. For they were a City of murderers, and killed
their Messiah, and so ceased to be God's people; and as many as are not
converted to Christianity justify the act of their forefathers, and become
successively guilty of their bloody and murtherous Crime. Besides that, they
are professed Enemies and Rebels to the manifestly-declared Law of God, which
is the Christian Religion; and therefore the Jewish Nation can be no part of
the Kingdom of God, according to the Definition of it above mentioned.


Philop. You say true, Philotheus.


Philoth. Nor the Turk, for the same reason; I mean, for his express enmity to
Christianity, the plainly-declared Law of God, besides the tearing Cruelty and
Savageness of that Polity. For the Kingdom of God must be devoid as well of
bloody Persecution and Barbarity as of Idolatry and Polytheism. And what an ill
Character the Turks and Saracens have in the Prophetic Visions is plain, in
that the latter are figured out by Scorpion-like Locusts out of the bottomless
pit, Apoc. 9.10, 11.
the title of whose King is Abaddon or Apollyon; the other by Horsemen, ver.
17, 19.
whose horses heads are compared to Lions, and their tails to Serpents, to
intimate that league they have with the Kingdom of the Serpent or of the
Devil; for the Devil was a murderer from the beginning, and these Wasters of
the world by war and bloodshed.


Philop. This is more then enough evident.


Philoth. And for the Popish Church, it is well known how, besides their
multifarious Idolatries and gross Superstitious practices, it is all-over
besmeared with innocent blood: as she also is figured out in the Apocalypse by
that gorgeous Whore with whom the Kings of the earth commit Fornication, Chap.
17.2, 6.
and who is drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus.


Philop. It remains then that the Reformed parts of Christendom be the
Kingdom of God: for none else occurr to my mind that can lay claim to the
title.


Philoth. And there is good reason to conclude so: both because the Definition
of the External Kingdom of God above given agrees to them, namely, that they
worship the One and onely-true God, and have purified his Worship from all
Idolatrous practices and corruptions, and have so far ceased to be that
murtherous City that stoned the Prophets, that they use no other sword then
that of the Spirit against Idolaters themselves, whom they never kill, but
either in the open field in battle, or upon the account of Treason against
their lawful Prince; and also because (God be thanked) they are free from any
yoke but that of Christ and their own Reformed Princes. And therefore being a
self-sufficient Power, able to maintain themselves against all extraneous and
Idolatrous Powers, these of them that are in this condition seem to me to be an
hopeful Inchoation of that promised Kingdom of the Son of man which Daniel
foretells of, and to be the first Rudiments of the Fifth Monarchy; forasmuch as
they arise out of the ruin of the little Horn with the eyes of a Dan. 7.25.
man, which is said to wear out the Saints of the most High.


Philop. I understand you very well, Philotheus. O the admirable perspicuity
and convictiveness of Truth! O how necessary is the knowledge of this Theory to
all the Protestant Dominions, that they may know how to be both good Christians
and good Subjects at once! For no man can oppose, undermine, or be false to the
Protestant Interest as such, or to any Reformed Prince, but he must ipso facto
commit Treason against the Kingdom of God, and be a Traitor or Rebel against
the Sovereignty of the Lord Jesus. O how infinitely satisfied am I with this
Truth! O how I could dwell upon this so-concerning a speculation! O how am I
eased in mind, and freed from all distraction, while my Soul is steadfastly
determined to one, that I know what to wish for, what to pray for, what to act
for, what to suffer for! I mean, for the interest of the Kingdom of God, and
the reviving Monarchy of the Lord Jesus Christ.


Cuph. That smaller faults in Things or Persons hinder not but that a Church
may still be the Kingdom of God.
This Truth, if it be a truth, is like a spark fallen into very combustible
matter, that it has set Philopolis thus all on a flame. It Is pity but what you
say should be true, Philotheus, that Philopolis his sincere and ingenuous zeal
may not have hit on an undue subject. But, for my part, I cannot but be
something hesitant at least in the point, if not quite incredulous. For the
Manners, the Opinions and the manner of the Rise of Reformed Christendom are
such as, in my judgment, ill suit with so glorious a Title.


Hyl. What? it seems then that Mr. Advocate General of the Paynim will now act
the part of an Accuser of the brethren. This it is to be of such an
universalized spirit, as to be ready and fit for all turns.


Cuph. I shall aecuse them, Hylobares, whom I desire to be found clear, and
before such Judges as I hope will not be unfavourable.


Philoth. For my part, Cuphophron, I cannot say that either all Things or all
persons of the Reformation are without fault. But the sinfulness of some (yea,
though it were of many) does not exclude the whole from being the External
Kingdom of God. And that is the point that we are upon. For the External
Kingdom of God may be presumed much larger then the Internal. And our Savior
Christ himself, you know, compares the Kingdom of God in this external sense
to a Net cast into the Sea, Matt. 13.47.
which gathers of every kind, as well bad as good. The people of Israel was the
Kingdom of God: but was every particular man of them holy and virtuous? The
Roman Empire in Constantine's time became the Kingdom of God: but were no
particular members of the Church at that time in any thing reprehensible?
Whether the Reformation cease to be the Kingdom of God for the wickedness of
some of that denomination, let our Adversaries be judges, who never spared to
style themselves Holy Church, for all the abhorred ungodliness of the Heads,
their Holinesses at Rome, and universal pollution of the members; and that
because they took themselves to be the true Christian Church, and to hold the
right Faith, and to retain the Rites and Religious Practices as to the
external Worship of God; though they were indeed an Antichristian Church, and
all overrun with abominable Doctrines and Idolatrous Practices, and Diabolical
Cruelties against the true Worshippers of God. Of how much more right therefore
ought the Reformation to be held the holy people of God and his peculiar
Kingdom, who profess the Apostolic Faith entire without any Idolatrous
superadditions, who murder no man for his Conscience, and make the infallible
Word of God it self the Object of their Profession, and the platform of their
Religion?


Cuph. The truth is, the disparity is infinitely great, if the Roman and
Reformed Church stood in competition which of them two should be the Kingdom
of God.


Bath. But it being so plain that the Reformed Church is the true External
Kingdom of God, forasmuch as they make pure profession of the Gospel of the
Kingdom cleared from all the gross Corruptions of men, and teach Christ merely
according to the Word of Christ; and that also in this regard the Church of
Rome by their Antichristian Doctrines is really a contrary Kingdom thereunto,
that is, the Kingdom of Antichrist; how abominably nauseous, O Cuphophron,
must Indifferency in Religion be amongst Pretenders to Protestantism, whenas
the Romanists themselves scarce in the worst of times would have laid down
their zeal in the behalf of that Christianity against Turcism, though Turcism
ought not to be more abominable to them then their Antichristianism ought to be
to us? The Charge of Antinomianism against th Reformation.
For what can be more contrary then the Kingdom of Christ and of Antichrist?


Cuph. This would bear more weight with it, Bathynous, if there were no gross
flaws in the external Profession of the Protestants, and that they were right
in their declared Opinions. For, in my judgment, Antinomianism and Calvinism
(I mean that dark Dogma about Predestination) are such horrid Errors, that
they seem the badges of the Kingdom of Darkness, rather then of the Kingdom
of God.


Bath. What you mean by Antinomianism, O Cuphophron, I know not. But, so far as
I know, there are but these two meanings thereof: either a conceit that we are
exempted by the liberty of the Gospel from all moral Duties; a thing exploded
by all the Protestant Churches, as you may understand by the Harmony of their
Confessions: or else it signifies a disclaim of being justified by the doing
our Duties, and an entire relying on the Satisfaction or Atonement of Christ;
which rightly understood has no evil at all in it, but is an excellent Antidote
against Pride. For those that profess such an Antinomianism as this, and
declare they look to be saved by Faith only without the Works of the Law, will
not deny but that they are to live as strictly and holily as if they were to be
saved by the integrity of their conversations; and yet when they have lived as
precisely as they can, that they are wholly to rely upon the mercy of God in
Christ. How lovely, how amiable is such a disposition of a Soul as this, who,
taking no notice of her own innocence or righteousness, casts her self wholly
on the Goodness and Merits of her Savior, and so, like an un-self-reflecting
and an un-self-valuing child, enters securely and peaceably into the Kingdom
of God, and into the choicest mansions of his heavenly Paradise!


Cuph. Nay, if that be the worst of it, Bathynous, I am easily reconciled to
Protestantism for all this.


Bath. This is the worst of it, O Cuphophron, so far as I can understand. And
you know the orthodox Protestants universally add their Doctrine of
Sanctification or a good life to that of Justification by Faith only: so that
I dare say they dealt bona fide; but by a secret Providence directed so their
style and phrase as was most effectual to oppose or undermine the gainful
traffic of that City of Merchandises, where the good works they ordinarily
cried up so were nothing else but the good and rich wares those cunning
Merchants purchased at cheap rates from abused souls; the increase of whose
sins were the advance of the Revenues of the Church, and their external good
works, as they are called, an excuse for their want of inward Sanctification
and real Regeneration, the main things the Protestants stand upon, which can be
no more without Good works in the best sense so called, then the Sun without
Light.


Cuph. But are there then, Bathynous, no Antinomians in the ill sense amongst
the Protestant?


Bath. No otherwise, Cuphophron, then there were Gnostics and Carpocratians in
the Apostolic times. There are, but disallowed by general suffrage.


Cuph. Let that then suffice. The Charge of Calvinism against the Reformation.
But this dark Opinion of Predestination how dismal does it look, Bathynous!
black as the smoke of the bottomless pit out of which the Locusts came.


Bath. What, do you allude to the Turks and Saracens, Cuphophron? The Turks
indeed are held great Fatalists, whence some in reproach call this Point of
Calvin Calvino-Turcism. Who would have thought Cuphophron so Apocalyptical?
That you take so great offense at Predestination in that rude and crude sense
that some hold it, I do not at all wonder: for it has ever seemed to me an
Opinion perfectly repugnant to the nature of God, that he should Predestinate
any Souls to endless and unspeakable misery for such sins as it was ever
impossible for them to avoid. This is a great reproach, in my apprehension, to
the Divine Majesty. But that there is an effectual Election or Predestination
of some to eternal life, I must confess I think it not only an Opinion
inoffensive, but true; which seems to me probably to be intimated from such
passages as these. Apoc. 13.8.
And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship the Beast, whose names are not
written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.
And again in another place of the Apocalypse, And they that are with him are
called, Apoc. 17.14.
and chosen, and faithful. And also in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8.28,
29.
And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to
them that are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow he
also did predestinate, and whom he did predestinate them he also called, etc.
These places considered together want not their force for the inferring the
abovementioned Opinion. And what hurt is it, O Cuphophron, that God is
conceived effectually to predestinate some men to Grace and Glory, and so is
proclaimed to be more good and gracious then the Arminians themselves would
have him, who put it to an adventure whether any man shall be saved or no?


Cuph. There were no great hurt in this, I confess, Bathynous: but Reprobation
or Predestination to eternal death, that is the great reproach to the Reformed
Religion.


Bath. Though some private men are very express in that Point, yet the public
Confessions of the Protestants are more modest and tender in that Article, and
only are for a Preterition of persons, no designment of them to sin and
damnation: which I promise you, Cuphophron, he that with an impartial eye looks
upon the Phenomenon of Providence can hardly deny to be found verified in the
effect. Besides what the Scriptures themselves intimate, Psalm. 58.3.
The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray so soon as they be
born. These are great and profound Secrets, and such as very good men may
easily lose themselves in; and therefore Mistakes in such Points may well be
competible even to the members of the true Kingdom of God. And that they took
away Free Will so universally, Divine Providence might permit them to slip into
that Error, making use thereof as of another crooked Engine against the frauds
and falsenesses of that crooked Serpent of Rome, I mean the Pope and his
Hierarchy. For they being for Free Will and Good works, more out of a design of
merchandising and enriching the Church with large Incomes of money for Pardons
and Indulgences, for Deliverances out of Purgatory, for certain Sales and
Contracts for Heaven, and ensured shares and portions of the Elysian fields;
the founding Salvation upon God's eternal Decree, and the declaring that we
have no power of our selves to do any thing for the obtaining eternal life,
this quite spoiled the market of these crafty Merchants, and over-turned the
tables of these Moneychangers. For the way to Salvation was now discovered not
to be those manifold formal postures which the Roman Tutours put their Novices
into, nor hard Penances, nor commutation of Penances (the main scope of the
Discipline of that Church) into pecuniary Mulcts, for the amassing and heaping
together an immense treasure of money: but every one was admonished with sad
and solemn preparation to frequent the Divine Ordinance, the powerful preaching
of the Gospel, to be instructed in the stupendous Arcana of God's free
Election and eternal Decrees, and not to reckon upon the Certainty of
Salvation from obedience to the devised Institutes of the Church, which drove
mainly at the dominion of the Priest, and the sucking of the purses of the
people; but to make their Calling and Election sure, that is to say, to
discover the certainty thereof by the inward fruits of the Spirit, by Faith
especially, (whereby they firmly believed that they were of the number of God's
Elect) and from thence by Love also to God and to their neighbor; all which
they conceived wrought in them, not for any thing that they could do or had
done by way of Merit, but merely by the free Spirit of Grace effectually
operating in their hearts. And, I pray you, Cuphophron, how much did this state
of things misbecome the Kingdom of God? especially considering that whatever
the Error was, it was in a Point so intricate as has puzzled the greatest wits
of all Ages; and was so seasonable, that it tended highly to the overthrow of
the Kingdom of Antichrist; and was so harmless to the believers of it, that
while they disclaimed all Free Will or ability of doing any thing themselves,
yet were they seen carried on in all holy Duties of Devotion and Sobriety of
life, while the other Party, that boasted so of their Free Will, might be
observed wallowing in all Worldliness and Sensuality, and with their Free Will
freely and merrily descending down together into the pit of Destruction.


Cuph. I think there is a kind of Magic or Witchcraft in conversing with
melancholic men. Bathynous his speech has so fettered and confounded my
spirit, that I am half ashamed of this Allegation which I thought at first so
dismal and formidable. Reformed Christendom will be the Kingdom of God, I
think, whether I will or no.


Philop. I hope so, Cuphophron.


Cuph. But are no other Christian Churches besides the Reformation the Kingdom
of God?


Philop. Whether there be or there be not other Christian Churches that are
part of God's Kingdom, it nothing infringes the truth of the Reformation's
being so. But from the intimations of Philotheus, I dare pronounce, that no
Christian Church that is in bondage under another Sovereignty, or does not
emerge into power upon the destruction or humbling of the little Horn, that is,
the Papal Hierarchy, can be that Kingdom Daniel points at, or the Inchoation
of the Fifth Monarchy.


Cuph. The Charge of that horrid sin of Rebellion.
Of this I am not so solicitous, O Philopolis, but I anxiously desire an answer
to the last Objection I intended, touching the Rise of this pretended Kingdom
of God. For the adverse Party confidently give out that its first Birth was
from Rebellion, which is worse then the sin of Witchcraft.


Sophr. It is an ill Omen against your Objection, O Cuphophron, that your
Scripture-quotation is so ridiculously impertinent. For in Samuel, where it is
said that Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23.
it is spoken of the Rebellion of Saul against the Lord, not of the people
against Saul.


Cuph. But I mean the Rebellion of the people against Saul, or the Secular
Magistrate, which is next to Rebellion against God, whose Vicegerent he is.


Sophr. That assertion is very true, Cuphophron; but the Imputation of our
Adversaries extremely false.


Bath. Most assuredly, O Sophron: And that Character, amongst the rest that
belong to them, which styles them (...), Liars, I conceive is not to be
restrained to their Legends and such like Forgeries, but is to take in also
their abominable Calumnies against the true Church of God. For they are a
generation of Vipers, that make up the Resemblance of the old Serpent under
Paganism in every stroke thereof. And the Dragon was cast out, Rev. 12.9, 10.
that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world.
And I heard a loud voice saying in Heaven, Now is come Salvation, and strength,
and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ: for the Accuser of
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.
Wherein the impudence of religious Liars is set out, as spreading Lies and
Calumnies even before the face of Heaven and the presence of God. And it is a
note that our Savior also of old has set upon Satan, John 8.44.
that the Devil is a Liar, and the father of all Lies and Calumnies.


Euist. And that this Objection of yours, O Cuphophron, is as loud a Lie as
ever the Devil invented, had your great parts condescended to be as conversant
in History as in the sublimer parts of Philosophy, your self would long ere now
have discovered.


Cuph. O how dearly do I love thee, Euistor, for this freeness! But since my
self has been taken up with higher matters, I prithee declare the truth freely
from thine own reading. For indeed I have a great suspicion of Luther and
Calvin, whose names are most illustrious in the Reformation, that they were
abettors or exciters of Sedition and Rebellion.


Euist. I shall declare the truth freely and impartially to you, Cuphophron,
touching these persons, and by the manifest injuries done to them you may judge
of the rest. As for Luther, he was so far from being an exciter or abettor of
Rebellion against Secular Princes, that he wrote a Treatise to exhort every
Soul to be subject to the higher Powers, and was himself a very severe and
careful practiser of his own Doctrine. For at that Confederacy of defensive
arms at Smalcald, which the Romanists declaim against as such an example of
Rebellion, (though it was not,) Luther was very shy and averse from giving his
Assent thereto, till he was thoroughly instructed by the learned in the Law
touching the Constitution of the Empire of Germany. For by the Magna Charta, as
I may so call it, of the Empire, the Princes of the Empire are invested in such
Rights, as, if they be violated by the Emperor, it is lawful for them to take
arms and resist sine Rebellionis aut Infidelitatis crimine. And the skillful in
the Law abundantly satisfied Luther that the Emperor had violated these Rights.


Philop. The truth is, Cuphophron, since the Empire was made Elective, and a
perpetual Power established in the Seven Electours, the Emperor's Authority
in many parts of Germany became little more then titular, and an empty Honor
without Power; they that elect him having a right also to depose him for
Mal-administration of the Affairs of the Empire. The Electours and other
Princes of the Empire govern their own Principalities without paying any thing
to the Emperor but Homage; and the Imperial Cities are most free from the
Imperial Laws. Must every appearing in arms then against the Emperor be
presently Rebellion?


Cuph. I did not think there could have been so much said in the behalf of
Luther.


Euist. And now for Calvin; the Charge of Rebellion upon him is, that he
expelled the Bishop of Geneva, who was the chief Magistrate of that City, and
changed the Government into an Aristocracy, and so carried on Reformation and
Rebellion at once. Is not this that which you mean, Cuphophron?


Cuph. I believe it is, for I have not much interess'd my self in these
Religious contests.


Euist. But this is a mere Calumny against John Calvin, and without all
ground. For not so much as that is true, that Calvin was one of the first
Planters of the Reformation at Geneva, and much less, that he or any other
Reformers expelled the Bishop out of the City. It was Farrell, Froment and
Viret, that by their Preaching converted Geneva in the Bishop's absence, who
fled away eight months before, being hated by the Citizens for the Rape of a
Virgin and many Adulteries with their Wives: he being also in fear of his life
for his Conspiracy with the Duke of Savoy to oppress the Liberties of the City,
for which his Secretary was hanged. But those that changed the Government were
strong Papists, and after main opposers of the Reformation.


Cuph. I perceive a man must take heed how he believes any charges of the
Romanists against the first Reformers.


Sophr. The measure of truth with them is the Interest of Holy Church; and
therefore every Lie subservient to that end is holy.


Cuph. But, if I mistake not, Zwinglius cut his way for the Reformation
violently with his Sword; for they say he was slain in battle.


Euist. That Is another gross mistake, Cuphophron. For the Reformation was
established in Zurick at least ten years sooner by Edict of the Senate upon the
peaceable preaching of the Gospel there; and the Switzers had shaken off the
yoke of the Empire two hundred years before. So little ground is there of
accusing the Reformation there of Rebellion.


Cuph. But as loud a noise of Rebellion as ever sounded in my ears, begun in
reference to Reformation, is that of the United Provinces shaking off the yoke
of the King of Spain: this sounds as high as that of Luther.


Euist. And is as loud a Falsehood. For the Reformed Religion was spread over the
Seventeen Provinces many years before their union against the Spaniard; nor did
they unite upon the account of Religion, but of State, for the maintaining
their Liberties against the Oppression of Spain. And therefore they chose for
their Prince Francis Duke of Alenzon a Roman Catholic, which they had not done
if the Protestants had been the greater part. Nor was the King of Spain their
absolute Sovereign, but their Count. So that neither the Reformation was the
Brat of this Union, nor this Union more by the Protestants then by the Papists,
nor less justifiable afterward, in that they held it in the behalf of the true
Religion also as well as of their Liberties, and would not submit to one that
was not their absolute Sovereign, to have their Souls murdered by a false
Religion, or else their Bodies by adhering to the true.


Cuph. I did not think, Euistor, that these Aspersions could have been so
easily wiped out. There Is but one Instance more occurrs to my mind, and that is
of the Boisterousness and Rebelliousness of Scotland in the behalf of the
Reformation. If i be not mistaken, I have heard a very ill report of that
Nation in this point.


Euist. That Is very likely, Cuphophron, nor are they any way to be excused, nor
the Reformation to be accused of what appertains not properly to its spirit,
but is peculiar to the spirit of that Nation. For before the Reformed Religion,
the Scots of an hundred and five Kings (which they reckon till Queen Mary) had
killed thirty five, besides five which they had expelled, and three which they
had deposed.


Cuph. The Collection thence is very easy.


Philop. And the like consideration is to be had of whatever unlawful Risings
of the Protestants there may have been in France. It is not to be imputed to
their Religion, but to the Genius of that Nation, who are so easily and so
often drawn into Rebellion, and where that crime is looked so slightly upon, as
a Countryman of their own has ingeniously noted of them, and has impartially
drawn into view such things and circumstances as give good light how to
estimate the measure of their transgression in this matter. Which I would
recommend to your reading, Cuphophron, I knowing you to be so great a lover of
Truth and Virtue. For the Author has wrote very pertinently to satisfy you
that the Reformation nowhere owes its birth to Rebellion, and that the
doctrine of Rebellion upon pretense of Religion is universally exploded by the
public Confessions of all the Protestant Churches, but both professed and
practiced by the Janissaries of the Bishop of Rome. The Title of the Book is, A
vindication of the Sincerity of the Protestant Religion in the point of
Obedience to Sovereigns.


Cuph. Very good, Philopolis, I thank you for your information. I shall enquire
for the Book, and at first leisure from my Philosophical Speculations I shall
give my self the satisfaction of perusing it. In the mean time therefore I
shall give you only this one trouble touching a point which cannot be denied
by Euistor, nor any Historian of them all. Did not the first Reformers rebel
against the Sovereignty of the Pope?


Philop. O no, Cuphophron, they resisted or cast off the pretended Sovereignty
of the Pope; but that was not to rebel, but to repel a wicked Usurpation. For
first, that Christ never constituted the Bishop of Rome the Successor of Peter
and his infallible Vicar General of Christendom appears, in that there is no
such Doctrine in the ancient Fathers, nor any such timely appeal to this
Bishop's Infallibility, nor any such thing recorded in Scripture; which had
been such an high Point, that, if it had been true, it could never have been
left out. Nay, on the contrary, it witnesses against this pretense: for Paul
in his Epistle to the Galatians does plainly declare himself inferior to none
of the Apostles. Chap. 1. and 2.
And though Peter was present, yet James did confessedly preside in the Council
at Jerusalem. Besides that the Uncircumcision was the Diocese of Paul, but
Peter's the Circumcision, which certainly was the less Circuit of the two. Not
to add how Paul withstood Peter at Antioch; which suits ill with Peter's
Superiority, as Peter's being at Antioch as well as at Rome with the
Superiority of the Roman Bishop above him of Antioch. For that Peter was at
Antioch is out of question; but whether Peter was ever at Rome is still
questionable among the Learned. And lastly, if Peter was so much taller by the
head and shoulders then the rest of the Apostles, why did he give the right
hand of fellowship to Barnabas and Paul?

Then again in the second place, No secular Sovereign can forfeit his
Sovereignty to any Spiritual pretended Superiority or Superintendency, unless
we admit that Principle of Wickleffianism, Dominium fundatur in gratia, which
the Jesuits themselves so loudly hoot at when they please, and is unfeignedly
to be hooted at by every one that has an honest and upright heart.


Bath. But do you not observe, Philopolis, how this Argument will also protect
the Subject as well as the Prince from all wrong and violence from a spiritual
Tyranny?


Philop. You say right, Bathynous: But so be it protect but my Sovereign safe
from all injuries, I am none of them that shall envy the overplus of good it
may do in behalf of Subjects, that any-where may be thought to fall short of
that grace of Illumination that others pretend to have, when indeed they are
wholly overwhelmed with gross Errors, Superstitions, and Idolatries.

And thirdly and lastly, Suppose his Holiness of Rome had once a Sovereignty
over all the Churches of Christendom in ordine ad Spiritualia, (which is the
only plea that can with any color be pretended) when his spiritual wares are
so infinitely poisoned and corupted, that the Religion he requires obedience to
is as gross as any Pagan-Idolatry, (as most certainly Romanism is) he does most
assuredly lose his right of Sovereignty or Command in Spirituals, unless he has
a right to command us to disobey God and Christ, whose Vicar he pretends to be;
and losing his right of Spiritual Sovereignty, the Temporal Appendages thereto
appertaining must likewise fall with it. This, methinks, must seem very clear
to an impartial eye.


Philoth. It must so, Philopolis; and yet I will cast in a fourth Argument of
undeniable evidence to them that understand it. Every Secular Prince, nay,
every private man, has a commission from Heaven to cast off the yoke of Rome,
as being that Mystical Babylon mentioned in the Apocalypse, of whom it is
said, Apoc. 18.4.
And I heard another voice from Heaven saying, Come out of her, my people, that
you partake not of her sins, and that you receive not of her plagues.


Philop. That Is well thought of, Philotheus: That Is an invincible Argument
indeed to as many as are convinced that by Babylon there is meant Rome
Christian, or, if you will, Pagano-christian, as I profess that I am very well
satisfied it is, by what I have read in late Authors, who have demonstrated
that Truth so plainly, that I think no man that has but the patience to
understand it (and it is no such great Riddle) can ever have the face to deny
it. What say you, Cuphophron, to it?


Cuph. I say, Philopolis, that I have not yet had the patience to understand
it. But yet I understand so much from the present discourse as silences all
scruples in me against Reformed Christendom's being the Kingdom of God; so
that Philotheus may pass to your Third Quere, if he will.


Philop. I thank you for that good news, What success the Kingdom of God has
had hitherto in the world, and how correspondent to Divine Predictions.
Cuphophron. I beseech you therefore, Philotheus, take my Third Quere into your
consideration, and tell us What success the Kingdom of God has had hitherto in
the world.


Philoth. I am glad we are come to this Point, Philopolis, as well for
Hylobares his sake as your own. For there is not a more illustrious Specimen of
Divine Providence then the Progress of the Church or Kingdom of God,
judiciously compared with the Prophecies, from its first commencement to this
day.


Hyl. Though I am, God be thanked, O Philotheus, very well settled in my belief
of the Divine Providence; yet, as men do not drink of wholesome and pleasant
wines merely for necessity, but indulge something to delight; so, though this
farther satisfaction be not altogether needful as to that point, yet the
pleasure of the instances of a Truth of so great importance you may be sure
will be very acceptable to me, besides that it is a main ratification of the
soundness of our Religion. Upon which account I shall be still your more
diligent Auditour.


Philoth. And the consideration of so serious and ingenuous an Auditour makes
me with the greater alacrity betake me to my task; which yet I must by reason
of the time perform with all possible brevity. To omit therefore that first
Prediction of the Incarnation of Christ according to the more mystical sense,
Genesis 3.15.
that The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's head, we will take notice
in the first place of that ancient Promise of God to Abraham, Genesis 12.3.
In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed: as also in another
place, where God is said to bring Abraham forth abroad, and to say unto him,
Genesis 15.5.
Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able to number them;
for so shall thy seed be. And in the same Chapter, a deep sleep falling upon
Abraham at the going down of the Sun, and an horror of great darkness seizing
upon him, the Lord said unto him in a Vision, Genesis 15.13, etc.
Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years.
And also that Nation whom they shall serve will I judge; and afterward shall
they come out with great substance. And thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace,
thou shall be buried in a good old age. But in the fourth generation they shall
come hither again, (that is, to the Land of Canaan.) For the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full. And in the seventeenth Chapter more expressly touching
that Land; And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the Land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession; and I will be their God. And upon Abraham's willingness to offer up
Isaac, the first Promise made to him has a very high and pompous Ratification,
Chap. 22. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord; For because thou have done
this thing, and have not withheld thy son, thine only son; That in blessing I
will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of
the Heaven, and as the sand that is on the Seashore: and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his Enemies. And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice.


Hyl. You have produced abundant testimonies of God's timely Promise to
Abraham, O Philotheus; but in what considerations do you conceive it to have
been performed?


Philoth. The Numerousness of Abraham's Offspring is notorious even in the more
carnal sense. For the people of the Jews properly so called are very numerous,
not only in the Turkish Empire, but in Christendom it self, as Travelers
observe. Besides that vast plenty of Abraham's blood that may run in the veins
of Nations of a disguised name, as amongst the Turks; and did amongst the
Saracens without disguise: not to add all Christendom, to which in a better
and more mystical sense the completion of the Promise is applicable. For all
Christians in this sense are the seed of Abraham. How will then the seed of
Abraham be multiplied, when all the Kingdoms of the World are become the
Kingdoms of Christ the son of Abraham? and how completely will then that be
fulfilled, And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, which
has in a good measure been fulfilled in all Christendom already? And whatever
is commendable in the Morality or Religion of the Turks, it is plain they owe
it to Moses or Christ. And whatever was illustrious and laudable amongst the
Heathen Nations heretofore in Virtue and Philosophy, the first seeds are
credibly conceived to have been fetched from the posterity of Israel.


Euist. The ancient Fathers harp much upon that string, as if Pythagoras and
the wisest Philosophers of Greece had all from that Fountain.


Bath. I, and the mavelous applicability of that ancient Philosophy to the
three first Chapters of the first Book of Moses, which are all Philosophical,
does wonderfully ratify that Conjecture of the Fathers.


Cuph. But that Vision of Abraham at the going down of the Sun has an
interpretation and completion more express touching the affliction of his
offspring in Egypt, and their redemption from that bondage after four hundred
years, saving that it was penned after the Event.


Bath. That, in my judgment, O Cuphophron, is a very disingenuous Exception,
whenas you see so plainly that those Prophecies also are verified that reach
some thousands of years beyond the time of Moses. By this cavil Moses should
have omitted all Predictions whose Completion was before his own time, nor have
recorded either the Dreams of Pharaoh or of Joseph himself.


Philoth. Indeed, Cuphophron, this fetch of yours is over-fine and witty, and
next to the distrusting of the whole History of Moses. But the truth of the
Prophecies that point at Events some thousands of years after Moses's time
countenances also the History. As in that notable Prophecy of Jacob; Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
till Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be: Which
Prophecy plainly points at the time of the coming of the Messiah, and
Conversion of the Nations to him, which fell out accordingly.


Philop. It is very true, Philotheus.


Philoth. But that also is very wonderful and observable which Saint Paul
intimates, Historical Types of what was to befall Christ and his Church: As
the Sufferings of Joseph, and his Exaltation.
that the Actions and Accidents that befell the seed of Abraham are Prophetic
Types touching Christ and his Church. It were an endless business to number up
all, but not amiss to give you an instance or two. As the Conspiracy of the
chief of Jacob's Family against Joseph their brother, to put him to death; Genesis
37.19
Behold, this Dreamer comes: Come now therefore, let us slay him. A fit Figure
of the Conspiracy of the Scribes and Pharisees and the Rulers against Christ,
who by Divine Revelation knew himself to be the Messiah, as well as Joseph by
his Dreams was fore-advertised that he should be exalted to that honor, that
his Father and Mother and Brethren should bow down themselves to the Earth to
him and worship him, as his Father declared from his Dream of the Sun and the
Moon and the eleven Stars doing obeisance to him. And from the Dream of the
Sheaves his brethren said unto him, Genesis 37.8.
Shall thou indeed reign over us? Wherefore for these things they envied him to
the death. But after his Sufferings, his descent into the pit, and his garments
dipped in blood, (which are not unsignificant of the death and burial of our
Savior Christ) he was not only raised out of the pit again, but highly
advanced into the Political Heaven in the Court of Pharaoh; which bears an
Analogy to the Ascension of Christ and his Apotheosis. For as even those that
crucified Christ, after adored him as the Son of God: so those that conspired
the death of Joseph, after did the lowliest obeisance to him; and, as Jacob
speaks in the interpretation of his son's Dream, they bowed themselves down to
the Earth before him. And also as the death of Christ tended to the Salvation
even of them that crucified him: so that Conspiracy against Joseph, and the
Affliction they brought him into, proved at last the Conservation of the
Conspiratours. And lastly, as it is said of Christ, Isa. 53.10.
When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days: Genesis 50.22, 23.
so it is said of Joseph, that he lived an hundred and ten years, and that he
saw Ephraim's children of the third generation; the children also of Machir the
son of Manasseh were brought up upon Ioseph's knees. Wherefore the great
increase of the Children of Israel (after Ioseph's sufferings by his brethren)
in the Land of Egypt is a Type of the great increase of the Disciples of Christ
or his Church (after his Passion, Resurrection and Ascension) in the Roman
Empire; which till their deliverance in the time of Constantine was to them an
house of sore bondage and unsupportable affliction, as the Land of Egypt was to
the children of Israel, till their deliverance by Moses. And Egypt from hence
has ever remained a Type of such Powers as are the Persecuters of the Children
of God. Whence it is also applied to the Pagano-christian Tyranny of the Pope
in the Revelation of St. John.


Philop. The Paschal Lamb, and the Israelites passage through the Red Sea.
Truly, Philotheus, what you say seems not to me anything hard or incongruous.
But methinks there is no Type so significant of the Sacrifice of Christ's
Passion as that of the Paschal Lamb, whose blood, being sprinkled on the posts
of the doors of the Israelites, saved their firstborn (which some make a Type
of the Soul) from the destroying Angel.


Philoth. You say right, Philopolis, it is a most palpable Prefiguration of the
Crucifixion of the Lamb of God that was to take away the sins of the world by
virtue of his blood, and so to work Salvation for us. But what think you of
Pharaoh and his host's being overthrown in the Red Sea? is that nothing Typical
of the blood of Christ?


Philop. In all likelihood it is, and signifies our Redemption from the bondage
of Sin and the Devil by the blood of our Savior. Is there any thing more in it?


Philoth. It is manifestly applied in the Apocalypse to the escape of the
Reformed Churches out of the bondage of the Roman Pharaoh, the Pope. For I pray
you tell me, Philopolis, who can those be that are said to have gotten the
victory over the Beast, Apoc. 15.2.
and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name, but
such as have renounced Popery, and are redeemed from the Tyranny of that Church
and Empire?


Philop. I must confess, Philotheus, I have not read Interpreters upon that
Book with so ill success, but that I am fully satisfied of that, and therefore
will easily admit that Reformed Christendom is concerned in that Description.

But these, Philopolis, are said to stand before a Sea of Glass mingled with
Fire, Apoc. 15.2, 3, 4.
and, having the Harps of God, to sing the Song of Moses the servant of God,
and the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
almighty; Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? For thou only art holy: for all Nations
shall worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest.


Philop. I cannot deny but that hereby is meant the Judgment of the Whore or
little Horn with eyes, begun in the Reformation; and that this Song of Moses
refers to that of the Israelites upon the destruction of Pharaoh and his
Chariots in the Red Sea. But is there any mention here of the Red Sea it self,
Philotheus?


Philoth. Yes manifestly, Philopolis. It is said in that Song of Moses which
the Israelites sung, Exodus 15.8.
The floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the
midst of the Sea; that is to say, the Red Sea became as Ice, for its fixedness
and transparency. And here it is called a Sea of Glass for the same reason. Are
these Metaphors so different?


Philop. Hugely congenerous, O Philotheus.


Philoth. And in that it is said to be a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, that
in the letter may allude either to the color of the Sand that shined through
the water, (and some kind of Red you know is called Color de feu) or to the
fiery appearance of the Angel that shined into it as they passed through it by
night.


Philop. This I must acknowledge is ingenious. But well, what then, Philotheus?
Suppose this Sea of Glass the Red Sea, in what sense is the Italian Pharaoh and
his host said to be overthrown in this Sea of Blood?


Philoth. Justification by Faith in the blood of Christ for the remission of
sins, in opposition to enslaving Penances, and hypocritical Good works, in
which consisted much the trade of that City of Merchandises, this is the Red
Sea wherein the Roman Pharaoh and his Chariots and horsemen were overthrown in
their pursuit after the Israel of God, those that bore the brunt of the first
Reformation.


Bath. And if their Successors on their part will fill up the Mystery of the
Sea of Glass mingled with Fire in the more inward sense thereof, that is to
say, in virtue of Christ's blood and spirit (which is compared to fire) will
perfect righteousness in the fear of God, 1 Cor. 10.2
and not only be baptized in the cloud and in the sea, (as the Apostle speaks,
alluding to their passage through the Red sea) in the exterior meaning, but
will drink the blood of Christ in the true participation thereof, and be
baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, to the consuming all Hypocrisy and
wickedness out of their hearts; I do not doubt but their conquests against
Pharaoh and his hosts will be infinitely more great and glorious then ever. As
it is said of the Israelites by Balaam, when the King of the Moabites would
have had him to curse them, He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Number. 23.21.
neither has he seen perverseness in Israel: and then it follows, The Lord
their God is with them, and a shout of a King is among them. Ver. 24.
Behold, the people shall rise up as a great Lion, and lift up himself as a
young Lion: he shall not lie down till he eat of the prey, and drink the blood
of the slain. Number. 24.6, 8.
As the valleys are they spread forth, as a Garden by the River's side which the
Lord has planted, as the Cedars beside the waters. God brought him forth out
of Egypt, he has as it were the strength of an Unicorn. He shall eat up the
Nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through with
his arrows. This success attends the uprightness and integrity of the
Israelites of the Old Covenant; and the same in Analogy is to be expected in
the New.


Philop. The brazen Serpent, the Tabernacle, High Priest, and whole Camp of
Israel, a Type of Christ and his Church.
True, Bathynous. But to return to the Prophetic Types touching the Blood of
Christ; methinks there is nothing more expressive of the Crucifixion of our
Savior then the lifting up of the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, as he
himself intimates in St. Iobn: As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, so shall the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life.


Bath. That is very well observed of you, Philopolis; it is a very expressive
Type indeed: and it has been a great delight to me when I have considered with
my self not only on that one Symbol of the brazen Serpent, but how the whole
Camp of Israel with the Tabernacle among them was one entire holy Type of the
itinerant Church of Christ, traveling through the Wilderness of this World to
the Land of Promise, or the Kingdom of Heaven. The Incarnation of Christ, his
Divinity and Apotheosis, his Passion, Ascension and Intercession, all these are
lively set out in those standing Figures among the Israelites.


Hyl. I pray you, how, Bathynous?


Bath. The Incarnation of the Logos, O Hylobares, is plainly figured out in the
Tabernacle and (...) from whence God spoke. And you know the Apostle calls this
mortal body (...) a Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13.
as the ancient Pythagoreans (...). Joh. 1.14.
And the Word in St. John is said to tabernacle amongst us, the Apostle
speaking there of his Incarnation. God's Residence therefore in the Tabernacle
(the Children of Israel in the mean time encamping about him in their booths)
is an easy Representation of Christ's Incarnation, of the Word his living in
the flesh amongst us that live in the flesh.


Hyl. It is so, Bathynous.


Bath. And for Christ's Passion, what more significant thereof (as Philopolis
has rightly observed) then that of the brazen Serpent, Christ, as it, being
lifted up in his Crucifixion on a Pole of wood? And as that Telesm was of the
most accursed shape of Creatures; so Christ was made sin and a curse for us,
crucified betwixt two Thieves, as if himself had been such a Malefactor. But
himself having no sin, the Contemplation thus of him on the Cross had a
sovereign power to take away both the pain and poison of Sin, and redeem us
from eternal Death: as the brazen Serpent, being no Serpent, but a Figure,
healed them that looked up to it from the sting and poison of the fiery flying
Serpents, and so redeemed them from a temporal death.


Hyl. But how is his Ascension and Intercession figured out in these
Israelitical Types?


Bath. His Intercession, Hylobares, is signified by the (...) or Mercy-seat.
For in that Christ has suffered in the flesh, and is now set down at the right
hand of God, he is our Atonement with him, in him God is made propitious to the
world. But his Ascension (as also his Intercession) is farther typify'd by the
High-priest's entering alone into the most Holy.


Hyl. That is the very same that the Author to the Hebrews takes notice of.
Hebr. 9.



Bath. And lastly, Hylobares, his Divinity is most magnificently embroidered on
the Robes of Aaron the High Priest, who undoubtedly was an illustrious Type of
Christ. For, according to Philo Iudaeus his own confession, the Robes of Aaron
were a Type of the visible Universe: and who can be said to wear and bear out
into shape and order, and fill the whole frame of Nature with his Presence, but
he that made it, and continues it in Being? who but (...), or the Divine Logos?
None can be said to fill out these Robes but he. And that Aaron's Robes were
not only a Type of the Universe, but fitted according to the truest Systeme
thereof, is apparent; forasmuch as the Ephod and Breast Plate, which was placed
about the region of the Heart, (which is the Sun of this lesser World) had its
contexture of Scarlet and Purple, Exodus 28.6.
with Gold and white Silk, which plainly denote the vehement heat and refulgent
light of the Sun, the Pythagoreans (...), as this Ephod and Breast Plate are
placed in the midst of the body of Aaron. The blew Robe also resembles so much
of the Heaven as comprehends the space of the Planets, which the pendulous
Pomegranates represent; and that farther-reaching Stole of eye-work the Coelum
Stellatum, the Stars resembling so many twinkling eyes, but the Bells the
Harmony of the Universe.


Hyl. I understand you very well; for I have read in a late Author a more full
description to the same purpose. The consideration of these Congruities of the
Israelitical Types strikes my mind with a mavelous pleasure. They are very
admirable, Bathynous, and very delectable, and solid pledges (compared with the
completion of them in the Christian Church) of a perpetual and peremptory
Providence of God in carrying on thus the affairs of his own People and
Kingdom.


Philop. But some, Vocal Prophecies touching the Kingdom of Christ and its
Success in the world.
Hylobares, are convinced more by express vocal Prophecies then by silent
Types, the slowness of their wit suspecting such Interpretations of overmuch
Phancifulness.


Hyl. Wherefore, Philopolis, Philotheus will easily return again to that
province, upon your least intimation.


Philoth. That I shall, Hylobares. But I hope Philopolis does not expect I
should range through all the Prophecies that concern the Jewish Church: for it
were a Task that would require a Volume.


Philop. I am so far from desiring that, Philotheus, that I am rather afraid of
it, and therefore debarr it; as also the troubling your self much with setting
out the success of the Jewish Affairs while their Polity held. For these things
are to be seen orderly in the Bible, and are so numerous, that we should lose
our main design by entering into them. That their Captivities were
fore-threatned by reason of their sins at good distances, and their Return
predicted, is ordinarily known. For fear time fail us, let us entreat you,
Philotheus, to confine your discourse to such Prophecies and Observations only
as concern the Kingdom of God set on foot by the Son of God, the Lord Christ.


Philoth. Such as the Prophecy of Jacob, which I last mentioned: In which that
long Captivity of the Ten Tribes seems to be involved. For Jacob's Prophecy
pitches upon that Tribe that was to continue till the coming of the Messiah.


Philop. That Is a plain Indication that Jacob's Prophecies touching his sons
were not uttered at random.


Philoth. So it is, Philopolis. And as Jacob's Prophecy so plainly bounds the
time within which the Messiah would not fail to come, so do also those of
Haggai and Malachi; Chap. 2.6. Chap. 3.1.
they both declare plainly that it should be within the time of the second
Temple.


Philop. I know they do. Wherein Providence was very faithful to the people of
God, in giving them so certain a sign of the Advent of their Savior, and that
the Jews might understand upon the demolishing of their Temple, that there was
no Temple left for them to worship toward but the Holy Body of Jesus the Son
of Mary, which he carried into Heaven with him at his Ascension.


Philoth. These are very manifest Traces of Divine Providence, Philopolis, but
nothing, methinks, so exact for the designation of the time of Christ's coming
as the Seventy Weeks of Daniel we above mentioned. For beginning the Epoche of
the Weeks from the seventh year of Artaxerxes in Ezra 7, the Passion of Christ
(or of the Messiah who is there said to be cut off) will fall within the last
Week. And is not this a notable precise Prediction to be made five or six
hundred years before the Event?


Hyl. This is indeed a notable demonstration of Providence, if there be an
easy Congruity of the Text to the Event.


Philop. Take that upon my credit, Hylobares, the Application is mavelous
easy and natural, and such as can have no corrival, as I understand from See
Doctor More's Mystery of Godliness, Book 7. chap. 4.
a late Explication of that Prophecy.


Philoth. But there is yet a more early Prediction, O Philopolis, of the
Sufferings of Christ in Isay, who prophesied above an hundred years sooner,
which Prophecy contains several other Characteristicks also of his Person.


Philop. You mean Isay 53. That is indeed a very illustrious Prophecy, and such
as I am abundantly satisfied in: As also of the exact Providence of God and of
his vigilance over his Church, in thus foretelling the determinate time and
proper characters of the Person of Christ the Savior of the World. But my mind
is carried on to the Success of his coming.


Philoth. He that is represented riding on the white Horse at the opening of
the first Seal in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 6.2.
with his Bow in his hand, did at last hit the mark which was aimed at, and he
then took possession of that Crown that was given him, when at the sixth Seal
the Roman Empire under Constantine became Christian. But as the Spirit of
Prophecy had foretold that through many tribulations and afflictions we should
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; so through many horrid and bloody
Persecutions and difficult* Oppositions did Christianity possess it self of the
Empire. And therefore this time of Conflict is fitly prefigured by that bloody
Battle betwixt Michael and the seven-headed Dragon; and that most direful
Persecution of all (begun in Diocletian's time, and continued through the
Reigns of some other Emperors) by the Altar, Apoc. 6.9, 10.
at the fifth Seal, under which were seen the Souls of them that were slain for
the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, who cried, saying, How
long, O Lord holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the Earth? But after this greatest extremity was that high
Victory of the Church in Constantine, that mighty Earthquake, Ver. 12.
at the opening of the sixth Seal, which dissettled and broke a-pieces the
Pagan Power, and cast the Empire into the lap of the Church. Wherefore that was
fulfilled in a more eminent manner which was spoken by the Prophet Daniel, Dan.
2.44.
And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom:
which Kingdom is called the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven (as I
told you before) out of these Prophecies: which begun indeed with Christ and
his Apostles, (and therefore is more commonly called the Kingdom of Christ)
but was most notoriously so when by their fortitude and sufferings they had
subdued the Roman Empire to Christ's Scepter, and so continued while the Church
was Symmetrall, as it was all the time of the six Seals. But within the
confines of the fourth and fifth Century this external Kingdom of Christ
began to degenerate into the Kingdom of Antichrist; and the Beast that had
received the deadly wound was again a-healing, Apoc. 13.3.
and all the Idolatries and Superstitions of the Pagans were at last revived in
a spurious kind of Christianity, and the newfangled Idolatrous Ceremonies of
the Church became the living Image of old Heathenism, Ver. 14
and finally, the Beast that was not, during the Reign of the purely-Christian
Caesar's, became the Beast that was, Apoc. 17.8.
and is not, and yet is. For the Empire became Pagan again by becoming
Idolatrous, and yet not that old Pagan Empire, because it was paganized with a
pseudo-Christian kind of Idolatry; and yet by resemblance it is that old Pagan
Empire, Idolatry and Murder and other gross Enormities being so lively strokes
in the feature of them both. This is the Success, Philopolis.


Philop. The Apostasy of the Church how consistent with the durableness of
God's Kingdom in Daniel.
This I believe is too true, Philotheus: but how consistent is that Apostasy of
the Church with what follows in Daniel? For he says, In the days of those
Kings (suppose in the fourth of them, viz. the Roman) shall the God of Heaven
set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, but it shall break in pieces
and consume all those Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. How is this
standing consistent with that Apostasy?


Philoth. This is a material Objection, Philopolis, but the Answer is not far
to seek. For though we should not grant that in a more External and Political
sense even degenerate Christendom may be called the Kingdom of Christ, and
that these Representations of her Apostasy do not so much mean that she is no
Spouse of Christ at all, as that she is a whorish one, and that her Enormities
are only set off at that height the more effectually to reclaim her, or make
people forsake her Communion; This alone may satisfy this difficulty, that all
along this abhorred Apostasy of the Church, set out by those figures (of the
Whore of Babylon, the two-horned Beast, and the false Prophet, the healed Beast
with ten Horns, and the Proculcation of the outward Court by the Gentiles for
42 months, as also by the little Horn with eyes, spoken of by Daniel, Dan. 7.
who was to domineer for a time and times and half a time,) we are to consider
that there is a Continuance of the true Apostolical subjects of Christ's
Kingdom all this time synchronall to this Apostasy, and prefigured by the
Virgin-Company in the Apocalypse, by the two Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth
1260 days, and by the Woman in the wilderness continuing there for a time and
times and half a time. So that the Kingdom begun by Christ and his Apostles,
though plagued and persecuted and cruelly opposed by both Rome Pagan and Rome
Antichristian, was never yet subdued, but remains still, for all those glorious
purposes God intends it, to this very day. This is that precious stone cut out
without hands, which must become that Mountain that will fill the whole Earth,
Dan. 2.35.
and not that carnal lump of Idolaters and bloody Murderers. These are the
Hundred forty four thousand mustered on Mount Sion: Apoc. 14.1.
and if you demand to what Hierarchy they belong, they follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, and follow no man farther then he follows the Lamb,
according as that ancient Follower of the Lamb exhorts them, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. In this Head they are an united
Kingdom of God and of Christ, living all under his Laws, and submitting to no
Decrees contrary thereunto. This Kingdom, Philopolis, has not yet been
destroyed, and I am confident never will be.


Philop. I hope so too. But in the mean time the sum of the Success of the
Kingdom of Christ since the beginning of the Apostasy it seems is this, That
from thenceforward the Kingdom of Christ for about 1260 years became the
Kingdom of Antichrist, excepting the Succession of those Regiments of the
Lamb who had his Father's name written in their foreheads, Apoc. 14.3, 4.
and to whom alone it was given to sing that new Song before the Throne, as
being redeemed from the Earth, and having become pure Virgins, in whose mouth
there was found no guile.


Bath. These are those, Philopolis, of whom it is also written, John 1.12, 13.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name; which were born, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And from the carnal
man are hid all the Mysteries of Regeneration. That new nature is a new Song
that he can never learn before he be truly regenerate, let him lay about him
as stoutly as he will with his unsanctified Reason and external Institutes.


Sophr. And from this Ignorance, or rather Antipathy of life, is that War and
Persecution raised against the innocent Soldiers of the Lamb. Accordingly as
it is noted by the Apostle, Gal. 4.28.
Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise, that is, the
children of the spiritual birth: Ver. 29.
But as then, he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born
after the Spirit, even so it is now.


Cuph. The Kingdom of Antichrist how warrantably so called, and whether the
Pope be that Man of sin spoken of by the Apostle.
I, and ever will be so, I think, O Sophron, especially while they that are born
after the Spirit give such ill names to them that are born after the flesh.
What a mavelous reproach is that of Philotheus, to call the Rule of the Church
for above a thousand years together the Reign of Antichrist?


Sophr. Why, Cuphophron, would you have Philotheus wiser in judgment and
expression then the Spirit of God himself, who has called that Monster, that
would corrupt and wast the Church so, by the name of Antichrist, as also
generally did the ancient Fathers? And I pray tell me whether the false
Prophet, the blasphemous Horn with eyes, the two-horn'd Beast, the Whore of
Babylon, the Man of sin, be less harsh Appellations then that of Antichrist.
And these assuredly belong to the Hierarchy of Rome.


Cuph. The blasphemous Horn with eyes, the Whore of Babylon and the Man of sin,
methinks, are as reproachful Titles as that of Antichrist: and if the Bishop of
Rome could be proved any of these, especially that Man of sin, it would be hard
to fend off that other more ordinary imputation which they so whinch at.


Euist. It was the generally-received opinion of the Church, that the Man of
sin described in the Epistle to the Thessalonians is that famous Antichrist
that filled the Christian world with his noise and terror.


Philoth. And that this is the Pope with his Clergy, O Cuphophron, you, that
are so scrupulous of the right Rise of the Kingdom of God in the Reformation,
have a peculiar obligation to believe; the Rise and Continuance of the Pope's
Sovereignty being by such odious and wicked means as nothing worse can be
imagined. For that he had no such universal Sovereignty left him by Christ as
he pretends to, is a thing acknowledged by their own best Historians, as by
Guicciardine (for example) in the fourth Book of his History.


Euist. You mean, Philotheus, what was left out of all the Latin, French and
Italian Copies of Guicciardine, and was published and printed in those three
Languages at Basil by it self in the year 1561. A notable specimen of that foul
play which is usual with that Church for the maintaining their own Interest.


Philoth. I mean the very same, Euistor. And this I think is very observable in
that Excerption, that although the Historian rejects the famous Donation of
Constantine to Pope Sylvester as a Fiction, Some, says he, questioning, or
rather affirming that Constantine did not so much as live in the same Age with
Sylvester, much less by deed of Gift pass away part of his Empire to him, (as
the City of Rome it self and many other Cities and Countries in Italy, namely
at that time when, changing the Seat of the Empire, he betook himself to
Byzantium, which afterward from him was called Constantinople;) yet in the
conclusion he adds this, Nemo tamen negat Imperii Constantinopolin translatione
ad Pontificum potentiam viam esse patefactam, ex eaque originem habuisse. Then
which nothing can be a better Commentary on those passages of the Prophecy of
the Man of sin; 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7.
And now you know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time: and
again, Only he that now lets will let until he be taken out of the way;
and then shall that Wicked one be revealed, etc. It was the presence of the
Emperors at Rome that hindered the Bishop from discovering his Luciferian
Ambition, and from showing himself to be the firstborn of all the sons of
Pride.


Euist. This is very consonant to the sense of the Fathers, who took the (...)
to be the entireness of the Roman Empire, as if the breaking of it would be the
bringing in of Antichrist, and the Corruption of it the Generation of such a
pestiferous Monster. But this receding of Constantine to Byzantium is but the
first beginning of the completion of this passage of the Prediction touching
the removal of that out of the way that hindered the visible growth of
Antichrist, supposing the Pope to be him. It was the Inundation of the
Barbarians that did more effectually second his design. For Italy being overrun
by these, though there were for a time also Western Emperors, yet they ended
in Augustulus, and Constantinople became the sole Seat of the Imperial Majesty:
Which being raised to an extraordinary magnificency, was so agreeable to them,
that after, when the Barbarians were driven out of Italy, the Emperors never
cared to return to Rome, but ruled Italy by Exarchs placed at Ravenna, who sent
meaner Governors under the title of Dukes to reside at Rome. Wherefore the
meanness of this Secular Power there made the Ecclesiastical shine forth with
the more uncheck'd luster, and gain an awe and reverence from the people to the
Episcopal See, and so the more easily prepare them for future Subjection.
Things standing in this case, in come the Lombards into Italy, whose design
being wholly to possess themselves of the Country, they destroyed the
Emperor's power as much as they could. In which juncture of Affairs the Pope
had a fine opportunity to play his Cards to his own advantage. For the Emperor
having so potent an Enemy in Italy, the cunning Bishop knew how to serve his
own turn of them both. For he would fence himself from any due chastisements
from the Emperor, for whatever Insolency he might commit, by help of the
Lombard; and defend himself and the City of Rome from any violence of the
Lombard, if he ever assaulted it, by the Aids of the Emperor. So that while he
abused both their Powers to his own advantage, by the help of the French he at
last made himself Master of both as to the Italian Territories, he by this
means emerging there into a higher power then either. And lastly, the weakening
the Emperor (when once that bone of Contention was cast betwixt them) being
ever the strengthening of the Pope, it is manifest that the Incursion and
overflowing of the Saracens on the East part of the Empire, as well as of the
Barbarians on the West, was a farther help toward his unjust Usurpations. For
the Eastern Empire being so weakened, the Barbarians could the more securely
settle themselves in the West: who, being a rude and unlearned people, were the
more pliable to the Pope's Instructions, whose Renown, by reason of the City,
being far above any other, as also his Power and Interest in Western
Christendom, these raw Proselytes were imbued with such Principles in their
Conversion to Christianity as were most conducive to the advancement of the Sea
of Rome. So that we see every way how that the discerption and dissipation of
the Power of the Empire by the Invasion of the Nations made for the Pope's
lifting up himself into that conspicuous Eminency and more visible Insolency
afterward over Kings and Emperors, opposing himself against and exalting
himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped; as Interpreters expound
that Prophecy.


Cuph. This is pretty, Euistor, and the Application had been very plain, if the
Apostle in stead of the (...) had named the discerption of the Roman Empire
expressly. But the expression being so loose and general, the Application must
needs be the more uncertain.


Euist. What do you think, Cuphophron, that it had been fit for the Apostle to
tell the Thessalonians that the Roman Empire would be invaded by the
Barbarians, and pulled a-pieces by their forces, especially the Romans
flattering themselves as if Rome and its Empire should be eternal?


Cuph. That I confess had not been altogether so safe and discreet. But what
are those ungodly pranks that the Bishop of Rome is reported to have played
toward the founding of his Antichristian Empire?


Euist. The Narration would be infinitely tedious, and beyond the time we are
confined to. But I will give you some few Specimina for a taste. As first, What
think you, Cuphophron, of that Courtship of Gregory the first, that great Saint
and Bishop of Rome, in his congratulatory Epistle to Phocas, who had made
himself Emperor by an horrid murder of Mauritius his liege Lord, having first
killed his children before his face, Benignitatem Pietatis vestrae ad Imperiale
fastigium pervenisse gaudemus; laetentur Coeli and exsultet Terra, and de
benignis actibus vestris Reipublicae populus hilarescat?


Cuph. That Is too-too vile and Parasitical, Euistor, and, methinks,
pedantically profane, to abuse thus the Phrases of Holy Scripture to the
applauding of the success of so wicked and bloody an Usurper. To what purpose
was this impious Courtship?


Euist. O Sir, the conciliating the favor of the Emperor to the Sea of Rome
he knew would have its fruits in due time.


Cuph. What, I beseech you?


Euist. It was this Phocas, the Murderer of his Master, that gave Boniface the
third, the next Successor but one to Gregory, the Title of Universal Bishop.
A Title notwithstanding that Gregory, when he was jealous of the Patriarch of
Constantinople's carrying of it, cried out, that it belonged to none but to
that Rex superbiae, Antichrist himself, or his Forerunner.


Cuph. It seems then that those fawning words of Gregory were compensated in
his Successor Boniface by that fair Title of Universal Bishop; words requited
with words.


Euist. But such verbal Titles, doubtless, O Cuphophron, have real effects upon
the minds of the people. And therefore this favor of Phocas might be no
contemptible Instrument of raising the Pope to that power in Christendom;
though I must confess he laid his hands on more gross means.


Cuph. That Is it I would hear, Euistor.


Euist. Gregory the second rebelled against Leo Isaurus, and made all Rome and
the Roman Duchy do the same: and while the Emperor was engaged in the East
against the Saracens, made himself Master of that part of his Empire in the
West.


Cuph. Is it possible, Euistor? what pretense had this Gregory to do thus?


Euist. O, Cuphophron, a very goodly pretense. Leo Isaurus was accounted by the
Pope as an Heretic, forasmuch as he was against the Adoration of Images. The
loss therefore of the Roman Duchy was his imposed Mulct or Penalty for that
heinous Crime.


Cuph. The Crime of obeying God rather then the Pope.


Euist. And yet for the same crime was the said Constantinopolitan Emperor Leo
the third deprived both of his Empire and the Communion of the Church at once
by Gregory the third, as Platina reports. Is not this a Man of sin indeed,
who, by thus thundering against the Emperor's obedience to God's holy Word and
Commandment, tramples down both God and the Emperor at once?


Philop. These two Popes were notable Restorers of the Image of the Beast.
Apoc. 13.14.



Euist. It were too long a story, O Cuphophron, to tell you of the Collusion
betwixt Pope Zachary and Pepin Major-domo to the then King of France.


Cuph. But, I pray you, give us some brief hints of it at least, Euistor: I
love to hear of such tricks.


Euist. Pepin got this Problem propounded to that Oracle of Christendom, viz.
Whether he that has the Name and Title of a King, or he that does the Office
and exercises the Power, is to wear the Crown.


Cuph. You mean, whether he that is fit to rule, or he that is lawful Heir and
actually possessed of the Crown, is to be King.


Euist. Yes surely, that is the sense of it.


Cuph. The case is much like that propounded to Cyrus (when he was a little
boy) by his Master, who taking two Coats from two Lads, the lesser of whom had
the longer, and the other the shorter coat, gave them both to Cyrus to dispose
of to them again, to try what notion he had of Justice.


Euist. And how did he dispose of them?


Cuph. He gave the longer coat to the taller lad, and the shorter to the lower.


Euist. Just thus did Pope Zachary solve the Problem proposed to him, giving
the Crown to him that was accounted more fit to wear it, not to him whose due
it was by Inheritance.


Cuph. It seems then that that Oracle of Christendom was as wise as a boy of
about eight years old, who was chastis'd by his Master for his gross mistake in
the administration of Justice.


Euist. But I promise you, Cuphophron, this was no childish mistake in Pope
Zachary, but a piece of meditated Fraud and Injustice against Chilperick King
of France, for the promotion of the Sea of Rome. He had great self ends in
delivering so false a Sentence. This wicked Juggle and Injustice of Zachary
was the chief cornerstone upon which the magnificent Sovereignty of the Pope
was afterward so highly raised. For Pepin gaining the Kingdom of France by the
help and authority of the holy See of Rome, he by way of gratitude was ever
ready to advance the Ecclesiastic Sovereignty of the Pope, and not only gave
him a Spiritual Jurisdiction over the Gallicane Church, but assisted him in any
streights by his sword, freed him from the Siege of the Lombards, and enriched
him with the gift of the Exarchate of Ravenna, and many other Countries in
Italy, (as things fallen unto him by right of Arms) as you may see more
particularly in Guicciardine. And Charles the Great, son to King Pepin, having
the same Obligation to the Sea of Rome, (as being Successor to his Father the
Pope's Creature and bold Usurper of the Crown of France) continued the like
observance to the Pope, and ratified the Grants of his Predecessor; whom yet
the Pope afterward, namely Leo the third, for the better serving their mutual
Interests, elected Roman Emperor: Whence the Papal Authority was easily
coextended with the Conquests of Charlemaign.


Philop. Do you see, Cuphophron, upon what a fair foundation the Kingdom of
Antichrist stands?


Cuph. Upon the Bishop of Rome's abetting the Conspiracy of Traitourous
Subjects against their lawful Sovereign.


Euist. Nay, and in being in actual Rebellion themselves, as Gregory the second
was against Leo Isaurus, who robbed also his Master of the Duchy of Rome. As
Stephen the second likewise robbed him in receiving the Exarchate from Pepin,
whom himself called into Italy. For the Exarchate belonged to the Emperor of
Constantinople, the Pope's sovereign Lord and Master, and therefore of right it
should have been restored to him.


Cuph. All it seems was fish that came into St. Peter's net. Methinks these
Popes were notable fellows. I pray you what other pranks did they play, Euistor?


Euist. Very strange ones, Cuphophron, and so many, that, if I should discourse
till Cock-crowing, the time would not suffice to declare the manifold odd
exploits of these pretended Successors of St. Peter. Gregory the fifth, with
the Emperor his Kinsman Otho the third, contrived away the Right of the City
of Rome in choosing their own Prince, by settling the perpetual power of
electing the Emperor in seven German Electours; provided only, that he that
was elected by these German Electours should not be called Emperor or
Augustus, but Caesar or King of the Romans, till he was crowned by the Bishop
of Rome: so that the cunning Pope by this device both deprived the City of Rome
of their right of choosing their own Sovereign, and also transferred it partly
upon himself, and partly on the German Princes, but in such a way as was mainly
intended for his own Interest, the Power of the Emperor being thus weakened,
that himself at any time might the easilier make head against and insult over
him. Some impute this contrivance to Pope Innocent the fourth, or Alexander the
third his Successor. But be it whose it will, the Policy of it is conspicuous.


Cuph. These Popes, it seems, are mavelous subtle Sophisters.


Euist. I, and very roaring and rampant creatures too. For such the Emperor
Henry the fourth found Pope Hildebrand, alias Gregory the seventh; who having
deposed the Emperor, and excommunicated him, conferred the Empire upon
Rudolphus Duke of Suevia: but he being overcome by the Emperor in battle, at
his seeing his hand cut off his heart was also smitten with the sense of his
Disloyalty against his Sovereign, and rebuked the Bishops for their wicked
Instigation of him to take arms against him to whom with an Oath of Fidelity he
had lift up his hand to God.


Cuph. That Is a very remarkable passage, Euistor: methinks it might have made
the Pope himself have relented.


Bath. Job 41.24.
Their heart is as firm as stone, as hard as the nether millstone.


Euist. So it is, I think, Bathynous; nothing will fright them off from
pursuing their worldly Interest. And therefore Urban the second, who made that
ungodly Decree, that an Oath is not to be kept to an Excommunicated person, he
also excommunicated and persecuted this Henry the fourth: and Paschal the
second, who succeeded him, made the Emperor's own son take up arms against
him; who being overcome and deposed by the Pope's command, and the Crown and
other Imperial Ornaments violently taken from him, and given to his son, and
himself thereupon kept in prison, he dying there within a little time after for
very grief and anguish of heart, the Pope would not suffer his son to bury him,
but forced him to let his body lie five years unburied.


Cuph. Monster of Inhumanity! The Pope's carriage is as if he thought himself
above all the Laws of God and Nature.


Euist. And therefore you will hear with less detestation that ceremonial
Haughtiness of Pope Adrian the fourth, who chid Frederick Barbarossa the
Emperor that he held the wrong stirrup when his Holiness was a-getting on
horseback.


Cuph. There is a ridiculous Pride in this, Euistor, but not so much course
Harshness and Cruelty.


Euist. But what think you of this Specimen of the Pope's Pride, O Cuphophron?
how harsh or soft is it? Alexander the third, Successor to Adrian, when the
forenamed Emperor stooped to kiss his Holinesse's foot, trod rudely upon his
neck, using these words of the Psalmist, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and
Adder, Psalm. 91.13.
the young Lion and Dragon shall thou trample under foot. And whenas the
Emperor, ashamed of doing so base an Homage to the Pope, would have cast the
Submission on St. Peter, in saying, Non tibi, Sed Petro; the Pope bustles up,
and treading upon his neck again said with a big voice, Et mihi, and Petro.


Cuph. I have heard of this Story before, it is so very famous: but is it
possible to be true?


Euist. They cite twenty Historians to attest it, and wise men and well versed
in History do firmly believe it.


Cuph. Had the Emperor his Imperial Crown on then at that time, think you,
Euistor? for it had been the more strange and ugly sight.


Euist. No, I believe not: But if he had had it on, it would not have protected
the Emperor's neck from being trampled upon by the foot of that insulting
Prelate: For the Popes have as well made Foot-balls of the Crowns of Emperors
as Foot-stools of their Necks.


Cuph. I know not what you mean, Euistor.


Euist. I reflect upon the manner of Henry the sixth* and his Emperesse's
Coronation by Pope Celestine the third, who put on the Crown upon the Emperor
and Emperesse's head with his feet, sitting on his Pontifical Chair, and as
soon as it was on the Emperor's head, he kicked it off again; though the
Cardinals that stood by were so civil Gentlemen as to reach it up for the
Emperor, and put it again on his head.


Cuph. But however he was not so rude to the Emperess, as to kick the Crown off
of her head, I hope.


Euist. No, he was not.


Cuph. It was a great Civility to that Sex.


Philop. But do you not see in the mean time, O Cuphophron, what a lively
Picture the Pope is of that Man of sin that opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called God, or that is worshipped?


Cuph. He exalts himself against and above the (...) or Emperors with a
witness; but how above God?


Philop. He exalts himself against and above God in autoritatively opposing and
cancelling his Laws, as is manifest in abundance of Examples of that Religion,
which he has established as a Law, expressly against the Law of God.


Euist. Bell. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 5.
And his great Creatures, no less then Bellarmine, avow this Right of his,
declaring that he has a power to make that no Sin that is Sin; and that if the
Pope command Vices and prohibit Virtues, the Church ought to believe Vices good
and Virtues evil.


Cuph. This is a most enormous Elation of the Pope, to pretend that he can
change the immutable nature of Good and Evil.


Hyl. He that can transubstantiate Bread into the living Body and real humane
presence of Christ, so that his natural Body may be totally present in a
million of places at once, what cannot he do?


Philop. I tell you, Hylobares, he cannot clear himself, before any intelligent
and impartial Judge, from being the most daring and bold Impostour that ever
appeared upon the face of the earth.


Euist. But to satisfy Cuphophron's curiosity a little more palpably. If the
Pope exalt his own throne above the Throne of Christ, does he not manifestly
exalt himself above God in the grossest manner one can imagine or expect?


Cuph. I pray you how is that, Euistor?


Euist. Whose Throne is the Holy Table, O Cuphophron, if it be not the Throne
of Christ's Body?


Cuph. Indeed they that hold the Bread once consecrated to be the very Body of
Christ, as the Romanists do, must of necessity hold the Holy Table to be the
Throne of Christ, or his Royal Seat on which his Body rests.


Euist. But the feet of the Pope's Chair of State trample upon this Throne of
Christ at his Inauguration; whence he receives also at that time the Adoration
of the astonished people, and that in the Temple of God materially understood
as well as figuratively.


Cuph. History and Prophecy strangely shake hands together in these things.


Hyl. Emperors and Princes how frequently excommunicated by the Pope.
But I believe in the mean time, Euistor, you are diverted from pursuing the
Examples of the Pope's Insolences against Emperors in his Excommunicating of
them and Deposing them. I am so little versed in History my self, that I desire
to hear you farther on that Subject. For these things seem of that hideous
consequence in setting all Christendom on broils, that methinks the Bishop of
Rome should very rarely venture on such exploits.


Euist. How the Popes of Rome are minded in this point, that one Clause in the
Bull of Pope Pius Quintus against Elizabeth Queen of England will inform you at
once, viz. That God has made the Bishop of Rome Prince over all people and all
Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy, scatter, consume, plant, and build. He pretends
this Charter from God: And I Will assure you, Hylobares, he has not spared to
make use of the Privilege as often as he had but any hopes that it would serve
his worldly Interest. For after Pope Hildebrand had given that outrageous
example upon the Emperor Henry the fourth, both Urban and Paschal followed
that wicked Precedent against the same person, and with such hideous
circumstances as I above intimated. And after this, many examples of like
Insolency succeeded. Calixtus the second excommunicated Henry the fifth;
Alexander the third Frederick the first, as I told you before. Innocent the
third excommunicated and deposed John King of England, and gave his Kingdom to
Philip of France: as Celestine the third gave the Kingdom of both the Sicilies
from Tancred to the Emperor Henry the sixth. But for Henry the third King of
England, never was any man's Superstition so basely abused as his. His fear and
Superstition kept him indeed from incurring Excommunication; but his Submission
was such as was below the condition of the vilest person, or the pettiest and
most contemptible Schoolboy.


Cuph. Why, I pray, Euistor, what was it? I long to know. Was it worse then
what Frederick Barbarossa suffered?


Euist. You shall judge of it, Cuphophron, your self. The fear of the Pope and
the awe of Superstition debased the King so far, as that so soon as he was
within the sight of the Cathedral of Canterbury, where that Martyr and Saint
Thomas a Beckett lay, whom the King was accused to have slain by an angry
countenance, he put off his shoes, as if all the ground at that distance had
been holy, and in the form of a poor beggar, barefoot and bare-legged, and
bare-bodied too, (saving a vile Coat cast about him) passed through the City in
the sight of the people in this sad habit, beating the bare hoof on the stones
and dirt of the street, till he came to the Sepulcher of the Saint which he had
occasioned; where he did his Devotions to his Saintship with prayer and fasting
in most humble manner.


Cuph. Verily, Euistor, I know not whether the Humiliation of Frederick
Barbarossa or this of Henry the third be the more tolerable.


Euist. But you will know, Cuphophron. For King Henry, after he had fasted
there a day and a night, having not yet satisfied the expectation of his hard
Masters and his own Superstition, gave his bare body to the Rod of Discipline,
and the Covent of the Monks of Canterbury being assembled, he received of each
of them a Lash. The Writer of the Life of this rigid Saint says, There were no
less then fourscore Monks, and that the King received of each of them three
stripes.


Cuph. If this be the difference betwixt the Humiliation of Kings and
Emperors, for my part, I had rather be an Emperor then a King. I wonder in my
heart how so sour a soul as this Thomas a Beckett, if you call him so, ever
came to be canonized for a Saint.


Euist. Spondanus will tell you. Deo utique gratissimam navare operam and
coronis dignam, non solum qui pro Fide Catholica illibata servanda a
persecutoribus necantur, sed etiam qui pro juribus bonisque Ecclesiae
conservandis and repetundis ablatis occiduntur.


Bath. This indeed is at the bottom of all the Pope's Canonizations, the Wealth
and Interest of the Church, for which they have framed and contrived their
Religion, that whole mass of Superstitions and Idolatries. Whence I should
think that Thomas a Beckket and Thomas Aquinas are Saints altogether upon the
same score, because they advanced the worldly Interest of the Church.


Hyl. That Is likely enough, Bathynous. But, I pray you, Euistor, go on.


Euist. The same Pope Innocent the third excommunicated also the Emperor Otho
the fourth, and deprived him of the Titles of the Empire. And Pope Honorius the
third excommunicated and deposed the Emperor Frederick the second; as also did
Gregory the ninth after him, and that in most abominable Circumstances. For the
Emperor being gone into Palaestine upon the Pope's own errand, yet he takes
this opportunity of anathematizing of him, and, by his Preaching Friars, of
raising him enemies in Germany, that, taking the advantage of the Emperor's
absence and those Combustions, he might with better success send an Army into
Apulia, and seize there on his Land. Pope Innocent the fourth also
excommunicated this Emperor, and after his death gave away the Kingdom of
Sicily from his Son to Richard, Brother to Henry the third of England. Boniface
the eighth excommunicated King Philip the Fair of France, and by a Decree of a
Council deprived him of his Kingdom, and gave it to the Emperor Albert.


Philop. This is that Philip that answered that insolent Letter of the Pope
with this courageous Preamble, To Boniface, calling himself Sovereign Pontif,
but little greeting, or rather none at all. Let thy most egregious Folly know,
that in Temporal things we are subject to no man.


Cuph. I believe the King spoke truth, and declared but the Right of all the
Secular Princes of Christendom as well as his own. But did not that Vejovis of
Rome shatter him all a-pieces with his Thunderbolts?


Euist. No such matter, Cuphophron; Resist the Devil, and he will flee from
you. Philip the Fair held his own, and made such friends in Italy, that the
Pope was surprised at Anagnia, and disgracefully mounted on a poor Jade was
brought Prisoner to Rome, no man rescuing this terrible Thunderer, either out
of fear or love: but Pride and Regret taking vengeance of him burst his swollen
heart within a few days, and thus ingloriously he died; his Successor
Benedict the eleventh not only absolving Philip, but highly complementing him.
For the Popes use to fawn on those Princes whom they cannot bite without
manifest danger of breaking their Fangs. But to proceed: The Emperor Ludovicus
Bavarus was excommunicated by Pope John the twenty third, and deprived of his
Empire: which Sentence was also renewed by his Successor Benedict the twelfth;
but so vehemently pursued by Clement the sixth, that the Electours were at last
prevailed with to choose a new Emperor.


Philop. That was Charles, Son to John King of Bohemia; which was the occasion
of great and bloody Wars. But what is most observable, the Election of this
Emperor was the very breaking of the back of the Empire, Charles pawning the
Tributes of the Empire to the Electours, and swearing also that he would never
disengage that Pawn. Moreover he made that authentic Capitulation with them,
whereby, without the crime of Rebellion or Disloyalty, they were enabled to
take up Arms against the Emperor and his Successors in defense of their own
Rights. This huge weakening of the Empire had the strong working Policy of the
Popes at length brought about, they ever phansying that the bringing down of
the Power of the Emperor was an exaltation of their own. But the wicked were
here taken in their own Nets. For the Power thus invested in the Princes of
Germany proved at last mainly serviceable for the Reformation there, and the
Humiliation of the Pope; it being not in the Emperor's power to succor him
against that noble and Heroical Champion for the Truth, Martin Luther. But let
me not interrupt you in your progress, Euistor.


Euist. This is a very material Interpellation, O Philopolis, and such as I
dare say Hylobares will thank you for, who by this time surely is glutted with
my so copious recital of Instances.


Hyl. I do thank Philopolis for his so judicious Note on the Capitulation of
Charles the fourth, but desire you to hold on in your recital till I say I am
glutted.


Euist. That I will not promise. However I will add some few Examples more,
seeing you have not yet said that you satisfied: as that of Benedict the
thirteenth, who sent a Bull of Excommunication against Charles the sixth, King
of France: But the bearers of the Bull were very coursly disgraced, and sent
back again to their Master with a flea in their ear. Julius the second laid
about him like mad with both Swords, and particularly against Lewis the twelfth
of France, whom the excommunicated, and put his Kingdom to Interdict, as Pope
Innocent served John King of England. But he came off much better then this.
For the Emperor and the King of France having called a General Council at
Lions, which yet presently removed to Pisa, Julius was there condemned for an
Incendiarie, and deprived of his Papal Chair.


Philop. Was it not there that the King coined golden Crowns with this Motto,
Perdam nomen Babylonis?


Euist. It was so, Philopolis, and a well-boding Omen toward the Reformation.
For Truth was a-dawning afar off, and at last rose to broad day. But in Henry
the eighth's time King of England it was but as yet a dim Twylight in
comparison of after-years. And yet that King could discern that the Pope's
Excommunications were but a flash without a bolt; and therefore contemned the
Thunderings of both Clement the seventh and Paul the third. How Pius Quintus
excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, and deprived her of her Kingdoms, I intimated
before. And Gregory the thirteenth drove on the same designs against the Queen
which his Predecessor had begun. The memory of that Pope will for ever stink
in the nostrills of all posterity, for the abetting and applauding that
devilish Contrivance against the poor innocent Protestants, under the color
of celebrating the Nuptials of Henry King of Navarr and the Sister of Charles
the ninth of France. This Gregory sent Cardinal Vrsin as Legate into France to
return thanks, and bestow Blessings and spiritual Graces upon the King and the
rest of his ungracious Accomplices, for their successful acting this worse-then-
Thyestean Tragedy.


Philop. You mean that horrible Massacre in France.


Euist. I do so: which yet I think that train of Villainy laid in the
Gunpowder-treason-plot, if it had taken effect, would have far exceeded. But I
cannot get out of Queen Elizabeth's time, against whom Sixtus Quintus renewed
the Excommunication, in favor of the enterprise of Philip the second upon
England. This Pope also excommunicated Henry the third of France, as Gregory
the fourteenth Henry the fourth: which Excommunication Clement the eighth
renewed against him. I have wittingly omitted many Deprivations and
Excommunications of the Pope against lesser Princes, and will close all with
that remarkable Observation, That the Gunpowder-plot, which was in Paul the
fifth's time, was the effect of the Pope's Excommunications and Interdicts, as
was acknowledged by the very Conspiratours. Have I not wearied you by this
time, Hylobares?


Hyl. The Bishop of Rome how bugely guilty of the effusion of blood in
Christendom.
You have satisfied me, Euistor, but not wearied me. But is it possible there
should be such frequent Excommunications and Deprivements of Kings and
Emperors, but a world of War and bloodshed must follow?


Euist. Therefore that is very remarkable in History, that the Pope's
Thunderings were usually accompanied with great showrs of blood. For how can it
possibly be otherwise, when the Excommunicated Princes Territories are ipso
facto given up by the Pope to the Invasion of others, or to the Insurrection of
their own Subjects, as being absolved from their Oaths of Fidelity thereby? At
least he does what in him lies to set all together by the ears. Julius the
second by his pragmatical planting and plucking up and transplanting is said to
have been the occasion of the slaughter of two hundred thousand Christians in
the space of seven years. And it is observed by Historians, that those two
Emperors alone, Henry the fourth and Frederick the first, were enforced to
fight at least threescore bloudly Battles against the enemies of the Empire,
stirred up to Arms by the Popes of Rome. If two or three Instances amount to so
much, what will the compute of the whole? what will all the Massacres committed
upon the poor Protestants adjoined to that sum, when that one Massacre of
France within the space of three months amounted to an hundred thousand? Nay,
P. Perionius averrs that in France alone, in that great Persecution against the
Albigenses and Waldenses, there were murdered no less then ten hundred
thousand men. From that time to the Reformation no small number was made away
by Sword, by Fire, and other Tortures. From the beginning of the Order of the
Jesuits till the year 1580, Balduinus reports there were about nine hundred
thousand of the Orthodox Christians murdered, that is, within the space of
thirty or forty years. Within a few years in the Low Countries alone the Duke
of Alva cut off by the hand of the Hangman thirty six thousand souls of the
Protestants. And the Holy Inquisition, as Vergerius witnesses, (one well
acquainted therewith) in less then thirty years space consumed an hundred and
fifty thousand with all manner of cruelties. Insomuch as that learned and
Judicious person, Mr. Joseph Mede, is of opinion, that the Papal Persecution
does either equalize or exceed the destruction of men made upon the Church by
those Ten famous Persecutions under the Pagan Emperors: and yet there has been
a considerable Accession made since to this bloody Catalogue in Piedmont and
Ireland, if not in other places.


Bath. The consideration of this horrible destructive Tragedy, Philopolis,
acted by the Pope, has many times cast me into a confidence that that bloody
Bishop is as well concerned in the Vision of the King of Babylon as of the
Whore: Isa. 14.19, 20.
But thou art cast out of thy Grave as an abominable branch, as a carcass
trodden under foot; because thou have destroyed thy Land, and slain thy People.


Philop. Like that touching the Whore of Babylon; Apoc. 18.24.
And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that
were slain upon the Earth. As if the Pope were the very Pest and Trouble of
Christendom.


Cuph. Certainly, Philopolis, if there be any truth in History, the Pope is a
very Sinful man at the least, if not that Man of sin.


Philop. Their murtherous attempts by Poisoning and Stabbing of Princes.
And if he cannot have his will on Princes by this Thundering and Lightening
and raising of War, then their Attempts are by a closer way, by Poisoning and
Stabbing: Some venomous Serpent is sent crawling out of the shades of their
Monasteries to poison or sting a Prince to death. Thus was King John poisoned
by a Monk, and Ludovicus Bavarus, as they say, by some secret Minister of the
Pope. And more and more pertinent Instances of the like nature might be
produced, could I so easily recall them to mind.


Euist. But this way of Poisoning of Princes, Philopolis, is managed with a
great deal of niceness and caution.


Philop. What do you mean, Euistor, that they are very careful and circumspect
that in tampering with such mortiferous Poisons they unawares mischieve not
themselves?


Euist. That they poison not the Soul of the Prince by making him accessory to
his own death. And therefore that King-killing Jesuit Mariana advises not to
poison his Meat or Drink, because by putting the Cup or Meat to his own mouth
he would become guilty of Self-murder; but rather infuse some strong and
subtle Poison into some Garment of his or into his Saddle.


Bath. As if the Prince were not as guilty of Self-murder by putting on his
Clothes or mounting into his Saddle, as by lifting his hand to his mouth to
feed himself. O the execrable Hypocrisy of accursed murtherous Villains! or
rather the damnable Contempt of the blood and life of Princes, when they stand
in competition with the Interest of the Papal Tyranny! What is this but to
flear and to jear and tacitly to insult in that false and detestable liberty
they think they have in behalf of their Holy Father the Pope, to kill and
murder the most Sacred Persons in the world?


Philop. I profess, Bathynous, I think you have light upon the right sense of
that passage of Mariana. It seems to smell rankly of an affected Hypocrisy and
base Contempt of the Sacred blood of Princes.


Cuph. But is it possible, Philopolis, that they should stab thus as you talk
of? That is not the garb of Religious persons, but of Hectors and of Highway
men.


Philop. You know, Cuphophron, whose saying that was, Joh. 10.10.
The thief comes not, but to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. Christ, the
good Shepherd, lays down his own life for the sheep: It is no wonder then that
Antichrist, in opposition to Christ, murders the sheep for his own gain and
Interest.


Cuph. But these Examples surely, Philopolis, are very rare.


Philop. The attempts of this kind against that glorious and blessed Queen
Elizabeth were many, though, through the protection of the Almighty, they took
no effect. But it is notoriously known in History, that James Clement, a
Dominican Friar, stabbed Henry the third of France with a poisoned Knife. Peter
Barriere also attempted the murdering of Henry the fourth, suborned and
animated by the Jesuit Varade. John Chastell, also a Scholar of the Jesuits,
for the obtaining Remission of his sins and eternal Life, as he was instructed,
attempted to kill the said King; but he struck out one of his teeth only with
his Dagger. But that wicked Wretch Ravaillac, animated by the Jesuit Aubigny,
did that horrid Execution that was so often attempted before, and stabbed the
King to the heart in his Coach in the streets of Paris; alleging upon his
Examination, that the King would make war against God, meaning the Pope.


Cuph. Jesus bless us! I did not think, Philopolis, there had been such mad
doings in the world. The Pope, I perceive, is a very dangerous enemy.


Sophr. Cuphophron has been so mewed up in his Philosophical and Metaphysical
Cock-loft, that he could never yet vouchsafe to cast down his eyes upon the
outward transactions of this lower world.


Cuph. And I tell you, Sophron, I think it is no small point of wisdom to
continue thus mewed up, and to rest satisfied in the silent Solaces of
Philosophy and Virtue. For I perceive that Religion is a very quarrelsome thing.


Philoth. O Cuphophron, Cuphophron, deceive not your self with any vain
pretenses to the Solaces of Virtue, unless you have the Life in you; nor
presume you have the life in you, unless you feel an hearty Antipathy against
Virtue's enemies, against all manner of Vices and villainous Actions, and the
greatest against the greatest. And think both this Life and Antipathy in vain,
unless you have Fortitude, whereby you dare look out to find the abode of
Truth and Righteousness, and own them wherever they are, in open defiance to
all their enemies. He that has not Fortitude, Cuphophron, carries a Traitor in
his heart to God, to his Prince, to all Truth and Virtue.


Cuph. Nay, Fortitude is a good thing, Philotheus, if a man knew how to come by
it. But I pray tell me at once and compendiously, what are the most ugly and
Antichristian Enormities in the Papal Hierarchy?


Philoth. Their foul Idolatries, gross Impostures, and direful Murders.


Hyl. I Will pawn my life Cuphophron is so frighted into a fit of good nature,
that he will turn Advocate-general for the Papists now, as he did for the Paynim
before.


Sophr. And I believe with like success in both.


Cuph. I pray you let me try a little. Cuphophron 's Apology in the behalf of
the Romish Idolatries.
For this noise of Idolatry in men that have a true Notion and belief of God
seems to me sometimes to be more a scarecrow then any such dangerous evil. I
mean briefly this, That he that professes the only true God cannot be capable
of committing Idolatry, forasmuch as he can worship nothing beside with the
same intended honor he does him; and that is the only peculiar honor done to
God, which they call Latreia.


Philop. But this, O Cuphophron, the Papists give to the consecrated Host,
which is not God.


Cuph. It Is true, they say they do. But unless they took the Host for the true
God, they would not worship it. So that the Worship is really meant to the true
God, and passes to him.


Philop. Why, Cuphophron, did ever any Pagan, or is it possible for any man
living in good earnest to give that supreme Worship to any thing he thinks not
the supreme God? Wherefore if mistake will excuse from Idolatry, there never
was nor ever can be any Idolatry committed in the World by a conscientious
Worshipper, but only by him that worships for fear or for filthy lucre.


Cuph. It may be so, Philopolis, examining Idolatry by the true Philosophical
and Metaphysicall touchstone: and all the better if there be not.


Sophr. Did not I tell you what a successful Advocate Cuphophron would prove
for the Romanists, being driven to those streights that he can no ways excuse
them from Idolatry, but by admitting there never was nor ever can be any such
thing as voluntary or conscientious Idolatry in the world? This had gratified
both his beloved Paynims and the Papists at once. But our Charge of Idolatry
upon any party, or our acquitting of them, must not be according to the
shifting subtilties of a Metaphysicall wit, but according to the intimations of
Scripture in such a sense thereof as is obvious to the vulgar capacity, who
judge more solidly in these cases then such as are cunning to pervert Scripture
for their own Interest. He that said in the Decalogue, Thou shall not bow down
to any Image nor worship it, that is to say, worship any Image by bowing down
unto it, and still forbids Idolatry in the New Testament, without declaring a
new definition thereof, certainly intends the Christian world should take such
Actions as these for Idolatrous; especially considering the Purity and
Spirituality of Christian Religion.


Cuph. And for the Invocation of the Saints, O Philopolis, it seems to me free
enough from all suspicion of Idolatry, and rather a greater acknowledgement of
God's Goodness, that has so highly advanced the Faculties of his Servants the
Saints departed, that they hear and see all things from the highest Regions of
the Air or Ether that are transacted on the face of the Earth. Which being
granted, there is no incongruity in invoking them, more then in speaking to any
good man upon Earth to assist what he can in a time of need.


Philop. But to answer you, Cuphophron, in a way of Law; I conceive, as Tully
somewhere intimates, that Religion is that part of Justice that respects the
Deity, and that one main Right of God (that highest invisible Power) is
Invocation, founded in his Omniscience, which Omniscience, for distinctness
sake, let us distribute into Terrestrial, Aereall, and Heavenly, which
including all places includes the whole compass of the Divine Omniscience cast
as it were into these three shares. Now if he has declared none Tenants in
common with him in any of these shares, making it over to them by deed of Gift,
as we see he has not, they wanting this foundation of the right of being
invoked, our Invocation of them is an acknowledging such an excellency in them
as is nowhere but in God; and so the giving that right of Worship to others
that is due to God alone becomes that piece of Injustice against God which is
termed Idolatry; aggravated with the circumstance of a very saucy reproach to
God's Wisdom and Goodness, in presuming that to have been more wise and good
which God has omitted. What think you of this, Cuphophron?


Cuph. I think it is much that a Lawyer should prove so subtle a Divine. I
must confess, supposing it clear that God has made no such donation to the
Saints departed, if there be such a thing as Idolatry, the Invocation of Saints
would be one part thereof.


Philop. The silence in Scripture touching this Gift, in my judgment,
Cuphophron, is a sufficient argument against the lawfulness of Invocation. For
if God has given them such a Gift, he keeping the knowledge thereof from us,
it is a sign it was with a reservation of the right of Invocation to himself.
But if he has not so much as given them any such share of his Omniscience, as I
verily believe he has not, it is still more firm that they have no right of
being invoked.


Sophr. For my part, Philopolis, I think that passage in Isay has no
contemptible weight with it, to assure us that God does not communicate any
such share of his Omniscience to the holiest Souls departed: Though Abraham be
ignorant of us, Isa. 63.16.
and Israel know us not; yet thou art our Father that know us and beholdest
us, and art ever ready to hear our Prayers. For that this is the sense, the
verse immediately preceding does plainly insinuate; Look down from Heaven, and
behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory, etc. And then
follows that of Abraham.


Philop. Besides, Cuphophron, our mere having no commission to give away or
communicate a known peculiar Right of God to the Creature on our own heads,
without any warrant or declaration from him, (for this power of Invocation he
has entrusted us with as his Depositum for his own use) for us, I say, to give
this to any other invisible Power besides himself, the very Law of Nature and
common Reason will tell us it is Injustice against God. And being it is the
giving away part of his rights of Worship without his leave, it is that piece
of Injustice against him which is Idolatry. And how gross a piece of Idolatry
then is this Invocation, when it is set out with those Pagan Circumstances of
consecrated Altars, Images and Temples, to the Saint they invoke! The case is
so plain, Cuphophron, that I desire you would give your self no farther trouble
touching this point. See if your Apology will succeed better in the next.


Cuph. His Apology in the behalf of their Impostures and Murders.
That of Imposture. Why, methinks, Philopolis, that is the easiest of all to be
apologized for; because the generality of men being so hugely devoid of all
real Virtue and goodness, methinks it is but a just and pleasant spectacle to
see a company of subtle witty Lads, timely trained up for the game, to play
tricks with this wicked World, to ride them and bestride them, and sit as close
as an Ape with a whip in his hand on a great Mastiff's back, next to the
Bearward chief Master over the Dogs and Bears. The ordinary mass of mankind
gives no other milk then what is thus fetched from them by tricks of
Legerdemain, they being far more prone to believe Lies then to conceive Truth.
And were it not a great oversight then, Philopolis, for the Priests not to
frame such as make most for their own gain and honor?


Philoth. Phy, Cuphophron, that you should so boldly apologize for that which
is both the bane and shame of any Priesthood, nay, the subversion of all
Religion, and the filling of the world with Atheists and Unbelievers! This is
the genuine effect of the Imposture of the Priests: They bring ruin upon
Religion, and shame and destruction upon themselves, cheating and couzening
being so vile, so base, and so hateful a thing in the sight of all men.
Nothing ought to be more pure, nothing more holy, nothing more sincere then a
Priest. If these Fountains will not run clear, all men's mouths must be filled
with either poison or mud. Matt. 5.13.
Ye are the salt of the Earth: but if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith
shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and
to be trodden under foot by men. Whence that prayer of the Psalmist will ever be
seasonable, Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, Psalm 132.9.
and thy Saints with joyfulness.


Sophr. And I promise you, Philotheus, one will not easily be without the
other. For the Priests contriving their Impostures into a Law, it must needs
bring a sad Persecution upon the Saints of God. Witness that one Instance of
Transubstantiation, a Figment made anonce for the honor and profit of the
Priesthood, in what bloody Persecutions has this involved the innocent Lambs of
Christ? For thus stood the case before the Reformation; the Pope with his
Clergy having so wholly seized these parts of Christendom, as Robbers entered
into an house, they that would not be bound and gagged they murdered. It is
but an homely comparison, but sets off the case of the Empire in those times
very truly and lively. If any cried out against the Frauds and Impostures of
the Roman Priests, rejecting their Lies and Figments as instruments of their
(...), of their Thefts and Robberies, Apoc. 9.21.
he was presently murdered by fire or the sword.


Philop. Do you see, Cuphophron, whither your pleaded-for Impostures carry,
even to savage Murder and Bloodshed? What Apology can you find for this?


Cuph. O Philopolis, are you so well versed in Politics, and do not understand
what a great difference there is in Right and Justice betwixt private man and
man, and private men and the public? This point the noble Philosopher touches
notably in some of his Letters.


Philop. What then, Cuphophron? you think Reason of State may justify any
actions, though never so barbarous, even the Murder of innocent persons.


Cuph. There Is a great Subtilty in those things, Philopolis: Next to
Metaphysics they will require a very acute judgment.


Philoth. Truly, for my part, Cuphophron, I am so dull, as that I could never
conceive any Power to have a right to do another man wrong. And certainly the
slaying of an innocent man for standing to the Truth of God, and declining
Idolatry, is the highest injury that can be done to any one. The chief Priests
and Pharisees indeed of old ran upon that Principle of Reason of State, when
they held a Council against Jesus, If we let him thus alone, John 11.48.
all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our
place and Nation. And thus by their wicked Policy at the end were they cast
upon the murdering of the Son of God; but by that fact brought upon themselves
that horrid Destruction which they thought by this means to have avoided. As
Daniel also intimates, who presently upon his mentioning of the Jews cutting
off their Messiah, Dan. 9.26.
adjoins, And the people of the Prince that is to come, viz. the Romans, shall
destroy their City and their Sanctuary, etc. And thus the carnal Pontifician
Jerusalem, that has committed so many Murders on God's Saints and Children
upon the account of Reason of State, that is, of their Church State,
establishing their own Security, as they think, in the blood of the innocent,
this murtherous Policy shall be their certain Ruin; according as it is written
and annexed as an Epilogue to the description of their predicted Destruction,
For in her was found the blood of Prophets, Apoc. 18.24.
and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth.


Philop. What think you now, Cuphophron? how well has your Apology cleared the
Pope from proving that Man of sin the Apostle forewarned the Church of?


Cuph. Why, Philopolis, will three faults, for which something, you see, may be
said, (though not so fully to the purpose) fill up all the numbers and measures
of a complete Man of sin, or of Antichrist?


Philop. How the Man of sin can be said to sit in the Temple of God, while his
sitting there makes it the Synagogue of Satan.
If this will not serve, cast in all that you may have read in the Idea of
Antichristianism writ by a modern Author.


Cuph. I have read that Idea, Philopolis, and, to say the truth, it contains a
description of things bad enough in all conscience, (as the Vulgar count bad)
and big enough and numerous enough to furnish out a full Man of sin. But in the
mean time it is but an Idea.


Euist. Believe me, Cuphophron, though it be writ in way of an Idea, yet I am
sure it is a plain Transcript of History. And I was marvellously well pleased
at the reading thereof, when I saw so well-a-digested use made of such laxe and
large Church-story as I had rambled through, and competently retained in my
mind. But suppose this Idea a true History touching the Pope and his Clergy,
how near bids he for Antichrist then, think you?


Cuph. That was hinted before, Euistor. But I Will tell you farther in your ear.


Euist. He says as near as fourpence to a groat. But I dare say, that if all
were congested together out of History touching that Church, and disposed
according to the order of those Heads the Author of the Idea pursues, the real
History would look more dismal and ugly, and would be a more foul and horrid
Image of Antichrist or the Man of Sin then the Idea it self: So favorable has
that Author been in his draught of him. I suppose on purpose he left some work
for the pencills of Posterity to be employed in.


Cuph. But if the constitution of things were so really bad, Philopolis, as
that Idea represents them, the Church would not be the Church or the Temple of
God, but rather the Synagogue of the Devil, which would be a Repugnancy to the
Prophecy, that says that the Man of sin fits in the Temple of God.


Philop. That is not hard to answer, Cuphophron: For an adulterous Wife
undivorced is still called such an one's Wife, though she be an Adulteress. And
you know the Holy City is said to be trodden down and profaned by the Gentiles
for forty two months. Apoc. 11.2.
It has the denomination of Holy even then when it is said to be profaned: For
it is so by Title and designation. And in that sense even the Apostatized
Church is the Temple of God, besides that the Virgin-company is still in it.


Cuph. I partly conceive what you would have, Philopolis, and do not much
gainsay. But there is one weakness still behind in the application of the
Prophecy of the Man of sin to the Bishop of Rome, which must needs make it very
uncertain. There is no assignation of time.


Philoth. Yes but there is, Cuphophron, the removal of the (...) had you forgot
that?


Cuph. Means to know that the Man of sin prophesied of is already come into the
world.
It is true, the Wickedness of the Bishop of Rome may be great, and that Change
in the Empire considerable: but who knows but some other (...) may be meant, at
the removal whereof a tall Man of sin indeed may appear, a Goliath in
comparison of him we would have to be the Antichrist, and that he is the
Antichrist prophesied of, and none else?


Philoth. Assuredly, O Cuphophron, he that has his inward senses awakened into
a due quickness of perception and discrimination of good and evil from that
inward life and spirit in him, without the help of any Prophecy, if he read
but their Story, he will plainly discern the Pope and his Clergy to be so great
an Antichrist, that it will be hard for him to imagine any greater; he will
find the spirit of them and their proceedings so exquisitely and palpably
contrary to the spirit and life of Christ in himself. I tell thee, Cuphophron,
it is not so much from the want of the knowledge of Prophecies, as the defect
of a sound and substantial sense of Honesty and true Virtue, that a man is not
well assured of the Pope and his Hierarchy's being the Antichrist. An
adulterous generation seeks after a sign, Matt. 12.39.
and a spurious-hearted Christian after a Prophecy. But it is the inward life
and sense of sincere Honesty that of it self will give a man abundant assurance
in points of this nature.


Philop. But is there no way, Philotheus, to prove that this Prophecy of the
Man of sin points at such a time as is in the reign of the Popes?


Philoth. The greatest stress in the Prophecy it self this way lies in the
words (...) and (...), backed with the opinion of the Fathers, that it was the
intireness of the Roman Empire that hindered; and in the easy applicability of
the Prophecy to the Events, as you have already seen. But as this Prophecy is
parallel to that of the King of Pride in Daniel, Dan. 11.36.
and as it were a Copy thereof, it is more cogently to be proved that the time
will fall within the time of the Popes. For that King of Pride, whose reign is
within the time of the Roman Empire, (as appears from the order of things
there, Dan. 12.11, 12.
and the direction of those two number 1290 days and 1335 days) being both a
Professor of Coelibate and one that does not worship the God of his Fathers,
the Pagan Romans, but in the mean time magnifies himself above all, whom can
this denote but the Pope?


Philop. Truly I think you are in the right, See Mr. Mede his Apostasy of the
latter Times, chapter 16. and Synopsis Prophet. lib. 2. c. 17. sect. 11.
Philotheus. For I am very well satisfied that the King of Pride described in
Daniel are the Popes, out of two modern Writers I have lately read.


Philoth. Wherefore the King of Pride being within the time of the Roman
Empire, the Man of sin and the Popes are so too.


Philop. I understand you, Philotheus.


Philoth. Besides, the little Horn with the eyes of a man, which must either
signify Antiochus Epiphanes or Antichrist, (as no man can deny that considers
these things) it being impossible it should be Antiochus, (this Horn appearing
among the Horns of the fourth Beast, which most certainly is the Roman Empire
discerped into so many Kingdoms) it necessarily remains that it be Antichrist.
But the discerption of this Antichrist or little Horn, to whom amongst the
Horns does it belong but to the Pope and his Clergy?


Philop. I must confess, Philotheus, I think it is a clear case that it can
belong to none but them, as also that Antichrist is again within the time of
the dilacerated Empire of Rome.


Philoth. And what think you, Philopolis, of the Beast that was, and is not,
and yet is, who has seven Heads and ten Horns, of a scarlet color, and full of
names of Blasphemy? does not he, do you think, belong to the times of
Antichrist?


Philop. Undoubtedly, Philotheus.


Philoth. But this Beast got into Being immediately upon the fall of the
Seventh King, Apoc. 17.10.
who was to abide but a short space, and you know S. John lived under the
Sixth, viz. the Pagan Cesars, whose continuance was but about three hundred and
odd years; wherefore the purely- Christian Caesar's were to continue much less
time, who were the Seventh King. But after their expiration comes in the
Eighth. And the Beast that was, Ver. 11.
and is not, he is the eighth. How timely then, think you, began this Beast
full of names of Blasphemy, that is, how timely began the Empire to be
Idolatrous again and to Paganize under Christianity, to be rid by the Whore,
that intoxicated the Kings of the Earth with the wine of her Fornication?


Philop. Many hundred years ago assuredly, Philotheus. So that Cuphophron's
Scruple touching the time of the Man of sin is quite taken away. In my mind,
the Author of Synopsis Prophetica has demonstrated this even with
Mathematical Perspicuity and Certitude, in the Eleventh Chapter of the First
Book.


Sophr. Nothing, I think, can be more certain or clear in either Philosophy or
Divinity then what that Author concludes in that Chapter, viz. That the Whore
that rides the Beast full of names of Blasphemy is Rome Christian, or rather
(as he calls it) Pagano-christian, and that this has been the condition of
Christendom many hundred years.


Cuph. If that could be so Mathematically demonstrated, it would even force a
man to believe the Pope Antichrist whether he would or no, though he may use
his own discretion whether he will openly profess it.


Bath. If you would but once vouchsafe to bow down your Metaphysicall
Intellectualities to these meaner Theories, most assuredly, Cuphophron, you
would find Sophron and Philopolis to speak nothing but what is true.


Cuph. Cuphophron 's ridiculous indifferency in the greatest Points of Religion.
I find a great averseness in my self, Bathynous, to be convinced of the truth
of such hot and quarrelsome Speculations, be they never so true. Obsequium
amicos, Veritas odium parit. You know not the peace and quiet of an
universalized spirit. Wot you not, Bathynous, of that notable Maxim in Logic,
Parts consentiunt cum Toto, dissentiunt inter se? I am for neither Member of
any Division, because it cannot be without Opposition, (as the Learned in that
Faculty tell us) which is contrary to the spirit of Peace, and makes a man
guilty of the sin of Contradiction.


Hyl. Cuphophron, is a Catholic of the greatest compass or comprehension that
ever I met withal yet in all my life. What, can no Division or Party of men
whatever lay claim to you, Cuphophron?


Cuph. I am pure oil, and float above all waters.


Hyl. What is your meaning, Cuphophron? That you are neither Papist nor
Antipapist, and yet a Christian; neither Christian nor Turk, but yet a Deist;
neither Deist nor Atheist, but yet what? Where Is your oil now, Cuphophron, that
floats aloft? It is converted into neither flame nor light, that I see.


Cuph. It is vanished into the soft free invisible Air.


Philop. I prithee, Hylobares, leave toying with Cuphophron, and permit him to
enjoy his own humor. Our time is precious, and I would fain proceed with
Philotheus.


Philoth. Hylobares his Sportfulness, O Philopolis, is very excusable, it
seeming to aim at that which is most useful and serious, that is, the
awakening of us into the sense of our duty; that, seeing there are these
Divisions, and there is a necessity of being of some or other of them, we
should make our choice with care and judgment, and stand to the judgment we
have made with courage and fortitude.


Philop. Some few Prophecies hinted at touching the Reformation.
A very good Interpretation. But in the mean time, Philotheus, let us take
notice whereabout we are in our Discourse. You have showed us that the Kingdom
of God after Christ's coming was the same that the Kingdom of Christ, which
Kingdom of Christ continued so till, after Constantine's time, by a wicked
Apostasy into Pagan-like Superstitions, Idolatries and Persecutions, it became
the Kingdom of Antichrist: and that then, after this long Papal Tyranny, by
the special assistence of God and the courage and conduct of the everblessed
Reformers, the Kingdom of Christ again, in the most proper sense, emerged from
under the bondage of Antichrist. Now as you have noted some Predictions of the
Apostasy of the Church, so I desire you would briefly produce some Prophecies
touching the Reformation. For these things, Philotheus, marvellously illustrate
Divine Providence.


Philoth. They do so, Philopolis; and the Spirit of Prophecy could not be
silent in this point neither, unless he would quite have left us in the dark.
But I will give you but an Instance or two; and shall rather point to them,
then pursue them. The first is that in Daniel, the Prediction of the burning of
the little Horn with eyes, that wore out the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7.25.
and changed times and Laws, which were given into his hands for a time and
times and half a time. Now whereas it is said, Ver. 26.
But the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume
and destroy it unto the end; the Beginning of this Judgment is the Reformation
which happened in the last Semitime, as it is also set out in the reviving of
the Witnesses in the last half-day of the three days and half. Apoc. 11.11.



Philop. These are well put together, Philotheus, and they suffice.


Philoth. I need not therefore add, in that the ten Horns should hate the
Whore, Apoc. 17.16.
should make her desolate and naked, should eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire, that this also was begun in the Reformation in the due sense of the
Prophetic style: nor that notable Prophetic Hit touching the fiery spirit of
Luther, and the ungodly Wares of Pope Leo the tenth, Ezekiel. 29.18. See Synops.
Prophet. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Because thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities, by the iniquity of thy Traffic; therefore will I bring forth a
fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to
ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee. But the most
noble representation of the Joy and Triumph of the Reformers and their Party is
that of the Harpers with the Harps of God in their hand, Apoc. 15.2.
standing upon the brink of the Sea of Glass, and singing the Song of Moses the
Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb; of which I have told you the meaning
already.


Philop. I remember it very well. In what part of the Revolution of Ages we now
are; with some Cautions for the right understanding of the style of the
Apocalypse
But if there has been already a Rising of the Witnesses, in what part of the
Revolution of Ages are we placed, O Philotheus? Are we not in the Seventh
Trumpet?


Philoth. Yes: it cannot be otherwise. For upon the rising of the Witnesses it
is said, that the second Woe is past, and the third is the seventh or last
Trumpet, wherein all the Kingdoms of the world are to become the Kingdoms of
the Lord and his Christ: but they must be taken in by degrees, as Victories are
gained more and more against the Beast.


Philop. Why? is there such fighting against the Beast under the last Trumpet,
Philotheus?


Philoth. Yes: For all the Vials are comprehended within the first Thunder of
the last Trumpet. The first Thunder contains the Seven Vials, as the last Seal
does the seven Trumpets. And I conceive that this seventh Trumpet is called a
Wo-Trumpet mainly for these Vials of the wrath of God that fill the first part
thereof, namely the first Thunder.


Philop. That is not irrational, O Philotheus. But, I pray you tell us, in what
part of the seventh Trumpet are we now placed?


Philoth. In the first Thunder, Philopolis.


Philop. And in what Vial?


Philoth. In the third, Philopolis, so far as my judgment reaches in these
things.


Philop. Can you point then, Philotheus, to the Events orderly corresponding to
the three first Vials?


Philoth. I do not know what you mean by orderly corresponding, Philopolis, nor
am I assured that the Vials signify such a continued orderly succession of
individual Actions or Events, (the first ceasing with the first Vial, the
second with the second, the like Vial with its Event never being reiterated or
continued while some others are a-pouring out) and that the seven Vials are not
like the seven Heads of the Beast, which signify seven kinds of Governments,
of which some, when intermitted, were resumed again; so I am not assured but
these seven Vials may signify seven kinds of Plagues, rather then seven
distinct and precise individual courses of so many kinds, ceasing so soon as
another begins, and never beginning again when once ceased. For there is
mention of the Event of the first Vial under the fifth. Apoc. 16.11.
And indeed to prepare you at once for all, I do think a man may miss of the
more genuine sense of the Apocalypse by overmuch leaning to humane Curiosity.
Which I think the Spirit of God does not at all go about to gratify, but in an
high and majestic style conveys only what is mainly useful for the Church to
take notice of. And therefore in that high noise and tempest of Prophetic
Phrases and Iconisms rattling about our ears and beating upon our phancies, we
are to lie low and couch close, and to listen to a more still, soft and
intellectual voice conveying a more inward and frugal instruction with it, not
tickling our natural spirit with the gratification of the precise knowledge of
the time of the Events, nor bearing us into a belief that the quality of them
is so externally big and boisterous as the Prophetic Figures will naturally
incline us to imagine, if we stand not upon our guard, but sweetly charming our
attention to her more calm and still whispers, she safely instructs us in the
most true and useful meaning of the Prophecies, as much as is sufficient to
encourage us to side with Truth, and faithfully to adhere to the Interest of
the Kingdom of Christ.


Philop. I do not well understand you, Philotheus: I pray you exemplify your
meaning in the very Point we are upon.


Philoth. It is the thing I drive at, Philopolis. I say therefore, that that
inward and still Instruction which this whole Vision of the Vials aims at seems
to me to be no more then this, That God will at last destroy and utterly rout
all that Antichristian Power that has hitherto, Pharaoh-like, held the People
of God in so great a Bondage. For the alluding to the Plagues of Egypt in the
description of the Vials intimates no more then so, that these Plagues are
prepared for that City that is spiritually called Egypt, the Antichristian
Church, wherein Christ in his Members is crucified again, and grievously
persecuted. Now in interpreting the meaning of these seven Plagues, wherewith
God will afflict and finally destroy this Mystical Egypt, we may err as well
in learning too much to a more gross Political sense as to a Physical; and it
may be Swords and Cannons are no more made use of in this Contest with Egypt
then Thunder and Lightening and Hailstones of a talent weight.


Philop. What then, Philotheus, would you make the Vision of the seven Vials
only a pompous Prophetical Parable signifying that Christ will slay the Man of
sin by the breath of his mouth and by the brightness of his appearing? 2 These.
2.8.
only this garnished with various Allusions to the Plagues of Egypt?


Philoth. Nay, I can scarce abstain from telling you, O Philopolis, that the
whole Book, in a manner, of the Apocalyptical Visions, in reference to the
Church, seems such as if the Penman thereof did not industriously aim at any
thing more then at a certain, though aenigmaticall, prefiguration and
prediction of the Apostasy thereof into Antichristianism by the misguidance of
the Churchmen, with an Indication of the time no preciselier then was useful;
and that this Antichristianism will be again chased out of Christendom, and
pure and Apostolical times return again. These things are most certainly,
punctually and manifestly set out in the Apocalypse. (So that to me it is a
very great wonder, that any one that has parts and patience to consider things
can doubt of the truth of that which is at least the main, if not the sole,
scope of that Book of Prophecies.) But that every pompous Prophetical
Expression is to have its distinct Event answering to it, it may be is no more
necessary, then that every circumstance of a Parable should have a moral
meaning in it.


Philop. For ought I know, The Application of the three first Vials to external
Events.
there may be a great truth in what you say, Philotheus, if rightly understood.
But I hope this shall be no excuse to you from applying the three first Vials
to the external Events in the world.


Philoth. Because you will not be otherwise satisfied, Philopolis, it shall not.


Philop. What Event therefore, I pray you, answers to the first Vial, which was
poured on the Earth, from whence there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon
the men that had the Mark of the Beast, Apoc. 16.2.
and upon them that worshipped his Image?


Philoth. That Vial was not poured on the Earth, but in a general sense, as in
the preceding Verse, where it is said to all the Angels, Go your ways, and pour
out the Vials of the wrath of God on the Earth: and it follows, And the first
went out, and poured out his Vial on the Earth, according to the sense of that
general command. But the Allusion of the Effect of this Vial is to that
Egyptian Plague of Boils and Blains.


Philop. If Earth here be understood but in that general sense, it had been
needless to repeat it.


Philoth. The Repetition is very ornamental to the Cortex of the Vision,
because it bears a correspondence with other Subjects the Vials are said to be
poured upon, as the Sea, the Rivers, the Air, etc. as if God would stir up all
the Elements of Nature to fight against the Beast or Antichristian Powers. And
besides this, Exodus 9.8.
it was Earth, that is to say, Ashes of the furnace, from whence this Egyptian
Plague of Blains and Boils did arise.


Philop. Well then. But what is the Application of this first Vial? what
answers in Event?


Philoth. You know, Philopolis, the pouring out of the first Vial immediately
follows the ascension of the Witnesses into Heaven, whom, you may be sure,
these marked Slaves of the Beast looked upon with a very envious eye, Apoc.
15.2.
and must needs gnash their teeth at the Triumphal Song of those Harpers
harping on the brinks of the Sea of Glass mingled with Fire. Wherefore the
Envy, Malice, bitter Zeal and mad Rage of the Pontifician Party against the
Reformed, who were now got into power Political both in Church and State,
Apoc. 16.2.
this was that noisome and grievous sore falling upon them from the first Vial;
this those Boils and Blains from the scattered ashes of the furnace in this
Land of Egypt. And the concomitants of these were grievous Wars raised against
the Witnesses, or horrid Persecutions, wherever their Adversaries were able to
effect it. But this rancorous sore sticks more especially and peculiarly on
those marked Vassals of the Beast which go under the name of Jesuits, whose
Order Pope Paul the third confirmed a little after the beginning of the
Reformation, and whose Author bears not only Ashes but Fire in his name: an
ill Omen, portending what Incendiaries his Disciples would prove to
Christendom.


Cuph. Philotheus seems to offer at an allusive jest upon the name of Ignatius
Loyola, the Founder of the Jesuits. It Is much he did not bring in the hot
ashes of the furnace here too, or touch upon the (...) as congenerous to this
conceit of Fire.


Philop. Well, but go on, I pray you, Philotheus.


Philoth. Now when a Kingdom, Province or Principality is but of so little
standing in the Reformation, as that it is but like an Animal fallen into a
swoon rather then stone-dead, and that the Papal Interest is not so quite
extinct, but that they in a short time may be recoverable to the obedience of
the Sea of Rome by the mischievous Activity and zealous and embittered Industry
of the Pope's Agents and Emissaries, or by whatever means they can raise to
reduce them to their former Superstitions and Idolatries; that Kingdom, State
or Principality is under the Influence of the first Vial: I mean, it is the
object of that exulcerated malice and fierce and implacable Activity of those
marked Servants of the Beast. This plague of unquietness and vexation sticks
indeed upon themselves; but it is manifest that they will ease their Rage and
Virulency upon whatever part of their adversaries they have any hope to
prevail against. But if they hold out so long against all the rancorous
attempts of the Romish adherents, as that the minds of the people are quite off
from any inclination or capacity of receiving the Papal Laws again, and his
Interest has in a manner quite expired, no warmth or hopes being left; then are
they in such a condition as is figured out by the second Vial, Apoc. 16.3.
the Sea becomes as the blood of a dead man, and the Fishes therewith die in
it. For, according to the Prophetic style, Sea signifies the People gathered
together into one Polity, and the death of the Fishes the disappointment of
hope and gain.


Philop. The Application, methinks, is very easy and obvious. The Pope loses
his Fishing in such a Sea, as being not permitted to put in S. Peter's Net: his
Fishing there is destroyed.


Cuph. His angling for such Fishes as have money in their mouths.


Bath. And happy those Kingdoms that become so dead and hopeless a Sea unto
him! for they are in peace. But who-ever revives to him any hope of recovery,
relapses that Kingdom into the state of the first Vial, awakens all that
rancour and malicious Activity of these marked Slaves of the Beast against it,
by all imaginable Frauds, Impieties and Barbarities to ruin it, rather then it
should fail to be subjected to the Pope.


Philop. That Is a weighty consideration of yours, I promise you, Bathynous.
Give them but hope, and they will straightway turn it into an eager and
direful desire, and Diabolical plotting and machinating whatever mischief
they can think may make for the securing or hastening their expected Harvest.


Philoth. Lastly, Philopolis, as the Sea signifies a Kingdom, State or
Principality, be it lesser or greater: so Rivers signify any Emmissaries,
Powers or Agents from any Kingdom or Jurisdiction, whether Armies, Provincial
Magistrates, or whatever other Instruments or Ministers of the State from
whence they are sent. Now when any State or Kingdom is so strong and
established that they continue long, and are able in the mean time to do
execution on the bloody Papal Emissaries, whether Military or Sacerdotal, that
are found to excite the people to Rebellion against their Prince, the slaughter
of these Enemies is the effect of the third Vial, which turns the Rivers into
blood.


Philop. The condition then of the Reformation in Germany before the
Smalcaldick War, and of England in Edward the sixth's time, before the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, seems to be such as is denoted by the first Vial. The fresh
Ascension of the Witnesses was the Object of the wrath and envy of the marked
Vassals of the Beast, according as is intimated in that very Chapter, Apoc.
11.18.
And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, etc. But in Queen Elizabeth
and King James his time the condition of the Reformation in England was such as
is denoted by the third Vial; forasmuch as that great Armada of Eighty eight
was stoutly repelled with much slaughter on their side, besides several
traitorous Emissaries executed.


Philoth. This of the third Vial is the opinion of a very judicious Interpreter
of the Apocalypse, and it is very hard to avoid it though a man would never so
fain, the Text speaks it so plainly: Apoc. 16.5, 6.
Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou
have judged thus. For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou
have given them blood to drink; for they are worthy.


Cuph. Methinks, Philotheus, it is but an harsh and strained sense of Scripture
that fetches out blood: The Spirit of God surely breaths out more Meekness and
mercifulness.


Bath. There is a Meekness and Sweetness of the natural Complexion which would
pretend to that Divine Spirit, but falls as short of it as Nature does of God,
and is a Softness over-usually accompanied with a Falsness and Perfidiousness
to all Truth and Virtue, and betrays all that ought to be dear to a man, his
Prince, his Friend, his Country, and all. What Rigor or unmercifulness was
there in slaying the Spaniards at Sea that would have destroyed our Land with
fire and sword, if they could, as they intended, have made an Invasion? What
Harshness in executing such persons as would traitorously have murdered the
King or Queen? Such Mercy as this is like that of the wicked, Pro. 12.10.
which, as Solomon says, is Cruelty it self.


Cuph. Nay, Bathynous, as you represent the case, I am abundantly convinced.


Philoth. And so you may well be from the very Text it self. For the Angel of
the Waters his justification of this Revenge is only touching the Rivers, that
is, Emissary forces that come to assault others and ruin them. Surely
defensive Opposition in so just a Cause, and the paying them thus in their own
Coin, has with it all the Equity imaginable. And therefore this passage is not
at all misbecoming the Spirit of God.


Philop. I am fully of your mind in that, Philotheus; and those Reformed
Churches that can do that right to themselves by propulsing their Enemies, I
think they may thank God for the good condition they are in. But we are
advanced no higher in the Vials as yet, Philotheus, are we?


Philoth. No surely, not in that more external and Political sense. But I
know not whether in some other sense we may. And assuredly the Apocalypse has
its eye upon Religious accounts as well as Political: I mean, the Prophetical
Iconisms sometimes have not only a Political sense, but a more Spiritual,
and, it may be, sometimes only such.


Philop. In the mean time I am not a little pleased, Philotheus, that I know
whereabout we are in this Political sense, which, methinks, should be as
desirable to be known by all that have any thing to do with the affairs of the
Kingdom of God, as it would be to the Pilot of a Ship on the main Ocean to
know in what Longitude and Latitude he is. You have led me through my Three
first Quere's, Philotheus, with much delight and satisfaction. Let me now
entreat you to give your self the trouble of instructing me touching the last.


Cuph. Philopolis his last Quere deferred till next day's meeting.
Truly, if I have any aim or presage in me, Philopolis, if Philotheus fall upon
your last Quere thus late, he will not only give himself, but also you and the
rest of the company, the trouble of sitting up all night.


Philoth. Indeed, Philopolis, I fear my self that that Theme will so spread it
self in the entering into it, that it will require at least as long a time as we
have spent already.


Philop. This is a sad distraction and unexpected that I am cast into,
Philotheus. To desire you to go on, would be both uncivil and unsupportable to
you and the whole company. To leave off would be such a torment to my desire of
seeing to the end of this great Theorie, and a loss so irreparable, that I have
not the patience to think of it.


Cuph. Why then, Philopolis, is it not a plain case, that you must stay in town
to morrow?


Philop. I must so, Cuphophron, whatever becomes of my Country affairs. I will
lie at a friend's house by the way on Sunday, and on Monday I shall be pretty
timely at home.


Cuph. Very well resolved, Philopolis. But I will not thank you for this. Dine
but with me here in this Arbor, (for now you cannot say you are pre-engaged)
and for that honor you and this company shall do me, I shall heartily thank
you. You may begin your Discourse with Philotheus immediately after Dinner, and
gain an hour or two's time.


Philop. How ready and skillful Cuphophron is to entrap men into the acceptance
of a Civility! If you will give your Parol that you will make us a right frugal
and Philosophical entertainment, I will dine with you to morrow, because I see
you so earnest in it.


Cuph. The Conclusion, with the Song of Moses and the Lamb sung to the Theorbo
by Bathynous.
I promise you I will not at all exceed. In the mean time this Glass of Canarie
to you till our next meeting.


Philop. Not a drop, I thank you, Cuphophron. A Fit of Music rather, according
to your Pythagorick mode, to compose our minds to bedward. For indeed it is
late, though I was loath to think so when I would have had Philotheus to proceed
in his discourse.


Sophr. Bathynous, play us the other Lesson, I pray you; Philopolis desires it.
And but a short one, it being so late. Here, take the Theorbo.


Bath. It seems I must the second time show my unskilfulness. You shall sing,
Sophron, and I will play a thorough Base to it.


Sophr. What shall I sing? I have neither Song nor Voice.


Bath. Yes, but you have the Song of Moses and of the Lamb.


Sophr. The only piece of Poetry that I was ever guilty of in all my life. My
zeal and love for the Reformation was the Muse that with much ado once
inspired those humble Rhymes, which I can only repeat, not sing at all.


Bath. If you cannot, Sophron, I can. And the Lute, I think, is pretty well in
tune.


Philoth. I pray you do, Bathynous.


Bath. Great and mavelous are
Thy works, Lord God of Might;
Thou Sovereign of Saints,
Thy ways are just and right.
Who shall not fear thee, Lord,
And glorify thy Name?
Thou only Holy art;
Thine Acts no tongue can stain.
All Nations shall adore
Thy Judgments manifest,
Thy holy Name implore,
And in thy Truth shall rest.

Philop. That is, all Nations shall be converted to the pure Truth of the
Gospel, and rest satisfied at the length in so solid and unexceptionable a
Religion.


Sophr. I meant so, Philopolis.


Philop. A very good meaning, and a very suitable Song for this day's Subject. I
pray God hasten that time, to the comfort of the whole Earth. I must abruptly
bid you all good night for the present, and see if I can dispatch a Letter home
by this night's Post. But I shall keep promise with Cuphophron, and am not a
little joy'd that I shall once more enjoy this excellent society before I leave
the Town.


Cuph. It is our happiness that we have detained you one night longer.


Philoth. Good night, dear Philopolis. I shall meet you here according to your
expectation.


Philop. In the mean time, dear Philotheus, good night.


The-End of the Fourth Dialogue.
THE FIFTH DIALOGUE. Philotheus, Bathynous, Sophron, Philopolis, Euistor,
Hylobares, Cuphophron, Ocymo.
Cuph. FOR all your have, The entrance into the Dialogue.
Ocymo, spread the Carpet on the Table before you go hence. So, it is well. If
any enquire for me at the house, be sure to tell them I am gone out.


Ocym. I shall observe your command, Sir.


Cuph. We'll not be interrupted all this afternoon, if an harmless Equivocation
will help it.


Hyl. You went out of your house when you came into your Garden. O what a
mavelous Mercurial Wit is Cuphophron!


Cuph. It is the gift of Nature, Hylobares, to them that know how to make a
right use of it. What Is a clock now, Philopolis, by your Watch? that we may see
what a fair share of time we have before us.


Philop. It is turned of one. We have dined in very good time.


Cuph. But both you and Philotheus ate so sparingly, as if either you did not
like the Provision, or thought your After-dinner's discourse would as well fat
the Body as feed the Soul.


Philop. Your entertainment, Cuphophron, was very noble and inviting: but I
must confess my mind was much carried out to the After-delicacies I expected
from Philotheus.


Cuph. And I pray you, Philopolis, defer not to satisfy your Appetite in that
point. I know Philotheus is ready for you.


Philoth. I am always ready to serve Philopolis and the rest of this excellent
Company in any thing that lies in my power.


Philop. Philopolis his last Quere, touching the Success of the Kingdom of God
till the end of all things.
Without any farther Preamble therefore, I pray you, Philotheus, let us fall
upon the last Quere I would have propounded yesternight, namely, What Success
the Kingdom of God is likely to have to the end of all things.


Philoth. The Success of Christ's Kingdom, Philopolis, will be mavelous,
both in respect of its farther Victories against the Kingdom of Antichrist,
whose power will be utterly destroyed; and also in respect of it self. For
undoubtedly it will be in a more glorious condition both for Quality and Extent
then it was ever yet since the Apostles times.


Philop. What you say touching the destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist, I
am abundantly satisfied therein, both from the consuming of the little Horn by
fire in Daniel; Dan. 7.11.
and also in that it is said in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 19.20.
that the Beast and the false Prophet were taken, Apoc. 16.19.
and were both cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone: and lastly, the
Effect of the seventh Vial seems to imply so much.


Philoth. To which you may add the Vision of the Winepress trodden without the
City, Apoc. 14.20.
out of which a vast Lake of blood issued so deep as up to the horse-bridles,
and so large as that it reached to the space of a thousand and six hundred
furlongs.


Cuph. Jesus God! What a kind of Victory over Antichrist is this, O Philotheus!
I did not think there had been such a bloody Prophecy in all the Apocalypse.
Shall Christ enlarge his Kingdom by making all the World swim in blood?


Philoth. Be of good courage, Cuphophron, and look not so pale and
affrightfully on it. You are scared but as Children with a dreadful Picture.
This is but a Prophetic Iconism, as the putting the Beast and the false
Prophet into a Lake of fire, and that alive. Can their dead bodies swim in
blood and they be cast alive into a Lake of fire and brimstone at once? This
lake of blood and lake of fire signify the same thing, but are neither of them
the thing which they signify.


Philop. Cuphophron's color comes to him again, Philotheus, so that you need
enter no farther into that Subject before you orderly come at it. For I am not
content only to know that the Kingdom of Antichrist will be utterly
destroyed, but very desirous (at least as far as the remaining Vials will afford
light) to understand the gradual process thereof. For surely that is couched in
the Vision of the Vials.


Philoth. I doubt not but it is. But it is a very great hazard and difficulty
to attempt the particular Explication of Prophecies before they be fulfilled.
For there is a strange unsettled Vibration of the Prophetical expressions,
that in this tremulous motion seem to touch upon many things, but it is very
hard to know where they will fix till the Event determines. But how-ever I
shall, with God's assistence, endeavor to satisfy your desire as near as I
can, and in such order as you shall demand.


Philop. I humbly thank you, The Interpretation of the fourth Vial.
Philotheus. I shall demand according to the Order of the Vials. And therefore
I desire you in the first place to instruct me in the meaning of the fourth
Vial poured out upon the Sun, Apoc. 16.8.
whence power was given him to scorch men with fire, insomuch that they
blasphemed God for the very pain of their burning.


Philoth. You must understand, Philopolis, (which I tell you at first for all)
that the Prophetic Iconisms may by an Henopoeia of the second kind (as a
modern Writer teaches us) sometimes comprehend more significata then one,
Synopsis Prophet. lib. 1. c. 3. sect. 8.
and that intendedly, though before the Event, whether only one or more be
intended, is not to be defined. But if but any one be accomplished, it is
enough. And therefore it is the safest pitching upon what is most within our
ken. It was said of the Church before she fled into the Wilderness, that she
was clothed with the Sun, Apoc. 12.1.
as well as had the Moon under her feet. Now the Moon is the Law of Moses
comprised in the Pentateuch, which consists of dark Types and Figures, but all
the Light it has it borrows from Christ and his Gospel. The Truth comprised in
the New Testament reflecting on the Mosaicall Law makes it shine like the Moon
with this borrowed Light. It was rightly therefore said of these two opposite
Luminaries, that while the one, viz. the Sun, shone round about the Woman, and
she was clothed with the glorious Light and the Truth of the Gospel, that the
Moon was then as it were with the Antipodes, under her feet; as he says of the
two Poles, Hic vertex nobis semper sublimis, at illum
Sub pedibus Nox atra videt, Manesque profundi.



Philop. This is something high and Poetical, Philotheus. But that which you
would have, I suppose, is this, namely, That as the Moon and Sun in the Vision
of the Woman, according to an intimation of Hugo Grotius, may signify the Law
of Moses and the Law of Christ; so the Sun here may also signify the Law of
Christ comprehended in the New Testament, or rather, more at large, the Word of
God (which we call the Bible) comprising the New Testament, and the Old so far
forth as it respects Christ, and the Old is ratified by the New. Is this the
body of the Sun you mean?


Philoth. Some such thing I drive at; you understand me very well. Now I say
the pouring out the Vial upon this Sun is the enlightening it with clear and
convictive Expositions by Holy men assisted by the Spirit of God, or rather the
removing the clouds of Obscurity from before it, that it may shine in its full
strength, to discover plainly the unrighteous mysteries of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, and show to all the World in what a foul and horrid condition they
are, how apostatized from God and Christ, and how plainly and reprochfully
their abominable doings are characterized by the finger of God in the
Scripture, and how lively their most direful and diabolical Image is there
described. This is the pouring out the Vial upon the Sun, whereby power is
given him to scorch men with fire, and so vex them that they blaspheme the Name
of God by reason of these Plagues, and rather vilify and reproach the
Scriptures and the Spirit that writ them, then repent them of their sins, and
give glory to God by acknowledging the Truth. This, I conceive, may be one
sense of the fourth Vial.


Philop. But this is a more Mystical or Spiritual sense. Is there not also,
Philotheus, a Political one?


Philoth. Yes there is, Philopolis, and it is a very obvious one. For nothing
is more confessed then that in the Prophetic style the Sun signifies the
greatest person in the Political Universe, as he is the most glorious
Luminarie in the Natural. Now who do you think is the greatest person in the
World the Pope rules in?


Philop. He and the Pope has disputed it a great while, and I think it is hard
to say whether is at this very day.


Philoth. Wherefore the next Vial seeming more peculiarly to concern the Pope,
this is likely to appertain to the Emperor.


Philop. What therefore do you think the pouring of the fourth Vial upon the
Sun to signify in this Political sense?


Philoth. I hope it signifies the Conversion of some Emperor illuminated with
the true knowledge of the Gospel. For thus the general Reformation which he
will introduce in his Empire, through the Light and Zeal he has conceived for
the Truth, will scorch and burn and vex the Vassals of the two-horned Beast to
the very heart. This is a sense natural enough, I think; but whether it or the
former be more natural, I leave to you to judge.


Philop. There is abundant Concinnity in them both. Nor do I think it is at all
necessary that that Subject on which the Vial is said to be poured should
always suffer Mischief, but that at least Mischief should be thence reflected
upon the Beast. But is there no other possible sense of the fourth Vial,
Philotheus?


Philoth. There may be an See Synops. Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 3. sect. 3.
Henopoeia adjoined to this Iconism of the Sun, so that it may signify as it
does Isay 24. at the last verse. But then the Signification will be very
congenerous to the later of the foregoing senses, the meaning being also
Political.


Philop. That intimation suffices. For I understand thereby the taking in of
more Kingdoms or Principalities into the Light of the Gospel, distinct from
those that appeared on the behalf thereof at the rising of the Witnesses. I
know not but this may be a right meaning as well as any of the other, and a
farther preparation to the times of that Vision of the Rider of the white
Horse, Apoc. 19.12.
on whose Head it is said there were many Crowns. I pray you, Philotheus,
proceed and tell us the meaning of the fifth Vial poured on the throne of the
Beast, Apoc. 16.10.
whereby his Kingdom became dark.


Philoth. The throne of the two-horned Beast is the same with the Throne of the
Whore who is said to sit on the seven Hills. The Interpretation of the fifth
and sixth Vials.
Wherefore this in a Political sense seems to boad ill to the City of Rome,
which is the Seat of the Beast. But whether it be the sacking of Rome and
banishing the Pope from thence for ever, or whether, from the Effects of the
former Vial Politically understood, the Trading and Revenues of that greatest
Merchant of the great men of the earth will grow very low and slender, and so a
great deadness and obscurity and darkness seize even his principal Seat, or
what other thing it may be analogous to this, time must determine, I cannot.


Philop. But is this the only sense, Philotheus, of this Vial?


Philoth. It is that which I suppose is most to your tooth, Philopolis: But
sometimes another occurrs to my mind. What if we should conceive the Pope's
Chair here perstringed by this Throne of the Beast? I mean that Chair of
Infallibility that he and his Pseudoprophetick Body boast they sit in, and so
dictate infallible Oracles to the world for their own Profit and Interest,
facing down the people, whatsoever they find gainful to the Church, that it
is really true, be it a Figment never so foolish or incredible, never so
blasphemous or impossible: but it cannot seem so to the people, while they take
the Church to be infallible. Now I say, as the present Vial in the Political
sense may be in some kind a consequent of the former politically understood;
so the Efficacy of the former more spiritually understood may introduce in time
the Effect of this present Vial in the more Spiritual meaning also; and the
pouring thereof on the Throne of the Beast may be the abolishing of that false
Opinion of the Pope's and his Church's Infallibility out of the generality of
men's minds: which false Light once removed, they must needs find themselves
much in the dark, their Religion being such as neither Scripture, Reason, nor
any thing else that has any Authority with it, can afford any light to, or the
least color for; wherefore his Kingdom must needs be overwhelmed with more
then Egyptian darkness: and the Sticklers for the Papacy seeing so general a
dissatisfaction in the people, and that they, through the penetrancy of the
Light of the Gospel, have lost this great hold on them, it will make them gnaw
their tongues for very anguish and pain.


Philop. Nay, I know not but this may be one sense too. But, I pray you,
Philotheus, proceed to the sixth Vial.


Philoth. The sixth Vial, Philopolis, seems to touch upon the Conversion of the
Jews, Mr. Mede, Comment. Apocalypt. ad cap. 16.
as that late excellent Interpreter has with great judgment and credibility
made the discovery. And the comparing of the Vision of the treading of the
Wine Press without the City, Apoc. 14.18.
and the Battle and Victory of that illustrious Heroes riding on the white
Horse, Apoc. 19.11.
with the last Vial, does, as he also suggests, make much for the probability
of this Exposition. For that there is an Identity or Coincidency of Events
signified by the treading of the Wine Press and the battle of that great Heroes
seems to be clearly enough intimated in those Visions, in that the Rider of the
white Horse is said also to tread the Wine Press of the Wrath of God, Apoc.
19.15, and 13.
and to have his garments dipped in blood. Which correspondeth excellently with
that in the Vision of the Wine Press, Apoc. 14.20.
that there came out blood up to the horse bridles: Which implies therefore
that the Wine Press was trod by the Rider of the white Horse: And then you see
how naturally it will follow that his Vesture will be dipped in blood.


Philop. The Congruity is mavelous, Philotheus. I do not doubt but these two
Visions signify much-what the same thing.


Philoth. Well then. Apoc. 19.20.
But in that the Beast and false Prophet are taken in the Victory of the Rider
of the white Horse, and cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone, it is
plain that this is the last effusion of the wrath of God upon them, as most
certainly the last Vial is. So that these two Visions also signify the same. I
mean the Vision of the last Vial, and of the Rider of the white Horse.


Philop. That Is very clear again, Philotheus. But what of all this? I know not
what you would be at.


Philoth. I would infer, that as the treading of the Wine Press, the Battle of
the Rider of the white Horse and the seventh Vial are all one, so the Harvest
immediately preceding the treading of the Wine Press, Apoc. 14.15.
and the Marriage of the Lamb immediately preceding the Battle of the Rider of
the white Horse, Apoc. 19.7
and the sixth Vial immediately preceding the seventh, are also all one.


Philop. There is a very specious probability of it.


Philoth. Now the Harvest intimating, according to our Savior's own sense,
Matt. 9.37.
the gathering men into the belief of the Gospel, and the Marriage of the Lamb
the espousing some people to Christ; the sixth Vial must also have some such
signification. For the notable Artifice of security of Concealment and
certainty of Revealment of the Visions in the Apocalypse consists most-what in
this, The one in the Defectuousness and Scatteredness of the Prophecies in
several, the other in their accurate Correspondency and Synchronism.


Philop. That Is very remarkable. But what do you think is meant by those three
Visions you compare?


Philoth. It may be not only the Conversion of the distinct and discernible
Nation of the Jews, but, as it is said in the general, Apoc. 16.12.
that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared, so it may at large
signify some Harvest or fruits of the Gospel amongst the Turks and those
Eastern Countries. It may be some great Bashaws may revolt from Mahometisme to
Christianity by this time, and that jointly with the Conversion of the Jews.
Which state of the Turkish Empire is signified here by Euphrates being dried
up. Not as if that Empire were utterly broken in pieces or destroyed and
consumed: but as it is said of the old Israelites in their passage through the
Red sea, Exodus 14.22.
that they walked upon dry land in the midst of the Sea, and the waters were a
wall unto them on the right hand and on the left, and so they passed dry-shod:
such will be the condition of the Turkish Empire under the sixth Vial; those
newly-converted Princes of the East will pass over with safety to join with
the true Church of Christ before the effusion of the last Vial.


Philop. I like this Interpretation marvellously well, Philotheus, it being so
plain that the Euphratean horsemen in the sixth Trumpet are the Turkish Armies,
Comment. Apocalypt. ad cap. 9.
as Mr. Mede has made it out with a great deal of skill and judgment. And yet
I would not exclude the Persian from the Concern of this sixth Vial.


Bath. The Harvest, the drying up of Euphrates, and the Marriage of the Lamb,
it may be, may rather signify an approach or preparation and ripening of
Affairs toward that great Event, then the Completion thereof it self, which
will emerge into more perfect actuality under the last Vial. The Jews and other
Oriental people, it may be, by this time may acknowledge Christ to be the
Messiah, and the Pope and his Clergy to be the Antichrist, and yet not be
settled in all the Apostolical Points and Doctrines of our Religion.


Philoth. That Is a cautious Note of yours, Bathynous, which I will neither
gainsay nor subscribe to, but leave it to be considered on.


Philop. Much less will I presume to contradict it. But, I pray you, proceed to
the last Vial, Philotheus. The Interpretation of the last Vial.



Philoth. I shall, Philopolis. To the understanding whereof more easily it will
be requisite to make a Remark or two upon the Vision of the Rider of the white
Horse. As that his Equippage is such, that it seems very harsh to conceive that
the War is gross and carnal, but spiritual. For to be clothed in fine Linen
white and clean is not the armature of a carnal warfare, Apoc. 19.14.
as neither the Sword coming out of his mouth. Ver. 15.
It is plainly the warfare of the Word of God, as his Name also implies,
proceeding out of the mouth of his Saints, and convincing men's Consciences of
the Truth. Whence also we have abundance of security that the Vision of the
Wine Press (trodden by the Rider of the white Horse) does not signify so
grossly and bloudily as the words externally sound; which seem to be framed so
Hyperbolically on purpose to bear off the cautious from any such rude conceit.
And in that the Angel standing in the Sun invites the Fowls of Heaven to the
Supper of the great God, Apoc. 19.17, 18.
to eat the flesh of Kings and Captains, and the flesh of mighty Men, and the
flesh of Horses, in that other Vision, I must confess I look upon it as but a
Prophetical Parable, The Egyptians are men, Isa. 31.3.
and not Gods; and their Horses flesh, and not spirit. But it would be too long
to insist on these things. That such an Angel of light should be so meanly
employed as to invite Birds of prey to a Feast of dead men's Carcasses, is a
Decorum I understand not. But we cannot stay here. That which I would have you
most of all take notice of in that Vision is, the different Event of the War
upon two different sorts of Enemies the Rider of the white Horse wages war
with. For the Beast and the false Prophet, whereby is signified the
Antichristian Party properly so called, and such as actively and obstinately
persist in their Antichristianism, Apoc. 19, 20.
are taken and cast alive into a lake of fire and brimstone: but the Remnant,
Ver. 21.
that is, the other part, (...), they are slain with the Sword of him that sat
upon the Horse, which Sword proceeded out of his mouth. These are that part
especially of his Opposers at this time that were Pagans or Infidels, and did
not believe the Apostolical Doctrine of Christ. So that taking the whole
Conflux of men, or entire Aggregate of the two opposite Armies before the
Fight, and dividing them, they naturally fall into this Tripartition; The true
Christian and Apostolical Party, the Infidel Party, (distinct from the Beast
and false Prophet) and the Party Antichristian.


Philop. What then is meant by the Infidel Party's being slain (and whoever
else fell with them) by the sword that came out of the mouth of the Rider of
the white Horse?


Philoth. Assuredly, Philopolis, their Conviction and Conversion to the true
Christian Faith. For the Word of God can slay them no otherwise then so.


Philop. I but it is added, And all the Fowls were filled with their flesh.


Philoth. Luke 15.7, and 10.
I tell you, Philopolis, the Angels of Heaven feast and make merry more upon the
Conversion of one sinner then on ninety nine just persons that want no
Repentance. But I told you before that these phrases are only Parabolicall;
and every passage of a Parable is not necessarily drawn into a particular
Signification. It may signify only in the general a very great Slaughter,
argued, in a Parabolicall way, from the consequences thereof.


Philop. I am pretty well persuaded that this may be the main meaning of this
Vision of the Rider of the white Horse, whatever else there may be in it
beside.


Philoth. Let us therefore now proceed to what is parallel thereto, namely the
seventh Vial; which has seemed to me as obscure as any thing I have met with in
all the Apocalypse. But in the general I dare pronounce, that the sense is more
spiritual then is ordinarily conceived, both because it is parallel to the
Vision of the Rider of the white Horse, and also from that Intimation, Apoc.
16.15.
Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
Garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his shame. This is the time that God
will pluck off the Covering from off all Nations, Isa. 25.7.
and the veil of Hypocrisy from off the people, as Isay foretells; and he
that keeps not to the right clothing will be found most deformedly naked. This
therefore is not like a premonition against the day of a bloody Battle, where
the blood rises up to the Horse saddles for the space of a thousand six hundred
furlongs together. In so great a slaughter literally understood men are more
solicitous of their lives then their clothes, and more afraid of being killed
then of being exposed to some outward shame.


Philop. What may then be the meaning of that passage, Philotheus?


Philoth. A timely forewarning to seek after Truth and Righteousness, and to
understand the Mysteries of the Gospel so well, as when this day comes, I mean,
the effusion of the last Vial, we be not discovered to be such silly Sots and
Bigotts, as out of an ignorant and superstitious Conscience to take part of the
Plagues and Distresses the Beast and the false Prophet will then be plunged
into, but through sound Knowledge and a purified mind timely to be adjoined to
the true Church, the Body of Christ. For in that day a man shall be looked upon
as hugely naked and bare of all wit and common honesty, that has so little of
either as not to relinquish the Idolatrous and Imposturous Church of Rome, and
entirely betake himself to the Apostolical party. He will be a reproach and
laughing stock to all, and will be able by no means to hide his shame, he
discovering himself to be so wholly destitute of the sense of Truth and
Righteousness.


Philop. Methinks you have very peculiar apprehensions of things, Philotheus,
that come into your mind, which makes your converse more delightful. But give
me leave now to ask your opinion touching other (it may be) more difficult
passages. As that of the Frogs going out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast
and the false Prophet, which are said to be the spirits of Devils, and that
they work Miracles.


Philoth. These are the Emissaries, Orators, Negotiatours or Solicitours of
the Affairs of the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet, though they are called the
Spirits of Devils according to the usual Genius and style of the Apocalypse,
putting Angels and Spirits for that company of men that may be conceived to be
under their guidance. But they have the shape of Frogs, to betoken their
Earthliness and Uncleanness, and that the spirit and wisdom they act from is
earthly, Jam. 3.15.
sensual and devilish; contrary to that wisdom which is from above, which is
said first to be pure, then peaceable; but these Frogs call forth the Kings of
the Earth and the whole World to battle, even to fight against God and his
Christ. But those ungodly Forces, by the overpowering guidance of God Almighty,
pitch battle in such a place as is unfortunate to them from the very name. For
Armageddon signifies the Destruction of their Armies. Nor can I omit how
significant this Iconism of Frogs is, to set off that power in them of working
false Miracles to deceive the people, according to the sense of the ancient
Onirocriticks; (...). See Synops. Prophet. lib. 1. c. 6. sect. 17.
Amongst which Impostures may be reckoned the falling into Trances, Quakings,
Possessions by irresistible Powers, pretended Inspirations, (and what else
soever that carries from the Apostolical Faith) as well as those old Cheats
and Juggles or lying Miracles of ancient Paganism, or of modern
Antichristianism properly so called.

But here again, Philopolis, I would have you above all things take notice that
there is a Tripartition in this Conflux of people also. For here is God
Almighty and his Christ on one side with their Apostolical Legions: and then
on the other side there is first the Dragon with his Pagan or Infidel Forces,
all such as believe not the plain and Apostolical truth of the Gospel, such as
is comprised (for example) in the Apostles Creed; and lastly, there are the
Antichristian forces properly so called, such as appertain to the Beast and
false Prophet. So that this Tripartition is exquisitely answerable to that in
the Battle of the Rider of the white Horse.


Philop. Well, Philotheus, what then?


Philoth. All these meet in a place which in the Hebrew tongue is called
Armageddon.


Philop. They do so, Philotheus. But what is the meaning of the pouring of this
last Vial into the Air, to do vengeance on the Legions of the ungodly?


Philoth. In the external Cortex of the Prophecy it comports only with the
other Vials being poured out upon the Earth, the Sun, and the Sea; as if God
would stir up universal Nature in a rage against his enemies, as I told you
before: But in the more inward and mystical meaning it is only an
Introduction to these following Symbols of Voices and Thunderings and
Lightnings, etc.


Philop. What is the Mystical meaning therefore of those?


Philoth. These are parallel to the Description of that Heroes on the white
Horse, Apoc. 19.12, 15, 13.
whose eyes are said to be as a flame of fire, and a sharp sword to come out of
his mouth, and whose Name is also The word of God. These Voices therefore and
Thunderings and Lightnings are the Divulgations of the Law of Christ, (with an
allusion to that terrible way of the Promulgation of the Law of Moses on Mount
Sinai,) that is, of the Gospel of Christ, in the power of the Spirit, which is
resembled to fire. By these, I say, is set out an extraordinary efficacious
preaching of the Word in the power and demonstration of the Spirit under this
last Vial. Analogous to which is that Vision in Esdras, 2 Esdr. 13.10.
of the Man who sent out of his mouth as it were a blast of fire, and out of
his lips a flaming breath, and out of his tongue he cast out sparks and
tempests: which is there expressly interpreted of the Law of the Son of God, 2
Esdr. 13.38.
which is like unto fire. Now this Thundering and Lightning is accompanied with
a mighty Earthquake, as it is said of mount Sinai at the thundering out of the
Law, that the whole Mount quaked greatly; Exodus 19.18.
and again in the Psalms, Psalm 77.17, 18.
The air thundered, and thine arrows went abroad: the voice of thy Thunder was
heard round about, the Lightnings shone upon the ground, the Earth was moved
and shook withal.


Philop. Well, but what in the mean time, Philotheus, becomes of that pitched
Battle that those impure spirits the Frogs called the whole World to in the
field of Armageddon? For there is neither Fight nor Victory mentioned, as if
the Vision were left imperfect.


Philoth. Their Success is intimated in the signification of the word
Armageddon, as I told you before. And the Vision is completely continued,
though under a new representation. For you are to take special notice how this
large pitched Camp (the Symbols naturally leading to it) is by a Commutation of
Iconisms on a sudden turned into a mighty great City, which signifies still but
the same thing, that is to say, the Comprehension of those three Parties I
numbered up to you before. But this Tripartition is more plainly and elegantly
declared (in the Cortex of the Prophecy) upon the mention of the Earthquake, as
if it were an Effect of it, Apoc. 16.19.
(...).


Philop. The Elegancy indeed is very admirable, Philotheus, very pleasing and
harmonious.


Philoth. Nor is there any harshness in resembling that great Conflux of people
in Armageddon to one great City, because the Kings of the Earth and of the
whole World are said to be gathered together there in that Symbol of a Camp,
which being turned into the Iconism of a City, that City must needs be said to
be a great one, for it is in a manner the City of the whole World, Matt. 4.8.
in such a sense as all the Kingdoms of the world were said to be shown to our
Savior, which therefore must needs be the Comprehension of a world of Cities,
though the whole World be but as one great City, Philo Jud. lib. de Joseph.
as Philo speaks; (...). And though every Kingdom of it self be a Sea, yet the
Comprehension of abundance of Kingdoms together is, in the Prophetic style,
termed one great Sea; as it is in Daniel 7. where the four winds of Heaven are
said to strive on the great Sea. Wherefore as the great Sea consists of a great
many Seas, so, in like Analogy, may one conceive this great City in the inward
sense to consist of a great many Cities, and these great many Cities (which is
the thing I drive at) to be divided into three parts or parties; the Cities of
the Infidels, conceited Deists and mere Moralists, the Cities of the true
Christians, and the Antichristian Cities, viz. Babylon with her daughters.


Philop. Well, I confess, Philotheus, this is not unnatural. But what execution
in the mean time is there done in that Battle of the great day of God Almighty?


Philoth. The Cities of the Nations fell, that is to say, the Cities of the
Gentiles, Infidels or Unbelievers.


Philop. I suppose by the edge of the sword, Philotheus.


Philoth. By the edge of that sword that comes out of the mouth of the Rider of
the white Horse, I mean, by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.
Or rather, to keep to the present Vision, they fell being Thunderstruck by the
powerful Boanergesses of the Gospel under the last Vial: they were convinced
and subdued and brought under the Scepter of Christ, and were adjoined to his
Kingdom.


Philop. Very good news: I pray God it may so come to pass. But Babylon it
seems stands it out.


Philoth. Did not our Savior of old tell the chief Priests and Elders that the
Publicans and Harlots would go into the Kingdom of God before them? Matt.
21.31.
But Babylon stands it out to her utter ruin and destruction. She is forced to
drink of the wine of the fierceness of God's wrath: Apoc. 16.19, 20.
and every Island flies away, she shall not be possessed of any of her Churches
or consecrated places; and the Mountains are not found, all her Ecclesiastical
Honors and Dignities shall vanish. For great showrs of Hail out of Heaven
shall fall upon her, Ver. 21.
every stone about the weight of a Talent, that all her goodly Trees will be
spoiled and stripped of their both leaves and fruit, their boughs broken down,
and their stocks beaten bare even to the inmost bark. Apoc. 18.6, 7, 8.
Then shall it be doubled unto her double according to her works; and how much
she has glorified herself and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow
will be given her. For strong is the Lord God that judges her.


Philop. But will not all this misery reclaim her, Philotheus?


Philoth. Ask Solomon that question, Philopolis, and he will tell you roundly,
Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestill, Prove.
27.22.
yet will not his foolishness depart from him. A considerable part of her may
be thus obstinate for ever. These are the fools that will be found to walk
naked, and all will see their shame; which if themselves could see as well as
others, they would be converted: But being struck with superstitious Blindness,
in stead of acknowledging the Truth, and giving glory to God, it is said, Apoc.
16.21.
they blaspheme God, because of the plague of the Hail: for the plague thereof
was exceeding great.


Philop. So far then as I see, Philotheus, neither the Vision of the Rider of
the white Horse, where the Beast and the false Prophet are said to be cast
alive into the Lake of fire, nor this last Vial, nor the Vision of the
Wine Press, signify the destruction of the Persons of the Antichristian
Kingdom, but only the abolishing of their Power, and the despoiling them of
their Honors and Dignities, and of their Emoluments thereon depending.


Philoth. What Wars in this great Earthquake there may be whereby the great
City is said to be divided into three parts, (according to the intimation of
the external letter) I know not. But that is a thing the Spirit of God least
intimates in the Apocalyptick Visions. Nor does that phrase (...) necessarily
imply a diruption of the City into three parts, but may only signify that the
parts of the City were three. That mighty Earthquake at the opening of the
sixth Seal denoted only the downfall of the Pagan Religion. Apoc. 6.12.
Nor may this at the pouring out of the last Vial (though it be said to be an
Earthquake greater then ever any before it) signify any thing more then the
utter demolishing the Babylonish Power and Superstition, that it may rule
nowhere any longer. Nay, the bloody Vision of the Winepress signifies no more
then so, though it glance at Babylon, by reason of the number of the furlongs,
which are applicable to Stato della Chiesa, as Mr. Mede observes. Comment.
Apocalypt. ad cap. 14.
The extinguishing the Pope's Power there, rather then the slaughtering of his
Armies, is signified thereby.


Philop. But that number is as well appliable to the Holy Land, as the same
Writer observes.


Philoth. Be it so, Philopolis: then may the Vision bear two faces, the one
respecting the Roman Church, the other the people of the Jews: the first
affording a sense Political, as I have already hinted, the other a sense more
Mystical.


Philop. As what, I beseech you, Philotheus?


Philoth. It signifies the power of the Passion of Christ on the converted Jews
to the mortifying all sin and wickedness in them, and to the making of their
Conversion and Repentance have its perfect work to the utter subduing of the
mystical Edom in them, and the letting out his blood plentifully, according to
that Prophecy in Zachary, Zach. 12.10, 11.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will pour upon the house of
David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and
supplication, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced; and they
shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him as one is in bitterness for his firstborn. In that day
shall there be a great mourning, as the mourning of Hadad-rimmon in the valley
of Megiddon.


Philop. For ought I know, Philotheus, these Mystical senses may be also
meant, for they plainly have their usefulness.


Euist. And this Application of that passage in Zachary will gain the more
credibility, if we could, with Capellus and other Critics, allow Armageddon to
be the same place that Megiddon there mentioned.


Philop. Let the Critics decide that controversy, Euistor. In the mean time I
am hugely solicitous, if there be no considerable personal destruction of the
Antichristian party, what will become of them after the last Vial.


Philoth. Their condition will be much-what such as the dispersed Jews was
after their denying the Messiah at his first coming. So upon this second coming
of Christ, an obstinate and confirmed Ignorance will fall upon this people of
Babylon, after their place is taken from them and their Nation dispersed; they
will live in resolved Error, Superstition and Wickedness; they will be so
stricken with Blindness, that they will not be able to find entrance into the
Holy City. But that will be fulfilled upon them then (as well as on the rest
that stand out) in the most ample and distinct sense, Apoc. 22.15.
Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whatsoever loves and makes a Lie.


Cuph. I perceive by this upshot of things, that the Apocalypse is not so
bloody and boisterous a Book as I have heard some to represent it to be, but
that there is a Genius in it more kind and humane, not exhorting to spill
blood in way of Revenge merely, (though I confess the Antichristian Party has
been as savagely bloody as the Red Dragon himself, the old Roman persecutive
Paganism) but simply by way of Defense, as I understood in the third Vial.
Methinks it is so harmless a Writing, and so full of mavelous pretty
phancies, (like Platonism) and unexpected reflections of one thing upon another,
that it would invite any one to endeavor to understand the meaning of it for
the mere pleasure sake.


Sophr. I hope then, Cuphophron, that your self will bend your studies that way
in due time.


Cuph. After I have read over Des Carts his Principia, his Dioptricks, Method
and Meteors once or twice more, much may be, Sophron.


Sophr. Why, that will not take you so long a time.


Cuph. It may be not. But I must also run over all his Volumes of Epistles
first, and likewise the delicious Dialogues of Plato, and be fully Master of
his Timaeus, but of his Parmenides especially, (that is a notable Metaphysicall
piece, O Sophron:) and then it is likely at spare hours I may see what St. John,
the beloved Disciple of Jesus, says in his Apocalypse. This will take up some
time.


Philop. But I have a more eager appetite after these Mysteries, O Cuphophron,
and therefore must rudely interpose, and desire Philotheus to proceed, that we
may lose no time in our present affair. I am very well satisfied, Philotheus,
with your Exposition of the seven Vials: and though I think it very hard for
any mortal eye by virtue of these Visions to see the futurity of things in
their perfect Circumstances, without all mistake or defect; yet methinks what
you say hangs so handsomely together, that this instruction may at least convey
as much truth as Anatomicall Pictures do to him that has not with his own eyes
seen an Anatomy.


Philoth. I hope so, Philopolis.


Philop. The future Glory of the Church after the utter Destruction of Babylon.
Wherefore, since we are got so successfully thus far, I pray you, Philotheus,
let us go on to the other part, The glorious state of the Kingdom of Christ
after the utter Destruction of Babylon: For first I would have you to describe
this glorious state wherein it consists; then declare the Grounds of your
belief why you think any such thing will be; thirdly, What Signs or Forerunners
there will be of this glorious appearance; fourthly, Whether there be any Means
that the present Kingdom of Christ may make use of for the accelerating this
excellent state of the Church, and what they are; fifthly and lastly, How long
this happy state will be, and what the condition of the Church to the close of
the World.


Philoth. These are very great Questions, Philopolis; but I shall endeavor to
give you what satisfaction I can. But being so many, (as I did aforehand
divine) time, you know, will not permit me to be over-copious: otherwise it
were easy to draw a very large description of this future state of the Church
from innumerable passages of the Holy Scripture. What can be a more glorious or
desirable state of the Church of Christ then that described by Isay chapter 11. v.
4, etc? where speaking of Christ's Reign, With righteousness, says he, shall
he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the Earth: and he
shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his
loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. The Wolf also shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf and the
young Lion and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them. The
sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child put his
hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy on all my holy
Mountain: For the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea.


Philop. This is an excellent state of the Church indeed, Philotheus.


Sophr. Psalm. 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God.


Philoth. Isa. 2.2, etc.
Again chap. 2. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain
of the Lord's House shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. And many people
shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the
House of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk
in his paths. For out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. And he shall judge amongst the Nations, and rebuke many people:
and they shall beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. O house of Jacob, (will the Nations say) come ye, and
let us walk in the light of the Lord.


Sophr. Like that concerning the new Jerusalem in the Apocalypse, And the
Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it, Apoc. 21.24.
and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory unto it.


Philoth. But that of the Apocalypse seems more expressly to allude to that of
the 60th of Isay; Ver. 1, etc.
Arise, O Sion, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee. For behold the darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross
darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising. And at the latter end of that Chapter, The Sun shall
be no more thy light by day, Ver. 19, 21, 22.
neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee; but the Lord shall
be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy people also shall
be all righteous, they shall inherit the Land for ever, the Branch of my
planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one shall
become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation. I the Lord will hasten it
in its time.


Sophr. I believe to this time also may belong that of Isay 30. Isa. 30.26.
Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the
Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their
wound. As also that of Zachary, Zach. 12.8.
In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is
feeble amongst them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall
be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them.


Euist. The Hebrew has it, (...). Where Drusius renders (...) sicut Dii,
understanding thereby Angels.


Bath. John 1.11.
As it is said in St. John, that to as many as believed on him he gave power to
become the sons of God. And our Savior, Matt. 11.11.
though he declared, that among them that were born of women there had not
risen a greater then John the Baptist; yet notwithstanding, says he, he that
is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then he.


Philoth. That is a shrewd Note of Bathynous his upon the Testimony of our
Savior touching John, and such as should urge a man to search deep into his
own Conscience, as well as it will instruct him how little hitherto there has
been of the Kingdom of God in the World. But in the mean time, Philopolis, I
think it is pretty plain already what in the general the state of the Church
will be in those glorious Times we speak of, viz. That there will be spiritual
Strength and Righteousness and Peace and Joy and Security from Wars within the
Church, and from any Persecution of God's people.

This for the Quality of the Church. The Extent thereof.
But for its Extent, it is insinuated that it will be exceeding large, as if it
would spread over the face of the whole Earth. Isa. 11.9.
For it is said, The Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea: and that is far and wide. And again, that the Mountain of
the Lord's House shall be established on the top of the mountains, Chap. 2.2.
and that all Nations shall flow unto it. Also in that expression, A little one
shall become a thousand, Chap. 60.22.
and a small one a strong Nation, etc. To which you may add what is foretold
by Daniel chap. 2.32. And the Stone that smote the Image became a great
Mountain, and filled the whole Earth. And again, chap. 7.26. But the Judgment
shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and destroy it to
the end. And the Kingdom and Dominion and the greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High,
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and
obey him. Accordingly as those voices in Heaven do declare upon the sounding of
the seventh Trumpet, Apoc. 11.15.
The Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever and ever.


Philop. These things, Philotheus, in the general are very plain and clear. But
are there not more particular Prefigurations in the Prophetical Writings
touching the state of the Church you now discourse of? Will the one and
twentieth Chapter of the Apocalypse afford no more Particularities then thus?


Philoth. Probably it may, A more particular description of the future state of
the Church out of the Apocalypse.
Philopolis. What you can recall to mind, I pray you propound.


Philop. More comes to my mind then is needful. I will omit therefore those
passages which import but the same things you observed out of the old Prophets;
The Righteousness and Purity of that Holy City there described, implied in the
exclusion of every thing that defiles, and figured out by those precious
Stones and pure transparent Gold; and in that all tears are said to be wiped
from their eyes, Apoc. 21.4.
it is an intimation of Peace and security from Persecution: And all the whole
description of it is so full of Glory and Light and Joy, that no man can miss
of that character. But I would ask you, Philotheus, the meaning of other
passages: as, Why this Holy City is called the new Jerusalem: Ver. 2.
Why said to come from Heaven: Why said to have twelve Gates with the names of
the twelve Tribes of Israel thereon; Ver. 12.
and why the Wall of the City to have twelve Foundations, Ver. 14.
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb: Why the City is said
to be measured with a golden Reed; Ver. 15.
and why found to be twelve thousand Furlongs, Ver. 16, 17
and the Wall an hundred forty four Cubits: What also is the meaning of that
saying, Ver. 3.
Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men; and yet that there was seen no
Temple there, Ver. 22.
because the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it: and again,
What the genuine sense of that sixth verse, And he that sat upon the Throne
said, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. I will give
unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely: And
lastly of the last verse, And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing
that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination or makes a Lie, but they
that are written in the Lamb's Book of Life.


Philoth. You have congested a number of things together, Philopolis; but
however I shall return answer to them as orderly and as briefly as I can. I
conceive therefore, to begin with the first, that the City which John saw is
called the new Jerusalem in counterdistinction to that old Jerusalem where our
Lord was crucified, Apoc. 11.8.
whether understood literally or typically; as also because its Citizens have
put on the new man, Ephesians. 4.24.
which is framed according to Righteousness and true Holiness, because they are
the sons of the new Birth, or new Creation of God. But it is said to come down
from Heaven in such a sense as the Doctrine of John is said to be from Heaven:
Matt. 21.25.
and agreeably to that passage in the Apostle, that the Jerusalem that is above
is free, Gal. 4.26.
which is the Mother of us all. That actual City of God consisting of Saints
and Angels in Heaven, this new Jerusalem which St. John describes being so like
to them in Purity and Holiness, it is therefore said to descend from Heaven, as
being a Copy or Transcript of that Heavenly Perfection. To all which you may
add, that what the Prophets have seen in Heavenly Visions touching this City,
it being thus at last accomplished upon Earth, it is therefore said to be a
City descended from Heaven.

And this is that very City Ezekiel saw, Ezekiel. 48.31.
of which he says, And the Gates of the City shall be after the names of the
Tribes of Israel; three gates Northward, one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah,
one gate of Levi; and so of the rest, three gates of a side, in all twelve
gates; as it is said in St. John's Vision, that the City had twelve Gates, and
the names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel written thereon. This
among other things intimates, that Ezekiel's City and this of the Apocalypse is
all one City. And in that the Apostles Names are said to be writ on the twelve
Foundations of the Wall, that shows, jointly considered with the other, that
Ezekiel's Prophecy must have its completion in the Jews Conversion to
Christianity, viz. when Jew and Gentile are gathered together under one Head,
Christ Jesus, and become of one Faith and one Church, which is this Holy City.
But the Apostles Names are said to be in the Foundations of the Wall, because
their Doctrine is the Foundation of the Church into which the Jews are to be
graffed, and through that Mercy that is communicated to the Christians may also
find mercy at that day.

This comparing the Church to a Building is very usual in Scripture. St. Peter
tells the Believers, 1 Pet. 2.5.
that they as living stones are built up a spiritual House. And St. Paul to the
Ephesians, Now therefore you are no more strangers and foreiners, Ephesians. 2.19,
etc.
but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; and are built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief corner stone: In whom all the building fitly framed together grows
into an holy Temple in the Lord; In whom you are also builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. And in this is that expression fulfilled,
Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men. And the name of Ezekiel's City is
also Jehovah shammah, Ezekiel. 48.35.
The Lord is there. And yet there is no material Tabernacle nor Temple where he
might be conceived to rest him, and toward which the people should worship; But
the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple thereof: that is to say, In
this new Jerusalem there will be no visible Fabric toward which men will
affect to worship, but with bended knees and pure hearts, and hands and eyes
lift up to Heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, shall men
worship the Father in spirit and in truth. Joh. 4.23.



Philop. And yet God says to Ezekiel, before that accurate description of the
Temple and City and all the Judicial Ordinances, Ezekiel. 43.10.
Thou son of man, show the House to the house of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the Pattern. This seems to be
quite contrary to this new Jerusalem described by St. John.


Philoth. The summarie sense of that accurate description of the Judicial
Oeconomie in Ezekiel is only this, (interpreted plainly by St. John) That when
all the glory and exactness of the Judicial Dispensation is set off to the
utmost, the measuring of the Pattern, the matching and fulfilling of it is that
state of Christianity which will appear after the effusion of the seven Vials,
when Jew and Gentile become one Church, one holy Temple and City of God. Which
spiritual meaning betrays it self even in Ezekiel's own description of things.
For what other sense then a Mystical one can be made of the holy waters
issuing out of the Sanctuary in Ezekiel. 47.1 and 12.
the form of a mighty River, and of the Trees bringing forth fruit according to
their months, the fruit whereof should be for meat, and the leaves for
medicine? Is not this perfectly answering to that River of Water of life, Apoc.
22.1, 2.
clear as crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb, and to
the Tree of life on either side of the River, yielding her fruit every month,
whose leaves also are said to be for the healing of the Nations?


Philop. I must confess it is exceeding probable.


Philoth. Now they being one and the same Vision as to the Object of their
Prediction, the new Jerusalem and the River and the Trees being mystically to
be understood, Ezekiel's Vision also is to be mystically understood.


Philop. As for St. John's Vision, methinks it is a mavelous childish conceit
to expound it literally: as if there should be a City made of diaphanous Gold,
the Wall of precious Stones, and the Gates of Pearl.


Philoth. And yet methinks this is more mavelous, That the City should be as
a Cube, Apoc. 21.16.
as high as it is broad or long. And yet it is so declared; and twelve thousand
furlongs is the Cubical measure thereof.


Philop. What then is the meaning of that passage, I pray you, Philotheus?


Philoth. I think two things are hinted thereby. The one I have noted already,
That this City cannot be understood literally. The other is what was intimated
before by the names of the Apostles. This solid Cube twelve thousand signifies
that this City will be wholly and entirely Apostolical in Life and Doctrine
and Discipline: The square Root also of the measure of the Wall 144 Cubits
intimating the same Apostolicalness of Dispensation. For the saying a hundred
forty four Cubits is the measure of the Wall, Apoc. 21.17.
implies that it is 12 cubits high and 12 cubits broad; nor could the
intimation reach any farther, speaking suitably to the nature of a City wall.
For what kind of City must that be the compass of whose Wall is but 144 Cubits?


Philop. Some say, Philotheus, that the Root of that Cube you mentioned being
extracted, and so the Perimeter of this City S. John describes discovered, it
is found to be the same in a manner with the Perimeter of that City Ezekiel
describes. Ezekiel. 48.35.
What does that signify; think you?


Philoth. I know not what else it should signify, but that these two Visions
aim at the same thing, and that the meaning of that also in Ezekiel is
spiritual: and that those Prophetic Figures that strike the fancy and the
flesh are to be fulfilled in the dispensation of the Spirit, which the whole
Judicial Economy seals to as a Type to the thing typified. And from hence is
to be interpreted that sixth verse, And he that sat on the Throne said, It is
done. All is finished now: Now we are come to the Dispensation of the Spirit,
all is fulfilled. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. I began with
that Mosaicall Oeconomie which consists most-what in Figures and carnal
Formalities, which was in a manner revived again in an exterior Christianity:
but this oldness of the Letter is to be done away, and all shall be ended and
accomplished in the dispensation of the Spirit, and by the real Renovation of
the humane nature into the new Creature, the living Image of God; according as
it is written, And he that sat on the Throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. These are the days in which the Lord has promised that he will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah, Jer. 31.31, 33,
34
namely, that he will put his Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts; so that they shall teach no more every man his neighbor and every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord: For they shall know me from the least of
them to the greatest. Apoc. 22.4.
For, as S. John says, they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their
foreheads: According as our Savior has foretold, Matt. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. All which denotes the
Dispensation of the Spirit. According as Ezekiel also witnesses of these Times,
Neither will I hide my face any more from them: Ezekiel. 39.29.
for I have poured out my Spirit on the house of Israel, says the Lord. This
therefore is the meaning of that passage in the sixth verse, Apoc. 21.6.
And I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of Life
freely, viz. I will freely communicate unto him the power of my Spirit.
According as Isay likewise has foretold, Isa. 44.3.
For I will pour water on him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground:
and I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring.
Whence I should interpret the crystalline River S. John mentions of external
Prosperity also, Apoc. 22.1.
the Joy and Peace and Security of the Church. (...).
To all which you may add that our Savior compares the Spirit to living
waters. John 7.38.



Philop. I remember it very well.


Philoth. And now for that last verse, Philopolis, I see little difficulty in
it. Abomination, (...), it usully signifies an Idol. And the sense, I conceive,
is, That all Idolaters and Impostours or Liars in any sense will be excluded
the Holy City, nothing being admitted there but Truth and Simplicity of Life;
only those that are written in the Book of Life of the Lamb.


Philop. I, what is the meaning of that, Philotheus?


Philoth. Only the Elect of God.


Bath. It is much that such an innumerable company of Souls should be all of
the number of the Elect; such as of whom it is said, Jer. 1.5.
I sanctified thee from the womb, and knew thee before thou wast born.


Philoth. I call all Elect that upon the privilege of their new Birth or the
retaining of the Divine Life have their names enrolled, as Citizens of the new
Jerusalem, in the Book of Life of the Lamb.


Philop. A sober Interpretation. And now, Philotheus, I warrant you, you think
you have run through all the Particulars I proposed.


Philoth. Why? have I omitted any of them, Philopolis?


Philop. The Angel's measuring the City with a golden Reed, what the meaning
thereof.
Only one, but that a main one, I think, viz. Why the Angel is said to measure
the City here with a golden Reed, whenas S. John is said to measure the Temple
of God and the Altar, and them that worship therein, simply with a Reed.


Philoth. This is well recovered, Philopolis. For it is in my apprehension a
notable testimony of the transcendent condition of the new Jerusalem even above
those Times of the Church which were accounted symmetral, viz. the first four
hundred years or thereabout. For in that the Church was then measured by a man,
Apoc. 11.1.
but this new state of things by an Angel; that simply with a Reed, Apoc.
21.25, 17.
this with a golden Reed; it implies that this new state of things will as much
surpass that state (though the best the Church has yet been in) as Angels do
Men, and a golden Reed an ordinary combustible one. Assuredly there was
something in thosedays (though much better then, then when the Church did
grossly apostatize) that will not abide the fire, but consume into smoke and
vanish: But all in this new Creation is like the Measure it is measured with,
((...), as Aristotle somewhere speaks,) such as will abide the fire without
wasting. Thy word is very pure, says the Psalmist, Psalm 119. And again, Psalm.
12. The words of the Lord are pure words, even as the silver that is tried from
the earth, and purified seven times in the fire. It is therefore the precious
Word of God or pure Law of God (which David esteems above thousands of gold and
silver) which is this golden Reed to which the new Jerusalem is commensurate.
Psalm 119.72.
Nothing is retained as having an authentic stamp upon it in this new
Dispensation, but what is plainly agreeable to the Word of God. 1 Cor. 3.12.
All the hay and stubble of humane Traditions and Institutions will be burnt
up, and the pure and Apostolic Doctrine and Discipline will be the sole
Measure of all. So that the measuring of the City with a golden Reed, and the
hundred forty four Cubits, and the twelve thousand Furlongs, end all in this
sense, That the Constitution of things then will be purely Apostolical,
squared all by that Doctrine, by that Spirit which is the eternal Spirit of
God, the Fountain of all holy Truth and Divine Reason.


Philop. Indeed, Philotheus, these Interpretations of yours seem to me very
natural. But are there no farther Characters of this excellent state of the
Church in other Visions or Prophecies?


Philoth. Several passages of the Mercavah expounded, or the Vision of
Cherubims seen by Ezekiel.
There are, Philopolis, but it were an endless thing to pursue all. And yet I
cannot abstain from giving you some Intimations from Ezekiel's Vision of the
four Cherubims or Chariot of God; with which the Throne of God in Heaven
amongst the four Beasts seen by S. John has no small correspondency. For this
you are to understand, Philopolis, that the great purpose of that early-begun
and long-continued Negotiation of the Son of God with us terrestrial Creatures
has been the enlarging the Kingdom of God even to these earthly Regions, that
the Kingdom of Heaven may be also upon Earth, perfectly corresponding to the
Heavenly pattern thereof. And this is that which we are taught to pray for by
our Savior, Thy Kingdom come, that is to say, Thy will be done on Earth as it
is in Heaven, namely, by his holy Angels. And therefore the ultimate end of the
Dispensations of Divine Providence is, as I noted from the Angel's measuring
the new Jerusalem, to reduce the Church to an Angelical state or condition,
that it may answer that Heavenly Pattern in the Visions of God.


Philop. I do not yet well understand you, Philotheus.


Philoth. But you will do, Philopolis, if you do but attend to the orderly
process of my discourse. I say therefore in the first place, that the Vision of
the Cherubim or Chariot of God seen by Ezekiel (but not first by him, Ezekiel. 1.4.
for I doubt not but the same appeared also to Moses and Aaron on the Mount)
Exodus 24.10.
is the Pattern of the Angelical Polity over which God immediately rules.
Psalm 68.17.
The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels; and the
Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place. Now the great design of all
is, that in the fullness of time the Church upon Earth may be his Chariot as
fully and commandingly as the Angelical Orders in Heaven.


Philop. Why, how fully is that, Philotheus?


Philoth. That, methinks, the Vision of Ezekiel does lively describe; though I
will not omit other observables in my brief passage through the Vision, and yet
think it needless to touch upon all. Ezekiel. 1.4.
I looked, says he, and behold, a Whirlwinde came out of the North, a great
cloud and a fire enfolding it self, and a brightness about it, and out of the
midst thereof as the color of Amber, out of the midst of the fire. This color
of Amber out of the midst of the fire I cannot but parallel to that description
of the new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21*18.
And the City was pure Gold, like unto transparent glass. Think with your self
how near in resemblance, Philopolis, transparent Gold and Amber are one to
another.


Philop. Very like one another surely. But what is the meaning thereof,
Philotheus?


Philoth. The fire and the light is the Spirit thoroughly penetrating and
possessing this pure amber-like or transparent Gold; as Iron it self looks in a
manner transparent when it is ferrum candens, which they ordinarily call
red-hot. Isa. 33.14*
Who shall dwell with devouring fire? who shall dwell with everlasting burnings?


Philop. Pure Gold certainly, (though as transparent as Amber) and such as has
lost all its Dross. They must be of a pure Angelical nature indeed: For God is
a consuming fire to whatever is contrary to his own Holiness. Deuteronomy. 4.24.



Philoth. Wherefore there being nothing to resist in this Cherubick Chariot of
God, they are perfectly obedient to his Will, and he has an absolute empire
over them; they are wholly guided by his Spirit: as is also intimated in the
Vision more then once. Ezekiel. 1.12.
And they went every one straight forward; whither the Spirit was to go, they
went. And in that it is said, they went straight forward, and that they
returned not when they went, this signifies the peremptory and irresistible
progress of Divine Providence administered by his Angelical forces. Ver. 18.
For in that the wheels of his Cherubick Chariot are said to be full of eyes, I
conceive this is meant thereby, That the Circuits and Periods of times and Ages
are carried by a special Providence of God, who oversees all things. And
whereas it is said, Ver. 19.
And when the living Creatures went, the Wheels went by them; and when the
living Creatures were lift up from the earth, the Wheels were lift up; this
signifies the Adnexion of the Dispensations and Periods of times to the
Ministry of the Angelical Hosts, and that they spirit, actuate and animate all
such Circuits and Periods. The matter is by the decree of the Watchers, Dan.
4.17.
and the demand by the word of the holy ones.


Euist. I had thought, Philotheus, that these Wheels with eyes might have been
the starry Heavens turned about by the Intelligences.


Philoth. That Is a phancie as far dissonant from the ancient wisdom of the
Jews as Falsehood is from Truth.


Euist. Why, Philotheus, Jonathan Ben Vzziel is expressly of this opinion, as
you may see in Moses Aegyptius his More Nevochim. Part. 3. c. 4.
And he brings no small reasons for it. For he shows how in the repeated
Narration of the Vision a Wheel is called a Globe or Sphere, Ezekiel. 10.13.
which makes him always render Ophannim by Galgallim. Wherefore to have a
Sphere in a Sphere, (as it will then run) what can be more significative of the
celestial Orbs? This is very notable. Besides that they are said to have eyes,
(which answer to the Stars) and their color to be (...), (as the Seventy also
translate it) which the Latin renders ut visio Maris, which is a caeruleous
color correspondent to that of the Heavens.


Philoth. This I confess, Euistor, besides the authority of the Rabbi, bears in
it self a special prettiness with it: But it has no force nor solidity at all.
For though (...) signify a globe or sphere, yet it signifies a wheel also, and
therefore is interpretable in that same sense that (...) is, viz. a wheel.
Besides that one wheel is said to be on the Earth; Ezekiel. 1.15.
but no celestial Orb is on the Earth. And all the Wheels, for ought I know,
may be intimated by that one Wheel; and by the Earth, all the terrestrial
Regions of the Universe. For all the four Cherubims or Animals are said also to
be but one. Ezekiel. 10.15.
And what this means in the Cabbalisticall style is easy enough to conjecture:
And that there may be a wheel in a wheel in such a sense as Ben Vzziel would
have a globe in a globe. There are lesser and bigger Circuits of Providence in
humane affairs, the one surrounding the other, and the Completions of the
lesser Circuits are antecedaneous to those of the greater. Which is of notable
observation in the Church of God, and in the fulfilling of Types and
Prophecies. And those of the farthest reach and largest Compass are those
Wheels that are so dreadful and stupendous for their vastness, Ezekiel. 1.18.
as the Vision describes them. And such is that large voluminous Period of
Providence, which, beginning with the first Fiat Lux in Genesis, ends not till
the last Thunderclap intimated in the Revelation.

And whereas the color of the Wheel is said to be tanquam visio Maris, that
ratifies our former Exposition, that those Wheels are the Circumvolutions of
Providence, and Periods of Kingdoms and People and Nations, which the
Prophetic style compares to the Sea.

And lastly, in that they are said to be full of eyes, it denotes the
assistence of the Angelical Orders in humane affairs, (their intermingling
themselves and meddling with them) they being those numerous eyes of Providence
watching over the terrestrial Regions, and carrying all things on according to
their own purpose.

(...).


Cuph. These Wheels of Ezekiel have made my mind all this while run upon the
Wheel of Fortune, that vulgar expression so often in men's mouths now-adays.


Euist. Not only now-adays, O Cuphophron, Clio, cap. 207.
but as ancient as Herodotus, in whom this is the very language of Croesus to
King Cyrus, in his speech touching his encountering with Tomyris Queen of the
Massagetae; (...).


Cuph. This Conceit of the Wheel of Fortune, I perceive, is far more ancient
then I was aware of.


Philoth. But the Conceit being so early and so common, it is an indication how
naturally expressive it is of the thing, and therefore a farther ratification
of the easiness and naturalness of our exposition of that part of the Vision,
which makes these Wheels the periodicall Circumvolutions of humane Affairs. But
here is the difference betwixt this Divine Vision and that profane History,
that in the one it is the Wheel of Providence, or of Divine Fate, in the other
the Wheel of Fortune, if (...) must needs imply that it is (...). But this
only by the bye.

The main thing to be urged against Ben Vzziel's exposition of the Wheels is,
that it implies a false systeme of the World. Besides, the meaning of Ezekiel's
Mercavah is not Physical, but Moral, Spiritual, or Divino-politicall, if I may
so speak.


Philop. I pray you then hold on your Interpretation, Philotheus, in that
sense, and give us some more Remarks upon this Vision. What say you to the
number and form of the Cherubims, and the Man enthroned on this Cherubick
Chariot?


Philoth. As for the number of the Cherubims, which is four, I conceive it
intimates the universal Comprehension of the Angelical Orders, or of those at
least that are ministering Spirits. For the Pythagorick (...) is comprehended in
the Tetractys. And in that their faces are said to be four, it seems to
signify so many sorts of natures or offices in this Angelical Polity; which
it may be are more grossly distinguishable in the Polities of men, and with an
eye whereunto this Angelical Type perhaps has been exhibited to Prophets and
holy men of God. I conceive therefore that the four distinct Faces of a Lion,
Man, Ox and Eagle, signify those four main parts that make up their Polity,
the Lion the Military part, the Man all that part employed about the hearing of
Causes and peaceable administration of Justice, the Ox the Laboring part,
whether in Agriculture or what other useful employment in things done by the
hand, and the Eagle the Sacerdotal and Philosophical part, the Speculative and
Devotionall. This general Quadripartition of Genius's or Employments may not
unfitly be conceived some way to belong to both men and Angels. But every Beast
is said to have all these four Faces, because every Beast is a fourth part of
the whole Comprehension of the Angelical Host, and these sorts are mingled one
with another. Moreover, in that their whole body and their backs and their
hands and their wings were full of eyes, Ezekiel. 10.13.
it signifies that all their strength and activity is guided by Knowledge, and
that they see whither they go and whence, and act not out of blind obedience,
but out of the light of Life. And in that their faces are set all one way,
Ezekiel. 1.9.
it notes that they are without distraction, all of one mind and purpose, as
being one overruled Cherub-chariot of God. Ver. 4.
And that they drive from the North, the Region of darkness and coldness,
toward the South, the signification is obvious. As also why the face of the Man
is placed toward the South in the Van, Ver. 10.
(the Lion on the East Side, the Ox on the West) and the Eagle on the North,
to bring up the Rere. For it seems the Van and the Rere are the two most
honorable places, according to that of Isay, Isa. 52.12.
For ye shall not go out with haste nor go by flight: for the Lord will go
before you, and the God of Israel will be your Rereward. And Man, you know, has
the Sovereignty of all that move on the Earth, as the Eagle of all that fly in
the Air.


Philop. But he is Sovereign over the Fowls of the Air too, Philotheus.


Philoth. He is so, and is the symbol of Righteousness and Peace. And that is
the very nature of the true Man, and the highest perfection in him, and the
Charter whereby he rules over all. 1 John 4.20.
He that says he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a Liar.


Philop. I partly understand you, Philotheus. But have you not forgot to
descant on the feet of the Cherubims as well as on their faces?


Philoth. You say well, Philopolis. I will give you my observation of that
also, though I have already touched upon more things then I intended. Their
feet are said to be like Oxe-feet, Ezekiel. 1.7.
and to sparkle like the color of burnished brass. In that they are said to
resemble burnished brass, it denotes the steady strength and purity of the
Angelical Affections, which the Pythagoreans also compare to Feet. But in that
they are said to be Oxe-feet, it signifies they neither affect nor travel for
that which is useless and unprofitable. Isa. 55.2.
They do not labor for that which satisfies not, nor expend their pains for
that which is not bread. Though each Cherub be said to have the face of an
Eagle, yet none have any other feet but those of an Ox. Which insinuates, that
the most speculative Angels spend not their time in fruitless Subtilties,
though never so high, nor soar up into unedifying Contemplations.


Hyl. All this, methinks, goes off naturally enough, Philotheus: only that of
the Ox resembling that part of the Polity that comprehends Agriculture, and
what other offices that require the labor of the hand, how this can belong to
the Angelical World, unless as they are Presidentiary Powers over such in this
Terrestrial Region, I know not. Wherefore I thought of this conceit while you
was discoursing, that these four faces of an Eagle, a Man, a Lion, and Ox, may
signify the four Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance.


Philoth. And it was not thought of much amiss, Hylobares. I Will assure you this
is an early specimen of your towardliness in these kind of Contemplations.
Only you should have put Sapience for Prudence, the latter being so proper to
Man, and such a concomitant to Justice and Practice of Life, that they, as one
and the same thing, may be both emblematized by the Man. But Sapience, which is
the searcher of the highest or deepest causes of all Justice both to God and
Man, Lib. 2. de Legibus.
(which Cicero rightly derives from the Divine Intellect) is more fitly set out
by the Eagle, who is so strong-sighted as to be able to look upon the Sun, to
which Philo resembles the eternal Mind of God, the (...) Phil. Jud. lib. de
Somniis.
(...), as he calls him. Wherefore the highest or ultimate judgment of the
truth of things is rightly represented by the Eagle, as being able to give
sentence from that eternal Law of Divine Reason.


Sophr. It never came into my head before now why the Standard of Dan bore the
Figure of an Eagle.


Bath. Because Dan signifies Judgment? But I was thinking of something else
that favors Hylobares his conjecture, namely, of that Degree of the Cardinal
Virtues which Plotinus calls Paradigmaticall, which makes the Soul of man
(...), that is to say, in the condition of a pure Angel. Theosophists also
declare that the four Rivers of Paradise signify the four Cardinal Virtues
even in the Intellectual or Angelical world. Which things have not only
Authority but reason on their side, but that it would be too long to unfold it.
So that, so far as I see, Philotheus and Hylobares conjectures touching the
meaning of this quadriform aspect of the Cherubims may both stand together, and
clash no more then an Abstract and Concrete, which make but one Subject.


Philop. I think so too. But indeed I did not hope there could have been drawn
out so many profitable Lessons out of this dark Vision of Ezekiel. But you have
yet said nothing, Philotheus, of him that rides in this Cherubick Chariot, who
has the shape of a Man, Ezekiel. 1.26, 27.
and the color of Amber with circumfulgent fire.


Philoth. That is the Heavenly Humanity of the Son of God. His very Title is
writ in the Amber, I mean in (...), if you read it Cabbalistically. And yet he
is said to be the God of Israel, Ezekiel. 10.20.
and the surrounding Rainbow emblematizes him the God of the whole Universe.
But enquire no farther of these things: I shall proceed to what follows.


Philop. I beseech you do, Philotheus.


Philoth. Now this Type of the state of Perfection in the Church, the time of
Moses being not capable of the truth thereof, yet God thought fit to draw down
the Shadow of it, to beautify the Religion of the Israelites. So that the
Heavenly Type seen only by Prophets and holy men of God was also impressed
upon Earth, and made visible amongst the people of the Jews, who bore this
Figure among them. For they both had material Cherubims in the Dabir, on which
the Eternal Word was conceived to fit and give Oracles, Exodus 25.18, 22.
as he that sat on this Chariot in Ezekiel is said to speak from among living
Cherubims the Prophet saw; Ezekiel. 10.1, 2.
and besides, (which is an admirable correspondency of things) the Throne in
the midst of the four Cherubims in that Chariot answers very plainly to the
Tabernacle in the midst of the four Camps of Israel, Numb. 1.52. and 2.2.
under the Standard of Reuben toward the South, under the Standard of Judah
toward the East, under the Standard of Ephraim toward the West, and under the
Standard of Dan toward the North: the Ensigns also of each Camp (according to
the tradition of the Rabbis) answering to the posture of the faces of these
four Cherubims; the Ensign of Reuben being a Man, An Exposition of the Vision
of the Throne of God in Heaven, the four Beasts and twenty four Elders, seen by
S. John.
the Ensign of Judah a Lion, the Ensign of Ephraim an Ox, and the Ensign of
Dan an Eagle.


Philop. The Correspondence indeed is very admirable.


Philoth. Thus did the people of God in those days bear the Heavenly Type in an
earthly and carnal manner. They did also receive the Law with the appearance of
fire and lightening, as this Cherub-Chariot is also described. But their
Dispensation was not that fiery Law of the Spirit which our Savior at his
coming introduced, who is said to baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire. He
began therefore this true Cherubicall or Angelical Dispensation amongst his
Apostles and Disciples, and it continued in some measure for some time. But
Carnality and Externalness, especially after the Reign of Constantine, quickly
overran all. But however the pattern of Perfection was again recorded in the
Vision of St. John, Apoc. 4.2.
wherein he saw the Throne of God in Heaven, the four and twenty Elders, and
the four Beasts full of eyes. For even in this he was shown also things which
must be hereafter. Ver. 1.
For this is the Heavenly Idea of that state of the Church which will be
actually on Earth when the new Jerusalem descends from Heaven, and the
Tabernacle of God is amongst men, and that he dwells in them by his Spirit and
by his living Presence. Which Community of God's people some conceive may be,
in some sense, represented also by the Sea of glass like unto Crystal before
the Throne, Ver. 6.
as well as by the four Beasts: Because Sea signifies the Collection of people
into one Kingdom: and the fixedness and pellucidity of this Sea may denote the
steddiness and purity of the hearts and consciences of God's people, whom his
Spirit penetrateth and possesses, and the Light of his Presence does comfort
and irradiate, and expells out of them all mistiness and darkness of sin and
error. Their Conflation is as that of Glass, by fire; by the fire of Zeal and
Charity, which has rectified and reduced whatever is foul and opake, but their
purity, solidity and transparency is as that of Crystal.


Philop. This were congruous enough, if Sea were here understood as in the
Prophetic style. For those Interpreters that so understand it look upon it as
a fixed crystalline Sea: But surely this Sea here alludes to the Sea in
Solomon's Temple. 1. King. 7.23.



Philoth. In all likelihood, Philopolis, that is likewise alluded to, Apoc. 4.5.
the seven Lamps being also mentioned. But though we understand this Sea of
Crystal in such a sense as the Sea of brass is meant in the Temple of Solomon,
yet it will again respect the Community of God's people, it being that Sea
wherein they are baptized into one body. It will notwithstanding prove that
effectual Laver of Regeneration, that Baptism of Christ which is with the Holy
Ghost and with Fire. 1 Cor. 12.13.
For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit. And our Savior Christ declares, John 4.14.
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst, but
the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up to
everlasting life. But this he spoke of the Spirit, as it is said elsewhere.
Apoc. 22.4.
And the River of water of Life clear as crystal is said likewise to proceed
out of the Throne of God; as this Sea of glass to stand before it.


Philop. 2 Chronicles. 4.6.
But the brazen Sea of Solomon, O Philotheus, to which this Sea of glass
answers, was for the Priest to wash in.


Philoth. I deny it not. Only remember, Philopolis, that outward washings
profit little, but that it is the Spirit that cleanses. This is the Laver of
the New Birth, whereby we are baptized into one body and into one Spirit and
into one holy Community of Saints, the light of the glorious Presence of God
shining quite through this pure Sea of Crystal. So that this Spirit of
Regeneration and Purification being the same that this Laver or Sea of
crystalline water, and residing in the Saints of God, the Saints of God again
or the pure Church is this Sea, according to the Prophetic style. And the Sea
of Solomon seems to have born the title on purpose to meet with this happy
Allusion at last. I am sure Aretas upon the place says expressly, That Sea
signifies an immense multitude. So that, so far as I see, this Type may bear a
double Allusion; one to the use of Solomon's Sea, the other to the
signification of the name in the Prophetic style.


Philop. Nay, I am of your mind, Philotheus. And you know all true Christians
are a Royal Priesthood; 1 Pet. 2.9.
and no man is washed by the Spirit but drinks in the Spirit: for the Spirit
washes us not without, but within.


Philoth. But mistake me not, Philopolis. I do not mean that the Sea of glass
stands primarily for the Hieroglyphick of God's people; (for the four Beasts
are plainly the Hieroglyphick of that Communialty) but it stands for the Laver
of the Spirit into which the people of God are baptized: Which Laver of the
Spirit is set off by the effects thereof, in that it makes the people of God as
this Sea of glass like unto crystal, the light of the Spirit of Life
penetrating and possessing their pure and pervious hearts and minds, as the
beams of the Sun do the clearest and most transparent Crystal.


Philop. I commend your care and accuracy of judgment, O Philotheus; for you
lose nothing of the usefulness of the Representation, and yet decline that
harshness, as it may here seem, of having one and the same thing represented by
two several Hieroglyphics in one and the same Vision.


Philoth. You understand me aright.


Philop. But I pray you what is the meaning of those seven Lamps of fire
burning before the Throne, Apoc. 4.5.
which are said to be the seven Spirits of God?


Philoth. To omit all conjectures touching the seven last Sephiroth, I shall
only return this answer for the present, That the number Seven need not here
signify Numerically, but Symbolically, denoting the Purity and Immateriality
of those Angels or Spirits that watch over the Church and minister to it, when
that shall be fulfilled in that glorious degree that is foretold, Apoc. 21.3.
The Tabernacle of God is with men. Here the Lamps are distinguishable from the
four Beasts: but in Ezekiel's Cherub-Chariot the living Creatures themselves
are resembled to Lamps, Ezekiel. (...).
because that Vision represented also the actual Kingdom of Angels. But yet
the Beasts here are described almost just in the same manner the Cherubims are
in Ezekiel's Vision, which denotes the Angelicalness of this last and best
state of the Church. The quadriform Genius of those of the Angelical Kingdom
I need not here repeat, the Application is easy. I will only pick out some of
the most useful Observables in this present description, and then go on.

As first, Apoc. 4.6.
That the Beasts are said all of them to be full of eyes before and behind.
Which implies that they look backward and forward, into the History of times
past, and into the Prophecies and Predictions of things to come, and compute in
counsel all possible futurities, the better to manage the present affairs of
Christ's Kingdom, and be provided against every Emergency. For in this
consists all useful and practical wisdom.

Apoc. 4.8.
Secondly, They are said to have six wings: Undoubtedly for that use the
Seraphims are said to make of them in the Prophet Isay, Isay 6.2.
With twain to cover their faces, with twain to cover their feet, and with
twain to fly. Which implies a reverence of the Divine Majesty, an activity and
readiness in his Service, and a carefulness over our Affections, that we walk
in clean paths. For upon the mention of the six wings, all the four Beasts are
said to be full of eyes (...), (as Grotius well and skilfully draws those two
together) without and within. And therefore they with one eye regarding the
outward Objects, and with another eye their own Nature, and so comparing them
together, they will ever behave themselves decorously and becomingly, with due
reverence to what is above them in Dignity and Excellency, and at a due
distance from those things that are unworthy of them and beneath them. They
will not commit any thing unworthy of the excellency of their own nature, nor
admit of any thing repugnant to the innate Light and immutable Principles of an
Intellectual Creature. And therefore, if any such thing be offered them
without, their eyes within will easily discern the Proposer to be either a Fool
or an Impostour.

Thirdly, As the Sea of glass like unto crystal signifies our being baptized
into one holy Community; so the Lightnings and Thunders and Voices over this
collected Body of the Church, the four Beasts, and the twenty four Elders,
signify their joint-Instruction and Guidance by the fiery Law of the Spirit,
in which Dispensation they live. According to that promise of the second
Covenant, Jer. 31.33.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. This is the City which Ezekiel
calls Jehovah shammah; Ezekiel. 48.35.
not for any visible symbolicall Residence of God there, but for the abode of
him in the hearts of men by his Spirit, by which they have one common mind and
one motion: as it is in the Angelical Kingdom in the Cherubims of Ezekiel,
Ezekiel. 1.11, 12.
Their wings touched one another; and whither the Spirit was to go, thither
they went. And the twenty four Elders and the four Beasts be thus of one
spirit. For when the Beasts worship God, Apoc. 4.9, 10.
the twenty four Elders also cast down their Crowns before the Throne,
acknowledging from whom and for whom they reign, even for the manifesting of
the glory and honor and power of God in the Kingdom of his Saints.


Cuph. But, I pray you, Philotheus, how can the Beasts be said never to rest
day nor night, Ver. 8.
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty; and yet the twenty four Elders, as
often as they do thus, to cast their Crowns before the Throne? For one casting
would serve for all, and their Crowns would ever lie before the Throne of their
own heads.


Philoth. These things, O Cuphophron, are by no means to be so grossly
understood. For their never ceasing day nor night from saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, signifies nothing else but a perpetual declaring the Holiness of God, in
whose presence they walk, by the constant purity and holiness of their own
Conversations. (...). And as there is this one continued tenor of Holiness in
the people, so likewise is there one continued correspondency of humble
Devoutness in their Rulers, who live in a perpetual sense of their Office and
Duty, casting down their Crowns before the Throne of God; acknowledging
thereby, that the measure of their Rule and Government ought not to be their
own Interest, but merely the Interest of Christ and his Kingdom; that they
reign wholly through him and for him, and therefore are not to seek themselves.
This is the inward meaning of that external Representation of their worship,
which reaches the inmost life and spirit, and is not a shadow of a shadow.


Philop. This is a sufficient solution of Cuphophron's Quere, Philotheus. But,
I pray you, why are those crowned Elders (being that they wear golden Crowns
like Kings) said to be clothed in white like Priests, Apoc. 4.4.
and why placed next to the Throne of God, and why four and twenty?


Philoth. By their golden Crowns and white Raiment jointly considered, it is
signified, that in their respective Kingdoms all power is in them, as well
Sacerdotal as Secular; that is to say, In all causes, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, they, next to Christ, are supreme Heads in their own Principalities.
And therefore their Thrones (for so they are called in the Original) are placed
next to the Throne of God. That is also a farther Intimation of their
Sacerdotality, in that they are thus placed about the Throne, it seeming to
allude to the Levites pitching their Tents about the Tabernacle. Number. 1.50.
But in that they wear white Raiment, it signifies also their Innocence,
Uprightness and Sanctity, their Sacerdotal Piety and Devotion in their
solicitous Addresses to the Throne of Grace in the behalf of themselves as
Rulers, and of the people committed to their charge. And lastly, they are said
to be four and twenty, 1 Chronicles. 24.4, 18.
it is likely, in some allusion to the distribution of the Courses of the
Priests and Levites into that number: which again shows the Sovereignty of
these Kings in Sacerdotal affairs, as if they were the Princes of these
Divisions. But I must confess, I think that which is mainly aimed at is this,
viz. An intimation that this glorious state of the Church will be then when
Jews and Gentiles are become one Sheepfold; That this is the state of the new
Jerusalem, Apoc. 21.12, 14.
that has the names of the twelve Patriarchs inscribed on her as well as of the
twelve Apostles. This I conceive may be the account of the four and twenty
Elders. For I doubt not but the number here signifies Symbolically, not
Numerically.


Philop. This Interpretation indeed seems to be of more importance, it implying
both the Conversion of the Jews and the Apostolicalness of these Times of the
Church at once.

Well, Philotheus, you have described out of the Prophets an excellent state of
things; which being so eminent that it transcends the power of speech, nor can
be set out according to its due worth by all the words and phrases I am master
of, I will be content to contract it for my memory sake into as few as I can:
which briefly are these; Apostolicalness of Doctrine and Worship, Integrity of
Life, and Security from Persecution for Conscience sake, and from intestine
Wars and Troubles. For thus it will truly become the Kingdom of the Dan. 7.13.
Son of man, whenas the four Kingdoms hitherto have been justly compared to
four ravening and devouring Beasts, 2 Esdr. 13.10, 11, 12.
and such as have been so mad as to tear their own flesh. But this Angelical
Kingdom, as you call it, wherein God's will is done on Earth as it is in
Heaven, is a Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. O
how am I transported with the view of so glorious a prospect! I shall pray, Thy
Kingdom come, with a more peculiar Emphasis, for this day's Instruction,
Philotheus, then ever I have done hitherto in all my life. But that I may do
it with the greater Plerophorie, I pray you proceed to the next Point, and
declare the Grounds of this your so glorious hope.


Philoth. Why, What Grounds of hopes out of Scripture for that glorious state
of the Church to come.
are you at a loss, Philopolis, for the Grounds of this hope, when you have
heard so many Prophecies assuring you of it?


Philop. But who knows, Philotheus, but that they may be conditional, and may
take effect only according to the uncertainty of our will?


Philoth. That implies as if these things depended on our merit. But the great
Affairs of the World, and such as are the chief Objects of Divine Prediction,
do not hang on such weak hindges. There is a Fate assuredly, O Philopolis,
there is a Divine Fate and irresistible Counsel of God Almighty, that, maugre
all that can be done by men or Devils, must take effect in its season. Jer.
2.24.
The wild Ass in the wilderness snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; who can
turn her away? They that seek her will not weary themselves after her: in her
month they shall find her. And David foretells, Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power. Psalm. 110.3. Ezekiel. 37.3.
Son of man, can these bones live? says God to Ezekiel in the Valley of dead
men's bones. But he answered with reverence, O Lord, thou know; insinuating
that it was in his power whether he would make them live or no. But you know
when once God had commissioned the Prophet to prophecy on the dead bones, Ver.
4, 5.
and to say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord: Behold, I
will cause breath to enter into you, and you shall live; the effect did most
certainly follow: For there was a noise and a shaking, Ver. 7, 8.
and the bones came together, bone to his bone; and they were straightway
covered with sinews, flesh and skin. And so when he had said, Ver. 9, 10.
Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain; the breath
came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding
great Army. Was there ever any case more hard and desperate then this?


Philop. I doubt not but God can, if he will, bring up such a glorious state of
things as are prophesied of, but that our demerits may put a stop to it.


Philoth. Such vast Oecumenicall favors as these, Philopolis, are not
dispensed according to our Merits, but according to the free Counsel of God.
Hear what the same Prophet says to the house of Israel: Ezekiel. 36.22, 23.
Thus says the Lord, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for
my holy Name's sake, that I may not be blasphemed amongst the Nations. I will
sanctify my great Name, which is profaned among the Heathen, and the Heathen
shall know that I am the Lord, says the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified
in you before their eyes. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes; and ye
shall keep my Judgments and do them. What think you of this Language,
Philopolis? And there are many such Expressions in the Prophets.


Philop. I must ingenuously confess, that I think that such National or
Oecumenicall Mutations of things for the best do not depend on our Merits or
Free Will. For, so far as I see here, God gives both to will and to do,
according to his own Counsel and the Predictions of his holy Prophets, that
his Providence may not be suspected, nor his Name reproched amongst Unbelievers.


Sophr. The description of the New Covenant in Jeremy is also according to
this tenor. Jer. 31.33, 34.
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.
What? out of any Merits of theirs? No, but merely out of his own good pleasure.
For I will forgive their iniquities, says he, and I will remember their sins
no more.


Bath. The Souls of men at last, for the eternal High-priest's sake, return
into their Sabbatism of spiritual Rest.


Philoth. Besides this, Philopolis, see what a causeless thing this is, thus to
mistrust Divine Providence, who has so steddily and peremptorily carried things
on hitherto according to the Predictions of the Prophets touching the Affairs
of his Church, (as you have heard) all along from the beginning to this very
day. Not to take notice of those things before our Savior's Ascension and his
sending down the Holy Ghost according to promise, Apoc. 6.12.
consider how punctually the six Seals are accomplished, and in the sixth the
Victory of Michael over the Dragon, when under Constantine the Roman Empire
became Christian. An Event out of the reach or ken of any mortal eye to
foresee, only our Savior, the onely-begotten of God, foretold it his
followers in that saying, Fear not, Luke 12.32.
little flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.
Consider also the distinct Accomplishment of the six Trumpets, during the
succession of which (according to Divine foresight and prediction) there was
the Virgin-company, or the Woman in the wilderness, and the mournful
prophetic Witnesses, as well as the two and ten-horned Beasts, and the Whore
of Babylon or the false Prophet: And how in the last Half-time, Apoc. 11.11, 12.
or Half-day, within the blast of the sixth Trumpet, there was a great
Earthquake, and the slain Witnesses rose, and, to the admiration of the
beholders, in despite of all the Persecutions of that Man of Sin, ascended
gloriously into Heaven, by the late Reformation in several Kingdoms and
Principalities. Are not these very great things, O Philopolis?


Philop. They are so indeed, Philotheus.


Philoth. And such as are plainly set down in that admirable Book of Divine
Fate. For it is expressly written, For God has put in their hearts to fulfill
his will, Apoc. 17.17.
and to agree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God
shall be fulfilled; that is to say, till the times be accomplished foretold by
the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 7.25.
till the seventh Semi-time be expiring. Then there will be amongst the ten
Horns those that will hate the Whore, Apoc. 17.16.
and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire, that is, shall abolish the Papal power and Religion in their
Dominions. Which yet was an Event beyond the conceit of all the Papal
Politicians, that Church accounting herself impregnable, and saying in her
heart, Apoc. 18.7.
I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. What? shall God
thus effectually permit the Degeneracy and Apostasy of the Church till a
certain time, and shall he not more irresistibly effect that promised Recovery
of her into Righteousness and Glory? For these great and Oecumenicall Graces,
as I told you before, he dispenses not according to our Merits, but for his own
Name's sake, that his Glory may be known. And how inglorious a thing would it
be, Philopolis, to make so express, so vast, so illustrious and absolute
Promises, and then ex flamma dare fumum, to let all vanish into smoke? Or what
a piece of gross Diffidence and Unthankfulness is it in us, when that he has
unexpectedly fulfilled in a considerable manner that Prediction of the Ruin of
the Papacy already, in the ten Horns hating the Whore, and burning her with
fire, (which is the close of the sixth Trumpet) and that we are proceeded to
the third Vial in the seventh, as I told you, and know, as it were, in what
Longitude and Latitude we are in this Voyage, that we should (seeing the steady
steering of Providence hitherto in the Affairs of the Church from the beginning
to this very day) have any mistrust or doubt but the same Providence will bring
us safely at last to the desired Haven?


Philop. You would almost persuade a man that it is impossible but that it
should be so in the conclusion. But what will you say to those that pretend
that these glorious Promises are fulfilled already? That the glorious Times
predicted by the Prophets have not yet appeared on the face of the Earth.



Philoth. Why, Philopolis, has the Devil, as he is expressly so called, been
laid hold on, bound with a chain, and cast into the bottomless pit, and sealed
up there for the space of a thousand years, since Christ's time? From the
beginning of the Christian Church to Constantine's time did not this old Dragon
fight with Michael in Heaven, Apoc. 12.7.
and was beat and cast down to the Earth not till under the sixth Seal? And
were not the ten bloody Persecutions of the Church during that Battle? And
after Constantine's time, (to say nothing of Julian the Apostate) what a
Torrent of Blood and Contention did the Dragon spew out of his mouth in the
Arian Persecution, Apoc. 12.15.
(to have swept away the Church, if he could) which was not quite extinguished
for about an hundred years or more after it had begun! About three hundred
years after Constantine did that great Impostour Mahomet begin the Saracenicall
Kingdom. How close then think you was the Devil sealed up in his Prison from
deceiving the Nations? Apoc. 20.3.


If we should run through all the six Trumpets, are they not so many
testimonies of the Devil's being still then loose? For who but he raised that
mighty Tempest of Hail mingled with blood and fire under the first Trumpet?
Apoc. 8.7.
I mean that bloody Irruption of the barbarous Nations into the Empire that
wasted all with fire and sword. Both these under Alaricus, and those that after
followed under Radagaisus the Scythian, as also others in the year 406, no man
can imagine what a raging Tempest they were but he that reads the story. The
second Trumpet also how direful a fate did it sound, under which the Empire was
dilacerated into so many Kingdoms, Apoc. 8.8.
upon Alaricus and Gensericus's casting the burning Mountain into the midst of
the Sea? After which, under the third Trumpet, the sorrowful Western
Caesareate, Ver. 10.
compared to a Star or Lamp, but fed with the oil of wormwood, in its sliding
condition drew on along with it much trouble and Calamity, and was in a short
time quite extinct in Augustulus the last Western Emperor, vanquished by
Odoacer the Herule, who thereupon made himself King of Italy.


Euist. But after sixteen years Reign he was overcome and slain by Theodorick
King of the Ostrogothes, who, besides Dalmatia and Rhaetia, which were the
Provinces of Odoacer, added also Sicily to the Kingdom of Italy, and with a
vast expense repaired the Walls and buildings of Rome, administered the Affairs
of his Kingdom with great wisdom and moderation, retained the ancient
Dignities and Offices of the City, as Consuls, Senate, and other known
Magistracies of Rome, insomuch that, bating the infamy of her having been so
sadly burnt and spoiled, she seemed plainly to have recovered her ancient
splendor and glory.


Philoth. You say true, Euistor. But this state of things lasted but a few
successions of those Kings of Italy, and was quite blown away at the blast of
the fourth Trumpet. Apoc. 8.12.
For upon the War that Justinian raised against them under the conduct first of
Belisarius, and after of Narses, the Consulship and Senate and other Orders of
Magistracy were quite abolished, and the City governed by a Duke substituted by
the Exarchs of Ravenna, to whom Rome was also made Tributarie. Thus were their
Sun and Moon and Stars smitten, and the glory of their City turned into
baseness and Obscurity. And lastly, what infinite Devastations the Locusts, C.
9. ver. 1.
(that is, the Saracens) under the fifth Trumpet, Ver. 14.
and the Euphratean Horsemen, (that is, the Turks) under the sixth, (both which
are called Wo-Trumpets) did upon the Empire, both the Title of the Trumpets and
the description of the Visions do abundantly declare. So that certainly, all
being so full of Wars and bloodshed (and that in the Empire that was
denominated Christian, and looked upon as the visible Kingdom of Christ,)
through all the first six Trumpets, the Devil, as he is a Murderer, could not
be then sealed up in his Prison. And if you consider how the reign of the
two-horned Beast or false Prophet synchronizes with these six Trumpets, you
must acknowledge him also loose as an Impostour, not only deceiving the
Nations, but that people which is called the Church of Christ.


Philop. This to me, O Philotheus, is very demonstrative, that the Millennium
wherein that old Serpent, Apoc. 20.3.
the Devil and Satan, is said to be bound, has not yet begun upon Earth. And
therefore I must ingenuously confess, that nothing is so plain according to
Scripture, as that the glorious Times there predicted and so described in those
places you have produced are yet to come. Nothing is more demonstrable out of
Scripture then this. But are there not also Arguments of a lower allay that
Reason and prudent Sagacity may suggest?


Philoth. XIV. What grounds in Reason for the coming of those glorious Times.
I will tell you rather, O Philopolis, what Life and Experience does suggest. To
me, I must confess, it is a wonder the World is no better then it is, Vice and
Wickedness to my sense seeming so harshly repugnant to humane Nature, and
Virtue and Righteousness so harmoniously agreeable thereunto. For this
Rectitude of spirit that belongs to the true Israel of God is the possession of
so perfect Pleasure and Happiness, that the Soul of man feels it to be her
peculiar Satisfaction; and that the state of Vice and Sin is a state of
Diseasement and Unnaturalness, not only plainly and demonstratively repugnant
to right Reason, but most hideously and harshly grating against that inmost,
and most Divine and delicious sense of the Soul, which is the Repullulation of
the pure Love, and is the Excitation of the Life of God in the humane Nature,
whereby we have a natural delight in all the ways of Goodness, Purity and
Righteousness. This is the natural Sanity of the Soul; the contrary her
Disease: this her state of Sobriety; the other a mere fit of Drunkenness: And
therefore methinks the World should not continue in it for ever, but that even
the Misery and Confusion of this drunken state should forcibly awaken them at
length to follow Peace and Righteousness. Which time, methinks, the Prophet
Isay may seem to point at, Isa. 24.18, etc.
where he says, The windows from on high are opened, and the foundations of
the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean
dissolved, the Earth is moved exceedingly. The Earth shall move to and fro like
a Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage, and the transgression thereof
shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again. And it shall
come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the Host of the high ones
that are on high, and the Kings of the Earth upon the Earth. (This, I conceive,
Philopolis, is under the effusion of the last Vial.) Then the Moon shall be
confounded and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Sion and in Jerusalem and before his Ancients gloriously: that is to say, Apoc.
4.4.
in the new Jerusalem, before the four and twenty Elders in white Raiment, and
with golden Crowns on their heads. And in this Confusion the Earth will be, not
only upon the account of their Wickedness, but Ignorance also and gross
Errors in Religion. For mankind are held down in these things by an hard
violence to their own Reason and Nature, as well in Popery as Turcism and
Paganism, those Religions being not only groundless, but foolishly fabulous
and contradictious to all sound Reason. But when the windows from on high shall
be opened upon them, and the heavenly Grace and Truth showred down, and the
pure Light of the Gospel let in upon them, the Foundations of the Earth shall
shake under them, and they will find the falseness and unstableness of the
Fundamental Frauds and Lies of men, which shall utterly perish, and all those
that cleave to them.

This therefore, Philopolis, by way of Prudence and Sagacity may be presumed,
That those days having shone upon us that Daniel has foretold, when many shall
run to and fro, Dan. 12.4.
and Knowledge shall be increased, this liberty of searching after Truth, and
the success of finding it, will contribute very much to the ruin and
subversion of those stately Structures of Lies which Superstition or false
Policy has so magnificently built up, and would have all men to bow to as to
the golden Image Nebuchadnezzar had set up. But that Illustrious Heroes on the
white Horse, Apoc. 19.11, 13.
the Word of God, and right Reason, will trample this Image under foot. And the
meaning of the Scripture, even in the Prophetical passages thereof, will be so
plainly understood, against Turcism, Papism, Paganism, and Judaism, or
whatever Religion in the world or Irreligion, even against Atheism it self,
that I am persuaded this very Advantage alone will be of infinite consequence
for the converting of Souls to Christ. There will be such an assured sense of
all the Visions of the Apocalypse, besides those of Daniel, that this one
peculiar Privilege of Christianity, (in having the whole Scene of Divine
Providence, and of all the Affairs of the Church of God, and indeed of all the
World, (so far forth as they respect the Church) so lively set off and
prefigured for so many hundreds of years, nay for some thousands) this, I say,
alone must of necessity drive all the world to a firm belief that Jesus is the
Messiah, the Savior of the World; and that there is a God whose Providence
watches over the Affairs of mankind; and that there is a Life to come and a
blessed Immortality for all true Believers. I tell you succinctly, Philopolis,
the clear Completion of so many, so weighty Prophecies, and so many hundred
years distant from the Event, seems to me to be a more convictive ground of the
truth of Christianity, then all the Miracles done by Christ and his Apostles to
those that lived in those days, especially to as many as did not see them
themselves, and observe the Circumstances of them.


Philop. This is very considerable that you say, Philotheus, and I should be
absolutely of your mind, could I persuade my self that the Prophecies would be
so vulgarly and universally understood by Christians. For this skill, added to
Sobriety of Life and a sincere Zeal for the Gospel, would be a mavelous
Engine in their hand to bear down all before them, and subdue all Nations under
the feet of the Lord Christ.


Philoth. Do not doubt of that, Philopolis. Wisdom is easy to him that
understands. Pro. 14.6.
And the times are coming, and will be at hand before the pouring out of the
last Vial, wherein the understanding of the Divine Prophecies touching the
Affairs of the Church will be as common and ordinary as of the Childrens
Catechism. The ways of God, and the faithfulness of his Providence
corresponding to the Divine Predictions or Prophecies, will be known to all
from the greatest to the least. And it will be an easier task to their
Capacities, then many of those things that have been heretofore Catechistically
put upon them. That there is no fear that either Familism or Behmenism will
supplant the expected glory of the Apostolic Church.



Sophr. This Conjecture of yours, Philotheus, in my judgment, is not at all
extravagant as to the unhinging of the World from the false Religions they have
been so long held captive under. But when I have been thinking with my self on
these things, I have been often cast into a fear that the pure Apostolic
Christianity may not then take place for all that, but some other mode of
Christianity, which some pretend to be the Reign of the Spirit, but is as
errant a Nulling of that Christianity which was taught by the Apostles, as that
Christianity was of Judaism, if not more, or as Mahometism is of both.


Euist. I believe Sophron has in his eye the Love-service of the Modern
Nicolaitans, with their more visible Offspring the Quakers. For indeed their
Prophet, in his Prophecy of the spirit of Love, does expressly promise his
Followers the possession of the whole Earth, that all Nations will submit unto
them. For though they will admit that the Service of Christ in the Belief is
the Holy of the true Tabernacle; yet they boast that the Holy of Holies is
their Service of the Love, which therefore ought to take place above all.


Bath. In my judgment, Euistor, this fear of Sophron's is but a groundless
fear. For besides the many gross, impossible and ridiculous Interpretations of
Scripture, upon which notwithstanding this Prophet would build himself; the
obvious Evidence from his Writings that he was a mere Sadducee, and held
neither Angel nor Spirit nor the Immortality of the Soul, is a palpable
assurance that in so great a Light as God has and is raising in the World this
man's Dictates and Doctrines will never pass into any National Religion, but it
will appear to all that he was a mistaken Enthusiast. Methinks it is infinitely
more improbable that the World should take him for a true Prophet, then that
the plain Apostolical Faith and Doctrine, which has such convincing and
miraculous Attestations to it, and is so suitable to moral Goodness and Reason,
should not overrun all.


Euist. This gross Error of Sadducism might indeed disenable this Prophet from
doing any great injury to the Personal Offices of Christ, which he seems to
undermine and beat down. But the Reign of the Spirit, in opposition to the
personal Scepter of the Lord Jesus, has fallen into more refined hands, that do
expressly acknowledge the Immortality of the Soul, and consequently the present
Subsistency of Christ and his Personality, and yet are altogether for the
Spirit and Christ within them, as if that part of Christianity that respects
Christ without us were quite antiquated. You know whose Motto that was, Our
Salvation in the life of Jesus Christ in us.


Bath. Yes, I do, Euistor: It was the Teutonick Philosopher's. And do not you
know who said, That the Mystery hid from Ages and from Generations, but then
made manifest to the Saints, was, Christ in us the hope of glory?


Euist. You say true, Bathynous, S. Paul writes so to the Colossians. Col. 1.26.



Bath. And therefore, Euistor, it was Jesus the Son of Mary with his Apostles
that first conducted men into the Holy of Holies, not H. Nicolas nor I. Behmen.


Sophr. A very pertinent Observation.


Bath. But admit that I. Behmen drives all inward in his Writings, as if he had
forgot that Christ without him who suffered at Jerusalem, (whom yet I am sure
he did not forget on his deathbed, when he cried out, Thou crucified Lord
Jesus, have mercy on me, and take me into thy Kingdom) and withal that he has
healed Familism of that unsoundness and rottenness of corrupt Sadducism; yet
for all that the invincible Obscurity of his Writings will prevent his being
over-popular, and his mistakes in his pretended Inspirations in matters of
Philosophy ruin his Authority amongst the more knowing and sagacious sort of
persons. In a Philosophical Age they that pretend to Philosophical
Inspirations, and have them not, must needs be taken tripping: Which if they be
in any thing, their credit falls flat in all, and nothing will be believed
merely for their saying it is true and inspired.


Euist. If this were indeed the Teutonick's case, there were very little fear
of his doing any great harm in that way Sophron's Jealousies did so sadly
presage.


Sophr. It Is likely Bathynous would not speak thus, unless he had some certain
grounds for it. I pray you what are they, Bathynous?


Bath. Do not you think, J. Behmen 's mavelous pretense to the knowledge of
the Language of Nature.
O Sophron, that it is a superlative strain of Melancholy, for a man to conceit
that he has the knowledge of the Language of Nature communicated to him?


Sophr. I suppose the skill of the Signatures of Plants, and the Presages of
Meteors, and other such like Phenomenon of Nature.


Bath. No, to tell you syllabatim in the words of any Language what they
naturally signify. As suppose he would take the word Tetragrammaton to task,
he would tell you what all the Syllables signify from Te to Ton.


Sophr. That Is mavelous pretty, that even the Terminations of words should
have their signification also.


Bath. Nay, the very Letters, as in Tincture and others.


Sophr. This decides that ancient Controversy amongst Philosophers, whether
the Imposition of Names be (...) or (...). A. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. 10. cap.
4.



Bath. Well, Sophron, you may jest at it as you please. But this Philosophic
Illumination has taught the Teutonick that the Names of the seven Planets are
plainly derived out of the Language of Nature.


Sophr. Does he mean the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew Names; or Dutch, or French, or
Spanish?


Bath. I suppose he either means all, or High Dutch only, as being his natural
Tongue, in which alone he was skilled.


Sophr. It was a great omission, that he did not explain himself in that point.
But I pray you, Bathynous, why does he think that the Ancients gave Names to
the seven Planets from the Language of Nature?


Bath. Because their Names are according to the Properties of Nature, viz.
Astriction, Compunction, Anguish, Fire, Light, Sound, Body; which answer to
Saturn, Mercury, Mars, Sol, Venus, Jupiter, Luna.


Sophr. These are Mysteries above my capacity. Nor do I see how the Names of
the Planets signify those Qualities. But what does he drive at, Bathynous?


Bath. At a Philosophical account of every Day's Creation, with a respect to
the Name of the Day from the Planet which is said to rule the first Hour
thereof, and which corresponds with such a property of Nature. As for example,
The Ancients called the first day of the week Sunday, because God then moved
the Sun-property in the Creation; the second day Monday, because he moved the
Moon-property, etc. And thus the Explication of the six Days-works in Moses is
made upon the Astrologicall Names of the Days of the Week.


Sophr. Is it possible, Bathynous? I had always thought that the Planetary
Names of the Days of the Week had proceeded from the orderly reckoning of the
Planets from Saturn downward; and so giving every one of them the dominion of
an hour one after another through the four and twenty, every first hour of the
day will have a new Planet, and that necessarily in such an order as the Names
of the Days of the Week import. As, suppose, let Saturn have the first hour of
the Day: From Saturn to Luna thrice inclusively there is twenty one hours: Then
say, Saturn twenty two, Jupiter twenty three, Mars twenty four; the next hour,
which is the first of the day following, is Sol. Then again, from Sol to Mars
thrice is twenty one: Then say, Sol twenty two, Venus twenty three, Mercury
twenty four; and the next hour, which is the first of the day following, is
Luna. And so quite through the Week you shall find this orderly reckoning
necessarily give such Names to all the Days of the Week as they bear.


Bath. You might as well have begun with Sol to Mars, he being the most eminent
Planet, and giving Name to the first Day of the Week.


Sophr. Undoubtedly, Bathynous.


Bath. I must confess this Consideration, O Sophron, made me smile, when I
observed how nimble the inspired Philosopher was in his Mysterium magnum, to
communicate some of his own skill in the Language of Nature (discovered in the
Names of the Planets) unto the Ancients, as if they had been acquainted with
the Mosaicall Mystery of the Creation, from affixing the names of the Planets
to such days of the week: when, God wot, they dreamed of nothing more then this
orderly piece of Astrologicall Superstition which you have so judiciously taken
notice of. But there are also several other palpable Indications to the
impartial and intelligent Reader, that what the Teutonick Philosopher writ was
not by an infallible spirit.


Sophr. Farther Indications that J. Behmen did not write from an infallible
spirit.
I pray you produce some few of them. For it can be no unbecoming office to
unbewilder some over-serious souls, that may be too much captivated with such
kind of Writers.


Bath. I will give you one Instance for all, O Sophron. He did not understand
the true Systeme of the World; as appears by his Story of Lucifer, in whose
place he substitutes the Sun, and declares that all the Stars take light and
power from him: Denies that there is any Morning or Evening above the Moon,
though the four Moons moving about Jupiter plainly witness against it: Tells us
how the six other Planets are Sol's six Counselors; wherein he does not dream
of Tellus's being as good a Planet, and consequently as good a Counselor, as
the rest, especially as the Moon, which will make seven; and those four about
Jupiter four more, and as good Wives for the Sun and Stars as our Moon is.
Which considerations break a pieces all his fine Conceits touching the Harmony
and Analogy betwixt the seven Planets and his seven Properties of Nature.
Whence I profess I am very well assured he is not divinely inspired.


Euist. How then, Bathynous, should he come by such unheard of Mysteries? As
one especially that does most of all astonish me, because I find some profess
they know the truth thereof by experience; I mean, the distribution of all into
three Kingdoms or Worlds, The dark-Fire-World, the holy Light-World, and this
mixed Out-World.


Bath. Yes, Euistor: and that Mystery is the more strange to me, in that he
declares in a Physical sense, That all these lie in one another; That Heaven
is in Hell, and Hell is in Heaven, as to place. Which he would illustrate from
Darkness and Light being in the same place together; Darkness presently
discovering it self at the removal of the Light.


Sophr. But certainly it was not actually there while the Light was there.


Bath. One would think so, Sophron. Besides, his dark and light Kingdoms must
be purely spiritual, if they lie in the same space with this Out-world, as the
Inhabitants also of them, who yet he admits can see one another, I mean those
of the same Kingdom, though those of different Kingdoms cannot.


Euist. Luke 16.23.
How then is Dives from out of Hell said to have seen Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom; as if the framer of that Parable had been ignorant of this Behmenicall
Mystery? And how came Michael and the Devil to dispute about the body of
Moses? Jude 9.
Can Devils and Angels hear one another talk, and yet not see one another being
so hard by?


Bath. That in the Parable is something hard to salve. But supposing these
three distinct Worlds to have their distinct Spirits of Nature, (as they may be
called) in virtue of union wherewith the Inhabitants of each World discern all
Beings that are united with its spirit; it will be consequentiall enough to
conceive, that while the Angels are in union only with the Spirit of the
Light-world, and the Devils with that of the dark-Fire-world, they can have no
discernment of one another, though as to space they be hard by, and if they
were corporeal, might rush against one another, as deaf men in the dark. But
admitting they have a Capacity for a time of uniting with the Spirit of this
mixed Out-world, in this conjuncture they may see one another and discourse
with one another. But I confess, Euistor, the Theorie is something remote and
strange.


Euist. And yet that which is stranger, Bathynous, there are some that profess,
(which were a great Attestation to the truth of the Teutonick Philosophy if it
were certain,) that they have such openings of their brains or eyes that they
can see into both those internal Kingdoms, and view the mavelous shapes of
the Inhabitants of them both.


Bath. That I must confess, Euistor, is still more wonderful, though, upon the
Hypothesis I even now hinted, not simply impossible. But we must take heed how
we become over-credulous in such things. He that will averr he has discovered
those internal Worlds by Sense, must first assure himself that he is not
imposed upon by his Imagination. For Fancy becomes sometimes presentificall,
as in Madmen and those in high Fevers, whose Phantasms seem real external
Objects to them. Nay, it is sometimes so in them that are well and in their
wits, either arbitrariously, as in Cardan, or surprisingly, as in several
others I have conversed with, but are so wise as to know it is a fancy, and
give it the stop. But if they did believe there were such an internal World,
and did vehemently desire to converse there, how exceeding credible is it that
these people would take their inward Phantasms for external Objects in that
Inward World!


Euist. But how shall they rid themselves of the error, Bathynous?


Bath. If some number of them that conceive they have recovered the inward eye,
(which was put out by Adam's Fall) whereby they can see through the outward eye
into the internal Worlds, would experiment the seeing of the same Object
together. For if they do not see it together in the same place and
circumstances, it is a shrewd presumption all is but internal fancy.


Sophr. But suppose they do see the same Object together, invisible in the mean
time to ordinary eyes.


Bath. Yet they are not secure but they may be imposed upon by false Reason.
For it does not follow for all this they see the Inhabitants of such an
Internal World as the Teutonick Philosophy declares for, but the more subtle
Inhabitants of the External: For both Air and Ether are the Elements of this
External world, not of the Internal. And fallen Spirits purely Immaterial are
to me, I must confess, a great Paradox; or that having material Vehicles they
should not have their abode in a material Element. Which Element being the Dark
world, it is evident that the Dark world cannot be in one place with this
Out-world but as part of it. To say nothing of the Light world, which I must
confess I take to be material also.


Sophr. And so do I, Bathynous, nor can by any means admit that Heaven and Hell
are in the same space, forasmuch as the Inhabitants of Heaven are Corporeal.
For the glorified Saints have Bodies, and so have the Angels too, according to
the Opinion of the best Divines and Philosophers.


Bath. But in the same place or Region Heaven and Hell may be manifested in
particular Creatures, what is common administering to their property; as the
Seminal Soul of the World is as busy in forming Toads and poisonous Serpents
as in the fairest and most harmless Creatures.


Euist. What, do you think then, Bathynous, that I. Behmen was not at all
inspired, that there is so little assurance of any considerable truth he has
communicated to the World?


Bath. To declare my conjecture of him freely and impartially, Bathynous his
judgment touching J. Behmen, with some Cautions how to avoid the being
ensnared by Enthusiasts.
Euistor, I will in the first place allow him to be a very serious and
well-minded man, but of a nature extremely melancholic. And in the second
place I conjecture that he had been a Reader of H. N. and Paracelsus his
Writings. Both which being Enthusiasticall Authors fired his Melancholy into
the like Enthusiastic elevations of spirit, and produced a Philosophy in which
we all-over discover the footsteps of Paracelsianism and Familism, Love and
Wrath, Sulphur and Sal-niter, Chemistry and Astrology being scattered through
all.

I do not deny, Euistor, but that both H. N. and I. Behmen were inspired; but I
aver withal that their Inspiration was not purely Spiritual, Intellectual
and Divine, but mainly Complexionall, Natural, and Daemoniall: (...), as
Aristotle speaks; which is best understood by that of Plotinus, Ennead. 2. lib.
2. c. 10.
(...). This therefore was an Inspiration too far removed from the first pure
Fountain to come clear. Complexionall Love, the noblest Motion impressed upon
us by the Spirit of Nature, first oppressed in the Constriction, Compunction
and Anguish of a down-bearing Melancholy, and after burning and flaming out
into a joyful liberty, and carrying captive with it those severer Particles,
that would have smothered it, into a glorious Triumph of Light and cheerful
Splendor of the Spirits, which makes the Soul overflow with all kindness and
sweetness, this, I conceive, is all the peculiar Inspiration or Illumination
these Theosophists had at the bottom. Which yet is not so contemptible, but
that they justly magnify it above the grim ferocities of the superstitious
Factions in the imbittered Churches of the world, who have not so good an
Inspiration as this, but their tongues and hearts are set on fire of Hell. Jam.
3.6.
This Light of Nature, I say, is abundantly well appointed, both for Right and
Skill, to chastise and reproach the gross and grievous Immoralities of
Hypocritical Religions, and to be subservient to that Truth and Life that is
really Divine.


Euist. But they writ professedly as from the Spirit of God. And I. Behmen
seems to have had the assistence of a good Angel, by that story of an Old man,
who, upon pretense of buying a pair of Shoes of him, read him his destiny, and
gave him holy and pious Instructions.


Bath. Who knows but that it was really a man? For he carried the Shoes away
with him which he bought, nor did he vanish in his sight. And suppose he was a
good Angel, not a Devil, does it follow straight that he was infallible? The
Inhabitants of the other World are good Physiognomists, and know very well who
are most for their turn in this.


Cuph. As an Horse-courser knows an Horse by his marks.


Bath. And lastly, that Jacob declares what he writes is from God, that is but
that which is necessary for all Enthusiasts to do. For if they did not think
themselves inspired, they were not Enthusiasts. But there is a very powerful
Magic in this their heightened Confidence for the captivating others to them.


Hyl. How shall a man do then, Bathynous, to keep himself from being ensnared
by their Writings, and from being hurried away with their Enthusiasms?


Bath. For him that reads them there is only this one short Remedy and safe,
To observe the moral and pious Precepts they tumble out with such extraordinary
Zeal and fervor, and to endeavor to be as really good as they declare
themselves and all men ought to be, and to make that your first and chief care,
without any design of engrasping great Mysteries. This is the only way of
being assuredly able to judge them, and of coming to that state which David
blesses God for; Psalm 119.99.
I have more understanding then my Teachers, because I keep thy Commandments.


Philoth. That is very good advice, Hylobares, and the most certain way of
keeping out of the snares of Enthusiasts, and one of the greatest good effects
that God intends by the permission of them, to inveigle certain Complexions in
the ways of Holiness, and to exercise the gift of discerning of Spirits in
others to whom he has given it, for the Safety of his Church and the magnifying
the Ministry of the Gospel of his Son Jesus in the true and Apostolic
Promoters thereof.


Sophr. If this way were taken, my fears and jealousies, O Philotheus, were all
hushed, nor could I doubt but the pure Apostolic Religion would carry all
before it.


Philoth. And verily as touching those two Sects, I must farther confirm to
you, O Sophron, that there is not any such great danger in them, no not in that
more suspected one, (for as for the Behmenists, I am of Bathynous his mind,
that they are unjustly suspected.) For at present, by a kind of oblique
stroke, God does notable execution upon the dead Formality and Carnality of
Christendom by these zealous Evangelists of an internal Savior: and if any
of them out of mistake and error should in a manner antiquate that part of
Religion that respects the external, which I hope are not many, nor will be,
yet (and mark what I say) if they continue sincere, I do not doubt but they
will be fetched in again, at least at the long run, as being to be found in
that third part of the Cities that are to fall by the sword of him that sits
on the white Horse at the time of the effusion of the last Vial. Apoc. 19.21.
and 16.19.



Philop. That is very likely, Philotheus, nor have I now any doubt but those
glorious Times of the Church will come, and in such a sense as has been
predefined. But the next point is concerning the Signs of their coming.


Philoth. Can you desire a better Sign then the orderly succession of the Vials?


Philop. But I had in my thoughts the Rumor of Elias his coming first, That
there is an Elias to come, and in what sense.
as at the first coming of Christ; for so a very learned Author declares for
the Appearance of Eliah before his second coming also.


Philoth. And for ought I know, Philopolis, that Opinion may be true, if
rightly understood; that is to say, neither of Elias the Thisbite, nor of John
the Baptist personally, nor of any one Person exclusively, but (according to
the Prophetic style) of the Spirit of Elias in a Company or Succession of
persons. In this sober sense I know not but this expectation of the coming of
Elias first may not be vain.


Philop. What do you understand then by the Spirit of Elias, O Philotheus, that
we may know where and when he does appear?


Philoth. As touching that, Philopolis, we are not to excogitate what Character
we please, but casting our eyes upon History and Prophecy we are impartially to
gather the true Character of that Spirit out of the Scripture.


Philop. How, I beseech you, Philotheus?


Philoth. The Character of this Elias gathered out of Prophecy.
As first out of Prophecy. Admitting the Prophecies to have a double
Completion, (as our Savior seems plainly to imply a double coming of Elias,
forasmuch as when the Baptist was beheaded, yet he said that Elias will indeed
come and restore all things) the description of the Messenger of the Covenant
in Malachi is an admirable lively description of the Spirit of Elias: Mal. 3.1,
2, 3.
Behold, I send the Messenger of the Covenant which ye delight in, (by whom the
Hebrew Writers understand Elias,) behold, he shall come, says the Lord of
Hosts. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a Refiner's fire, and like Fuller's soap. And he
shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver, and he shall purify the sons of
Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering of Righteousness. Therefore the Doctrine of casting away all
Corruption, Insincerity and Hypocrisy, is one Note of the Spirit of Elias.
Again, in the Prophet Isay; Isa. 40.3, 4, 5.
The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make straight in the Desert an highway for our God. Every Valley shall
be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low; and crooked places
shall be made straight, and the rough places plain. And the glory of the Lord
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. For the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it.


Philop. What Note do you gather out of that, Philotheus?


Philoth. A Doctrine or declaration against the Distortion or perversion of the
Simplicity of Christian Truth by proud and politic persons, who have made
Religion a Labyrinth for men to lose themselves in, that they may the more
easily take them up as a prize and booty. The anfractuous serpentine windings
of a false Church-policy, that has so monstrously corrupted Religion in
Doctrine and Practice, is here declared against: The Voice in the Wilderness
bids take it away, that the glory of the Gospel may be manifested to all flesh
in the genuine purity and simplicity thereof, and so all Nations be brought
under the Scepter of Christ.


Philop. That meaning is mavelous easy and natural.


Philoth. A third Character of this Spirit is remarkable in the last of
Malachi: Behold, Mal. 4.5.
I will send you Eliah the Prophet before the great and dreadful Day of the
Lord, (that is to say, before the Battle of the great Day of God Almighty under
the last Vial: Apoc. 16.16.
) And he shall turn the heart of the Fathers unto the Children, and the heart
of the Children to their Fathers; lest I come and smite the Earth with a curse.
That is to say, This Spirit will be no Sectarian spirit to rend and tear, but a
reconciling spirit to soder together the affections of Magistrate and Subject
in the Kingdom of God, to prevent the Miseries of this earthly life that arise
out of Dissension, Tumult and War.


Philop. This is an excellent Spirit of Elias indeed. I pray God hasten his
coming.


Philoth. There is also another very remarkable Character of the Elias to come,
intimated by our Savior himself, in his discourse with his Disciples after his
Transfiguration on the Mount; before which time notwithstanding (as I told you
before) the Baptist was beheaded: Matt. 17.10, 11.
yet he being asked by his Disciples touching the Opinion of the Scribes, That
Elias must first come, he answers, Elias truly shall first come, and restore
all things. Which effect however to accommodate to John the Baptist I believe
would be very hard.


Philop. Well, but what Character, Philotheus, do you gather out of this
Prediction?


Philoth. That the Spirit of Elias will neither abrogate what is authentic,
nor introduce what is new, but be a Restorer only of what useful Truths or
Practices may seem to have been lost in the long delapse of Ages. For the
Decursion of Time is like that of a River, which, if there be not great care
taken, will bring down straws, leaves, and sticks, but sink what is most solid
to the bottom.


Philop. This consideration of Knowledge, Philotheus, puts me in mind of that
Proverbial Prediction of the Jews touching their expected Elias, Elias cum
venerit solvet omnia. It seems then he will be a great Promoter of Wisdom and
Learning: will he not, Philotheus?


Philoth. Such you do not mean, Philopolis, as the finding out the Quadrature
of the Circle, or a perpetual Motion.


Philop. To tell you the truth, Philotheus, I do not know what I mean. I pray
you what do you think of it?


Philoth. I told you before he will be a Restorer of useful Truth; and, it may
be, of such clear and plain Principles as may solve the most concerning
Difficulties that Humane Reason is subject to be entangled withal. But I do
not believe that he will be an Abettour of any useless Subtilties, or of any
Knowledge that promotes not Virtue and the common good. He is that Voice in the
Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight. His
wisdom respects only the Promotion and Interest of the Kingdom of Christ.

His Character taken out of History.
But now for the Characters taken out of the History of John the Baptist and
Elias. First, it is observable in both their Persons how much sequestered they
were from the World, what haunters of Wildernesses and Deserts. And more
particularly of Eliah, how his abodes were by Brooks and under solitary Trees,
1 Kings 19.8, 9, etc.
in Caves and Mountains; as on Mount Horeb, where God talked with him after
there had passed before him the strong Wind, the Earthquake, and the Fire.


Philop. Shall then all that partake of the Spirit of Eliah be Eremites?


Philoth. That Is not the meaning of it, Philopolis; but that they shall be of a
spirit separate from the World, and untainted and unsophisticated by the
unwholesome Converse of men; that their Judgments shall not be blinded by
beholding the frequent and accustomary practice of authentic wickedness.


Philop. And what, I pray you, is meant by the Raiment of Camel's hair and
leathern girdle about John the Baptist's loins? Matt. 3.4.
And the very body of Elias is so described, 2 King. 1.8.
that he was an hairy man.


Philoth. That Is very obvious, O Philopolis, to spell out. It signifies how
rough and unpolished, how rude and sylvatick the spirit of Elias will appear to
the World, because it will so freely and impartially reprehend the World. To
declare truth in all plainness and simplicity of heart, (though otherwise with
all civility imaginable) assure your self, Philopolis, will appear to the World
a great piece of roughness, rudeness and uncourtliness. So tender and so rotten
is the heart of the wicked. But there are also in the Story other Characters of
the Spirit of Elias that are less symbolicall. As an holy boldness and
undauntedness of courage to witness to the Truth, though to the utmost peril
of one's person: Which was conspicuous both in the Baptist and in Elias. The
instructing every one in their Duty, as John did the People, Luke 3.10.
the Publicans, and the Soldiers. The raising men out of a false Security from
external or carnal respects, as he did the Sadducees and Pharisees: Matt. 3.8,
9.
Bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. And say not within your selves, We
have Abraham to our Father, or that we are the Successors of Peter and the
rest of the Apostles: For God is able of these Stones you tread upon, to raise
up Successors unto Peter. This also is a notable Character of the Spirit of
Elias, 1 King. 19.10.
a vehement Jealousy in the behalf of the purity of God's Worship, against all
Polytheism and Idolatry.


Philop. Yes, that was very conspicuous indeed in Elias the Thisbite. But what
is meant by his bringing down fire from Heaven upon the Captains and their
Fifties? 2 King. 1.10.



Philoth. That indeed is again symbolicall, Philopolis, and signifies, that the
Elias to come will use only the power of the Spirit from on high to oppose all
weapons of any carnal warfare against him.


Philop. There is but one passage more, Philotheus, and I think we shall then
have Characters enough of the Eliah to come, viz. The Thisbite's Contest with
the Priests of Baal: where he seems to try the Truth of Religion by this
Touchstone, The God that answers by fire, 1 King. 18.24.
let him be God.


Philoth. The Elias to come will make the same appeal to the people. Ye worship
you know not what: John 4.22.
(as our Savior said of the Samaritans, that did not worship God in spirit and
in truth) The God that answers by fire, let him be God.


Philop. I, but what is the meaning of that, Philotheus?


Philoth. Does God care for the oblation of a Bullock, Philopolis? The Beast
which we are to offer to be consumed in a Burnt-sacrifice are the Beastly
Affections in us. The God that answers by fire, that is to say, by his Spirit,
to the consumption of these, let him be God. But he that worships not this
living God that by the working of his Spirit cleanses us from our Corruptions,
let him be deemed as the worshipper of an Idol.


Philop. This is a good useful sense, Philotheus: Nor have you, I think,
omitted any Character of the Elias to come, unless it be that Severeness and
Austerity observable in the Baptist, and the sharpness and tartness of his
Reprehensions.


Philoth. That was partly glanced at before, in the roughness and hairiness of
their Persons and Garbs, I mean, of both the Thisbite and the Baptist. Which
Dispensation, though it may seem harsh, yet it will stand in a seasonable
opposition to the Vanity and Levity, to the Profaneness and Frivolousness of
the Age it appears in.


Cuph. I think both Philopolis and Philotheus are so sadly and severely set on
it, that they have on purpose declined the mentioning of as notorious an
Example of Elias his carriage of himself as any occurrs in his whole Story.


Philop. I pray you, Cuphophron, what is that?


Cuph. The deriding the Priests of Baal so sarcastically.


Philoth. That was left for Cuphophron to glean up, it fits his humor so well.


Hyl. And I dare say he catched at it with great greediness, Philotheus,
hoping, for his other-day's tart jears and satirical Derisions of the known
miscarriages of the civilized World, under pretense of playing Advocate-General
for the Paynim, that he may deserve, if computation of time will permit, to be
deemed no small limb of that great Elias that is spoken of.


Cuph. Who? I, Hylobares? I would not for all the world be so much as the
little finger of so hairy, rough and hispid a body. Nay, I thank my God, I am
of a more smooth, civil and compleasant temper then so.


Philop. And let him be so, The time of Elias his coming.
if he will, Hylobares. In the mean time, Philotheus, since I am pretty well
satisfied touching the Characters, I beseech you tell me when the time of the
coming of Elias is.


Philoth. Within the first Thunder.


Philop. That I knew before, Philotheus: for you told me it would be before the
effusion of the last Vial. But under what Vial will it be?


Philoth. About the fourth or fifth, nor may I define more precisely. About
that time is the appearance of Elias in the Spirit.


Philop. Is that then the beginning of that Regnum Spiritus the Cabbalists
speak of?


Philoth. No, Philopolis, not properly the Beginning of it, but rather a
Preparation to it: according as it is written, Mal. 3.1.
Behold, I send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me. And then
the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple.


Philop. What Temple's that, Philotheus?


Philoth. Ezekiel's Temple in the new Jerusalem I above told you of. That is
the Temple meant in this second Completion of the Prophecy. And you know there
are several Periods of their Completion, as in Ezekiel's Vision there was a
wheel in a wheel. Ezekiel. 1.16.



Philop. But it is said of that new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21.22.
that there is no Temple there.


Philoth. There is, and there is not. There is no material Temple, but yet
there is a Mystical one. For God Almighty and the Lamb is the Temple thereof.
God Almighty is the Object of our Worship: and the Lamb, that is, stylo
Prophetico, the Body of Christ, his Church, (for 1 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 3.16.
Christ sometimes signifies so in Scripture) in which he rules and dwells by
his Spirit, is the Temple; according to that of the Apostle, For the Temple of
God is holy, 1 Cor. 3.17.
which Temple ye are. This is the Temple which the Lord Christ is in a more
peculiar manner to come into after the Ministry of Elias, the Messenger of the
Covenant, who is to be as a Refiner's fire, and as Fuller's soap, to purify
the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may become an
holy Temple and Priesthood, the new Jerusalem, that City of God, whose Wall is
of Jasper, and the City of pure Gold, like to transparent Glass. The Spirit of
Elias is the spirit of Burning and of Anguish, the spirit of sharp Reproof and
bitter Repentance, the spirit of travail and pain in Sion's new Birth: But the
Regnum Spiritus is the actual Renovation of the World into perfect
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy.


Philop. Certain Principles tending to the acceleration of the glorious Times
of the Church.
You speak of most excellent Things and Times, O Philotheus, and with such a
confident career, that you hurry a man away not only into a belief that they
will be, but into an impatience that they are not already. Which therefore
makes me eagerly desire to hear you discourse of the Means of accelerating
these good Times.


Philoth. And that I shall, Philopolis, but with all possible brevity, for fear
I should keep you up again too late of the night. But I shall impose upon you
in nothing, but appeal to your own judgment, if what I propound be not right.
As in the first place, That Reformed Christendom is the true visible Kingdom
of God; The First Principle.
and that therefore all men are bound in Conscience by all lawful means to
promote the Interest thereof.


Philop. That Reformed Christendom is the Kingdom of God, Philotheus, I am
fully persuaded, and of the duty thereupon depending.


Cuph. But we of the more Philosophical Genius, O Philopolis, are not of so
easy a belief, but make longer pauses in so weighty Points, before we close
with them.


Philop. Why, Of Luther's Conference with the Devil touching the abrogating of
the Mass, together with his Night-Visions of flying Firebrands.
what is the scruple now with you, Cuphophron?


Cuph. Why? do you think that that can be the Kingdom of God whose foundation
is laid by the Activity of the Devil? For my part, I am no great Historian, but
what I read I read impartially; and those that you call the Kingdom of
Antichrist do with great noise and confidence aver, that Luther abolished the
Mass upon Conference with and Instructions from the Devil.


Bath. O Cuphophron light of belief! Does your Philosophical Considerateness
permit you to give any credence to such things? As if either Luther had any
real Conference with the Devil about the Mass; or, if the Devil did dispute
against it, that it was in the behalf of the Reformation. It is true, Luther
himself, a person of great plainness of heart, and no great Naturalist, says
that at midnight he awakening was presently in a Dispute with the Devil, whom
he describes speaking with a strong and deep voice to him. But thus has many a
man awakened into the perception of a struggling with the Nightmare, or
Ephialtes, as with some real person, which, when they have been more perfectly
awaked, they have found to be nothing else but a Colluctation with their own
fancy; the more knowing especially. But the more ignorant and superstitious
(and you know, Luther had been a long time a very devout Monk, whose Cells are
full of the stories and phancies of Apparitions and Devils) do ordinarily take
such passages for external Realities. Which I must confess I conceive to be
Luther's case: For he had a body and complexion obnoxious to such Illusions.
But suppose it was not an Illusion of fancy: It does not presently follow that
that invisible Disputant was a bad Angel or a Devil. That may be imputed only
to the modesty of Luther, that he thought so, who professes himself no affecter
of Dreams nor Visions of Angels. And therefore the good man in an humble
ignorance took this Dispute to be an Exagitation of the Devil; but was so
sincere a lover of the Truth, that when he was convinced thereof he would not
disown it or refuse it, though it had been blown upon by the breath of
Beelzebub: Acts 16.16.
As the Pythonissa's witnessing to the truth of the Gospel in the Acts does not
put Paul and the rest of Christ's followers out of conceit with the Christian
Faith. Nor did the Devil's confessing Jesus to be the Messiah, Mark 3.11.
the Son of God, make the Doctrine of Christ less passable with the Apostles or
any other Disciples. And therefore lastly, admit that it was not a good Angel,
but a Devil; it does not follow that the Truth is less Truth, or that it is any
Argument against the Reformation, or that the Devil began this Dispute with
Luther in favor of it, but rather of Papism. For he foreseeing how obvious and
useful those Arguments were for the abrogating of the Mass, and that Luther
could not but hit on them in the conclusion, he, like a cunning Sophister, to
prevent the ruin of his own Kingdom, suggests these Reasonings to Luther
betime, that they, being thus disparaged by the first Inventour of them, might
do the less execution against the Mass, and, therewithal, against the whole
Lurry of Popish Idolatry and Superstition. For this was a device worthy that
old Serpent.


Cuph. And you, Bathynous, I think, have a fetch beyond the Devil himself. My
Philosophy had not considered the thing so thoroughly. But now I am more
awakened to consider of it, why may it not be some crafty fellow got into
Luther's Bedchamber that thus abused him, (there are such Stories of men
speaking through Trunks) and with the same design the Devil is supposed to have
had in it, this crafty Knave personating the Devil?


Bath. Any of these ways, in my judgment, are sufficient to take off that
odium that some would cast upon the Reformation from this passage of Luther.
And I look upon the first as not inferior to any of them, as corresponding
with the conceit which I have also of his nocturnall visions of the flying
Firebrarnds. Which appearance I believe was only in his fancy; because
always after this appearance he was tormented with a grievous distemper of the
Head, and had usually the oil of Almonds put into his ears for a cure or
mitigation.


Philoth. I can never think of these nocturnall visions of the Firebrarnds,
Bathynous, but with a reflection on the fieriness of Luther's spirit, whose
invincible zeal so far emboldened him, as publicly and solemnly to cast the
Pope's Bull and Canon Law into the fire, and in conclusion, by the fiery
Activity of his indefatigable spirit, to burn down a great part of the Papal
Monarchy, as a Dr. Heylia in his Geography.
late Historian phrases it, with allusion to Luther's fire.


Bath. That so it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the mouth of the
Prophet Ezekiel against the King of Tire; Ezekiel. 28.18.
Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the
iniquity of thy Traffic: therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of
thee, it shall devour thee; and I will bring thee to ashes upon the Earth in
the sight of all them that behold thee: as you hinted to us yesterday,
Philotheus.


Philoth. By the iniquity of thy Traffic, that is to say more particularly, by
the wicked sale and trade of Pardons and Indulgences sent out by Pope Leo the
tenth in Luther's time, from whence Luther first took fire.


Bath. Why, it hits marvellously well, does it not, Philotheus?


Philoth. It does, Bathynous, and is the same (now you put me in mind of it)
that I offered at yesterday. But to proceed. Therefore will I bring forth a
fire from out the midst of thee; that is, I will bring Martin Luther out of his
Monkish Cell, from amidst all his Superstition and false Devotion, a man of so
hot and fiery a complexion, that his fancy was filled with nothing but flying
Firebrarnds in the night; and he shall devour the Papacy by the fire of his
zeal.


Bath. Which he has done in a very considerable measure already: The
Achievement whereof stands as a pledge of the future Consummation of what has
been begun so successfully. Of the Obnoxiousness of Luther and other Reformers.



Euist. I hope so too, Bathynous. And yet, to speak impartially and according
to the truth of History, the Instruments God made use of in the first
Reformation of the Church were not altogether of so unexceptionable demeanor
and tenor in Doctrine and Practice, as that we should much build our faith
upon the worth of their persons. But I must confess that Luther was one that
made himself the most obnoxious.


Bath. What you say, Euistor, admit it were true, it does not one whit
prejudice the cause of the Reformation. For the Reformation is not into the
Opinion of any weak and fallible man, but into the knowledge and belief of the
infallible Word of God. And therefore it is vainly and to no purpose alleged
by the Romanists, That Luther was of so big and boisterous a spirit; That he
was impatient of a single life; That he was mistaken in his judgment in
several things, in some things inconstant to himself, vehement and
uncontrollable in all, and opposing all gainsayers with rudeness and bitterness
of speech. For notwithstanding all these Complexionall Infirmities, yet I
cannot but believe that he had a substantial Sincerity underneath, a firm
belief in God and Jesus Christ, and a lusty Indignation against the bloody
Tyranny, the gross Idolatry and base and unworthy Cheats and Impostures of the
Church of Rome. Whenas, on the contrary, his Antagonist, Pope Leo, was not
only an open abettour of these, but a close Infidel or Atheist; as appears by
that wicked saying of his to Cardinal Bembo, wherein he did insinuate that the
whole History of Christ is but a mere Fable. Was not Luther, think you, holy
enough to grapple with such an Holiness as this Leo the tenth? I must confess I
cannot think so very highly of Luther as some do, and yet I think him to have
been a very happy Instrument in the hand of God for the good of Christendom
against the horrid Enormities of the Papal Hierarchy. And though he might not
be allowed to be the Elias, the Conductour and Chariot of Israel, as some have
styled him; yet I think at least he might be accounted a faithful Postillion in
that Chariot, who was well accoutred with his wax Boots, oiled Coat and Hood,
and who turned the Horses noses into a direct way from Babylon toward the City
of God, and held on in a good round trot through thick and thin, not caring to
bespatter others in this high jogg, as he himself was finely bespattered from
others.

The meaner the Romanists make our first Reformers, Euistor, the greater
disgrace returns upon themselves, That the Corruptions of their Church were so
gross, that even men but of an ordinary life and judgment could both discern
them and detest them at once. If God by ordinary Instruments wrought
extraordinary things, the more was his Glory, and the less hazard of eclipsing
the luster of the Sacred Apostolical Foundation, or of disturbing that Number
that is so holy and celebrious in both History and Prophecy throughout the
Scripture. Vnexceptionable Reformers had been a means rather to captivate us
again to the flesh, to carnal respects and personal Dotages, then to promote
the Dispensation of the Spirit, which must be the upshot of all. The Ministry
of Luther and the Reformers was rather to recover to us the use of the
Scripture, then to dictate a Law to us from their own infallible and
unexceptionable worth; to break off the Papal Yoke, rather then to put us into
new Fetters. The Word of God then it was, hid like a precious Cabinet, and sunk
in that Augeae stabulum, the overflowing Corruptions and down-bearing Tyrannies
of the Church of Rome, which that noble Heroes Luther, like another Hercules, by
removing the filth, was to bring into the sight of the world again. And would
you then have had him and his Fellow Laborers (not such as they were, but)
such pure, spruce Gentlemen, in white Spanish-leather Pumps, in clean Linen
Stockins and Holland Doublets, with all other correspondent Elegancy and
unexceptionable Neatness? and in this pure and splendid plight to have taken
into hand their Shovells, Wheel-barrows and Muck-forks, to rid away this
stinking Dunghill? Christ did not owe his wicked Corrivall for the Government
of the World so much respect. And for such course work, there was more need of
a resolute robustuous courage, such as Luther had, then of any such external
Sanctimony or accuracy of Wit and Judgment, as not to be taken tripping
any-where in either Reason or Conversation.

Wherefore all Arguments against the Reformation from the quality of the
Reformers are very weak, both because they were substantial good men in the
main, notwithstanding what oversights soever they may be pretended to have
committed through humor or passion or unavoidable surprise; and also because
it is not their Authority we stand to in matters of Religion, but to the
Scripture, in the Recovery of the use and enjoyment whereof they were
gloriously instrumental; and lastly, because all their particular judgments
are swallowed up, not to be seen nor looked upon any farther then they appear
in the common judgment of Reformed Christendom represented in the Harmony of
their public Confessions. But for God's carrying on the Reformation in
particular Circumstances, in his taking the Kingdom to himself and judging the
little Horn, if all be not so plain and pervious to our understandings; yet let
us the rather take up the Psalmist's form of Devotion, and say, Psalm 97* 1, 2.
The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice. Clouds and Darkness are round about
him, Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his seat.


Philop. Bathynous has suggested many material Considerations in the behalf of
the Reformation against all possible Cavills of the Adversary touching the
first Reformers, whom I am very well assured that, according to the Genius of
that Church, they do in many things most wickedly calumniate; and that those
that are not Calumnies as concerning Fact, are no such horrid Crimes as theirs
that accuse them, but more venial Infirmities or less commendable Humors.
Insomuch that, notwithstanding all their Cavills, I am not at all shaken in my
belief of Reformed Christendom's being the true visible Kingdom of God and his
Christ. Which is the first Document, Philotheus, that you gave us, tending to
the Interest of Reformed Christendom. I pray you now therefore, since I am so
well satisfied in this, proceed with what dispatch you can to the rest, without
any farther interruption.


Philoth. The Second Document then, The Second Principle.
Philopolis, is this, That as Reformed Christendom is the Kingdom of Christ,
so the Popedom is the Kingdom of Antichrist. This, as it is a Truth in it
self, so it is of mighty consequence to be known, believed, and declared in the
Kingdom of Christ, to settle them and establish them in the Profession they
are in. For it is not at all beyond the capacity of the meanest to be fully
ascertained of this Truth. And yet though it be but one, and so easy, it is
worth all the Arguments besides for the fixing a Soul to the Reformed Religion:
so hugely accommodate it is to strike their Imagination, and satisfy their
Judgment, and settle their Conscience, at once. For if the Church of Rome be
Babylon, as most certainly it is, then think you with your self, Philopolis,
what mighty force that voice of the Angel will have in the Apocalypse, Come out
of her, Apoc. 18.4.
my people, lest you partake of her sins, and of her plagues.


Philop. That is to say, It will be as potent to call others from the Communion
of the Church of Rome, as to establish our own in the true Faith they already
profess. And indeed, methinks, when they cast their eye upon the multifarious
gross Idolatries and bloody Cruelties of the Papacy, and compare them with the
Character of the Whore of Babylon, (whose very Whoredom signifies her
Idolatry, upon whose forehead is written, Apoc. 17.5, 6.
Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Fornications and Abominations of
the Earth, and who is said to be drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus) and it be plainly made out to them, as it
may, that this cannot be understood of Rome Heathen, but of Rome calling itself
Christian; methinks the Reflection upon their known practices, compared with
their description in this Prophecy, should so plainly convince them, that they
could not but presently run from her Communion with sudden horror and
affrightment.


Philoth. One would think so indeed, Philopolis, and that there is not a better
Engine imaginable then this to beat down the Mystical Babylon: And that
therefore it must be out of a great deal of either Unskilfulness, or
Unfaithfulness to the Interest of Christ's Kingdom, that any should persuade
us in our Oppositions against Rome to lay aside this weapon, whenas indeed, as
David said to Abimelek concerning the sword of Goliath, there is none like unto
it. 1 Samuel 21.9.
And certainly our first Reformers found it so, who generally made this Outcry
against the Roman Church. And there are of their own Writers that confess how
much prejudice has been done them by that Opinion of the Pope's being
Antichrist. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 21.
Wherefore the taking away of these Bulwarks against the forces of Babylon
looks like the betraying of us again to the Tyranny of the King of that City.


Bath. The thing it self, Philotheus, I am afraid looks thitherward. But I
believe withal that several persons out of a conscientious tenderness over
the Interest of the Reformed Churches may be so backward from charging the
Church of Rome with being that Mystical Babylon, or the Pope the King of that
City, that is to say, that notorious Antichrist, for fear that, by conceding
that Church to be Antichristian, they should therewithal acknowledge that it
is not a true Church. Whence that fearful Inconvenience would follow, that
Succession were destroyed, and that we should thereby be at a loss to prove our
selves to be the true Church of Christ.


Philoth. Of the Church of Rome 's being a true Church.
If that be at the bottom, Bathynous, their well-meaning is commendable. But I
believe they fear where no fear is. For we have more strings to our bow then
one. For none of those Titles that the Church of Rome may be perstringed by in
the Prophetical parts of Scripture, whether the City of Babylon, or the Seat
of Antichrist, that Man of sin, or the like, do necessarily infer they are not
a true Church, but an extremely-faulty Church, and such, as God would have his
people forsake their Communion, if they will not reform, as forfeiting their
Salvation by partaking of such sins as have passed among them into a Law. A
Wife that is an Adulteress is a true Wife, till she be divorced, though a
faithless one; and a Ship with an hole at the bottom is a true Ship; and an
House whose Walls are besmeared with the Plague or Leprosy, or infested with
murtherous Goblins, is a true House; but that not to be sailed in, nor this to
be inhabited, before they be reduced to an useful and safe condition. The Form
of a thing makes it to be true; but the Sincerity or Integrity of it makes it
to reach its end, and become useful. Wine is still Wine, though some drops of
Poison be conveyed into it; but it is such as no man that knows thereof will
adventure to drink. We will therefore grant that the Church of Rome is a true
Church, but in such a sense as a Ship that will sink a man to the bottom of
the Sea is a true Ship, or such an House as I described a true House. Nay, we
will concede that it is the House or Temple of God, but such as wherein the Man
of sin sits, that son of Perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4.
that exalts himself above all that is called God or worshipped. Wherefore I
say, those reprehensive and reprochful expressions of Scripture against the
Church of Rome do not imply her to be no true Church, but a very impure and
faulty one, and grown not only not useful to them that adhere to her, but
extremely mischievous. She is a Cup of Wine mixed with deadly Poison in it, an
House infected with the Pestilence, or infested with wicked Demons. Wherefore
if we succeed in the true pattern of the House or Ship, in the sincere nature
of the Wine, in the due Offices of a Wife, and leave out the Adultery, the
Poison, the Plague, the Leprosy, and the Devil himself, is our Succession the
less perfect? If a Family were once sound, and then diseased for some Ages, and
then some of this Family by skill in Physic or more then ordinary Temperance
should grow sound again; are these sound branches less the Succession of this
Family, then* they that are still unwholesome and diseased?


Philop. I think the sounder the better Family, as being of a nearer affinity
or consanguinity with the most ancient Progenitors of them all. And therefore,
questionless, we are not the less of the Succession of the Apostles for
cleansing our selves from After-corruptions, and reducing our selves to their
ancient Apostolic Purity. The Succession indeed is continued in the Church of
Rome, as a diseased Family is the Continuation of the Family of their
Ancestors; but the Apostolical Succession is not only continued, but
rectified again and perfected in the Reformation. So that I conceive there is
no hazard at all to Succession in admitting those due, but sharp, Invectives in
the Apocalypse and other places of Scripture to belong to the Church of Rome,
they all not amounting to the making her no true Church, or no Church, but an
Idolatrous one, a Murtherous one, and an Imposturous one. As an adulterous,
murtherous and cheating Wife is a Wife, and therefore a true Wife, till she be
dead or divorced.


Philoth. That although the Church of Rome were not a true Church, yet it
follows not but that the Reformed Churches are.
You understand me right, Philopolis. But besides this, suppose the Miscarriages
of the Church of Rome were at last so high, and that for some Ages, that she
plainly ceased to be in any sense a true Church, (which yet I must confess I
cannot believe, no more then that the Church of the Jews ceased to be a true
Church when they stoned the Prophets, and shamelesly polluted themselves with
Idolatry:) yet the true Church was continued elsewhere, and the truest Church
of all, the Elect of God, everywhere. There was a Woman in the Wilderness when
the Church had become a Wilderness: Though I must confess this respects rather
the Perpetuity of the Church at large, then the continued Succession of
Pastors. But neither do I hold that necessary, that every true visible Church
should have a visible Succession of Priests from the Apostles to their time.
The Jerusalem that is said to come down from Heaven will be a true Church,
Apoc. 21.2.
and will be approved to be so, though she could not make this Boast in the
flesh, that she can number a visible Pastoral Succession upon Earth from St.
Peter at Rome, or St. James at Jerusalem. And suppose at that call of God's
people out of Babylon, Apoc. 18.4.
Come out of her, my people, lest you partake of her sins, and of her plagues,
that all the Priesthood had hung together upon Interest, and would not have
stirred; had a whole Kingdom that had reformed without the leave of the
Priesthood been no Church, nor the Prince had any power to appoint the most
able and eminent of his Subjects in the knowledge and practice of Christianity
to preside in Rebus sacris, in the Affairs of Religion, and begin a Succession
from them, whom we will suppose to order all things according to the Word of
God and the Practice of the Apostles, and to profess no other Doctrine then
what they taught, and is evident out of the Scriptures? What, shall such a
Nation as this be no Church for all this in these Circumstances of things, O
Philopolis?


Philop. I promise you it is a very nice Controversy, Philotheus; I know not
well what to say to it of a sudden.


Bath. It is a nice point indeed, Philopolis. But I Will propound to you a point
that is more clear. Whether is not every Sovereign Supreme Head of the Church
as well in Ecclesiastical Affairs as in Civil in his own Dominions?


Philop. Surely he is, Bathynous, or else he is not absolute Sovereign. For I
conceive that to be the Supreme to which is committed both the trust and power
of ordering all for the welfare of the Subject, which consequently must needs
include Religion, of which therefore of necessity the Supremacy is Judge.
Whence every supreme Magistrate is, if not formally, yet eminently, as well
Priest as King; else he were not King, or the King not supreme Magistrate, as
being bound to be ruled by the judgment of the Priest in matters of Religion;
which unquestionably all Mundane Affairs ought to stoop to. Whence it will
follow, that all Power that does not include the Priesthood in it, at least
eminently or virtually, must stoop to that Judicature. But being the Supremacy
of any Nation is to stoop to none but God, it is plain that he that is Supreme
has at least virtually the Sacerdotal Power in himself.


Bath. I profess unto you, Philopolis, you are so subtle in Politics, that I
conceive it will be very hard for any one to evade the force of your arguing.


Euistor. The anointing of Kings and Emperors at their Coronations, as also
the Emperor's Crown comprehending in it the Episcopal Mitre, methinks,
Bathynous, bears a notable Compliance with this Conclusion of Philopolis.


Cuph. You may as well argue for a communion of Kingship in the Priesthood,
because the Priests be anointed in the Church of Rome.


Bath. It Is likely they would catch at that greedily enough, Cuphophron. But in
that Kings are crowned as well as anointed, Exodus 40.13, 15.
but Priests anointed, and not crowned with royal Crowns, it is an intimation
that both the Kingship and Priesthood, in some sense, is in the King, but only
the Priesthood in the Priest. But a more notable Correspondence then this of
Euistor's occurrs to my fancy: that is, the Vision of the twenty four Elders
with the robes of Priests and the Crowns of Kings upon them; Apoc. 4.4.
which assuredly intimates, that in the best state of the Church every
Sovereign will be confessedly both Priest and King over his own people.


Philoth. You say well, Bathynous. And it is very remarkable in that Vision,
that there is no one visible Head of the universal Church, (such as the Pope
pretends to be) but every Sovereign is there set out as a Kingly Priest, or a
Priestly King, in his own Dominions.


Philop. Gentlemen, you have finely adorned my dry Reasonings with your
Historical and Prophetical Observations; all which jointly considered do
easily bear me into a full and settled persuasion, that every Christian King
has so much of the power of the Priesthood in him, and of the Authority of our
Heavenly King and Priest Christ Jesus, that being enlightened with the true
belief of the Gospel, and being destitute elsewhere of a Priesthood to
officiate in the Church, or rather of such as may consecrate men to that
Function, himself may raise a Succession of them by his own power, Exodus 29.5,
6.
and they ordering all things according to the Word of God and practice of the
Apostles, that the whole Nation yielding obedience to these Precepts and
Institutes does ipso facto become a true visible Church of Christ. What think
you, Bathynous?


Bath. Nay, I am abundantly satisfied: For you know, Extra Ecclesiam non est
Salus. And it is a wonder to me, if men acting and living thus Apostolically as
you describe can be in the state of Damnation.


Philop. Wherefore we see plainly, that there is no Inconvenience to the
Reformed Churches in declaring the Roman Church to be the Kingdom of
Antichrist, accordingly as our first Reformers generally held, but every way an
unspeakable Advantage, as any one may easily discern that will consider. And
therefore we being clear in this point, I pray you proceed to the next,
Philotheus.


Philoth. The next Document, as you call it, Philopolis, is this; That, seeing
we are so well assured that the Papacy is the Kingdom of Antichrist, or that
City of Babylon wherein the People of God were held captive, we should leave no
string nor tassel of our ancient Captivity upon us, such, I mean, as whereby
they may take hold on us, and pull us back again into our former Bondage, but
look upon our selves as absolutely free from any tie to them, more then in
endeavoring their Conversion and Salvation. Which we knowing so experimentally
not to be compassed by needless Symbolizings with them in any thing, I conceive
our best policy is studiously to imitate them in nothing, but for all
indifferent things to think rather the worse of them for their using them: As
no person of honor would willingly go in the known garb of any lewd and
infamous persons. Whatsoever we court them in, they do but turn it to our scorn
and contempt, and are the more hardened in their own wickedness. Wherefore,
seeing that needless Symbolizing with them does them no good, but hurt, we
should account our selves in all things indifferent perfectly free, to please
and satisfy in the most universal manner we can those of our own Party, not
caring what Opinions or Customs or outward Formalities the Romanists and
others have, or may have had from the first Degeneracy of the Church. Which we
ought to account the more hideously soiled for the Romanists using of them,
but, supporting our selves upon plain Scripture and solid Reason, to use and
profess such things as will be most universally agreeable to us all, and make
most for the safety and welfare of the true Kingdom of Christ. For this,
undoubtedly, O Philopolis, is the most firm and solid Interest of any
Protestant Church or State whatsoever.


Philop. I am fully of your mind, Philotheus; and this freedom is no more, I
think, then the Protestant Churches generally profess, and particularly the
Church of England, in the Book of Articles and in the Homilies. Artic. 20, and
34. In the Homily of Fasting.
But would you not have them to keep pretty strictly to a Conformity to those
Ages of the Church which are called symmetrall; and the people in the mean time
to yield a peaceable obedience to such Institutes as are not altogether of so
antique a character, (provided they be indifferent) during the pleasure of
their Superiors?


Philoth. I am very really and cordially for that peaceable Compliance, O
Philopolis, and must also acknowledge, that there is a special Reverence due to
those Ages you speak of. But you must remember that the holy Oracles have
predicted and promised us better Times then those, I mean then some of them
especially. Those were the times of the measure of the Reed; these we expect,
of the golden Reed. Things in their own nature immutable are indispensable; but
things indifferent are mutable. And Opinion is ranged amongst those mutable
things: But Faith is as the Rock of Ages. What is commensurable to the golden
Reed must not be cast out: but what is combustible will perish by the Word, and
by the Spirit, which is Fire.


Philop. Of the Use of the Word and of the Spirit in counterdistinction to dry
Reason.
The first Reformers talked much of the Word and of the Spirit: but this present
Age are great Challengers into the field of Reason, to duel it there. And
their Adversaries seem to like the way of Combat. What is the matter with
them, Philotheus?


Philoth. That is not, Philopolis, because they can think their Cause more
rational then ours; but because the vulgar are commonly bad judges of such
Combats, and as ill users of that weapon. They cannot so easily defend
themselves therewith against the Sophisters of the Kingdom of Darkness, nor
well tell upon this account when these Sophisters are overcome by others;
unless they would confess themselves vanquished when they really are so, which
their Policy and Haughtiness will never permit them to do. Insomuch as there
is never any end of such Contests. And therefore though such Combats may do
well enough among the Learned; yet I think it for the Interest of the Kingdom
of Christ, by no means to let go the use of those weapons our first Reformers
found so available in the Recovery of it. The Fourth Principle.
Let no man quit the assurance of the Spirit and of the Word, taking refuge in
dry Reason for the maintaining the truth of his Religion. And this shall be the
Fourth Document.


Philop. The Word both sides are agreed upon. But why do you bring the
judgment of the Spirit in stead of the exercise of our Reason upon the
Scripture?


Philoth. I do not exclude the exercise of Reason, but of dry Reason unassisted
by the Spirit.


Philop. What then do you mean by the Spirit, Philotheus? For this seems to
open a gap to all Wildness and Fanaticism.


Philoth. As you may understand it, Philopolis, it may. But as I understand it,
it is the only way I know to Sobriety. For I understand by the Spirit, not a
blind unaccountable Impression or Impulse, a Lift or an Huff of an heated
Brain; but the Spirit of Life in the new Birth, which is a discerning Spirit,
and makes a man of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. Isa. 11.2, 3.
This is the anointing of our Head and true High Priest the Lord Jesus in the
first place in a supereminent manner, but flows down to the very meanest and
lowest of his Members. In the guidance of this Spirit a man shall either
immediately feel and smell out by an holy Sagacity what is right and true, and
what false and perverse, or at least he shall use his Reason aright to discover
it.


Philop. How a man shall know that he has the Spirit.
Such a Spirit as this indeed, Philotheus, is no Fanatic spirit, but a sure
Guide in all things. But how shall a man know that he has this Spirit?


Philoth. John 3.6.
By the fruits of it. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which
is born of the Spirit is spirit. He that is born of God sins not, 1 John 3.9.
because his seed, that is, the Spirit, remains in him. If we have cast off
the deeds of the flesh, mortifying them through the Spirit, it is a sign the
Spirit of Christ dwells in us. Now the works of the flesh are manifest; Gal.
5.19, etc.
such as are Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings. To which you may add Pride, Insultation,
Contempt of our brother, Cruelty, Fraud, Imposture, Perfidiousness,
Worldly-mindedness, Extortion, Covetousness, and the like. Gal. 5.22, 23.
But the fruit of the Spirit, says the Apostle, is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: against such
there is no Law. This is that Spiritual man that discerns every man, 1 Cor.
2.15.
but is himself discerned by none, unless he be spiritual. Of this Spirit of
life it is said, 1 John 5.12.
He that has the Son has life; but he that has not the Son has not life: Romans
8.9.
As also, He that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. But of him that
has the Son in this true sense, namely, by the abode of his Spirit in him, John
8.36.
it is farther declared, That if the Son make you free, then are you free
indeed.

It is not therefore into an Huff of Fancy, which ignorant giddy men may call
the Spirit, but it is the Spirit of Life in the new Birth into which we would
ultimately resolve our adhesion to the pure Truth of the Gospel, in opposition
to the false adulterate Religion of the Church of Rome. And the Dictates of
this Spirit in its opposition to the gross Idolatries, Impostures and
Barbarities of that carnal Church, (which true Dictates are the Privilege of
that Life that is to Righteousness in the meanest regenerate Christian) would I
set against the popular conceit of that false Church's Infallibillity. This
true ground, though popular, would I have retained, to bear against that
popular Imposture of pretending that the Church of Rome cannot err. For we
being made free by that Spirit of true Sanctification and Holiness, all their
Frauds and Wickednesses are easily felt by vital Antipathy: whereby their
Authority falls to the Dust, and all their contradictious Figments made for
their own worldly Interests are easily judged by the meanest Reason backed and
emboldened by this sincere Spirit of Righteousness and Love; and so they are
found, through the Assistence of this living Principle common to all true
Christians, to be Murderers, Idolaters, and gross Impostours. This is palpable
to the Spirit of Life in the new Birth, which is the Privilege, as I said, of
every true Christian. Nor will all their subtilties of Reason or farfetched
deductions of a tedious or endless intricate Sophistry be able at all to move
or entangle such as are thus perfectly freed from Superstition, and so firmly
established in this Principle of Life and Reality.


Philop. This is not only a safe Sanctuary against all the perverse Sophisms
and cunningly-devised Intricacies of the Church of Rome, whereby they would
illaqueate such honest Christians whose Education has not made them nimble
enough at the weapon of Reason and Disputation; but is also a strong engagement
to make us all more closely and seriously Christianize, that we may the more
palpably feel our selves actuated by this Spirit of Life, and thereby the more
justly and securely defy all the Sophisters of the Dark Kingdom. I mean, this
will not only scatter and repel them, but establish and edify our selves to
eternal Life.


Philoth. Your observation, Philopolis, is very true and good. But now, as by
way of Counterpoize I have set the Spirit of Life in the new Birth against the
pretense of the Infallibility of their Church; so, for my part, I think to run
counter to them in most things that are notoriously peculiar to them, would
prove a safe Direction in Policy. As for example, They are peculiarly infamous
for their Doctrine and Practice, upon account of Spiritual Jurisdiction, of
depriving men of their temporal Rights, as if Dominion were founded in Grace;
and upon this pretense, of Deposing of Kings, and of raising their Subjects in
Rebellion against them. Wherefore my Fifth Document or Instruction should be to
all the members of Christ's Kingdom, The Fifth Principle.
That they do not suffer themselves to be stained with the least blemish or
taint of Disloyalty to their lawful Sovereign upon any account whatsoever, but
especially upon a Religious one; there being no greater Disinterest to the true
Religion, then to appear to be promoted or maintained by so gross Immorality as
Disloyalty, nor no greater Advantage, then through Faith and Patience to bear
all Trialls and hardships, as the old primitive Christians did: Whose eyes
being lift up to Heavenward, and their feet directed wholly in that path, by a
Providence stumbled on the Imperial Crown, the Emperor at last becoming a
professed Christian. Which was a very accumulate Completion of that Prediction
of our Savior, Matt. 6.33.
First seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, as has been noted before.


Philop. This is an excellent Principle indeed, Philotheus, and has annexed to
it a comfortable Observation for all those that live under Princes that as yet
are not converted to the pure Faith of the Gospel, but are still captivated to
the Religion of Rome. But as for your Political Principle of always running
counter to that Church in whatever they seem so notorious, I doubt how that
will always hold. For they do notoriously boast of and affect an universal
Unity in Judgment and Practice; should we therefore affect or indulge to a
Disunity or Difformity in matters of Religion?


Philoth. Alas, Philopolis, my meaning was not that we should run counter to
them in any good things they boast of, but in those bad things they have. They
are divided into multitudes of Opinions amongst themselves as well as others
are: And in those things they seem universally united in, they are rather
forcibly held together by external awe, and fear of being burnt, or having
their throats cut, then out of plain Conviction of Conscience that the Points
they universally profess are true. This is not Union of Life and Spirit, but
the cramming and crouding disunited dust, feathers and straws, and tying them
up close in one bag. This is all the union they have in their universal
Profession. But why this should be called Christian Union, thus by a barbarous
force and compulsion to make a company of men profess and practice the same
things, be they never so Idolatrous or wicked, I understand not. Nor know I
what is, if this be not, an Union or Communion Antichristian. Wherefore we run
opposite enough to them, if we set up against their Antichristian Union an
Union which is truly and really Christian. Which shall be the Sixth
Instruction, viz. That we endeavor above all things after an Union of
unfeigned Belief and Love. The Sixth Principle.
That it may be said of the Church, as of the living Creatures in the Cherubick
Chariot of Ezekiel, Whither the Spirit was to go, Ezekiel. 1.20.
they went.


Philop. How the Church shall attain to the Unity of the Spirit.
This is surely the Unity of the Spirit, which all good Christians are exhorted
to. But how shall we attain to it, Philotheus?


Philoth. This I conceive would confer much thereto, if all Opinions and
Practices in Religion that either hinder or do not promote the Life of God in
the world were universally undervalued by the Church of God. For in this Life
of God is his Spirit. And by this means all opportunity and pretense of any
one's showing himself to be religious, but wherein true Religion does consist,
being quite cut off, men that would be thought at all religious must endeavor
the imitation of that Life we speak of, to approve themselves such. Which they
will do very lamely without the presence of the Spirit. And all occasions of
squabbling and contention about the Shadows and Coverings of Opinions and Forms
being thus removed and taken out of the way, it will be far easier to perform
what the Apostle exhorts to, Ephesians. 4.3.
namely, To keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. For no man then
shall be able to bustle with any credit, unless it be in the behalf of what
tends to the good of the people of God and of all mankind.

But of those external Coverings hear what the Prophet Isay denounces: Woe to
the rebellious children, Isa. 30.1.
says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me, and that cover with a
Covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin. This is the false
Covering of Opinions and Formalities heaped together by the Ignorance or
Hypocrisy of men, whereby they would hide themselves, as Adam, from the eyes
of their Maker. But God has foretold that those of Mount Sion, the Soldiers of
the Lamb, Isa. 25.7.
shall destroy the face of the Covering cast over all people, and the Veil that
is spread over all Nations. And then they must either be clothed with the
Covering of the Spirit, Apoc. 16.15.
or be found stark naked to their open shame, as they are forewarned in the
last Vial. Thus should we approach nearer to that Type of the best state of the
Church figured out in the form of the Cherubims or the four Beasts, where the
Eagle is conceived to have the foot of an Ox, Isa. 55.2.
none of them labor for that which is not bread. Wherefore the number of
Formalities and Opinions being lessened according to their uselesness, and
consequently being but few and profitable, all the Church will easily
understand their importance and truth: As all the four Beasts are said to be
full of eyes, (in opposition to that blind Obedience cried up in the Roman
Church;) and so thoroughly discerning the same Object, and therewithal passing
the same judgment upon it, are also carried with one joint motion and
affection. For even their wings are full of eyes, as denoting they move not out
of any blind Principle, but from a Principle of certain Knowledge. Which
therefore, Philopolis, I would, in opposition to the Church of Rome, (who cry
up Ignorance as the mother of Devotion) make the Seventh Document of holy
Policy, The Seventh Principle.
viz. To instruct the People thoroughly and convincingly of all the Fundamental
mysteries of Truth and Interest appertaining to the Kingdom of God. They that
obtrude Falsehood for their own advantage upon the People, it is their Interest
to keep them in Ignorance: But they that are the Assertours of the Truth, it is
their Interest to have it as fully and fundamentally understood as may be, and
made clear out of Reason or Scripture. And I conceive all Truth that is
needful to Life and Godliness may be in such manner cleared to the
unprejudiced. Whence it will be a very hard tug to seduce any from the Church
to Romanism, Infidelity or Atheism.


Philop. How the mind of man may arrive to a state of Unprejudicateness.
I am clearly of your mind, Philotheus; but all the difficulty is to get to
that state of Vnprejudicateness.


Philoth. If the Son make you free, then are you free indeed.


Sophr. That is not spoken, Philotheus, of freedom from Prejudice, but of
freedom from Sin, so far as humane Nature can be free. John 8.34, 35.
Whosoever commits sin, says our Savior, is the servant of sin. And the
servant abides not in the house for ever; but the Son abides ever. Then
follows, Ver. 36.
If the Son therefore make you free, then are you free indeed.


Philoth. And a little before he says, If ye continue in my word, Ver. 31, 32.
then are ye my Disciples indeed; (that is to say, If ye keep my Commandments)
And ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. Whereupon the
Jews expostulate with our Savior, We be Abraham's seed, Ver. 33.
say they, and were never in bondage to any: how say thou then, Ye shall be
made free? Whereupon in that passage, O Sophron, which you cited, he charges
them with being servants to sin, implying, that that was the Prejudice and
impediment to their attaining to the Truth, in that they lived in sin. So that
freedom from sin, I think, in our Savior's own judgment, does infer also
freedom from Prejudice that hinders the knowledge of the Truth.

Wherefore, O Philopolis, in the Eighth and last place, (for I will not
discourse so now as if I despaired of ever having the opportunity of conferring
with you again,) I shall propose this one Document more, not only very
serviceable for the Unity of the Church, but the most effectual I know, and the
most necessary, for the bringing on those excellent Times your desire is so
carried after.


Philop. I long to hear it, Philotheus.


Philoth. It is Faith in the Power of God and the Spirit of our Lord Jesus
Christ, The Eighth and last Principle.
which he has promised to all Believers, that by this assistence we may get the
conquest over all our Sins and Corruptions, and perfect Holiness in the fear of
God. This Doctrine, That we are not only obliged to an higher pitch of
Morality then either Paganism or Judaism did pretend to or could boast of, but
also that through the Spirit of Christ inhabiting in us we are able to be
reduced to that Rectitude of Life and Spirit which our Savior sets out in his
Sermon upon the Mount, and elsewhere in his Discourses in the Gospels; It is
this Doctrine, I say, that must renew the world in righteousness, and bring on
those glorious Times that so many good men believe and desire; This,
Philopolis, is a necessary preparation thereto. For what Doctrine but this can
reach the Hypocrisy of men's hearts, who, under color of not being able to be
rid of all their Sins, will set themselves against none, or but the least
considerable, or will be sure to spare their darling-sins, and perpetually
decline that Self-resignation which is indispensably required of every true
Christian? Nay, they will quit none of them, under pretense we must necessarily
retain a gradual Imperfection throughout. And they will be sure to pitch on
that Degree that is most for their own ease, and the satisfaction of their own
Lusts.


Sophr. This is a very searching Doctrine indeed, Philotheus. But what do you
drive at? an absolute perfection quoad parts and quoad gradus, as the Schools
phrase it?


Philoth. I drive at an absolute Sincerity by this Doctrine, O Sophron, that a
man should not allow himself in any known Wickedness whatsoever, but keep an
upright Conscience before God and before men: Forasmuch as his own Conscience
tells him by virtue of this Doctrine, that if he be not wanting to himself, God
is both able and willing, by the Assistence of his Spirit, to free him from all
his Corruptions. And the Scripture plainly declares that this is the end of
Christ's coming, namely, Tit. 2.12.
That denying all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly and
righteously and godly in this present world: Ver. 13.
looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all Iniquity; according to that exhortation of St. Peter, Wherefore gird up the
loins of your mind, 1 Pet. 1.13, etc.
be sober, and of a perfect hope in the grace that is brought to you through
the Revelation of Jesus Christ: As obedient children, not fashioning your
selves according to former Lusts in your ignorance: But as he that has called
you is holy, so be ye holy in your whole Conversation, (in every thing you
do:) Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. And our Blessed
Savior, in his Sermon on the Mount, Matt. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. And St. Paul to
the Ephesians witnesses for our Savior, that this was the end of his giving
himself as a Ransom or of dying for his Church, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
namely, That he might sanctify it and cleanse it with the washing of water by
the Word; that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish, like the Lamb's Wife in the Revelation, which is the new Jerusalem.


Sophr. I must confess, Philotheus, these places sound at an high pitch of
Sanctity, which Christians are called to, and yet fall so infinitely short of.


Philoth. That is for want of this Faith I plead for, a Faith in the Power of
God and in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, for the purging away all our
Corruptions. For the New Birth is the Son of the Promise, and is that Isaac,
the Joy of the whole Earth. But he is conceived by Faith in the omnipotent
Spirit of God, who from the four winds blew upon the slain in the Valley of
dead men's bones, Ezekiel. 37.9
and made them stand up a numerous Army; who gave the promised Seed to
Abraham, Rom 4.18, etc.
who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many
Nations. For he considered not his own body now dead, nor the deadness of
Sarah's womb: he staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in Faith, giving glory to God; being fully persuaded that what he had
promised he was able also to perform. This Faith therefore in the Promise of
the Assistence of the Spirit of Christ in the new Birth is that which must
renew the World into the living Image of God, and make all the Nations of the
Earth blessed; which must bring the new Jerusalem from Heaven, and will call
down God himself to pitch his Tabernacle amongst men. Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.


Euist. Even wonders of wonders, I think. But this Faith, Philotheus, in the
Power of God and in the Assistence of his Spirit, to enable us to extirpate and
mortify all our Corruptions to an happy Resurrection to Life and
Righteousness, was not the Faith that our first Reformers were so zealous in.
How was it then, I pray you, that they should miss of so useful a Truth?


Philoth. They did not wholly miss of it, The Doctrine of Faith in the Power of
God's Spirit for the ridding us of Sin, why not so much insisted on at the
beginning of the Reformation.
Euistor, in that they did zealously call to men to relinquish humane
Tradition, and to betake themselves to the pure Word, and to the Belief and
faith of the Gospel, according to that more infallible Rule. Wherefore that
Faith which they preached having for its Object the pure Gospel of Christ, the
Doctrines according to Scripture; this Doctrine of Faith in the omnipotent
Spirit for the vanquishing of Sin being also contained in Scripture, must be
part of the Object of the Faith which they preached.


Euist. That is, I acknowledge, O Philotheus, in some sense true. But their
zeal ran mainly out in declaring and crying up that part of Faith which
respects only Justification in the blood of Christ, and free Remission of our
sins.


Philoth. And it was very seasonably cried up, as being a very plain Gospel
Truth, and such as was trod down under foot in the Church of Rome, for the
more absolutely enslaving the people of God, and holding them under an hard
Bondage in that Mystical Babylon, or Land of Egypt; they laying many heavy
burdens of Superstition upon them only to advance the King of Egypt's
Interest, and so to extinguish the Light and Comfort of the Gospel. Wherefore
that Truth of Justification by Faith being so accommodated to shake off the
Roman Yoke, it is no wonder it was so zealously insisted upon, and so generally
inculcated by the first Reformers.


Sophr. But this was not all, Philotheus. For several things passed from some
of them, who were otherwise very successful Instruments in the Reformation,
that seem not only to favor humane Infirmities, and to dishearten men from
attempting any such Conquests over our Lusts and Corruptions as your Doctrine
animates us to, but also, on the contrary, to savor much of rank
Antinomianism, as ill a disease as can seize on the Church of Christ.


Philoth. I acknowledge, O Sophron, that Divine Providence might permit such
misinterpretable Expressions in some of the first Reformers. But you know,
Luther himself, who is most suspected, yet wrote against the Antinomians: and
the Harmony of Confessions of all the Protestant Churches adjoyns the Doctrine
of Sanctification or a Good life to that of Justification by Faith. But that
such a pitch of Holiness as we now treat of should have been exacted so
zealously by the first Reformers from their Followers, seems not congruous nor
seasonable for those Times. The over-severe Inculcation of such Doctrine in
opposition to the false Righteousness of Romanism would have drawn away but few
Auditors from that Church, whose Sanctity was only carnal. They would have
thought they had been to be led out of a lesser Bondage or Captivity into a
greater; and so that small distinct Number of the immaculate Lambs of Christ
had been a more certain, as well as a more delicious, Morsel for that
devouring Wolf of Rome.


Bath. I understand perfectly whereabout Philotheus would be, namely, That
Divine Providence made choice of such Instruments by an external Instigation,
as who left to themselves in many things, to cut out their own way, would fall
into such Opinions and Expressions as would be most effectual for the rending
or tearing of huge massy pieces from the Church of Rome, that in these great
Lumps the Gold might be safe amongst the Dross, and that in his mixed Numerosity
there might be a more safe Protection of the Godly against the bloody
Persecutions and barbarous Tyrannies of the Papal Power.


Philoth. The true means of unity in the Church again glanced at.
You understand me aright, Bathynous. But now, I say, after the Stone was thus
cut off again from the great Mountain, and safely disjoined therefrom, it was
not still to have ly'n unpolished or Moss-begrown, for want of Art or Industry
in the Master Builders; but all of us ought to have become by this time living
stones, pure and well-polished, and through the Unity of the Spirit to have
been joined together into one holy Temple of God. Which Unity of Spirit,
Bathynous, can never be without Unity of Life: For in the Life is the Spirit,
as I suggested before. Nor can this Unity of Life ever be without a through
Purification of the Church from Sin and Corruption; nor can this Purification
be without Faith in the Power of God and the Assistence of Jesus Christ to
refine us from all our Dross. For he that believes no possibility of any such
thing will neither pray for it, nor attempt it, nor any way go about it.
Wherefore this general Indulgence to our Corruptions keeping us from the Unity
of Spirit and sameness of Judgment in matters of Religion, and making us
destitute of that healing Virtue of brotherly Love and Charity, we are left,
like so many wild Beasts and grizly Monsters, to grin and spit fire at one
another, but can never attain to Peace before we attain to a due measure of
Righteousness. For Christ in the Church must first be Melchizedek, Hebr. 7.2.
and introduce his Righteousness amongst us, before he can be King of Salem in
this sense, Isa. 9.6.
a Prince of Peace. Nor can we have this Spirit of Righteousness communicated
to us before we be embued with that Faith in the Power of Christ for the
vanquishing of Sin, as has been said over and over again.


Bath. Wherefore, Philotheus, so far as I see, this Faith in the Power of
Christ for the vanquishing of Sin, especially accompanied with Charity, may
stand in balance against the Romish implicit Faith that they would urge for the
suppressing of Schism: as if nothing would so well assure the Peace of the
Church, as for men to have either a perfect upright Conscience, or else no
Conscience at all. But this latter being so hideously detestable, we see the
greater necessity of exhorting all men with all diligence to make after the
former.


Philoth. Which without this Faith in the Power of Christ for the conquering
our Corruptions they will never endeavor after, much less successfully attain
thereunto.


Bath. So I have said already, Philotheus, I think, or at least intended to say
so.


Philoth. But being full of Faith, The mavelous Efficacy of Faith in the
Power of the Spirit of Christ for the vanquishing of Sin.
and perfectly persuaded that Christ by his Spirit both can and will assist to
the utter vanquishing of all manner of Sin and Corruption in us, such, I mean,
as Pride, and Covetousness, and Uncleanness, and all Hypocrisy and
Selfishness, and the like; what is there of all that* that disturbs the World
and distracts humane affairs that will not fly before so invincible a force?
If this Faith were once implanted in the hearts of men, and they read in the
Prophets the lively and lovely descriptions of that excellent state of the
Church which is to come; what quick approches were they able to make in virtue
hereof, while they look upon that glorious Pattern, and through Faith and holy
Imitation be daily changed by the Spirit of the Lord from glory to glory? 2
Cor. 3.17, 18.



Philop. The more I consider it, Philotheus, the more I am satisfied of what
infinite importance this Doctrine of Faith in the omnipotent Spirit of Christ
is, both for the present welfare of the Church, and also for the bringing on
that future Happiness predicted by the Prophets; what searching Physic it is
to cleanse the Soul, and what a mighty Cordial to revive her. So far as I see,
this kind of Faith is the Primum mobile or the first Spring of all Motion that
can tend effectually toward the Renovation of the World in Righteousness, and
the bringing on those glorious Times of the Church which you did so graphically
describe out of the Visions of the Prophets.


Sophr. An Answer to an Objection touching this Doctrine of Faith.
And I can scarce forbear to cast in my suffrage too, Philopolis, were it not
for this one Scruple, That this so high Doctrine of Faith in the omnipotent
Spirit for the utter Extirpation of Sin might as well scare people out of the
Reformed Churches, as have hindered them at first from coming in to the
Reformation. The truth of the Doctrine rightly understood I do not much
question, but only the discretion of professing it.


Philoth. This is a material Consideration of yours, O Sophron. But you are to
understand, that this Doctrine rightly interpreted does not at all clash with
any of those due Comforts that accrue to us from that other of Justification by
Faith, and of free Remission of sin in the blood of Christ. These things I
write, 1 John 2^, 2.
says St. John, that ye sin not. But if any one sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: And he is a propitiation for our sins.
All that is aimed at is, a cheerful and sincere endeavor of not sinning at
all, (as we pray in our Liturgy every Morning.) Which constant endeavor if it
be used, no man ought to be dejected for his Failings till God give more
strength, but cheerfully to rouse himself with a greater indignation and
resolution against Sin, not at all despairing of forgiveness, having so potent
an Advocate with him whom he has offended. But if any one is content to sin
without any endeavor of Resistance or belief of ever being able to overcome
and subdue his Corruptions, and would forsake the Communion of the Reformed
Church for the rubbing up his Conscience with a more wholesome and searching
Doctrine, and so seek Teachers elsewhere after his own heart's lusts; all that
I can say is this, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
That for this cause God shall send him strong delusions, that he shall believe
a Lie; that he may be damned for not believing the Truth, but having pleasure
in Unrighteousness. And I hope very few will venture upon those Pikes. This
Doctrine can hardly fright any away, but such as have an explicit mind and
purpose fully to plunge themselves into the filth of sin. But what a vast
company has broke from the Reformed Churches into private Sects, upon pretense
that their Doctrine tends not sufficiently to Perfection, can be hid from no
man's eyes that looks never so little into the World. So far is this Doctrine
from being against the Interest of Reformed Christendom. To all which you may
add, that it need not be imposed as an Article, but allowed.

In the mean time that general Languour and Remissness in all Duties of Life,
or rather that universal Deluge of open Lewdness and wickedness, which, for
ought I know, has broken in upon us for want of such Doctrines as would more
effectually engage us in all Holiness of Conversation, is by far a more
formidable Dis-interest to the Reformed Churches, then the Profession or
Permission of this Doctrine we speak of any way can be. For Providence has no
obligation to continue their Religion to those, be it never so true, who have
no more Conscience then to hold the Truth of God in unrighteousness.


Sophr. Nay, your Answer, I must confess, Philotheus, is very home and
pertinent.


Philop. And so think I too; and am hitherto (which I must acknowledge with
many thanks to you, Philotheus) very competently satisfied (and therefore am
the more unwilling to urge you any farther in any more Particulars) touching
these Heads, feeding my self with hopes of future Conference from your own
comfortable Intimation. But however, I cannot but give you the trouble of
passing to the last Point, Of the Duration of the glorious Times of the Church.
to gratify my Curiosity touching the Duration and Permanency of this
excellent state of the Church, and of describing to me in what order and
distinctness things will proceed to the end of all.


Philoth. This is an hard Problem, Philopolis, as well as curious, the second
part especially. For touching the Duration or Permanency of the Church in that
glorious Condition, the holy Oracles plainly intimate it will be for a thousand
years, Apoc. 20.3.
though I do not think it necessary to understand that expression as if it
should continue no longer. For the meaning of that number may be symbolicall.
But for the order and distinctness of the proceeding of Affairs to the end of
the World, this a man cannot well know, unless he understood the Synchronalls
to the seven Thunders into which the last Trumpet is so distinctly distributed.
Apoc. 10.3.
Which I must confess, Philopolis, was ever out of my reach, till I fortunately
fell into acquaintance with one Theomanes, a very good man, The Character of
Theomanes.
and most passionate well-willer to the Affairs of the Kingdom of God.


Cuph. That Is a peculiar Privilege of yours, Philotheus, to be so intimately
acquainted with Theomanes. For my part, I have often courted him with the best
skill and diligence I could, but could never yet get into any familiarity with
him.


Sophr. And, I think in my heart, never will do, so long as your name is
Cuphophron.


Philop. I pray you, Philotheus, what is this Theomanes for a man? and what did
he impart to you touching the seven Thunders?


Philoth. I gave you part of his Character already. And if you do not yet
understand me, Philopolis, I add farther, That he is a man wholly devoted to
the Knowledge of his Maker from his very youth, and quitted the World almost as
soon as he was born into it, having never any design upon any thing that the
World is so mad after, neither Honor, nor Power, nor Riches, nor carnal
Pleasures; but his mind has been wholly set to search out true Knowledge in the
Light of the Simplicity of Life, in which quitting all Self-relishes he became
an entire Servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and a faithful Minister
of his Kingdom.


Philop. You give the Character of an excellent person. But what did he impart
to you, Philotheus?


Philoth. The Vision of the seven Thunders, if I may so call it for brevity
sake. But his meaning is, the Vision of things synchronall to the seven
Thunders.


Philop. You will infinitely oblige me, if you please to communicate them unto
us, O Philotheus. But is he not a man something Enthusiasticall or Fanaticall?


Philoth. The greatest Fanaticism that I know in him is this, That he professes
he understands clearly the truth of several Prophecies of the mainest
concernment (which yet many others pretend to be very obscure) whether he will
or no. But he is so far from being Enthusiasticall or Fanaticall that, whereas
Enthusiasm is a false Surmise of a man's self that he is inspired, when indeed
he is not, he, on the contrary, does disclaim his being at any time inspired,
though a man would think sometimes that he is. But he imputes all to the Light
of the Simplicity of Life, the greatest Gift of God that is communicable to the
Soul. Neither does he boast that this Vision of the seven Thunders is any
over-bearing Inspiration, though it was the most involuntary thing that ever
happened to him perfectly awake.


Philop. I pray you therefore tell us in what Circumstances it happened to
Theomanes. For I believe he would conceal nothing from you, by reason of your
Intimacy with him.


Philoth. Time will not permit to make any long Story of it. The Circumstances
therefore in brief are these. Upon a time, after he had much worn away and
exhausted his spirits by a long and serious study in the Divine Oracles, he
thinking to take a long and leisurely walk into the fields to recruit his
Strength by the open fresh air, and to let his Mind be perfectly vacant for the
relief of his Body, of a sudden in the midst of the fields this Vision of the
seven Thunders surprised him without his desire or expectation, which took fast
hold on his Mind and Fancy, insomuch that he could not be quiet for the
working thereof, (though it made him so weak that he could scarce go on his
legs) till he had committed the same to writing.


Philop. This is something extraordinary. Have you a Copy of it, Philotheus?
For the Narration of such things ought to be very accurate.


Philoth. I have a Copy of it both in my Pocket and in my Memory; it has left
so strong an Impress upon my mind. But I believe you will think it most safe
if I read the Copy, for it is yet light enough, and I brought it on purpose,
foreseeing the need thereof in this day's Discourse.


Philop. I pray you, Philotheus, read it to us.


Cuph. There are ordinarily Political and Philosophical Gazetts; but it is
our Privilege, it seems, to have a Prophetical one.


Philop. Cuphophron will have his conceit on every thing, be it never so
serious. Let him call it what he will. I pray you, Philotheus, read it
leisurely and distinctly.


Philoth. Theomanes his Vision of the seven Thunders.
I shall, Philopolis. The Title is, The space of the seventh Trumpet dividing it
self into the seven Thunders, with their previous Coruscations, in order as
follows. It begins with a straight stroke and broken line abruptly after this
manner;

-- And the first Coruscation cast forth its Light, which shone from one end of
the Heaven to the other. Whereupon a most dreadful Thunder uttered its voice,
insomuch that the Earth shook and trembled and shrunk under it. Wherewithal
the Clouds were discharged of a most noisome and prodigious Rain of Blood, of
Fire, of Hail and infectious Dust, with other such like Plagues of Egypt;
insomuch that men were exceedingly tormented and enraged by reason of the
intolerableness of the Plagues.


Philop. This I believe is but a more broken and confused Representation of the
Effusion of the seven Vials, or of something synchronall thereto: As you have
already declared that the seven Vials are Synchronall to the first Thunder.


Philoth. It may be so, Philopolis.


Philop. But I pray you go on, I shall not again interrupt you.


Philoth. After this I looked up, and behold in the East a large white Cloud,
which came sailing as it were with a cool and refreshing gale of wind toward an
exceeding high Mountain, at a certain distance from which the second
Coruscation discharged it self from this Cloud. Whereupon I heard a more
cheerful Thunderclap re-echoing through the Air, and the Cloud breaking
a-pieces, I saw a most glorious City lightly descending, carried in the stream
of this cool breeze obliquely downward, and so settling at last on the Top of
this high Mountain.

But I had not long fed mine eyes with so beautiful a Sight, when unexpectedly
from over the City a bright Coruscation broke forth, so great and so glorious,
from the pure Sky, that the light of the Heavens was sevenfold more clear then
the light of the Sun. Upon which immediately I heard from thence the voice of
the third Thunder, and thereupon as it were the voice of a Man, tunable and
articulate, saying, Hallelujah. Apoc. 19.6.
The Lord reigns. And suddenly after a whole Quire of voices seconded this
first Voice, saying, Hallelujah. Psalm 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. The Mountain of the
Lord's House is established on the top of the Mountains, Isa. 2.2.
and all Nations flow unto it. Apoc. 21.24.
The Nations of them that are saved walk in the light of it, and the Kings of
the Earth do bring their glory and honor unto it. Hallelujah. Which Heavenly
and enravishing Melody was heard from the Holy City for the space of four
hours.

After this I cast mine eyes toward the West, and I saw a large Cloud of two
colors, black and pitchy on the West part thereof, and of a bright shining
color toward the East. And lo, of a sudden the fourth Thunder uttered its
voice from the West Side of the Cloud, and discharged it self upon certain
hollow Rocks and Mountains, tearing them a-pieces, and rending open their
infernal Caverns. While in the mean time there issued out on the East Side a
strong Wind, but pure and refreshing, which dividing into several parts that
turned round became so many innocuous Whirl-winds of sincere Air, tinctured
only with a cool refreshing smell, as if it had passed over some large field
of Lilies and Roses. Which Whirl-winds moved from man to man, lifting them
somewhat from the Earth, and so letting them easily down again; but left a Mark
upon the Bodies of every one they thus lifted, and a sweet Savor on themselves
and on their Garments. And the number of them thus lifted and marked is the
number of the Companies of the Lamb, and their number was 1728. But in the
Western part of Heaven the Air was ill-sented by reason of the Fumes from those
dark Caves, out of which were seen to come many direful and dismal Forms,
with part of their melted Chains (which the Thunderclap had broke a-pieces)
hanging upon their bodies. Which Hellish Shapes ran up and down after men upon
the face of the Earth, catching them and breathing upon them a poisonous breath
that corrupted their bodies, and made them look black and deformed like Devils.
But the lifted Companies were too light-footed for them, neither had they any
power over them, because they bore the Mark of the Lamb upon their bodies.

These things I saw under the voice of the fourth Thunder. After which I
beheld, and lo, the whole Heaven was overcast with Clouds, especially toward
the bottom: And immediately the fifth Thunder uttered its voice. And there was
a re-echoing noise round about the Heavens, like the beating of Drums.
Whereupon I saw innumerable Armies of men from the four Quarters of the Earth
marching up toward the Holy City, to lay close Siege unto it. Apoc. 20.9.
And they encompassed the Camp of the Saints round about. And I was in an
exceeding great fear and trembling.

But in the midst of this solicitude there came a large flash of Lightening
from the East, which shone unto the West, and the sixth Thunder uttered its
voice. And I saw the Clouds rent from the Horizon upwards, and they were parted
toward the North and toward the South like the Curtains of an opened Tent or
Canopie. Whereupon a mavelous Light sprung up very fast from that quarter,
and the voice of the Thunder was immediately drowned with a terrible sound of a
Trumpet which filled the whole Concave of the Heavens, and made the Ground
tremble under men's feet. Apoc. 20.11.
And lo, there suddenly appeared a great white Throne arched like a Rainbow,
with the Son of man sitting upon it with glory and great majesty, from whose
face the Earth and Heavens fled away, and there was found no place for them.
And the dead all appeared before the Tribunal of God, and the Books were
opened. And they whose names were written in the Book of Life, their strength
was renewed unto them, and they mounted up with wings like Eagles, and
associated themselves with the Angels of God. But the Hypocrites and Profane
were condemned, whose hearts grew more heavy then lead, and became the dregs
and sediment of the World, Fear and Despair sinking them down; while Joy and
Assurance lifted up the Sincere into those more defecate Mansions. For the
whole Sky was filled with Myriads of myriads of Shapes in this great
Compearance; where the purer Spirits ascended upwards, and the more gross were
precipitated downwards, by the stupendous operation of the great Refiner of
the Universe. And I saw the Good perfectly separated from the Wicked, and the
King of Glory rise from his Throne. And this general Assizes was turned
suddenly into a Triumphal Pomp to the Godly, they marching orderly in the open
Sky with the rest of the Army of the great King, with such splendor and luster
as is ineffable; their Mouths also being filled with Songs of Victory, and
their Ears with the Echo of their own Melody. For the Air was miraculously
tuned into Musical Accents to their Divine Ditties, as if some invisible hand
had played upon the Concave of the Heavens as upon some well-strung Harpsicall
or Theorbo. So that my Soul was so enravished with the sight and with the
Music, that my Heart melted, mine Eyes flowed over with tears, and my Spirits
failed within me, for very excess of Joy.


Philop. Certainly Theomanes was in a very great Rapture when he was thus
affected.


Philoth. And he was thus really affected, Philopolis, as he told me; and I
dare believe him: for he is a man of the greatest Simplicity imaginable.


Philop. But I have interrupted you again, Philotheus, before I was aware. I
pray you go on.


Philoth. But part of this pleasure was quickly intercepted by a sudden
overcasting of the Heavens as it were with an universal thick Cloud of a rusty
hue. But I heard the Music still, whereby I might discern the motions of that
Triumphal Pomp. But a more dreadful noise presently put an end to that Rapture
also. For this Cloud of Night broke into a Chasm near the celestial Army, which
was instantly filled with a most glorious Light, and through that lucid passage
I heard a mighty voice like the sound of a Trumpet saying, I am Alpha and
Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginner and Continuer and Ender of Ages. I
am he that lived and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, and have the
Keys of Hell and Death. Whereupon the Chasm closed again, and the Souls of the
forsaken were filled with horror. For they presently expected the execution of
that dreadful Sentence, Matt. 25.41.
Go ye accursed into everlasting Fire. And indeed after some pause and silence,
(wherein I again heard that Heavenly Melody, but a little farther off, that
Triumphant Company ascending higher and higher through the bright azure fields
of peaceful Bliss) the arched roof of this hollow Dungeon seemed all on fire
with cross Flashings and Lightenings running all over. Which had no sooner
ceased, but the seventh Thunder uttered its voice, which was accompanied with a
rolling and tearing noise every way over the whole Sky. Whereupon the Clouds
set a-raining one continual sad and direful shower of Fire and Brimstone upon
this forlorn Crew, till the whole Earth became but as one round Lake or Pond of
burning Sulphur. Apoc. 20.15.
And whosoever had not his name found in the Book of Life, his portion was in
this Lake of fire burning with Brimstone; Apoc. 21.8
which is the second Death.

This is Theomanes his Vision, O Philopolis, of the seven Thunders. Which
contains in it the most distinct order and succession of Affairs in the Church,
from the beginning of the seventh Trumpet to the end of all things, that I ever
met with. I must confess the Distinctions are but general: but if I had had any
thing more precise and particular, that great sincerity and nobleness of
spirit, and hearty love and zeal for the Interest of the Kingdom of God, which
I persuade my self I discern in you, would have obliged me to have imparted it
to you with a very good will.


Philop. I give you many thanks, Philotheus, for your good opinion and
bountiful intention. But what you have imparted is more then I could merit or
hope to obtain from any other hand, and such as I must acknowledge my self
competently well satisfied with, as having some guess what every one of those
Thunders mean; but should be better confirmed in my apprehensions thereof, if
you would briefly communicate your thoughts of them.


Philoth. That I shall do, A brief Explication of Theomanes his Vision.
and very briefly, O Philopolis. These seven Things therefore are orderly
contained in the seven Spaces of the seven Thunders. In the first, the Effusion
of the seven Vials. In the second, The settling or establishing of the Church
into the State of the new Jerusalem come down from Heaven. In the third, That
more full and universal Reign of Christ called the blessed Millennium (...), or
in a more proper and eminent sense. In the fourth, The loosing of Satan, or the
visible vergency of the World to another Degeneracy or Apostasy from the
Kingdom of Christ. In the fifth, An Attempt of the apostatized part of the
World to get the Dominion again over the Godly, and the danger of the Wicked's
again captivating the Just. In the sixth, The visible appearance of Christ in
the last Judgment, wherein he gives Sentence upon both the bad and the good.
In the seventh and last, The Execution of this Sentence; the Godly and sincere
Believers ascending with the holy Angels toward their Heavenly Inheritance
prepared for them, while Hypocrites and Unbelievers are tumbling with the
Devils in the Lake of Brimstone burning with Fire.


Philop. I thought there was some such meaning of this Vision, and plainly see,
through the Symbols and Iconisms of it, that there is nothing contained in it
that is at all dangerous or Heterodox. But the manner of his being affected in
his receiving these orderly-ranged Truths seems to me something extraordinary.
Does not Theomanes highly relish such a peculiarity of Dispensation, O
Philotheus?


Philoth. The important Usefulness of Theomanes his Vision, together with the
Iustifiableness of his yielding to such an Impression.
Not at all, Philopolis, so far as I can discern. He only expresses himself
well pleased with the Reasonableness and Usefulness of the Vision. For he
professes it consonant to both Scripture and Philosophy, and has taken notice
several times in my hearing how useful it is, both for the digesting all those
Visions in the Apocalypse that appertain to the last Trumpet into their right
Order according to Synchronism; and also to discover the Ignorance of some that
have pretended to Inspiration, who guessing that the last Trumpet is the
Trumpet of the last Judgment in a Political sense, but not discerning these
distinct parts of it, (I mean the distribution thereof into the seven Thunders)
have adventured to conclude, to the prejudice of the Apostolic Faith, that
there is no other Judgment but this, nor any other Trumpet to raise the Dead,
and to summon them before the Tribunal of Christ, then the Evangelization of a
certain Doctrine of their own broaching. But assuredly, Philopolis, that
Resurrection which St. Paul treats of in his first Epistle to the Corinthians
is not a Moral nor Political Resurrection, (as cannot but be palpably manifest
to any one that impartially peruses his Discourse;) and therefore the last
Trumpet there mentioned cannot bear a mere Moral or Political signification:
As it is manifest that cannot in his first to the Thessalonians, For the Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be
with the Lord. It is intolerable to hale this to a Moral or Political sense.
Therefore I say all the last Trumpet is not of a Political meaning, but only
the five first parts thereof. In the sixth part, or under the sixth Thunder,
the sound of the Trumpet may be natural or audible, as also the Thunder in the
seventh; and the Lake of Fire and Brimstone not symbolicall or dioristicall,
but visible or natural, whatever Infidelity or Sadducism suggests to the
contrary. For this Earth must have an End as well as it had a Beginning. So
that that false Inspiration which Theomanes seems to obviate is as well against
Philosophy as Scripture.


Philop. This is an apparent Usefulness indeed, Philotheus, of Theomanes his
Vision. But it is a marvel he was not afraid to admit of any such Impression
upon his mind, that pretended to disclose the Mysteries of the seven Thunders
which John was bid to seal up, and not write them.


Hyl. That was only for that time, Philopolis: but what hinders but that
afterward they might be made known?


Philoth. That was very courteously meant of you in the behalf of Theomanes, O
Hylobares. But his Adventure wants no such excuse. For I have also objected
such things unto him: But he said, he had no reason to be afraid to admit of
such Impressions as did only seal his Imagination but with such Truths as
Scripture and Reason had assured him of before. Besides, that he does not
pretend that this Vision of the seven Thunders is the disclosing those seven
Oracles or Voices then uttered so St. John, which he was prohibited to write,
but seven distinctions of Affairs succeeding in the seventh Trumpet, which this
Impression bore him into a belief of being synchronall to the seven Thunders.
And there being just seven general Successions of Affairs typified by those
Visions in the Apocalypse appertaining to the seventh Trumpet, to which all
other may be reduced as synchronall, it seems to be a great Ratification of the
purport of this Vision. But it would be too tedious to make out all this to
you, Philopolis, at this time.


Philop. Philotheus prevailed with to play a Divine Rhapsodie to the Theorbo.
And I am so abundantly satisfied for this bout, that I have no reason to permit
you to give your self that trouble. You have gratified me in all the Points I
have proposed to you, Philotheus, beyond my hope and expectation, so that my
mind is even lost in Joy and Amazement.


Cuph. Nothing better to collect it again then such a Song as Bathynous sung to
the Theorbo for the composing Hylobares his great Emotion of mind upon our
other-day's Discourse. Come, Bathynous, I hope you will be as civil to
Philopolis as you was to Hylobares.


Bath. I would willingly serve Philopolis in any thing that is in my power,
provided it were not to his prejudice.


Philop. Why, Bathynous, a grave strain of Music and a Song suitable to this
day's Dissertation will be so far from doing me any prejudice, that it will be
the ultimate completion of my present Enjoyments.


Bath. But it were to your prejudice, for me, who have twice performed so
badly, to undertake the same Province this third time, whenas there are others
here present that can discharge it much more to your satisfaction.


Sophr. Certainly he must mean Philotheus, who, I believe, would fit this turn
better then any, he has such a special faculty of joining parts of Psalms
together, and of directing them to the same scope, (and that out of an
excellent Paraphrase) which he plays to the Theorbo with enravishing delight
both to himself and others.


Philoth. I delight my self so sometimes, but it is beyond my expectation if
others be delighted with such mean Music.


Sophr. But the sense is wonderfully taking and transporting, O Philopolis, and
therefore do not forbear to require this Civility at his hands.


Bath. That you may have no more trouble then needs must, I Will tune the Lute
for you. It is within a thought in tune already. It Is an excellently-sounded
Instrument. Here take it, Philotheus.


Philoth. Well, I prevailed with you, Bathynous, more then once, and therefore
your demand is the more reasonable, and cannot be denied, since it is also to
gratify Philopolis.


Philop. I am infinitely engaged to you, Philotheus, for your intended favor.


Cuph. I pray you, Philotheus, sing no Tragical strain in agreableness to the
last Thunder, that I lose not my Repose this Night, or dream affrightfully.


Philoth. Nothing can affright a firm and upright Conscience: Non fulminantis
magna Iovis manus. Horat. Carm. lib. 3. Od. 3.

You know the cheerful description of that state in the Poet, Cuphophron.


Cuph. I do so.


Philoth. But however my Music shall rather be in Consort with the third
Thunder then the last.


Philop. I pray you, Philotheus, let us hear it.


Philoth. Thou who art enthroned above,
Thou by whom we live and move,
O how sweet! how excellent
Is It, with Tongue and Heart's consent,
Thankful Hearts and joyful Tongues,
To renown thy Name in Songs:
When the Morning paints the Skies,
When the sparkling Stars arise,
Thy high Favors to rehearse,
Thy firm Faith in grateful verse!
Take the Lute and Violin,
Let the solemn Harp begin,
Instruments strung with ten strings,
While the silver Cymbal rings.
From thy Works my Joy proceeds:
How I triumph in thy Deeds!
Who thy Wonders can express?
All thy Thoughts are fathomless,
Hid from men in Knowledge blind,
Hid from Fools to Vice inclined.
Tell mankind Jehovah reigns;
He shall bind the World in chains,
So as it shall never slide,
And with sacred Justice guide.
Let the smiling Heavens rejoice,
Joyful Earth exalt her voice:
Let the dancing Billows roar,
Echo's answer from the shore,
Fields their flowery Mantles shake:
All shall in their Joy partake;
While the Wood-Musicians sing
To the ever-youthfull Spring.
Fill his Courts with sacred Mirth.
He, He comes to judge the Earth.
Justly He the World shall sway,
And his Truth to men display.
This or such like Rhapsodies as this do I often sing to my self, Philopolis,
in the silent Night, or betimes in the Morning at break of Day, subjoyning
always that of our Savior as a suitable Epiphonema to all, Abraham saw my Day
afar off, and rejoiced in it. At this window I take breath, while I am even
choked and stifled with the crowd and stench of the daily Wickednesses of this
present evil World, and am almost quite wearied out with the tediousness and
irksomeness of this my earthly Pilgrimage.


Philop. Well, Philotheus, Philopolis his mistake in preferring high
Contemplations before the useful Duties of a Practical Life.
you may complain as you please; but you seem to me a Company that live the
most delicious and Seraphick Lives that I could ever imagine any to do upon
this Earth. The Prelibation of those future Joys and Glories, that you in a
manner make present to you by so firm a Faith and clear Prospect of things, is
an Anticipation of the Happiness of Heaven, at least of that Heaven that is to
be upon Earth when the new Jerusalem shall descend from above. I am so
infinitely transported with your excellent Converse, that I am almost out of
conceit with my own condition of Life, and could wish I had never been engaged
in the care of a Wife and a Family, or any other Secular Occasions, that I
might join my self for ever to your blessed Society: Of such unspeakable
pleasure has this five days entertainment been to my mind.


Philoth. God forbid, Philopolis, that the Sweet of Contemplation should ever
put your mouth out of taste with the savoury Usefulness of Secular Negotiations.
To do good to men, to assist the injured, to relieve the necessitous, to
advise the ignorant in his necessary affairs, to bring up a Family in the fear
of God and a cheerful hope of everlasting Happiness after this Life, does as
much transcend our manner of living, if it ended in a mere pleasing our selves
in the delicacy of select Notions, as solid Goodness does empty Phantastry, or
sincere Charity the most childish Sophistry that is. The exercise of Love and
Goodness, of Humanity and Brotherly-kindness, of Prudence and Discretion, of
Faithfulness and Neighbourliness, of unfeigned Devotion and Religion in the
plain and undoubted Duties thereof, is to the truly regenerate Soul a far
greater pleasure then all the fine Speculations imaginable.


Philop. You Will pardon this sudden surprise, Philotheus: for your wholesome
Instruction has reduced me again to the right sense of things. I am fully
convinced that all Speculation is vain that tends not to the Duty of Practice,
nor inables a man the better to perform what he owes to God, to his Prince and
Country, to his Family, Neighbors and Friends. Which is the only
consideration that makes my parting with this excellent Society any thing
tolerable to me at this time; being so fully instructed by you, that I am not
to live to please my self, but to be serviceable to others. And therefore I
shall endeavor not so to leave you, as not to carry away the better part of
you along with me.


Cuph. His Complement to Cuphophron and his Friends, with Cuphophron 's return
thereof upon Philopolis.
You mean Euistor and Hylobares, do you not, Philopolis?


Philop. I mean not Persons, but Things: the endearing memory of the sincere
Zeal and sound Knowledge of Philotheus, the free and profound Judgment of
Bathynous, the Prudence and Sobriety of Sophron, and the Gaiety of Temper and
singular Urbanity of my noble friend Cuphophron; to whom I return many thanks
for his repeated favors and civilities since my arrival hither, as I do to
Philotheus also and the rest of this excellent Company for their great
Obligations, and shall impatiently expect an opportunity of making some
requital. In the mean time I leave my thanks with you all, and bid you
farewell.


Cuph. Not the Memory, O Philopolis, but the Reality of all those
Accomplishments you reckon up, of right you carry away with you, because you
brought them along with you hither. Nor will we take leave of so accomplished a
person till needs must. We will wait upon you to morrow morning to see you take
horse, and then wish you a good Journey. In the mean time we only bid you
Goodnight.


Philop. That will be too great a favor.


Philoth. That Is a Civility very well mentioned, Cuphophron. We will at least
do that, if not carry them part on their way.


Hyl. And I will defer my manifold Acknowledgements to Philotheus till then.


THE END.
A brief DISCOURSE Of the true Grounds of The Certainty of FAITH IN Points of
Religion.
FAith and Belief, though they be usually appropriated to matters of Religion,
yet those words in themselves signify nothing else but a Persuasion touching
the Truth of a thing arising from some Ground or other. Which Persuasion may be
undoubted or certain to us, that is to say, We may be certainly persuaded
without any staggering, though the Grounds be false, and the Thing it self
false that we are thus firmly persuaded of. So that the being firmly persuaded
is no sure sign to others, nor ought to be to ourselves, that either the
Grounds or the Belief it self is true. (...). And this (...) may very well
arise from an (...) or (...). Peculiarity of Complexion or the Besottedness of
Education may be so prevalent, as very forcibly to urge Falsehood upon our
belief, as well in things Natural as Religious, either upon very weak and false
Grounds, or no other Grounds at all but that of Complexion and Education,
Passion, or Interest, or the like.

But the true Grounds of the Certainty of Faith are such as do not only beget
a certain and firm Faith, but a true one, and this in virtue of their own Truth
and Solidity, as being such as will appear true and solid to all impartial and
unprejudiced Examiners, that is to say, to all such as neither Complexion, nor
Education, nor Passion, nor Interest does pervert their Judgment, but have
their (...) clear as the Eye to discriminate Colors. Whence it is plain that
the first and most necessary Preparation to the Discovery of the true Grounds
of the Certainty of Faith is Moral Prudence, in such a sense as the nature of
it is described in a late Moral Discourse entitled Enchiridion Ethicum, lib. 2.
cap. 2. This ought to be antecedaneous to our judgment touching either
Authority or Reason. But for a man of a polluted spirit to take upon him to
dissent from the Constitutions of the Church he is born under, is a very rash
and insolent Attempt. As if God were more bound to assist a single Wicked man
for the finding out of Truth, then a multitude; or as if a man could more
safely or more creditably err alone, then with a company that has the stamp of
Authority upon them. But if thy endeavor be to perfect Holiness in the fear of
God, and to walk in all Humility before him and before men, thou may by such
rational Grounds as these examine the Fidelity of thy Teachers, and the truth
of their Doctrines of Religion.

First then, It is plain that Certainty of Faith presupposes Certainty of both
Reason, and Sense rightly circumstantiated. For, forasmuch as Faith properly so
called is nothing but an unwavering Assent to some Doctrine proposed upon the
ground of infallible Testimony, there must be some Reason to persuade us that
that Testimony is infallible; that is to say, that they that testify are
neither obnoxious to Error in the things they witness of, nor have a mind to
make others to err or to think what is false, or else that they never had any
opportunity of falsifying in the Points they propound to our Belief. Certainty
of Sense is also required. For if the Sense be not certain, there could be no
infallible Testimony of matter of Fact, and Moses's conversing with God in the
Mount may be but a Dream; nor could there be any certain Eyewitnesses of our
Savior's Resurrection and Ascension, if God will delude our Senses. Wherefore
to take away the Certainty of Sense rightly circumstantiated, is to take away
all Certainty of Belief in the main Points of our Religion.

Secondly, Sense and Reason are rightly circumstantiated, the one, when the
Organ is sound, the Medium fitly qualified, and the distance of the Object
duly proportionated, and the like; the other, when it is accompanied with
Moral Prudence rightly so called, such as it is defined in the abovesaid
Enchiridion, Lib. 2. c. 2.
that is to say, That this Reason be lodged either in a perfectly-unprejudiced
Mind, or at least unprejudiced touching the Point propounded. For there are
some Truths so clear, that Immorality it self (provided it do not besot a man
or make him quite mad) puts no bar to the assenting to them, that is, puts no
bar to their appearing to be true, no more then it does to the Eye unhurt to
the discerning of Colors; which the Wicked and Godly do alike upon this
Supposition. Wherefore

The third Conclusion shall be, That there be Natural Truths, whether Logical,
Physical, or Mathematical, that are so palpably true, that they constantly
and perpetually appear so as well to the Wicked as the Good, if they be
Compotes mentis, and do not manifest violence to their Faculties.

The fourth, That these Natural Truths, whether Common Notions or Scientificall
Conclusions, that are so palpably true that they perpetually appear so as well
to the evil as the good, are at least as certain and indubitable as any thing
that the Reason and Understanding of a man can give assent to, that is to say,
There is at least as great a Certainty of these Axioms that they are true, as
there can be of any. And therefore, because there is acknowledged a Certainty
in some Points that our Understanding and Reason closes with, let us set down
for

The fifth Conclusion, That these Natural Truths that constantly appear such as
well to the evil as the good (if they be not crack'd-brained nor do violence to
their Faculties) are in themselves most certainly true.

The sixth, That what is a Contradiction to a certain Truth is not only
uncertain, but necessarily false: forasmuch as both the parts of a
Contradiction cannot be true.

The seventh, That no Revelation which either it self, or the Revealing
thereof, or its manner of Revealing, is repugnant to the Divine Attributes, can
be from God.

The eighth, That no Tradition of any such Revelation can be true, forasmuch as
the Revelation it self is impossible.

The ninth, That no Revelation is from God that is repugnant to Sense rightly
circumstantiated. This is manifest from the first Ground, That Certainty of
Faith presupposes Certainty of Sense duly circumstantiated. For if our Senses
may be mistaken when they act in due Circumstances, we cannot be assured that
they are at any time true. Which necessarily destroys the Certainty of all
Revelation ab extra and of all Tradition, and consequently of our Christian
Religion. Wherefore God cannot be the Author of any such Revelation, by
Conclusion the seventh: For it were repugnant to his Wisdom and Goodness.

The tenth, That no Revelation is from God that contradicts plain Natural
Truths, such as were above described. This is abundantly clear from Conclusion
the 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. For if Reason where it is clearest is false, we have no
assurance it is ever true, and therefore no Certainty of Faith, which
presupposes Reason, by Conclusion the first. Besides, by Conclusion the sixth,
That which is contradictory to a certain Truth is certainly false: But Divine
Revelation is true: Therefore there can be no Revelation from God that bears
with it such a Contradiction. Nay we may add, That if there were any Divine
Truth that would constantly appear to Reason rightly circumstantiated
contradictory to any constant Natural Truth, God would not communicate any such
Truth to men, by Conclusion the seventh. For the revealing of such a Truth were
repugnant to his Attribute of Wisdom, it making thereby true Religion as
obnoxious to suspicion and exception as false. For there is no greater
exception against the Truth of any Religion, then that it proposes Articles
that are repugnant to Common Notions or indubitable Science. Besides that one
such pretense of true Revelation would enable a false Priesthood to fill the
World with Figments and Lies. Wherefore God will never be the Author of so
much mischief to mankind. And lastly, since the first Revelation must be handed
down by Tradition, and Tradition being but humane Testimony, and infinitely
more lubricous and fallible then the (...) or natural Science; how will it be
possible for any but Sots or Fools to believe Tradition against solid Science
or a Common Notion? So that the Result must needs be either blind
Superstition, gross Irreligion, or universal Skepticism.

The eleventh, That no Revelation that enforces, countenances, or abetts
Immorality or Dishonesty can be from God. This is manifested from the seventh
Conclusion. For it is repugnant to God's Attributes, his Justice, Fidelity,
Goodness, and Purity or Sanctity. The Image of God is Righteousness and true
Holiness: Wherefore no Doctrine that tends to Injustice, Unrighteousness and
Impurity can be a Revelation from God.

The twelfth, That no Interpretation of any Divine Revelation that is repugnant
to Sense or Reason rightly circumstantiated, or to plain and indubitable
Morality, whether it be made by a private or public hand, can be any
Inspiration from God. There needs no new Confirmation of this Conclusion. For
the same Arguments that prove that no Divine Revelation can be in this sort
repugnant, do prove also that no Interpretation of any Revelation in this sort
repugnant to Sense, Reason or sound Morality, can be Divine.

The thirteenth, That no Interpretation of Divine Writ that justifies Sedition,
Rebellion, or Tyranny, can be any Inspiration from God. This is easily evinced
from the foregoing Conclusion. For Sedition and Rebellion are gross and
ponderous Species of Injustice against the Magistrate, as Tyranny is also
against the People; both such high strains of Immorality, that no
Interpretation of Scripture that justifies these can be true, much less
Divinely inspired.

The fourteenth, No Church that propounds as Articles of Belief such things as
are repugnant to rightly-circumstantiated Sense and Reason, or sound Morality,
can rightly be deemed Infallible. The reason is plain: For it appears out of
what has hitherto been said, that they are already actually deceived, or at
least intend to deceive others.

The fifteenth, That the Certainty of Faith cannot be grounded upon the
Infallibility of any Church, particular or universal, as infallibly inspired,
that is deprehended to be actually deceived in any Points she proposes to be
believed as necessary Articles of Faith. This is so plain, that it wants no
farther proof.

The sixteenth, That the Moral and Humane Certainty of Faith is grounded upon
the Certainty of Universal Tradition, Prophecy, History, and the Nature of the
things delivered, Reason and Sense assisting the Mind in her Disquisitions
touching these matters. That Certainty of Faith I call Moral or Humane that is
competible even to a carnal man or a man unregenerate; as it is said of the
Devils, that they believe and tremble. By Universal Tradition I understand such
a Tradition as has been from the Apostles, that is to say, has been always
(since the completion of their Apostleships,) as well as in every place of the
Church. For since there was to be so general and so early a Degeneracy of the
Church as is witnessed of in the Holy Scriptures, the generality of the Votes
of the Church was not always a sufficient warrant of the truth of Tradition.
But those Truths that have been constantly held and unalterably from the
Apostles times til now, it is a sign that they were very Sacred, unquestionable
and assured Truths, and so vulgarly and universally known and acknowledged,
that it was not in man's power to alter them. By Prophecy I understand as well
those Divine Predictions of the coming of Christ, as those touching the Church
after he had come. By History I mean not only that of the Bible, and
particularly the New Testament, but other History as well Ecclesiastic as
Profane. And what I mean by the Nature of the things delivered is best to be
understood out of such Treatises as write of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, such as Dr. Hammond's, and Mr. Baxter's late Book. See also Dr.
More's Mystery of Godliness, where the Reasonableness of our Christian Faith is
more fully represented, and plainly demonstrated, Book 7. chap. 9, 10, 11.
that it has not been in the power of the Church to deceive us as touching the
main Points of our Belief, though they would.

The seventeenth, That no Tradition is more universal and certain then the
Tradition of the Authentickness of such Books of the Bible as all Churches are
agreed upon to be Canonical. There can be no more certain nor universal
Tradition then this; in that it has the Testimony of the whole Church and all
the parts thereof with one Consent, though in other things they do so
vehemently disagree. Wherefore no Tradition can be of any comparable Authority
to this. And therefore we may set down for Conclusion

The eighteenth, That the Bible is the truest Ground of the Certainty of Faith
that can be offered to our Understanding to rest in. The Reason is, because it
is the most universal both for time and place, the most unexceptionable and
universally-acknowledged Tradition that is.

The nineteenth, That the Bible or Holy Writ dictated by the Spirit of God,
that is, written by Holy and Inspired men, is sufficiently plain to an
unprejudiced Capacity in all Points necessary to Salvation. This must of
necessity be true by Conclusion the seventh. Otherwise the manner of Gods's
revealing his Truth in the Holy Scriptures would be repugnant to the Divine
Attributes, and, which were Blasphemy to utter, he would seem unskilfully to
have inspired the Holy Penmen, that is to say, in such a way as were not at
all accommodate to the end of the Scriptures, which is the Salvation of men's
Souls; nor to have provided for the Recovering of the Church out of those gross
Errors he both foresaw and foretold she would fall into.

The twentieth, That the true and primarie Sense of Holy Scripture is Literal
or Historical, unless in such Parts or Passages thereof as are intimated to be
Parables or Visions writ in the Prophetic style, or the literal Meaning be
repugnant to rightly-circumstantiated Sense or natural Science, etc. For then
it is a sign that the Place is to be understood Figuratively or Parabolically,
not Literally. The truth of this appears out of the immediately-foregoing
Conclusion. For else the Scripture would not be sufficiently plain in all
Points necessary to Salvation: Indeed in no Points at all: but all the Articles
of our Faith that respect the History of Christ might be most frivolously and
whifflingly allegorized into a mere Romance or Fable. But that the History of
Christ is literally to be understood, is manifest both from the Text it self,
and from perpetual and universal Tradition. Which if it were not the right
Sense, it were a sign that it is writ exceedingly obscure even in the chief
Points: which is contrary to the foregoing Conclusion. But that those Places or
Passages that are repugnant to rightly-circumstantiated Sense or natural
Science are to be interpreted figuratively, is plain from the general Consent
of all men, in that they universally agree, when Christ says, I am the Door, I
am the true Vine, etc. That these things cannot be literally true. And there is
the same reason of Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body.

The twenty first, That no Point of Faith professed from the Apostles time to
this very day, and acknowledged by all Churches in Christendom, but is plainly
revealed in the Scripture. This may be partly argued out of the nineteenth and
twentieth Conclusions, and also farther proved by comparing these Points of
Faith with Texts of Scripture touching the same matter.

The twenty second, That the Comprehension of these Points of Faith always and
everywhere held by all Christian Churches from the Apostles time till now, and
so plain by Testimony of Scripture, is most rightfully termed the Common or
Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

The twenty third, That there is a Divine Certainty of Faith, which, besides
the Grounds that the Moral or Humane Certainty has, is supported and
corroborated by the Spirit of Life in the new Birth, and by illuminated Reason.
This is not to be argued, but to be felt. In the mean time no more is asserted
then this, That this Divine Certainty has an higher Degree of Firmness and
Assurance of the truth of the Holy Scriptures, as having partaken of the same
Spirit with our Savior and the Apostles, but does not vary in the Truths held
in the common Faith.

The twenty fourth, Whatever pretended Inspiration or Interpretation of the
Divine Oracles is repugnant to the above-described Common or Catholic and
Apostolic Faith is Imposture or Falsehood, be it from a private hand or
public. The Reason is apparent, because the Articles of this Common Faith were
the Doctrines of men truly inspired from above, and the Spirit of God cannot
contradict it self.

The twenty fifth, None of the Holy Writ is of it self unintelligible, but
accordingly as men's spirits shall be prepared, and the time suitable; as God has
already, so he may (as Seasons shall require) still impart farther and farther
Light to the Souls of the Faithful, for a fuller and a more general
understanding the obscurest Passages in the Divine Oracles. The truth of this
Assertion is so clear, that it seems little better then Blasphemy to
contradict it. For to say the Holy Writ is in it self unintelligible, is
equivalent to the pronouncing it Nonsense: or to aver that such and such
Books or Passages of it were never to be understood by men, is to insinuate as
if the Wisdom of God did not only play with the children of men, but even
fool with them. This is but a Subterfuge of that conscious Church that is
afraid of the fulgour of that Light that shines against her out of such places
of Scripture as have for a long time seemed obscure.

The twenty sixth, That there are innumerable Passages of Scripture, as well
Preceptive as Historical, that are as plainly to be understood as the very
Articles of the common Faith, and which therefore may be very useful for the
clearing those that may seem more obscure. This wants no proof but Appeal to
Experience and the twentieth Conclusion.

The twenty seventh, That no Miracle, though done by such as may seem of an
unexceptionable Life and of more singular Sanctity, can in reason ratify any
Doctrine or Practice that is repugnant to rightly-circumstantiated Sense, or
Natural Truths or Science, or the common Christian Faith, or any plain Doctrine
or Assertion in Scripture. The Truth of this is manifest from hence, That no
man can be so certain that such a man is not a crafty and cautious Hypocrite,
and his Miracle either a Juggle or Delusion of the Devil, or (if he was not an
eyewitness of it) a false report of a Miracle, as he is certain of the truth
of rightly-circumstantiated Sense, of Common Notions and Natural Science, of
the Articles of the Apostolic Faith, or of any plain Assertion in the
Scripture. And therefore that which is most certain in this case ought in all
reason to be our Guide.

The twenty eighth, That it is not only the Right but the Duty of private men
to converse with the Scriptures, being once but precautioned not to presume to
interpret any thing against rightly-circumstantiated Sense, Natural Truth,
common Honesty, the Analogy of the Catholic Faith, or against other plain
Testimonies of Holy Writ. The truth of this appears from the Conclusion
immediately preceding. For why should they be kept from having recourse to so
many and so profitable and powerful Instructions from an infallible Spirit,
when they are so well fore-armed against all Mistake, and are so laid-at by so
many not only fallible but fallacious and deceitful persons to seduce them?
And why is there not more danger of being led into Error by such as are not
only fallible, but false and deceitful, then by those Inspired men that wrote
the Scripture, who were neither fallible in what they wrote, nor had any design
to deceive any man? Wherefore there being no such safe Guide as the Scripture
it self, which speaks without any Passion, Fraud or Interest, it is not only
the Right but the Duty of every one to consult with the Scripture, and observe
his times of conversing with it, as he tenders the Salvation of his own Soul.

The twenty ninth, That even a private man assisted by the Spirit of Life in
the new Birth, and rightly-circumstantiated Reason, being also sufficiently
furnished with the knowledge of Tongues, History, and Antiquity, and sound
Philosophy, may by the help of these, and the Blessing of God upon his
industry, clear up some of the more obscure Places of Scripture to full
satisfaction and certainty both to himself, and any unprejudiced Peruser of his
Interpretations. That this Assertion is true may be proved by manifold
Experience, there having been sundry persons that have cleared such Places of
Scripture as had for a time seemed obscure and intricate, with abundant
satisfaction and conviction. But it is to be evinced also a priori, viz. from
the seventeenth and eighteenth Conclusions, which avouch the Scripture to be
the most Authentic Tradition that is; as also from the twenty fifth, that
concludes it not unintelligible in it self nor to mankind; and lastly out of
the first, that asserts that Certainty of Faith presupposes Certainty of
Reason. For thus the Object of our Understanding being here certain, and we not
spending our labor upon a Fiction or Mockery, and our Reason
rightly-circumstantiated, not blinded by Prejudice, nor precipitated into
Assent before due deliberation and clear comprehension of the matter; if after
so cautious a Disquisition she be fully satisfied, she is certainly satisfied,
or else there is no certainty in rightly-circumstantiated Reason, which yet is
presupposed in the Certainty of Faith, by the first Conclusion. So that the
Certainty of Faith it self seems ruinous, if no private man have any Certainty
of any Interpretation of Scripture that has once been reputed obscure. Not to
add, that all the Scripture that has been once obscure, and the Interpretation
thereof not yet declared by the Church universal, has been hitherto, and will
be God knows how long, utterly useless. Which is a very wild Supposition, and
such as none would willingly admit, unless those that would rather admit any
thing then that Light of the Scripture that discovers who they are and what
unworthy Impostures they use in their dealings with the children of men.

The thirtieth, That no Tradition can be true that is repugnant to any plain
Text of Scripture. The Reason is, because the Scripture is the most true and
the most Authentic Tradition that is, and such as the universal Church is
agreed in.

The thirty first, That if any one Point grounded upon the Authority of
Tradition, that has been held by the Church time out of mind, prove false,
there is no Certainty that any Tradition is true, unless such as it has not
been in the power of the Church to forge, corrupt, deprave, or else their
Interest not at all concerned so to do. The Reason is, because the Certainty
of Tradition as Tradition is placed in this by those that contend so much for
it, that nothing can be brought into the Church as an Apostolic Practice or
Doctrine but what ever was so from the Apostles. Wherefore if once a Point be
brought into the Church, and professed and practiced as Apostolical, that may be
clearly proved not to be so, this Ground for Tradition as Tradition is utterly
ruined, and, considering the Falseness and Imposture that has been so long
practiced in Christendom, can be held no Ground of Certainty at all. As not
Reason qua Reason, nor Sense qua Sense, but quatenus rightly-circumstantiated,
can be any Ground of Certainty of Knowledge; so not Tradition qua Tradition can
be the Ground of the Certainty of Faith, but only such a Tradition as it was
not in the power of the degenerate Church to either forge or adulterate. And
such were the Records of the Holy Bible only.

The thirty second, That rightly-circumstantiated Sense and Reason and Holy
Writ are the truest Grounds of the Certainty of Faith. This is the common
Protestant Doctrine, and a great and undeniable Truth, and will amount to the
greatest Certainty desirable, if the Spirit of Life and of God assist. For that
will seal all firm and close, and shut out all Doubts and Waverings. In the
mean time, even in mere Moral men, but yet such as use their Sense and Reason
rightly-circumstantiated in their Dijudications touching the truth of Holy Writ
and Religion, it is plain they are upon the truest Grounds of Faith they can
go or apply themselves to, forasmuch as the Holy Writ is the truest and most
certain Tradition, and no Tradition to be discerned true but upon the Certainty
of rightly-circumstantiated Sense and Reason, as appears by the first
Conclusion.

These Advertisements, though something numerous, are yet brief enough, but
very effectual, I hope, if strictly followed, to make thee so wise as neither
to impose upon thy self, nor be imposed upon by others, in matters of Religion;
and so Orthodox, as to become neither Enthusiast nor Romanist, but a true
Catholic and Primitive Apostolic Christian.

THE END.
DIVINE HYMNS.

DIVINE HYMNS.
An HYMN Upon the Nativity of CHRIST.
THe Holy Son of God most High, The Historical Narration.

For love of Adam's lapsed Race,
Quit the sweet Pleasures of the Sky,
To bring us to that happy Place.
His Robes of Light he laid aside,
Which did his Majesty adorn,
And the frail state of Mortals tri'de,
In Humane Flesh and Figure born.
Down from above this Day Star slid,
Himself in living Earth to entomb,
And all his Heavenly Glory hid
In a pure lowly Virgin's Womb.
Whole Quires of Angels loudly sing
The Mystery of his Sacred Birth,
And the blessed News to Shepherds bring,
Filling their watchful Souls with Mirth.
The Application to the Emprovement of Life.
The Son of God thus Man became,
That Men the sons of God might be,
And by their second Birth regain
A likeness to His Deity.
Lord, give us humble and pure minds,
And fill us with thy Heavenly Love,
That Christ thus in our Hearts enshrined,
We all may be born from above.
And being thus Regenerate
Into a Life and Sense Divine,
We all Ungodliness may hate,
And to thy living Word incline.
That nourished by that Heavenly Food
To manly Stature we may grow,
And steadfastly pursue what is good,
That all our high Descent may know.
Grant we, thy Seed, may never yield
Our Souls to soil with any Blot,
But still stand Conquerours in the field,
To show his Power who us begot.
That after this our Warfare's done,
And travails of a toilsome Stage,
We may in Heaven with Christ thy Son
Enjoy our promised Heritage. Amen.
An HYMN Upon the Passion of CHRIST.
THe faithful Shepherd from on high The Historical Narration.

Came down to seek his strayed Sheep,
Which in this Earthly Dale did lie,
Of Grief and Death the Region deep.
Those Glories and those Ioys above
'Twas much to quit for Sinners sake:
But yet behold far greater Love,
Such pains and toils to undertake.
An abject Life which all despise
The Lord of Glory underwent,
And with the Wicked's worldly guize
His righteous Soul for grief was rent.
His Innocence Contempt attends,
His Wisdom and his Wonders great;
Envy on these her poison spends,
And Pharisaick Rage their Threats.
At last their Malice boiled so high
As Witnesses false to suborn,
The Lord of Life to cause to die,
His Body first with Scourges torn.
With royal Robes in scorn the him dight,
And with a wreath of Thorns him crown:
A Scepter-Reed in farther spite
They add unto his Purple Gown.
Then scoffingly they bend the knee,
And spit upon his Sacred Face;
And after hang him on a Tree
Betwixt two Thieves, for more Disgrace.
With Nails they pierced his Hands and Feet,
The Blood thence trickled to the ground:
The Pangs of Death his Countenance sweet
And lovely Eyes with Night confound.
Thus laden with our weight of Sin
This spotless Lamb himself bemoans,
And while for us he Life does win,
Quits his own Breath with deep-fetch'd Groans
Affrighted Nature shrinketh back,
To see so direful dismal sight;
The Earth does quake, the Mountains crack,
The abashed Sun withdraws his Light.
The Application to the Emprovement of Life.
Then can we Men so senseless be,
As not to melt in flowing Tears,
Who cause were of his Agony,
Who suffered thus to cease our Fears,
To reconcile us to our God
By this his precious Sacrifice,
And shield us from his wrathful Rod,
Wherewith he Sinners does chastise?
O wicked Sin to be abhorred,
That God's own Son thus forced to die!
O Love profound to be adored,
That found so potent Remedy!
O Love more strong then Pain and Death,
To be repaid by naught but Love,
Whereby we vow our Life and Breath
Entire to serve our God above!
For who for shame durst now complain
Of dolorous dying unto Sin,
While he recounts the hideous Pain
His Savior felt our Souls to win?
Or who can harbor Anger fell,
Envy, revengefull Spite or Hate,
If he but once consider well
Our Savior loved at such a rate?
Wherefore, Lord, since thy Son most just
His natural Life for us did spill,
Grant we our sinful Lives and Lusts
May sacrifice unto his Will.
That to our selves we being dead,
Henceforth to him may wholly live,
Who us to free from Dangers dread
Himself a Sacrifice did give.
Grant that the sense of so great Love
Our Souls to him may firmly tie,
And forcibly us all may move
To live in mutual Amity.
That no pretense to Hate or Strife
May rise from any Injury,
Since thy dear Son, the Lord of Life,
For love of us (when Foes) did die.
An HYMN Upon the Resurrection of CHRIST.
The Historical Narration.
Who Is this we see from Edom come,
With bloody robes from Bosrah Town?
He whom false Jews to death did doom,
And Heaven's fierce Anger had cast down.
His righteous Soul alone was fain
Isa. 63.3.
The Wine Press of God's Wrath to tread,
And all his Garments to distain,
And sprinkled Clothes to die bloud-red.
Against Hell and Death he stoutly fought,
Who Captive held him for three days:
But straight he his own Freedom wrought,
And from the dead himself did raise.
The brazen Gates of Death he brake,
Triumphing over Sin and Hell,
And made the Infernal Kingdoms quake,
With all that in those Shades do dwell.
His murdered Body he resumed
Maugre the Grave's close grasp and strife,
And all these Regions thence perfumed
With the sweet hopes of lasting Life.
O mighty Son of God most High, The Application to the Emprovement of Life.

That conqueredst thus Hell, Death, and Sin,
Give us a glorious Victory
Over our deadly Sins to win,
Go on and (...), Phil. Iud. Flesh and blood in the moral sense.
Edom still subdue,
And quite cut off his wicked Race;
And raise in us thine Image true,
Which sinful The old Adam, Romans 6.6.
Edom does deface.
Teach us our Lusts to mortify
In virtue of thy precious Death:
That while to sin all-dead we lie,
Thou may infuse thy Heavenly breath.
To Righteousness our Spirits raise,
And quick'n us with thy Life and Love;
That we may walk here to thy Praise,
And after live in Heaven above.
Grant we in Glory may appear
Clad with our Resurrection-Vest,
When thou shall lead thy Flock most dear
Up to the Mansions of the Blessed.
An HYMN Upon CHRIST's Ascension.
The Historical Narration.
GOd is ascended up on high
With merry noise of Trumpet's sound,
And Princely seated in the Sky
Rules over all the World around.
The Tabernacle did of old
His Presence to the Jews restrain:
But after in our Flesh enfold
A larger Empire he did gain.
For suffering in Humane Flesh
For all he rich Redemption wrought,
And will with lasting Life refresh
His Heritage so dearly bought.
Sing Praises then, sing Praises loud
Unto our Universal King:
Act. 1.9.
He who ascended on a Cloud,
To him all Laud and Praises sing.
Captivity he captive led,
Triumphing over the Powers of Hell,
And struck their eyes with glory dread
Who in the Airy Regions dwell.
In Humane Flesh and Shape he went,
Adorned with his Passion-Scars,
Which in Heaven's sight he did present
More glorious then the glittering Stars.
O happy Pledge of Pardon sure, The Application to the Emprovement of Life.

And of an endless blissful State,
Since Humane Nature once made pure
For Heaven becomes so fit a Mate!
Lord, raise our sinking Minds therefore
Up to our proper Country dear,
And purify us evermore,
To fit us for those Regions clear.
Let our Converse be still above,
Where Christ at thy right hand does sit;
And quench in us all worldly Love,
That with thy self our Souls may knit.
Make us all Earthly things despise,
And freely part with this World's good,
That we may win that Heavenly prize
Which Christ has purchased with his Blood.
That when He shall return again
In Act. 1.11.
Clouds of Glory, as he went,
Our Souls no foulness may retain,
But be found pure and innocent;
And so may mount to his bright Hosts
On Eagle's wings up to the Sky,
And be conducted to the Coasts
Of everlasting Bliss and Joy.
An HYMN Upon the Descent of the Holy Ghost at the day of Pentecost.
The Narration.
WHen Christ his Body up had born
To Heaven from his Disciples sight,
Then they like Orphans all forlorn
Spent their sad days in mournful plight.
But he ascended up on high,
More Sacred Gifts for to receive,
And freely shower them from the Sky
On those which he behind did leave.
He for the Presence of his Flesh
To them the Holy Spirit imparts,
And does with living Springs refresh
Their thirsty Souls and fainting Hearts.
While with one mind and in one place
Devoutly they themselves retire,
In rushing Wind the promised Grace
Descends, and cloven Tongues of Fire.
The house the Amighty's Spirit fills,
Which does the feeble Fabric shake;
But on their Tongue such power instills Acts 2.

That makes the amazed Hearer quake.
The Spirit of holy Zeal and Love The Application.

And of Discerning give us, Lord;
The Spirit of Power from above,
Of Unity and good Accord:
The Spirit of convincing Speech,
Such as will every Conscience smite, Act. 2.37.

And to the Heart of each man reach,
And Sin and Error put to flight:
The Spirit of refining Fire,
Searching the inmost of the mind,
To purge all foul and fell desire,
And kindle Life more pure and kind:
The Spirit of Faith in this thy Day
Of Power against the force of Sin,
That through this Faith we ever may
Against our Lusts the Conquests win.
Pour down thy Spirit of inward Life,
Which in our Hearts thy Laws may write,
That without any pain or strife
We naturally may do what is right.
On all the Earth thy Spirit pour,
In Righteousness it to renew:
That Satan's Kingdom 't may o'repow'r,
And to Christ's Scepter all subdue.
Like mighty Wind or Torrent fierce
Let it Withstanders all o'rerun,
And every wicked Law reverse,
That Faith and Love may make all one.
Let Peace and Joy in each place spring,
And Righteousness, the Spirit's fruits,
With Meekness, Friendship, and each thing
That with the Christian spirit suits.
Grant this, O holy God and true,
Who the ancient Prophets did inspire:
Haste to perform thy Promise due,
As all thy Servants thee desire.
An HYMN Upon the Creation of the World.
WHen God the first Foundations laid The Narration.

Of the well-framed Universe,
And through the darksome Chaos ray'd,
The Angels did his Praise rehearse.
The Sons of God then sweetly sung Job 38.7.

At first appearance of his Light,
When the Creation-Morning sprung
To deck the World with Beauty bright.
Within six Days he finished all
What-ere Heaven, Earth, or Sea contain,
And sanctified the Seventh withal,
To celebrate his Holy Name.
Then with the Sons of God let us sing
Our bountiful Creatour's Praise,
Who out of nothing all did bring,
And by his Word the World did raise.
O Holy God, how wonderful
Art thou in all thy Works of might,
Astonishing our Senses dull
With what thou daily bringst in sight!
The fit returns of Night and Day,
The grateful Seasons of the Year,
Which constantly man's pains repay
With wholesome fruit his Heart to cheer;
The shape and number of the Stars,
The Moon's set course thou do define,
And Matter's wild distracting Iars
Composest by thy Word Divine.
The Parts of the Earth thou hold close
Together by this sweet Constraint:
Thou round'st the Drops that do disclose
The Rainbow in his glorious Paint.
Thy Clouds drop fatness on the Earth,
Thou make the Grass and Flowers to spring:
Thou cloath'st the Woods wherein with mirth
The cheerful Birds do sit and sing.
Thou fill'st the Fields with Beasts and Sheep,
Thy Rivers run along the Plains:
With scaly Fish thou stor'st the Deep,
Thy Bounty all the World maintains.
The Application.
All these and all things else the have made
Subject to Man by thy Decree;
That thou by Man might be obeyed
As duly subject unto thee.
Wherefore, O Lord, in us create
Clean hearts, and a right spirit renew:
That we regaining that just state
May ever pay thee what is due.
That as we wholly from thee are,
Both Gifts of Mind and Body's frame;
So by them both we may declare
The Glory of thy Holy Name.
An HYMN Upon the Redemption of the World through CHRIST in his Re-introduction
of the New Creature.
THe Lord both Heaven and Earth has made, The Narration.

His Word did all things frame,
And Laws to every Creature gave,
Who still observe the same.
The faithful Sun does still return
The Seasons of the Year,
And at just times the various Moon
Now round, now horned appears.
The Plants retain their Virtue still,
Their Verdure and their Form:
Nor do the Birds or Beasts their guize
Once change, or shape transform.
It Is only Man, alas! that brake
Betimes thy Sacred Law,
And from that Image Heavenly, pure,
To Beastly Shape did grow.
He headstrong left thy Holy Will,
His own Lusts to pursue;
Whence the true Manly form did fail,
And Brutishness ensue.
But thou, O God, who by thy Word
Did frame all things of Naught,
By the same Word made Flesh, for Man
Have rich Redemption wrought.
Thy choice Creation-piece, thus marred,
Thou do again create,
And by the incarnate Word restor'st
Unto his pristine state.
The glory of which Work raying forth
Whiles Christ from Death does rise,
These two Creations one Seventh Day
By right does solemnize.
The Application. 2 Cor. 4.6.
God, who commanded first the Light
Out of the dark to shine,
Enliven and enlight our Hearts
By his pure Word Divine:
That when this New Creation work
In us is finished clear,
The bright and glorious face of Christ
May in our Souls appear.
That we thus once redeemed from Sin
Hebr. 4.10.
From our own works may cease,
And rest in God's eternal Love,
The Spirit's Joy and Peace;
And quit from this Earth's Toil at last
May sing among the Blessed
In that long-lasting Sabbath Day,
That Iubilee of Rest.
Amen.
THE CONTENTS OF All the Five DIALOGUES.
The First Dialogue.
I. THE Preference of Virtue and assurance of an happy Immortality before the
Pleasures and Grandeur of this present World. II. The Description of Hylobares
his Genius, and of Cuphophron's Entertainments in his Philosophical Bower.
III. Philopolis his Quere's touching the Kingdom of God, together with his
sincere purpose of proposing them. IV. Hylobares his Interposall of his
Quere's, first touching the Existence of God and Divine Providence. V. The
Existence of God argued from the orderly Designs discoverable in the Phenomenon
of Nature. VI. Several Instances of that general Argument. VII. That necessary
Causality in the blind Matter can do as little toward the orderly Effects in
Nature, as the fortuitous Iumbles thereof. VIII. That there is no Phenomenon
in Nature purely Mechanical. IX. That there is no Levitation or Gravitation of
the Ether or of the vulgar Elements in their proper places. Whence it is plain
that the Matter's Motion is moderated by some Diviner Principle. X. That the
Primordialls of the World are not Mechanical, but Vital. XI. Instances of some
simple Phenomenon quite contrary to the Laws of Mechanics. XII. The fond and
indiscreet hankering after the impossible Pretensions of salving all Phenomenon
Mechanically freely and justly perstringed. XIII. The Existence of God argued
from the Consent of Nations, from Miracles and Prophecies, from his Works in
Nature, and from his Idea. XIV. The Obscurity of the Nature of God, and the
Intricacy of Providence; with preparatory Cautions for the better satisfaction
in those Points. XV. The Attribute of Eternity. XVI. An Objection against the
All-comprehension of Eternity, with the Answer thereunto. XVII. Another
Objection, with its Answer. XVIII. The Attribute of Immutability. XIX. Of the
Deity's acting ad extra. XX. The Attribute of Omnisciency. XXI. The Attribute
of Spirituality, and that God cannot be Material. XXII. The false Notion of a
Spirit. XXIII. That there is a Spiritual Being in the World. XXIV. That
Extension and Matter are not reciprocal. XXV. That there is an Extension
intrinsecall to Motion. XXVI. That there is an immovable Extension distinct
from that of movable Matter. XXVII. That this Extension distinct from Matter is
not imaginary, but real. XXVIII. A fresh Appeal touching the truth of that
Point to Reason, Sense, and Imagination. XXIX. The essential Properties of
Matter. XXX. The true Notion of a Spirit. XXXI. The Attribute of Omnipresency.
XXXII. Cuphophron's Paradox of God's being nowhere. XXXIII. The Confutation of
that Paradox. XXXIV. That all Spirits are some-where. XXXV. The Grounds of
Cuphophron's Paradox [that Spirits are no-where] produced and examined. XXXVI.
That God is essentially present everywhere. XXXVII. The Arborists affected
liberty of dissenting in unnecessary Opinions, and friendly Abusiveness of one
another in their Philosophical Meetings. XXXVIII. The Conclusion.
The Second Dialogue.
I. THe Introduction, containing Philopolis his thanks for the last day's
Discourse, with a touch by the bye of Inspiration, and of the Difficulty of the
present Subject. II. The two main Heads of Objections against Providence, with
certain Laws to be observed in disputing thereof. III. Evils in general how
consistent with the Goodness of God. IV. The Arguments of Lucretius against
Providence. V. Providence argued against from the promiscuous falling of the
Rain, and undiscriminating discharges of Thunderclaps. VI. An Answer to
Lucretius his Arguments. VII. Of Death, how consistent with the Goodness of
Providence. VIII. Of Diseases. IX. Of War, Famine, Pestilence and Earthquakes.
X. Of ill Accidents happening to brute Creatures whereby their lives become
miserable. XI. Of the Cruelty and Rapacity of Animals. XII. Of the Rage of the
Elements, the Poison of Serpents, and the Wrath of wild Beasts. XIII. Of
Monstrosities in Nature. XIV. Of Fools, Madmen, and men irreclaimably wicked
from their-very Birth. XV. The best Use to be made of the saddest Scene of the
things of this World. XVI. How the Entrance of Sin into the World can consist
with the Goodness of Providence. XVII. Cuphophron's Lunatic Apology whereby
he would extenuate the Hainousness of Sin. XVIII. A solid Answer to the
foregoing Apology, though ushered in with something a ludicrous Preamble. XIX.
A more sober Enquiry into that Difficulty, How the Permission of Sin in the
World can consist with the Goodness of God. XX. The first Attempt of satisfying
the Difficulty, from that Stoicall Position of the invincible Freedom of Man's
Will. XXI. The second Attempt, from the consideration of some high Abuses of a
vincible Freedom, as also from the nature of this Freedom it self. XXII. The
third and last, from the Questionableness whether in compute of the whole there
does not as much good redound to the Universe by God's Permission of Sin as
there would by his forcible keeping it out. XXIII. How consistent it is with
the Goodness of Providence, that God does not suddenly make men holy so soon as
they have an hearty mind to it. XXIV. The Parable of the Eremite and the
Angel. XXV. That the Adversity of the Good, and the Prosperity and Impunity of
the Wicked in this life, are no Arguments against the Accuracy of Providence.
XXVI. A civil, but merry-conceited, bout of Drinking in Cuphophron's Arbor.
XXVII. The mavelous Conjuncture in Hylobares of an outward Levity and inward
Soberness at once. XXVIII. His serious Song of Divine Providence. XXIX. The
breaking up of the Meeting.
The Third Dialogue.
I. COnjectures touching the Causes of that Mirth that the Meeting of some
persons naturally excites in one another. II. Hylobares his Relapse into
Dissettlement of mind touching Providence, with the cause thereof. III.
Paucity of Philosophers no blemish to Divine Providence. IV. Reasons in general
of the gross Deformity in the Religions and Customs of the Savage Nations, as
also of the variety of this Deformity in Manners and Customs. V. Of the
barbarous Custom of going naked. VI. Of the ridiculous Deckings and Adornings
of the Barbarians. VII. The Lawlessness of the Barbarians and their gross
Extravagancies touching Wedlock apologized for by Cuphophron, Advocate-General
for the Paynims. VIII. Of the (...) and the men of Arcladam that lie in
Childbed for their Wives. IX. Of the Pagans Cruelty to their Enemies, and
inhumane Humanity to their Friends. X. Their killing men at Funerals to
accompany the dead. XI. The Caraiamites murdering good men to seize on their
Virtues. XII. Of the Anthropophagi or Cannibals. XIII. Of the Atheism and the
Polytheism of the Barbarians. XIV. Of their Men-Sacrifices. XV. Of their
worshipping the Devil. XVI. Of their sacrificing men to the Devil. XVII. Of
Self-sacrificers. XVIII. The meaning of Providence in permitting such horrid
usages in the world. XIX. The Madness of the Priests of the Pagans. XX. Of
their Religious Methods of living in order to future Happiness. XXI. Of their
Opinions touching the other State. XXII. The Vnsuccessfulness of Cuphophron's
Advocateship hitherto in reference to the ease of Hylobares his Perplexities.
XXIII. Several Considerations to make us hope that the state of the World may
not be so bad as Melancholy or History may represent it. The first
Consideration. The second Consideration. The third Consideration. The fourth
Consideration. The fifth Consideration. The sixth Consideration. The seventh
Consideration. The eighth Consideration.
XXIV. Excellent Instances of Morality even in the most barbarous Nations. The
ninth Consideration. The tenth Consideration. The last Consideration.
XXV. Cuphophron's rapturous Reasons why God does not dissolve the World
notwithstanding the gross Miscarriages in it; with Hylobares and Sophron's
solid Animadversions thereon. XXVI. Hylobares as yet unsatisfied touching the
Goodness of Providence by reason of the sad Scene of things in the World.
XXVII. An Hypothesis that will secure the Goodness of Providence, were the
Scene of things on this Earth ten times worse then it is. XXVIII. Bathynous his
Dream of the two Keys of Providence, containing the abovementioned Hypothesis.
XXIX. His being so rudely and forcibly awaked out of so Divine a Dream how
consistent with the accuracy of Providence. XXX. That that Divine Personage
that appeared to Bathynous was rather a Favourer of Pythagorism then
Cartesianism. XXXI. The Application of the Hypothesis in the Golden-Key-Paper
for the clearing all Difficulties touching the Moral Evils in the World. XXXII.
Several Objections against Providence fetched from Defects, answered partly
out of the Golden, partly out of the Silver-Key-Paper. XXXIII. Difficulties
touching the Extent of the Universe. XXXIV. Difficulties touching the
Habitableness or Unhabitableness of the Planets. XXXV. That though the World
was created but about six thousand years ago, yet for ought we know it was
created as soon as it could be. XXXVI. Hylobares his excess of Joy and high
Satisfaction touching Providence from the Discourse of Philotheus. XXXVII. The
Philosopher's Devotion. XXXVIII. The hazard and success of the foregoing
Discourse. XXXIX. The Preference of intellectual Joy before that which is
sensual. XL. That there is an ever-anticipative Eternity and inexterminable
Amplitude that are proper to the Deity only.
The Fourth Dialogue.
I. A brief Recapitulation of what has hitherto passed in their discourse. page
1. II. The great force of a firm Belief of a a God and his Providence for the
fixing a man's Faith in the truth of Christianity. 3 III. The folly of
Skepticism perstringed. 5 IV. That there is a Divine Temper of Body requisite
for the easilier receiving and more firmly retaining Divine Truth, with the
Method of obtaining it. 7 V. Philopolis his Quere's touching the Kingdom of
God. 13 VI. What the Kingdom of God is in the general Notion thereof, with a
defense of the truth of the Notion. 14 VII. Of the absolute Sovereignty of God,
and whereon it is grounded. 21 VIII. The Kingdom of God withinus what it is.
27 IX. The means of acquiring it. 31 X. The external Kingdom of God properly
so called, what it is. 39 XI. When this Kingdom of God began. 41 XII. Of
Christ's appearing in humane shape to the Patriarchs before his Incarnation. 46
XIII. Thy Kingdom come in what sense meant in our Savior's time and
afterward. 50 XIV. The Easiness of the Prophetic style. 57 XV. Where the
Kingdom of God now is. 59 XVI. That smaller faults in Things or Persons hinder
not but that a Church may still be the Kingdom of God. 64 XVII. The Charge of
Antinomianism against the Reformation. 67 XVIII. The Charge of Calvinism
against the Reformation. 71 XIX. The Charge of that horrid sin of Rebellion. 78
XX. What Success the Kingdom of God has had hitherto in the World, and how
correspondent to Divine Predictions. 93 XXI. Historical Types of what was to
befall Christ and his Church: as, the Sufferings of Joseph, and his Exaltation.
99 XXII. The Paschal Lamb and the Israelites passage through the Red Sea. 102
XXIII. The brazen Serpent, the Tabernacle, High Priest, and whole Camp of
Israel, a Type of Christ and his Church. 108 XXIV. Vocal Prophecies touching
the Kingdom of Christ and its Success in the World. 113 XXV. The Apostasy of
the Church how consistent with the durableness of God's Kingdom in Daniel. 120
XXVI. The Kingdom of Antichrist how warrantably so called, and whether the
Pope be that Man of Sin spoken of by the Apostle. 124 XXVII. Emperors and
Princes how frequently excommunicated by the Pope. 148 XXVIII. The Bishop of
Rome how hugely guilty of the effusion of blood in Christendom. 160 XXIX.
Their murtherous Attempts in Poisoning and Stabbing of Princes. 164 XXX.
Cuphophron's Apology in the behalf of the Romish Idolatries. 169 XXXI. His
Apology in the behalf of their Impostures and Murders. 176 XXXII. How the Man
of sin can be said to sit in the Temple of God, while his sitting there makes
it the Synagogue of Satan. 182 XXXIII. Means to know that the Man of sin
prophesied of is already come into the World. 185 XXXIV. Cuphophron's
ridiculous Indifferency in the greatest Points of Religion. 190 XXXV. Some few
Prophecies hinted at touching the Reformation. 192 XXXVI. In what part of the
Revolution of Ages we now are; with some Cautions for the right understanding
of the style of the Apocalypse. 195 XXXVII. The Application of the three first
Vials to external Events. 201 XXXVIII. Philopolis his last Quere deferred till
next day's meeting. 212 XXXIX. The Conclusion, with the Song of Moses and the
Lamb sung to the Theorbo by Bathynous. 214
The Fifth Dialogue.
I. The Entrance into the Dialogue. 217 II. Philopolis his last Quere, touching
the Success of the Kingdom of God till the end of all things. 218 III. The
Interpretation of the fourth Vial. 221 IV. The Interpretation of the fifth and
sixth Vials. 228 V. The Interpretation of the last Vial. 235 VI. The future
Glory of the Church after the utter destruction of Babylon. 258 VII. The Extent
thereof. 263 VIII. A more particular Description of the future state of the
Church out of the Apocalypse. 265 IX. The Angel's Measuring the City with a
golden Reed, what the meaning thereof. 278 X. Several passages of the Mercavah
expounded, or the Vision of the Cherubim seen by Ezekiel. 280 XI. An Exposition
of the Vision of the Throne of God in Heaven, the four Beasts, and twenty four
Elders, seen by S t. John. 298 XII. What Grounds of hope out of Scripture for
that glorious state of the Church to come. 313 XIII. That the glorious Times
predicted by the Prophets have not yet appeared on the face of the Earth. 321
XIV. What grounds in Reason for the coming of those glorious Times. 326 XV.
That there is no fear that either Familism or Behmenism will supplant the
expected glory of the Apostolic Church. 332 XVI. J. Behmen's mavelous
pretense to the knowledge of the Language of Nature. 337 XVII. Farther
Indications that J. Behmen did not write from an infallible spirit. 342 XVIII.
Bathynous his judgment touching J. Behmen, with some Cautions how to avoid the
being ensnared by Enthusiasts. 349 XIX. That there is an Elias to come, and in
what sense. 355 XX. The Character of this Elias gathered out of Prophecy. 356
XXI. His Character taken out of History. 362 XXII. The time of Elias his
coming. 367 XXIII. Certain Principles tending to the Acceleration of the
glorious Times of the Church. 370 The First Principle. 371 XXIV. Of Luther's
Conference with the Devil touching the abrogating of the Mass, together with
his Night-Visions of flying Firebrarnds. ibid. XXV. Of the Obnoxiousness of
Luther and other Reformers. 377 The Second Principle. 384 XXVI. Of the Church
of Rome's being a true Church. 388 XXVII. That although the Church of Rome were
not a true Church, yet it follows not but the Reformed Churches are. 392 The
Third Principle. 398 XXVIII. Of the Use of the Word and of the Spirit in
counterdistinction to dry Reason. 402 The Fourth Principle. 403 XXIX. How a man
shall know that he has the Spirit. 404 The Fifth Principle. 409 The Sixth
Principle. 412 XXX. How the Church shall attain to the Unity of the Spirit.
ibid. The Seventh Principle. 415 XXXI. How the mind of man may arrive to a
state of Vnprejudicateness. 416 The Eighth and last Principle. 417 XXXII. The
Doctrine of Faith in the Power of God's Spirit for the ridding us of Sin, why
not so much insisted on at the beginning of the Reformation. 423 XXXIII. The
true means of Unity in the Church again glanced at. 426 XXXIV. The mavelous
Efficacy of Faith in the Power of the Spirit of Christ for the vanquishing of
Sin. 429 XXXV. An answer to an Objection touching this Doctrine of Faith. 430
XXXVI. Of the Duration of the glorious Times of the Church. 434 XXXVII. The
Character of Theomanes. 435 XXXVIII. Theomanes his Vision of the seven
Thunders. 440 XXXIX. A brief Explication of Theomanes his Vision. 451 XL. The
important Usefulness of Theomanes his Vision, together with the Iustifiableness
of his yielding to such an Impression. 453 XLI. Philotheus prevailed with to
play a Divine Rhapsodie to the Theorbo. 456 XLII. Philopolis his mistake in
preferring high Contemplations before the useful Duties of a Practical Life.
461 XLIII. His Complement to Cuphophron and his Friends, with Cuphophron's
return thereof upon Philopolis. 464
FINIS.
ERRATA sic corrige.
Page 9. line 5 read Paradisiacall. p. 118. l. 9. for But after r. But upon.
p. 157. l. 26. r. then this other. p. 188. l. 6. r. Description. p. 207. l. 21.
r. Emissarie Powers. p. 276. l. 21. r. Prosperity also, the. p. 309. l. 2. r.
off of. p. 378. l. 21. r. spirit; That. p. 380. l. 3. r. Postillion in.


