For her Highness the most Illustrious incomparably virtuous and r^ligious Lady
ELIZABETH Princess DOWAGER. Given by a Loyal true old friend, and most
affectionately devoted servant.
A Funeral Oration; or in a Truth, a most just plain wrought Panegyric of the
most mighty Lord Oliver Cromwell PROTECTOR of England, etc From the love of the
most Illustrious Lord Thomas de la More, Knight of the Banner, and Garter
Royal. And of Great Brittany, France, and Ireland, etc. the most unconquered
and thrice adorned Standard Bearer.

A Most sad also, Elegiack Posie, upon the not mortal, never to be forgotten,
not to be repaired, Aghast Death: Or upon the Funeral universally dropping
Tears, not unlike to the last gasp Ejulations of that unfortunate Edward the
second, a Prince how soever conversant in Wars, when he was a dying. By the
Counsels, and Tyrannical Tarquinateship, of that diabolically elated spouse of
his, Queen Isabella; And of that innocent white fox, Adam of Or^^on, Bishop of
Hereford; And of that very wicked knave Gorney; And of that most opprobioufly
notorious Traitor, the ignoble fellow Maltravers; when he was with a burning
hot Iron thrust through the Fundament; and unregally murdered, at Barkley
Castle in Glocestershire (but true is that* whosoever is slain overcome his
tormentor) very like also to that horrid and Ca^u^ Caligula's perterrefying
Thunder and Lightning. And most like unto those bitter tears, and loud cries
with sobbings of Hadradrimmon in the Valley of Hynnom. This our English,
Scottish, Irish, is no ill tuned Epicede, of a most just, most unconquered, most
holy* thrice most Noble, equally well learned; And of all the Arts, Languages,
and of the faculty, and profession, and the Kingly Theology, thrice most of all
expert, and of a most August Monarch; and most illustrously Heroic Caesar. A
Prince magnanimous in virtues, and in the imbroydered goods of the mind most
richly set in gold of a most dread PROTECTOR, And most lovingly loving with the
most beloved of great Brittany, Ireland, Flanders. And Emperor of the Isle of
Wight, Jarnsey, Gransey, Lunday, Man, etc. As also of Jamaica, the most potent
Lord and King, OLIVER CROMWELL, whose divine spirit the third day of September
1658. At his Royal Palace White Hall in Westminster City of the English
Nation: Departing this life without spot and blameless, most gloriously
innocent, and purely chaste, he returned to eternal salvation, his God Almighty,
our heavenly Father; who with Jesus Christ our Lord, the only begotten Son of
God the Father, and with the Holy Ghost is blessed for ever. Amen

Brute, Priame, Alexander;
Turnus King Evander:
Arthur Prince Aeneas;
Stout Hector Achilles:
Constantine; Boar, Crookback
Richard that kill-King hack:
Charles, Caesar, Augustus
Great Gustave Adolphus:
King William Bastard
Conqueror no dastard
Windsor Edward longshank,
Valiant Woodstock the Frank,
Black Prince, bold Harry fifth;
The eight (six Queens did shift:
Coined new wifes). Are all dead
Cromwell to heaven's fled.
Warlike, renowned Hero;
Great divine Apollo.
Holy, well learned chaste;
Above the Stars is placed,
Shines brighter than those Lamps
More safe than in his Camp,
Oliver man of God,
And great Brittany's rod:
Staff, comfort, yesterday:
Prince Richard now our Joy
Of men the pure offspring,
First Olivarian King,
Great Cromwell's dearest son
Englands hope and freedom,
Times O manners! and then
The love of Englishmen,
No faith in the world: piety
Virtue praise what unity?
Thou art alone our Lord:
Protect us with thy Sword:
Thou art to me thrice dear,
Fourth Richard do not fear.
Rule branch of Oliver,
Lay the Robe to th Quiver,
Join Arms Gown together:
Live great King for ever.
So be it, Amen.
Written upon Monday September 20, 1658. about Twelve at noon. At our Country
Museole; or Study by the Groves; being in times past a Mansion place, of Pagan
de Moubray a noble man in the Reign of Henry the third, King of England, in
Oxenfordshire of the Forest of Whichwode: At this day de la More's incurious
provincial Court, Farewell. In August mostly these days of Mourning, a
disconsolate consanguine sad true friend unto his late Highness heretofore the
hope, the Protector of the English good men; O thrice, and four times blessed
most Religious Lord Oliver the great to be buried: And thrice piously devoted
subject, most of all Thomas of More chief Standard Bearer of great Brittany,
etc.
Faithfully Translated after the Original Latin Copies by the diligence and
leisure of the Author himself, subscribing to the same, Thomas More.
At my Study in Drury Lane, November. the 22, 1658.
Elegiak perselect Poems: or Funeral Trophies upon his late Highness Oliver
Lord PROTECTOR, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. Translated the third of
September, 1658. from an Earthly Scepter to a Kingdom immortal; and a Crown of
Glory for ever in heaven, Selah.
OLIVER deserves a Princely Poets Thunder;
Greater than Caesar, Charlemaigne, the worlds wonder.
Kinton, Burleigh house, Gaynsborough, Lincoln City,
Winsby; and Prince Ruperts Irish Ladies pretty.
Taken in pursuit to Leicester, from Nasby field
By Parliament soldiers stripped stark naked and killed
Newbery, Langport, Bridgwater, the club battle,
Nonny de la More, Bath, Barkley, Shirborn Castle:
Bristoll, Cornwell, Fxeter, Borstall, Oxenford,
Basing house, Wallengford, Levellers at Burford:
Preston, Uttoxeter, tryumphant Marston Moor,
Ragland, Ireland, Scotland, and Muscleborough Shore.
Dunbar, Worcester, Jamaica, Van Trump, Mardike,
Dunkirk, Graveline, Don, John, and The Army Catholic.
These martial Chevaliers; And Nations all did quake,
And tottered like the Pillars, which great Sampson shake.
At the renowned name of CROMWELL they expired,
As if he had been sacred from heaven inspired.
September third, he laid down's arms, put on a Crown:
Sixteen hundred fifty one he took Worcester Town.
That day twelve months before, he nobly won Dunbar,
In The year forty eight, Duke Hamiltons Army mar.
England, France, Netherlands pay Tribute to his hearse,
The holy good Protector's dead, Oh weep a verse.
The pious, learned, wise great Heroic man of war:
Is with his Captain Jesus, the bright morning Star.
At Grayes Inn of Court November 16. 1658. Sr. Thomas de la More Knight of the
Banner, and Garter Rayall, Standard bearer of England and Wales, Prince of
Mercia de la More and Port pool, Lord Marquess Eschallers, Baron northmore
Moreton de la Thames, de Ponts Haddon, Waddon, Pagans Mubray, Le Feoks, Holborn
S. Gyles, etc.

FINIS.

