A short and plain TRACTATE OF THE LORDS SVPPER: Grounded upon 1 Cor. 11.23.
etc.

By WILLIAM MORE, Minister of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Charles Green, and are to be sold at his shop in
Ivy Lane, 1645.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady FRANCIS HOBERT, Wife of the Honorable Sir
JOHN HOBERT Knight and Baronet.
MADAM:
THe many obligements in which I acknowledge my self tied unto your honors
honorable husband (who has been Gods gracious instrument in preserving me
from the unjust oppression of the perverse; though I be not repaired in my
sufferings) have made me humbly to present unto your Honor (as a true token of
a grateful mind) this little Tractate; short, as might be, shunning
obscurity; and plain according to my best possibility. Though Momus carp, I
care not: The Word of God is not bound. Receive, honorable Lady, this mite
from him who daily does plead at the Throne of Grace for your honors
honorable husband, for your honorable Ladyship; And happy hopeful Children:
And who is really,

Madam, Your Honors humble servant in the Lord, WILLIAM MORE.

EMMANVEL. A short and plain Tractate of the LORDS SUPPER: grounded on 1 Cor.
11.23. etc.
Q. WHat is a Sacrament of the new Covenant?

A. A divine Institution; in which by visible signs, all the blessings of the
new Covenant are represented, given, sealed and applied (that is, Jesus Christ
and all his graces) unto all faithful receivers, Mat. 3.11. Act. 19. Mat.
26.26. Romans 4.11. Joh. 1.12.

Q. How many Sacraments are in the New Covenant?

A. Two: Baptism and the Lords Supper. Our Lord, nor his Apostles ordained no
more.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. A Sacrament of the faithful, their spiritual nourishment, and increase of
grace through Christ, 1 Pet. 2.2.

Q. Does not the Lords Supper work faith in those who receive it, though they
lack faith?

A. No: For, as no temporal food can make a dead child to live; no more can
this spiritual food any who is spiritually dead, Mat. 7.6.

Q. Must we communicate often?

A. Yes: for our souls (like our bodies) must be often fed; and we must labor
for it, Joh. 6.27.

Q. We are but once baptized; why should we often communicate?

A. As there is but one beginning of natural life, and yet, it must be often
fed: so there is but one beginning of spiritual life (which is faith, Romans
1.17.) And it likewise must be often fed, 2 Pet. ult. ult.

Q. Why is both bread and wine given in the Lords Supper.

A. 1. As our bodies must be fed both with meat and drink: so our souls must
be fed with Christ's body (which is that true bread that strengthens our heart)
and with his blood which makes the heart glad, Ps. 104.15

2. To demonstrate that Christ is the only ^ll, and perfect food of our souls,
Joh. 6.51.

Q. May not infants baptized, ignorants, of perverse indisposition, natural
fools, obstinate, malicious, grossly scandalous sinners, drunken men, be
admitted to this S. Supper?

A. No: because they cannot discern the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Q. How many parts are there of the Lords Supper?

A. Four: 1. A lawfully admitted Minister.

2. The elements, bread and wine.

3. The words of Institution.

4. And a competent number of communicants.

Q. Are all those necessary parts of it?

A. Yes: any of those wanting, there can be no true Sacrament.

Q. May not any of the effectually called administer this Sacrament?

A. No: for none may administer the Sacraments but Preachers, Mat. ult. 19. And
none may preach except they be sent of God, Romans 10.14. And those who are sent
of God must be lawfully admitted, 1 Timothy 4.14. Heb. 5.4.

1 Cor. 11.23. The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took
bread.
Q. Who did first institute this Lords Supper?

A. The Lord Jesus himself, Mat. 6.26. Mark. 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. 1. Seeing my Lord did institute it, I must in filial fear observe his
commands in preparing my self to take it, it tending so much to his glory, and
to my salvation, Mal. 1.6.

2. And seeing he is Jesus my Savior, Mat. ^.21. I must in love to advance his
honor, and mine own salvation, hunger for it, Mat. 5.6.

Q. Seeing Christ gave it in the night, must not we do so likewise?

A. No: unless it be in times of persecution.

1. Because that Sacrament of the Old Covenant the Passover, behoved to be
ended, before this Sacrament of the New Covenant, the Lords Supper was
instituted; for this succeeded to that, Luke 22.15.16.

2. The Pascall lamb was commanded to be killed in the evening, Exodus 12.6. and
eaten that same night, v. 8.

3. This Supper was instituted as near before Christ's death as possible could
be, to the and that nothing might be altered in it, added to it, nor taken from
it, Heb. 9.17.

4. That this legacy bequeathed by our Lords latter will unto all the
faithful, might be more firmly fixed in our memories.

No such necessity, viz. persecution urge us.

Took bread.
Q. Why did our Lord take bread to resemble his body?

A. 1. As our bodies cannot ordinarily live without bread (which strengthens
man's heart, Ps. 104.15.) no more can our souls live wanting Christ, who is the
living life, giving bread, that gives eternal life, Joh. 6.51.

2. Christ took bread, for its generality: because of all meats, bread is most
generally known, most universally used; and in most Countries most easily
acquired.

3. Because of breads likeness: for of all creatures which are eaten, bread
most resembles Christ's body; And hence He calls His body the true bread which
came down from heaven, Joh. 6.32.35.

4. As bread is needful for all meats: So is our Lord for us in all matters
most necessary, Joh. 15.5. 1 Cor. 1.30.

5. As the bread has endured all kinds of breaking ere it can be food for my
body: So Christ suffered all kinds of death (death in sin only excepted) ere
he could be food for my soul, Heb. 2.9.10.

Q. What does this teach thee?

A. I must labor for the fullness of faith, that I may get the bread which
endures unto life everlasting, Joh. 6.27.

Q. What does that bread signify?

A. 1. Christ's body, as his own words prove, This is my body.

2. As it is but one bread made of many grains: so all the elect are members
one of another, Ephesians. 4.25. are all members of Christ's mystical body, Ephesians.
5.30. and Christ is their head, v. 23.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. I must love Christ above all things, Mat. 22.37. and my neighbor as my
self, v. 39. especially the faithful, Gal. 6.10.

Q. What kind of bread took Christ?

A. Common table bread, unleavened: for no leavened bread might be eaten at the
Passover, Ex. 12.15.

Q What was meant by leaven there?

A. False doctrine, Mat. 16.22. Hypocrisy, Luke 12.2. Malice, and wickedness,
1 Cor. 5.8.

Q. What should that teach thee?

A. Those all must be rooted out of my heart, before I adventure to the Lords
Table, 1 Cor. 5.8. otherwise I shall come unworthily, to mine own damnation, 1
Cor. 11.29.

Q. What form was that bread of?

A. S. Scripture is silent of that.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. The vanity of Papists, Prelates, and Lutherans, who use thin wafers printed
with a crucifix.

V. 24 And when he had given thanks, etc.
Q. What is meant by those words?

A. Christ would not break that bread, until He first thankt his heavenly
Father for it, Luke 22.19. and blessed it, Mat. 26.26.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. 1. As Christ was both ready and willing to lay down His life for me, Joh.
10.18. and thankt His Father who made Him redemption unto me, 1 Cor. 1.30. So
should I be ready, willing, and thank the Lord, if he will count me worthy to
suffer shame (which is worse then death) for His sake, Act. 5.41.

2. In every thing (especially for giving Christ to sive me, Act. 4.12.) to
give thanks 1 These. 5.10.

He brake it.
Q. What is meant by breaking of that bread?

A. Its breaking was partly necessary, that one bread might be divided amongst
many; and partly mysterious, to signify that Christ was broken for all the
elect, Esaias 53.4.5. Ioh. 19. the whole Chapter.

Q. Did Christ suffer in his soul?

A. Yes: as is evident, Mat. 27.46. Luke 22.44.

Q. Did Christ suffer in his Godhead?

A. As Christ is God, He is All sufficient, Genesis 17.1. His Godhead therefore
could not suffer.

Q. Seeing that Christ was made like unto us in all things, sin excepted, Heb.
2.17. compared with Heb. 4.15. How could He satisfy Gods infinitely wronged
justice, if His Godhead did not suffer?

A. The excellency of the party who suffered (even Jesus Christ, God-man in one
person, the great Mediator betwixt God and the elect) being infinite, gave
infinite satisfaction to his Fathers infinite justice.

For, although His Godhead neither did, nor could suffer. Yet Jesus was
crucified, Act. 1.36. The Prince of life was killed, Act. 3.15. Christ dyed for
us, Romans 14.9. The Lord of glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. The Father spared
not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, Romans 8.32. And the Son of
God gave himself for us, Gal. 2.20.

Such an infinite person therefore suffering, Gods infinite justice is
satisfied to the full, as the father Himself acknowledges, Matthew. 17.5.

Q. What does this teach thee?

A. 1. If I receive this Supper faithfully, I get the great Mediator, who was
broken for me; and so I cannot be damned, Romans 8.1. Ioh. 6.54. Yea, I am made
one of the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12.

2. Seeing that Christ was broken for my sins, I must break off my sins by
repentance before I dare communicate, because God is of purer eyes then to
behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity, Hab. 1.13.

And said, Take.
Q. To whom said Christ this?

A. Unto all who were present, even to His twelve Apostles; for none other
might be present at the Passover with him, Exodus 12.3.

Q. No woman was there; must they now be excluded?

A. God forbid: women are elected, 2 Ioh. v. 1. ult.

Q. Did Judas communicate at the Supper?

A. He ate of the Pascall lamb, which was the type of Christ, and was Christ in
signification. The difference is in this, under the Law they received Christ to
come: under the Gospel we receive Christ come already.

Q. How did they take it?

A. With their hands; otherwise it could not have been a perfect communion:
which, in this Supper, was first between Christ the head, and the faithful,
His members: And secondly, between the faithful communicants amongst
themselves.

Q. What table gesture did they use at this Supper?

A. Christ, and they all did sit, Mat. 26.20. Mark. 14.18. Luke 22.14. Ioh.
13.4.12.

Q. Some say they leaned, and sat not?

A. If so, one hand had been useless. And if so, yet it was the table gesture
of that Country.

Q. May not we kneel now when we communicate?

A. No: otherwise we violate the Institution, and break Christ's command, Do
this, etc.

Q. What hurt can we have by kneeling?

A. 1. This Supper is a banquet of love: our Lord calls the faithful His
friends, not servants, Ioh. 15.15. servants invited kneel not at their Masters
tables, much less friends.

2. Kneelers in receiving defraud themsolves of their grace here, and of their
glory hereafter; which are promised in the word, sitting, Mat. 8.11. and 19.28.
Luke 13.29. and 22.30. Ephesians. 2.6. Rev. 3.21.

Q. The more humbly we receive, is it not so much the better for us?

A. 1. Will Worship in our worshipping of God, is always rejected of God, Esaias
1.12. Col. 2. ult.

2. Kneelers in the act of receiving, violate the Institution: for Christ and
his Apostles did sit as is manifest, Mat. 26.20. Mark. 14.18. Luke 22.14. Ioh.
13.4.12.

3. Kneelers transgress Christ's command, He commands us thus, Do this in
remembrance of me. Now this command must be extended unto every particular of
the Institution, otherwise we have no rule whereby we can convince Heretics,
Papists, Prelates, Lutherans, in matters concerning this Sacrament.

Q. What does all this teach thee?

A. 1. The foolishness of Priests in the Romish and Lutheran Churches, who put
the bread into the receivers mouths, by which their mutual communion is
frustrated.

2. I see, and sorrow at the blindness of those will-worshipping kneelers,
Rev. ult. 18.

Take.
Q. What are we to take here?

A. Heavens excellency, the earths only good, even the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and all his heavenly graces, which are all here, not only freely
offered, but also fully given to all worthy receivers: for as truly and really
as I get that bread and that wine to be one flesh with me; so likewise as
really and as truly I get Christ's body by faith (as his own words prove, This
is my body) to be one spirit with me, 1 Cor. 6 17.

Q. But Christ's humane body is in heaven; How then can I get him?

A. By faith: for Christ dwells in our hearts by faith Ephesians. 3.17.

Q. But my bodily eyes see nothing in that Supper but bread and wine only: How
then can I get Christ?

A. Thou see these, thou hear Christ's words affirming of that bread, This
is my body; and of that wine, This is my blood; which of those two beleevest
thou, Christ or thy senses? believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou getst
him, Ioh. 6.47. compared with v. 54.

Q. Can I be infallibly sure, that if I have saving faith to believe Christ's
words (This is my body, This is my blood) that I shall get Christ himself in
this Supper?

A. Thou may, and must be infallibly sure of it; for Jesus is the truth, Joh.
14.6. He cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. He cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. Heaven and
earth shall pass away, but His words shall not pass away, Mat. 24.35. Mark.
13.31. Luke 21.33.

Q. But I find in my self a body of death, of corruption, of doubtings, how
then dare I either take that bread, or think that I can get Christ?

A. Christ resolves thee, Mark 9.23. If thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes.

Q. What does that teach thee?

A. Three things: 1. I must have saving faith that I may get Christ, seeing He
is freely offered.

2. I must take that bread and that wine; otherwise I both refuse the means by
which Christ is truly given in this Sacrament unto the faithful: and also I
refuse Christ who now offers Himself unto me.

3. And if I now take not Christ, He will take vengeance of me in flaming fire,
for not observing this part of the Gospel (yea which is its greatest part of
it) 2 These. 1.7.8.

Eat.
Q. What does this import?

A. 1. By faithful receiving of that bread, I get the true life giving bread,
Christ, Joh. 6.47. compared with v. 50.

2. That Christ's flesh is meat indeed to all faithful hungring souls, Ioh.
6.55. And whosoever eats of it shall live for ever, v. 58.

3. As with my bodily mouth I must cat that bread (which is the sign) that my
body may live: so with my souls mouth, faith, I must eat the thing signified
(which is Christ) that my soul may live for ever, Ioh. 6.51.

4. As my body cannot live ordinarily wanting bread which strengthens our
heart, Ps. 104.15. So, nor my soul, wanting Christ, who is the true bread that
came down from heaven, and gives life unto the world, Ioh. 6.33.

5. As bread is not food to my body, unless I cat it: So, nor Christ is food
to my soul, unless I eat him by faith: for, no promise profits unless it be
received by faith, Heb. 4.2.

6. The fearful condition of such who refuse it, Prove. 1.24. etc. much more
who despise it, Heb. 10.28.29.

7. The godlessenesse of Papists, and Lutherans, who eat not their thin wafer,
but keep it whole in their mouth.

Q. Did Judas eat that sacrament all bread?

A. Weigh well Luke 22.19. ad 24. and its probable that he did eat it.

Q. Did not our Savior call Judas a Devil? Joh. 6.70.

A. Yes: yet, he ate only the bread of the Lord; but not the bread the Lord.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. I may not abstain from this S. Supper, though all communicants be not
alike holy; for, their unholinesse can not hurt me, if I be not accessory unto
it, Deuteronomy. 24.16. Ier. 31.30. Ezekiel. 18.20. Gal. 6.5.

This is my body.
Q. Do not those words prove clearly, either transubstantiation (as Papists
affirm, that is, that that bread is changed into the body of Christ) or
consubstantiation (that Christ's body is in, with, under that bread) as
Lutherans say?

A. There is no necessity that Christ should be bodily present in this
Sacrament: neither in respect of this Sacrament it self: nor yet of these
words of Christ, This is my body, which is thus proved:

1. Christ's bodily presence is not necessary, in respect of this Sacrament it
self; for if we be truly faithful, we may, and do attain unto this
Sacraments four ends, although Christ's humane body be in heaven.

2. This Sacraments first end is to remember Christ, as his own words do
witness, (Do this in remembrance of me:) now, this Sacrament it self puts
all faithful receivers in remembrance of Christ: and His very words (Do this
in remembrance of me) do evidently show Christ's bodily absence: for we
remember absent, not present friends.

3. Its second end is to show Christ's death till He come: This we can do,
though His body be absent. And (Till He come) demonstrates His bodily absence.

4. Its third end is to unite us unto Christ: This union is partly real, and
partly relative: our real union with Christ is by faith; for Christ dwells
in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. And Christ lives in us, and we live in Him
by faith, Gal. 2.20. And this is called our putting on the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 13. ult. to be our wedding garment, Mat. 22.11. Our relative union with
Christ is like that union between a man and his wife; for we are espoused to
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. and married to Him, Ier. 3.14. Hos. 2.19.20. A wife is
flesh of her husbands flesh, and bone of his bone, Genesis 2.23. although they
were ten thousand miles asunder.

5. This Sacraments most principal end, is to seal the Covenant of Grace, for
increase of, and strengthening our faith, Romans 4.11.

But by Papists Transubstantiation, and Lutherans Consubstantiation, our faith
would be much weakened: for, which of these two are easiest to be believed, that
we get Christ by faith, which all S. Scriptures affirm (Ioh. 1 12. and
3.16.18. and 6.29.40.47. and 11.25.26.) Or that a bit of bread, and a cup of
wine are transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ; or
consubstantiated with His body and blood, which both want all warrant in S.
Scripture; yea, which flatly contradicts S. Scripture, Act. 3.21. Heb. 8.4.

In respect then of this Sacrament, Christ's bodily presence is not necessary.

Neither is Christ's bodily presence necessary in this Sacrament, in respect of
Christ's words, This is my body: 1. Because it is frequent in all Sacraments both
of the Old and New Testament, to call the sign by the name of the thing
signified.

As Circumcision is called Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.10. yet v. 11. it is but the
sign of the Covenant.

The Lamb is called the Lords Passover, Ex. 12.11. yet it was only the
sacrifice of the Lords Passover, v. 27. and a sign, Ex. 13.9.

Baptism is called the washing of regeration, Tit. 3.5. Yet it is but the
sign of it; for Christ's blood only, can wash us from our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
Baptism is also said to save us, 1 Pet. 3.21. Yet it is but a sign of Christ's
blood which saves us, Act. 4.12.

So, in this Sacrament, our Lord calls that bread, His body, and that cup,
His blood: Yet, they are but the signs of His body and blood.

There is then no necessity of Christ's bodily presence in this Sacrament, in
respect of Christ's words, This is my body.

2. A second reason against Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation, is this,
This change is impossible; for it is against Christ's glory; for he never
appeared on earth, but in glory, Exodus 19.16.18. 1 King. 19.11.12. Mat. 17.2.

Object. Christ came in the form of a servant? Philip. 2.17.

A. It is true: yet the Apostles behold His glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14.

3. This change would derogate from Gods honor: for, although Christ's power
can make such a change; yet, Christ did never show his power, but for advancing
of Gods glory and honor: what honor can it bring unto the Lord, to change a
bit of bread into Christ's body? Christ can do all things but these, which
dishonor God: Christ cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. nor deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.

4. This change were against Gods wisdom; for the Lord neither did, nor does
any thing but for some good end: but in this change there can be no good end;
seeing all the faithful (wanting this change) can, and do get Christ by
faith, as has been proved before, Ioh. 1.12. and 3.16. etc.

5. This change were against all our senses: we hear Christ calling it bread,
Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.19. The H. Ghost calls it bread, 1 Cor.
10.16.17. and 1 Cor. 11.23. Now in objects of sense, our senses are competent
judges, according to Christ's own argument, Luke ult. 39. we see, we touch, we
taste, we smell bread.

6. This change were against not only S. Scripture, Ioh. 16 7.28. and 17.11.
Act. 3.21. Heb. 8.4. But also, this change were against natural, yea heavenly
reason, that Christ's humane body should be at one and the self same time in
heaven, and on earth also; it would contradict, Mat. ult. 6. Mark. ult. 6. and
Luke ult. 6.

Ob. D. Luther affirms, that there is no contradiction in this affirmation:
Christ's humane body is at one and the same time not on earth: as Joh. 17.11.
Christ says, I am no more in the world: then it is understood of a sightly,
moveable, and comprehensible manner of being. But when it is said, that Christ's
humane body is in the world (as in the bread and wine:) Then it is understood
of the unsightly, immovable, and incomprehensible manner of being.

A. The H. Ghost taught no such divinity in S. Scripture, That Christ's humane
body has a manner of being belonging unto it, of invisibility, immoveability,
and incomprehensibility: Besides its visible, moveable, and comprehensible
manner of being: Surely, Christ even after His resurrection, demonstrates the
realty of His humane body, by its visibility, and palpability, Luk ult. 39.

7. This change would altogether overthrow the very being of this Sacrament;
for in every Sacrament there must be both a sign, and the thing signified,
that the elect may receive both.

8. If such a change be, it must either be natural, or miraculous: by nature
it cannot be, that a little bread should be made Christ's body: nor is it done
by a miracle; for all miracles were visible: but this we see not; yea, all our
senses witness the contrary.

9. What Christ once rejected, as unnecessary unto salvation, He will not
afterward admit of it as necessary unto salvation (for he cannot lie, Tit. 1.2.
nor deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.) but Christ has rejected the carnal eating of
his flesh (which Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation do maintain) as
unnecessary to salvation, Joh. 6 63. He will not then admit it now as necessary.

Ob. Christ affirms, that unless we eat His flesh, and drink His blood, we
have no life (i.e. everlasting) in us, Joh. 6.53.

A. 1. To believe in Christ, and to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, are
one, and the same, Joh. 6.29.35.40.47. compared with 1.51.53,54,55.

2. These words literally taken, would contradict Christ's affirmation unto
Mary Magdalen (who never tasted this Supper) Luke 7.48. and his assurance given
to the thief on the cross, Luke 23.43. who never tasted this Sacrament.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. That that Sacramental bread, and wine, are not changed in their nature,
(even after the Consecration,) but in their use and end only.

Which is broken for you.
Q. Why was Christ's body broken for the elect?

A. For two maine causes:

1. That although Christ be the fountain of life, Ps. 36.9. Ioh. 6.58. as in
Himself, Ioh. 10.18. So, also unto us, Act. 17.25.28. Col. 3.4.

And although His flesh be meat indeed, and His blood drink indeed, Ioh. 6.55.

Yet, unless His body had been broken for the elect, He had neither been our
life, nor our souls food: not our life, until by death he had destroyed him
who had the power of death, that is the devil, Heb. 2.14.

Nor could Christ be our souls food until His body was broken, Heb.
9.13,14,15,16.

2. Unless Christ's body had been broken, He could not have procured remission
of sin unto the elect; for, without shedding of blood, there is no remission of
sin, Heb. 9.22.

Nor could he have answered Gods truth, Genesis 2.17. because that nature that
sinned, behoved to dye.

But now His body being broken, He is a fountain opened for sin, and for
uncleanness, Zach. 13.1.

Q. What does this teach thee?

A. 1. To know the love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. that
I may love him above all things, counting my life and all things but dung in
comparison of Christ, Philip. 3.8.

2. To bewail my sins, confess them, and forsake them, Prove. 28.13. because
they occasioned the breaking of Christ's body, Esa. 53.5. and crucify him
afresh, Heb. 6.6.

3. Papists and Lutherans sinful folly, who keep their sacramental bread
whole, unbroken in their mouth.

Ob. But they offer an unbloudy sacrifice, as they say?

A. They are mere deluders of their own souls; for without shedding of blood,
there is no remission of sins, Heb. 9.22.

4. Seeing the Father spared not his own Son, but gave him freely for us all,
Romans 8.32. And that Christ spared not himself, but laid down His life
willingly for all the elect, Ioh. 10.18. If I can get Christ in this Sacrament
by faith. I get all whatsoever is good for me, Romans 8 32.

Do this in remembrance of me.
Q. What does the Holy Ghost aim at in those words?

A. 1. This is the first end of this Sacrament; in which I am commanded to
remember continually all that Christ has done, and suffered for me: which all,
is summarily signified in this Supper of the Lord.

2. That whatsoever was at first done, and said in this Sacrament by our Lord
and his Apostles, must be imitated (in discretion) ever afterward.

Q. What does this teach thee?

A. 1. Never to forget my Lords love, lest I be turned into hell, Ps. 9.17.

2. In receiving this Sacrament, to imitate the institution according to my
calling, be I Minister or hearer.

3. The terrible condition of such who refuse or contemn this Sacrament: for
they refuse the means of their salvation, and remember not Christ.

V. 25. This cup is the New Testament in my blood.
Q. Why did Christ take wine to represent H^ blood in this Sacrament?

A. 1. Because wine resembles Christ blood, both in color (being red) and in
nam^ for its called the blood of the grape, Genesis ^.11.

2. As it is not wine until it be pressed o^ of the grape: So, nor Christ's
blood did sa^ as actually, untillit was shed out of His body, Mat. 26.28. Heb.
9.14.

3. As wine is to be given to the sorrowful and heavy hearted for comforting
them, Prove. 31.6. So Christ's blood is the only salve which can comfort a
sin-sick soul, which is sensible of its sin and misery, Act. 2.38,39. 1 John
17.

4. As wine makes man's heart glad, Ps. 104.15. So does Christ's blood glad our
souls, when by faith we are sure that it was shed for us, 1 Pet. 1.18,19.

Q. What does the Holy Ghost show in these words (This cup is the New Testament
in my blood?)

A. 1. As the Gospel consists of two main parts:

1. Of all that Christ did, and suffered for all the elect.

2. That Christ was chosen of the Father to be redeemer of all the elect, Ps.
89.19.

That the Father did preordain Him, 1 Pet. 1.20.

Sent Him, Ioh. 3.17.

Sealed Him. Ioh. 6.27.

Sanctified Him, Ioh. 10.36.

And that Christ was freely given of the Father, Ioh. 3.16. And was made of the
Father unto all the truly faithful, our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Es. 9.6. And that Christ gave
Himself freely for all the elect, Ephesians. 5.2.

So, this Sacrament represents both these unto us.

2. That this Sacrament is the seal of the Gospel, Romans 4.11. showing all that
to the eye (for it is a visible word) which the Gospel presents to the ear:
Even that Christ is freely given of the Father; and fully gives Himself in
this Sacrament unto all who will take Him by faith, as His own words prove,
Take, eat, this is my body: Drink, this is my blood.

Q. How can I take Christ?

A. Taking of Christ is an act of the will, which act by faith takes Christ to
be my Prophet to teach me, Ioh. 15.15.

To be my Priest, whose sacrifice of Himself can only save me, Heb. 7.24,25.

And to be my King to apply salvation unto me, Act. 4.12. And whose only laws
concerning his worship, and my salvation, I must solemnly swear to observe,
Ps. 119.106.

2. As I must take Christ by faith (which wanting, Gods best Ordinances profit
not, Heb. 4.2.) So I must take Him, to love Him above all things, Philip. 3.8.
for nothing can please the Lord which is not done in love, 1 Cor. 3. passim.

3. In taking Christ I must resolve, and constantly endeavor to my best
possibility, to serve Him all the days of my life, Luke 1.74,75.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. 1. Seeing Christ who is the full food of my soul) is given of the Father,
and freely gives himself in this Supper, I must purge away all my native
corruptions, Es. 1 16,17. and hunger for it, Mat. 5.6. before I receive it.

2. I admire the hellish obstinacy of Papists, and Lutherans, who confess
these words (This cup, etc.) to be a figurative speech, (The cup for the wine)
and yet will not allow so much, when the Lord calls the bread His body.

3. Papists perverseness, who give not the wine unto the inferior sort of
their receivers.

Do this in remembrance of me.
Q. What is here to be marked?

Q. Two things* 1. Why is remembrance again commanded. And secondly, what is it
that we must remember?

Q. Why is remembrance again urged?

A. Because of our natures total corruption, Genesis 5.6. Romans 7.24. forgetting
what we should remember; and remembering what we should forget.

Q. How is that proved?

A. We are commanded to remember:

1. The seventh day to keep it all holy, Ex. 20.8.

2. To remember and not forget how we provoke the Lord to wrath, Deuteronomy. 9.7.

3. To remember now our Creator in the days of our youth, Eccles. 12.1.

4. To remember Lots wife, for looking back to sin, Luke 17.32.

5. And in this Sacrament to remember Christ, which all we too often forget.

Again, we too much remember injuries, which we are commanded to forget, Mat.
6.15.

So, our memories are like strainers, which keep the dregs, and suffer the best
to pass through.

Q. Are not all those from our memories weakness?

A. No: but from our natures perverseness; for the world, sin, trespasses, and
vanities are too much remembered, even of the faithful, Romans 7.15.

Q. What are we here to remember concerning Christ?

A. 1. We must remember what Christ has done and suffered for us: And that His
blood (which is my soulss spiritual drink, and which only can cleanse me from
all sin, 1 John 1.7.) is fully and freely given here unto all faithful
receivers.

2. We must remember this Sacraments four ends.

3. That Christ's blood was shed for me, Mat. 26.28.

4. And to imitate the Institution.

Q. What learnest thou here?

A. 1. To bewail my natures perversity, and my memories frailty.

2. To frequent this Sacrament often, that I may still remember what my Lord
has undergone for me.

V. 26. Ye do show the Lords death till he come.
Q. What is here propounded?

A. Another end of this Sacrament: Christ's death.

Q. What was Christ's death?

A. It was the last act of His voluntary humiliation: in which He suffered the
most extreme, most horrible pains which were due unto all the elect by reason
of their sins.

Q. Why is his death which is a passion) called an act?

A. Because Christ did dispose himself willingly to undergo it, Joh. 10.11.18.

Q. Why is Christ's death called voluntary?

A. None could enforce Him unto it, for He is omnipotent, Esa. 96. Rev. 1.8 and
19.16. His death was of power, Col. 2.15. not of infirmity: for observance of
His Fathers will, Mat. 26.39.42. for His love to the elect, Ioh. 10.15. for
satisfying His Fathers justice by victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. and not succumbing by
misery, Act. 2.24.

Q. Did our Savior indeed suffer such extreme torments?

A. Yes: for his sufferings did equal all those eternal torments which the
whole elect should have suffered, Esa. 53. Psalm. 22. Ioh. 19.

Q. Christ's sufferings being so short, how is that possible?

A. 1. The eternity of pain, the total absence of Gods favor, and such other
circumstances accompanying the eternal torments of reprobates, are not of the
essence, but are adjuncts of pain: And therefore Christ did not undergo them.

2. Our Lord had sufficiency both of power and dignity to overcome death, and
all its circumstances, Act. 2.24. 1 Cor. 15.54.57.

3. These limitations duly considered, Christ's death was the very same; both in
its kind, for it was accursed, Gal. 3.13. and in its measure; for he bare all
the elects sins, Esa. 53.3,4,5 6. And His death did represent the very death
of the damned fully, Mat. 27.46. Luke 22.44.

Q. What does this teach thee?

A. 1. Seeing that the Father spared not the Son of His love (who did no sin,
neither was guil found in His mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22.) He will not spare me if I
continue in any one known sin with delight, Iam. 2.10. compared with Deuteronomy.
27.26.

2. That the Lord is of purer eyes then to behold evil, and cannot look on
iniquity, Habbac 1.13.

3. I must communicate often, that I may show always the Lords death, and that
sin live not in me, Romans 6.3. compared with. v. 6.

4. If in this Sacrament I get Christ by faith, then his blood cleanses me
from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7.

V. 27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord unworthily; shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Q. What is most remarkable in this verse?

A. Three things especially.

1. What that sin is, which makes unworthy receivers guilty of Christ's body
and blood.

2. How that unworthiness makes them guilty.

3. And the ground or cause of that guiltiness.

Q. What sin is that which makes them guilty?

A. 1. It is some special, either contempt, or light esteem offered or done to
the person, offices, ordinances, actions, sufferings of our Savior, or too
some one of them.

2. On to sin against that greatest work of our redemption; and so to partake
with the murderers of Christ.

Q. How is that proved?

A. To be guilty of blood, is in some sense or other to be a murderer: to be
guilty therefore of Christ's blood, is to be a murderer of Christ.

Q. How can I be a murderer of Christ, he being in heaven, and I on earth?

A. By continuing in known sins with delight thou crucifiest the Son of God
afresh, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6.6. and 10.29.

Ob. Those two Scriptures strike at such who fall from faith, to infidelity.

A. It is true: and yet, when faith purifieth not thy heart, it is no saving
faith, Act. 1^.9. And when faith produces not good works, it is a dead faith,
Iam. 2. ult.

If then thou continuest in known sins with delight, thou art a murderer of
Christ, and thy doom is denounced, Mat. 7.22,23. Luke 13 26.27.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. 1. Seeing Abels blood was so heavy on Cain who murdered him, Genesis 4.19. O
how intolerable will Christ's blood be upon the souls of such, who murder
Christ by their sins delighted in, and unrepented! Rev. 6.15,16,17.

2. I may not continue even in the least known sin, lest I fall from faiths
practice, and so from faiths profession: Seeing that sin is the transgression
of the Law, 1 John 3.4. and that brings the curse, Gal. 3.10.

Q. How does that contempt or light esteem, make receivers guilty?

A. By eating this bread, and drinking this cup of the Lord unworthily.

Q. How do receivers eat and drink unworthily?

A. In general, it is to communicate wanting our wedding garment, Christ, Mat.
22.11. for we must be clothed with Christ, Romans 13. ult. otherways we may not
come to this marriage, Mat. 22.2. compared with v. 13.

Q. How can I put on Christ?

A. Do as Jacob did, bring the two kids, Genesis 27.9. That is, have faith (by
which Christ lives in us, and we live in Him, Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 2.20.) and
observance which demonstrates our faith to be sound, Jam. 2.18.

Q. What are the more special means which render unworthy receivers to be
guilty?

A. Ignorance; in not knowing the Virtue, Worth, Use, and Ends of this
Sacrament.

Q. Wherein consists its Virtue?

A. If thou communicate (having on thy wedding garment) all thy fears
(occasioned by sense of thy sin) will be quite removed.

1. If thou complainest thus; Alas! how shall I get Christ to be my wedding
garment?

Christ answers: Take, eat, this is my body; This is my blood, drink it by
faith, and live for ever, Joh. 6.47. compared with v. 51.

2. My sins multiply daily.

A. The Lords mercies are new every morning, Lam. 3.23. God is the father of
mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. Rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4.

3. I am dead in trespasses and sins.

A. Believe, and thou shall live, Joh. 11.25.

But I cannot get repentance for my sins.

A. Repentance that is sound, is Gods work, 2 Timothy 2.25. Seek, knock, and ask
for it, and God will work it, Mat. 7.7 8. Jam. 1.5. Mat. 9.13.

2. This Sacrament being rightly received, will resolve all thy doubts.

1. Will the Lord save such a lost sinner as I am?

A. Christ came to seek, and to save that that is lost, Luk 19.10. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Ps. 50.15. Mat. 11.28. Ioh. 6.37.

3. It will cure all thy diseases, Ps. 103.3. and salves all thy sin-sores,
Esaias 53.5.

4. In this Supper thou getst Christ himself, who is all, and in all, Col. 3.11.

Q. Wherein stands the worth of this Sacrament?

A. By worthy receiving, we get Christ, as his own words do witness: And in
getting Christ, we get the Father, and the Holy Ghost: for these three are one,
1 Ioh. 5.7

Q. Wherein consists the use of this Sacrament?

A. That bread, and that wine, are taken from their common use (which is to
strengthen, and glad man's heart, Ps. 104.15.) To signify, seal, and really to
give unto all faithful receivers Christ's body and blood to be meat indeed,
and drink indeed to their souls, Ioh. 6.55. And so Christ dwells in us, and
we in him, v. 56.

Q. What hurt will it bring, though we be ignorant of this Sacraments four
ends?

A. Great every way, both to the Pastor and people, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7,8,9. For,

1. Ministers must be diligent to know the state of their flocks, and to look
well to their herds, Prove. 27.23.

They must not be blind, but seeing; nor ignorant, but must know; nor dumb,
but must speak; nor sleeping, but must watch; nor greedy of another man's goods,
but contented with the Lords allowance; nor drunken, but sober, Esa. 56.10. etc.

Nor daubers with untemperate mortar, promising peace where there is no peace,
Ezekiel. 13.10. They must warn the wicked to forsake his way, otherwise the blood
of the wicked will be required at the Ministers hand, Ezekiel. 33.8.

They must feed the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5.2. And watch for their souls, for
which they must give an account, Heb. ult. 17.

2. The people likewise perish for lack of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. when they are
not taught to know this Sacraments four ends.

1. To imitate the institution, in remembrance of Christ.

2. To show Christ's death till he come.

3. That this Sacrament unites true receivers unto Christ.

4. And that it seals the covenant of Grace to all worthy receivers, Romans 4.11.

Q. What does those things teach thee?

A. 1. The fearful condition of ignorant communicants; for they are murderers
of Christ.

2. And the terrible state of those Ministers who take no care to catechize
their flock, Mat. 15.14.

Q. We have heard that a light esteem or contempt of Christ: The want of our
wedding garment; and ignorance of the virtue, worth, use, and of the ends of
this Sacrament, makes unworthy receivers to be murderers both of themselves,
and of Christ. Now what other sins do work the same effects?

4. A. Want of faith, Heb. 11.6. when receivers believe not fully that Christ
gives himself effectually to all faithful communicants in this Supper: nor
that themselves can by faith get Christ in it; and yet dare receive the signs,
that bread, and that wine; by which they sin dangerously, Romans 14. ult.

5. Superstition, believing Papist, and Lutheran-like, that they eat in this
Supper the humane body of Christ, with their bodily mouth: and yet, we can only
eat him with our souls mouth, faith: for, to believe in Christ, and to eat his
flesh, is one, Job. 6.47. compared with v. 51.

6. Sensuality; when cloyed with worldly cares, with the deceitfulness of
riches, and pleasures of this life, Luke 8.14. They hunger not for Christ. Such
shall never be filled, Mat. 5.6.

7. Carnal security; when receivers neither expect good in worthy receiving;
nor evil, by unworthy: Such are like Laodicea, Rev. 3.15.16.

8. Presumption: foolishly believing the they shall speed as well as the best,
thought they lack preparation, and sanctification; yea, and their wedding
garment: let such read and tremble, Mat. 22.11,12,13.

9. Want of true love: which brancheth it self in two several particulars.

1. When men rashly suspect other men's intentions, or actions without
sufficient warrant. This is described Esaias 65.5. Stand by thy self; come not
near unto me, for I at holier then thou. This is prohibited Mat. 7.1. Judge
not that ye be not judged. Threatened v. 2. with damnation, Luke 3.37.

Such rash judgers are hypocrites, Mat. 7.5

2. Who will not forgive men their trespasses; and so, the Lord will not
forgive their trespasses, Mat. 6.15. These are implacable unmercifull, Romans
1.31. Such shall have judgment without mercy, Iam. 2.13.

10. Temporising: receiving for fashions sake* Such are hypocrites, 2 Timothy 3.5.
Those likewise who come to this Supper more for fear of the Magistrate, then
for fear of the Lord. This is hellish fear, even the spirit of bondage, Romans
8.15.

11. Inconsideration: when receivers thoughts are estranged from the action;
and ^re intent upon the world, sin, lust, and such like. Such cannot please
God, Romans 8.8.

12. Profaneness: scorning the action, in not believing Christ's truth: This
is my body; This is my blood: or scornfully refusing to receive, though Christ
commands, To take, eat, drink, do this.

13. Damnable injustice, in adding, altering, or substracting any necessary
thing of the institution. All plagues are denounced against such, Rev. 22.18 19.

Whosoever is guilty of all, or of any of these horrible sins, are murderers of
Christ.

Q. What is the ground, or cause that makes unworthy receivers guilty of
Christ's body and blood?

A. 1. They contemn Christ's authority, and are therefore accursed, Esa. 45.9.

2. They despise Christ himself, who gives himself freely, and fully to all
faithful receivers.

3. They despise his merits, Heb. 9.14.15.

4. They despise Christ's three offices.

His Prophetical office, Luke 10.16.

His Priestly office, Heb. 10.28,29.

And they despise his Kingly office; for they will not have Christ to reign
over them, Luke 19 14.27.

5. They despise Christ's most meritorious work of man's redemption, Romans
5.8,9,10,11.

6. They contemn Christ's love, who loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blond, Rev. 1.5. Heb. 10.28,29.

7. And they despise the whole Covenant of Grace, whereof this is a seal, Romans
4.11.

Q. Many received who were ignorant of these things; and yet they live and
prosper: How comes that?

A. The times of that ignorance God wincked at; but now commands all men every
where to repent, Act. 17.30.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. 1. To seek, knock, and ask without ceasing, that I may be clothed with
Christ my wedding garment; that I be not one who murders Christ.

2. I must zealously and incessantly beg in the name and merits of Christ, that
the Lord will cleanse my soul, and make it clean from all these, and all other
sins, as is covenanted, Ezekiel. 36.25.

V. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup.
Q. What is here to be considered?

A. Here are the ordinary means to save us from being murderers of Christ: And
these are, our examination of our selves.

Q. What must we do in examining our selves aright?

A. 1. Right examination requires, that we cast totally out of our thoughts
all other cares: for true examination must take us wholly up. We must (as in
prayer) shut our door, Matthew. 6.5.

2. We must examine our selves in six things especially.

1. Of our knowledge, what we are to receive in this Supper.

2. Of our desire of this Sacrament, so known.

3. Of our faith, by which only we can obtain our desire.

4. Of our love toward God, and our neighbor, that we may be sure our faith is
sound.

5. Of our repentance, which proves out love to be pure.

6. And of our observance past, present, and its purpose for the future, which
demonstrates our repentance to be perfect.

Quest. 1.
Q. What must I know is here to be received?

A. That as truly as I get bread and wine which are my bodies food: So truly I
get Christ's body and blood by faith, which are my souls only food, Joh. 6.47.
compared with v. 55.

Quest. 2.
Q. How shall I knew my desires to be real?

A. Counts thou all things but dung in comparison of Christ? Philip. 3.8. Try
if desire, which is thy souls appetite, does hunger for Christ, Mat. 5.6.

Quest. 3.
Q. What shall I examine my self concerning my faith?

A. 1. That thy faith be not an historical, temporary, or a faith of miracles.
None of those alone, no nor altogether can apprehend Christ truly, Jam. 2.19.

2. That it be a justifying faith, which, though it be but one simple grace;
yet it is of a two fold consideration: first, as it is our spiritual life, by
which Christ lives in us, and we in him, Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 2.20.

2. As faith is a virtue, and our duty toward God: and so, faith is an act
flowing from that our spiritual life, by which I believe all whatsoever the
Lord has propounded in his S. Scripture, Act. 24.14.

Q. What is faith, as it is our spiritual life?

A. A resting of our hearts on God, as on the only author of our life and
salvation; that is, that in God we are freed from all evil, and are assured of
all that is good, Esa. 10.20. Ps. 37.5. Act. 4.12. Ps. 84.11. Thirdly, try thy
faith in six things.

1. In its author, who works it.

2. In the means by which it is wrought ordinarily.

3. Concerning its object.

4. In its effects.

5. In its ground.

6. And concerning its end.

Q. Must I necessarily know all these?

A. 1. Yes verily: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. ult.

2. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

3. Gods best ordinances avail not to us, unless we receive them by faith,
Heb. 4.2.

Q. Who works faith in us?

A. Jesus is the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. And the Holy
Ghost works faith in us, 1 Cor. 12.9. for the Father through the Son, by the
Holy Ghost works all works which are wrought on the creature.

Q. By what means is faith wrought in us?

A. 1. By hearing of Gods word, which is a religious receiving of Gods revealed
will, by whatsoever way we can know it.

2. Most ordinarily by hearing the word preached, Romans 10.14.17.

Q. Who is the adequate object of our faith?

A. Christ, as he is our redeemer, is the immediate object of our faith: And
God (as by his grace we live well, 1 Timothy 4.10.) is its ultimate object: for we
live to God through Christ, Romans 6.11. We have hope through Christ to Godward,
2 Cor. 3.4. And we believe in God through Christ, 1 Pet. 1.21.

Q. Which are those effects of faith, by which I must examine my self?

A. The first act of faith is to believe: do thou believe?

1. That there is but one God, Mark. 12.32.

2. That this God who is one in essence, is distinguished into three Persons,
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7.

3. That the Lord Christ is equal with the Father in all things, Philip. 2.6.
save only as he is Mediator, Joh. 14.28.

4. That creation is ascribed to the Father, redemption to the Son, and
sanctification to the Holy Ghost (as it is in the Creed?) And yet, do thou
believe that all the actions of all the three Persons of the Trinity (on, and
in the creatures) are common to them all, and proper to every person? Joh.
5.17.19. and 16.13.14.

2. Do thou, by faith, role thy self, and thy ways on Jehovah? Ps. 37.5.
Set up thy hearts rest on holy Jehovah, Esa. 10.20. And give thou thy self
over unto God? 2 Cor. 8.5. Job. 13.15.

3. Does faith purify the heart from the love of all sin? Act. 15.9.

4. And examine thy self, if thy faith works by love? Gal. 5.6.

Q. What is that ground on which justifying faith is built?

A. All the promises, which are of mercy, in S. Scripture: for those only are
properly the sure foundation on which our faith is built: because those only
propound Christ unto us, Ioh. 5.39. Romans 10.4.

Q. What end does faith aim at?

A. Most principally at the advancing of Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. And
secondarily, the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Quest. 4.
Q. Wherein must I examine my self concerning love?

A. If thou love God above all things, Mat. 22.37. and thy neighbor as thy
self, v. 39.

Q. How shall I know that I love God above all things?

A 1. By thy burning desire to be united with God through Christ, Ps. 42.1,2,3.
which is wrought by faith, Gal. 2.20. called the love of union.

2. By that joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which arises from that union,
1 Pet. 1.8. This is called the love of well-pleasednesse.

3. By thy zeal to advance Gods glory in all things, Ps. 69.9. and 119.139.
This is the love of benevolence.

Q. How can I love God above all things?

A. When both in affection, and all effects, thou loves the Lord, preferring
him above all things in heaven and earth, Mark. 12.33.

Q. How shall I know that I love my neighbor as my self?

A. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them, Mat. 7.12.

Quest. 5.
Q. What is true repentance?

A. A godly forrow for offending God, with a continued total change of our
will, willing nothing but Gods glory, and our salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.11.

Q. How shall I know that my repentance is sound?

A. 1. By sorrowing for sin as it offends the Lord, more then for fear of any
punishment, Psalm 51.4.

2. By confessing and forsaking all sin, Prove. 28.13.

Q. How can I repent of my unknown sins?

A. Who repent distinctly of every known sin, does virtually repent their
unknown errors, Ps. 19.13.

Q. Must I repent often of all my sins?

A. 1. Our bypast sins should never be forgotten, Deuteronomy. 9.7. Ps. 25.7. and
51.3.

2. Because we sin daily, Prove. 24.16. we must repent daily, Luke 13.3.5. for
one sin unrepented (if it be known) makes us, as if we had never repented of
any, Jam. 2.10.

3. I must repent greatly, if my sins be great; as did David, Job, St. Paul,
St. Peter, and Mary Magdalen.

Quest. 6.
Q. What is observance?

A. Observance is that by which Gods will is performed in subjection for Gods
glory.

Q. Why is that (in subjection) added?

A. Because observance applies my will to fulfill Gods known will willingly,
in respect of his absolute authority over me, Romans 9.21.

Q. Does not obedience the same?

A. No: for observance consists as in the external performance of Gods
known will: So, or more in the internal intent of a willingly subjected will,
unto Gods revealed will in all things. 1 Samuel 15.22. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

But obedience respects the external act, which it often performs, even
when the internal intention of the will is wanting: As in Galley-slaves, and
sleepy servants.

Q. How shall I know that my observance is sound?

A. 1. By thy esteem of Gods revealed will, more then of all, or any man's
commands, Act. 4 19. This is a sure sign; for the life of observance is in our
lovingly subjecting our will unto Gods revealed will in all things. Reprobates
nill they, will they, must obey; but they do not observe, Romans 8.7.

2. By willingly subjecting thy will unto Gods known will, even when it
seems contrary to reason. Ioh. 13.18.

3. By loving these parts of S. Scripture most, which most exactly teach
observance, Ps. 119 33. Act. 9.6.

4. By fearing to offend God, Prove. 28.14. and by flying from all occasions of
offense, Heb. 12. ult.

5. By resolution to persevere in observance, though thou lose life and the
world, Act. 20.24.

6. By constant use of all means which can incline thy will unto a willing
subjection, Josh. 1.8. Ps. 1.2. 1 Cor. 9. ult. Ioh. 5.39.

And so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
Q. What is meant by those words?

A. Being fitted by examination, as the word, So, imports; we may without
danger of bloud-guiltinesse, v. 27. and of damnation, v. 29. communicate to our
everlasting comfort: As those officers said, Ioh. 7.46. Never man spoke like
this man. So I avouch, Tha^ never was bread, like this bread: Nor cup* like
this cup.

Q. But how shall I be assured that I am fitte^ for receiving, even after I
have examined my sel^*

A. The examination of thy self must b^ continued till thou sinde thy self
fitted.

Object. The H. Ghost commands not that continued examination.

A. 1. The word, So, demonstrates the contrary: for, So, is not an adverbe of
time, but a note of qualification.

2. The H. Ghost commands us, To examine our selves till we be prepared, So to
eat of that bread and drink of that cup; which certainly denotes continuation.

3. He has never examined himself exactly, who continues not his examination
until he find these six spiritual graces (knowledge, desire, faith, love,
repentance, and observance) in some good measure wrought in him; which all, he
may obtain by zealous prayer, according to Christ's promise, Mat. 7.7,8. Iam.
1.5.

4. We must examine our selves, because hypocrites may delude the most exact of
all mortal examiners.

5. Our hearts which are deceitful above all things, desperately wicked, Ier.
17.9. can only be examined by God, v. 10. and by our selves, 1 Cor. 2.11.

Q. Seeing that we are commanded to examine our selves: why should our Minister
examine us?

A. 1. Because we are commanded to do good to our selves, may none other do us
good?

2. Faithful Ministers must (of all callings) be most conscientiously diligent
to know the estate of their flocks, and to look well to their herds, Prove.
27.23.

As the salt of the earth, Mat. 5.13. they must season their hearers.

As lights of this world, Mat. 5.14. they must show in doctrine the true light;
and in conversation practice it, Mat. 5 16.

They must open their hearers eyes, convert them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18.

They must first feed their slocks with milk, and thereafter with meat, 1 Cor.
3.2. 1 Pet. 5.1.

They must be stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1.

Ministers must watch for their peoples souls, and give account for them, Heb.
ult. 17.

All the premises prove, that faithful Ministers must examine their people.

We are commanded to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the
hope that is in us, with meekness, and fear; and we must be ready to do it, 1
Pet. 3.17.

Who obstinately refuse to be examined by their Minister, run hazard of
condemnation: Seeing light is come into the world, and such love darkness
rather then light, John 3.19.

Such, are doers of evil, haters of the light, and dare not come to the light,
lest their deeds should be reproved, Ioh. 3.20.

Such, who will not be examined by their Minister, are despisers both of
Christ, and of God, Luke 10.16.

Q. What learnest thou hence?

A. 1. The H. Ghost tyeth this examination, and our receiving together: I must
not then separate them, Mark. 10.9.

2. The greater that the danger is in unworthy receiving, we should be the more
strict in our examining of our selves, and in our being examined by our
Minister.

3. All Christians (occasion being fully offered) must receive, or be despisers
of Christ, and of God: all then who would be Christians must both examine
themselves, and be examined by their Minister, lest they despise Christ and God.

4. Who will not examine themselves, and be examined by their Minister, they
hide their sin, and so shall never prosper, Prove. 28.13.

5. Who will not examine themselves concerning their sins, and wants, cannot be
helped by receiving. Judas the traitor, Ioh. 13.17. and Simon Magus, Act. 8.20.
are instances.

Quest.
Q. What must I do when I come to the table to communicate?

A. We must come with filial fear; setting our faith a work in meditation of
four things:

1. When we see that bread broken, and wine powered out; we must call to mind,
That our Savior was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our
iniquities, Esa. 53.5.

2. As that bread, and that wine are given unto us: So, God the Father gave his
Son, Romans 8.32. And Christ gives himself unto us in this Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11.24,25.

3. We must believe without doubting, that as that bread eaten, and that wine
drunken of us, become one substance with us: So Christ, and all the faithful
receivers are made one, Ioh. 17.21. That Christ is our bead, Ephesians. 5.23. That we
are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. And that we
are every one members one of another, Romans 12.5.

4. As we take that bread, and that wine with our bodily hand: So with my
souls hand, faith, we must take Christ, Ioh. 6.29.35.40.47. compared with v.
51.54.56.58.

Quest.
Q. What must I do after I have received?

A. 1. Render all possible praise unto God for that his inestimable benefit,
Ps. 103.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.

2. If we have sped well, and gotten Christ, we must be the more thankful, and
become new creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17.

But if we find not our selves to have sped well, we must notwithstanding
praise the Lord, and not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9.

Quest.
Q. Is it not a sure sign of unworthy receiving, if we become worse after we
have received?

A. We must distinguish betwixt a real worsenesse, and Satan's delusions.

1. If we become really worse, then a^redly our unworthy receiving made that
holy Ordinance ineffectuall unto us; as unto Judas, and Simon Magus.

2. But though passiens stir in us more furiously, and temptations assail us
more desperately after we have received, then they did before; we must not
conclude thence, that we received unworthily; but by the plain contrary.

For if by prayer and practice we continue constantly to resist these sinful
motions; our constancy in that our resisting, proves that we were worthy
receivers: for then we may be sure, that (because sin (in our worthy
receiving) had a deadly wound, and that Satan was dislodged out of his too long
kept lodging) sin would the more furiously rage, and Satan more fiercely
assault.

Quest.
Q. I swore both before, and in the act of recuving new observance, I come far
short of performance: was I not then an unworthy receiver?

A. The true sight and real sense of our imperfections, with a zealous
endeavor to be perfect, is the greatest perfection we can attain unto in this
life: for to know our fins, to confess, and forsake them, is to find mercy,
Prove. 28.13. And to endeavor zealously, is to be accepted of God through
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.12.

V. 29. For he that eareth and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
Q. We have heard what unworthy eating, and drinking is: But what is meant by
damnation?

A. 1. Some Interpreters read it thus: They eat and drink judgment to
themselves. But because the H. Ghost did affirm, v. 27. that such were guilty
of the body and blood of the Lord, which was proved to be murder; it is more
consonant to the scope of the H. Ghost to read it damnation.

2. Damnation is the consummation of spiritual death; or the highest degree of
that eternal punishment which the Lord has adjudged unto reprobates for
sin, Revel. 19.2.3.

Damnation is infinite in respect of loss: for reprobates lose God, who is
that infinite and only good, Mat. 19.17.

Damnation is eternal in respect of duration; for it shall never be ended,
Mark. 9.44.46.48.

Hence is the highest height of all extremest torments upon their souls and
bodies; having a never dying worm of their accusing conscience within them,
eternal torments of devouring fire round about them, ugly devils to be their
only companions: And all to continue everlastingly, Luke 16.23.

Not discerning the Lords body.
Q. What is that, To discern the Lords body?

A. 1. To have the Lords body in highest esteem, duly considering its
excellencies, that so with most exact examination, preparation, consideration,
and sanctification, we come and receive at the Lords Table.

2. That that bread, and that wine, even after the words of institution,
remain bread and wine in substance. And although that Christ's humane body be
in heaven, Act. 3.21. Heb. 8.4. Yet in due receiving this sacramental bread
and wine, all faithful receivers get in this Sacrament, Christ's body, and
spilt blood, by faith; as his own words (Take, eat, drink, This is my body
which is broken for you: This is my blood which was shed for many for remission
of sins) do prove.

3. It is by a full knowledge of our damnable condition by sin; and to know
what Christ has done and suffered for us, that so we may prepare our selves to
be both ready and willing to do and suffer for his sake, Philip. 1.29.

Q. What does this teach thee?

A. Four things:

1. The deadly and damnable condition of especially perverse ignorants, who
neither know, nor will be taught what infinite good there is in worthy
receiving; nor what infinite evil is in unworthy receiving: They are murderers
of Christ, v. 27.

2. Their desperate estate, who either maliciously despise, or carelessely
neglect their examination, preparation, consideration and fanctification; and
yet dare adventure to receive: Those eat and drink damnation to themselves, v.
29.

3. Their dangerous condition, who having time and opportunity to examine
themselves; yet will not communicate: Those are despisers of Christ, Luke 10.16.

4. And their blessed estate, who come well prepared, having on their wedding
garment, Christ; for they get the seal of the Covenant, Romans 4.11. They get
increase of grace, and of all spiritual graces: They get Christ, who is our
life, Col. 3.4. Our light, Rev. 21.23. And our all, Col. 3.11.

FINIS.
Soli Deo gloria in aeternum.
Amen.
Imprimatur. Ia. Cranford,

Aug. 28. 1645.

