A True relation of the Murders committed in the Parish of Clunne in the County
of Salop by Enoch ap Evan upon the Bodies of his Mother and Brother, with the
Causes moving him thereunto.

Wherein is examined and refuted a certain Book written upon the same
Subject, by P. STUDLEY, Entitled the Looking glass of SCHISM.

Also an Appendix in further defense of this Relation, wherein are examined the
most material Passages added in the Second Edition of the said LOOKING-GLASS,
whereby the Author vainly sh^weth his desire to maintain and excuse his
erroneous Reports in the former Edition of his Book.

By RICHAR MORE Esquire.

Printed by Order of a Committee of t^^ Honorable House of Commons now
Assembled in Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by T.B. for P. Stephens and C. Meredith at the golden Lion in
Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

The Printer to the Reader.
VVHeras the ensuing treatise refers to the Pages of the former Edition of
the Looking-glass, of Schism; This is to give notice that both editions (for
substance) do agree to the 35. page; and there begins the eleventh Section,
wherein Master Studley inserteth that violent love passion, which befell Enoch
(the day and night before he committed these Murders) which being omitted in
the former edition occasioned in the second, an increase of only four leaves,
so in this small distance is likely to be found whatsoever this Relation has
reference unto, after the said 35 page This I thought convenient to be
certified in this place for the ease of such as have either of the two editions
of Master Studleys book.

An advertisement to the Reader touching the Ensuing Relation, showing the
occasion of Printing thereof this present year 1641. and how hitherto
suppressed.
Gentle Reader,
TO the ensuing Discourse the style of the Prophet Isaiah, Cap. 37.3. may be
applied, the children came to the birth, but there was no strength to bring
forth. This relation though at first not so intended, was made ready for the
Press in the year 1635 and being then tendered to the view of the Licencer
who gave approbation for the printing of Master Studleys Looking GLASS of
Schism, it was for that time by him rejected. No better acceptance could this
Truth then find, Truth must rather be suppressed than the falsehood of that
Glass be discovered. The Author of the Looking-glass pretends to set forth
the disobedience of Nonconformists against Royal Majesty, and the laws of our
Church doubtless, Noncormitie and disobedience to just commands are to be
searched out and brought forth to deserved punishment. But experience teaches
that whilst that angry Author by his false glass labored to represent
Nonconformitie to be the only cause of those execrable Murders committed by
Enoch ap Evan, he has thereby not convinced but hardened many that wavered,
and scandalized others who better knew their duties to just laws.

These and other pernicious consequences of this deceitful Glass being
considered by diverse worthy members of this present Honorable Assembly in
Parliament, who well knowing this rejected Relation had discovered the true
circumstances of these deplorable murders, by diligence in examining all
persons reputed to have any competent knowledge of the said Enoch and his
disconsolate frinds, they have now called it forth.

An occasion of my travel therein was obedience to the commands of those
Judges, by whose sentence the murderer was condemned to die, and his body to be
hanged up in Chains, for shortly after the execution of that sentence, the
said body being to the great affront of Justice secretly taken down from the
Gibbet and conveyed away; those Judges required my service, (amongst others the
Justices of that County) for the discovery of the offenders. And having hereby
informed my self, I did examine those circumstances of fact, whereupon Master
Studley had framed his pretended Looking-glass of Schism, and finding the
falsehood thereof I composed the ensuing Relation, apprehending my self
thereunto deeply obliged, as well for vindication of my Neighborhood as the
satisfaction of such as desired the Truth of this accident. In pursuance whereof
I presented one Copy of this ensuing Relation to the Bishop of Hereford, in
whose Diocese the murders were committed. Another Copy I presented to the
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, in whose Dioces the Author of the
Looking-glass, then and now lives. Afterward I was moved to commend it to
the Press for more public satisfaction. The success whereof is before
related. All which proceedings being likewise known to the forementioned
worthy members in Parliament, and a Comittee being assigned to take information
of the complaints against refusing of License for printing lawful books, the
denial of this Relation was particularly questioned by some of the said
Committee; the reasons given for the denial being slender, By the Vote of the
said Comittee this Relation was ordered to be Printed.

And thus, Gentle Reader, thou have a plain account of what I have promised in
this advertisement, the uses which I conceive may be rightly made of this sad
occasion, I have expressed in the twenty seventh Section of this relation:
whereunto in reference to that vehemence which the Author of the Looking-glass
manifests in his answer to certain cryminations against his book (most
likely to be of his own composing) I shall here add the words of Solomon,
Eccles. 7.9, 10. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for thou do not
enquire wisely, concerning this. That also of our Savior is not to be
forgotten, Luke 13.4, 5. those eighteen on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and
slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
Jerusalem? J tell you Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

And so I commend to thy view the relation as it was prepared for the Press in
the year 1635. where take notice of what follows touching the Pages and
Edition of the Looking-glass, whereunto this relation has reference.

I Desire those to whose hands this ensuing Relation may come, to understand,
that it has reference to the first printed Looking-glass of Schism, and to
the pages of that Book which is since reprinted, with some additions,
alterations, and an answer to certain criminations, or objections of the
Author of his own framing: which I take not upon me to meddle with further,
then wherein they are contrary or contradictory to what in this of mine is set
forth: wherein J have set down the ground and authority upon which it is
warranted, and have named the parties upon whose testimony the truth will rest:
as Master Erasmus Powell Vicar of Clunne, who has perused my whole Relation,
and has subscribed that Copy which J keep, testifying, that those things in
and about which I use his name or refer my self to his knowledge, are truly
set down by me, and received from him. So has John Howels the brother in law
of Enoch, whom Master Studley calls John Powell, in the confirmation of whose
words he confesses the life and Truth of that History is really containd, as
is set down, page the eighth, of his answer mentioned aforesaid. And in like
manner of all the rest, upon whom any material point of contradiction rests.
So that what is in difference between us, will be apparent by records,
acknowledgment, manifest contradiction in the Looking-glass it self, or
witnesses such as we both agree upon. All which will be evident to him that
shall diligently compare them: and which I leave to the judgment of the
considerate Reader, the maine scope of mine intention herein being peace with
truth, which is ever Prayed for by

The true lover Thereof Richard More.
LINTEY 29. June 1635.
A True relation of the Murders committed by Enoch ap Evan upon the bodies of
his Mother and Brother.
SECTION. I.
TRuth is Gods, and He has bound man to Manifest the same if concealed, and to
vindicate her if wronged: and whosoever shall either Conceal or wrong her, or
hinder the manifestation, or vindication thereof shall offend. The serious
consideration whereof, has moved me to undertake this brief ensuing treatise,
for the more full discovery of the truth, (in part) as yet not generally
known, and to rectify the conceits of many, who have been abused (as the
best may be) by false reports. The matter it self (though both the party by
whom, and the place where it was done, were obscure) is very notorious and
remarkable, and such as many not only of the Vulgar sort, but eminent persons
have taken notice of, and so much more by reason of a Book published,
entitled the Looking Glass of Schism: wherein (as the Author pretends) by
a brief narration of the execrable Murders done by Enoch ap Evan a downeright
Separatist, on the bodies of his Mother and Brother with the cause moving him
thereunto, the disobedience of that Sect against Royal Majesty, and the Laws
of our Church, is plainly set forth, be Peter Studley Master of Arts, and
Minister of Gods Word in Shrewsbury. That this Murder was committed is true,
and no waie^ doubted of. The question is what should be the cause moving him
thereto? And what kind of people inhabited the Neighborhood where those
Murders were committed? It is confidently affirmed that he was a Puritan, that
Puritanisme was the cause moving him to this Murder, for which he had judgment
to dye, and his Body was hanged upon a Gibbet in Chains; and moreover, that
they were Puritans who took him down from the Gibbet, and that he had been
by politic seducements drawn into those opinions, ( Looking-glass page one
hundred thirty seven) so desperate and raging in their furious cruelty.
Whereupon I labored to inform my self, and was required by Authority
(amongst others) to search out the truth, and to discover the Parties who had
taken down the body of Enoch from the Gibbet. Which being discovered, I
committed the several passages to writing, wherewith I acquainted a Minister
in the Neighborhood. He reduced my Papers into a methodicall confutation of
those errors and untruths, which are most palpable, and indeed intolerable.
It being finished, was intended for the Press, yet not permitted. When I
perceaved untruth so much still to prevail, many abused, my neighborhood
about Bishops Castle injured, and such ill use made of such a fearful
example; I conceaved my self deeply obliged to inform others in the truth,
vindicate my neighbors, and to persuade others to make better use of this
lamentable accident. And to that purpose, having revised mine own papers, have
digested them into this Historical narration: wherein I do acknowledge more
want of ability to set truth forth to the View of the Learned, then of an
honest and upright heart to discover her, though naked and without ornaments.
And herein I shall differ from the common received opinion of those that are
more remote from this part of the County, concerning the Puritanisme wherewith
this wretch was charged: and perhaps for the same I shall be suspected to be
Puritanicall, or at least to Patronize Puritanisme, both which being taken in
the sense of Schism or nonconformity I solemnly disavowe, and seriously
protest, that I have always disliked Nonconformity, and both in judgment and
practice have conformed my self unto the Orders and Discipline of this Church
of England, and especially in that particular of kneeling so far, as, that if
our Church had left the gesture to be used in the blessed Sacrament
indetermined, I would have made choice of that gesture of Kneeling before all
others, as the most reverend, and fittest to be used in that holy Action,
wherein we come so near unto our God.

Sect. 2.
Herein my special aim (according to the truth of my knowledge) being, to
free the neighborhood of Bishops Castle (wherein I live and have bestowed my
time) from the false and infamous aspers^^ns of Puritanisme and Nonconformity;
I set my self on work to make this true relation ensuing, touching the estate
of the said Enoch ap Evan, the Son of Edward ap Evan of Shadwall, in the
Parish of Clunne, in the County of Salop, where he lived all the time from his
Birth; and to show how he was thought of by the neighbors about Bishops
Castle, no Puritans, though so termed by the Author of the Looking-glass page
102.

Sect. 3.
It is certain he was a young man of no great abilities for learning, he
could only read English, he was thrifty and given to no vice, whereof any
public notice was taken; he did diligently frequent his Parish Church of
Clunne upon Sundaies and Holy days, to hear Divine Service, and was seldom
absent from the beginning of Prayers: he very seldom went to any other Parish
Church upon any week days: he was not known to reason of any matters of
controversy in religion, as being above his capacity, which was very mean, as
the Author of the Looking-glass often confesses calling him ignorant Dolte,
of mean Understanding, able only to read English, etc. He was so far from
traveling abroad to hear Sermons, or to acquaint himself with any Preacher,
that I cannot find out that he was known of any Minister that dwelt but three
Miles from him, He rather gave himself to solitarines, especially in his later
time: and as is confessed in the foresaid book p. 21. being of a swarthy
complexion under the Predominance of the humor of Melancholy so he carried
himself sullenly and Cynically, in so much that his friends feared that he
began to be distracted a year and more before he committed that horrible murder
of his Mother and Brother; and thereupon was let blood by the Harbor
Surgeon of Bishops Castle by name William Griffiths, which blood letting for
that year, it seems, stayed the breaking forth of that humor into any
notorious observation: but not half a year before the Murder committed, in a
very cold season of Frost and Show, he was seen to stand barefooted and bare
legged in the midst of a running brook, which with the force of the stream,
his face being up the same, did wet him to the middle; his hat he held before
his face, as if he were praying. Master Clunne of Clunne a Gentleman in the
neighborhood ryding by the place with his wife, conceived him, before he came
near, to have been a natural fool, called John of Acton, dwelling not far
from thence, until his wife told him that it was Enoch ap Evan; the gentleman
then seeing who it was, persuaded him to to regard his health, to put on his
Hose and Shoes, and to go home to warm him, and that he would take a more
convenient place to pray in. And this is the truth of that which the Author of
the Looking-glass has so much mistaken in his eleventh page both in the
persons and the matter, multiplying words as a false Glass does faces, and of
a little tale told him, by his Rhetorical additions makes a long story.
William Tanner justifyeth that he told this to Master Studly in this manner,
and not as he has related it.

Sect. 4.
After this at Easter following, Enoch with his Father Mother and Brother being
to receive the Communion at their Parish Church of Clunne aforesaid, he
reverently in outward show received the Bread from Master Powels hand, who is
the Vicar of Clunne allowed by the Author of the Looking-glass to be a reverend
and aged Divine page forty seven, and indeed he is a Master of Arts of an
ancient standing, the rural Deane of that Deanery of Clunne, and a Surrogate
to the Chancellor of the Dioces of Hereford:) but when the assistant by name
Master Robert Barret following Master Powell to deliver the Wine) came to
Enoch, he found him not prepared by kneeling down, whereupon he called upon
him to kneel; Enoch bad him fill ^he Cup with Wine, and although there was in
the Cup more then usually others drink, or that he himself had used to
drink, yet notwithstanding the Assistant filled the Cup, and coming back to
Enoch, he bowed his knee, and taking the Cup drank all the Wine within a very
little. Now this strange alteration from his former usual manner being
observed in Enoch, the opinion that he began to be distracted increased so, as
the said Vicar of Clunne thereupon sent Master Barret to Enochs father to
advise him to look to his son Enoch, and to procure some help for him.

Sect. 5.
After this in May next before he committed these Murders, Enoch came to one
John Lewis a Smith in Bishops Castle a man of good credit, with whom one Master
Gravenor a Scrivener sojourned, and entreated John Lewis to help him to agree
with Master Gravenor to teach him to write better, for he could not then write
legibly, and they agreed that for five shillings the said Master Gravenor
should teach him, John Lewis admitted Enoch into his house with Master Gravenor
where Enoch continued about a fortnight. There was then in Bishops Castle one
Master John Moore a Schoolmaster, who came to the house of John Lewis, and
desired the said Master Gravenor to show him his prospective glass, upon sight
whereof the said Master Moore, Master Gravenor, Enoch ap Evan, and John Lewis
went into the yard or backeside of the said John Lewis his house, where all of
them made use of the prospective, Master Moore and Master Gravenor thence
discerning through the prospective Sheep upon a Hill called Bishops Moate, but
John Lewis could not discern any thing through the same; Enoch looked through
it also, but said nothing at all to them. That night there lodged in the house
one that brought Tobacco to sell, and some other Scholars: and in the night
when they were all quiet in Bed, John Lewis heard one coming down the Stairs
from the Room where Enoch lay, and he called and asked who is up there? Enoch
answered, I am here: whereupon John Lewis rose out of his bed to come to him,
and found Enoch much distempered, and to utter imperfect speeches. John Lewis
persuaded him to go to bed, and to take his rest: Enoch would not, but said,
did you see that villain my Master (meaning Master Gravenor, the Scrivener)
how he has betrayed me, and conjured the Tobacco-seller to come from Ireland
to kill me? And the said Enoch being in his Shirt, desired John Lewis to lend
him a suite of Apparel, and would not be persuaded to fetch his own out of the
Chamber. John Lewis endeavored to satisfy Enoch that he did but dream, and
that he was mistaken: and the better to work upon Enoch, John Lewis caused
his Wife to to arise, and got Enoch to come with him into his bed, and John's
wife being risen, made first a Posset and afterward an Alebrew for Enoch, and
at last after some speeches of Enoch which were Nonsense he fell on sleep.
Hereupon John Lewis and his wife (having heard before that Enoch was inclined
to Lunacy) then concluded it was true which they had herd. On the morrow Enoch
arose and began to write, but it was not long before John Lewis being in his
barn, discerned on to run apace by him: he looked out to see who it was, and
perceived it was Enoch: John hasted after him to overtake him, but could not
obtain sight of him any more. Thereupon John sent one of the Scholars (being
Enochs sisters son) after him to his fathers house, who brought John Lewis
word that he was at his fathers house. As Enoch went home he met with Master
Jeremy Powell, to whom Enoch said, get your Armor, and prepare your self, for
yonder is the Scrivener at Bishops Castle will bring the Enemies upon us, and
though Enoch would not at first be persuaded to go any more to the Scrivener
to learn to write, yet about a fortnight after he came to him and bestowed
drink upon him, and paid him what he had promised for teaching him to write,
viz. five Shillings, thanking him, and said he was sorry for the words he had
spoken of him. This is it, and in this manner, that the foresaid William Tanner
told the Author of the Looking-glass concerning Enoch, and all those whom I
have named, will justify the truth hereof, who are none of them Puritans.

Sect. 6.
As for the second argument in the Looking-glass, which the Author page one
hundred says was likewise told him by William Tanner, to prove Enoch to be
Lunaticke, touching the shrill voice which he heard in the Church of Clunne,
saying, Enoch prepare page one hundred four, the said William Tanner utterly
denies the telling of any such thing unto him: neither can I learn of any
body that there was any such thing: and if Enoch had had any such conceit, it
were a further argument of his Lunacy. Let therefore the Author of that
Invention take heed least the Lying Spirit hold not as much interest, and take
as strong possession of his soul, as he did of Enochs, according to Enochs
advise page one hundred and five, for from the time that he went so into the
river as aforesaid, the report of his distraction increased. The said William
Tanner likewise denies that he ever told the Author of the Looking-glass of
the third argument, mentioned page one hundred and seven, concerning the use of
Purging and Phlebotomie, to mitigate the strength of humors, causing malady
and distemper in his mind, though it be true as before is set forth, that once
he was let blood by the Harbor Surgeon of Dishops Castle. But there was
never any trayning of the band of Captain Scriven at Newport as there is
alleged, as the said Gentleman assures me: who likewise denies that he
told the Author of the Looking-glass that he never heard of any distemper by
Lunacy or frantic moodes in Enoch his Soldier, as is alleged page 111. for I
my selfe-shewing that passage in Master Studlyes book to the same Master
Scriven, who is of no less worth then he is acknowledged in the same book to
be, he presently brought one of his Soldiers to me, who had excused Enochs
absence from a training in regard of a fit of distraction then upon him, and
this Soldier by name Erasmus Jones was familiarly acquainted with Enoch, and a
near neighbor to him. It was grown a general report upon the grounds before
set down, that Enoch was distracted: yea it was a common term about Bishops
Castle, and it passed for current and credible in all the Neighborhood
thereabout, that Enoch was subject to Lunacie and distraction; as the Author of
the Looking-glass says page 99, and that in a fit of distraction he
committed those horrible Murders, as his carriage the day and night before the
perpetration of them will farther manifest.

Sect. 7.
For upon thursday before the murder committed, being Market day at Knighton in
the County of Radnor, Enoch went thither against the mind of his Father,
Mother, and Brother, as himself confessed to Thomas Howels his kinsman; and
being there he told the said Thomas, that the occasion of his then coming
thither, was to speak with his Sister Margaret, for he heard that the black
Ox was to be in the Town to be fold that day; which Ox (said Enoch to Thomas
Howels) your Father and your Uncle Henry know very well. These words of Enoch
to Thomas (knowing that there was no such matter) persuaded Thomas Howel that
Enoch was then in a fit of distraction. Enoch likewise enquired of his kinseman
Howels whether he had seen Margaret the Sister of Master Richard James in
Knighton that day? And though Thomas Howels could not tell that she was in the
Town, yet Enoch had in a short time found her out by enquiry, and called his
kinseman Howels to come in with them to drink, telling him that he meant to
marry with her that night, though intruth he was then not acquainted with her:
they went in together to drink with the aforesaid maid, with whom Enoch often
whispered, sitting next unto her, and spoke in Welsh: but she disliking his
motion, and weary of his company, made have to be gone, giving him a flat deny
all, yet Enoch went out of the house with her, but presently turned back to
Thomas Howels, and shortly after rode home without any further speech with the
said maid, notwithstanding that night following Enoch (being in bed with his
brother John) rose out of his bed, and went suddenly to the town of Clunne: his
brother John also arose and went with him, and they came thither about
midnight, where Enoch called at the house of one Ursula Jones and Erasmus Jones
her son before named rose up and came to them: Enoch asked what company was
in the house, and whether Master Christopher Powell a Curate and the aforesaid
Margaret James were there? Erasmus answered they were not there. No said Enoch?
Then either they have mistaken me, or I them: though intruth there was no
appointment of meeting between them. But Enochs brother John privately wished
Erasmus Jones to persuade Enoch to go home, and told him he was out of his
senses, which also the said Erasmus had discovered, being Enochs friend and
fellow Soldier as aforesaid, and therefore he did persuade Enoch to go home
with his Brother John, and they did so. John in the morning acquainted old
Edward ap Evan their father with what had happened, and desired his father to
seek for some help for his brother, and after went to plough, leaving Enoch
at home, who fetched in his fathers horse, whereupon the old Man rode to Bishops
Castle upon the Friday being market day there, and spoke to Harbor Surgeon
aforenamed to come to let his Son Enoch blood, as he had once formerly done.
But when the old man came home, he found his wife and son John the same day
both slain in the house in several rooms, their heads being cut off and
carried thence: but he found not his son Enoch, and therefore imagined that
he had committed that cruel Murder. And here it is remarkable, that in that
place where he did usually read the word of God and prayers, he was tempted,
overcome, and committed this fearful sin. It is thought and was confessed,
that John was sleeping when he received his deaths wound, though it were not
his custom after his weariness with labor to repose himself in slumber for
an hour on the end of a table board, upon a cushion, as the Author of the
Lookingglasse says page 38. for his watching and traveling with Enoch to
Clunne as is before expressed, was the cause of his heavy sleep after he came
from plough.

Sect. 8.
Now I refer it to the impartial reader, whether these things before setdown
(though many other also might be added) be not sufficient arguments of Enochs
distraction. And if only the Puritans about Bishops Castle conceaved so, then
is the country indeed full of Puritans, for not only they who conducted him to
the Jail, but generally all were of that opinion, yet the Author of the
Looking-glass is so mad as to take Enochs own word that he was not mad, as
appears page 99. and thereby conceaveth, that he gives nonconformists a
deep disgust in the relation and (as he conceaveth) evident refutation of the
arguments convincing Enochs Lunacy, by his denial of it.

Sect. 9.
After this murder committed by Enoch, and after he had hidden the heads of his
Mother and Brother; he himself went to Guilden Down to the house of Roger
Howels, Father of Thomas Howels before mentioned: and thither the same day
shortly after came the Hue and cry, upon which Enoch was apprehended, and
brought before Sir Robert Howard, and there he confessed to the foresaid
Master Powell Vicar of Clunne, where he had hidden the heads, and there they
were found: but he himself (having likewise confessed the murder) as by his
examination upon record appears (was conducted to the Jail at Shrewsbury,
not by the Constable of the Hundred, as is by Master Studley related p. 48. but
by the Sergeants of Clunne and others: neither were they to pass by Enochs
Fathers house, nor did he turn into the house (for it was out of their way)
nor made that reply to his sister, we live in a false Church, as she her
self affirms, nor did her husband relate such words to Master Studley, or
offer to affirm them upon his oath in any Court of this Kingdom, as is falsely
related page 50. for he says he will affirm upon his oath, that he did not
say so in the presence of Master Studley, or any where else.

Sect. 10.
In the way to Shrewsbury Jail, they take up their lodging at Powderbacke, and
there we read of strange things that happened, as appears in the
Looking-glass page 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, and 56 as that Enoch stared with
indignation upon the Constable of the Hundred, that he started up in a
desperate rage, and caught at a Spit to have goared the Constable, and that a
most fearful noise is heard in the Street near the door of the house where
Enoch lay, as if it had been the rattling of the wheels of two or three Carts
furiously driven, this noise wakened Enoch, affrighted him etc. So many
particulars related, so many falsehoods, for there was no Constable there to be
goared: there was indeed the Sergeants of Clunne as I said before, he has
assured me that neither there, nor in all the way, did Enoch offer any violence
to him, or any in the company, neither did he catch at any Spit, only he
looked earnestly and ghastly upon every object, like a distracted man, as he and
the rest conceived him to be, as I said before. And as touching the noise in
the street, one of the watchmen told me, that they saw apparently the cause of
the noise, which was the running of Calves along the street, by the door of
the house where Enoch was lodged, neither did he come down naked, or use that
exclamation: all which if true, had been no arguments of Puritanisme.

Sect. 11.
And now Enoch is brought to the Jail at Shrewsbury, and he with his Mittimus
delivered to the Jailer. Many desire to see and to question this notorious
malefactor, he never that I can hear off, denied the fact to any; but the
cause inducing him thereunto is earnestly enquired after also. Faelix qui
potuit rerum cognoscere causas, says the Poet. What the opinion of the
Neighborhood was, is formerly declared: they that knew the course of his life,
and observed the dutiful respect of Enoch to his Father and Mother, and the
love and affection between his brother and him, could imagine no reason or
cause of those heinous facts, but Satan's working upon his distraction and
Lunacy. For it was generally observed, that they lovingly agreed together (as
is set forth in the Looking-glass page 32) from their infant years and
weaning from the breast of their mother to the one and thirtieth year of the
age of the younger of them (which was the year wherein John was slain) during
which time Enoch assured Master Studly, engaging his truth and salvation upon
it, there had never fallen outanyverball quarrel, no not so much as the Term
(thou) had ever passed in anger from the one to the other. Yet how soon after
Enochs coming to Shrewsbury Goal are other causes vented, if not there
invented? And those gathered also from Enochs confession, as the other
profession of love was. And the causes are several and disagreeing between
themselves. Now if the confession of Enoch had been certain and constant to
all, the cause had been more evident: but it was not, at the least the
relation of it, shows it not to be so: for one while Enoch assigns one
cause, another time the contrary, a third time he differs in assigning one and
the same cause. First, he gives this to be the cause, to draw the children of
light out of darkness, and to declare his own zeal to the word of God page
35. when he gave this reason, hewaseither non compos mentis, or he conceived
his mother and his brother to be children of light; he intended to do them a
benefit to deliver them out of darkness by taking away their lives; and this
could not proceed from hatred, but love: what then is become of the rage, and
malice, so often repeated and agravated by the Author of the Looking-glass?
Now this was done as is beforesaid, to declare his zeal to the word of God,
yet at another time, he confesses that he fell into those facts by sin, as
page 81. Sin and zeal to Gods word are not the same. Again he makes
difference in opinion touching kneeling to be the one cause page 31.72.127. for
we must understand that after Enoch came to Shrewsbury Goal, he is there
discovered to be a Puritan, nay a downright Separatist; yet (as before is
said) he never separated himself from his own parish Church, within which
Parish, or within which hundred there was never Puritan known to be so far as
I can understand. And it is confessed that Enoch read Prayers out of the
Service Book of our English Church, in his fathers house, in a constant course
page 22. this is no argument of a Separatist or a Puritan. He constantly
received the Holy Communion in his own parish Church, and that reverently
using the posture of kneeling, as is testified by the foresaid Vicar of Clunne
and the parishioners, except it were at Easter next before the committing of
these murders, and yet then being required, he bowed his knee as is before
said; so that in his practice he was conformable. page 72.
But says Master Studley upon Enochs confession, he differed in opinion from
his mother and brother, touching the gesture at the Communion, they would
kneel, and he would sit and bow his body, and for this cause only his wrath
kindled against his brother, and in that wrath he slew him, and yet page 123.
he yielded not that he slew his brother only because of his kneeling. Therefore
Enochs confession is uncertain, contrary and contradictory. I confess to
satisfy my self fully in this point, I have spoken with, and seen testified
under the hands of diverse both of the Clergy and Laity, men in all points
conformable, that both going to the Goal, and whiles he remained there, he
utterly denied, that the difference in opinion between his brother and him,
was any cause at all why he slew him: and that the strong temptation of sin
was the only cause. The persons who testify this, are Master Powell aforenamed
Master Smith, Master Needham, Master Bourne, Master Thonas Matthews.
Master Bedford, al of the Clergy, besides many more of the Clergy and
Laity: yea some, that have been present with Master Studley in the Jail, have
assured me, that to Master Studly himself he utterly denied that the
difference about kneeling was any cause at all, but that Sinwas the cause
moving him to commit those murders, and so it is set down by Master Studley in
the Looking-glass page 81.

Sect. 12.
Enochs reason for bowing, and not kneeling, related by Master Studly in his
own phrase (for whosoever knew Enoch will be confident it was never his) will
better satisfy the reader, that he was no Puritan; and it is this page 16. For
in the site and gesture of kneeling the legs are cast behind the rest of the
body, and receive not that influence of nourishment spiritual, at least in
proportion and measure of attraction as the rest of the body does, and
therefore the gestures that this vain, light, and seduced man concepted to
himself as most convenient in that Sacred act of Gods worship were either
standing and bowing, or sitting and bowing of the body. As this gesture of
bowing is singular in En^ch, so is the reason different from any Puritan or
Nonconformist that ever I heard or read of. They like not the gesture of
kneeling, counting it superstitius, in regard it is a gesture of adoration, and
therein nourishes those that are popishly affected in their opinion of
transubstantiation. Now Master Studley by a distinction of his, makes bowing
only to be a gesture of adoration, for these are his words page 18. For the
postures of standing, of sitting, of kneeling, being all natural and bodily
actions; without the addition of bowing, which is a mental and spiritual
action, and has relation to some other nature, either in the Creator, or in
the Creatures to whom it is directed, are in themselves, as they are actions
bodily and natural, neither good nor evil at all: and do only partake of
goodness, or illness, as the motion of bowing with intention of adoration is
added unto them. So that by this distinction Enoch framed a gesture of
adoration by his bowing, which Puritans and Nonconformists distaste, and so he
differed from them. But he that well examineth Enochs reason, and Master
Studleys distinction, will find apparently, they come out of one forge, and
indeed they are alike senseless. And I should have thought Master Studley had
derided Enochs reason, and had spoken ironically, where he calls it a
conceit so sublimate, fine, and subtle, had he not compared that vain and
frantic reason to the (...) devices, and (...) the depths of Satan, therein
grossly abusing those places of Scripture. 2 Cor. 2.11. and Rev. 2.24. for those
devises and depths of Satan there spoken of are not such as may be discerned,
avoided, and derided by the shallowest judgment: but such as from which good
Lord deliver us.

Sect. 13.
Other points of Puritanisme are laid to the charge of Enoch, by Master Studle
page 25. as that he disliked the Superiority of Bishops the sign of the Cross
i^ Baptism, and such like: but none of these are insisted upon: only the
dislike of the gesture of kneeling in the Sacred Communion, is it that makes
him a Puritan, yea a Separatist, page 72.
and for this cause he slew his Brother. And though Enoch vary in his
confession of the cause, though he deny that to be any cause, though some times
he say it is not the only cause, and though he assign another cause, a^ has
been showed, yet Master Studly by two arguments will prove, that only for
kneeling at the Sacred Communion Enoch killed his Mother and Brother The first
argument is taken out of 1 John 3.12. Looking-glass page 124
where the text is, not as Caine wh^ was of that wicked one and slew his
Brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his
Brothers righteous. Here says Master Studley the conjunction (...) is causall,
as the Learned know, and refer us to the sole and total cause, and not in
part assigns the cause, why Caine slew his Brother. Therefore etc. I confess
I want Logic, and therefore desired this work might have been performed by
one more able; yet I want not so much reason as to see the weakness of this
argument, the cause of Caines murder is plain so is not Enochs: for that, we
have the word of God expressly assigning the cause, which was this, because his
own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous: for this, we have only the
confession of a sinful wretched man: which confession is uncertain, variable,
and contradictory: so that to make this argument hold, Master Studley, must
imply that Enochs confession (apparently variable) is as true as Scripture. I
say no more, I leave it to the Learned to Judge.

Sect. 14.
The second argument is page 127. Enoch ap Eva^ slaies his Brother either for
this cause only, that John would kneel at the Communion, or for some other
cause. But for other cause or causes, he never pleaded any for himself, but
totally excluded all other causes. Therefore etc. I answer, Enoch pleaded other
causes, many times to many persons, yea even to Master Studley himself (as is
before expressed) and did utterly deny this to be any cause at al: and
therefore this Syllogism so much bragged of by the Author, that the thing
affirmed remains pregnant, dilucidate, and invincible, is not binding, but
directly false.

Sect. 15.
I should not have insisted so much upon the clearing of this wretched Enoch
from being a Puritan or nonconformist (for I know he was worse, he was a
cruel murderer of his mother and Brother) nor upon the cause moving him to
commit that heinous crime, (for I think and believe that a nonconformist may
be a Subject upon which the Devil might work, since even the wo^thy servants
of God have grievously fallen, as Noah, David, Lot, Peter, and others recorded
in holy Scripture) had not the Author of the Looking-glass uncharitably
charged his seducement, and inveighing into the opinions of non-conformitie
upon some Ministers or lay persons, and this he is so confident of, that he
knows it to be so, as surely as he knows it to be true that his own soul
is living within him, as is expressed page 137, 138 139, moreat large. For full
satisfaction in this point, I desire the reader to observe; first, that the
said Author lays his former grounds upon Enochs confession in his conference
with him in the Goal: this upon his own conjecture, discrediting Enochs flat
denial of it, for so Master Studley himself informs us page 138. (...) he
ans wered him as he had done often before, and continued in that obstinacy to
his death, that not from man, but from God he had received those conceits: and
being particularly demanded, how he came first to dislike the gestures of his
betters for wisdom etc. page 75, 76.
as is largely set down whether by conference with any Ministers disaffected to
peace and unity? or by private persuasion of some of his acquaintance? Or by
example of any? Or by reading of Schismatic books? Enoch answered, by none
of all these means, but by reading of Gods word. Does this defamation of his
brethren in the Ministers and others, agree with the rules of charity? or does
it proceed from a gracious inclination to solid Piety, and a public
declaration of an honest heart, disposed to peace and unity? page 96:
this Master Studley bragges of but practices not. Secondly, though he
boasts himself to be the known Antipuritan of the county, as is said, and so
most likely to know the puritans in the cou^ty, yet he namethnone that seduced
Enoch, he teleth us of puritans about Bishops Castle, page 99.
that framedarguments to make Enoch appear to be lunatic, and thereby perhaps
intimates that by some thereabouts Enoch was seduced; for it is before
confessed that Enoch all his life time had his abode within two or three Miles
of Bishops Castle. I my self have dwelt within two miles of the said Town
this forty years (for the most part) I know most of the Clergy within the
Deanery of Clunne, in the Diocese of Hereford, and I am confident there is not
amongst them all one nonconformist, neither is there any of any note (that I
can learn) of the laity but do conform, and particularly in that point of
kneeling in the receaving of the blessed Sacrament. Master Studley should do
well, to make the Puritans known, that they may be reformed, and not conceal
them, and yet cast an aspersion upon the Ecclesiastical and civil government,
and that merely upon his own imagination, what may the reverend Father our
present Diocesan, think of us in this part of his Diocesses? what will the
world (to whom we are unknown otherwise then by report, which falls out with
such prejudice in this particular by the Looking-glass of Schism) conceave of
us better, then such a nest of Puritans and Non-conformists, as England
affords not the like?

Sect. 16.
Our lately deceased Diocesan, the reverend father in God Bishop Lindsel, much
desired to understand that part of his Diocese, took special notice of every
particular minister that were Preachers at the monthly Lecture in Bishops
Castle, before established by the Bishop of the same Diocese, and by his own
appointment supplied the places of some that were lately dead, and they are
twelve in number; all of them in the same Deanery of known conformity: more
particularly he requested to be informed about this Enoch ap Evan, and to
speak with his father, and for him I prepared my first papers, by whose means
we had very good hopes to have our neighborhood cleared from the aspersions
laid upon it by the Looking-glass of Schism: which book he had read, and
thereupon (until he was informed to the contrary) conceaved that these parts
had need of reformation, for until he spoke with some that could inform him in
the particulars concerning Enoch, he did not imagine the relation to have been
so false in the chief points: but it pleased GOD to take him out of this life,
before what we wished came to pass. The same reverend father delivering his
opinion concerning the said book (which would not have pleased Master Studley)
asked a Minister of this Country whether he had not observed a passage in it
concerning Master Studlies great and ungodly wit, adding that he that said so
of him, did him wrong, he would excuse him of the first of those, if any could
free him from the latter: of which he can by no means be excused, since he
has put his pen on work to publish such scandalous slanders against the
Clergy and lay persons as affected to nonconformity, seducing Enoch into his
opinions, and to conceal both their names and the true cause of the fact.

Sect. 17.
We see what work Master Studley has made us in the Jail at Shrewsbury, now
the Jail delivery draws near, and the Judges are in their Circuit at the
next County of Stafford adjoining to Shropshire; there they are informed of
this murderer by the reve^end father the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, who
was so careful not to misreport, as that he required Master Studley, who was
his informer, to lay down in writing under his own hand, and subscription of
his name the truth of the particulars received from the prisoner, as Master
Studley confesses page 121. The reverend judges who ever labored to suppress
Schism and nonconformity, being at Shrewsbury reprehended the Justices of
Peace, that had not informed them of so notorious a malefactor, before they
came to hear of it in a Sermon; when as in ^uth the Justices themselves that
dwelt nearest to the place, where the offense was committed, were Ignorant,
that the offense was committed upon any such ground or reason as
nonconformity. But at the assizes, Enoch is severally indicted for the murders
by him committed upon his mother and brother, upon the several indictments he
is severally araigned, upon his araignments he pleads guilty, upon which
plea, as you shall hear anon, he had judgment (to be executed) given upon
him, according to justice and regular proceeding: though Master Studley
(assuring us in the word of a minister, that we have a relation of such
substantial truth, as he will maintain against any person living upon the
face of the earth) be not ashamed on hearesay to deliver, as he has set it
down; page 135, 136.
that the evidence of his murders, so often published to the world, by his free
and voluntary confession, might have prevented the formal process of law, by
jury, conviction, and casting, and have put him into the power of the judge for
sentence of death from his own acknowledgement, and expression of his guilt:
but for more strength of justice, and regularity of proceeding, the jury found
him guilty, and made him liable to sentence of death. As if after Enoch had
pleaded guilty, it had been more for the strength of Justice and regularity of
proceeding to have tried him by a jury of life and death. The Judges (for both
of them sat at his araignment) were careful to find out the cause moving
Enoch to this barbarous murder, and therefore after he had pleaded guilty, one
of the judges asked him, what the cause might be, moving him to kill his mother
and his brother, whether there were any difference or falling out between
them? Enoch answered there was some difference in reasoning between his
brother and him about the gesture of kneeling at the Communion. It was then
urged by the judge, that then that was the cause why he slew his brother? Enoch
answered no, it was not, being again demanded what then might be the cause? He
answered, the strong temptation of sin. He was further asked whether he did
not desire to receive the holy Communion before his execution? He answered, yes
he did. It being then declared unto him by Baron Trevor, that he might use no
other gesture in that action, but that which was prescribed by law, and
practiced by the Church, which was kneeling, and that no Minister should
deliver it him otherwise: and it being so, he was demanded what in that case he
would do? Enoch answered, he had rather bow his body; yet rather then he
should not receive the Communion, he would kneel. This passed openly at his
araignment upon friday the Sixteenth of August. The judgment to be given upon
Enoch was deferred until the next day being Saturday, upon which day and
before judgment Enoch is brought to the Judges Chamber, and there privately
they both examine him touching the cause moving him to commit the murder, but
as I heard from one of the Judges, he w^ (...) no other cause, o^ (...) ^hen
what he had done publickely. Afterward being brought to the bar (without a
jury to find him guilty) he received his judgment from Sir William Jones, the
Judge that for that time sat upon Life and Death.

Sect. 18.
The Sheriff being commanded to see execution done, was directed, that he
should be hanged in chains, in some convenient and eminent place not very far
from the place where the murder was committed; and thereupon he is brought to
Bishops Castle, where Master Gervase Needham is Vicar, the learned Gentleman
and minister of that parish, mentioned by Master Studley page 161. He repaireth
to Enoch (as he was informed) by the appointment of the Judges, and conferreth
with him, to the end the better to prepare him for death, then shortly to
ensue, for it was the day of his execution, and this was in the presence of
diverse of the Clergy and laity: which conference and the passages therein
before, and at his death, the said Master Needham presently after committed to
writing, and hereafter it follows, as it was by him delivered to me, without
change or alteration.

It being asked, whether he was truly and unfainedly sorry for the fact whereof
he stood condemned?

He answered that he was so, that he thought in his heart no man living had
such a weight of sin upon him, or had ever done the like heinous murder, that
he was Justly condemned and willing to dye for it, that he was truly sensible
of the sin committed, and heartily sorry that he could not be more sorry for
it: yet that he did confidently believe God would have mercy upon his soul,
desiring all to pray for him.

Whether he did not receive some disparagement, or disgrace, or injury, from
his brother and mother? and whether he did not conceive them to be profane and
wicked people, unworthy to live? And whether he did not conceive his father or
himself to be of a more undefiled and unspotted conversation?

He answered that he thought them all to be religious and godly, and (with a
great sigh) that his brother was ever loving and dear to him, no man had a
better brother then he had of him, and that there was no malice nor difference
betwixt them at the time he slew them, only some two days before they had
discoursed of standing and kneeling at the Sacrament, himself approving of
standing or bowing rather, but there was no high words, or anger, or
coffeehouse between them upon that conference.

What might be the grounds of his opinion for standing and bowing at the
Sacrament?

He answered that he conceived it to be our Saviors gesture at the first
institution: and further that it is written, Behold I stand at the door and
knock.

Whether he did not think it Idolatry to kneel at the Sacrament? And whether
he did not ground his action upon that in Deu. 1^ 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. where it
i^ written, if thy brother the son of thy mother entice thee saying, Let us
go serve other Gods etc. thou shall not consent unto him etc. but thou shall
surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him etc.

He heard such things and many untruths had been reported of him, but for his
part he thought it no Idolatry to kneel at the Sacrament, neither did he
ground that action upon any such text of holy Scripture, and therein he had
manifest wrong.

Whether he did not frequent any private meetings and conventicles in the
Neighborhood or elsewhere? Or whether he did not ground that fact upon some
doctrine or words he had heard at Sermons o^ Lectures at Bishops Castle or
elsewhere? Or some private discourse with any of the ministry or other of his
acquaintance?

He answered that he was never at any such meeting or conventicle, neither did
he in any private discourse, or from any preacher hear or receive any doctrine
o^ counsel that might encourage or move him to such a fact.

What then might be the cause, if none of these? Or what end he proposed to
himself in the action?

He answered that it was the temptation of sin. But being desired to explain
himself in those terms, he said it was the corruption of the flesh and
Satan's suggestion.

It being urged that our subtle adversary the easy, to work upon us, is wont
to propose in every temptation some matter either of profit or pleasure, and
sometimes even the glory of God, (as the end) thereby the rather to deceive us
and lead us into sin?

He answered that he could give no reason or ground at all why he did the act,
neither did he think what might be the end or issue of it being done, and that
he never thought of such a fact, toward man, woman, or child, till within one
hour or less before the murder was done, and that his thoughts did so rise
upon him that he could not have any rest or quiet till he had done the deed.

Whether he intended to have murdered them both when he first laid hands on
his brother?

He answered, no surely; but his mother came in to rescue his brother, not yet
fully dead, and so wounded her also mortally, and a length cut off both their
heads, not deliberating with himself upon it.

Whether the Devil did not then appear to him, and (as some reported) give
the Axe into his hand violently enforcing him unto the fact?

He answered, no, there was no such matter, the Devil did not then, or at any
other time appear unto him.

Whether he did not sometimes see a vision of the holy Ghost appearing to him
in the likeness of a Dove, as was reported?

He answered that indeed he did conceive a thing in the likeness of a Dove
full of brightness to come into the Chamber in his fathers house, where he
then lay upon his bed in the night broad awake, and that he thought it to be
the holy Ghost.

It being urged, that the spirit of God would not surely have appeared but to
some special end in such an extraordinary manner, and question being made
whether he felt himself thereby illuminated further in the mysteries of
salvation? Or in the sense of his own sins more humbled? Or whether it
imposed any particular charge or command upon him? Or revealed any secret of
note unto him at the present?

He answered that he was not sensible of any such operations as these or the
like: in so much that after further discourse in this particular, he said that
he knew not what to think of it: it might be the distempered work of his
brain for ought he knew to the contrary.

Whether he did not desire a kinsman to convey him secretly to Bishops Castle
to the minister or Vicar there? for he had an intent to sacrifice one head
which he had privately hidden to him: and the other to a neighboring Gentleman
as was reported?

He answered that he never made mention of any such word as head or sacrifice:
only he had a desire to see that Gentleman, intending to reveal unto him what
he had done: and to ask advice from him what he were best to do (his
conscience then grievously accusing him of the murder he had committed) as well
for the satisfaction of the Law, which he desired, as for the safety of his
soul being then in himself helpless, and even despairing of mercy.

Whether he was formerly well acquainted with the said Vicar of Bishops Castle,
and how long he had been so?

He answered that he knew him well by sight, but never had any conference or
acquaintance with him, only he had heard him sometimes preach: and once
passing by the churchyard, the said Vicar asked him his name, and how far he
traveled that way.

What moved him so far (being a mere stranger) to mention the said Vicar of
Bishops Castle, and upon examination to show himself more willing to open
himself to the said Vicar, then to any other? And to receive the Sacrament
rather from him, and upon his first motion (notwithstanding his former opinion)
willingly to receive the holy Sacrament kneeling?

He answered that often he had seen him, and sometimes heard him preach Gods
word though seldom: and he thought him a good man, and had heard his father
very much commend the said Vicar both for his pains in the ministry, as also
for his care in teaching, and love to two of his grandchildren then Scholars
under the said Vicar of Bish^ps Castle.

Whether he did earnestly desire to receive the blessed Sacrament at that time?
and for what end or cause did he so desire it?

He answered that he much desired it, for he thought and believed it to be an
especial means that GOD had ordained to strengthen his faith in he
apprehension of Christ his merits unto salvation. So he received it reverently
kneeling, and acknowledged that he received comfort by it.

It being urged that not only the blessed Martyrs, but even guilty malefactors
also, dying under the Law justly condemned for felonies, murder and the like,
many of them at the place of execution, in one hours before their death, by
their open and hearty confession, earnestness of prayer, holy exhortations to
the people, by cheerfulness of pr^^ses and the like, have much glorified God?

He answered that he resolved so to do, that he would make the best use of his
short time he could, to that purpose he desired a Bible with the singing
Psalms, intending to make choice of the thirtieth Psalm as most proper for
that occasion, and reflecting upon the present condition wherein he stood as
he conceived.

So passing to the place of execution not unwillingly, for he seemed often to
be weary of the throng and press of people, many of the same questions were
again urged, concerning the fact and circumstances thereof: to which he
briefly gave the same answer as before, only with this difference as follows
concerning the reason or cause why he should do it. The question being
proposed thus, did you therefore kill your Mother and your brother because they
received the Sacrament kneeling or no?

He answered that was not only the cause; whence it was argued that it was part
of the cause and that he withal concealed some further reason also that might
move him to do the fact.

Being therefore urged to a further satisfactory answer to declare the whole
truth, and confess at large, whether that, vizt. their kneeling was the cause
wholly? Or if but in part, whether yet he had not a further reason, and what
that might be?

He denied that it was any part of the cause, or that he was able to give any
cause, or reason at al of the fact. In so much that a grave and reverend divine
answered thereupon in these words; then Enoch it seems that word might well
have been left out, I mean the word, only.

Sect. 19.
For further satisfaction as touching his manner of death: he made upon the
ladder a short, and general confession, that he was guilty of much sin, and
of this murder in particular, that he was sensible of the heynousnesse of the
fact, and did earnestly repent him of it: he exhorted the people by his
example, to beware, and watch over themselves, least they fall into temptation
in like manner. After this he read the thirtieth Psalm; and he came down, and
kneeling upon the ground he made a general Prayer, by way of confession of
sin in general, and petition for pardon and remission, briefly touching upon
this fact of murder therein. And being urged to pray again for pardon of that
sin more particularly, he kneeled down the second time, and enlarged
himself upon that sin, and the heinousness of murder, and this murder
especially, with petition of pardon and forgiveness, to the satisfaction and
comfort of those present, who commended the prayer, and praised God, in hope
they had of the salvation of the poor soul, After that he read another Psalm.
upon the Ladder, and so still calling upon God, and the people to pray for him,
he prepared to die with much trembling in his legs and joints, but with a
cheerful voice he spent his last breath in Lord have mercy, God have mercy
upon my soul.

Sect. 20.
These narrations premised, serve first, to manifest upon what weak reasons
and false grounds Master Studleys accusations in these particulars are framed.
For he (having gained from Enoch a confession that there was a difference in
resoning between his brother and him, touching the gesture of kneeling)
concludes thereupon, that he was a down right separatist: though Enochs
reasons alleged may better conclude him to be a mad man then a Puritan. A
better reason might have been used to have proved him a Puritan, because he
was a Protestant out of his wits. And he conceives he has given
non-conformists a deep disgust in his refutation of the arguments and
objections convincing him of Lunacy, by Enochs own deny all that he was mad,
as appears page 99. upon the supposition that he was a Puritan, he concludes
the cause of his murder was puritanisme and difference in opinion; and this
grounded upon Enochs variable and contradictory confession to Master Studley,
as has been showed. And hereupon he resolves, it must needs follow that he
was seduced into these opinions to the destruction of his body and soul;
therein not crediting Enochs often and constant denial thereof. They serve
also to show what manner of man this wretched Enoch was conceived to be. By his
neighbors, by his parishioners, by the Vicar of the parish (who best knew him)
he was esteemed toward his latter time, a distracted or Lunaticke man, though
he had his Lucida intervalla: but no separatist, no Puritan, or nonconformist:
for (as has been said) he constantly frequented Divine Service in his own
parish, and received the Sacraments, even to the time of his falling into this
sin of murder. And likewise to show that Satan (working upon his predominant
humor of melancholy) tempted him to commit these murders: or as he in the
Jail confessed to many before named, to the judges at his arraignment, and at
the time of his death, it was the strong temptation of sin that moved him to
commit them. And that he was not seduced into the points of Puritanisme by any
of the Clergy or laity, about Bishops Castle or Clunne land: for there were
none such to persuade or seduce him, as has been showed. And for more
confirmation thereof, I refer it to the better knowledge and testimony, of
the present Chancellor of the Diocese of Hereford (Master Doctor Skinner) who
has continued that place under the three last Bishops of that Diocese, and
who by presentiments, and other means for his information, is likeliest to know
the state of the country in that behalf.

Sect. 21.
Though in this narration we are come to Enochs death, yet death the end of
life, gives not an end to the stirs and rumors about him: from this
Puritanicall Phoenix, hatched by Master Studley in this part of the Country,
others have risen out of the ashes: for (says he page 164.) the dead body of
this Enoch hanging forth waving in the air, more then a fortnight, and less
then three weeks, some brethren of his own disposition and faction, who are
restless in wilfulness (that he say not wickedness) contrived a device by
rearing up a Ladder in the night, a work of darkness, to saw off that part
of the Gibbet where his body hanged, and took it away, etc. and these he
terms saucy rebels under the visard of Puritanisme.

Sect. 22.
The act of taking down his body, and that in the night, is not denied. The
question in this also will be, who, and what manner of persons the actors were:
and thesewere brought to light, before Master Studleys book came to publik
view: and there was great care taken for the discovery of so great an affront
to publik justice. For the next day after this act committed, Master Walcot (a
justice of peace dwelling near Bishops Castle) and my self met there: we fell
into consideration, what means was to be u^ed to discover the offen^ers. It
was considered, that if any warrants were directed, for the apprehension of any
that might be suspected; the fear of punishment, might cause a more close
concealment: and therefore we purposed by private means to inform our
selves, and to communicate each with other what we could discover. But Sir
Robert Howard (living then at Clunne) presently granted out warrants, and
thereby (amongst other things) required a search to be made in all lakes of
water, pits, and other places, where in likelihood the putrified body might be
cast or drowned. And although this were a probable course being carefully
managed, (as indeed it was) for finding of the body, yet neither was it found,
nor any person thereby discovered for the fact. Then we all joined our best
endeavors in this discovery, knowing that the delinquents being once
manifested, the body would soon be found. Having therefore received some
private intelligence, of some persons, who had commended the actors in this
work of darkness, and some also who had offered for some consideration to
effect it, we at length brought those parties to examination, though therein we
used the help of Sir Robert Harley, a justice of peace of Hereford Shire for
the apprehending of one of them, who indeed proved innocent. Sir Robert Howard
and my self meeting at Bishops Castle examined another, named Lewis Owen, upon
whose examination, and testimony of witnesses, there was evidence from his own
mouth, that he (at least) had knowledge of those that had taken down the body,
though in truth (as it proved afterward) in his drink he had spoken more
then was true: but w^ before the full truth appeared, bound him over to the
then next assizes. Master Walcot and my self proceeded, (Sir Robert Howards
occasions then calling him to London) and upon examination, we bound over
another, by name Richard Williams, who had offered to Edward ap Evan the father
of Enoch, that he would take down his son from the Gibbet, if he would
consider his pains.

Sect. 23.
By this time the judges of our circuit, Sir William Jones, and Sir Thomas
Trever had heard of the taking down of the body of Enoch, and they directed
their letters, dated the eleventh day of October 1633, to the high Sheriff of
the County, and us the forenamed Justices, requiring us to make diligent search
and enquiry, by our selves and all others, whom we thought fit to be imployd
therein, whoare the Malefactors, and by whose abetment and privity the same was
done; and to inform them of our proceeding therein with all convenient speed,
because (as they expressed) they were to give an account of our proceedings.
Although we were not conscious to our selves of any want of diligence, yet here
is a further tie upon us, unto which we give all dutiful regard: and
therefore, having by the former proceedings observed, that the actors were like
to be such, as for money, or some such respect, performed the work; we proceed
to the examination of such near friends of Enoch, as were likeliest to give
some reward. And in this number on Meredith ap Reece, who married Enochs
sister, told us that his wife had entreated him, to let her make ten Shillings
of something that might be spared, to pay her Sister Margaret, according to
her promise, to give to them that had taken down her brother Enoch from the
Gibbet. This being so far made known unto us, we often pressed the friends of
Enoch to discover the truth to the end there might neither suspicion, nor
suffering, light upon innocent parties: and called to their remembrance the
judgments of God already fallen upon their family, and which were likely to
proceed further, if they or any of them, being actors or abettors in this
offense, by their concealing of it, should cause others to suffer for it.
Hereupon (this being Saturday) we were entreated to stay our further
examination until monday following, upon which day it was promised, the three
Sisters of Enoch should discover the whole truth. And according to this promise
they came. The eldest Sister, being Margaret the wife of John Howells of
Spoade, did then upon her examination confess unto us, that she being grieved
and afflicted, not only for the lamentable loss of her dear mother, and her
only two brethren; but also because her brothers body hanged upon the Gibbet,
being ignorant (as she said) that it was an offense against the law, procured
and persuaded her two other Sisters to contribute with her in hiring a young
man named Hugh Meredith (whom she conceaved fit for that purpose, being of an
able body, and a trained Soldier in the band of Captain Scriven before named)
to take down the said body of Enoch from the Gibbet: which the said Hugh
Meredith (having procured another fellow-souldier named John Ieames, and
another poor mason to join with him) effected in the night time, and carried
the said body (being then putryfied) three miles upon a horse back, and buried
it in a sawpit, together with the clothes and Irons. To this effect they al
confessed upon their examinations, which are yet upon record remaining, with
the clearke of the Assizes, to which for more assurance I refer the reader.

That nothing might be wanting for the discovery of these offenders, the Kings
Majesty's counsel in the Marches of Wales also directed a commission to
certain Commissioners, as well in Shropshire as Mountgomery Shire, for the
finding out of these Delinquents: but before there could be any effectual
proceeding therein, they were discovered, bound to appear at the assizes, and
the foresaid Judges certified of our proceedings, who eft-soones acquainted my
Lord Keeper therewith, as by their letters bearing date the 26. of November,
1633, expressing their approbation of our doings, more largely appears.

These persons who procured the taking down of Enochs body, or were actors
therein, are all free from Puritanisme, and so were conceived by the judges of
assise, who as they were careful to have the offenders discovered, as is
manifest by their letters, so when they appeared before them, they as
diligently examined them: but finding in them, fond affections joined with
ignorance, and not any apparent wilfulness, or factious contempt, in
commiseration of that distressed and afflicted family, they spared severity,
and discharged them without further punishment: which they would not have done,
if the offense had appeared to have been committed by any Schismatical
factionists, as they publicly delivered.

Sect. 24.
Surely Master Studley wanted some employment in this discovery, for his
instruction to have made a more true relation; but he that presumes to lay
this imputation to the judges (for it must needs tax their Lenity and overmuch
indulgence to such brethren of Enochs faction and disposition, as he sets
them forth to be) what will not he dare to say? Peradventure he thought the
justices of peace deluded the judges, in the examination of the parties, and so
made them appear others then in truth they were: I that am one of them do
challenge Master Studley, to bring my actions, and theirs that joined with me,
to public examination, and if we be therein faulty, let us not be spared. But
if upon true trial it appear that the Author of the Looking-glass, in his
Epistle to the reader (as aforesaid) assuring us in the word of a Minister,
that we have a relation of such substantial truth, as he will maintain against
any person living upon the face of the earth; in this matter of substance,
which has been examined in the face of the County, at the assizes, does
deliver such a manifest falsehood, who can believe him in any other thing?
Especially, since hereby he casts the foul aspersion of Puritanisme, or
nonconformity, not only upon particular persons that took down Enochs body
from the Gibbet; but also upon the honorable judges, and the justices of peace,
as favorers of Puritans and Schismatics. It may be he may apologize for
himself, that the manifestation of this, and the examinations now upon record,
were not to be seen when he wrote his book: for his Epistle is dated the
fourth of September, 1633. I say it beseemed his discretion, to have well
informed himself of the truth, before he cast such aspersions upon any: but
however his Epistle be dated as before, yet his book came not to sight in
print in this Country, until September 1634. before which time, there had two
assizes passed (after the execution of Enoch*) which might have directed him by
the proceedings therein, to have made a more true relation, or corrected his
copy.

Sect. 25.
As Master Studley deals with those before spoken of, so with others: as with
the melancholy minister (page 40.) who did deprive himself of his virilitie:
and who (if I mistake not his meaning) is yet alive, and therefore (in
compassion of his infirmity) fit to be omitted. I could wish he were as free
from that humor, as he is from nonconformity. And so also with the layman of
Tewxbury, page 143. etc. falsely accusing him, and censoriously judging, the
very thoughts of his heart in the particulars following, amongst more that
might be observed, as first, that he was twice Churchwarden, yet never was
once. Second, that he took down a cross, built in the Churchyard. He meddled
not with the taking of it down, but another workman did it. Thirdly, that he
placed the loose Stones under the Church wall. He did not. Fourthly, that the
second time he was Churchwarden, he took the stones away. He begged a stone to
make him a trough for a Grindestone, and a stone of the Cross being already
hollow, and so fittest for his purpose, was given him by the then
Churchwardens. Fifthly, that he cementing them together, made a Swines trough
of them. This is false as before is said, the stone being one, and hollow, his
wife put Whey therein, and the pigges did drink of it, before it was converted
to that intended purpose. Sixthly, that the first meat his swine did eat
therein, did drive them instantly into a raging madness. The pigges were not
mad, but wounded to death Seventhly, that the 2 next children that his wife
(after he had taken down the Cross) brought into the world, proved deaf,
lame, and deformed, by monstrositie of body (and this) for his violation, and
defacing of the ancient monuments of other men's devotion. If this befell him in
his children (as it did not) yet it were a hard and heavy censure. We see this
known Antipuritan, knows the secret cause of Gods judgments. Eighthly, that
discovering, by the terrible testimonies of Gods wrath, the naughtines of his
heart, in abusing things dedicated to conserve the memorial of our Lord, and
being overcome with tormenting terrors of a wounded soul, he leapt into a
draw well, and was taken up bruised, and drowned. He was visited with a purple
feavor, then epidemicall in the Town of Teuxbury, and Doctor Bave being
consulted, did foretell that through the violence of his disease, he would be
distracted, giving warning to look unto him: this advice of looking unto him
being not followed, he arose, and went forth into a neighbors backeside
adjoining, being the usual wayto his garden, and he was found drowned in a
well in the same backsid, whether by chance or choice, he came unto this end,
to this day is uncertain. I have selected these eight material falsehoods in
this relation, and have set down the truth after every particular, which I
have taken out of a more large relation thereof, testified to be true under
the hands of the Bayliffes, the Justices, the Coroner, and the Churchwardens of
the same town, and parish, dated the 28. of October; 1634. to which for more
full certainty I refer the reader. But upon these fictions Master Studley
takes occasion to vent his hearts grief for many years suppressed etc. page 169.

Sect. 26.
In like manner he deals with Master F. in the latter end of his book:
wherein he himself fails in what he would correct Master F. for; that is,
in wisdom, in honesty, and in charity; for he publikly declared in his
congregation to his auditors, that he had been credibly informed, that a very
factious Sermon had been preached on friday, before, in the hearing of them. It
was well known to all that heard him, who it was that had preached the friday
before, and so consequently the preacher known, though not named. Where was
then Master Studleys wisdom, in taking on trust, and by information, a report
so weighty without examination? Where his honesty, in contempt of Master F. his
person, whom he ought of duty to have privately consulted? Or where his
charity? Which is never suspicious of evil before it be convinced by evidence
of fact? The choice of Master F. his text, seems factious to Master Studley:
for the Lord Bishop having preached upon the Text, 1 Pet 2.17. Fear God, and
hon^ur the King. Master F. took his text Matthew. 10* 28. Fear not them which
kill the Body, etc. Now it is confessed by Master Studley, that Master F. was
wholly ignorant of the Lord Bishops text, as is set down pa. 281. nay he was
so far from factiousnesse, that being importuned to preach, and having scant
time for study, he preached the same Sermon, and upon the same text, which he
had a Sunday before preached in his own parish. And therefore the Lord Bishop
(as he himself told me) concerning neither error in the doctrine, nor
factiousnesse in the manner of preaching, did order for full satisfaction, that
Master F. should preach again at Shrewsbury and explain himself: which was
performed, and the Minister stood in the Bishops good opinion, as appeared by
his commendation of him to my Lord of Saint Asaph. Yet after this course taken,
Master Studley puts in print a letter (as he calls it) of a sharp contents;
and indeed it was very violent and virulent. unfit to pass between men of that
order and rank. Wherein he taxes that Minister of Gods word; as a false
traducer, unwise, dishonest, uncharitable, a sectarie, a Schismatic,
lightheaded, furious, fantastical, disloyal, and unquiet, yet those who know
him (as I protest I do not) say he is no such man, but a modest, sober,
discreet, and conformable minister: and so my lord Bishop of Lichfield
conceived of him, as he likewise told me lately. The certificate mentioned in
the letter, I have seen a copy of it, and of their names who have subscribed
it, who are of the best rank and understanding in the Town of Shrewsbury, an^
not such as would certify under their hands, the confirmation of a lewd and
false report. They who heard the Sermon, and know the men, marvel at the
impudency of the Author of the Looking-glass. And if the certificate, the
Sermon, and the Bishops censure, were printed as well as Master Studleys
letter, the Reader no doubt would have full satisfaction. The letter it self
of Master Studleys hand writing I have seen, and compared it with the printed:
which is verbatim (as he says) without addition, detraction, or mutation of
one syllable: yet I have observed, and ^an make appear, above ^wenty
variations of the printed, from the written letter it self, page 296 sect. 54
but he that fears no man's tongue, what should he stick at?

Sect. 27.
Hitherto I have labored in the search and discovery of the truth, and
endeavored to free my neighborhood from the aspersion of Puritanisme or
nonconformity: now my conclusion shall be, an earnest request to all good
people, to make a right use of such fearful examples: not to be more profane,
and to abstain from divine Service, the hearing of Sermons, hearing and
reading of Gods word, public and private prayer, because they have heard, and
read that this Enoch was a bold and busy scripturist, that he would ride three
or four miles to hear Sermons, which is termed, the ordinary practice of
this formal age, and yet he fell into these heinous crimes: but rather to be
more zealous, diligent, and constant, in the profession and practice of
Christianity: and with all circumspection and fortitud, watch over our selves,
and resist the temptations of the flesh, the world, and Satan, by continual
prayer, Lord lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. The
consideration of the parties murdered, and the party murdering, will be
special motives hereunto.

The parties slain, were his mother, out of whose bowels he came, and from
whose life, his life (next under the Almighty Creator) was derived: and his
brother, who came out of the same womb, and sucked the same breasts. Yet the
lives of that dearest Mother, and nearest brother, were taker away, and by him,
whom they least suspected, never feared: and even then when they were most
secure. How great cause have we al, none excepted, of thankesgiving to our good
God for ou^ preservatio^ from such a sudden bloody and cruel end of prayer,
that our heavenly father would continue his gracious protection over us and to
deliver us from sudden and violent death (...) of preparation, for who knows
when that time will come, or in what manner we shall end our days* Therefore
by continual repentance, faith, prayer, doing of good works, let us prepare
our selves, taking heed, least at any time our hearts be overcome, with
surfeiting, drunkenes, or the cares of this life, and so that day come on us
unawares.

If we consider the party murdering, he was conceived to be honest, and
upright in his dealing, free from drunkenness, or other notorious sins (as
far as I can learn) he was given much to reading and praying, not only
privately and in his fathers house, but to frequent divine Service and Sermons.
Now that God should permit such a man to fall into, and preserve others in
outward show more profane and ungodly, from such a bloody crime; may minister
matter of wonder and amazement at the judgment of God, which is many times
secret and profound, yet always just. And of terror, least he should suffer
us to fall so fearfully in the like manner.

Lastly if we consider the religious duties which Enoch practiced, as prayer,
reading of the Scripture, frequenting of divine service in Gods house: these
are in themselves good, and ordinarily means necessary to salvation; we are
bound unto them by divine law, and the command of our Church and state: shall
we neglect them, because he practicing them fell into these sins? Shall we
think that these were any causes of these murders? Shall we condemn those
that are frequent in these holy actions? God forbid! The Scripture contains
the Gospel, which is the power of God to salvation: let us read it. Prayer is
the key of heaven: let us use it with our best devotion. The Church is the
house of God, it is the place of his blessed presence: let us frequent it. And
by those means, we shall be prepared for the estate of everlasting glory:
wherein shall be no tempter, no temptation, no sin, no sorrow: but
righteousness, peace, and fullness of joy in the presence of God, and
preasures for evermore. Unto which estate the Lord in mercy bring us, and ^n
the mean time keep us from such horrible sin.

The true Copy of the subscrip^^on formerly mentioned, we whose names are
underwritten do acknowledge that those things in this treatise which have
relation to us and our knowledge are truly set down and received from us,
which we testify by the subscription of our names.

HUMPHRY WALCOT. THOMAS CLUNNP. E. POVVEL vicar of Clunne. GERVAS NEEDHAM.
WILLIAM BEDFORD. ROBERT BARRET. THOMAS HOVVELLS. WILLIAM TANNER. JOHN HOVVELLS.
WILLIAM GRIFFITHS. JOHN LEWIS.


FINIS.
An Appendix in further defense, of the precedent Relation wherein is examined
Master Studleys pretended refutation of such objections as were made against
his Looking-glass of Schism.
Gentle Reader,
WHen I did first set my self to compose the precedent Relation, I did not
purpose to have it printed (as in the beginning of my relation I have
intimated) in regard whereof I had no respect in the framing of my discourse to
the swelling style which Master Studley pleases himself with in his Narration
proposing to my self only a brief discovery of the naked truth of the
business in hand; therefore marvel not that I have forborne to follow him in
^ll his deviations and impertinent digressions: yet now my relation comes to
the press unexpectedly I am urged to add something in regard of ^aster
Studleys additions to ^he second edition of his looking glass wherein he
recites ten Criminations which I conceive to be all of his own contriving,
yet for the present admitting them by way of reply to Master Studleys answers
I shall clear such passages as from them seem to reflect on what I have
delivered for truth.

The first Crimination is to this effect, That Master Studley has published
the most lying boooke that ever came forth in print.

The Hyperbolicall part of this Crimination I maintain not, Reply.
yet that his book does contain many falsehoods, I suppose it sufficiently
evidenced in those instances given in the fiftenth and twenty sections; and the
twenty five Section declares eight falsehoods in Master Studleys unnecessary
digression to that of Teuxbury.

The second Crimination. Master Powell the reverend Minister of Clunne under
whom Enoch lived from his birth knows many of your relations to be false etc.
MAster Powel had the view and perusal of my precedent Relation, Reply.
and finding it agreeable to the truth, of his knowledge he testifies, the
integrity of this my Relation; by the Subscription of his name: to that
original Copy, which now I have in my custody, yea he was so earnest in
attestation of the falsehoods in this looking-glass, that after he had
subscribed, this relation in manner, and form, as in the end thereof is set
down; he desired to be the means of conveying it to the Bishop of Hereford,
and did deliver it to his Chancellor, Master Docter Skinner, by whom it was
delivered, to the Bishop.

Now let the unpartiall reader, judge whether Master Powell would deal so
unworthily with himself, as to subscribe his own approbation, of my Relation,
and convey it to his Diocesan, if hehad in deed so approved Master Studleys
report; as is pretended.

It is true that Master Powell is now dead, and lest in that regard doubtful
thoughts may be entertained, with some men, I have hear inserted a
Certificate, from diverse persons, (of such worth and credit, as Master Studley
himself, will not except against them) the Certificate, I set down in the
same words, as it was sent unto me, only I add the specification of their
quality, and Condition for the readers better satisfaction.

We whose names are subscribed, have heard Master Erasmus Powell late vicar of
Clun in his life time complain of diverse gross untruths and falsities in
Master Studleys Relation: of Enoch ap Evan, in his book entitled the looking
gl. of Schism.

Humphrey Walcot esqu. Samuel Hildersam Rec^or of the Church of west felton
county Salop. Tho Clun of Clun Gent. Hugh Edwards Gent. Esaias Thomas Alderman of
Bishops Castle. William Tanner a free ^urges of Bishops Castle. George Lawson
Rector of the Church at the Moore. Gervase Needham vicar of the Church at
Bishops Castle.


If opportunity had served, or the cause required, futher proof might be
produced, in like kind. For the present I further call to mind Sir Robert
Harley Knight of the Bath. Walter Barker, of Hamond Esquire, and Master
Standley Gower Rector of the Church of Brompton Brian, who have informed me,
that they heard Master Powell declare his dislike, of Master Studleys book in
regard of the falsehoods therein contained. And which is yet more, the
aforenamed Master Barker, and Master Hildersam, were present, when Master
Powell did to Master Studleys face tax him, for his untruthes in his book.

The Third Crimination concerns the taking down of the body from the Gibbet:
here Master Studley sweates to persuade the reader, that he had stronger
arguments to Master his understanding then to believe that such simple women,
as Enochs sisters, could be the chief abettors of such a fact, five silly
reasons he recites, moving him to publish his conjecture that crafty heads
contrived that devise of conveying his corpse from the Gibbet, and breathed the
same by instruction, and counsel into his sisters, Enabling thereby ignorant
women, of rustic quality and small understanding to take upon them, the
mannaging of a devise so subtle and bold, who then were the authors of this
design, Master Studley tells us in his looking-glass, (Page 164. edit. 1)
some brethren of his own disposition, and faction, restles in willfulness,
(that he might not say wickedness,) contrived a devise by rearing up a ladder
in the night, to saw off that part of the gibbet, where his body hanged etc.

As I will not affirm, but that some others might first suggest to Enochs
sister, the taking down of his body, which they upon exam^nation, have denied,
so I hope no indifferent man will suppose it to be without the compass of
women's understanding, to be guilty of hireing others to remove such an object,
so near the place of their habitation and birth.

I am to thank Master Studley, that he does declare his belief, that the rest
of the Commissioners, with my self traveiled prudently, and faithfully, yet he
says he neither does, nor can, nor will believe that the total truth was by
us delivered, (for so he says in his refutation of Crimination, page 15.) for
satisfaction of the Reader, herein I desire him seriously to consider, the
proceedings against the offenders; as they are faithfully exhibited, in the
twenty two and twenty three and twenty four Sections of my relation, to which
I here add (verbatim) that letter mentioned Sect. 23. From the Judges, Sir
William Jones, and Sir Thomas Trevor.

To the Right worshipful our loving friends, Humphrey Walcot, and Richard
Moore, Esquires.
WE receive your letter, and thereby dounderstand of the great care, and
pains taken by you, for the discovery of that great affront to Justice, in
taking down the body of that notorious offender, Enoch ap Evan, and the burying
of him, in an obscure place, which we much commend and approve in you, for your
industry therein, and so does my Lord Keeper, unto whom we have made your care
known: We also like well that you have bound over Enochs sisters, to the next
Assizes, and do desire the Continuance of your care for the apprehending of
those offenders, that were the actors in cutting of him down, that their
persons may be sent to the Jail to remain there till the next Assizes.

As for the body of Enoch, (which is much putrified, as you write unto us) we
think it fit that it remain in the earth, where it is until you receive
further directions therein.

And so thanking you both for your extraordinary diligence in this service we
commit you to God and rest,

Your assured loving friends, William Jones, Thomas Trevor.
This 26 of November. 1633.

THe fourth Crimination I reject as unworthy the reciting, being framed out of
an idle and frivolous imagination.

The fifth Crimination, is sufficiently maintained, in the twenty five Sect.
which concerns one of Teuxbury, in the County of Gloucester, and is eagerly
pursued by Master Studley, But he cannot free his looking-glass from
falschoods, though he labor to excuse it as no lie by a threefold distinction,
and in that he received it upon report, yet Master Studley (perhaps to declare
his unwillingnesse, to forgo his title of the Anti-puritan) shows his
readi^esse, to go on to bring that matter to a further trial upon the
information of five inhabitants, of that Town, (none of them named) what
Master Studley presumes will be sufficiently proved by those five men, is
contradicted, in that Certificate, dated 28. of October. 1634. and mentioned in
the 25. section of the relation, being under the hands of the then Baylifes of
Tewxbury, Christopher Canner, and William Terret, four Justices of Peace;
William Hitches, Richard Bradford, Co. Richardson, and Thomas Vaughan, the
Coroner, William Hill, and the Churchwardens, Edward Millichop, and Thomas
Hate testifying the same to be true, in these words. Tho. Hicks, by
profession, a Slater, painful in his profession, and thereby maintained a
great charge in common repute, was a very honest just man, but never of
ability, to be near the place of a Churchwarden in the corporation, or any
other office whatsoever, About sixteen years since, the parish Church, being a
goodly Abbey Church was much repaired, wherein this poor man was many months
employed, and adventured his life in mending the roof thereof, Hickes meddled
not with the Cross, but one Richard Kings another workman, and yet living in
this town, took down the head of it to place there a Sun Dyall of value,
being bestowed by a skillful mathematician, to give direction for the ringing
of the Bells to Service, and there being no other place, to place it, the
Southside of the Church being enclosed.

This stone being thus taken down, was put aside in the Church, amongst other
refuse stones, and Hickes, wanting a stone to make a Trough for a grindstone,
to whet his tools did beg one of the then Churchwardens, who assigned him
that particular stone as most fit for that purpose, being already made hollow,
which he accepted and carried to his house, and he deferring to employ it as
he intended, his wife put Whey into it, whereout young weaning pigges did
drink. Of this, complaint being made to one of the Bayliffes, he committed
Hickes to prison, and bound him to his good behavior, and at the next
Sessions, upon examination of the Churchwardens, and all other circumstances,
he was discharged, the rather, for that it appeared not what Images or Pictures
had formerly been ingraved upon the stone, but were many years worn out and
defaced.

And there it also appeared that the pigges which drank the said whey, did not
run mad, nor dye of any disease, but were mortally wounded.

This was finally ended, and nothing thought or spoken of it, by the space of
about 12. years, but the poor man went cheerfully on in his calling as
before, until about three years since, the purple Feavour was then
Epidemicke, and many families in the town visited therewith, and his amongst
the rest, and his person in particular, in a violent manner, in his sickness
Doctor Bave was consulted, and did prognosticate some distraction, as he has
certified under his hand and seal: which (it seems) happened accordingly, for
the next day he went out of his house into a neighbors backeside adjoining,
being the usual way he went to his garden, and there was found drowned in a
well.

Hereupon a jury was impanelled, sworn and charged, by his Majesty's Coroner,
who having no evidence, how he came into the well, would have found an
Jgnoramus, but being pressed by authority for a more satisfactory verdict, they
understanding what doctor Bave had spoken, and what others visited with that
disease, had attempted: found it specially that by the violence of the disease,
being out of his senses, he cast himself into the well. Yet many of the Jurors
were threatened to be bound over before the Judges, before they would yield so
far as to determine whether he came into the well by chance, or choice,
voluntarily, or accidentally and by the verdict he was freed from being guilty
of felo de se, neither were his goods lost or forfeited. That this is true, the
parties before named, testified by subscribing their names.

THe sixth Crimination concerns the suppression of a love passage, the truth
of which is set forth in the seventh section of the precedent relation, the
omission whereof is in this crimination charged upon Master Studley, or else he
charge himself therewith, for I could never hear of any other Author of
these Criminations, and surely a guilty conscience is restless, therefore
having first accused himself he proceeds, and says My answer is this; that
diverse prudent and judicious persons, who had the oversight and perusing of
that sinall treatise, did all concur in judgment together, that the
imparting of that Relation would seem to weaken the strength of the whole
Narration: and leave in the mind of a heedful reader, some thought and
suspicion that the rage of his love passion, had transported his mind from a
settled temper, both of prudent consideration of what he intended, and from the
present sense of natural affection to his loving brother. This judgment of
theirs (says Master Studley) I must needs approve, and being a true conclusion
naturally emergent from the manner of my expression of that particular piece,
for from a defect in my self, because I was not willing in that place, to
interrupt the Series and course of the History, before the due place by my
self assigned, for refutation of objections, the relation of that matter,
which might seem to imply a repugnance and contrariety to the maine scope of
al my aims, through the body of the discourse, was thought fit, both by sound
judgment, and heed full circumspection to be suppressed.

Here the reader may see plainly by Master Studlyes own answer, Reply.
which I have recited in his own words, that as the Lycencer of his book, and
his concurring ^^iends judged, it would weaken the strength of his whole
Narration: so also himself confesses, that he must needs approve their
judgment, as being a true conclusion, naturally emergent from the manner of
his expression of that particular piece. Surely there is little need of any
further discourse, to demonstrate to the reader, that Enoch ap Evan was subject
to Lunacy. The apprehension thereof, so appearing to the diverse prudent, and
judicious persons of Master Studleys Looking-glass, that it moves them by
sound judgment, and heeafull circumspection to suppress the passage of Enochs
love passion, which might seem to imply a repugnance, and contrariety to the
maine scope, and aims of Master Studley, through the body of his discourse.

As little need there is to discover, either the indiscretion and weakness
of Master Studleys apology, or the inadvertency of the Licencer of his answer
to these Criminations if at least it had any license at all. The conclusion
then seems to be this, that the maine scope of all Master Studleys aims
through the body of his discourse must not receive any opposition or
contradiction. He does not here declare what his aims are, but true it is,
that in his Epistle to the Reader before his Looking-glass, he recites such
aims for the furtherance whereof. I shall at all times, I hope, be no less
ready then himself, or any other, to contribute the uttermost of my abilities,
and wherein they shall fall short: my fervent prayers shall go along with
those that with their greater abilities shall carry on so good aims, as the
glory of God, the honor of our King, the vindication of his innocent laws, and
desire of our churches tranquillity and peace; to these the Author pretends,
and calls God to witness the integrity of his conscience therein. I will not
assume to my self, to be judge of that appeal of his* But when I consider the
vehemence of his spirit, manifested through the body of his discourse, with the
eagerness of his resolution to exhibit by this false glass, an infamous badge
on those whom he terms Puritans, I cannot discern it to be any breach of
the rule of Charity, to doubt of his pretended integrity, and conclude him
guilty of premeditated defamation, of that profession and those persons whom he
terms Puritanicall.

The truth of this will sufficiently appear to those, who shall diligently
consider the precedent relation, and compare it with the Authors Looking-glass,
wherein by way of review, I desire the Reader to take notice of Master Studleys
confidence, expressed in the 25, 26. and 27. Sections of both Editions of his
book, wherein he assumeth to himself the reputation, of the known
Antipuritan of that County, and under that denomination, boasts of himself,
and of his pains, as having by his first argument (recited in Section 26)
justly concluded. That Satan has instigated a nonconformist, to as
unnatural, and bloody a fact as ever was committed, and upon his second
argument Sect. 27. (he says) the force thereof, is so clear, conclusive and
birding, that neither Enochs Non-conformed brethren, will accept or reject the
word, (only) the strength of the thing affirmed remains pregnant, dilucidate,
and invincible. The insufficiency and vanity of those his two arguments, I have
showed, (Sect. 13, and 14.) but what is that which Master Studley has
affirmed, I will not trouble the Reader, with the repetition of all the
contradictions already noted here, I desire him to take notice, that in the
first Edition of his Looking-glass, (page 160.) having in that 34. Section,
discoursed of Enochs opinions, Master Studleys conclusion is, that he was
neither Anabaptist, Enthusiast, or of any other odd sect whatsoever, but only
a silly ignorant and downright English Puritan, but in the Title of his first
Edition, a downright Separatist, and then in the Title of the second Edition
of his book, he terms him a downright Nonconformist Surely Master Studley
will find it a hard task to free himself in these variations, from great
vanity and giddiness in his virulency against his supposed Puritans, again I
desire the Reader to peruse the 38. Section of his Looking-glass, in both
Editions thereof, having in the 27. Section finished, with Enoch the County
prisoner, and now (says Master Studley) To vent my own hearts grief, for many
years suppressed, and stifled in my troubled bosom, and a little to enlarge
myself, and to make known the quality of that people with whom I live: know
good Reader (says he) that this Town of Shrewsbury, the place of my birth,
and residency, is greatly troubled with a sect of men and women: and so goes
on accusing them of disobedience to supreme Majesty, and of hate and
detraction of his person, with detriment, and loss to his temporal estate.
Now I suppose the Reader will be persuaded that I have done Master Studley no
wrong, where alittle before I did conclude him guilty of premeditated
defamation, of those he terms Puritans. Again consider the tenor of Master
Studleys Letter to Master Fisher, who is known, and aproved to be a grave and
conformable Divine: the very reading of which Letter, by any ingenious man,
will render the writer to be an insolent Scurrilous Detractor, the letter was
written upon a report, Master Studley heard that the said Master Fisher should
preach a factious sermon, the proceeding of that business is set forth in the
26. Section of the precedent Relation.

Now considering the many repugnances and defamations of the Neighborhood of
Bishops Castle, the judges of Assize, justices of peace, and other particular
persons, contained in Master, Studleys Looking-glass, he is to rest
thankful to God and those men whom he has so traduced if for his callings
sake, his person be permitted to keep his residency, in quiet to attend his
populous charge where I heartily with him comfort and peace, if he apply
himself faithfully to discharg the duty of a minister of Gods word, which is
the style he gives himself, which if he perform, he may find better
arguments, and motives to reduce his neighbors to conformity, then by charging
upon them, as he has don in this his scandalous Looking-glass; which a
Catholic Priest makes use of, in a book called (Puritanisme the Mother since
the Daughter) where the Priest has borrowed from Master Studleys
Looking-glass, this fact of Enoch for an occasion amongst others of his
writing that treatise, printed an. Dom. 1633. And so I leave the reader to
consider of some better use to be made of this deplored accident touched in
the close of the precedent relation.

The Postscript.
THere remain 4. other Criminations which Master Studley recites, I do
conceive they may be justly objected against him notwithstanding what he
answers for himself: but for as much as they seem to be framed out of a
guilty conscience, and no way concerning the precedent relation, or any matter
therein, J pass them over without further reply.

An Errata.
Page 12. l. 15. dele. to p. 19. l, ult. on one p. 30. l. 9. r to the Harbor
p. 35. l 12. r. Powderbache p. 30. l. 16. r. Sergeant, p. 41 l. ^2. r. only p.
7. l. 1. r, superstitious p. 54. l. 20. r. inveigling p. 55. l. 18. r. that he
answer p. 56. l. 16. r. in the ministry p. 76. l. ult. r. and at length p. 110
l. 8. r. Secondly, p. 117. l. 2. instead of concerning read conceaving.


