THE LIFE AND DOCTRINE OF OUR SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST. With short reflections for
the help of such as desire to use MENTAL PRAYER.

THE FIRST PART.

Also 24. Intertaynments of our Blessed Savior in the most BLESSED SACRAMENT.

With certain Aspirations tending to the increase of the LOVE OF GOD.

By. H. M. of the SOCIETY OF JESUS.

IHS


GANT by MAXIMILIAEN GRAET of the sign of the Angel 1656. Permissu Superiorum,

The Life and Doctrine of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, With short notes for the
help of those who desire to be directed in the way of Meditation.
The first Part.
TO THE READER.
THe Life and Doctrine of our Savior Jesus Christ set forth some few years
past with short reflections in latin, by way of Meditation, could not well be
translated into our language as it was there digested (though desired by diverse)
because in great part it was compiled of loose sayings of holy fathers, which,
besides the concise expressions of the latin tongue, would have made the
translation fall short both in substance and method; that manner of expression
and method sorting better with such as are learned, and experienced in the way
of contemplation, and an English translation being rather to be fitted to the
vulgar and unexperienced. I thought best therefore my self at covenient times to
take it in hand, presuming I might have the more freedom to follow, or to
alter the method, as I should find cause, and also to ad what might occur to
be supplied in places which might seem otherwise bare.

As for the work it self, I have little to say; Only in regard the ground of
it is the holy Text of the Evangelists, the Reader may be advertised out of S.
John Chrysostom, Chrysoft. hom. 18. in Ge^es.
that the holy Scripture utters nothing rashly, or by chance, and at
adventure, but every syllable, and every little tittle of it contaynes a hidden
treasure, and consequently in few words thou may find much said, and a great
deal of matter in a little compass, and may be sure there is still more and
more to be found, because (as the same saint advertizeth) they are the words of
the holy Ghost, hom 15.
whose infinite wisdom comprizeth much more in one word, then the wit of man
can arrive to dive into. Ponder therefore diligently, not only what is culled
out to thy hand, but much more the ground itself: for as the spouse says in
the Canticles Thy breasts are better then wine, and have the savor of most
precious ointments: Cant^.
Of which I whish thee from my heart abundance, and rest in Christ jesus.

Thy well wissher and Servant H. M.
Introduction to the Meditations of the Coming and Childhood of our Savior.
I. PART.
I. HOcscientes tempus. The time which we live in this World is but time, not
Eternity! short, Romans (...).
uncertain, momentarie; We are not assured of the next minute. The long day
of (...) follows: Day, if we pas this moment Well and virtuously; Night
eternalle, if we pas it wickedly, and do not repent in time. Therefore the
Apostle with reason admonishes us that it is high time to awake and rise from
sleep. Hora estjam; perhaps this is the last ho^re, and the last call; Hora est
j^a nos de somno sur gere.
perhaps now or never shall we have time! let us therefore not only awake, but
rise from sleep, and ^loth, and not delay our amendment: for many awake and
see their danger, and for sloth or pleasure ly til it be too late. And no^ our
salvation is nearer then when we did first believe. H^^e enim proprior est
^ostra salus qu^cum credidimus.
For the longer we live, the greater is the mercy of God toward us in
expecting us; and we are nearer our end, which, if we will, is salvation; and
nearer then we can easily believe; for few believe they shall d^e, til they be
almost past feeling death.

II. How much are we beholding to God that we were not borne and b^ed in the
night of infidelity, or Turcisme or the like, Nox pr^^eslit, dies autem
approqinquavit.
But in the day light of the Gospel of Christ where we come with ease to know
nor only the true God but the true way of worshipping him, and hane means by
the Sacraments, and other helps to perform i^, utterly rejecting and detesting
the worckes of darkness, Abijcia^mus ergo opera t^nebrarum, and induamur arma
lucis, sicu^ in die h^^este a^bulemus.
and practicing the centrary virtues: for as they are not only like a comely
garment unto us, such as we may with honor appear in before the whole world,
but they are armor of offense and defense against our Ghostly enemies, and we
grow by the practice of them daily stronger. and stronger.

III. Consider that the more we know of our Savior, and the longer we have
been in his service, the more shame it were for us if we should not follow his
doctrine and his steps. And we should be as much ashamed of it as to go naked,
after we have come to the use of reason; for whatever is not according to our
Saviors doctrine is but filth and nastines. Be clothed therefore with Jesus
Christ. Induimini Dominum Iesum Christum.
That is, because you cannot do this of yourself, beg incessantly his grace
and help, and do not only not hinder him by your perverseness or sloth and idle
humor, but concur with your endeavor that you may be clothed, and remain so
in perfection, and better and better, by increase of virtue and virtuous
practice; toward which the consideration of the mysteries and passages of our
Saviors life will conduce as they begin now of new to be represented unto us
by the holy Church this holy time of Advent.

Introduction to the coming of our Savior.
II. PART.
I. THe great incitement to welcome our Savior into this world, Hoc lentite
in vobis quod in Christo Jesus, qui^^ in forma Dei esset. etc. Philip. 2* 5
and to rejoice at his coming, and the memory of it, is that he is God, not
undertaking it of necessity, but freely and Charitably for our redemption,
relief, instruction, example. As he is God, he is infinitely happy with in
himself, and Was so from all Eternity, equal in all things with his father,
one God. one essence, one substance with him, one in power, knowledge, honor.
wisdom; and, after the Creation, equal in respect due, and done unto him by
all Creatu^es. Above all need of any thing, and beyoynd all possibility of
Wanting.

II. Consequently consider the distance which was betwixt him and man; which
distance, if Angel and man had well observed and kept, the first had not fallen,
nor the second needed redemption. They did trench upon that which was due unto
God, and was his only right, and therefore, as committing rapin upon an others
goods were deservedly punished; Not so the second person in the Blessed
Trinity, the only son of God, but it was his rig^ to be equal and no way
inferior: but what he did in this kind was voluntary; Non rapinam arbitratus
est esse se aequalem Deo.
he as it were emptyed himself, concealing what he was, and taking upon him
that nature, Ph. 2. 7.
which in comparison to the divine Nature and glory was nothing.

III. O infinite humiliation! And wherefore? To the end that in the nature of
man, he might suffer for man, satisfy for man, s^actifie man, instruct man by
word and example, encourage man to suffer for him and for his law, finally
crown man with part of the glory due to himself, and make him partaker of
himself, that is, bring him into the true way of being like to God, to which he
was falsely tempted at the first Creation. This true way is imitation of his
humility and obedience, persevering in it unto death and bearing our C^osses,
Matthew. 16* 24.
as himself teaches* Saying He that will come after me to heaven, or be my
disciple on earth* let him deny himself, the contentments, in which the world
places its happiness, Hoc Sentite. Phil. 2. 5
and take up his Cross, and follow me. Let this mind be in you, let these be
your thoughts, and endeavor to find favor and contentment in this as Christ
Jesus did.

IV. He humbled himself to the conjunction with humane Nature; to the prison of
nine months; to the command of his inferior; to the stable and manger; to
poor clouts, and straw; to the inconveniences of an infa^t, to the company of
shepherds; to be circumcised as if he had been guylty of syn; to be presented
as subject to the law; to be redeemed after the rate of the poorer sort; to
yeald to Herod's wrath, as if he had been the weaker; to fly, as if he had need
to fear: to wander, as if he had not been lord of the world; to ly hidden, as
a man of no account; to be set at naught, as son to a Carpenter; to live in
silence, as a man of no parts, to be obedient, as if truly subject. If I make
more of myself, behold thou stand up against me. Th. Kemp. ^. 3. c. 8.

The Incarnation of our Blessed Savior*
I. PART.
I. THe Angel Gabriel was sent from God. O ^lessed Angel: Missus ^st Angelus
Gabriel ^ Deo. Luc. 1. 20.
I rejoice with thee that this employment of so great importance and of so
high a nature, has falen to thy lot. Blessed art thou among those heavenly
spirits who assist with thee in the presence of God, and blessed is the
message, which thou bring; Assist me I beseech thee to conceave rightly of
it, and to benefit my self by it, as is intended.

II He was sent to a city of Galilie the name whereof was Nazareth to a Virgen,
espowsed to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the
Virgins name was Marie. Galilae^ and Nazareth. Both Country and City were
among the Jews contemptible; Joseph a Carpen^er by trade: by which we
understand that however to fulfill the promise and prophecy, our Savior would
descend from the blood royal of David; ye^ he would do it in the humblest, and
co^cealedest manner that could be; to teach us, not to glory, or place any
happiness in that kind of honor which is so much blazed among men, but to shun
it. Galilaee, Volubili^ie: Joseph, increase Nazareth, floride Marie, exalted.
Yet by the names of Galilaee, Nazareth, Joseph, and Marie we may justly gather
that he would betoken the spiritual change of the world to the better and more
flourishing estate; the Increase of Gods graces particularly to S. Joseph, and
to us; and that the Virgen Marie in nature of Mother of God was to be exalted
above all creatures, as Lady and Misteres of them al.

III. And the Angel being entered in said unto her. Hayle, full of grace, our
lord is with thee; Blessed art thou among women. Placing thy self in presence
of the Blessed Virgen, say with the Angel, and imitate the inward and outward
reverence which he bears her: then enlarge thyself considering with how great
reason s^e is termed full of grace, being so from her conception and forward,
fuller then the Angels themselves (setting a side the clear vision which they
inioyed) by how much she was exalted to a better name; Hebr. 1. 4.
she to be Mother, they always servants. Our Lord is with thee: now more
specially; greeting thee, and inviting thee to accept of this dignity, and
putting this great business of the salvation of the world by this means, into
thy hand and choice: O Blessed Virgen* choose this, for nothing can be better
for thee, or for us; for thereby we shall be blessed among all creatures; above
the Angels that fell, and above many of those that stand. Blessed art thou
among women, by whom we shall all be blessed: blessed in thy self by the
favors received: Blessed in him who designs to be thy son: Blessed in the
honor due to thee in regard of it, and the prerogatives which by it thou shall
enjoy Ave gratia plena, Dominus tecum. Beg by her intercession Grace that the
vnsettlednes of thy soul being cured, thou may bring forth, not only
flowers of good desires and purposes, but fruits of good works; and increase
so in strength of mind that thou may be master over thy disordered
appetites and passions. Amen.

The Incarnation of our Blessed Savior.
II. PART.
I. Who when she heard him, she was trobled at his saying. Quae (...),
^udisset.
Prudently comparing the commendation given with what she found within herself,
and how far it was above what se conceaved of herself, never having heard the
like salutation made to any of those persons, men or women, to whom, it was
recorded, that Angels had appeared; whereupon being pensive The Angel said unto
her: fear not Marie, for thou have found particularly grace and favor with
God. Behold thou shall conceave in thy womb and shall bring forth a son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus. ^here in a spiritual sense we may reflect who
is bid not to fear, but the humble. And who shall find further grace, but they
who cooperate with the former, and do thereby their endeavor to increase it.
Who shall conceave in their minds and bring forth a Jesus, but they whose
conversation is with the Angels by prayer and by good offices. By the
intercession of the Blessed Virgen. Beg and purpose accordingly.

II. He shall be great, though he must pas to it through many lessenings; and
through the whole world he shall ^e caled and acknowledged the son of the
highest. And the Lord God shall give him the ^eate of his father David: who from
a keeper of sheep was made Prince of his people: and he shall reign for ever
in ^he house of Jacob, who supplanted his Elder brother, that is, sense (which
is elder in us then Reason) but the elder must serve the younger, that of his
kingdom here in us there may be no end, Romans 9. 12.
and we may reign with him with out end.

III. Come Lord Jesus, and take poSsession of thy kindome in my heart; Come thou
that ought to posses it: S. Bern. Hom. 4. super Missus.
for Avarice comes and offers to take place. Pride and vanity presents it self
and would have the command. Pleasure and pastime are waiting to come in, and
over rule. Veni Domine and nolitardare and revoca dispersos in te^ram suam.
That all which is in me may acknowledge and obey thee; Come, and establish thy
kingdom for ever in me. ^men. V^les^ be obedient ^o thy ^ommand, be I never so
great I shall be little, ye worse then nothing; by obeying thee, be I never so
contemptible otherwise, I shall be great; and shall have a seat at the right
hand of the heavenly father, and reign for ever. However meanly borne here, I
shall be the son of the highest: O Grace inestimable! Come holy Ghost and
work this great wonder in thy servant.

The Incarnation of our Blessed Savior.
III. PART.
I. HOw shall this be done because I know not man? Quomodo fiet istud.
By this, first it is evident that she had made a vow of perpetual Virginity,
to which her husband had consented, otherwise her question had been sensles.
Secondly: she did not doubt of the truth of what the Angel said, or demur upon
it, upon the ground which Zachary had done; whose question was. How shall I
know this? for I am old. But upon a resolution not to accept of the greatest
honor or dignity that could be imagined, with breach of her vow and offense
to God. Encourage thyself to the like resolution in thy good purposes.

II. The Angel answering said to her, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the highest shall over shadow thee, that is. Thou shall not need
to fear any breach betwixt God and thee, for it shall be done by his only power
and Omnipotency, with out any blemish to thee. Therefore also that which shall be
borne of thee, Holy, shall be caled the son of God. Bles the Holy of Holies
who would vouchsase the Virgen and us this benefit and beg of her that thou by
the grace of the holy Ghost may be one of her spiritual Children, and by
holiness of life and conversation be reckoned among the Children of God.

III. And behold Elizabeth thy Cosen, she also has conceaved a son in her
old age, because there shall not be impossible with God any word. One miracle is
confirmed by an other (says S. Bernard) that one joy may be heaped upon an
other, S. Ber^ supr^.
and that the Mother of God should not seem to be made a stranger to the
councels of God. Noe word is impossible with God: because it is as easy for
God to do as to speak* O Virgen and lady, speak that word, which heaven and
earth and those under earth do exspect: from thy mouth does depend the comfort
of those, that are in misery, the redemption of those that are in captivity.

Veni sancte spiritus etc. Sine tuo numine nihil est in homine. etc.

The Incarnation of our Blessed Savior.
IV. PART.
I. BEhold the ^andmayde of our Lord. Behold humility in the highest degree.
She Styles herself hand maid, Ecce ancilla Domini. S. Ambr*
who is chosen to be Mother, nor is she puffed up with the unexpected promise.
Behold her devotion and respect to the will of God delivered by the Angel. Be
it done to me according to thy word. Practi^e accordingly humility amidst the
greatest honors, and obedience where it is due, taking as from God the messages
delivered.

II. Behold the infinite Me^cy, the infinite humiliti^ of the son of God
coming at this consent to vnit^ himself to humane nature in the womb of the
Virgen. Adore him, and think not much to stoop to whatsoever seems low,
irksome, or sounding restraynt, seeing he, who was not as other infants, void
of reason and understanding, contained himself so long in this enclosure.

III. Behold how the Blessed Virgen in her interior did welcome this blessed
infant, conceaved of her substance; with what admiration, Devotion and
reverence* and how ever after she held herself so much the more bound to show
herself grateful for so great a benefit and dignity, and would not for all the
world displease in the least so great a Gheste; but do ^ll things what ever
with intent to please him, and comply with his holy inspirations.

IV. Behold with what reverence the Angels of heaven did admire, and ado^e this
mystery, and invisibly join themselves to the Archangel Gabriel, (as
afterward in the nativitie) singing praises to God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, rejoicing in the Council of God, who had exalted an inferior
Creature above them, and acknowledging with due obeisance their duty to the
Blessed Virgen. Behold also the Archangel how he took leave other, and
returned with joy to his place in heaven, to assist with greater honor before
the throne of God; where postrate I will beseech him again to assist me, and
bles God with him in this his first entrance into this world.

The visiting of S. Elizabeth.
I. PART.
I. OUr blessed Lady rising from her devotions, Exurgen^, Maria. Luc. 1. 39.
and from receaving the greatest Gheste that could have come unto her, went
with him, not out of mere curesie, much less for curiosity, but obeying his
inspirations unto the mount anous country, where Zachatie dwelt, and entering
the house saluted her Cosen Elezabeth.

She that was superior (says S. Ambrose) came to her inferior to assist her,
S. Ambr*
she made have to humble and charitable actions. Rise (o my soul) shake of
^loth and delay; thou haste a mountain to climb (thou know not whatto
morrow will breed. Think of the super^al city, hasten thither by the help of
the Uirgen, and sweet Jesus. Enter the house of thy heart, Visit, and search
into thy infirmities, which are thy nearest kindred. and stick fastest to thee;
Begassistance of the Virgen.

II. For when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mariae, the infant did leap in
her womb, and Elizabeth was replenished with the holy Ghost, and she cried out
with a loud voice* Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of
thy womb. Happy were that soul that could receave a visit, and salutation
from the Blessed Uirgen; salute her that thou may be saluted; in her
presence rejoice with the infant and hope to be sanctified, rejoice in
Innocence, and in silence, and in being hidden from the world, and in
obscurity, as the world terms it; and think it the greatest happiness, if thou
could be released out of the prison of this world, to enjoy her and her Son
face to face, with out this veyle of faith. Gal upon her with ^ loud voice.

III. In the mean time imitate hers, and S. Elizabeth's faith and expressions.
Whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord does come to me, and my Lord
himself. He that is nothingh cannot think whence, but from God alone: And yet
God comes to this nothing. Behold with what revere^ce, admiration, faith,
gratitude, and with what profie he is to be received and intertayned. Where is
the humility of the Virgen? The integrity of the Mother? The diligence of the
handmayde? The endeavor of Marie? That those many things may be per^ited in
thee, which have been said unto thee by our lord. Ps. 44. v.
Hear (soul) and consider and incline thy ear and forget all worldly business
at the time in which thou art to intertayne such a Gheste: does not thy heart
leap for joye, at the news of his coming? What more welcome news can be
expected? O most sweet, o most loving Jesus, how much reverence and
thanksgiving is due to thee with perpetual praise; for the receaving of ^hy
blessed body. Th. Kem. ^. 4. ^. 2. n. 2.

The Visitation of S. Elizabeth,
II. PART.
I. THe blessed Uirgen retiring her thoughts from her own praises turns her
heart to God, Magni^icat.
lessening what ever may seem to relate to herself, and magnifing the work of
God in her, as every one ought to do. And she Magnifies him with her whole
soul and strength, clearly discerning what was due to him and what to herself.
And as S. John leaped for joy in his and her presense, and at the benefit
received, so did she exult in the glory which God received by her son and
Savior, and that he vouch safed to use her as handmayd in this great my
sterie: for which she was not only to be eternally in heaven, Ex hoc beata^ me
dicent etc.
but successively here on earth proclaimed Blessed through all the generations
and Countries of the world.

II. As she acknowledged that God by his sole power and mercy had wrought great
things in her, for which she sanctified and blessed his name; so consider with
in thyself from time to time what great things God has done for thee in soul
and body above tho^sands, Fecit mihi mag^^.
upon whom he has not cast so favorable an eye. And that his Mercyes may last
upon thee, fear him, reverence him, serve him, love him the more.

III. Admire his judgments, who with a strong hand punished the Angelical
spirits for their pride of mind, and threw them down from the high
preferments which they might have inioyed, if humble and obedient, Deposuit
potentes (...) Sede etc.
and took compassion of this worm of the earth, Man, subject to hung^^ and
thirst and a thousand miseries. Thirst thou after justice; for those that
neglecting it, make themselfs, or account themselfs rich toward the world,
will be found pore and ^mptie in the sight of God.

IV. Apply thyself to receave thy God, who for thy sake has made himself a
Child, merely of his mercy, Suscepit Israel pue^um s^um.
thou deserving never to be looked on: see how punctual God is in his promises,
and neglect not what has once passed from thy heart to thy mouth to promise
him. Be ^ercyful that thou may find mercy, and receave the ^ewards which are
promised. Amen.

The Nativitie of S. John Baptist.
I. PART.
I. Elizabeth's full time was come to be delivered, Elizabeth impletum est etc.
Luc. ^. 57. S. Ambr*
and she bare a jonne And her neighbors and kinsfolk heard that our Lord had
magnified his mercies with her, and did congratulate her. The life of the just
has fulness (says S. Ambrose) the days of the wicked are empty. They show
themselves full of spiritual graces who bring forth ^olid fruit of virtuous
actions; with these the Angels do congratulate and the whole company of the
faithful servants of God, with whom alone we are to accompany and converse as
neighbors and kinsmen. For from sinners far is salvation. Psalm. 118. 155.
Though even from these the works of God do draw praise and commendation, and
they are to be helped toward him.

II. And when they came the eight day to circumcise the Child, they called him
by his fathers name, Zachary. His Mother answering said, not so* but he shall
be called (...) And they said unto her there is none in thy kindred that is
called by that name. And they made sign to his father, and demanding a table
book he wrote, Ihon is his name, and they mervailed. As we are borne sons of
wrath so ordinarily by the world we are putt into courses, Ephesians. 2. 3.
which send to wrath, unless the Mother of Grace and Mercy prevent us. If thy
neighbors and kindred call upon thee, to follow their les iustificable, or less
upright courses* as usually, because others do so, answer resoluedly with S.
Elizabeth* Not so, but Grace shall prevail. Turn thy self to thy heavenly
father, and yeald thy self as a clean table-booke that he may write in thee
what he pleases; and let whosoever will marvyale at thee, so God be more and
more glorified.

III. Forthwith the mouth of Zachary was opened and he sword^ blessing God:
and ^eare came upon all the neighbors and all these things were bruited over
all the country. And all that hear^, laid them up in their heart, saying, what
an one, trow ye, (...) this Child be; for the hand of our Lord was with him.
Behold the effects of an heroical Act: All do admire it, their mouths aropen
to the praise of God in it: those that are otherwise affected, are afraid to
move against it, seeing the resolution; they reverence him that persevers in
such acts; the sweet odor of it spreads itself through the whole house and
country; the good are preferred before the evil, as over ^opping them,
however great they seem; The good example sticks in the minds of the
beholders, and they are encouraged to do well, and to think of the eternal
reward. What an one do ye think this man will prove? This, who is so
contemptible in his own eyes: This whose life we esteemed madness etc. But the
hand of our Lord is with him etc. Again, what an one do you think this man
would prove, if the hand of ^od were not continually with him etc. Gratia tua
nos qu^esumus Domine semper preveniat and sequatur a^ bonis operibus iugiter
presuet (...) intentos. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.

The Nativitie of S. John Baptist.
II. PART.
I. AS we can never conceave highly enough of the Mystery and benefit of the
Incarnation of our Savior, Benedictus Dominus etc.
nor admire it sufficiently, so we can never bles and thank God for it to the
full: Le^ us therefore join with holy Zachary (now full of the holy Ghost) and
say. Blessed be our Lord God of Israel, because he has visited, and wrought
the redemption of his people. And now not of those only who for a time, and for
ou^ better instruction, were his chosen people, but the redemption of the whole
world, whereof I having been made partaker, have the more obligation ever to
bles him, and for protecting and defending me from my Ghosthy enemies.

II. Secondly upon his wonderful perfourmance of his promises by his holy
prophets from time to time, Sicut locutus e^t per os sancto^^^ etc.
I must raise my confidence in him, not only for the eternal rewards, which he
has promised to those who live according to his law, but for all which
belongs toward the helping of me to the atayning of those rewards as the
continuance of his graces toward me in this life (though he seems for a time
to leave me) if I continue in my commanded duty and in the performance of wha^
other helps I have by his holy inspiration undertaken: and chiefly that when
ever I return unto him with har^y sorrow he will not reject me.

III. And if he has called us to a more retired life, V^ sine timore (...)
manu inimicorum liberati*
where with less just fear of our Ghostly enemies then worldlings have, we
may serve him in sanctity and justice in his sight all our days, we have the
more reason to bless God for it, and to endeavor to be grateful by making
use of those particular means to which he has directed us, not neglecting so
good an occasion of his service and of our own salvation.

IV. Pray unto S. John that as he was chosen to discover first this great light
to the world, Illumina^^ his qui etc.
so he will now assiste us, not to shut our eyes unto it, and obtain for us
the remission of our sins. Per viscera miseri^ordie Dei nostri etc. For if he
had been man, man could not have been delivered as S. Augustine speaks: S.
August*
if from above Light does not shine upon us we shall remain for ever in
darkness and go astray.

The office of S. Ihon as Precursor.
I. THere was a man s^nt from God whose name was Ihon. Fuit ho^ mo Missu^ 2
D^o. Io. 1. 6.
And for such he ackno^ledged himself when afterward the Pharisees examining
him asked who art thou? A man, and consequently a weak vessel for the purpose
intended and indeed for all things, but that we must have confidence in God,
who made us, who sends us, who makes use of us as he pleases, and good reason
we should conform, and concur with him to our poor power, havinge our eye
chiefly upon his Grace, and endeavoring chiefly to mayntaine his Grace in us.

II. He came to give testimony of the light that all might believe through
him. Light needs noe testimony. How great was our darkness since we needed so
much help! When shall I come to discover him face to face with out this rule of
faith? But since he has thought it most Proportional to our state, and
therefore vouchsafed to veyle himself with our flesh, let us stoop to his
pleasure and be content and glad to see him as he gives leave, and beg that all
may see him, and at least by example of life conformable to his, law bring as
many to him as we can.

III. The true light was that which inlightens every man that comes into this
world. How many false lights be there in this world. Honor would take upon it
to be light: Riches would be light; knowledge would be light; many principles
which the world advances, would be light. The true light is Christ Jesus and
his doctrine only: This only brings us to the light ^verlasting; This is the
only pure light without blemish. By this we may have light and heat, and the
flames of eternal love. I^ inlighteneth every man that acknoweledgeth himself
as man to need it; every one that guydeth himself by reason, not by passion or
preiudicate opinions. Every one that is enlightened receaves his light from
hence, and with out it all were darkness. Give thanks for this light; beg
that it may increase in thee and bring thee to that, which is with out so much
restraynt* etc.

IV. The direct way to come to this light is to have recourse to those who are
sent from God, and to follow their directions: God does not immediately by
himself direct us in all things, neither can we be ever so confident upon our
own persuasion as we may justly be upon those who God has placed in his
Church over us: Matthew 23. 2.
Upon: he Chayer of Moses have sitten Scribes and Pharisees* hear them
notwithstanding* (says our Savior) and do not easily censure them.

S. Joseph is certified by the Angel concerning the Incarnation.
I. WHen Marie the Mother of Jesus was espoused unto Joseph (before they came
together) she was found to be with Child by the holy Ghost. And Joseph her
hu^b^nd being just, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded
to dismiss her secretly. Admire t^ Blessed Virgin^ silence in what did so much
concern her: she concealed it from S. Elizabeth till the Child proclaimed it:
It not being now possible to conceal it, she committs herself to the
protection of God, often having recourse to him, and to the blessed infant
within her, and to the Angel; Consider the several thoughts which she and S.
Joseph might have. S. Ambr*
Learn (says S. Ambrose) wha^ a just man ought to do when he spieth another
falt) He does not blaze it, he excuses it, he thinks and speaks the best, he
compassionats it, he committs it to God to judge.

II. As he was thus thinking, behold the Angel of our Lord appeared unto him in
sleep, saying, Joseph Son of David, fear not to take Mary thy wife, for
that which is born in her is of the holy Ghost. And she shall bring fort a
son; and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins. Psalm. 9. 10.
Deservedly does the psalmist sing. Our Lord is become a refuge unto the poor,
a helper in occ^sions and in troble. They who know his name will hope in him;
because he does not for sake those who seek him. Both these ^ervants of his
found it so to both their comforts. Congratulate both the one and the other:
she might have brought many arguments for herself, but the testimony of the
Angel was more propper, and upon it, behold with what reverence and ^espect
everafter S. Joseph carried himself toward the Virgen; with what comfort he
thought of the child* with what eagernes he desired and expected the Savior
and salvation promised.

III. For says the holy Text, Joseph rising from his sleep did as the Angel
of our Lord had commanded him, and took unto him his wife, and knew her not
till she brought forth her first born son, and called his name Jesus. Rise
thou also from s^eepe, after so many good inspirations which thou have had, and
do as thou art willed, either secretly in thy soul, or openly by those who
are to direct thee. Betake thyselfe to the Blessed Virgens help and protection,
and of S. Joseph, and the Angels, and hope for assistance of the Child by their
means and intercession. He is the first bor^ of the heavenly father, and as he
had no other sons but adoptive, so the Blessed Virgen. Give her the joy of
this, and of all her other children, among whom endeavor thou to be one.

A preparative for the receaving of our Savior.
I. PART.
I. THe first step tovvard the receiving of our Savior must be an humble
acknovvledgment of our own weakness, Vox clamantis in deserto. Luc. 3. 4.
wickedness, and want of of light: life, and redemption; and natural forces not
being able to reach either to know God, and to serve him as we ought, or to
make our peace with him after we have offended; but we are like people in a
desert, helpless and wa^dering we know not whether; this the greatest wits
that ever were among men are forced to confess; not being able to dive into
the mysteries of God, nor the future rewards, or resurrection etc. at the
mention whereof (as we read in the Acts) they wondered, and laughed at S. Paul,
Act. 17. 32.
and every thing did seem strange unto them: But how ever foolish these things
seem to worldlings, we must stoop unto them, and humble our own conceit,
seem it never so high: in proclayming this our weakness and want our voice must
be continually employed.

II. The second step is hope and desire of his mercyes who offers himself to
relieve us, Omnis vallis implebitur. S. Leo.
because (as S. Leo tells us) As he finds no body free from guilt so he comes
with intention to free every body: let no body therefore despair, no body out
of pusillanimitie conceive he may not receive plenty of his grace. Omnis mons
and collis humiliabitur.
As all hills and hillocks must be humbled, so all valleys shall be filled,
that will not put a stop to the current of his grace.

III. The third is a right intention, desiring and embracing his coming and his
ways, Erunt prava in directa.
not for temporal comforts or respects, nor delaying our amendment for any
such considerations* And if we can raise our thoughts and affections to seek
him purely for his own goodness and deservings, he will come the more welcome
to us.

IV. The firth is, resolution to break with the ways of the world, and of
people worldly given, Et aspera i^ vias planas*
seem they never so pleasing to sense, and to furnish ourselves with
confidence that by the help and example of our Savior the way which he takes
and teaches shall be easy though seeming at first never so hard.

A preparative for the coming of our Savior.
II. PART.
I. COnsider him who is expected as he is God. In principio erat v^rbum.
In the beginning (that is before any thing, from all Eternity) was the word;
that only word which eternally spoken by his Father contaynes all things in a
word; and the word was with God, in the bosom of his Father, in equal
happiness and glory with him; and God was the word, one God, one Essence, one
substance, one all things with him. This was in the beginning with God; thus
was the case, this was the state, the glory, the happiness from all Eternity,
and for all Eternity of him that is expected. And more over all things were
made by him, and with out him was not any thing made. Which not only signifies
unto us his power, and that not the least thing that is can be with out him,
but also that he comes voluntarily unto us, not constrained, not ou^ of any
necessity on his part, but freely, liberally, graciously offering himself unto
it, not overavved by his Father, but willingly accepting his, and doing his
own pleasure in it. Offer thy self to him, sorry that not from the beginning.

II. That which was made, in him was life, as in the fountain from whence all
that is came; with out him nothing lives, nothing moves, nothing is. Unless we
direct ourselves to him, unless we follow his commands, our life is no life, but
a wandering to eternal death, we are not living but continually dying. In him
all things bring life, our infirmities, our sufferings, our wrongs born for him
are life.

III. This life was the true light of men; it is the property of light to
expel darkness: see that thy darkness be not so great as to resist it; open thy
eyes, hope in him, welcome him, intertayne him; without him we can do
nothing; but also many things there be which with out us he will not do.

A preparative for the coming of our Savior.
III. PART.
I. HE was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world did not
know him. In mundo erat and mundus per ipsum factus est.
O misery! O ingratitude! what greater misery then not to know so great a
friend, so ne^re us, so ready still to do us more good, and still doing good
unto us? What greater ingratitude then not to acknowledge him from whom we have
all that which we have? He came into his own and his own did not receave him.
Stir up thy self to receave him, and see thou be such as he may own thee.

II. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become sons of God, to
such as believe in his name. He refuses none that are but willing to receave
him: Be they slaves, be they freemen (says S. Ihon Ch^isostome) be they wise,
^. Ihon Chrysostom.
or unwise, noble or ignoble, rich or poor, princes or private, publicans or
south sayers, lame, blind, crooked; he disdayneth not to adopt them his
children. O bounty vn^onceivable! and nothing can deprive us of this power but
our selves.

III. Who not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, not of the will of man, but
of God are born. As who should say, nobility of blood, and descent according
to the world do not here avayle* nor to have been the lineal sons of
Abraham o^ David etc. not to have invented a religion voluntary; but faith in
Christ, and to believe in his name, is the entrance into this new pedigree, and
the means to become the sons of God. Again, after we are adopted, we must be
careful not to give way to flesh and blood, and to our own crooked will; but
we must earnestly endeavor by purity of life to maintain this right and
privilege which God, by our redeemer expected, does offer us. This I say unto
youbrethren, that flesh and blood cannot possess the kingdom of God. 11. Cor.
15. 50.

A preparative for the coming of our Savior
IV. PART.
I. Consider to how many errors we are subject in our understanding against
faith, O (...) quae ex ore (...)
as among Infidels and heretics: and how far wide we are by our natural
strength from the truth, either concerning God, the Persons of the Blessed
Trinity, the Resurrection, and account to be give^ of our actions and
thoughts, and the true end why man was created; how various and unsettled men's
minds have been, and are in point of religion, when left to themselves, and
yett a thing so highly concerning us as an Eternity of pain or bless: How
much we needed an Infallible Guide, and how much bound to God for sending us
one who is truth itself, the Eternal wisdom proceeding from his own mouth,
and the selfsame God with him, to show us from end to end this life happily.

II. Consider the weakness of our will, O Adona^ Domine.
prone to as many follyes as our understanding: to errors, and even leading us
against our understanding and knowledge, to that which we know to be naught;
and consequently as much necessity there is in it of a guide, who with a
strong hand should bring us through the desert of this world, and the many
difficulties we find in it, and inflame us by his example to the love of the
land which is promised us. This our Blessed savior, the son of God is doing.
etc. Thank him for it, deliver thyself as a poor blind or ignorant pilgrim to
be dir^cted and encouraged by him.

III. Consider to how many passions, O Radi^ ^essae.
and changes in them we a^e subject, and the troble which comes by them,
besides the offense of God and man: Now angry, now pleased upon a trifle; now
sad* now iocund, now full of fears and frights, now as foolish and fond in our
hopes, in so much that we make ourselves oftims a laughing stock to oaths, and
are a hell to ourselves. Our Savior comes to show us a way how to rule these
passions which most commonly overrule us. Beg of him that he will lend us his
helping hand in it, and resolve to helped ^yself by his help.

The Journey of Jesus Marie, and Joseph toward Bethleem.
^. IN those days there came forth an Edict from Caesar, Exiit Edictum.
that the whole world should be enroled; and all went to be enroled every one
in his own city. Thus most men order their business, for other ends then those
which God has ordained, who reaches from end to end strongly, and disposes
all things sweetly, and brings them at last to his bent. Admire, Sap. 8. 1.
Adore, love his providence, and disposal, and be not slovver in obedience to
the All governing God, then men to men: Whose ambition and pride is not a
little also to be admired, glorying in so short, so uncertain, so tickle a
fortune, as is of all great men, and not acknovvledging from whom they have it,
and on whom it chiefly depends. Psalm. 94. 4.
In the hands of God alone are all the bounds of the earth. Heb. 13. 14.
We are pilgrims, and cannot say we have here a city permanent; though if we
take the whole world for our habitation, as it shall please our sovereign lord
God, who is everywhere, we may be permanent in him, doing his will here, and
inioying him ever herafter in heaven.

II. And Joseph went up from Galilaee, out of the city of Nazareth, into
Iewry, to the city of David called Bethleem; because ^e was of the house and
family of David, to be e^roled with Marie his espoused Wife, who was with
child. Reverence the obedience of Joseph and Marie, but chiefly the little
infant, Lord of the World, who by this Act traced out unto us a law of
obedience to those who are in command (as S. Isidore reflecteth) though
commanding for sinister ends, so nothing be commanded contrary to the
obedience we ow^ to God; and not upon pretense of poverty to decline the
paying duties, much less to be in any thing refractorie, because we will not
part with our accommodations, or undergo some little troble more then
ordinary.

III. And when they came there was noe place for them in the Inn. For whom?
And perhaps neither upon the way as they came; or they had not those
accommodations which people in iournyes desire, or stand in need of, being
cold, weary, infirm. How often does God seek and find noe place? Free thyself
from all troblesome Guests, from all that may be a hinderance to him: who, or
what is there that can challenge place before him? Rid thyself of all
unnecessary business, of business not belonging to thee, not beseeming thy
calling. Converse often with the blessed Virgen, with S. Joseph, and with such
company as they affect. Salute the little infant in his mothers womb; prepare
thy soul, and thy arms for him; see they be such as he may not refuse.

The birth of our Savior.
I. ANd it came to pass when they were there, Et factum est c^m essent ibi.
her days were fully come that she should be delivered, and she brought forth
her first begotten Son. Where, after all this, came it that she should be
delivered? Behold the place; Consider the hovre of the night, the season of the
year; the solitude of the Mother; dive into the inward thoughts of the Virgen,
and S. Joseph. He was born in journey, to bring us travelers with out error
to our iournyes end: He was born in the night* to be to us the light of truth.
Adore with the Angels the first begotten of the heavenly father, and of the
Virgen Mother, of whom it is said let all the Angels of God ^dore him. Hebr.
1. 6.


II. And she swathed him in Clouts. Esuriente^ implevi^ boni^.
How much honor was here done to Poverty? With how few things is nature
content? How much are the incommodities, and wants which some times we suffer
sweetened by this example? In what height is humility placed? Consider with
how many good thinghs the Blessed Virgen was filled (according to her own
prophecy) which the empty riches of this world do not affoard, nor rich men
relish? Reverence, and kiss those blessed clouts, and see thou contemn not
those who are but, poorly cladd.

III. And she laid him in a manger. This throne, this palace the God of heaven
chose and preferred it before the golden seats, and Ivorie beds of Solomon,
that is, of those who are wise to this world. Prepare for him the manger of thy
heart; beg of the Blessed Virgen the furniture of several virtues to adorn
it, the foot cloch of humility, and obedience to his commands; the Violet of
hope in his mercyes; the Crimson of love and charity: the purple of sorrow and
contrition; visit all the houses of thy heavenly friends* and find out by them
with what thou may best furnish this one room of thine, to the end he may
willingly take up his lodging in thee. O that I had that beautiful variety
with which the heavens are adorned, the knowledge of the Cherubims, the Fervor
of the Seraphims, the Strength of the Virtues, the Promptnes of the Angels: the
Zeal of the Apostles, the Constancy of the Martyrs, etc.

The Angel brings joyful tidings to the shepherds.
I. ANd there were in the same Country shepherds, Pastores erant in regione
eadem.
watching, and keeping the night watches over their flock. And behold an Angel
of our Lord stood by them, and the brightness of God did shine round about them,
and they were greatly afraid. Blessed shepherds in regard they were in the
same country so near their savior; more blessed because they were watchful,
first over themselves, then over their flock and did not slacken by reason of
the incommoditie of the night, and winter season. Such receave comfort from our
Lord, are made partakers of his mysteries, and of his company, and are bid not
to fear. For what should they fear from the world, which they comtemne, and
all that is in it? Or from heaven which they love and desire?

II. And the Angel said unto them: fear not, for behold I bring you tidings
of great joy, which shall be to all people: because this day is born to you a
Savior, which is Christ our Lord, in the city of David. What greater joy if
we rightly apprehend our wants and our misery? What tidings happyer? A
Savior to all, and to me as much as to all; and this day. if I will; H^br. 13.
8.
for Christ is equally a Savior then, and now, and to the worlds end; and this
Day particularly inclined to dispose of his heavenly creatures and gifts as on
the day of his birth solemnized in heaven and earth.

III. And this shall be a sign to you: you shall find the infant swathed in
clouts, and laid in the ma^ger? This shall be a sign to you that are humble
(says S. S. Bern.
Bernard) to you who are obedient, to you who are not high minded, to you who
watch, and meditate upon the law of God day and night, in the light of
knowledge, and in the obscuritic of faith; in the interchange of comfort and
desolation, and are not curious searchers, but readyly veyle to what ever sign
God is pleased to give of his blessed will and presence. You shall find the
eter^all God become an infant, and swathed in clouts etc. And of what can this
be a sign but of pardon, of grace of peace etc. Apply thyself to this infant;
Psalm. 32. 9. 10. 1.
He said the word and all things were made. He commanded and they were
created. All things were made by him etc. That which was made in him was life
etc.

The shepherds make have to find our Savior.
I. Et subito facta est cum Angelo.
ANd suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly Host
praising God and saying, Glory in the highest to God, and peace in earth to
men of good will. Join thyself to this multitude, and sing praises to God for
so great a benefitt, and make use of it while it is fresh, seeing it is putt
into the hands of they will. This life is a warfare, and a term of
Temptation, we may not therefore hope for glory with out victory, nor victory
with out strife, by which we purchase even here upon earth peace with God,
with our neighbors, and with ourselves.

II. And when the Angels parted from them into heaven, the shepherds speak to
one an other; let us go over to Bethleem, and see this word which is done,
which our Lord has showed to us. As if they would have taught us to say, let
us pass from darkness to light, from death to life, from our old customs to a
newnes of conversation, to Bethleem, the house of bread, the true sustinance
of our sou^es, and dive into this word made flesh for our sakes, and discover
more and more the greatenes of this benefitt which God has bestovved upon us.
And they came with speed, and they found Mari^, and Joseph, and the infant
lay^d in the manger. Imitate their speed: Cast of all cold demurrs, which the
holy Ghost does not relish, the infant dislikes, impatient of delay because
burning with love. And what a treasure did they find? Marie, and Joseph, and
the infant, laid out of love in the manger. They found humility in the
infant, chastity in the Virgen, justice in S. Joseph.

III. And seeing, they understood of the word which had been spoken to them
concerning this Child; And all that heard did marvel concerning those things
which were told them by the ^hepherds, but Marie kept all those words
conferring them in her heart. How long and how often shall we see, and not
understand! Imitate the Blessed Virgen in conserving those things in thy heart,
and the shepherds in speaking of them; And cease not to admire that which can
be never sufficiently admired, glorified, praised, loved, imitated, etc.

The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I. Postquam consumati sunt die^ octo. Coloss. 3. 9
AFter eight days were expired that the child should be circumcised his name
was called Jesus, which was called by the Angel before he was conceived in the
womb. With the old year let us put of (as S. Paul exhorts) the old man with
his actions, and put on the new, which is created according to God, in justice,
and true sanctity, or holiness of life. O powerful hand of God, work this
happy change in me.

II. Days do expire; the hour, which does pass by moments, is not to be
recalled; what if this day were to be my last? With what disposition, with
what feeling should I hear God say, thy days are expired?

III. When the days were expired, this child did not aspire after rest and
ease, did not hang after humane and worldly comfort, the favor and praise of
men, liberty, freedom, or privilege, but attended his circu^cisio^: wherefore
do thou favor thyself? At what art thou proud? ^ccl. 18. 6.
As for the wonderouse works of God, nothing can be taken from them, nothing
can be added to the^, neither can the depth of them be found: when a man has
done, then he beghinneth.

IV. He that was above the law, and not bound unto it, keeps and obeys the
law, not without shedding of his blood: He began the year, not fayntly
languishing, but fighting valiantly: The kingdom of heaven which he comes to
bestow upon us, will be gained by force. S. Bernar^
It is a good circumcision (says S. Bernard) which we undergo by voluntary
Poverty, by penitential labors, by religious observances. These are the
arms with which we must fight, that we may overcome, and begin that happy
year which never will have end.

Of the name of Jesus.
I. Et vocat^ est nomen ejus Jesus,
HIs name was called Jesus to wit, first called so by his heavenly Father, who
only fully knew the nature, and desert, and office of this child. If thou werte
to be named according to they nature, desert, and manner of performance of they
duty; by what name should God, or man deservedly call thee?

II. What betokens this connection of circumcision and the name of Jesus? S.
Bernard
Acknowledge in it (says S. Bernard) the mediator betwixt God and man,
coupling divine and humane, high and low things together. Circumcision is a
testimony of the truth of his humanity; his name does signify the power of
his divinity. For he and noe other can save us from sin, and yet not without
us, and our cooperation. How often do we seek freedom from siknes, and
bodily troble more them from sin? Bodily health more eagerly, then the health
of the sovle? Content often times to be sinners, but not to be called so; ashamed
to do penance, not ashamed to sin; apt to receive wounds, bashful in
seeking remedy.

III. The Angel, the Blessed Virgen, and S. Joseph were the first worshipers,
and proclaymers of this holy name of Jesus: It is an honor to be their partner
in it, Act; 9, 10^
and with S. Paul, who was chosen to carry this name through the world, and
taught us that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Phil. 2 10
of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, and that every tongue
should confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.

IV. If thou do acknowledge jesus, if thou do honor him as thy Lord, be
not ashamed of his liverie, let thy hand agree with thy mouth, and not the
voice be of Jacob, and the hand the Esau. He was called Jesus before he was
conceaved, Genesis 27. 22.
before thy works renew thy intention.

Of the star which appeared in the East.
I. When Jesus was born in Bethleem Judah, Cum natus esset Jesus in Bethleem
Iudae
in the days of king Herod behold there (...) sages from the East, to
Jerusalem, saying, where is he that is born king of tho Jews? For we have
seen his star in the East, and are come to adore him. How great ^ benefitt
is it to be called to the says and service of Christ, whereas thousa^ds are
left behind? How great to be stirred up to reform our conversation, to be
called to Religion, to converse with God in prayer, by sweet and ^fficatious
means, from our tender years, or from the turmoile of earthly trobles? Who is
Author of all the thi^g^ but this infant? S. August.
Who on earth is carried in his mothers arms and commands the heavens to
wait on him.

II. How great a favor is it to receave daily new illustrations from heaven,
or to have our ancient f^rvour conserved and confirmed? with what thankfulness
ou^ht we to correspond? We saw his star and we came instantly with out delay:
overcoming all difficulties which might be objected at home, or abroad. We came
from our home commodities, into a strange country, from freads, to those who
might prove upon the matter enemies; upon no absolute evidence, but greatest
likely hood. Walk while you have light, Ih. 12. 15.
that darkness overtake you not. He that walks in darkness, knows not
whether he goes.

III. Where is he that is born king? As if they should have said: S. Chris.
why is the king of the Jews laid in the manget, and no: seated in the
temple? Wherefore does he not glitter it purpse, but Iyes svvathed in clouts:
And by their asking these questions of those who are, or should be knowing,
they rebuke their negligence, they cheek their sloth, they blame the Servant
that he does not go to meet his master etc. He is b^r^ king of heaven and
earth: The heavens acknowledge him and wait upon him. O dulnes of my earthly
ha^^ that is so little dutiful, so little respectfull, as not to take notice
where he is? Or not to affoard him a place more befitting him!

How Herod was trobled at the news.
I. Audien^ Herode^ turbatu^ est.
KIng Herod hearing this, was trobled, and all Jerusalem with him and
assembling together all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people, he
inq^ired of them where Christ should be born. They are trobled who had most
cause to rejoice: Beware of ingratitud^, least benefitts received turn to thy
prejudice. Beware of passion, and prejudicate opinions, which blind us from
seeing, or detayne us from acknovvledging that which we cannot but see. Bevvare
of dissembling: For there (...) no counsel against our Lord, says the
Prophetr. Pr. 21. ^0*


II. And they said, in Bethleem Iuda^ for so it is written by the Prophett;
And thou Bethleem land of Judah art not the least among the Princes of Judah, for
out of thee shall come forth the Captain, that shall rule my people of
Israel. How readyly could they point out the place of his birth, and yett not
stir to look after him? But if Bethleem be esteemed great, because in it
our Savior was once bor^ how great may we be, in whom he is, as it were daily
born in the holy Sacrament? Follovv this Captain, and esteem thyself happy to
be ruled by him, and to be one of his people. P: 5 n. ^
O Lord I am thy servant.

III. Then Herod secretly calling the sages, learned diligently of them the
time of the star, which appeared to them. And s^nding them to Bethleem, said,
Go, and ask diligently after the child, and when you shall have found him,
make report^ to me, that I also coming may adore him. O blessed Child^ Who
would not diligently ask after thee? Who would not carefully inform himself
of thee, that he might from day to day understand more and more, that thou art,
as the Prophett styles thee, Esaias. 9. 6.
admirable, God, strong, Prince of peace, Father of the future world, Ask
earnestly of him what thou want; he will bestow his gifts as a Father, as a
Prince, as God. As a Child: Inquire of those who know him best, that knovving
him more perfectly, thou may adore him more reverently, and serve him more
diligently.

The Sages find, and adore our Savior.
I. When they had heard the king, Quicum audissent regem.
they departed; and behold the star, which they had seen in the East, went
before them, till it came and stood over, where the child was. While ordinary
means do last, God affoardes not extraordinary; when ordinary fail, he
supplies by ways best known to himself. Behold the reward of constancy, and
of resolution in overcoming difficulties, in contemning humane respects, and
judgments, and fears, in continuing the good courses, which upon due
consideration we have undertaken for God.

II. And seeing the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy; and going
into the house, they found the Child, with Marie his Mother. Rejoicing
exceedingly at the light of the star, how much more did they rejoice at the
light of the Child! And what Child! in what hovse^ Behold where thy king is
born, where this Child is to be found with his Mother; whether Jesus is to be
followed, with the faithful Kings, and shepherds; And falling down, they
adored him: notvvithstanding his s^al retinue his poor furniture, the small
appearance of kingly presence. Son suffer me to do with thee what I will, I
know what is good for thee. etc.

III And opening their treasures they offered unto him gifts, Th. a Kep. ^ 3.
c. 17.
Gold, frankincense and Myrrh; and hoving received an answer in sleep, that
they should not return by Herod, they went back into their country another
way. S. Fulgen.
Observe what they offered, and acknovvledge what they did believe; by these
three, his divinity, his royalty, his mortality are infinuared, S. Ambro.
Open thy heart, and see what treasure thou there have laid up to offer. Is thy
treasure* Advisednes? S. Greg.
Is thy treasure Chastity? Is thy treasure a desire and inclination to pray,
to overcome thy passions, to mortify thy sensuality? Offer at least thy ^art
and soul, to receave what he shall please to bestovv on thee, or to take from
thee what may be displeasing to him. If thou have no gold, offer the bitterness
of thy tears, and in all thy distresses and doubts have recourse to God, that
thou may est be directed and strengthened in the right way to thy heavenly
Country. How many dangers have thou escaped by his suggestion? Into how many
good ways have thou been put. etc. Return not by the ways of the wicked
world, least they be occasion that this child be taken from thee or misused.

The Purification of the Blessed Virgen.
I. AFter the days of her purification were fully ended; Postquam impleti sunt
dies purgationis eius.
according to the law of M^yses, they carried him up to Jerusalem to present
him to our Lord, as it is written in the law of our Lord: Every male etc. Here
be no excuses, no supposalls of exemption, no declining the law, though now
dravving to an end, but the time, Sap. 2. 11.
and houte being come, they obey, though she a Virgen, and he above the law:
Let our strength therefore be (according to the counsel of the Wise man) the
law of Justice, that is, to fulfill it, not to endeavor to make it void, or
to decline it.

II. Consider what a Kind of present this was from the hands of the Blessed
Virgen, and her Son, to God his Father. How worthy? How grateful? How
complete. Then, as to ourselves, how greedily should we attend, how
cheerfully welcome, and make use of the houte in which we might present
ourselves to God in prayer? Enter into the Interior of the Blessed Virgen, S.
Joseph, and the Child Jesus and behold with what disposition they present
themselves, and him. It is a happy law which orders every thing so, as we
may securely expect till the day, and hour, and moment come about, wherein we
are to apply ourselves to this or that service pleasing to God.

III. All the days of this life are days of purgation: As we wash our hands,
our face our garment, so must we our soul, that it may appear before our Lord
an acceptable present. Now present thyself to the Child, and to the Virgin,
that thou may find favor when he shall come as Judge: Apoc. 2. 27.
For nothing that is polluted shall enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, nothing
that is not purified, by innocence of life by penance, or by the purging fire.

The law of Purisication.
I. EVery male that opens the womb, shall be called holy to our Lord. Omne
masculinum.
Consider upon how many titles thou art Gods, and ought to be holy to him,
and wholly his: He created thee of nothing, to his Image, and likeness, for a
holy, and sublime end, to wit, to serve him with body and soul, and eternally
to enjoy him: Thou have been redeemed with blood most holy, that in holiness,
and justice thou should serve him all the days of thy life: Luc, 1. 75.
Thou have been called into a Holy Church, perhaps to holy vows, and to be an
instrument to make others holy, fed with the holy bread of Angels, bred up to a
holy course of life, with holy documents, and inspirations, in conversation
with holy persons. How ^omes it to pass that my beloved in my house does (if
not many Hietemiae ^^. 15.
things which are naught) so few holy things? Put on a manly courage in the way
of virtue that thou may become truly holy to our Lord.

II. And to offer Sacrifice, according as it is said in the law of our Lord, a
pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons. Consider the Indulgency of God
toward us; He requires nothing above our strength; Give according to the law:
Keep the commandments; keep thy rule: this is a most grateful sacrifice; do
not pretend that that is above thy strength which he appoints: Noe man is so
poor, or weak as to be excused from conforming himself to his blessed will.

III. A payer of turtles etc. A double offering, for the Mother and for the
Son: Thy soul, and thy body: thy understanding, and thy will, thy interior,
and thy exterior carriage; thy intention, and thy works; both of them sincere,
and innocent, not inconstant and ^leeting, not hanging after worldly
contentments. Ecol. 2, 2^
I esteemed laughter deceit (says the wiseman) and to joy I said, wherefore
do thou in vain let thyself be deceived.

The coming of old Simeon to meet our Savior.
I. ANd behold there was a man in Jerusalem named Et (...) homo era^ in
Jerusalem.
Simeon, and this man was just, and religions, expecting the consolation of
Israel, and the holy Ghost was in him. How few of this kind of men are now to
be found and even in Jerusalem (that is, the most sacred place) how few? The
word Simeon signifies one that gives ear; how few give ear to the Best
things? Who so does, is in a way of Justice, and religion, and attends not
the vain, and empty comforts of this world, which pass as in a blast, but
the inward comfort of the holy Ghost, and of the presence of God, and of our
Savior.

II. And he has received answer from the holy Ghost, that he should not see
death, till he first saw the Christ of our Lord. See how many commandments,
rules, or directions thou have received from God in thy state of life, for so
many answers have thou received from him, that thou shall not see death if thou
keep them: so our Savior said answering the young man. Luc. 10. 28.
Do this, and thou shall live; and the Wiseman: Fear God, and keep his
commandments, Eccl. 12. 13.
for this is the whole man; as much as to say, in this is all the happiness of
man: with what confidence shall we look upon a temporal death, and avoid the
eternal if we be thus armed?

III. Simeon was expecting the consolation of Israel. Follow thou his example,
and the advice of the Royal Prophet, Ps. 26. ^^
Expect our Lord, and be of good courage, whether thou be by him often, or
seldom spiritually visited, whether business succeed to thy mind, or otherwise,
in what ever employment he does engage thee. This disposition is a sign of
Justice, and Religion and of the Holy Ghost dwelling in us; A sign that we
have the true spirit of wisdom, and understanding, and of counsel, and of
fortitude, and of Piety, and of the fear of God, and of his love. not wedded
to our own ways etc.

Simeon takes the Child Jesus into his arms.
I. ANd he came in spirit into the Temple. Et venit in Spiritu in templum.
Reflect with what spirit, how fervently, with how much thirst and eagernes; or
co^trarivvise how coldly, and dully thou appearest in the Temple, at prayer, or
at the holy Sacrifice of Mass, (where the Angels assist with reverence) or at
other pious exercices; and see what success thou may hope for. If by a
customarie performance of thy devotious thou be fallen to a feeblenes in them,
rouse up thy spirits, renew what is decayed: Cant. 2.
Rise, make have, my beloved (says the bridgroome) and come.

II. And when his parents brought in the Child Jesus, to do according to the
custom of the law for him, He also took him into his arms, and Blessed God,
and said, now thou may dismiss thy servant, o Lord, according to thy word,
in peace. VVhata blessing is it to receave our Savior in our breast? To have
him in our hands? And as it were in our possession? Who can sufficiently
esteem that instant in which we may say with Jacob. Now I will not dismiss
thee unless thou bles m^. Genesis 32. 26.
What may we not hope to obtain having our God as it were in our power?
Beg peace, salvation, light, comfort in tribulation, and in expecting the
time of comfort, and what ever may be wanting to thee toward thy own, or thy
neighbors assistance.

III. My eyes have seen thy salvation which thou have prepared before the face
of all people etc. Bless God for sending this salvation to all, and that thou
in particular have been made partaker of it: Beg increase of this light etc.
And his Father and Mother were marveling at these things which were spoken of
him. And not with out reason shall we detain ourselves in admiring, and
adoring his goodness, his willingness to impart himself unto us, and infinite
other thinghs which we may find in this Child, who gives himself into our arms
incomprehensible in himself, but framing himself according to humane nature, by
love, and imitation of his virtues to be comprehended by us.

Simeon his Prophecy.
I. ANd Simeon blessed them, Et benedixi^ illis Simeon.
and said to Marie his Mother. Behold this Child is set to the ruin, and
resurrection of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be contradicted.
God mingleth sorrow with joy and gladness; which in this life is not only the
common case of every body, but also a blessing. And therefore when adverse
things do not befall us, we shall do well to forthinke them, least we be
ingulfed in too much liberty and licentiousnes, or overtaken with pride and
haughtines. Be mind full of Poverty in time of abundance, Eccli. ^6* 25. 27.
says the Wiseman; and again, an advised man does always fear, and in the
days of sin will beware of carelessnes.

II. If of this child it could be said he was to be the occasion of ruin, and
rising to many, what may be thought of us? S. Paulinus.
Let every one say with S. Paulinus, would to God Christ may be to me ruin,
and resurrection that sin may be ruined in me, and he rise who fell when
sin began to rise. And again; whatever be likely to be the event of future
thinghs, it is our duty diligently, sincerly, and with out all anxietie to
perform that good which we have in hand, and commit the event to God. It is an
idle thing to repose our confidence in man, Thom. ^ Kemp. i. ^. c. 7.
or in any creature: finally he that does not expect to be contradicted, or
goes not armed for it, does in vain presume he shall have peace in this life,
or be accounted a true follovver of Christ.

III. And thy soul a sword shall pearce, that the thoughts of many hearts may
come to light. What did she deserve who brought forth her child without pain,
S. Berdar.
but bred him not without grief? Make account, (says S. Bernard) that nothing
happens to any which may not happen to thee; and do not say in what have I
deserved it? How many thoughts of men will come to light when this child shall
come to indge them? What different judgment will men make of themselves, and
of all things belonging to this world, from that which heretofore thy indged,
not taking the doctrine and inspirations of this child in their way? Pearce thy
own soul now with grief for thy sins, that then the judge of the just may
be revealed to thee. etc.

Anne the Prophetess.
I. ANd there was Anne ^ Prophetess, daughter to Phanuel, of the tribe of
Aser, she was far stricken in days, and had lived with her husband seven
years from her Virginity, and she was ^iddow ^ntill eighty and four years.
Et erat Anna Prophetissa.
By her name learn how deserving she was, and in what degree thou must be that
thou may deservedly meet our Lord. Anne signifies, gracious, merciful,
giving, reposing; Phanuel, one that sees God, or walks in his sight: Aser,
blessedness: for a soul thus qualified may deservedly be termed blessed: she
was far stricken in years, she did not go backward (says S. Peeter
Chrysologus) but daily increased in Chrysologus.
virtue a sign, and advancement to this, follows

II. And she departed not from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving day
and night. Origin.
Deservedly says Origin) did this holy woman receive the spirit of prophecy,
being by constant chastity, and continued fasting, mounted to this height and
we, S, Cypri,
(according to the Counsels of S. Cyprian) who are always in light, because
in Christ, must not cease even in the night from prayer, darkness and profound
silence are no little helps to compunction. And she at the same time coming in,
praised our Lord, and spoke of him to all those who expected the redemption of
Israel. An ample subject of praise and thanksgiving, God man, and become an
infant for our sake. Confitemini Domine quoniam bonus; quoniam in saculum
miserieordia ejus.

III. And when thy had done all things according to the law of our Lord. they
returned into Galilee, to their City Nazareth. And were not any thing puffed
up with so much praise, and commendation: but returned to their wonted humble
exercises, and mean place of aboade. And the child grew, and waxed strong,
full of wisdom, and the grace of God was in him. Thom ^ Kemp. 1. 3. c. 7.
Son, it is more profitable, and more safe for thee to hide the grace of
devotion, and not to think, or speak much of it, but rather to humble
thyself, and esteem thyself unworthy of it. etc. Thus we may grow in strength
and wisdom and grace in the sight of God, Prove. 3. 3^.
and have God dwelling in us; for with the humble is his conversation.

The flight into Egypt.
I. BEhold an Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying; rise and
take the child, and his Mother, and fly into Egypt. He appeared to S. Joseph,
and not to our Blessed ^ady, Ecce An^ gelus dui apparuit in sown is Joseph.
Matt. 2. 13.
to give us in her an example, of humility and obedience, and in him both a
pattern of constant faith in seeming contradictions, and resignation to what
ever God shall dispose, submitting our seeming wise thoughts to his
unsearchable wisdom, and putting no bound to our submission. And be there till
I shall tell thee.

II. For it will come to pass that Herod will seek the child to destroy him.
Not knowing before hand what will happen, it is fitting we should ever have
tecourse to whom all things lie open, and there repose our doubtful thought;
so Herod with all his power and craft will not be able to annoy us; for as
when God flies man, it is not out of fear, but for some hidden mystery; so
when he puts us in case of flying, it is for our good, and for some ends of
his toward it. Herod sought the child to destroy it. Seek thou his enemies,
that is, sinful dispositions to destroy them, and maintain him who is thy
true life Christ Jesus.

III. Who rising took the child, and his mother in the night, and retired into
Egypt, and was there till the death of Herod. Reflect how poor a life it is
likely they did lead in Egypt: Their best riches was obedience; their
accommodation patience; their comfort prayer, and devotion; with drawing their
thoughts from all but the will of God. Fear not (said old Tobie to his Son)
it is a poor life Tob. 4. 23.
which we lead, but we shall have many good things, if we fear God, and depart
from all sin, and do well. See that Christ flying finds intertaynment for
himself, and those whom he vouchsafes to style his little ones. He and his
Mother were posted away at an unseasonable hour in the nigat, to teach us that
all hours are to be accounted seasonable when God calls, or his service; and
they retired into Egypt, where their forefathers had been oppressed, yet God
protected them. etc.

The slaughter of the little children.
I. THen Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the Tunc Herodes videns quod
illusus esset a magis etc.
Sages, was exceeding angry; and sending, slew all the male children that were
in Bethleem, and in all the borders thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had dilig^ntly inquired of the Sages. Then he
saw he was deluded, when his malicious disposition deserving it, God permitted
him to perceive it, and not before. And as wicked people and such as are
imperfect, do not see God working all things, and disposing all according to
his divine pleasure; so Herod; but like angry and foolish dogs, he followed
the stone, not minding who did cast it at him. How late do those who are
wordly wise, and given to worldly courses, see their error? And say when it is
too late, Sap. 5. 4.
we fools, accounted the life of the just to be madness, and their end to be
with out honor. etc.

II. In the mean time, the children were happy* whom (as S. Augustine speaks
of them) life everlasting S. August. S. Fulg.
met in the very davvning of their days He slew all, but missed of him, whom
he sought above all; neither did he hurt those whom he found) says S.
Fulgentius. S. Leo.
And out of it S. Leo gives this lesson; that we beware of ourselves, for our
Ghostly enemy strives to slaie in us a kind of tender infancy of our faith
and virtue. etc.

III. Then that was fulfilled which was spoken by Hieremie the Prophet, A voice
in Rama was heard, much erying and wayling, Rachel hewayling her children, and
would not be comforted, because they are not. Thus We often grieve where we
have cause of joy, and will not receive comfort, because we conceive that to be
which is not, and do not think of that which is most important. I will not
have you ignorant of those that sleep (says S. Paul) that 1 Thessalonians. 4^ 13.
you may not be sad, as other folk who have noe hope. The wicked are truly to
be bewailed. For it were better for them they were not, if thy do not repent;
the loss of our soul by fynne deserves much wayling; other losses are never
comfortless, to those that understand what true comfort is. See that crying
for thy offenses be from thy heart, and not a voice only from the teeth outward.

Their return out of Egypt.
I. But when Herod was dead, Defunct^ autem Herod.
behold an Angel of our lord appeared in sleep to Joseph in Egypt, saying.
Rise, and take the child, and his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for
they are dead that sought the life of the child, who rising took the child,
and his Mother and came into the land of Israel. What is become of Herod and
of all his power? He is dead, but that is not all: And to the like end will
all those come who either do not seek Jesus, or not where he is, in the
Catholic Church: We must all dye, but taking the child Jesus, and his Mother
with us, we shall arrive at the true land of I srael, the land of promise,
flowing with that which is better then milk and honey with out comparison,
Thom. 2 Kemp. 1. 1. c. 11. n. 3.
if we were to ourselves perfectly dead. Consider also in the persons of the
Angel, the Blessed Virgen, and S. Joseph what may occur.

II, But hearing that Archelaus did reign in Jury for his Father Herod, he
feared to go thither, and being warned in sleep retired into the quarters of
Galilee. Again by fear the faith, and patience of the Elect is exercised;
observe their usual recourse to God by prayer, from which they received, these
frequent directions; yet oftimes God leaves some thing to prudent
consideration, defitous of our cooperation with his Illustrations.

III. And coming he dwelt in a city called Nazareth; that it might be
fulfilled which was said by the prophet, that he shall be called a Nazarean.
The Prophets fore told it, because it was to be so, God foreseeing all things*
and bringing to pass what he has foreseen, and determined; which obliges us
the more to have recourse unto him in all things gaeate and little, that we may
be conformable to him, and not seem to resist that which cannot be resisted;
and esteem nothing so little as not to need his help and direction in it, for
even the g^eatest things are little to him. The word Nazareth signifierh,
sanctified, or set a part, o^ preserved, and florid: So was our Savior, so
must we endeavor to preserve the flower of innocence, and set a part some
constant time to attend to the service of God, by prayer, that we may attain
that degree of sanctification which he desires in us, and flourish with those
virtues, and the sweet odor of them, which may preserve us to an Eternity of
happiness. Amen.

Christ remains in the Temple at twelve years of age.
I. ANd his parents went every year to Jerusalem; ^tibant Parents ejus. etc.
^nc. 2, 41.
at the solemn day of the pasover. And did not for fear omit their devotions;
as S. Augstin advertiseth: the way also to our heavenly Jerusalem is, to be
constant in the service of God, and observance of his commandments. And when he
was twelu^ years old, they going up to Jerusalem according to the custom of
the festival day, and having ended the days; when thy returned the child
Iesns remained in Jerusalem, and his parents knew it not. How happy a thing is
it to begin to serve God from tender years? Whether they live long, or dye
soon, thy shall find great benefit. Little Jesus invites us to begin, and to
perserver with him, that we may ascend the easyer to the spiritual Jerusalem,
perseverwith more facility by good custom, and end our days full of good
works.

II. And thinking that he was in th^companie, they came a days journey, and
sought him among the kinsfolk and acquaintance. But he who of set purpose had
left his good parents, would not remain among his kindred, to teach us not to
set our affections upon trifles, when we have set at naught far greater
matters, nor to stick at less, when we have undergone greater burdens: yet in
the mean, behold with how heavy hearts they went from place to place inq^iring
after him, And returning t^ Jerusalem seeking him.

III. And it came to pass after three days, they found him in the Temple,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them; and all
that heard him astvnished at his wisdom, and answers. Who is able to
conceive, what passed in the child Jesus his heart and conversation those three
days and nights; for it is likely he remained in the temple the whole time*
concealing himself, and appearing in the sight of others, as he thought good.
As he is fo^^d sitting in the midst of the Doctors hearing them etc. Sit thou
down at his ^eete; his doctrine and answers being more admirable then any
thing that can fall from man as man: Sit down at the feet of those that hold
his place in the Church, hear them, and ask them, and not others, The three
days after which he is to be fo^nd are, contrition, confession, and
satisfaction, according to S. Bernard: S. Bern^^^
and yet to the finding of him in these he has a chief hand, without which he
cannot be found: beg of him that thou may find him.

Jesus his Answer to his Mother.
ANd his Mother said unto him: son, Et dixit Matter ejus ad eum. S. Bernard
why have thou done so by us? Behold thy father, and I forrowing did seek
thee. This little one (says S. Bernard) did not blanch at his being publicly
before the doctors owned by his poor Mother, by Joseph a trads man, and to be
as it were found falt with* But with how much more reason may he, and his
Blessed Mother say to us, son, why have thou dealt with us thus, and thus?
Behold thy eternal father and I, have done these and these things for thee.
etc. Ponder With what humility the Blessed Virgen names Joseph first, and
styles him Father. Say to the child Jesus with devout Thomas a Kempis. Th: a
Ke: 13 c 2 n 5
Let others seek for themselves what they please, nothing does, or shall give
me contentment but thou my God, my hope, and my eternal Welfare.

II. And he said unto them: what is it that you sought me? Did you not know
that I must be about those things which are my Fathers? He would ^ot be so
thought to be their Son (says S. Augstin) as not to be understood S August.
to be the Son of God Therefore also he would be found in the Temple (as S, S
Bid
Bid reflecteth, to the end that whose Majesty and glory was one and the
same, the same house and seat should contain them.) Make thyself his Temple:
keep thyself in the Church of Christ; wherefore do you seek him in vain in
the company of the unfaithful. Eucherius
Says Eucherius.

III. And they understood not the word which he spoke to them. For God uses to
reveile his mysteries to his friends by parts therefore that we may understand
them, they are continually to be ruminated. Our spiritual generation, and hope
of eternal inheritance is to be always before our eyes, That we are Sons
of God, that he is many ways our Father; how much it does importe us to be
about those things which concern us in the other world, to be diligent in
observing his commands, to behave ourselves like dutiful and loving children
toward him: what difference there is betwixt toyling in the world and for
the world, and taking pains for the service of God; how different a revvard
belongs unto it, This if we did rightly understand we should be the more
diligent. etc.

The Life of Christ till he was thirty.
I. ANd he went down with them, and came to Nazareth. Et desce^ dit cumeis etc.
He went down with them, and stooped to the lovvnes of their manner of
living. He began to be in the things which were thieas, till having passed
Maste^ of humility, the time came wherein he was to be acknowledged to be above
all Creatures Descend thou also from thy high flovven thoughts, from self
conceit, and pride, and ambition, and contention and come to Nazareth. Where
thou may be little or nothing regarded: what do thou in court, in the
earthly city of Jerusalem? Esaye 25; 20
Enter into thy closet, shut thy door upon thee, lie closse for a while till
the wrach of God pass. The highest God descended, how low?

II. And he was subject to them. Eucherius
Let subjects give ^are to thi^. and not disdain to be subject: let superiors
hear, and observe that oftimes subjects deserve better then superiors: and S.
Bernard. S Bernard
Wh will not blush to stand obstinately to his own opinion, seeing the
eternal wisdom to yeald from his. God does subject, and trust himself to
mortals, and will any body still abide to walk his onne ways: And he was
subject. Who* To whom?

III. And his Mother kept all these things in her hare and Jesus proceeded in
wisdom, and age, and grace, with God and men. How odoriferous a poesy can we
think these things were in the breast of the Blessed Virgen* how little was
she cloyed with often reflecting upon them* Material flovvers need to be fed
with water to preserve them from decay, these flovvers also must be watered
from the fountains of our eyes, and warmed with the rays of devout
reflections, that they may continue to refresh us: so shall we proceed, and
increase with Jesus, in spiritual, and other wisdom also, and be in favor
etc. Sit under the shade of thees trees Jesus, Maria, Joseph, and thou will
gather fruits which will be pleasing. Amen.

A Meditation by way of introduction to those of the Passion of our Savior.
HArkening to that which our Savior said to his Apostles. Ecce ascedimus Hie
rosolyma:
Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered to the
Princes, Mat: 20. 18
to be mocked, and schovrged, and Crucified, beg of him grace to understand
the intent of this hard usage, that thou may behave thy self accordingly. And
first.

It Consider that whereas the chief intent of the sufferings of our Savior, was
to satisfy for the Sins of the world and to blot them out of our souls, and
also to give us example of virtue, and encouragement to it, we ought to dispose
ourselves to a perfect hatred of sin, as the cause of this great evil which
happened to our Savior, weighing who it is that suffers, and for what: for as
the greater the person is to whom an affront is offered, the affront is also
the greater and more detestable; none being comparable to God in greatness,
nothing can be more detestable then sin against him, to which if we add the
goodness of our Savior toward us as man, the hatred of sin must be the
greater, as of an object the most injurious that can be both to God and man:
which is the reason why the Apostle puts us in mind to consider well the person
of him that suffers for us. Recogitate ^um etc.
Recogitate eum qu^ talem sustinuit a peccatoribns adversus s^metipsum
contradictionem.

II. Hebr. 12. 3.
The second consideration is that which follows in the Apostle, That you be
not wearyed fainting in your mind, for you have not as yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin. As if he should have said in the ha^^ed of sin, in
striving against temptations, in overcoming and bridling out passions, in
denying and mortifying our desires, in obeying Gods comma^dments and counsels,
and in the practice of all kind of ver^ue, (with out which the hatred of sin
cannot be perfect) many difficulties do occur, particularly in the beginning
of our couversion to God; we have the more need therefore to set this example of
our Savior the more lively before our eyes that we may not faint, or fail
considering how much more he has done, and suffered for us* then can happen to
us in this conflict.

III. And thirdly; by his example also we must encourage ourselves to patients,
and constant suffering, and going through with what ever may happen unto us
otherwise; because as it behoved him to suffer, Luc. 24. 6.
and so to enter into his glory, so we by suffering*and persevering with
patience, and resolution, in the fight shall be also crowned: Heb. 12. 2.
looking therefore upon the Author of this our Faith, and finisher Jesus, who
having joy proposed to him, sustained the Cross, contemning the shame, and
sitreth at the righe hand the seat of God, say unto him, sweet Savior as thou
did voluntarily offer thyself to thy heavenly Father with arms spread upon
the cross, and thy body naked; so do I willingly offer myself to thee, and
purpose by thy grace and example rather to dye then offend thee; rather to
suffer any worldly inconvenience then to part from thy counsels and
commandments. etc.

A meditation of the Council of the Jews against our Savior.
Remembering the excessive labor and pains which our Savior took day and
night for our sake, journiig, and preachi^g, and offering his help to every
body; beg of him knowledge, how thou may be grateful to him for it, and a
will to put i^ practice what thou know. And First.

I. Consider that as the Jews, Tun^c^^^ gregati sunt Principes Sacerd^tum*
Mat. 26.
out of envy and emulation against our Savior, were the more mad against him
the more good he did, and the more wonders he wrought, and they met in
council, and studied ^ow they might apprehend him by some ^raft, and lay hands
on him, and kill him: so we contrarievvise, considering he has done so much
for us, and is still doing, must with all diligence study how we may serve him
with a sincere heart, often begging, and often offering it to God, now specially
when we see before our eyes in his passion so mani^est, and so unquestionable
signs of his sincere, and constant, and unchangeable love toward us.

II. Consider secondly that as the Jews, though their malice were great, yet
feared the people, and sought therefore privately by craft to circumvent our
Savior; so we in the service of God must not be afraid what people will
think, or say of us; but banishing all humane respects, and worldly reasons,
go on with that which we know to be good, and acceptable to God, with Courage
and resolution, in the face of the world, for the grearer glory of God, as
much, as provident reason will allow.

III. Consider thirdly. As the devil entered into Judas, as a fit instrument
for the Jews toward their malicious intents, and he of his own accord went,
and offered himself for money to find means to betray our Savior; so detesting
his treacherous and covetous mind, beg earnestly of the holy Ghost, that he
will vouchsafe to take possession of thy heart, and soul, and body, and of all
that thou have, to use it as a means, and an instrument for his glory, and
with a noble resolution offer thyself voluntatily to do whatever lies in thee
for the honor of God; and seek convenient occasions to advance it, though it
be with pauning thyself, and all that thou have to redeem him, and his blessed
son our Savior from disgrace. etc

IV. And again consider 4thly. As the Jews we^e gladd of this offer of
Judas, and accepted it, and concluded the bargain with him, and he watched upon
the occasion of betraying our Savior without tumult; so out whole joy must be
to happen upon any special means, or occasion of serving our Savior; to accept
of ^ when it is offered; and to enter covenant betwixt God and ourselves, to
perform it, and to bethink ourselves how and by what means, and when we may
best effect it. without noise, in regard of discretion and humility: and yet
though it be with noise, in regard of good example, and the hindrances with
which often times we must be forced to break, or else nothing will be done.

Prayer. To our Savior; offering to him, as is a foresaid, chiefly a sincere
heart, void of humane respects, courageous, resolute, and watchful, by all
convenient means to do him service.

See the prayer of the sunday with in the Octave of the Ascension.

A meditation of the Paschall Lamb.
Matthew. 26. Luke 22.
I. THe first day of the feast of vnlevened bread, Primo di^ Azymorum etc.
the disciples came to Jesus, and said, where will thou that we prepare for
the to eat the Passover? VVherin we may reflect, that we must not always
expect to be bidden, but prevent rather the time in things belonging to order,
and approved custom, and show therein our esteem of the service done to our
Savior, and be constant in it; and though the benefit thereof redound also to
ourselves, yet our intention and desire must be chiefly fixed in him for
himself, and how to prepare a place in our souls which he may think worthy
of him.

II. And Jesus said; go into the city, and there will a man meet you
b^aring a pitcher of water^ follow him, and say to the master to the house, our
master says, my time is at hand; with thee I make my Passover. O welcome
nevves come o Lord, and do not delay: do not decline this poor habitation:
Lord, I am not worthy; yet come, and with thy grace prepare my soul; give me
the water of sorrovv, tears of true compunction, grace to follovv thy
commands, bearing the cross which thou shall lay upon me, for thou do
follovv with the revvard of thy company those who do thus follovv thee. When
shall I come into that (...) where I shall meet with the fountain it self of
living (...) which here I bear but in an earthen pitcher. subject to be broken
by infinite chances, and do be^^e it with labor, and difficulty, but there
is c^ase and security.

III. And he will show you a large room, furnished; there make ready. How
readily should we at all times, and all occasions, welcome our Savior, and
those whom he accounts his, though they be poor and in distress, and then
most of all? Enlarge thy heart toward his service, and furnish it with
thoughts and deeds befitting him, and see that it be always furnished for
him, for we know not the time which he has chosen; see that it be not taken
up by others. Our Savior and his Apostles had no certain accommodation, yet
God provided: Consider their punctualitie in observing the law though it were
but a figure of that which thou recei^est. O blessed lamb of God slain fot our
sakes, and broyled upon the cross, be thou my everlasting food, both in this
dangerous passage, and for all Eternity. Amen.

A meditation of our Saviors washing his disciples feet. 10. 13.
Preamble. Beholding our Savior with a basin of water in his hand, and a
tovvel, ready girt, and upon his knees, beg of him that thou may profit by
this admirable action of his. And first.

I. COnsider that our Savior knowing that his hour was come that he should
p^sse out of this world to his father, Sciens Jesus quia venit hora eius. 10.
13.
when he had loved his who were in the world, he loved them to the end: and to
show his love the more, he applied himself to this humble and necessary
action. We that know not at what hour we shall pass out of this world, but
may every moment be taken away, have the more need to cleanse our souls, and
wash them by humble confession, and hearty con^rition; how ^ls shall we show
that we love ourselves to the end for which we should? Or how shall we show
that we love God, and our Savior as we should? Specially seeing our Savior
said to S. Peeter. Vnless^ I wash th^^ ^hou shall not have part with me.
Amplius lava me a^ iniquitate mea. etc.

II. Consider secondly. That howsoever we may find repugnance in laying open
our souls to our Ghostly Father, either by reason of the troble of searching
into ourselves or the foulenes of our offenses, or the frequency of our
negligences, or for bashfulnes, or other respects, yet if we consider well that
all things lie open to God, and that which we ourselves discover, God does wash
and cover, the ease of our mind for the present, the satisfaction of our own
souls at the hour of death, the necessity of it at one time or other, we
shall say with S. Peeter. Lord not my feet^ only, but my hands, and my head.
That is, not only that in which I have lately transgressed, but whatsoever I
have done, good or badd, from the beginning to the ending I will willingly lay
open, that I may have full remission and direction.

III. Consider thirdly. That comfortable, and with all fearful saying of our
Savior. He that is washed, needs only that his feet be washed, but is all
clean, and you are clean; but not all for he knew who it was that would
betray him. That is, he that is once washed by a good confession, and
performs accordingly that which he there purposes, to wit, the keeping of
the commandments for the time to come, needs only that his feet be washed,
that is, those lesser offenses* which cleave like dust to our feet, and no man
is able to avoyde them more or less who travelleth in this world, but yet to
the end that through the benefit of being cleansed by confession, we should not
grow into Pride, and presumption, or neglect for the time to come* we must
remember that though by the grace of God we are cleansed, he only knovveth who
shall persever.

IV. Consider fourthly. And admire at large the humility of our blessed
Savior, in regard whereof S. Peeter said, Lord do thou wash my feet? Thou?
My feete^ And learn how grateful it will be to our Savior, that thou by his
example stoop to humble and charitable of^^ices tovvard thy neighbor, that is
toward him in them. And also how we ought to conceal, to excuse, to
diminish, and wash away as much as we can, the faults and imperfections which
we see or hear of in others, to preserve their good name, to help them out of
them, to compassionate them etc.

Prayer. To our Savior according to the present subject and affection.

A meditation of the parting of Judas from the rest of the Apostles.
Ihon 13.
I. Our Savior having washed his Apostles feet, Cum (...) dixisset, turbatus
est spiritu.
and among them Judas which is particularly to be reflected on, and gave them
wholesome instructions how they should imitate him, the servant not being
greater then his Lord, and again did infinuate that all were not yet clear,
though outwardly washed, to the end that Judas might take notice that he knevv
what he was going about, and repent: but seeing he did not: H^ was ^robled in
spirit, and protested, and said more plainly, Amen, Amen that is, in very
truth, I say unto you, that one of you will betray me. A heavy saying, and no
wonder that every one of the disciples looked one on the other doubting of whom
he spoke, and were much contristated, and every one asked him (the rest with
fear and trembling, but Judas boldly and impudently) Am I the max^

II. Our Savior declining the direct answer, and leaving every one to examine
his own conscience, and to look upon that more then upon one another, upon
entreaty of S. Peter said unto S. Jhon (woe leaned upon our Saviors breast)
He it is to whom I shall give the bread dipped, and when he had dipped it, he
gave it to ludas: who probably did not hear what our Savior had said t^ S.
Jhon, having had warning enough before, neither did the rest of the Apostles
understand the mystery; but Judas being ready to receive any courtesy from
our Savior, the more to dissemble his wicked intent, took the bread, and
after the morsel s^tan entered him, and bitter ^orsell* not now bread to
sustain life, but by malice of the receiver turned into deadly poison. Our
Savior probably with the bread gave him an inward hint again^ that he knevv
what he was going about, but his obstinacy refusing such gentle and charitable
admonitions, tending to the concealing of the falt and preserving of his good
name, if he would repent, Satan took full possession of him.

III. Andour Savior said unto him, that which thou do, do it quickly; for
I am as ready to suffer, as thou, or thy master to put an affront upon me: And
immediately h^ went out, and it was night. Dark night indeed to him, and cause
if utter perdition See what it is to part with our Savior, and with devout
company. Joan. 12. 35.
He that walks in darkness, knows not wheter he go^th But by severing the
bad from the good our light grows the cleerer; therefore when he was gone,
forth, our Savior said, now the son of man is glorified, and God is
glorified in him: For there can be no greater glory to God by any humane
action, then was that which rose from our Saviors virtue and sufferings:
Endeavor by imitating him in occasions to increase his glory; Coloss. ^ 24.
and as S. Paul speaks, accomplish those things that want of the passions of
Christ in our flesh.

A meditation of the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament.
Preamble. Beholding our blessed Savior distributing his blessed body and
blood among his disciples under the shapes of bread and wine, Desiderio
desideravi hoc Pascha manducare vob^scum etc.
beg of him that thou may with true and due affection receave this heavenly
gift. And.

I. Luc. 22. 15.
COonsider first. That the worthynes of this blessed Mystery was partly the
cause why our Savior a little before so humbly washed his disciples feet, who
were to receive him: to give us to understand with what acknovvledgment of our
own vnvvhorthines, and with what purity of soul and affection, and also of
body we ought to approach to this heavenly banque^. Therefore also in the
Catholic Church all things about the Altar are so neat and costly, because
nothing spiritual or temporal can be precious or curious enough to bestow in
the intertainment of so divine a guest: If thou know him, if thou esteem him
as thou ought, and as he deserves. Bestow all the care thou can in
cleansing the rooms of thy soul, and dressing up the Altar of thy heart to
receive him.

II. Consider secondly. That by this heavenly mystery it is manifest how much
Christ our Savior does love us, seeing out of love he desires always to be
with us; and being to go out of the world, would by this admirable Invention
stay still among us as if he could not be without us: To the end we should
daily increase in the love of him, and understanding that really we cannot be
without him, we might desire the more earnestly his blessed company and
conversation, by all the means which are possible for us. O my love! whether
do I wander from thee?

III. Consider thirdly that this miraculous act of love is the more to be
valued and admired because when he was going about it (as some do hold) there
was at board one that would betray him, diverse certain that would forsake him,
and he foresavv thousands and thousands that would negligently, vnreverently
vnvvorthily misuse his blessed presence: labor thou to be none of these.

IV. Consider fourthly. How our Savior giving outwardly this blessed bread of
life, did inwardly inlighten the hearts of his Apostles, and t^ach them that
this was the bread which he had promised before; bread in outvvard shape, but
really his body and blood: And how they, according to their weak capacity
as then app^chending and believing it, were filled with admiration, and love,
and thanksgiving, which are the acts which we must exercise; begging that he
will strengthen our faith, establish our hope, and take possession of our soul
and body, and make us wholly his, transforming us into himself by love, and
perfect union with him.

A meditation of our Saviors Prayer in the Garden. Matthew. 26.
Preamble. Beholding our Savior sadd, and heavy, and full of fear and agony,
and the blood trickling down his forehead while he was earnest at his
prayers, beg of him that thou may profit by this dolfull sight.

I. COnsider first if thou did truly love thy Savior, Caepit contristari and
moestus ess^ etc.
how thou would compassionate him, seeing him so sadd, so pale* so pensive,
with tears in his eyes beginning to trickle down his cheeks; now hanging
down his head, now looking up to heaven sighing, and scarce able to bring
forth three words together, yet at last breaking forth into this mournful
note; my soul is sorrowful unto death. And with this he suddenly leaves his
disciples; and having gone but a stones cast, he falls down upon his knees,
and upon his face, and prays a long hour. Father if it be possible, let this
Chalice Pass from me: but not my will, but thyn^ b^ done.

II. Consider secondly. That it is God who suffers this Agony to come upon him
for thy sake; to teach thee how thou ought to take the Crosses which thou
fore^eest* or feel. For condescending to our infirmity, he shows that we
may earnestly beg of God to be delivered from them. In which respect thou
ought greatly to love him, and thank him for his compassion over thee. And
on the other side how we must beg with Resignation to his holy will, in
regard that these Crosses may be many ways beneficial to ourselves and much
for the glory of God: And it is reason we should leave ourselves in his hands
it being a fearful thing to be out of them at our own choice: and say often
from our heart that which we say daily in our Pater noster thy will be done.

III. Consider thirdly. That at the end of his first prayer he comes again to
his disciples, as it were ^o refresh himself, and also to instruct them, and
^ebuks S. Peeter for sleeping, when he should have prayed: so could thou not
watch one hour with me? And returns again to his wonted prayer, and so
again the second time: To show us that he is willing we should take comfort
by the help of creatures, though our chiefest comfort must still be in God: For
creatures of themselves have it not in them, though we imagine they have it, and
oftimes they breed more affliction instead of comfort, as it could not be but
some affliction to our Savior, to see his beloved Apostles in steed of helping
him and arming themselves by prayer, to sleep, and as it were forget both him
and themselves.

IV. Consider fourthly How at his last return he fell more earnestly to his
prayers, and out of mere anguish, and agony svveating blood, that it fell in
great dropes upon the ground, an Angel came and comforted him; with which he
went courageously on to death. Shevving us that in our afflictions we must
never leese our courage and our hope: For when crosses are in their height, and
we in our greatest agony, then comes the Angel of comfort, and the spirit of
God, and either blows all over, if it be expedient for his Glory. and our
good; or puts new courage into our hearts, and makes us bold to look death,
and disgrace, and loss of friends, and fortunes, in the face, and rise, and go
forwards to meet them.

Prayer. To our blessed Savior that he will vouchsafe, by the merit of this
blessed action of his, to give me courage both in my prayer, to persever with
constancy till the end, and in all other occasions of difficulty and distaste
to conform my self to his blessed will.

A meditation. How our Savior was betrayed and apprehended.
Preamble. Reflecting how busy Judas and the J^vves were about their
mischievous intentions, while our Savior savv all at his prayer, beg of our
Savior grace to profit by his behavior in this action.

I. COnsider first with what peace and quiet of mind our Savior after his last
prayer came to his disciples, Dormite ia^ ex requiescite: Surgite eamus etc.
and said unto them, sleep now and rest: with what courage he attended the
blow, and when he savv the office^s dravv nigh, said again to his Apostles.
Rise let us go. He does not say let us fly, but go, and meet, and confront our
adversaries. Behold how undauntedly he went and met them, and asked them whom
seek ye* and told them, I am he. Admire all, and in all the power of the
grace of God, and of a good resolution settled upon that sole powerful grace;
for of ourselves we are weak, but let us (to our power) ply God, as our
Savior did and we shall have his grace.

II. Consider secondly. How little malice can prevayle against good, but when
God sees time and permits it: I sat by you daily (says our Savior) teaching
in the Temple, and you held me not, but this is your hour, and the power of
darkness. We must therefore neither be wrath, nor over fearful, but
discreetely confident in the power, and providence of God for his glory, and
we shall see his wonders, and multitudes of Good spirits to defend us.

III. Consider thirdly. How usual a thing it is for us to be accounted-and
spoken of, and handled as male-factours: But this is our glory that doing
well, 1. Pet. 2. 12.
people should detract of us (as S. Peeter says) as of malefa^tours. You have
come (says our Savior) as to a thee^e, with swords and clu^s to apprehend me.
Let us not lee^e our patience, but remember for whom, and like to whom we
suffer: indiscreet defending of ourselves by words or actions makes the matter
worse, as S. Peter's striking.

IV. Consider fourthly. How the Traitor kisseth, the officers apprehend, and
bind, and hale thy lord away, with shoutes and cries, and taunts, and a
thousand injuries. And all this for thy synns: O what have my synns deserved!
He on the other side, like a lamb^ suffers himself to be bound, and led as they
please; he speaks mildly to Judas: Friend wherefore come thou? He heals the
ear of Malchus; appeaseth Pe^c^rs untimely wrath; offers himself to drink the
chalice of his passion. though he could have had thovvsands of Angell^ to
defend him. Endeavor to benefitt thyself by all.

The Prayer. O my love! Draw me after thee, and we will run O how do I hang
back in all things! Can^. 2. 3.
Draw me after thee, my love, in what bands thou will, for the love of thine,
which I do honor, and do reverence and kiss, and esteem above gold, and
precious stone. I bind myself to follovv thee, O blessed la^be. I have sworn
and resolved (says the Prophet) to keep the judgemets of thy justice. P. 118.
106.


A Meditation of what passed in the night in which our Savior was taken.
Mat^. 26. 10. 18.
Preamble. Desirous to know what passed, beg of our Savior grace to profit
by his example.

I. Consider how they brought our Savior first to Annas, Adduxe. runt eum ad
Annum primum 10. 18.
one of the chief priests, to boast and to show how they had compassed their
intent. And Annas began to question him about his doctrine. Whereunto our
Savior answering what he thought fitting, one of the Servants, or officers,
stroock him on the face, or cheek, reproachfully saying, do thou answer: he
chief Priest so? And our Savior replied mildly, if I have spoken ill, bear
witness of the Evil, but if well, why do you strike me? See how every one
applauded the bold fellovv, and laughed at our Savior, and insulted over him.
Take heed of rashly passing thy censure upon any man, much more of proceeding
further to words or actions before thou have well wieghed the deser^s of every
man's cause; If thoube censured, and abused, in word or Acton, remember our
Saviors mildnes here and every were. Beware of Passion, for such occasions be
the fuel which sets it on fire; when there is no pregnant occasion a body may
easily think he is fre^ from passion, when it is but a sleep.

II. Consider secondly. How from hence they carry him presently to Cayphas the
high Priest; at whose house the whole council of the Jews was met: And
because they had no true crime to charge him with, they sought false witness:
but they agreed not in their charge, though many came in against him. And our
Savior held his peace. How loath are we that any false things should be
bruited of us! How little are we able to hold our peace in it, as our Savior
did? How does it free us? How many discourses do we intertaine in our
thoughts and with ourfrendes, and others? That we ought not to put it up; that
to be silent were to acknovvledge ourselves guilty; that such people are not
to be borne with for example sake, etc. Oftimes though the thing be in part, or
wholly true, we storm the more: Consider well how much better it is in very
many occasions to be silent, and arm thyself with patience to dissemble them.

III. Consider thirdly. How Cayphas when nothing would take, rose up, and
adjured our Savior to tell him whether he were Christ the Son of God! And
our Savior ansvvered plainly, I am and more over, that thy should see the
Son of man sitting at the right hand of God, and coming in the Clouds of
heaven. Whereupon Cayphas tore his own garment, as it were admiring at the
indignity of his answer, and said he blasphemed; what need we more wines? And
all pronounced him guilty of death. Note our Saviors sincerity, and playnes
in that which was the principal of his doctrine, though he knevv he was to die
for it. And how nothing can be done, or said so just, or true in true in this
world, but it is subject to be construed quite contrary by Some or other. But
we must rest satisfied in that which is truly upright, and expect our revvard
in an other world, where the just judge at the right hand of his Father will
do every body right. Fear the judgme^ts of God eve^ where thou see no
greare cause to fear in the greatest time of prosperous success. As our
Savior was to be Judge, though here he were condemned, so oftimes that which
we commend will in another world be judged. Contemn no body, though to the
eye he be poor and contemptible: perhaps in the world to come he may fit in a
throne with the ludge, or at least be cleared, when I shall be condemned.
Observe how patiently out Savior bare the pride of Cayphas the slander of
blasphemy, the rude clamours of all that he was guilty of death, their unjust
sentence etc.

Prayer. To our Savior for patience in adversities, and reproaches, proposing
to ourselves something of his virtues to imitate in our daily Actions.

A meditation of that which passed in the night in which our Savior was taken.
II. PART.
^reamble as in the former. And

I. COnsider first. How Cayphas having passed sentence upon our Savior the
Counsel brake up for that time. Tune expuerun^ ^n faciem ^ius etc.
And the Officers and servants, that were left in Charge with our Savior,
played their part upon him all the night till morning: some sp^t in his face;
others boxed him about the ears, others covered his eyes, and bad him
prophecy, who it was that struck him, and spoke many others blasphemies,
tvvyting and reproaching him with one thing or other. Place thy self upon thy
knees by our Savior and reflect, how they misuse him, whom thou say thou
lovests; think what thou has^ been wont to say, or ^hink if any body has been
at any time so bold or forget full as to rub upon thee in any of these manners,
though but very far of: How thou will carry thyself hereafter ^n occasions of
contempt, or want of respect, or punc^uall observance and the like. O what is
all the beauty of this world compared with our Saviors, but a corner to ^pit
in? Specially if we add what we have deserved by ^ynne: I have d^served all
these skornes and mockerie^ too too much by my sins, to ^hinke that I do^ any
great matter if I bear them^it is not a thousand part of which I deserve.

II. Consider secondly. How our Savior sits patiently with his eyes looking
down to the ground, silent, forsaken of all his disciples, and acquaintance,
no body looks after him. Pet^r followed him first a far of, as if he would not
be seen to belong to him: then he sat in the room with him a far of, but
would not be known to be of his acquaintance. Afterward being urged by the
Maid, and the men, he denied him once, twice, thrice. and protested, and
cursed, and swear that he knew him not. All this our Savior heard, and turning
toward him: and Peter remembering the words of our Lord went forth and wept
bitterly. O eyes of mercy! look upon me, who have so often turned my back to
thee.

III. Consider thirdly, that this denial of S. Peter was no small corr^sive,
and affront to our Savior, but much more the consideration of the unrepentance
of so many millions in the world both Jews and Gentills, notvvithstanding
these his sufferings and examples, and his former doctrine. To whom Judas was
now leading the way by his treachery first, then by despair, and wilful
murder of himself: A figure of what the wicked Courses of the world lead men
unto at last, wilfully casting away their souls with out repentance for a
little dross of which they are so greedy.

O svveete Savior preserve me! O Infinite goodne^ have mercy on me poor
sinner. etc.

A meditation how our Savior was accused before Pilate.
Pr^amble. Beholding our Savior toward morning. expecting what would become
of him, beg of him that thou may accompani^ him with the affections which
are due to this blessed mystery.

I. COnsider first, that pr^s^ntly in the morning the whole Council of the
I^w^s met again, and called our Savior before them in that plight as thou
may imagine he was by this night^ watching, Vtfactus ^st dies confestim
convenerunt seniores plebis etc.
and the servants outrages against him; and in fine our Savior confessing
again that he was the Son of God, they all rose, and exclayming against him,
carried him bound to Pilate. Reflect with what patience our Savior bare their
Captiousnes, their fury, their outcries, the have which they made to ruin him;
How hard ourselves are to believe when our Savior, or good people in his name
tell us that which we are not willing to hear or practice: How if he ask us
we are not able to answer him one for a thousand, ^ob 9. 3:
wherewith he may charge us etc. How we storm when nothing but truth is told us.

II. Consider secondly, that when he came before Pilate, the things which they
laid to his charge were, that he perverted the people, and r^ysed seditions,
that he forbad tribute to Caesar, that he said he was Christ, and that king
whom they expected: In fine, if he were not a malefactor they would not have
brought him thither. Ponder how oftimes it happens so with us; we seek to
do good, and it is construed quite contrary; we seek peace, and are
accounted turbulent; we profess allegiance, and are esteemed rebels; finally
we are cried down for malefactors, and what not, and every bodies word must
be taken, and we cannot be heard speak.

III. consider thirdly; that our Savior in public, amidst those clamours,
ansvvered nothing at all, but stood as if he heard them not, in so much that
^ilate wondered very much. But in private he answered Pilate, that he was ^
king, that his kingdom was not of this world, that if it were of this world
his subjects would strive that he should not be delivered to the Jews, that he
came into the world to speak the truth; that every one that is of the truth
would hear his voice. Ponder all these particulars and turn them again and
again in thy mind and draw out that which may be for thy profit and
instruction.

IV. Consider fourthly and principally that saying of our Savior. My kingdom
is not of this world: For if we bear this deeply printed in our mind and
memory, it will be a comfort to us in all our afflictions in all our
mortifications and contradictions, in all our trobles of mind or body, in
fine in all things in which we have not our will, or contentment, or fancy in
this world; and finally ponder how we ought to strive that Christ have his
right, and be delivered out of the wrough of sin and sinners.

The Prayer. To our Savior, to this effect offering ourselves* to advance his
kingdom in ourselves, and others, to show ourselves to be his subjects, by
charity, peace, patience, longanimitie, and imitation of all the virtues which
he teaches, and will have us practice.

A Meditation how our Savior was sent to Herod.
Preamble. Tendering the good and glory of ou^ Savior wait upon him to see
what passes.

I. COnsider first, That Pilate finding no cause to proceed against our Savior
and being desirous to ridd his hands of him, took occasion to send him to king
Herod, because they said he was of Galilee: Herod on the otherside was of a
long time desirous to see our s^viour, because he had heard much of him, and
hoped to see him work some strange thing. Doubtless in the compass of the
three years which our Savior preached in the City* and country* Pilatus
audien^ Galilae misit (...) ad Herodem. Luc. (...)
Herod might have seen our Savior i^ he would have b^t stirred out of doors
for it; but we so both by Pilate, and by Herod, how wor^dly cares, and
pleasure overvvhelme ^s, and give us ^o respit to do even the good which we
oftimes desire to do^, or at least pretend and say we desire it: How worldly
ends soever sway v^, and hinder us for standing for justice, or from shevving
ourselves in the service of God How much better is it to break with the world
to the end we may attend to that which we know is good, and to the more
serious consideration, and practice of the law of God?

II. Consider secondly. When our Savior was come before Herod, Herod asked
him many curious questions, but our Savior gave him not one sole word;
whereupon Herod, and his retinew skorned him, and in mockery put a whit^
garment upon him, and so sent him back to Pilate: and Herod and Pilate were
made friends upon it Observe in this passage. That our desire of knowledge of
matters of spirit must tend to practice, or else our Savior will say unto us.
Nescio vos. I know ye not; and when we shall say to him Lord, Lord, he will
not answer us. How easily oftimes we pass our Censure without diving into
the bottom: Lu^. 13. 26.
How much, and how easyly the world is mistake^, taking wisdom for folly,
and folly for wisdom: How much does our Saviors silence incite us to spare
words in twenty occasions.

III. Consider thirdly. In the white garment, our Saviors Innocence, and how
that which the world intends for our disgrace, God ordaynes it for our greater
honor: How we may imitate our Savior by not being over curious in our
apparel though the fashion be otherwise; but content ourselves with reason,
and glory, if doing that which is reason, we be neglected, or laughed at.

IV. And fourthly Follovv our Savior in his iourny to and fro, see what
intertaynment he meets with in the streets from men, women, and Children;
hear how diversely they speak of him, and learn to bear contempt in word or
action. And among the rest forget not to cast thy eyes upon his blessed Mother,
S. Marie Magdalen, S. ^hon, and some others, and conform thyself ^o their
^ffections.

Prayer. To our blessed Lady, to give thee part of that which she felt at that
time, and which she practiced ever in imitation of her son, offering to him
by her hands some practical purpose in honor of this blessed myste^ic.

A meditation how the Jews refused our Savior and chose that Barabbas should
be rather releesed then he.
Preamble. Restless till thou see what becomes of thy Savior, stand by the
people and by our blessed Lady expecting.

I. Consider first^ That Pilate finding more and more that there was no cause
to proceed against our Savior, Est autem vobis con
sought diverse ways to deliver him out of the hands of the Jews, suetudo v^
vnum dimittam Luc. 23.
who merely out of envy had brought him before him. Therefore he thought to
make use of an ancient custom, Which they had among them, to set some one
malefactor free, about the time of easter, and made choice of Barabbas ( Who
was a notable seditious fellow, and at thief, and had in a sedition committed
murder) to propose to them, which our Savior, which of them they would have
set free, Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ* And they cried out, not
this man, but Barabbas, take this man away, and deliver to us Barabbas. And
When Pilate asked again what then shall I do with Jesus? They all cried,
Crucify him, Crucify him; why? what has he done? Says Pilate, I find no
cause to proceed against him. And they cried more violently, Crucify him.
Heat their ^hamefull outcries; see their rude behavior, observe how busy
the chief of the Jews are to buzze in the peoples ears, and stir them
against our Savior against him whom they had so much follovved before, and who
had deserved so much at all their hands, by so many ways; and admire at all;
compassionate our Savior, pit^ie our Savior, pity our blessed Ladies
deseste the peoples Wicked choice, and inconstancy, and weep bitterly
thyself, reflecting how often thou have passionately, and with as much
inconstancy, turned thy back to our Savior, and embraced sin.

I. Consider secondly, that this custom of delivering one at easter was good,
and grevv out of gratitude, and thankfullnes for their deliverie, about that
time of the year, out of the bondage, and servitude of Egypt* and was a figure
of the deliv^rie of the whole world, full of sin, and theft, and sedition
against God, by means of the selfsame God that delivered them out of Egypt: But
they through their malice and envy toward our Savior turned good to evil:
whereby we may well learn how deadly a thing passion is, that makes use of the
best things for mischeevous intents, and turns all to poison look back upon
they self, Whether in great or little, thou have not been misledd by it, and
let others be a warning to thee.

III. Consider thirdly, how the chief of the Jews fell into this extremity
of hatred against ou^ Savior* they, I say, that should have had more
understanding* more temper, more circumpection etc. Having received greater
gifts. They fell not intovpon the sudden, as the people did, that were
inveigled by them, but out of their pride, and selfconceite; and worldly
humors they misliked now one thing, now another, and so grevv in distaste;
and now they carped at his poverty, and then as his power, and fed
themselves so long in these rath censures, that at last they could dream of
nothing but how to ruin him, and be revenged, and follovved it as headlongly
when they thought they had the occasion. Thus if we take not heed to the
beginnings, we grow into extremities against others, and think them
intolerable, not that they are so indeed, but by giving way to our passions,
and conceits, we make ourselves so tetchy that every little thing seems
intolerable in those parties, thongh we can bear with others, upon every
moving of a finger we grow into more passion, and murmur, and frame judgments
of them, that they are this, and that, and scarce worthy to live among men, and
will not hear, nor be persuaded the contrary.

The Prayer. To our Blessed Savior, and our blessed Lady, bevvayling in their
presence thy miseries, with Shame, and confusion, and a world of good purposes,
which through their assistance be confident to perform

A meditation of the whipping of our Savior.
Preamble, Pilate failing of his former project, gave order that our Savior
should be whipped at a pillar; which only word were sufficient to melt a loving
heart; yet beg of our Savior more feeling of it.

I. COnsider first, how upon this order given, Tunc ergo apprehendit Platus
Iesum and flagellavit.
a company of rude souldierlike fellows took our Savior, and stripped him
naked, and bound him to a pillar. O virginal flesh! O my Savior, and my God?
Let thy bashfulnes satisfy for all my disorders: And give me leave to lie
kissing the ground on which thou stand, I will never more lift up my eyes to
esteem of any creature, but thou shall be the everlasting object of my
thoughts, and inward senses: Blo^ out I beseech thee, by the sacred presence,
all other fancies, or take me out of this world, that I may see thy glory, and
not make use of my sight to my eternal shame. Thou have wounded my heart with
this one sight of thyself; let it ever be a bar to keep out all other things
that may distaste thee and dravv my heart from thee.

II. Consider secondly, or rather harken what a fearful noise the rude blows
make upon thy Sviours render skin, and do lay the very bone naked, the blood
spirting out on every side and running down in whole streams by thee, as
thou kneelest. And the soldiers in the mean time have ^oe more compassion in
thresshing upon our Savior, then thou have in offending him, with all kinds of
syns, as with so many lasshes, and severa^l kinds of whips: O spare him, if
thou mean to be spared, speak to thyself, speak to others spare him; hold
thy hands and thiers from offending as much as thou can; step in betwixt,
and offer thy shoulders to save him from further mischief: say with king David
It is I that have sinned. 1. Paral. 2^ 7.
It is I that have done wrong, this innocent lamb what has he done? This
wrath must rather fall upon me. Thank thy Savior for taking upon himself the
heavyest punishments, and beg of him to accept of that little which thy
little heart affords.

III. Consider thirdly, how patiently, how silently, how vnmoveably our
Savior stands, as long as he can stand, and bears the load, the smart,
the disgrace, the pain of this torment, till the soldiers being desirous to
make themselves more sport with him. untied, him. See now in what a pitiful
case he is, all galled, and gore blood, with holes in his flesh that a body may
lay his finger in them, and read in these red litters what thy synns have
deserved, and what they have done: Can thou think of them with patience? And
yet he has patience with thee, and does not punish thee as thou deservest,
that thou may repent, and punish thy self with sorrovv at least, and
something more then ordinary watchfullnes over thy self to amend, and reform
what is ainisse.

The Prayer. Pour out thy heart to our Savior, and give tears at least for
blood, and among thy many miseries bevvayle that thou can not bevvayle enough
his sufferings and thy offenses.

A meditation of the Crown of thorns.
Preamble, Not forgetting in what case thou left thy Savior untied from the
pillar, beg of him grace to profit by that which follovved.

I COnsider first. Milites plectentes coronam de spinis imposuerunt capiti eis.
10. 19.
when the soldiers ^ad untied our Savior from the pillar, and laughed their
fill at his nakedness, and feeblenes, and the plight in which they had put him;
he had scarce got his clooths about him, when they took him into the
courtyard, and setting him upon some stone or other, pulled of his apparel
again, and put a ragge of purple upon his naked shoulders, and making a wreath
of thorns, pressedit down upon his head, instead of a Crown, and gave him
a reed to hold in his hand instead of a scepter: what soul can hold from
admiring this habit of the king of glory? He said well of himself his kingdom
was not of this world; but it seems this is the way to the kingdom of the
other world, not by glory and prompe, but by contempt of all earthly glory,
and by suffering patiently what people in their mad and foolish humors are apt
to put upon us, taking away our goods, giving us short and hard measure,
putting us still to more pain, and grief, and troble, and not car^ng what
they lay upon us, so they have their ends, and make themselves merry. And
consequently.

II. Consider secondly that the soldiers were not content to put this affront
upon our Savior, but in words also and unseemly gestures mocked him, and
laughed him to skorne, and kneeling down before him upon one knee they saluted
him Hayle king of the Jews; as who should say, a proper king indeed, and they
spet upon him, and beat the reed which he held in his hand about his ^ead, and
boxed him. Think what has ever happened to thee comparable to any of this,
that thou should be impatient, or stomackfull; and resolve to be more
conformable to our Saviors sufferings.

III. Consider thirdly*. As servants and retayners in this world think it an
honor to go in the liverie which their master gives, and much more to be in
the fashion which they see their king and master wears i so the true servants
of our Savior should be so far from being ashamed to be put to shame, that
they should in their herts rejoice in it; and the way to bring our nature to
it, thought it be never so much repugnant, is to watch upon the occasions when
a word or an accident falls out that is cross, and to take it v^ as a piece of
the purple garment which our Savior wore, to kiss it, to embrace it, and to-
offer it up unto him as a special act of our service with which he is pleased
to honor us.

The Prayer. To out Savior as he sits in this pitiful plight, begging
earnestly of him to help our infirmity, and to strengthen us in the occasions
of disgrace, that by bearing it we may have more plenty of his grace, one
glance whereof is far to be preferred before all the favors which the world
can afford us. And with all, bevvayle thy own rechlesnes in behaving thyself
often in his blessed presence, as if thou did not believe that he were king
indeed, 10. 4. 23.
but in mockery; and lea^ne to adore him always in spirit and truth

A meditation of the Ecce homo, 10. 19.
Preamble. Beholding Pilate going forth to the Jews again, and our Savior
follovving him, in the skornefull habit of a king of clours, beg of him that
thou may profit by this spectacle.

I. Consider first, the speech which Pilate made to the Jews when he brought
out Savior this time to them, Ec^ea* duco e^m for as v^ ^ognosc^tisnullam
invenio in ^o caufam 10. 19.
which was this: Behold I bring him forth unto you, that you may know that I
find no cause in him, that is, no cause to condemn him. And again. Lo the
man. As who should say, this is the man. Run over this saying again and
again, and ponder every tittle of it for it is full of mystery. Behold; O
what a spectacle is this! Pilate in pomp and glory, our Savior made a
laughing stock. what eye can behold attentively our Savior in this case, and
not wish never to have use of sight more to offend him. I bring him forth;
whom? Our Savior ^c^us, the worker of miracles, the curer of all diseases, the
rayser of the dead, the blessed ^onne of David, the king of the Jews. Thou
do well and Pilate, to say, Lo the man, for no man living would have taken
him to be the man. And I bring him to you. To put him to your merciless
mercies; who I know delivered him to me out of envy. I find no cause in him,
and I bring him to let you know it, and yet I have thus punished him. O
senseless pilate! O judge without Judgment! Lo the man. O endless object of
beholding the man that is God, and man, The man, in whose hand all men are
reeds, in whose sight all purple is but rags, all gold is thorns, all worldly
wealth. and happiness is a moc^erie, to the glory and wealth and happiness
whereof he is everlastingly possessed, and yet behold here he stands at the
stake for thee, that thou may know there is no cause in him of all this,
but in thee, and in thy offenses.

II. Consider secondly, that Pilate had no sooner ended his speech, but the
Jews cried, Crucify him, Crucify him, take him away, and Crucifi him; not
being able to abide the sight of him that was their Savior: Tremble at this
blindness, and hardness of heart, and bevvare of the least shaddovv of the
beginnings of it, iremembring that saying of our Savior. Ma^th. 25, 40.
That which you have done to one of my little ones you have done to me. Ponder
again these words: take him away, and Crucify him. And beg that he may
never be taken from thee, but thou rather Crucified, and thy sinful appetites
rooted out, and abolished.

III. Consider thirdly. That Pilate overcome with the clamours and threats of
the Jews* that if he quitted Jesus, he should not be a friend to casar,
adjudged him to be crucified, according to their desire, though in testimony
that he thought him Innocent, he called for water, and openly before them all
washed his hands, saying, I am Innocent of the blood of this just man, look
you to it: and the Jews ansvvered his blood be upon us, and our Children. See
how the world, and passion blinds us, and leads us to things against our
conscience; and though we see we have reason to think ourselves guilty before
God, we smother it with some colorable reason to satisfy the world, and after
a sort to satisfy ourselves for a time; but when the passion is over, the
sting breaks out, and galls us. See therefore whose friend thou will be Caesar's
or Gods, and for whom thou will stand in occasions of apposition and
difficulty. Pilate washeed his hands and said. I am Innocent of the blood etc.
A poor bath to wash away such an offense. Seek rather (in a contrary sense
to the Jews) that the blood the blood of this Innocent lamb may be upon
thee, and upon all thy works to wath thee, and to perfect them, for with out it
nothing is avayable: Abhor sin, and abstain from offending him, and thou
shall have his blood upon thee, and be Innocent.

A meditation of the Carrying of the Cross.
Preamble. Beholding our Savior with a heavy piece of timber upon his
shoulder, in form of a Cross, beg grace to profit by this Mystery.

I. Consider first. Suscepe^ runt ergo e^m, and eduxe runt ^rucifige ^ ren^
. That so soon as sentence was given, they proceeded to the Execution, and at
the gates of the Palace they laid a heavy Cross upon our Saviors shoulders,
to show to all the town as he went, that he was to be crucified upon it: see
what a dint it made in his tender flesh; how it strayned his back, being
weak of himself, and much more weakened by his nights watching, his hurrying
from place to place about the town, and the loss of so much blood* and being
also fasting: In so much that he fell down under it thrice in the way, having
a long mile to go, though they took one by the way, and compelled him to go
along with him, and to help him to carry it. O my soul! what a sea of
compassion had thou need to have to equal the grief which thy Savior felt
in this passage! look, and see again, and again every circumstance, and
follovv him step by step, for he cannot go f^^t, though they hasten him, and
beat him on. Mark the different humors of them that follovv him, and them
that go before him, and them that compass him round about to see the man in
this case, whom they had seen not long before far otherwise attended.
Reflect among other things how thou may ^ase our Savior of his burden,
either by disburdening thy soul of sin, or by corcuring to disburden others
both of synns and afflctions, orbytaking some penance upon thy self for
satisfaction of thine o^vne, and others synns, and to p^event them, or by
bearing whatsoever Cross, not as it were by compulsion, but willingly for his
sake; for it is some ^ase in sorrovv to have a companion in our sorrows.

II. Consider secondly, rhat whereas many people followed him, and many women
lamented his case, he turned to them, and speak in this sort. Daughteres of
Jerusalem, do not weep upon me, but weep upon yourselves, and upon your
Children. Because behold the days will come in which they will say, blessed
are the barren, and the wombs which have not borne, and the paps which have not
given suck. Then shall they begin te say to the mountayns, fall upon us, and so
the hills, Cover us; for if in the green^ wood they do these things, in the
dry what shall be done? Harken with what a Majesty he speaks these words,
and with compassion of them that little deserved it; Ponder every tittle of
them, and see what sweetness thou may gather to the benefit, and instruction
of thy soul out of them.

III. Consider thirdly, That when he had gone about half way on his journey, a
devout matrone met him, and taking compassion of him, proffered him a
handkerchief, to wipe of the blood and the sweat of his brows; he accepted
it, Meeh^di: us apud Baroniu^
and wiping his face with it, left the Image of his visage in the handkerchief,
and returned it to the woman. Thou may easily imagine with what joy She
received it, and with what reverence She kept it; and how well she thought
herself paid for her charitable commiseration. Such are the returns which our
Savior makes of courtesies done to himself in his service, or in his Servants;
he leaves the print of himself, and of his love more deeply in their hearts,
which Surpasses all treasures, and makes us the speedier to be in tertayned in
his heavenly Court.

The Prayer. To our Savior offering our service to him according to the
present circumstances and affections.

A Meditation of the Crucifying of our Savior.
Preamble. Having gotten a place somewhere upon the hill, as near as thou
can to our blessed Lady, and S. Ihon, attend with all diligence, and desire
to see the end.

I. COnsider. That our Savior being with much difficult ie gotten up the hill,
Et vene ^ runt^n locum qui dicitur Calvariae locus,and dabant ei bibere
Myrrhatu ^ vinum sum fell* mixtum etc.
the first comfort he receives is a cup of wine mingled with Myrrh and Gall,
to stint his bleeding, and that he might not suddenly faint away; he teasted
it but would not drink ^ it. Then thy unmercifully pulled of his clothes,
renewing most of his wounds, and he at their appointment, lays himself
down, and spreads himself as well as he can upon the Cross, to be nailed to
it. Here every circumstance is so full of compassion; that it must be a heart of
stone that does not relent, and much more greeve at the cause, which are my
sins. These were the GALL mingled with all his comforts, and he had them too
lively presented before his eyes to accept of more them a taste of the bitterness
of them, which is so great that all bitterness of the world is rather to be
svvallovved, then to swallow the least of sins wittingly; what then of so
many*

II. Renew not his wounds hy thy harshnes toward thy neighbou^s, who are the
living members of his mystical body, and are often wounded sufficiently by other
occafions deserving compassion: see how willingly for God he lays himself
down upon his Cross, and imitate him. But imitate not the unmercifulness of
them, that Strike the nails into his hands and feet, and so much as lies in
them, by their obstinancie and often repeated offenseso are perpetually nayling
him: But nail thyself, by daily and hourly purposes, never to part from the
will, and appointment and commandment of God, though it has bitterness some
times, and a Cross annexed.

III. Our Savior being thus nailed upon the Cross as it lay upon the ground,
with ropes and other instruments they rear it upon one end, and let it fall
with a jumpe into a deep hole, where it was to stand. Reflect what pain this
bred to our Savior in all his lims, and at his very heart: see how our blessed
Lady weeps and is ready to faint with grief; Hear the outcryes of the
people, blaspheming him, shaking their heads at him, and saying, he saved
others, let him save himself. If he be Christ, if he be king of the Jews; if
he be son of God, let him now come down, and we will believe him. This is
the man that would destroy the Temple, and buyld it again in three days.

The Prayer. Fixing thy eyes, and thy thoughts, upon our Savior Crucified,
never satisfi^ thyself with vie^ving all circumstances, with such acts of
devotion, and such devout petitions as the nature of the mystery requires, and
the grace of God affords.

A Medation of the words which our Savior spoke upon tho Cross.
1. PART.
Preamble as in the former.

I. COnsider that in all this grief, and disgrace, the first word which our
Savior spoke upon the Cross, Pater, dimitte ^is, non ^nim sciunt quitd
faciun^. Luc. 23.
was, Father, forgive them, because they know not what they do. O endless
mercy and meekenes! He does not crave revenge. He does not say, o righteous
judge, but Father, no^ Revenge, but forgive, and forgive them, whom? But those
that are even now blespheming me, and are not satisfied till they see me dead.
This is the greatest and truest trial of charity, S. Gregor
if we love him that is contrary to us (says S. Gregore.)

II. They know not what they do: who can be slow to excuse, or hard to accept
of an excuse of an others falt hearing our Savior excuse so apparent malice?
Also (says S. Augustine) no man must despair of remission seeing it offered to
them that were auctors of our Saviors death. S* August.
No man must be sullen when he is offended, and think himself charitable
enough if he says nothing, or remits his quarrel to God, but remember they are
sons of one Father, and put on the bowels of a brother, and not be as
strangets one to another,

III. Father, forgive O. in how many things do we all offend, and daily and
hourly need forgivene! How much does it import to forgive, seeing our Savior
has so often inculcated it unto us, and put it in our daily petition, and
absolutely told us we shall have no mercy, unless we forgive our brethren from
our hearts? Matthew. i8. 37.
Make use of thy weak understanding in spiritual things, or apprehension of
thy danger to plead before him for thyself, who is so willing to excuse; and
say; Lord, I did not know what I did, when I did offend thee; be a Father unto
me. and forgive me; Luc. i5. 24.
say with the prodigal Child. Father, I have sinned against heaven and thee
and am net worthy to call thee Father, but seeing thou love that tiile,
acknowledge me for thy Son, though ungrateful, and forgive me: Father etc.

Of the words of our Savior.
II. PART.
Preamble. As in the former.

I. NExt after our Savior had besought his Father to pard on his persecutours,
Vnus aute^ de his quipen debat ^atronbus etc.
he pardoned the thief upon the Cross, and promised, him the kingdom of
heaven, for his fervent confession for whereas there were two crucified with
him, one on the right hand, the other on the left, and our Savior in the
middle, one of them blasphemed our Savior with the Jews, the other defended
him, acknovvledging his own offenses and deserts, and proclayming our
Saviors Innocence, and begged that he would remember him when he came into
his kingdom^. Ponder first the disgrace put upon our Savior to be as it were
the principal malefactor of the three crucified: wherein, notvvithstanding
holy Fathes do discover two great Mysteries; (...)*
the one, that he lovingly presented himself both to Jew, and Gentill, if the
one should refuse, and thirst his Innocent blood to their ruin, the other
might make benefit of it to eternal welfare; endeavor to be among them that
make benefit, and thirst after his sacred blood with love and veneration: The
other Mystery is, that in the very manner of their crucifying thy represent
that which in the latter day will happen, S. Leo.
when thse on the right hand shall be revvarded, and those on the left cast of
into eternal punishment.

II. Consider secondly. The noblenes of this act of the good thief, standing
for our Savior when all the world almost forso^ke him; see also what it is to
be patient in affliction, and humbly to acknovvledge that we have deserned it:
On the other side how little it did advantage the other thief (through his
own perversenes) to be so near our Savior, and reflect on the Judgments of
God, and that as no man must presume, so none must despair.

III. And Jesus said unto him. Verily I say unto the^, this day thou shall be
with me in paradise. Ponder every word; who, to whom, and with what
assurednes. This day, with me, in Paradise. O blessed day and more blessed
company! See how the peniteut, and the innocent, are associated, and learn
to contemn no body, to judge, or flight no body, This day thou shall be with
me: O let this day never end, it is Paradise enough to be with thee, blessed is
he who vuderstandeth what it is to love Jesus, etc. Tho. a Kemp. l. ^. c. 1.

Of the words of our Savior upon the Cross.
III. PART.
Preamble as before.

I. THere stood beside the Cross of Jesus, Staban^ juxta Crucem Jesus (...)
ejus, 10. ^9*
his Mother, and his Mothers sister, Marie of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalen. And
the beloved deciple S. Ihon, as appears by that which follovveth. But consider
first, with what constancy, and resolution they all remained there; look into
the breast of every one, of them, one by one, and their affections of love, and
sorrow, and faith, and resignation; see with wha^ tears of compassion and love
they lifted up their eyes to the crucified, and then cast them down upon
themselves; how some of them embraced the Cross and kissed the staynes of
blood remaining upon it: How they Harkened to every tittle that he spoke.
Stand with them, and harken; for he speaks not to those rhat pass by: be not
ashamed, be not afraid, stand by his Mother, cast thyself upon thy knees with
the Magdalen, bevvayle thy own offenses etc. He that persevereth may justly
expect a word of comfort.

II. When Jesus had seen his Mother, and the disciple standing, whom he loved,
he said to his Mother, woman, behold thy Son, and to the disciple, behold
thy Mother. Consider what impression this speech made in the hearts of both, in
regard of the thing itself, and of the manner so unexpected, and at such an
exigent, ponder how in different senses, these words might work different
affections in our blessed Lady. Woman. See how all looked up, but his eye was
directed to his Mother: Behold thy son. Which Son? Him upon the Cross? Or
by the Cross? How ever what a change is here; and yet what love, and care
does my Son show concerning me. etc. And to S. Jhon. Behold thy Mother. What
an honor was this unto him, and in him to us all, making us adoptive Children
to our Blessed Lady, brothers to our Savior; so great a good is it to stand
hy the Cresse says Theophilact; so great a good to suck wisdom from our
Saviors breast, Theophil. S. Ambr.
say S. Ambrose.

III. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own. Into his own
charge (says S. Augustine) to have care of her, S. August.
and to attend her. Con^ider with what respect, and dutifulnes, and veneration
he ever beheld her, and provided for her, remembering ever whose Mother she was.
Imitate this loving and beloved disciple; and beg of her also now that she
will take the into her protection, that by her means thou may obtain
according to those Mysteries, forgivenes of thy sins, the kingdom of thy
Savior here, and in the other world, the company and love of his saints,
constancy in adversities, and never to part from svveete Jesus whatever befall
thee.

Of the words of our Savior.
IV. PART.
Preamble. Behold the sun suddenly eclypsed and the heavens darkened at noone
day, and beg that this vnvvonted accident may stir in thee some vnvvonted
good affection. And

I. First to take heed that in midst of the graces of Almighty God, Deus,
De^ us meus, vt quid dereliquisti me*
which shine upon thee, as the sun at noone day, darkness do not suddenly,
through thy falt, come upon thee, by the withdravving of his heavenly beams;
and upon every change that thou finde^t, bevvare. Then open the ears of thy
soul, and harken how our Savior cries out with a loud voice, O my God, my
God, wherefore have thou forsaken me? Dive into the anguish of his soul, from
the beginning of his passion to the end, he being as a man forsaken not only of
men. but of God, that is, left comfortles to bear the burden of all these
griefs, with out any refreshing from the divine person, with which his humane
nature was conjoined, without diverting his thoughts, or his imagination from
it by other means. When did the like ever happen to man? Say with him; O my
God, my God, wherefore this, but for me, to satisfy for my vain worldly
comforts. To teach me to want them. and to contem^e them; to teach me courage
in occasions of distaste, and derelictions, and not to complain, seeing he
would not have complained neither first of his sorrovv unto death, nor now of
being forsaken, but to persuade me of this truth, that he suffered as a man
indeed forsaken. O my God, forsake me not, though I cannot say but that I have
deserved to be forsaken.

II. Some that stood by, and heard him, said; this man calls upon Elias, let
us see whether Elias comes to deliver him. As if he had need or expected help.
How ordinary it is for people to mistake, or misconstrue words and actions*
and again think with what kind of contempt they said, this man; and, les us
see, whether any comes to save him, or to take him down, Prepare thyself for
the like incounters, and call upon him in the days of this tribulation; call
with a lowd^ voice, that is with fervor of affection, and acknowledgement of
thy necessities.

III. Consider also the goodness of God, who in our extremities of corporal
pain, or spiritual derelictions, does not forbid us to ask why, though we
cannot but know that we have deserved it, if we know ourselves and God. But
the question must be as our Saviors, with a loving respect and submission,
with resignation to the very last: Hear him speaking to thee: Son I came
down from heaven to save thee etc. as in Thom. Kemp. l. 3. c. 18. And answer
him as there.

Of the words of out Savior upon the Cross.
V. PART.
Preamble as in the former.

I. Jesus knovving that all things were now consummated that the Scripture
might be fullfilled he said I trist. Post hae sciens Jesus q^ia omnia
consummata sunt.
And certainly naturally he had great thirst, for the toil of his journies to
and fro might procure it, his watching, his sadness, the effusion of so much
blood his attention to what was said, and done by others, and what was to be
done or said by himself, and it is fitting that we should compassionate him in
it, and animate ourselves to suffer that which may hapsen to us in that Kind.
Yet if we reflect how once he begged water of the Samaritan, ^^* 4.
and said to his Apostles my food is to do my Fathers will, we shall find
there was another cause of thirst, to wit, he thirsted to accomplish his
Fathers will, to accomplish the Prophecies which were of him, that not one
tittle, mightremayne unfulfilled. He thirsted the salvation of thy soul, and
that all might be pa^takers of the living waters of his merits and grace. He
did thirst after thee, that thou might learn to thirst after him, and his
heavenly gift^, without which all is drougth and bitterness.

II. A vesseltherfore of vinegar stood there full of vinegar, and they putting
a sponge full about hissope offered it to his mouth, reaching it to him with a
reed. This the tormentours did to prolo^g his life in pain, that he might not
faint away, as before they offered him the mingled wine; which we have reason
to lament, but much more the hardness of ha^t even of believing Christians, who
for the vpshot of all the sorrovves which our Savior has suffered, either
continue in their wonted synns, or offer him vinegar to drink, that is,
Actions as sour as vinegar, lukevvarme, without life, or vigor, half dead
with tepiditie, and dulnes, and niggardnes toward him: And like spunges drink
up worldly contentment, which soon turn sour^, and are as hard as flint in
respect of that which is spiritual, or like reeds wavering, and changeable and
weak. Take heed that this manner of proceeding dry not the fountain of his
graces, and bring the life of thy soul to a bitter end.

III. O Jesus give me the wholesome thirst of which thy prophet speaks saying.
Psalm. 62.
My God, ear^^y do I awake, to thee; my soul has thirsted after thee and my
flesh very many ways, that neither soul, nor body may desire any thing but
thee, and the accomplishing of thy blessed will in both; that hating the thirst
which hithert^ I have labored in vain to satisfy in the world; I may taste
thy living waters. etc.

Of the words of our Savior upon the Cross and of his death.
VI. PART.
I. When therefore Jesus had taken the vinegar he said it is consummated and
again^ crying out with a loud voice, Cum ergo accepisse^ Jesus acetum,
he said. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and saying so, bowing
down his head he gave up the Ghost. Now indeed the Sun is ecclypsed at
noone day, our Savior being taken away by a cruel death, in the prime of his
years, and middle of the usual course of men in this world. He would
notwithstanding see all things before fullfilled, that he might justly say to
every one of us, what could you expect I should do more for you? I have given
myself, body and soul, for you, and all the labors and pains that I have
taken in them: Consummatum e st. See what you will do for me.

II. O loving Father, into what better hands can I commend both body and soul,
then after thy sons example into thine? To thee I do bow down my head
acknovvledging thy soveraignitie over me, and over all things created; Thou art
lord of life and death; accordig to thy will, and best knowledge dispose of
me. Thy hands did frame me, into them I render myself, to be ordered as thou
please: I confess some times my spirit does rise against that which does not
suite with it but it is when I do not consider rightly that all comes from
thee to whom all ought to be subject; In manus tuas commendo spiritum ^eum.

III. With how different a note do those cry out at the latter hour who are
overtaken with death, before they have done all that they ought to do toward
God, and their neighbor, the good and the bad, the diligent and the
flouthfull? Eec^. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand can do, do it instantly, for neither work, nor
counsel, nor wisdoms, nor knowledge is after death, whether thou hastenes.
Says the Wiseman. Beg of our Savior that he will assiste thee, living and
dying, that having passed this life, and vale of misery, thou may enjoy him
the more perfectly in the other world.

Of the things which happened after our Saviors death.
I. ANd behold the veil of the temple was ^ent into two parts from the top to
the bottom, Et eccevelum Templi scissum est id duas parts.
and the earth did quake, and the rocks were split; and the sain^ts that had
stepped, vose. Behold these Alterations, not without contentment, that now the
hidden mysteries of the old testament should be revealed, and the holy of
holyes be known publi^ely to all: The very rocks, and dull earth testifying
the feeling which we ought to have of the indignities offered to our Savior,
and that the hardest hearts, and people dead and buried in sin, and oblivion,
should reap benefit, if they would, by out Saviors death and passion. Open
thyself to thy Savior divide thy heart into love, and grief, think of thy life
past from the top to the bottom; break through the rocks of difficulties;
cleanse the sepulcher of thy heart from all corruption.

II. Imitate the Centurion who seeing what passed cried out, truly this man was
just: certainly this man was the Son of God. And multitudes of them that ^ere
present returned knocking their breast. These are the affections which thou
must endeavor to raise in thy soul, and many more which thou may learn of
our blessed Lady, and S. Jhon, and S. Marie Magdalen, reflect upon the
behavior of every one of them, and dive into their inward thoughts, while
they were expecting what would be further done to the dead body of our Savior.

III. The Jews besought Pilate that their bodies might not remain so upon
their Saboth, but that their thighs might be broken, and so taken down; and
the soldiers broke the thighs of the o^e, and the other thoefe: In what
anguish may we imagine were the devout souls, fearing that that cruelric might
be done upon our Savoiur also, not knovving perhaps certainly that he was dead,
or though they knevv it. But the providence of God prevented their malice: for
coming to our Savior, and finding him dead, they did not break his thighs,
but one of the soldiers with a lance opened his side, and instantly water and
blood issued. This spear went also to the heart of the Blessed Virgon, and of
the rest; yet finding that he was dead before, they applied themselves more to
the gathering up of that Sacred blood and admired the my sterie of the ^vvo
different liquors, which S. Augustine explicareth in these terms. S. August*
The Ev^^gelist made use of a very significant word when he said, He opened,
to show that there in a manner the gate of life was set open, from whence the
Sacraments of the Church have flovved, with out which no man enters into that
life which is truly life.

IV. Open thy heart to our blessed Savior, and if i^ pain thee, Cant. 4. 9.
here thou have a lenitive: Thou have wounded my heart in one of thy eyes. Says
the spouse. How many darts are here, by which thou may receive the like
loving wounds? Cast up thy eyes frequently; meditate continually of these
mysteries, enter into his sacred side etc. say with the Prophct. This is my
resting place for ever, Ps. 131. 14.
here I will dwell, because I have chosen it.

Of the taking down from the Cross and buryall.
I. IN the evening Joseph, Cum autem sero factum esset venit Joseph etc:
a rich man of Arimathea, and noble decurion, just, and expecting the kingdom
of God, disciple of our Savior in private, came, and boldly went to Pilate,
and demanded the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave it him? He is deservedly
reported to be rich (says S. Ambrose) having received the body of Christ. S.
Ambr.
But see the preparations to receive it; he was just, valuing the kingdom of
God more then his wealth; and hovvever private before, now he boldly
professes it; devotion overcame fear and humane respects. Asteeme of this
gift above all gifts, and think how and where thou will reserve it.

II. Joseph having bought a syndon (or rich winding sheet) and taking him
down, wrapped him in it; Nicodemus came also (who first came by night to our
Savior) and brought a composition of myrrh, and aloes, about one handred
pounds; and they bound up the body with them. If the Apostles had buried him
the Jews would have said the had not been buried, S. Ambr.
as they said he was stolen: But the just man is he that wrappeth our Saviors
body in white linen; the Innocent man inbalmes him; do thou the like offices,
bring one hundred pounds, a complete quantity of faith, and good works.

III. And there was in the place where he was cru^ified (...) garden, and in
the garden a new Monument, in which not any had as yet been laid, cut out in a
rock, There therefore, because it was night, they laid Jesus, and rolled a
great stone to the entrance, S. August:
or door of the monument. To the body of our Savior Sanctity and Virginity
is ever due, a womb untouched conceived him, S. Ambr*
a new sepulcher received him. And deservedly is it cut out in a firm faith,
and a stone rolled to it, because whoever shall have buried our Savior in his
breast, must be careful that he leese him not. See also that thy heart be a
garden well kept, not a wilderness, or full of weeds, and near to the Cross,
that thou may be the surer to have him lodged in it.

IV. Forget not in the mean time the duties which our Blessed Lady, and S.
Ihon, and the Magdalen did unto him, when he was taken down; how every one
strived to embrace him, and reverently to kiss his feet, and hands, and side,
and could hardly be brought to relinquish him, but that the time of day, and
precept of keeping the sabbath called upon them, which they dutifully obeyed,
retayning him still in their thoughts and in their p^ous discourses.

An Exercise in honor of the precious wounds of our blessed Savior.
I. IT is likely that those devout persons who were actours in taking our
Saviors body down from the Cross did severally their respects to his sacred
wounds, all proceeding from love, and mingled with it, yet diversely according
to the several dispositions of their minds, and the occasions which they had
to attend our Savior in his life time. S. Ihon betook himself to the right
foot, and as more beloved then the rest expressed his gratitude in affections
of love, and thanksgiving for the particular favors received; leaning his head
upon that foot, as before upon our Saviors breast, and pouring forth
abundance of tears for the absence of so loving a master: He remembered the
request of his Mother, that he might sit at the right hand, Ma^th. 20.
or at the left of our Savior in his kingdom; but now he resolved to drink
perpetually this chalice; This should be his cup and his comfort till that
other kingdom came to be revealed after this life, miserable with out this
relief. O svveete cup. Psalm. 22.
etc. Dominus regit me, and nihil mihi deerit.

II. The Magdalen was at the left foot, where thou must beg of her to give
thee a little room, to wash that foot with tears of sorrovv for thy several
offenses; she is loath to yeald an inch of place, or minute of time, because she
knovves all is too little for her own expressions: Importunity and
compassion will overcome her: therefore settle thyself to it, ^ierem. 9.
and say, who will give me as fountain, a flood of tears that I may bowayle
the Son of God, thus slain for my synns? O cruel sin that thus killest
two at once, me and my Savior; and as for me, I am worthy of a thousand
deaths, and will die a thousand times before I offend again: But he, what has
he deserved? Luc. 7. 45.
The Magdalen did not, ceafe to kiss, but I must not cease to weep, that I
may wash away that which has thus stained my Savior. O blessed Magdalen have
compassion on me.

III. Joseph of Arimathia held the ri^ht hand; Math. 27. ^9.
and as he offered his own new sepulcher to our Savior for his buryal, and
the winding sheet, and other necessaries, so he poured forth his harth
liberally to him, offering himself to whatever future service to him, or his;
sorry that his sepulcher was not more rich, and the sheet more white, and
costly, to wrapp so great a treasure. No precious stone could have been equal
to his desert, no gold or sylver enough to garnish it; o that my heart were not
too hard, or too base, to lay thee in it! whatever it is, take possession of
it, Psalm. 72. 26.
and of all that belongs to it; Tho^, art God of my heart, and my portion God
for ever.

IV. At the left hand. Nicodemus stood, not having alltogeather shaken of his
fears; therefore he brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, Io, 19. 39.
about (perhaps not full) a hundred pownd weight. For so long as we are yet
living, we cannot be altogether without fear to be cast of to the left hand;
and a moderate fear is profitable toward the buryall of our Savior in our
souls; because we are earth, Prove. 3. 32.
and with the humble is his conversation. Minmingle this holy fear with thy
love; it will serve to bind up the spices with the body, that they be not
s^attered abroad with vain complacencie in thy self, or in this very actio^
to the prejudice of charyty toward thy self and of thy neighbor, who is an
other receptacle for our Savior.

V. Our blessed Lady having the sacred body in her lap, had the wound of his
side perpetually in her eye, and her thoughts occupied in conte^plation, how
he was God and man, immortal and yet dead, extremely deserving love, and yet
thus used, Behold the tears silently trickling down her cheeks, some times
sighing; some times lifting up her eyes, and repeating our Saviors words my
God my God, Matthew. 4. 26.
wherefore did thou thus forsake him; father forgive them. O my son! Other
motherly expressions were not wanting, which she tempered with her wonted
virtue, and with her sons command. Weep not upon me. She applied herself to
the duties of his buryall, and had her thoughrs upon his resurrection. etc.

Of the Passion of our Saviourby way of repetition.
I. PART.
I. PLace thyself in a corner of the Counsel Chamber where Cayphas, and the
rest are met; and first wondering with the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.
why they should be so fierce against a man from whom every body received so
much good and they might if they would, and acknovvledging that, do what they
can, God will at last turn their counsels upon themselves: Qui babita^ in
coelis irridebit cos etc. Turn thou also Cayphas his verdict upon thyself, and
acknovvledge thy own blindness, and backvvardnes toward thy own good: Vos
neseitis quicquam. For whereas it is the general document of all spiritual
men, and experience teaches, that every one has some principal bad
inclination, or vice, to which he is most prone, and which draws us after it
into many inconveniences, either we do not search after it, or knovving it, we
do not prosecute the rooting of it out, as it were fitting. Expedit vt vnus
moriatur homo (infectus) and non tota gens pereat.

II. Transfer thyself from thence to the Chamber where our Savior made his
last supper, and reioy cing to be rather in that company, hear our Savior
foretelling his Apostles of their weakness in forsaking him, and in being
scandalized, and be not presumptuous, as Perer was at that time, but
acknovvledge rather the contrary, that though all should stand yet I have
cause to fear a fall, and by experience do find many reasons for it, taking
myself in so many occasions not follovving him as I ought, but ( a long) a
far of, God wot, even where there is no such matter of difficulty to be
striven with, but do take easy denyalls for good excuses.

III. Beholding him washing his disciples feet, beg of him, that by the
example and merit of this humble action, he will give thee more strength and
wash away what ever may cleave to thee offensive, or disturbing his service.
Ampl^us lava me ab iniquitate mea. More, dear lord, and more, for I never
cease to soil myself. Fall down at his feet, and wash them with reares, as
the Magdalen, and do not cease to kiss them. If thou have any thing
superfluous (says S. Augustine) give it to the poor, ^. August.
and thou have wip^d our Saviors feet: To thee it is superfluous our Saviors
feet have need of it. If thou have any quarrel with any body, give it into our
Saviors hands to be washed away; for if it be not washed: thou shall not have
part with him for ever. ^hou know not what thou do if thou do not
forgive; thou will afterward know it to thy cost. Lord, not this only, but if
I were a thousand times ^hore offended, I do entirely offer i^ into thy hands,
and freely do forgive, as I desire to be forgiven, for I cannot answer one for
a thousand, that thou art able to lay against me.

Repitition of the mysteries of the passion of our Savior.
II. PART.
I. VVAlking in the Garden of Gethsemanie cast thy eyes upon our Saviors
sorrovvfull heart, and knocking thy breast, say, o heart of mine, that have been
cause of this grief! O that it were a fountain of water, breaking forth at my
eyes, to bevvayle the sins which he bevvayleth! sorrowful is my soul, that
it is not full of sorrovves. O dullnes, and drovvsines. Is this a time when
thou beholdest thy Savior svveating dropps of blood, betrayed, apprehended,
bound, haled, outraged like a rogue and a miscreant? Where be thy resolutions
to suffer prisonment, and death for him? Why do thou not imprison thy
wandering thoughts, and confine them to this dolfull spectacle? Why do thou
not die to thy desires of esteem and case, seeing him so affronted and misused?

II. And they brought him bound to Annas first. Where consider that though he
receive the box on the ear, thou deservedst it, and by right the fellovv
might have said to thee. Sic respondes Pontifici? Is this the gratitude which
thou shevvest to the Priest of the new Testament, who shedding his own blood
for thee has redeemed thee? Ponder who thou art, who he is, and how thou
do answer the benefitts received of him (besides thy redemption) natural
and supernatural, sic? So dully, so coldly, so scarcely, so contrarily? If he
has said, and done well for thee, why do thou stricke him? Why do thou
offend him?

II. At the Counsel before Cayphas he was pronunced guilty of death; but it
was because thou were guilty, for whom he had engaged himself, there being no
need of seeking false witness against thee; being guilty of more them thou
would willingly have known to the world: He was truly the Son of God;
how often have thou desired, or endeavored to be thought so when thou were
far from being so, at least in that degree as thou ought, and have had
means to be: for which if people had spet in thy face, and given thee the lie,
with a box on the care, it would have been but what thou did deserve: Cast
thyself at his feet, and beg pardon of these thy transgressions, and a
favorable aspect from him, for even thus outraged he is merciful, and will not
the death of a sinner, Eze^^^. 33. ^^.
but that he be converted, and sav^d by the meritts of this his bitter passion.
Amen.

Repetition of the mysteries of the passion of our Savior.
III. PART.
I. IN his iournies to Pilate, and Herod, and back again, accompanying him,
consider the fury with which he was haled and hurried up and down all the
morning; what taunts by the way, what gazing, and censuring, much more freely
then before, when they durst not speak openly of him for fear of princes, or
of people; but now their thoughts and tongues were let loosse, and they
thought, and spoke their pleasure, and proceeded as if he had been a
malefactor, and seducer indeed: If he were not so we would not have delivered
him over to thee, said the Jews to Pilate. Admire his silence. And yet in
his thoughts he said, I have given myself for those that are malefactors
indeed. and am content to be reputed so. How much more ought I be content who
really am so, if not in one thing, Psalm. 18. 13.
in an other? A^ occultis meis munda me Domine, and ab ali^nis parce servo tuo.
And it will not be ill for me, if by suffering in one kind, though perhaps not
so justly. I may by it satis^ie for my other offenses.

II. Pilate offered to deliver Barabbas, to be executed instead of our Savior,
and to spare him; but they hated our Savior worse of the two, and cried a
main, deliver not this man from death, bnt Barabbas rather: what are these
clamours but my sins, and my passions, which right or wrong must be
satisfied? These do stir up all my spirits, as the princes did the people,
rather to ask Barrabas, a these, a seditious follovv, a murderer* these stop
my ears not to hear of any thing, but what rends to the satisfying of them;
they stop my eyes so that though I see what is better I choose the worse,
because the better is not so agreeable to my humor: Curb them before they
grow too stro^ng: for neither was the hatred of the Princes toward our
Savior at first so great, but giving way now to one censure of him, now to
another, and not looking into their own hearts with a mind to mend, have
grown to that height, that now nothing but utter destruction, and death could
conrent them. Examine well thy heart, and see in what measure, or degree it
stands.

III. When Pilate savv that all this world of disgraces would not quench their
passion; he resolved to dravv blood, and caused him to be scourged to the
purpose: the soldiers stripped him, tied him to a pillar, and belabourned him
with several sorts of whips, that from the top to the bottom he was all gore
blood. Psalm ^^^.
Supra dors^m meum sabicaverunt peccatores (says the Psalm) prolongaverunt
iniquitatem suam. First, they that presuming of his mercy differr their
conversion, continuing in sin. Secondly, such as considering what our Savior
suffered for them, be slow in doing penance themselves for which, if God out
of his mercy do continue his graces, yet they will be afterward the longer in
satisfying, and the longer deprived of his blessed sight; to say nothing of the
here^iks of these times, who think that because our Savior has suffered
abundantly, they need do nothing, but believe, and trust in him. Fall down
at his feere with shame and repentance; for continuing thy syns, thou do as
much as is in thee continue his stripes, O svveere Jesus give me the spirit of
mortification, and repentance, that I may case thy pains, and wipe away the
scarres which have light upon thee. Ego peccavi I am he that has offended,
what has this man deserved^

Repetition of the Mysteries of the Passion of our Savior.
IV. PART.
I. THe soldiers beyond their order, after they had cruelly scourged him, took
him from the pillar, and setting him upon some stone in the Court yard, cast a
rag of purple about his shoulders, make a Crown of hard thorns, and press
it down upon his bare head, and put a reed into his hand, and having mocked
him thus to scorn, kneeling down ridiculously before him, and saluting him,
king, and show him in this guise to the people, saying, Eece homo, behold the
man you are afraid of; the man whom you hate and envy; see what he is come
to; Behold a propper, and likely king: what say you* O my God! What shall I
say? My eyes should speak, and not my mouth, and gush out tears of blood,
beholding my God, my king, my Savior, my love, my all things, in this plight:
behold the worker of miracles; for this is the miracle of miracle, that he
would be not only man, but such a man, for such a man, as I am Behold. For I
cannot be satisfied with beholding, because I cannot sufficiently admire thy
mercy, thy justice, thy goodness thy example; for it is to give me example, how
not to skorne to be skorned, but rather love it, because I say I love thee. O
pu^ple! O thorns! O reed! Such is all worldly honor, a rag a thorn, a reed.
O God and man! Give me grace ever to esteem them so and not to behold them in
the false light of this world, but in thee, who art the true light; that J may
not be misled.

II. The Jews not satisfied, cry Crucify him, Crucify him. And Pilate
yealdeth; And he loaded with a heavy Cross, goes forth of the Palace into the
streets, and high way, scarce able to stand on his legs with wearynes, and
loss of blood, and yet turns to the daughters of Jerusalem and bids them
weep for themselves and not for him: for my self indeed, but why not for thee?
Or why nor more for thee, then for myself? For though I should suffer all the
torments that hell can devise, I may deserve them; the least of what thou have
suffered, is more unworthy then can be imagined. I must not indeed bevvayle
thee alone, for what will it avayle, unless I bevvayle myself also, and my
sins, and bevvayle them so as not to fall again? Hovvever, it is resolved I
must weep; what will then become of me, whose eyes are so dried up with
hardness of heart, that there is no appearance. I will at least help to carry his
Cross, and take of from him so much of the burden, by amendment of my life,
and declare myself to be one of those that do follovv him with love, and
esteem and respect, and not as the multitude of unbelievers and sinners.

III. And forget not that not only thou must not be loaded with sin, if thou
pretend to follovv our Savior, but that it is also up the hill, against the
stream, oftimes with much difficulty; and that it is up Mount Calvarie, where
the sight, and contemplation of a deaths head will avayle thee more, then the
sight of all the beauties of the world; and that all must end with death,
whatever the world can afford, or does esteem. By the contemplation whereof we
come to overcome the bitterness of death, and make that svveete and desirefull
which otherwise is so abhorred.

Repetition of the mysteries of the Passion of our Savior.
V. PART.
I. Upon the mount, the Sun, the Moon, the earth, the rocks, the dead men's
graves teach us what to think and do: That it is God that does suffer, his
power not being diminished toward the preserving of every thing in its
wonted course, but his incomprechensible proceedings astonishing them: They are
ready to revenge his injuries, he is holding his hands fast nailed to the
Cross, and commanding them to forbear: Father forgive them for they know not
what they do. The Cr^atures, otherwise insensible, protest themselves sensible
of these indignities, and those who have sense and reason do not resent them.
The sun in effect says, why should I give light, seeing the fountain of
light ecclypsed? And the moon, where should I borrovve it, the sun of
justice being thus obscured? The earth trombleth at the hidjousnes of these
offenses, among which mine are not the least, and I do not tremble with it;
Memento mei Domine, otherwise I cannot escape utter ruin; I acknovvledge that
I deserve to be svvallovved up, and that in it I should be but justly punished,
Nam digna factis reciperem. But here thy mercies exceed thy justice Memento
mei; but I am not worthy to be thought on: Ps. 131.
Memento Domine David and omnis mansuetudinis ejus. Look also upon thy blessed
Mother, to whom in thy beloved disciple thou have commended me, and do not
forsake me.

II. He is in the seat of mercy, and beggeth forgivenes for us, and yet is
doing justice upon them that by their own concurrence do not apply the
meritts of his bitter Passion t^ themselves in particular; for of the two
malefactors crucified with him, he saves but one, and him that by confessing
of his sins to this high priest craves pardon, acknowledges his deserts,
and beggeth admission into his kingdom, In ipsa patibuli specie, (says S.
Leo) S. Leo.
monstratur, illa qu^ in judicio omnis homini^ ^st facionda discretio; what can
we expect at the later day, if in this there be such rigor.

III. Pater in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum. I join with thy blessed
Son, and say father; for seeing he has vouchsafed often to rearme himself my
brother, I may with the more confidence call thee Father; and with him, that
does not envy thy mercyes, as the elder brother to the prodigal child, but
even craves them for me, and craves them with bleeding eyes* Heb. 5, 7.
cum clamore v^ido and lachrimis, with him I commend my soul also into thy
merciful hands, and do commend it now with the more humble suyte, because it
cannot be but that thou wile grant what ever comes now commended by him pro
su^ reverontia, for the respect which thou bear him, and which he ever, and
at this instant did bear toward thee, O h^avenly F^ther, look upon the
bleeding hands of thy beloved Son* there thou will find me also written with
letters of love, though far vndeserving, through these I commed my poor
soul unto thee, for I have not hands of my own that dare appear before
thee, to offer any thing in them. Manus, manus sunt Esau, hands of vndeserving
Esau, Gen ^7*
that has so often sold his birthright for a Mess of portage, but the
fragrancie of the merits of this they Son, joined with his Mothers
intercession will obtain an abundant blessing for me. Amen.

Of the Solitude of the Blessed Lady.
I. THe evening, and the Sabbath coming on, the company was forced to leave
the sepulcher, and retire every one to his home S. Ihon accompanics our blessed
Lady, bt still her thoughts were upon her Son, some times looking back
toward mount Calvarie, some times toward the garden, and sepulcher not
far of, then saying to herself, and to S. Ihon; here he turned to the
daughters of Jerusalem, and wished them not to weep; here he faynted; lo
yonder is the palace of Pilate, where he was whipped, and crowned with
thorns. O cruel people that could misuse him so; what heart can think of it,
and not melt into tears? O how has he been cried up in these streets, and
now to be this vil^fied. One that was made of so much goodness that he was ever
obliging people with his admirable worth, and even at last prayed for those
that did most cruelly butcher him. Father forgive them, they know not what they
do. O that they had known so much as I, they would never have fallen into
such extremities. O my Son* My Son! But why do I say my Son! Son of
the living God, his natural, and only, and eternal Son! Why were thou thus
forsaken? Why did thou thus abandone thyself? thou had power at will,
thou sayedst to Pilate. Tho^ should not have any power at all against me
unless it had been given thee from above. And why given? Was there no other
means but this to save man kind? O Blessed Son*

II. S. Jhon to give her some comfort in this her sadness peradventure said,
there is nothing indeed more to be admired then that his Father would choose,
and he yeald to this means only, he foretold us of it oftimes and not many
days past, but we could not believe it, even when he pointed us out the
Traitor. O wicked Traitor but when I accompaned him into the garden of
Gethsemani, and savv him fall extraordinarily to his prayers, and call upon us
to pray, and that he had even sweat blood with anguish, and earnestnes, crying
out alovvde that we could hear him at a distance. Father not my will, but
thine be done, not as I will, but as thou, and still repeating it, I began to
fear the worst. And it is now my only comfort to think that it was his, and
his Fathers will it should be so; and certainly it gave him strength* and
courage to endure what he endured; for even in the garden after his prayer he
was another man, then when we went in. Then he was sorrovvfull, as he said,
unto death, and it appeared in his very countenance, and carriage; but now he
was courageous, and ready to meet his enemies, and in all the affronts and
indignities which were offered him, either at Cayphas, or Herod's, or Pilats
palace he did not blanch.

III. Yet it could not but be very irksome and paynfull to him; and with whar a
Cross did they load him, when he was scarce able to stand, and how cruelly
did they rend of his garments from his bleeding shoulders, and streach him, and
unmercifully nail him? This is the sword of which old Simeon told me so many
years since; it cannot but pearce my very heart, and soul with grief: and
though he said he would rise again the third day, and I verily believe it
will be so; yet what heart can think of these things, and not even burst with
sorrovv? It will be night with me till that day comes which he has promised. O
light of my ^yes, when shall I see thee? Me thinks I still hear him crying with
a lovvde voice. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. O Father return
this happy soul so commended; return it again with glory, that we may see
his face, as in mount Thabour, which mount Calvarie has so defaced. I ^ommend
my soul into thy hands. O hands of pity; Thou have done justice enough upon
thy Son; restore him, that we may joy together; in the mean time I shall
expect with sorrovv, yet resigned to thy will as he has taught me. Not my will
hut thine be done. Amen.

Introduction to the Mysteries of the Resurrection of our Savior.
I. THe Mysteries of the Resurrection of our Savior being full of joyful
Communication with him, who is in himself the fountain of all happiness, and to
us has been, and is the source and conduit^ of all goodness, the affections
which are properly to be raised, and some^^ed by the consideration of them, be
those of love, and joy, and Congratulation, Admiration also and praise of his
loving goodness, desire of his presence in this world, and in the next, horror
of being separated from him, detestation of the least beginning of a gap or
distance betwixt our souls and him: And in these and in the like our time is
more to be bestormed, then in discourse: (...) every action and word
endeavoring to fall upon some such short reflection as may ^indle in ou^ heart
these flames of love.

II. The chief ground whereof the Apostle does represent unto us, and places
in that God who is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4.
his exceeding Charity wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by synns,
quickened us together with Christ, and raised us up with him, and made us sit
with him in the Celestiales. Chiefly therefore we are to ponder from what, and
to what we are raised: where we lay, and where we might justly have been laid
by our offenses, and where he offers to seat us, if we concur with his grace
and love: How Rich he has been toward us; in what infinite proportion his
Charity has exceeded and does exceed When we were dead he gave us life; when
we were buried in synns he raised us, and has made himself our Harbinger going
before to prepare a place for us, at the right hand as his father with him.

III. O Jesus! is it possible that I should (...) Companion to thee in Glory,
who have been so far from consorting with thee in thy will and commandment? O
unspeakable love! o inconceivable Goodness! I wretched sinner, not worthy, to
lift up my eyes to heaven, with thee in the heavenly places! o Charity
exceeding all thought! o Mercy with out bound or measure! What can I say of
myself, but that I am worthy of all confusion; and thou preparest Glory for
me? I have nothing to say for myself, but that I have sinned; Blessed be thy
infinite Mercyes toward me, and blessed be thou with the Father and holy Ghost
for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Saviors going down to limbus Patrum.
I. NO sooner had our Savior given up his blessed Ghost, Descendit ad Inferos.
but troops of Angels who waited against that hour, attended him (as after
his victory in the desert) and accompanied his glorious soul toward limbus
Patru^, with songs and hymns, far more full of lubilee then that which they
sung at his nativitie: The infernal fiends hovvled, and roared at the arrival
of his forerunners, commanding them to avoyde; but much more at his glorious,
and triumphant presnce, shining brighter then the sun at noone day, and more
resplendent then all the heavenly host together: Here they were forced to
adore his glorified soul, who had refused due homage at first to their
Creator, when themselves might have been in glory by one act of humble duty*
what a corrasive was this to them? What a document to us? What comfort to the
just that had been confined so long to darkness, now to see so much light
approaching.

II. But he appearing in the midst of them, and saluting them with the like
salutation as afterward his Apostles, Pax vobis, what exultation? What
Jubilee was there? What wellcomes on all sides? What congratulations toward
him, in regard of his victory? Toward themselves in regard of their speedy
releasement? And if he appeared unto them with his glorious body also (as many
affirm) what admiration? What acts of compassion? What wondering that he
would retain the marks of his wounds? Zachari^ 13. 6.
What are these wounds in the midst of thy hands? (said Zachary the Proph^t)
and he ansvvered, these I received in the house of them that loved me. And
David remembered, Psalm. 21 1^.
that prophesying he had said, they have dug into my hands, and feet and
have numbered all my bones. S. Ihon Baptist, most joyful of any, repeated his
wonted saying. Io. ^. 29.
Behold the lamb of God, behold who takes away the sin of the world, and
has born the smart of it upon his own shoulders. And all generally from Adam
to the good thief extolled his mercies, and now not only understood of what
they had bee^ a figure, but gave him the joy of having fullfilled all to his
greater glory.

III. Our Savior also took particular content to see them all at once, who
had been subservient to the mysteries which he had accomplished, and
congratulated the just for concurring with his graces toward the preserving
of their justice; and with the penitent for having recourse to his mercyes;
with those who had suffered persecution, torments and death for his love and
law, for their fidelity and constancy giving them all now with more feeling
to understand how wei bestovved was all that which they had done, or suffered
in the world, and how great mercy it was that they persevered to the end,
among so many millions who failed, and that they were not overvvhelmed in the
deluge of sin but preserved in that of his sacred blood. And in that one late
example of the good thief, and the bad, see to wha^ different end comes the
service of God, and the slaverie of sin; behold them both, and with humility
fall down before our Savior, begging of him to visit, and preserve thee
among the just* choosing ten thousand times to be his captive in all things.

IV. Probably he lead all, or many of those ancient Patriarchs to Purgatory
also, giving them who were there detayned a plenarie releasement from their
pains in that great day of Jubilee, and joining them to those who were at
rest before; where at there was great joy on all sides, and great glory
redounded to the merits and passion of our Savior, which thou have reason to
magnify, and beg what graces of him thou find most need of.

The Resurrection of our Savior, and his appearing to his blessed Mother.
I. THe Jews did not bury their malice with our Saviors death, but informed
Pilare that he had said in his life time, Convenerunt principes sacerdorum ad
Pilatum dicentes; Domine, recordati sumus etc. Math. 27. 62.
that the third day he should rise again, therefore they besought him to
appoint a guarde to watch upon the sepulcher, that his disciples might not
come, and take his body, and brute that he was risen; he appointed a watch and
they sealed up the stone, or sepulcher. And this turned to our Saviors greater
glory and more assured proof of his resurrection; in so much that they were
afterward forced to bribe the soldiers to make good their slander; for he
with out forcing the stone away, or breaking their seal, came forth by virtue
of his glorified body, as afterward he came into his disciples the doors of
the room being shut. Extol the power of God which is able so to change the
natures of his Creatures, and give lumpish earth spiritual qualities; Beg of
him that by force of his blessed spirit, thou may pass without difficulty
through those things which to nature are difficult; Call to mind in particular
what does most weigh the down, or seem ^ardest, and present it unto him to
be facilitated by his grace, and the merit of his resurrection.

II. The blessed Virgen ever since friday in the evening was retired,
ruminating with grief what had passed, and expecting the comfortable hour,
when she should hear, or see him risen; when suddenly, the morning appears
unto her more bright then ordinary, and her eyes beginning to dazzle with the
increase of the glorious light, beheld her Son in the room. Here we must not
expect many words; for she falling on her knees, adored, and kissed his sacred
feet, wondering at the wounds there, and in his hands, and side, and
perceiving instantly the mystery, burst forth into tears of joy* O my Son*
and no more; the rest must pass in thought, in what comfortable expressions
our Savior delivered himself to her, assuring her more and more, that now all
pain, and troble, and danger was eternally past; that he was for some days
still to appear upon earth, to confirm his resurrection, and instruct his
Apostles; that she was to remain some years for the increase of her merits,
and comfort of his Church, and all for the glory of his heavenly Father, for
which he was to make that day other visits.

III. A happy hour, but short, and if it had been days they would have been
short, and yet the parting had no dash of grief, the comfortable and joyful
countenance of our Savior, which he left printed in her thoughts, and eyes,
had not only wiped away all remaynder of sorrovv, but drowned it in thoughts
of content, and satisfaction that he was eternally happy; and to it conduced
the congratulations which she received from the blessed souls that accompanied
him, those in particular which bare her in figure, Genesis 3. 20.
as Eve, in that she was the Mother of all the living: Iahle, by whom the
general of the Enemies army was struck in the head; Iud. 4 21.
Esther, Esther c. 7.
by whose intercession the people of God were delivered from a general
massacre. Judith Iudich c. 13.
by whom Holofernes was slain, and diverse others. All concluding in the sense
of the Angel that once saluted her. Blessed art thou among women; Luc. 28.
and with S. Elizabeth, who in likelihood was also present: Blessed is the
fruit of thy womb, Luc. 1. 42.
Jesus, Amen. Endeavor when thou receivest the most blessed Sacrament of the
Altar to intertayne our blessed Lord with some such reflections as our blessed
Lady had in these circumstances, and make it a joyful hour of meeting, as in
realitic it ought to be.

The resurrection of our Savior.
II. PART.
I When the sabbath was past, Marie Magdalon, and Marie of ^ames, and Salome,
bought spices, Cum transisset sabba thum. Marci 16.
that coming they might anoint Jesus: and very early the first of the sabbath
they come to the Monument* the sun being now risen, and they said one to
another who shall roll the stone for us from the door of the Monument? They
were not satisfi^d with the duties done by Joseph, and Nicodemus, and thought
nothing enough to be bestovved upon their beloved master; others good deeds
must not satisfy us: Time passes, we must be diligent in them. What is it to
anoint Jesus, but to solace our neighbor in time of spiritual, or corporal
distress! His glorious body needs not, yet is honored with our services;
his mystical body has need of comfort. And very early, the first: after our
corporal rest, we must furnish ourselves with good thoughts that in the
process of the day we be not found empty: The penitent, the suppl^ant, or
practiser or mortification, and the peaceable, or contemplative, all aim at
one end, the glory of God, and of our Savior: They are all three, Mary's,
that is, greatly exalted in the sight of God, and must be so esteemed in the
sight of one another.

II. And they said, who shall roll the stone for us from the door of the
monument? In the beginning of all our our actions it is necessary to humble
ourselves, acknovvledging our own forces to be too weak to do any good
thing, that we may have the more fervent recourse to God, and be the more
confident of his help, and assistance in it. And this will be an effectual
means that we shall not be overvvhelmed with apprehension of difficulties, more
then we shall find by Gods grace upon trial: If they had given way at first to
this apprehension, they would not have bought the spices, or set forth, and so
should have missed of the happiness which befell them in the sight of the Angel,
and of our Savior.

III. Though they set early forth, the Sun was risen before they came to the
monument. This might have given them an other apprehension, that they came too
late, and in likely hood they blamed themselves, as it is ^itting when should
do in the best of our actions; for we are often defective when we think we are
not; and that very thought is a great defect; for we cannot but be short of
what God deserves of us: yet they persevered; the only way to supply our
defects; and perceiving from a far of the stone to be removed, we may easily
imagine how they mended their pace; and not easy to say whether the penitent,
or the attender to mortification, or the contemplative ran fastest. 1. Cor.
9. 24.
In fine every one is to run so as he may comprehend, as the Apostle tells
us; but how soon, or in what measure we shall comprehend, that is to be left
to our Savior; and as these holy women, the nearer they came, and the more
hope they had by the removing of the stone, the more they were inflamed in
their desire, and endeavor to wait upon him, and to serve him, so must we
daily increase, till we come to the perfection which he has designed. Amen.

The Resurrection of our Savior.
III. PART.
I. ANd looking, they saw the stone rolled back, and it was a very great one;
Et respicientes vitlerunt revolutum lapidem etc. Marci 16.
for there had been a great earthquake, because the Angel of our Lord
descended from heaven, and coming rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. By
perseverance we deserve increase of the grace of God, by which, difficulties,
otherwise seeming vnsuperable, are not only easily overcome, but turn to our
greater comfort, and case, and satisfaction. The earth quake was also great;
yet the holy women did not perceive it, nor were terrified; for it is no wonder
to pious souls if sense be troubled at that which reason, and God does
suggest, and they pass on their way nothvvithstanding: would to God (says S.
Peter Chrysologus) the Angel of God would even now descend, Sermon. 75.
and plough up the whole hardness of my heart, break open the seals which sense
has put upon my eyes, and ears, and testify by it, that Christ has risen in
the midst of us.

II. His countenance was like lightening, Matthew. 28.
and hi^ garment as snow and for fear of him* the watchmen were frighted, S.
Eern.
and became as dead. He in whom Christ has risen is in his countenance more
cheerful, in his aspect more graceful, in his speech and words more innocent
in his gate more composed, more prompte and lively in all spiritual duties.
Endeavor to be thus qualified by the merits and example of the resurrection,
and intercession of thy good Angel; reverence him both glorious in heaven, and
careful in assisting thee; and neglect not his holy admonitions: His presence
is dreadful to our invisible enemies* comfortable to us Bevvare of waiting
upon our Saviors holy body in the blessed Sacrament, or otherwise attending
upon him, for other respects then for his love and service; all such actions
are as if they were dead, and may justly fear the Angel of god, and the
substraction of his graces.

III. In the general day of Judgment the like will happen; for by our
Saviors glorious presence the just will be exceedingly joyed, and the wicked
will be extremely terrified, and wish they were dead body and soul, and be
notvvithstanding a great testimony both of his mercyes, and of his Justice;
but his very mercyes will then be a terror, and a corrasive to them, because
neglected when time was to make use of them. Let therefore nothing hire thereto
do evil, no pleasure, no profit, no fear; let thy countenance be free from
dissembling (for all will be there discovered) thy actions pure, thy
conversation as from heaven, so shall thou enjoy the blessed company of the
Angles, and of thy beloved Redeemer. Amen.

The Angel declares to the women that our Savior is risen.
I. THe Angel said to the women, fear not you, for I know that you seek
Jesus of Nazareth, crucified; he is not here, for he is risen, as he said;
come and see the place where our Lord was laid. A comfortable salutation to
them that truly-seeke Jesus, and him crucified: All desire to rejoice with him,
fevv will suffer any thing for him; frame thy affections so that God and his
Angels may say, I know that you seek Jesus. See that thy conscience be not
able to contradict thy outward comportment, and tell thee, he is not here; S.
Chr^sor
He is wherever he pleases, and wherever thou art that seek him thou art in
him whom thou seek.

II. Come, and see the place where our Lord was Laid. If with this we
transfer our eyes to behold the souls which by sinful thought or action
have lost the grace which once they had received, what a lamentable spectacle
is it? If to a soul which has worthily received our blessed Savior in the
Sacrament, how comfortable a sight? Joy in rhis behalf with the blessed
Virgin, and say with holy Church, Beata Viscera Mariae Virginis qu^ portaverunt
aeterni Patris Filium. Reverence the very Sepulcher, and the resemblance of it,
the holy Altar, and all that belongs to the Altar; See with what reverence the
Angel pronounces, our Lord: esteem one receiving of him above all creatures
imaginable: look often into the place into which he is to be received, that
nothing be out of order in it. I am a lover of purity. etc.

III. And going quickly tell the disciples, and Peeter, Thom. 2 Kemp. l. 4: c.
12.
that he is risen: and they went forth quickly out of the monument, with fear
and great joy, running to tell the disciples. Observe with how many several
affections they entered and visited the monument. How loath they were to go
away quickly, and yet how fearful to stay: how willing to impart the good
nevves to others, how unwilling to be mistaken: love made them greatly to
rejoice; fear cooled their joy; the Angel pressing them to be gone, They run
to tell the disciples, more joyful that they did not find him, then if they
had found, and inbalmed his body only, that would have continued their grief,
this did wipe away all that which was past, leaving only a desire now to see
him glorions, whom they lately savv in torment, and hoping our Savior might
have prevented them, and ^^evved himself to his disciples first; that with them
they might be happy in the sight of him, They run, not to fail of meeting
him, Happy desires which will not fail to be fullfilled. Amen.

Peter and Ihon run, to the Sepulcher.
I. MArie Magdalen ran, Cuc^rrit Maria Magdalena and venit ad Simonem Io. 2p.
and came to Simon Peeter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved; and
said to them, they have taken our Loed, out of the monument, and we know not
where thy have put him. She ran before the rest who loved more then the rest,
and she came to those, toward whom her Lord had ever shevved particular
respect: neither did she decline him that had thrice denied; she knevv he was
penitent, and the Angel had avovved so much: see with how great reason the
penitent sinner, and the persevering just man are coupled together. But how
stands so much incredulity, and so much love together? She has not given
credit even to the Angel that he was risen: They have taken away our Lord: who?
The Angels? And we know not where they have laid him. Look into thy hatt;
where does he venture to lay himself? It was the greatness of her love which
made her fear where there was no cause of fear. Sermon. 79.
But S. Chrysologus tells us, that we have no cause to (...), if she or the
rest were slow of belief, since we find ourselves to this day so slow, having
had far more testimonies of the truth of these Mysteries: Beg that thou
may have true feeling of them.

II. They two therefore ran together, But Ihon came first to the Monument,
and did not enter; Poeter following entered, and saw the linen cloths lying,
and the napkin which had been upon his head lying a part wrapped up. Then
e^ired the other disciple also. The Virgin by purity of body and mind is in a
higher degree then the penitent, but nby humility she must esteem herself
last, otherwise she cannot enter. Not always those that seem to run
slovvest arrive latest. It behooves every body to run and not to slaken. If
evil habits hang upon us, and hinder our speed, let us not be discouraged, for
the very striving with them is running, and he that fights most valiantly
shall have the most glorious crown. That the linen did not ly at randsome,
but handsomely folded, was a testimony that our Saviors body was not stolen;
and that the Angels had done that respect to him; which we must imitate in
neatenes about things belonging to the Altar, but chiefly in oursoules. These
two savv no Angel, having other ^ufficient testimony of the truth.

III. When they had vievved the monument, Lue. 24.
they went homewards, but Peeter went wondering within himself, at that which
had happened. It seems John ran as fast back as he came; But Peeter took
leisure to compare what had happened upon Mount Calvarie, and in the other
passages of his passion, with that which here he savv, and found testified by
the women, and had been foretold by his master; and in these thoughts our
Savior appeared to him: For before evening the disciples were found saying our
Lord is truly risen, Ibid. 24.
and has appeared to Simon. How comfortable a meeting whas this to Peeter?
How humbly did he prostrate himself, and ask pardon, confounded within
himself considering his own falt, and the goodness of his master? Here is a
large field of affection which thou must imitate.

Our Savior appears to Marie Magdalen.
I. PART.
I. MAria Magdalen returning to the monument with the two Apostles, Maria
autem stabat ad monumentum foris plorans. etc. Io. 20. 11.
when they ran back stood without weeping, ad stooping down, and looking
into the monument, she saw two Angels in white sitting, one at the head, and
one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had been laid. This posture of hers
was a token of the disposition of her mind: She stood without; she did not
believe what had been told her; yet because she stood, bevvayling with tears
her own misery, or misfortune in this case, and was inclinable to goodness,
she savv first the Angels; then our Savior. How deservedly are those to be
bevvayled with reares who keep with our, and do not stoop to the doctrine of
Christ, either in faith, or practi^e? The Angels sitting at the head and feet
of our Savior, do betoken (as S. Gregory S. Gregor.
tells us) that he is to be attended upon in prayer, and practice, who is God
from all eternity, and man in time appointed. And moreover how carefully, and
how reverently, not only the Body of our Savior, but the place wherever it is
laid, or to be laid, is to be attended, coming to receive him with due
preparation, and waiting at leisure upon him after receiving, with angelical
purity and expressions of joy.

II. The Angels say to her, Woman, why weepest thou she says to them; because
they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have put him. This is
our misery in this world, that our Lord is often taken from us, and we know not
where, or when he may be found again. The more falt we have in it, the more
cause we have to weep: yet he is often also nearer us then we doc imagine. The
more ways we have to leese him, the more reason we have to bevvayle it. One
main cause why we leese him is, because when we have him, we know not, or we
do not take much notice how, or where we lay him: we lay the falt of not
attending him upon others, or upon business calling us away, when there might
be time for all: Infine we are inconstant, or think that weeping alone will
remedy all.

III. But the Magdalen turned back, and saw Jesus standing, and did not know
that it was Jesus. We must in this case turn our thoughts back and examnin all
our action, that we may find what has bee^ the cause that Jesus has been
taken from us, and the wonted peace of our heart; he will not fail to instruct
us, however for a time he delays the fulness of our joy. How often do we see,
or hear Jesus standing, and will not believe it is he: Ap. 3. 20.
Behold, I stand at the door, and do Knock. If any will open to me, I will
come in unto him, and sup with him, and he with me.

Our Savior appears to Marie Magdalen.
II. PART.
I. Jesus said unto her; Woman, Dice^, di Jesus ^^lier.
why weepest thou? Whom seek thou? She thinking he was the gardener said,
sir, if you have carried him hence, tell me where you have laid him, and I
will take him away. Into what shape and posture does not our Lord Jesus fashion
himself to assiste us? Yet deservedly requires we should ourselves reflect what
it is we complain of; we shall find the cause of our discomfort to be in
ourselves; for that either we do not sufficiently believe, or confide in him,
or are wedded to our own apprehensions, and do not ourselves know what we
would have. It was better he should live, and rise according as he had
foretold* then that she should find him yet dead, and do her best respects
toward him as such; what therefore do thou seek? Wherefore do thou weep,
for that which is worse then that which God has provided for thee? Thou are
ready to lay the blame on the gatdiner or on the next thou meetest, and it is
thyself that are to be blamed.

II. Thou will take him wherever he is laid, and do not reflect that thou
thyself have bereaved thyself of him, by imagining him another then he is. He
is indeed to be taken wherever he laid, in the Cribb, or upon the Cross, in
the desert, or among the multitude, compassionating and assisting them in their
infirmities, preaching and praying; derided and glorified; beaten and
bevvayled; carrying his Cross, and the glorious ensigns of his resurrection:
See thou make thy word god, and be ready to taken him whersoever. If we suffer
with him, Romans 8. 17
we shall be glorifed with him, if we follow him helping others, and suffering,
we shall find his help at hand, and comfort.

III. So did the Magdalen; And Jesus said unto her Marie, she turning, says,
Master; and as it seems, fell down at his feet, a place where she was well
acquainted, for Jesus said to her do not touch me, for I am not yet ascended
to my Father; not shall so soon depart, but go to my brethren, and say to
them, I ascend to my Father, and you Father* my God and your God. He did not
forbid her absolutely to touch him, for it was the best respect she could do^
to him, but not to intertayne herself so long in that comfortable posture, as
to be a hindrance to the next good action which was to be done; there will be
apportunitie at another time I am not yet gone. She went, and told she
disciples that she had seen our Lord, and that these things he had spoken to
her. We may imagine how full her heart was of joy; how ready to run, our
Savior being disappeared; how she was comforted in rehearsing what had
happened, and that he had styled them his Brethren, and called her by her name,
how she condemned, or laughed at herself for taking him to be the gardener,
and for not believing, or forgetting what he had formerly said of his
resurrection; how she went to her brother Lazarus, and to her sister Martha,
and gave them the good nevves as an eye witness, and what confortable discourses
there passed betwixt them concerning it. Tu^ne thyself to him, fall at his
feere, and remain there till he bid thee rise, and pour forth thy whole heart
unto him, for he is thy Father* and thy God, loving, and omnipotent willing and
powerful.

Our Savior appears to the women.
I. MArie Magdalen rann to, Atilla execuntes sugerunt de monument to Marci 17.
7.
and fro; to, and with the disciples, and had the happiness to see our Savior,
as S. Mark relates: The other Women going forth, fled from the monument (for
fear and trembling had invaded them, and they said nothing to any body, for
they were afraid: Perhaps they rann also to the disciples, but said nothing
by the way to any body else; or, if not at all to any body, we may reflect how
often we fly, and avoyde those things which we should rather love and embrace,
how often we fear where there is no cause offeare, and do not fear where
there is cause: How silent we are in things of which we should speak, and
ready to speak of things which we should conceal. Fly sin, do^ not fly the
thought or memory of death: fear to offend, and thou shall not need to fear
the later account. Proverb. 22. 13.
The slothful says there is lion abroad, I shall be slain in the midst of
the streets.

II. When they had delivered their message, and perhaps met with other women of
their acquaintance, and told them what had happened, they were returning to the
monument, though not so fast as the Magdalen; and behold, Jesus meets them,
saying, Hayle; and they came near, and took hold of his feet, and adored
him. If he had not spoken first to them he might have passed by unknown, but
he would revvard the good desires of seeing him, or any thing belonging to him,
which himself had kindled in them; for no man knovves Jesus, unless he be
first saluted by Jesus, from whom is all salvation: It is our part to make use
of his favors, and co^^e near: How often do we rather break of first, and
turn to other thoughts? we touch, but do not take hold of his feet. Approach
to God, and he will approach to you.

III. Then Jesus said to them: Jacob, 4. ^.
fear not, go tell my brethren, that they go into Galilee; there they shall
see me. A happy hour when Jesus shall bid us not fear: In this life we cannot
be absolutely without it. O happy day when it shall be not only alayed with
love, but wholly turned into love, and joy! in the mean time we must exhort
ourselves and others, to pass thither in thought, and expectation, and leese
the sight of him here as little as we can. Hold thyself by Jesus living and
dying. Thom* a Kemp. lib. 2. c. 7. ^. 2.

Our Savior appears to the two disciples traveling.
I. PART.
I. TWo of the disciples went the same day toward Emaus, and while they were
reasoning of the things which had happened, Jesus approaching, went with the^,
but their eyes were helf that they should not know him, Et ecce duo ex illis
ibant ipsa die. Luc. 24
and he said unto them, what are these discourses which you hold with one
another, walking, and are sad? O Jesus! Whether do I wander instead of staying
for thee? And what are my discourses when! should think of thee? How can I
expect that thou should approach to me, I flying from thee; Approach unto God,,
and he will approach to thee, are the words of thy Apostle, but thou see my
weakness, and I appeal to thy goodness; Ps. 6. 3.
Have mercy on me, because I am weak; heal me o Lord, because my very bones
are out of order, and my soul is much trobled, even for this reason that my
eyes are withheld from seeing thee; How many things, alas, do withhold me? How
many things do blind me? I acknovvledge thy just hand upon me, but be thou
merciful that I stay not from thee.

II. One of them said unto him; Art thou the only stranger in Jerusalem, and
have not known of the things which have happened there these days? To whom he
said, what things? And they told him of Jesus of Nazareth, who was a Prophet,
powerful in work and word, in the sight of God, and of all the people; and
how the chief Priests and Princes delivered him to be condemned to death, and
crucified him. But we hoped it had been he who was to redeem Israel; and now
to day is the third day, since the things were done. And certain Women of ours
made us afraid etc. O Jesus! How patiently do thou give ear^ to my poor
discourse, though full of imperfection, fearing where I should not fear, and
doubting where I should not doubt? It is a grief, and a great confusion to
me, that I am so great a stranger in those things which have happened to thee
for my sake; I hear them, and as it were see them acted before my eyes, but
how little impression do they make in me? O my Jesus! powerful in work and
word, work thy word and will in me, that I may be acceptable in thy sight, and
not offensive in the sight of men. Thou after thou have done, and suffered all,
and more then was needful to be done, or suffered for me, (because the least
of thy actionor sufferings had been abundant satisfaction and example) do
ask what things! As reckoning all little for the love thou bear; and what
do I?

III. O foolish and s^ow of heart to believe? Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and so enter into his glory? This was thy answer; and too much
true in me: but upon thee, what was it that could impose this necessity, of
suffering, but thy sole goodness? t was ind^ed an incomparable act to
condescend unto it for my greate^ benefit and more pressing example; and many
rare congruties may be found in it, but that it ought to be so, caine from thy
voluntary acceptance and inconceivable obedience to thy heavenly father. O
that I had never offended, rather then such indignities should be offered thee!
O give me grace that I may never offend thee! for to offend thee is yet a
greater indignity. Sons of men how long, Psalm 4 3.
and to what end heavy hearted. Wherefore do ye love vanity, and seek after
that which will deceive ye? Here is matter of love, worth your longing, and
truth worth your seeking; Christ suffering, and so entering into his glory.

Our Savior appears to the two disciples traveling.
II. PART.
I. ANd they drew nigh to the town whether they went, (...)
and he made as though he would have gone further, and they constrained him,
saying, stay with us, because it is toward evening, and the day is far
spent: And he went in with them. They were courteous, and charitable as to a
stranger. He is no stranger to thee, see with what affection thou will invite
him. Consider thy necessity, how near the nighr thou travellest, and how
near thy end. He deserves, he expect to be invited, and in a manner forced by
our earnestnes, that we may grow in esteem of him, and thevv it. O how many
ways do we rather give him occasion not to come in to us! O slovvnes and
dulnes, that cannot compass so happy company unless he stay for us! Man^
mobiscum Domine.

II. And while he sat at table with them, he tooks bread, and blessed, and
brake it, and did reach it to them; and their eyes (...) opened, and they knew
him, and he vanished out of (...) sight. See the effect of Christ his staying
with us, and of devoutly communicating with due thanks giving, and blessing of
God for his so great benefit, and consideration of the passion of our Savior:
Be not hasty to depart when thou have received him; stay and ponder his
greatness, his goodness, his familiarnes with us, his wisdom, his power etc.
This is the way to have thy eyes more and more opened, and to increase in his
knowledge, and love. This veil of mortality, and the Sacramental shapes
will not afford thee a clear sight, but faith and submission must supply, and
love proportionable: It is better to sit in a corner with him then with
multitudes of those to whom nature does more incline us.

III. And they said one to the other, was not our heart burning in us while he
spoke to us in the way, and opened to us the Scriptures? And rising the same
hour, they returned to Jerusalem, and told the things that were done in the
way and how they knew him in the breaking of bread. The means to become fervant
is meditation, and pious discourse; often also to reflect upon our former
courses, how we have gone a^tray, and to be punctual in observing our times,
and hours, of reading, and hearing spiritual things, and of other devout
practices, with how little fervor, alas! Do I think or speak of these
things, after so much handling of them? How cold is my heart even at the times
when it has cause of most heat? Our repiditie and negligence is much to be
lamented and commiserated that we come to our Savior with no more affection
etc. Th. a Kemp. lib. 4. cap. 1. n. 2.

Our Savior appears to his disciples when they were together.
I. When it was Late that day, Cr^ ser^ esset die illo etc. Io. 20.
and the doors were shut, where the disciples were gathered, together, for
fear of the Jews, Jesus came, and stood in the midst, and says to them;
Peace be to you, and showed: them his hands, and side. The disciples therefore
were glad when they saw our lord. It seems always late when Jesus delays his
coming: Yet we ought not to despair, specially if we forgo not our
recollection, and do intertayne ourselves in holy desires of seeing him. Veni
Domine, and noli tardare. Come to forgive, come to comfort; the closest secrets
of my heart shall be always open to thee, and always ready; no fear shall
shut the doorevpo^ thee; take thy standing in the midst, and full possession of
me, for thou bring peace, and complete joy: O blessed hands, and side
pierced for my sake! what object can be compared with this? Where can I dvvell
with more content?

II. He said to them again. Peace be to you, as my Father sent me I also send
you; then he breathed upon them, and said, Chryso^ 8. 8^.
receive the holy Ghost; whose synns you shall forgive they are forgiven, and
whose you shall retain, they are retained. What does this repetition of peace
betoken, but that as he had with his presence quieted their minds, so did he
commend quiet; and peace among themselves; to the end that while some did
rejoice that they had believed, others lament that they had failed; one should
not immoderately extol himself above the other, or think of himself the
be^^er. Secondly; that the peace which he did give them did not consist in an
idle rest, or present quie^ from troble and pain, but as his Father sent him
to suffer, and take pains, and with the like love to them, as his Father had,
notwithstanding his sufferings, to him. Where we must not forget to prepare
ourselves with a pure conscience that we may act, and suffer with merit of the
revvard promised; and to that end make use of the power given to the Apostles,
and their successors, for the remission of our sins, that they be no
hinderance to ourselves, nor to the good intended by our good God.

III. They yet not believing and marvelling for joy* he said have you here any
thing to be eaten? and they offered him a peace of fish broyled, and a honey
comb; and when he had eaten before them, taking the remaynder he gave it them.
His eating was not for need of it, S. Bid.
but by that which he could do, to confirm his resurrection: besides that the
^^sh broyled signified our Savior himself, who ought to be our continual
food: He vouchsafed to hide himself in the sorrovves of mankind and be caught
in the net of death, broyled upon the cross; but he that was thus broyled in
his passion, became a honey comb in his resurrection; and joined these two
together in his refection, because he receives those into his mystical body
in eternal rest, who suffering here for God, find sweetness in it, in regard
of the love which they bear him. Thou have this food in the blessed Sacrament;
feed on it with sweetness of heart and love, (...). 16. 20.
for it contains all sort of delight.

He appears again to his disciples Thomas being present.
I. THomas, Thomas autem vnus ex duodecim non erat cum illis.
one of the twelve, wae not with them, when Jesus came; the other disciples
said to him, we have seen our Lord: But he said unless I see in his hands
the dint of the nails, and put my finger into the place of the nails, and put
my hand into his side, I will not believe. S. Jhon Chrysostom. S. John
Chrysostom.
As to be easy of belief is a sign of weakness, so to be over curious in
searching is dulnes, and stubbornes. Yet God of his goodness (as S. Gregory
reflecteth) permitted this accident, S. Greg.
that the incredulous disciple while he handles the wounds in his masters
flesh, should cure in our hearts the wound of Infidelity. Praise God
almighty his goodness toward thee, and beware of the falt discovered in the
disciple; reflect how unreasonable it was for one to stand against so many, and
the more the longer that humor stuck by him: Specially our Savior having
foretold he should rise again. How many means does God use to prevent, and to
salve wounds, and yet we will not be cured? ^ierem* ^^.
Behold thy ways (says the Propher) reflect what thou have done; and thou
sayedst, I will not; I have loved strangers, and after them I will walk. How
much better is it to keep good company and follovv it?

II. After eight days again; his disciples were with in, and Thomas as with
them: Jesus comes, the doors being ^^ut and stood in the midst, and said.
Peace be to you. Then he says to Thomas, put in thy finger hither, and see my
hands, and bring hither thy hand; and put it into my side, and be not
incredulous, but faithful. Slovvnes in belief deserved slovvnes in the cure:
Yet S. Jhon Chrysostom S. Ihon Chrysostom.
puts us in mind of our Saviors mercyes and goodness who for one soul does
willingly show his wounds, and comes to save one, and does not expect till he
beg it: He reiterates the same signs again, coming the doors being shut,
and suddenly appearing in the midst of them, and his wonted, and known
salutation, to stir us up the easyer to believe and love him: So he does
daily in the course of nature, and grace; Job 38. 2^.
for who is the father of the rain, and who has begotten the drops of dew?
But he, that is continually renewing his works for us. Here thou may touch
his omnipotency, and his goodness, and thrust thy whole hand into his treasures
of mercyes and benefits, and overcome all incredulity, and hardness of heart,
and unfaithful serving of him; and do not content thyself with once, or
slightly touching upon him; stretch forth thy thoughts often to reach further
and further into him.

III. Thomas answered, my Lord and my God; expressing both his acknowledgement
and his love, confounded for his not believing, and at our Saviors mildnes
toward him; believing now not only that really it was his master, but that
he was truly God, and God who to me in particular, to me so vnderserving would
vouchsafe to show himself so loving. And where shall we improve these
affections better then by touching the sacred wounds of our Savior, and
entering by his side into his everloving heart? where we may see, and believe;
and yet, not being overcurious to see, be partakers of that other blessing
contained in the answer of our Savior, because thou have seen me, Thomas,
thou have believed; blessed are they who have not seen, and have believed. For
wherefore should any man say; I would I had lived in those times to have seen
our Savior working miracles etc. 2. Pet. ^* 19.
we have the word of prophecy more sure, which you do well ^ttending unto as
to a light shining in a dark place.

The causes why our Savior kept the marks of his wounds in his hands, feet,
and side.
I. HE showed them his hands, and side, and the disciples were joyed seeing our
Lord. O^^endit ^is manus and latus. Io. 20.
Not only at his presence, as their friend, their master, their Redeemer, now
freed from so much affliction in which they had lately seen (...) but for the
glory also and good which was to come (...) and to themselves and particularly
they wondered to see the marks of his wounds remain in his side, fecre, and
hands, and could not sufficiently admire them diving to the reasons wherefore;
some reflect that they were signs of the love which he had borne us, and
manifested in his life and sufferings for us: for as S. Bernard S. Bernard
discourses; the secrets of his heart do appear through the overtures in his
body, his bowels of mercy are discovered.

II. Others beheld them as inci^ements to love him the more, and to venture thy
more for him; so S. Thomas S. Thom.
reasons; He shevved his hands to encourage us to fight for him; his side to
inflame us in his love; his feet to egg us on to run in the path of his
commandments, His whole body to move us to compassion. O fountain of love!
what shall I say of thee, who have vouchsafed to be so mindful of me. Th. a
Ke. l. 3. ^. 1. n. 2.


III. S. Ambrose S. Ambr.
tells us that they strenghen our faith and confidence in him; they set an edge
upon our devotion, considering that he would retain these marks to represent
them to his heavenly Father as pledges of our Redemption, and pleaders for us.
Here the sparovv finds a house, and the turtle dove a nest (says S. Bernard)
S. Bernard
In these the dove does shelrer herself, and without fear beholds the hawk
flying about. Say then with S. Augustine: S. Augu.
Behold I beseech thee, o Lord, the wounds in thy hands; for lo in thy hands
thou have writt^n me; read thy own hand-vvriting, and save me.

IV. They encourage us to suffer fot him; for he that enters into his wounds,
will not be so sensible of his own. S. Bernard
And finally as they are a comfort to the good* they will be a corrasive to the
wicked, when in the latter day it shall be said to them. See the man whom thou
have crucified; S. Augu^.
see the wounds thou have made; see the side which thou have pierced: By thee
and for thee it was opened, and yet thou would not enter. O blessed wounds,
give me leave that I may with reverence behold ye, lovingly kiss ye, humbly
enter, and constantly embrace ye; that neither life, not death, not any chance
whatever may sever me from ye; but that my love stronger then death may be
eternally toward thee, sweet Jesus, who barest them for me.

Our Savior appears to some of his disciples while they were fishing.
I. PART.
I. THere were together Simon Peeter, Erant simul Simon Petrus and Thomas. Io.
21.
and Thomas, and Nathanael, and the Sons of Zebedee, and two others. Simon
Peeter said to them I go to fish; they said we also come with thee; they
went into the boat, and that night they took nothing. Thomas had learned not
to part with good company, and they jointly mingled competent work with their
retirement; and upon the confidence which our Saviors presence upon earth had
given them, they durst now go forth of their houses without ^eare of the
Jews; but yet they took nothing that night, not because it was night, but to
show that all did not lie in their industry and labor, besides that the ill
success of their fishing was to serve to the more clear manifestation of
Christ's glory and resurrection,

III. In the morning Jesus stood on the shore, yet they know not that it was
Jesus. He said to them, Children, have you any meat; They answered him, no:
He said to them cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you shall
find: they did so; and now they were not able to draw the net, for the
multitude of fishes? It is very profitable (says S. Prosper) S. Prosp^r
for a man to obey the commandment of God, though he understands not the reason
of the command; because God by commanding makes whatever he commands to be
profitable. And we have the more reason to submit with our examining, because
we are of ourselves Children, and consequently ignorant, and we are his
Children, and if passion do any thing sway, that makes night, which otherwise
would not hinder. When this night is over, and the light of reason has scope
to appear, then we discover on which side to cast our net, and that before we
were wrong; obeying brings abundance both of me^t and success.

III The d^sciple therefore whom Jesus loved, said to Peeter, it is our Lord,
Simon Peeter hearing that it is our Lord, girded his coat unto him and cast
himself into the sea; but the other disciples came in the boat, drawing the
net of fishes. The elder some times may learn by the younger: The tenderness
also of his love might make him r^flect the sooner; yet Peet^r as more fervent
ventured further, and cast himself among the waves; which (as signifying the
world) he was to govern; (...)
and ^hevved that now he neither feared, nor refused any troble for his
Savior The others came, dragging their net, to show (as S. Bernard (...)
discourses) that even the Elect come not without difficulty out of the
depth, to heav^nly illustrations. Inligh^en me svveete Jesus with the clearnes
of internal light, and drive all darkness from the closet of my heart. Th. a
Kemp. l. 3. c. 23. n. 8.

Our Savior appears to some of his Disciples while they were fishing.
II. PART.
I. When they came on land, (...)
they saw colo^ of fire lying, and fish laid upon them, and bread. Iefus said
to them b^ing of the fishes which you have now caught: Simon Peeter went a
board, and drew the net to l^nd, full of great fishes, one hundred fifty and
three; and though they were so many, the net was not broken. God of little
things as w^il as of great makes use, to show his power and it is hard to
say in which he is more to be admired: His bounty and goodness toward us in
them is no less; we need the little as much as the great; and here w^ may
reflect, that in this his happy state he not only kept company with people of
mean condition, as before, but acco^modated himself to their kind of fare not
of necessity, but for example and encouragement; besides that the My, sterie
of Christ's passion is again represented in the fish upon the coals; though
with this difference, that the Apostles presented him honey with it, and he them
with bread; because in this life we must more seek solid virtue, as our
chief sust^nance, then comfort even in our most spiritual actions. There also
the fish was already broyled, as signifiing his passion that was past; here it
is upon the coals because here we must expect to suffer.

II. Therefore also he bids them bring of the fishes which they had then caught,
to wit, to be added to the fi^h already upon the coals, to make up their
meal; to signify that we must not think because our Savior has suffered for
us, therefore we need not suffer; but ours must be added to his; ours of
themselves are not sufficient, as fish ^ot dressed is not meat for man, but
qualified by the sufferings of our Saviout, and united with his, they are a
grateful Sacrifice to him, and to us very meritorious. Therefore Peeter went
joyfully and readyly a board* to dra^v the net, and though it were full loaded,
it was not broken: because ^od adds strength to a willing mind, though weak of
itself, and not able of itself to go through.

II. Jesus said to them; come, dine, and nene of them durst ask him, who art
thou? knowing that it was our Lord; and Jesus came and took bread, and gave it
them, and fi^h in like manner. Here we may see the uncertainty with which in
this life we must be content; to wit to know and not to know many things
which do very ne^^ely concern our salvation, or our progress in virtue etc.
and satisfy ourselves in some things with belief, in others with
probabilities, and not be over curious in inquiring, but reverence that which
we cannot or ought not dive into. This humble disposition does invite our
Savior to come the more familiarly, and to give us that which we dare not
ask; bread of solid comfort, and strength together with what ever affliction
we suffer for him or as for him. S. Greg.
S. Gregory more over does put us in mind by occasion of this meal with his
seven disciples, that they only are admitted to the eternal refection, who
here are replenished with the seven gifts of the holy Ghost Beg them by the
intercession of these seven disciples. My Lord my God I am thy poorest servant,
and contemptible worm of the earth, much poorer and more contemptible then I
know, or dare say. Th^^ Kemp. l. 3. c. 3. n. 6.

Our Saviors question to S. Peeter thrice repeated.
I. When they had dined, Cum erg^ praudissent 10. 2 15.
Jesus said to Simon Peeter, simon love thou me, more then these^ He says
to him, yea Lord; thou know that I love thee; he says to him, feed my
lambs. He says to him again: Simon love thou met He says to him yea, Lord,
thou know that I love thee. He says to him, feed my lambs. He says to him
the third time; Simon love ^hou m^t ^eeter was grieved because he said to
him the third time, love thou me? And said to him; Lord thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee. He said to him feed my sheep. A triple
confession is required for his triple denial, S. August.
that his tongue might not be less pliable to love, then it had been to fear,
or imminent death have forced from him more expressions then life now present.
S. Ihon Chrysoft.
And reflect with S. Ihon Chrysostom that he does no^ so much as mention his
denial, or any way touch upon it, much less cast it in his dish, but puts him
in mind what is chiefly required of those who pretend to follow our Savior
nearest, to wit, love of God, and of our neighbor in no ordinary degree; for
how can it be ordinary (specially in those who are to govern) if it must be
more then that of the rest of the Apostles, S. Ihon not excepted? That which
most of all does gain us the love of God, is the love of our neighbor, and to
lay down our life for one another which we offer sometimes with S. Peeter to
lay down for our Savior.

II. Bear no grudge; feed great and little, that is, be obsequious to them,
go to them, and do not expect that they should come to thee. ^. 10. 3. 14.
He that says he is in light, and hates his brother, is yet in darkness. We
know that we are transferred, from death to life, because we love our brethren;
he that loves not, remaynes in death. And the colder our love is, the more
signs of death. He laid down his lif^ for us, and we must lay down our
lives for our brethren. He fedd us with his whole life, by example, by word, by
labor, by day, and by night; feed my lambs, with tender love; feed my
sheep, with solid love; feed every one to the proportion of his necessity,
but with no small proportion of love.

III. Peeter was grieved because he was asked the third time, but the asking
shows the necessity of our inquiry, and searching into our breasts, whether
there do not lurk something that does gaynesay our affirming; and as for the
comparative, we must always avoyde it with S. Peeter here, now learneder
then at the last supper when he said. Matt. 2^. 33.
Though all be scandalized in thee, yet not I. Lord thou know all things,
the secrets of my heart are secret from myself; how often have I been deceived in
myself, and how apt to be still deceived? Yet I cannot but say I do love
thee; and if I do not, I will love thee; I desire to love thee more and more.
Love all for Jesus; love Jesus for himself: Jesus Christ alone is singularly to
be loved. Thomas a Kempis lib. 3. cap. 8. number. 4.

Our Savior foretells S. Peeter of his death.
I. VErily, Verily, I say to thee, Amen dico tibicum esset iconies.
when thou were younger, thou did gird thyself, and walk where thou would;
but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another
shall gird thee, and lead thee where thou will not. This he said, signifying
by what death he should glorify God; and when he had said this, he said
(...) him, follow me. It is a kind of death also by which God is greatly
glorified, when for the love and service of our neighbor we let him gird us,
that is, restrain us from that to which of ourselves we have a mind, and do
yeald to another weakness in that which is no offense to God, or bear
patiently even with offenses. We may also learn here, that the elder we grow
the more we shall see that it is wisdom to suffer ourselves, to be guided by
others, and not wed ourselves to our own dictamens and desires, specially if
we reflect what has been oftimes the result of follovving ourselves. Confine
thyself to the Tenets of the Church to the commandments of God, and of his
Church, and to the will of thy superior in that in which thou art subject.

II. He say to Peeter, follow me; perhaps parting from the rest he intended to
instruct Peeter more particularly concerning his Church, and the government of
it, and desired that the rest should understand it so; but by occasion of it we
may reflect how great a dignity it is to follovv Christ; greater then
whatever promotion, and that those who have charge of others, or pretend to the
love of Christ more then others, must follovv closer imitating his virtues, and
suffering for him. Peeter turning saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following,
and said, Lord, and this man what? Not thinking much that he followed also,
though not spoken to, but for the love and cour^esie which was betwixt them,
he was desirous to know what was to become of him as well as of himself.

III. Jesus said to him, so I will have him remain till I come, what is it to
thee? As if he should have said, attend to thyself, and thy own business;
leave the disposition of this matter to me; when it shall be time I will
manifest my will concerning him. Follow thou me. A document not to be
inquisitive concerning others, and also to bear willingly a reprehension in
things which we do^ or say with good zeal and intention. Beg incessantly and
labor to remain with our Savior to the end, as the thing which most
imports, undervaluing whatever else in comparison of this. O that I could
remain with him so, that is, beloved as the disciples, worthy to be admitted
to lea^e upon his breast, so pure, so illuminated, or rather so, that is, with
that patience, and love as our Savior is content to remain with us in the
blessed Sacrament, and in our neglected, if not sinful souls. Dive not too
far into future things, which are ever uncertain. Harken to our Savior
speaking; son suffer me to do what I will with thee, I know what is good
for thee. Them. a Kemp. l. 3. c. 17.

He appears to the Apostles while they were at table.
I. LAstly he appeared to the eleven as they sat at table, Novissime autem
recumbentibus illis. Marci 16
and checked them for their incredulity, and hardness of heart, because they did
not believe those that had seen him risen again. Lament thy own slovvnes or
slendernes in belief, and hardness of heart, and observe how strictly he
requires that we believe others, and that we be not obstinate, though we
ourselves do not see the grounds, and depth of that which is raught us Here he
condescends to their weakes, because they were the first that were to teach
others, and presented himself to all, because some had doubted; but by this
reprehension he gives them to understand that their doubts were not always to
de satisfied that way.

II. And he said unto them: Going into the whole world, preach the Gospel to
every creature (neither Jew nor Gentil excepted) he that shall believe, and be
baptized shall be saved, but he that shall not believe shall be condemne^.
Reflect that the whole cour^e and intention of Christ's coming into this world,
and preaching, and sufferring did not tend to the gaining to himself or us any
worloly prosperity or delight, but that we should believe, and know God to be
our chief Lord and Master, obey his commands and orders, and so after this
life come to be saved, of which the promises to the Jews of milk and honey
were but a figure. Christ reserving to his own coming the increase of light
in these supernatural things, and the extension of his favor to all nations.
In this knowledge and duty and in no other, we excel all creatures; failing
of it we become like beasts, and in worse condition; because subject to
eternal condemnation, for not having lived like men subject by nature to God,
and his laws. Give God thanks for giving thee this belief, and life at this
time when with ease thou may come unto it.

III. Them that believe these signs shall follow, In my name they shall cast
out devils, they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpent^,
and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay
hands upon the sick, and they shall be well, these signs when ever it is
necessary do still follovv, and continue in the Church of God, as we see by
daily experience, S. Bern.
bu^ mystically (as S. Bernard and others do discourse) they daily d^e happen;
for by the abundance of Gods grace, and by true contrition, we cast the devil
out of our hearts; we speak with new tongues, not excusing, but confessing our
falts: though we suffer evil suggestions, they do us no hurt, because we
instantly cast them of, Act. 28. 5
as S. Paul did the viper. This strife, this contention and solicitude is
troblesome, and dangerous to infirm nature, but by belief, and confidence in
the goodness of God we shall find his, and his servants hand upon us, to protect
us, and strengthen us. Temptations are to man oftimes very profitable though
troblesome etc. Thomas ^ Kemp. l. 1. c. 13. n. 2.

Our Savior appears to his disciples in Galilee and else where.
I. Our Savior in the forty days after his resurrection which passed before
his Ascension appeared several times to his disciples, ^raebuit leipsum viuum
po^^ Passionem suam. Act. 10.
confirming by many testimonies that he was truly risen, and teaching them the
things belonging to his kingdom, which is the Church militant, and triumphant,
and among other things he said unto them. All power is given me, Matt, 28. ^^
in heaven, and on ^arth, and; behold I am with you all days, to the end of
the world. Adore and submit to our Saviors power so universal ioying that
not only as God, he is omnipotent, but as man he has all power also given
him, to judge, and to revvard, and to assiste, and to mediate. From whence the
Apostle does dravv this argument of confidence who is he that shall condemn?
Christ Jesus that died, Romans ^. 34.
y^^ that is risen, who is on the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. And with all consider how short all human power is; never
all in one, and that which is, is ever many ways confined, and uncertain to
continue. His is in heaven and earth, eternal, commanding both, visible and
invisible, outward and inward, Dan. 4. 32.
and where he pleases nothing can risist: whereupon he once upon good ground
gave us this item. Luc. 12. 4.
Yea, I say unto you, fear^ him.

II. But here he treates more of mercy; for after he had willed them to preach
to all nations, teaching them to observ^ all his commandments, he promises
them his continual assistance to the end of the world: Behold I am with you,
etc. as if he should have said, (as S, Prosper) do not fear therefore by
reason of your infirmity, but confide in my power. which is always present
invisibly, though my person be not visible to you. He is with all to assist
them with his grace, though with his Apostles he is more particularly by reason
of their charge: All days, that is, at all times, both of comfort and
affliction, to the end of the world, never weary, never forsaking, and most of
all assisting in the end of their lives those who have been faithful to him,
Th. a Ke. 1, 2. c 8,
or with penitent heart have recourse to his mercyes. When Jesus is present all
is good and nothing seems hard.

III. They which were present asked him, Lord, wilt th^^ at this time restore
the kingdom of Israel? And he said unto them, it is not for you to know the
times and seasons which the father has put in his own power: but ye shall
receive the virtue of the holy Ghost, and be witnesses to me, to the utmost of
the earth. See here thy own weakness, who never so often put in mind of
heavenly things, inclinest still to thy wonted conceits, and affections, and
imperfections, as if nothing had been said or done: It is not any temporal
kingdom, or commodity of this world at which thou must aim, but the kingdom
of the other world: neither is it for every body to know whether he be worthy
of it, no^ the time and season of parting hence unto it; but we must attend to
our task, that is, by good life, ^^cording to the prescripts of our Savior,
witness that we are his disciples, and of his flock, if we bear this mark, we
shall be admitted when time is; which God of his goodness grant.

Christ Assenssion.
1. PART.
I. OUr Savior having pitched upon a day for his Ascension, Vndecim discipuli
abierunt in Galilaea^ in montem vb^ constituerat illis Jesus Matthew. 28. 1 Cor
15 6.
appointed his Apostles and disciples to mee^e upon mount Olive^; of which
meeting probably the Apostle speaks when he says, he was seen to above ^iue
handerd brethren together; and invisibly had many thousands of Ang^ls waiting
on him besides the blessed ^ompanie of Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the
just of the old restament; in which company he approaching, we may easily
imagine with what joy and reverence he was received by them, and with what
expectation of what he would do or say; some admiring his maiesticall
presence, others his blessed wounds, others recording what had passed in his
passion, and comparing his sayings with the event, and how from that Mount he
went once trivmphant to Jerusalem, ^uc19 37.
all the people crying, Osa^na, and accompanying him strovving boughs, and
their garments in the way and now not fearing any new mischance, wished and
hoped for the like triumph; and that he would declare himself king of Israel.
Praise God, as the Apostles did at that time with loud voice; calling to mind
all his wondrous works, and say, Blessed art thou who come king in the name
of God: Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.

II. Our Savior after he had saluted them, and thanked them for their love,
and respect toward him said, these are the words which I spoke to you,
(...) 34 44
when I was (...) with you, that all things must needs be fullfilled, which
are written in the law of Moses and the Prophets* and the Psalms of me. Then
he opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures; and
he said to them, that so it is witten, and so it behoved Christ to suffer, and
to rise again from the dead, the third day, and penance to be preached in his
name, and remission of sins, to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem. If in
our Savior all things were necessarily to be fullfilled, how can we expect
reward unless we fulfill our duty and his commands? If it behoved him to
suffer before he could rise to glory, let us not think to escape all
suffering, if we pretend to glory, but apply ourselves to do penance for our
synns, that we may have remission: nothing of this world is gained with out
some hardship; and what is all that is in this world compared to the glory
which we a^e promised. The Patria^chs and the Prophets, as they were figures,
and foretellers of these his sufferings, so did they suffer also themselves.
and we must encourage ourselves by the example of those who have gone before
us. H^^c su^t verba, these are the words of truth itself, which cannot deceive,
nor be deceived.

III. And lifting up his hands, he blessed them, and while he blessed them, he
departed from them, and was ca^yed i^to heaven. Beg pa^te of this blessing,
that thou may fulfill his sayings, and follow him in time, as now in
thought: He was carried into heaven by his own power, having no need of
assistance of Angel, or Cloud though these did their duty attending him: Thou
need in all things his assistance, and can not do any thing but by his
power. O lumpish flesh of mine! how hard do thou make it to follovv thy
Savior? Th. Kem, ^ ^. 3. c. 54. ^. ^.
Nature is crafty, and draws many, and in^angleth and deceives them, and
always has itself for its end. O poor end.

Christ's Ascension.
II. PART.
I. IN heaven our blessed Savior was received with hymns of joy and
exultation, Dominur regnavit decor^m indutus est. Ps. 92.
such as the holy Prophet David foresignified when he said; Our Lord has
reigned, and is clothed with beauty; he is clothed with strength, and has girt
himself to accomplish his work from heaven which he began upon earth; He has
established a new world upon earth (his church) which shall not be moved,
because its buylt upon a rock, against which hell gates shall not prevayle: His
seat was prepared from the beginning of the world, Matthew. 16. 18
but he, as God, was before, from all Eternity; wonderful persecutions will
be raised against him, but he will be more wonderful by overcoming them, as it
has been prophe^yed of him. And again; who shall ascend unto the hill of our
Lord, Ps. 23. 3.
who shall stand in his holy place? He that has innocent hands, and a pure
heart, lift up your gates ye Princes, O ye eternal gates be lifted up, and
the king of glory will make his entrance. Who is this king of Glory; our
Lord, strong and powerful; our Lord powerful in the combat etc. And being
seated at the right hand of his Father, they all adore him; with whom we must
concvrre, and so much the more because for us was all his combat employed, 10.
14. 2.
and he is gone before to prepare us a place, as parting with his disciples he
told them.

II. But the Apostles stood amazed upon the hill gazing toward heaven, Viri
Galilaei quid ^^atis. Act. 1.
doubtful perhaps whether he would appear again among them. And as they
looked steadfastly toward heaven, behold two men stood by them in white
garments, and said, ye men of Galilee, why stand you looking into heaven;
This Jesus, who is assumpted from you into heaven shall so come as you have
seen him going into heaven. He sends these blessed spirits as a restimonie that
even from heaven he harh care of them, and is not so de parted as to have laid
aside mindfulnes of them in his greatest joy, and prosper^^^e; He is to come
again but not now presently and subject to the miseries in which you have seen
him, but in glory as when he went now from you. Why stand you looking only
unto heaven, fall to the performance of that which he has commended unto you
and commanded, so shall his coming again in glory be a comfort to you: In
this show yourselves Men of courage and resolution overcoming the instabilitie
of your nature. Viri Galilaei.
This is Jesus who is assumpted from you, and as he by fulfilling the commands
of his father, and by suffering, went into heaven, so make account you are to
do, to attain the eternal revvard, which he has prepared for those who obey
him.

III. Then they adoring returned to Jerusalem with great joy, Et ipsi
adorant^^ regressisunt. Luc^ 24 52.
and continued with one accord in prayer. Thus the parting which naturally
might have bread grief turned to great joy and comfort; they revereneing our
blessed Savior in their minds no less then externally adoring him; and
perhaps the print of his sacred feet did even then, or soon after, appear
(as is recorded) which was a continual refreshing to them. Observe in the
mean time two notable effects and signs of Gods spirit to wit, union, and
love of prayer; for from whence could it otherwise come that they who before
were delighted only with their trade of fishing, and were ready upon the
passion of our Savior every one to part upon his several occasions, should
now hold so fast together, and love retirement and devotion? loyne thyself to
this blessed company often; behold the joy in which now they are, and how
they arrived to i^ persever in the unity of holy Church; have recourse to the
blessed Virgen, and the Apostles, that by their in^ercession and imitation thou
may come to see Jesus in glory, and adore him with eternal comfort* Amen.

Considerations moving to the love of God and of our Neighbor Introduction.
I.Our blessed Savior upon his parting with his disciples before his passion,
in the long speech which he held at that time, did particularly commend unto
them the love of himself, 10. 14 21.
and of one another: He that loves me, shall be loved by my Father, and I will
love him, and manifest myself to him. and v. 23. If any love me he will keep
my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make abode
with him. And Chapter 15. As my Father has loved me, I also have loved you;
abide in my love. 10. 13. 34.
And concerning the love of one another; a new commandment I give you, that you
love one another, as I have loved you. In this all men shall know that you are
my disciples, if you have love one to another. This interim therefore betwixt
the parting of our Savior from his disciples in his ascension, and the coming
of the holy Ghost, may be not unfitly employed in considerations moving us to
the love of our Savior, and of our neighbor; both to solace ourselves in his
absence, and to dispose us the better to receive the spirit of love: For
doubtless the more we resemble him who is the eternal love of the Father and
of the Son the more inclinable he will be to communicate himself in more
abundance; and he that sends him, finding the dispositions already laid, will
willingly accept of the dwelling, and direct him to it.

II. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3. 16.
considering the abundan^ ^iches of graces and glory which are communica^ed to
us by the merits of our Savior Christ, stricken with admiration, breaks forth
into an affectionate prayer, that they, and in their person, all Christians,
strengthened by the holy Ghost inwardly in their souls, might come to know,
and to comprehend (so far as our poor capacity is able to reach) the
breadth, the lenght, the height, and the depth of the exceeding charitia of our
Savior surpassing all (...). To the end doubtless that being filled with
abundance of the same charity, we might answer with some proportion of love
toward him, ^^kindled by his, and in some sort correspond to the infinite
measure of his charity toward us, and have latitude in our love toward
him, and longitude, and depth, and height, as he toward us has had all these
dimensions in a proportion incomparable.

III. To this purpose it will not be amiss to enlarge our thoughts upon these
considerations, as four excellencies, to which all other properties of his
love may be reduced; and by them we may best see what measure of love in all
reason God may require of us, and learn more perfectly by our own experience
the lesson which S. Bernard teaches; that the cause of our love toward God
must be God himself, S. Bern.
the measure of our love, to love him without measure. God of his love inspire
our thoughts to conceive worthy things of him, and inflame our hearts in the
love of them, that hovvever weak our love may be, it may increase to that
measure which his immeasurable goodness has designed. Amen.

An act of humble acknowledgment of our own weakness.
I. O My God what am I or what is thy love^ Thy infinite love my God, toward
man what is it? That I sylly worm of the earth so easily venture, not only to
lift up my head to behold it, and ponder it, and esteem it (for to this end
thou have shevved it unto us that we should behold it and love it) but dare
scanne in my thoughts, and undertake to discypher the great greatenes of it in
these fevv words, the broken of^alls of my shallovv conceits: Or is thy love
peradventure a thing which can be comprehended by man, or declared by the
highest Angel, or defined by any but thyself? for thy love is thyself, ^. 10.
4. ^^^
and the great greatenes of it is the immense Immensitie of thy loving self,
by which thou dilatest thyself toward us, and in us, thy creatures, and
through the infinite length, bleadth, depth, and height of thy inflamed
charlti^ comprehendest us all in the bowels of thy love, loving us before we
were, that we might be, and ever loving us while we are, that we may never
leave to be, but ever live in love with thee.

II. Who therefore can reach so far as that infinite length? or who is there
that can measure that breadth which is immeasurable? Who can sound the depth,
or take the height of thy infinite love, but thy only self, who art sole
equal, and sole equally infinite to thyself And yet thou will have us measure
it in our thoughts, and sound it in our hearts, and stretch ourselves to that
length, and dilate ourselves to that b^eadth, and lift up ourselves to that
height, and drown ourselves in that depth of thy love; that finding how
far we are from the true measure of it we may reach, if not as far, and as
wide, and as high, and as deep as it deserves, yet so far in all these
kinds as by thy grace our hearts will serve us, which is acceptable in thy
sight, though too small a measure in regard of thy infinite deserts.

III. O Imalnes of our measure O greatness of thy deservings! Who have moved
heaven and earth for our sakes, and searched all the corners of thy infinite
treasure, and poured forth thy riches to the bottom, to help us, to reclayme
us, to win us to thy love! And when thou had as it were spent all that thou
had to gain our affection (forall that we see, or hear of, or can imagine,
are thy love-gifts, as I may term them, to dravv us to thyself) thou sparedst
not thy own bowels, but gave thyself unto us, and in that loving and free
manner, that there was not any part of the breath of thy sacred body which thou
did not dedicate to our service, nor one drop of thy precious blood which
thou did not shed for us, but for the greater satisfaction of our unbelieving
minds, and the more effectually to move our stony hearts, even after thy death,
thou would have thy side opened with that cruel spear, that we might see
with our eyes that there was no more blood left, when after the blood spent
there issued water. 10. 19. 34.


IV. O sacred bath, rempered for my soars! soseen the hardness of my heart, alay
the immoderate heat which I find toward temporal occasions; moysten the
droughth of my faint desires; cure the blindness of my eyes, that at least
through this gap laid so wide open I may discover some parcel of thy love,
and inamoured with it, may be drawn further and further into the depth, that
being wholly absorpt in it, I may leese myself while I go about to measure, and
never find myself again, but wholly drowned in thee, who art my God and my
only love. Amen.

The length of the love of God is the Eternity of his love.
I. THe length of the charity of almighty God, is the Eternity of his love.
If we cast our eyes upon that beginning of his Eternity which has no
beginning, even then before we were, and when he only was, he loved us as now
he loves, and determined then to give us all that good which we find he has
since performed, or has for hereafter laid up in store for us; in that
Eternity, before all time, before all thought, and to which no thought of
creature can arrive, when he was delighting himself with his only self, and
with the infinite riches which he has within himself, the Father with the
Son, and the Father and the Son with the holy Ghost, then he vouchsafed to
think of us, to love us, to ordain all things for us, and to desire our love:
Then when not only he had no need of us, but when he had no other reason to
think of us but his own sole infinite goodness, Sap. 8. ^
He disposed all things sweetly, to the end in time to gain that which in
Eternity he desired, to wit our love; and beholding us with in himself, and
seeing that we were all good, and all very good because we were all in him, he
would, Genesis 1. 3^
in time appointed, that we shoul have part of that good in ourselves by him,
which we had from all Eternity in him. And therefore he made us out of himself,
that acknovvledging from whence we derived all the good we have, we should
seek not only in duty, or gratitude, to return all to him who best deserved
it, but also by nature we should be eve^ ^orne toward him, as every thing
naturally is ever bent toward that from which it has its being.

II. If again we cast our thoughts upon the end of his loving eternity, which
has no end, we shall find his love not contained with in the short limitts of
a month, or a year, or ten thousand years, but that he loves us to the end,
with out end, and desires nothing more then that we should live, 10. 13. 1.
and love him, world with out end. And as in his Eternity with out beginning
he disposed all things sweetly for our good, and salvation, with out any
desert of ours, so in this Eternity with our ending, he reaches strongly,
striving against all our deserts, to bring our love to that perfection that his
and ours may have no end. If the least of those injuries which we offer to God
(thousands perhaps in a day) were done by man to another man, Sap. ^^
it were enough instead of further love to inflame a mortal, and as much as
lies in him, an Eternal aversion. But that which seems impossible to man is
possible to God, who with infinite charity does daily, and hoverly, and every
moment put up infi^^te disgraceful actions and remains ever strong in love
rill our dying day, Luc. 18. 27.
when if we depart not in his love, he leaves not us, but we die leaving him:
Otherwise so long as we live, he inviteth us, and works us to his love,
desiring nothing more then that his love and ours should be Eternal.

III. O svveete Eternity! O strong and never failing, but ever loving
Eternity! What can a mortal, and ever fading creature do in requital of
such immortal love? Of mortal to immortal, of temporal to Eternal, of man
to God, what comparison is there? Betwixt such bitterness as we offer him, and
such infinite svveetenes of love with which he inviteth, expects, and
receives us, betwixt such weakness of affection on our part, and such
infinite strength on his, what equali^ie may be expected? Ours lies dead a
long time before it begin, his ever lives with out beginning; ours when it
begins to live languisheth yet betwixt life and death, and staggereth often
whether it shall choose to live by loving him, or die by leaving him, though
the difference betwixt such a loving life, and such a hateful death be
infinite; his lasts and lives, never decaying, never wav^ting, never
failing, but always follovving, and persuing us till our dying day, when
both life and love, must either live our die Eternally. O love Eternal.

The first means to perpetuate our love to God by desires that our love had
been eternal.
I. IT is not possible that our love should be eternal without beginning, for
our life is not with out beginning; as there was a time in which we were not,
so there was a time in which we could not love (...) was no time in which God
was not; he (...) time, and before all time he loved us: What shall we do in
recompense of this love? Let us at least stretch forth the arms of our soul,
which are our desires, and fervently wish our love had been eternal without
beginning? shall we wish we were God? For nothing is eternal with out
beginning but God: perhaps nothing can be so eternal but God alone: But it is
the property of love not to consider whether the things be possible which it
desires, or not possible; it is sufficient if affection be satisfied in doing
all that it can do and in desiring a great deal more then it shall be ever
able to effect: And even these impossible desires, as they are pleasing to men,
when expressed by some outvvard sign, because by them we see the hearts of
those that do affect us, much more are they pleasing to God, to whom all hearts
are open, and who does not measure our love so much by the show of the work,
as by the poyse of the affection* if the work be not wanting when there is
means to perform it: let us therefore wish that our love had no beginning, but
had been eternal as God, not only in himself, but also in his love toward us
is eternal. God is more loved then understood (says Hugo Victorinus) love
enters where knowledge stands with out. O that I could from all Eternity
have been with God, and loved him Eternally as (...) deserves*

II. Let us wish again that at least from the first instant of our Conception
we had been so happy, as to have no sooner begun to be, then begun to love that
infinite goodness, by whom we had our beginning: For as all gifts, when they
deserve least, do yet deserve we should love the giver, this being of ours,
being the beginning of all other gifts, even then deserved our love, and if it
had been possible for us we should have presently turned our hearts to God, and
as S. Ihon Baptist, not long after his conception in presence of our Lord, Lue.
1. ^1. 49
have leaped for joy, and love, at the voice of our creator, commanding us to
be: For even then, he did great things unto us, and things most worthy of his
powerful hand, when out of his infinite love he made us capable of loving
him. That which was wanting then, let us supply now and with inflamed
affection love him the more fervently, the more time has been spent before We
began to love him.

III. O Blessed Virgen, Mother of the eternal lovel thrice happy do I account
thee, though it were but for this alone, that even when thou weret in thy
Mothers womb thou did more perfectly love the giver of thy life, then did
ever pure humane creature love him in most perfect years: were it not possible
for us now to supply this want which we find in ourselves of love toward thy
loving Son? We may I hope by thy assistance, and by conioyning our love with
thine, not only love him from the beginning of our life, but from the beginning
of both thy life, and love, and restore him not only as many years as are past
of our love but in recompense of former losses give all those years which
betwixt this and that time in which thou first did begin to live, thou did
spend in his love. Therefore humbly trusting in thy favor; but what do I say?
I feate I am too bold, Noe. Thy love does bear it; his love deserves it; all
love requires it: I humbly conioyne my love and life with thine, that this
little drop of my love being drowned in that sea of thine, and both made but
one life and love (as a drop is made one with the liquor into which it is
infused) I may love him as he deserves; no^ only as soon, but before I began
to be. O blessed conjunction! Thou did desire that thy love had been
Eternal; to make it such thou did join it with the love of thy blessed
Son, and Eternally with him thou desiredst and beganst to love him: My love
therefore being now one with thine, and thine one with his, all three make but
one eternal love; which triple knot of love, God of his infinite goodness ever
please to continue. Amen.

The misery of most men bewailed and the happiness of younger years.
I. THe happy conjunction which we may make of our love with the love of God,
and of our blessed Lady, may be an exceeding comfort to us: far greater
comfort would it have been, if besides the condition of being but in time,
there had been no further distance. But alas! How often besides have we made a
breach of love betwixt us and God? we were no sooner Masters of our love, Luc.
15. 13.
but we began to wast it lavishly, as the prodigal child did his substance, in
a far country from God, cleaving in affection to the husks of his Creatures,
which the swine do eat, the external appearance of the things of this world,
in which worldlings do delight: For they never enter by consideration into the
substance of things created, to feed their souls with the goodness, and mercy,
and wisdom, and power, and other infinite perfections of God who made them:
neither do they consider to what end they were made, to wit, to incite us, and
help us the more to his love; but as the psalmist speaks, Psalm. 31. 9.
like a horse or a mule who have no understanding, they rest in that to which
sense does lead them, and like swine feed greedyly upon the husks, and attend
to fill their bellies, that is, their inordinate appetite, with things which
for the present. and by reason of their unbridled hunger and distempered mind,
do seem to content them, and in the mean time let their souls pine away
for want of the food they were created to feed on.

II. What a dreadful distance is there betwixt such souls and God when not
their love (by which alone we ca^ approach to him) but their hat^ed (by which we
go further and further from him) begins by little and little to be eternal
toward him, who deserves eternal love: for the too much love of Creatures
does insensibly breed dis^ast of the Creator: the cleaving to the visible
blinds us ^owards the invisible; the eye that looks much upon earth is loath to
look upon heaven, as too far from its purpose: If wishes will supply, with
what weeping and lamenting ought we to wish that such a gap had never been
made, but that at least we had begun the love, which we owe eternally to God,
so soon as it was in our power ^o love him, and that when we began first to
have the use of reason, we had reflected how great reason there was not to
desire to live but only for his love.

III. Happy are they who have their years before them: for by the benefit of
their age, having not settled ^hier affections upon any thing else, they have
them still wholly in their hands, to bestow upon him who beft deserves our
love; for all things beside him are either naught, or nothing in comparison to
him. Happy years which make their possessours able to say to God, my loving
Lord; Thy infinite love has been toward me e^^rnall without beginning,
because the being of thyself was the beginning of thy love, both eternal
without beginning: This beginning therefore of my life shall also be the
beginning of my love toward thee, that when by thy grace, and continual
assistance, I shall enter into that other Eternity which has no end, my love
may be found to have been so long as my life, both equally eternal: for it
would be a great confusion to me, in that doubtful day of thy judgment, to
have it laid to my charge that I had lived longer then I had loved thee, who
have not lived one moment longer then thou have loved me.

IV. Thrice happy in this kind o^ blessed Gonzaga; who coul^st lovingly glory
that at seven years of age thou did perfectly turn thyself to God, Lib. 1.
vi^^ ^.
and with great fervor of mind consecrate thyself wholly to him. Thou knew
then how grateful to God would be these first fruits of thy love: Beg of him
pardon for my neglect, and vnmindfullnes, and promote the desires of those who
are yet young, that they may follow thy steps* and place their love betimes,
where, if it be not placed* it will finally either be lost, or misspent; lost,
if bestowed upon things which do not deserve our love; misspent, if upon things
which rather deserve our hatred. O hateful expense of love that is so pre^ious.

A second means to perpetuate our love toward God.
I. THey who have let s^ip time so precious, ^ust repair their loss so well
as they can, not with often sighs and sorrows only, for that which is past,
bu^ with constant purposes for the time to come, and say with the Psalmist, Now
I begin, o Lord to love thee: This love by thy grace I will continue for ever
Ps. 76. ^
till it be perfected after this changeable life in thy never changing
Eternity. O that I were able to say with they Apostle, or rather with that
confidence, and with that love which he did. Cerius sum, I am certain tha^
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, Bo. 8. 3^,
nor Powers, neither things present, nor things to come, neither might, nor
height, nor depth, nor other creature shall be able to separate me from the
charity, which I owe, which I bear to thee, my God, for thy loving self, and
for thy loving Son Christ Jesus our Lord.

II. But how often have I said thus to God* And may not I with reason fear
least he slight my words, having experienced that the work does so slowely
follow* Of this I am (...), that were not his goodness immeasu^able, he would
long care this have loathed so much instabilitie of heart, and so often change
of love: no man would have abided it: Bu^ God knows himself, and knows us:
He knows himself to be eternal, ever permanent, ever the same; He knows
that as we have had a beginning in this life, and shall have an end, so all our
life stands upon beginnings and endings; and consequently it is no wonder
that we have in us so many changes: but even this condition of ours must be to
us an incitement every hour in the day and every moment to begin, as if that
hour, or that moment were the first, and last of our life: How many have been,
to their own and others thinking, able and strong, and likely to outlive many
days and years, and have been suddenly taken away? Let us therefore make use
of this our nature, and believe this truth, that we have not one day, nor one
hour certain of life: why therefore should we neglect this hour, and not
employ it wholly in his love?

III. O that our love were toward God so fervently earyed as it is some times
foolishly bent toward creatures! how short would these days of our life most
justly seem to be? O love! how justly may I complain of thy sottish
ignorance, and blind measure? Great, and long love toward creatures, little,
and short toward our Creator, what a monster is it? Few be the days of my
life, ^ my God, the days of my life be few, compared with the Eternity of the
love which I owe thee; they be fevv compared with the love which I wish thee;
O that I had a thousand lives to bestovv in they love! from this hou^e, if I
had them, I would bestovv them all in thy love; from this houte, I do
consecrate all the hours, and minutes of my life, (how long or how short
soever thou know it will be) wholly and entirely to thy love. How to wish
it, I cannot tell: The longer I live, the oftener I offend against thy love;
perhaps, the more I shall do, or suffer for thy love* here thou must be the
chooser; grant me only thy grace, that that which is and shall be, may be wholly
thine; Grant that how long soever I live, it may seem little in respect of
the greatness of thy love, which I desire to show* cersaynly it will be little
in comparison of that which ^^ou deserv^st, my God, my love* Amen.

Of the desire of being dissolved.
I THe great saints of God out of the abundance of love which they bear him,
do oftimes desire most earnestly that this their miserable life were quickly
at an end, not because they are weary of troble with themselves or others, but
because love is increased, and established by the presence of the parties who
do love, and especially by such an all seeing and all inioying presence, by
which we discover infinitely more the infinite perfections of God, with out the
least alay of imperfection, infinitely more then we can possibly arrive to
understand in this life, by all the natural and supernatural knowledge which
we have; and by this blessed presence we are ourselves perpetually confirmed in
love, without any danger of failing in the least duty of correspondence; and
finally we are made more capable, and never weary of loving him; because we
still discover more and more that he infinitely, and incomprehensibly,
deserves the eternal continuance, and perseverance of our love toward him.
Philip^ ^ 23.
Say therefore with the Apostle. I desire to be dissolved, from these mortal
bonds, which aggravate and depresse my soul from that perfection of love which
a sincere heart desires, and thou my God deservest: I defire to be dissolved,
if not out of perfect love which excludes fear, I. 10. (...) 18.
yet out of such love as breadeth a filial fear of offending, and lothnes to
continue in the least danger of leesing, or lessening thy love.

II. O dreadful danger! a danger worse then death itself! With what exquisite
manner of all corporal death would I not willingly redeem this hazard? What
hazard would I not most joyfully runn to purchase an eternity of never
offending my God? O precious Eternity! One thing I have asked of my lord God,
Ps. (...)
this I will again, and again require, that the very hour, and moment that
he sees me inclining to offend, he will rather call me out of this life, then
permit me to fail in his love. Happy man! Ps. ^4. 7.
If I be thus prevented; who will give me wings as of a dove, and I will fly,
from this death of sin, which does hang over my head; o love of my dear God!
How long shall I abide this hazard of leesing thee, who art my only true life?

III. I do not envy any thing more in the blessed sain^ts, and Angels of
heaven, then that their love to God is continual with out intermission,
constant without wa^ering, certain without fear of leesing it, or of
relenting, Eternal with out end of loving; neither can death be truly welcome
for any other end, more then that it may be a beginning of this loving
Eternity: O Eternity of love! what time can be suffici^^t to dwell upon so
loving a consideration! What hour, or minute of my life should pass, in which
I should not be found still loving thee my God, and still exercising acts of
thy love in ha^^, and deed? Print this thy love, sweet Jesus, in my heart, by
thy bitter Passion, and by ^hy sacred wounds: what better seal then thy loving
self? What stronger wax then thy sacred blood? What highter ^ire then thy
eternal love? O that my soul were ^he whitest parchment worthy to receive
such a noble impression! which being presented, and unfolded in thy eternal
Consistory, nothing might appear written in it from the beginning of my life
to the end thereof, but Jesus, my love, my love sweet Jesus. Amen.

How we ought to imitate the Eternity of the love of God, in the love of our
Neighbor.
I. THe ^ternitie of love which we endeavor after our mean kind of measure to
express in ourselves toward God, in answer to his eternal love toward us,
the same it is fit we should practice toward others, in imitation of this
first excellency of his infinite love, both to f^ee ourselves from that
inference which S. Jhon makes, ^. 10. 24.
that if any say, I love God, and hat^^h his brother be is a liar, and from
that imperfection to full^ll the commandment which we have of it; for so the
same beloved disciple assures us, (...)
This commandm^^ (...) have from ^^d, tha^ who loves God, loves also his
^rother, 10. 14. (...)
and again; he that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me.

II. We must therefore love our neighbor, even before he loves us, and when he
gives us no occasion to love him, but rather occasion of hatred, by his ^hvvart
demeanor toward us, or ill carriage toward God. Again, we must never be
weary of loving him, or of doing good unto him, or for him; we must with great
patience, and longanimitie bear his daily, and continual imperfections, and
offenses; neither wondering, nor impatiently grudging at his often falling, or
hard measure^ nor pusillanimously sitting down, thinking how to fly, and
retire from such company to others, with whom we imagine we shall have no such
troble; 2. The^^ 3 4.
but imitating the charity of God, and patience of Christ, and saying with S.
Augustine, S. Aug ^
if the vessels of flesh be narrovv, let the bounds of charity be enlarged,
that is, let men be infirm, and troblesome and sinful, hard to be ruled,
harder to accommodate themselves to my disposition, or concei^e* it is the
nature of flesh and blood to be so, my charit^^ shall not be so scant, as not
to out-reach all this, and persever to the end in bearing, that so I may
fulfill the law of Christ, and imitate his love.

III. O love of my God more strong then death! for death could never have
overtaken my God, unless love had yealded him into his hands: This brought my
dear Savior to the deathbed of the cross, and did not suffer him to come
down from it, for any of the vpbrayding-scoffs with which the Jews did
taunt him, nor for any weaker motive which humane frayletie might have
suggested, nor for any fair seeming reason which worldly wisdom might have
invented, but being stretched upon it to the utmost, as he had began to love us
from the beginning of his, not only mortal, but immortal life, so h^ resolved
to yeald up his last breath and blessed Ghost for us, that this his ^ying for
our sake might be a most evident testimony of his never dying love, seeing he
choose rather to leave this life, then to forgo our love O that my heart and
soul were w^oly absorpt in this thy eternal love! that I might dye by thy
love, who did die for the love of me, and die rather then relent in the least
point of love toward thee, or toward my neighbor for thee. Amen.

The latitude, or Universality of the love of God.
I. THe latitude of the charity of God, is the Universality of his love,
extending itself to all in general, and to every one in particular. He will
have all men to be saved (says the Apostle) and to come to the knowledge of
the truth; 1. Tim. 2 4
and the beloved disciple, he inlighteneth every man that comes into this
world. Io. 1. 9. Eccl. 15. 15.
Therefore when he had created man, he added his commandments, and precep^s,
that if he would keep his commandments they should keep him. Therefore he
punishes sinners in this life by pieces, Sap. 12. 2.
putting them in mind of that in which they have offended, that leaving their
malice, they may believe in thee, o Lord: Therefore he picked out a choosen
people, to show his wondrous power more signally to all the world by them,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
that hearing all his precepts, they should say, behold a wise, and
understanding people, a great nation Therefore he came himself, and took flesh
upon him, to satisfy for the sins of everre one of us, and to give us
example of obedience to the law of God, which he came to promulgate; and
afterward sent his Apostles, and their successors into the whole world* with
commandment to preach the Gospel to every creature, Matthew. 28. 20*
testifying that with the like assistance he will be with us to the end of the
world.

II. To this universality belongs the sweetness of the law of Grace, and the
easynes by which we may come to the remission of our synns, and to salvation:
for what ceremony could be instituted more easy then that of baptism? What
means of remission of synns afterward committed, more indulgent then that of
private confession^ For whatever people ill disposed may think of it, if an
earthly Prince had appointed such a way of pardon for crimes committed, who
would not runn unto it? And this not once, or twice, but ten thousand thousand
times to be had; and in fine as often as we shall have offended, and when ever we
will have recourse unto it, after never so long delays or relapses. What
shall I say of the helps internal? by remorse, and inspiration, and external,
by exhortation, and example; of which in the Church of God there is continual
succession and abundance: what of the presence of our blessed Savior in the
Sacrament? continually as it were waiting upon us, and by it inviting us. and
putting us in mind of our duty toward him: That he would be in every Country
Church attending us, is no small token of his universal love toward us,
refusing no body neither rich, nor poor, nor lame, nor blind, nor the most
noylomest creature that we can imagine. Matthew. ^^. 28
Come to me allyee that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh ye.

III. That he refuses no sinner though never so great, is particularly to be
pondered, as a sign of the v^niversalitie of his love; of which, though we see
daily example, the Apostle testifyeth it in himself, extolling this grace, and
giving special thanks, 1. Tim (...)
that though before he was a blasphemer, and a persecutour, and contumelious in
his thoughts, and speeches toward Christ our Savior, yet he received mercy.
Ponder the hardness which naturally we find among men to forgive offenses, and
compare it with what we experience in God, and be confounded at thy
ingratitude; have recourse to his mercyes; enlarge thy ha^t in hope, and
confidence; and give not way to thoughts of diffidence: for if thy synns be as
scarlet, Esaias. 1. 18.
they shall be whitened as snow, and if they be as red as crimson, they shall
be white like wool. He gave unto Solomon latitude of heart as the sand which is
on the sea shore, 3. Reg^ 29.
but what is this compared with the largenes of thy mercyes, my God, ready to
forgive more offenses then there be sands on the shore, and to receive into thy
arms more offenders then the whole world is capable of. One drop of thy
precious blood was capable to satisfy for millions of worlds; what a sea* then
of mercyes has all humane kind offered unto it by thee, my God, to plunge, and
cleanse itself to the full? O let me not be ungrateful! Amen.

The love of God toward us is universal because to every one in particular.
I. THis is testified unto us by the Apostle, when magnifying the grace
received by Christ he says I live in the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2, 20
who loved me, and delivered himself for me. And is seconded by our Savior to
S. Gertrude, Blosius in moni^. ^. 1.
saying, Behold thou see how for thy love, I did once hang upon the Cross,
naked, contemptible, disjoynted in every member, and wounded in every part of
my body; and yet to this very day my ha^t is so sweetly affected toward thee
by love, that if it were convenient for thy good, and that thou could not
otherwise get to heaven, I would for thee alone suffer all that which I
suffered then for the whole world, O my God! what am I in particular, that thou
should thus lovingly express thyself? Or what does my particular import
thee, that thou should be so tender of me? O that I had the loves of all in
particular to bestovv upon thee who deservest all! Blessed is he that
understands what it is to love Jesus, etc.

II. That which our Savior said to S. Bridget expresses an other degree of
latitude in this love; Th. Ke^. 1. 2. c. 7.
for thus he is recorded to have spoken My love toward mankind is now as
great, Blosius ibidem.
and as incomprehensible, as it was at the time of my passion: And if it were
convenient that I should die as many deaths as there be damned soule^ in hell,
I would most willingly, and with the greatest love that may be, deliver my body
to be tormented, and would suffer the same death and passion again for each
soul in particular which I endured for all, This infinite charity seems
strange to men, who measure the perfections of God by their own imperfection:
But the heavenly wisdom pronunced rightly of him? Thou lo^ vest all the
things which are, Sap. 10. 25.
and hate nothing of that which thou have made, neither have thou ordained,
or made any thing hating it. In so much that the very damned souls are
punished (though excessively) yet beneath the desert of sin* and hovvever he
be a rigorous judge, yet he desi^eth that in the later day he might find
nothing to be punished; for which end he gives us day to repent to the very
last; and so many means to blot out sin, and the remaynders of it.

III. To this end he reserved the blessed marks of his sacred wounds even in
his glorified body, that we should ^^nd, as it were, so many gates laid open
to his mercyes and that these might be a never dying memorial of his part and
future love, both to us, to excite us, and to his heavenly Father, with our
further words to plead for us: for though neither he, nor his heavenly father,
do need incitements to love us; or remembrances, not being subject to forget,
or to forgo their own loving natures, yet out of their superabundant goodness
they would that these marks should be reserved, Genesis 9. 15^
more efficatious to assuage their anger against sin, then could the rain
bovv be against a second diluge. O Blessed wounds, laid wide open for my sake!
it seems by you that the divine soul of my Savior had more love for me then
the earthen vessel of his body could contain: O that my soul were capable to
receive the remaynder! I did run in the way of thy commandments when thou
did dilate my heart, Ps. ^^. ^. 32^
said they holy Pro^het supply it with thy ardent affection; stretch it to all
thy commands that as there was nothing which thou refusedst for the love of me,
so there may be nothing at which I may shrink, which ought to be done,
suffered for the love of thee. Amen.

How we may imitate the universality of the love of God.
I. PART.
I. THe universality of the love of God may be imitated first, by loving and
esteeming all that he loves and esteems, and disesteeming and hating all
that he disesteemeth and hates: To which we must endeavor to attain by
continual mortification* and inure ourselves not to affect things which
deserve not our affection, that is, all earthly things so far as they have not
connection with his service, using them merely as instruments to do him
service, and otherwise wholly neglecting them, and making no account of them,
nor giving them any place in our thoughts or affections: which is that to which
the Apostle exhorts us by his example, 2* Cor. ^^ 10.
always bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus, that the life
also of Jesus may be manifested in our hodys. How came it that some saints
were so perfect and so contemplative? because they labored to mortify
themselves alltogeather from all te^rene desires. Th. a Ke^. I. 1. c. 11.


II. How large accordingly this measure of love toward God was in the Apostle
himself, and in diverse other Saints. is apparent in their lives, and writings;
and in some of them we find it expressed not with ink, but with the spirit of
the living God, 2. Cor. 3.
not written in tables of stone, but in the tables carnal of their heart, and
body* such as may say with the same Apostle, Gal. 6. 17.
from hence forth let no man be troblesome to me, (that is let no man think he
shall be able to take Christ from myhatt) for I bear the marks of our Lord
Jesus Christ in my body. In which kind S. Francis, founder of the Order of
friars minors, might justly glory in our Lord: for having expressed his love
toward God in that strict poverty, and perfect renuntiation of all things, to
the end to give himself by prayer, and good works wholly to God; Our Savior
testified to the world that he was wholly his, printing the marks of his sacred
passion in his hands, feet, and side, and as it were designing in his body
that longitude, and latitude, and height, and deepth of love, which was long
before engraven in his soul o blessed Saint. etc.

III. Blessed Mother Teresa of Jesus, Rub 1. ^. c^^
for her exceeding love toward him, had a favor not far inferior, when the
saw, and felt another Seraphim, digging in her hatt with a da^t of gold, to
make way for the incomprehensible greatenes of the love of God toward her, and
to enlarge her hatt that it might be more capable of love toward him. And S.
Francis Xavier, late Apostle of lapan was also often seen and heard, when
walking in the garden at home, or on his journies abroad, he enlarged his
garments with both his hands, to give scope to the love which burned in his
breast; or by external cold to suppress from outvvard show the internal fire
with which he was excessively inflamed, often repearing those words. It is
enough, O Lord, it is enough.

IV. These blessed Saints, and many more, had enough of that of which no body
can ever have enovgh; because though in effect they never had so much, but that
they desired more, and eve^ then when they said they had enough, not content
with what they had, they enlarged themselves to receive yet more; which is a
pregnant sign that indeed they had very much. We that feel not these
inflamed desires, because we never were thoroughly possessed by love, and none
but such ca^ ever feel the^ not being able to enlarge our hearts into such
fervent affections, what can we do less, then by attentive ponderation of his
love, and thiers, and humble endeavor, try whether by often striking the
steel of our consideration upon our stony hearts, we may at last beate-out some
one spark of of true love, which taking in the tinder of our affections, and
blown with the most svveete breath of the heavenly spirit, may increase into a
greater, and never quenched fire of love. Amen.

How we may imitate the Universality of the love of God.
II. PART.
I. AN other means of imitating the Universality of the love of God is by
exte^ding it to the love of our Neighbor, in that measure as we see God does
to us, and his Saints have done in imitation of him. God out of his mere
goodness, when we were not, gave us our being and all the good which we have;
and though we deserve it not, continues his goodness toward us, making his
sunn (which he has at command) rise over good, Matt. 5^ 45.
and evil* and rayning over just and injust; which kind of love he requires we
should bear toward others; not considering what they deserve, but what is
sitting for us to do, to the end to be like God in love toward them; and
therefore also it is said, the second commandme^ is like the first, Matt, 2^^
39.
because it m^st have the conditions of the first, that is, as we love God with
our whole ha^t, our whole soul, our whole understanding, and our whole
strength, so must we employ all these wholly upon our Neighbors good; not
loving him by halfs, or coldly, and remissely but with much heat of affection,
solidly, constantly, courageously, nobly; not giving way to what ever opposes
it, and embracing largely whatever may be for his adva^age, and prosecuting it
with our whole strength and forces

II. This university requires also that we extend our love ^o all sorts of
people, to the poor as well as to the rich, to the infirm as well as to the
strong; and the more infirmities we discover in another, the more should we be
inclined to assist him in imitation of our Savior, Romans 5. 30.
who where iniquities did abound gave superabundance of his grace; and of S.
Paul, who out of the largenes of his heart said to the Cotinthians (who gave
him not the best satisfaction) our mouth is open to you, 2. Cor. 6. 11.
O Corinthians (for your (...) instruction) our heart is dilated: you are not
streightened in ^^ And again to the same Corinthians; 1. Cor. 9. 19.
when I was free from all, I made myself a servant of all, that I might gain
the more: To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak; to all men
I became all things, that I might save all.

III. In conformity to this love, our good God has not only set a part in his
Church those of the Clergy* to attend to the help of all sorts of people by
administration of the holy Sacraments, and of his divne word, but has
instituted all sorts of religions, both of men, and women, that those might be
houses of refuge for all sorts of humors; and that at least by prayer and
example others might be benefitted by the most retired: the obligation of which
vocations is duly to be considered* and specially of those who out of an
universality of spirit profess themselves to be ready to assiste all nations,
and confine themselves with in no bounds of countries, or persons, or pious
employments, by which they may any way advance the sal^ation of their
Neighbors, to the end that having once opened their mouth, Iud. 11. 36.
and heart to God in this universality, they do not afterward relent, and
our of pusillanimitie, or self love, streighten the bounds which they have once
promised should be none at all.

IV. 2. Cor. 12. 15.
O blessed Apostl* who could say, I most gladly will bestow, and will myself
more over be bestowed for your souls though loving more, I am loved less. How
well did thou Follow the example given thee by thy Savior who bestowed upon
us all that which we have, and himself moreover, in ^o large and loving a
manner, as to man is incomprehensible, and is so slenderly rewarded by us: 2.
Cor. 11. 27.
labor, and misery, and much watching, hunger, and (...), and much fasting,
cold, and nakedness, could not streighten thy love, not whatsoever danger of thy
life; be a means to enlarge this spirit in the hearts of those who have
dedicated themselves to the like employments.

The height of the charity of our Lord.
I. THe height of the charity of God, and of our Savior is the
supetexcellencie of his love: for love being two fold, one by which we love
because we do or may receive benefit; the other by which we I ove to benefit;
it is evident both that this second is the more excellent, and that the love of
God ^ovvards us could not have the imperfection which the first does involue.
Let us love God, because God has first loved us says the beloved disciple; 1
Io. ^ 13.
which, considering before we were we could not love, is of itself apparent;
and considering to what end he loved us, to wit to communicate himself to us,
first by says, then by clear sight, and inioyment of his glorious self, we
may take a scantling according to our weak apprehension, or dull affection, of
the excellency of his love toward us; seeing nothing can be more eycellent
then to see, and enjoy God. All that we see or hear of in the world was
created for our benefit, yet all that is nothing compared to one minute of
time, what then to an eternity of enjoying God? O if thou had seen the
eternal crowns of saints, with how much glory they now exult who were
contemptible and not thought worthy to live. etc. Th. 2 Ke. l. 3. c. 47* n, 3.


II. A second degree of excellency of the love of God is, that which the
Apostle does reflect on, and with reason does dilate himself upon it, to wit,
that not only when we were nothing, but when we were sinners, when we were
enemies, when we were weak, Romans 5. ^^
and infirm, full of ulcers and sores, he loved us, and was beneficial unto
us; when we deserved his hatred, he did not only not execute it to the full
upon us) as we miserable creatures are wont to do upon one another) but spared
us, had compassion on us, releeved us. God commends his charity toward us,
in that when we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us: Ep. 3. (...)
This is charity which surpasses all knowledge and all conceit of man; for
as the same Apostle discourses. A body can scarce be willing to di^ when of
necessity he must, Romans 5. 7.
or when by justice he is condemned, perhaps for a good cause, or for defense
of that which is right a body may dare to die, but for his enemy, for one that
takes away his good name, and as much as is in him, his life, who is there
that would think of offering himself to die? O my God, in this thou show
thyself to be God, that is, all goodness, and all love; give me grace to love
thee at least for this thy love, and die, that I may not die by syn.

III. Yet a third excellency is to be reflected on, which the same Apostle
suggesteth, to wit, that God did not spare his own Son, but delivered him
for us all. Romans 8. 24.
In the infinite treasure of his divine knowledge and goodness, there could not
but appear^ diverse means to express his love, and exercise his mercy toward
us, yet this offering itself as the most convenient in all respects, he did not
spare it, though the most precious jewel of his heavenly Cabinet, the nearest
and dearest treasure of his divine breast, but gave it for us; and who are we?
You are bought with a great price, it is reason we should glorify, 1. Cor. 6.
20.
and bear God, not in our minds only, but in our body also, in our hearts, in
our tendrest affections, and let nothing have place, where nothing can be
spared from him, who sparing not his own Son gave us all things with him,
and in him more then all: what can the world give thee with our Jesus? He that
finds Jesus finds a great transure. Th. a K. l. 2. c. 8. n. 2.

How we are to imitate the superexcellencie of the love of God.
I. PART.
I. TO love God to benefit him more the^ already injoyeth, is impossible; we
may notwithstanding comply with the excellency of his love, by wishing him all
the good which he has, and being (...) glad that he is as he is; which is the
part of a friend to an other friend, that is superior to him: And we may dilate
our thoughts, and affections of this nature congratulating him his Eternity,
his Immen^itie, his Omnipotency, his Bounty, his perfection in all kinds, and
professing ourselves to be heartily glad that he is so. This is the expression
which the Seraphims do make who assist before the throne of God, Esaii; 6 2
covering their feet, as short in conceiving or affecting so great
perfections, but yet stirring up one another to praises, such as they are able,
repeating, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, full is heaven and earth
of thy Majesty.

II. To this Kind of love belongs the desire that all the world should know
him, and serve him; and the sorrow that he is offended, and that we are so
short of understanding what he is, and of loving him as he deserves: let us
therefore say with the Wise Man, Glorifying him so much as you can, be will yet
exceed* and wonderful is his magnificence, Blessing him, exalt him so much as
you can, for he is greater then all praise. Exal^ing him put forth all your
strength, Eccl* 43 32
be not wearied, for you shall not comprehend him* Many things are hidden
greater then these for we have seen few of his works. To this also belongs the
desire of even being with God in Prayer, and in other services belonging to
him; not for the benefit which comes to us by it, though it be great, but
because he deserves to be continually attended and served; which was the ground
upon which our Savior retired himself so often to Prayer, Luc: 6 12,
and spent whole nights in it, and when he was but twelve years old, Luc* 2^
49.
answered his Mother; did you not know that I must be about those things which
are my Fathers? And it has been the drift of those saints who have practiced
the retayning of the presence of God continually in their thoughts; doing
whatever they do as in his sight, with affections to please him in what they
can; that is, ever to do his will in all things; endeavoring to imitate our
Savior in that which he said; He that sent me is with me, and has not left
me alone, Io: 8 2^
because the things that please him I do always; Sap: 8 1^
say therefore which the wiseman. Entering into my house (that is into the Closet
of my heart, and secretest retyrement) I will rest with him, for in the
conversation with him there is no bitterness, nor tediousnes in living with him,
but joy and gladness. Say with the Psalmist, one thing (above all others) have I
asked Ps. 264
of our Lord, this will I again, and again seek after* that I may dwell in
the house of our Lord all the dax^^ of my life, Luc. 10. 40
that I may behold the pleasure, the delight, the sweetness, the beauty, of my
God. Blessed sisters Martha, and Mari^, the one diligent in serving our
Savior, the other attentive to hear his words both happy in his loving
presence; who can express the delight, and benefit which you reaped by so
desirefull a conversation? for if by conversing with men we come to know them,
why should we not by conversing with God increase in his knowledge, and
consequently in his love; for in him there is no danger of discovering
imperfection, as too too often it happens in men.

How we are to imitate the height of the love of God.
II. PART.
I. Our Savior upon his parting with his disciples, before his passion gave
them command to love one another, Io. 13. 34.
and styled it, anew commandment, because their love was to have the
ex^^llencies of his love. I give you a new commandment, that you love one
another, as I have loved you: We must therefore love our neighbor, before he
love us (as has been said) yea though it were impossible for him to love us;
we must love him though he be ungrateful, unthankful, mali^ious toward us:
we must love him though never so poor, and unable ever to requite our love;
and this not in words only, or bare affection, but with real deeds and
services, according to our ability, and ready for more then our ability seems
able to reach unto* and as the Apostle advises, Romans 12: 21
we must not be overcome by any evil ^urne, but overcome evil with good;
heaping coals of charity upon his head, unquenchable by whatever misdesert.

II. If we cast our eyes upon our Savior we shall moreover see that he was so
far from sparing himself in any thing for us, that he debarred his humane
nature from that happiness which was from the first instant of his conception
due unto it* to the end to suffer for our sakes: what is it then for us to bar
ourselves of the contentments of this world for the service of our neighbor?
S. Ignatius Founder of the Society of Jesus left a president in this nature,
above the ordinary strain: S. (...)
for discoursing of an offer which might be made of dying presently, and going
directly to heaven to enjoy God for ever or of staying still in this world to
do him more service in the way in which he was, he said, that of the two, he
would choose to stay, though uncertain as he was of ^aluation, if he might be
sure to do God any whit the more service, not doubting but God would have care
he should not peri^h. Here certainly self love was not called to counsel, nor
slothful pusillanimitie; but perfect love, and a true value of that which God
deserves at our hands, had taken full possession of that virtuous and loving
ha^t, causing him to prefert the service of God before whatever concerned
himself, though never so important.

III. The like does happen in other saints, who are so wholly absorpt in the
desire and endeavor of helping their neighbor for God, that they wholly forget
themselves, and live and labor as if they had not bodies as other men, or as
if the common infirmities did not work upon them; such was S. Francis Xavier
who passed neither for heat, nor cold, nor fair nor foul weather, nor
storms at sea, nor dangers at land, but all was sweet unto him, through the
vehemence and sweetness of his love* in so much that he rather desired more and
more to suffer, that he might be more conformable to his Savior who had
suffered for him.

IV. O love which in my Savior went more strong then death; Cant. (...)
place thyself as a soale, or mark upon my heart that beholding thee, I may
never forget my duty to God, and to my neighbor for God: place thyself as a
badg^ upon my arm, that all my works may carry a resemblanc^ of his love. O
that thou were in me as strong as death, which overcomes all things, high and
lovv, rich and poor, mighty and infirm, beautiful and hard favored, noble
and ignoble! O that thou were as fast holding as the very gate of Hell, which
keeps its prisoners eternally captive: Happy were this eternal captivity
for me: for though to those who measure all things by sense, and ^emporall
contentment, it would seem hard indeed to be so toyled, as the saints of God
have been, and a kind of Hell unto them; for those who know what it is to love
and serve God, it is a sweet captivity, and the harder we are held by love,
the easyer we shall bear the burdens of this life; for even in this it is most
true, that nothing is hard to him that loves.

The depth of the love of God.
I. PART.
I. THe depth of the love of God. appears first in that when he had choosen
to save us by means of his eternal Son, being made man for our sake, and the
life of that man might have been ordered several ways for our benefit, he
choose the most abject way of living, and the most paynefull* and ignominious
way of dying; to be born of poor parents, in an obscure cottage, persecuted
from his cradle, and in the height of his preaching to be circumvented,
condemned as blasphemer, whipped and scourged as a slave, crowned in scorn as
an usurper, and crucified betwixt two thieves as a notorious malefactor.
This to the Jews, 1. Cor. 1. 23.
who expected their messiah to be glorious in a worldly way, was a scandal,
and by the Gentills, and worldly wise, to this day, is accounted folly. The
sensual man, (says the Apostle) perceives not the things which are of the
spirit of God; 1. Cor. 2. ^^.
for its foolishnes to him, and be cannot understand, because it is spiritually
to be examined.

II. The depth of his love appears secondly, in the vnsearcheablenes of it,
in that having vouchsafed to be the scorn of men, and outcast of people for
our sakes, and suffered death for us, (...). 21. 7.
and the death of the cross, he would notwithstanding that the final effect
and fruit of all his pains (our eternal salvation) should depend upon our
correspondence with his graces, and consequently that his infinite merit should
be, in a manner, in great part lost, by our vntovvardnes, or at least
hazarded; which as on the one side, to those who endeavor to make use of his
love, it is a great incitement to love him the more, who for the fruit in a
fevv would suffer, and takes from all men all occasion of despair; so on the
other side, by reason of our weakness, it does necessitate us not to presume,
1. Pet. 1. 19 2 Pet. (...)
but to live in fear for the time of our seiourne, and to labor by good works
to make sure our vocation, and Election. Which design of his we must
everence, and lovingly submiting to his divine ordination, industriate
ourselves to concur the more diligently with it, and with his love toward us
in it.

III. The depth of his love appears, in the extraordinary vocations of some,
and graces extraordinary bestovved upon persons oftimes in which we cannot
only not discover any merit, but rather much demerit, and desert of the
contrary; of whom that saying of God, and of the Apostle comes to be verifyed,
I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, Romans 9 ^^
and I will show mercy to whom I will show it. And with good reason; for he is
Lord of his gifts, and free to give of them more or less to whom, and when he
will: So that as we may admire, and must rejoice, and not envy when he does
bestovv them, so we must not grudge when and where he does not bestow them; but
attend that our eye become not naught, because he is good, Matthew: ^^ 15
as our Savior himself once answered.

IV. O my God! give me grace so to consider this thy love, that I may increase
in love toward thee; give me grace that by measuring this thy greatenes, I
may grow greater in thy favor, and by reaching to thy height wax higher in
thy sight, and by diving into the bottomless depth of thy infinite charity sink
deeper into thy love, that being wholly absorpt in it, I may ever find myself
wholly drowned in thee, my God, my love* Amen.

The depth of the love of God.
II. PART.
I. FInally, in this matter of the love of God it will be profitable to reflect
with a devout personage of this age.

I. First that it was not possible for God to create man after a heigher
model, then according to the image and similitude of God.

2. It was not possible to create him for a heigher end, then the clear
vision, and fruition of God.

3. It was not possible to give him a greater Gift, then God himself, and all
creatures.

4. It was not possible to give him a heigher, or more noble employment then to
serve God, and in some sort to serve himself of God, to de^^^e in a manner
himself and others.

5. It was not possile to give him a more perfect Guide in his pilgrimage, then
our Savior, and the holy Ghost.

6. It was not possible to feed him with more choice sustenance, then the body,
and blood, and divinity of our blessed Savior.

7. It was not possible to express a greater esteem of man then, by shedding
his blood for him.

8. It was not possible to give him a greater motive to abhor sin, then
that God dyed to abolish it.

9. It was not possible to give a greater ground never to despair, then by
constituting himself his Advocate.

10. It was not possibble to enable sinful man to co^rrespond to these and
other his benefits but by giving him the merits of Christ, dignified infinitely
in his divine person, by which we satisfy to the full for our offenses, and
gain a proportion in our good works to the rewards promised.

II. O infinite goodness! O immense charity! O love imcomparable! Where shall I
find, either conceptions, or words, or strength to express the least part of
my great obligation to thy love? that heart can love thee enough? (...) tongue
praise thee? What forces serve thee, as thou deservest? Help me ye blessed
Angels, and saints of heaven: Assiste me all ye orea^utes of my loving God: O
that I had so many tongues to praise him, so many hearts to love him! I know
not what to say, but with heart confounded, and blushing countenance, to offer
my love and service, such as it is, conjoined with his, because he is so
pleased, and beg of him that he will please himself with it and with his
own merits (for otherwise whatever I can offer is nothing) and that all
creatures in whom he is most pleased, will incessantly prays^ him, and glorify
him. Amen.

The coming of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles in fiery tongues.
I. PART.
I. Our Savior upon his Ascension had willed the Apostles to remain in
Jerusalem, Cum complerentur dies Pentecostes. Act: 2
till they should be indu^d with power from above, which they observed
carefully, persevering together in prayer, with our blessed Lady and others;
when behold the tenth day ^arely in the morning there was suddenly heard a
sound from heaven, as of a mighty wind, and it filled the whole house, where
they were sitting: and there appe^^ed to them parted tongues, as it were of
^ire, and it sat upon every one of them, and they were all filled with the holy
Ghost, and began to speak with diverse tongues, as the holy Ghost gave them to
speak. Prayer, and obedience, and agreement together, were dispositions now*
as well as afterward effects of the holy Ghost. He came suddenly upon them, to
teach us perseverance in our devout employments; for we know not at what hour
our Lord will come; Mat^h: ^4 42
in prayer, or reading, or charitable action; the wind was a token of
dispersing the Clouds of ignorance, and deceit, to which we are subject with
out the assistance of the holy Ghost* and no wonder that is was a strong wind,
considering how closse the fallaci^s of the world do stick unto us, and how
they are apt to possess themselves of every corner of our house. that is of
soul and body. The parted tongues as of fire signified the spiritual flame,
and fervor infused into their hearts, and was then to manifest itself by their
tongues, publikly and privately to be employed in the praises of our Savior,
and of his law, according as the holy Ghost gave to every one. Beg of him
every one of these his gifts and dispose thyself to receive them.

II. Consider that though the wind and fiery tongues were figures of the inward
operation, yet the gift this day communicated was not only the proportionable
effects wrought by the holy Ghost but the very person of the holy Ghost
communicated unto them and us, working these effects. And as in the Incarnation
of our Savior the holy Ghost in person overshaddowed our blessed Lady, Luc. 1.
3^.
so here he descended upon the Apostles, and the rest there gathered together,
though in such different measure as he thought good to communicate himself:
where we have cause to admire and adore the goodness of God, who would employ
his own person in our service, however in a different way from that of our
Savior. Veni Sancte Spiritus etc.

III. Reflect upon the particular attributes of the holy Ghost, that he is a
comforter, the spirit of truth, the light of our hearts, 10. 16. 13.
spiritual unction, and does not speak of himself, but what he has heard;
and enlarge thyself in affections toward him, comformable to his properties,
that thou may be partaker of his gifts, and honored with his sacred
presence. Vene creator Spiritus etc.

The coming of the holy Ghost.
II. PART.
I. Erant autem in Jerusalem habitantes.
ANd there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, of every nation that
is under heaven; and when this voice was heard a multitude assembled, and was
astonished, because every one heard them speak in his own tongue, And they
were all amazed, saying, what means this? Others deriding said, these men
are full of new wine, The impulsions of the holy Ghost are several; some times
more gentle, some times more strong: Here it concerned the whole future Church
of Christ, and the taking away the false aspersion laid upon him by the Jews
in his death upon the cross, and the giving a happy rise to the Gospel;
therefore it imported that a multitude should be assembled to receive the
gladsome tidings, and to receive it in this extraordinary way, with
admiration, and astonishment, which should make them attentive, and dispose
them to embrace the truth; and yet we see a means so forcible did not work in
all the like effect: by which we are admonished to have an eye over ourselves
both to dispose ourselves toward the receiving of Gods graces, and not to be
forward to construe to the worst that which we do not fully understand, or is
not to our humor and to reverence things which are above our capacity.

II. But Peeter standing with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke to
them; these are not drunk, as you suppose, seeing it is the third hour of the
day: But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel: Joel 2, 2^
It shall be in the last days, of my spirit I will pour out upon all flesh
and every one who calls upon the name of our Lord shall be saved. Two
prerogatives of the law of grace are signified unto us; first that it is not
confined to one nation, as in the law of Moses were the promises of the
Messiah, but to all nations of the world the benefit of salvation by Christ is
proclaimed, and whoever calls upon his name with lively says, working by
charity, shall be saved. Secondly that the graces of the law of Christ are not
scarce, but abundant, and plentifully poured forth upon all sorts of people, to
enable every one to correspond with his calling in whatever state he lives. Be
gratfull to God for these benefits, and apply thyself diligently to make use of
them.

III. And hearing these things they were sorry at heart, and said to Peeter and
to the rest of the Apostles, what shall we do? And Peeter said to them, do
penance, and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for
remission of your synns, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost; and
there were baptized that day about three thousand. We have reason to
congratulate the Apostles these first fruits and to be thankful to our
Saviou^, and his blessed spirit, that they have been propagated to our days,
with so much increase; and to observe the means by which the benefit of Christ
his sufferings are to be applied to us, to wit by use of the Sacraments after
baptism, and by daily examen of what we are further to do toward the
fullfilling of his commandments, and how we comply with them; for so it is
further said of the new converted. They were persevering in the doctrine of
the Apostles, Act. 241
and in the communication of breaking of bread, and prayers.

Fruits of the holy Ghost in the first Christians.
I. Erant perseverantes in doctrina Apostolorum.
THey were persevering in the doctrine of the Apostles: Where we may observe
the respect which they bare to their teachers, the submission of their
understanding to the mysteries of ^ayth above the reach of humane wit, their
constancy and peace of mind in the directions which they had received, to all
which they were encouraged by the miracles daily wrought by the Apostles; Act:
2 43
and by the same we have reason to this day to be confirmed in that which we
believe as received from them.

II. They continued also in the communication of breaking of bread and in
prayer. It is a special fruit of the holy Ghost, and a sign of his presence,
to have a pious affection and inclination to prayer, and to the devout use of
the Sacraments, and a due esteem of them: for if no man can say, ^ Cor: 113
Lord Jesus, but by the grace of the holy Ghost, as the Apostle testifyeth,
much less can we continue calling devoutly upon him, but by his special
assistance, observing constantly our appointed hours, and times for it; and so
much the more because it conduces much to the worthy receiving of our Savior
in the blessed Sacrament, and to the due interaynement of him after we have
received: besides the performance of that which our Savior taught, Luc: 18 ^
it behooves allway to pray and not to faint in it.

III. A third fruit was a great contempt of humane things, and of worldly
wealth, together with great confidence in God toward their relief; and
resolution to suffer for his sake who had suffered so much for us; for it is
said of them that all that believed were together, and had all things common,
their possessions and substance they sold, and divided them to all according as
every one had need: Not that every one was bound to do so, for S. Peeter said
to Ananias (who had made a show to quit all, and fraudulently deayned part of
his goods) remaining did it not remain to thee, Act: 5 4
and being sold was it not in thy power? thou have not lied to men, but to God.
But the perfection of the doctrine of Christ tending to this heigh contempt of
all things, the better to serve him, very many did embrace that course; in so
much that it was apparently the fruit of the holy Ghost, and the primitive
spirit so to do.

IV. A fourth fruit was ^nitie, and peace, and agreement among themselves;
Act: 2 46
they were daily continuing with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread
from house to house, they took their meat with joy, and simplicity of heart,
Praising God, and having grace with all the people; and our Lord increased them
that should be saved daily together. So that in their spiritual, and temporal
actions there was no disagreement, but peace, and joy, with out deceit; and
their conversation was much to the glory of God, and to their own benefit,
and the benefit also of others, who by the good example which they gave were
invited, and encouraged to follovv the like course, and to embrace the faith of
Christ, wherein otherwise there were points enough, both for belief and
practice, which might have averted them. Praise God for all, and have
confidence in him. etc.

The Mystery Of the Mystery of the most Blessed Trinity.
I. A Principal effect of the coming of our Savior into this world was the
declaration of the Mystery of the most Blessed Trinity, hidden even from the
Jews though the chosen people of God, and not mentioned but in very dark, and
hidden resemblances. But our Savior did openly proclayme it, specially after
his resurrection, Matthew. 28 19
commanding his Apostles to baptize all nations, in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as three persons equal in all things, and
one in name, that is, in power, authority, and essence: wherein we have cause
to admire, and adore the force of the light of the holy Gospel, by which our
Savior intending to abolish the belief, and worship of many Gods (brought in
by the craft of the devil working upon men's corrupt affections and desires)
established the belief of one true God, yet so that they should believe in
that one essence three persons, equal to one another, though under
Appellations which, according to our mean expression, might signify
inequality; it being impossible for us to conceive the divinity clearly as
it is. ^ayth therefore must supply that which reason cannot comprehend, and with
reverence submit to what our understanding cannot reach. Adoring equally in
three and one, the Omnipotency, Eternity, infinite knowledge, and goodness,
and all Perfection, the Immensitie, the Immutabilitie, the Beauty, the
sanctity of God, containing all, and more then we can imagine by the help or
comparison of all creatures, and all most perfectly, and with out multiplicitie
in one.

II. Adore the Father, as the incomprehensible source of the divinity with out
beginning, and of all things created in time, when he thought fit to give them
a beginning. Adore the Son, who being equal to the Father, vouchsafed for
our sakes to take upon him our humane nature, to instruct us by word, and
example, and by his sacred blood shed upon the cross to wash away our synns
and open us away to the eternal inioying of God by perseverance in his
commandments. Adore the Holy Ghost, as the mutual, and recip^ocall love of the
Father, and Son, the Auctour of our love toward God, the cause of our
adoption by his grace infused, and by himself, inhabiting in our souls; 10.
16. 13.
the spirit of truth, which leads us into all truth, and by his heavenly
lights disperseth the clouds of darkness, and facilitates our way to heaven by
his heavenly unction.

III. Adore all three in one; one in nature, one by consent, one in operation.
Beg of him that we may be one with him, by submission to him, and to his
blessed will; one by constant faith; one by never decaying love; one by
operation; esteeming ourselves in all our works as instruments of his divine
p^wre, and goodness, and so disposing ourselves in thought, and action that we
may not differ from him in the least, which he of his goodness grant* Amen.

The obligation which we haveto love God.
I. PART.
I. SO soon as Moses had declared to the people of ^srael that God was one,
he instantly inferres the commandment of loving him. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
Hear Israel our Lord God is one Lord. Thou shall love thy Lord God wi^h thy
whole heart etc. And our Savior in his answer to the lawyer tells us, it is the
gre^test, and the first commandment* and with reason ought we to think so,
Matthew. 2^ 38.
and accordingly apply ourselves to love him. For as we were worse then beasts,
if we did not love those who are beneficial to us, much more if welove not
God, from whom we have absolutely all that we have. The law therefore of nature
does impose this upon us so soon as we come into the world; upon which account
S. Thomas, and other divinc^ do hold it a great offense, if so soon as we
come to the use of reason in our Childhood, we do not turn ou^ ^arts to God,
with loving acknowledgment that he is ou^ creator, and Lord. And the holy Text
infinuates as much, presently after the commandment saying. And these words
which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, Deuteronomy: 6 6
and ^ho^ shall (...) them thy Children, to wit, that they may know their duty
in time.

II. It is also the first commandment, in dignity, and excellency; for it has
the highest object that can be, to wit, God; and the noblest way of service, to
wit, for love, not for fear of punishment, o^ hope of reward; but rises upon
consideration of his great excellency With in himself, and great goodness
toward us. And besides, it gives us the greatest excellency that we can
attain unto in this world, and prepares far greater in the world to come:
for as by loving base things, we become base, and contemptible; so by loving
God, and other things, as they belong to God, we become ^ono^rable in the ^ight
of God and men: and there can be no greater honor, and excellency imagined,
then that to which those have risen who have loved God in perfection.

I^I. It was like wise first in the intention of the lavvgive^s* all other
commands and directions, and indeed all the works and wonders of God, which he
has shevved us, tending finally and properly to this that in thought word, and
deed we should express our love to him, for how could any thing subsist, Sap*
II 26
if it had not been thy will? or been preserved, if not called by thee? Thou
sparest all, because they are thine, ^o Lord, who love souls. As he therefore
did, and does all things out of love, so is it expected from us that all should
proceed from love; and further more as in the natural love of one an other, we
must not only not show aversion from the thing which our srend does (not
synfully) love, but even observe his ways of proceeding; much more ought we to
love that which God loves, and commands, because we love him, and he loves us;
for which reason the Apostle says. The fullnes of the law is love, ^om: 13 10
even of our neighbor, because we love him for God.

IV. It is the greatest command, because most necessary of all other precepts,
as with out which no other i^ thoroughly avaylable, or ^^^ly commendable: For
the fear of God is but an introduction to love, and some way or other must be
perfected into some degree of love, else it will fall of the effect we desire;
and how many things does the Apostle reckon which are nothing with our
Charity? 1 Cor: 13
If I have the tongues of Angels, if Prophecy, if Faith if knowledge, if I
give my goods to the poor, if my body to the fire, and have not Charity, it
avayleth me nothing. On the other side, it does set an inestimable price upon
the least of our actions, when ever they are done for the love of God: so that
with out it, all, with it nothing is lost.

V. Finally it is greatest, because it is the most lasting, and works
greatest, 1 Cor: ^^ 8
and most lasting effects. Charity never fails; Faith instructs; hope rayseth
our mind to he^venly things: Charity unites us to God, and makes us one spirit
with him, Cor: 6 17
And as in nature, so in grace, love breaks through all difficulties; and
accordingly we may see the efficacy of it in the Apostles, and Apostolical
men, in the Martyrs, and Confessors, E^emites, and Virgins, by things done and
suffered beyond all compass of other consideration then of love.

Our Obligation to love God.
II. PART.
I. WE may love those things which we have nor seen with our eyes, we cannot
love that which do not some way know: we know God by Faith, by discourse, or
contemplation, and by fruition, or enjoying him. The readyest and easyest way
is by Faith, as we may discover by the difficulty which the greatest wits of
the world anciently had with out Faith to know there was a God, one, eternal,
Omnipotent, all seeing, all disposing. Therefore we must both thank God for the
light of Faith, and often exercise acts thereof submitting all contrary
suggestions unto it. This kind of knowledge was delivered first from hand to
hand by our forefathers to their Children successively; then renewed in the old
law by God appearing pearing to Moses, and the children of Israel; lastly by
the son of God himself our Savior, coming into this world^^ confirming by
signs and miracles both the being of one God, and that himself was sent to
establish his law in the hearts of men, and to unfold and perfect all that which
formerly was delivered, and practiced in figure of what was to come. The record
whereof is holy Scripture, and Tradition; both which concurring are a proof so
invincible that under heaven there is not any more forcible.

II. We may confirm this knowledge by discourse, and contemplation; as for
example; finding nothing to be in this world which has not some cause, or many
causes concurring to its being, we begin to think there can be nothing which
has not some cause whereby it begins, and yet in all absolutely it cannot be
so, and consequently there must be a first cause, caused by nothing else, and
that is God, Then the order, and government of the world, and seasons of the
year shows there is some great thing that governs it; as order among men
cannot be without a directour; and the like. We must not think notwithstanding
that we can comprehend his Essence, or his attributes, which are in him one
single Essence; but by admiring them, and adoring them, and acknowledging our
own weakness to decipher them, we shall come to understand more of him: for if
we know almost nothing of these inferior things, but the outward appearance
of them, and cannot dive into the substance, and essence of them, though we see
them, and touch them, how shall we be able to comprehend the least attribute of
God, in whom nothing is not infini^e.

III. Perfect inioying of God is not the state of this life, neither can any
creature even in any life come unto it, but by the special grace of God,
vouchsafing to communicate himself; yet in some measure, through his grace^^ we
may even in this life enjoy him, and so increase also in his knowledge, by
believing him to be, as he is, always present with us, and that there is not
a place, or creature, in which he is not, giving it life, and motion and
subsistence; and consequently loving him for this continual, and loving
assistance, and ioying in it: for as by continual conversation with men we come
to know them, so God is also known by looking upon him; and because all that
is in him, or proceeds from him, is good, there cannot but be insinite cause of
loving him, with out any cause at all of distaste; which can hardly ever be
among men. Eccl. 43. ^1.
Blessing him therefore; exalt him so much as you can, for he is greater then
all praise, Exalting him, put forth all your strength, be not wearied, for you
shall not comprehend him.

Our obligation to love God.
III. PART.
I. THou shall love thy lord God. By how many titles is he Lord? First he is
God. 2, Creator. 3. Conserver, 4. Prince over all the kings of the earth, 5.
Redeemer, 6. Sanctifyer, 7. Judge, 8. Rewarder. And even those qualities which
naturally are awefull, are not in him without motives of love, for though he be
judge, he is also our Advocate, and our Father; and though he be so great a
Prince he ha^h particular care of us all, Sap. 12. 13.
and does nothing injustly.

III. How many ways is he thine? As Creator, and Conserver, and Prince he
gives himself in all creatures which are all for our use, and in them, and with
them he is continually serving us. As Redeemer, and Sanctifyer, he gives us
again himself, and as the Apostle argues, He that spared not his own Son,
Romans 8. 32*
but delivered him for us all, how has he not also given us all with him?
Finally as Rewarder, he gives himself eternally, and in so complete a manner,
that nothing can be mote desired.

III. What is there in the world among the things which either we account, or
desire to be ours, which are more ours, or more to be desired, then God*
Honor, Pleasure, Wealth, Quiet, Power, Friends, in the world are all short,
superficial, transitory; short, because they satisfy but part of our desire;
superficial, because they are ^ore outward, then inward (...) our mind;
transitory, because soon lost, and oftimes so soon as we think we have them;
All things which are desired cannot come in comparison, Prove. 3 15
says the Wise Man: If all things fall short, certainly every thing in
particular is much shorter; and who in the world has all but he that loves
God, who is all in all? And again, if honor be to be desired, the greater
honor is more to be desired, and so of wealth, and pleasure; which greatness
nothing under God can claim.

IV. As therefore by natural obligation, be thou also by thy own choice wholly
his; acknowledging thy subjection to him, and doing him due homage, by
observing all his commands, and follovving his counsels, and flying all things
which may breed a distance. Let thy tongue attend upon his praises, thy ears
harked unto his inspirations; thy eyes behold his wondrous works, thy feet be
ready to go upon his errands, thy hands to labor in his affairs, and thy heart
be wholly his. etc.

Our Obligation to love God.
IV. PART.
I. THou shall love thy Lord, thy God, with thy whole heart; S. August:
when he says with thy whole heart, he leaves no part of thy life vacant, no
place to be given to any other love* Secondly love him with thy whole heart,
that is, with much heat and affection; not coldly, and remisly. Thirdly with
thy whole heart; that is solidly, constantly, vndantedly; not giving way to
whatever opposes, and bearing whatever crosses, and going through whatever
concerns the divine love. Fourthly, with thy whole heart, that is, with a
noble, and large heart, embracing whatever may be for the advantage or will, and
pleasure of God.

II. Thou shall love God with thy whole soul^. Desire conjunction with him, as
the soul does with the body, and be as loath to be separated: labor for
dispositions fiting this conjunction: Have feeling of no thing, but what is for
him, or against him: be ever moving toward him, both thyself, and others also.
Without the soul what is the body. Worse is the soul without God: have a
horror from this separation, both for it self and for the difficulty of
returning: to return to life is a great miracle, so is this.

III. Love him with thy whole mind, and strength, that is, employ the whole
force of thy mind, and body to love him; let nothing occur to thy mind, out of
which thou do not draw some occasion to love him: Be wholly transformed into
love, such as our Savior expressed, when that saying of the Prophet was
verified in him, the zeal of thy house has consumed me; making no reckoning
of temporalls in comparison of the love of God. l0: 217.


Aspirations tending to the increase in the love of God in our souls.
The first Paragraphe.
O My God, my love; Blessed be thy infinite goodness and Charity, Sorrow for
former offenses and omissions*
by whose only gift it comes that I may term thee my love; O love ^ternall!
O that my love had been toward thee continual, as I find, and feel thine to
have been ever permanent toward me.

II. O love, to whom it is never too late to come, though in regard of thy
all-deserving love, all delay is long, all coming is late, because coming is a
sign that there I was not before, whether I now only come.

III. Alas where was I? That now only I may say I come? I know not where I was;
it is a shame for me to say, it is a grief for me to think where I was. This
certainly I know, and must confess to all, that I was not with thee in that
measure of love, which thou ever deservedst of me. O measure without measure!
why do I so measure my affections as not to give them to the^ without any
measure?

IV. I say I come, and I think it is pleasing unto thee; and so it is; for thou
art easyly pleased, and pleased with a little; But in reason I should not still
say I comes because so long as I come, there is some distance betwixt thee and
me; which distance yet if it were only so, that thy Creature cannot be even
with thee. My God, and Creator in love, as I cannot be even with thee in
nature* and Essence, I could be well content; because nothing ought to content
me more, then thy infinite perfection in all things to which no Creature can
arrive. But as long as I say I come, there is some thing else betwixt thee and
me, and not only thy sole infinite goodness which causes this distance.

V. And this grieveth me again, and to think that there should be any thing
betwixt thee and me, or that there should be any creature so bold, as to take
part of my love from thee; or rather; I so foolish as to give it from thee
toward who^ it is apparent injustice, not to give full abu^da^t measure, which
cannot be without giving entirely all.

VI. Come therefore without measure to me, and supply, I beseech thee, with thy
infinite love the many defects which thou find in mine. Come, who art never
absent, neither from those who absent themselves too too often from thee; Apoc.
3: 20.
but stand at the door, and knocest expecting when we will open again unto
thee: Behold, dear God, now my heart is wholly thine; take it, possess it, use
it, fashion it as thou please that it may still be more capable, still more
perfect in thy love. Amen.

The second Paragraphe.
I. ABove all things give me grace to be ever present with thee, The presence
of God.
who art never absent from me: Ever in thee, as thou art in me: Present with
thee by walking in thy sight, who ever see all things, and to whom nothing is
hidden, that I ca^ think, say, or do, in the very secretest corner of my heart,
every twinkling of my eyes thou markest, every glancing of my thoughts thou
judge; Give me grace to mark them, and to judge them myself, that I may
always, as I ought, adjuge them to thee, and direct them for thee, to whom
only they are wholly due, and to no other but for thee.

II. In the light of the sun who is not ashamed to offend: if men look, much
(...): what if a Master, a judge, a king, from whom reward, or punishment is
certainly to be expected? What if my love? Shall I before his face reprochfully
turn myself from him, and embrace in his sight whom he does disdain? O eyes
of pity, pardon that which is past! forgiveme, my love, my many offenses
committed in thy sight: and let this thought of thy Allseeing eye ever fixed
upon me, be a stay to my thoughts, a temper to my actions. that nothing may
pass unbeseeming thy presence.

III. Behold, o my soul, that God does behold thee. O dreadful! o loving
sight! o that I had always lovingly feared thee, and respectfully loved thee,
my God, that thy eyes might have beheld with content thy work vnde filed; but
now give me grace at least to bathe myself with tears, and bitterly to bewail
my many losses, that so I may appear before thee with less shame, and remain
more constant in thy service, through the memory of my finnes, which in all
reason I ought to endeavor to counterpoise with ten thousand times more love,
and more attendance upon thee.

The third Paragraphe.
I. Grant me that I be ever in thee, with a right intention, Right intention.
and with pure Affection, doing all things for thee, and loving nothing in all
that is, but thee alone, who art the life, the love, the All of all things.

II. I know there is no Creature that can in reason ask any thing of me but
for thee, but it will happen some times (as there are many of them many times
unreasonable) they will demand unreasonably* I myself too too often shall be
inclined unreasonably: Grant me that I give them but that which is reason: And
what can be reason which is not for thee? Nothing. Grant me that I give them
nothing but for thee; no thought, no word, no work, no Affection, but distaste
of all things where I find not thee.

III. The whole world is a book, the fairest, the learnedost, the greatest
that ever was made, ^ very creature is a letter, Every Accident a line,
Every motion a sentence, Every disposition a lesson, the whole a most
eloqvent Oration, a most ample Treatise, full of all Rhetorical persuasions;
pregnant in teaching, forcible in moving, pleasant in delighting, sounding out
thy divine praises, speaking thy wonders, inviting to thy service, withdrawing
from thy offense, inflaming in thy love. O that my understanding were so
instructed, my will so inclined, as to apply themselves with profit to read of
these lines, to learn by these lessons. There is nothing but may be used;
nothing but is ordained for my benefit.

IV. VVo to me, my God, that have so long played the Trewant, going daily to
thy School with this thy book about me, and have not yet learned to read
scarce one little letter of it. O my dearest God, my loving Master, teach me to
begin now at least this new Christ-Crosserew, this Alphabet of perfection.
Grant me grace to profit by the occasions which thou show me. Amen.

The fourth Paragraphe.
I. IT is a deceit too too frequent inveigling such as have wavering minds, We
may benefit ourselves by all occurrances:
not settled in thee, no^ resigned to thy will, never content with the state
they are in, still lamenting the miserable case, in which they find themselves,
their occasions of troble, their inward griefs, or outward aggreevances, their
many distractions, and hindrances of thy service; but seldom they think of
thy All disposing providence which ordained even those trobles for the increase
of their merit.

II. O dear God, how often under color of thy better service, of more quiet
and more continual attendance to thy will, have I sought my own will, and
fled the occasions of patience and mortification, lost diver^ acts of
Heroical Humility, and more perfect charity? I thought I had been hindered by
this or that, and even those hindrances thon did ordain, that wrestling
with them, I might have the more glorious victory* and the more tesplendent
crown. It was myself alone that hindered myself of making use of that which
thou lovingly; and graciously did present unto me* by my repining thoughts,
and easefull desires, the sole causes of my daily losses.

III. Away slothful excuses, and deceitful delays: Not when this troble is
past, or that other commodities presents itself, then I will attend to
virtue, and wholly give myself to the service of my God* but now, even now* in
this troble, and distraction whatsoever it be, in this grief and sorrow, in
this company and concurrence of persons, and actions, will I make my best
profit, and find out means to serve thee with perfection my God; for to this
end thou have ordained them: Give me therefore grace, o Lord, to be ever
entirely resigned to thy will, receiving all things from thy blessed hand, and
beholding in all things, not so much the things themselves, as thy
All-disposing Providence, which in them does present me such occasions of
virtue as are best for me, though often times they be not best pleasing unto
me: In virtue, as well as in other things, I may seek myself, and foolishly
please myself in my own inventions* but the way which thou layest before me
must ever be my best rule, and surest direction. Grant that I may direct
myself by it, and ever practice such virtues as are proper to the occasions
which daily happen.

The fifth Paragraphe.
I. A morning oblation* Psalm, 6^
O God, my God, (let me say so with thy Prophet) o thee I watch from the
morning light, my soul has thirsted to thee, my flesh to thee very many
ways. Thou beholdest daily my poor estate, my mind weak in thy service, my
body yet more feeble; yet both desirous of thee, both dedicated to thy
pleasure. To thee I make offer of them both, beseeching thee to enrich them
with thy graces, to innoble them with thy favors, to a^^ist them with thy
forces; establishing my memory i^ good thoughts, replenishing my understanding
with holy discourses* inflaming my will with divine affections, se^ling my
imagination upon good objects; my eyes, my ears, and other senses, disposing
them to profitable impressions, and making my whole carriage such as thy fol^
goodness may be infinitely glorified. Amen.

II. O that all the enemies snares, and gilded ^ookes might be unto me as so
many baits, to draw me to thee! It is possible; because nothing is impossible
to thee, in whom I conside that nothing will be impossible to me, not even that
whatsoever it be in which thou see me most infirm, for thou art my light,
and my salvation, whom shall I fear? Thou the Protecour of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? while the harmefull approach upon me, to eat my flesh (to
devour my soul) my enemies that troble me themselves are weakened, and are
fallen. (...) (of temptations) stand together against me, my heart (...) not
fear; if battle (of affliction) rise upon me, in thee I will hope: for one
thing I have asked of our Lord, this I will seek for, that I may dwell in the
house of our Lord all the days of my life, that I may see the pleasantnes of
my Lord, and visit his temple. The rest I esteem not, but I hope to see the
good things, the great wonders, and favors of thee, my God, ev^cin this land
of the dead, because thou art my helper.

The sixth Paragraphe.
I. Prayer and meditation. Sap. 8
THy conversation has no bitterness. thy company has no tediousnes but all
joy and gladness. Who would not desire to be with thee, all the days of his
life? all the hours of the day? But who is there that is so happy? or rather
who is there that can find this happiness as it is? for certainly thou art ever
with us all the days, all the hours, all the minutes of our life. But who is
there so happy as to find himself well with thee one hour in the day? O that
one hour at least were duly and wholly spent in speaking with thee! O happy
hour!

II. One hour with a worldly Prince, daily in his chamber of presence, to
negotiate our business, to propose our necessity, to beg his protection, to
present our petitions, to receive his graunts, what a benefit would it worthyly
be esteemed? One hour at table for our corporal sustenance is not willingly
omitted, for what^oever business; it helps rather then hinders dispatch. And
who would be either so discourteous toward thee, or so cruel toward
himself, as to neglect such a favor, of sitting one hour at thy blessed
table, to take such heavenly repast as thou afordest to thy servants, in prayer
and contemplation? Who that is wise will overslip the commodity of having so
ample, and so favorable audience, of so noble and so liberal a king?

III. True it is, that in all places, and at all times, thy eyes are upon me,
thy ears are open unto me; if I cry unto thee, thou will willingly hear me,
who stand thyself, and cryest always alowde to my soul; and therefore no
hour in the day ought to pass, in which I must not turn my heart to thee, to
give, and to receive (though always in giving I do receive, because my very
giving is abundantly to receive from thee; yet foolish, and ungrateful were ^,
if because of this lesser means of benefiting myself, I should forgo thy
greater favor, and such a favor with out which this other is commonly either
cold* or not frequent. Flames and sparks do not rise bu^ from a greater fire,
or if they chance with out such fire to rise, their continuance is but short,
and they are but of little force.

IV. O my God, my love; when I think of the multit^de of waters and forcible
streams of several distractions, which are wont to be heaped all the day upon
this little burning flash, the little fire of ^ervour* which I may raise, what
can I do, but turn myself to thee, and with what courage and strength I can,
not of mine own, but of thine, offer myself unto thee, and cast myself into
thy arms and say: Here, take me, I am thine, use me as thou will, I will not
from thee: put me to what thou will, so thou always keep me thine; for thine
I will be wha^ soever come of me.

The seventh Paragraphe.
I. THou tendrest us all as thy decrest Children, created to thy Image,
Conversation*
redeemed with thy blood, exalted to be thy fr^e^ds, fellow heirs, and
spouses; give (...) grace so to behave myself, so to deal with others, as
always I may have this in mind; if thou grant me this, I shall never have
the face to be careless of myself, or disdaynefull of others, but shall bear
due respect and love toward all, desirous to do for them, all that I may for
the love of thee.

II. It is true, there be many things, which may easily make me enter into
misconceite of others, and grow into neglect, and by little and little into
contempt of thy servants, if I take not heed, (as their imperfections of mind
and body) but I know it is my part (and I hope thou will give me grace to
remember it) to weigh most of all mine own many miseries both of body and
soul; many which show themselves without, and many more which lie hidden
within me (which thou only know) and therefore to humble myself in the sight
of all: And in them, to consider the many gifts of nature and grace which thou
have either bestowed upon them, or peradventure laid up in store for them; and
perchance in heaven I shall be glad to sit at their feet.

III. O that this, and such like considerations could befixed in my mind! how
affable meek, how servicable should I be to all? It is thy only lesson in a
manner, or most properly thine, when, that which thou had showed by thy
example, coming down from heaven to live among us in that manner, as thou
livedst, thou declarest in words, saying, learn of me, because I am meek, and
humble of heart.

IV. It is besid^ the way to gain others to thee, Matthew. 11. ^9.
in whatsoever state they be; it breeds in them confidence, and freedom, and
openes of mind, which is the only true way that brings a soul to thee:
where as rudenes, sadness, untimely ieasts, or inconsiderate gestures, rising of
passion in one kind or other, be the breeders of distaste, and the overthrow of
all; much more to contend, or to wrangle with those with whom we deal. Rather
I must yeald, not only to betters, or to my equals, but even in many things to
my inferiors, and follow their opinion against my own, when otherwise there
is no special inconvenience.

The eight Paragraphe.
I. O My God; infinite is the Circumspection, Circumspection.
which I see I must have to live in this world, to give satisfaction to all,
and above all to thee. I see, I must be careful of not showing any particular,
or otherwise inordinate affection to any, or disaffection from any, though
there should seem just cause: ^ must be patient in bearing, where I perchance
may have received the wrong: patient in hearing whatsoever complaints of myself
or others, if it be committed to my charge to have any little care of others:
Never making show of much have or of great business; much less of unwillingness
to give free access to any, though the parties seem importune, prolix,
passionate unapt to receive satisfaction, impertinent, though tempted against
myself: but with all mildnes intertayning them, when they shall require it, and
if business will not permit, appointing them with all quiet some other certain
hour.

II. I must not, my God, be easy of belief, but esteem it, as it is, the
ruin of the household whersoever shall live the disunion of those with whom I
shall deal: It is the bane of charity to give facill hearing, and easy credit
to that which is first related. I know that many things are said, otherwise
then they are, even by virtuous and holy persons, not faynedly, falsely, or
always with offense of God, but good men, being men as others be, they may be
also in these things deceived: Wherefore one ear must be kept for the contrary
part, and my mind rather incline to excuse, then to condemn, to defend rather
then to oppress; to all meeknes and lenity, rather then to rigor and
austeritie, as much as the order of true charity will permit.

III. Moreover I know thou would have me to have a special care of the
credit and good opinion of all, not only in my own mind to think well of them,
and not easyly settle my judgment, though upon somewhat apparent defects: But
also with all others, concealing their defects, whersoever it may be done; and
when any seek to amend their faults (be they never so great) receiving them
and esteeming them, as if never any thing had happened amiss: for so thou of
thy infinite goodness dealest with us, forgeting our offenses, where thou
find repentance and rewarding us in all things far above our deserts.

The ninth Paragraphe.
I. Patience.
O Patience! O longanimitie! O perseverance! O evenes of mind, and external
carriage! O courage and magnanimity! O indifference! O confidence! O feeling of
thy providence! O my God, where shall I find all this, but in thee, my God, my
love; whose nature is goodness, whose works is mercy? Jf we see a poor
creature, we are moved with pity; we give what we can to releeve his
necessity. Thou see my wants; I need not say thou art rich in all this, and
much more; I need not say, thou art good, and infinitely good, or that thou art
mighty, and infinite I mighty; co^ceive it would be enough that thou see my
thoughts, in which are both ever represented thy riches and my pove^tie; I say
no more, I trust in thy goodness that thou will assist me; I am assured in t^y
love that thou will help me; more certain I am that thou will help thyself,
and dispose all things so as they may be best for thy glory, which when thou
do, thou satisfiest me, who am the slave of thy honor, born to nothing else,
but to attend thy ever blessed will and pleasure.

II. I must confess I would oftimes be shut of those distractions, me thinks
in humility I ought to desire it, because I am not so much as worthy of the
name, of thy unprofitable servant. Me thinks charity toward them, whom thou
love, and among whom I live requires no less, but seeing thou ordaynest so,
I have no cause to complain or to ^hrink. The greatest humility is to be
subject to thee; the greatest charity is to conform myself to thy holy
disposal; I yeald myself therefore wholly and freely to thee, for I will be no
more mine own but thine.

III. But this in love and ^inceritie I must make bold to tell thee, that the
lesser my ability is, or my virtue, thine must be the greater care; for I
account myself to be but thy instrument: in what soever good work; thou art
the directour, thou art the workman, I am as it were the Plain, or chisill in
thy All-skisfull hand. Jf therefore I be blunt or crooked, the more is thy
pain, the more is thy care; I in so good a hand, cannot but do well; only
give me grace not to shrink out of thy hand, but to remain as thou have made
me; for the very remaining will better me; the very benefit of thy using me in
thy service, will give me new servour, and set a sharper edge on my decayed
desires

IV. To thee a great deal more then to me it appertains that thy business
be well done. Watch therefore, and be careful, and use me as thou please. I
know thou do not use me because thou need me, but only of thy infinite
goodness, for thy glory and my good; as therefore thou art careful of thy
glory, and desirous of my good, so careful art thou and so desirous of my
faithful discharge.

The tenth Paragraphe.
I. What more to say I know not, not because there is not infinitely more to
be said of thy infinite goodness, Resignatio.
and of my wants, but because I know not where well to begin, or when I
should end if I should enter any further. I feel besides that all finally must
be resolved in this, that thou must help me; thou must instruct me; thou must
guide me, thou must strenghthen me, thou must be All in all, and I suffer
myself in thy hand to be dealt with as thou please. I see not what I need
greatly say more, but yeald myself joyfully to thy disposition, and daily
purpose, and endeavor by thy grace not to hinder thy work, and seek to
redress what I may find does disturb it.

II. But alas* whether shall I go to seek, Here again I enter into an other
wood; and how shall I get out of so many busshes, such thorny briars, and
deep-rooted brambies, as I find in my soul? well may I be pricked among them
with sorrow and grief; well may my soul be rent with affliction, but to pull
them all away, and give thee free passage, how shall I do it? It is possible
to thee* to whom nothing is impossible, but for me i^ is wholly and absolutely
impossible.

III Yet why do I say it is absolutely impossible? I remember a great servant
of thine was wont to say, that if we did but in a whole year, root out one
only vice, we should be quickly perfect. O infinite goodness! have thou so
great patience? Examen. Th. a Ke l. 1. c. 11. ^. 5.
or is it possible to be so? I^ is doubtless, for thou leavest not thy friends,
to be so foully deceived as they should be if it were not so. Therefore seeing it
is so, I dare be a little more bold, and offer unto thee my endeavor, not
every year alone, but every month* o^ two, to do the best I can, to root
out some one thing, that I may find to be a hinderance to thee. In which I have
this comfort, that fighting against one ^ I shall certainly together with that
one pull up many more besides, because when I pull at one principal one, I
shall shake the roots of all that be about it, and dependant of it, and
plucking it out I shall pull the rest with it.

IV. And not so must Iayme at one, but that of all I must have a special care.
O infinite care? No I presume if I can sometimes in the day amidest all my
trobles recall my mind to thee, it will be sufficient; thy grace will be ready,
when at other times business will not le^ me be so attentive to thee, if when I
can, I be careful to accustom myself to think of thee. Yet more trust I in
thy infinite goodness; that though sometimes I should be so careless as not to
think upon thee, when there is occasion, yet if I be careful to enter into
myself and acknowledge and judge my offenses (though it were but once in a day)
and bewail them in thy sight, in my secretretirement, with purpose of
amendment, and humble confidence in thy grace, ^ trust, I say, in thy infinite
goodness, thou will perdon me for the present, and give me plenty of thy grace
to be more watchful over myself an other day, and more mindful of thee, my
God, ever after.

The eleventh Paragraphe.
I. BEhold, o my love, how bold I am with thee, how far I have stretched and
strayned thy love, thy infinite goodness! Beginning with sorrow, that I was not
wholly with thee, Our mutabilitie.
and ending with care that I be not wholly from thee. O Creature that I am! what
can I say other, but that it is the property of all creatures in this
changeable world to be thus subject to change. Tho^ know it better then I
myself that feel it, and smart daily for it: And therefore thou have patience
with me, greater then I can many times find in my heart to have with myself; and
yet alas, I have too too much patience, or rather Indulgence, when I see, and
say nothing, and let myself go so far, that where to find myself I cannon
oftimes tell, but only that I am sure I am too too far from thee.

II. O my God; my love; Behold I come again, and desire to draw as near thee
now, as I was far gone before. I am bold to say so, I am bold to do so,
because of thy infinite and ever permanent love, which cannot be overcome with
ten thousand times ten thousand changes of mine in this kind; thou love me,
though I leave thee, that I may return unto thee; Thou love me when I
approach unto thee, that I may be ever more inward with thee; love me now for
ever, that I may ever stay with thee; for this is my only desire, never more to
part from thee.

III. To this purpose I give myself wholly unto thee now and for ever. This gift
of mine I daily intend to renew, till that everlasting day comes, when there
will be no more renewing, because transformed into thee we shall be always
new, and ever permanently conjoined in love with thee without decay, which that
it may quicly be I humbly beseech thee, my God, my love, Amen.

The twelfe Paragraphe.
I. Desire of being dissolved:
O happy day, when shall I see thee? O everlasting day, when shall I enjoy
thee? Too too long be these short and ever decaying days the evens of that one
day which never fails, when will they pass? Too too many be these changing
days, the forerunning nights of that which never changes, when will they be
at an end? O end! The break of that day which will never end, Job. 10. 1.
when will thou come? My soul is weary of this wearisome life, I will send
forth my speech against myself, I will speak in the bitterness of my mind, I
will say unto God. Ps. 26. 13.
When shall I see the good things of my Lord in the land of the living? Psalm.
41. 3.
My soul has thirsted after thee my God, when shall I come, and appear
before thy face. My tears are unto me my daily bread while it is said unto me
every day, where is thy God?

II. Alas every day it is here said unto me, where is thy God? And betwixt so
many days, and nights, as I find daily, and hourly in myself, now rising, now
falling, while I loose thee, and I leave thee; through my manifold
imperfections, and do scarce for one minute perfectly hold thee, what a life
do I live? What death had I not rather die? That once with thy thrice happy
spouse having passed these transitory days, and these too too do^btfull
nights, Cant. 3 4.
I may say; I have found whom my soul does love, I hold him, and I will not
let him go.

III. Here if one ask me where thou art, my God, I must confess thou art a
far of, Ps. 137. 6.
because a far of thou do behold those which are not humble. Ps. 29. 8.
Thou turnest away thy face, Ps. 114. 3.
and I am filled with affliction; sorrows of death do compass me round
about, dangers of Hell do presently assalt me, and whether to turn myself to
seek thee, ^antie. 1.
and to find thee, I cannot tell. Show me, O my love, where thou feedest, where
thou restests at noone day, when the heat of temptation scorcheth my soul,
that flying under the shadow of thy wings, I may feed, where thou feedest and
rest, where thou restest, and not beging to wander after the droves of these
imperfect comforts, in which there is no quiet rest, no solid food.

IV. Show me rather my God, that everlasting noone, in thy heavenly city,
Apoc. 2^ 23.
where neither son, nor Moon do shine, but thou art the ever permanent
comfortable light of all the inhabitants; that there I may rest, and feed with
thee, without danger of resting in any other but in thee, or of feeding of any
thing but of thy only self: for in this world I see there is no rest, but
continual tumbling, and tossing from one thing to an other; and who is he that
amidst so many boisterous winds, and ways can continually hold thee? Since thy
blessed Apostle, the beloved disciple, gives Sentence upon us all that we are
subject not only to loose thee by many distractions, but also to leave thee by
sins by too too many, and daily imperfections.

V. And who knows, but thou, o my loving God! whether in this very desire of
mine to be ever with thee in bliss, since I cannot be ever with thee in this
fearful banishment, there lies not secretly hidden more love of myself, then
perfect love of thee? O hard vncertanti^! I am delighted with the love of God,
Phil. ^. 32
and drawn to desire to enjoy it everlastingly, there where it only ever
permanently lasts, I desire it, and beg it according to the inward man, but
I see another love, which I fear creeps in with it* rep^gnant to that
perfect love, and pure desire which I should have of thee. Unhappy man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this doubtful and uncertain state.

VI. I am in streights on every fide; if I remain, I am in doubt whether I
shall ever remain with thee: rather I am certain I shall often shrink from
thee, Jacob 3. ^
for i^ many things we do all offend. Jf I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with thee; thy Apostle says, it is a thing much more better, and yet he
himself, what he shall choose he knows not; because to abide in flesh is
necessary for thy service. But alas, what necessity can there be of me that
am so vnprositable? Thou will say, that all must think and say of themselves,
that they are unprofitable Servants, Luc. 17. 10.
even when they have done their very best in thy service. It is so: And
therefore, be I profirable, or vnp^ofitable I know not what more to say, or do,
but yeald myself wholly into thy hands to do with me as thou please. Take me,
or leave me as thou think good. Hastenme, or differ me, as thou see
reason. I refuse not the labor, if tho^ think me profitable; I will bear
patiently to be differred, if thou judge me unworthy; yer still I am
streightened of the two, having desire to be dissolved and desire to be with
thee, which is by thy own Confession in thy blessed Apostle, a thing much more
better.

Intertaynments of our Blessed Savior when we receive him in the Blessed
Sacrament. First as God.
I. AT the birth of our blessed Savior, the swathing bands did not hinder us
from believing that infant to be God, or stop the Angels from singing. Luc. 2.
14.
Glory to God in the higest degree, and from adoring him, but do incite us
the more to admire, and love his goodness: the resemblances of bread and wine,
remaining after consecration in this blessed Mystery, must not in like manner
be any hinderance to us from believing the truth contained under them,
delivered in our Saviors own words. This is my body, Mat^. 26.
this is my blood, that is, the living body, and blood of our Savior, and
consequently his blessed soul, and divinity, God and man, the eternal word
made flesh for our sakes. And as in them we adore his power, we admire his
wisdom, we embrace his infinite goodness; we do not argue from his immensitie,
that he could not be contained in the manger; nor from his unity in essence
with the Faiher, and the holy Ghost, that he alone could not be man; nor from
his immortality, that he could not suffer; but do submit as to the manner,
and do believe the substance; so we must raise our thoughts, in this Mystery
to believe his real presence, though in a way incomprehensible to our short
understanding, and adore the person of the Son of God our Savior; not
arguing from his quantity, that he cannot confine himself to so little room;
nor from his unity, that he cannot at once be in so many places; nor from his
Majesty, that he will not stoop to so mean an action, as to be daily
handled, and received by us; but so much the more admire his goodness, that as
there once so here daily he does give himself unto us. O blessed Angels who in
multitudes did adore him at his coming into the world, Heb. 1. 6.
though in a disguise far different from your apprehensions, with you I do
willingly submit my weak conceits, and do adore here present, the living God,
the eternal word made flesh for us. O blessed host! with how much reverence
art thou to be handled, and received, seeing the ground on which Moses stood,
when God appeared to him, Exo. 3. 5.
was holy; for here the holy of holyes is contained after a more sublime
manner; put (my Soul.) thy shoes from thy feet, that is, from thy
apprehension, and affection, all inferior thoughts, and with eyes of faith
behold this great sight; I am he that is* He that is does vouchsafe to be thus
among us for our relief. This is this name for ever, and this his memorial
from generation to generation.

II. Anciently when God resolved to manifest himself to the Childred of Israel,
thunder and lightening went before him, Ex. 19. 18*
the mountain was covered with a thick cloud of smoke, and all the people
trembled at the clashing of the skies, and heard the noise of the trumpets, and
they were commanded not to approach least multitudes of them might perish by the
fire. Lord God of hosts terrible, Ex. 15. (...)
and worthy of all praise, working wondrous things, what but thy own infinite
goodness could induce thee thus to change thy style, and work this wonder of
wonders, that thou whose voice is like thunder, and lightening, able to break
into shyvers the highest Cedars, should thus meekely appear among us, not
in a cloud of smoke, Ps. 28. ^.
but under the resemblances of bread and wine, inviting us to thy table? Come
eat of my bread, and drink the wine which I have mingled for you. There,
though sanctified according to the law, the people were forbidden to approach
under pain of death; Rom, 9. ^^
here thou invitest us, that we may live, if we will but observe thy law: shall
not my soul be subject to God for from him is salvation. He is my God, Psal^.
^^^
and my Savior, my defense, and I shall not be: (...).

III. Finally presenting thyself before our Savior, and bowing to the ground
with Moses say. Exodus 34 6
O Lord, Lord God, merciful, and grations, patient, and abundant in mercy, and
truth, reserving (...) for thousands, I acknowledge the great honor which
thou do to me, and to all man kind, forgive my transg^essions; pardon my
vnreverent behavior toward thee: Esaias 6.
The Seraphims cover thie^ faces in thy presence, while adoring thy greatness
they sing unto thee, Holy, Holy, Holy full is all the earth of thy glory To me
what is due but confusion in thy sight, who am not able to conceive the least
part of thy worthynes? Benedicite Dommo omnes Angeli ejus. O blessed Angels of
heaven, and all Creat^res, Sun, Moon, and Sta^res, Mountains, and valleys,
fruits of the earth, and sea, young and old, supply my wants! with them all I
do prostrate myself at thy feet, begging th^^ thou will co^serve us in the
order thou have created us, and that we may be ever subject to thy blessed
will, and ordination. Amen. Whence is it that thou come to me? Who am I, Th.
a Ke.
that thou should give me thyself? How dares a sinner appear before thee?
And how comes it that thou vouchsafest to come to a sinner. l. 4. c. ^. n. 1


Intertaynment of our Savior as King.
I. THat our Savior is a king, is among Christians undoubted; 10. 18. 37.
Apoc. 19. 16.
himself ackowledging it before Pilate, and in the Apocalips we read that, he
has in his garment, and on his thigh, written, king of kings and Lord, of
Lords; So that he is not only as other Princes, kings, and Lords, of a parcel
of ground, bounded and confined with in certain limits, but he is king over
the whole universe; and as such, even in this disguise, we must acknowledge him;
and prostrating ourselves in his presence with the four and twenty ^lders,
and laying all the Crowns of heaven and earth at his feet, Apoc. 4. 10
profess that he alone is worthy to receive all gloris and honor, from every
creature in heaven and earth, and under the earth; and however he has not here
that visible attendance which kings of the earth use to have; it is for our
sake that he conceales it, that we may have the more free access to him; for
as he said to S. Peeter in the garden with one word he could show us, Matt. 25
53
that he has at hand above twelve legions of Angels to attend him.

II. The part of a good subject is, not only to acknowledge the right of his
Prince, and to do him corpo^all reverence, but to his power he must keep the
kings peace, observe his laws, and also suppress disturbers, so far as it
may conce^ne him in duty to do it. Luc* 17 27
Now our Savior tells us that his kingdom is within us; with in ourselves
therefore we must keep peace, and watch upon the quiet of our souls;
suppressing our passions; which are the only disturbers, and not countermanded
do break the peace betwixt God, and us, and his other subjects, which are our
neighbors. Jn this occasion therefore of receiving, or of being present at the
holy Sacrifice, it is fitting we should offer unto him our endeavor, one day
in the week or one week in the month, to watch upon the passion of anger
that it does not disband; another day or week upon fear, that it do not
withdraw us from our duty, another upon too much inclination to liberty, or
to sloth, and idleness; and so upon the rest of our passions, or inclinations,
or also upon our senses, our ears, our tongue, our sight, etc. That we may
become, and persever perfectly subject to him, and he reign peaceably in our
souls.

III. And because here he does offer himself not only to the view of his
people, to be worshipped by them, and to take their allegiance, but also to be
intertayned; as when kings go their progress, they appoint their lodgings, and
send their harbingers before them; seeing he is pleased to choose thy heart for
one of his stations, beg of him that the will be also pleased, to send his
harbingers, who are his holy Angels, and ^aincts, to take up the rooms for
him; and joining thyself to them adorn with the virtues, which they suggest*
all the powers of thy soul; thy Memory with representations of his own noble
act^, and royal favors bestowed upon thee, and upon all mankind; thy
understanding with reflections upon his infinite perfection and worth; thy will
with acts of submission, love, and thanksgiving: Thy Irascible power, with
resolution against whatsoever sin past, or hear after to be suggested to
thee: The Concupiscible, with desires of purity, and of himself alone,
addressing thyself to those Saints in particular in whom thou have most
special confidence.

IV. Finally present thy petition to him; and that it may be pertinent, do not
neglect to think well before hand what is best, and most necessary for thee to
demand; and let i^ be with full resignation to his blessed will, to obtain, or
not to obtain what thou ask in particular; being assured that he will do
for thee for the best: and however, fail not to repeat often in this occasion
that which himself has put into our mouth, Thy kingdom come: that it may be
once universally spread over the whole world, and that in those who are under
thy charge thou may ever have care to maintain it. Luc* 19. 38.
Amen. Blessed is he that does come king in the name of our Lord; Peace in
heaven, and glory in the higest.

Intertaynment of our Savior as spouse of our soul.
I. S. Gregory upon the parable delivered by our Savior of a king who made a
marriage for his Son says, S. Grego.
that God the Father did then make a marriage for his eternal Son, when he
joined him to humane nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin; and again,
when through this mystery of his Incarnation he did as it were wed him to Holy
Church. Ep. 5. 32.
According to that of the Apostle speaking of Matrimony. This is a great
Sacrament, or Mystery, but I say in Christ, and in the Church to wit,
perfected, and completed in the loving coniunctio^ of Christ with his Church,
and consequently with every soul that in it does conserve his grace, and love.
Which conjunction he does renew and confirm^ with new demonstrations of love,
every time that we do worthily receive him; in so much that we may justly make
account that every such time he says unto us, as in Ozea the Prophet, Oztae 2.
19.
I will betroth thee unto me for ever; I will betroth thee unto me in justice,
and sanctity, and in judgment, (over thy enemies) and in mercy (taking pity
of thy infirmities) and in faith, and fidelity unto thee: O my soule^ Where
shall I have thoughts and forces sufficient to thank my Savior for such
exceeding love? or what do I stand so long demurring, as if there could be an
offer made more honorable, or more beneficial? O mercy incomparable!
prostrate at thy feet, I do adore thy love, and by thy mercy do promise
faythfullnes unto thee.

II. The day of marriage is a day of joy; the bride is as costly attired as her
state will affoard; friends and kinsfolk are invited, and gifts presented. So we
read in S. Jhon, speaking of the last act thereof, of which this is a figure,
let us be glad, and rei^yc^, and give glory to God, because the marriage of the
lamb is come, Apoc. 19. 7.
and his wife has prepared herself, and it was given her that she should cloth
herself with silk, glittering and white; and the silk are the iu^tifications of
the saints. With these, by the grace of God which is given us, we must prepare
ourselves before hand; not satisfied with slight endeavor, but imitating the
diligence, and care of Gods saints, and exercising acts of virtue, which may
deserve the name of silk, and not of courser sturf; and with the like care
conserving our souls white, and resplendent in the sight of our spouse, with
out spot of sin, or too much affection to what ever creature. O saints of
God! Where shall I find these silks? I give glory notwithstanding to my God
that he does not despise my poverty: It is a rule approoved by thee. According
to thy ability be merciful. If thou have much, Tob. 4. ^.
give abundantly; if thou have but little, give willingly a little. That which
I have I give wholly unto thee, and do beg that by thyself, and by thy
saints, thou will supply my wants, and take compassion of me, who do not
turn away thy face from those that ca^^ upon thee.

III. Reflect more particularly upon the greatenes of this match, and the
beneficiallnes of it; for in all matches, the Bride is made noble by the
noblenes of the bridegroom, groom, and he indowes her with his person, and
substance; where upon the Prophet foretells, that the Church of God and every
faithful soul shall have a new name, Esaias. 62 2
which the mouth of our Lord shall give it, and that he will rejoice or take
contentment in such a soul, as a bridegroom does in the bride; and she shall
be to him as a crown of glory, and a royal diadem, that is, so much
esteemed by him. And the argument of the Apostle is here also in force. Romans 8
32
He that has delivered for us his own Son, how has he not also with him
given us all things? So that, honor and profit inviting us, what can we say,
but humbly yeald ourselves his servants, admiring his goodness beyond all
desert, and endeavoring not to dishonor ourselves, and him, by any base act
whatsoever, all sort of greevous synns being termed in holy writ spiritual
adultery, in regard of the fidelity which we owe to him. and the link of
love which he desires should be betwixt us, and the obligation which we have
unto it.

Intertaynment of our Savior as he is the good shepherd.
I. This title he gives himself, and with-all, the qualities of the good
shepherd; l0. 10. ^^
I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd gives his life for his sheep:
Call to mind the life of our Savior, from the beginning, to the end, and thou will easily discover, how truly he may say, he has given it all, and wholly for
thee; and with much more reason then Jacob said to Laban, Genesis 31. 40
day and night I was parched with heat, and cold, and sleep did depart from
my eyes, and so for twenty years I served thee; and then standing betwixt the
infernal wolf and us, he suffered himself to be torn in pieces, rather then
we should perish. O loving Jesus! Whence comes it that thou do thus own us
for thine, and take so much care of us? It is thy own merciful goodness, that
puts thee to this troble, and pain with us, sylly creatures, and apt to be led
astray; I acknowledge myself unable to defend myself; thou art my protector,
Psalm 143.
in thee I do place my hope. etc.

II. The benefit which we reap by this his care is in comparable; he
performing toward us that which he foretold, Ezech. ^^ 16
and promised by Ezechiel, I will seek that which was lost, and bring back
that which was driven away; and will bind up that which was broken, and
strenghten that which was infirm, and preserve that which is strong, and in
good liking. Which is that which he says of himself in S. Jhon. l0. 10 ^^
I came that they should have life, and should have more abundantly, that is,
more easy, and more plentiful means toward salvation, and daily grow more
perfect, by this his care and liberality. And again, as my Father knows me,
and does acknowledge me for his Son, with love due from a Father to a Son,
l0. 10. ^^
so do I know, and acknowledge my sheep, and am as tender of the^ as of
children.

III. In consequence whereof he says further, that he knows every one of his
sheep by name, and takes particular notice of every one, none excepted* he
goes before them, to show them the way by his own example, and puts them to
^o hardness, which himself has no endured for them; he provideth them pasture,
and such as the world cannot sufficiently admire: S. Ihon Chrysos^ome.
That, at which the Angels tremble and dare not freely fix their eyes upon,
that is our food; to him we are united, and made one flesh with him, Psalm. 105 ^
who can express the power of our Lord, and set forth all his praises? What
shepherd does feed his sheep with his own blood? Many Mothers do put forth
their Chrildren, to others to nurse: He has not endured to deal thus by us;
he feeds us with his own blood, and does wholly unite himself unto us.

IV. O my soul! How is it possible thou should not love this good
shepherd, to whom nothing is too dear that may be beneficial to thee? How
comes (...) that thou do not always hear his voice, and follow him, but
turnest thy self to a stranger, who will lead thee into ways, of which at last
with grief thou will confess, that thou have gone astray from the way of
truth, Sap. ^^
and wearyed thyself in the way of iniquity, and perdition, and gone ^agy
ways, and not known the way of our Lord His ways are full of pleasure, and
his paths peaceable, and free from danger I will hear what my Lord God does
speak in me, Prove. 3 17.
for he will speak peace to his people, Psalm. 84 9
and to those that return into their heart, for his salvation is nigh those
that fear him.

Intertaynment of our Savior as he is our Teacher, or Master.
I. Luc. 10. 39.
CAll to mind how Marie Magdalen, having Christ her Guest, sat at his feet,
hearing hi^ word; and make account that no less happiness has befallen thee,
the day that thou receivest him in the blessed Sacrament, or art present at the
holy sacrifice; for to this effect S. Jhon Chrysostom says complaining and
answering. S Ihon chrysostom.
How many do now say, I would see his feature his garments, his shoes:
Behold, thou do see him, thou do touch him, thou do receive him; thou
desire to see his garments, and he does thee a greater favor, that thou may
not only see him, but touch him, and receive him with in thee sit therefore
down at his feet, and harken to his divine words: Consider the excellency of
this master* his infinite comprehension of all things; his excessive desire of
benefiting thee; his resolution to spare no labor and pains for thy
instruction; the impossibility of his being deceived or mistaken, or of having
any will to misinforme thee; and withal, the importance of his doctrine; as
concerning no less then our eternal welfare, and that upon the point, he is,
and ought to be our only master, whom above all others, we must hear, Ma^^h.
23 ^o
and harken to no body against him.

II. In this life time he had many places from whence he did teach the people;
the Temple, private houses, the open fields, and mountains, whether people did
flock after him by many thousands; and (...) his enemies did conf^sse that
never did man speak as this man* Io. 7. 46
This day he saves thee the labor of running after him; he is come to thee,
and has choosen thy heart for his chair; say with young Sam^el, ^ Reg. 3. 10
speak o Lord, for thy servant hears. Say with the Prophet Esaias. Our Lord
has opened my ear; I will not gain say; ^say 50 5.
I will not turn back. O my Jesus, forgive me many reluctances to thy heavenly
inspirations: I acknowledge thy goodness toward me, and thy desire of my
welfare, my heart is at thy command, make what impression in it thou please;
how over hard I have been heretofore to receive them, now I desire to be like
wax in thy hand* to temper it according to thy own mind which shall be ever
mine etc.

III. The need which we have, and the benefit which we receive by this our
master, will be more plain unto us, if we reflect how many ways, and in how
many things we are of ourselves ignorant, and apt to mistake, or to be misled:
How often do obscurities rise in us concerning the knowledge, the goodness, the
providence of Almighty God? What fears and anxieties do accompany them?
How often does vice insinuate itself under color of virtue? our faith, our
hope, our Charity is assalted by the wily serpent: Ps* 118 68
Say with the royal Prophet, thou art good; through thy goodness teach me thy
justification. Teach me, not as other teachers, whose words sound in my ears,
but touch not my heart; Marci ^ 22
teach me as having power withal, to dispose one with heart and hand to follow
thy doctrine. O divine master, I do give thee full power to mould this my heart
as thou think best. S: August
I say with S. Augustine, give what thou command and command what thou
please. I say again with thy royal Prophet, give me understanding, and I
will search into thy law, and keep it with my whole heart; lead me in the path
of thy commandments, for it is that which I desire.

Intertaynment of our Savior as he is our Physician.
I. A Chief employment of our Savior while he lived among us, was to cure the
sick, and the blind, and the lepers, and people touched with the palsy, and
other diseases, preserving the life of many, and giving life again to others;
and we may observe with what eagernes the people flocked to him from all sides
for their cure, Mar^i 6 ^^
in so much that the Ghospel says, there were so many that came, and went,
that he had not leisure to eat his meat: His intent was by it to cure their
souls from their dead pal^es, and lamenes and bli^dnes; and to give them the
true life, which is his knowledge, and a will to serve him. O that I did half
so lively apprehend the danger, and troble of my spiritual diseases and death?
how eagerly should I run to this heavenly Physician, from whom alone I can
have relief? O dullnes! that I must be so often put in mind of my own good,
and be so ^low in seeking it? and why do I say in seeking it? he presents
himself unto me, and seeks after me to cure me; and instead of taking a
reward, he will reward me being cured.

II. The Blessed Sacrament is termed the Sacrament of the living, and nor of
the dead, because if our souls be dead by mortal sin (which God forbid) we
must first confess our synns, and have absolution, and so be restored to life,
that we may receive our Lord; otherwise instead of cure we give ourselves
another wound, and do incur greater damnation, and that which is ordained
for our good turns to our greater harm. Yet for the receiving of that life,
he is our Physician whom we receive in this Sacrament; the Priest being his
minister, and he by the mouth of the Priest pronouncing absolution; and here he
confirms, and strengthens the same life in us by his blessed presence, and
by more abundant grace bestowed, giving us more strength to overcome
temptations, keeping of our Ghostly enemy by himself; and by his holy Angels
accompanying him, and asswaging the heat of our concupiscences, and earthly
desires; and the oftener we come devoutly to him, the more we shall find these
gracious effects to be wrought in us; that we may humbly say with the Apostle.
Heretofore I was blasphemous, ^ Tim. ^^3
and a persecutour, but I have obtained mercy.

III. Life is defined to be the beginning, or fountain of motion, or
operation; we are said to live, so long as we can move, and so is a tree, or a
plant, so long as it can put forth; when we see no more such effect, we say, it
is dead. In which respect charity, or the love of God, being the life inherent
in our souls, S. Gregory says, that the proof of charity is the exhibition
of the work: and our Savior himself. I0. 14. 2^
He that bath my commandments; and does keep them, he it is that loves me;
our Savior in nature of a Physician comes to us to strengthen this life, by
the cordial compound of his own precious body and blood, delivere^ unto us
under the shapes of bread and wine; that by the devout receiving, we may both
breath out the superfluous, and corrupted humors remaining after our purgation
and cure; and with more rigor apply ourselves to the exercises of Christian
duty, to which by his charitable assistance, we must concur; first, by
giving time to the working of this heavenly receite, by some little
recollection, and not instantly ingulfe ourselves in our wonted worldly
affairs; and secondly, by renewing our good purposes in his presence, and
begging of him that he will bless them, and those most in which we fear we
shall have most difficulty to accomplish; toward which also we may justly
expect he will suggest some special remedy to a willing mind.

Intertaynment of our Savior as he is our Redeemer.
I. THe word Redeemer does import, that the redeemed being once e^ther free, or
in the power of one, comes to be subject to another, and is bought out of that
subjection; so was man by his creation wholly Gods, and being left free, as to
his will, he fell by sin vou^ltarily into the possession, and power of the
devil and as his captive, and prisoner, was loded with a thousand miseries, and
egged on daily from one sin to another, till dying in sin he should be
eternally condemned to the prison, and pains of hell fire; and no power under
God being able to rescue him, the Son of God our Savior offered to pay his
ransom, and to give him again his freedom; whereby he might remain in Gods
possession perpetually, by his own free choice, as well as he was by nature,
and come to enjoy the happiness which God had laid up for him. The price where
with he was ransomed, was the body and blood, and life of our Savior laid
down for us upon the cross i this very body, and blood, and life, himself
does here present us in the Sacrament, that we may make a grateful oblation of
it to our heavenly Father, as the price of our redemption in particular, and
represent unto him with joy, and thanksgiving, our freedom to serve him,
pro^essing that we will never give way to any other to possess us.

II. This benefit of our redemption will appear in a better light, if we
consider the misery of the slaverie in which we were, or are by sin. And
first by sin from reasonable creatures we turn unreasonable, and the longer
we continue in sin, the more vnreasonnable we become; not unlike the man
mentioned in the Gospel, whose habitation was not among men, but in the
fields, and dens, Marci 5.
among beasts, and beastly company; ^aked, having lost all shame; Luc. 8. 26.
and could not be held within any compass but ranged about breaking through
all bonds of the law of God and man: and being possessed by a legion of Devils,
did not understand that they were his masters who did egg him on to his own
destruction, in so much that he cut his own flesh, and did make nothing of it;
and when our Savior, or any good body came near him, he raged the more,
crying out with a loud voice, what have you to do with me, or I with you?
Which state of a sinner, however while one is in it he does not heed it, in
itself notwithstanding is extreme miserable, and men of reason see it to be
so: And how much this man did afterward acknowledge himself obliged to our
Savior, when being delivered from this legion of Devils, he quietly sat at
his feet clothed, and well in his wits, much more ought we to thank our
Savior for our redemption; our spiritual slaverie being infinitely more
prejudicial, and more to be lamented.

III. Our Savior in S. Luke asks this question, who among you having a
servant ploughing, Lu^. 17. 7.
or keeping cattle, will say to him, returning from the field, go, sit down*
and says not rather, make ready for me, and serve me, and afterward thou
shall eat and drink. This is the practice among men one to another; but our
Savior more indulgent to us, not weighing that we are indeed but his slaves,
bought at so dear a rate, as his most precious blood, and from so base and
unworthy a slaverie, as is that of sin, and so injurious to himself, does
notwithstanding coming from our own worldly occasions, no^ much thinking of
his service in them, invite us to his own table, that is, to his own most
precious body and blood* entreating us to pattake of so heavenly a banquet at
which the Angels do rejoice, and does not pass for many a spo^ dust that
stick upon us, though we have washed away the dirt and filth; it were our duty
to be as clean as out of the font of baptism; but, o the weakness of man! O
the goodness of God. Who notwithstanding our unworthiness, when least unworthy,
does extend his kindness unto us so far beyond all humane kindness or
capacity! He out of whom he had cast the legion desired to be with him still
in his company, and he did not admit of him, but bad him go home; and recount
how merciful God had been to him, How much more ought we to retire ourselves
for a while into the closes of our heart, and reckon up the mercyes of God
toward us, and put this in the head of them, that notwithstanding so lately
voluntary slaves to his enemies, he does us this great mercy, and favor, to
admit of us, not only to his presence, but to his table.

Intertaynment of our Savior as Judge.
I. THe coming of a Judge to a city, or house, is generally not without some
apprehension, and fear in the parties to whom he comes; for if they be gylty
they have reason to fear: if they be not guilty they know not how the Judge
may be informed concerning them. That our Savior is our Judge is undoubted;
the Father has given judgment to the Son^e, Io2. 5. 22.
says our Savior of himself: yet at this his coming unto us in the blessed
Sacrament, we have not so much cause of fear; first because his rigorous
judgment is reserved till after this life; Joan. 3. 1^
in which respect himself says, God did not send his Son into the world, to
judge the world, but that the world should be saved by him. Secondly there is
no danger that he should be misinformed of us. Thirdly, when he comes to judge;
Matt. 25 ^^
he comes in majesty, with the attendance of all his heavenly. court; here he
comes disguised, of set purpose, because we should know that he comes in a
familiar way, to do us honor, and favor, and not for any sinister end.

II. Yet in regard he is a Judge, the Apostle does put(...) in mind that before
we presume to receive him, 1 Cor 11 26
we examine examine ourselves whether we be gylty of any such offense, as may
hinder his loving intertaynment; for if there be enmi^ie betwixt him and us,
with what face can we thrust ourselves thus upon him? And according to our
Saviors counsel whatever gift we offer to God we m^st first make peace with
our brother, Matt. 5 23
if we be at variance with him, and rather leave our offering, then bring it
with that distance in our breast; how much more ought we to be wary that our
Savior himself be not our Adversary, and if he be, reconcile ourselves unto
him quickly in the way, least we turn his mercyes into rigor; for h^ that
receives him unworthily draws judgment upon himself, not making difference
betwixt this and other ^eats. We must therefore before hand judge ourselves,
that we may not be judged* and as for lesser offenses (though we must do what
we can to clear ourselves also of them before hand) he will dissemble them,
and give us more grace to overcome them, ^ap. 1^. 18.
and jugde us with compassion, because he is the son of man. Io. 5. 27.
And we have the more reason to come with this confidence to him, because we
see that he very seldom punishes instantly those, that come unworthily, but
gives them time to repent, even of that treacherous intertaynment; much more
will he have mercy upon those, that have done their best endeavor to clear^
themselves even of lesser staynes.

III. Moreover he comes unto us indeed as Judge, in favor of us, against our
Ghostly enemies, as once he said; (...) 12* 31.
Now is judgment of the world, now the Prince of this world shall be cast
forth. And I, if I be exalted, will draw all to myself (which he said;
^ignifying what death ^e should die) to wit, exalted upon the Cross. And here
in the holy Sacrifice he is daily exalted for us, daily Sacrificed for our
redemption, and utter destruction of the Devil, and his power; which is more
and more lessened in us, the more often, and more devoutly we receive him; for,
as the Council of Trent Council ^ Trent.
speaks, this holy Sacrament is an Antidote, by which we are freed from our
daily faults, and from mortal sy^ns preserved. O merciful judge! Beholding my
daily offenses, I have reason to fear, Apoc. 2 23
because thou art the searcher of heart and reyns; and man knows not whether he
deserves love or hatred. Eccl. 9. 1.
Ye^ ^eeing here thou come to save me, I am the more con^^dent in thy
goodness, that thou will judge in my behalf against my enemies, and beat down
their power by thy authority, as thou did often the evil spirits, and the
winds and waves of the sea, Marc. 4 3^
saying; Peace, be still; and there was a great clame. O! clame my heart, that
it may receive thee with loving respect, and respectfull love, Psalmo 2
and do not withdraw thy me^cyes from me! Iudica me Deus, and discern causam
meam.

Intertaynment of our Savior as our Mediator, and Advocate.
I. THe title of Mediator, and Advocate, as belonging to our Savior, is full
of comfort; and that he is so, 1 Io. 22
S. Ihon testifyeth. If any man shall sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, ^ Tim. 25
Jesus Christ the just; and S Paul. One is the Mediator of God, and men, man
Christ Jesus. Our need also is apparent, for as we daily offend, so we have
need of an advocate, incessantly to plead pardon for us; and as unworthy by
ourselves to approach to the throne of God, specially being gylty, we have need
of a Mediator, to make our way unto him. This office our Savior does, as man,
but man so nee^ly linked to God, that he is also God, and therefore infinitely
worthy to be admited, and to be heard, whether it be to plead for remission, or
for some new grace, and favor: which is the reason why holy Church does
g^nerally present all her prayers, with this clause, through Christ our Lord;
that his merits may prevayle, where on ou^side there is little that can deserve
to be heard, and much p^radventure by which we may deserve rather to be
rejected; for which we have reason deeply to humble ourselves and to have
conti^uall recourse to him.

II. This office he performed while he lived, by prayer, and good works,
offering them for our sake; but ^hiefly upon the Cross, when also for us, as
well as for the Jews and gentiles present, Luc* 23 34
he prayed saying, Father forgive them, because they know not what they do*
And for the same end he reserved the marks of his most precious wounds, that
they might be a continual plea for the r^mission, for which they were first
opened: And here in the blessed Sacrament, we receiving the self same body of
out Savior, with the selfsame wounds, what force and efficacy may not our
prayers have, offering the^ steeped in these precious wounds, and as it were,
written, or imbellished with his sacred blood* (...). 83. 10.
O my God! Look upon the face of thy Christ. In him thou will find no cause*
why thou should deny him; the multitude of his deservings, will outweigh my
ill deserts; hear his plea for me: ^. August.
Behold he has written me, and my petition, in his hands; read his
handwritting, and have mercy on me. With him, I say Father forgive, and into
thy hands I do give myself with him.

III. Though from the beginning he put himself upon this office for us, and not
only before we could deserve it, but when we deserved that all the world should
plead^ against us, for which we owe him infinite obligations; yet having
undertaken it, and continuing it with the same efficacy with which he begun
it, it is reason we should think how to gratify him in what we are ablei and
first, it is necessary that while he is pleading for us, we plead not against
ourselves by infringing his Fathers commandments; secondly, we must follow the
order of petitioning which he prescribes, and principally ask spiritual
things, and such as concern our soul; before all temporalls, which rule he
has set us down in our daily prayer of the Pa^er noster. Thirdly we must not
be weary of waiting the time, and good pleasure of his Father, as he is not
weary; and be content whether he grant our petition in the terms we ask it,
or some other way saying as he did. Matthew. 26.
Not my will, but thine be done: Not as I will, but as thou. Fourthly, the
greatest obligation that we can put upon him, is to be confident of his love
and care, and often to use this meditation, and especially, presenting his
sacred person to his heavenly Father in the holy Sacrifice, and Sacrament, When
we assiste, or receive. There is nor a more worthy obligation, or greate^
satisfaction toward the washing away ou^ synns, then to offer up ourselves
sincerly and entirely ^ith the oblation of the body of Christ in the holy
Sacrifice or Communion. Thomas a Kempis. lib. 4. cap. 7. number. 4.

Intertaynment of our Savior as a friend.
I. Our Savior is pl^ased to style his Apostles, his friends, and the condition
which he Puts, gives us ground to extend this favor to all that observe the
condition. You are my friends, Io. 15. (...).
if you do the things which I command you. An easy condition, if we consider
with the Apostle, To. 13. 10*
that the fullnes of the law is love. Love God, love our Neighbor, and we have
fullfilled the law, and become friends with God; though indeed God is our friend
before we love; for so we have in S. Jhon, God first loved us. And it could not
^e otherwise, Io. 4 19
for he first created us, and the wiseman assures that he loves all things
which are, and hates not any thing which he has made, sap. 11. 25*
neither out of hatred did he make any thing. But it is in our choice whether
we will be friends with God or no; and all our misery came, and comes to this
day, through our choosing the negative, by breach of his commandments. Our
Savior as a friend exhorts us to the affirmative; and here in the most
blessed Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the Altar represents unto us what God, and
he have done for us, to reclayme us to his love: our merciful and gracious
Lord has left a memorial of his wonders, food for those, Ps. (...) 4
that fear him: says the Royal Prophet. O wonderful incitement to love. Our
Savior in person to be ever soli^ citing us, as if it did concern him as much
as us: and to be daily present with us, desiring nothing more then to be one
with us* and therefore he did institute this blessed Sacrament under the forms
of bread and wine, to be taken inwardly by us; that as bread, and wine so
taken, are turned into our substance, and made one thing with us, so we by
receiving him should become one with him, transformed into his love and
imitation, which is the sense of that which the Apostle says of himself. I
live, (...)
(...) not I, but Christ lives in (...).

II. And indeed a friend should be as it is said, alter ^go. not properly
another, but as it were the same again through conformity in their humors,
and wills* and proceedings. How far our Savior does endeavor this, he makes
sufficient demonstration, when he says to his Apostles I call you friends, Io.
15 15
because all whatever I have heard from my Father, I have made known^ unto you;
and again, Luc: 11 9
ask and it shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall
be opened to you. For as in all friendship, so in this much more, it is supposed
that we will not ask things either unlawful, or hurtful, to ourselves. And
whereas friends, because they cannot be the same in person, desire to be always
at least in place, and company together, our Savior, you see, does not fail
in this, being content with any kind of accommodation in the poorest parish
Church, or Chapel, rather then to be from us* and so i^ our souls, so they be
in grace.

III. Moses by often trea^ing with God grew to that confidence that once he
said to God, Exodus: 33 13
If I have found favor in thy sight show me thy face, that I may know thee;
and God answered, I will show thee all good. When the promise came to be
performed, i^ could not be otherwise then by a little hole in the rock, and God
passing in a cloud, and covering that little hole, so as to conceal most part
of his glory; for as the Apostle witnesses, ^ Tim. 6 16
God dwells in a light inaccessible, no man ever saw him, nor can see him. In
the person of o^r Savior while he lived upon earth, God was seen under the
veil of his humanity; here he is seen under the resemblances of bread and
wine: that his intention is to show us finally his glory, this blessed
Sacrament he has left us for a pledge: therefore the beloved disciple
records before the washing of the feet, and before the institution of the
blessed Sacrament, Io. 13. 1.
that whereas he had loved his who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
It is our duty to be careful that he be not frustrated of this end, and we
fail of that eternal friendship which he desires we should have with him.
Prove. 328
The Counsel of the Wiseman is. Say not to thy friend go and come again; to
morrow I will give it thee* when thou may presently give: we know not how
soon our end is, when it will be too late to give our love to him, which we
may do presently, and the more, having so loving an imitation, and so sure a
pledge of his love.

Intertaynment of our Savior as our Brother.
I. Our Savior after his resurrection appearing to the women, Matthew. 28* 10
bad then go, and tell his brethren of it; honoring his Apostles, and
disciples with this title, in regard that by his goodness thy had one heavenly
Father; his by nature; ^hiers by adoption, one eternal inheritance, as the
Apostle witnesses, tearming us Heirs to God, Romans 8 (...)
and coheyres to Christ. Which Brotherhood being derived unto us by the grace
of God, and by Charirie, Rom* (...)
or the love of God, poured into our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given
us, we are the more beholding to our Savior, because by this holy Sacrament
received, he does confirm us in this grace of adoption, and increases it, and
strengthens it more and more. making the etetnall inheritance belonging to it
more sure unto us, Genesis 37 4
so far is he from envying us his Fathers love, Luc. 15 2^
as Joseph's brothers did, or not rejoicing at our return into grace after our
going astray, Luc. 12 (...)
as the elder brother to the prodigal child, or contending about the
inheritance, as two brothers in the Gospel.

II. The wiseman tells us, Prove. (...)
that a brother that is assisted by his brother, is like a strong city, and
their counsels like the bars of city gates: Why therefore should we distrust
the overcoming, or keeping ou^ our Ghostly enemies from the castle of our heart,
seeing our Savior does so lovingly offer us his assistance, not only
encouraging us by his words, and exhortation, but himself puts himself into our
heart to defend it with us; so that we ^ay with Esaias the Prophet confidently
say. lisay (...)
He that does justify me is by me; who shall gayne-say me? let. us stand
together, who is my adversary? let him come: And indeed if we do not faintly,
or treacherously flinch from him, we shall be impregnable*

III. By which we may understand how much they wrong themselves, and others who
di^wade from often ^ecoiving this bl^ssed food, under pretense perhaps of more
devotion, but indeed not well understanding how to order their devotions; for
as it is the counsel of phys^tia^s, and experience teaches that they who have
weak stomachs should eat often, and of things that are of good nutriment; so
it fares also with our souls, which of themselves are weak: and as to the
fimilitude in which we are, they are numbered amo^ng the six whom God does
hate, Prove. 6 19
who sow discord betwixt brethren: And certainly, to keep us from often
intertayning this our brother* must needs be the seed of discord between him and
us; for by neglect of the Sacrament we grow less able to resis^ temptations,
and consequently are the easyer drawn into sin, which only can make a
distance betwixt him and us*

IV. Finally by this title we are put in mind, that we Christians, being all
brethren, should labor to maintain brotherly love among us so much the more
by how much our Savior is also our brother; and we know that generally one
brother takes up the quarrel of another brother; and it is not for our purpose
to have our Savior against us* Therefore particularly when we are to receive,
or have received, we must according to the counsel of S. Pe^ter, lay a side
all malic^, (...) Pet. 2*
all deceit, and dissembling, and ^nvy, and all detraction, to the end to
maintain this brotherly love as being of one family with Jesus Christ, and
feeding upon the same supercelestiall bread of his sacred body; and dispose
ourselves to all meek^es, and affability, that there be no dissension, nor
hartburning, not any occasion of it, by word or d^ed, but a^^ist one another in
what we can, with no less promptitude, and readynes, then one hand is ready to
help the other.

Intertaynment of our Savior as he is the sacrifice of the law of grace.
I. SAcrifices were practiced in the law of nature from the beginning of the
world, and instituted in the law of Moses, as the prime act of worship due to
God, as he is the author, and giver of all things, and as due to none but God.
And because none can deserve better then he who is the fountain and giver of
all, the light of nature did dictate, and the law prescribe, that the best
things, and prime fruits should be offered, nothing ^ame, nothing corrupted*
nothing which was not perfect in its kind. Genesis 4. (...)
So Abel is commended for offering the first begotten, and the fat of his
flock. Cain not looked upon because defective. And because life is the best
thing that we have, and most esteemed, and for the mayntayning of it all other
things serve, Genesis 22*
God commanded Abraham to offer him the life of his only son Isaac, as a
testimony that he was Lord of life, and death, that is, supreme over mankind;
and secondarily, as his acknowledgement of it, and obedience: Content
notwithstanding with the demonstration of his willingness, and not pleased that
we should exercise that upon one another which would turn to cruelty, and
barbari^me, he furnished him with a ram to sacrifice; and in conformity, all
the sacrifices of beasts, or foul, or what other thing offered, were
testimonies and acknowledgements that what we did to them, was due to be done
in our own^ persons, God of his goodness accepting other things in lieu of us,
as afterward he appointed in the law, that the first begotten Children should
be redeemed with money: where besides the truth of the thing. Exo. 13. (...)
We may see how pleasing it must needs be to God to part with life and goods,
and the contentments of this world, rather then offend, or that we may serve
him better, and persever; for every such act is a sacrifice, and has the
nature, and me^it of the highest act of religion.

II. Christ our Savior coming into this world to perfect the written law of
Mo^ses, and to institute the law of grace, could not leave this law of his,
with out a more perfect sacrifice, then had been before; therefore being to
complete all the sacrifices of the old law by the sacrifice of himself upon
the altar of the Cross, and to provide a continual sacrifice, not inferior
to any, for his people, and Church, to the worlds end; the day before his death
he institu^ed this blessed sacrifice of the altar, that is, his own self to be
offered, and no^ only in words, but by a public ceremony common to the whol^
Church, and to be really sacrificed, not bloodyly as once upon the Cross (for
that would have been incompetent to him, and inconvenient to us) but yet so
that his death should be daily, not only represented, but in a manner acted,
the words of consecration dividing, as it were, the body from the blood, and
the blood from the body, by being pronounced severally upon several matters;
not that the blood of our Savior is not also in the sacred host, and his body
in the chalice, but it is not there immediately by force of the words, but
accidentally because the body, and blood is now living, as at the last supper.
When our Savior said. Luc. 22. 19 (...) Cor 11: 24*
This is my body which shall be delivered for you; this is my blood, which
shall be shed for you. And again, do this in memory of me. Ordering the same
sacri^ice to be continued successively in his Church, by his Apostles, and
those who were to succeed them in their Pri^stly function: so that here is the
best thing offered for us, and offered in the highest way of expression of our
acknowledgement toward God; the only Son of God, the first born of all
creatures, Coloss. 115
Who as God, contains all things in himself O unspeakable grace. O wonderful
favor! O immense love expressed toward man! what shall I render to our Lord
for this grace, for so excessive love* I cannot give him a thing more
grateful, then wholly to deliver him up my heart, and entirely unite it unto
him. Thom* a Kemp. lib. 4. cap. 13. number. 3.

III. As in the sacrifices of the old law, so in this our Savior would have
all his people partake of this sacrifice, and therefore did institute it under
the form of bread and wine, and not in the proper shape of flesh and blood,
bread and wine being things both most universal. and best agreeing with every
bodies taste, and from which generally people not only have least aversion, but
most use; and do best signif^e the effects of this holy sacrifice, as it is
also a Sacrament; to wit, the spiritual nourishment, and fortifying of our
soul by the presence of our Savior in person, Io. 6. 55. 56
and by special graces flowing from him; in which respect our Savior terms
his body and blood truly meat and drink, and that he that eats this bread
shall live for ever; because, as by often eating and drinking we main^^yne our
bodily life, so by this bread we may maintayn^ ou^ spiritual life, which is to
remain for ever. O how gr^eate and honorable is the office of Priests to whom
power is given with sacred words to consecrate our Lord of Majesty, with their
lips to bless him, in their hands to hold him, to receive him in their mouth,
and to minister him to others! O how pure ought those hands to be, how clean
that mouth, how holy that body, how unspotted that heart into which the author
of Purity does so often enter. Thom a Kemp. 1. 4. c. 11. n. 6.

Intertaynment of our Savior as he is a spiritual banquet.
I. Meat and drink is for necessary sustenance, a banquet is moreover for
pleasure and contentment, not only of the taste, but generally all other
delights concur in it. Now if the wiseman ^ould say of the Manna in the old
law, Sap. 16 (...)
that it had in it all delight, and the siveetnes of every thing that we taste;
doubtless, if we apply ourselves unto it, we shall find also in this heavenly
Sacrament (where of that was a figure) all sort of spiritual delights. And
first, occurs the exquisitenes of the food; it being the bread of Angels, and
sen^ us down as far as from heaven, prepared to our hand, without other
labor on our part, then, as in all bankers to dress ourselves handsomely, that
we be not found to appear at so great a table, and in such company, without
our nup^iall or wedding ga^^ent, that is, without Charity* the love of God,
Mat^^. (...)* 1^
and our neighbor, or purity of heart from mortal breach of his commandments,
though we be otherwise poor, and lame, and weak, he does not disdain our
company, but gives us a most hearty welcome. Come unto me all ye that labor;
Matthew. (...)* 28
and to whom it is paynefull to serve me, and are burdened with evil customs,
and passions, and I will refresh you. O sweet, Thom. a Kemp. l. ^ c. 1. n. 2*
and friendly word in the ear of a sy^^er; that thou my Lord God do invite
this poor, and needy Creature, to the feeding upon thy sacred body: The
heavens are not pure enough, and thou say, come unto me all.

II. Besides this exquisitenes of the food, and company, and hearty welcome, if
we attend, we may find that which will please the eye of our soul very much*
to wit, the death and passion of our blessed Savior (to put us in mind.
VVherof, this holy Sacrament, and sacrifice is instituted; and, as it were, to
Act it before us.) And what can be more comfortable to a sinner then to see
before his eyes, the price of his redemption laid down? to receive into his
breast the forgiver of his sins? the sacred body and blood by which they are
more and more daily washed away? If we do understand what sin is, and how
much it does import us to be clear of it, we cannot but take great
contentment thus to receive our Savior, the lamb of God, who takes away the
synns of the world. 10. 1 29
Rejoice, o my soul, and give thanks to God for so noble a gift, and such
singular comfort left thee in this vale of tears; for as often as thou
recordest this mysteric, and receivest the body of Christ so often do thou
work the work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits of
Christ. Thom. a Kemp. l. 4. c. 2. n. 6.

III. As to our taste, and other senses; if we consider the refreshment which we
receive by this holy Sacrament, we shall find that the effect of it, is, to
cure the pala^e of our soul; to take away our false appetites, which egg us
to feed upon things that are hurtefull, and poysonsome; to breed satisfaction,
and contentment in our devotions, and spiritual exercises, and a right temper
of body and ^oule, in which our health does consiste: By often receiving
devoutly we shall come not to thirst so much after vanities; nor to be altered
upon every sugges^ion or temptation, as being strengthened with this fruit of
the Tree of life: And as by the practice of virtue we shall find the sweetness
of it, so the same sweetness will diffuse itself to others by good example, and
the house will befilled with the odor of the ointment, that is, we ourselves,
Io. 12 3
and others will be pleased with it. O admirable and hidden grace of the
Sacrament which is known only to Christ's faithful people. In this Sacrament
spiritual grace is given, the strength of our soul is repaired, the beauty
thereof, lost by sin, is restored. The grace is sometimes so great that from
the fullnes of devotion* ^ot the mind only but our weak body also does feel^
more strength bestowed upon it, Thomas a Kempis lib. 4. cap. 1. number. 11.

IV. Who could by contemplation raise up his soul so high, would not fail to
hear the music also of the Angels singing glory to God in this blessed
mystery* for, that the Angels do assist in multitudes, both at the
consecration and receiving, there is no doubt, Holy Fathers confessing it, and
many visions confirming it; and seeing in his life time, in the desert, after
his temp^ation, they came, and ministered to him; Matthew. 4^ 11.
now in glory, they certainly never leave him; and attending him, they cease
not to sing his praises; and also thy happiness, who have the favor to
intertayne so great a Lord, to lodge so great a Guest, to have so pleasant a
companion, so faithful a friend, so noble. and so beautiful a spouse. o happy
soul which have been made worthy devoutly to receive him, and receiving to be
replenished with spiritual joy. Thom a Kemp. l. 4. c. 3. n. 4.

Intertaynment of our Savior with the blessed Virgen, and S. Joseph.
I. THe time which our Savior lived with our blessed Lady, and S. Joseph, may
be distinguished into three parts; the time of his Childhood; the time of his
youth till man's estate; and the time after of his preaching: In the time of his
infancy, and Childhood, though he were in most things like other children, yet
some rays of his divinity at times appearing did not fail to put them in
mind that he was more then a Child, he carrying himself with more discretion,
and more pliablenes then usually infants, and Children do; never froward,
never untoward, modest in his sports, moderate in his desires: so that besides
the natural love which parents have to their little babes, they had a
particular sweetness, and contentment, in that he was such a babe, so qualifyed
above all others; and accordingly when they beheld him, or took him into their
arms, or provided necessaries for him, they did it not only with
extraordinary love, but with loving reverence and respect; their minds being
elevated to a higher pitch by the continuance of his divine comportment, and
never having any the least cause of distaste* by him. This is he whom we
receive into our breasts, and as so qualified he does commend himself unto us,
he having* as it were, (...)
lessened himself into this form, to the end we should take him between our
a^mes, and embrace him* and reverently kiss his fee^e, and hands; assuming the
affections of father, and mother, so far as to exp^^sse the ^tmost of our
tender love toward him, in regard, that for us he would become an infant
first, and then in this blessed Sacrament be as tractable to us, as a little
infant, in whom is all that a fatherly, or motherly heart can desire.

II. When his Childhood was past, we cannot but think they took so much the
more soq^d comfort in him, by how much they observed in all his actions, and
speeches, not only more of the man, but more of that mae^ who was d^scyph^^ed
unto them by the Ang^l, to wit that it was he who should be great, (...)
the Son of the highest, the Savior of his people, r^igne for ever: And his
di^courses tending to the clearer ^xplication of those high poi^ts to wit, in
what true greaten^s did consiste, what was the salvation exp^cted, what was
truly to reign, how all might come to be Sons of God, and favo^red by him as
such: they were infinitely taken with his conversation, spending nights and
days with great contentment in him: and though at times he wrought with S.
Joseph at his trade of Carpent^ie, Marc^ 6 3*
their eye was never of him, nor their ^are from taking up every word, and
action that fell from him; which actions doub^lesse were sometimes mi^aculous,
and such as afte^wards bred that confidence in ou^ blessed Lady at the ma^iage
feast to ask of him wine by miracle. Io. 3. 2^
His coming unto us in the bl^ssed Sacram^nt, is to hold th^se discourses with
us, to inlighte^ our understanding, and to inflame our affections toward
things of the other world; if we find it not at all, or not so much as ^e
might, it is because we give not ourselves leisure to ha^ken to him, but
withdraw ourselves instantly from him to our worldly occasions: Attend a little
to prayer, read some good book with reference, and respect to his presence,
and yo^ will find, that as the wiseman says, he will impart good things to
you; and be a comfort in time of care and tediousnes: Sap. 8. (...)
If a^ that instant you be called away indeavou^ to supply it afterward by
sometime of retirement: Sometime miraculously, he does inlighten and inflame
people without these diligences on their part; we must not presume of those
extraordinary favors, but apply ourselves to the ordin^rie way of his
proceedings.

III. After our Savior began publicly to wo^ke miracles, and to preach, we
read nothing of S. Joseph, probably he was dead, our Savior and our blessed
^^dy assisting him; but our blessed Lady followed him, among the rest of the
devout women; and we read in the Gospel, that she stood sometimes with out
door, and could not get in by reason of the throng: Luc. 8. 20
By it we see her desire, and endeavor to be present with him at his
exhortations and miracles, the more to increase in his love by the
experimental knowledge of his greatenes. Labor that the throng of importune
thoughts, or affections, do not divert thee from inioying. thy Savior in this
coniuncture, and from ha^kening to what he will speak to thy heart: say unto
him: How come I by this favor tha^ I may find thee alone and open my whole
heart unto thee, and enjoy thee as my very soul desires* that now no creature
may divert me; that thou alone may speak to me* and I to thee as one friend
to another, and as the beloved is wont to his beloved. Thom. a Kemp. lib. 4
cap. 13.

Intertaynment of our Savior with S. Ihon Baptist.
I. S. Ihon Baptist in his Mothers womb leaped for joy, Luc. 1* (...)
at our Saviors presence, and for the benefit of sanctification then received;
our Savior, by the voice of our blessed Lady when she saluted S. Elizabeth*
manifesting himself unto him, and presenting him with the first fruits of
redemption, by freeing him from original sin, and imparting unto him his
holy grace in extraordinary manner before he was born so that though he did
^ot see our Savior with his corporal eyes, by the eye o^ he knew him to be
there present, and to his power expressed his joy and contentment in it. By the
words of our Savior, and voice of holy Church we acknowledge our Savior to be
present in the blessed Sacrament, though vayled with the resemblances of
bread, and wine as the he was concealed in his mothers womb; if we reflect
with all upon the worth of his person, the intent of his coming to us in this
manner, daily more and more to sancti^y us, and strengthen us in his grace, and
service, the familia^nes and frequencie of this favor, we shall find that we
have cause to leap for joy with S. Jhon, and so much the more in regard that
our Saviors presence to S. Ihon was at a di^^ance, but to us, he is with us in
our breasts; where we may make use of the words of S. Elis^beth speaking of
herself, and for her speechless infant. Whence is this to me, that my Lord
comes thus to me. Luc. 1. 43.
When the ^rke was brought into the Camp, (...) R^g 4.
^he Children of I srael gave a great^ shout, and the earth rang of it, and
their ^^imies were astonished at the joy; much more joy should we show at the
coming of our Savior into us; and all the powers of our soul and body should
make their expressions ioyn^ly and severally welcoming him.

II. Our understanding raising itself to acts of lively faith, and humilitic
may say in imitation of S. Jhon (when our Savior came afterward to be
baptized by him;) Matt. 3. 14
I ought to be baptized by thee, and thou c^mest to me? It were my part to
run through fire and water to come unto thee, Werc it but to touch the hemme
of thy garment with the devout woman, Luc. 8 44
to the end to be cured of my invetera^ed diseases; and thou come to me?
Thou* who art the king of kings, the Lord of Angels, the onl^ ^onne of my God*
God from all eterniti^ without beginning? Io. 127.
I am not worthy to untie the latchet of hi^ shoe, nor to approach so near him
as to do him the humblest service that can be imagined, and ^e comes to me,
in this familiar, and friendly, and humble manner. Thom. a Kemp. l. 4. c. 1. n.
10.
O invisible Creator of the world, my God, how wonderfully do^st thou deal
with us? how sweetly, and graciously do thou communicate thyself unto us in
this bl^ssed Sacrament. This does surpass all understanding* this does in
pa^^icular manne^ draw the hearts of devout people unto thee, and inflame their
affections.

III. Toward which we may consider further, the ^ontentment which S. Ihon
took in beholding our Saviovr as he passed along diverse times by him, when
pointing at him he said, Behold the lamb of God; (...) 1 3^
behold him that takes away t^ sin of the world; for his thoughts rested not
in that which bodyly eyes only did discover, but they reached to that which had
been taught him by spirit of God; that this was he who though borne into the
world after him, Io. 11^
was from all eternity before him, the Redeemer promised, and now come to take
away the sins of the whole world: and as he said in an other occasion, this
was the Bridegroom, Io. 32^
or spouse of our Souls, himself being only a friend of the bridegroom
standing, and rejoy^ing at his voice: how much more reason have we to rejoice,
and take content, who do not only hear his voice, but receive him with in us,
for the selfsame effect for which he came first into the world, and to
accomplish the work which ^hen he began. And as the eye of the bride is never
of from the eye of the bridegroom whom she passionately affects, so should
out eyes be fixed upon our Savio^r in this blessed Sacrament, taking
contentment in his perfections, which are without blemish, and in his benefits
which are incomparable. Th a K^^ l 4 c. (...) 12
It is very much to be lamented and pitied that we are so cold and negligent,
aed are not carried with more affection toward our Savior, in whom is all our
hope of salvation.

IV. S Ihon when he was in prison, sent two of his disciples to our Savior
with this Message for their satisfaction, Matt. (...)
art thou he that art to come or expect we another? Our Savior gave them no
other answer, but that they should go, and report to S. Ihon what they had
heard, and seen; the blind see, the lame walk, lepers ar^ ^lens^d, the deaf
hear, the dead rise again, to the poor^ the Gospel is preached, and blessed
is ^e who is not scandalized in me. This is the way to increase in de^otion
toward our blessed Savior, and this blessed Sacrament; not to be scandalized,
or stumbled at what we see outwardly of him, but consider his power, his (...)
mercy his meekenes, in stooping to the poorest among us, for our comfort, and
relief; and that we ca^ expect no relief but from him; let us therefore
humbly present our blindness, and lamenes, and deafnes, and other miseries to
him, with confidence that he will cure us, for he refuses no body that truly
desires and labors to be cured, and gives us more over forces to desire, and
labor it.

Intertaynment of our Savior with the Samaritan Woman.
I. AS our Savior sat alone, Io. 4^
upon the brink of the well (at which people were wont to draw water for th^er
occasions) expecting his spiritual, and corporal, refection; so in the
Churches of Catholics (where his precious body is reserved in the blessed
Sacrament, for the refreshment of the (...), and of those that are in heal^h)
with great patience h^ expects that people will come unto him; and though he
might well be wearyed with so much attendance, and thirs^eth nothing more them
our relie^e, yet even so h^ sits still expecting, and by inward
inspirations, and outward admonition says to out souls as to the Sama^itan
woman, give me to drink. It were to be wished, that we would not so often
answer him with the put of, which the women used toward him a^ first. How
do thou, being a ^ew, ask of me to drink, who am a Samaritan Woman? (for
the Jews do not use to converse wit^ the Samaritans.) for much like is the
answer of many, who pretend, that being people of the world, encumbered with
worldly occasions, and employments, they cannot attend so often to be present
at the holy sac^ifice, or to receive: and ought not to be pressed, or exhorted,
to it, it belonging (as they conceit) to such as are retired from the world,
and not to their profession; as in the parable of the supper expressly they
began all to excuse themselves; (...)
one because he had bought a farm, and was to take a view of it; another
because he had bought five yoke of exen, and was to make trial of them; a
third because he had married a wife, as if that did make his coming impossible.

II. Our Savior, by his answer to the Samaritan, does bar all excuse.
saying, If thou did know the gift of God, and who he is, who says unto thee,
give me to drink, thou peradventure would have asked of him, and he would
have given thee living water. For certainly if we did truly weigh the greatenes
of the gift, and of the giver, in this blessed Sacrament, the wonder would be
^ather on his part, how he being the foun^aine of all that can be desired ( in
who^ are all the treasures and the fullnes of that which is God) does ask of
us, Col: 2 3 (...)
to drink and eat, at his table* and that with such thirst, as if he wanted
our company: and a second wonder on our part, that being so lovingly invited
to these living waters, we still hang-of; and it is but peradventure that we
will accept of them; whereas there is no peradventure on his side, but he would
certay^ly and freely give himself, and with himself impart his treasures unto
us: and does not refuse us because we are sinners, so we do confess it, as
this Samaritan, who acknowledged to him that she was an advlteresse, and
carnally given, having had five husbands; nor does he decline us, because of
our worldly business, but with reason expects we should lay it a side for some
hours to attend him, as this woman who did not think this time long which she
spent in discourse with ou^ Savior; and left her pitcher behind her for a
time, that she might mo^e fully comply with him.

III. At the first pe^haps we may not find so much comfort in ^ec^iving, by
reason of our overmuch greedynes about our worldly affairs* or little use of
praye^; the one dulling, the other withdrawing our thoughts; neither does God
always suddenly wo^ke any notabl^ alteration in our souls, but by degrees as
in this woman first asking her to drink, as if himself had needed: every good
motion has its beginning from him, Iac. (...)
every good gift is from above; and then he expects we should help ourselves
by consideration of the dignity, the necessi^ie, the profit of this blessed
Sacrament. ( Every one tha^ drinks of the water of this world shall thirst
again, Io. 4. (...)
and be ever thi^ftie, till his dying day, not on^ in te^ thousand thinking
that he has enough, but that for one occasion, or other he would have more;
but he that drinks liberally of water which our Savior will gives him, shall
not thirs^^ after the manner of the world, with troble and vexa^ion, but the
very water of grace received shall be unto him as fountain ever bubling and
thrusting us on to life everlasting. The water of this world is heavy, ever
pressing us downwards, cold, and subject to ill ^avours, and corruption, the
waters of his grace received in the Sacrament give life eternal, and as
be^wixt temporal, and eternal there is no comparison, so betwixt the worth
and benefit of the one, and the other water.

IV. Lord give me this water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw.
This was the first good effect in the woman of ^ur Saviors motion, to wit a
desire of the water of which he was speaking; and it was seconded by further
instruction; for she, all this while, thought he had spoken of the material
water, and therefore alleged, that the well was deep, and se^ing he had
nothing wherewith to draw water, she wondered where he should have thos^ living
waters: But he by little, and little raised her thoughts to understand that he
spoke of spiritual water, and refreshment belonging to eternity; a thing
which even in her understanding was of more importance; and therefore she said,
she expected the Messiah who would instruct her in all those high matters;
whereupon our Savior differred her no longer, but told her he was the Messiah
expected; which she instantly proclaimed, with grea^e joy, through the whole
city from whence she came; and he was received in it with much satisfaction. O
powerful word! I am he who speaks with thee. It is the Savior of the world
who does thus familiarly impart himself unto us. Too great a person to be put
in balance with whatever thing created, and his blessed presence too great a
favor that any thing should be admitted to stand in competencie with it. Come
and s^^ the man, who is able to satisfy you in all your doubts, and from whom
you shall receive all goodness; take these things into your consideration, that
you may enjoy the living waters which he promises, and in which you will find
eternal comfor^*

V. His disciples returning from the to^ne with provision, wondered to find him
talking with the woman; but (...) more, when inviting him to take his refection
upon what they brought, he answered, that he had other meat^ to feed on, which
they knew not; and to take away their ^ondering, he declared himself, that his
food was to do^ the will of his father; and whereas it was then near harvest
time, his harvest was the good of souls; in all things endeavoring to raise
our thoughts from these temporal things, to that which does infinitely more
import us, to wit, our spiritual food, and the harvest of which we ar^ to make
ou^ eternal living; for which end he would remain with us continually under
the shapes of bread and wine that as we cannot forget, nor forgo for any thing,
our corporal food, so we should be as mind full, at leas* of our spiritual
food and sustenance; and not neglect it, or differ^e it long for any temporal
occasion whatsoever. O Lord my God, prevent m^ with the sweetness of thy
blessings, that I may devoutly, and worthily approach to thy Sacrament: stir
up my heart toward thee, and ^ake away the heavy dullnes which possesse^h me.
Tho^* (...) Kemp. lib. 4. c. 4.

Intertaynment of our Savior with the penitent Magdalen.
I. S. Mari^ Magdalen is set before us as a pattern of the best love, Luc. 7.
32*
after hearty repentance for our synns; her tears bearing testimony of her
sor^ow; her incessant kissing of our Saviors feet, witne^^ing her love; and
her anointing them, her desire of making satisfaction to her power: which
three though at all times it behooves us to practice, yet chiefly in order to
the holy table of our Lord, before and after receiving him* which might be the
cause among others, why he ordered her conve^sion to happen while he was
sitting at board with the Pharisee; whose invitation he accepted the rather,
because (as in the Samaritan) he had other food to feed on, then was outwardly
set before him, and accordingly he wished him to take notice of what this woman
was then doing, to receive instruction, how it had bee^ ^itting for him to have
behaved himself toward our Savior in his receptiopn, by discovery of his
errors com^itted in it.

II. The pa^able which our Savior used to the Pha^isee of two debtors, whereof
one owed a great sum of money, the other a less, and were both forgiven;
may serve us for the first document, and ^each us, that we are all debtors to
our Savior, more or less; and that he that shall think himself less debtor
then another, shall run great hazared to be grossly mistaken; as we find
this Pharisee was; and that other, who comparing himself with the Publican,
Luc* 1: v. 14
however in his own eyes he thought he deserved better, was found in the eyes
of God to be far behind. Let every one therefore retire himself into the
closet of his heart, and look over his obligations, new and old; he will not
find them all cancelled; if those for which he was eternally to lie in chains
have been delivered us upon repentance, and promise of amendment (as to the
servant that fell at his Masters feet, Ma^e. 18. 27*
and craved his patience) let us look whether the obligation which we have to
our Neighbor, to deal by him as God has dealt by us, be discha^ged. And if
we fi^d no great sums of this nature owing, yet besides infinit^ little
debts which we daily incur, we have the great debt of his patient
forbearance* still lying upon us, and of his more then patient love, out of
which he has not been overcome with our often offenses, but still favored us
with his graces: in regard of all which, we must prostrate ourselves with the
Magdalen at our Saviors feet, with tears acknowledging our Arriers. More in
number^ then the hayres of our head, and pour them out largely as water,
confessing that all we can do is not sufficient to discharge even this new
obligation of his gracious admitting us, poor sinners, to his table, What does
this pious condescendencie mean, and this friendly invitation? How shall I dare
to approach, who have nothing good whereon to presume? Th. a Kempis. lib. 4. c.
1. n. 3.

III. But ^o draw so near as we can to our discharge, we must chiefly in this
occasion practice acts of love; which is two fold, towa^ds God, fignifyed by
her incessant kisses; and toward our Neighbor, signified by the ointment
bestowed upon our Saviors feet. These two are the fullfilling of the law; Ro^
13 10.
and in these two consists our Plenarie Indulgence, and remiss^^^: for,
having received ^bsolution of all great offenses, which we could remember, in
the Sacrament of confession; in this are forgiven more fully those which we
could not remember, and what other venial synns we may have committed since
confession, being sorry for them, with purpose ^o amend; and by acts of love,
and true contrition, which are proper to this Sacrament of love, much of the
pain due to sin is ^eleased; and the more, the more we love, as our Savior
said, in conclusion, of this blessed saint. Many syns are forgiven her,
because she loved much, he that finds less forgiven him, it is sign he loved
less. And of that love which we owe our Neighbor the holy Ghost tells us,
that alms giving, or works of mercy deliver from all sin, Tob. 4. 11.
and from death, and will not suffer a soul to go into darken^sse. Th. a Ke^
l. 3. c. 59*
Lord what is my confidence in this life, or what greater comfort among all
things under heaven; is it not thou my Lord God?

IV. The Magdalen understood her unworthiness yet did not forbear to approach to
our Savior* but knowing the greatenes of her disease, she came with humility
to the Physician, whom she found able and willing to cure her, she placed
herself behind (...) his feet; shame commanding her to be bashful, love
drawing her on to a reverent confidence: she began with tears, but never
ceased to kiss his feet; for whoever has least cause to weep has most
cause to love, his synns being either forgiven him, or prevented* S. Greg^^
She considered what she had done and would put noe stint to what she was to
do for satisfaction* she poured forth tears from her eyes, but more acts o^
love from her heart, and her very tears served her as oil to (...) me her
affection, comparing her own unworthiness with so kind a reception Behold this
woman: compa^e reception with ^eception: by how much this is more gracious, by
to much thy tears and kiss^s ough to be more abunda^t and ^ervent.

Intertaynment of our Savior with the Cananean.
I. THe Magdalen was not so lovingly intertayned, but the Cananean may seem to
have been as roughly, Matthew. (...) 22.
at first, rejected; for though she cried after him a main; and had his
Apostles intercessours, and coming nearer prostrated herself before him, she
could hardly be heared; because she was a stranger by nation, and not of the
Jews, to whom our Savior was immediately sent and not to the gentiles. It is
true also that her request was not directly for her spiritual relief, as the
Magdalens but for the relief of her d^ughter that was tormented with an evil
spirit: Yet that was figuratively her soul, S. Jerome.
(as S. Jerome interprets it) oppressed as then with Idolat^ie. And all this
to us is an Instruction, no^ to come at any time to this blessed Sacrament for
human respects, as to do as others do, or because we ^ill no^ displease, or
only for some temporal end that tends not to our spiritual good; for though
nothing of this be absolutely unlawful, and in time God has so much mercy of
us, that he turns our affections to some better motives* yet we shall not have
^or the present so much benefit; but ^ather do deserve in some measu^e a check
and that out Savior should turn himself from us; for he comes not to us for
those ends, but for our spiritual occa^ions.

II. The poor woman, as it seems, had so much belief of our Saviors power,
and so much confidence in his goodness, that she would not be beaten of; but the
more he delayed her, the more earnest she was in her request; and having used
other expressions before, explay^ing her daughters necessity, here prostrating
herself before him, confined herself to few words saying only, Lord help me.
And our Savior ^elling her, that it was not good ^o take the bread of the
Children, and to cast it to the dogs: She nothing trobled at i^, but humbly
acknowledging her unworthiness, replied, that it was true, but ye^ that little
dogs did feed of the crumbs that fell from their ^^asters table. In effect
saying with the prodigal Child upon his return, (...).
(...) I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, now I am not worthy to be
called thy son make me as one of thy hyrelings, or servants, or the meanest
in thy house, to sit under thy table; for the crumbs which fall from it are
more delicious then all the daynties of the world, and more sovereign for all
my infirmities. O heavenly banquet, O sacrum convivium*
in which Christ is received, the memory of his passion is recorded; the soul
is filled with grace; and a pledge of future glory is give^ into our hands.

III. Her perseverance, and humility prevayled so far with our Savior, that
he not only granted her request, in the cure of her daughter; but greatly
commended her faith; giving us to understand, that nothing must beat us of
from steadfastly believing his blessed presence, and the power of the Sacrament,
though we do not sudenly feel the effect of receiving* and that we must
humble ourselves the more, and impute the delay to our own vndeservings, as
truly the cause why we feel not so much benefit: And it is no ill way to
deserve increase of grace, to offer to our blessed Savior at the time of
receiving a good purpose to abide, or dissemble a reproach, or a hard word,
which may fall from our neighbor toward us, by example of this Woman, who in
effect seemed to be reckoned no better then a dog; and how meanly do some
people think, and speak of our Savior himself, and of this holy table? Yet he
dissembleth it for our good, and continues his gracious presence with us.

Intertaynment of our Savior with Ma^tha Marie and Lazarus.
I. LAzarus is figure of the purgative life, Martha of the active* Marie of the
contemplative. The acts which are proper to all these three, can not be better
employed then in intertayning our Blessed Savior, with the like love that
these two sisters, and their brother Lazarus did intertayne him in their life
time. Lazarus first languished, (...)*
then dyed of his siknes; but was restored to life by our Savior, and at an
intertaynment, a little before our Saviors passion, Io. (...)
was one of th^se that sat at table: It is far from our duty, but too often
seen in us, that by disorder, we suffer ill humors, and ill dispossitions to
grow in our souls, which vitiating the health thereof, we languish, and are
dull in the service of God; and not using convenient remedy in time, we come
to dye mortal offense; and abiding long in it, we become oysome, Io. 11 39
and of ill example to others; and were not the goodness of God incomparable, so
we should lie irrecoverably turned into very earth, without possibility of
returning, or raising our head toward heaven: But our Savior; of himself,
profers to coem to us, and raise us. He is dead, but let us go to him; and out
of our corruption draws our greater good. Here it fitting we should borrow
tears of the systers; and contemplating our own spiritual misfortunes,
bewail them vnconsolably. Lord, what a disastre was it to me, that I should
forsake thee? if I had had thee in my thoughts, as I ought, this would not have
befallen me; I am loathsome to myself in this dungeon of sin, in which I am
buried; what a weight of difficulty does press me down, that I cannot raise
myself* Command, sweet^ Iesns, that the stone be removed; give me grace to
understand thoroughly where I have laid myself; call upon me with a strong
voyc^^ Lazarus come forth; untie the bonds in which I am ensnared; o how
willingly will I obey thy voice, and be careful not to fall into the like
herafter.

II. We may easyly imagine what joy this bred in the two sisters, but it bred
also no less envy; and malice in some of the Jews in so much that the chief
of them contrived how they might kill Lazarus, because many did beleieve in our
Savior by occasion of this miracle. Io. 12 ^0
By which we must learn both to be thankful to our Savior for so great a
benefit, as at which the very Angels do rejoice; and be the more wary we be
not intrapped by our Ghostly enemy, Luc. ^5 10
who like a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom be (...) dev^ure; (...)
the diligence of Martha in intertaying (...) will put us in a way to secure
ourselves (...). Our Savior in such an occasion said unto (...) Martha,
Martha, thou art careful, and art trobled about many things. Lu^. 10 42
He did not mis^ike her carefulnes: not to be (...), is next degree to neglect;
to be careful and (...) I, argues pusillanimitie: to be (...) out of a noble
disposition, confident in that which is best: And, speaking of intertaynment,
in three things people use to show their care; that there be variety of good
meats; that they be tender and well seasoned; that they be served in good
order and time. These three betoken the serious mortifications of our passions
and evil customs after our reconciliation: Variety of virtuous actions
sometimes praying, sometimes reading, sometimes doing some deed of Charity,
spiritual or temporal, sometime attending to our other occasions according to
our calling. And thirdly that all these things be not done at random, but in
an orderly, and constant way, and distribution so near aspossibly we can.

III. It is very true, that Charity, or the love of God* is the queen of
virtues, and is that one thing, which is absolutely necessary, as indeed
comprehending all other virtues, 1 Cor. 13 4
as the Apostle sets forth unto us: Charity is patient, benign, does not
envy etc. and is never to be taken from us; because faith, and hope, and other
virtues will cease in heaven, where there will be no occasion of them. Charity
remains for ever. And happy are they who with Marie Magdalen can sit at the
feet of our Savior; by hearing and speaking of his love* to inflame it in
their hearts: It is the best part, yet they must understand that, so long as we
live in this vale of misery, it is but a part; it must be so attended unto* as
not to hinder other occasions, which daily call upon us. And even in this
intertaynment of our Savior, when we receive him, though our whole life time
were not sufficient to attend upon him for once receiving, yet having set at
his feet some convenient sp^ce, so we part ^o^ from him for idleness,
ortediousnes, or neglect, we may not omit other necessary bysines; but having
commended all the occasions of the day, or week following* to his direction,
we shall find that we shall have no reason to complain that we are left alone,
but be helped, (...) assisted in our distractions by our former quie^. (...)
thou art my beloved, Thom. (...) Kemp. l. 4 c. 13 n. 2
choosen among a thousand, in whom it has pleased my soul to dwell all the
days of my life; thou are he in whom is all true peace and quier.

Intertaynment of our Savior with Zacheus.
I. ZAch^us was Prince, Luc. 19
or chief of the Publicans: a rich man, and desirous to s^^ our Savior, as he
passed that way, but could not by reason of the throng of people, himself being
low of stature, therefore running before, he went up into a sycomore tree. that
he might see him. This represents unto us the condition of many. who are hard
of belief, and find a thousand difficulties* particula^ly in this Mystery of
the blessed Sacrament; humane reasons thro^ging upon them so thick, that the
more they strive inthem, the further they are thrust of from seeing our Savior
as he is; and the richer they are endowed with natural wit, the more
difficulty oftimes they find; and where their natural wit does not help the
^ownes of their stature, they think that run^ing before every body with
philosophical discourses they shall discover that which will give them content
and satisfaction. But as Zache^s had been little the better, if no other co^^^e
had been taken, but his stepping into the sycomore tree, and perhaps that only
sight might have put him into a m^aner conceit of our Savior then before it;
Thom. a Kemp. l. 4 c. 18
so it fares with these men. Thou must beware of curious, and unprofitable
searching into this most profound Sacrament, if thou will not be drowned in the
depth of doubtfulnes. etc.

II. In regard nothwithstanding that his endeavor to see our Savior was not
all together of curiosity, b^^ probably out of some reverend conceit of him
mingled with it, our Savior taking compassion of him showed him the way how he
might come, both truly to know him, and in^oy him; wherefore looking up upon
him, he (...) unto him, make have, and come (...), for this day, I (...) ^bide
in thy house. It must be light from our Saviou^ eye, supernaturaly inlightening
us, that must give us (...) ^rue notion of this mys^erie; it is our duty how
lo^ (...) we be of stature, or howeve^ rich in natural (...) to make have,
When ever any reason represents itself (...) trarie to what faith does tell us
(not to run higher a^^ higher in our (...)) but ba^^ing discourses, to (...)
lower and lower into our own disabilities, mindful of that caveat which S.
Cor. 8.2
Paul gives us: If any man think that he knows some thing he has not yet
known how he ought to know. Thom. a Kemp. l 4 c. 18 n. 2
Many have lost their devotion, while they would be searching into higher
things.

III. And he made have, and came down, and received him rejoicing; and when
all saw it, they muttered, saying, that he turned in to a man that was a
sinner. But Zacheus standing said to our Lord: Behold the half of my goods I
give to the poor, and if I have defrauded any man of any thing, I restore
fourfold. Let people mutter as they please, either at the blindness of our
faith, or at our have to come to our Savior, and often receiving; We see here
the bene^it of it* the more we submit our thoughts to faith, the more constant
we become in it; the of^ener we receive, the more grace is derived into us, and
more ligh^, and resolution to discover, and remedy things of which before we
made no account: And ^he office of our Savior, and intent of his coming, being
to seek and to sav^ that which was lost, we have the more frequent occasion,
and more pote^t motive to seek ^ith him into our souls, and expect salvation
from him. Thom. a Kemp. l. 4* c. 16. n. 2*
Behold I stand before thee, poor and naked, begging grace, and craving mercy.

Intertayment of our Savior with the people of Jerusalem.
I. THe Prophet Zachary exhorts the people of Jerusalem greatly to rejoice,
and to exult in regard of our Saviors coming: Zach. 9 9
Behold thy king shall come unto thee poor (or as S. Matthew records it)
^eeke, sitting upon an, Ass, and upon a colt, the fool of an Ass. And he
gives the reason, Matthew. 21*
because in this meek and ^umble manner he intended to conquer the world
bringing both Jew and Ge^till to receive him as their king, and to obey his
commands and directions. The same meek, and humble manner he continues till
this day, particularly in the blessed Sacrament, offering himself to be
received b^ us in so loving a way, that however they who have ^ier thoughts
pinned upon worldly greatness, may t^^nk it strange in him, and folly in us to
believe, tha^ ^e should come unto us in so poor, and infirm wise, yet to
those who truly consider his loving intent in it, it is both admirable, and to
be received with all joy and exul^ation, subiecting our understanding to his
power, wisdom, and goodness; and bridling our wild thoughts from ranging out
of the high and beaten way of Gods received truth.

II. The expression which the people made of their joy and contentment, was not
a little also to be admired, considering the humble manner in which he choose
to make this his solemn entrance: The disciples covered the Ass, and the colt
with their garments; the people likewise Spread thiers upon the ground all a
long as he rode; others cut down branches, and leaves of trees, and strewed
them in the way, and multitudes that went before him* and followed him, cried
Hosanna, to the Son of David; blessed is he that comes in the name of our
Lord, Hosanna in the highest: And when he was entered Jerusalem the whole city
was moved, saying who is this? and the people said, this is Jesus, S. Bern.
the Prophet, of Nazareth in Galilee S. Bernard tells us, that to receive our
Savior worthyly, we must be clad with the garments of the Apostles, their
doctrine, their virtues, their obedience, their charity; we must lay ourselves
under his fee^e, acknowledging that whatever we have is his; garment, branch,
and leaf; and incessantly consider who he is; for whatever we can arrive to
know of him will fall short of his worth: This is Jesus: Blessed is he that can
understand this word. Thom. a Kemp. l. 2 ^* 8. n. 2.
He that finds Jesus, finds a good treasure, yea a good above all goods: He
that leeseth Jesus, leeseth more, then the whole world.

III. Our blessed Savior, amidst all this intertaynment, and all this joy of
the people, so soon as from the top of mount Olivet he discovered the city of
Jerusalem, brake forth into tears, and into a most sad expression of himself.
Luc. 19. 2
O Hierusalsm; if thou (...) known, even in this thy day, the things which
belong to thy peace; but no^ they are hidden from thy eyes. etc. He saw that
however the whole city was moved at his coming, the greatest part of it, had
not the motions toward him which becomed them, and him; and even many of those
(...) for (...) present cried Hosanna, would not long after be (...) and cry
Barrrabas, and Crucify him. Where we see with how much reason the Apostle
admonishes every one of us, 1 Cor ^^ 28.
to examine, and prove himself, before and after he eats of this facred bread,
that he come not unworthily not making difference betwixt this and a common
table; nor after having been intertayned at it, return like a dog to his
vomit. We approach to him who has an eye which searches into our very hearts;
there is no dissembling: but as he searches into us, let us search into his
deservings, and be midfull of them, and we shall find the peace of God, which
is hidden from the eyes of the world, and enjoy the peace of our mind, which
will be to us a continual banquet. Prove. 15 ^^
And instead of drawing tears from our Savior, we shall rejoice him and the
Angels; who will join with the devout people, and sing Hosanna, Th. a Ke^ 1.
4. c. 17. n. 5
at this happy meeting. Let all people, nations, and tongues praise thee, and
thy holy, and me^^ifluous name, and magnify it with ardent devotion, end
jubilee. etc.

Intertaynment of our Savior with the first Christians.
I. IT is recorded of the first Christians that they were presevering in the
doctrine of the Apostles, Act. 2 42
and in the communication of breaking of bread, and prayers, and great fear
was in all. And all that believed were together, and had all things common.
Their possessions, and substance they sold, and divided them to all, as every
one had need. This being the practice of those primitive times, it must serve
us as a pattern, in some proportion, to imitate, at least in the occasion
which we have to receive our Lord, and partake of that heavenly bread, which
they handled with so great reverence: And first we must continue steadfast in
the doctrine of the Apostles concerning it: which doctrine we may read at large
in the eleventh Chapter of the first of S. Paul to the Corinthians, confirming
what the Gospells deliver, concerning the realitie of the Body and blood of our
Savior, under the shapes of bread and wine; and teaching us how great
difference we ought to make betwixt this spiritual banke^, and other meetings;
and consequently examine ourselves before hand, and clear our consciences from
sin coming to receive him, who is the searcher of hearts and judge of the
quick and the dead. Th. a Ke. 1. 4. c. ^.
If thou had the purity of Angels, and the holiness of S. Ihon Baptist; thou
were not worthy to receive this Sacrament.

II. Secondly; it is fitting we should bestow some time in prayer, both before
and after receiving; and not come abruptly to the holy table, or go from it, as
we would from an ordinary meal; but think what we are doing, and have done;
and commend ourselves to God, and his Saints upon it, that we may receive the
benefit of so great a treasure more plentifully. The Apostle tells us* i, Cor.
11 30
that many were weak, and feeble among the first Christians, and many did dye,
because they made little or no difference betwixt this and other meats; which
spiritually at least does befall us, when we come and go away vnreverently; for
first we grow weak, and feeble in our resolutions of serving God, and keeping
his commandments, and then neglect them, which brings us to the death of our
souls.

III. Thirdly the day in which we receive, it were fitting we should continue
in our thoughts the fear of God, more particularly th^n other days,
remembering now and then what a guest has vouchsafed to lodge in our breast:
and fourthly also weane ourselves some thing from the pleasures; and vanities
of the world; doing some act of charity toward our Neighbor, by way of alms
or otherwise; taking heed that we fall not into contention with others, but
maintain love and charity toward all; for our Savior has reserved nothing
from us, but given us his whole substance; and this is properly the Sacrament
of love, in which he desires to be with us, one body and one spirit, and that
we should be so one with another, Ec^. 4. 4.
as we have been called in one hope of our vocation. O my God! how much did
they endeavor to do to please thee? How little is that which I do? How
little time do I bestow wben I prepare myself to receive? Seldom wholly
recollected, more seldom free from all distraction. Thomas a Kempis l. 4. c.
1. n. 5.

Intertaynment of our Savior with the Apostles.
I. S. Peeter upon occasion of the transfiguration of our Savior said unto
him. Lord it is good for us to be here; Matt. ^^
if those wi^^, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias. Our Savior in the blessed Sacrament does not show
himself in a glorious shape, but shrouded with the cloud, or form of bread
and wine; yet beholding him (not with the eye of sense, as then S. Peeter) but
with the eye of faith, we may with as much love and confidence say unto him,
Lord, it is good for us to be here: and instead of the tabernacles of Moses
and Elias, make use of the figures of the old testament, which represented this
blessed mystery; as the Sacrifices of Abel, and Abraham, here accomplished;
and the Manna, outgone by many degrees; and the Paschal lamb, and the bread of
proposition, and the daily Sacrifices, and what ever el^ is recorded in all the
ceremonialls, with all the prophecies; and consider how much the person of our
Savior, and the manner of his being present with us, and the inrent and effect
of this my sterie, does exceed all that is gone before; and taking up thy rest
in the tabernacle of thy heart with our Savior, say often to him, how amiable
are thy tabernacles o Lord of hosts! Ps. 83.
My soul longs, and languisheth after the course of my Lord: my heart, and my
flesh have exvlted in my living God. etc.

II. S. Paul had a desire to be dissolved; that is even to dye, that he might
be with Christ, esteeming better then life, or any thig that that this life can
affoard; Phil. 1. 23.
that was a desire of seeing him in an other world; yet if we did conceive
things in their right value, we should in reason, with as much fervor, lay
aside all worldly business to be with Christ in this blessed action at
convenient times; saying with the same Apostostle; To me, Ibid. V. 2^.
to live is Christ, and to die is gain: that is Christ is my life; and though
I forsake all the world to be with him, I shall be a gayner by i^- Who therefore
shall sever us from the Charity or love of Christ. Tribulation? Or distress?
or famine? Or nak^dnes? Romans 8* 35.
Or danger? Or persecution? Or the sword? I am sure that neither death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things present, nor
things to come, nor might, nor height, nor deapth, nor other creature shall be
able to separate etc. I desire to be dissolved from this mortal body, that I
may see thee face; but seeing it is thy pleasure that I only enjoy thy in this
covert manner, I willingly forgo all worldly content, all company, all pastime
or intertaynment, to be with thee, for thou art my God, and all things.

III. S. Andrew with another, seeing our Savior once pass alone by him, and
hearing S. Jhon Baptist (whose disciple then he was) say, ^^. t. 36.
Behold the lamb of God, accosted our Savior, and asked him, Master, where
dwell thou? And he said, come, and see; they came and saw, where he abided,
and tarried with him that day. What can be more beseeming thee in this blessed
action, then even out of compassion to ask our Savior where he dwells here
below, seeing his glorious habitation is so adorable in heaven. What are our
Churches, be they never so sumptious? And how many of them are more like
stables then Churches? And what is thy breast? Come near, and home to thyself,
and see where, and how thou intertaynest him, and how long thou use to stay
with him* S. James, and S. Ihon, upon occasion that the Samaritans once did
with discurtesie refuse to give passage to our Savior through their city,
Luc. 9 52
would have commanded fire from heaven upon them, which zeal though our
Savior rep^ehended as unreasonable, yet it behooves us to reflect, how deeply
we are apt to take an indignity offered, where ourselves are concerned and how
slight oftimes we make of this so great a courtesy of our Savior, though it
wholly concern us; and again how that really that punishment was not
exorbitant, considering the person contumeliously rejected, and yet how little
oftimes we value him.

IV. Finally therefore join with S. Ihon, who deserved the name of the beloved
disciple; and seeing our Savior is pleased to remain in thy breast, as he
gave upon his a resting place to S. Io. 13 23
Ihon, be not backward, nor straight laced in point of love, but as the favor
is greater, so to thy ability strain thy^elf to greater love: give him his
full rest in thy soul: do not disquiet him with v^^ quiet thoughts, words, or
deeds. Beg of him that he will stay with thee, even beyond the time limited
by the species; Luc 24. 29
say with the two disciples. Mane nobiscum Domine quoniam advesperascit. l. 4
c. 16 n.
And with the devout Thomas a Kempis. Would to God that thou would totally
inflame me by thy presence: Io, 20. 2^
stretch forth thy hand with S. Thomas, and touch his sacred side, and hands,
and frete, and kissing them say. My Lord and my God.

Intertaynments of our Savior with the Angels and Saints.
I. While the Apostles, at our Saviors Ascension, were looking toward heaven
after him, two Angels appearing said, what stand you looking into heavon? Act.
1 1^
This Jesus, who is taken up from you into heaven shall so come, as you have
seen him going into heaven. And really if we should consider only the worth,
and dignity of his person, it were but fitting he should in all occasions
appear in so much, and much greater glory; but stooping to our weakness, and
to our commodity, behold how he comes, not clad with glory, but clouded
under the shapes of bread and wine; yet this is the same Jesus, who then taken
up into heaven, sits at the right hand of his heavenly Father in glory.
Stand therefore, and look earnestly into this heavenly mystery. Admire and
love his goodness; once he will come to judge; but to do mercy upon us, to
increase his graces, to bestow himself in so friendly a manner, he comes
millions and milleons of times, and will continue so till the end of the world.
This is Jesus, this is my Savior, my Redeemer, my all things. O that I could
say, he shall never be taken from me. Come sweet Jesus, and come so, that I may
ever enjoy thee. Amen.

II. His taking up into heaven, betokens not any need that he had of
assistance (for he ascended of himself) but the reception, or intertaynment,
which the Angels and Saints gave him at his ascension: all the nine quiers
ranking themselves in order, from the highest to the lowest heaven, and taking
him in the midst of them singing praises of his divinity, and humanity, and of
the wondrous things which he had done; and suffered for mankind, and
rejoicing at his exaltation even above themselves; 3. reg. 8. 7.
the Cherubims, not daring to stretch their wings over his head, as anciently
over the Arc; and the Seraphins, Esaias. 6. ^2.
hiding their faces, in reverence of the splendor of his glorious countenance;
the Thrones, and Dominations, and Principalities proftrating themselves unto
him as king of kings and Lord of Lords; Ap. 9. 16.
and the rest of the heavenly court doing homage every one in his degree. Why
stand we looking only upon him? And not industriating ourselves to do him,
with the holy Angels, all the honor and homage thar lies in our power; or
perhaps do not so much as look after him, but let our thoughts and feet
wa^der instantly after other objects. O object eternally to be looked on, and
upon which the Angels; and saints do eternally look, and cannot be satiated
with the beauty and riches of it.

III. S. Jhon said once to the people. There has one stood in the midst of
ye whom ye know not. Io. 1. 26.
Let not this be now veryfied in thee, after so many evidences; Imitate the
faith of the Apostles, and say with S. Peeter. Thou art Christ, Matthew. 16
the son of the living God. Say with Nathanael, Thou art the Son of God,
Io. 1. 49.
thou art the king of Israel. Looking up into heaven with S. Stephen,
acknowledge that this is the same Jesus, Act. 7. 55
who stands at the right, hand of God. Harken to S. Ihon Chrysostom, S. Ihon
Chrysostom.
who tells us, that millions of Angels do assist at the holy sacrifice, and
holy communion, with head and knee bowed before him: S. Agnes
say with S. Agnes. To him I keep my faith, to him with entire devotion I
commit myself. Say with S. Agatha, S. Agatha
Carnal medicine I never applied to my body but I have my Lord Jesus, who by
his word alone does, repair all things. S. Cecilie
Sing with S. Cecely* Let my heart become without spot, that I may not be
confounded in the sight of my heavenly spouse. Offer up unto him with these,
and other Virgins. Purity of ha^t; with the holy Confessors, mortification of
thy senses: with the holy Bishops and Doctors, entire obedience to that which
they have generally delivered concerning this blessed mystery* with the
glorious Martyrs, constanci^ and resolution in whatever opposition? With all
the Saints, joy and exultation at the glory and goodness which shines in it,
and falling down with them upon thy face before him say. Amen Benediction, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, honor, and power, and strength, to our
God for ever and ever. Amen.

THE TABLE.
PReface to the Reader. 3 Introduction to the following Medit. I. Part. 5
Introduction. II. Part. 6 The Incarnation of our Blessed Savior. I. Part. 8
The Incarnation. II. Part. 9 The Incarnation. III. Part. 10 The Incarnation.
IV. Part. 11 The Visiting S. Elizabeth. I. Part. 12 The Visitation. II. Part.
14 The Nativitie of S. Ihon Baptist. I. Part. 15 The Nativitie of S. Ihon. II.
Part. 16 The office of S. Ihon as Precursor. 17 S. Joseph certifyed by the
Angel. 1^ A preparative for the receiving of our Savior. I. Part. 20 Of the
preparative. II. Part. 21 III. Part. 22 IV. Part. 22 The journie of Jesus,
Marie, and Joseph to Bethleem 23 The Birth of our Savior. 25 The Angels
joyful tidings to the sheepherds. 26 The shepeherds make have to our Savior,
27 The Circumcision of our Lord. 28 Of the name of Jesus. 29 The start which
appeared in the east. 30 Herod trobled. 31 The Sages find our Savior. 32 The
purification of the Blessed Virge^. 33 The law of Purification. 34 Old Simeon
meets our Savior. 35 He take the Child in his arms. 36 Simeon his Prophecy.
37 Anna the Prophe^^sse. 38 The flight into ^gypt. 39 The killing of the
Innocents. 40 The return out of Egypt. 41 Christ in the Temple at twelve
years of age. 42 His Answer to his mother. 44 His life till thirty. 45
Introduction to the meditations of the Passion. 46 The Council of the Jews
against our Savior. 47 The Pascal Lamb. 49 The Washing of his disciples
feet. 50 The parting of Judas from the test^ 52 The Institution of the Blessed
Sacrament. 53 His Prayer in the Carden. 55 Our Savior betrayed. 56 What passed
in the night. I. Part 58 II. Part. 60 Our Savior accused before Pilate. 61 He
is sent to Herod. 63 Barrabas preferred. 65 The whipping of our Savior. 67
The Crown of thorns. 68 Ecce Homo. 70 The Carrying of the Cross. 72 The
Crucifying. 74 The words of our Savior. I. Part. 75 II. Part. 76 III. Part. 77
IV. Part. 79 V. Part. 80 VI. Part. 81 What happened after his death. 82 The
taking from the Cross and buryall. 84 An exercise in honor of the wounds of
our Savior. 85 Of the Passion by way of repetition. I. Part. 87 II. Part. 89
III. Part. 90 IV. Part. 92 V. Part. 93 The soiitude of our Blessed Lady. 95
Introdnction to the Mysteries of the Resurrection. 97 Our Saviors going down
to limbo. 98 His Resurrection and appearing to his Mother. 100 II. Part. 102
III. Part. 103 The Angel speaks to the women. 104 Peeter and Ihon run to the
sepulcher. 106 He appears to the Magdalen. I. Part. 107 II. Part. 109 He
appears to the women. 110 To the disciples traveling. I. Part. 11^ II. Part.
113 He appears to the disciples together. 114 And to them with S. Thomas. 116
The causes why our Savior kept the marks of his wounds. 118 Our Savior at the
fishing. I. Part. 119 II. Part. 120 Our Saviors discourse with S. Peeter. 122
He foretells him of his death. 123 He appears to them at table. 125 He
appears in Galilee. 126 Christ's Ascension. I. Part. 128 II. Part. 130
Considerations moving to the love of God and of our Neighbor. 132 An act of
humble acknowledgment of our own weakness. 133 The length of the love of God.
135 The first means to perpetuate our love. 137 The happiness of younger years.
139 The second means. 141 Of the desire of being dissolved. 143 The Eternity
of love in the love of our Neighbor. 144 The latitude of the love of God. 146
Its universal because to every one in particular. 147 How we may imitate it.
I. Part. 149 II. Part. 151 The height of the love of God. 153 How we are to
imitate it. I. Part. 154 II. Part. 156 The depth of the love of God. I. Part.
158 II. Part. 160 The coming of the holy Ghost. I. Part. 161 II. Part. 162
Fruits of the holy Ghost in the first Christians. 164 The Mystery of the
Blessed Trinity. 166 The obligation we have to love God. I. Part. 167 II.
Part. 169 III. Part. 171 IV. Part. 172 Aspirations tending to the increase of
the love of God in twelve Paragraphes. 173
Intertaynments of our Blessed Savior when we receive the most blessed
sacrament.
First as God. 188 As king. 190 As spouse. 192 As the good sheepherd. 194 As
Master or Teacher. 196 As our Physician. 197 As our Redeemer. 199 As our Judge.
201 As Mediator and Advocate. 203 As our friend. 205 As our Brother. 207 As the
sacrifice of the law of grace. 208 As a spiritual banker. 211 Intertaynment of
our Savior with the blessed Virgen and S. Joseph. 213 With S. Jhon Baptist.
215 With th Samaritan woman. 218 With the penitent Magdalen. 221 With the
Canane^n. 224 With Martha, Marie and Lazarus. 225 With Zaccheus. 22^ With
the people of Jerusalem. 229 With the first Christians. 231 With the
Apostles. 233 With the Angels and Saints. 225
FINIS.
Errors of the Second Part. Such, as is hoped will not troble the
understanding reader, are omitted^
Page Lin. Err. Corr. 9 1 mind wind 9 9 us more more 11 10 to tho^ 15 28 it
turn it to turn 16 31 spuorie savorie 25 17 then their 30 the to 52 32 of
dele 54 25 soldeers soldiers 55 ^ God go 61 21 diffension dissension 62 11
ofsentation oftentation 63 35 spead spread ^ 31 o of ^ 25 not reflect not to
reflect ^ 22 we we if we, if we ^ 41 which with ^ 4 ffi all shall 95 4 in in
the 34 then thou 100 33 impace impeache 104 1 to us ^s 117 27 ercised exercised
122 18 and at 125 39 house of a house 40 of a dele 130 39 all not 140 1
consider we consider 149 1 loving lea^ing 156 6 best be best 168 2 ayp has
Cayphas 174 2 owe awe 184 20 say I say 202 7 followers flowers 10 per pen 206
29 mal map

THE LIFE AND DOCTRINE OF OUR SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST.

With short reflections for the help of such as desire to use MENTAL PRAYER.

THE SECOND PART.

Wherein every seventh Meditation is an application of the former to the most
BLESSED SACRAMENT.

Also seven Seats, where, by the contemplative our Blessed Savior may be
found in the seven Days of the Week.

IHS


BY H. M. of the SOCIETY OF JESUS.

GANT by MAXIMILIAEM GRAET at the sign of the Angel 1656. Permissu Superiorum.

INTRODVCTION To the Following MEDITATIONS.
THe following considerations being grounded upon the doctrine of our Savior,
it is connaturall first to cast our thoughts upon the excellency of the
deliverer of it: For as S. Ambrose observes, L. de Virg
Primus discendi ardor, nobilitas est Magistri, the first spur to learn is
the excellency of the Master. And who more excellent then our Savior? Whom
the Angel proclaimed Great in all things that can be esteemed great; Luc. 1.
32.
and the son of the Highest in all things that can be accounted high; himself
being equal to his Father. The beloved disciple tells us, Io. 1*
he is the word of God from the beginning of all eternity, coeternall with him
who spoke him; so that nothing that is in God, or in his pleasure, can be
hidden from him. And again, in him was life, and life was the light of men. As
who should say, he was from all eternity, and is, the fountain of life, and
light, and all that proceeds from him gives life, and light; all is dark, and
deadly which is contrary to his doctrine and word.

II. This only begotten son, 10. 1. 18.
who is in the besome of his Father, and privy to all his counsels,
vouchsafed to come among us, to impart them unto us, and not only to teach as a
Master, but to encourage us as a Companion in performing of them; nothing so
hard does fall from his mouth which he does not in his deeds, and sufferings
show that it is not beyond flesh and blood to do and suffer; he was in the
bosom of his Father, in eternal rest, and pleasure, aod happiness, and did not
disdain to come in mortal flesh to partake of our miseries and infirmities,
to show us how to bear them, and how to cure them, He is a dull, and cowardly
soldiar that seeing his Captain march, and menage his arms before him, ^ither
cannot learn, or will not follow, specially such a Captain, so noble, so
charitable, so deserving. Behold, Esaias. 55. 4.
says Esaias the Evangelicall Prophet, I have given him a witness to all people,
a leader, and master to all nations, Him, who is the all-knowing wisdom of
the eternal God; him, who cannot testify any thing but what is truth; who
cannoa lead to any thing but what is righteous, who cannot teach but what is
honorable, and prositable, and also pleasant to such as have not their thoughts
and actions seasoned with that which will be their destruction, if not
abandoned. Him I have given of my infinite goodness; and he out of his equally
infinite charity has accepted this charge, not valuing the labor and pains
to be taken in leading and teaching so poor creatures as we all are, refusing
no^e though never so weak and wretched.

III. Exult therefore Sonn^s of Sion, Io^l. 2. 23.
rejoice in our lord God because he has given you a master of justice. The
benefit which you shall reap by following his doctrine i^ not only the assured
performance of that which is just and right (which of itself norwithstanding is
a benefit inestimable) but our Lord will cause to descend, upon yo^ morning and
evening showers of his timely graces, to prevent evils, an^ further good
thoughts and actions, (...) your floores (...) filled with wheat* with food
that (...) substantial an^ free from the chafe upon which worldlings feed?
And your wine presses shall flow with wine (...) oil of spiritual comforts,
even in those things which to flesh and blood are pressures: and I will restore
v^t^ you the years, which the locust has eaten, and the ca^ket^worme and the
c^tterpiller; by ^ervour of spirit reforming your former loose behavior, and
repayring the loss of former time; for my strength is Great, which I (...)
sent among you. It is not our desires or endeavors which are of force to work
any of these things. It is the strength of our Saviors merits and sufferings
and grace^ which he of his goodness grant us. Amen.

The Baptism of our Savior.
I. THen Jesus comes from Galilee to the river Jordan to Ihon to be baptized
by him: Tun^ venit Jesus a Galialea in ^ordanem. etc.
But Ihon forbad. him, saying, I ought to be baptized by thee, and come thou
to me? Our Savior had lived thirty years at home in Nazareth, Matt 3. 13.
and with S. Joseph in his trade of carpentring, as may be gathered by the
opinion of the Jews saying, Is not this a Carpenter, Ma^c^ 6. ^.
the Son of Marie? Now, when the time was come which he had alloted for his
preaching, and manifestation to the world, he comes as poorly, and as humbly;
among the throng of people who floketh to S Jhon, to be buptized by him: He had
not need of baptism, or other preparation to perfection as the rest; but as he
obeyed the law of circumcision in his in fancy, he would not now
discountenance, but honor the pious practice of S. Ihon, and undergo that in
figure, which he was to establish afterward as a necessary means toward our
purgation; in this, as in other things, giving us example not to undervalue
things of this nature, though to a worldly eye, and haughty mind thy may seem
impertinent: so says S. Paul of himself writing to the Corinthians, and I was
with you in inf^mitie, and fear, and much trembling, and my speech, and my
preaching was not in the persuasible words of humane wisdom. etc. Humility is
the ground of all great actions proceeding from God, who being in all things
great, would also be great in the humbling himself, to humble (if possible]
our pride.

II. Ihon forbad him saying, I ought to be baptized by thee. etc. Our Savior
was not ashamed to be accounted a sinner among the rest; but S. Ihon knowing by
revelation who he was, proclaimed his innocence, and took occasion to
acknowledge, and confess his own wants and unworthiness; and every one of us
may with much more reason say. It is I who have real need of this sacred
ceremony from thy hands, who alone can wash away my sins: it is I who have
daily and hourly need of washing; my sins and imperfections are so great
and so many: It is I that ought to undergo this shame of confessing them,
having not been ashamed to commit them: It is I who owe the debt, and must pay
it to the uttermost farthing, Matthew. 5 26
unless thou by thy Sacraments, and by thy mercyes do forgive me. Jesus,
answering said, suffer it now for so it becomes us to fulfill all justice.
Many conveniences may offer themselves to thy infinite wisdom for which it may
become thee thus to humble thyself: but for me it is necessity, it is my
duty, it calls upon me by all the titles of a creature, and a sinner, and a
subject, and a servant, and infinite other obligations; these are titles of
justice, which if I do not fulfill, I shall bear the smart: thou fullfillest
all this with out any obligation to do so, but of thy goodness, to correct our
backwardnes in doing that which is fitting for us to do. What is there that
will not become me to do to the utmost, be it never so mean, or seeming to be
below me, seeing thou have stooped thvs low to thy servant.

III. Jesus being baptized, forth with came out of the water, and lo the
heavens were opened to him, and he saw the spirit of God descending as a dove,
and coming upon him, and behold, a voice from heaven, saying, this is my
beloved son* in whom I am well pleased. Three signs of the effects of the
baptism which those receive who are washed in the water sanctified by our
Savior. The gates of heaven are opened unto them, the holy Ghost descends upon
them; and they are made the adoptive sons of God. But our Savior was his
natural, and eternal son, eternal beloved, and now upon a new title of his
superexcellent obedience as man, and charity toward mankind, coming into this
world with the innocence and meekenes of a dove, not to punish, but to spare
and to forgive. Have recourse unto him while the heavens are thus open; delay
not thy conversion; prepare thy heart with purity to receive the spirit of God,
and his graces be meek, and humble, and peaceable, because such are styled
the Sons of God; Matthew. 5 9
love, that thou may be beloved; endeavor to Please God above all, and for
no man's pleasure displease him. How sweere, and how rich is the name of Son,
which he vouchsafed us from heaven, Psalm: 4 3
and in order to the heavenly inheritance? Sons of men, how long heavyharted.
To what purpose do you love vanity, and hunt after a lie? The only true
honor and true riches is to be the son of God.

The fast, Temptation, and Victory of our Savionr.
I. THen Iesns was led by the spirit into the desert, Tunc Jesus ductus est a
spiritu in desertam etc.
to be tempted by the devil, Matthew, 4
and when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward he was
hungry. He was led by the same spirit that had descended upon him at his
baptism, to the holy actions of retirement from worldly occasions, and of
fasting, and by occasion of that, to be tempted by the enemy of all wholesome
exercises. His food all that time was prayer, and the fervent desires of
performing in life, and death, the will of his heavenly Father: by which he
taught us how to arm ourselves against the assalts of the devil, and not to
think because we are sorely now and then set upon, that therefore we are
deserted of God, and of his spirit: How also to prepare ourselves to what ever
employment God does call us unto. And though hepersevered so long without touch
of hunger, at last he was hungry: stooping to the infirmity of man, whose
nature he did bear, and whom he had undertaken to instrvct; the tempter not
being able to dive into the deapth of the mystery of the Incarnation, yet by
many circumstances co^i^cturing, took hold of his being hungry, and
approaching said, If thou be the son of God, command that these stones be
made bread: knowing that it was much easyer to do so, then what had been done
in creating all of nothing. Our Savior did not yeald unto his motion, because
(as S. Augustine reflects.) The Tempter is not overcome but by contemning him)
but answered. S. August.
Not in bread alone does man live, but in every word which proceeds from the
mouth of God. For the Children of Israel themselves in their forty years
pilgrimage in the desert, were not maintained so much by the Manna, as by the
divine providence, concerning both body and soul. Raise thy thoughts to this
spiritual food, and to confidence in God, who will not suffer us to be tempted
above that which we are able, but with the temptation will give us issue that
we may sustain it. 1 Cor. 10 12


II. Then the devil took him up into the holy ci^^y, and ^et him upon the
pinna^le of the Temple; and said, if thou be the Son of God, cast thyself
down; for it is written; he will give his Angels charge of thee, and in their
hands they shall hold thee up etc. No man can pretend to be free from
temptation, seeing the devil so bold with our Savior and the nearer we come
to holiness, and higher we are taken into the favor of God, the more we must
beware; for the temptations are always the more secret and cloked with some
pretense of good, as heece with the words of scripture misapplyed: if thou b^
the Son of God do^ not cast rhyself down to things inferior to God, and his
service; do not permit thyself to be taken up by a high conceit of thyself,
remain rather in the desert; if thou be taken out, live notwithstanding in
fear; be not rash; do not thrust thyself into occasions, which may be
dangerous. Our Savior answered: Thou shall not tempt thy Lord God. Gape not
after extraordinary comforts, unusual lights, new conceits; go up and down
by the usual degrees of virtue, practiced by saints, allowed by the Church;
and by those who in it have the place of directing us. He has indeed given his
Angels charge of us but we must not be headlong, or headstrong in our ways.

III. Again he took him up into a very high mountain, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, saying, all these will I give
thee, if falling down thou a door me: Whether does not pride and ambition
carry a mind that is once poisoned with them? of what does it not brag though
never so false, as here the devil, as if all had been his to give and to take
away at his pleasure? I will give thee all the kingdoms; as if all did consist
in present wealth, and glory, and pleasure, and command: They who have had all
at will, what is become of them? All these what are they? people climb
mountains, and pass through a thousand dangers, to gain a little parcel of
them, and with them they heap upon themselves mountains of synns, and
torments due to sin: say with our Savior. Avaunt Satan, thou shall adore thy
Lord God, and serve him alone. No inticement of Inremperance, no smoke or mind
of vanity, no splendor of wealth or command shall remove me from this
resolution, or inveigle me with their allurements, to forget or forgo my duty
to my God, and to Conscience. And as upon this the Tempter gave over for that
time, and the Angels came, and ministered unto him, what was necessary; so by
constantly resisting, we shall be the more free, (though never absolutely
secure, so long as this time of warfare lasts) and the Angels will be (...)
more ready to assist us against this common enemy. Beg all this of thy
Savior by his merits. Amen.

S. Ihons restimonie of our Savior.
I. THe next day Ihon saw Jesus coming toward him; Altera die vidit Ioannes
Iesum venientem ad se etc. Io. 1. 29 Thom. 2 Kemp. l. 2 c. 8
and said, behold the lamb of God; behold him who takes away the sin of the
world: When Jesus is present all is easy, and nothing does seem hard unto us:
When Jesus is not present every thing is harsh Come sweet Jesus, and take
from me this heavy burden of sin, and of repugnance to that which is thy
will. O blessed lamb; Innocent, meek, patient, obedient; silent, rightly
styled the lamb of God, because from God alone these virtues can proceed; and
in whom they are there is God, Prove 3. 34
because with the simple is his conversation: Behold with a loving, and
thankful eye this lamb, who only is able to take away thy sins, and out of
his infinite mercy does daily take them away by means of his holy Sacraments,
and other helps; and though daily multiplied, is yet ready to take them all
aw^y, upon the first repentance, and does meekely and patiently bear with us
day by day.

II. Again Ihon was standing, and two of his disciples, and beholding Jesus
walking said, behold the lamb of God. the two disciples heard him speak this,
and they followed Jesus. Jesus said nothing; but his modesty and his
humility spoke for him, and showed that indeed he was the lamb ordained, and
ready for the sacrifice. Behold him again and again; observe all his actions,
stand and consider; be not easily diverted from so profitable and pleasing an
object; follow him with thy thoughts and actions: he compels no body, unless
his love be so potent in thee as to compel thee. O sweere compulsion! draw me
after thee, Cant. 13
and we shall run in the fragrancie of thy ointments; there is nothing in him
which will nor invite thee to follow; if thou do duly consider whom thou
do behold. He walks not the wide ways of the world, which lead to
perdition; he walks the way of righteousness and shows us the way to our
eternal repose.

III. And Jesus turning, and seeing them follow him says to them, what seek
ye? they say to him, Master where dwell thou? Our Savior was pleased with
their promptnes to follow him upon S. Ihons words, and with their modesty, and
respect toward his person, forbearing to interrupt his thoughts, while he was
walking; he liked also well their intention of not contenting themselves with
some small conversation with him by the way, as being desirous at leisure to
hear and converse with him more at large. He therefore turned himself to them,
and familiarly asked. What seek^ you? to the end to make them the more
confident. O loving aspect! Observe the benefit of making use in time of holy
inspirations and suggestions; and that our Savior does not ask, whom seek
you? for it was apparent enough they sought him; but whht seek you in me?
What do you aim at in following me? A question which may give every one of
us occasion to lay his hand upon, his breast, and examine whether really in
following him, we seek him, or some thing else which self love or some other
occasion does suggest. If thou seek Jesus in all things, Thom. a Kemp. l. 2
c. 7 n. 3.
thou shall find Jesus; if thou seek thyself thou will find thyself.

IV. He says to them; come and see: they came, and saw where he did abide,
and they tarried with him that day. They desired to know, where he dwelled, that
they might in private hear his instruction, and resort the oftener to him,
they saw where he did abide; perhaps as then he had no house, or dwelling;
however; in them he invites us to come and see at leisure: where? poorly
enough in all. probability, as once in the stable, and in his banishment in
the desert, and by whole nights in the fields, in prayer, and even then upon
the Cross in thought and resolution. Come, and see, how long, and with what
disposition of mind he remained in all these, and does still in the most
blessed Sacrament; stay with him in the closet of thy heart, in thy lawful
Superiors, in every one of his little ones, all the days of this life: Ascend
into heaven with thy thoughts; there he dwells eternally; pass thither in
desire, that thou may pass the more courageously following him by the way
which he shows thee. Psalm. 83:
Quam dil^cta tabernacula tua Domine virtutum? How lovely are thy Tabernacles,
even in this life? Master, teach me where I may find thee best, show me where
to feedest, Cant. 1. 7*
where thou restest at noone day that I may not begine to wander after the
herds of my fellows, that is, after the multitudes of those who wa^der
without guides they know not whether

Our Savior begins to gather disciples.
I. ANdrew brother to Simon Peeter was one of the two that had heard what S.
Ihon said, Erat autem Andreas frater Simonis Petri vnus ex duobus. Io: 1 40.
and followed our Savior. He first finds his brother Simon, and says unto
him, we have found the M^ssias; and brought him to Jesus. The spiritual
treasures are not as those of the world; they increase by communication: The
spirit and the spouse say come; Apoc. 22 17
and he who hears, let him say come; and he who thirsts let him come. There
is abundance for every body that will receive. We have found the Messiah:
imagine what joy was in the heart of S. Andrew when his thoughts were upon this
purchase. Thom. a Kemp. l* 2* c. 8
If Jesus speak but one word, we feel great comfort, and he that finds
Jesus finds a great good thing; yea all that is good; and if he bewell with
him, he is most rich. We have found him; and he brought him to Jesus: this was
a true brotherly part; a brother who is helped by his brother, Prove. 18 19
Be^da.
is like a strong town. This is truly to find our Lord, if we truly burn with
his love, if we have true care of our brethrens salvation.

II. Jesus beholding Peeter, said, thou art Simon, son of Jonas, thou shall
be called, Cephas, which is interpreted Peeter. Or a Rock, or stone; it is not
enough to find Jesus by faith, or by a sensible sweetness in our prayers, faith
is the groundworke, spiritual comforts are helps so buyld the more
courageously upon the principles of faith; we must incorporate his precepts and
his instructions, and (as S. Paul speaks) put on our Savior, that is, Romans
13. 14
his conversation, and manner of living. Therefore so soon as he was found, he
gave diverse of them other names besides that which they had before: simple
obedience (which Peeters former name might seem to signify) agreed well with
him while he was a subject, but he was to be governor of the whole Church, for
which much fortitude was necessary, and much solidi^ie, always aiming at
that which is the center of our souls, the glory of God, and the exaltation
of his holy name: acknowledging that of ourselves we are but earth, hard to
take any good impression, and still tending downwards; but if Christ say the
word, that is able to make no less change in us, then he did in S. Peeter.

III. On the morrow he would go into Galilee, and he finds Philip, and says
unto him, fellow me. Philip finds Natba^ael, and says, him of whom Moses
in the Iaw, and the prophets wrote. we have found, Jesus Son of Joseph, of
Nazareth. Nathanuel said, from Nazareth can there by any good? Philip says
unto him, come and see. Consider the goodness of our Savior in seeking after
thee, when thou think not of him; follow his holy inspirations, and
endeavor by word and example to encourage others. Be not rash iu judging, nor
conceited of thyself, as if thou did understand more then others; take
leisure and consider whether another may not have more reason and more ground:
be not contentious: Contemn no man's Country and descent, or occupation; God
has his saints in every degree and place: see the riches of God in the poorest
snakes.

IV. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him; behold as Israelite
in very deed, in whom there is no guile. Nathanael says to him: How know
thou me. Jesus answered, before Philip did call thee; when thou were under the
fig tree, I saw thee O all seeing eye! from which nothing is hidden: Psa^m 138
Thou understand my thoughts a far of; thou foreseest all my ways, there
passes not a word from my tongue which thou do not know: O wonderful
knowledge: It is folly for me to endeavor to hide or conceal, or dessemble
any thing before thee: give me grace to serve thee in true simplicity of heart,
and converse in the sight of men, and Angels with out guilt, or fraud* for
thou will judge with equal weights, Esaye 2^ 17
and do justice with right proportion, and frustrute the hopes grounded upon
lies, and under falsehood no man shall be protected. N^thanati said, thou art
the Son of God, thou art the king of Israel. Jesus answered, because I said
to thee I saw thee under the figtree, thou beleevest; greater then these things
thou shall see; ye shall see the heavens opened, and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of man. S. Bern:
They ascend and descend in one and the same man, admiring the Majesty of his
divine person, and the infirmity of human nature, in both stooping to his
service, and to his command, which they esteem the greatest honor they can
ascend unto. Adore our Savior as God, and as king of the whole universe, who
has command of life and death; humbles the proud and exalts the humble,
Reg. 2 ^
he rayseth the needy man from the dust, and he lifts up the poor from the
dung, that he may sit with princes, and hold the throne of glory.

The turning water into wine at the marriage feast.
I. THe third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the Mother of
Jesus was there, Et die te^tia nuptiae factae sun^ in Cana Galilae^: Io: 2. S.
Maximus.
and Jesus also was called, and his disciples to the marriage: And the wine
failing, the Mother of Jesus said to him; They have no wine. He went to the
marriage, to the end that as he had long before by his sovereign power ordained
marriage, now by his blessed presence he might sanctify it. But S. Ihon
Chrysostom puts us upon another consideration and says thus. S. Ihon Chysost*
If you think good, let us set before our eyes two houses; one of those who are
marying, and at a marriage feast, another of such as are in mourning and
affliction; let us enter them one after the other by our consideration, and see
which is the better. And the wine failing: this is what we may be sure of in
all iolities of the world, they cannot ^aste: and how soon do such comforts
fail? how often do they breed discomfort and disastres, even while we are
inioying them? A discomfort so much the greater, because most commonly they
trench upon that which alone is a continual banquet to wit, Prove. 15 15
a good Conscience, and a quiet mind. These found in their necessity the
favorable intercession of the Mother of God: if they had not been in want they
would not have thought him so much as a considerable person; being invited as
it seems more for his Mothers sake then for his own.

II. Jesus says to her, what is it to me and thee, woman? my hour is not yet
come. His Mother says to the wayters, whatever he shall say to ye, do ye.
It is apparent, by his Mothers instant and confident words to the servants,
that our Saviors answer was no check, but only that he would express that it
was a thing not belonging to him, nor to her, to take care of supplying such
temporal wants, or rather superfluities; not to him because he came to relieve
the spiritual necessities, and not properly for any temporal occasion; not to
her, because she was there as a stranger and guest: yet she moved him in it
(though otherwise he did not intend to manifest himself in that occasion)
because she understood it was his pleasure to condescend to her motion, (which
was also very modest, only mentioning the want) and said, whatever he shall
say be sure to do it, for you will see a comfortable effect.

III. And there were six water-pitchers of stone standing (according to the
purification of the Jews) holding every one, two or three measures: Jesus
says to them, fill the pitchers with water; and they filled them up to the
top; and Jesus said to them; fill out now, and carry it to the chief steward;
and they carried it. The ceremonial Jews unless they ofren vvash their hands
they do not eat, Mar^i 7. 3
holding the tradition of the Ancients; our Savior made use of this custom,
the stone pitchers standing in the room for that purpose: He caused them to be
filled up to the top with water, and to be filled our presently, that there
might be no place to say there was some thing mingled with it, or some thing
done which required time: The same intellectual word changing instantly the
water into wine, Genesis ^
which in an instant created heaven and earth in the beginning. It behooves us
notwithstanding at leisure to consider who it is that at his pleasure changes
water into wine, and wine into water, and has all things at command, to the
end no body should be so rechlesse as not to be wholly depending upon him, and
wholly at his beck. The meditation of the Blessed Virgin, the prompt obedience
of the wayters, but chieflly the glory of God, which he only sought, did
cooperate to this wonder: These are the means by which the waters of affliction
are turned into wine of comfort, Romans 8. 28
and that to them who love God all things do cooperate to good. After the
chief steward had tasted the water made wine, and knew not whence it was, but
the servants knew that had drawn the water; the chief steward calls the
bridgroome, and says to him, every man first sets the good wine, and when
they have welldrunk, then that which is worse, but thou have keept the good
wine till now. The joys of this world, begin with defect and want, faling
short of our expectation, and end with greater deceit: how many favors do we
receive from God, and know not of them? chiefly perhaps because we seldom
reflect upon them, or do not look about us sufficiently; if we had once well
^asted of the wine which our Savior presents us, we should easyly esteem all
other mean, and unworthy to be rasted. His wine lasts for Eternity: If it
were wonderful to turn water into wine, S. Ambr*
much more is it turn sinners into saints; and that things which to the world
are insiped, and cold, and dead, should be restored to heat, and color, and
life, and taste. The Apostles believed upon that one sign, we having received
so many wonderful benefits, shall we not believe?

Applications of the former Meditations to Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe Ancient Patriarchs, in the words of the prophet Esaias, did with much
devorion beg that the heavens would send down their dew from above, Esaye 45
^
and the clouds rain downs the Just, that the earth would open, and bring
forth a Savior: But here the heavens are always open for us to behold the
beloved Son. who sits at the right hand of his Father, and in v^home he it
vvellpleased, coming daily down in the holy Sacrifice, in no less humble, and
meek manner, then when he came to be baptized; o that we had the eyes of S.
Ihon to see his inward perfections, and worth, and glory! How should we cover
our faces with the Seraphins? And say, thou come to me? Thou, the eternal
son of God, Creator, and Lord of all things; thou, the beloved of the
Angels; Thou in whom is all hope of life, Hccl. 24. 25.
and strength, and pleasure, vouchsafest to come thus to me, most miserable
creatute: I have great reason, not only to suffer it now, but with all the
strength of my soul and body to desire it, and to labor to fulfill all
justice, that I may not be altogether unworthy; but thou, o infinite goodness,
infinite mercy, infinite compassion, and love; I have not words to express
what I think, nor thoughts to equal thy deserts: come notwithstanding, sweet
Jesus, and be a Savior to me.

II. O bread of life! it is not corporal food that can mayntaine me to
eternity; nor all that the world can present, though I should be master of all
the kingdoms of the world; thou alone art the sustenance that must maintain
us to those long days. I that am made of earth can hardly think of any thing
but of earth, and earthly commodities; thou come from heaven, Io. 3. 31.
and what thou have seen, Prove. 9 5.
to that thou do invite us. Come eat of my bread and drink of the wine,
which I have mingled for ye. Thy bread is thyself, having in thee all that
can delight. and the sweetness of every thing that is spvorie; thy wine, Sap.
16. 20.
is thy sacred blood, which thou have thus mercifully, and admirably mingled
with the outward shape of wine, that as it is most comfortable to our souls,
it should not be distasteful to our bodies: this bread will never feyle us (as
Saul's did in his journey) nor this wine (as in the marriage feast) but the more
greedyly we feed, 1. Reg. 9. 7 Io* 2.
the more plenty we shall have of the fruits and effects of it. Fill your eyes
with tears of sorrow and love, and pour out your heart to him, for even these
he will turn to your eternal comfort, and fill them again with his graces.
Amen.

III. Come often, and see where he dwells, how poorly he is content to be
lodged for thy sake; look into the Churches, where be remayns day and night
for thee; all that is there is not devotion, God worcester, all is not revetence and
respect; all is not cleanlynes, and decency, and yet he does not avoyde the
room: look into the souls of the attendance, and chiefly into thy own; even
when he is received into thy inward rooms, how are they swept? How are they
hung? How are they furnished for him? and yet he has patience. Ps. 118. 124.
O blessed Master? have mercy on thy Servant; give me understanding, and teach
me thy iustifications; I am thy servant, that I may know thy testimonies. It is
time of doing, o Lord; for they have made void thy law. Therefore have I loved
thy commands above gold and precious stone. etc.

They who did trafick in the Temple are cast forth.
I. THe Passover of the ^ewes was at hand, and Jesus went up the Jerusalem;
and he found (...) the Temple them that sold oxen, Prope erat Pascha ^udaeorum.
and sheep, and doves, Io. 2 13
and the bankers sitting; and when he had made as it were a whip of little
cord, he cast them all out of the temple, the sheep, also, and the oxen, and
the money of the banker (...) poured ou^, and the tables he overthrew, and to
them that sold doves he saved, take away these hence, and make not the house of
my Father a house of merchandise. Our Savior duly kept the feast appointed;
but it was no small grief unto him to see so little respect to that place,
which being the house of God, should be the house of prayer, as he said in
another such occasion. Here he thought fitting moreover to show his zeal,
Matthew. 21 13
and his power. But S. Paulinus recals us home to ourselves and tells us, S.
Paul^nus.
that it is for us convenient that our Lord Jesus would often visit the temple
of our heart with the whip of his holy fear, least our soul be possessed
withsome kind of ^va^ice, or the slownes and dullnes of oxen retarde our
senses, or that we set our own innocence, or the divine graces to sale etc.
This is a good zeal to imitate. And also as S. Bid advertizeth, S. Bid
that seeing he showed so much zeal in behalf of that Temple, in which such
sacrifices of oxen and sheep were offered, much rather should we show zeal
where the body of our Lord is consecrated, where there is no doubt but that the
Angels be always present.

II. He made at it were a whip of little cord. The punishments of this life are
but as it were a whip in comparison of the torments of the life to come, both
in respect of the grievousnes of them, and of the continuance. Yet seeing with
so contemptible a weapon he was able alone to do such execution upon such a
multitut^ (S. Hierome S. Hierome
deservingly accounting it as great a miracle as any other done by him) we
have reason to dread and to beware least through our misdemeanors his heavy
hand does not at last light upon us. Prove. 11 4
Wealth will not avayle in the day of revenge; but justice will free us from
death.

III. The Jews said to him, what sign do thou show us that thou do
those things? Jesus answered: dis^olve this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it again; the Jews said, in six and forty years was this Temple
buylt, and will thou raise it in three days! But he spoke of the Temple of his
body. It was true of both the one, and the other; he had been able to have
raised in three days the material Temple if it had been demclished; and he
would insinuate that the Temple, and all that which was done in it, was but a
figure of his body, and of the humane nature which he had assumed to accomplish
those figures in it, so says S. Ambrose. S. Ambr.
The body of Christ is truly the Temple of God, wherein is wrought the purgation
of our sins; that flesh was truly Gods Temple in which there could be no
con^agion of sin; but was itself the sacrifice for the sins of the whole
world; that flesh was truly the Temple of God in which the image of God did
shine, and the fullnes of divinity did corporally dwell. The Jews required a
sign of his commission to undertake such grea^e things, as if that very Action
had not been sign sufficient. Yet our Savior did not deny them a sign, but
referred them to that which had been figured in Jonas of him and prophesied;
that is, to use their own Industry and the ordinary means of understanding
the mysteries so fair as is necessary, and not to be still asking new signs,
and still remain unsatisfied, because things were not according to their fancy.

He instructs Nicodemus.
I. THere was of the Pharisees a man called Nicodemus, Erat homo ex Pharisaeis
Nicodemus nomine etc: Io. 3
a Prime man among the Jews. This man came to Jesus by night, and said,
Rabbi, we know thou art a Master come from God: For no man can do these signs
which thou do, unless God be with him. He came by night; held back as yet
by the infirmity of his profession (as S. Ihon Chrysostom S. Ihon Chrysostom.
reflects) and loved God but by halfes; the other half the world had still in
possession. And by his speech it appears he did not believe as yet that our
Savior was God, but some special teacher, or prophet sent from God,
testifying his mission by those signs. Our Savior finding that he retained
too much of the Pharisaicall spirit told him three things very strange, and
wholly contrary to his and the worlds apprehension and humor for first he
said Amen, Amen, that is, in every truth, I say unto thee unless a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of heaven, as if he would have said,
you talk to me of greatness, but I say you must all become little, and begin of
new, and take new ways if you will enter the kingdom of God: and when
Nicodemus asked how can these things be done? how can a man be born when he is
old? Our Savior repeated the same again, and told him moreover, that now he
must withdraw his thoughts from material and wonted objects, and things
concerning this corporal life, and think of a spiritual life, the beginning
and entrance whereof is baptism, and so to be born of water, and the spirit was
necessary toward it. This to natural reason and common apprehension seems
strange, and to some perhaps impertinent. But no man has ascended into heaven
to know the secrets of Gods eternal disposition, but he who descended from
heaven, the son of man, who is in heaven. To him the greatest Clarks must
stoop, and humbly receive from this great Master that to which by strength of
wit and industry they cannot reach. And to our daily purpose, besides the
thanks which we owe to God for the benefit of baptism, and of faith. S.
Augustine puts us in mind daily to renew ourselves; for says he, S. August.
wherefore should a body be borne again, but to the end to be renewed? And
wherefore should he be renewed; but for that he is become old?

II. The second strange thing was, that whereas Moses had set up a brazen
serpent in the desert, Number. 21. 9
to the end that they who were bitten by serpents should be cured, by casting
their eyes upon that figure; so says our Savior; must the son of man be
exalted, that every one that believes in him, may not perish, but have life
everlasting, as if he had said: this very man, whom thou do so much
reverence as a man of God, must be exalted upon the Cross and die a shameful
death, and unless people do notwithstanding believe in him, and follow him,
they cannot have life everlasting. His person will be hated among you as much
as those serp^nts of the desert, yet you must fix your eyes of faith upon him,
or else you will perish. As Moses by Gods appointement placed that serpent for
a corporal relief of those who were stricken; by the same Gods appointment
shall I be placed upon a Cross, for the cure of those who have fallen into
spiritual serpents jaws by sin.

III. And yet a stranger thing I do tell thee. God so loved the world, as to
give his only Son to be so misvsed, and so tormented, to the end that every
one that believes in him perish not, but have life everlasting, Thou take me
to be man only, as other men, and do wonder that I, so much favored by God,
should come to suffer as I tell thee. But the love of God is greater then to
content himself to employ a man only: I am not man only, but the only Son of
God; and yet I am to suffer as I said for mankind. O strange thing! o infinite
love! Tell us (o blessed Ihon) what does this short word, S. Ihon Chrisost.
so, signify? Tell us the measure, declare the greatness, teach us the
excellency of this love. God so loved: o love incomprehensible by man or
Angel. So that none can comprehend the reason of it; why so? why not otherwise?
O deapth unsearchable! renew thy love daily testify it by thy actions;
declare it by thy conformity to him in belief and life; serve him night and
day, in public and in private; let no part of thee be wanting to this love,
that thou may not perish but live and love eternally. Amen*

The Conversion of the Samaritan.
I. IEfus comes to a city of Samaria, Venit Jesus in civitatem Samariae quae
dicitur sichar etc.
called Sicar; and there was a fountain, or well of Jacobs Jesus therefore
wearied, of his journey, sat so upon the fountain, it was about the sixth
hour. There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water; Jesus says to her, give
me to drink. His disciples were gone into the city to buy meat. She says to
him, how do thou, being a Jew, ask of me to drink, Io. 4.
who am a Samaritan; for the Jews do not communicate with the Samaritans.
Jesus answered: if thou did know the gift of God, and who he is who says to
thee, give me to drink; thou perhaps would have asked him, and he would have
given thee living water. It is not for nothing (says S. Augustine) that Jesus,
the power and strength of God, is wearied; it is not for nothing that he is
wearyed by whom all who are wearyed receive refreshment. We find Jesus strong,
what can be stronger then he who made all things with out labor or pains
taking? We find Jesus infirm; the word was made flesh, and dweleth among us.
By his strength he created us, by his infirmity he repaired us. and again,
our inobedience, our backwardnes, our dulnes, is wearysome to him, see how this
woman holds back. O if thou did know who he is: and yet there comes in a
perhaps on our part, where we find none on his: she replies again; neither
have thou wherein to draw, and the well is deep; whence therefore have thou
living water? Art thou greater then our Father Jacob, who gave us this well,
and himself drunk of it, and his Children, and his cattle? How do we prefer
our earthly commodities before better things? How fast do we stick to that to
which we are acc^stomed? What power has Father, Children, cattle with us? How
slow are we to believe that which we do not see? The well is deep by our own
fal^.

II. Our Savior besides his own, natural goodness which lead him into this
conversation, was pleased with the woman's religious scruple of not commoning
with a Jew, and with the esteem she had of Jacob, and of that which he had
labored for posterity: yet two things were wanting, to wit, a desire of that
which was better, and a vessel fit to r^^^ive it. He therefore continuing his
discourse says, every one that drinks of this water shall thirst again, but
he that shall drink of the water, which I will give shall not thirst for ever:
But the water which I will give shall become in him a fountain of water
springing up to life everlasting. And she begging. Sir give me this water that
I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw, though her desire were imperfect,
and for low ends. Yet our Savior goes on, and says to her, call thy husband,
and come hither. Giving her occasion to confess her falt, as she did saying, I
have no husband; which our Savior showed her that he knew before, telling her
that she had had five husbands, but he whom now she had, was not her husband,
and commended her for saying the truth.

III. Upon this the woman perceiving he was a prophet put an other question
concerning religion; whether the mountain in Samaria, or Jerusalem were the
place where God was to be adored? Our Savior graciously answered, that the
salvation was to be frrom the Jews, but that the time was at hand when neither
to Jerusalem, nor to that mountain, they should be confined, but as God is a
spirit, and every where, so every where he should be adoreal in spirit, and
truth; for such the heavenly Father requires. And she refe^ring herself to the
coming of the Messiah; our Savior said to her: I am be who speak with thee:
Here the fountain of living water springing up to life everlasting discovered
itself more plainly to this sincere and humbly religious creature, then to many
others who had other means to find it out. Not he that only dippeth, but every
one who shall drink of this water shall not thirst after worldly contentments,
nor desire to come back to earthy channels to draw with unprofitable, and often
with dangerous labor a small pittance of transitory comfort in creatures.
Water in a well (says S. Augustine) S. August.
is worldly pleasure; running in a dark deepnes and hardly drawn up with the
bucket of desire: This breeds a troblesome thirst, and does not quench it: The
living water is the grace of devotion, the love of God, the knowledge of holy
Scripture, these fill our desire with good things. Lord give me this water that
I may not thirst* nor come hither to aravv.

The conversion of the Samaritan.
II. PART.
I. THe ^voman therefore left her pitcher, Reliqui^ ergo hydriam suam mulier
etc. v. 28
and went into the city, and says to those men, come and see a man that has
told me all things whatsoever I have done; is not he Christ? They went forth
of the city, and were coming to him. She carried not her earthly pitcher home,
but full of the heavenly grace, S. Cy^illus
and doctrine of our Savior, she made have to instruct others. Our Savior had
bid her call the man with whom she lived; she not content with that, out of her
zeal, summoned the whole town, and doubtless by our Saviors instinct, he
being desirous to be invited, that he might be the more beneficial to them
all. Come thou also, and behold the man, from whom nothing is concealed; come
greedely, that thou may receive the more plenty of his gifts, invite him
kindly to thy poor cottage, he will not refuse thee.

II. In the mean time, his disciples being returned, desired him to eat, of
what they had brought. But he said to them, I have meat to eat which you
know not. They say to one an other, has any man brought him to eat ^ Jesus
said: My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to perfect his
work: You do say there be four months to harvest; but lift up your eyes and
see, the countries, S. Ambr.
they are already white for the harvest. What meat is more pleasing, then
to do the will of God? This is the food of Angels, to obey the commands of
their Creator. S. Jhon Chrysostom S. Ihon Chrysostom.
says moreover, that our Savior termed the salvation of man meat, to
declare how great care he had of us, and with how much affection he desired
our good. The Apostl^s were as yet unacquainted with these metaphors, and
wondered of what meat he should speak; therefore he bids them lift up the ^yes
of their mind, and behold the spiritual harvest, the gathering in whereof was
his employment, and his aim, and must be thiers; specially the time being come
preordayned by his heavenly father, wherein all regions of the world were now
ripe for it. O dullnes! that we know not our own happiness, but turn that
oftimes into vinegar which would be honey to us if we would behold the will of
God in it.

III. And many of that city believed in him, for the word of the woman giving
testimony, that he had told her whatever she had done; and when they were come
to him, they desired he would tarry there; and he tarried there two days; and
many more bel^^ved for his own word; saying, ourselves have heard, and do
know, that this is the Savior of the world indeed. This woman represents unto
us the Church of God, particularly instructed by our Savior: And as these
cittize^s, so they who at first believe because the Church reaches so, are
afterward much confirmed in their belief, when by practice and further
instruction out of holy scripture they find all things agreeable. Consider also
and pity the obstinacy of the Jews and such like people, who have much more
means of instruction at hand, and yet profit less then these to whom our
Savior came as it were by chance and cursorily. Yet he stayed two days with
them, and at parting we may easyly imagine what thanks he received from them,
and with what heavy hearts many of them did take their leave. Keep thyself by
Jesus living and dying, and commit thyself to his trust, who when all do sail
can alone help thee. Th. a Ke. l. 2. c. 7. n. 2.

He cures a noble man's son.
I. There was a certain noble man, Erat quldam Regulus cuus silius
infirmabatur etc.
whose son was sick at Capharnaum. He having heard that Jesus came from jurie
into Galilee, went to him, and desired him that he would come down, and cure
his son, for he began to dye. Observe tha^ neither nobility, not wealth, nor
favor, nor youth, no^ Court, nor country are exempt from sickness, and death,
and other accidents of this world; Io. 4. 46
and oftimes God does send these accidents, to the end people should be
mindful to have recourse unto him, and not forget what they are of themselves.
However; it behooves us to be always prepared for them, with patience, and
resignation, and humble acknowledgment of our own natural misery. And as for
corporal helps we are vigilant and inindustrious not to neglect them till the
last; so for our spiritual helps we must not be backward, least we be taken
short: This young man was at deaths door, before this soverain Physician was
looked after.

Jesus said to him, unless you see signs, and wonders you believe not. He
came down to our Savior begging his sons health by his means; S. Greg*
how then did he not believe? He did not believe that he could be cured,
unless our Savior had been corporally present; in part therefore he did not
believe, as not conceiving our Savior as God to be every where. S. Augustine S.
August.
rayseth our thoughts yet higher, and says, that our Savior would teach his
faithful people never to expect miracles, but to have says stronger then all
signs and wonders. Yet mercyfully he provides that in his Church there be
always miracles and wonders wrought, to strengthen the infirm, and confound
the obstinate, and increase the devotion of such as are otherwise piously
given; to recompense also in some measure, even here among men, the labors and
affronts which his saints have suffered in this world, by then glory not only
in heaven, but on earth; and to macifest his own continual presence both for
spiritual and norporall assistance. Magnify his holy name in them, and look
not for etraordinary visists or signs unless upon extraordinary occasions,
and then with all submission and humility of heart grounded in our own great
unworthiness and misdeserts.

III. The noble man said, Lord comedowne before my son die. Jesus syed to
him: go, thy Son lives. The man believed the word that Jesus said to him,
and went. Chr^sologus.
Harken how low he trayles upon the ground: as if he could not have raised him
dead, or did not know in what state his Son was. Yet our Savior both to
exercise the man's faith and the show more evidently his own power, bids him
go, for that he should find his Son living, and out of danger. Theophylact
Theophil.
takes occasion from this word, to tell us that we must not stand still in the
way of Gods service, but walk on, for if we do not, we are in danger to die.
But the man believes, and went and moreover meeting his servants, who brought
the good news, he examined at what hour he began to mend and found it was
just at the time that our Savior had said, he lived; and he, and his whole
household did believe. Happy sickness which brought so many to our Savior. etc.

Sitting in Peeters ship he teaches the people.
I. When a multitude pressed upon him to hear the word of God, Cum turb^
irrue^^^^ in ^um etc.
and himself stood by the lake of Genezareth, he saw two ships standing by the
lake and going up into one which was Simons, Luc. 5
desired him to withdraw it a little from the land, and sitting he taught the
multitude out of the ship. S. August.
That he teaches the people from the ship, signifies this present time, in
which our Lord from the Authority of the Church reaches all nations, S. Ambr:
For the Church is a ship, which under the mayneyard of the Cross, and with
full sail, inspired by the holy Ghost sayleth prosperously in this world.
Those who will hear the word of God truly delivered must press to this ship;
others sail in the sea of this world, but Christ is to be found in Peeters
ship only. He desires it be drawn from the land, because the more we withdraw
out thoughts from earthy and worldly principles the more capable we shall be of
his heavenly doctrine. Give him thanks for teaching thee from this ship, and
press to hear the word of God from it. Io. 669.
For there be the words of everlasting life.

II. As he ceased to spoke, he said to Simon launch forth into the deep; and
let your nets loose for a draught Simon answered, Master, laboring all night
we have taken nothing, but in thy word I will let loose the net. And when they
had done, they enclosed a very great multitude of fishes. S. Ambr
This ship is no mean vessel, which lau^cheth into the main; and is
sequestered from the unbelieving: from which they are commanded to let down
their ne^s, and Hooks of wholesome doctrine, and fi^h for souls, launch into
the maine, that is into Christ. The Son of the highest, who exalts the
humble above those who are high. This is that which is rustly to be admired,
that the point of Christian faith being so deep, and so hidden from humane
reason, so many notwithstanding of all sorts should submit unto them, contrary
to the corrupt inclinations of nature; the greatest wits of the world labored
all that long night of Infidelity, before our Saviors coming, and could not
reach to half that which a true believer understands in a very sh^^ time. And
in all things we may be sure we shall have little for our labor but our
pains, unless our Savior says the word, and gives his bl^ssing. Imitate the
prompren^s of S. Peeter against his own experience.

III. And their not brake, and they beckoned to their fellows who were in
the other ship, that they would come, and help them; and they came, and filled
both ships, so that they did almost sink. Which when Peeter did see, he fell
down at Jesus his knees, saying, go forth from me, because I am a sinful
man, o Lord. For he was wholy astonished* and all that were with him. And
Jesus said to Simon, fear not; from this time forvvard thou shall be taking
men; and having brought their ship to land, leaving all things, they follovved
him. Miserable creatures who fall out of the net in which our Sa^iour has
taken them: more miserable those who tear it: Happy they who are called, and
employed to assist, that it be not torn. They will be filled with heavenly
graces; and though they be often ready in a manner to sink under the burden,
they will be relieved in time, so that they shall suffer no prejudice. Fall
down before our Savior, with admiration, and thanks, S. Ambr.
and acknowledgment of thy unworthiness. Peeter does not ask to be forfaken,
but that he may not with the success be puffed up with pride, Leave all things
rather then leave thy Savior. etc.

Second Application to the most blessed Sacrament.
I. OSonne of the highest! o depth of mercy and love! I a sinful man, and thou
not only to receive me into thy ship, but into thyself? for so are thy words;
he that eats my flesh, Io. 6 57
and drinks my blood, remains in me, and I in him. O deepth unsearchable!
the life of the fish is to be in water; it thinks it death to be in the net;
and struggles to get out. But here is a net out of which no man that is wise
will be; because the more he is in it, the more water he has, and the more
scope to do whatever is fitting to be done. His precious wounds are as so many
messhes, which captivate us to Christ, yet do let in unto us the fountains of
living water, promised to the devout Samaritan; fresh, sweet, pleasant,
springing up to life everlasting, in which we may live, and drink when ever we
will: Lord, give me the right taste of this water; that I may not go other
where and thirst when I have done. I am not worthy to approach unto thee,
because I am a sinful man, but thou have ordained this sea of water, to the
end that plunged in it, we should both be cleansed and refreshed, and live
eternally in thee. O that we did know how great a gift this is! fall down
at his knees, and ask; he is not sparing of his gifts, who so freely and
bountifully gives his own self unto thee.

II. O prodigious bounty! O wonderful dulnes of such as hearing, and knowing
that Jesus comes thus down from heaven for our relief, do not make have
unto him! How insensible are we of our dangers, and our diseases? we have but
one soul, which ought to be more dear unto us the any Son to his father; it
lies gasping oftimes for life, and here is life which offers itself, and we
are slow in accepting it. When a sick person begins to have no heat in his
fecte we say he begins to die; what are the feet of our soul, but our
affections? If these be not warmed with this fire of love, which is our
Savior, what can we think of ourselves? Lord come down before my soul dye.
O stupiditie of mankind! can this Lord of Lords come down lower then he has
done? he came into a Virgins womb, into the Crib, unto the Cross, into the
jaws of death, and yet here he comes lower then in all these, into thy bosom,
into thy breast. Go, and believe, and obey readyly his commands, and his Angels
will meet thee, and bring thee the joyful tidings of health, and thou will
know that that hour most of all will be the time in which thy feverish
distempers will leave thee.

III. Be not still asking with Nicodemus, in the cold night of thy tepiditie,
how can these things be done? But buyld upon the testimony of our Savior, who
speaks what he knovves will be done upon his word; this is my body. God so
loved the world as to give his only Son; this son has no less love to
the world then his father: He gives himself, and is daily giving in this
admirable manner, no^ contenting himself to be once only for three and thirty
years and upward upon earth; he will be with us to the worlds end really
present among us; that after-ages need not envy those years of his visible
appearance, having the selfsame Son of God here present under these visible
shapes, more universally through the whole world, and more for our present use,
and necessities. Exalt him as Moses did the serpent in the desert, Behold him
with a devou^, and loving eye, and he will preserve thee. Cast out all earthy
conceits, and tumultuous busineses from the temple of thy heart, and make it as
it ought to be (specially in this coniuncture of time) a house of prayer, a
house of thanksgiving, a house of praise, and of magnifying thy loving Savior
who has done so great things for thee; and this greatest of all that he
vouchsafes to be within thee. Luc ^ 49.
O invisible creator of the world, Thom. 2 Kemp. l. 4 c. 1. n. 10
how wonderfully do thou deal with us! how sweetly, and graciously with thy
elect, offering thyself unto them to be received in this Sacrament.

His fervourin preaching, and diverse cures.
I. ANd they enter into Capharnaum; and forth with upon the Sabbath, E
tingrediuntur Capharnaum and statim etc.
going into the Synagog, he taught them and they were astonished at his doctrine,
for he taught as having power, and not as the Scribes. And there was in the
Synnagog a man possessed with a unclean spirit who cried out, Mar ^1 21
what to us and to thee Jesus of Nazareth? Luc. 4 ^
art thou come to destroy us? I know who thou art, the holy of God. And Jesus
threatened him saying, hold thy peace; and go out of the man. And the unclean
spirit tearing him, and crying out with a loud voice went out, and did not
hurt him. And they all marvelled, and questioned among themselves, what thing
is this? What is this new doctrine? For with power he commands the unclean
spirits, and they obey. And the bruit^ of him went forth presently through the
whole country. we have no less reason to admire, and rejoice, and magnify his
name, and his power; which he retaynes over all evil spirits; and his
wonderful wholesome doctrine, and to beg he will ever exercise the same power
over them, to restrain their malice; and over us by the force, and virtue of
his doctrine to overpower all that may contradict it in us: Romans 7 23
for we find a law within us striving against the law of our mind (which is
reason and virtue) and captivating us under the law of sin: unhappy that we
are, who shall deliver us? But the grace of God, by Jesus Christ. This law as
it were teareth us in pieces* yet does not hurt us, unless we voluntarily
consent unto it, for it is left in us not to damnation but for exercise, and
reward, if we fight courageously.

II. Going forth of the Synagog, they came into the house of Andrew and Simon.
Simons wifes Mother lay sick of a great fever, and they besought him for her,
and taking her by the hand, he commanded the fever away, and it left her, and
she presently rising ministered unto them. And when the Sun was down, all
that had diseased of sundry maladies brought them to him; and he laying his
hands upon every one cured them. And devils went out of many, crying thou art
the Son of God; and be rebuking them, suffered them not to speak that they
knew he was Christ. S. Ambr.
The fever of which we lie sick is our Avarice, our ambition, our wrath, and
anger etc. a fever inflames the body, these disteper the mind. We must have
recourse to our Savior, and beseech him to help us: those fevers neglected
grow greater and greater, and bring unlucky deaths: if we be freed from the
violence of these passions, we must not be idle, but diligent in the service of
our Savior. See how worldly business does delay our spiritual cure; people
flocked not till sun set. How many differ repentance to the last? God is
merciful, and often wayteth our leisure, but not always.

III. And rising very early be went into the desert, and prayed; and Simon
sought after him, and they who had been with him, and when they found him, they
said, all seek thee; but he answered, I must preach to other cities also the
kingdom of heaven; for therefore am I sent. He went (...)
into the desert to teach us that if we chance to do any thing extraordinary,
we must fly the praise of men and give God thanks in private for the benefit
received. He went away sudainly, and without the knowledge even of his own
disciples, to teach us to take time while time is, and not to delay, but dread
the judgments of God, who often withdraws himself even from those, who at times
desire his presence, because at other times they neglect him. And he rounded
all Galilee, preaching and healing all diseases; and his fame did spread itself
through all Syria, and multitudes did follow him from Galilee and Jerusalem,
and Iewrie, and from beyond the river Jordan. Thou may soon drive away
Jesus, and leese his savor, Thom. ^ l. 2. c. 8. n. 3.
if thou turn thyself to external things. etc.

Three pretending to follow our Savior.
I. AS they were walking in the way, Ambulantibus illi^ in via etc.
one of the Scribes said unto him; Master, I will follow thee whersoever thou
go. Jesus said to him, the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
neasts, Matthew. 8 ^9
but the Son of man has not where to lay down his head. Luc. 9 57
We may well conceive (says S. Augustine) S. Augu^^tin.
that this man, if he had followed Christ, would have sought himself, and not
Christ: therefore he was answered, that, the son of man has not where to rest
his head. But where has he not? He has not in thy faith: foxes have taken up
thy heart, because thou have a doble heart; the birds of the air have neasten in
thy heart, because thou art proud: the deceitful, and the proud do not
follow me. How can craft and deceit follow simplicity, or pride humility?
And withal admire the poverty of our Savior, in which he lived, and how he
was often put to exigents for want of shelter, and retired himself, into the
desert to pray. The Son of man has not where to rest his head; and is it for
me so easyly to give way to lazines, or to seek my ease?

II. To another he said, follow me, and he answered, Lord let me go first, and
bury my father; and Jesus said to him, let the dead bury the dead; but go thou
and preach the kingdom of God. S. Augu^^
That which this man desired to do, was an act was an act of piety: but the
heavenly Master taught him what he ought to have preferred. When the
misbeleeving bury a corpse, the dead bury the dead, the man's body lost the
soul, but their souls had lost God. Ponder the difference between these two
deaths, and these two burialls; and again reflect, what have thou to do with
secular business, when it is time of prayer, and such spiritual employments?
Let the dead bury their dead.

III. Another said, I will follow thee Lord: but let me first take leave of
them that are at home: And Jesus said to him; no man putting his hand to the
plough, and looking back is apt for the kingdom of heaven. S. Basilius
He would not suffer that those whom he brought up for the kingdom of heaven
should be one moment diverted from it, but that having given themselves to God
they should make no account of earthly things at all, nor have any thought of
them. And if no man looking back be apt for the kingdom of heaven, how can
thou expect the divine illustrations in prayer, or his assistance in other
things if thou have not thy eyes upon him, but art looking back upon things
impertinent? How can thou hope to profit, if thou look upon those who lag
behind, and not upon the fervent who go before thee? One thiug (says S. Paul
is of importance, Philip. 3 13
or one thing I endeavor) forgeting the things which are behind, and
stretching myself to those which are before, I pursue the mark, the prize of
the supernall vacation of God in Christ Jesus: let us therefore as many! as are
perfect be thus minded.

He calmes the sea.
I. ANd they take him into the ship, Assumunt eum ita vt ^rat in navi etc.
as he was; and behold a great tempest rose in the sea; the wind blew and the
waves beat into the ship; so that it was covered with them, and he was in the
hinder part sleeping upon ^ pillovve. Matthew. 8 23
It is a great commendation, and excellency of faith, Marc. 4 36
to receive our Savior, as he is in the ship, that is, in the church, S.
Chry^^^ogue.
leaving the multitude of questions and reasons* A tempest rise; it is but to
try the skill of the Pilote and the diligence of the mariners; for whatever
happe^eth, will not contristate the Just; Prove. 12 2^
who repose upon the pillow with our Savior; to wit upon a good conscience,
with trust and confidence in him, and resignation to his will. Record what
storms the Church of God has endured, and has been delivered out of them
all: Consider also the inward storms which rise in thy soul, and how thou art
to behave thyself in them. S. August^*
Has some body slandered thee, or miscalled thee? It is a wind which is risen
against thee; have thou been angry at it? It is a wave which has beaten into
thy ship. Remember how our Savior has behaved himself; and he was sleeping.

II. His disciples came to him, and raised him, saying* Master does is nothing
belong to thee that we perish? Save us: And he says to them, why are you
fearful, o ye of little faith? As if he should have said. You do well to
call upon me, and to believe that I can save you; but you should moreover have
believed that even sleeping I have care of you that you perish not, and have a
mind to save you, though for a time I permit you to be in troble: He said
well, S. Bernar^
let the world rage, and the wicked bend their teeth against me, Psalm. 43. 23
yet I will hope in thee. Rise, why do thou sleep o Lord? Rise and do not
put me of to the end; wherefore do thou turn thy face frrom me? Why do
thou forget our want and our tribulation? Rise o Lord, and help us, and redeem
us for thy name sake.

III. Then risen he commanded the winds and the sea, and said to the sea,
Peace, and be still; and the wind ce^sed, and there was a great calm. And the
people admired at it, and were stricken with much fear, saying, what an (...)
is this? seeing the winds and the sea obey him. Thou have no less cause to
wonder, and to reverence him, who is so powrefull, and may often experience
it in thyself; for if at any time thou have a calm it comes from him. Follow
S. Augustins S. August.
advise. Imitate the winds and the sea; obey thy Creator. The sea does hear
the command of our Savior Christ, and art thou deaf? Let not the waves
overcome you in your affliction. When a man well disposed is afflicted or
temp^ed, Thom. ^ Ke^p. l c 12. n. 2
then he understands that God is more needful to him, with out whom he finds
he can do nothing.

Our Savior casts out a Legion of evil spirits, and suffers them to go
into the heard of hogs.
I. When he was come beyond the water into the country of the Gerasens, Cum
ve. nisse^ trans fretum in regronem Gerasenrum etc.
there met him a man possessed by the devil of a long time, and had his
dwelling in the sepulchers; exceedeng fierce, so that no chain would hold him,
nor could any man pass that way: But seeing Jesus a far of ran and adored
him, and crying out with a loud voice, Matthew. 8 28
said what is it to me and thee Jesus Son of God most high, Marc. 5 1
I adjure thee in the name of God not to torment me. For Jesus had said to
him, Luc. 8 27
go out of the man thou unclean spirit. It is apparent (says S. Hierome) S.
Hierome.
that this confession was not voluntary, but wrested out of him by the virtue
of Christ's word; as fugitive slaves, when they see their Master, think of
nothing but of stripes. In the mean time we may see how the enymy domineers
over those who are in his power; how they dwell upon those things which are
rather to be fleed by reason of their noysomnes, leaving the right rode (as it
is in the Proverbs) and walking obscure ways, Prove. 2. 14
rejoicing when they have done mischief, and exulting in the worst things. And
by continuing thus a long time, they grow loath to leave their courses* and
clamor if any body admonish them; what have you to do with what life I lead?
And as S. Luke adds he w^nt naked and cut himself with stones; for they grow
shamlesse, and with out sense, or feeling of any good thing, neither moved with
fear nor love, nor regarding any bounds of any law either of God or man; a
very miserable spectacle to all that have any reason in them.

II. Our Savior asked him, what is thy name? he said, a legion, for we are
many; and he beseeched him much that he would not cast them out of the country
nor command them into the depth. And there was a heard of swine feeding on the
mountains, and they desired he would permit them to enter into them, and he
permited them. The devils therefore went out of the man, and entered into the
swine, and the heard with violence went into the lake and (...) stifled. First
observe as one devil brought in many; so (...) sin brings a multitude after
it, if it be let stay any time: Secondly; that sin is as loath to leave us as
the devil, our concupiscens and disorders favoring it: thirdly; that greatest
sinners some times see their own ruin, and feate it; and fourthly; by that
which happened unto the swine, we may see whether at last the devil with
violence will east us, not into this material sea, but into a sea of torments
in which we shall never dye. Fifthly; for our comfort, that the devil has not
power so much as over hogs, unless God permit it, muchlesse over sheep (says
Tertullian) Tertull*
who are of his flock.

III. And the swine-heard fled, and told it in the city, and they came to
Jesus, and found the man siting at his feet, clothed and well in his wits; and
they were afraid, and besought him to depart from them. And the man out of
whom the devils were cast, desired he might be with him: but Jesus dismissed
him saying, return into thy house, and tell how great things God has done to
thee; and he went through the whole city preaching how great things Jesus had
done to him. Observe that no man in this life is so great a sinner, or so much
overgrowne with vice and imperfection, that his conversion is to be despayred.
Secondly; reflect upon the effect of true repentance, which is humility: So
the Magdalen laid herself at the feet of out Savior: Intertayne a wholesome
fear of being again separated from Jesus, and from the means by which we were
cured: Also a continuance of a great esteem of the benefit which we have
received, magnifying it with in ourselves, and extolling it also before others,
when there is is occasion. Those of the town sought the contrary, not knowing
what was good for them. Acknowledge thyself unworthy of divine comfort and
rather deserving affliction. Thom. ^ Kemp. l. ^ c. 2 n. 4


He cures one sick of the Palsy.
I. ANd again he entered Capharnaum after some days, Et iterum intcavit
Capharna^n etc. Marc* 2 Luc. ^
and many came together, so that there was no place, no not at the door: and
he spoke (...) them the word; and they brought one sick of the palsy carried by
four, and when they could not offer him unto him for the multitude, they
uncovered the roof where he was, and let down the couch wherein the sick man
lay. Beg of our Savior that he will again and again enter thy heart, and
make it his seat, and teach thee to overcome the passions of it, and remedy
the diseases: That the holy Angels will compass it, that no ill encounter may
appear even at the door; acknowledge thy weakness, and besides having recourse
thyself to thy Savior; S. Ambr.
Endeavor to have some who will admonish thee of thy duty, and how dull thou
art; some that will lift thee up to higher thoughts, and by whose help thou
may as occasion shall be humble thy self before Jesus, and be lifted again
up with confidence.

II. Jesus seeing their faith; says to the sick man, son thy sins are
forgiven; and there were certain Scribes sitting there, and thinking in their
hearts, why does he say so? He blasphem^^h: who can forgive sins but only God?
Sin was the greater evil of the two, and is the cause of all our evils:
Therefore he speaks of that to put us in mind (with S. Augustine) S. August.
that if we be sick of any spiritual disease we have recourse to this
spiritual physician, and open to him that which is covered, or hidden in our
souls, and regard not the censures of men, but humbly believe we may be cured.
S. Hieron.
And with S. Hierome, extol the humility of our Savior, who vouchsafes to
call such a poor snake Son, whom the proud Scribes and Pharisees would
scarce have looked upon, how ever zealous they seem here to be of the honor
due to God alone.

III. But Jesus seeing their thoughts, says why think (...) thus within
yourselves? Which is easyer to say to the such man, thy synns are forgiven? Or
to say, Rise, take up thy couch and walk: But that you may know that the Son
of man has power on earth to forgive synns; I say unto the^ Rise, take up thy
couch and go into thy house. And he forthwith arose, and took up his couch,
and went away in the sight of all; and all marveled and glorified God who (...)
given such power to men. By answering to their though^^ he gave them to
understand that by the same power he could also forgive sins, and confirmed
it by this mi^^cle; that as his word was made good in the outward (...) so it
would by the same virtue be made good in the clearing of souls from sin. And
observe by the way, that as this man coming for his corporal health received
with it that which is better; so we praying for things which occur to us as
beneficial, may receive that which is better, though perhaps we receive not
directly that which we then ask. And be not ashamed to confess thy sins,
seeing God knows thy secretest thoughts. Rise take up thy couch. S. Augus^
Our couch is our body; we take it up, when we cause it to obey the
commandments of God; it is heavy, therefore he says walk. Few are they who
after much infirmity can run: we walk into our house, following the
commandment of Christ, when after death we are received into the celestial
habitation.

The calling of S. Matthew.
I. ANd when Jesus passed thence, Et cum transisse: inde, vid it hominem etc.
he saw a man sitting in the custom house, named Matthew, and he says to him,
follow me; and he rose up, and leaving all things followed him. Other
Evangelists call him levi out of respect to S. Matthew, Matthew. 9
dissembling his ordinary name: Marc. 2 14
He calls himself Matthew and a Publican; for as the wiseman says; Luc 5 29.
the Just is first in accusing himself. S. Hierome.
And with all shows us, that no man must despair of salvation: Julian the
Apostata imputes it to folly that people upon a slight call would follow our
Savior; as if they had not reason, he working so many prodigious wonders.
Besides that the Majesty of his divinity, which doubtless did show itself in
great measure in his very countenance, was able to draw people to him: For if
a lodestone and amber be able to draw after them material things, how much
more forcibly is the Creator able to draw his Creatures* Look upon this
mirror of perfection; harken what kind of doctrine, and in what manner, he
delivers it; observe him diligently, and thou will see thou have reason to
follow him without delay.

II. And Levi made him a great feast in his house, and there were a great
multitude of Publicans, and of others that were sitting at the table with him,
and with his disciples. And the Pharisees seeing said to the disciples,
wherefore does your Master eat with Publicans and sinners. S. Hier.
These Publicans saw one of their trade converted to better life, therefore they
did also hope to find place for repentance and salvation; for they did not come
to Jesus with intent to remain in their former vices, as the Pharisees
murmured, but being repentant, as the following words of our Savior do
insinuate. And who (says S. Gregory Nazianzen) Gregory Nazianzen.
accuses a Physician that he visits the sick, that he abides the stench,
that he endeavors to set up the infirm?

III. Jesus hearing it, answered; they that are in health and able, need not a
Physician, but they who are ill at ease. Go, and learn what it is, I will
mercy, and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the just, Hilarie.
but sinners. No man by the law is just; he shows therefore that they did in
vain brag of justice. And the wiseman asks this question, Prove. 20 9
which concerns every body. Who can say, my heart is pure, I am frre, from
sin? Let us therefore have recour^e to this merciful Physician, whose fees
are but what is for our profit, and not his own; he has the labor, and we
the fruit; he the thanks, and we the reward: and seeing mercy is that which he
desires, and esteems it as sacrifice, follow the advice of old Tobie to his
son: Tobie 4 8
To thy ability be merciful; if thou have much bestow liberally; if thou have
little, give a little willingly. And that which is always in thy power,
forgive as thou desires to be forgiven.

The third application to the most blessed Sacrament.
I. S Matthew upon his conversion made a banquet for our Savior: Our Savior
upon our turning to him, makes us a banquet: But, o infinite difference* that
banquet was of temporal and perishable meats, turning to corruption both of
body and soul; Io. 6 33
this banquet comes down from heaven and gives life to the world, and is his
own flesh, and precious blood, which whoever eats, has life ^verlasting.
Drinking of this cup (says S. Ambrose) S. Ambr.
our body does not stagger, but does rise to better life; our mind is not
trobled, but consecrated and made holy. And the council of Florence: Council.
Florent^
what ever good effect material meat and drink does work in us toward
corporal life, mayntayning, increasing, repayring, and delighting, this
Sacrament works toward our spiritual life; it withdrawes us from that which
is evil, it strengthens us in that which is good, and increases grace and
virtue in us. But if we consider further, that it is our Savior himself, who
feeds us with himself, the bread of Angels, Io. 6 32
and the true bread from heaven, not in figure only, as the Manna of the Jews,
but really himself, as he is God and man, what a treasure have we? what a
banquet? what love? what mercy, what desire of our love showed us? O Sacrum
convivium in quo Christus sumitur etc.

II. It is moreover a medicine for all spiritual diseases? and what a legion
of syns, and imperfections, and passions does possess us? So exceeding fierce,
sometimes, that no man can pass by, Matthew. 8 28
but we must have a saying to him, or whom by word or example we do not anoy,
Luc. 8 27.
neither remaining in house, that is, in the Church at our devotions, nor in
the city among men of civil conversation, but in the sepulchers and in the
mountains, among those who live a wild, and barren kind of life, void of good
works, having little respect to the chains of the commandments in which we are
bound, Marci 5 3
but breaking them at pleasure, and not being willingly subject to any body. A
pitiful sta^e: o Savior of the world! command this evil disposition out of
me, that it cast me not into the depth, among the hogs: suffer me to be with
thee, I beseech thee, and I will publish the great things which thou have done
for me, having mercy on me.

III. And here most of all must we take our Savior, Marc. 4 36
as he is, and as he is pleased to present himself unto us under the shapes of
bread and wine; and whatever wind of contradiction rise from our sense, or from
our weak ynderstanding, say unto it: Peace, be still; and believe the power of
the mighty hand of God, who wi^h a word made all things, and the infinity of
his love, who, as he gave himself to be rudely handled by the Jews, gives
himself here to be lovingly handled by us unworthy creatures, not valuing that
he is sometimes also misused by us; wherein his love is the more manifest, and
more to be valued by us. Present him thy heart and soul, as a pillow to rest
on, and attend him resting. Afford him the courtesy which the spouse in the
canticles received; Cant. 2 7
do not raise him, nor cause him to awake, till he will himself. Cant. 5 2
He sleeps, but his heart watches over thee. Let not thy eyes go of from him,
least through thy negligent attendance thou receive not with him the fruit
which he bestows upon the watchful. I rose (says the spouse) to open to my
beloved; I opened the bolt of my door for my beloved; but he was gone a side,
and passed away; my soul was melted when he spoke, I sought, and did not find
him; Thom. ^ Kemp. l. 2 c. 8 n 3.
I called and he did not answer me. Be devour and quiet and Jesus will stay
with thee.

He rayseth the daughter of Iayrus and cures the woman of her bloody issue.
I. THere comes one of the rulers of the Synagog named Iayrus, Et venit quidem
de Archisynagogis etc.
and seeing him, faleth at his feet and besought him much, saying, my
daughter, is at the point of death, come and lay thy hand upon her, that she
may be saved and live. Marci 5 ^^
And he went with him, and a great multitude followed and thronged him. In
diseases, and death of our soul what expressions ought not we to use? These
bring us truly to the last cast; for after our temporal death, there is
another death to be feared, far more grievous, because ever and never dying:
In these occasions therefore bestirre thyself; fall at our Saviors feet,
beseech him, follow him; thou see his readynes to concur with thy
endeavors, and to go along with thee; fear not that the multitude, fear not
that the greatness of thy sins will divert him from thy help, if thou
prostrate thyself with a sincere heart, and beseech pardon, as thou ought.

II. And a woman who was in an issue of blood twelve years and had suffered
much from many physicians, and ha^ bestowed all that she had, neither was any
thing better, but rather worse; when she heard of Jesus, came behind him, in
the press, Luc. 8 44
and touched the hemme of his garment; for she said, if I shall touch but his
garment, I shall be safe and forthwith the fountain of her blood was dried up
and she felt in her body that she was healed of that malady. Search into the
causes of thy long diseases; consider how thou spendest thy time, and thy
spiritual, and temporal substance, and upon whom, and why thou go rather
backward, then forward; come with humility, and confidence to the Sacraments:
Let the very name of Jesus give the assurance of remedy; specially if thou
touch with reverence the garment with which he is pleased to cover his sacred
body in the holy ^ucharist, which are the resemblances of bread and wine, in
which he gives us his sacred flesh and blood, and do not come rudely and
disorderly upon him, S. Cy^illu^
as the multitude; for when Christ remaynes in us he cools the raging law of
concupiscence, he strengthens devotion, and quails the unbridled motions of
our mind. And Jesus turning said, who has touched my garments? His disciples
said thou see the multitude thronging thee; and say who touched me? But
the woman fearing and ^remkling fell down before him, and told him the truth:
and he said, daughter, thy faith has made she whole; go in peace. See how he
takes notice of the reverent and not of the rude, S. Ambr.
and how great a grace it was that she who was ashamed to be seen, was not
ashamed to confess her imperfections; hide not thy falts, acknowledge that
which he knows already.

III. As he was speaking; they come to the ruler of the Synagog, saying, thy
daughter is dead, why do thou troble the Master any further? But Jesus says
to him; fear not, only believe: And be admitted not any to follow him, but
Peeter, James and Ihon: And seeing folk weeping and wayling says why weep you
so? She is not dead, but sleeps: and they derided him: but he having put
forth all, but the Father and Mother, and them that were with him, taking her
by the hand, says, wench, I say to thee rise: and forthwith she rose up and
walked, and they were greatly astonished, and he commanded them earnestly that
no body should know it; and bad that some thing should be given her to ^ate:
and the fame of it was spread through the whole country. God so disposing that
the more we are careful that the good which we do should be secret God should
be more glorified by it. She rose and walked: because a sonle raised from
sy^ne, must be stir itself that it fall not into a relapse; but be dispersing
noisome thoughts, and dispositions; by virtuous actions it must also cast of
the multitude of worldly occasions; and weep and wayle those losses only,
which most of all deserve the name of losses; converse with a few and good,
exercise the faith of Peeter, the hope of James, the love of Ihon, finally
frequent the Sacraments, to the end to get strength and vigor after so
dangerous infirmities.

He cures the sickman at the Poole.
I. IN Heerusalem there was a Poole, having five porches; Est autem
Hierosolymis probatica etc. Io. 5
in these lay a great multitude of sick persons, blind, lame, withered,
expecting the stirring of the water; and an Angel of out Lord descended at a
certain time into the poole, and the water was stirred, and he that had gone
down first into the poole after the stirring of the water, was made whole of
whatever infirmiti^ he was holden. God in all ages and all times, even among
the faithful, provideth certain places where constantly mirac^es are wrought
for the increase of the devotion of the faithful, and to confirm their faith
of the omnipotent power of God, who as he created all with a word, can in an
instant restore all things to their perfection, yet will not do it with out
our particular concurrence, and according to the times and ways which in his
wisdom he has ordained. But for our spiritual diseases he has left in all
places present remedy, with out expecting times and seasons; for the holy
baptism may in necessity be administered by any body; and for the Sacrament of
penance there be in all places those who are appointed, nor for one only, or
for the first, or second, but for all, and the sooner the infirm come unto it,
the better it is, neither night, nor day excepted. In these the diseases of our
five senses are cured; the five porches signifying the five precious wounds of
our Savior, by which they have entrance to their cure: Enter, and bathe
thyself in these.

II. And there (...) a man that had been eight and thirty years in his
infirmity; him when Jesus savv lying, and knevv that he had a long time,
said to him: vvil^ thou be made whole? the sick man ansvvered, Lord I have no
man, when the water is trobled, to put me into the poole: for vvhiles I come,
another goes dovone before me, Jesus says to him: rise, take up thy bed, and
walk: And forvvith he was cured, and took^ up his bed, and walked. Our
Savio^r came to cure mankind, who^ me no man, nor Angel, or other creature
could cure: O infinite mercy. And no less infinite, that he oftimes pickes out
one from a multitude to bestow his graces and favors upon him, leaving other
sins, and diseases; to seek the ordinary remedies, not by chance, or at
adventure, but knowing all the circumstances, and causes of the weakness of the
party, and when he thinks not of any such favor, Nor does he with out great
ground ask: will thou be cured* For how many times comes it to pass, that we
will, and we will not? we will be cured, but will not use the means which is
necessary, or will not put ourselves to the utmost to obtain our desires;
though we have layen eight and thi^tie years in syn, yet, if we will, we may
be cured. Rise^ rouse thyself, and put on a resolution to overcome whatever
difficulty; S. A^gus^^
take up thy cross, and walk^. When thou were infirm, thy neighbor did bear
with thee; art thou cured* bear with thy neighbor.

III. And it was the sabbath that day. The Jews therefore say^d to him, it is
the sabbath, thou may not take up thy bed; he answered: He that cured me
said to me: take up thy bed, and walk; they asked him, what is that man, that
said: take up thy bed, and walk? But he that was cured kn^w not who it was;
for Jesus had declined the multitude standing in the place. Afterward Jesus
finds him in the temple, and says to him: behold thou art cured, sin no
more, least some wors^ thing happen to thee. The man went, and told the Jews
that it was Jesus who had cured him. T^^rvpon the Jews persecuted Jesus
because he did these things upon the sabbath. Temporal cures are ordained for
the cure of our souls; the diseases whereof, and the punishments due to them,
are incomparably worse, then what ever can happen here: these we must attend
unto chiefly upon the sabbath days, which, to our shame, we often bestow more in
idleness, and in vanities, then in what they where ordained for: frequent the
churches; give praise to God for thy deliverance; in these Jesus will willingly
find thee out and give thee wholesome instruction: requite him not with
ingratitude, as this man did as it seems, at first overjoyed with his cure for
he never looked after him from whom he had received so much benefit: though
that afterward he went, ^^thym.
and told the I^w^s, was not t^ betray him, but to divulge his praise.

He cures the man that had a withered hand.
I. ANd he entered again into the Synagog, Et introivit iterum in Synagogam etc.
and there was a man that had a withered hand, and they watched whether he
would cure on the sabbath; and he said to the man that had the withered hand,
rise into the midst: Marci 3
then he says to them, is it lawful on the sabbath to do well or ill? t^
save a soul, or destroy? and they held their peace. And looking upon them with
anger, being sorrowful for the blindness of their heart, he says to the man:
stretch forth thy hand, and his hand was restored him. In the Synagog one man
had a withered hand, many had withered hearts, which planted so near the
fountain of heavenly waters took no benefit by them. They watched upon him,
but for no good intent, and by their own malicious thoughts did put a bar to
the heavenly graces; watch thou upon him, and observe him, disposing thy soul
so as it may reap good, for thou see that much does depend upon thy inward
disposition. Ris^ into the midst: be not ashamed nor backward to cooperate to
thy own cure. Stretch forth thy hand, S. Ambr.
to be m^rcifull to the poor, often to receive, and lodge a pillgrime,
always to God for forgivenes of thy sins. Let not thy hand be stretched
forth to receive, Eccl. 436
and shut to bestovv. He looks about with anger and sorrow in this life; have
recourse from his anger to his compassion, Matthew. 37
and beware of the anger which is to come.

II. And he said to them, what man shall there be of you that shall have one
sheep, and it (...) into the ditch on the sabbath, will he not take hold of
it, and lift it up? How much better is a man, then a sh^^p^? Therefore it is
lavvfall on the sabbath to do a good deed. Ho^ often notwithstanding do we
prefer our inferior occasions before the relief of our brother, and make no
account of that which is more to be esteemed, and preferred? We ponder much
that we have but that on^ sheep, that one child, that one thing that we
esteem in the world, and do not consider that our neighbor also has but one
soul to save; he has often but one bit of bread to put in his mouth, one penny
for the whole week, one poor rag to his back, where as God has given thee a
sab^oth of rest and plenty wherein thou may take thy pleasure and case.

III. And the Pharisees going forth immediately made ^s consultation with the
Herodians, how that they might dest^oy him. But Jesus with his disciples
retired to the s^a, and a great multitude from Galilee, and from Iewrie
follow^d him; and he healed many, so that the folk pressed upon him to touch
him, that they might be cured. Miserable Pharisees who turned to venom the
doctrine, and the wonders ordered for their salvation! O wretched going forth
from all reason and con^ideration of what was fitting^ bur Jesus ceased not to
do good not with standing: follow him, press reverently to touch him;
specially when he offers himself in the blessed Sacrament; shrink not away,
but prepar^ thy self carefully and approach with confidence, there is ^o disease
which he does not cure.

The choosing of the Apostles.
I. ANd he went forth unto the (...) to pray, Exi^t (...) monte^ orare.
and he passed the whole night in prayer, and when day was come, he called his
disciples to him, and he chose twelve of them, Lu^. 6^^
whom also h^ named Ap^stles. Simon, whom (...) surnamed Peeter, and Andrew
his brot^er; James and Ihon, and he called their na^es Bo^^^rges that is sons
of Thunder etc. S. Ambr^
Not every one that prays ascendes unto the mountain, but he that prays
well, who going forward from earthly things, to those which (...) abo^^ us,
mounts up to the top of the heavenly court. He does not ascend who is
solicitous about his worldly wealth or honor: All great and high spirits
ascend. And do not think that he prays as infirm and weak: The owner of
Power becomes Master of obedience. He is out Advocate; he prays not as
infirm, but as compassionate; what ought thou to do in order to thy own
salvation, seeing Christ prays all night for thee? what ought thou to do
when thou beginnest any good work having our Saviors example before thee.

II. He changes their names, to give us to understand that we must change our
conversation upon whatever favor received from our Savior, and endeavor to
have the soliditie of a rock in the service of God; and to be able with out
resolution, in that which is good, to terrify his opponents. Victor
Judas also among the rest was choosen to be an Apostle, to show us, that it is
not our nature which is cause of our perdition, Euthym.
but our wretched will; and that God receives a man while he is good, and till
himself fall of, S. Ambr.
and become evil: Also that we might learn the force of Truth, and of the
Sacraments which are the same, though ministered by the wicked: And that, if
thou chance to be forsaken, or betrayed by thy friend, thou may learn to
bear it patiently.

III. And he made them to be with him, and that he might send them to preach:
and he gave them power to cure infirmities, and to cast out devils. First we
must be united with Christ, acknowledging that all that we can do proceeds
from him, and depends of him, and must be done for his glory, and with
confidence in his goodness: then we must endeavor to have a longing desire to
be with him, as much as we can, and to find sweetness in conversing with him in
prayer, as with the fountain of all goodness, our Redeemer, our friend, our
benefactour, our spouse; that in all our afflictions, and in all occasions, we
find ourselves with him, as it were at home; and even in our outward actions
never to be from him; but be doing them for his love, and with reflection, and
desire to please him in them; holding ourselves as instruments in his hand, and
working by the force, and strength, and aptitude which he gives us. T^om. ^
Kemp. l. 3 ^* 22 n* 5*
Nothing ought so much to rejoice him that loves thee, o Lord, and
acknowledges thy b^nefits, as thy will in him, and the good pleasure of thy
eternal disposition.

The eight Beatitudes.
I. ANd seeing the multitude he went up unto a mountain and when he was set
his disciples came to him, Vid^ns ^^^sus turba^ ascendi^ in montem etc.
and opening his mouth, he taught them, saying. Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for thiers i^ the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. ^
Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land. Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. His going up to the mountain betokens
the height of the doctrine which he then did intend to deliver, far beyond
the expectation of all people of this world, and contrary to their wonted
dictamens, and desires; therefore also he is said to have ^pened his mouth, as
the tresurie of divine wisdom, hidden hitherto from the world, for the world
places happiness in riches, and in filling their desires with wealth and
plenty; he places happiness in poverty; nor in that which comes upon us by
necessity; but in voluntarily quitting ourselves of the mcumbrances of this
world, and putting of the very desire of wealth; this making the way to the
kingdom of heaven plain, and ready, without those rubb^ which the desire of
wealth does raise. In like manner whereas in the world there is perpetual
contention about lands and possessions, and nothing can be had, or kept,
without strife, and debate, the land of the living, so great as it is, is
wholly, and quietly possessed by meekenes, and by yealding of our seeming right,
according to the world. Besides that nothing is more powerful toward the
world (says S. ^ho^ Chrysostom) S. Ihon Chrysost^*
then meekenes, for as water puts our fire, so does a meek answer quench
the flame of Anger. Finally not those who live in jolytie shall find comfort of
it at last, but those who bewail the offenses committed against God, and pass
soberly through the miseries of the world, and through the losses of friends and
goods: for all will make at last for their eternal comfort, being borne with
pa^ience and with thoughts fixed upon our heavenly habi^tion.

II. Blessed are they that hunger, and thirst after justice, for they shall
have their fill. Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. Hunger and thirst are
things which we seek to avoyde in this life, and we are never long satisfied:
But the hunger and thirst after justice; is to be procured* for of itself it is
a full satisfaction to our souls; and though we should want wherewith to
satisfy our bodies, we are satisfied in mind* because even that want
cooperates in our justice. S. Hiero. (...)
Neither is it enough to desire to be just, unless we hunger and thirst after
it, acknowledging ourselves never to be just enough, but being always
desirous of more. How much unmercifully dealing is there in the world, in all
states, and occupations* Nothing but opression, nothing but squeezing, nothing
but exacting satisfaction to the utmost, and more then the utmost. This is not
the way to have mercy where we most need, but to be merciful, compassionate,
easy in our dealings toward another, as we would others should be toward us
in our necessities. And because pure^es of h^rt is so little looked after in
the world as being out of sight, he puts us in mind of the Allseeing eye, from
which nothing is hidden; promising that if we have care that he see no
uncleanness harbored in our thoughts, he will discover himself unto us, who is
purity itself; neithe^ is it possible to arrive to the sight of God without
purity of ha^t.

III. Blessed are the peacemakers, because they shall be called the children
of God. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice, for thiers is the
kingdom of heave^^. They who sow discord, ^. ^reg.
let them reflect whose children they must needs be; for if they who make peace
he ^earmed children of God. doubtless they who disturb it are children of
Satan. S. Leo.
But with in this peace are not comprehended certain fond familiarities, and
frendships, grounded upon sympathy of nature, but such peace as is made
according to the will and pleasure of God, and for his honor. Finally he
concludes with suffering persecution, to the end to cut of all at once, the
desires of the contentments of this world, seeing our happiness is not to be
wrought by them, but by suffering on all (...), in our goods, and in our good
name, in our bodies, and in our estates; keeping our mind free to God in
thanksgiving for the reward which is laid up for us in heaven, for patiently
and joyfully going through with them* for he exhorts us not only to patience,
but to joy, because our reward is to be plentiful in heaven. Thom. ^ Kemp. l.
2 6. 6 n. 2
To glory in tribulation is not hard to him that loves* for it is to glory
in the cross of our Lord.

Other documents belonging to the Evangelicall law.
I. I Tell you, Dico ^u tem vobis nisi abundaverit justitia vestra etc. v. 20
unless your justice abound more then that of the Scribes, and Pharisees: that
is, then that which they reach and practice, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Then because A^ger is a chief vice, and passion, which
generally reigns in all men, he shows how we ought to overcome it, and come
to the perfection of meekenes contrary unto it: And first he says thus. You
have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shall not kill: and who
kills is in danger of judgment. But I say to you; whoever is Angry with his
brother, shall be in danger of judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of a council* and whoever shall say, thou fool,
shall be guilty of ^el^fire. By degrees therefore of the falt (as S. Gregory
S. Greg.
tells us) the sentence does also increase; Anger, without outward expression;
Anger, with expression, and clamor; Anger, with clamor, and reproach are all
of them condemned, but differently punished. If therefore thou offer thy gift at
the Altar, and there do remember that thy brother has ought against thee,
leave there thy offering, and go first to be reconciled with thy brother.
Behold neither is sacrifice pleasing from the hand of them that are at variance.

II. You have heard that it was said: an eye for an eyes* and a tooth for a
tooth: but I say to you, not to resist evil: but if one strike thee on the
right cheek, turn to him also the other; and to him that will take away thy
coat, let go also thy cloak. This is a second degree of meekenes: for having
come so far as not to express Anger, neither by word, nor outward sign, but
mastred it within ourselves, we must endeavor after one injury, or hard
dealing, to be willing to receive another, and not say: I am not Angry with
him, or* I do forgive him, but I will do by him as he has done by me; this
being to contradicte by deed that which we seem to say by word.

III. And yet to a third degree he endeavors to raise us, saying: you have
heard that it was said, love thy neighbor, and hate thy enemy; but I say to
you, love your e^imies, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
persecute you, and abuse you, that you may be children of your Father who is in
heaven; who makes his Sun ^ise upon good and bad, and rayneth upon the just
and unjust: for if you love them that love you what reward shall you have? do
not also the Plublicans this? and if you salute your brethren only, what do
you more; do not also the heathens this? Be you therefore perfect as your
heavenly Father is perfect. S^ Hi^ro. ^e.
Many measuring the commandments of God by their own weakness, and not by the
strength which is in saints, esteem these precepts to be impossible, and say;
it is perfection enough not to hate our enemies, but to love them is more then
human nature can bear. But they must know that our Savior Christ does not
command things impossible, but that which is perfect, and such as David
practiced toward Saul, and Absalon; and S. Stphen the martyr, who praeyd for
them that stoned him; and S. Paul desired to be an outcast for them that did
persecute him. This Jesus taught and performed saying. Father pardon them, for
they know not what they do.

The fourth application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe dignity of the most Blessed Sacrament is so very great, that no
purity of heart, no perfection under God, can be thought sufficient to receive
it, as it deserves to be received* our Savior himself, God, and man giving
himself to us in it. Yet he vouchsafes graciously to come unto us, if we be
but free from mortal sin* much more if we endeavor withal to free
ourselves from the inveterate passions of the mind, which consume the strength,
and substance of our thoughts in things either impertinent, or hurtful. The
woman humbly touched the hemme of our Saviors garment, and was cured, She had
done her endeavor for twelve years; at last our Savior took compassion of
her, and by this one act of devotion toward him the obtained her desire: he
mercyfully also accepted the excuse of the sickman at the poole, that in eight
and thirty years he had not a man to help him in: Have recourse to this man,
who is also God. Psalm. 22
He has prepared in thy sight a table against those who troble thee. S: ^non
Chrysostom:
Who be those that troble thee? The suggestions of the enemy, thy ow^e
passions, and disordered desires, the pleasures and honors of the world which
thou look after. Come to this table with fear and trembling and thy trobles
will be turned into comfort: those things which infirm flesh esteems will
become contemptible, and spiritual things be held in that repute which they
deserve.

II. Likeness in disposition, and manners do breed familiarity. What was the
disposition of our Savior while he lived here on earth? Of himself he says,
Matthew. (...) 29.
learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart. And the P^ophet Esaias
say^h of him. He shall not contend, nor clamor, neither shall any man hear
his voice in the street; the bruised reed he shall not break, and smoking
flax he shall not extinguish: he practiced poverty from the beginning to the
e^d of his life: Who more zealous for the honor of God? who more merciful,
and desirous of making peace, and yet who more persecuted; and reviled? These
be the virtues in which according to the proportion of our state of life we
must endeavor to appear clothed, that we may be the more welcome to this
heavenly table. For as he says, by his Prophet; Esaias. 66. 2
upon whom shall I rest, or upon whom shall I cast my eye, but upon the
meek, and humble, and him that trembled at my words? Genesis 81^.
The dove which was let out of the Arc found not where to set her foot, till
the second time the discovered an olive tree, and brought a bra^che to the
Arc: And our Savior in his life time resorted much to mount Ovelit,
signifying how much desire he had of peace of quiet, and that we should follow
him in it.

III. Our Savior finding the man (whom he had ^ured at the Poole in the
temple, said unto him: behold thou have been cured, sin no more, least some
thing worse befall thee. By which passage we learn three things ^itting to be
endeavored after receiving. First, we must remain in the Temple sometime in
thanksgiving for so great a benefit Secondly, we must search into the causes
of our long dise^ses, and order remedy for them, and specially beware of those
sins, which we have lately confessed begging assistance to avoyde them.
Thirdly, we must indeavou^ to increase in the knowledge, and love, and respect
to our Savior: For the man, before ^e presented himself this second time, knew
him not; knowing him, he proclaimed that it was Jesus who had done that great
miracle upon him. Thom. ^ Komp l4. ^. 2. n. 2
O sweet and merciful Jesus how much reverence, and thanksgiving, with
continual praise is due unto thee for the receiving of thy blessed body, the
dignity whereof no man is able to explicate.

The narrow way commanded.
I. ENter by the narrow gate; (...) Ip^ augustam portam. wc.
for broad is the way, and large is the gate, which leads to perdit^o^, and
many enter by it: But narow is the gate, and straight is the way which leads
to life, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7. 13.
Blinded by their own worldly, and carna^^ desires, which they choose rather
to follow; and because they are pleasing to sense, the way they walk in seems
large and pleasant; but in fine it leads them to eternal perdition; and they
are hardly recoverable in this world, when they are once entered; because it is
harder to leave the ways of the world when one has once pleased himself in
them, then if he never rasted them* yet we must not think that the gate and way
to life of is so narrow, as to be always irksome; but as S. Gregory S. Greg.
advertizeth: The way of God to beginners is narrow to those who are perfect it
is broad: for the narrowest gate is widened by love; and when a man considers
that for temporal commod^ties forsaken, he is to receive eternal joy, he
begins to love that which otherwise would afflict him.

II. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven,
he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. S. Hier.
For what kind of confession is it, so to believe in God, as not to care what
he commands? or how can we say, Lord, from our heart, if we contemn his
precepts, whom we acknowledge to be our Lord and Master? Our hands therefore
must go with our mouth, and our works according to our bel^^fe: for otherwise
there will be many that will say in the latter day. Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and wrought many
wondrous things? and then I will confess unto them that I never knew them:
depart from me you that work iniquity.

III. Every one therefore that hears these my words, and does them, shall be
likened to a wise man that built his house upon a rock. And the rain fell, and
the fluds came, and the winds blew, and they beat against that house and it
fell not, for it was built upon a rock. And every one that hears these my
words, and does them not, shall be like a foolish man that built his house upon
the sand, and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the wind blew, and they
beat against that house, and it fell; and the fall thereof was great. The Rock
on which we must build is our Savior, whose only merits do uphold us: for of
outselves we can do nothing, nor pretend any thing in the sight of God toward
eternal life. His doctrine is the ground of our faith: His life is the sampler
according to which we must frame ours, to the end to be accepted at the later
day; and to be able in the mean time to withstand al our Ghostly enemies. S.
Ihon Chrysostom S. Ihon Chrysostom*
tells us more over that a strong resolution to go forward in Gods service is
the rock on which, under our Savior, we must build our spiritual building.
For the other building (says he) was easyly over^^rowne; not by the violence
of the Temptatations; for so the first also might have fallen; but by reason of
the weakness of the foundation, that is of our resolution. Temptation is not
the cause of our fall, but the vnconstantie of our mind, and our want of
courage* by which oftimes, even without any temptation, we come to be
overthrown* for sand of itself does yeald; but a diamond resists the force
of the hammer.

Our Savior cures the servant of the C^nturion.
I. ANd he entered Capharnaum, ^ intr^vit Capharnaum etc.
and the servant of a certain Centurion being sick, was ready to dye; who was
dear unto him; and when he had heard of Jesus, Luc* 2^
he sent unto him the Ancients of the Jews, desiriug him to come, and heal
his servant: They being come to Jesus, besought him earnestly, saying: he is
worthy that thou should do this for him; for he loves our nation, and has
buyl^ a synagog for us: and Jesus went with them, The Centurion went not to our
Savior in person: S. Angust.
with the strength of faith he went unto him; an Alien by birth, Crige^.
by faith pertaining to his household. And whereas others had recourse unto him
for diverse infirmities, this man alone intercedeth for his servant* saying
within himself; this is my servant, and I am servant to my Creator; if I do
not take pity of my servant, how shall I expect that my my Creator will have
mercy on me?

II. And when he was not far from the house, the Centurion sent his friends to
him, saying: Lord, troble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou should
enter under my roof; for the which cause, neither did I think myself worthy to
come unto thee: but only say the word and my servant shall be cured. For I also
am a man, subject to authority, having solders under me. And I say to this,
go, and he goes; and to another, come, and he comes; and to my servant, do
this, and he does it; Believing and professing that, as he, being in command,
though a subject, had his servants and soldiers obedient unto him, much more
our Savior, being Lord of the whole world, could command any creature, and it
would obey without resistance. Be ashamed at thy stownes in doing his commands*
whom sun, and moon, and stars earth, and heaven do obey upon his word.
He believed also that it was not necessary that our Savior should so much as
see the sick person; but that whatever disease he had, it would leave him upon
his command: wherefore though he received him not under his roof, he had him in
his har^, so much the fuller, the more humbly he did demean himself.

III. And Jesus hearing this message marvelled; and turning to the multitude,
said: Amen, I say to you: neither in Israel have I found so great faith. And
I say to you, Matt. 8. 11^
many shall come from the East, and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven; but the Children of the Kingdom
shall be cast out into the exterior darkness, there shall be weeping, and
gnashing of teeth: and he said to the Ce^turion, God as thou have bel^ved, be
it done unto thee: and the servant was healed at the same houre^ The Jews
certanly had more helps toward the faith, which they should have had in Christ
our Savior; But this alien, bread up in his youth in idolatry among the
Romans, whose servant he was, made better use of the benefit which God had done
him in bringing him to live among his chosen people, where his eyes might be
opened, and be a document for us not to neglect Gods great grace toward us;
least we come at last to be rejected. Our repiditie and negligence is much to
be lamented, and pittyed, that we are not lead which more affection to our
Savior. etc. Th. a Ke. l. 4. ^. 32.


He ^ayseth from death the son of the widow of Naim.
I. ANd he went into the city which is called Naim; Et ibat in in Civitatem
qu^ dicitur Na^m etc*
and there went with him his disciples, and a very great multitude: and when
he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, a dead men was carried forth, the
only son of his mother, and she was a widow, Luc. 7. ^.
and a great multitude of the city with her. the city was called Naim,
because it was a beautiful city: butwhat did beauty, or strength of the city
avayle against death? Or the youth of him that was carried out, or that he was
the ouly son, or rich, or well^beloved, and respected, and attended? We all
dye, and as water we sink down into the earth. And who is there almost, that
does think of it as he ought, and prepare for another world, in which he is
never to dye? We are carried away with that which concerns this body of ours,
which no industry can preserve long; and think least of our soul, which must
be preseved by good life here, if it will not be miserable for ever, when this
everdying life is gone. is gone. whom: ^ Kemp. l. ^ c. 7 n. 2
Glory not in wealth if thou have it, nor in friends that they are powerful,
but in God, who gives all things. Be not extolled with the beauty and
proportion of thy body; a little sickness does dissigure it, and destroy it*

II. Whom when our Lord had seen, being moved with compassion upon her, he
said to her, weep not: And he came ^eere, and touched the coffin, and they
that carried it, stood still; and he said, young man, I say to thee; ^ise; and
he that was dead sat up, and began to speak, and he gave him to his Mother. O
blessed eyes of my Savior! look upon me with compassion; for behold, I am
carried, ^ know not whether, now with one fancy, now with another, now with one
passion, now with another: And this wretched body of mine in which I am
coffind^ will be cause of my doble death, if thou do not lay thy merciful
hand upon it, and stop the course which naturally it is running. O soul!
forget not that thou art always young, if thou will thy self: Rise, take
courage, sit up, speak to thy senses, and desires, to keep themselves in
order and compass. Thom. ^ Kemp. l. 3 c. 57. n. 4
O Lord: Blessed be thy word, sweet to my mouth above honey and the honey comb.
What should I do in so many trobles and vexations if thou did not comfort me
with thy holy speeches? So I may arrive at the haven of salvation what matter
is it what I suffer etc.

III. And fear took them all, and they magnifyed God saying: a great Prophet
is risen among us, and God has visited his people. And this saying went into
all Iewrie of him, and into all the country about. The people had more reason
to fear when they saw the young man carried out dead, not knowing what was
become of the Better part of him, or by whom, or whether it was carried. His
reviving being a sign of the common resurrection, when that voice, which
called the world out of nothing, S. Chrysologus
will in the later day call it again out of co^ruption; and he that in the
beginning raised man out of earth, will raise him again in the later end out
of dust. Magnisie this great prophet, who has brought thee to the belief of
these things: Beg of him that he will often visit thee with his heavenly
inspirations; and be thou more joyful to receive his heavenly instructions,
then the sorrowful m^ther could be to receive her son alive.

S. Ihon Baptist sends his disciples to Christ to be instructed.
I. When Ihon had heard in prison the work^ of Christ, Ioanne^ c^m audisset in
vinculis etc.
sending two of his disciples, h^ said to him: art thou he that art to come,
or look we for another? And Jesus making answer said to them: Matthew. ^^^
go, and report to Ihon what you have heard and seen: the blind see, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, and to
the poor the Ghospel is preached; and blessed is he that shall not be
scandalized in me. S. Ihon did not doubt but that our Savior was the only
Messiah expected; but, to satisfy his disciples more fully, he sent them so
our Savior, who answered not in words, but by the admirable works he was then
working in all sort of cures; which cures it was long before prophesied the
Messiah should work. And we also are to restifie by our works, that we are
Christians, not beleeying and professing one thing, and doing nothing suitable
to that which we profess, but suting our lives to our belief. If our voice be
Jacobs, our hands must not be Esaus. Nor because God has perhaps blessed us
with riches must we neglect the poore^ There is no other to come to save us by
any other way, Genesis 2^ 22
then Jesus has already traced our unto us: be not scandalized in him,
because crucified, dead and buried: the same will come at the later day to
Judge the more rigorously, the slighter we make of his commands and directions
here: Harken after all his works of mercy and lustice, that esteeming him the
more, thou may follow him the more willingly, and expect him with the more
comfort^.

II. And when they wen^ their way, Jesus began to say to the multitude of Ihon,
what went you into the desert to see? A reed shaken with the wind? Or what went
you to see? A man clothed in soft garments? behold they who are so clothed are
in kings houses. But what went you to see? A Prophet? ye^, I tell you, and more
then a Prophet; for this is be of whom it is written: Behold I send my Angel
before thy face, who shall prepare the way before thee. Our sa^iour proposes
unto us what we are to reverence, and imitate in S. Ihon; His constancy in his
course of life, perseveriug from his childhood to his dying day; not shaken
with every wind as a reed; nor hollow and empty, and able to bear no^streffe;
but with fervor of spirit, and manly resolution overcoming the weakness of
flesh and blood: not given to delicacies, but content with that which bare
necessity required: those who are otherwise disposed, are fitter for the
courts of earthly princes, and to be rewarded accordingly; the courtiers of our
heavenly King must put themselves to more hardship, that they may have the
reward of eternal joy; and endeavor to resemble the Angels here, that they
may enjoy their heavenly company.

III. For from the days of Ihon the Baptist till now; the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence; and the violent bear it away. That is, you must not think
that the kingdom of heaven is to be gotten by lazynes, and remissenes: it is a
kingdom, and it is the kingdom of heaven, deserving far more then any
earthly kingdom. And they are as violently opposed who fight for it, as are
any foreign armies assalting any Princes dominions. It is a Kingdom, and our
Kingdom: Th. ^ Ke. l. ^. c. 25.^. 11.
if we suffer ourselves to be thrust out of it, we are eternally miserable,
unless by force we regaine it. It is greater pains to resist our vices and
passions then to sweat at any corporal labor.

The conversion of the Magdalen.
I. ONe of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him: Rogaba^ illum qu^^dam
Phais^vs. etc.
and behold: a woman that was in the city, a sinner, as she knew that he was
sit down in the Pharisees house, brought an alabaster box of oyniment, and
standing behind at his feet, with tears she began to water his feet, an^
wiped the^ with the hayres of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed the^
with the oyniment. S. Greg.
She had entered deeply into consideration of what she had done, and would put
no stint to what she was to do; she was greatly confounded w^thin herself?
therefore she did not valve the confus^o^ which might come upon her from abroad:
of the things which had been instrument of her delights, she offered holocausts
to God for remission of her sins. She kept behind our Savior, as not daring
to appear before that mirror of perfection, till she were cleansed; she lay
at his feet, as more worthy to be trodden upon as dirt, then regarded, or
looked after: she bathed them with her tears, that from thence they might
receive virtue to cooperate to the washing away her sins, and clear those
eyes which had been so often soyled with objects not befitting them; she
employed the hair of her head as a towell, more to pur a new tincture upon her
hair, and to wash away the ordure it had contracted, then that our Saviors
feet needed it, and said with in her heart: o Lord. my iniquities have been
multiplied above the number of the hayres of my head* pardon my offenses, and
receive this sacrifice of myself in an adoure of sweetness; but this sweetness
must come from thee, for not all the ointments the world can bestow a^e able to
take away the stenche of one of my vggly syns. O how loathsome are they to me!
but have thou pity upon me, Amen.

II. The Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, said within himself. This
man, if he were a Prophet would know who, and what m^nner of woman she is who
touches him, that she is a sinner. Jesus said to him; Simon I have somewhat
to say to thee. And he said, Master say. A certain Creditour had two debtors:
one did owe five hundred pence the other fifty: They not having wherewith to
pay, he forgave both. Whether of them does love him more? Simon said* I
suppose be whom he forgave more. And be said to him, thou have judged
rightly. From the rash judgment of the man concerning himself, and the woman;
our Savior taking no notice outwardly of it, gives him an instruction which
concerns us all; That we are all debtors to God, and that it behooves every one
to look into his accounts* for to reckon up others falts will avayle him no
thing, but bring him at last to confusion, when his falte shall be represented
unto him in a different looking glass then he has framed to himself. And be
they little* or be they great, we are not able to satisfy, but must have
recourse to the mercy of our Creditour to forgive us; now, as to the question,
who loves more* S. Augustine S. Angust.
answers rightly: O Pharisee! therefore thou love little, because thou
think that little is forgiven thee; nor that it is little, but thou do
think it little. And thou who ever thou best who say thou have not offended
much, tell me, why* And by whose help has it happened?

III. And turning to the woman, he said do thou see this woman? I entered
thy house, water to my feet thou did not give me; she with tears has
bathed my feet, and with her hair has wiped them* Kiss thou gave me not,
she since I came in has not ceased to kiss my feet: with oil thou did not
^noynt my head, she with ointment has anointed my feet. For the which I say
unto thee; many syns are forgiven her, because she has loved much; to whom
less is forgiven, he loves less. And he said unto her; thy syns are
forgiven thee: and again; thy faith bath the made sufe, go in peace. Follow
the advice of our Savior, look attentively upon this woman; see her
diligence, in applying herself unto him for that, which did most import her:
see her perseverance, not ceasing to kiss his feet; her noblenes in bestowing
what was best upon him. The Phar^see did not anoint our Saviors head, he did
not believe he was God; she even in the infirmity of his humanity believed
it, and therefore had recourse for forgivenes of her syns: Before she knew they
were forgiven she loved much; how much afterward* being loath to leave her hold
even upon the second saying of our Savior. Thom. a Kemp. l. 2 c. ^ n. 2
Hold thyself by jesus living and dying.

He casts out the dumb devil, and gives diverse wholesome instructions.
I. HE was casting out a devil, Et erat eij^^ens doemonium.
and it was dumb: and when he had cast out the devil, the dumb spoke; and
the multitude marveled, and said, is not this the Son of David^ How many
ways are we dumb to our prejudice? Luc. 11 14
We conceal our falts, when according to the eouncell of the holy Ghost, Prove.
18 1^
we should be the first to revcale them, that we might be justified in the
sight of God by humble confession; we are forward to speak of other folks
falts, and silent in occasions of thie^ commendation: forward to hold
impertinent discourses, flow in speaking of things profitable to ourselves and
others. Such were the Pha^isees and their associates, who seeing this miracle
said. In Beelzebub the Prince of the devils, he casts out devils; and
others tempting him, asked of him a sign from heaven. As if they might not
have found matter of praise and commendation, as well as the multitude; but
their ^ares were (...), and their tongues tied from that which was behooufull,
and open to all kind of wicked suggestions, Beg our Saviors assistance
against these pestiferous diseases.

II. He seeing their thoughts, said unto them. Ev^ry kingdom divided against
it self, will be brought to desolation, and house upon house will fall: If
satan be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? And if I in
Beelz^bub cast out devils, your children, in whom do thy cast them out?
therefore they shall be your judges. But if I in the finger of God do cast out
devils, surely the kingdom of God is come upon you. Beware of dissension: the
mischief which comes of it is too apparent. Beware of censuring other-folks
actions, or words and construing them to the worst: most commonly they condemn
themselves as one time or other guilty of the same. Imitate our Savior who is
still doing good to these, who show themselves thus ungrateful* for it is a
sign that we pertayne to the kingdom of God, who makes his Sun to shine
over the good and the bad, Matthew. ^ 4^
and rayneth upon the just and unjust.

III. When an unclean spirit departs out of a man, ^e wandereth through places
without water, seeking rest; and not finding, he says: I will return into my
house whence I departed, and he finds it swept, and trimmed, but vacant: then
he takes seven other spirits worse then himself, and entering in, they dwell
there; and the last of that man becomes worse then the first. S. Augustine S.
August.
says that they are signified in this parable, who believing in Christ and
embracing his doctrine, shrink afterward in the performance of it, overcome
with their too much inclination to case and pleasure; for though at first they
resolved to overcome it, yet missing afterward of those remporall delights, to
which they were too much affected, they fall to them more greedily then before,
and are utterly lost in them. Beg of our Savior, the seven gifts of the
holy Ghost, contrary to the seven wicked spirits which labor to prossesse
us. To wit true wisdom, joined, with profound humility: clear light of the
understanding, with out too much adhering to our own conceit, easynes, not
only to take advise, but also to follow it, fortitude, even in those things
which are not all together to our liking, if otherwise sitting, or commanded
to be done: knowledge without of tentation; true piety and devotion with our
all kind of dissembling: and the true fear of God, not to be overcome with the
falsely styled freedom* which endeavors to undermine it. Veni San^te Spiritus.

The fist application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe Magdalen, the Centurion, and the Widow of Naim gives as an ample
subject wherewith to interrayne our Savior at the holy Communion, with tears
of repentance for our manifold offenses; with humble acknowledgment of our
great unworthiness to be visited by such a guest, and with joy at the raising
of our soul from (...) to life by the powerful mercy of our Savior, taking
^ompassion of us when we were carried away by our disordered desires to our
utter ruin. Prostrate thyself at thy Saviors fee^e with the one, begging
pardon, and washing with reares, the aspersions which thou have cast upon them
by thy disorder. Retire thyself with the other into the bosom of thy own
nothing by nature, and worse then nothing by sin; and be ashamed to approach:
yet not so, but that with the third thou may raise thyself to confidence,
seeing he is pleased to meet thee, and to stretch his loving hand toward thee
to be received by thee.

II. But we must not rest in affections only; we must bestow upon him the
ointments which he desires, resolutions to embrace the narrow way by him
commended. For not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 7^ 6.
but he that does the will of his heavenly Father. This resolution we must
strengthen by often applying ourselves to this holy Banquet, P^alm^ 17^
and often receiving it. For heis our strength, and our refuge, ^^d in him is
all our hope See how he gives sight to the blind, hearing to the dease Speech
to the dumb, life to the dead; how he refuses not the poorest snake that is,
but gives ^free access, and comfort to every body that is willing to be helped
by him. And be not scandalized in him, thinking that he makes himself too
cheap, or that it is better to foxbeare* for if he be willing to afford us
this comfort, and this honor, as certainly he is, it were rather a
discourresie to shrink back, and as it were to forbid his coming to us. For
neither did the Centurion so, but presenting himself unto him, expressed only
his firm beleese, that in absence also he could cure his servant.

III. When thou have received take heed of instantly turning to other thoughts,
unless some absolut necessary business come upon thee, but give him some time
of loving intertaynement, least he that is cast out, watching his opportunity,
finding the house trimmed, but vacant, and empty of any good employment, or
thought, strive to come in again; and for our ingratitude we find less
devotion, if not some thing worse happen unto us. Employ thyself in his
praises, as he did in S. Jhons when his disciples were returned: say unto
thyself; what a Guest have I received into my house? A Prophet? an Angel? No:
the inlightner of Prophe^s, and the Lord of Angels, in whose prelence-they
stand with reverent respect singing: Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord of hosts: full
is heaven and earth of thy glory and Majesty: Thee The, glorious quire of the
Apostles: The multitude of Prophets: The, glitering armiers of blessed Marryrs:
The, whole Catholic Church spead through the world, do praise, and glorisie,
and consesse to be their God, their redeemer, their glorifier.

The parable of the seed.
I. When a gr^^te multitude assembled, Cum tur^^ plurima conveni^ent.
and hastened out of the cities to him, be said by a similitude; the sower
went forth, to sow his seed, and in sowing some fell by the way side, and was
trodden upon, Luc. 84
and the fowls of the air did eat it. Othersome fell upon the rock, and
being shot up, it withered, because it had not meisture. Othersome fell among
thorns, and the thorns growing up with it choked it. Othersome fell upon good
gro^^d, and being shot up yealded fruit an hundred fold. S. Bern.
The sower is the most Blessed Trinity. the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, the blessed Angels, the holy Apostles and Prophets in their doctri^e
preached and written for us. The seed is every good thought, every good motion,
stirring us to that which is our duty toward God, toward our neighbor* and
ourselves. (...)
Every good thought that is given, and every perfect gift is from heaven,
descending from the Father of lights, It behooveth us to think, how we receive
them, not to be ungrateful to the gracious giver, and prerudiciall to
ourselves. God is bountiful to all, and upon every man's ha^^ he sows his
seed: Prove. 16 36
it belongs to man to prepare his sou^ by the selfsame graces, and to render it
^upple, and pliable by cooperating with them: for we are not by (...) tute
rocks, but by our own wilful hardening our hearts, nor are we necessitated to
lie by the high way side, where every one is apt to tread upon us, nor bred so
among tho^nes, that we cannot avoyde them.

II. In the explication of this similitude our Savior tells us, that the birds
of the air, signify the evil spirits, who while we lie open by the high way
side to every one that passes by, cast in other thoughts into our mind, and so
tread down, and overwhelme the good, which we had received, and put it quite
out of our memory. They that fall upon the rock, are such as with joy receive
the word and having no moisture take no root, and for a time beleave, and in
time of temptation they fall away. And that which fell into thorns, are they
that having heard going their ways, are choked with cares and riches, and
pleasures of this life, and render no fruit. So that we have here three enemies
of our good; The evil spirits upon who^ we must wa^ch, and keep our heart
recollected, that they may have noe entrance by their devices. Our own flesh,
which if it be not subdued, and broken of its wicked and stubborn desires, and
so made capable of the heavenly dew, will grow harder, and harder to be brought
to good: and however pleasing for a time a heavenly inspiration is, it will
take no root* but as a resty jade will fly-of where most of all it should go
on. And thirdly the cares and wealth, and pleasures of this world are as so
many thorns, which insta^tly choke us, so soon as we begin to think that the
service of God cannot be complied with, unless in some measure we forgo them:
for their importunity is without measure and stint.

III. And that which fell upon good ground, are they who with an honest, and
good heart hearing the word, do retain it. Matthew. (...) 23
and yeald fruit in patience; some a hundred fold, another threescore, another
thirty; As S. Matthew relates it. Though God does bestow his graces liberally
upon all, yet is he to some more liberal then to others. For which every one,
according to his measure, ought to give him thanks, as being his free gift
without any original obligation to us. Sap. 8. 1^.
And if he have bestowed upon us a soul inclined to Good, we are the more
bound unto him: and yet we cannot expect to yeal^ fruit without patience: for
in hearing and retayning, ^ad in cooperating, we shall find our difficulties,
Custom will lie cross in our way, Th. a K^^ (...)
and is to be overcome by better custom. Our flesh will repine, and is to be
bridled by fervor of spirit; the old serpent will tempt us. and afflict us,
and is to be put to flight by prayer, and al^o to be shut o^t by profitable
labor.

The Parable of the Cockle.
I. Another parable he proposed to them, Al^am p^abo^am proposu^^ eis dicens^
etc
saying, the Kingdom of heaven is ressembled to a man, that sawed good seed in
his field. But when men were in sleep, his enemy come, and sowed over it
cockle among the wheats, and went his way; Matthew. ^^^
and when the blade was shot up, and brought ^ith fruit, then also app^ared
the cockle. Another similitude to stir us up to watchfullnes; for as sleep
is necessari^ for our corporal fustina^ce, so to our soul it is pernicious*
that is, spiritual drow synes sloth, and neglect of what passes in us or
about us; Th a Ke. l. 1. C. 19. n. 2.
lightly to omit our exercises, scaree ever passes with out some loss. In our
beginnings we receive good seed; if we be not watchful the enemy crastily
sowes other principles, tending to liberty, to self will, and self judgment,
and the like; and he lets us alone for a time, as if nothing had been done; but
as we grow in years, and into employment, then those loose principles begin to
appear, and, unless we be aware, will over bear the good corn: and by the
neglect of the^, and not choking them in their first sowing, many a sad event
befalls those, who otherwise might have borne much fruit in the Church of God.

II. The same parable signifies also unto us. that in the Church of God, and
in all communities, there be good and bad, ^ervent in the service of God, and
some less fervent; God giving every one means to do well, but some out of
neglect suffer the enemy to sow other seeds in the^. which hinder the fruit
which they might bear, and turn them from wheat into cockle. These he says
are not always to be dealt with rigorously, but with patience, and good
admonitions, exemples and reprehensious expected, till God dispose them either
to better in this life, or to punishment in the next. The servants said, wilt
tho^ we go, and pluck up the cockle; and he said: No; least gathering the
cockle, you root up the wheat also with it. Let both grow till harvest and in
the time of harvest. I will say to the reapers, gath^r first the cockle, and
bind it into bundles to burn, and (...) the wheat into my barn.

III. Admire the patience of Almighty God, who suffers so many affronts f^o^
sinners, and yet expects the^ to the last; reckon thy self in the number, and
b^ware thou try not his patience too long; but a wake be times, and look
about thee, and search eve^ conner of thy field, that is, thy soul; see what
is there sowed, and by whom: many an one seems a friend and is an enemy,
because favoring our humors, he speaks things pleasing, and not profitable,
(...)
but prejudicial to us. While we do not resist the enemy in the beginning,
he enters by little and little wholly into us: and the longer we continue
sloathfull in resisting, the weaker we grow, and our enemy the stronger; yet
we must take S. Hieromes S. Hierom
advertisement in our way, who upon this parable says, that our Savior
forbids to pass our censure sudainly, where a thing is doubtful, but
rather leave it to God to judge.

The parables of the Mustarseed, the Treasure, and the pearl.
I THe Kingdom of heaven is like to a Mustardseed, Simile ^st Re^^^^ (...) etc.
which ^ the least of all seeds, but when it is grown, i^^s greater then all
herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the sowles of the air come and dwell in
the branches thereof. Matthew. ^
Christian faith and the doctrine thereof at first seems contemptible, S. Ambr.
and had but slender beginnings from the preaching of a few fishermen, but in
process of time, being well pondered and thoroughly sifted, the life and
vigor of it appeared, and it has over toped all other professions; so that
the sublimest wits have found full satisfaction in it. Besides that persecution
has increased it, as the seed when it is grinded is more forcible; Our Savior
himself how contemptible did he appear to the world being crucified dead and
buried? Yet that made for his greater glory, and by it he would show us the
only way to glory to be to humble ourselves, and be humbled, bearing it
patiently, and with courage, and assurance that at last we shall have a crown
of glory, and immortality for our sufferings^ Let us therefore not be dejected
with persecution, or crosses, but according to the advice of S. Hierome S.
Hi^rom
take wings of a dove in simplicity of heart, and fly into the branches of this
tree, and contemning earthly things, and that which here is in esteem, make
have to things celestial. Again the kingdom of heaven is like a Treasure
hidden in a field, which a man having found, did hide it, and for joy thereof
goes and sells all that he has and buyeth that field. From how many in this
world is the treasure of the service of God hidden, or rather how few be there,
who know the perfect valve of it? Hidden, because they will no^ take the pains
to find it, and do think every thing too much that is bestowed that way;
whereas for other things, which at last will prove but tra^h, they spare no
labor nor cost: he that finds it, and considers the worth, hides it in his
heart with wholesome fear of loosing it, and with joy parts with all, rather,
then he will part with it: and happy are those who do voluntarily part with
all other things, with which of necessity they must part sooner or later, to
be the surer possessours of it.

III. Again it is like a Merchant man, seeking good Pearls, and having found
one precious pearl, he went and sold all he had, and bought it. One and the
same thing is declared to us by diverse similitudes, because no one thing can
sufficiently express the worth of it. The Pearl is hidden, within the shell,
in the deepth of the Sea, and among roks and stones; so is the service of God
beset with difficulties; yet is a pearl, and the most pretions that is which
an experienced Merchant finding, prefers it before all other wealth, and
spares no labor to get it. Others who know not the value of it, Th. a Ke. l.
^ c. 24. n. 5
neglect it, or sell it for naught. The day will come, when he shall be thought
the wisest merchant, who here was accounted a fool. Then tribulation will be
pleasant, them devotion will breed joy* then our flesh, here afflicted* will
more rejoice, then they who have been bred up in dainties; a poor cottage will
be commended above princely palaces.

He is misused in Nazareth.
I. ANd be came to Nazareth, Et venit Nazareth vbi Nutritus.
where he was brought up, and entering according to his custom upon the ^abboth
into the Synagog, he rose up to read: And the books of Esaias being delivered
unto him, Luc, 4. 16.
he found a place where it was written* The spirit of our Lord upon me, for
which he anointed me, to evangelize to the poor he sent me, to heal the
contrit^ of heart, to preach to captives remission, and sight to the blind, the
acceptable day to our Lord and the day of retribution* And he said, this day
is fullfilled this Scripture in your ears, Give God thanks that thou have been
borne, and bred up in this day, when these things have been fullfilled; and he
that is the light of the world has been revealed unto thee, in whom, and by
whose holy Sacraments, thou may have remission of thy synns, and an eternal
retribution besides, for the things done in his service, and according to his
service, and according to his doctrine, and example. Think often of the rewards
both of good and bad, that avoiding the one, thou may be pertaker of the
other, and be accep^able to God in the day of retribution. How many, even to
thishoure, have not this happiness? among those who were present when he opened
these things unto them, diverse were of another mind, and took rather harm
then good) for though diverse admired him, and his doctrine, and the grace with
which he delivered it, Maci. 6.
yet others said: is not this Joseph's Son? Is he not a Carpenter, the Son
of Mary? And they were scandalezed in him.

II. And he said to them, surely you will say to me this similitude: physician
cure thyself; As great things as we have heard done in Capharnaum, do also
here in thy country; Amen I say unto you, no prophet is acceptable in his own
country. There were many widow as in Israel in the days of Elias, and to none
of them was he sent, but to Serepta of Sidon to a Widow woman. And many
leprouse people were in ^srael under Elizeus, and none of them were cured, but
Naaman the Syrian. A document for us, not to weigh too much the outward
circumstances of the parties who are our Superiors, and Governors, but their
inward ^alents, and vocation: for God (as it is in the psalm) rayseth up the
poor out of the dust, (...)
and lifts the needy from the dunghill, to set him with the Princes of his
people. Also to beware that custom in the use of good things do not diminish
our devotion, and respect to the^: but endeavor that they be always new to
us, as certainly, if we apply ourselves accordingly, they will every day breed
in us some new grace, whereby we may be more acceptable to God, and he more
dear to us.

III. And all in the Synagog were filled with anger, hearing these things: and
they rose, and cast him out of the City, and brought him to the edge of the
hill upon which their City was ^uylt, that they might throw him done
headlong, and he passing through the midst of them, went his ways. Instead of
taking benefit by his admonition, they fell into rage; o how often does this
happen to us? And how lamentable effects do often follow of it? We seek to
revenge ourselves for a good turn, and we cast ourselves headlong into a
thousand inconveniences, and indiscretions, by speech, and actions unbeseeming
us. Matt. 5. 14.
The City, that is the Catholich Cruce, in which we dwell is buylt upon a
hill: How many have cast themselves headlong out of it by wilful opposing
themselves to their teachers, and thinking to hurt them, have been eternally
ruined* Thom. a ^emp. ^. c. 3.
Our opinion, and our thinking does often deceive us, and sees little. What
does it avayle to cavil about hidden and obscure things* etc.

Instructions given to his Apostles, and Disciples.
I. SEnding his Apostles about the country to preach, Nolite (...) aurum.
and giving them power, and command over evil spirits, and all kind of
diseases, toward the cure of them; Matt 10. 9.
he first arms them against Covetous^es, and too much solicitude about
corporal sustenance. Do no^ possess, (or provide) neither gold, nor sylver,
nor money in your purses, nor a scrip for the way, nor two coats, nor shoes,
nor rod; for the workman is worthy of his meat: freely you have received,
freely give. Their whole care he will have to be about the spiritual work for
which they were sent, and for the rest rely upon God Allmigh^^^s providence,
who as he has ordained them for the spiritual assistance of his people, so
does he provide that those who have tempotall means shall assist them without
pressing upon them.

II. Secondly he commends circumspection, joined with sincerity. Behold I send
you as sheep, in the midst ^ wolves; be therefore wise, as serpen^s and simple
as doves: and beware of men. S. Ihon Chriso^t.
What shepherd sends his sheep into the midst of wolves, and does not rather
gather his sheep together when he discovers the wolf* Christ does contrary:
and he does not say, Go of your own head, but behold I send you; who art thou?
I am he who have spread the Canope of the heavens over thy head. O power of the
omnipotent? Wolves round about, and the wolves they were changed into sheep*
The wisdom of the serpent is to look to the principal, as the serpent does
to save his head, whatever becomes of the rest of his body: this wisdom must
be accompanied with synceritie; for worldly craft does not beseem the servant
of him who is the eternal Truth.

III. Thirdly he commends courage and constancy: fear ye not them that kill
the body, and cannot kill the soul; but fear him that can destroy both soul
and body into hell: Fear of temporal inconveniences is to be overcome with a
more just fear of eternal punishment, if we shrink from our duty: but much
more with love of our duty, and of him for whom we labor, and by whom we
live. And to encourage us he adds. Are not two sparrowes ^old for a farthing?
And not one of them shall fall to the ground without your Father. But your very
hayres of your head are all numbered: fear not therefore, better are you then
many sparrowes: and more dear to him whom you justly call Father, and who has
a fatherly care over you, that you come not to harm, but when it is most for
his glory, wherein you are also most to glory: For every one that confesses
him before men, he will confess him before his heavenly Father.

IV. Finally he will have them shake-of all carnal affection whatsoever. He
that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and he that
loves son, or daughter above me, is not worthy of me: and who takes not up
his Cross, Euthinius
and follows me, is not worthy of me. The Cross was the instrument of his
death; he signifies by it that we must be dead to the world, and to all
worldly contentment. Another Gospel says, he that takes not up his Cross
daily; S. Hierom
least we should think that one ^ervent act were sufficient: our Cross is
always to be carried that we may testify that we always love our Savior.
These things are hidden from the worldly wise, but in fine, we shall find them
not only necessary, but comfortable, according as he says in the sequel.
Ma^th. ^
Come to me all ye that labor, S. Angust*
and are burdened, and I will refresh you: take up my yoke upon you, and
learn^ of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart, and you shall find rest
in your souls; for my yoke is swe^te, and my burden light. That which is hard
in respect of the labor, is easy to the self same parties in guard of their
love; for love makes hard things easy, and in a manner nothing.

The death of S. Ihon Baptist.
I. Herod apprehended Ihon, Herodes tenuit Ioannem.
and bound him, and put him in prison, because of Herodias, his brothers wife:
for Ihon said to him, it is not lawful for thee to have her: Matthew. 14. ^
and willing to put him to death, he feared the people, because they esteemed
him as a Propher. No man is so innocent but is subject to suffer either by
power, offended with out cause, or by ennie of others, in whose light he is
conceived to stand, or by mistake, and misconstruing of some word, or action,
or some other accident of a thousand in this world; so that it behooves every
body (...) be prepared for a blow, which when least expected, falls; least
taken at unaware he be transported to that which may be unbeseeming his person,
or his quality; in which occasions, though innocence may be modestly pleaded,
yet the best satisfaction is to content ourselves with a good conscience, and
not to be too eager in defending, but commit himself, and his cause to God, who
in his good time will re^eale the truth.

II. And on Herodes birth day, the daughter of H^rodias ^aunced before them,
and pleased Herod, where upon he promised with an oath to give her whatever
she would ask, him. And she being instructed before by her Mother, said: give
me ^ere in a d^^h the head of ^hon Baptist: and the King was strooken s^d, yet
because of his oath, and for them that sat with him at table, he commanded it
to be given. See how one sin breeds another, and to what rashness passionate
affection to any thing brings us: How humane respects overcome reason: How the
rulers of the world have oftimes least command over themselves: And practice
betimes moderation, that when the occasion happens thou may not be to
seek. Euthymi^ ^
O slave of a woman! Thou fearedst to have witnesses of thy perjury those who
sat at table, and fearedst not a world of spectatours of thy unjust murder

III. And he sent, and behe^ded Ihon in the prison; And his (...) cam^, and
took the body, and buryed^; and came, and told jesus Consider how S. Ihon
took the news first, and then the stroke, being ever ready for it; how happy
he was to be at once delivered out of two prisons; how much his happy soul was
welcomed among the Patriarchs and Prophets; those of old time, and those who
were later deceased, as old Simeon, and his Father Zachary, and ^. Joseph, and
such others, meeting him with joyful acclamations, and saluting him in the
quality of forerunner to the Messiah so long desired. And as his disciples did
their duty toward his body, do thou to his soul the respect no less due to
it, S. Angust*
and imitate his constancy! Ihon condemning openly Herodes impiety lost his
life, but gained immortal glory; how often do we rather fall to flatter, for
fear of offending, or to curry favor*

The sixth aplication to the B. Sacrament.
I. What a hidden treasure have we in the most B. Sacrament* And what a
pearl* Christ Jesus, Coloss. ^* 3
in whom are all the treasures, of the divinity, and of his sacred humanity,
hidden under the shapes of bread and wine, in most admirable manner, and laid
up in the field of holy Church for our refection, when ever we shall think good
to make use of it. Hidden from our corporal eyes, but open to the eyes of
faith: buylt upon his never sailing word: This is my Body, this is my Blood:
The living Body, and Blood of my Savior, torn and shed for me upon the
C^osse, but presented entire as it is now in heaven at the right hand of his
Father A Treasure signifies that which is able to supply all our necessities,
and moreover to enrich us and raise us to a higher stare then that in which we
were before: Such is our Savior here offered; and moreover a Pea^le to adorn
us. How short are all other ornaments to this! As a Treasure, we hide it, and
lay it up in our breasts, not thinking of any things else but of it: and how we
may make best use of it. As a Pearl, we glotie to have such an ornament about
us, by which we may seem to all the heavenly Court more beutifull, and be more
welcome. And as Pearl is a Cotdiall taken inward, so is this most B.
Sacrament. An Antidote against death, Ignatius ad Pretios
a preserve for immortality, a medicine chasing away all vice, and freing us
from all evil.

II. The seed; which we read was sowed, was food-seed: what better seed then
our Savior Christ? Able to tu^^e the hardest rock into good mould, being
softened by his precious Blood distilling upon it out of his sacred side. O
sacred dropes fall upon my stony heart, that I may receive the with fruit an
hundred fold! If it has hitherto laid by the high way side, I will now hedge
it in, that thou be not trampled upon, and I by my own falt frustrated of the
profit. I confess I am but as a dead carcass ever tending to corruption, and
by the ill savours of my sins inviting the brids of the air to prey upon me;
^en. 15. ^^.
but as faithful Abraham chased them away from his sacrifice, so will I
endeavor that they light not in my field, to bereave me of so beneficial a
seed. Away with thoughts of worldly occasions in this happy conjunction: What
greater wealth, or what happyer pleasure can offer itself, that it should
withdraw us? Can we not spare one hour, or one piece of an hour to enjoy it,
and make our benefit of it? Unless the seed falling upon the ground have some
time to alter it, 10. 1^. 24.
itself remains alone; but if it has time it brings forth much fruit. Th.
a Ke. l. 4. c. 1. n. ^^
O the blindness, and hardness of the heart of man, not to attend more upon this
unspeakable gift, and from daily use to fall even not reflect upon it!

III. The Synagog of Nazareth would have cast him headlong from a steep hill.
How came they to this outrage, but by undervaluing the person of our Savior?
Many things lead carnally minded men to the like, as we find by the heretics
who denying his power to do this great wonder, cast him quite out of the
Church: more over deriding him and misusing him in words and deeds: O that
loose Catholics did not very neete the same* coming scarce once in a year,
and with little preparation and respect. He passed through the midst of them,
and wondered at their incrude^itie; And did not ^eave notwithstanding to do
good round about, that they also might repent* reflecting upon his goodness, and
come at last to believe, and understand the benefit. Th. a Ke. l. 4. c. 1. n.
1^.
O admirable and hidden grace of the Sacrament, which the faithful Christians
doc only know; the incredulous and slaves to sin cannot experience.

The multiplying of the five Loaves.
I. Jesus li^ting up his eyes saw the great multitude, Cum sublevass et oculos
jesus. etc
and said to Philip, whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? And this he
said tempting him; for himself knew what he would do. ^a: 6. 5
Philip answered, two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them,
that every one may take a little. Andrew says, here is a boy who has five
barley loaves and two fishes, but what are these among so many* God tempts his
friends, that is, he tries in several occasions how much virtue they have, how
much humility, how much confidence, how much belief in him, the occasions
themselves serving as incitements to that which is best: Iac: 1^
For he temp^ed no body to supplant the^, or that evil may come of it. Philip
answered right in words; his mind peradventure was diffident how, and were so
much bread might be had, because they were in the desert, and their stock of
money would not reach so far, Our savior expected they should have
reflected upon his power to provide so much, and more, they acknowledging him
to be the Son of God: Of themselves indeed those five loaves, and two (...)
were not sufficient, but the power of our Savior could have made less to
serve: Pf: 144 ^^
The eyes of all creatures hope in thee, and thou give them food in
seasonable time: Thou openest thy hend, and fillest every living creature with
blessing.

II. Jesus says, make the men to sit down; and there was mush grass in the
place; The men therefore sat down, in number about five thousand. Jesus takes
the loaves, and when h^e had given thanks, he distributed to them that sat: in
like manner also of the fishes, as much as they would. Nor only the Apostles,
but the whole multitude must needs wonder what our Savior meant when he caused
them all to sit down in ranks by hundreds and fifties, Marc. 6 40.
as S. Mark relates; and in it he showed his Authority among them, as
afterward his power in making those few loaves, and fishes to serve so many,
and that every one notwithstanding should have as much as he wo^ld; And the
Apostles showed their obedience to his commands* though the event was hidden
from them. A greater miracle is the governing of the world, S. August:
then the feeding of five thousand with five loaves: This no man wonders ^t,
the other seemed wondrous, not because it was greater, but because it was
rare. This was done to the eye to raise our minds to the admiration of our
invisible God, working these things visibly, and to the end that lifted up by
faith, and purged by Faith, we might desire to see him though now invisible to
us.

III. After they were filled, he said to his disciples, Gather the fragments,
that are remaining, least they be lost, and they gathered, and filled twelu^
baskets with the fragments of five barley loaves which remained to them after
they had eaten. Those men therefore when they had seen what a sign^ was done
they said, this is the Prophet indeed which is to come into the world: And
jesus knowing that they would come to take him, and make him King, fled again
into the Mountain himself alone. He had distributed the loaves before by his
disciples, and now bids them gather the fragments, to make the miracle more
visible to them, and to the multitude; that God might be the more glorisied,
and he acknowledged the Messiah, though not in that temporal way of power
which they imagined, and sought to put upon him. In a mystical sense,
according to S. Augustine, S. August.
the five barley loaves ^ignifie the five books of Moses,* which being broken,
that is expounded, and distributed, what a world have they filled with
sp^rituall sustenance? And by the fragments which the people could not eat,
are vnde^stood diverse hard and hidden passages of holy writ, which the vulgar
does not understand* but are revealed to them, who are appointed to teach the
rest. Magnify our Savior by occasion of this miracle; acknowledge him King,
and Governor of the whole world; confide in him in time of necessity; and
want; he has millions of ways to supply us, which we do not understand* rely
in all occasions upon his word; perform what he commands and directs: the
least fragment that falls from him is sufficient to fill thy heart with
infinite satisfaction: Offer it unto him to be filled. Endeavor by his example
to be, but avoyde to be accounted, great in the eyes of the world. He fled
from the height of glory which was offered him, and embraced the pains of an
approbious death, S. G^eg.
that his followers might learn to decline the favors, and not to fear the
threats of the world, to love adversity coming upon us for may^tayning of
truth, and to decline prosperity for fear of miscarying in it; because this
does often stayne our heart by the affections of Pride, adversity, by the
payne-fullnes of it does rather purge us.

Jesus walks, and bids Peeter walk upon the water.
I. HAving dismissed the multitude he went up to a mountain alone to pray;
Dimissa turba ascendit in montem. etc.
and when it was evening he was there alone. But the boat (in which his
Disciples were) in the midst of the sea was tossed with waves; for the wind was
contrary. Matthew. 1^. ^3
And in the fourth watch of the ^ight came unto them, walking upon the sea; He
knew what was to happen, and what would be the event, and remedy, and yet
prayed; we with much more reason not knowing, and not being able to dive into
future events, ought continually to have recourse to God, that by his allseeing
Providence he will direct us to the best: He prayed alone, and in a solitary
place; circumstances useful for recollection, and to reap profit by it. Our
soul may be tossed with contrary winds wherever we are, because they rise
from our inward passions, now desiring one thing, now another quite contratie;
but in the midst of the sea of this world the rising of the winds is more
dangerous, because of the waves of several allurements by which we are in
danger to be swallowed. Theophr^^
Our Savior came not till the fourth watch, that is, toward morning to teach
us that we must not instantly crave to be delivered from affliction or pain,
but abide it with courage.

II. His Disciples seeing him upon the sea walking, were trobled, saying it is
a Ghost; and for fear they creyed out: and immediately Jesus spoke unto them,
saying, have confidence; It is I; fear ye not: Our fancy generally is so
sudainly moved, and so strong, that it is one of the master pieces of this life
to govern it, so that it be not transported into gross mistakes of error for
truth, and truth for erroneous and deceitful: the night, the vnusuallnes of
our Saviors being upon the water: the present troble in which they were made
them apprehend strangely of him, that was no stranger to them: and the like
does happen daily in words, and actions, meant with all synceritie, and yet, by
mistake of our fancy, construed to the worst: As we take a thing to heart; Th. a
Ke: l. 1 c: 14^ 1
so do we often judge of it; for we easily mistake the right, being
transported with selflove.

III. And Peeter making answer, said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee
upon the waters, and he said; come; and Peeter going out of the boat, walked
upon the water to come to Jesus; but seeing the wind rough, he was affrayd, and
when he began to sink, he called out, saying, Lord save me: And Jesus
stretching forth his hand took hold of him, and said to him, O thou of little
faith, why did thou doubt? And when they were gone up into the boat, the
wind ceased. Behold Peeter (says S. Augustine) S. August:
who then was a figure of you, now he is confident, now he straggers: In the
Church there be those who are firm and strong, and there be those who are
infirm: do thou love God? thou walk upon the sea, all worldly fear is
under thy feet: do thou love the world? It will swallow the up. Every ones
disordered desires, is a tempest to him; if the world favor the, see that from
within thyself some contrary wind do not rise to subuerte thee. Th; a kc: 13
(...)
Son I am thy Lord, and a comforter in tribulation. Come to me, when it is
not well with thee: This does chi^fly hinder heavenly comfort, because it is
late before thou turnest thyself to prayer.

He cures the Daughter of the Cananean.
I. GOing forth from Genezareth, ^t Egros. sus inde. ^^ecessit in parts Tyri.
he retired into the quarters of Tire and sidon: and behold a Cananean woman
came out of those parts, and crying out said to him, have pity of me, o Lord,
Son of David: my daughter is sore vexed by a devil: Matthew: (...)
who answered her no one word: and his Disciples came, and be sought him,
saying, dismiss her, for she cries out after us: And he said; I was not
sent, but to the sheep that are lost of the house of Israel. Those whom he had
first choosen, he did not desire t^ forsake; S. Ambr^
but whe^eas they forsook their Creator, by little and little he turned
himself to the Gentiles, (of whom were Tire and Sidon) that by the respect which
the heathens did to him, the Jews might learn, or be the more justly
condemned for their contumacie. Among others, a woman came craving help for her
daughter, tormented with an evil spirit: S. Hier
Who are those, but poor souls, who not knowing their Creator, adore stoks
and stones, as if they were God? S. August*
He answered not at first, not to the intent to deny her mercy; but to increase
her desire, and to show the force of humility by her example. The Disciples
offered themselves intercessours, and were refused, S. H^er;
because they knew not the mystery of our Savior delaying her, and perhaps as
imperfect, were weary of her importunity.

II. But she came, and adored him, saying, Lord help me; who answering said,
it is not good to take the bread of the Children and cast it to the dogs. But
she said, yea Lord; fer the welps also eat of the crumbs which fall from the
table of their Masters! (...)
She did not despair though put by so often: we we if do not obtain what we
ask, do presetly leave of; whereas we should come nearer, and fall to our
prayers with more carnestnes. The answer of our Savior might have seemed
harsh, but he tempered it so with his manner of delivering of it, that it
wrought the effect which he desired, to wit, that she should acknowledge
herself unworthy of the benefit, and yet press to receive i^. I confess
myself to be no better then a dog, yet as such vouchsafe me a crumb. S. Ihon
C^yso^t


III. Then Jesus answering said to her. O woman great is thy Faith, be it
done to thee as thou ^ilt, and her Daughter was healed from that hour. Chri^ol;
She is deservedly adopted into the number of children, and set at table,
seeing with so great humility she cast herself under the table. Son stand
steadfast, and hope in me: what are words, bu^ words* If thou be giltly, think
that thou will willingly suffer it for God.

He cures a deaf and dumb man, and one that was blind.
I. ANd again going forth of the coasts of Tire he came by Sidon to the sea
of Galilee; ^t Iterum exiens de finibus Ti ^i Mar, 7,
and they bring to him one deaf, and dumb, and besought him to lay his hand
upon him, and taking him from the multitude a part he put his fingers into his
ears, and spiting, touched his tongue, and looking up to heaven, he sighed,
and said to him, Ephetha which is, be thou opened: and immediately his ears
were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosened, and he spoke playn^.
Our Savior could with a word have cured him, but he would commend unto us a
reverent opinion of the ceremonies, which were afterward to be used in his
Church, no less significative then these. Vict. Antioch.
He took him from the multitude a part, to teach us, that whoever will be
cured of his spiritual diseases must withdraw himself from evil company,
and attend to God in private. Also that sinners are often to be admonished in
private, least shame keep^ them from repentance. He sighed more bewayling the
inward deafnes of the Jews, then the outward of this one man: And used those
other ceremonies to show that he spared no endeavor to correct them. S.
Gregory, S, Gregor
by (...) fingers, understands the gifts of the holy Ghost, infused into his
soul, and by his spitle, heavenly vvisdone, vvherby we come to speak
rightly, and teaches us by his sighing to lift up our hearts to God, and sigh
for those heavenly gifts of which we have so much need.

II. And the Pharisees and Sadduces came to him tempting him, and demanded of
him a sign from heaven. But he answered; when it is evening you say it will be
fair weather, for the ^lim^nt is red; and in the morning. This day there will
be a tempest, for the sky does glow, and lowre: The face of the eliment you
have skill to discern, and the signs of times can you not* There shall not a
sign be given, but the sign of Jonas the Prophet; and he went away; and left
them. So many signs and miracles our Savior was daily vvorking, ^a^d none
would satisfy them, desirous of some after their own fancy, which when it had
been yealded unto would have wrought as little which them. For how often had a
voice come from heaven declaring what he was, and they never the nearer,
finding some other thing to impute it unto. This is a deafnes more to be
commiserated then any other, wearying out even our Savior himself, and causing
him to forsake them upon whom words, and signs were spent in vain. Though he
put them often in mind of his resurrection by the example of Jonas, who was three
days in the whales belly, yet at it when it happened; they were as blind, and
wilful seeking new occasions, and took no benefit by it. Th. a Ke. 1. 2. c.
4. 11. 2.
If thou were within good, and pure, then thou would without hindrance see
and understand all things

III. They came to Bethsaida, and bring to him one blind, and desired him that
he would touch him; and taking the hand of the blind, he led him forth of the
tow^e, and spiting into his eyes, and laying his hand upon him, asked him if he
saw any thing; and looking up he said, I see men, as it were trees walking:
and again he laid his hands upon his eyes, and (...) began to see, and was
restored so that he saw all things clearly. The Ceremonies are much the same,
the event different; He cures him by pieces; not for want of power but for our
Instruction; who must content ourselves with what God will allow us; and by our
thankfulness, incite him to do more at his own time. He saw men walking lik^
trees, with their heads downwards, and their feere vp^ward; grovelling in the
earth, and altogether busy to get root in worldly wealth, and honor, and
seting heavenly things at naught; O tha^ our Savior would lay his hand again
and a gain upon our eyes, that we might see all things clearly, how different
judgment should we make f^^o that which passes most commonly for good in the
world

Peeter confesses Christ to be the Son of the living God.
I. Jesus came into the quarters of Cesarea Philippi, V^nit Iesu^^ (...) parte^
Cesar^^ Philippi.
and asked his Disciples, whom say men that the Son of man is? And they
said, same Ihon Baptist, and other-some Elias, others Hierome, or one of the
Prophets. Matt* 16. (...)
How many ifferent opinions, have there been, and are still of our Second Part.

Savior? For to say nothing of the Arians, and such like Heretics, who denied
our Savior to be God, or to be truly man, how many even among those, who
profess themselves Christians and Catholics, have not so reve^end opinion of
him in effect, as these Jews had, whose censure the Disciples did relate? For
either they think his doctrine foolish, or harsh, and impossible; or show by
their actions that they believe not that he shall come to judge, or that he
has zeal of the glory and honor of his heave^ly Father, which Elias, and
the P^ophets had; dissembling their iniquities; and do measure his proceedings
by their own foot. Enter into thy own breast, and ask thy soul, whom it
thinks Christ to be? Examine thy actions, and see whether thou findst not two
different opinions, one of thy belief, another of thy life; and beware that
that of the pfalme be not true of thee, deceitful lips, Ps* 11. 3*
in heart and heart they have spoken; that is, in two hearts, one drawing one way,
the other to the quite contrary.

II. And he says to them, but whom do you say I am? Simon Peeter answered,
thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: And Jesus answering, said to
him: Blessed art thou Simon Barion^; because flesh and blood has not revealid
^o thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And we also must shut the eyes of
flesh and blood, which see no further then she outside of every thing, and
opening the eyes of faith, believe as we have been taught, that however in the
outward he is man, and subject to the common miseries of mankind, he is truly
the Son of God, and one God with him, and reverence him accordingly: what is
there in the world of which we see more then the outward lineaments, and yet
from the effects, we come to believe, and know that there is more in it then we
do see; much more of our Savior, and of all that belongs to him, and to the
other world, ought we to be most certain* that it is otherwise then our short
sight or understanding can of itself discover: Blessed are they who believe
enlightened from above; beg increase, and strength of faith, that thou may
partake of the rewards laid up for humble believers.

III. And I say to thee, that thou art Peeter, and upon this rock nill I buyld
my Church, and the gates of hell shall no^ prevayle against it. And I will give
to thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatever thou shall bind upon
earth, if ffiall be bound also in the heavens; and whatever thou shall loos^ on
earth, if stetall be loosed also in the heavens. God is never backward in
rewarding that which is good; and the more heroical acts we do, the more we
shall experience it. Peeter signifies a rock, or stone, therefore alluding to
the name which himself had given him before upon design* he promises to buyld
his Church upon him, so strongly that no attempt of hell gates shall prevayle
against it. I say unto thee; S. Hierom*
I whose saying is doing. The Keys which he promises signify wisdom to
discern, S. Bed^*
and power, whereby he may refuse the unworthy and receive the worthy into the
Kingdom. Buyld confidently upon (this rock submit thyself to these Keys; for
our Saviors word and promise cannot fail. Luc* ^1. 33*
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away.

Christ foretells his Passion.
I. Exind ca^pi^ Jesus o^tender^ Discipuli^ (...).
FRom thence forward he began to show his Disciples, that he must go to
Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the Scribes, and chief Priests, and ^e
Killed, and the third day rise again. And Peeter taking him unto him, began to
rebuke him, saying, Lord, be it far from thee; this shall not happen to
thee: who turning said to Peeter. Go after me Satan, thou art a scandal to me,
because thou savourest not the things that are of God, but the things which are
of men. The more knowledge he imparted to them of his divinity, the more he
did inculcate to them that he was to suffer, that by the belief of his power
as God, they might be the less trobled when they should see him suffer as man;
but hope, as then, in his resurrection, so ever after in their own aflictions
for his assistance from above. Peeter understood not as yet how these things
might stand together, and out of his affection to our Savior, and natural
aversion from suffering, measured his desires that they might both he happy
without suffering. Our Savior ranketh him among the instruments of Satan, as
withdrawing him (...) ^ourse which God had appointed; and teach (...) we must
not only believe, that it ought to have (...) but to find sweetness in it, in
regard that it is God* Th. a Ke. ^. 2. c. (...)
(...) To whom all things savor as they are, and no^ (...) are said or
esteemed to be he is truly wise, and ^aught rather by God then by men.

II. Then Jesus said to his Disciples. If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me; for he that will save his
life shall loose it, and he that shall loose his life for me, Theophil*
shall find it. You forbid me to suffer; but I say unto you, not only if I do
not suffer, it will be hurtful for you, but if you also do not dye you cannot
be saved, nor any body else, man or woman, rich or poor: and yet observe that
he does not say, unless a man dye whether he will or no, but he that will
loose his life, Now what it is to deny ourselves, we may easyly learn, if we
consider what it is to deny another: and who ever by denying himself flies
sin, S. Bid*
must labor to increase also in virtue, for therefore it is added let him take
up his Cross and follow me.

III. For what does it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and sustain
damage of his soul: For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his
Father, with his Angels, and then will he render to everyone according to his
works. S. Victor.
For we have not another soul to put in place of that which we loose. Theophil.
Here thou may give tears, and alms, and fasting: There such things will
have noe place, if differred; for the judge jndgeth of thingh past. S. Hier*
Do thou fear this kind of death? Harken how he promises glory. Do
thou fear a Cross? Behold the Angels coming. to receive thee. And remember
that he will render to every one according to his works; there is no acception
of Persons, rich or poor; not the man, but the work is regarded. In all
things have regard to the end and how thou will stand before the severe Judge,
from whom nothing is hidden. Th. a Ke. l, 1. c. 24.

The seventh Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe miracle of the five loaves multiplied so as to serve five thousand
people was forerunner to the mystery of the most blessed Sacrament, admirable
in very many things, and in this particular, that one and the same Body of our
Savior, under the shapes of bread and wine, is distributed in the whole
Christian world to millions of people, at one and the self same instant oftime,
and consecrated in millions of places at once, by the word of our Savior
pronounced by so many several Priests; but as then our Savior by his divine
power did not make of One loaf many, but still multiplied the same loaves,
till all were satisfied, and had notwithstanding a remaynder of twelve baskets
f^ll of the fragments: so now by the same divine power, he gives us his
self-same body in many pleaces at once; and not only while we are actually
receiving (as the heretics feign by their faith) but afterward, to be reserved
for the occasions of sick and dying people, and for the continual comfort of
Christians; that as he is ever present to the Church triumphant in heaven, so
the Church militant might not want the continual comfort of his actual, and
real presence with it. Th* a Ke* l. 4. c. 1. fine
There be many Priests, and in many places Christ is offered, that the grace
and love of God may appear so much the more toward men, by how much the more
this holy communion is spread through the world. Thanks be to thee sweet Jesus
eternal pastor, who have vouchsafed to refresh us poor banished people with
thy most precious body and blood.

II. They who look no further then natural reason, and ordinary principles
of Philosophy do lead them, will be apt to say in this particular, and many
others concerning this blessed Sacrament with the Jews, I0. 6*53
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? And the winds and waves of
contrary arguments will rise so as to endanger to over whelme us, unless
confident upon our Saviors wo^d we tread them under foot, and do not suffer
our Faith to grow cold and weak in it. It is I, that say it, says our
Savior, ^e not affrayd to give credit to my word in this, more then in any
other mystery of your faith, in which you will find full as much contrariety
to human reason as in this, if you fall to questioning how can this be? I0. 3* 9
So Nicodemus did in the point of bapti^me^ How can the^e things be done? so
did the Arians in the blessed Trinity; How can the Son be equally eternal
with the Father? O thou of little faith werfore did thou doub^* And by
doubting experience the wind to grow stronger, and stronger against thee, so as
to be ready to sink, whereas at first upon his word thou were confident, and
did walk without feate. Lord save me, that I may not perish with the
incredulous.

III. I am not worthy, o Lord, to partake of this bread of Angels; it were
enough for me to stand a loo^e, and feed upon the crumbs which fall from the
table of that heavenly court. But, ^ the goodness, and greatness of our Savior!
not content to feed us with the comfort of holy Scriptures, nor wi^^ his daily
inspirations, and inward and outward assistances, he gives us himself for our
spiritual s^stenance. S. Ihon Chr^sost:
Parents oft-times put out their Children to others to be nursed, and
mayntayned: I (says he) do not so, but do feed you with my own flesh, and
set myself before you, desiring that all of you should be noble, and assured of
your furture inheritance; for seeing here I give you myself, much more shall I
do it in the life to come. I would be your brother by taking your flesh and
blood upon me; the selfsame flesh and blood by which I became of kin unto you,
I do give you. Approach therefore with great reverence to his heavenly table;
retire thyself from the multitude; prepare thy ears to hear his word, and thy
tongue to receive the touch of his sacred flesh, that thou may hear, and
speak perfectly of those things which belong to thy salvation and spiritual
profit. Say with S* Peeter; thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and be
in this confession constant, buylding thy faith upon the rock which cannot
fail, and against which the gates of hell shall not prevayle. Th. A4 418
Tou must beware of curious and unprofitable searching into this most profound
Sacrament, if thou will not be sunk into the depth of doubtfullnes.

The Transfiguration of our Lord.
I. Et post dies sex assumit jesus Peltrum etc. Matthew: 17*
ANd after six days Jesus takes unto him Peeter, and James, and Ihon his
brother, and bringing them unto a high mountain a part; he was transfigured
before them; and his face did shine like the Sun, and his garments became
like snow. And there appeared to them Moses and Elias, talking with him. He
had lately spoken to them of his passion, and though with all he told them of
his rising the third day, yet to confirm them in the confidence of his divine
power, and nature, and that those miseries were not to be perpetual, or
without great fruit of glory, he shows them part of the future happynes,
which he was to enjoy, and those also who should follow his example and
doctrine. Moses led the Children of Israel out of their captivity in Egypt
through the red sea, and the desert, and fed them from heaven with man^a, and
provided at times other necessaries: Elias was taken up to heaven in a fiery
chariot; both figures of what our Savior was in a better and spiritual way to
do^ for us by the sea of his sacred Blood shed for us, to deliver us from the
captivity of sin, and of the devil, and bring us through the desert of this
world to eternal rest in heaven; and of these things they discoursed with him;
teaching us to record often the benefits, and the glory to which we are
ordained by them.

II. And Peeter answering said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here;
if thou will, let us make here, three tabernacles, one for thee, S. August.
and one for Moses, and one for Elias. He had a taste of one drop of sweetness,
and loathed all other sweetness; what if he had tasted that great mass of
sweetness, which thou have laid up in store for those who fear thee, S. Greg.
and as yet is hidden? Yet he was taxed for what he said (another Evangelist
recording: Ma^c: 9*6.
he knew not what he said) because not having yet perfectly discovered the
truth, he desired to pla^t his tabernacle here on earth, wher^as all good
people know that they are here strangers and pilgrims; and yet he had easyly
pardon, because so much good as he saw could not be but very desirable. No man
is worthy of heavenly consolation, Th* ^ Ke* l 5 C 20 ^5
unless he has diligently exercised himself in holy compunction.

III. And as he was yet speaking, behold a light cloud over-shadowed them; and
lo a voice out of the cloud saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him, and the disciples hearing it, fell upon their faces,
and were sore afraid. The voice from heaven instructs us in two things; first
that our Savior is truly the eternal Son of God: secondly that to please
God we must hear him, and follow that which he teaches us; which is in
effect, that by the Cross we must go to glory, and by no other way; which
though it troble us, and deiect us according to sense, yet the nearer we keep
ourselves to our Savior, the leffe we shall fear it; for so it is said
immediately. And Jesus came, and touched them, and said to them, rise, and
fear not. Stay a while my soul attend the divine promise, Th: a Ke l 13 c 16
n 1
and thou shall have abundance of all good in heaven. This is the way to be the
beloved Son of God.

IV. And they l^fting up their eyes, saw no body but only Jesus, and as they
went down from the mount he commanded them saying, Tell the vision to no body,
till the son of man be risen from the dead. To teach us that we must not
rashly, and out of season speak of the favors, which we receive from God, but
in the closset of our heart be thankful for them? At that time, (as S Ihon
Chrysostom advertiseth) the more strong the things were which were said of
him. S. Ihon Chrisost.
the less credit they found with many, specially proceeding from a few of his
own disciples, whom they might account partial to their Master. Happy
souls, who coming down from prayer can have their minds and intentions to
recollected, as to see none but Jesus only, their minds being lifted up above
all earthly allurements. etc.

He casts out a devil which his disciples could not.
I. ANd when he was come to the multitude, there came to him a man^ falling
downs upon his knees before him saying, Et ^um venisset ad turbam Matthew; 17 14
Lord, have mercy upon my son, for he is l^natick, and sore vexed, ^for he
falls often into the fire, and often into the water; and I offered him to thy
disciples, and they could not cure him. And he asked him, ho^ long is it since
this has chanced to him? Mare. 9. 2*
And he said from his infancy. We are borne sons of wrath and from our
first father we are infected with a disease much like to the falling sickness;
and though the falls of our souls are neither so sudaine not so against our
will as those of the body, yet we have so great an inclination from our youth
to fall* that even those who converse most familiarly with our Savior, and
endeavor to follow him nearest, cannot easyly avoyde the effects of it: It
casts us to the ground, while we hunt after earthly things, not without damage
to our soul: It makes us for the time dumb, and deaf to holy admonitions: It
tormenteth us, and trobleth us, so that we lie wallowing and turning ourselves
every way, rather then to that which we ought; and it is none of the least
evils, that the very name, and first aspect of virtue seems harsh unto us; as
our Savior did to this man, for when he had seen him, imediately the spirit
trobled him, and being thrown to the ground he tumbled foming. Marc* 9 20
Jesus answered and said, O faithless generation! how leng shall I be with
you? How long shall I suffer you? bring him to me; and the Father said to him,
if thou can any thing, help us, having compassion on us. And Jesus said to
him, if thou can believe, Marc. 9 22
all things are possible to him that believes; and the Father of the boy
crying out with tears, says, I do believe; Lord, help my incredulity. We
are indeed an incredulous generation, and able to move the greatest patience;
as being subject to so many evils, and yet can hardly be induced to believe
that they are evils, but do take delight in that which is our utter ruin.
Beg light and crave help with tears; for what is more worthy of them, and
more to be lamented, then this heavy yoke which lies upon us from our Mothers
womb, Eccl. 40
till our very grave, and is the cause of all our spiritual and temporal
miseries? O sweet Jesus, who alone can do all things, help us taking
compassion on us. If I, by thy grace, endeavor to overcome this propensio^, it
exclaymeth, and greatly teareth me, Marc: 9 26
and oftimes it lies dead, so that many say, it is dead, but this is another
thing to be lamented, that even from myself that is hidden which is in myself:
S. A^gust.
And no man in this life (which all of it is called a temptation,) can be
secure, that as from worse, he was made better, so he may not become from
better worse; our only hope; our only confidence, the only thing upon which we
can buyld is thy mercy.

III. And when Jesus saw the people coming together, he threatened the unclean
spirit, saying, I command thee; go out of him, and enter no more into him; and
the chile was cured from that hours: and his disciples asked him in private,
why could not we cast him out? Jesus said, this Kind is not cast out, but by
Prayer and fasting Prayer and fasting do much conduce to the remedy of these
evils, to which we are naturally subject: for by these holy exercises, by
little and little, we put on as it were another nature, becoming from carnal
spiritual, and delighting more in that which belongs to virtue, then we did
before in our worldly contentments: but our chief assistance is in our Savior
of whom we must be continually begging, that he will ^end us his powerful,
and concurring hand, that we may be wholly free.

Humilie commended, and care of avoiding scandal.
I. In illa hora accesserunt Discipuli ad Iesum etc. Matthew. 18.
AT that hour the discipless came to Jesus, saying, who think thou is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? And Jesus calling unto him a little Child,
set him in the midst of them, and said, amen. I say unto you, unless you be
converted, and become as little Children, you shall not eniter into the
Kingdom of heaven: whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little
Child, he is the greater in the Kingdom of Heaven. S. Marck relating this
passage, Marc: 9. 33
says that our Savior asked them first, What they had treated of by the way,
and they held their peace; for in the way they had disputed among themselves,
who should be great? So that it was no spiritual question, as how by virtuous
life they might come to be great in heaven? Of which they had not need to be
ashamed; but it was a kind of ambition of the greatest place in the temporal
Kingdom, which they imagined our Savior would come to, because he spoke often
of his kingdom; and of this they were ashamed; whereby we may see, that if we
will carefully observe our ow^e thoughts, and question with ourselves, as we
would do with another, what is it that thou art musing on, or going about? We
should easyly discover that our conscience would tell us many truths which
otherwise we slubber over, and conceive that we think, or do, no harm. But
our Savior showed them, that he knew both what they thought, and said; and
gave them and us a lesson that we must be converted from those pretenses, and
turn our hearts to other thoughts then people of this world intertayne
themselves with; and think of humbling ourselves; for the gate of heaven is
narrow* and the more we stoop, the easyer we shall enter, and be the more
acceptable. We must return to the simplicity of infants (says S, Hilarie) S:
Hil^^ie.
because by it we shall carry in our conversation the resemblance of our
Saviors humility.

II. And he that shall receive one such little one in my name, receives me;
and he that shall scandalize one of these litleons that believes in me, it is
expedient for him that a millstone be hanged about his neck, and that he be
drowned in the deapth of the sea: see that you despise not one of these
littleones, for I say unto you, that their Angels in heaven do always see
the face of my father which is in heaven. Next to humility, and simplicity of
heart he commends Charity, even toward the least and poorest creature that is,
giving it the high reward of receiving our Savior himself, while we receive
our neighbor; then which what can be more honorable, or more to be desired?
It is a great motive not to neglect such good officies that they have an Angel
attending, and having care of them, but what is that to the receiving of the
Lord of Angels? Much more ought we to be ware of scandalizing them, that is of
giving the^ just cause of offense, S. Hierom
or of offending; for punishment will doubtless follow and better were it
(says S. Hierome) that some short punishment should here attend us in this
life, then that we should be reserved to further torment.

III. Woe be to the world for scandals; for it is necessary that scandal dos
come, but woe to that man by whom scandal comes. If thy hand, or thy foot
scandalize thee, cut it of: it is good for thee to go into life mayned, and
l^me, rather then having two hands and two fee^e, to be cast into hell fire.
And if thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; It
is good for thee having one eye to enter into life, rather then having two eyes
to be cast into hell fire: supposing the malice of men, S. Hierom
it is necessary: that is, infallibly scandalls will happen; but woe to him by
whose falt they do happen. And as concerning ourselves, every one may easyly
find out what is a scandal to him, that is, what is the occasion of his
offending God, or of slacking in his service. Whatever therefore or who-ever it
be, though so necessary, and useful to us as our hand, or our eye, we must
forgo it; for nothing must be preferred before the service of God, no
affection, no Kindred, no assistance, no friend whatsoever.

The parable of the King calling his servants to account.
I. Tuuc accedeus Petrus ad (...) dixi^. Matthew. 18: 21
THen came Peeter unto him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother offend
against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times? Jesus said to him. I say
not to thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven times.
Theophil.
And yet he does not limit our pardoning to this number; for it were absurd to
set and number till forty, or twenty, and so forth: but as often as one falls,
and asks pardon so often forgive him. S: Barill.
Neither is it to the purpose to ask what kind of offenses we ought to
forgive; S. Hierom
seeing our Savior excepteth none. And do not say, he does not ask pardon
from his heart: leave that to God. I take that which I hear; let Christ take
that which he knows.

II. Therefore is the Kingdom of heaven likened to a King, takeng account of
his servants* and when he began to take account, one was presented to him, who
owed him ten thousand talents; and having not whence to pay it, his Lord
commanded that he should be sold, and his wife and Children, and all that he
had, and it to be repayed* but the servant faling down, besought him: Have
patience with me, and I will repay thee all: And the Lord of the servant moved
with pity, dismissed him, and the debt he forgave him. The debt of ten
thousand talents, being a debt incomparable (as reckoned to be six hundred
times ten thousand crowns) signifies the debt which we owe God upon infinite
titles; and yet* so great is his mercy; that not being able to pay it; he
pardons us upon our falling down with humility and sorrow before him, S.
Ihon Chrisost*
and promise of amendment; and as S. Ihon Chri^ostome reflecteth, does not only
grant what we ask, but what could not so much as come into out thoughts to
ask.

III. But that servant going forth, found one of his follow-servants, who owed
him a hundred pence, and laying hands upon him, throtled him, saying, repay
that which thou owe; and his follow servant falling down, besought him, have
patience with me, and I will repay the all: And he would not, but went his way,
and cast him into prison till he repayed the debt. See the different ways of
men toward men, and of God toward men. For how little a matter in comparison
of what we owe to God do we molest on another, and how patient is God toward
us? How cruel, and mercylesse are men? How easy is God to pardon? How soon
do we forget what God has done for us? How little do we consider another
case as our own? But see the event.

IV. And his follow-servants, seeing what was done, were very sorry; and came,
and told their Lord, all that was done. Then his Lord called him; and said
unto him, thou vngratio^s servant; I forgave thee all thy debt because thou
besoughest me, ought not thou therefore also to have mercy on thy follow
servant, as I had mercy on thee? And his Lord being angry, delivered him to the
tormentours, until he repayed all the debt; so also shall my heavenly Father
do to you, if you forgive not every one his brother from your hearts. In the
first falt, and failing in his account he was to be cast into prison, but no
mention of tormentours, S. Ihon Chrisost.
in the second, he is delivered to tormentours: For as S. Ihon Chrysostom
reflecteth: God hates nothing more, then a man greedy of revenge, fostering in
his breast everlasting enmity against his neighbor. And in the conclusion, S.
Hierom*
he excludes all dissembling, and all feigned and plastered peace, saying if you
do not forgive every one his brother from your hearts. A fearful sentence:
that according to our disposition of mind, God frames his judgment; if we
forgive not our brethren in small matters, he will not forgive us in greater.

He goes privately to Jerusalem to the feast of the Tabernacles.
I. THe festival day of the Jews, Erat aut^ ^n proximo dies Festus Io. 7. 2:
Scenopegia, was at hand, and his brethren said to him, go into Iewrie, that
thy disciples also may see the works which thou do: for no man does any
thing in secret, and seeks himself to be in public: if thou do these
things, manifest thyself to the world: for neither did his brethren believe in
him. Jesus therefore said to them, my time is not yet come, your time is
always at hand; the world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I give
testimony of it, S. Bid.
that the works thereof are evil. His disciples were well acquainted with the
works and wonders which our Savior wrought; but his Kindred did not believe in
him, as knowing where he was bred and borne, and were ambitio^s of worldly
glory and esteem; therefore they said, Pass from hence into Iewrie, that the
head city^ and the chief of the nation, may see thy wonders; manifest thy self
to all, that thou may be praised, and commended by all. But our Saviors glory
depended of his Passion and death, which they could not conceive: he was hated
by the chief of the city, because he spoke against their proceedings; they as
complying with the world could not be hated, and therefore might appear when
they pleased. Th. a Ke. l. 3. c. 28.
Son do not take it ill, if some have an ill opinion of thee.

I. After his brethren were gone up, then he also went up to the festival day,
not openly, but as it were in private: And he sent messengers before him, who
entered into a city of the Samaritans to prepare for him, and they received him
not, because his face was toward Jerusalem, His Disciples James and Ihon,
seeing it, said, Lord, will thou we say that fire come down from heaven, and
consume them? And turning, he rebuked them, saying you know not of what spirit
you are. The Son of man came not to destroy souls, but to save, and they
went to another town. S. Ambr.
Perfect virtue seeks not revenge; neither has a^ger place where there is
fullnes of charity* Infirmity is not to be crushed, but helped; Indignation
must be far from a religions spirit. Th. a Ke. l. 1, c. 16.
That which a man cannot mend in himself or others, he must bear patiently:
think that perhapt it is better so.

III. The Jews therefore sought him on the festival day, and said, where is
he? And there was much murmuring in multitude of him: some said he is good;
others said, No, but h^ seduceth the multitude: yet no man spoke openly of
him, for fear of the Jews. Th* a Ke* l. 3. c. 36.
Son, set thy heart steadfastly in our Lord, and fear not the censures of men,
where thy conscience tells thee thou art innocent: It is good, and a happy
thing so to suffer: neither will it be grievous to an humble heart, confiding
more in God then in itself.

Officers sent to apprehend him, Commend him.
I. THe Pharis^es heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him;
Audi^runt Pha^resaei turbam ^urmurante^. Io. 7. 32.
and the Princes and Pharisaees sent ministers to apprehend him. Jesus therefore
said to them, yet a while I am with you, and I go to him that sent me; you
shall seek me, and shall not find me, and where I am you cannot come. The
Jews therefore said among themselves, whether will this man go, that we shall
not find him? Will he go into the dispersion of the gentiles, and teach the
gentiles? The Princes and the Phari^es had most reason to reverence our Savior,
because they were most learned, and could not choose but know the Prophecies
which were of him; and blinded with ambition, and covetousnes, and other vices
which our Savior reprehended in them, instead of seeking to him, they sought
to take him, and kill him. A miserable condition: and worldly greatness the more
to be feared; and that council of the wiseman the more carefully to be
followed. Eccl. 3. 20
The greater thou art, humble thyself the more in all things, and then shall
find favor in the sight of God. This is the way to seek our Savior so as not
to miss of finding him, and to come where he is. Th a Ke. l 2 ^ ^
Iefus has many lovers of his heavenly Kingdom, but few caryers of his
Cross.*

II. And in the last great day of the festivitie, Jesus stood, and cried
saying, if any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink; He that believes in
me (as the Scripture says) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water:
And this he said of the spirit which they should receive, who believed in him*
When he saw that few gave him the hearing, he redoubled his endeavors, and
cried out with a loud voice: If any man thirst let him come to me: As if he
should have said. I know you thirst after worldly commodities, but they will
not quench, but increase the distemper: If you will be truly satisfied, come to
me, and drink of the doctrine which I teach you; that will cool the heat of
your ambition, by showing you where true honor dwells: it will quench the
desire of heaping up wealth, showing you how ^ickle it is, and how full of
troble and vexation. It Will put you out of conceit with other pleasures;
teaching how much they are under the noblenes of man, and either mere toys*
or filth. Come to me, you will see nothing in me but honorable, substantial
and divine.

III. The multitude when they heard these words, said, This is the Prophet
indeed; This is Christ. And the ministers came to the chief Priests and
Pharisees, and said, never did man speak so as this man: and the Pharisees
answered; are you also seduced? Has any of the Princes believed in him, or of
the Pharisees? But this multitude which knows not the law, S. Ihon Chrisost.
is accursed. They should have asked what were these admirable things, which he
had so delivered as no man the like; but they avoided that, and when themselves
should have been compunct they fell to accuse him. Th: a Ke: l 1 c ^ n 3
Truly high words do not make a man a saint, and just, but a vert^o^s life
makes us to be beloved of God*

The eight Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. Our Savior while he lived on earth, appearing outwardly as an ordinary
man, showed his disciples part of the glory (even then due unto him, and at
his command) being transfigured before them, his face shining like the sun,
his garments as white as snow; Being now glorious in heaven, and presenting his
sacred body on earth unto us, in the most Blessed Sacrament, to be adored, and
received by us, be coveret^ the glory due unto it, with the shapes of bread
and wine, (...)
as much for our good, as his transfiguration was for the instruction of his
Apostles. For if the children of Israel were not able to look Moses in the
face, when he came down from conversing with God, for the glory which shined
in his countenance, how should we be^ able to receive so great a benefit, as
is the presence of our Savior glorified, if he did not mercyfully cast this
vaile^ before his face, that we might confidently approach. The^ Apostles
hearing the voice from heaven, This is my beloved Son, hear him* fell to the
ground, and were much afraid; so should we be stricken at the voice of the
Priest pronouncing. This is my body, if our Savior, as he makes it instantly
present, should present it glorious; and we should not be able to make that
devout use of it as he desires. Yet it is our duty to acknowledge, and say
with hare and tongue; This is that beloved Son of the heavenly Father, in
whom he is pleased. This is my Savior, and my redeemer, my Lord, and my God,
who is pleased thus mercyfully, and miraculously to afford himself present to
me. O, in whom, or in what should I take more pleasure then in this beloved,
and so great lover of me sylly wretch* as not to be content to give himself
once for our sakes, but is continually giving himself in this familiar way, for
my comfort, and for the strengthening of me in his service, that is, in that
which is my only glory.

II. Let us make here three Tabernacles: and all three for him alone. One in my
memory, recording, if not perpetually, yet at convenient times this
incomparable benefit of his presence with us and thanking him infinitely for
it, calling all creatures to assist me; for all is too too little. Benedicite
omnia opera Domini Domin^, la^date and super exaltate ^um in (...). A second
tabernacle, in my understanding, submitting it to his heavenly word, this is my
^ody, this is my Blood, believing both his power to do it, and eternal truth,
which cannot say, and not do, or deceive those with whom he does deal. At
this shore the boisterous sea of Philosophical arguments must break the
swelling waves of humane conceit, and turn into froth: for who is able to
contradicte the Omnipotent? Second Part*

A third Tabernacle, in my will, pouring forth itself into affections of love,
and dwelling upon them perpetually. O beloved Son of the eternal Father! in
whom he does take full satisfaction, and contentment, wherefore should I seek
content else where? Seeing tho^ alone do fill the eternal God who is
infi^ite? O heart of mine! empty thy self of all other things, that thou may
receive this beloved Guest, to his and thy full contentment. O poor
Tabernacle! O miserable dwelling which I do present thee! Let thy glorious
face shine upon it to disperse the darkness; clothe it with the white garments
of thy virtues.

III. Moses and Elias, even in this manifestation of his glory, (...) of his
passion, and of the death which he was to su^^^r: for he was still on earth,
though for the time glorify; And this Blessed Sacrament is a co^memoration,
and representation of the sacrifice, which once he offered upon the Cross,
dying for us: to put us in mind that our chief medita^ions and endeavors
here, while we live on earth, must be of suffering and of humbling ourselves as
he humbled himself, and of imitating him in the carrying of our Cross, that so
we may come to an everlasting glory: And consequently the most acceptable
offering that we can offer to him at holy mass, or at receiving, is to think
of his bitter passion, not only with a thankful mind but with a mind full of
purposes to imitate his conversation upon earth, and his sufferings, thinking
in particular in what this day or this week I may more constantly imitate him*
and in the mean time on the day of our receiving, endeavoring to remain
^lone with him for our greater profit and satisfaction.

The ^uring of the ten lepers.
I. Et ^um in grederetur in quodda^ Castellum etc.
ANd as he entered into a certain to^n^, there met him ten man that were
lepers, who stood a far of, and they lifted up their voice, saying, Jesus
^aster, have mercy on us. Whom as h^ (...), he said, Go show yourselves to
the Priests, Lu^. 17 ^^
and it came (...) as they went they were cleansed. According to S. S. Grego^*
Gregory, leprosy signifies heresy; because as in a leper part of the skim
is taynted, and part retayneth the natural color, so heretics mingling
falsehood with truth do stayne the right color of Christian doctrine S. S.
August
Augustine concurreth in the same, for as leprosy is in the outward skin, so
they hide not their errors, but boldly vent them for truth; These as lepers
out of ^oune, are shut out of the Church, and must be kept standing a fa^re of,
least with their breath* and stench they infect the rest; and the only way to
be cured is to submit themselves to the Priests, and teachers of the Catholic
faith. Though in a more general sense, leprosy may signify all kind of
imperfections mingled with our virtuous actions and thoughts. For which we
deserve to be delayed the entrance of the heavenly city; and must lift up our
cries to God for remission, and have often recourse to the Sacrament of
confession that we may have remission, and also receive strength to amend; The
very resolution of opening ourselves, as we are going ^eleeving us in many
molestations which come upon us. They were cleansed as they went (says S. S.
August
Augustine) by which it is manifest, that God does accept of the heart, where by
necessity we are hindered from coming to the Priest.

II. And one of them, as he saw he was cleansed; returned with a loud voice,
magnifying God, and fell on his face before his feet, S. Bernard.
giving thanks, and this was a Samaritan. A happy Samaritan (says S. Bernard)
in that he acknowledged, that he has nothing but what he had received; and
happy is he who for every particular grace returns to him, in whom is the
fullnes of all graces, toward whom while we do not carry ourselves
ungrateful, we make way whereby we may receive more plenty of grace. Thom*
(...) Kemp. l. 2* c. 10. n. 5.
Be grateful for the least, and thou will be worthy to receive greater* let
the least be to thee as the greatest; If we have regard to the dignity of the
giver, no gift can be thought little.

III. And Jesus answering, said, were not ten cleansed, and where are the
nine? None was found to return and give, glory to God but this stranger. And
he said to him, Rise go thy way, S. Bernard
thy faith has made thee whole. Our Savior does with reason ask where the
nine were? Because far from Sinners is salvation. So also after sin he
asked, where our first Father Adam was: and in the last judgment he will
profess that he knows not the works of iniquity, Often, but one returning,
and he a stranger, puts us also in mind, how few there are who serve God as
they ought, in comparison of the multitude who follow their worldly occasions:
Eccl. 2. 20.
and being domesticalls of God (as the Apostle speaks) buylt upon the
fo^mdation of the Apostles, we ought to take heed that strangers do not go
before us in life and manners; bringing confusion upon us, that we being
Christians, and having so much means to do well, do not live accordingly.

The woman taken in Advlterie.
I. Jesus aute^ perrexit in moute^ Olivet^. Io. 8.
IEfus went unto the mount Olivet, and early in the morning agains he came into
the temple, and the people came to him, and sitting he taught them. And the
Scribes and Pharisees bring unto him a woman taken in advlterie, and set her in
the midst, and said to him, Master, this woman was even now taken in advlterie
and in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such; what therefore say thou?
And this they said tempting him, that they might accuse him. Our Savior in
the nights went to private places to pray, and the more willingly to the mount
Oliver, because it bare the name of mercy, for which he came into this world:
The day he spent in the ^emple reaching, (...) otherwise doing good to the
people. This could not save him from the malice and envy of ill disposed
persons, who not finding wherein to accuse him sought by his meekenes and
compassion to entrap him as breaker or con^emner of the law and of justice: But
he being the eternal wisdom, ^new how to temper bot^ so together, as to
impeace neither of them; and to this wisdom we must submit in occasions where
there does not appear to us how his justice can be blamlesse, using so much
mercy and longanimitie toward most grievous sinners. Thom. a Kemp. l. 3. c. ^8.
Son take heed of disputing high matters, and the secret judgments of God,
why this man is left, and he assumed to so great grace.

II. But Jesus, ^owing himself down^, with his finger wrote in the earth* And
when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said to them. He
that is without sin among you let him first throw the stone at her; and
again bowing himself he wrote in the earth; and they hearing went out one by
one, beginning from the Seniours; and Jesus remained, and the woman standing in
the midst. What did he write, but that of the Prophet: S. Ambr.
Earth, Earth: write these forsaken men. The names of the faithful are not
written in earth but in heaven. He wrote in the earth with the same finger with
which he had written the law. Matt. 7 3*
Thou see a mo^e in thy brothers eye, and the beam which is in thy own eye
thou see not. Consider also how far different our synns will appear unto
us, when God shall lay them before our eyes, then now when self love does blind
us. V. Bid
O the answer of wisdom itself! How did he turn them, and their thoughts
into themselves, there to behold what lurked in their own breast, raked up out
of their sight, and consideration, till he with his omnipotent finger
discovered themselves unto themselves?

III. And Jesus lifting up himself, said to her; woman, where are they who
accused thee? Has no man condemned thee? Who said, no man Lord; And Jesus,
said, neither will I condemn thee; go, and sin no more. S. August.
Our Savior did also condemn the sin, but not the person. For if he had
favored the sin, he would have said; go, live as thou will. But he says, I
have blotted out that which thou have committed, observe thou that which I have
commanded, to the end thou may find that which I have promised.

Jesus the light of the world.
Again Jesus spoke to them, Iterum locutus est eis Jesus dicens Io: 8 12.
saying, I am the light of the world; S. August.
he that follows me, walk not in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
Our Savior is the light; which made this visible light: He was covered with
the cloud of his flesh, not to darken him, but to te^per his shining: if thou
follow the visible sun it forsakes thee at the setting, if thou do not
forsake God his light will never set to thee. The light of the old law was
confined to a small compass, and scarce appeared out of the land of Jury; the
light which our Savior brought by his sacred presence is diffused far and
near; and excludes none that will embrace it. It is universal; yet darkness
is not avoided by only knowing him, but by following his steps, and practicing
the doctrine which he taught. I am the light: others, who teach not con^or^ably
to him, are not to be followed as being false lights, which will deceive us,
and lea^e us in the dark. O the wicked world! That chooses rather to follow
their pleasures intemperately, then wait upon this light; and in the mean
time they walk, and little think whether. The light which our Savior
brings, leads us to an everlasting light and life; and the very dignity of
the leader might justly entice us to follow him; for he is God, the same that
anciently said, Exo. ^ 14* Th. a Ke. l. 3. c. 23. n. 8.
I am he that is. Inlighten me, sweet Jesus, with the clearenes of internal
light, and expel ou^ of the habitio^ of my heart all darkness.

II. You judge according to the flesh: I does not judge any man; and if I do
judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I, S. August.
and he that (...) me. They saw our Savior as he was man, and did not believe
he was God: judging therefore according to that which they saw with their
carnal eyes, they erred: he judges not man, according to the outside, or
according to human affection, but as ^^e and his heavenly Father, being God,
knows all things. How many to this day judge no otherwise of him, then as
man; And even among Christians how many think his ways none of the best or the
wifest, measuring them either by their own disordered appe^its, or by their
short understanding and conceits? And concerning one another, we must follow
the directions of S. S. August.
Augustine. Every one that is bad does either therefore live that he may amend,
or that the good may be exercised by him: so long as they are such, let us not
hate them; for we know not whether they will always be such: and oftimes when
thou think thou ha^est thy enemy, thou ha^est thy brother, and do not
know so much: The devil and hi^ Angels are declared to us that they are
damned, their asmendment is alone to be despayred of.

III. I go, and you shall (...) I go, you cannot come; you are from beneath, I
am from above, you are of this world, I am not of this world. Therefore I said,
you shall die in your synn^; for if you believe not that I am he, you shall die
in your synns. Our Savior was to go out of this world by death upon the
Cross: the Jews to this day seek him, as expecting still their Messiah, and
die in their synn^ of refusing him when he was upon earth, because they will
not yet bel^eve that he was the man they expected. They were of the world, and
from beneath, still harping upon wordly freedom, and wealth, and honor, and
did not raise their thoughts* to the heavenly things, and heavenly Kingdom
which he did preach to them; this was the cause of their blindness; of which we
must also beware least with these things beneath we fall short of the heavenly.
A heavy saying to a soul, I go, and you shall seek me, and shall die in your
sin. He does not depart so, unless he be forced away by our obstinacy in
sin: yet his parting at all times is heavy, though but for a time of trial,
in regard of our infirmity; but if we seek him carefully, and lovingly, we
shall find him to our greater comfort. Cant. 3. 4.
A little when I had passed the watch, I found whom my soul loves; I have
found him, and will not suffer him to depart. S. August.
Where are the bowels of Christian compassion, if bewayling the body that is
forsaken by the soul, thou bewaylest not the soul forsaken by its Savior?

He gives sight to him that was borne blind.
I. Praeterien^ Jesus vidi^ hominean caecum:
^suas passing by, saw a man blind from his nativitie; and his disciples asked
him, Eccl. Io. 9*
who has sy^ned, this man or his parents, that he should be borne blind? Jesus
answered; neither this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God
may be manifested in him, and when he had said, he spit upon the ground, and
made clay of the spi^^e, and spread the clay upon his eyes and said to him, Go,
wa^^ in the pool^ of Silo^; he (...) and washed, (...). Jesus his passing by,
is never without (...); if we attend not more to curiosi^ies then sol^de
virtue. Out (...) to kn^w the reason of things with never be able to di^^ so
deep to us to come to the truth, unless our Savior reveal it. And as here
he laid clay upon the blind man's eyes to make him see, however contrary it
might seem^ to the standers by, so our spiritual eyes are more opened by
humbly shutting them to humane reason, and believing our directours, then by
curious questioning. This is the highest and the most profitable lesson, Them:
a Kemp. l. 1. ^: 2, n. 4.
the true knowledge and contempt of thyself. We are dirt and ashes, wherefore
should we be proud? We are moreover defiled with synn^: we must wash in the
pool^ appointed by our Savior, which is the Sacrament of Confession, and do
it humbly, and syncerly, as this blind man did, and with true desire to be
cured.

II. The Jews were more blinded in their minds the^ he had been in his
corporal sight, for to so evident a miracle they gave little credit. Some
said, this is the man that sat begging; others said not; but h^ is like him*
They bring him to the Pharisees and they asked him, how he saw? And certa^ne of
them said, This man is not of God, who keeps not the Sabbath. And they say
to the blind: Thou what say thou of him? And he said: He is a Prophet: And
the Jews did not believe of him, that he had been blind, and saw. They called
his parents, and asked them* They called him again, And he still affirming the
truth and pleading for ou^ Savior, they cast him forth. A passionate man does
construe good to be evil, and does easyly believe that which is ill. Thom. a
Kemp. l. 2 c. 3. n:
A good peaceable man does turn all to good. A miserable thing* that some
should be the more blinded the more they seem to search after the truth. So
long as they did look that he would have denied himself to have been blind,
they thought him worthy to be believed; but finding him to speak the truth
undauntedly, then they condem^e him* When most of all they should have admired
him.

III. Jesus heard that they h^d cast him forth, and when he had found him, he
said unto him, do thou believe in the Son of God? He answered who is he,
that I may believe in him? Jesus said* Thou have seen him, and he that ta^keth
with thee, He it is: and he said, I believe Lord; and falling down he adored
him. Jesus is so far from forsaking those who suffer, that he seeks to the^
(...) them, and manifests himself more unto them. The blind man before said
he was a prophet, but here our Savior gives him further light and rayseth him
to believe that he is really the Son of God. S. Ihon Chrisost.
They who suffer adversity, or reproach, for truth; and for confessing Christ,
are more honored by him. We do not read that he spoke so plainly, and
directely to any, besides his Apostles, but to the Samaritan, and, when he was
apprehended, to the high Priests. And moreover reflect, that mystically
according to S. S* B^r^:
Bernard. Betwixt the eternal word, and a soul there passes very familiar
conversation, as between two neigbours; state is laid a side, where affection
growestro^g

Our Savior is the door into the Kingdom of heaven, and the good shepherd.
I. AMen, Amen, I say to you, he that enters not by the door into the fold of
the sheep; Amen, Amen dicovobis quinon intrat pero^tium. Io. 10.
but climbeth up another way, S. August.
he is a thief, and a robber. The thief comes not but to steal^, and kill,
and destroy: I came that they may have life, and may have more abundantly. Many
heathens and infidels say, we live well; they discourse subtly of virtue and
vice; they fill books with reasoning, and disputing, and say, follow us,
embrace our sect, that you may be happy. Heretics say the same; there be
innumerable of them who boast that they are not only knowing men, but
particularly enlightened by Christ: but they enter not by the door. They
indeavou^ to steal into men's minds, but the end is destruction: for there is
no hope of life unless we acknowledge, and follow Christ, whom these men
either out of blindness do not know, or out of pride do contemn him. Christ
is a low and humble door; he that will enter into the fold without hurting
himself must stoop, and be humble. He that proudly lifts himself up
endeavoring to come in any way, rayseth himself to catch a fall.

II. He that enters by the door, is the Pastor of the sheep: To this man,
the porter opens, and the sheep hea^e his voice; and he calls his own
sheep by name, and le^^eth them forth, and goes before them, and the sheep
follow him, Because they know his voice. A stran-ger A stranger they follow
not, ^ut fly from him, because they know not the voice of strangers* I am the
door; by me if any enter, he shall be saved, and he shall go in, and go out,
and shall find pasture. See the goodness of our Savior expressed in this
parable: He is the door, and he is the Pastor, or Shepherd; he takes
particular notice of every one of his sheep, he calls them by name: He does
not send them where he goes not himself; S. Grego.
he goes before them. Coming in by faith, and going out of this life to the
clear vision, in both they find refreshment. Entering by contemplation, or
going out by profitable action, in either they find pasture: And that, not
scarce and niggardly, but abundantly. How much has grace abounded above that
which was under the law of Moses? Io. 1. 14.
We have seen his glory, as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth. Follow this Shepherd. Harken not unto the voice of strangers. His
voice is swee^e, however it seem harsh to sense and self-will; the more we
harken to it, the more we shall come to know the sweetness of it. S. Basil.
Behold how they come to know our Savior: They hear him; they do not dispute
they are obedient, they do not wrangle.

III. I am the good Past^ur; the good Pastor gives his life for his sheep:
No man takes it away from me, but I yeald it of myself: I have power to yeald
it, and I have power to take it again; This commandment I received from my
Father: and therefore my Father loves me, because I yeald my life, that I may
take it again. For what greater motive can we also have to love him, Romans 4 25
then that he dyed for our syns, and rose again^ for our justification. Nothing
compelled him; he freely gave his life for us; he freely offered this sacrifice
for us, and submitted himself freely to be commanded unto it by his Father. And
not barely for remission of our sy^ns, and the avoiding of eternal punishment
for them, but that we might rise again, as he rose, and enjoy an eternal and
inconceivable happiness with him in life everlasting.

The seventy two Disciples choosen by our Savior.
I. Post hae^ designuit Dominss. Luc. 10.
AFter this our Lord designed also other seventy two, and sent them two and two
before his face, into every city and place whether himself would come. And
said to them, the harnest is much, but the workmen few; desire therefore the
Lord of harvest, that he send workmen into his harvest: Go, behold; I send you
as lambs among wolves. Our Savior, besides his twelve Apostles, provided
others to preach to the people, and prepare the way for his coming. He sent
the^ two and two, that one might be a help to another, both corporally and
spiritually; for by having a witness of our actions and speeches, we are the
more careful to carry ourselves well and orderly. And however, in his divine
wisedom^, he knows what is fitting to be done, and has care to do it, yet
he will have us concur with our Prayers to the performance of it: And as in
going thus among wolves our confidence can only be in him who says. Go: and
that he will protect us; so in all other kinds of life, and in all difficulties
(which are not a few) we must rely upon his goodness, and power; for nothing can
befall us without his knowledge, and permission, and in all things he speaks
in like manner, Go, I send you this, or the other affliction, or benefit.

II. And the seventy two returned with joy, saying; the devils also are
subject thvs in thy name: And he said to them, I saw Satan as a lightening
fall from heaven. Behold, I have given you power to tread^ upon serpents and
scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you;
but yet rejoice not in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice
in this, that your names are written in he^ven. How apt are we to glory in
that in which (if the (...) were known) we have very little: and our Savior
to teach us to beware of this pride, pu^teth us in mind of the fall of Luci^^^,
like lightening from heaven, that is, in the ^^incling of an eye; and so it
falls out oftimes with us; when we think we are at the h^ight of our glory, or
steadfast in it sud^^nly we get a fall* Ps. 29. 7.
I said in my abundance, I shall not be moved for (...), thou ^ Lord, in thy
will gave beauty to my virtue. Thou did (...) away thy face, and I was
trobled. Our glory must be in our hope of heaven, and that by Gods goodness we
are in a way toward it; all other things ^vayle us little, but as these are
accompanied with humility, S. Gregor.
and other virtues. Whosoever rejoices in that which another has not, by his
very abundance he becomes the worse, because his joy is no^ of the common
good, but of his private interest.

III. In that very hour he rejoiced in spirit and said, I confess to thee
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to little ones; and turning to his
disciples, he said. Blessed are the eyes that see the things that you see; for
I say unto you many prophets and Kings desired to see, those things, which you
see, and saw them not, and to hear the things, that you hear, and heard them
not. Our Savior rejoiced not at the sin of those by whose falt, and
presuming to be wise, these things were hidden from them; but at the goodness of
his heavenly Father, who did not disdain to reveal th^^ to those who in the
world were co^te^ptible. And what are these things? But that by humility, and
by suffering we must go to glory, and that in this is the happiness of this
life, not in the wealth, and honor, and pleasurs which men so much hunt after,
and think themselves only then happy when they enjoy them at will, and
miserable whenever they are bereaved of any of them. Blessed are the eyes which
see these things in our Saviors life, and doctrine now, as well, as when the
Apostles saw him upon earth. Many Prophets and Kings before our Saviors coming
desired to see and hear them; we have the same blessing according to his own
saying to S. Thomas Blessed are they that have not seen, Io. ^0. 29.
and do believe.

The ninth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. HEre we are to admire the goodness of God, and of our Blessed Savior
toward us, who notwithstanding that we are so imperfect, and all the good we
do (if we do any) so much mingled with things distasteful to him, that we
deserve to be kept aloof of (as the lepers) and oftimes perhaps to be shutout
of the city of heaven, for greater offenses; yet upon our crying to him for
mercy, and showing ourselves to the Priests, in the Sacrament of confession, he
admits us so familiarly to his holy table. O with what gratitude should we
magnify him for so great mercy and love! with what humility should we cast
ourselves upon our faces before his feet^, giving thanks, and purposing to be
perpetually mindful of so great a benefit: Thomas ^ Kempis (...)
But where are our thoughs oftimes eve^ when we should most attend? Our
repeditie and negligence is much to be lamented and pittyed, that we are not
drawn with more devotion to receive our Savior Christ. In whom is all the
hope of them that be to be saved, and all their merit. If one in ten of out
thoughts be employed this way, we think it a great matter, whereas our whole
atte^dance were indeed nothing in comparison of that which this great goodness
of our Savior deserves.

II. Our Savior to cure the blind man, and to give him his sight, laid clay
upon his eyes, which seemed quite contrary to the cure: we also if we will see
the truth of this mystery, must close up our eyes to humane reason; according
to that which our Savior answered the Jews upon this occasion: for they
asking him. Are we also blind? He said to them, Io. 9. 40.
if you were blind, you should not have sin; but now you say, we see, your
sin remains. S. Lewis of France when his courtiers brought him news that
there was a little child to be seen in the Priests hands as he was lifting up
the sacred host, would not stir to see it, but answered that he believed the
real presence of our Blessed Savior upon better ground then that sight could
affoard him. He was truly illuminated with the light of faith, shutting his
eyes to curiosity, and opening them to the words of our Savior, who is true
light, and cannot deceive I am the light of the world; Io. 8. 12*
He that follows me, wal^eth not in darkness, however dark the mysteries of
faith seem to be.

III. And if we reflect upon the other title which he gives himself of good
Pastor: In what could he show his goodness more then that having once offered
that great oblation of himself upon the Cross, and given his life for us, he
rests not content with that, but daily would have it offered for us, yea
hourly, through the whole world* for our greater comfort, and satisfaction;
providing that his sheep may never want so fertile a pasture, but upon all
occasions may have such celestial food at hand. See how they who record the
passion and sufferings of our Savior in time of the holy sacrifice, S. Chrisp.
drinking of the spiritual fountains springing from that ^orrent of love, do
delight themselves with sweet tears above all delicacies: And how much
sweetenes they do suck into their souls, inquiring and cons^dering where their
God is, Certainly this one word, and this one consideration, that God is so
near them (not only as to the whole world) but in this particular familiar and
constant way, is able to melt the heart of any loving soul, and abundantly to
fill it with all delight. ^^This good Pastor giverth his life for his sheep,
S. Gregor
in that he delivers his Body and Blood in this Sacrament, and with the
substance of his own flesh does feed the sheep which he redeemed.

The parable of the man wounded in his way to Jericho.
I. ANd behold a certain lawyer stood up, tempting him, and saying, E^ ecce
quidam le gisperitus etc.
Master, by doing of what thing shall I possess life everlasting? He said to
him, in the law what is written? How read thou? He answering said, Thou
shall love thy Lord thy God, with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul,
Luc. 10. 25
and with all strength, and with all thy mind. And they neigbour as thyself.
And he said to him, thou have answered right, do this, and thou shall live.
How many do say; would to God I knew the direct way how to be saved or how to
overcome my passions? And having it before their eyes, they heed it no^; the
weak resolution, or difficulty which they have about forsaking either their
will, or their company, or their wonted steps, blinding them; life everlasting
when they think of it, is a great attractive, and deservedly; but whether they
persuade themselves thoroughly that it deserves so much pains as they conceive
is to be taken; that is the question; and yet as this man confesses, the way
is love, which makes all things in the world easy; for unless worldly people
did love their employments, they would find no less difficulty in serving the
world, then they apprehend in serving God. Love God, and they neigbour, and
nothing will be hard.

II. But ^e desirous to i^stifie himself said to Jesus, who is my neigbour?
Jesus said; A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell
among thieves who stripped him, and ^^unding him went away, leaving him half
dead. It chanced that ^ Priest went down the same way, and seeing him passed
by; so did a Levit: but a Samaritan going his journey came near him, and seeing
him was moved with compassion, and going to him, bound his wounds, pouring in
oil and wine, and setting him upon his own beast, brought him into an Inn,
and took^ care of him, and the next day he took forth two pence and gav^ to
the host, and said, have care of him, and whatever (...) shall bestow above; I
at my return will repay thee. Which of these three in thy opinion was
neighbor to him that fell among thieves? He said, he that did mercy upon him:
and Jesus said to him, Go, and do thou in like manner. And thou (says S.
Ihon Chrysostom) S. Iho^ Chrysostom.
if thou see any body needing help for body or soul, do not say to thyself,
why did not such an one, or such an one assist him? But help him thou in his
distress: If thou happen upon a bag of gold lying in the high way thou do
not ask why another did not take it up, but make have to take it, before any
body elscome: So when thou meetest with thy neighbor fallen, think that thou
have found a treasure, to wit, an occasion of helping him.

III. This is that which we ought to practice; but in a spiritual sense, as S.
Augustine S. August
discourses: The man that fell among th^eves, was Adam, and in him all man
kind* The thieves were the devil and his Angels, who stripped him of his
innocence, and of immortality; and wounding him, by persuading sin, they
left him half dead; for in as much as he has ability to know God, he is
alive; in as much as he synneth, he is dead; The Priest, and the Levit signify
the ceremonies of the old law, which could not avayle toward the relief of
the wounded; the Samaritan is our Savior, a stranger to this world, as he is
God, and coming as it were a long journey, he took our offenses upon his own
body suffering for then, and bringing us into his Church, takes care of us, and
commends us with the exercise of the two precepts of charity, to the
governors of the Church, and what ever we do more then we are absolutely
obliged unto, he will repay it to the full: betake thyself to this Samaritan*
etc.

Martha intertaynes our Savior.
I. ^actum ^st autem dum iren^ Luc. 10. 38.
ANd it came to pass as they went, he intr^d a certain^ town and a certain
woman named Martha, S. Ber^ard
received him into her house, and she had a sister called Marie, who s^tting
also at our Lords feet, heard his word. What is this town, but the heart of
man? which before our Lord resorted to it, was rounded with a deep ditch of
Cupi^ditie, and disordered desire; enclosed with a wall of obstinacy, having
in the midst a babyloniall toure of confusion; victualled with carnal
pleasure, and worldly vanity; and armed and m^nitioned with arguments of
carnal wisdom: This town at the entrance of our Savior must fall down, and
a new one be buylt, with a ditch of humility, and wall of constancy, and
toure of circumspection, and care of all our actions and thoughts; victualled
with spiritual comforts, armed with the armor of faith, hope and charity.
Martha receives him with devou^ action, and Marie i^tertaines him with pious
contemplation.

II. But Martha (...) busy about much service; who stood, and said, have thou
no care, that my sister has left me alone to serve? S. August.
speak to her therefore that she help me. Martha was busy ho^ she should feed
our Lord; Marie was busy how she migh (...) by our Lord: Martha was preparing a
banquet for our Lord; Marie was taking delight in the banquet which our Lord had
prepared for her. S. Bernard
But happy is that house or congregation, where Martha complaynes of Marie,
action of contemplation; for it were an unworthy thing for Marie to grow into
emulation with Martha, contemplation with action; where do we ever find Marie
complaining that Martha has left her alone sitting in her retirement? Martha
must always persuade herself that she needs help by contemplation, and that
she is in want of it.

III. And our Lord answering said to her* Martha, Martha, Thou art careful
and trobled about many things; but ^ne thing is necessary; Marie has choosen
the best part which shall not be taken from her. To be neither careful no^
trobled at our carelesnes, is a ^igne of great neglect of our duty to God* To
be careful and yet trobled is a sign of pusillanimitie, and little confidence
in the mercies of God, or little apprehension of them: To be careful and yet
not trobled is proper to an humble and loving spirit, acknowledging its own
infirmity and confiding in the goodness of God, that he will not forsake us. S.
Grego^
The fervor of our action (says S. Gregory) is then in its best disposition,
when we so apply ourselves to our work, that with a peaceable heart we
endeavor to behold him before us, to whom we have consecrated our labors:
excess of solicitude is but a confounding of our intentions. Marie was
occupied in that one thing which our Savior commended; S. August*
she said with the psalm. It is good for me to stick to God, Ps, 27. 28*
She sat at his feet: The more humbly she sat, the more she received, the
waters do gather in the low vallyes; they leave the pround hills dry. Our
Savior did not find falt with the employment, but showed the difference. The
multiplicitie of labor passes away; the unity of charity remains:
Therefore that which Marie choose shall not be taken from her: from thee,
Martha, that which thou have choose^ shall be taken away, but it shall be taken
for thy good, and a better thing given thee: labor shall be taken away, that
thou may rest: Thou do sail the sea, she is in the haven.

He teaches his disciples to pray*
I. PART.
I. ANd it came to pass when he was in a certain place praying, Et factun^
est cum esset in quodam loco orans.
as he ceased, one of his disciples said to him, Luc. ^: Matthew. ^*
Lord, teach us to pray, as Ihon ought his disciples. And be said to them when
you pray, say, Our Father which are in heaven; hollowed by the name, Thy
Kingdom come, Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. The name of Father
is of itself apt to breed in us thoughts of love and confidence, for it is
proper for a Father to provide carefully and lovingly all things necessary for
his Children. The tearming him our Father, does add yet more confidence and
love, because as he is the common Father of all, so is he ours in particular,
whoever with a child's love and respect do acknowledge him and obey him; with
these affections therefore we should come to our prayers; They who have
misdemeaned themselves toward him yet coming with due sorrow and submission
will also find him a loving Father, easy to forgive the offenses of his
children. And with all we must remember that he is our Father which is in
heaven, Creator of heaven and earth, every where present, but chiefly showing
his glory in heaven above; and consequently adoring his Omnipotent power
together with his love, behave ourselves not carelessly and disrespectfully,
but with great submission and attention, when we pretend to appear before him
in our prayers, representing to ourselves by faith the majesty of the heavenly
court, and the royal attendance upon him.

II. Holowed be thy name; That is, be thou, and thy holy name worshipped and
reverenced with all holiness, and purity of action, and intention. Be thou for
ever glorified, and magnified for all eternity: This he put first in our
petition, to give us to understand that it is the chiefest thing which we ought
to aim at in all our actions, and our whole life: It is that for which heaven
and earth and all that is in them were created. Ps. 18.
The heaven set forth the glory of God, and the firmament declare his works
how wonderful they are. This is the occupation of the Angels and saints, and
of all creatures: and nothing more to be lamented then that they who have most
reason every minute to praise and magnify him, because they are made
reasonable creatures and capable of his knowledge and love, that they I say,
should be the most backward, and most undutiful above all others, and instead
of honoring him, and glorifiyng him, do the quite contrary, as much as in
them lies; though he, out of his omnipotent power, turns all to his glory,
whether they will or no, which at last they will find to their cost, in the
punishments which he will most justly lay upon them.

III. Thy Kingdom come, By the parable which our Savior delivered to the
people, we find that his kingdom is two fold, first, that which he came to
establish here o^ earth, which is his holy Church; and this we beg may be
propagated, and enlarged through the whole world. Secondly that kingdom which
he has prepared in heaven for us from the foundation of the world, Ma^^h. 2^.
34
we desire may come, and we be translated into it, as a thing better then all
the happiness which we can enjoy in this world; which because those who are
wedded to the world (finding the sweetness which sense takes in the inioying of
temporal commodities) can hardly conceive, therefore he would have us daily
repeat this prayer, to raise our thoughts to that which being not only
eternal, but superabounding with all contents imaginable, is much more to be
desired, then to live here under the Princes and Potentates, and great men of
the earth; or to be a Prince or Potentate ourselves; for all this below is
uncertain, perishable, full of troble, full of danger to body and soul, which
being immortal it is fitting and necessary, it should daily and hourly think
more of that who it may be happy forever, then by neglecting it become
eternally miserable; for if we be not in his Kingdom by glory, we shall be
eternally subject to his enemies, over whom notwithstanding he reigns to
punish them. O most blessed mansion of the heavenly city! Thom^^ ^ Kempis (...)
O most clear day of eternity.

IV, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. This is the way to that
heavenly kingdom, to do his will, delivered unto us in his commandments and
counsels: and though the infirmity of our nature will not permit us so
perfectly to execute his will, as the blessed do in heaven, yet the greatness
and the goodness of God, does deserve that we should aim at the best way of
doing it, and imitate the heave^s as near as we can; esteeming it not only the
most necessary business which we have in this world (as o^ which depends our
eternal happynes or misery) but the thing in which we must place most content
in regard of what God is, and by which we shall receive most content within
ourselves* for nothing is so solidly satisfacto^e to man's mind, as to consider
that the will of God is performed, and to take contentment in it, because it is
the will of God: for which end his kingdom also is chiefly to be desired,
because it is his kingdom: and his ^^me to be ^anctifyed, because it is his
name: whereby we shall raise our thoughts and affections from seeking ourselves
even in these things, which so maynly concern us, but in all seek the glory
of God, consisting in that his name be hallowed, his kingdom come, and his
will be done.

He teaches his disciples to pray.
II. PART
I. GIve us this day our daily bread. Panem nostrum quotidia number etc.
After that which concerns us most as belonging to life eternal, he teaches
us to ask our temporal sustenance, in order to maintain ourselves in this
life, so long as it shall be his will and pleasure that we should remain here;
and will have us ask it daily, to acknowledge the continual dependence which
we have of his omnipotent power and goodness; for if he blesses us not, nothing
can prosper; Genesis 4^.
he can when he pleases send seven years of famine, as to the Egyptians, and
recompense them when he pleases with seven years abundance: and in an instant
send that which shall destroy all our provisions; therefore we must pray to him
this day: And yet not be too solicitous about it, ^xo, 10, 13
but content ourselves with moderate care, and rely upon his providence, who as
this day, he has mayntained us, and blessed us with that which is necessary
for us, so he will the next, and the next; over much solicitude nothing
conducing to the time to come, which to us is uncertain, and cannot be by us
mended or pared.

II. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us. After the care of ourselves, he pleaceth Charity toward our neighbor,
whom we are commanded to love as ourselves, and therefore no wonder that he
measures his resolution of forgiving us, by the proportion which we use in
forgiving our neighbor: For he that will not forgive another, who is his
equal, at least in nature, a man like himself, subject to infinite
imperfections and mistakes* how can he think that God deals hardly with him in
not forgiving him, seeing betwixt God and man there is no comparison at all.
The words of the Text are, forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors; for
even in temporal debts owing us, we must not be hard dealers, but consider how
ourselves may desire to be forborne in occasions which may happen to us. We
should rather imitate God, who notwithstanding the distance betwixt him and us,
by which our offenses are infinitely aggravated, yet is the first that opens
the way to forgivenes, giving us motions and helps to repent us, that we may
be forgiven by him.

III. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. Amen. We
have spiritual and temporal evils to which in this life we are subject;
the spiritual are temptations, proceeding from our Ghostly enemy, who as S.
Peeter expresses, ^* Pet. 5. ^
as a roaring lion walks round, seeking whom he may devuore, whom resist
ye, strong in faith; Chiefly con^iding in the assistance of God, with out
which it is impossible for us to overcome his temptations; nor those neither
which the prosperity of the world may bring us into, or the disordered
desires, and delights of the flesh: into these we beg that God will not
bring us, by permitting us to be overtaken by them. As also not by the evils
and adverse accide^ts of the world, which push men oftimes into despair, and
not to think so dutifully of God as they ought; from these we beg also to be
delivered, as irksome to our bodies, and sometimes inthralling our souls: at
least we crave not so far to be ^rcised by them, as to endanger our falling
from that which is justly expected at our hands. By all which we see how
providently our Savior disposed of our prayers; that first we should beg of
him that which is best for our soul and body; and then to be delivered from
the hurtful^ molestations of both: concluding Amen, as much to say, as in
truth, let this be done.

He teaches his disciples to pray.
III. PART.
I* ANd he said to them, which ^f you shall have a friend, and shall go to him,
Et a^t ad illos quis vestrum. Luc. ^5.
at midnight, and say, friend, lend me three (...), because a friend of mine in
his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him, and he from
within answering says, troble me not now, the door is shut, and my children
are with me in bed* I cannot rise, and give thee: If he persever knocking,
though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet for his
importunity he will rise, and give him as many as he needs. After our
Savior had taught his disciples what to pray for, he gives them diverse
encouragements to pray: And first that God is a friend; for however we carry
ourselves toward him he always carries a friendly mind toward us, Matt. 5. 45
Making his sun to shine over the good, and bad; and rayning over the just
and iniust. Secondly that all hours he can hear our prayers: the middle of
the night being as much as day to him. Thirdly that there is great difference
between God and man; for suitors to men are many times troblesome, to God none
can be so, and therefore he bids us confidently Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to you. Fourthly that
notwithstanding, we must not think that instantly we shall obtain what we
desire, but must persever knocking. S. Hierom
Whereupon S. Hierome says, Great is perseverance, which, though it seem to
be importune and troblesome, has more power then the title of friendship.

II. For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to
him that knocks it shall be opened. S. August
Humane sloth and dulnes has reason to be ashamed, seei^g, God is more ready
to give; then we are to receive; he is more willing to have mercy upon us, then
we are to be delivered from our miseries; for in that he exhortes us, it is for
our good that he exhorts us. Some things which seem to be, are not denied,
but differred that they may be granted at time convenient. And a powerful
mean to obtain, is to acknowledge that we have nothing of ourselves: S. August
A beggar asks an alms of us, and we are beggars of God. Consider other
folks necessities, and God will consider thine: finally we must pray from our
heart, Ps. 120*
as the Psalmist professes of himself: From the deapth I have cried unto thee,
O Lord. He did not pray from the teeth outward, S. Ihon. Chrysostom.
but from the deepest of his heart, with great application, and great
endeavor: such prayers have great force.

III. Which of you, if he does ask his Father bread, will he give him a stone?
Or a fish; will he give him a serpent? Or if he ask an egg, will he reach him
a Scorpion? If you then, being naught, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will my Father from heaven give the good spirit to them
that ask him? S. August
God knows before we ask what we have need of, and what is good for us: he
will notwithstanding that we pray; not that our desires may be made known to
him, woe knows all thing, but that our desire be exercised and inflamed in
prayer, that we may be the more capable of that which he is ready to give: That
which he will give, is very great, but we are little, and little able to
receive. Faith is signified by the fish, which the serpent endeavored to
subvert: Hope is signified by the egg, as containing in expectation a living
creature; Charity by bread, which charity stony hearts do reject. This is the
good spirit which the heavenly Father never denies those who have recourse unto
him.

Avarice condemned.
I. ONe of the multitude said to him, Ait ei quidam de turba^ ^uc, 12. 13.
M^ster, speak to my brother that he divide inheritance with me. But he said
to him; man, who has appointed me Judge or divider over you? And he said to
them: see and beware of all Avarice: for not in any man's abundance does his
life consiste, of those things which he possesses. A document for those who
have retired themselves from the world, not to put themselves into worldly
affaytes: and for them that are in the world, not to undertake more then they
can well come-of with: and for both to beware of all kind of covetousnes. S.
August.
Wherefore does he say; all kind* Perhaps thou would judge him only covetous
who incrocheth upon other folks goods: But I say, be not greedy and pinching
even in thy own: This is a great charge: for it is not a thing to be
flighted, where our Savior says ^eware: He knows how dangerous a thing it
is, we know not; let us believe him. And he gives us an excellent motive to
beware, and look to ou^selves in it; because abundance is not that which
advantageth our spiritual life, which most of all concerns every body; nor
when we have scraped it up (perhaps by none of the best means) are we sure
we shall compass even our tempo^all ends with it; as he declares by the
example following.

II* A certain rich man's field, yealed plenty of fruit: And he thought
within himself, what shall I do, because I know not whether to gather my
fruit? And he said, this will I do; I will destroy my barnes, and make
greater, and thither will I gather all things, that are grown to me, and my
goods. And I will say to my soul, soul, thou have many goods laid up for
many years, take thy rest, eat, drink, make good cheer. But God said to
him, Thou fool, This night they require thy soul of thee, and the things
which thou have provided, whose shall they be? First he did not consider who
gave him that plenty, and that it comes more by Gods blessing, then by humane
industry and labor. Secondly he did not reflect upon the end wherefore God
does bestow plenty upon others, to wit, to relieve the needy, and to do works
with it which may turn to Gods glory, and not only to rest, and ea^e, and
drink, and make good cheer, or the like merely temporal ends. O foli^h
words (says S. Basil) for if thou had the soul of a hog, S. Basil
what could thou have said more like a hog? Thou mights have answered with
far more ease, I will feed the hungry, I will imitate Joseph, and relieve a
whole country. He should have taken into consideration the casualities of the
world, and the uncertainty of his own life; vvherby he might have moderated
his intemperate affection to his wealth, and provided better for an other
world, as well as for this: we have not one night certain of either life or
goods. Thou fool, this night, when thou do little think, they who have,
power of life and death shall require at thy hands, as a thing depositated for
a time, thy soul, which imports thee more then all thy goods, which thou
know not whose they shall be; and when thou art gone neither thou vvilt
care whose they are, nor they who have them care for thee.

III. So is he, who lays up treasure to himself, and is not rich to Godward.
A general saying, of which every body should take notice, least while he
seems wise to himself, God call him fool, and prove him so. All our
thoughts, all our actions, all our endeavors, in what kind so ever, must have
a tincture of Gods service, and be done in some measure for him, or else while
we think ourselves rich, we shall prove poor, Apo: 3. 17
as he in the Apocalips: we are not forbiden to lay up treasure, but we must
look ^o what purpose we lay it up, least instead of advantaging us, it prove
our ruin, as it does to most men who have no other end but themselves.

The tenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. IN the most blessed Sacrament we have indeed plenty of fruit not produced
by our own industry, but sent us from above, as the celestial Manna: nor of
one years growth, but daily growing from the fountain itself our Blessed
Savior. The barnes are our heart, which though we have cause to enlarge with
love, yet we shall not need to destroy any thing, but what is of itself
ruinous, and by the very ruin whereof we buyld; Here we may freely and with out
danger say to our soul, soul thou have many goods, laid up, in this small
room for many years; and for thy whole life time, and after this life for
all Eternity, take up thy rest, eat drink and make good cheer; for this is
the lamb slain for us from the beginning of the world; Apoc* 13. 8
This is the fat calfe with which the father of the prodigal child feasted
him, Luc: 15.
at his repentant return; This is the hidden Manna promised in the Apocalips.
Apo: 2. 17
to him that overcomes his greedines of worldly commodities; and feeds
himself with this. Sap: 16. 20
This is the food of Angels, prepared for us from heaven, without any labor of
ours. having in it all delight, and the savor of all kind of sweetenes. O
foolish people, who either for worldly cares, care not for th^s treasure, or
for want of due consideration of the benefit of it, or of the goodness of the
benefactour do neglect it: whereas after due receiving, though that night
unexpectedly they should require our soul, we should not need to fear, but
that we should be eternally his; then which happenes what can we desire more?

II. Give us this day our daily bread. In the primitive Church when the number
of Christians were few, but fervent, they received daily; S. Hierome says of
his time; I know that in Rome the custom^ is: Hier. Ap. ad Pammech.
that the faithful do^ always receive the body of our Savior. And S.
Ambrose argues, S. Ambr. I. 5. de Sacram.
If it be our daily bread, why do thou stay a year before thou receivest
it, as the Graecians in the East are wont? Receive that every day which may
daily benefit thee: live so as thou may deserve to receive daily. Christians
being multiplied, and among many, many not being so well disposed or so
fervent, the council of S. Ignace Ignat: ad ^phesios.
the Martyr is to be embraced. Endeavor often to meet and Communion; for when
you meet often, the power of Satan is weakened, and his fiery darts inciting us
to sin, fly back upon him with out indamaging us. S. Cypri. ^p. 12.
He that ea^eth of this bread hungers no more, because the grace of this
Sacrament is so full, and the understanding of it is so satisfactorie, that
whoever comes to the notice of this abundance, having found out the utmost of
all perfection, carrying Christ about him in his breast, and bearing him in his
mind, sounds forth by word and deed his praises, with great joy, and is
continually singing songs of thanksgiving.

III. No man can think but that S. Martha* and her sister Marie and Lazarus did
take exceeding content so often as our Savior came to their house, and never
thought he came too often, but endeavored ever to be ready to receive him, and
to be diligent, and respectfull at his receiving. Martha did not think she did
too much, when she desired her sister should help her, but she thought that
both of them could not doc enough: she complained that she was left alone to
wait upon him, let us look, that our Savior have not reason to complain of
us, that we do leave him alone he ministering to us, and we either do not come
to him, or when we have received him do not attend him. Here he presents us not
with a part, but with his whole self, Who is there among the faithful that
can make any doubt, but that at the instant of the consecration, the heavens
are opened at the Priests voice? That at that Sacrament of our Savior Jesus
Christ, quires of Angels are present; The high and the low are coupled
together, earth and heaven are joined, visible, and invisible are made one
thing. S. Ihon Ch^^sost.
Who therefore that is right in his senses will despise, or neglect this
reverend and dreadful mystery?

The watchful and diligent servant commended.
I. LEt your loins be girded, and candles burning in your hands and you like
men expecting their Lord, (...)
when he shall return from the marriage that when he does co^and knock
forthwith they may open unto him. It (...) the custom of the Eastren people to
go in long garme^t^, therefore he bids us have our loins girt, ^^rtulia^
That we man be free (says Tertullian) from the impediments of a loose life,
intangling our feet, so that we cannot be quick in walking, but ready at every
step to stumble; and burning lights in our hands, that is, our mind burning
with a lively faith, and shining with the light of good works. Thus we must
expect our Lord Jesus when he shall come and knock, that we may be in an
instant ready to wait upon him. S. Grego.
Our Lord comes, when he hastens to judgment he knocks when by the
sharpenes of sickness he gives us notice that death is at hand; we open
presently unto him, if we receive him with love: He is not willing to open,
when the Judge knocks, who fears to leave (...) body, and dreads to see the
Judge whom he remembers he has contemned. He that has confidence by hope and
good works does presently open when he knocks, because he expects the judge
with gladness, and when the time of death approaches, does joy in the reward of
glory promised.

II. Blessed are those servants, whom when the Lord com^th he shall find
watching. Amen I say to you: that he will gird himself, and make them sit
down, and passing will minis^er unto them. And if he come in the second watch,
and if in the third watch he come, and so find, blessed are those servants.
Blessed are we, who have such a master and Lord, who though his greatenes be
infinite, and his glory so incomprehensible that no diligence of man can
deserve it, no capacity of nature receive it, or look upon it, yet to the end
to reward them even above their deserts, will gird himself, and accomodate his
greatness to their measure and make them sit down, with eternal ease and
delight at his heavenly table, and there minister unto them, all manner of
deliciousnes: Thomas a Kempis l. 3. c. 48. n. 2
The citizens of heaven know how full of joy that day is; The sons of Eve do
lament the bitterness, and tediousnes of their present life. But o the goodness
of God! S. Gregor
His mercy convinces the hardness of our heart and leaves it no excuse; for
showing his patience and his longanimitie, he adds, and if he come in the
second watch, and if in the third, and so finds them then watchful he does not
reject the^. The first watch is child hood; the second, youth; the third, old
age; yet no man must abuse this his longanimitie for he adds.

III. And this know ye, that if the house-holder did know at what hour the
thief would come, he would watch verily, and would not suffer his house to be
broken up. Be you therefore ready: for at what hour you think not, the Son of
man will come. S. Gregor
Our Lord would therefore have the last hour unknown to us that we might
always expect it. Thom. Kemp. l. 1. ^. 13. n. 7.
Ah fool! to what purpose do thou think shall live long, seeing thou have
not one day certain? How many have been deceived and sudainly taken away.

The punishnent of the unrepentant.
I. IF the sernant say in his heart, (...) dixerit ^^^vus ille.
my Lord is loag in coming; and shall begin to stricke the servants; and eat,
and drink, Luc. 12. 45.
and he drunck, the Lord of the servants shall come on a day that he hops
not, and at an hour^ that he knows not, and shall devide him, and apoint his
portion with the infidels. And that servant that knew the will of his Lord, and
prepared not, and did not according to his will shall be beaten with many
stripes; but he that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few. And every one to whom much is given, much shall be required
of him; see the danger of presuming of long life; we are apt to grow proud upon
it, and careless of our duty, insolent toward others, and to be drunk with
ambition, and desire of worldly wealth and pleasure; the punishment is that he
shall be divided from his pleas^res; and life, and from all hope of his masters
favor, and that unexpectedly so that he shall not have time to repent, but
shall be eternally cast of among the unfaithful, and branded with the
everlastiug disgrace of it, a punishment due proportionably to his falt: for
that he knew well enough what was to be done and did it not, not out of
fraylit^e, but presuming, and casting of the fear of his Lord.

II. When thou go with thy adversary to the Prince, by the way endeavor to
be delivered from him, least perhaps he draw thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the exactour, and the exactour cast thee into prison; I say to
thee thou shall not go out thence, S. Gregd^*
till thou pay the very last mite. Our adversary in the way is the word of
God, contrary to our carnal desires in this life; from whom he is delivered
who humbly submits himself to the commandments. Otherwise if we differ the
agreement, after this life, when we come to appear before the Prince, there is
no redemption, but we must to prison. S. Basil
In another sense; Our adversary is whoever does endeavor to bereave us of
that to which we have, or conceive we have tight; with such we shall best agree
if we observe the precept of our Lord. To him that will contend with thee in
judgment, Mart. 5^
and take away thy coat^ let go thy cloak also to him.

III. And there were cortayne present at that time telling him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices. And he said to
them; think you that these Galileans: were sinners more then all the Galileans,
that they suffered such things? No, I say to you, but unless you have
repentance, yo^ shall all like wise perish. And those eighteen upon whom the
tower fell in Siloe and slew thim, think you that they also were debtors above
all men in Jerusalem! No, I say unto you but if you have not repentance, you
shall all likewise perish. Therefore when you see any perish by shipwarck, S:
Ihon Chriso^^*
ot by the fall house, or by fire, or by water conceive that God perhaps of a
will punish that party less in the world to come, because, he suffered here,
and forbeareth other, that upon notice of the others punishment, he may repent
and mend his life, or if he do not, but persevereth in his bad cou^ses, most
grievous punishment will be heaped upon him. Th^mas a Kempls c. 24 n.
What other thing will that fire devour but thy syns? The more thou sparest
thy self here and followest sense, the more grievously thou will pay it here
after.

The goodness of God showed us in two examples.
I. ANd he said also this similutude, Diceha^ autem and hanc similitudinem.
A certain man had a figtree planted in his wineyards, and he came seeking
fruit of it, and he found none: and he said to the dresser of the wineyard;
Luc. 13 6
lo, it is three years, that I come seeking fruit upon this figtree, and I
find none: Cut it down therefore, whereto does it occupy the ground? But he
answering says, Lord let it alone this year also, till I dig about it, and
dung it, and if happily it yeald fruit; if not, here after thou shall cut it
down. S. Gregor.
The figtree occupies the ground with out fruit, when either the covetous,
and streightlaced do keep that without profit, which might be useful to
many; or when by the shade of sloth a man darkeneth the place, which another
might fertilize with the beams of good works. And in fine, whosoever does not
comply with his duty, does for the time occupy the earth, Ps. 23 4
and seem (as the Psalmist speaks) to have received his life and soul in
vain; yet God is so merciful, that he expected from year to year, and
gives time that we may reflect upon the foulnes, and stench of our sins,
signified by the dung; and do fitting satisfaction ^ot them, T^omas a Kempis l
1 c. 25
signified by the diging Be watchful and diligent in the service of God, ^d
think often wherefore thou came.

II. And he was teaching in their synagog on the sabbath* and behold a woman
that had a spirit if infirmity eighteen years, and she was crooked, neither
could she looks upward at all: Whom when Jesus saw, he called her unto him;
and said to her, woman thou art delivered from thy infirmity; and he laid
his hands upon her, and forthwith she was made straight, and glorified God. Our
Savior in the former parable signfied that at the intercession of others he
oftitimes grants time of repentance, here he shows how ready he is of
himself to take compassion of us, who are so croocked by nature, that nothing
but earth and earthly things contents us, and are continually looking
downwards upon them: seldom or not at all lift our eyes and hearts to heaven:
and indeed have no natural knowledge of so high a treasure as God has there
laid up for us. Jesus must call us by faith, and lay his sacred hands upon us.
that we may be cured. God in the beginning made man upright; by him we must
again be rectified. Her respect to the Sabbath drew her into the occasion of
meeting our Savior; and upon us he will look with a gracious eye, if we
neglect not to do our devotions.

III. And the Archisynagog said to the multitude: six day^s there are wherein
you ought to work: then come and be cured, and not on the Sabbath day. And our
Lord answering him said; Hypocrite does not every one of you upon the Sabbath
loose his ox^, or his ass from the manger, and lead them to the water? But
this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound these eighteen years, ought
not she to be loosed from this bond upon the Sabbath day? And his adversaries
^ere ashamed, and all the people rejoiced in all things that were gloriously
done by him. See the crookednes of our nature in this Pharisee, prone to en^ie,
and pride, and rashly to censure even the most reasonable things. When reason
was represented, they were all ashamed, but the holy text does not say they
craved pardon: and so it falls out often with us; we are ashamed within
ourselves, but to others we will not confess, or acknowledge a falt, but
rather out of pride defend it, or excuse it. Thomas a Kempis l; ^ c. 22 n. 6
O how great is the frayltie of man always prone to vice. Of temporal
things we have so much care that we will not neglect, nor put of the least of
them, but of our spiritual diseases we think slightly, and put of the curing
of them from day to day upon very shallow motives.

Our Savior bewayleth the vngreatefull and unrepentant.
I. THe same day there (...) certay^e of Ph^^isees unto In ips^ di^ accesser
(...) ad (...) quid^* (...)
him saying: d^parte, and go from hence, because Herod^ will kill thee: And he
said to them; go, and tell that fox: behold I cast out devils, and perfect
cures, this day, and to morrow, and the third day I am consummate: but yet I
must walk this day, and to morrow, and the day following, because it cannot be
that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. Interpreters say that this was a
rumor raised; and a devise either of the Pharisees, or of Herod himself toget
our Savior out of the country: where, with reason; we may reflect how
miserable a thing it is to be weary of that which in realitie is our greatest
good, it being as much as to say to our Savior, depart and go hence. We are
ashamed to say such a thing plainly, but we pretend we are not able to bear,
or to do this or that, it will be our death, and the like. Our Savior was not
moved with this report, but following his employment, and relying upon the
protection of God went on confidently, till the time ordained came. When thou
have Christ, thou art rich and have sufficient. He will be thy Purveyer, and
faithful steward in all things, Thomas a Kempis l. 2 c. 1 n. 2
so that it will not be necessary to confide in men.

II. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets and stonest them who
are sent to thee; how often would I gather thy Children, as the bird does her
brood under her wings, and thou would not? We do not cast stones at those
who are sent unto us for our instruction; we m^st be vvare notwithstanding
that in some proportion we be not guilty of rejecting the motions of the holy
Ghost, of censuring those by whom we are told of our falts, and instead of
embracing their counsel give them ill language; or speak ill of the^ behind
their backs. How often has God endeavored to reclayme us, and to p^rfite his
cure in us, to make us his children, to have us near him and under his vving?
Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 55 n, 3
I know the way to perfection, and do see clearly enough how I ought to
demean myself, but loded with the weight of my own corruption, I do not
rise to that which is perfect. O how necessary is thy grace o Lord? S. August.
The hen protects her chickens under her wings; how much safer shall thou be
under the wing of God? No bird does so spend herself upon her brood as the hen.
And because we were infirm and weak, the eternal wisdom of God became also
infirm among us: the word made flesh and dwelt among us, that we might have
hope and confidence under his wings.

III. Behold your house shall be left desert to you; and I say to you, you
shall not see me with you, till it come when you shall say; blessed is he that
comes in the name of our Lord. We rejecting the grace of God, and not making
use of it, he justly also comes to desert us; Rom: 1 24
and our soul, which was his house and temple, is turned into our own hands,
and delivered over to the desires of our own heart. A fearful return. How
much better is it to welcome our Savior* and his holy inspirations, and
blessing him for them, apply ourselves with alacrity to endeavor to put them
in execution? Thomas a Kempis l^ 3. ^. 55
My Lord God who have created me to thy Image and likeness, grant me this grace
which thou have showed me to be so necessary for me.

Precepts of Humility and Charity.
I. WHen thou art invited to a marriage, sit not down in the first place least
perhaps a more honorable then thou be invited by him; Cu^^ invi^^ tatus fu^ris
ad nuptias. etc.
and he that bad thee and him, come to say to thee, give this man place, and
thou then begin with shame to take the last place. But when thou art bidden,
go, sit down in the lowest place. Luc. 14 ^
that when he that invited thee comes, he may say to thee: friend, sit up
higher: then shall thou have glory before them that sit at table with thee,
because every one that exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted This general conclusion was the intent of the former
document: for not only in common conversation we ought to behave ourselves so
humbly, but much more toward God, always thinking humbly of ourselves. Pride
does heighten us in our own conceit; and hence rise contentions and quarells,
and hart-burnings, and extreme sadness and deiection, when we see another
preferred before us. But if it rise so high as to make us forget that whatever
we have, we have it from God, and to valve ourselves as of ourselves; whether
do you think we shall deservedly be cast? we must therefore continually
remember what we are, and that lesson which God gave our first father, must not
pa^ from our har^; Ge^. 3 19
Thou art dust, and into dust thou shall return. Every good gift comes from
above, from the Father of lights, with whom there is no change; We when we
are at the best that we ca^ imagine of ourselves either in body or mind, are
subject to so sudain changes, that we have cause to fear least (as it
happened to Nabucondonosor) when we think ourselves men, Daniel. 4 30
we become little less then beasts: for what ever God gives, he may sudainly
take from us. II. And he said to him that had invited him, when thou make a
dinner, or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren nor kinsme^ no^ thy
neighbors that be rich, least perhaps they also invite thee again, and
recompense be made to thee; but when thou make a feast call the poor,
feeble, lame, and blind, and thou shall he blessed, because they have not
wherewith to recompense thee; for recompense shall be made thee in the
resurrection of the just. Our Savior coming to preach the kingdom of heaven,
and to raise our thoughts from these earthsy things to things eternal which
import us most, takes occasion of all things to put us in mind of them; and
here he does not forbid civilitie to be used toward our kindred, and
neighbors, though they should be rich, in a measure and proportion convenie^t,
but teaches us that which is of so much more importance to us, as temporal
recompense is below the eternal: S. Ihon Chrisost.
If thou call the poor, God becomes thy debtour; and the less and lower thy
brother is, so much the nearer does Christ come to thee in him, and does visit
thee the more lovingly. He that receives a great man, commonly seeks honor
and profit by it. The same is in all other Charities toward our neigbour;
attending upon great people vanity creeps in: in the poor we do more
easily behold our Savior.

III. And a certain man said to him; Lord be they few that are saved? And he
said, strive to enter by the narrow gate, for many I say to you shall seek to
enter, and shall not be able, but when the goodman of the house shall enter and
shut the door; and you shall begin to stand without, and knock saying, Lord
open to us; and he shall say, I know you not, whence are you; then you shall
begin to say, we did eat before thee, and drink, and in our streets thou
did teach. And he shall say to you I know all whence you are, depart from me
all ye workers of iniquity: There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. In
regard that the precepts of humility and charity seem hard to flesh and
blood, V. Bed^
therefore he bids us strive, because unless the endeavor of our mind be
ferve^t and strong, the waves of the world in which we swim cannot be overcome:
people seek indeed to come in, because they desire to be saved, but they are
not able, because the ragednes of the way does frighten them; not that the
burden of our Lord is heavy, but because they will not learn of him who is
meek and humble.

Perfect renunciation.
I. ANd a great multitude went with him; and turning he said to them, Ib^nt
(...) tem turbae multae cu^ eo etc.
If any man come to me, and hates not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life besides, he cannot
be my disciple; Luc. 18 9
and he that does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my
disciple: first it is to be observed that he speaks not this to his disciples
only, as to those who have nothing to do in the world; but to all, whether
they have father, or mother, or wife, or children, or goods, or wealth, S.
Grego*
or whatever else. Secondly that our hatred must be so tempered that we love in
them, that which they are, and hate in them that by which they resist us, or
hinder us in our way to Godwards. It imports therefore in order to overcome the
difficulty, which nature finds in this hatred, that we ponder seriously, and
bear deeply imprinted in our mind, the necessity, the profit, the dignity of
coming to our Savior, and of following him; for as we apprehend this more or
less, our difficulty will be more or less; and they alone who either
apprehend it not at all, or do not sufficiently conceive it, or remember it,
do swarve from the right way in occasions of temptations. But to encourage us
he sets before us the similitude following.

II. For, Which of you, minding to buyld a tower does not first sit down, and
reckon the charges which are necessary, whether he have to finish it? least
after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that see
it begin to mock him, saying, This man began to buyld, and could not finish it.
First he insinuated that the following of Christ is the Tower, S. August
from which we may both discover our enemy, and put him to flight. S. Gregor
A Tower, because the precepts and counsels of the Gospel are high, and
sublime, and to perform them we must have high and sublime thoughts. The
charges are the strength which we must have to perform that which our Savior
teaches us, this strength, or means is not gotten, as worldly means by heaping
worldly wealth, but by disposing of our worldly means according to Christ's
direction in several places, as distributing them among the poor (as he said
to the youngman) Luc. 18. 22.
or in other charitable deeds, Luc. 10. 25.
(as to the laywer that asked how he should be saved) or as here in preferring
our duty to God before all worldly means.

III. Or what King about to go to make war against another King, does not
first sit down, and think, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him
that with twenty thousand comes against him. Otherwise while he is yet far
of, sending an embassage, he asks those things that belong to peace: so
therefore every one of you that does not renounce all that he possesses, cannot
be my disciple. Before; he spoke of a tower for defense, and also for pleasure;
here he puts us in mind that our life is a warfare: wherein certainly they who
have left all for Christ, have taken the safest course: for they have cut of at
once, ten and ten thousand enemies, and occasions of doing otherwise then well;
and have ten thousand helps more then usually men have in the world: yet this
very state is to be embraced upon good consideration, that we repent not with
shame, and also with so much damage, and hurt; as is to make peace with such
enemies; who are never at peace with us, but when we are in their power, and
slaverie. And he speaks of si^ting down and thinking, not that there is any
doubt at all to be made of following the doctrine of Christ in general, but
that we must s^ttle an immovable resolution to follow it, watever becomes of
our worldly friends or wealth; this resolution being a chief part of the
charges toward the buylding of our tower; Thom: ^ Kemp. l. 1. c* 19. n, 2.
and armor also for the battle According to our resolution, is the course of
our profit: if he that purposes strongly does often fail, what will become of
him, that seldom and slenderly purposes?

The eleventh Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe reward of the watchful and diligent servants was that their Lord and
master would gird himself, and make them sit down, and passing would minister
unto them. This we see verifyed to the eye in the most blessed Sacrament, in
which our blessed Savior, does make us sit down at his heavenly table, and
does confine his glorified body to so small a room as is the sacred host, and
by the hand of the Priests does minister it unto us, so lovingly, and to our so
much honor and benefit, that no tongue can express it, no thought can reach
the greatenes of it: How humble, how chaste, how recollected were it fitting we
should be, and how much shining with good works, and all kind of virtue? Let
S. Ihon Chrisost.
us therefore have care and watch over ourselves enjoying so great a happiness:
And if any unseemly thing offer itself to our thought, or tongue, or if
motions of anger rise in us, or of any other vice; let us call to mind how
great the honor is which our Savior does us, that that thought may quell all
unreasonable motions. Let us consider that we receive him whom the Angels
adore sitting at the right hand of his Father. And this know ye, that as they
be blessed, who do stand carefully prepared expecting their Lord, and are
highly rewarded by him; so the negligent ^ervant knowing his masters will and
worth, and not regarding it, will be dealt with accordingly, O my Lord, Thomas
a^ Kempisl. 4 c. 4.
my God prevent thy ^ervant with the sweetness of thy blessing that I may come
worthily and devoutly to this magnificent Sacrament: stir up my heart toward
thee. etc.

II. His patience toward us is no less then his magnifice^ce; both infinite,
expecting us from day to day, and year^ to year, to see whether we will bring
forth fruit according to the care which he has of us, visiting us so often. O
that we did consider rightly how great he is, who vouchsafes thus to look
upon us. Thomas ^ Kempis l. 4 c. 14. n. 2*
O truly ardent, and lively Faith of them, who truly know their Lord, in the
breaking of bread! whose heart does so greatly burn in them by Jesus his
walking with them. Far from me is such affection, and feeling devotion, so
great love and fervor. Be merciful to me sweet Jesus and look upon me with
those compassionate eyes with which thou did behold the crooked woman after
eighteen years infirmi^ie, and lift up my head and eyes that I may behold thy
power, thy goodness, thy mercyes, and thy blessed self, in this most blessed
Sacrament. Luc. 2. 29
Loose this bond of my dullnes, that I may say with old Simeon. Now thou do
dismiss thy servant, o Lord, according to thy word, in peace, because my eyes
have seen thy salvation.

III. The master of the Synagog reprehended the woman for coming to be cured
upon the Sabbath: The Pharisees came to our Savior wishing him to depart; but
seeing he is so stupendiously willing to have me even under his wing what can I
do better, then correspond with h^^ willingness? or where can I be better then
with him? ^ my soul let not any man's speech, or opposition; let not the
consideration of thy own unworthiness keep thee from accepting this loving
offer, Ecel. 21. 2
but as from the face of a serpent* fly sin and repayr to this thy
protector, thy nource, thy all things say with old Zachary: Blessed be our
Lord God of Israel, Luc. 1. 68*
because he has visited, and wrought the redemption of his people. etc.

The parables of the lost sheep, And the groate.
I. ANd then approached Publi^ans and sinners to hear him: E^a t autem
apropinquantes ^i publicani etc
and the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying. This man receives sinners,
and eats with them. Here again our Saviors goodness, and man's pervernes
appears; Luc. 15.
He giving intertainment to all that are willing to give care unto him; they
out of their pride rejecting those whom they thought not to be compared to
them: for thinking themselves holy and learned in the law, they despised those
whom they thought to be wicked, as not worthy of their company, and condemned
our Savior as not doing well in admitting the^ into his, or resorting to them:
not reflecting upon the intent for which our Savior did it, not suspending
their judgment till they should see the good effect of it. By the proceedings
of both we may see, that true justice has compassion, S. Gregor.
where false justice is moved with indignation and because the Pharisees were
so sick that they did not feel their own disease, to the e^d they might come
to know themselves, our Savior, like a good Physician, does apply an easy
remedy to them by the parables following.

II. What man of you having an hundred sheep, if he have lost one of them,
does he not leave the ninety nine in the desert and go after that which is
lost, until he find it? And when he has found it, lays it upon his
shoulders, rejoicing; and coming home, calls together his friends and
neighbors, saying, to them? rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep
that was lost: I say to you, that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon one
sinner, that does penance, then upon ninety nine just that need not penance. S.
Ambr*
Our Savior is a rich sheepeheard, among whose sheep all mankind is but the
hundred part. He left the ninety nine, the nine quires of Angels, and came into
our desert, seeking us; and took us upon his shoulders, when he took his
cross; and is joy full at the conversion of any one of us. He compares it to
the joy which men find in recovering their losses, but as the loss of one man's
soul is incomparably greater then the loss of a thousand and thousand sheep,
so his joy for the recoverie of one of us is with out comparison. Who would not
willingly return unto him to give him this joy?

III. Or what woman having ten groates, if she loose one groate, does she not
light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she finds? and
when she has found it, calls together her friends and neigbours saying,
reioy^e with me because I have found the groate which I had lost. So I say to
you, there shall be joy before the angels of God, upon one sinner that does
penance. The effect of this parable is the same with the former; but moreover
puteth us in mind how much we must endeavor to recover ourselves or another,
begging light of Almighty God, and bestiring ourselves in the search of our
falts, S. Ihon Chrysoft.
and causes of them. Also that as a piece of money has the stamp of the
Prince whose coin it is, so upon man the image of God is printed: in
consideration whereof we ought to use all diligence that it be not lost, and so
soyled, and bemired: or when it is lost, that it be found out again and
brought to its former luster. Christ also as S. Chrysologus discourses, S.
Chrysol.
is the full expression of the deity; the price of our redemption; he was
foretold and figured in the old law, and yet hidden; the Synagog of ehe Jews
had him, and through their obstinate darkness they did not see him; we following
the candle which our mother the Church holds forth unto us, and walking in
the light of our Saviors coutenance, shall find the groate, which is our
Savior, and rejoice with him in the co^ panie of his Angels. Amen. In fi^e we
must be toward our Savior as sheep, obedient, tractable, fearful, and wary
of the wolf, having recourse to him for help and assistance: toward others
meek and harmless, mo^e ready to suffer, then to contend; and esteem of our
souls as our chiefest substance, which once lost or impaired, as it cost our
Savior infinite pains and labor, so must we spare no labor to conserve, or
recover it.

The prodigal Child.
I. Acertayne man had two sons; Homo quidam habebat duo^ fi^ios.
and the younger of them said to his Father; Father, give me the portion of
substance which belongs to me; and he divided out the substance. And not many
days after, the younger Son gathering all things together, went from home,
into a far country, and there he wasted his substance living riotously. But
after he had spent all, there fell a sore famine in the coun^rey, and he Began
to need: And he went, and cleaved to one of the citizens of the country, and
he sent him to his farm to feed swine, and he would feign have filled his
belly with the husks, and no body gave unto him* In our paternall house of
God, so long as we be dutiful, we have three fountains of wealth and delight
all^ayes open to us, so that nothing can be wanting toward our happiness. These
are expressed in the words with which the loving father did endeavor to
appease the elder brother complaining of his debauched brothers intertaynement
at his ret^rne. Son thou art always with me, and all my things are thine;
for what greater preferme^t then to be sons of God? What greater pleasure
then to be always with him? What greater wealth then to have all that God
has to use it according to reason? What does most commonly put us by this
felicity? A great^ conceit of ourselves and of our ability to govern
ourselves, and an itching desire of disordered liberty: give me the portion of
substance: He that had all, confines himself to a portion: O blindness! But give
it me, who now have years, and wit enough; why should I be always kept
under? It belongs to me to order myself, and that which is mine: The eye of
my Father is now a troble to me, who see well enough what is to be done. I
will go see the world, and travel into far countries, where I may enjoy
the portion of my substance: for what avails it me to say that all things are
mine, if I cannot use them but as another will? youth, and age have different
ways. And thus not thinking any thing good, or safe, which was not at his own
dispose, not many days after gathering all things together, he went from home
into a far country. Far indeed he goes who endeavors to fly from God,
and from all rational courses: but what found he? Famine, want, slaverie,
beastly life, insatiable desires.

II. And returning to himself, he said how many of my fathers hirelings have
abundance of bread, and I here perish with famine? I will rise, and go to my
Father, and say to him; Father, y have sinned against heaven, and before thee:
I am not now worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hirelings:
and rising up he came to his Father. A happy return, when leaving of gazing
upon other folks actions, by which most commonly we take no good, we look home
upon ourselves; he saw by it that he lay wallowing in beastly pleasures,
feeding and delighting the hogs, that is, the d^vells, but himself void of
contentme^t; all worldly things being but husks, and of no solid substance or
^ut timent: therefore he says, he will rise from that dirty kind of life, and
from want of sustenance and go to his Father, with whom there is abundance of
bread for all sorts: and does not delay his rising and going: knowing that he
has a father to deal with; who, though I be unworthy to be received into
favor, will upon repentance have compassion of me; and, if not restore me to
my former state, which I deserve not, yet will give me sufficient to mayntaine
me e^erlastingly. Father I have sinned against heaven: This is the chief thing
to be considered in our offenses, that they are against God, against that
infinite power and goodness to whom all subjection is due, and all respect:
Then we must consider him as our Father, our benefactour; him by whom we
receive our life and mea^s; by whom wear protected and co^served: all which
deserved, in way of gratitude quite other co^rses the^ we have take^e. Again
that we have offended before him, in his sight, under his all seeing eye, and
have not considered it; and it is I who have done this; I who am but a worm of
the earth. not able to move hand or foot without him; and yet have used his
own creatures against him, and the strength and ability which I had from him,
I have turned to offend him. I am not worthy of any thing, but of punishment,
but thy mercyes are great, to which I betake myself upon my knees as to my
Father.

The Prodigal Child.
II. PART.
I. ANd when he was yet far of; his father saw him, and was moved with pity,
and running to him, fell upon his neck and kissed him. And his Son said to
him: Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee; I am not now worthy
to be called thy Son. This is the merciful proceeding of God toward us; he
casts his compassiona^e eye upon us though we be yet far of from him; and
runs toward us, with more sp^^d then we toward him; and condescendeth much
to our infirmity; stooping to us, while we are not able to raise ourselves so
hig^ as he deserves; and affoordeth us the loving kiss of peace; how ever we
deserve rather to be punished. He does not say whence come thou? Chrisolog
wherewert thou! Where is thy substance thou caryedst away? Wherefore did thou
change so much glory with so much baseness? These things he leaves to our
consideration; but he is all love and mercy.

II. And the Father said to his servants; quickly bring forth the first stole,
and do it on him, and put a ring upon his hand, and sh^es on his feet: and
bring the fatned calfe, and kill it: and let us eat, and make merry, because
this my Son was dead, and is revived, was lost, and is found. Chrisolog
And they began to make merry. The loving Father would have him clothed, before
he should come in sight; therefore he says, quickly: and it expresses a great
deal of willingn^s which is in God to see us not only out of our nastie rags
of sin, but clothed with those virtues which are most pleasing to him:
therefore not content to put on him the first stool^, that is, the garment which
he formerly used, he calls for a ring to his hand, to beautify his works,
and shoes to his feet, to strengthen his affections against the allurements
of the world. Yet the first stools mentioned must put us in mind: that all the
time spent far from God is lost: and returning we must begin where we left:
and happy we, if we be not cast farther back then we were when we parted. In a
mystical sense, Chrisolog
The father ran to us in his son when in him he descended from heaven, my
Father (says he) who sent me is with me. He fell upon his neck when in Christ,
the whole divinity rested upon our flesh; and he kissed him, when mercy and
truth have met, justice and peace have kissed each other He also is the fa^ned
calfe killed for our entertaynment: to the end we might not only have
sufficient to sustain us, but abundance, and of the best to delight us much
more in the service of God, then in our former course.

III. But the elder son was in the field, and when he came and drew nigh to
the house, he heard music, and dancing, and he called one of the servants,
and asked what all that should be: And he said to him; thy brother is come,
and thy Father has killed the fatned calfe, because he has received him safe;
and he was angry, and would not go in. His father therefore going forth, began
to desire him. But he answering, said to his father: Behold so many years do
I serve thee, and I never transgressed thy commandment, and thou did never
give me a Kid to make merry with my friends. But after that this thy son, that
has devoured his substance with whores, is come, thou have killed for him the
fatned calfe. But he said to him, son, thou art always with me, and all my
things are thine: but is behoved us to make merry, and be glad, because this
thy brother was dead, and is revived; was lost, and is fo^nd. This expresses
how consider that we should do by others, as we would have done to ourselves:
secondly how much we value the service which we do, as if God were beholding
to us for it. Thirdly how blind we are in not discovering our own falts. I
never transgressed; as if to envy another good were not to transgress: it
was not thy strength, but thy fathers grace which was cause of it. See on the
other side the goodness of God, who goes forth, and desires, even the
Stubborn Son; and learn that to sin against him, is to kill thy own
soul, which is much more to be abhorred then the loss of our life.

The unfaithful Bailey.
I. HE said also to his disciples; Dicebat autem and ad discipulosuos etc.
There was a rich man that had a Bailey, and he was ill reported of onto him, as
he that had wasted his goods. And he called him, and said to him, what hear I
this of thee? Give account of thy Baylyship, Luc. 16.
for now thou can no more be bailey. Our Savior Christ as God is the only
powerful King of Kings, ^. Tim. 6. 15:
and Lord of Lords, rich in all things, and chiefly in his mercyes, Ephesians. 2. 4.
to whom we must give account of every thing: for we are ^ords neither of life
nor lim not thought, nor deed, but accountable for all: neither can any thing
escape his knowledge; Chrysol.
Though here, that which he certainly knows, he reckons as heard by report;
because he is not rash or hasty in condemning; and will give us leisure to
repent, while the cause is, as it were, depe^ding before him. He asks an
account that we may ask pardon; and happy we, if by remorse of conscience he
ask it here, before the time of satisfaction be expired.

II. And the Bailey said within himself: what shall I do, because my Lord
takes from me the Baylyship. Dig I am not able, to beg: am ashamed. I know
what I shall do, that when I shall be removed from my Baylyship, they may
receive me into their houses. Chrysol
A man always desires to do well when death comes* and bereaves him of the
time of doing good. This question he should have asked himself before; what
shall I do seeing every hour and every minute my Baylyship is upon removing
from me? Be I never so rich to the world, and abound in all things for this
moment of time; I am most miserable, if for all eternity I shall be a beggar
by it: If I be not here able to work, how shall I there be able to suffer the
punishments of the slothful? If I be here ashamed to confess and beg
pardon, what shame shall I undergo there, where there is no pardon? It is not
unknown to us what we ought to do, that after this life we may be saved; God
grant we may take warning, and be wise in time, that we be not removed before
we have adiusted our accounts, and be ready to give in our reckoning.

III. Therefore calling together every one of his Lords debtors, he said to the
first, How much do thou owe to my Lord? He says, an hundred pipes of oil,
and he said to him, take thy bill, and sit down, quickly write fifty: and to
another, how much do thou owe? He said an hundred quarters of wheat; he
said, take thy bill, and write fourscore. And the Lord praised the Bailey of
iniquity, because he had done wisely: for the Children of this world are wiser
then the Children of light in their generation. And I say unto you, make unto
you friends of the Mammon of iniquity, that when you fail, they may receive
you into the eternrll Tabernacles. The Bailey of iniquity is here praised, not
because he did just things, but because according to the practice of worldlings
he showed himself witty, and at his masters cost made his own benefit. How
much more (says S. Hierome) S. Hierom
will Christ our Savior, who cannot be indamaged, and is inclined to pity and
compassion, commend his followers, if they be pittyfull, and compassionate
toward their brethren, and liberal in relieving or pardoning them? therefore
also he does not say absolutely that the children of the world are wiser then
the Children of light, but in their generation, that is, in the affairs which
pass through their hands; and as they by their moneys (most commonly
unjustly, or intemperately taked up) do work out a subsistence to themselves;
so must we by contemning the pels of this life, or disposing of it to righteous
uses, make friends in heaven, where we may be eternally welcome.

The Rich Glutton.
I. THere was a certain rich man, Homo quidam erat dives.
and he clothed in purple, and silk, amd fared every day magnifically; and
there was a certain beggar, called Lazarus, that lay at his gate, Luc. 16. 19
full of sores, desiring to be filled with the crumbs that fell from the rich
man's table, and no body gave him, but the dogs also came and licked his sores.
Riches we see in the prodigal Child bred riotousnes; in the Baylie deceit,
and unfaithfulness; here gluttony, and unmercifully contempt of the poor and
needy: all three making our Saviors words good; Matthew. 19. 23
It is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. The Beggar lay
without doors, but not without a Master; Fulge^tius.
naked of cloths, but not of Faith; exposed to the dogs, and fellow to the
Angels: who tasted not of the rich man's crumbs, but received the bread of
heaven, refreshing his soul. Mark the diversity; the richman poor and
miserable amidst all his wealth, and health; the beggar rich and happy in his
poverty and diseases. For it came to pass that the beggar died, and was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: and the rich man died, and he was
buried in hell.

II. And lifting up his eyes, when he was in torments, he saw Abraham a far
of, and Lazarus in his bosom, and crying, he said, father Abraham, have mercy
on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, to
cool my tongue, because I am tormented in this flame. And Abraham said to
him; Son, remember that thou did receive good things in thy life time, and
Lazarus Likewise evil; but now he is comforted, and thou tormented: and
be^ides all this, betwixt us and you there is a great gulf (or Chaos) fixed,
that they who will pass from hence to you may not, neither come from thence
hither. When he was in Prosperity he scarce ever lifted up his eyes to
acknowledge from whom he received that plenty, and to thank him; now he lifted
them up to his confusion, and greater affliction; he saw Abraham, but a far
of, he having lived far from following his belief and obedience; and Lazarus
now at rest, while himself was tormented, and wanted that help which he had
dedenyed the poor when thy begged. He beggs a drop who denied a crum; and
finds the heat of his tongue intolerable, Thomas a Kempis 1. ^ c. 24 n* 3
who could not in life time abide the least want of refreshment. In the things
wherein a man has sinned, in those he shall be more grievously punished; There
the sloathfull. etc.

III. And he said: Then father, I beseech thee that thou would send him to
my fathers house; for I have five brethren, to testify to them least they also
come into this place of torment. And Abraham said to him; They have Moses,
and the Prophets let them hear them. But he said, no, Father Abraham, but if
some man shall go from the dead to them, they will do penance; and he said
to him. If they hear not Moses and the Poophets, neither if one shall rise
again from the dead will they believe. This might be seen in the person of
our Savior himself: for the Jews neither believed the Prophets testifying him
to be the Messiah; nor Lazarus whom he had raised from death: nor himself
raising himself, after he had so publicly suffeted death by them. Neither is
the testimony of one rising from the dead* so assured a witness, as is the holy
Scripture, laying down before us that which we believe by it. An
extraordinary miracle may move admiration, but the ordinary means by which
God does use to instruct us is more solid, and the constantly knocking at the
door of our heart a greater mercy toward us: if we give not ear, and do not
open unto him, it is a hazard whe^he^ an extraordinary accident happening will
have force enough to break through those obstructions, which are so settled in
our thoughts and behavior. The rich man fared every day magnifically; it is
not said how long he lived so; Thomas 2 Kempis l. 1 c. 23 n. 24
but dying he was buried eternally in hell, and could have no help: This one
consideration is motive enough to take heed. Very quickly will there be an end
of thee, see how thou behavest thyself: to day a man is, and to morrow he
appears not. In all things have regard to the end, and how thou will stand
before the severe Judge.

The Pharisee and the Publican.
I. ANd he said also to certain that trusted in themselves as just, Dixit
a^tem and ad quosdam qui etc:
and despised others, this parable Two men went up into the temple to pray;
Luc* 18. 9.
the one a Pharise, the other a Publican. The Pharisee standing prayed thus, by
himself, God, I give thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men,
extortioners, unjust, advlterers, as also this Publican: I fast twice in the
week; I give tithes of all that I possess; It was not amiss neither to give
God thanks that he was not as other men, unjust, etc. Or to fast, and give the
^enths of his possessions; but our Savior insinuates that this was said with
a secret pride, as thinking he deserved to be so protected; or that God was as
it were beholding to him for his good deeds; contemning also others, whom he
thought not so upright as himself. He might have better said (says S.
Augustine) I am not as many men; S. August.
what is, as the rest of men, but all besides himself? I am just, the rest are
sinners. Scan his words, and see what he asked of God: Nothing: he went up to
pray; He asked God nothing: he fell to praise himself, and moreover to insult
over him that Prayed. Art thou so full that thou need nothing? Is not this
life a place of temptation?

II. And the Publican standing a far of, would not so much as lift up his
eyes toward heaven, but knocked his breast, saying; S. August
God be merciful to me a sinner. The Publican stood a far of, but God was
not far from him: his gilty conscience made him not dare presume to approach;
his piety gave him access. God is high, and looks upon the humble; but upon
such high people as the Pharisee he looks a far of: the Publican did not
only stand aloof, but would not so much as lift up his eyes toward heaven; he
thought himself unworthy to behold, or to be looked on, Heaven had been a long
time out of his thoughts: he held it too soon to take the boldness to look up
to it, however he desired it: He did reverence it more by humbly looking down,
then by lifting his eyes toward it. And he knocked his breast, doing penance
for his synns, and confessing them* and asking of pardon: what wonder is it, if
upon acknowledgment he obtained remission. O God be mercy full to me a sinner.

III. I say unto you, This man went down into his house justified more then
he, because every one that exalts himself shall be humbled, and he who
humbles himself shall be exalted. This is a document, not to judge others
easily, according to our Saviors rule, ^0. 7. 14.
Judge not according to the face, or outward appearance, but judge just
judgment, which is easyet to do of ourselves, then of others; for what do we
know of another inward disposition? Yea even of ourselves A man knows not
whether he deserve love or hatred. Eccl. 9 1
Secondly, It is a general rule, that humility is the only secure way to
heaven. Every one that exalts himself shall be humbled, And even in ordinary
things, a body may observe, that after pride comes some fall or disgrace. And
seeing our Savior, the eternal wisdom of God, choose this way to be
exalted, not so much in regard to himself, as for our example and instruction,
it were a kind of madness to seek to be great in any other way, S. Bernard
or in any other thing then in humility. It is a great and rare virtue to do
great things, and not to esteem thy self great: that the sanctity which is
manifest to all should be hidden from thyself: to appear admirable, and to
reckon thy self contemptible: This I take to be the most admirable virtue of
all the rest. He must needs be a faithful servant who suffers nothing to
stick to his fingers of that glory, Thomas a Kempis l. (...). 8
which though it proceeds not from him, yet passes through his hands shall
I speak to my Lord, seeing I am dust and asks? If I esteem myself better,
behold thou stand against me. etc.

The twelfth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe lost sheep sought so carefully, the prodigal Child intertayned so
lovingly, the humble Publican justified so mercyfully, give us occasion to
glorify our B. Savior; who in the most B. Sacrament, laying aside his
infinite glory, and leaving it with the quires of Angels, comes into our
desert here below, daily to seek us, and moved with compassion, comes running
toward us, and kisseth us: Quickly put on the best stole thou can, and a
ring on thy singer, in testimony that eternally thou will be his: He feasteth
thee with the most costly, and most sumptuous banquet that can be imagined; his
own most precious body and blood, his divinity, and humanity, his merits,
and example, and spared not his own life, and labor to provide it for thee. O
that we could hear the Music which the Angels make at this feast, and behold
their dancing, or their reverend behavior! S. Ihon Chrisost.
For that at which the Angels tremble and dare not freely behold, in regard of
the splendor which darts forth of it, on that we feed, to that we are united,
and made one body, and one flesh with Christ, let us make at least what music
we can; combining diverse acts of virtue to intertayne him; say with the
Publican, and with his humble comportment; O God be merciful to me a sinner:
say with the prodigal child; I am not worthy: Ps. ^^. 106
say with the Psalmist I have sworn and resolved to keep the judgments of thy
justice: Say with holy Church: O sacrum convivium in quo Christus sumitur.

II. The elder Brother to the prodigal hearing of the feast, would not go in,
till his Father came out, and desired him. The Fathers desire must prevayle
with us more then the example of the elder brother; S. Grill.
and encourage us, not easyly to abstain from this banquet. If we desire
eternal life, let us willingly run to receive this blessing: and beware that
the enemy, to hinder us, lay not before us, as a snare, some hurtful
scrupulositie. It is written, says he, that he that vnwortyhly eareth of this
bread, eats judgment to himself: and I trying myself, find myself unworthy.
When therefore shall thou be worthy? When will thou present thyself to thy
Savior (For if by synning thou be unworthy; and do not leave to sin (for
according to the Psalmist, who understands his transgressions? Thou will be
wholly deprived of this life-giving Sanctisication. Wherefore I beseech the
intertayne better thoughts; live virtuously and holily, and partake of this
blessing, which (believe me) is a remedy not only against death, but against
all diseases. For Christ our Savior remaining in us does assuage the raging
law of Concupiscence, strengthens devotion, quayleth the inordinate motions
of our mind.

III. Lazarus, though never so full of sores, lying at this rich man's gate,
will not be refused the croms that fall from this table, begging them with true
feeling of his poverty and want, and true desire of being relieved: what are
these croms? Io. 6. 50. 59.
The promise of neverdying. He that eats this bread shall not dye, but live
for ever. The hope of eternity; The remaining in Christ and Christ in him; a
more intimate participation of his merits; a more constant separation from the
wicked world, and a glorious resurrection. What is the bosom of Abraham to the
rest which we may find in our Savior, when we have him in out bosom? Would
to God by thy presence thou would dest wholly inflame me, Thomas a Kempis l. 4
^. 16 n. 3
and change me into thyself, that I may be one spirit with thee.

Our Savior perswads perfection.
I. ANd behold one came, and said to him; Good master, what good shall I do,
that I may have life everlasting? who says to him, E^ ecce vnus accedens a^t
illi. etc.
what ask thou me of good* One is good, God: but if thou will enter into
life, keep the commandments. He said to him; which? And Jesus said: thou
shall not murder; Matthew. 19. 16
thou shall not commit Adulterey; thou shall not steal; etc. The youngman
says to him, all these have I kept from my youth; what is yet wanting unto
me? First he did not reflect that perseverance was yet wanting, which no body
can promise himself; but must be continually indea^ouring to it, and praying
for it, as a gift above all gifts. Secondly, he did not perhaps sufficiently
reflect from whom he had received so much grace as to have kept all the
commandments, from his youth, nor did esteem of that benefit as he ought.
Thirdly in our Saviors answer, that only God is good; we may find, both the
humility of our Savior, referring all the goodness, which was remarkable in
him to his heavenly Father, without staying his thougs in himself, though he
were equally good. An instruction for ourselves, that all good comes from God,
all virtue, all observance; all possibility of entering unto life. Adore him,
and extol his goodness* and beg of him, so much participation of it as he
shall please to communicate to thee.

II. Jesus said to him; If thou will be perfect, go, sell the things which
thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; and
come, follow me, and when the yongman heard this word, he went away sad, for he
had many possessions. Perfection consists in that conjunction with God which
we may attain unto in this life, that is, in Charity, and the love of God; to
which perfection all are bound in some degree, so that at least, they never
prefer my thing in thought, word, or deed, before the love of God, and
observance of his commandments; and to this perfection it seems this young man
conceived that he had arrived. But our Savior showed him that there was a
higher degree, or a more advantageous way to increase perfection, and the love
of God, then he had hitherto thought on. If thou will be perfect, go, sell all,
etc. Great things (says S. Hierome) S. Hierom
are always left to the will, and free choice of the hearers: S. August.
they are not commanded, but counseled. The young man, when he asked what good
shall I do? Did desire eternal life; God was desirous to give it him in
perfection, but he found his hands full; God was ready to give, and found not
where to place his gift, Go, and sell, and give to the poor: place those
things in heaven, which here on earth do hinder thee: of what art thou
afraid? Thou shall not leese them: they will be reserved for thee in heaven:
Thou art afraid to leese thy money, and do thou not fear least thyself
perish?

III. And Jesus said to his disciples; Amen, I say to you, that a rich man
shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven* It is easyer for a Camel (or a
cable rope) to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. And when they heard this, the disciples marvelled
very much saying, who the^ ca^ be saved? And Jesus said to the^, with me^ this
is impossible, but with God all things are possible: This saying of truth
itself is much be to weighed; he does not say a rich man shall not enter,
though he retaynes his riches; but he says he shall hardly enter: and in the
other Evangelists he expresses it by way of admiration, How hardly shall they
enter who have money? Esteeming it a miraculous thing, and above the course of
ordinary grace, without extraordinary helps. To which purpose, S. Ambrose S.
Ambro.
says, whosoever is puffed up with honor, enlarged by his treasures of gold,
like a beast laden and hampered, will not be able to pass through the narrow
way of the Kingdom of heaven. Yet the advice which S. Augustine S. August
gives is greatly to be taken heed to: that whoever can glory of poverty
must beware of pride, least the humble rich men go before them; and beware of
floth; and want of devotion, least the devout rich men be perferred; and take
heed of intemperance, least the sober go beyond them: what avayleth poverty,
if thou follow not Christ.

The reward of loving all to follow Christ:
I. THen Peeter answering said to him. Tunc respondens Petrus dixit ei
Behold we have left all things, and followed thee; what therefore shall we
have? And Jesus said to them, Amen I say to you, that you who have followed
me, in the regeneration, Matthew 19 27
when the Son of man shall sit in the seat of his majesty, you also shall
sit upon twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. S. Peeter
representing to our Savior that he, and the rest of the Apostles had done that
hard thing, of which the rich young man was afraid, and sad when it was moved
to him, our Savior did not check him, nor say: thou have forgotten thy
poverty; what is that which thou have left, S. August
in comparison of the whole world, which upon my promise thou art to receive?
He leaves much, who leaves not only what he has but whatever he might desire
to have: for what poor snake does not swell with the hope which he has in
this world? Who is there that does not daily desire to increase that which he
has? This desire, this greedines is here taken away. S. Peeter did also well
observe that it was not enough to leave all unless he followed our Saviors
virtues and doctrine, neither can he indeed be truly said to leave all, who
retaynes so much of sense, and self-love, as to draw back from the perfect
performance of whatever virtue he is inspired unto; for though he leaves all
which he had without, he leaves not that which is with in himself, and which
is of more importance and more dear into us, then whatever, we have without us.

II. The answer of our Savior does import, that for our leaving all we must
not look for reward in this world but take thankfully whatever does happen,
and reserve our hopes to the regeneration, that is, to the next world, when
rising glorious we shall be regenerated into immortality; here we must look
for labor* there for reward; and however, though it were reward enough to
follow our savior, and to receive so much grace as perfectly to love him; yet
he promises, for the honor, which we might (...) in this world by our wealth
and possessions, much ^ore honor in the world to come; and so much as to (...)
seated by him; not as people who are to give account of their actions, and how
they have employed the goods, which were lent them but as judges of others
actions and pioceedings: What can be more glorious? (says S. Bernard) S.
Bernard
let the sons of Pride now judge* and censure at their pleasure; let them sit
with their kings; that king, who choose to himself, the northen quarter; let
them be exalted as the cedars of Libanus* we shall pass to out throne, when
they shall not be regarded.

III. And every one that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or Father,
or Mother, or wife, or Children, or lands for my namesake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall possess life everlasting Here be promises not only a
reward in the other life, Luc. 18 6
but also in this life, as it is expressly in S. Luke; which temporal reward,
though it be not to be looked for, yet our Savior out of his superabundant
liberality, promises it, and performs it partly by the inward content, and
quiet, which those find, who have left all for him; and by the facility with
which they perform the acts of virtue; which deservedly is valved above an
hundred fold of temporales: partly also he performs his promise by providing,
so as seldom, or never they want any thing, who left all for him; but have
within themselves all the comfort of assistance, which either father, or
mother, or brother or sister, or friend, or land could have affoorded them in
the world. And in the mean time, from whence-soever this hundred fold does
arise, so it be an hundred fold* S. Bernard
so it be worth an hundred, so it please, comfort, delight, and be to be
beloved an hundred times more then other things, what madness is it, that men
are so slow in leaving a single thing for an hundred fold where is the
covetous? what is become of the ambitious Where are those who traffic in
this world? Does not he in vain do evil who might more advantagiously and
more plesantly serve God then serve the world?

Workmen hired into the Vineyard.
I. THe Kingdom of heaven is like a house holder, who (...) forth early in the
morning to hire workmen into his v^^neyard, Simile est regnum Celorum Patri
Familias etc
and having covenanted with the workmen for penny a day, be sent them into his
vineyard.. And going forth about the third hour, he saw others standing in the
market pla^^ idle, and he said to them, Matthew. 20
go you also into the vineyard, and (...) what shall be just, I will give you.
And again he went forth about the sixth, and the ninth hour, and did likewise.
And about the eleventh hour he went forth, and found others standing, and he
says to them, what stand you here all the day idle? They say to him, because
no body has hired us: He says to them, go you also into the vineyard. The
vineyard is the Church, and every ons soul; the market place, is the world,
the workmen the Apostles, and Apostolical me^, and every one is workema^ to
his own vineyard: wages is promised to the first, the second, and third; to
the last nothing is promised, but yet if then they do their work, God will not
be behind hand with them. For any man to say he is not hired, is an excuse of
the idle. God is the great householder, who from the beginning of the world to
the e^d thereof; does not cease, to hire us to do his work, which is ours
also, for ours is the benefit, if we perform it, though however his is the
glory of it. We have reason to acknowledge his goodness, who in all ages does
admonish us of our duty, and is not failing to send helps to instruct us, and
to set the work forward; and seeks our good to the last period of our days.

II. When the evening was come, the Lord of the vineyard said to his Baylie;
call the workmen, and pay them their hire, beginning from the last to the
first. Therefore when they were come who came about the eleventh hour, they
received every one a penny. But when the first also came, they thought that
they should receive more, and they also received every one a penny: and
receiving it, they murmured against the goodman of the house, saying The last
have continued one hour, and thou have made them equal to us, who have borne
the burden of the day, and the heates. This largess seemed to these men
iniust; S. Ambr.
but what answer did they receive; What instruction was given them? The
justice of this distribution was not revealed to them, neither were they
admitted to view the hidden secret; but to the end that they should refrain
from scanning Gods judgments, the goodness of the mercy-full householder, and
the power of him that ordayneth all things, according to his will, was laid
before them, as if that of the Apostle had been said unto them; Who art thou
that thou do answer God. Romans 9 10


III. He answering, said to one of them; friend, I do thee no wrong; did not
thou covenant with me for a penny? Take that is thine, and go: I will also give
to this last even as to thee: Or is it not lawful for me to do what I will?
Or is thy eye naught because I am good? So shall the last be first, and the
first last. for many be called, but few elect. The penny promised to all is
life everlasting, which is common to all that shall be saved: yet in the same
life there be degrees of glory, as betwixt star and star in the firmament.
If therefore we be admitted to life everlasting, 1 Cor 15 41
we can have no wrong, it being above any thing we can deserve; and they who
came later may have equaled the longer time of the former by their fervor, and
surpassed it: we are not good judges in our own case, it must be left to him
who cannot be unjust: Our eye cannot arrive to comprehend, neither what in
goodness, nor what in justice God may do. If we will keep him our friend; let
us not be over curious, but apply ourselves to our work, and for the rest
stand to his mercy, S, August
which is infinite. Many are called. Take heed thou differ not to come,
because thou art assured to receive thy penny, when ever thou come: say not
to thyself; He will give every one as much, wherefore should I take more
pains? What he will give, and what he will do, is locked up in his own
breast: Come when thou are called. Equal hire is promised all, but about the
hour of working their is great question. Young men may say we will come at the
eleve^th hour; but no body has promised thee that thou shall live till the
seventh: see that thou do not by differring bereave thyself of that which he
otherwise upon his promise would give thee. Few indeed are choosen: but those
are of the elect, who not despising their caller, follow him; and believe him
for men believe not, but of their own free choice.

The raising of Lazarus.
I. PART.
1. THere was a certain sickman, Lazarus, of Bethania, of the town of Marie,
Erat quidam languens Lazarus a Bethania etc Io 11
and Martha her sister. His sisters therefore sent, saying, Lord behold; He
whom thou love is sick: and Jesus hearing said to them: This sickness is not
to death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorisied by
it. And Jesus loved Martha and Marie ad Lazarus; As he heard therefore that he
was sick, he tarried in the same place 2. days. The faithful are diversely
tried; S Ambro^
some by loss of friends, others by loss of goods, and several other
vexations: would to God I could see my flesh infirm and weakened; that I lived
not in flesh, but in the faith of Christ: for greater oftimes* is grace in
infirmity, then in health. Sickness, and death are no signs of less love: but
as the sickness was not to death, because death itself was not to death, but for
the glory of God, so our infirmities are more for the glory of God, then our
weak nature will give us leave to imagine: and when God delayeth the restoring
us to health, we are so much the more to conform ourselves, by how much we
acknowledge that his wisdom is greater, Ap 3 19
and his love by taxying nothing the less; I whom I love, do rebuke and
castise: says our Savior in the Apocalips.

II. Then he says to his disciples, let us go into Iewrie again: the
disciples say to him: Now the Jews sought to stone thee, and go thon
thither again? Jesus answered, are not their twelve hours of the day? If a
man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of the
world: but if he walk in the night, he stumbleth, because the light is not in
him: See the love of our Savior: for our good he does not stick to venture his
life, and in structeth his followers, to confide in God, who is the true light
of the world, and walking under his protection, even that which others may
think amiss cannot be to us amiss; for to them that love God, Rom 8 28
all things cooperate to good. God governes the hours of the day, and every
thing that happe^s in them; upon this his providence, having always our eye,
we shall not stumble. They who consider not this, as they ought, do ever walk
in darkness and are diversely perplexed, according to the diversity of
accidents, which must needs befall the^ in this world, which is all in cha^ges.

III. After this he says to them, Lazarus our friend sleeps, but I go that I
may raise him from sleep. His disciples said, Lord if he sleep, he shall be
safe: but Jesus spoke of his death: the^ therefore he said plainly to them.
Lazarus is dead: And I am glad for your sake, that you may believe, because I
was not there, but let us go to him. Thomas said to his co^di^iples; let us go
also and die with him first father Adam brought death upon us; S. Ihon Chrysostom.
Christ our Savior coming into this world took away even the name of death. A
blessed sleep which brings us rest and quiet* of which the psalmist says;
Precious in the sight of our Lord is the death of his saints. Ps. 115
Consider the difference betwixt the just and unjust: To the unjust death is
eternal, because though they rise again, it is not to life, but to a new and
worse death: the death of the just is properly a sleep; because they rise
refreshed, and to a better life, then before they slept; thus we shall sleep,
if we be his friends. Lazarus our friend sleeps: here by contemplation and
love there by clear vision and imbracings: here we must not think, that our
sleep is to be continual; it is his will that we be raised from it at
convenient times for his glory in other respects: he comes to raise us, when
the course of our vocation calls us to other duties; the which we must obey
readily, Cant. 5. 2.
and lovingly, knowing that it is the voice of our beloved that calls us. if
thus we sleep we are safe. And if we be wholy dead to the world, we have the
more reason to be glad, because we shall find that to be true, which we
believed; and that Christ will not forsake us, being imitatours of his death.
Blessed is he that can with hearty and effectual desire say, let us go and die
with him.

The raising of Lazarus.
II. PART..
I. Jesus therefore same, and found him now having been four days in the
grave. And many of the Jews were come to Martha and Marie, to confort them,
concerning their brother. Martha therefore when she heard, that Jesus was come,
went to meet him; but Marie sat at home. It is a mystical senee of holy
Fathers that Jesus when he came into this world, found mankind, four thousand
years b^ryed in the stinking grave of sin, and there lying without sense of
feeling of that which might concern the soul, and without motion toward it.
Bless our Savior, that at last, for the glory of God, and to the end we
should more palpably see the necessity, and virtue of grace, he came himself
to raise us. S. Augustine S. August
more over says that; the first day of our burial in sin, is when we
first consent; the second, when by not repenting quickly, we come to have an
itching desire to commit it again, and again, and take pleasure in it; the
third day; when we grow into custom; the forth day, when custom brings upon
us a kind of necessity of doing ill, and it seems unto us that we cannot
avoyde it. Thomas a Kempis l. ^ c. 13 n. 5
We must watch chiefly toward the beginning of temptations; for then out
enemy is more easyly overcome. We may find many that will go about to
comfort us, not taking the right way; but we must harken out Jesus, and make
have with Martha to meet him; for in him alone is our redress.

II. Martha said to Jesus, Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not
dyed. But now also I know that what things that shall ask of God, God will
give thee. Jesus said to her, Thy Brother shall rise again. Martha says to
him, I know he shall rise in the resurrection in the last day; Jesus says to
her: I am the resurrection and life, he that believes in me, though he be dead
shall live: and every one that lives, and believes in me shall not die for
ever. Beleevest thou this? She says to him; yea Lord, I have beleaved that
thou art Christ the son of God, that art come into the world? Thomas ^ Kempis
l. 2 c. 8 n. 2
If Jesus be with thee, no enemy can hurt thee. Our chief care must be not to
loose him yet if we do chance to loose him, we know that he is merciful,
Ezech 33. 11
and will not the death of a sinner, but that he live, by repe^ta^ce returning
again unto him. We shall all rise again in the last day, but in the days of
this life we must labor the more that by good works; 2 Pe^. 1 1^
we may make sure our vocation, and election. He is the sourse and means to
life and resurrection; every one that believes in him, and lives accordingly,
though he dye in body, shall live happily, here by grace, there by glory. This
we believe, because he himself the son of God, has taught it us.

III. Having said these things, she went, and called Marie her sister secretly
saying, the master is come, and calls thee; she, when she heard, rises
quickly, and comes to him. The jews who were with her, when they saw her rise
quickly, and go forth, followed her, saying, that she goes to the grave, to
weep there. Marie when she was come where Jesus was, seeing him fell at his
feet, and said to him, Lord if thou had been here my brother had not dyed.
Mark the expressions of love toward our Savior; ^he rose quickly and came as
sudainly; she fell at his feet, where first she had received pardon, and
loving intertaynment; she expresses her belief and confidence, that if he had
been present he would have eased her of that cross: Yet neither she nor her
sister do require of him, that he would raise their brother to life; either
esteeming it too great a request, or thinking that it might best as it was;
or that if he thought it better, he would have compassion of their very tears
without other expression: In fine however it should happen, it was a comfort
above all comforts to have him present; which thou must endeavor to make also
thy comfort, Thomas a Kempis l. 2 ^. 8. n. 2.
and say. what can the whole world afford me, without Jesus.

The raising of Lazarus.
III PART.
I. Jesus therefore when he saw her weeping, and the Iew^s, who were come with
her, weeping, he groned in spirit, and trobled himself, and said, where have
you laid him? They say to him Lord, come and see. And Jesus wept. The Jews
therefore said, behold, how he loved him. But certain of them said, could not
he that opened the eyes of the blind man, make that this man should not dye.
Observe that tears do move our Savior to compassion: we shall not want them,
if we seriously consider, where our souls are laid, and are like to be laid
by sin. Come often, and see: most men miscary, because they do not attend to
this; thoughts of the world carry their minds another way, and in the mean
time they fall into the lapse and heed it not. How grievous a thing must sin
needs be, which caused our Savior himself to groan and weep? And not only to
weep, but to sweat drops of blood, and yeald a whole flood of it from his
sacred side to vvash us from it? And how great a token is it that he loved us,
seeing he would undertake so hard a task for us? He could have made that we
should not sin at all. But in this we must submit to his infinite wisdom,
who thought it more reason that we should be left to our choice, that by
striving to do well and overcoming our contrary inclinations, our reward
might be the greater after the victory.

II. Jesus again groaning in himself, says: Take away the stone: Martha said
to him: Lord* now he stinketh, for he is (...) of fou^e days. Jesus said to
her: did I not say to thee, that if thou believe, thou shall see the glory of
God. They took therefore the stone away The very loathsomnes of our synn^ is
too too often a hindrance of our remedy: we are loath to discover them, we are
loath others should know how imperfect we a^e or have been; Yet the only
remedy is to discover them to those who have power to raise us: It is to
corrupt nature a hard and heavy stone, yet it must be removed, S Ambro,
before we can come to life. If thou accuse thyself, though thou be dead, thou
vvilt revive; he desi^es to see by this, whether thou be indeed dead to sin.
Believe this. and thou shall see the glory of God.

III. And Jesus lif^ing up his eyes, said, Father, I give thee thanks that
thou have heard me; And I did know that thou do always hear me, but for
the people have I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me, when
he had said this, he cried out with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth, and
fortwith he that had been dead came forth, bound feet and hands, with winding
bands, and his face was tied with a napkin. Jesus said to them, loose him, and
let him go. Sin, when it is grown into custom binds us, hand, and foot,
and fa^e, that we can neither see our own heavy case, nor move of ourselves
toward any thing that conduces to our good. God does thunder out his
judgments with a loud voice, to move us to come forth: He could have bidden
those who were nigh to take ^he body of Lazarus forth of the grave, but to
signify that we must cooperate to our own rising from sin, he cries out to
him to come forth. What do thou lie in the darkness of thy conscience,
(says S. Ambrose) S. Ambro*
and in the filth of thy sin, as in a prison of malefactors? Come forth:
Confess thy sin, that thou may be justified. By true confession thou will be
loosed, and let go, otherwise thou vvilt remain still bound. Glorify God that
has bestowed this benefit upon thee, and bevvare for hereafter.

The thirteenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. IF at any time perfection be to be desired, most of all when we are to
aproch to the most bl^ssed Sacrament; for so it is written. 1 Pe^. 116
Be you holy, because I am holy; and though it be not necessary, for the
perfect receiving of our Savior in the Sacrament, to sell all that we have,
and give to the poor: it is sitting not withstanding, that we should for some
convenient time lay aside all worldly business; and retire our thoughts wholy
to the due entertaynment of this Guest, who made himself poor for our sake,
and here desires a lodging in our breast: The Alms which he most destreth is
our heart; (though remporall alms be also a good preparation) which we must
give him, not with sadne^, 2 Cor. 97
as the young man; nor so much only, as of necessity we must give, or else not
be his at all, but we must give it freely and cheerfully: For God loves a
cheerful giver: such as S. Peter professed himself to be when he said; Behold
we have left all, and followed thee, what therefore shall we have? And what
answer can we expect from him, Who is able to make all grace abound in us, but
that if we sow in blessing, in blessing also we shall reap, for he is not
closhanded: Be^old his sacred wounds, and how out of them he is ready to
distill upon thee an hundred fold for one: Thomas a Ke^pis l. 4 c. 15 n. 4
Behold, so shall he be blessed, who seeks God with his whole heart.

II. It is not enough to leave all, we must follow him, that is, imitate his
virtues. What be the virtues, which here in this Sacrament he does practice to
the end of the world for our sake? Humility, in laying a side his glory and
coming to us in this humble and tractable disguise: Secondly, pati^nce, in
bearing with many indignities offered by such as receive him, either with
little respect or unworthily. Thirdly, Charity in affoording himself to all,
rich and poor, sick and whole, that he may gain all. Fourthly, Liberality,
not contenting himself with what he had done and suffered for us, while he
lived openly upon earth; but continually renewing the same sacrifice, and
affoording us the same supercelestiall food of life and fountain of all
graces: Matt. vlt. Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 57
Perseverance to the end of the world according to what he said before his
Ascension. Behold I am with you every day to the end of the world. Son
patience, and humility in adversity does please me more then much comfort and
devotion in prosperity.

III. O most sweet and most loving Lord, whom now I desire devoutly to
receive, Thomas a Kempis l. 4 c. 15 n. 4.
thou k^owest my infirmity, and in how many evils I lie vvallowing Behold
whom thou love is infirm. And though (as I hope) thi^ infirmity is not to
death, yet so long as it hangs upon me I am straightened having a desire to be
freed from it as a thing (to Phil. ^. 23
my thinking) much more better: But I must refere myself to thee, who do
best know, what is for thy glory; for I remember thou did say to thy
Apostle, My grace suffices thee; 2 Cor. 12 9
for power is prefected in infirmity, that is, thy power is more illustrious
by the infirmity of our flesh, whilst thou preservest us that we may not
fall. I can not say to thee, Lord if thou had been here, my soul had not
dyed: but thou may truly, and with shame enough to me, say, son, if thou
had been with me, thou had not dyed. For thou art ever present, and ready
to refresh me, but I, even when I come to receive thee, where am I? Wherefore
do I not prepare myself to receive these thy holy mysteries with more care and
diligence? Wherefore do I so easyly go from thee after receiving, making so
little difference betwixt this holy table, 1 Cor. ^ 30
and other meats? Therefore there be among us many weak, and feeble, and many
sleep. O sweet spous^! let thy voice sound loud in my ears, Cant. 2 1^
that I may rise from this dulnes, and shake of the bonds which hinder me from
walking to thee; as I ought; and from beholding thy face, and thy great love,
and goodness in this most blessed mystery: rise quickly and fall at his feet^,
with the Magdalen, and pour forth tears of love and sorrow, according as his
goodness, and thy backwardnes do deserve.

Christ foretells his Passion.
I. ANd they were in the way going up to Jerusalem, Erant autem in yi^
ascende^ces Hierosolymam.
and Jesus went before the^, and they were astonished, and following were
afraid; and taking again the twelve, he began again to tell them the things
that should be fall him. The Apostles were afraid, Matt. 20 17
because they knew the malice of the Jews against o^r Savior; upon which
account they said a little before. Matthew. 10 32 Io. 11.
Master even now the Jews did seek to stone thee, and go thou again
thither? They were astonished to see with that speed, and alacrity our
Savior notvvithstanding made have to Jerusalem, where he was most maliced:
and to add to their astonishment he began to discourse with them of his
sufferings: And certainly he that could foretell what was to happen to him,
could have prevented it, if he would; but it is an evident sign that he was
willing to suffer, seeing he so willingly went to the place, where he knew he
was to suffer, and by it he would show us, that our way to the heavenly
Jerusalem, is by suffering, which we must also in deavour to embrace with
alacrity.

II. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered to
the chief Priests, and to the Scribes; and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him to the Gentills to be mocked, and scourged, and
crucified, and the third day he shall rise again. Chrysol
He did not content himself with ordinary sufferings, or with a private
death; the creator of the world would die in sight of the world; that as his
patience was singular, so might be his sufferings. He tells them before hand of
it, and of his resurrection vvithall, that they might not think that those
things came upon him at unawares, as upon others, or that by suffering he were
utterly destroyed; but continue their belief in him, seeing the prediction and
event to agree, and his divine power much more evident by his resurrection
after so cruel a death, then by all the former miracles which he had wrought.
So in all our distresses, he leaves us not without special comfort, if we
attend to his Words: and in no particular shall we suffer, in which we shall
not be particularly rewarded; if mocked, we shall be honored; if scourged, and
crucified, we shall be not only eased of all pain, eternally freed, but shall
have particular refreshment, and content proportionable to our sufferings.

III. And they understood none of these things, and this word was hid from
them, and they understood not the things which were said. The Apostles first,
believed he was God, and could not comprehend how being God, so innocent, and
so powerful, he could come to suffer. Secondly, they had seen by experience
that when he would, he declined the fury of the Jews with great facility,
and hoped he would always do so. Thirdly, Nature shrinking at the very name
of suffering, they could not conceive, how he should willingly put himself into
their hands, who hated him, and sought his destruction. Fourtly, the love which
they bore our Savior made them the more unwilling to h^are of his sufferings,
and less capable to understand the reason of it. But our Saviors thoughts and
ours are so different that the evangelicall Prophet says of them. ^s. 55. 9
As the heavens are exalted abov^ the earth, so my ways are exalted above
yours, and my thoughts above your thoughts* And we may justly here bewail o^r
misery, that believing as we do, we are notwithstanding so little capable of
understanding the benefit of suffering, and so little pliable to it. Hard to
many does this speech seem: Thomas ^ Kempis l. 2. 2. 12
d^ny thyself, and take up thy Cross, and follow Jesus: But it will be much
harder to hear that last word. Go from me, you accursed into everlasting fire.
They who now do willingly hear, and follow the word of the cross will not
then fear.

The Sons of Zebedee demand the first places. THe^ came to him the Mother of
the sons of Zebede^ adoring Tunc ac^cessit ad ^um mate^ Filiorum Zebedaei*
^ad desiring some thing of him: who said to her, what will thou? she said to
him; say that these my two sons, may sit one at thy right hand, and one at
thy left hand in thy Kingdom. By this we see, Matthew. 20
how little the Apostles did relish suffering mentioned immediately before by
our Savior, they dream of a worldly Kingdom, and desire promotio^ in it,
esteeming it some thing: whereas it little deserves so much as to be called some
thing: but they with their Mother were loath at first to opon their request,
fearing the issue, and therefore they spoke in general terms, as if our
Savior knew not their thoughts; and she adored him, according to the custo^e
of prete^ders S^e did not apprehe^de what it might signify to be upon the left
hand of our Savior, Mat* 25. ^
acording to that passage; he shall set the sheep at his right hand, and the
goats at his left. Raise thy thoughts to higher pretenses, that thou may be
sure to be seated at his right hand, and hear, com^ ye^ blessed.

II. Jesus answering said; you know not what you desire* Can you drink the cup
that I shall drink of? Thy say to him, we can: He says to them, my cup indeed
you shall drink of, but to sit at my right hand and left, is not mine to give
^ou, but to whom it is prepared by my Father. First, they ^new not what they
asked, because they asked temporal ^lorie, and our Savior ever spoke of the
eternal. Secondly, even of temporal glory, and preferment they knew not what
they asked, because they considered not the danger, and troble, both to body,
and soul, and the uncertainty, and ficklenes of it, and all that vexation
which accompanies it. When our Savior put them in mind of the cup which he
was to drink, before he entered into his glory: and consequently every one, who
will be of his disciples, the desire which they had of preferment, made the^
boldly say; they could. But how able they were in realitie it soon appeared in
his passion, when they with the rest fled, and durst not in a long time appear
for fear of the Jews, least they should be put to the like sufferings, or
affronts* But in fine remaining his disciples they were to suffet, and upon
that account, they might deserve to sit at his right hand, but it was not our
Saviors commission or intent, to give the^ that seat upon favor, or
otherwise, with our deserving it, according to the divine ordinatio^.

III. And the ten hearing it were displeased at the two brethren; and Jesus
calls them to him, and says, you know that the Princes of the Genti^s over
rule them, and they who are the greater, exercise power against them, it shall
not be so among you, but whoever will be the greater among you, let him be your
minister; and h^ that will be first among you shall be your servant. Even as
the Son of man is not come to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his life a redemp^i^on for many. A powerful example for all to imitate, and to
learn by it to think nothing mean, nothing hard, that is done in the house of
God, and to the meanest of his servants, or to whomesoever for his sake. The
very domineering spirit of secular commanders were motive enough, to hate it,
and not to desire to be in the occasion, least we should be debauched by it:
and what slaverie do people oftimes suffer, under them? Look upon soldiers,
look upon tena^ts, look generally upon all servants in the world: what do
not they undergo for a bit of bread, or for I know not what hope of fickle
preferment, and oftimes miss of it? The reward of the servants of God is
certain.

The blind man near Jericho.
IT came to pass, Factumest aute^ cum appropinquaret Iricho Lu^ 18 3^
when he drew nigh to ^ericho, a certain blind man sat by the way, begging;
and hearing the multitude passing by, he asked what that should (...) And they
told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passed by: According to S. Gregory, they who
believe not in our Savior, are the blind me^and with reason they are called
so, S. Gregor
in regard of the many errors to which they are subject, and see them not; and
not enjoying the light of heaven* no wonder if they continually stumble, and
fall most miserably, full of all iniquity, Romans 129
as the Apostle specifies to the Romans They who believe are in the way of
salvation; but if believing they do not pray they forget they are beggars; and
no wonder then if they find not relief. Our Savior passed by us (says S.
Augustine S. August
) when he was borne, when he preached, when he suffered, and dyed for us. The
multitude of good works and miracles which he did; the manifold documents and
examples which he gave us must make us harken after him, both because he is our
only redeemer, Thomas ^ Kempis l. ^ c. 25 n. 6.
and the only way by which we must come to eternal life; and also because in
himself he is all goodness. O that Christ crucified would come into our heart.
How soon and how sufficiently should we be instructed?

II. And he cried saying, Jesus son of David, have mer^yon me. And they who
went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: But be cried much more,
son of David, have mercy upon me. He was not yet so much enlightened, as to
believe him to be the son of God, yet so far as he knew he honored him;
more then the proud Pharisees, who would not acknowledge in him any further
worth then to be son of a carpenter. They who went before our Savior, Mat.
13 5
and rebuked him, for calling upon him, signify our disordered desires, and
tumultuous imperfections, and vices which will not follow, nor obey what our
Savior orders, but will themselves be masters, and overruled us. But we must
cry our the more, and the louder for mercy and help. They have rounded me
(says the Psalmist) like so many bees to sting me, and have made a myse as the
fire among thorns, that my cry should not be heard, but our Lord is my
strength, and my salvation, to him I will have the more recourse.

III. And Jesus standing* commanded him to be brought unto him and when he was
come near, he asked him, what will thou that I (...) to thee? He said, Lord,
that I may see, And Jesus said unto him; do thou see: Thy faith has made
thee whole. And forthwith, he saw and followed him magnifying God. And a^^ the
people, as they saw it, gave praise to God. God is more compassionate then men;
he hears our prayers, and bears with our infirmities when they will not;
and in this we must imitate him, and disdain no man, be he never so poor or
wretched. He asked the blind; what will thou that I do to thee? When every
one might easyly reflect what he would have; but our Savior does show by this,
that though he knows our necessities and desires, he will have us manifest
them ourselves, and repeat them over again and again to him; and multiply
our petition, that we may show, that we know our own necessities; for he that
cease to pray, cease to esteem himself needy whereupon our Savior, by the
parable of the judge, taught us that it behooveth always to pray, Lu^. 18. ^
and not to be weary But S. Bernard upon this passage makes another
reflection, both upon the mercy of our Lord, S. Bernard
vouchsafing to ask what his servant will have him to do to him; and upon the
blindness of the man, who should have rather answered. Lord fa^re be that from
me, say thou rather, what thou will have me do, for so it behooveth me; so it
becomes thee.

Zacheus receives our Savior into his house.
I. ^t ingressus perambulabat Jericho. Luc. 99.
ANd entering in, he walked through Jericho, and behold a man called Zaccheus,
Prince of the Public a^s and rich, sought to see Jesus, who he was, and he
could not for the multitude, because he was little of stature: and running
before he went up into a sycomore tree; beca^se he was to pass by it. The same
of our Saviors works, and of the sublimitie of his doctrine spread it self
far and near; yet can we not arrive to understand the thousand part of what
he was, and is; Io. 21* 25
we are too little of stature. S. Ihon in the conclusion of his Gospel says,
There are many other thinghs also which Jesus did, which if they were written
in particular, neither the world it self, I think; were able to contain the
books that should be written. No body can easyly see Jesus (says S. Ambrose
S. Ambro.
) remaining on earth. The sycomore tree (according to S. Gregory S* Gregor.
and S. Bid ^. Bed^
) signifies the wisdom of saints, and the cross of Christ; which our world
esteems folly; as to suffer patiently the loss of our goods, and not to look
greedely after them; not to revenge an injury, but to be ready to bear such
another wrong wh^ it comes; by embracing this doctrine we come to discover the
wisdom of God, as it passes by in this life, and there is no other way: by
embracing the cross we come to be above the ordinary strain of people, not
encombred with so many secular cares, not kept under by so many vices and
imperfections* S. Augusti
from these we must strive to run, that we may get ground, before they take
hold of us. The proud multitude, the multitude which glories and rejoices,
when it can revenge itself, does hinder from seeing him, who from the Cross
prayed. Father forgive them because they know not what they do.

II. And when he came to the place, Jesus looking up, saw him, and said to
him, Zaccheus, come down quickly, because this day I must abide in thy house:
S. August
and making have, he came down; and received him rejoicing. That we might see,
we were looked upon; V. B^de
that we might love, we were first beloved. And yet that is true also which S.
Bid says; Jesus saw the man that saw him, and choose him, and loved the man
that loved him. For both must go hand in hand, the grace of God preventing us:
and our Correspondence, and cooperation with it. Therefore our Savior says,
come done quickly, because instantly we must close with the grace offered,
that we may receive favor unexpected: Zacheus esteemed it a great benefit to
see our Savior as he passed, sudainly coming down he deserved to receive him,
not passing, b^t into his house. This day I must abid^ in thy house. A blessed
day and worthily to be rejoiced in. Mane nobiscum Domine. etc.

III. And when all saw it, they murmured saying, that he turned in to a man
that was a sinner. But Zaccheus standing, said, to our Lord: Behold, the half
of my goods, Lord, I give to the poor^, and if I have dafrauded any man of any
thing, I restore fourfold; Jesus said to him, this day salvation is come to
this house, because he also is the Son of Abraham. For the son of man is
come to seek^, Chrysol*
and to save that which was lost. He condemns himself as unworthy of pardon,
who accuses God for turning in to sinners. But Zaccheus remaining constant to
his desire of seeing our Savior, and not undervaluing him by reason of the
mean aspect which outwardly he bare, S. Ambros
deserved to prove by his own example that sin is not in riches, but in them
who know not how to use (...) riches; for as they be a hindrance to the wicked,
so to the good they are a help to virtue; Zaccheus was rich, and one of the
elect, but it was by giving to the poor, and restoring what was ill gotten,
all rich men are covetous. Behold the efficacy of receiving Christ into thy
house; how sudainly is he become a Son of Abraham, who was a Child of the
devil? The Son of man, our Savior, comes to seek us, and do we fly him?
God forbid.

Marie Magdalen annoints our Savior in Bethania.
I. Jesus ant^ sex dies Paschae venit Bethania^n Io^ 12
Jesus six days before the Pass over came to Bethania where Lazarus was, that
had been dead, whom jesus had raised, and they made him a supper there: and
Martha ministered, but Lazarus was one of them that sat at table with him Marie
therefore took a pound of o^n^ment of right spikenard, precious* and anointed
the feet of Jesus, and wiped his fee^e with her hair, and breaking the
^labaster box she poured it upon his head, Marc: 14. 3
and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment. Marie Magdalen never
forgot the benefit, which she had received by her first conversion; the memory
whereof was lately renewed and redoubled in the raising of her brother Lazarus
from his grave; therefore as then with tears of repentance, she washed our
Saviors feet; here with precious ointment of thanksgiving she annoints both
feet and head, acknowledging all from the beginning, to the ending to be his
gift; and breaking the box she pours ou^ all upon him, thinking nothing too
much, though it seem to be with loss or pain. The two feet of our Savior.
S. Bernard
(Says S. Bernard) be his mercy, and his judgment. These a soul does first
betake itself unto, with the oil of Compunction: Afterward it rises to the
head with the ointment of devotion, compounded of the memo^ie of his infinite
benefits.

I^. One therefore of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, he that was to betray him,
said, wh^rfore was this waste made ^ ^hy was not this ointment sold for three
hundred pence, and given to the poor? And he said this, not because he cared
for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the purse, carried the
things which were put therein. And now also (says S, Bernard) when one is noted
t^ attend to his devotions, S. Bernard
there want not those who account it waste and loss of time and talents; not
that they envy sanctity, but would provide for Charity. And this among
people of good life and upright intentions. Others there be, who out of malice
laugh at those who give themselves to prayer, or to the service of God, and as
our Savior said to the skillfull in the law among the Jews neither do well
themselves nor suffer others to do well. Luc* 11. 52
But we must imitate the Magdalen in her constancy, and not regard what they
say or do, who are no better then thieves stealing souls from God; and
keeping the purse, have their thoughts more in that, then in what does more
concern the^. as to eternity. And what is three hundred pence, in comparison
of the reward in heaven, or satisfaction in this life.

III. But Jesus said, let her alone; why do you molest her? she has done a
good work upon me. Poor you have always with you and when you will, you may
do them good? Me you have not always. That which she had she has done; she
has prevented to anoint my body for the Buryall. Amen I say to you, where ever
this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, that also which she has
done shall be told for memory of her. A small work which the world would
little have regarded, or condemned, our Savior esteems so highly as to have
it preached through the whole world, and for the honor done to him, does
honor his saints even here on earth. That which she had she has done; God
regards every ones ability and good will, the heart and not the outward work.
Mar: 12 44
Among the rich casting many things into the treasury, the Poor widow cast in
two mites, which makes a farthing, and was esteemed by our Savior to have cast
in more the^ all the rest, because others out of their abundance gave some
thing, but she out of her poverty gave all she hand, her whole living.

The Council of the Jews against our Savior.
I. Collegru^^ ergo Pontifices and Phar. Conc. Io: 11 47
THe chief Priests therefore, and the Pharisees gathered a Counsel, and said,
what do we? For this man does many signs: if (...) let him alone so, all will
believe in him: and the Romans will come, and (...) away our place, and nation
But one of them, named ayp has, said to them, you know nothing, neither do
you consider that it is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, and
the whole nation pe^^sh not. And this he said not of himself, but being high
Priest, he Prophesied that Jesus should (...) for the nation, and not only for
the nation, (...) to gather into one the Children of God that were dispersed.
No man so holy, but he finds opposers; no man so upright but meets with
censures; and from those oftimes who least of all should opppose. S. Augus^ti
These men ask what (...) we ^ And do not say, as they ought, let us believe;
but fearing to leese their temporalls, thought not of the eternal, and so lost
both of them. O madness! thou fear to loose earth, and thou loosest heaven:
The signs which should have moved them to believe, as others did, through
their pride and malice, they turned to their own destruction; But God made use
of their malice to the destruction of Idolatry, S. Gregor
and the redemption of all man kind After a strange manner (as S. Gregory
discourses) working so, that what is done without thee good pleasure of God,
comes not to be contrary to his will; for turning evil deeds to good use,
even those things which are repugnant to his Counsels, do serve his Counsels.

I^. Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Ie^es, but he went into the
country beside the desert, and there he abode with his disciples. And six days
before the Passover he came to Bethania, where Lazarus also: because many of
the l^wes for him went away, and believed in Jesus. Our Savior declined the
malice of the Jews both for their good, to give them time of better
consideration, and because the time was not come in which he was to suffer: but
by their malice, even against ^azarus, we may see how dangerous a thing it is
to give way to passion; and how one sin draws on another insensibly; and
then, when once the enemy has hold of us, he blinds us so, as not to see, or
feel, the wickedness of the most enormious acts, Beg grace of God, not to
give occasion that our Savior depart, or hide himself from thee; for who
knows what will become of the in his abse^ce?

III. And the next day, when they departed from Betha^ia, he was hungry; Mar:
(...) ^^
and seeing a far of a fig tree having leaves, he came, if happily he might
find any thing on it: and he found nothing but leaves. And he said, now no
(...) eat fruit of thee any more for ever. And in the evening passing by,
they saw the figiree withered from the root^. So could he have done (says S.
Hierome) by his enemies, and caused them by the same power to wither away* but
that he expected they should repent* in the me, ane time it is fitting we
should learn, by this example to fear God Almighties Judgments, if we bear
not fruit, but content ourselves with the outward show of virtue. We know not
how long God will have patience with us, or how soon he will punish us. The
punishment for ever, is a dreadful thing. Thou thundrest over me thy
judgments, o Lord, Thom^^^ K^mpis l. 3. c. 1^
and with fear and trembling thou do shake all my bones, and my soul is
very much astonished.

The fouretenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. HEre most of all, at the receiving of the most Blessed Sacrament, it is
fitting we should ask ourselves this question, what do we? And certainly we
know nothing. neither do we consider what is expedient for us, if we know not,
that no diligence is to be esteemed too much toward our preparation to it, and
fot the entertaynment of his after receiving. Many signs and tokens of his
love toward us he has showed, both living and dying, but in this he has
summed the^ all up, taking so much pleasure in dying for us, that he would in
this manner be daily sacrificed; and so much content in giving, that he would
daily give himself wholly to us, to gather us to himself. Let not this pass
with out due reflection, but gather a counsel of thy thoughts to advise upon
it; and do not let him alone so, as perhaps heretofore thou have; for thy
enemies will come and take away thy place. Be not like the withered figtree;
But planted so near this fountain of water, bring forth thy fruits in due
season. (...)


II. Imitate the Magdalen; anoint his feet, that is, his humanity, with the
ointment of thanksgiving, compounded of all the mysteries thereof, from his
Mothers we^be to the Ascensio^, remembered and repeated with joy and praise of
so loving a Savior: pour out thy whole heart upon Consideration of his
divinity; desire with S. Paul that this vessel may be dissolved, that thou
may be wholly absorpt in his love. Break in the mean time by mortification,
thy passions and inclinations, which hinder thee from pouring ou^ all upon
Christ, that thy whole ^oule, and the whole house of which thou art a member,
may be filled with the odor of thy vert^es. O how weak is the sent of them?
How little heat is there in me, by which alone their fragrancie is dispersed.

III. Imitate Zaccheus desirous to see our Saviour^ and hearing that in the
holy Sacrifice he is to pass by thee, run to see him; Thomas a Kempisl. 4 ^-
1 ^. 13
If this most holy Sacrament were celebrated in one only place, and were
consecrated but by one only Priest in the world, with what desire do you think
people would apply themselves to that place, and to that Priest, that they
might see these divine mysteries celebrated? Let not the commodity of often
seeing him cool thy desire, and endeavor of coming to him; for though thou he
hold him never so often, and never so much, thou will t not be able to discover,
thoroughly what he is; come down quickly. from thy impertinent thoughts and
receive thy Savior With joy into thy house; he coming to seek thee, and to
save thee, it were great shame and folly to be backward in receiving so great
a benefit and so bountiful a benefactour; let not the multitude of the tepide
hinder thee; harken not after their checks, or rebukings, but cry out the more.
Jesus Son of David have mercy on me: Jesus was of another mind then the
multitude, he stood, and commanded the zealous to be brought to him. Shall we
refuse to come though not commanded, Thomas a Kempis l. 4 c. 13.
yet invited? Who will grant me that I may find thee alone, and open my whole
heart unto thee, an enjoy thee as my soul desires that no man now may
contemn me, nor noe creature move me.

Gentiles desire to see our Savior.
I. Eran^ quidam Gentiles* Io: 12 10
THere were certain Gentiles, of them that came up to adore in the festival
day; these came to Philip, saying, we are desirous to see Jesus, Philip tells
Andrew, and Andrew and Philip told Jesus. Jesus answering said, the hour is
como that the Son of man shall be glorified. Amen. Amen I say to you, unless
the grain of wheat falling into the ground, die, it self remains alone, but
if it die, it brings much fruit. The fame of the doctrine and miracles of
our Savior bred a desire in the Gentiles to see him; our Savior upon notice of
this honor retireth his thoughts to his passion and death. The hour indeed is
at hand in which I shall be glorified, by the conversion of the Gentiles to me,
but it will not fully come till I die: I rejoice much that I shall be then
glorified, but first I must endure the pangs of death: This is the way to my
glory: and in very truth I say unto you, that be a body of never so fine a
gra^ne, yet if falling to the ground* and acknowledging from whence he was
taken, he die not to all worldly content, he will not bring much fruit: for he
that loves his life, and makes too much of it, shall lose it, and he that
hates his life in this world, S. August*
and uses it accordingly, does keep it to life everlasting. A great and
strange saying; how a bodies love should turn to his ruin, his hatred to his
exaltation. If thou love evilly, thou hate: if thou hate well, thou love.
Happy are they who preserve themselves by hatred that they may not perish by
love.

II. If any man minister to me, let him follow me, and where I am, there also
shall my minister be, if any man minister to me my Father will honor him* Now
my soul is trobled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour, but
therefore came I into this hour; father glorify thy name. The hatred which our
Savior requires, is not without comfort in this life, and reward in the next.
The comfort in this life is that we have our Savior going before us, we follow
him, who cannot miss of the way; we follow him, who as he is far greater
the^ we, so have we the far less reason to shrink from him, and the greater
encouragement to follow him. The reward is, to be where he is, to be not only
rewarded but honored by God himself. Now our soul is trobled, with the
thought of this death, but what shall we say^ Shall we desire to be freed from
it^ No; it were neither for ourgood, nor for his glory. Therefore we c^^e into
this world. to be ordered as God should see best; Thomas a kempis l. ^. ^. 17
to this we wust conform, and we shall find it best for us also. Son suffer
me to do with thee what I will; I know what is expedient for thee; thou
think as man, thou iudgest in many things as humane affection persuades
thee. Father, glorify thy name: for in this is my full content.

III. A voice therefore came from heaven: Both I have glorified it and I will
glorify it: The multitude that stood, and heard said it thundered; others
said, an Angel spoke to him. Jesus said, this voice came not for me, but for
your sake. Now is the judgment of the world, now the Prince of this world shall
be cast forth; And I, if I be exalted from the earth, will draw all things to
myself; and this he said, signifying what death he should dye. Conformable to
our Saviors humilit^e, the voice said not, I have glorified thee, and I will
glorify thee; but I have glorified it, that is, my name, which is thy desire,
and the desire of all that are perfect: what ever become of me, be thou
glorified. The multitude, though hearing, understands not this language, but is
rather terrified with it, as some people with thunder: but it is the language
of Angles, Thomas a kempis l. ^^
and of God himself. Son, say thus in every thing: If it be pleasing to thee,
let this be done thus, o Lord. If it be an honor to thee* let it be done in
thy name. This proceeding of God condemns the ludgment of the world and by it
the Prince of this world, (who domineers over most part of it, by the sinful
life of worldlings) is to be cast forth* By the death upon the Cross our
Savior draws men's har^^ after him, even against the natural inclination
which w^ have to ease and pleasure; and yet so as they do willingly and
joyfully follow him. S. August
Do not think that thou art drawn against thy will: love also draws the
mind. Have our corporal senses their delights, and shall not the mind have its
delights also? The spowse says, draw me, ^e will run after thee in the odor
of thy oynements.

Our Savior teaches that he is not only man, but God.
I. Respond^^ (...) Io. 12. ^^
THe multitude answered him, we have heard out of the law that Christ abides
for ever, and how (...) thou, the son of man must be exalted? Who is this
Son of man? Jesus said to them; yet a little while the light is among you;
Walk while you have the light, that the darkness overtake you not. He that
walks in darkness knows not whether he goes. While you have the light,
believe in the light, that you may be Children of the light. These things Jesus
spoke, and nent away and hid himself from them. See how necessary it is,
besides the law (which the multitude had heard. and many of them doubtless had
read) to have a right interpreter of the law. It was very true that Christ was
to abide for ever, and yet it was also true that he was to dye, and not to stay
here visibly for ever. In like manner there be many things in holy Scripture
which seem to be contrary one to the other, and yet are not, being rightly
understood; be not therefore easyly moved, or trobled when they occur, but
refer thyself to the Church, and to the teachers thereof. The light of the
truth was among the Jews for a time; by their obstinate refusing to give full
credit to our Savior they fell into the darkness, in which we see them, and
they know not (alas) whether they go: with them, that among them believed, the
light did continue; and they became the Children of light. Believe also that
the light may not forsake thee. Our Savior went away* and hid himself* partly
by reason of the obstinate Pharisees, who sought his destruction, before his
time; partly to avoyde the honor, which others were ready to give him upon the
voice speaking to him from heavaven.

II. Whereas he had done so many signs before them, they believed not in him,
yet of the Princes also many believed in him, but for the Pharisees they did
not confess, that they might not be cast out of the Synagag: for they loved
the glory of men, more then the glory of God. Euthym^^
O the miserable captivity of people desirous to please men! They contemn
God, but stand in owe of men, and will do any thing to yet their favor.
Besides signs, and miracles, there must be a pious inclination to believe,
otherwise upon an obstinate heart they seldom work: good life also helps
oftimes, for they who are unwilling to leave their synns, ate loath to hear any
thing that may move then to it.

III. But Jesus cried and said, he that believes in me, does not believe in
me* but in him that sent me; and he that sees me, sees him that sent me: I am
the light come into this world* that every one that believes in me may not
remain in darkness. And if any man hear my words, and keep them not* I do
not judge him, for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. S.
Ambro.
The world. That I have spoken that shall judge him in the last day. This high
point of doctrine was to be proclaimed with a loud voice. What is that which
he says? He believes not in me? But that he believes not in that, which with
his corporal eyes he sees: he believes not, that I am only man. And to the
same effect he says that which follows. He that seet me sees him that sent
me, to wit, with the eyes of faith he sees more then with his corporal eyes
he can discover, he sees God in me* which happiness we have daily in the most
B. Sacrament: for under the forms of bread and wine we see our Savior, his
body, soul, and divinity, we see God. And here in we may rightly observe, the
excellency of faith, by which we see God, so much as the condition of this
life will give leave: and that the only way not to remain in darkness is to
believe; for though in the acts of faith there be ever some obscurity, there
is more light, as we may see by comparing the belief of Christians, with the
most knowing knowledge of those, who are not Christians, or are fallen from the
universal belief of Christians: for in many things, these will be found to
swarve even from common sense: In which notwithstanding they will not be
excusable, Rupertus.
because the word which they have heard, and which they cannot but know to be
true, if they lay aside their perverseness and obstinacy, will judge them, and
convince them. Where will this judge sit? with in us. In every ones
conscience; he will terribly thunder out a just sentenc^.

The parable of the Vineyard hired ou^ and of the two sons.
I. Homo (...) Pater familias. Matthew. 21. 34
THere was a man a house-holder, that planted a vineyard, and made a hedge
round about it, and dug in it a press, and buylt a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went forth into a strange country; and when the time of fruit
drew near, he sent his servants to receive the fruits; And the husbandmen
apprehended his servants, one they beat; another they killed; another they
stoned: Again he sent other servants, more then the former; and they did to
them likewise. As last he sent his son, saying, they will reverence my son;
But they seeing the son, said: This is the heir, come let us kill him, and
we shall have the inheritance: and apprehending him, they cast him forth of the
vineyard, and killed him: When therefore the Lord of the vineyard shall come.
What will he do to those husband me^? they say, the naughty men he will bring
to naught* and his vineyard he will let out to other husband men, that shall
render him fruits in their seasons. It is evident that God is this great
House-holder, Who has planted our souls here on earth to the end to yeald him
the choyest fruit; he has hedged us round with his divine protection, that we
be not tempted above our strength; he has dug a press, that is, has
furnished us with helps sufficient for bringing ou^ fruit to perfection; and
buylt a tower, for watch and ward, if we will make use of it. This vineyard is
let out to us for an uncertain term of years. God is every where: and
always present, but to those, who do not consider right, he seems to be in
a strange country far of: He sends his servants, at seasons to admonish us
of our duty: How do we intertaine the^ and their admonitio^s? He se^ds more
and more and never cease to put us in mind. He sent his only son our
Savior; how do we revere^ce him? We think by cvill means to enjoy this
world, to establish an inheritance, to make to ourselves a kind of heaven on
earth, and it will not be: such will be brought to naught before they think of
it. Think betime of rendering fruit in due season, least thou be taken tardie.

II. Have you never read in the scripture, The stone which the buyld^rs
rejected, the same is made the head of the corner? By our Lord was this done,
and it is miraculous in our eyes. Therefore I say to you, that the Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation. yealding fruits
thereof and he that falls upon this stone, shall be broken, and on whom it
falls, it shall all to bruise him. In the end of the last periode he asked
the standers-by, what they thought should be done to the wicked husbandmen, to
show that we need no other Judge then our own conscience; they answered, as
wicked men use to do, condemning themselves in another, when they reflect upon
his cvill deserts; for however vice does blind them in their own case, yet in
another they condemn that which themselves are doing. Here he tells them
directly that this parable concerned them; and that the true faith and means to
salvation would be taken from them, and from their observances, and preached to
all nations: That he was the corner stone, which was miraculously reserved for
the perfection of the buylding; They who fall upon him by contempt, as they
did, will but ruin themselves, S. August. Thomas a Kempl^ l. 1 ^. 22. n* 5^
and at the later day, he will fall heavy upon them, and crush them to pieces ^
herfore will thou put of this purpose till to morrow? Rise, and instantly
begin.

III. What is your opinion? A man had two sons, and coming to the first, he
said, son go, work to day in my vineyard; and he answering said, I will
not, But afterward moved with repentance he went: and coming to the other,
he said likewise; and he answering said, I go, Lord, and went not which
of the two did the Fathers will? They say the first. Jesus says to them.
Amen I say to you, that Publicans, and whores go before you in the Kingdom of
God: for Ihon came to you in the way of justice; and you did not believe him;
but they did believe him, And you seeing it, have not had repentance afterward
to believe him. Again he referres us to our own consicence, and judgment, and
teaches us not to despair though we have been refractarie, for he does
mercyfully attend our r^pentauce, and receives us, when we begin to think
ourselves. How often do we say, I go, and go not? O how great is the frayltie
of man, always prone to vice^ To day thou confessests thy synns, and to
morrow thou do again commit them. Our Savior gives us here a good Item, to
beware that we be not out stripped by the greatest sinners, and even by their
example to rouse up ourselves, we cannot but approve of the way, which is laid
before us, by Gods servants, as they did of S. Ihon Baptist; neither his
doctrine, nor their example did work upon him; beware of such hardness and
insensibilitie.

The parable of the King that made a marriage for his Son.
I. THe Kingdom os heaven is likened to a King that made a marriage for his
son. Simile factum est reguum caelorum hominiregi Matthew: ^2
And he sent his servants to call them, that Were invited to the marriage, and
they would not come: Again he sent other servants, saying; tell them, behold I
have prepared my dinner, my beeves and fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready, come to the marriage: But they neglected, and went their ways, one to
his farm, another to his merchandise; and the rest laid hands upon his
servants, and spitefully treating them, mudered them. And when the King heard
of it, he was wroth, and sending his hosts, destroyed those murderers, and
burnt their city. This happened literally to the Jews, who being invited, to
this spiritual wedding with our Savior, refused, and were destroyed: but
mystically it concerns us all. For eery living soul is invited to a marriage
with our Savior, by consent to his commandments. Who would not desire this
marriage (says S. Ihon Chrysostom) invited by a king, S. Ihon Chrysostom*
and to a marriage with his entirely beloved son? It is styled a marriage, that
we might understand both the love which God does bear us, and the galantnes of
it, where there is nothing that can contristate, but every thing full of
spiritual joy. All things are ready. Great therefore must their falt needs
be, who neglect so great a benefit, so loving an invitatio^, so plentiful a
feast, so great a person, so advantageous a match; and turn to that wherein
there is nothing but labor and toil, and hourly hazard of eternal
perdition* I have seen all things which are done under the sun, Eccl: 1. 14
and behold all vanity and affliction of mind. The wicked are hardly
corrected, and of fools the number is infinite.

II. Then he says to his servants; The marriage indeed is ready but they that
were invited were not worthy; Go ye therefore into the high ways, and
whosoever you shall find call to the marriage. And his servants going forth
into the ways, gathered together all thy found, bad and good and The marriage
was filled with guests. Literally the Jews refusing, the Gentiles were called
in to be the Church of Christ; dispersed through the whole world, and in
several ways of living, but gathered together in unity of Faith: good and
bad do believe, and make up a number here, but in the sequel the bad are
rejected; though also for the time the bad become good, for being baptized they
are cleansed of their former wickedness: Euthimius
in which sense, by the bad those are understood who were very inte^perate, and
wedded to evil customs, by the good such as were less vicious. For S. Paul
speaking of himself, and all others, says, we were also our selves found
sinners: Gal: 2. ^^7
and no man can brag of his deserving to be called, but it behooves us to think
of the way in which we were, and were like to be; and of the mercy of God in
calling us, by his servants, or by his inspirations, or by watever other
accident, and to be thankful to him.

III. And the King went-in to see the guests, and he saw there a man (...)
attired in a wedding garment; and he said to him, friend, how came thou in
hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was dumb; Then the King said to
the wayters, bind his hands and feet, and cast him into the utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. S. Hierom
For many be called, but few elect, If any man at the time of judgment (says
S. Hierome) be found under the name of a Christian, not to have the garment of
the heavenly man, but the cast clothing of the old man, he will be instantly
apprehended; neither in that day will there be place for penance, nor power for
to deny the falt. So that faith alone is not sufficient; we must retain the
garment of charity, and the love of God, in which we were wedded; and not
think that in the multitude we can escape the eye of God; one is here
mentioned, because not one can be hidden. He is styled notwithstanding, friend,
to signify that he is not punished out of hatred, but justice so requiring:
His ^ands and fe^te are said to be tied, because no man will have power to
avoyde the punishment. And though exemplified in one, it will happen to many,
because many are called, but far the less number do make good use of their
calling; as appears by a world of infidels and heretics, which either have not
accepted of the faith of Christ, or have wilfully lost it.

Tribute to be paid to Caesar, and of the Resurrection.
I. THen the Pharisees departing consulted among themselves to entrap him in
his speech; Tunc abeuntes Pharisaei. Matthew. 22 15
and they send to him their disciples with the H^rodians, saying, Master, we
know that thou art a true speaker, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man; for thou do not respect the person of men.
Tell us therefore what is thy opinion, is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar,
or no; These people were malicious hypocrites, and not only in their speech,
bu^ in their outward carriage fained themselves just (as S. Luke records) and
sought to cloak their malice by the Herodians, who were of another sect, S.
Hierom
taking Herod for their Messiah, Lu^. 20. 20
and so to decline the envy of taking our Savior out of the way, by geting
him apprehended by the Gentiles, for denying the duties to the Emperor: but by
them we may see both the strain of dissemblers, and how people ought in
reason, and honesty behave themselves in this world; for what themselves did
not practice, they commended in our Savior, that he had truth in his sayings,
vprightnes in his proceedings, respect to God above all men, fortitude not to
care what the wicked world thought or said of him, not respecting either power
or wealth, or greatness of men so much as to vary from the truth, Thomas a
Kempis l. 3 c. 45 n. 1.
or from the way of God in any thing. How often have I not found faithfullnes
where I thought to have had it?

II. But Jesus knowing their naughtines. said, what do you tempt me,
Hypocrites? Show me the tribute coin; and they offered him a penny, and Jesus
says to them, whose is this image and superscription? They say Cesars. Then he
said to them* Render therefore the things that are Cesars, to Caesar, and the
things that are God, co God: and hearing it they marvelled, and leaving him
went their way. Their dissembling speech and behavior could not hide their
malice from his all seeing eye; and he by his answer turned all to his own
more glory and repute. S* Ihon Chrysostom:
Coin, is the tribute due to Caesar; man himself is the tribute due to God: In
the Coin, you may see the picture of Caesar, in man, the image of God. As he
that falsifyeth the Coin of Caesar is most grievously punished, so the
corrupters of the image of God are eternally tormented. This must be our study
and profession in this life, to mayntaine the beauty and due proportion of this
image which we bear, that our understandings, and our wills be not blurred
with things unbeseeming: God claymes it as his due, He has put his own stamp
upon us, which can never be razed quite out; so long as we have a soul it will
be found to be the image of God, however it be used.

III. That day the Saducees came to him, who say there is no resurrection, and
asked whose wife shall she be that had seven husbands? Jesus said to them; you
err, not knowning the scriptures, nor the power of God; for in the
resurrection, neither shall they mary, nor be married, but are as the Angles of
^od in heaven, And concerning the resurrection, have you not heard that of God,
saying; I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob. He is not God of
the dead, but of the living, These men had the Scriptures, but had not the
right understanding of them, because in the reading of them, they did not take
with them the right rule of understanding them, which is tradition, and humble
submission to approved authority. they also do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, who condemn in this life those who do not
mary, or do vow virginity, which state notwithstanding being approved by our
Savior himself has by all ancient Fathers, and continual practice of the
Church been esteemed an Angelical life upon earth. In like manner is prayer to
saints a holy practice; for they are not to be esteemed as dead; but living,
and knowing much more by the power of God then by nature they could; and more
powerful to do good then ever they were in this life, however strange things
God was pleased to work by them even here on earth.

The great Commandment.
I. THe Pharisees hearing that he had put the Saducees to silence, Pharisaei
audien^es quod imposuisset silentium. Matthew. 22 34
came together; and one of them, a doctor of the law, asked him tempting him:
Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus said to him; Thou
shall love the Lord, thy God, from thy whole heart and with thy whole soul, and
with thy whole mind: This is the greatest and first commandment. It is the
first and greatest commandment; because first in order of promulgation; first
in dignity, by reason of the person whom we are commanded to love; first also
in perfection, because love is the chief of our passions, and placed upon so
noble an object does greatly innoble a soul; it is the greatest, because it
comprehends all other virtues, and draws them after it; and upon it depends
our whole good and salvation; and in regard of the greatenes of God, and his
infinite deserving to be loved, it requires that no part of us be vacant from
being employed in his love, our whole heart, and affection; our whole soul, and
invention; our whole mind, and application must be to his love.

I^. And the second is like to this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
On these two commandments depends the whole law and Prophets. Our Savior
answered the doctor more then he demanded; and put him in mind, that he was
not to ask such questions by way of tempting, but do what the law
prescribes, that is, do by others as we would be done by: Love thy neighbor
as thyself. This commandment is like the former, because we must love our
neighbor also, in his degree, with our whole heart, and soul, and mind, and
not suffer hatred to possess the least part of us: It is like the first,
because as we love God for himself, so must we love our neighbor, not for our
own sakes but for his, and for God. It is like the first, because upon this as
upon the other depends our salvation; and that of S. 1 Io. 4 20
Jhon is very true. He that loves not his brother, whom he sees; God, whom he
sees not how can he love?

III. Then Jesus spoke to the multitude, and to his disciples saying, upon the
Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees, all things therefore
whatever they shall say unto you, observe ye, and do ye, but according to
their works do ye not; for they say and do not. To show us how truly, and
how sincerly we are to practice the love of our neighbor, by this document he
gives us to understand, that however he misliked the proceeding of the
Pharisees, and often reprehended them sharply, yet he had care of their
honourand authority; and held with them so far as was reason. He teaches us
also not to carpe at superiors, being men as others and subject to be misled;
for in what their authority leads them in order to the instruction of others,
God has so much providence over every body, that he does particularly assist
them; besides that every one is more apt to say then to do well. S. August.
The Pharisees (says S. Augustine) did that in their life which was their
own, but an others (that is moyseses) chair, did not suffer them to teach
what was their own: They benefited many by teaching that which they did not;
but they would have benefited far more, Thomas a Kempis l. 3 c. 13.
if they had done what they taught, Son he that indeavoureth to withdraw
himself from obedience, withdraws himself from grace.

The fifteenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. Gentiles desired to see our Savior: S. Philip and S. Andrew were their
mediators, and brought them to his sight: if we follow the conduct of the
Apostle, and Apostolical men, teaching what they have received from hand to
hand, we shall be able to see our Savior really present in the most Blessed
Sacrament, and how that grain of wheat comes to die from what it was, and to
be transsubstantiated into the body of Christ by the powerful word of our
Savior, This is my body. This word a multitude of misbeleevers will have to
signify otherwise then it is taken by holy Church; but as our Savior
concerning the voice which came from heaven, declared that it was neither
thunder, nor an Angel that spoke, but a voice for our sake; so this word, by
which the Sacrament is perfected, he commands should, for our sake be spoken in
his Church, and that done by it which he then did at his last supper in
perpetual remembrance, or commemoration of him, and of his death for our sake;
so that as he then did really give his Apostles what he said, This is my Body;
so their descendents, who are commanded to do the same thing which he did, do
really consecrate and give the same body by virtue of the same words of our
Savior. By this the name and power, and love of our Savior is glorified to
the end of the world: For what a poor thing had it been, to have left only
bread and wine for a memory of him, and of his unspeakable love in dying for
our sakes? But leaving himself under these shapes, and leaving himself so as by
the consecration of them a part, one from the other, the separation of his body
and blood at his death is plainly signified, is truly a very admirable thing,
worthy of his former greatnesses, and able to draw the hearts of all after him,
by consideration of his love:

II. We need no other light to see this truth, then the clear word of our
Savior; yet we have also the consent of all ages, the practice of all
Christians, the authority of all the devoutest and learnedest, men in the
whole world, who are acknowledged by all to have been lights of the world; we
have infinite miracles, which to discredit were to belie the eyes of a world of
people; Let us walk in this light, and the darkness in which some are by
sticking over much to their own phancie, and natural discourses, will not
overtake us: we must walk, from humane apprehensions, to the power of God, to
the love of our Savior, to the eternal wisdom, to the infallible verity of
his word; walking thus, we shall not walk upon uncertainties, not knowing
whiter we go, but as obedient and dutiful Children of God, we shall admire his
works, and submit our thoughts unto him, and gratefully receive the benefit
bestowed upon us. Thomas a Kempis l. 4 c. 18.
Thou must beware of curious and unprofitable searching into this most profound
Sacrament, if thou will not be drouned in the deepth of doubtfullnes

III. But besides humble belief, and profound adoration of this blessed
mystery, we must have the wedding garment of Charity, being invited, and
admitted to so great a feast, in which all things are ready to our hand; and
to so incomparable a marriage, as is the conjunction of our Savior to our soul
and body. Who would not desire this marriage? who would not endeavor to make
himself worthy? Cast of the thoughts for the present, of farm, and
merchandise, and what ever other thing; and delay not thy coming with frivolous
excuses: the bad and the good were admitted, the perfect and imperfect, neither
had that one man been rejected, if he had conserved the purity with which he
was admitted: or if he crept in without that purity, he was the more justly
punished, as daring to aproch to so great a mystery without that, which
himself could not but know to be necessary. When I weigh thy dignity, o
Lord, Thomas a Kempis l. 4.
and my vileness, I do greatly tremble, and am confounded within myself: for
if* I do not aproch, I fly life* if I thrust myself it unworthily, I do
offend.

Signs of the coming of our Savior.
I. PART.
I. Jesus being gone out of the temple went, and his disciples came to show him
the buyldings of the temple; Et egressus de templo^ibat. Matthew. 24
And he said to them; do you see all these things? Amen, say to you, there
shall not be left here a stone upon a stone that shall not be destroyed. The
ruin of Jerusalem, was a figure of the ruin of the world; that city was
glorious in buylding, and specially the Temple, yet for the abuses committed,
it came to utter destruction, The buyldings, which men had buylt stood for a
time; S. ^hon Chrysostom.
Holiness, which God had ordained was neglected. Do you see all these things of
this world? They all pass away; if nothing else concur to their destruction,
time itself alone will ruin them; if you will buyld for eternity, you must
buyld in your souls a buylding of virtues; these be stones which may be
always conserved: Humility, and patience, and resignation, and contempt of
worldly pelse in the foundation; fortitude, and courage, and resolution, and
magnanimity in the walls; Constancy, and perseverance, and prayer, and
contemplation in the roof; Charity, and beneficence, the love of God, and of
our neighbor, through the whole buylding from the bottom to the top; Colos:
3. 14
for this is the bond of perfection, Co^. 13. 2.
and without it we are nothing as the Apostle professes of himself: These be
stones, that is, hard to sense, and worldly humors, but once polished, by the
example of our Savior, they become smooth, and so beautiful in their
postures, that it is a pleasure to others to behold them and a constant content
to them that have them.

II. And when he was siting upon mount Olivet the disciples came to him
secretly, saying, Tell us when these things shall be, and what shall be the
sign of thy coming, and of the consummation of the world? Jesus answering
said, beware that no man seduce you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I
am Christ, and they shall seduce many: you shall hear wars and bruites of
wars; see that you be not trobled: for these things must be done, but the end
is not yet. Nation shall rise against nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom,
and there shall be pestilences, and famins, and earthquakes in places; And
these things are the beginning of sorrows. Our Savior having spoken of the
ruin of the Temple, his disciples imagined that the world would be quickly at
an end, and would feign have known some further sign. He to vndeceive them,
first exhorts them to constancy in their faith; and that whatever do happen
they stick to him, as their only true Master: They will have many assalts in
that kind, many inward doubts, many outward temptations, many that will say,
why not thus and thus? Contrary to what is really true, and solid; but
beware, and follow not the many seduced, but keep yourselves to this one
Christ, one Lord, and Master, by whom are all things. Then he foretells them of
the several accidents and miseries which will happen in the world by war,
and famine, by pestilence, and the like; to the end they should not be trobled,
When such things happen but conceive of them, as disposed by the providence of
God for trial of the just, or permitted to the malice of men, as the beginning
of their forrowes, who are cause of unjust quarrels, and unjust dealing. It is
good for us that some time we have some greevances and contratieties; Thomas a
Kempis l. 1. c. 12*
because oftimes they recall a man home to his heart.

III. Then shall they deliver you into tribulation, and shall kill you, and you
shall be odious to all nations for my names sake: and then many shall be
scandalized, and they shall deliver up one another, and they shall hate one
another: and many false Prophets shall rise, and shall seduce many, and because
iniquity shall abound, the Charity of many shall wax cold: but he that shall
persever to the end shall be saved. Besides all other accidents, which are
matter of patience, he foretells them that they shall be persecuted directly
for their faith, and doctrine, and virtuous life, and followed even to death,
because they are his: which is matter of great comfort and rejoicing: 1. Pet.
2. 20
For as S. Peter tells us, if doing well, you b^^re patiently, this is thank
before God, so we must be far from wondering, or sorrowing, if we chance to
be ha^ed doing well, or betrayed by whom we least mistrust; much farther from
suffering our charity to wax cold upon it, but rather bend our bow the more
against iniquity, which is the only cause of all this disorder If people did
live well and orderly, they would be the nearer their eternal crowns, but
living loosely, and not following the precepts of good life which they know,
they wax colder and colder in Gods service, and so by pieces do fall away from
him. Thomas a Kempis l. 3. ^. 20. n. 4
How can this life be loved having so many bitternesses, and being subject to
so many calamities and miseries? Yet the reward of patient perseverance is so
great, that it sweetens all these miseries, and breeds comfort in the most
discomfortable accidents.

Signs of the coming of our Savior.
II. PART.
I. WHen you shall see the abomination of desolation (which was spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet) standing in the holy place, Cum videritis abominatione^
desolationis. Mat. 24. 15.
he that reads let him understand, then they that are in Iewrie, let them fly
to the mountains, and he that is on the house top, let him not come down to
take any thing out of his house, and he that is in the field, let him not go
back to take his coat; and woe to them that are with child, and give suck in
those days. This was literally spoken of the Jews, and as a sign of the
destruction of Jerusalem, when for punishment of their not receiving the holy
of holyes, to wit, our Savior, the holy places of the temple where polluted
with things which they did abominate; and were signs foretold them by Daniel
the Prophet of further desolation, from which our Savior advised them to make
have to fly, for so they would escape much misery, which those who remained in
Jerusalem would be put unto Mystically; Abomination of desolation signifies
all kind of wickedness, which when we behold practiced in the world, without
respect to holiness, either of place, or person, it is high time for them, who
are the true servants of God to fly to those mountains, of which the Psalmist
speaks: I have lifted up my eyes to the mountains, from whence help will come
unto me: Ps. 110
my help is from God, who made heaven and earth. Ps. 75. 5
To those eternal mountains; from which God does wonderfully inlighten our
hearts, and not stoop down to worldly comforts which will deceive us. S. Hierom
In which times of wickedness and temptation, it is dangerous to be with child,
that is still to be purposing, and not to bring forth our purposes to effect,
to be fearful to profess that openly, which we firmly believe, to be
always giving suck, Hebr. 5. 12
and not feeding out souls with solid virtues.

II. Pray that your flight be not in winter, or on the sabbath for there shall
be then great tribulation, such as has not bee^ from the beginning of the
world, till now, neither shall be; and unless those days had been shortened,
no flesh should be saved; but for the elest the days shall be shortened. In
winter it is hard to travel, upon the Saboth the Jews were forbid to travel.
By these similitudes he advises us to pray, that strong temptation do not
then come upon us when we are cold in devotion, S. Gregor.
or remiss in our conversation; and that death do not rush in upon us when,
not being prepared for it, we would feign fly, Thomas a Kemp^s 1. c. 1 22. n. 5^
when we can hardly walk: Wherefore will thou put of thy purpose till to
morrow? Rise and instantly begin. The tribulation of that day will be most
grievous, when we shall have before us another life, behind us our wicked or
^epide conversation, within us pangs of death, without us a world too much
beloved to leave willingly. Blessed is he that has the hour of his death
always before his eyes; and does daily dispose himself to dye. Other
tribulations also and vexations in the world are many, and grievous, and would
be more intolerable, were it not that God has care of his elect* and does
also hear their prayers toward the mitigatio^ of the^ III. For toward our
comfort in the most violent persecutions even of Antichrist himself (of whom
much of this is to be understood) and in what ever afflictions, he tells us,
Luc. 12. 18.
that a hair of our head shall not perish. And doubtless as to those, who are
convented before the Magistrates he promises to give mouth and wisdom, which
all their adversaries shall not be able to resist, and gayne-say, so to every
body he will give proportionable graces, 1 Cor: 10. 13
and not suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able. Specially if we
have recourse to him by humble prayer, and re^ignation to his blessed will.
Thomas Kempis l. c. 1 12. n. 2
When a man of good will is afflicted, then he understands that God is more
necessary for him, without whom he perceives he can do no good.

Signs of our Saviors coming.
III. PART.
I. (...)
IMmediately after the tri^ulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of heaven shall be moved; and upon earth distress of nations,
for the confusion, of the sound of sea and waves, men withering for fear and
expectation of what shall come upon the world. Our Savior desirous to find us
prepared for his coming foretells us what will become of the world, that he may
restrain us from loving it. The sun will be darkened. etc. For the day of
judgment being at hand, and men to appear in another world, the whole fabric
of this world will be dissolved by pieces; the light of the sun and moon
being no more needful after the end of all flesh on earth, nor the influences
of the stars; the bounds of the sea will also be broken up, and it will come
roaring over the land as its proper place; in which occasion people living at
that time will be in huge distress, not knowing whether to run to save
themselves; 1 Thessalonians: 5
and the more because it will come sudainly upon them, as a these in the
night, for when they shall say, peace and security, then shall sudain
destruction come upon them: as upon the incredulous in the days of Noe in the
general deluge; 1. Pe: ^3. 20
all which may be applied to the last day of every particular man, for that
upon the careless comes also very sudain and very terrible, when neither
sun, nor moon, nor star, nor any worldly thing will be any comfort to
them, but rather a discomfort, to think how they used the benefit of them: and
a whole sea of anguish will overwhelme them, and thought after thought, as wave
after wave oppress them. Watch therefore, because you know not what hour the
Lord will come.

II. Then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven and then shall
all tribes of the earth bewail, and they shall see the son of man coming in
the clouds of heaven, with much power and majesty: And he shall send his
angels with a trumpet and a great voice, and they shall gather together his
elect, from the four winds, from the furthest part of heaven to the end
thereof. Euthymiu
The sign of the son of man is the Cross, which then will shine clearer
then the sun; and as before Princes and Emperors their retinue marches, and
their Guard, so before our Lord the quires of Angels will come in state. And he
himself in so much greater Majesty as he is above them. Then the despisers of
the Cross will weep and wayle unprofitably, and be greatly stonied with the
sound of the trumpet, summoning them to their last reckoning. The elect
notwithstanding will hear it, and behold the Cross with some comfort, as
having reverenced it as the standart of their King, and followed him in his
war against the world, the flesh, and the devil so our Savior says to his
followers; Luc: 21. 28.
But when these things begin to come to pass, look up and lift up your heads,
because your redemption is at hand. Where the difference betwixt the good and
the bad is greatly to be pondered.

III. But of that day, and hour no body knows neither the Angels of heaven,
but the Father alone. But this know ye; if the good man of the house did know
what hour the thee^e would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his
house to be broken up: therefore be you also ready, because at what hour you
know not, the son of man will come. Our soul imports us more then all
worldly substance, be it never so great and rich; more watchful therefore we
ought to be that it pe^ish not* and so much the more because we are uncertain
of the time when it will be demanded of us, Thomas 2 Kempis l. ^. ^. 23. n. 2
O dulnes and hardness of man's heart which only thinks of things present, and
does not foresee what is to come.

The Parable of the ten Virgens.
I. THen shall the Kingdom of heaven be like to ten virgins, who taking their
lamps, Tunc simile eri^ regnum Cxlorum december Virginibus. Matthew. 25:
went f^rth to meet the bridegroom, and the bride; and five of them were
foolish and five wise: The five foolish having taken their lamps, did not take
oil with them: but the wise did take oil with them in their vessels with
their lamps. This parable tends in effect to warn us to be watchful and
provident, and not to mind only things present, not forethinking what will come
after: The wise besides the oil which was in their lamps, took provision with
them in another vessel* considering the vncertantie which might be fall them;
the foolish were short in this, thinking that what they had might be
sufficient. Besides the lamp of this body of ours fed with things present, we
have a soul to last for ever, we must have other provision to feed it. Our
journey is to meet the Bridegroom, and the Bride (our Savior, and his
glorified company) it imports us to beware that this journey in the world
which is intended for our eternal joy, prove not to our discomfort by our
negligence, and carelesnes. The things of this world will not avayle us,
unless we add to them the oil of a good intention, and of charity, with
these they may bring us to eternity of joy, without them they will fall full
short.

II. The bridegroom tarying long, they slumbred all and slept; and at midnight
there was a clamor made, Behold, the bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet
him. Then arose all those Virgins, and they trimmed their lamps; and the
foolish said to the wise give us of your oil, because our lamps are going
out. The wise answered; least peradventure there suffice not for us and you, go
rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. All do sleep; All must die:
The clamor after death, awakes us to life again, but not to time and means to
mend what was wanting while we lived. Then we discover our errors, when it is
too late; and we are denied assistance, because we neglected it when time was:
Then virtue pleases us, and we would feign have it, finding the want; but
every one must answer for himself, and be judged according to his own works;
then he cannot borrow of others any thing, not if he would give a thousand
worlds for it. Prayer does nothing avayle then, nor confession, nor
solicitude; Apo^ 1^. 13
all must be done in this life. Blessed are the dead who die in our Lord; from
hence forth now (says the spirit) that they rest from their labors; for their
works follow them.

III. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom was come and they that were
ready entered with him to the marriage, and the gate was shut. Last of all came
the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; but he answering said;
Amen, I say to you, I know you not, watch ye therefore because you know not the
day nor the hour. S. Gregor
O that we could relish in our hearts the admirablenes of that word. The
Bridegroom is come; or the sweetness of that other; They entered with him to the
marriage. Or the bitterness of the last, the door is shut, I know you not. But
there he that asks, can dese^ve nothing as Gods hands, who here would not
hear what he commanded. And they send forth their prayers, and are not
acknowledged, because then our Lord does forsake those as unknown, whom here
by their good deserts, he could not know to be his. Whatever thy hand can do,
do it instantly (says the Wise Man) for neither work, Ecc* 9. 16
nor counsel, nor wisdom, nor knowledge is in the grave whether thou
hastenest.

The Parable of the Talents distributed.
I. A Man going into a strange country, called his servants and delivered them
his goods; Homo petegre proficisce^s vocavit servos suos. etc, Matthew. 25. 14
To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to every one
according to his proper faculty: and immediately he took his journey: And he
that had received the five talents went his way, and traded with the same, and
gained other five, likewise also he that had received two gained other two. But
he that had received the one going away, dug it into the earth, and hid his
Lords money. This parable signifies whatsoever gifts of God, for there is no
man that is not partaker of his liberality. God therefore resembles himself to
a man in a strange country, because his ^hrone is in heaven, far from where
we dwell on earth; for though he be every where, he is not in our sight, but by
Faith, as a king is in the knowledge of his subjects though they see him not
with their eyes and though he be not in the realm: from God we have all that
which we have, and several talents as several abilities: with these we must
trade in this life, employing them in the service of God, our Lord and Master;
for to that end he does give them, as in the like parable in S. Luke, Luc* 17.
12
he expresses, saying trade till I come, and he gives us the term of this
life to do it: immediately he takes his journey, which signifies that he
leaves us to our free will and industry, not pressing us above our power, nor
compelling us as slaves; assisting notwithstanding i^visibly with his graces,
signified by every ones proper faculty or ability; but yet so, that something
depends upon our diligence and application: which as it was wanting in the
last, so the other two increased their, and their masters stock by it.

II. After much time the Lord of those servants came and took account of them.
He that received the five talents offered other five, saying Lord, five talents
thou did deliver me, behold I have gained other five besides. His Lord said
unto him, well fare thee good and faithful servant, because thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will place thee over many things; enter into the
joy of thy Lord: there came also he that had received the two talents, and
said inlike manner. He does not say after how much time, the Lord of those
servants came: the time of our life, and of our trading is uncertain; but how
ever short, if it be well employed, he accounts it much; if it be not well
employed, though not much in itself (for what is an hundred years to
Eternity?) Yet it is too much for them that do so trifle it away, or misspend
it. And in fine we shall be called to account, and there is no avoiding it.
Happy are they who have their account ready for that day which is so
uncertain; and can show how they increased their talents, raising the natural
actions of this life by virtuous application, to a value double to that which
they received by nature, and indeed in co^parably above it. And the reward is
as incomparable as of a few to many: where also he does not say how many, but
leaves it to us, to conceive, by the joy of their Lord, into which they enter,
which cannot but be incomparable* S. Luke expresses it by saying, that he that
brought five for one was placed over five cittyes, to have the command, and
profit of them. S. August.
Enter into the joy of thy Lord. What kind of entrance is this, from which a
body shall never go out? A great room, and a sweere retirement O retirement
without tediousnes, without bitterness of sorrow and temptation, without
interpellation, and disturbance of importune thoughts.

III. He also that had received the one talent, came and said, Lord I know
that thou art a hard man, thou reapest where tho^^ did not sow, and gatherest
where thou strewest not: and being affraide, I went and hid thy talent in the
earth; behold, lo her^ thou have that which is thine; and his Lord answering
said unto him: Naughty and slothful servant, thou did know that I reap
where I sow not, and gather where I strewed not, thou ought, therefore to
have committed my money to the bankers, and coming I might have received my
own with vsuri^. Take ye away therefore the talent from him and give it him
that has ten talents, for to every one that has shall be given, and he shall
abound, but from him that has not, that also which he seems to have shall be
taken from him, and the unprofitable servant, cast ye out into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping, and g^ashing of teeth People that are worldly given,
either of ignorance, or out of too much affection to their worldly ways, do
take God to be a hard master, and do think that he requires more at their
hands, then he gives ability to perform; but in truth he reapeth no where,
where he has not sown, and good reason that he should have the profit of it.
that is, our service; They who attend not to it, hide hi^ talent in the earth
of worldly actions and cares, and never look higher; no wonder therefore that
they are accounted naught and slothful, and be punished for their neglect.
They are afraid of the account which they are to give yet ou^ of sloth, or
malice they do not apply themselves to that which they know were best. Thomas
a Kemp^s 1. ^ ^. 24. ^. ^.
O miserable and foolish lynner, what will thou answer to God?

The last Judgment.
I. Cum aute^ venerit fili us hominis Mat. 25. 31
WHen the son of man shall come in his majesty, and all the Angels with him,
then shall be sit upon the seat of his Majesty, and all Nations shall be
gathered together before him, and he shall separate them one from the other as
a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, and shall set the sheep at
his right hand; but the goats at the left: Five things are here to be
pondered, and lively represented to our thoughts, the Majesty of the judge:
the retinue of all the Angels; the innumerable multitude of men, women and
children gathered together before him: the separation of one from the other;
the cause whereof every one will presently understand; and finally the innocence
of the sheep on the one side, and the stench of the goats on the other: What
different looks, what different thoughts will then be? The Majesty will be
dreadful to all: S. Thom Chri^^ost.
For as here at the coming of a terrible judge, not only the gyltie, but the
gyltlesse stander by is afraid; so there: how much more terrible will it be to
the gyltie? The Angels even at the separation (in which they will be actours)
will be a comfort to many: the right hand will signify some good toward the^;
those on the left, as forsaken, and haunted by evil spirits, will be in
extreme, anguish and confusion.

II. Then shall the King say to them that shall be at his right hand; come ye
blessed of my father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat, I was
thirsty and you gave me to drink; I was a stranger and you took me in, naked
and you covered me, sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to
met for so long as you did it to one of these my least brethren you did it to
me. Euthimius
O desirefull voice! O unspeakable hono^r! Come ye blessed, who have these
things of the world not of the work, Ps: 143 15
who account these Blessed, in plenty, but blessed of my father, by, and for
those graces of which you have made good use. Euthymi^
And he does nor say take, but possess the Kingdom: possess it as your
inheritance, possess it as your due: possess it as prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. And a kingdom of which every one of you shall enjoy
as full possession as if it were all entirely your own to yourselves. S. Ambro.
And; behold whom grace has made your debtour: It has made the heave^ly
father. God himself, your debtour, who for the good turn you did the poor,
will pay you to the full, as a good debtor pays his creditour: It has made
the eternal son of God your debtour, because he was hungry etc. And
consider that he says, so long as you did it to one of the least: that we
should make no exception, but do good to the poorest snake, as challenging
brotherhood with our Savior.

III. Then he shall say to them also at his left hand. Go ye away from me you
accursed into fire everlasting, which was prepared for the devil, and his
Angels. For I was hungry and you gave me not to eat; I was thirsty and you
gave me not to drink I was a stranger etc. And these shall go into punishment
everlasting, but the just into life everlasting. A terrible saying: Go ye away
from me, who am all happiness, all goodness, all joy and content; from me, who
have spent my heart blood for you, as you see by these marks of my wounds
reserved: Go ye away you accursed, not by my fathers privy ordinati^, but by
your own disorders, which have brought this curse upon you: go into fire
everlasting, not prepared originally for you, but for the rebellious spirits,
whose directions seeing you choose rather to follow then mine* it is reason you
should rather bear them company, then me; and as you were unmerciful to
your companions, look for no mercy here, but punishment, and that everlasting.
If now a little suffering do make thee so i^patient. Thomas ^ Kempis 1. ^ c.
24 n. 6
how will thou be able to abide the everlasting torments?

The sixteenth Application to the most Blessed Sacrament.
I. THe coming of our Savior at the later day will be very terrible, and the
more terrible, the slighter we make of his loving and gracious coming unto us
here; as therefore he advised us to make fr^ends of the Mammon of iniquity,
that when we sail they may receive us into the eternal tabernacles. Much more
ought we endeavor carefully to intertayne his friendship here, that there also
we may find him our friend: For if here we think it tedions to be with him, how
can we think that there he can be so very loving toward us? It is very true,
that by acts of trne repentance we purchase his favo^r; but there is difference
in favors, as there is in merits; and it is the token of a mean spirit to be
content with the least, when it is in our power to have greater; and also that
we have not in our thoughts the right value of such favors; besides the danger
of leesing them here by slighting them, and there by just punishment; The
foolish Virgins were once in favor; they had not that care of preserving it as
they ought to have had; they were shut out, with, I know you not. Because you
did not know me, nor the greatness of my favors toward you. The conclusion
was, watch therefore: be not careless, be not disrespectfull, do not slumber,
when you are to come to this holy banquet, nor after it. S. Gregor
To slumber before we sleep, is before death to grow remiss in the business of
salvation.

II. Behold the bridegroom comes, go forth to meet him. In the later end of
the Apocalypse when our Savior had proclaimed, I am the root, Ap: 12. 17
and the stock of David, the bright morning star, the spirit and the spouse,
or bride, said come; and it follows, And he that hears, let him say come;
and he that thirsts, let him come: and he that will, let him take the water
of life, gratis: That is freely, without cost or charge. As much as to say, as
upon the least notice of our Saviors loving aproch, he that has spirit and
the heart and loving disposition of a bride, will instantly embrace his coming,
and be as ready to invite him, as he inviteth us: if not, it is a sign that
either we are thick of hearing, or dull in understanding his worth, or so
altered with worldly occasions, that we thirst not the true water of life. If
we were rightly disposed, what joy, what content, what comfort; what readiness
and diligence, what care and circumspection, what speed, what alacrity would
not this news bring, the bride groom comes? Beware that because it is not so
great news, but that daily this voice is heard, because daily he offers
himself, thou be not the less taken with it, whereas so great a benefit, so
often offered is so far from lessening the favor, that it becomes
inestimably greater by it.

III. The structure of the Temple of Jerusalem was admirable: nothing but gold
and sylver, and precious stones was seen in all the furniture of it, though all
the sacrifices performed in it were but figures of this one sacrifice offered
daily in the Church of God: How rich should in reason our Temples be? Specially
that of which the Apostle speaking says, 1 Cor: 3. 16
do you not know that you are the temple of God? The honor of God, and the
dignity of him that was worshipped in it, did then require such ornament; much
more do our souls require, seeing we do really receive the same God, who was
in the other represented by faith, and by some extrinsecall relation to it. And
can it be thought (sakth Solomon at the dedication of his Temple) that truly
God does dwell upon earth? For if heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot
receive thee, how much more this house which I have built; And yet here truly
he dwells* Invite the heavens and the dwellers in them to magnify this
great work of his, and to supply the want thou find in thy house: Beg
and imitate the knowledge of the Cherubins, the love of the Seraphins, the
quiet of the Thrones, the courage of the Dominations, the noblenes of the
Principalities, the fortitude of the Powers, and the pie^ie of the Virtues, the
provident care of the Archangels, the diligence of the Angels, the hope of the
Patriarchs, the faith of the Apostles, the constancy of the Martyrs, the
reverent respect of the Bishops and Doctors, the humility and mortification
of the other Confessors, the purity of Virgins. With great devotion, Thomas
a Kempis l. 4. c. 27
and with ardent love, and with the whole affection and servour of my heart I
desire, o Lord, to receive thee, as many Saints and devout persons when they
did communicate did desire thee. etc.

SEVEN SEATS OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOVR WHEREIN BY A LOVING AND RESPECTFVLL SOVLE
HE MAY BE FOUND IN THE SEVEN DAYS OF THE WEEK, AND CONVERSATION HELD WITH HIM
WITH SPIRITVALL SATISFACTION
THE INTRODVCTION.
I. THE bride in the canticles addressing herself in a loving way to the Bride*
groom makes this request Show me, o thou whom my soul does love, where thou
feedest, where thou lie in the midday, as much as to say; show me how I may
come to know thee, how I may come to love thee in perfection: feeding,
representing knowledge; because it is with labor of searching, and ruminating;
lying, or resting, representing love, which is a content and satisfaction in
the beloved, Knowledge, in the way of spirit (of which we speak) was
represented to the Propher Esaias in the two wings of the Seraphins with which
they did fly; Esaias. 6
love, in the four wings with which they did cover Gods, or their own face,
and feet; for to come to perfection, the acts of the will and of love ought to
be double to those of the understanding and knowledge, these being as the steel
and stone struck one upon the oath; as the fire and tinder taking: those are
the needle, these ars the thread which remains in the work: and accordingly
that which we call meditation has more of the knowledge, and understanding,
though not without fervent acts of the will and resolution; Contemplation has
more of the acts of the will, employing itself upon things already known.

II. From the morning till Midday the sun is in continual motion, yet still
sending forth its beams with heat proportioned to the height in which it is:
At noone it rests in a manner and has doble the heat, which at other times
it had. So must our souls endeavor to mount up by degrees to contemplation,
and be still increasing, till we arrive to that posture of altitude, to which
God shall be pleased to raise us in this life; then we must not think that we
are licensed to decline again, but be rising still as to another world,
better, and in which are things stranger, and more admirable, then in this. It
being therefore our aim in this life to come as near the happiness of the other
as we can; and that happiness consisting in the perfect knowledge, and love, and
fruition of God, we must be continually using means to come nearer and nearer
to that fruition, beginning it here, so far as is possible.

III. The practice of Meditation is the high way to it; yet as travelers
cannot so continually walk, but that they must have their resting places, to
refreth themselves, and gather new strength; and those resting places are so
far^e from hindering their journey, that they do much advance it; so in this
our spiritual journey, besides Meditaeion by which we increase in knowledge,
and besides those heates which that knowledge breeds, still carrying us along
with good purposes, and actions sureable; if we take up our rest now and then
at some principal station, we shall find so much refreshment, that we shall
not so much feel the wearynes which oftimes may come upon us in our journey,
as be lightened (as after an hours, or a nights rest) and be fresher then when
we first set forth.

IV. According therefore to the seven days of the week I have disgested seven
resting places* or Seats, wherein siting down without much discourse, we may
look, upon our beloved in them, and take that content and profit, which may be
for our advauceme^ut; for as a green field sowed all through with several
Kinds of flowers does recreate the eye, and refresh the brain without labor,
and if there be variety of hills and plai^es about it, it is the more
pleasing; so will the sight of our beloved delight our souls, and refresh our
wearyed understanding; and the several positions in which we find him, may
make the sight of him the more delightful not that he is not always
exceeding delightful but because several people are of several humors; and
the same party is not always of the same; and variety does naturally both
please and ease us; for which cause also that which is here set down at every
station or seat, may serve as a short declaration of the intent of this
discourse, but is no ways meant, as a pattern for any body to follow; much
less to consine himself unto, for as upon a ground in music several artists
do make several Kinds of division, and the same man does vary as his phancie
leads him, much more does the holy Ghost in every body suggest diversity of
loving expressions toward the beloved of our souls, of whom he is the
infinite love. Sap. 7. 22
O Blessed spirit always one, and always manifold, being one, I beseech
thee, by thy many graces to that one love of my Savior, which I ought only to
have; that being one with him in this life, I may enjoy him in the life to
come, with the many whose multitude being but one heart and one soul, cannot
divide me from him, but increase my love toward him, by their never divided
affection to him. Amen.

The first Seat, the Seat of Purity.
I* HIs seat of Purity, is in the arms of the blessed Virgin his mother: for
she was immaculate from the first instant of her Conception, and did not only
preserve, but increase that Purity to her dying day: that of the Canticles
being verifyed in her; Cant: 4. 7
Thou art all beautiful my love, and there is no spot in thee: And again; How
beautiful art thou and how comely, Cap. 7* 6
my dearest in delights? Or spiritual delicacies bestowed upon thee. Solomon
is reported to have made for himself a great throne of Ivoris, and to have
adorned it with the finest gold; Reg: 10 18
there was not such a thr^ne in all the kingdoms of the world. Our Savior did
no less for our Blessed Lady, adorning her purity with all kind of virtues,
and chiefly with as much charity and love toward her blessed son, as could
be found among Creatures; and there was not such a creature, not only in the
world below, Cant: 6. 9
but not in the kingdom of heaven itself. Admire this Purity with the Angels,
and say, Who is this that comes forth, and advances as the aawning of the day
when it first rises, fair as the moon, choosen and clear as the sun.
Cant. 3. 7
This is the bed and seat of the true Solomon, which threescore valiant men
do compass of the most valiant of Israel; to defend it from the beginning to
the end, from all incursions of whatever enemy; she is beautiful, and sweet,
and comely as the heavenly Jerusalem, Cant. 6. 3
and there is not a citizen of it among us that is to be compared to her. How
truly might she say of herself, my soul does magnify our Lord and my spirit
exult in God my Savior, because he has done great things for me, even he
that is powerful; for if there be any greatenes in heaven or earth it is to be
found in her in measure incomparable. The moon is fair, but not fayrer then
she; the lilly is white, but not whiter then she: as a lilly among thorns,
C^nt: 2. 2
so my love among the daughters. All are but as thorns to her. If thou know
it not, by reason of thy humility, o fairest of women, go forth after the
foot steps of all the companies of heaven, Cant: 1. ^
and earth, and thou will find that neither Cherubins, nor Seraphins, not
Principalities, nor dominations, nor any of the quires of Angels, or Saints
will contend with thee, but reverence thee, and admire thee, and love thee as a
well ordered army of all excellencies within thyself. Cant: 6. ^
How beautiful are thy marches, o daughter of a Prince? And mother of the
Prince of Princes. Cant: 7. ^


II. But as a tree is much more beautiful, when it has the proper fruit
hanging on it, and a vine when it is full of ripe bunches of grapes, so is the
blessed Virgin with her blessed son in her arms. A son who alone is to her
as a thousand sons, having all the perfections in him of which the world is
capable. A son who did nothing prejudice her purity, but raised it to a
value inestimable, the remaining a perpetual Virgin, both before and after he
was borne, and in conceiving him. A son who beautified her soul, as the
sun does beautify the moon, when it is at full, and leaves no part of it
which does not sparkle with heavenly light. Ca^t 1. 15
O mother. O son. How pleasing are those doue-like glances, which you cast
upon one another? How do they inflame both your hearts with the purest love,
and set your affections on fire with mutual correspondence? How sweet are
those cheeks saluted with each others lips, Cant. 5. 3 ^ 5 13.
as a bed of sweet spices, and followers; and as a pomegranat when it is
broken. How pleasing are those imbracements, and a thousand expressions of love
and esteem, which it is not for pe^ to undertake, but a devou^e soul may
imagine; and yet fall short, because the son is infinite and the mother has
been capable of that infinite of which no other creature has been thought
capable. O blessed mother: May I be so bold as to salute those little hands of
thy great son; or to kiffe his feet? I am not worthy; give me leave at
least to put my head under the^, acknowledging him to be my Lord my God, my
soveraig^e and commander, whom I will eternally obey. O sacred feet! tread
down the pride of my heart; give me grace to tread the steps of thy humility,
and thy patience, and thy meeknes and thy obedience: O blessed feet, why are
they so ^a^e but that thou love Purity? How come they so warm, but that
thou love Charity? And nothing can make them cold, but my want of love of
thee; O love! give me grace to love thee.

III. Love Puriti^ that thou may be welcome to this pair of turtles. VVash
thy hands, and feet^ (thy works, and they affections) from all filth and dust,
(...) ^^8^. 71
let thy lips breath nothing but the praises of this mother and this son, and
of whateuer has relation to them; let the eyes be modest, Ca^t* 2. 3.
thy comportment humble thy thoughts respectfull; and sit under the shadow of
this most fruitful tree; for the shade will be delightful, and the fruit
sweet to thy taste. Pass from branch to branch, and see whether h^ b^ more
lovely in his cralde, or in his mothers arms; comforting old Simeon, or
encouraging good S. Joseph in his flight to ^gypt; in the Temple presented, or
found in the midst of dostours; working at his trade, or praying upon his
little knees, lifting up his sweet hand, and eyes for thee, to his heavenly
Father: O jesus, have mercy upon me a sinner: I put my^sel into thy hands, and
beg that thou will have me in thy thoughts.

The second seat, the seat of Authority.
I. HEre we are to represent vnot us our Savior as he was preaching in the
Synagoges of the Jews, Marc. ^* 22
with power and Authority, and not as the Scribes; at which, and at his
doctrine they were greatly as^onished. Act 22. 18
Sit down therefore at his feet, as S. Paul at the feet of Gamaliel; behold
his countenanc^, his gesture, his comportment, his fervor in reprehending,
tempered with unwonted mildnes; his zeal of Gods glory, and the good of every
particular* The Prophecy of Esaias being fullfilled in him according as himself
declared. (...). 4. 18
The spirit of our Lord is upon me, for that he has anointed me; to
evangelize to the poor he has sent me; to he^le the contrite of heart, to
preach deliverance to captives* light to the blind, remission to the bruised;
to denounce the acceptable year of our Lord, and the day of retribution. And
the more thou find want in thyself of spirit, and spiritual ointment, of
contrition, of sight, of freedom, apply thyself with the more attention to
hear his words; for the words which he speaks are spirit and life: Io. 6. 64:
Beg that he will open thy ears, and say thou as follows in the Prophet,
But I do not gain say, Esaias. 50. ^
I have not gone back. Stirte up thy affection not only to embrace his doctrine
with courage, and love, because a greater, a wiser, a more consrderate, a more
infallible teacher thou can not have, as in whom are all the treasures of
wisdom, Colos. 2. 3
and knowledge hidden. And really they are treasures of wisdom which only can
enrich a soul, and afford it pl^ntie and content for all eternity: They are
hidden under the outward shape of an ordinary man, Mat^. 13. 55
a Carpenters Son, from the eyes of worldly given thoughts, but not from the
eye of faith, which enters further the corporal eyes ca^n reach: andZ Thomas ^
Kempis 1. 1 e. 1 n. 2
he that has spirit will find hidden Manna in him.

II. From the Synagoges pass with him to Mount Olivet, where he often
preached, but chiefly give care to that prime sermon of his when opening his
sacred lips, he proclaimed those eight blessings, which the world accounts
rather folly and misery. Blessed be the poor of spirit, Blessed the m^eke;
Blessed they that mourn; Blessed they that hunger and thirst after instice.
Blessed be the m^rcyfu^^; Blessed the clear of har^; Blessed the peacemakers;
Blessed they who suffer persecution. And enlarging himself upon this last
point, declared what Kind of per^ecution, we ought to account happiness, to wit
when they shall revil^ you* and speak all naught of you untruly for my sake.
Be thou ever praised Lord God of heaven and earth, who have hidden these things
from the wis^ and prudent, and revealed them to the little ones. (...): 11. 25
Do not pa^^e these steps lightly over, but see how he did not only preach,
but practice the^ and made the^ steps to his eternal glory, and the glory of
all his saints. Thom as a Kempis 1. 1 ^. 3
Happy is he whom truth does teach by himself.

III. Then follow him with multitudes of people round about the Countri^s, Matt
9. 3^
sowing his celestial doctrine, and curing all disceases* commanding the winds
and the s^a, and the evil spirits; Lu^. 8. 25
Hear the people with admiration saying, Io: 7. 4
never man spoke as this man speaks. what word is this? For with power and
a^ctoritie, h^ commands the unclean spirits, Luc. 4. 36
and they go forth. See how he enters the Temple, Io. ^. 15.
and casts out the traffickers there, with ^is majesticall countenance and a
small little whip of cords: Magnify him with his disciples, Kuc. 18. 40
for if thou hold thy peace, the very slones willcry him up* O stony heart of
mine that is so hard, so covered and incombred with earth, so much inclined
always downwards, that this heavenly Master cannot find (...) into it.
Soften it I beseech thee, with thy most (...) blood; hold it up with thy
powerful hand; (...) from the earthly thoughts which clog it; and if it (...),
strike it with thy heavenly Chariti^, that some (...) at least may fly out of
it, and take in the tinder (...) doctrine, to inlighten and inflame my soul,
which, without it, will be eternal darkness, from which sweet Jesus d^liver
me. Amen. Exercise thy power and authority over my passions, as thou did
over the winds and sea saying, Peac^, be still; Teach me to do thy will in all
things; ^are, 5. 39
instruct me how to perform the particular oblig^tions of my state, and
calling with perfection. Teach me, above all, how I may prepare my self for thy
loving presence here in the most blessed Sacrament, and there where thou art in
glory, when it shall please thee to call me to ^hee. Amen.

The third seat. the seat of Majesty.
I When the Son of man shall come in his majesty and all the Angels with
him, M^t. 25 ^^
the^ he shall sit upon the seat of his majesty, and all nations shall be
gathered together before him. If his countenance were terrible when he took
outhoriti^ upon him in this world* what will it be when mounted on high upon
the Clouds, he shall have all the World before him at once, and come with
thousands of attendance, Iud 15
to do justice against all, and co^vince all the impious of all the works ^f
their impie^ie, and shall thunder out, that terrible sentence against those who
shall have deserved it: Go ye accursed into fire everlasting. Art thou able to
look up to that terrible seat? Or rather look down into thy heart, and wash
it quickly with reates, that that fire may not find where to take hold of thee.
That day is a day of ^rat^, ^ day of tribulation, Sophor, ^ 15
and anguish, a day of calamity and misery, a day of darkness and mist, a
cloudy and stormy day: a day of trump^t, and alarm, against the strongest and
highest, that people shall even wither away with fear and exp^ctation of what
will come upon them. Luc 1^ 16
He preached here an acceptable day, if here we receive what he preached, we
may be there accepted of; if we neglect here, that day will be little w^lcome
to us; a dismal day to those who have here spent their days unprofitably.

I^* S. Ihon in his Apocalypse describes this seat, saying* I saw a great
white throne, and one siting upon it, from whos^ sight earth and heav^n fled,
Ap. ^0 ^^
and there was not pl^ce found f^^ them, and I saw the dead, great and little,
stand in the ^ight of the throne, and books were opened; and anoth^r book was
opened which is of life: and the dea^ were^ ^dged of thos^ things which were
written in the books, a^cording to their works: and the sea gave the dead
that were in it; and death and hell gave their dead that were in them, and it
was i^dged of every one according to their works. And death and hell were cast
into the poole of fir^. This is the second death* And he that was not found
(...) in the book^ of lif^, was cast into the poole of fire. Behold again and
again this gre^te seat^, of the judge and his Assessours behold the
inhabitants of (...), declining, as much as they can, this sight, but that they
found no place to fly from him: behold the dead of all sorts great and little,
rich and poor, Kings and slaves, and no difference to be seen among them, but
by their works: Behold the books of every ones conscience, laid open, not
only to the judge, and to every one of his Assessours, but to all the standers
by; so that thousands, and millions will be looking into thy secretest thoughts
and actions, and see that which thou would not have God to have seen if it
had been possible: and not only thy actions, but thy intentions, so often
dissembled, and labored to be cloked with I know not what. Can thou abide
these looks? Now thou can not; then of force thou must to thy utter shame
and confusion; no wonder that the wicked are described to begin to say to the
mountains, C^c: 23. 30
fall upon us, and to the hills cover us. For it will be an intolerable
disgrace to be thus looked on. How willingly would the already damned have
remained where they were, and not have here appeared? But death and hell must
of force give up their dead; and the sea, and the earth, and wherever they were
concealed. Finally look, if thou can for fear and trembling, into that
poole of fire, so vast, that it is capable of a whole world of corpses as
stinking, and as filthy as they are; see how it gapes upon thee; see the vggly
smoke that rises from it: Go down into it living that thou may escape it
dying.

III Do not mistake thyself, and think that this day so dreadful, is far
of: it will be represented unto thee, as the great world in a little mal, Mat.
24. 29
at whatever hour thou shall come to die; then the sun will be darkened, as
to thee, and the moon will not give the light: all thy pretenses will fall to
ground, as so many stars, on which thou were gazing, and the powers of those
heavens, in which thou have placed thy hopes, and thy felicity will all fail
thee: Anguish, and confusion, and troble, and fear will ^eise thee, if before
hand thou have not* provided so, that when the sign of the son of man shall
appear, S. Andrew
thou may say with S. Andrew. O good Cross, long desired, and now prepared
for my loving soul: I come unto thee secure, and joyful; receive me also
joyfully, who am the dis^iple of him who did hang upon thee, O merciful
Savior, who art to be my Judge; by thy infinite mercy, I'beseech thee, that
thou will now protect me, that I may be, then protected; delivet me from evil
now, that I may then be delivered in that evil day: If thou be good to me
here, Rom: 8* 3^
it will be then well with me: for if God be for us, who will be against us?
and he delivered thee for us all, as a pledge of his love, and mercy toward
us, as a mediator for us betwixt his mercy and his justice: Who then shall
separate us from the Charity of Christ (With which either he does love us, or
we him) I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, Apoc. 46
nor things present, nor things to come shall separate us. etc I rejoice with
the multitude of Angels and Saints at thy victory over thy e^imies, and at thy
just judgments over them: Give me grace to ovbercome them here, that with
thee, Lord, God, Omnipotent, we may reign for ever and ever. Amen. Allelui^.

The fourth seat* the seat of love.
I. HIs seat of love is the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar: For what can
be more lovely then Christ in our hands, in our mouths, in our breasts, in our
souls? Here he does act all the parts, which possibly love can express, he
desires to be continually with us he accomodateth himself in a way, that he
may be wit^ us, and within us, with out all manner of offense, because in the
shape of bread, and wine; he bears wtih our infintie, and hourly
imperfections, and does not avoyde us for them: He is continually giving us
himself, in whom are all treasures: And because it is neither necessary nor
fitting that he should again die for us, yet he is so pleased with his death
for us, that he will have it daily commemorated, and in a divine kind of
manner, acted, and represented in this blessed Sacrament. The bread, and the
C^alice being consecrated severally into his body and blood, as if one were
separ^ted from the other. He acts the part of a father in providing such
sustenance for us; of a mother and nurse in feeding us at his own breast; of a
friend i^ comforting and assisting us: All these kindnesses require loving
co^respondence on our part; let us ^leare ourselves of as many imperfections as
ws can, that we may be less troblesome* accommodate ourselves to his will and
pleasute in all things, and be continually giving ourselves even to death for
his sake, if he so require; and be sure never to be from him by any grievous
offense.

II It is said in the first of king^ that the soul of Ion^th^s was joined
f^st to the soul of David, ^ Reg 18
and Ionathas loved him as he own soul; and they entered aleague: and Ionathas
striped himself of the coat where with he was clothed, and gave it to David,
and thee rest of his garments, unto his sword and bow, and unto his belt. Such
ought to be our love toward our blessed Savior in this most blessed
Sacrament; not only to be able to say with S. Paul, Who shall separate us from
the Charity of Christ? Rom 8 35
Tribulation? or distress? or famine? or nakedness? or danger? or persecution?
or the sword? But we must endeavor to have so tender a love toward him, that
we be as it Were one soul, and one body; for this is the intent of this his
loving and familiar communication of himself unto us; for^ S Grill
as melted wax if it be poured into other wax, they are thoroughly mingled one
with the oother; so he that receives the blessed body and blood of our Savior
is joined unto him, so that Christ is to be found in him, and he. in Christ.
He* being son to the king of heaven striped himself of his glory to cloth us
with glory* and gave us the rest of his garments* that is his ver^uous life,
and example to imitate; of what should not we strip ourselves to offer unto
him? Specially our passions of Anger, and spl^n^, and revenge* so contrary to
this Sacrament of l^ve, and lay them at his feet never to take them up* but in
his defense: and purely in his cause.

III Our everlasting happiness consists in our ever permanent union with God
in celestial bless: Of this happiness this blessed Sacrament is a beginning,
and a pledge: who would not be ever greedy to enjoy it? Entering into the joy of
his Lord, so often as ^e could; and because knowledge is the greatest sput to
love, who would not be ever ^^minating, and ever loving his perfections? and
with the Cher^bins and Seraphins saying. Holy, holy, holy. Tho^ art my God, my
Cr^ato^r, my Redeemer* infinite in power, in Wisedom^, in goodness, in mercyes,
in liberaliti^, in patien^e, i^ humility, in all things imaginable: Thou art
the giver of all good gifts, and founta^^e of living wat^rs, the ^^tidot^
against all evils, my strength, o Lord, and my refuge; with thee I w^ll dwell,
because thee have I choosen; possess thou I beseech thee my heart: Absorbeat
quaeso (...) meam ignita ac melliflua vis amoris ^ui, vt ^more amoris tui
moriar, qui amor^ amoris mei dignatus es mori. Am^n.

The fifth seat: the seat of Compassion.
I. THe seat of Compassion is the Cross^ on which he hung. At the foot whereof
finding the Magdalen I will first with her bewail my synns, which have been
cause of so painful, and so disgraceful a death, of so happy and so worthy a
person. O sin what can setforth thy enor^itie more, the^ that to get pardon
for thee, Luc: 24, 26
and to deface thee, it behoved the son of God ^o suffer? No blood could wash
the away, but the blood of this lamb of God. O stayne in grain! no m^decine
cure thee, but the sacred flesh of this immacula^e body thus bruised. Hier: 19
O venom intolerable. Who will give to my head water, and to my eyes a
fount^ine of te^r^s* and I will ^eepe, (...) ^^ment day and night the death of
this King of all ^ations* slaughtered for my synns; a King crowned with
thorns, which ought every one of them to pearce my h^rt, and pu^ish in me the
pride and sensualiti^, of which he never was guyltie. O nails in his hands and
feet! You have mi^taken the place, where you should have been struck; They are
my hands and feet^ which have sinned* this man wh^t harm has he done? Luc; 23
22
I find no cause i^ him. O God, my God, wherefore h^st th^^ thou forsaken him,
a^ given him over to such a cruel death? O death, I will be thy d^^th, I will
be thy mortal bit, (...) 13. 14
^ Hell. For joining myself With his powerful grace, and by the merits of this
victorious death. I will sin no more, and die rather a thousand death then
offend him.

II. Sorrow full (...) my soul^ unto death. And what wonder? For if I follow
thee from the place where thou did make thy last supper to the ^rosse, Mat.
26* 38
I find nothing but tears or blood, nothing but tants and sc^ffs, nothing but
blo^^s and stripes, nothing b^t wounds and t^rments, nothing but (...) and
(...) against thee, my God, my Savior* my love. What does this thy Prayer
signify; Father if it be possibl^, let this Chalicepasse from ^e. O bitter
Chalice? Which so much sweetness as was in thee would not alay. I do not say it
could not, for certainly the request thou did make was possible to be
granted, but thou would not. Thou did offer thyself unto it because thou
would. Yet this does not excuse me from compassionating thee* for however,
Esaias. 53. 8.
there was a Kind of necessity put upon thee. O hard necessity! Hebr^ 9 16
O that from my eyes there could trickle down such drops of blood, as then
from thy whole body! O drowsy head of mine! Why do I sleep in this occasion?
Behold the Trayt^ur sleeps not. What do these clubs, and s^aves, and swords
about this mild and innocent lamb* He was daily in the Temple among you, what
did you hear from him but good? Their ears are stopped; they hale him away by
night; they buffet him; they misuse him* they condemn him to dye, as guilty;
of what? What ^ccus^tion bring you ^^^inst this man? I am the m^lefactour* I ^m
^e that ha^h sinned, I have done wickedly, this lamb what has he done? Io* 18
20
Let this ^and, I b^s^^ch thee* be turned upon me, and upon the house of my
soul which has harbored so many unlawful, ^ Reg. 24 17
tumultuo^s, and ^iotou^ guests against the law of God and man.

III. Harken what a sound the lashes give, which were loded upon his tende^
skin, perhaps for hours together: behold the ^urro^es which they h^ve made in
his sacred flesh; and hold thy eyes from weeping, if thou be so stout^, and thy
heart from faynting, if it be so hard. O shame! O confusion! Behold the m^n. Is
this the man so cried up, not long ^ince, and now so much cried down as to be
set behind a murderer and a th^^f^, and a seditio^s fellow* O senseless
change! Take him away, (...) him away, cruci^ie him. O cry unmercifully! Take
him into thy arms and into thy heart, and help him to bear this Cross, for he
is ready to fay^t under it, as powerful and as stroug as he is otherwise* O
mount! wherefore art tho^ so cragy to him, whose steps are so wholesome? But
seeing he is plea^ed to choose thee for the stage of this his last* action,
(...) sh^l^ (...) my resting place for ^ver, h^r^ I will dwell because I have
choosen it. P^. 1^1 14
and the noise of those (...) which struck in those cruel nails shall sound
perpetually in my ^^res; my eyes shall be fixed upon this la^entable spectacle,
which the heavens are sorry to behold; my heart shall be nailed to his Cross
with him; I will stand with our blessed Lady, and S. Ihon weeping; I will say
in part with the Sc^ibes and Pharisees. H^ has saved others; He will also save
me. Lord have mercy upon me a sinner. Lord remember me now thou art in thy
Kingdom: my God, do not forsake me: Father forgive me.

The sixth Seat, the Seat of Misery.
I. THe seat of Misery, is my poor heart and soul, compassed with a body, as
poor and miserable. What is man that thou art mindful of him? Or the Son of
mn^ that thou do visit him? Ps. 8. 5
A leaf tossed with every wind* to day alive to morrow dead; to day green, Io^
13. 23
to morrow withered; to day set forth with borrowed favors, to morrow
abominable by its proper stench. What is beauty but the cover of a dunghill?
What proportion, but the pleasure of a^ other bodies eye? What is strength but
a laughing stock to thousands that are stronger? And when a body should have
all, what certainty? The soul is in a manner in as much uncertainty; for
though the body decay by nature, and accidents come upon it not possibly to be
prevented; and the mischief which happens to a soul is vol^ntarie, yet so
much weakness does often oppress it, so many enemies do assalt it, so many
crooked inclinations a^e leading it into dark, and crooked ways, that so long
as i^ is in this world it is in danger; and no man can absolutely say, I will
not fall. For what is my strength that I should b^ar^, Io^ 6 ^^
and go through with so many hard things? Or what will be my end, that I should
have patience enough to persever unto it? O my God! Thou must be my strength,
and my patience. Thou did vouchsafe to take upon thee my (...), that I might
be the stronger; thou were pleased to dwell in my nature, that by thy grace it
might overcome ^atur^, have compassion of this ^^rthen vessel, that it be not
put to more stresse, then tho^ know it will bear; for of myself I am very
frail and miserable, and know not what will be my end

II. O infinite goodness. This the goodness I must be ever clayming: for what but
thy goodness could move thee to cast thy thoughts so much upon me, as to have
mercy upon me most misereble wretch, leaving those rebellious spirits in their
iniquity? Were not thy mercyes great enough to have pardoned them as thou
did me? It were blasphemy to think otherwise: Heb. 2. 16
Yet no where does he take the Angels; but the seed of Abraham h^ takes, and
vouchsafes to suffer miseries with us, and to die for us, that this mis^rie
and this death, which we either daily endure, or hourly expect, might of
misery become a happiness, being borne patiently, resignedly, joyfully. They in
nature do so far excel us a^ it is not to us now comprehensible; we are the
least, and lowest of rational creatures; we made ourselves lower by our own
beastly ways, and became very slaves of thedevill, Prove. 8. 3^
How came it then to be thy delight to be with the sons of men, but by thy
own infinite goodness which delig^teth to be doing wonderful works, Ecc.
(...). 4
which thou alone can do, works glorious, and hidden, and unknown to all
but by thy own^ infinite wisdom.

III. The distance betwixt heaven and earth, is in all respects great* but
nothing to the distance betwixt God and me. He must be more then an Angel that
can measure it: Yet I not being able to raise my self from dirt and dust, he
stoopes to me: I myself that spoke, Lo I am presert: Esaias. 52. 6 ^5* 12
I myself will comfort you. Shall I fall down at his knees with S. Peeter, and
say, Go forth from m^, because I am a sinful man, Luc. 5* 12
Lord? Or with the humbl^ Centution; Match. 8. 8
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. Or with the
^en lepers retire. and keep a loofe, crying alowde, Jesus, Master, have mercy
on me. Or rather with that one Samaritane f^ll on my face before hi^ (...)
giving thanks, and with a lowad^ voice magnifying his great, great goodness,
that vouchsafes thus not only to look upon this miserable creature, but to be
with him, and within him many, many ways. O Lord! nothing is due to me but
confusion for my poorenes in all respects, and more confusiou for my many synns
without respect. To thee Blessing, and honor, and glori^* and power, Apoc. 5.
^3
and thanksgiving for ever and ever* for who is sufficient to declare his
works? Ecel. ^^
Or who shall add to decl^re his mercyes? When a man shall have done, then
shall h^ begin. what (...) man, and what is grace? And what is his grace? And
what (...) good? or what is his evil? God is patient toward him and po^r^t^
out his mercyes upon him, he has seen the presumption of (...) heart, that it
is naught; therefore he has fullfilled his propiti^tion toward them, and has
s^evved them, the vv^y of (...). Grant me grace that I may follow it, and bring
this miserable carkas, and wretched soul of mine to that glory which tho^
have prepared for me from the beginning of the world. Amen.

The seventh Seat, the Seat of Glory.
I. HIs seat of Glory, is at the right hand of his Father, where, equal to
him in all things as he is God, and nearest to him in glory, as he is Man* as
far above all the Celestial spirits, as the hand in honor is above the
foot, he possesses the Kingdom of his Father with full power, governs the
world at his pleasure and in the plesa^tnes of his countenance is the li^e of
all the heavenly Court; Pto. 16*
and the lamp (or light) (...) is the lamb: Ap. 21. 2^
for infinite glory does shine out even from that glorified body of his, able
to astonish the highest Che^ub^^s, as much as the three Apostles at his
transfiguration, were it not that they are strengthened above their nature. Es.
33 ^7
Hither if we lift up the eyes of our Soul, we may see the King in his beauty,
his throne, his scepter, his crown, his footestoole of gold, his garments as
vvh^^e as snow his face resplendent as the sun; His retin^^ in array
proportionable to his own most bountiful magnificence and their deserts: Ap.
17. 16.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Fall down before this throne, doing homage
unto him* and reioy^ing at his exaltation* more then at any thing in this
world, or in the next; because he alone is worthy: all other creatures, if you
take from them, what they have from hi^, what are they? He alone is holy. He
alone i^ powerful. He alone has immortaliti^, (...) Tim. 6. 15
and incorruptibilitie within his own absolute power, and of himself, and
th^re (...) resit his hand, Da^. 4. 3^*
or strength.

II. In the Apocalypse it is related that thousands of tho^sands of Angles made
joyful acclamations to this ^ambe of God* Ap^ 13. 14
this King of Kings, saying that he was worthy, that his power and divinity,
his wisdom and strength, his honor and glory should be praised and renowned
by all and every Creature that was in heaven, or on earth, or under earth
acknowledging the same? and that the four and twenty elders (that is, the
Patriarchs, and ^athers, and Sain^^s of the old, and new Testament, signified
by the perfect number of twelve twice told) did fall down before his throne,
and adored him, and took the crowns which they had upon their heads, and
laid them before his throne, acknowledging all from him, and all due to him
again. Behold therefore this spectacle with great joy and congratulation.
Attend every Angel, and every saint in his rank: The Angels with their
promp^nes; the Archangels with their c^re, the Thrones with their desire he
should rest in them, the Dominations wi^h their courage in his service; the
Principalities with their heroical acts: the Powers with their piety and
devotion; the Cherubins with their wisdom and discretion; The Seraphins with
their ardent love and affections. The Patriarchs with their expectation
fullfilled, and figures demonstrated. The Apostles with the clear sight of
that which they believed and preached* The Martyrs with their particular
laurel and content, for every thing that they suffered; The Bishops and
Doctors, with their knowledge infinitely augmented; the other Confessors with
the hundred fold reward of all their labors increased; the Virgins, and
Widows. with their purity and synceritie in following him wherever he went;
and if there be any particular among them with whom we have special
acquaintance, that party will do us the favor to conduct us, and show us more
then can be here expressed, and chiefly the singular honor which the Blessed
Virgin his Mother does him, for the singular favor received in being choosen
to so high a dignity, and in all respects fitted for it.

III. O ever blessed Savior* two things I behold i^ this glorious sight, thy
infinite worth, and my infinite obligations: where shall I find thoughts
sufficient (...)* press them; all these which I have rehearsed do no^ reach
the ten thousand part of them: Yet O that I had them all, and the concurrence
of all that are, and have been, and shall be! my demand seems great, and is
liele, as all that I have done or am able to do is (god ^ot) little. O
miserable littlenes! Accept notwithstanding swee^e Saviouur, of this little,
all that is: The two (...) of the VVidow were little; but o that I had that
great heart with which she offered all. Accept of it, sweet Jesus as it is. I
bless thee with all thy creatures in heaven and earth; I joy with them at thy
glory, with them I offer my perpetual service unto thee my God, my Sav^ou^,
my all things: with them I hope to enjoy thee more perfectly, when thou shall
be pleased with it, that I may give thee joy though not sufficiently, yet (...)
world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Introductio^ to our following Meditatio^s. 3
THe Baptism of our Savior. 5 His fast, Temptation and victory. 7 S. Ihons
testimony of him. 9 He gathers Disciples. 11 He turned water into wine. 13
Application to the most B. Sacrament. 15 He casts Merchants out of the
Temple. 17 He instructs Nicodemus. 19 The conversion of the Samaritan Woman. I.
Part. 21 II* Part. 23 He cures a noble man's Son. 24 He teaches from S.
Peeters ship. 26 Second Application to the most B, Sacrament. 27 His fervor in
preaching and diverse cures. 29 Three pretend to follow him. 31 He calmes the
Sea. 32 He casts our a Legion of evil Spirits. 34 He cures one sick of a
palsy. 35 He call's S. Matthew. 37 Third Application to the most B. Sacrament.
38 He rayseth lairus his daughter 40 He cures the sick man at the Poole. 42 He
cures a withered hand. 44 He chooses Apostles. 45 The eight Beatitudes. 47
Other documents. 49 Fourth Application to the most B. Sacrament. 50 The narrow
way. 52 He cures the Centurions servant. 54 He rayseth the widows Son. 55
S. Ihon sends his disciples to be instructed. 57 The conversion of the
Magdalen* 58 He casts out a dumb devil. 60 Thefift Application. 62 The Parable
of the Seed. 64 Of the Cockle. 65 The Mustard seed and treasure. 67 He is
misused in Nazareth. 68 Instructions given to his Apostles* 70 The death of S.
Ihon Baptist 7^ The sixth Application. 73 The multiplying of the five loaves 75
He walks and bids Peete^ walk upon the waves* 77 He cures the daughter of
the Canancan. 7^ He cures a deaf and dumb man. 8^ Peeter confesses Christ
to be the Son of God* 8^ Christ foretells his Passion. 8^ The seventh
Application. 85 The Transfiguration. 8^ He casts out the devil which his
discipl^^ could not. 88 Humility commended, and the avoiding of scandal. 90
The Parable of the King taking account of his (...). 9^ He goes privately to
Jerusalem. 94 Officers sent to appreh end him. 95 The eight Application. 96
The ten lepers. 9^ The Woman in Adultery, 100 Christ the light of our world.
101 He gives sight to one borne blind. 10^ Our Savior the door and good sheep
^eard. 10^ Seventy two disciples. 106 The ninth Application. 10^ The parable of
the ^ounded man. 110 Martha intertaines our Savior. (...) He teaches to pray.
I. Part. 11^ II. Part. 116 III. Part. 11^ Avarice condemned. 119 The tenth
Application. 12^ The watchful servant. 123 The punishment of the vnrepenta^^.
124 The goodness of God showed iu two (...)* 12^ He bewayleth the ungrateful.
127 Precepts of humility and Chariti^. 12^ Perfect ^enunciation. 131 The
eleventh Application. 13^ Parables of the lost sheep and the (...) 13^ The
Prpdigall Child. I Part. 13^ II. Part. (...) The unfaithful Baylie. 14^ The
rich glutton. 142 The Pharisee and the P^blican. 143 The twelfth Application.
145 He persuades perfection. 147 The reward of them who leave all. 149
Workmen hired into the Vin^yard. 150 Lazarus raised. I. Part. 152 II. Part.
154 III. Part. 156 The thirtenth Application. 157 He fortelleth his Passion.
159 The Sonues of Zebedeus demand. 161 The blindman near lericho. 162
Zaccheus. 164 The Magdalen annoy^ts our Savior. 166 The Council of the Jews
against our Savior. 169 The Fourtenth Application. 167 Gentiles desire to see
our Savior. 171 He teaches that he is God. 173 The parable of the vineyard
hired ou^. 175 Of the King marying his Son. 177 Tribute paid to Caesar. 178
The great Commandment. 181 The fiftenth Application 182 Signs of the coming
of our Savior. I. Part. 184 II. Partt. 186 III. Part. 188 The ten Virgins. 190
Talents distributed. 191 The last I^dgment. 194 The sixtenth Application. 195
Seven Seats of our Blessed Savior.
INTRODVCTION.
THe first Seat; of Pu^itie: 200 Seat of Authority. 201 Seat of Majesty*
205 Seat of love. 207 Seat of Compassion 209 Seat of Misery. 211 ^^^te of
Glory. 213
FINIS.
Errors of the Second Part. Such, as is hoped will not troble the
understanding reader, are omitted*
Page Lin. Err. Corr. 9 1 mind wind 9 9 us more more 1 10 to thou 15 28 it
turn it to turn 16 31 spuor^e savorie ^^ 17 then their 30 the to 52 32 of
dele 54 25 soldeers soldiers 55 8 God go 61 21 diff^nsion dissension 62 11
oftentation oftentation (...) 35 spend spre^d (...) 31 O of ^4 25 not reflect
not to reflect ^9 22 we we if we, if we ^0 41 which with (...) 4 ff^ all shall
95 4 in in the 34 then thou 100 33 impac^ impeache 104 1 to us as 117 27
ercised exercised 122 18 and at 125 39 house of a house 40 of a del^ 130 39 all
not 140 1 consider we consider 149 1 loving leaving 156 6 best be best 168 2
ayp has Cayphas 174 2 owe awe 184 20 say I say 202 7 followers flowers 10 per
pe^ 206 29 mal map


