THE SECOND LASH OF ALAZONOMASTIX laid on in mercy upon that stubborn youth
Eugenius Philalethes: OR A Sober Reply to a very uncivil Answer to certain
OBSERVATIONS upon Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima magica abscondita.

Proverb. He that reprooves a scorner, gets to himself a blot.

Ecclesiastic. Be not proud in the device of thine own mind, lest thy soul rend
thee as a Bull.

Printed by the Printers to the University of Cambridge. 1651.

THE SECOND LASH OF Alazonomastix: Containing a solid and serious REPLY to a
very uncivil Answer to certain OBSERVATIONS upon Anthroposophia Theomagica,
and Anima Magica Abscondita.

Proverb. He that reproves a scorner, gets to himself a blot.

Ecclesiastic. Be not proud in the device of thine own mind, lest thy soul rend
thee as a Bull.

Printed by the Printers to the University of Cambridge. 1651. A

To his singularly accomplished friend Mr. John Finch.
SIR,
I Know that your modesty cannot but be much amazed at this unexpected
Dedication. But the causes once discovered admiration will cease. Eugenius, as
little children use to do (who fallen into the dirt by their own folly,
commonly make a lamentable complaint to their Father or Mother against them
that help them up, as if they had flung them down) has told a hideous story to
his Tutour, as if I had soyl'd him and dirtied him, when as I only reminded
him that he lay in the dirt, which in this case is all one as to help him out
of it. Wherefore, that I might hold up the humor every way of opposing my
Adversary (as I must for fashionsake call him) he making his false and grievous
Accusation to his Tutour, I thought fit to direct this my true and pleasant
Reply to you my Pupil.

But if I should say, that this is so much as the least part of what moved me
to this act, I confess I should dissemble. For to say nothing of the
Nobleness of your Descent, which is held ordinarily a sufficient ground for
such a respect as this: it is indeed the Sweetness and Candor of your nature,
your great Civilitie and Pleasantness of Conversation, your miraculous
Proficiencie in the choicest parts of Philosophy, your egregious Perspicacity
and kindly Wit, your generous Freedom of spirit, and true Nobleness of mind
(whom the surly countenance of sad Superstition cannot aw, but the lovely face
of Virtue, and radiant Beauty of Divine Knowledge do most potently command to
approve and prosecute what is really best) that has extorted this Testimony of
love and respect from

Your affectionate friend to serve you, Alaz. Philalethes.

To his learned Friend Alazonomastix Philalethes, upon his Reply.
DEar friend! as often as I with care peruse
This strange Reply of thine, I cannot choose one.
But wonder at thy rare Complexion,
Where Wit, Mirth, Judgment thus conspire in
Where Inspirations which make others mad
Unto thy Reason, grace and credit add;
And Passion, that like dungeon dark, does blind
Proves the free fiery chariot of thy mind.
Go surly Stoic, with deep-furrowed brow,
Natures rude Pruner, that wilt not allow
What Is right and good. Here naught too much appears
Unless on thy shorn head thine own large ears.
Since Mastix merry rage, all now believe
Passion's an arm of man, no hanging sleeve.
Brave generous Choler! whose quick motions pierce
Swift like the lightning through the Universe;
And in their hasty course as on they fare
Do cleanse men's souls of vice, as that, the Air.
Noble Contention! which like brushing winds
That sweep both Land and Sea, does purge our minds.
It is thy free and ever-active fire
That rooseth men from snorting in the mire:
Androoz'd, thy aw makes them to tread the stage
In a due Order and right Equipage.
Thy hiss more dreadful is then wounding sting
Of serpents teeth, that certain death do bring:
And conscious souls start at thy laughter loud
As at a Thunderclap broke from a cloud,
When Jove some flash of world-rebuking wit
Lets fly, and faultless Gods all laugh at it:
For so ridiculous vice in ugly guize
Is made the sport and pastime of the wise.
But when fond men themselves to their own face
Have their foul shapes reflected, the disgrace
And conscience of deformity so stings
Their gauled minds, and fretted entrayls wrings,
That even grown wild with pain in vain they tire
Themselves, to shake off this close searching fire;
That sticks like burning pitch, and makes them wood
As Hercules wrapped in the Centaurs blood.
This is thy fate, Eugenius! Thy odd look
Reflected to thy self from Mastix book,
Has so amazed thee with the sudden glance,
That all thy wits be struck into a trance.
But Grief and Vengeance thou do so revive,
As if to them alone thou were alive.
And only take care with language foul
To soil his person, that would cleanse thy soul.
Thus the free cheerful Sun with his bright rays
Shines upon dnnghils, fens, and foul highways,
While they return naught back for his pure beams
But thick unwholesome mysts and stinking steams.
But yet at length near his Meridian height
Dispells the Morning-fogs by fuller light.
Go on brave Mastix then, those noisome fumes
Thy first appearance raised, sure this consumes.
Joannes Philomastix.

To the Reader.
Reader,
IF thou have perused my Observations upon the two Magical Treatises of
Eugenius Philalethes, and his Answer to them, I do not doubt but that seeming
and personated sharpness of mine will now seem just nothing at all, to thy
indifferent judgment; if thou compare it with his unchristian bitterness and
inhumane railings against me. For mine own part, I was so far from all
malice, that if I have trespassed, it was from that over-pleasantnesse of
temper I was in, when I wrote: which made me perhaps too heedlesse how much I
might displease the party with whom I dealt, being secure of the truth of that
saying in the Poet,

-- Ridentem dicere verum Quis vetat? -- But I find that I have so nettled him
unawares, as if his senses lay all in his backside, and had left his brains
destitute. Which has made him very ill-favouredly wrong both himself, the Rod,
and the Correctour. Verily if I had thought his retentive faculty had been so
weak, I would not have fouled my fingers with meddling with him. Nor would I now
lay on this second gentle lash (I seeing the disposition of my young Eugenius)
if it were not as well to wipe my self, as to whip him. I could have been
content to have been represented to the world as ignorant of Nature and
Philosophy, as he has by his bold and very bad speeches to me, endeavored to
represent me. For I am not bound in conscience to know Nature, but my self; nor
to be a deep Philosopher, but to be and approve my self a plain and honest
Christian. This forced me to this Reply. But I thought fit to cast in also,
what will prove me no less a Philosopher, then no Rayler.

But I am not contented to justify my self only from the success; but to thy
further satisfaction, I shall not think much to acquaint thee with my purposes
and principles. The truth is, Eugenius, though he be so highly conceited of
himself, that he thinks his worth is great enough to contract my envy; yet he
is so little in my eyes, and my self (I thank God) so little envious, that in
this regard he is not at all considerable to me. But my drift was to whip that
Genius and dispensation he is for the present under, upon Eugenius his own
back, as having deserved to be an instrument to so good an end. And I persuade
my self there are those parts and that freedom in some measure already in this
young Philosopher, that in a little time he will say that he deserved this
correction, and will laugh for company at the merry punishment, and will
freely confess that I am his brother Philalethes, a lover of him and of Truth:
And that he that whipped the money changers out of the Temple, is as much the
first Mastix, as Adam the first Magicus. But for the present he is under that
dispensation which is as pernicious to the nature of man and Christianity it
self, as it is, to the sober and wife, ridiculous. For he is even in a
feverish thirst after knowledge and fame, and (as he has made it manifest to
the world) more after fame by far then knowledge. Wherefore, I observing in
his Theomagicall tumor and loftiness nothing but confident misapplying or
conceitedly interpreting the holy Writ, the drift and meaning whereof is far
above all natural Philosophy or tricks of Magic whatsoever: and then a
sleighting and scorning those that, I dare say, he does not understand, who yet
are very rational and intelligible, I mean such as Des Carts: and down right
railing against the Aristoteleans and Galenists, who yet have many sober and
useful truths amongst them: Moreover, I noting a melancholic, flatuous and
heedlesse fancy to appear in his writings, clothed with sonorous and amazing
terms, such as might rather astonish the ignorant, then teach the docible: Add
unto all this, that it is too too common a disease now adays to be driven by
heedlesse intoxicating imaginations under pretense of higher strains of
Religion and supernatural light, and by bidding adieu to sober reason and a
purified mind, to grow first fanaticall; and then Atheistical and sensual,
even almost to the height of abhorred Gnosticisme: I thought in good earnest it
was very fit, out of my indignation to Foolery and Imposture, out of my
detestation to Beastliness, Atheism, and Sensuality, and lastly, out of that
honorable respect and tender affection I bear to the Plainness and Simplicity
of the life of Christ and true divine Wisdom, to take occasion to write in
such a manner as I did, and to discountenance that Genius, that defaces the new
appearing face of Christendom, and is a reproach to that just liberty that
belongs to all those that seek after God in sincerity and truth.

I but you will say, This indeed may be well meant: But what title or right
have you to intermeddle, or to correct another man's follies? This is usurpation
and incivility. To this may many things be answered. It is true; The inward
rottenness of men has made very smooth laws to themselves in favor of their
own follies and vices, and mutual connivence at what is bad is held the best
manners; as if mankind packed and conspired together to keep wickedness warm in
her usurped seat by never taking the boldness to examine her title. But to
judge more charitably of the generations of men, I think it is more out of
self-love, then love to her, and out of a tender dotage toward this imposturous
knot of Atoms, our earthly Personality. Which yet I thought I was more
favorable to here, having to do only with fictitious names not any known
Person. But it does not follow, Though this be the mode, that therefore it is
the right fashion: and Quando ego non curo tuum, ne cura meum, is but surlely
said of the old man in the Comedy. That Is the principle of Cain, Am I my
brothers keeper? There was more divine generosity in that noted Cynick, then in
civility it self, when it is so soft, that it will not prick nor hurt vice. He
would not spare to speak where things went amiss, however he sped for it;
tanquam Pater omnium, tanquam Frater omnium, as they report of him. And I think
I have sped ill enough for my but seasonable speaking.

But if this be to appeal to too high a law, I answer further, that Eugenius
had forfeited his privileges he might claim by the laws of civility, he
himself having so uncivilly dealt with others, that are above all comparison
better then he. I but you will say, Why do you make him so ridiculous in your
reproving him? Single reproof had been enough. I answer, I did not make him
ridiculous, but found him so. He put on himself the pyde coat, and I only drew
aside the curtain. Did not the Thracian Girl rightly laugh at Thales when she
see him stumble into a ditch, whiles he was staring up at the stars? And are
not they as ridiculous, that pretend to Seraphick mysterious Theories, and are
not masters yet of common sense, and plainest truths of Christianity? That
stumble at the threshold, or rather grope for the door as the blinded
Sodomites? All the faculties of man are good in themselves, and the use of
them, is at least permitted to him, provided that with seasonable circumstances
and upon a right object. And I have made it already manifest that my Act was
bounded with these cautions

I but there is yet something behind unsatisfied. Though Eugenius be
ridiculous; yet is it not ridiculous, for one that pretends so much to the love
of Christianity as your self, so publicly to laugh at him? That pinches
indeed. Why! am I so venerable a Personage? I am sure I never affected to seem
any such to the world yet. I wear no satin ears, nor silk cap with as many
seams as there are streaks in the back of a lute. I affect neither long prayers
nor a long beard, nor walk with a smooth-knobbed staff to sustein my Gravity.
If I be a Precisian, as Eugenius would have me, it must be from hence that I
precisely keep my self to the naked truth of Christianity. As for Sects,
Ceremonies, superstitious Humors, or specious garbs of Sanctimony, I look on
them all, if affected, as the effects of Ignorance, or masks of Hypocrisy. And
thus am I (...), a Gentleman in querpo, a mere man, a true man, a Christian.
One that never thinks himself so great, as to grow unweildy and unready to put
himself into any shape or posture for a common good. And I prithee, Reader, why
may not such a Christian as this laugh? Or tell me, Who is he in Heaven that
laughs them to scorn, that has the opposers of the reign of Christ in
derision? God is not a man that he should laugh, no more then cry or repent, as
much as concerns the Divine Essence it self: But as God is in a Deiform man he
may be said to laugh, and he can be said to laugh no where else. And if he
might, yet that which is attributed to God, though (...), cannot mis-become a
good man. Thus, Reader, is your argument against laughing as solidly argued as
sportingly laughed out of countenance; and affected austerity made ridiculous
by the plain and unaffected reasonings of Eugenius his merry Adversary, but

Your sober and serious friend Alazonomastix Philalethes.

To Eugenius Philalethes.
Eugenius,
THe reason why you heard not from me sooner, is because yours arrived to my
hands later then I exspected. It was so hot it seems, that none of my
acquaintance had so hard and brawny fingers as to endure the dandling of this
glowing coal till its conveyance where you would have it. It is a brand from
that fire, that has not only calcined, but so vitrified Eugenius, that it
has made him transparent to all the world. All men may see now through his
glassy sides how unevenly and disorderly his black heart beats and pants; they
need not feel his pulse to find his distemper. AEsops fair water but a little
warmed has proved a very effectual Emetick for thee, O Philalethes, and has
made thee vomit up thy shame and folly in the sight of the world, as his
Accuser did the figs before his Master. So that that which you falsely supposed
me to have endeavored, you have fatally brought upon your self, above the
desire, I should think, of your bitterest enemies, I am sure beyond the
exspectation of me that am your real friend. I did not endeavor your
personal disgrace, but the discountenancing of that, which in my judgment is
the disgrace of your person, and many other persons besides. And now that you
have done me the greatest despite you can imagine, and showed your malice to
the full, so that in the court of Heaven and according to the doctrine of
Christ you are no better then a murderer, yet for all this I am benignly
affected to you still, and wish you as much good, as I do those, that never
endeavored to provoke me. And really I speak it from my soul, if it lay in my
power to do it, you should find it. But for the present, I could in my
judgment do nothing more proper, considering all circumstances, then what I
have done, and still do, in advertising you of what is for the best. And truly,
(looking upon you in some sort as a Noctambulo, one that walks in his sleep)
that book which has proved so mischeivous a scandal, I intended only for a
stumble to wake you, (that you might shrugg and rub your eyes, and see in what
a naked condition you are,) not stone of offense for you to fall upon and hurt
you But you are fallen and hurt, and yet do not awake as if Mercuries rod, or 1
know not what other force of Magic still held fast your eyes. You only mutter
against the present disturbance, as one shogged while he dreams upon his
pillow, but you still sleep. You cry out as one cramped in your bed, but your
closed sight can not discern whether it be a friend in sport or for better
purpose, or whether it be your foe to torture you. Awake Eugenius! Awake,
Behold, it is I, your sportfully troublesome friend, or what you will in due
time acknowledge, though in this present drousie humor you puff at it, and
kick against it,

Your careful and vigilant brother ALAZONOMASTIX PHILALETHES.

The second Lash of Alazonomastix.
ANd now, Eugenius, if it be as lawful for me to speak to one asleep, as it
was for Diogenes to talk to Pillars and Posts that are not in a capacity of
ever being awake: Let me tell you (to begin with your Title Page first) that
you do very much undervalue and wrong your self, that you being a gentleman of
that learning and parts that you are, you will thus poorly condescend to that
contemptible trade of a Mous-catcher: And that you are not content to abuse
your self only, but you do abuse Scripture too, by your ridiculous applying
St. Paul's fighting with beasts at Ephesus, to your combating with, and
overcoming of a mouse. Truly, Philalethes, I think, they that have the meanest
opinion of you, would give you their suffrage for a taller office then this,
and adjudge you at least worthy of the place of a Rat-catcher.

As for your Epistle Dedicatory, I conceive you have a very indulgent Tutour,
else you would not be so bold to utter so foul language in his hearing. You
have a very familiar friend of him, if you can without breach of civilitie thus
freely vomit up your figs into his bosom,

But for P. B. of Oxenford his verses, I will only set this one verse of
Virgil's against them all;

Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua carmina, Maevi. Thus you see how gladly I would
rid my self of all your foul language and fooleries. I have nimbly run through
these, I shall leap over the rest as so many dirty ditches. Your slovingly
speeches and uncivil raylings, you must seek an answer for them in Billinsgate,
or amongst the Butchers;

Nobis non licet csse tam disertis. But where you bring any thing that bears
any show of reason with it, I will (though it be far below me to answer so
foul a mouth) return what in the judgment of the sober, I hope will not fail
to be approved as satisfactorie.

Page 4, and 5.
In these pages you accuse me of very high incivility and immoralitie. And it
is an accusation worth the answering, especially being set off with that great
aggravation of being committed against one that is a Christian. But verily,
Philalethes, I do not meet with any man now that takes you to be such, after
this specimen, as I call it, of your Kainish and unchristian dealing with me,
whom indifferent judges will not think to have deserved the hundredth part of
this revenge. I tell thee, Eugenius, there is no Christian but who is partaker
of the holy unction, (...) of the divine Nature, and of that pure and peaceable
love. But if thou think thy mere Baptism will make thee a Christian (while
in the mean time thy heart is possessed of uncleanness and hatred, which the
law of Christ interprets murder) the heathen Poet is able to show thee thy
gross error in this point;

Ah nimium faciles! qui tristia crimina caedis Fluminea tolli posse putatis
aqua, Oh fools and credulous! that think you may
By water wash sad guilt of blood away.
But to the accusation and charge it self: which is this; That I say you are
Simon Magus-like, a Heated noddle, a Mome, a Mimick, an Ape, a mere Animal, a
Snail, a Philosophik hog, a Nip-crust, a Pick-pocket, a Niggard, Tom fool with
a devils head and horns, one that desires to be a Conjurer more then a
Christian. This is the first part of your charge. But before I answer to the
particulars of it, or proceed to the other, these two things are to be noted;
First, that you have drained all the sharper humor that was but thinly
dispersed through the body of my book into two narrow places, that you may make
them appear like two angry boyls, or malignant pushes in the body; which if it
were done in the soundest body that is, there would be the like seeming
distemper. Secondly, it is to be considered that I did profess that I would
put my self in some seeming posture of harshnesse and incivilitie, that I might
show you your own real miscarriage to others, by imitating and personating the
same toward your self. But the thing that I contend for now, is, that this
personated incivility and harshnes of mine is nothing so harsh and uncivil as
you do here make it, as will appear from the causes or occasional
circumstances of this hard language you have thus culled out. For to begin with
the first: You having a design to seem no small thing in the world, and also
pretending to Magic; how easily, how naturally does it fall into the mind of a
man, to compare you to Simon Magus in these regards? And if you did not walk as
all touchy proud men do, as it were with their skins flean off, such a light
thing as this would not smart nor hurt you so sore.

Heated noddle. That Is the only mischief of it that it is true, and your flame
and smoke is as conspicuous as that of Aetna and Vesuvius:

-- Quis enim celaverit ignem? Enitet indicio prodita flamma suo. For who can
fire conceal? whose flame shoots out
And shining shows it self to all about.
As your heat and fire has sufficiently done, especially in this your last
against me, to your great credit: I am sure to mine, for you have writ so as if
you intended to save me from all suspicion of being mistaken in you.

A Mome, a Mimick, and an Ape. I only said that you were more like those then
Aristotle: And if you distrust my judgment, I pray you ask any body else.

And to call you a mere Animal occasionally in our dispute, Whether the world
be an Animal or no: what rudeness is there in it: worse then this is held no
incivilitie betwixt those two famous Philosophers Cardan and Scaliger, whom
your Magisterialnesse has made bold to use at least as coursely, as I seem to
have used you. But you would it seems have the whole Monopoly of reprehension
to your self. And much good may it do you Engenius. My generous liberty of
speech has been so well entertained by some in the world, that I shall take up
that prudentiall resolution for the future, Si populus decipi vult, decipiatur.

A Snail. But that a poor snail should stick in your stomach so, Philalethes,
I much wonder at it. Certainly as fair as you bid for a Magician, yet I
perceive you will be no Gypsy by your abhorrencie from this food.

But a Philosophic Hog, There Is a thwacking contumely indeed. Truly you are
young, Eugenius: and I pray you then please your self, if you had rather be
called a Philosophic pig. But then you would be afraid that some Presbyterian
may click you up for a tithe-pig, and eat you. (This is a pig of your own sow,
Phil. a piece of your own wit.) But being a Philosophic pig you may be secure:
That Is too tough meat for a country Presbyter. But I prithee Phil. why art
thou so offended at the term of Philosophic Hog? The meaning is only, That
thou would pretend to see invisible essences, as that creature is said to see
the wind. Does Christ call himself thief, when he says that his coming shall
be as a thief in the Night: Peace, for shame Caviller, peace.

Niggard and Nip-crust, viz. of your Theomagicall notions. That Is all I said:
And I am such a Nip-crust and Niggard of my speech, that I will say no more.

Pick-pocket. To this I answer fully at Observat. 26. page 64. where I show
that there being no suspicion at all of any such fact in you, it makes the
conceit harmless and without scurrility. And as little scurrilous is that
which follows, viz. Tom-fool, with the devils head and horns. For my speaking
of it in such sort as I did, implies only that I look upon you as a merry wag
playing the child and fooling behind the hangings, and putting out your head by
fits with a strange vizard to scare or amaze you^ familiar comrades and
companions. And I pray you, what bitterness is in all this? But you have made
the foulest, ugliest vizard for me in this your book, and put it on my head, to
make the world believe that I were both fool and devil incorporate into one
person. And this you have done out of malice Magicus, and implacable revenge.
But I wish you had some black bag or veil, to hide your shame from the world:
That is the worst I wish you.

One that desires to be a Conjurer more then to be a Christian: If you like not
Conjurer, write Exorcist. That Is all I would have meant by it. There is a
Conjuring out as well as a Conjuring up the devil. And I wish you were good at
the former of these, for your own sake.

But now to apply my Emollient to the other boil you have made in the body of
my little book. You have made the sharp humor swell into this second bunch by
your unnatural draining. A fool in a play, a Jackpudding, a Thing wholly set
in a posture to make the people laugh, a giddy fantastic Conjurer, a poor
Kitling, a Calfshead, a vaunting Mountebank, a Pander, a sworn enemy to reason,
a shittle scull, no good Christian, an Otter, a wa^er-Rat, Will with the wisp,
and Meg with the Lanthorn, Tom-fool in a play, a natural Fool.

A fool in a play, a Jackpudding, etc. Let the Reader consult the place if
there be not a seasonable occasion of reminding you of your over much
lightness, you taking so grave a task upon you as to be a public Professor
of Theomagicks.

A giddy fantastic Conjurer. No Conjurer there but a Fantastic. I admit in
you the lesser fault to discharge you of the greater. Is this to revile you, or
befriend you?

A poor Kitling. Poor Kitling! Take it in to thy lap, Phil. and stroke it
gently: I warrant thee it will not hurt thee. Be not so shie why thou art akin
to it, Phil. by thy own confession. For thou art a Mouse-catcher which is near
akin to a Cat, which is also a catch of mice: and a Cat is sire to a Kitling.

A Calfshead. I did not call thee Calfshead Eugenius, but said that no Chemist
could extract any substantial visible form out o^ thy brains, whereby they may
be distinguished from what lies in a Calfshead. And (...) vanting Mountebank is
no more, then vanting like a Mountebank. And there is a vast difference in
simply calling you Pander, and calling you Pander to Madam Nature: who, a^ you
confess, complains of your prostitutions.

A sworn enemy to reason. Why, Do you not pray against reason, A logica liber a
^ Domine? And I think any body would swear you are a real enemy to that you
pray against, unless your devotions be but a mockery.

A shittle skull. My words were, Did your sculler or shittle skull. I hope you
do not think, that I meant your skull was so flue and shallow that boys might
shittle it, and make ducks and drakes on the water with it, as they do with
oyster-shels: Or that your self was so Magical, that you could row to the
crystal rock in it, as witches are said to do on the seas in an egg-shell.
Excuse me, Phil. I meant no such high mysteries. It was only a pittyfull dry
clinch, as light as a nut-shell: something like that gingle of thine, Nation
and Indignation.

No good Christian. In that place you bad us show you a good Christian, and you
would etc. There I infer, that (you being at all other times so ready to show
your self, and here you slinking back;) you were conscious to your self that
you were no good Christian.

Otter and water-Rat. I said only that you did waddle on toward the river Usk
like an Otter or water-Rat.

Will with the wisp, and Meg with the Lanthorn. I do not call you Will, nor
Meg: but tell you, If you walk by River sides and marish places, you may well
meet with such companions there as those, to take a turn or two with you.

Tom-fool in a play. Why, is not your name Tom? They tell me it is Tom Vaughan
of Jesus College in Oxford. Well then Tom, Do not you make your self an Actour
in a play? For these are your words: I will now withdraw and leave the stage to
the next Actour. So here is Tom in the play. But where is the fool? say you.
Where is the wisest man? say I. My self says Tom Vaughan, I warrant you. Why,
then say I, Tom Vaughan is Tom fool in the play. For the fool in the play is to
be the wisest man, according to the known proverb.

But how will you wipe off that aspersion of calling me natural fool, says
wise Tom. That indeed I confess impossible, because it was never yet laid on.
I said only, if you had answered the Aristoteleans sic probo's, with mere
laughter, you would have proved your self a natural fool. But he has not done
so, nor is Tom Vaughan a natural fool I dare swear for him. He has too much
natural heat to be a natural fool. Bless thee from madness, Tom, and all
will be well.

But there is yet something else behind' worse then all this: That all these
terms of incivilitie must proceed from spite and provocation. And this you
place betwixt the two bilious tumors you have raised, as a ductus communis, or
common chanel to convey the sharp malignant humor to swell them to the full.
It is true, my words run thus; That I have been very fair with you, and though
provoked, etc. But this was spoken in the person of an Aristotelean, whom your
scornful usage of their Master Aristotle you may be sure did and does provoke.
But in good truth, Philalethes, you did not provoke me at all with your book,
unless to laugh at you for your Puerilities. I but you have an argument for
it, that I was provoked, viz. Because your Theomagicall discourse has so
outdone or undone my Ballade of the Soul (as you scornfully call it) that my
ignorance in the Platonic Philosophy has now appeared to the world. O rem
ridiculam! Thou art a merry Greek indeed, Philalethes, and art set upon it to
make the world sport. Thou do then profess openly to all the world, that
thou have so high a conceit of thy Anthroposophia, that it may well dash me out
of countenance with my Philosophical Poems; and that through envy, I being
thus wounded, I should by my Alazonomastix endeavor for the ease of my grief,
to abate thy credit. What a Suffenus art thou in the esteeming of thy own
works, O Eugenius? and of what a pitiful spirit do thou take Alazonomastix
to be? I do profess ex animo, that I could heartily wish that my self were the
greatest Ignaro in the world, upon condition I were really no more ignorant
then I am: So little am I touched with precellency or out-stripping others.
(But thou judge me to have wrote out of the same intoxicating Principle that
thou thy self have, that is, vain glory.) Or however if there was any thing of
that when I wrote those Poems, which, I thank God, if any, was very little; yet
long ago (I praise that power that enabled me) I brought it down to a degree
far less then thy untamed Heat for the present can imagine possible. But
you will say, This is a mystery above all Magic. What then was the Impulsive of
writing against your book? I have told you already, but you are loath to believe
me: Mere enmity to immoralitie and foolery. But if it were any thing that might
respect my self, it was only this; That you so carelessely and confidently
adventuring upon the Platonic way, with so much tainted heat and distemper,
that to my better composed spirit you seemed not a little disturbed in your
fancy, and your blood to be too hot to be sufficiently rectified by your
brain, I thought it safe for me to keep those Books I wrote out of a spirit of
soberness from reproachful mistake: For you pretending the same way that I
seem to be in, as in your bold and disadvantagious asserting, The soul to
pre-exist, and to come into the body open-ey'd as it were, that is, full
fraught with divine notions; and making such out-ragiously distorted
delineaments of that(...), as the Stoics call it, the enlivened Universe, with
sundry other passages of like grossnesse, I was afraid that men judging that
this affectation of Platonisme in you, might well proceed from some intemperies
of blood and spirit; and that, there no body else besides us two dealing with
these kinds of notions, they might yoke me with so disordered a companion as
your self: Reasoning thus with themselves; Vaughan of Jesus in Oxenford holds
the pre-existencie of the Soul, and other Platonic Paradoxes, and we see what
a pickle he is in: What think you of More of Christ's, that writ the
Platonicall Poems? Nay, what think you of Platonisme it self? Surely, it is all
but the fruit of juvenile distemper and intoxicating heat. But I say, it is the
most noble and effectual Engine to fetch up a man's mind to true virtue and
holiness, next to the Bible, that is extant in the world. And that this may
not suffer, I have suffered my self to observe upon you what I have observed,
my young Engenius. This is true, my Friend, to use your own phrase: And that
the world may know that I have not wrote like some bestrid Pythonick or
hackneyed Enthusiastic, let them look and read under what light I (...) and
sung that divine Song of the Soul.

But yet, my Muse, still take an higher flight,
Sing of Platonic Faith in the first Good,
That Faith that does our souls to God unite
So strongly, tightly, that the rapid flood
Of this swift flux of things, nor with foul mud
Can stain, nor strike us off from the Unity
Wherein we steadfast stand, unshak'd, unmoved,
Engrafted by a deep Vitalitie.
The prop and stay of things is Gods Benignity.
All Is is the rule of His Oeconomie,
No other cause the creature brought to light,
But the first Goods pregnant secundity:
He to himself is perfect full delight.
He wants naught. With his own beams bedight
He glory has enough. O blasphemy!
That envy gives to God, or sour despite.
Harsh hearts! that feign in God a Tyranny
Under pretense to increase his sovereign Majesty.
When nothing can to Gods own self accrue,
Who Is infinitely happy; sure the end
Of His Creation simply was to show
His flowing goodness, which He does outsend
Not for himself: for naught can Him amend,
But to his Creature does his good impart.
This infinite Good through all the world does wend,
To fill with Heavenly bliss each willing heart.
So the free Sun does light and' liven every part.
This is the measure of Gods providence,
The Key of knowledge, the first fair Idee,
The eye of Truth, the spring of living Sense,
Whence sprout Gods secrets, the sweet mystery
Of lasting life, eternal Charity, etc.
And elsewhere in my Poems.

When I my self from mine own self do quit,
And each thing else; then an all-spreaden love
To the vast Universe my soul does fit,
Makes me half equal to all-seeing Jove.
My mighty wings high stretched then clapping light,
I brush the stars and make them shine more bright.
Then all the works of God with close embrace
I dearly hug in my enlarged arms,
All the hid paths of heavenly love I trace,
And boldly listen to his secret charms,
Then clearly view I where true light does rise,
And where eternal Night low-pressed lies, and c
This, Philalethes, is that lamp of God in the light whereof my Reason and
Fancy have wrought thus many years. This is that true Chymicall fire that has
purged my soul and purified it, and has crystallized it into a bright Throne,
and shining Habitation of the divine Majesty. This free light is that, which
having held my soul in it self for a time; taught me in a very sensible manner,
that vast difference betwixt the truth and freedom of the Spirit, and anxious
impostures of this dark Personality and earthly bondage of the body. This is my
Oracle, my Counselor, my faithful Instructor and Guide, my Life, my
Strength, my Glory, my Joy, my communicated God. This is that heavenly flame
and bright Sun of Righteousness, that puts out the light, and quenches the
heat of all worldly imaginations, and desires whatsoever. All the power and
knowledge in Nature that is, all the feats and miraculous performances done by
Witches, Magicians, or Devils, they be but toys and tricks, and are no solid
satisfaction of the soul at all (yea, though we had that power upon lawful
terms) if compared with this. And as for divine knowledge, there is none truly
so called, without it. He that is come hither, God has taken him to his own
familiar friend, and though he speak to others aloof off in outward Religions
and Parables, yet he leads this man by the hand, teaching him intelligible
documents upon all the objects of his Providence; speaks to him plainly in his
own language; sweetly insinuates himself, and possesses all his faculties,
Understanding, Reason, and Memory. This is the Darling of God, and a Prince
amongst men, far above the dispensation of either Miracle or Prophecy. For
him the deep searchers and anxious soliciters of Nature drudge and toil,
contenting themselves with the pitiful wages of vain glory or a little wealth.
Poor Gibeonites! that hew wood and draw water for the Temple. This is the
Temple of God, this is the Son of God, whom he has made heir of all things,
the right Emmanuel, the holy mystery of the living members of Christ.
Hallelujah.

From this Principle which I have here expressed, have all those Poems I have
wrote had their Original: and as many as are moved with them aright, they
carry them to this Principle from whence they came. But to those, whose
ignorance makes them contemn them, I will only say to them what our Savior
said to Nicodemus; The wind blows where it lists and thou hear the sound
thereof, but know not from whence it comes nor whither it goes.

But I am afraid I have stood all this time in a little too high a station for
thee, my Philalethes: I descend now and come a little nearer to thee. And now I
tell thee further, that thy rash and unworthy abuse of DesCartes did move me to
write so as I did, more then any personal regard else whatsoever. For I love
the Gentleman for his excellent and transcendent natural wit, and like his
Philosophy as a most rational, coherent, subtle piece, and an Hypothesis
accurately and continuedly agreeing with the Phenomenon of Nature. This is he
whom thou call my fellow fool, to thy own great disparagement. But this is
he that I call the wisest Naturalist that ever came to my hands. And having not
had the good hap to light on such a rare piece of my own invention, I thought
it was the best office I could do the world to bestow my judgment and censure
of his. And so now you will say I am become so great a Cartesian that I begin
to think but meanly of Platonisme. A wise inference! as if divine and natural
knowledge were inconsistent. I tell thee no, Philalethes: Nor am I become cold
to my own Poems. For I say that that divine spirit and life that lies under
them, is worth not only all the Magic that thou pretendest to, but all that
thou art ignorant of beside, yea, and Descartes his Philosophy to boot. I say
it is worth all that a thousand times told over. Descartes Philosophy is
indeed a fine neat subtle thing, but for the true ornament of the mind bears
no greater proportion to that Principle I told you of, then the dry bones of a
snake made up elegantly into a hatband, to the royal clothing of Solomon. But
other natural Philosophies in respect of Descartes his, are even less then a
few chips of wood to a well erected Fabric. But I say that a free divine
universalized spirit is worth all. How lovely, how magnificent a state is the
soul of man in, when the life of God inactuating her, shoots her along with
himself through Heaven and Earth, makes her unite with, and after a sort feel
herself animate the whole world, as if she had become God and all things: This
is the precious clothing and rich ornament of the mind, far above reason or
any other experiment. And in this attire thou can not but dance to that
Music of the Sibylle.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I am Jehovah, (well my words perpend)
Clad with the frory sea, all mantled over
With the blue Heavens, shod with the Earth I wend,
The stars about me dance, the Air does me cover.
This is to become Deiform, to be thus suspended (not by imagination, but by
union of life, (...), joining centers with God) and by a sensible touch to be
held up from the clotty dark Personality of this compacted body. Here is love,
here is freedom, here is justice and equity in the superessentiall causes of
them. He that is here, looks upon all things as one, and on himself, if he can
then mind himself, as a part of the whole. And so has no selfinterest, no
unjust malicious plot, no more then the hand has against the foot, or the ear
against the eye. This is to be godded with God, and Christed with Christ, if
you be in love with such affected language. But you, O ye cages of unclean
birds, that have so begodded your selves, that you are grown foul and black
like brutes or devils, what will become of you? O you sinks of sin! You that
have heretofore followed religion to excuse you from real righteousness and
holiness, and now have found a trick to be abominably wicked without any
remorse of conscience. You are Gods and Goddesses every bit of you, and all
actions in you divine. He leads you up into the bed of a whore, and uncases you
both for the unclean Act. And when you tell obscene stories in a rapture, you
are caught up into God. O you foul mouths! You blebs of venery, you bags of
filth! You dishonor of Christendom and reproach of men! Is not all this
righteously come upon you, because you never sought after Religion, as a thing
within you, holy, and divine; but as an excuse to save you from wrath, and yet
to remain in your sins? But that cannot be: You are in the fuel of wrath
while you are in your sins, and that fuel will be set on fire some time or
other. But that you may be secure of wrath you say there is no sin, but that
it is only a conceit and a name. Is it not a sin to be less happy ten
thousand times then God would have you? Does not both sense and reason discover
to you, (I am sure it does to others) that you walk in the ways of Hell and
death? But you are still secure, you your selves are as much God as any thing
else is, and so you may make your Hell as favorable to your selves as you
please. But O you fools and blind! I see you cannot, but you are entangled with
the cords and snares that the divine Nemesis has laid for the wicked in all
the parts of the world. But you are not yet any thing moved, O ye dead in
trespasses and sins! For there is no God, say you, more then a dog or a horse
is God. Behold, O ye forlorn wretches and miserably mistaken! Behold, He is
come down to you: nay, He is ever with you and you see him not. Ask of him, and
He shall answer you. Demand of him, and He shall declare unto you, not in
obscure words or dark sayings, not in aenigmaticall speeches or parables; but
He will speak unto your own reason and faculties which he has given you:
propound therefore unto him why you think the soul of man is mortal, and why
you deny an omnipotent and omniscient God distinct from Nature and particular
Beings: propound unto Him, and He will plainly answer you. But alas! alas! you
are neither fit to hear nor able to propound, for you have destroyed those
faculties that he has given you by sinning against the light of them, and now
you have drunk out your eyes, you swear there is no Sun in the Firmament: and
now you have whored away your brains, you are confident there is no God. O sunk
and helpless generation! how have you sop'd and soaked, overflown and drowned
the highest seat and Acropolis of your soul, that through your sensuality it is
grown as rotten and corrupt as a dunghill? You have made your selves as fit to
judge of reason as if your heads were stuffed with wet straw. These things has
the divine Indignation uttered against you, but more for reproof then reproach.
But your sin has made you sottish, and your sottishness confident and
secure. But his anger burns against you; O you false Religionists! and the
wrath of God will overtake you when you are not aware: and your shame shall
ascend up like the smoke of the bottomless pit, and your stink shall be as the
filthiness in the valley of the children of Hinnom. This will be the portion
of all those that barter away sound reason and the sober faculties of the soul
for boisterous words of vanity, and unsettled conceits of Enthusiasts, that
having neither reason nor scripture nor conspicuous miracle, row down with the
stream of men's corruptions and ripen and hasten the unclean part in man, to a
more full and speedy birth of sin and ungodliness. But what is all this to
me? says Philalethes. I tell thee, Phil. I neither wrote before nor do I now
write only for thy sake, but for as many as my writings may reach for their
good. Nor am I out of my wits as some may fondly interpret me in this divine
freedom. But the love of God compelled me. Nor am I at all, Philalethes,
Enthusiasticall. For God does not ride me as a horse, and guide me I know not
whither my self; but converses with me as a friend, and speaks to me in such a
Dialect as I understand fully, and can make others understand, that have not
made shipwreck of the faculties that God has given them, by superstition or
sensuality: for with such I can not converse, because they do not converse with
God; but only pity them, or am angry with them, as I am merry and pleasant
with thee. For God has permitted to me all these things, and I have it under
the broad seal of Heaven. Who dare charge me? God does acquit me. For he has
made me full Lord of the four elements, and has constituted me Emperor of
the world. I am in the fire of choler and am not burned: In the water of
phlegm and am not drowned: In the aerie sanguine and yet not blown away with
every vain blast of transient pleasure, or false doctrines of men: I descend
also into the sad earthy Melancholy, and yet am not buried from the sight of my
God. I am, Philalethes, (though I dare say thou take me for no bird of
Paradise) Incola coeli in terra, an inhabitant of Paradise, and Heaven upon
Earth: and the white stone is mine, however thou scramblest for the
Philosophers stone. (I wish thou had them both, that is all the harm I wish
thee.) I still the raging of the sea, I clear up the lowering Heavens, and with
my breath blow away the clouds. I sport with the beasts of the Earth, the Lion
licks my hand like a Spaniell, and the Serpent sleeps upon my lap and stings me
not. I play with the fowls of Heaven, and the birds of the Air sit singing on
my fist. All the Creation is before me, and I call every one of them by their
proper names. This is the true Adam, O Philalethes: This is Paradise, Heaven,
and Christ. All these things are true in a sober sense. And the Dispensation I
live in, is more happiness above all measure, then if thou could call down
the Moon so near thee by thy Magic charms that thou might kiss her, as she
is said to have kissed Endymion, or could stop the course of the Sun, or
which is all one, with one stamp of thy foot, stay the motion of the Earth. All
this external power in Nature were but as a shop of trinkets and toys, in
comparison of what I have declared unto you. And an adulterous generation only
seeks after a sign, or idiots, such as love to stare on a dexterous jugler
when he plays his tricks. And therefore they being of so little consideration
in themselves; I see and am satisfied why miracles are no more frequent in the
world. God intends an higher dispensation, and greater happiness for these
later times, wherein Divine Love and Reason, and for their sakes Liberty will
lay claim to the stage. For He will as I told you draw us with the cords of a
man, not ride us as with a bridle like a horse, or tug us along like a mad
stear in a band. He will sanctify our inward faculties, and so take possession
of the Earth. But that a man may not deplore what is lamentable, or be angry at
what is injurious to God or Goodness, or laugh at what is ridiculous, this is
not any part of that Law that is made manifest in the Heavenly life, but the
arbitrarious precepts of supercilious Stoics, or surly Superstitionists. For
God has sanctified and will sanctify all these things. Nor am I at all mad or
fanatic in all this, O you unexperienced and unwise! For as our Savior said
of his body, touch me and handle me: so say I of my soul: feel and try all the
faculties of it if you can find any crack or flaw in them. Where is my Reason
inconsequent, or inconsistent with the Attributes of God, the common Notions of
men, the Phaenonema of Nature, or with it self? Where is my Fancy distorted,
unproportionate, unproper? But for the bottom of all these, that, I confess,
you can not reach to nor judge of, that is divine sense, the white stone, in
which there is a name written that none can read but he that has it. But for
the guidance of my reason and imagination, they have so safe a Stearsman, viz.
that Divine touch of my soul with God, and the impregnation of my Understanding
from the most High, that judgment and caution have so warily built the outward
fabric of words and fancy, that I challenge any man to discover any
ineptitude in them, or incoherencie.

And now verily the serious consideration of these weighty matters have so
composed my mind, that I find it some difficulty to discompose it into a
temper childish enough to converse with my young Eugenius. But as high as I
have taken my station, I will descend, and go less my self, to bring him to
what is greater. Behold, I leap down as from the top of some white rocky cloud,
upon the grassie spot where my Philalethes stands, and I shall now begin the
game of my personated Enmity, or sportfull Colluctation with him.

Page 7. lin. 5.
Be sure in your next to give me an account of this disease in what books or
persons, etc. Mouscatcher, take away thy Trap, and take off the tosted cheese
from off the wire, and with thy forefinger and thy thumb put it into thine own
wide mouth, O thou Tom Vaughan of Wales.

Lin. 14. I have found them in your Ballade. Ballade is a good old English
word, from which I abhor no more then Spencer, or Lucretius from old Latin,
who yet was something younger then Tully. Is not the song of Solomon called the
Ballade of Ballades, in some Church-bibles? Thou art so angry that thou art not
able to rail with judgment. But what high swollen words of vanity are there in
that Ballade of mine? Thou art so ignorant that terms of Art seem Heathen Greek
to thee. But for those words that I interpreted for the ignorants sake (you see
what a care I have of you, O unthankful Eugenius!) there is an Apology
prefixed that will satisfy the ingenuous, and for others it matters not.

Page 9.
Lin. 15. With a Bull rampant. You bestow upon me many Bulls, Eugenius: But
when you are so kind as to give me them for nothing, you may well expect that I
will be so thankful, as to return you a Calf for every Bull I have gratis. Let
us begin, etc. And you indeed have done your part already. The sense is, But
you indeed have done your part already: What is this but an (...)? But you have
I see as little skill in Rhetoric as Civilitie. The Calf take thee, Phil. or
take thou the Calf. There is one to begin thy herd.

Page 10.
Lin. 1. What, both tell-Troths? Before thou wast no Rhetorician, now thou art
no Logician nor Philosopher, that can not distinguish betwixt Verity and
Veracitie. Veracitie is enough to make a Tom Tell-troth, though his Narration
be false. Hence it is demonstrable that two men may be both Tel-troths, though
their stories be point blank contrary to one another. The sense of my words is
this; You have told what you thought Aristotle was blameable in: I will now
tell what I think you are blameable in. You may be against Aristotle, and I for
him, and both with veracitie, though not with verity.

Page 11.
Lin. 21. Found out some new truths. Yes, I say there are passages in your
book, that imply so much at least. We shall see when we come at them: and I
shall show that you found them before they were lost.

Page 12.
Lin. 17. The third project is the same with the first. Why, is to be skilful
in Art magic, and to find out new truths all one? It seems then you suppose
there are no new Truths to be found out but Magical ones. Blessed age that we
live in! All other arts are brought to their Non plus ultra. Physicians,
Geometricians, Astronomians, Astrologians, Musicians, put up your pipes.
Claudite jam rivos pueri. There is nothing remains to be done by you. All is
perfected. But let me ask you one sober question, Phil. Have you gone through
all these Arts and thoroughly understand them, that you do so boldly pronounce
them complete and perfect? I know Philalethes is not so immodest as to say so;
I am sure the world is not so foolishly credulous as to believe so. So that I
must conclude, Eugenius, that thou art so outragiously distempered in thy mind,
that thou art a weaker Arithmetician then the rude Thracians. They told to
four, Thou art out at three, and must begin again.

Page 13.
Lin. 11. How many more syllables in Anthroposophia, then in
Antipsychopannychia? Not so many. So that if I had affected to be so Magical as
your learned self, the same conceit would have fitted my Title Page. But I
begin now to suspect, you are so nimble at comparing, that your Title Page was
a kind of Apish Imitation of mine in the first Edition of my Song of the Soul.
But wast thou so simple as to think that any body thought better of my book
for those hard words in the Frontispiece of it? I only set them there as a
windmill on a stack of corn, by the clack of it to scare away sparrows and
crows, that it might be reserved entire for men. But I perceive for all that,
that thy Rooks bill has been pecking there. But much good may it do thee, Phil.
I envy it thee not.

Page 15.
Lin. 20. Vim scrmonis esse in verbis, etc. I say, the force and warrant both
of Nouns and Verbs is from their use,

Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus, and norma loquendi. But if you will have,
Orator to be good and proper: this Epistle of yours must then be no Epistle,
though you call it so, but an Oration to the Fratres R. C. which you spoke to
them when they were God knows where, and they will answer you God knows when.
Verily, Philalethes, thou art a fine fellow to have made an Orator of in King
Midas his time. For he had, they say, very long ears: And so might Thou
have made an Oration before the King in his absence.

Page 17.
Line 21. A twofold Definition, Accidental and Essential. That Is true, Phil.
what Freshman but knows that? But how it is to be understood, I perceive thou
do not know. I am ashamed that I must be fain to rub up in thee the very
first rudiments of Logic, or rather teach thee them. For could thou ever
forget what is meant by Accidental, what by Essential? Accidental is that
which may be or not be in a thing, and yet the thing be: As a horse may be a
horse, be it black or white. Essential is that which so belongs to the thing
to which it is said to be Essential, that the thing cannot be conceived to
exist without it. Now, say I, these faculties of Understanding, Reason, and
Sense are essential to the soul of man, because we cannot conceive a soul
without a power or faculty of understanding, reasoning, etc. And Aristotle has
defined a soul from these. Therefore would a Peripatetick say, with an
Essential Definition. But Eugenius, No: This is but circumstantiall, says he.
Therefore I do infer, Eugenius, that thou do dream of knowing the very
naked substance of the soul; which thou will as soon know, as see the wind. And
thus I spoke to that that thou must needs mean, if thou meanest any thing: but
it is a plain case, thou do not know thy own meaning. But Aristotle does
sufficiently countenance mine, with what he has very luckily let fall some
where in his Analyticks; And thus is it manifestly true in that sense that you
your self meant; That the very essence of any substance is not to be known, nor
is there any such Essential Definition. This is as true, Tom. Vaughan, as two
and two are four, though I do not call you Owl for your ignorance, as you do
me for my knowledge. But we shall have another bout again with this, in your
Anima Magica abscondita.

Page 19. to the 24.
To have made the world as a Carpenter, of stone and timber. Thou have
misplaced a comma in the sentence to make a Cavil. Put on thy spectacles, and
see if there be any comma before of in my Book. If you understood common sense
you could not but understand, that my meaning is this; That you tax the
Peripateticks for phansying God to have made the world as a Carpenter makes
houses of stone and timber. Now pitiful Caviller! But to the point. I say this
is a false taxation, Eugenius: For the parts of the world, according to the
Peripateticks own doctrine, are set in this order they are from an inward
principle of motion, and their own proper qualities: so that they do as the
stones and trees are said to have done at the music of Orpheus and Amphion,
move of themselves. But the stone and timber in the work of a Carpenter, do not
move themselves into their places they ought to be, for the building up of an
house. But you answer two things to this: First, that the parts of the world do
not move themselves: Secondly, that if they do, then they have infusion of
life. To the first: Why, dos not any part of the earth move it self downward,
if it be in an higher place then is natural to it, and the air and fire
upward, etc. and this from an inward principle of motion? Nay, is not the very
definition of Nature, Principium motus and quietis, etc. wherefore we see
plainly, that according to the Aristoteleans, all to the very concave of the
Moon have an inward principle of motion. And for the Heavens themselves, the
most sober and cautious of the Peripateticks hold them to be moved from an
inward Principle, their Forma informans, as they call it. So that though they
do not allow life infused into the world, yet they allow an inward principle of
motion in natural bodies, which is their Substantial Forms, by virtue whereof
they are ranged in this order as we see; or at least according to which they
are thus ranged and ordered. And this is not so dead a business as the
Carpenters building with stone and timber. But in the second place, you say,
That if they have this motion from an inward principle, then they have also
infusion of life. But do not you see plainly, that (according to the mind of
the more sober Peripateticks) they have motion from an inward principle?
Therefore you should have been so far from taxing them to look upon God as a
Carpenter, that you should have concluded rather that they held infusion of
life.

Page 24.
Lin. I. Thou have abused me basely. Verily, if that were true I shonld be very
sorry for it: For I would not willingly abuse any man living, of what
condition soever. But the thing has happened unluckily. I read thy Book, I knew
not thy person, nor thy name, nor thy nature, further then it was expressed in
thy Book, which did not represent it so ill as now I find it. If I had thought
my Galenical purge had met with such a constitution, I should have tempered it
more carefully: For I delight not in the vexation of any man. The truth is, my
scope in writing that Book was laudable and honest, and such as might become a
very good Christian, and my mirth and pleasantness of mind much and real; but
the sharpness of my style personated, and Aristotelicall; and therefore being
but affected and fictitious, I felt it not, there was no corrosion at all; but
all that was unkind in it, (if you will call that passion unkindnesse) was a
certain light indignation that I bore, and ever do bear against magnificent
folly. And there being no name to your Book, I thought I had the opportunity of
doing it with the least offense, as meeting with the thing disjoined and
singled from the person. But I verily think I should not have meddled at all, if
you had spared your incivilities to DesChartes, whose worth and skill in
natural Philosophy (be it fate or judgment that constrains me to it let the
world judge) I can not but honor and admire. He is rayled at but not confuted
by any that I see, in his natural Philosophy, and that is the thing I magnify
him for. Though his Metaphysics have wit and strength enough too, and he has
made them good against his opposers.

Line 21. And assure thy self I will persecute thee, so long as there is ink or
paper in England. Assuredly thou will not, Philalethes: For why, I am dead
already, taken in thy trap and tortured to death: will not this suffice thee? I
am dead, and thou thy self but mortal, will thou entertain immortal enmity
against me? But how can thou persecute me being dead? Will thou raise my soul
up, O Magicus, by thy Necromancy? and then combat with me over my grave? I
hope thou art but in jest, Eugenius: If thou be not, I must tell thee in
good earnest, thy present bitterness will make thee Simon Magus like, as well
as thy former boasting. O thou confounded and undone thing! how have thou
shamed thy self! Thy vizard is fallen off, and thy sanctimonious clothing torn
from about thee, even as it was with the Apes and Monkies, that being attired
like men and wearing vizards over their faces did dance, and cringe, and
kiss, and do all the gestures of men so artificially and becomingly, that the
Country people took them to be a lesser size of humane race, till a waggish
fellow that had more with then the rest, dropped a few nuts amongst them, for
which they fell a scrambling so earnestly, that they tore off their vizards,
and to the great laughter of the spectatours, showed what manner of creatures
they were. O Magicus! do not dissemble before me: For thou do not know with
what eyes I behold thee. Were it not better for thee and all the world beside,
to make it their business to be really and fully possessed of those things that
are undoubtedly good and Christian, nay, indeed if they be had in the right
Principle, are the very buds and branches of the tree of Paradise, the limbs
and members of the Divine nature, such as are meekness, patience, and
humility, discretion, freedom from self-interest, chastity, temperance,
equity, and the like: is it not better to seek after these things, then to
strain at high words and uncertain flatuous notions that do but puff up the
mind and make it seem full to it self, when it is distended with nothing but
unwholesome wind. Is not this very true, my dear Philatethes?

Line II. Upon certain similitudes and analogies of mine. Now we are come to
that rare piece of Zoography of thine, the world drawn out in the shape of an
Animal. But let us view the whole draught as it lies in your book, because you
make such a foul noise about it in your answer. Your words are these. Besides
the texture of the Universe clearly discovers its Animation. The Earth which is
the visible natural Basis of it, represents the gross carnal parts. The
element of the water answers to the blood, for in it the pulse of the great
world beats; this most men call the flux and reflux, but they know not the true
cause of it. The air is the outward refreshing spirit, where this vast creature
breathes though invisibly yet not insensibly: The interstellar skies are his
vital ethereall waters, and the stars his animal sensual fire. Now to
pass my censure on this rare Zoographicall piece. I tell thee if thy brains
were so confusedly scattered as thy fancy is here, thou were a dead man
Philalethes: all the Chemistry in the world could not recover thee. Thou art so
unitive a soul, Phil. and such a clicker at the slightest shadows of
similitude, that thou would not stick to match chalk and cheese together I
perceive, and mussitate a marriage betwixt an Apple and an Oyster. Even those
proverbiall dissimilitudes have something of similitude in them, will you then
take them for similes that have so monstrous a disproportion and dissimilitude?
But you are such a Sophister that you can make any thing good. Let Us try. The
Earth must represent the flesh because they both be gross: so is chalk and
cheese, or an Apple and an Oyster. But what think you of the Moon? is not that
as much green cheese as the Earth is flesh? what think you of Venus, of
Mercury, and the rest of the Planets? which they that know any thing in Nature,
know to be as much flesh as the Earth is, that is to be dark and opake as well
as she. What! is this flesh of the world then torn apeices and thrown about,
scattered here and there like the disjoynted limbs of dragged Hippolytus? Go to
Phil: where are you now with your fine knacks and similitudes? But to the next
Analogy. The element of water answers to the blood. Why? For in it is the
pulse of the great world. But did thou ever feel the pulse of the Moon? And
yet is not there water too? thou little, sleepy heedlesse Endymion: The blood
is restagnant there, I warrant you, and has no pulse. So that the man with the
thorns on his back lives in a very unwholesome region. But to keep to our own
station here upon Earth. Do thou know what thou say when thou venturest to
name that monosyllable, Pulse, do thou know the causes and the laws of it?
Tell me, my little Philosophaster; where is there in the earth or out of the
earth in this World-Animal of thine, that which will answer to the heart, and
the systole and diastole thereof to make this pulse? And beside this, There is
wanting rarefaction and universal diffusion of the stroke at once. These are
in the pulse of a true Animal, but are not to be found in the Flux of the sea;
For it is not in all places at once, nor is the water rarefied where it is. Now
my pretty Parabolist, what is there left to make your similitude good for a
pulse in your great Animal more then when you spill your pottage, or shog a
milk-bowl? But believe it Eugenius, thou will never make sense of this Flux and
Reflux, till thou calm thy fancy so much as to be able to read Descartes.
But to tell us it is thus from an inward form, more Aristotelico, is to tell us
no more, then that it is the nature of the Beast, or to make Latin words by
adding only the termination bus, as hosibus and shoosibus, as Sir Kenhelm
Digby has with wit and judgment applied the comparison in like case. But now
to put the blood, flesh and bones together, of your World-Animal: I say they
bear not so great a proportion to the more fluid parts, viz. the vital and
animal spirits thereof, as a mite in a cheese to the whole globe of the Earth.
So that if thou had any fancy or judgment in thee, thy similitude would
appear to thine own self outragiously ugly and disproportionable, and above all
measure ridiculous: Nor do not think to shuffle it off, by demanding, If there
be so little earth, to tell thee where it is wanting. For I only say, that if
the world be an Animal, there will be much blood and flesh wanting,
Philalethes, for so great a Beast. Nor do not you think to blind my eyes with
your own Tobacco smoke, (I take none my self, Eugenius,) For to that over
ordinary experiment, I answer two things. First, that as you look upon the
parts of the body of a true Animal, in the same extension that they now
actually are, not how they may be altered by rarefaction; so you are also to
look upon the parts of your WorldAnimal, as they are de facto extended, not how
they may be by rarefaction. And thus your Argument from Tobacco, will vanish
into smoke. But if you will change the present condition, of any lesser Animal
by burning it, and turning many of the gross parts into more thin and fluid,
you destroy the ground of your comparison, betwixt the World-Animal and it; for
you take away the flesh of your lesser Animal thus burnt. And besides, the
proportion betwixt the vapor or thinner parts extension to the remaining
ashes, is not yet so big, as of the thin parts of the World-Animal in respect
of its solid parts, by many thousand and thousand millions. Nay, I shall speak
within compass, if I say (as I said before) that there is a greater
disproportion then betwixt the globe of the Earth and a mite in a cheese. This
is plainly true to any that understands common sense. For the Earth in respect
of the World is but as an indivisible point. Add to all this, that if you will
rarefie the Tobacco or Hercules body by fire, I will take the same advantage,
and say that the water and many parts of the earth may be also rarefied by
fire, and then reckon only upon the remaining ashes of this globe, and what is
turned into vapor must be added to the more fluid parts of the World-Animal,
to increase that over-proportion. So that thou have answered most wretchedly
and pitifully every way, poor Anthroposophus! But besides, In the second place:
When any thing is burnt, as for example, your Tobacco. I say it takes up then
no more room then it did before: Because Rarefaction and Condensation is made,
per modum spongiae, as a sponge is distended by the coming in, and contracted
again by the going out of the water it had imbibed. But the Aristotelicall way,
which is yours, (O profound Magicus! that have the luck to pick out the best of
that Philosophy) implies, I say, gross contradictions, which thou can not
but understand, if thou can distinguish corporeal from incorporeall Beings.
Thy way of Rarefaction and Condensation, O Eugenius, must needs imply
penetration of dimensions, or something as incongruous, as every lad in our
Universities, at a year or two standing at least, is able to demonstrate to
thee. But if thou think it hard, that so little a body as a pipe of Tobacco,
should be multiplied into so very much superficies above what it had before, go
to those that beat out leaf gold, and understand there how the superficies of
the same body may be, to wonder, increased. And beside, I could demonstrate to
thee, that a body whose basis thou should imagine at the center of the Earth,
and top as far above the starry Heaven, as it is from thence to the Earth,
without any condensation used thereunto, is but equal to a body that will lie
within the boll of a Tobacco pipe. Where art thou now, thou miserable
Philosophaster? But to the next Analogy.

The air is the outward refreshing spirit, where this vast Creature breaths.
Two things I here object, to show the ineptnesse and inconguity of this
comparison. The one is taken from the office of respiration, which is to
refresh by way of refrigerating or cooling. Is not the main end of the lungs to
cool the blood, before it enter into the left ventricle of the heart? But thou
art so Magical, thou know none of these sober and useful mysteries of
Nature. All that thou answerest to this is, That we are refreshed by heat as
well as by coolness. Why then, Is that general sufficient to make up your
analogy or similitude? This is as well phansied as it is reasoned, when men
conclude affirmatively in the second figure. There are laws in Fancy too,
Philalethes: and I shall show thee anon, how ridiculous thou have made thy self
by transgressing them. If thou meanest by refreshed, to be cheared or restored
only, and what ever does this must be ground enough to fancy a respiration;
then thou breathest in thy cawdle, when thou eatest it, and have spoiled that
conceit of his, that said he never would drink sack whilst he breathed; for if
sack do in any sense refresh and comfort a man, it seems he breaths while he
drinks. I tell thee in the Homologi termini of similitudes, there ought to be
something in some sort peculiar and restrained, or else it is flat, ridiculous,
and nonsense. The other objection was taken from the situation of this air
that is to be the matter of Respiration in this great Animal. What a wild
difference is there in this? The air that an ordinary Animal breaths in, is
external, the air of this world-Animal, internal; so that it is rather wind
in the guts, then air for the lungs; and therefore we may well add the
Cholick to the Anasarca. Is the wind-Cholick an outward refreshing spirit, or
an inward griping pain? Being thou have no guts in thy brains, I suspect thy
brains have slipped down into thy guts, whither thy tongue should follow to be
able to speak sense. Answer now like an (...), O thon man of Magic! He
answers, and the point and sting of all the sense of his answer is in the tail
of it: page 29. lin. 11. and it is their outward refreshing spirit. He means
the Earths and the Waters. O feeble sting! O foolish answer! This only reaches
so far as to save the Earth alive from my jugulating objection. The globe of
Earth and Water indeed may be still an Animal for all that objection. But thou
said the whole world was an Animal. What, is the whole world an Animal
because the Earth is one? O bundle of simples! (to return thee thine own
parcel of ware again, for it belongs not to me) this is as well argued as if
thou should say, That a cheese is an Animal, because there is one living
mite in it. But that this Earth neither is a breathing Animal, is plain enough:
For what respiration, what attraction and reddition of air is there in it?
There may be indeed something answering to sweating and perspiration, nothing
to respiration, my good Philalethes. But to show thee thy folly, I will follow
thy liberty, and impudently pronounce that a pair of bellows is an Animal. Why,
is it not? It has a nose to breathe through, that is plain, the two handles are
the two ears, the leather the lungs, and that which is the most seemly
analogy of all, the two holes in the backside are the two eyes; as like the
eyes in the fore-side of a Crab as ever thou see any thing in thy life: Look
thee, Phil. are they not? You 'll say, The analogy of the nose is indeed as
plain as the nose on a man's face: But how can the handles be ears, when they
stand one behind another? whereas the ears of Animals stand one on one side,
and the other on the other side of the head. And then, how can the leather be
lungs, they being the very outside of its body? Or those two holes eyes? They
have neither the situation, as being placed behind, nor office of eyes. Answer
me all these objections, O Mastix! I can fully answer them, O Magicus! This is
an Animal drawn out according to thine own skill and principles. The leather
say thou must be no lungs, because it is without. Why then the air must be
no air for thy World-Animal to breath, because it is within: And if thou can
dispense with within and without, much more may thou with before and behind,
or behind and on the sides. So the ears and lungs of this Animal hold good
against thee still. Now to preserve my monsters eyes against this Harpy that
would scratch them out. They are no eyes say you, because they have not the
situation of eyes. But I told thee before, thou make nothing of situation.
But they have not the office of eyes. Why? They can see as much as the eyes of
thy World-Animal, for ought thou know. I but this Bellows-Animal breaths at
these eyes: And have not I showed thee that thy World-Animal breaths in his
guts? But I will make it plain to thee that those two holes are eyes: For they
are two, as the two eyes are; and transmit the thin air through them, as the
eyes do the pure light. So that they agree gainly well in the general: As your
Respiration in the World-Animal, in refreshing, though by heat, when in others
it is by cold. Fie on thee, for a Zoographicall Bungler. These Bellows thou
see is not my Animal but thine, and the learned shall no longer call that
instrument by that vulgar name of a pair of Bellows, but Tom Vaughans Animal.
So famous shall thou grow for thy conceited foolerie.

The interstellar skies are his vital ethereall waters. Here I object, O
Eugenius! that there is an over-proportionated plenty of those waters in thy
World-Animal, and that thus thou have distended the skin of thy Animal, God
knows how many millions of miles off from the flesh. O prodigious Anasarca! But
what do thou answer here? viz. That I say, that the body which we see betwixt
the stars, namely, the interstellar waters, is excessive in proportion. No, I
do not say so: but that they are two excessive in proportion to be the fluid
parts of a World-Animal. But how ever, as if I had said so, he goes about to
prove, that there is no excess of proportion in them. Do thou hear, Mastix?
says he, Look up and see. Well, I hear, Phil. I look up. But do not chock me
under the chin, thou wag, when I look up. Now, what must I see? What a number
of bonefires, lamps, and torches are kindled in that miraculous celestial
water. Yes, I see them all. I suppose they burn so clear for joy and triumph,
that my Reason and Sense have so victoriously overthrown thy Phantastry and
Nonsense. But why miraculous waters, Phil? I see the cause: Bonefires and
torches burn in the waters. That were a miracle indeed, Eugenius; but that it
is a falsity. Thou give things false names, and then would amaze us with
verbal miracles.

And the stars his animal sensual fire. What is thy meaning here, little
Phil. (For I never called thee to account for this yet) That this World-Animal
has sense only in the stars? To call them the eyes of the world is indeed
pretty and Poetical. And Plato's delicious spirit may seem to countenance the
conceit in that elegant Distich upon his young friend Aster, (which in plain
English is Star) whom he instructed in the Art of Astronomy:

(...)
(...)
Thou viewest the stars, my Star, were I the skies!
That I might fix on thee so many eyes.
But what, Eugenius, will thou venture in Philosophic coolness, to say the
sense of thy World-Animal lies in the stars? I prithee, what can those starry
eyes spy out of the world? They are very quick-sighted, if they can see there,
where there is nothing to be seen. But it may be, this Animal turns its eyes
inward and views it self. I would Philalethes were such an Animal too; He would
then find so much amiss within, that he would forbear hereafter to be so
censorious without. But what? is there sense then only in the stars? For
sense can be no where but where there is access for the Animal spirits. So it
seems, the stars must hear as well as see, nay, feel and taste; as they do
questionless, as often as they lick in, and eat up that starre-fodder, the
vapors, wherewith in Seneca, they are phantastically said to be nourished. And
thus you see, that Tom Vaughans Animal, I mean the bellows now, may see at the
very same two holes that it breathes at, for he confounds all by his indiscreet
fancy. How art thou blown about like a feather in the air, O thou
light-minded Eugenius! How vain and irrational art thou in every thing! Art
thou the Queen of Sheba, as thy Sanguin a little overflowing thy Choler would
dress up thy self to thy soft imagination, and make thee look smugg in thy own
eyes? Had that Queen so little manners, in her addresses to so great a
Philosopher? No, thy language in all thy book, is the language of a scold and
of a slut. And for thy wit, if thou will forgo thy right to the ladle and
bells, thy feminine brains as thou call them, may lay claim to the
maid-marians place in the Morris-dance: while my strong cruds, (as thou
tearmest my masculine understanding) which are as sweet as strong, not tainted
with the fumes of either revenge or Venery, shall improve their utmost
strength, for the interest of Truth and Virtue.

And thus have I taken all thy Outworks, Eugenius, yea and quite demolished
them. Yet now I look better about me, there is I perceive one Half Moon
standing still. Wherefore have at thy Lunatic answer to that which thou
call my Lunatic argument, which thou propoundest thus; That the Flux and
Reflux cannot be the pulse of the great World, because it proceeds from the
Moon, not from the Sun. I say, Philalethes, The Sun being the heart of the
world, according to those that be more discreetly fantastical (consult Dr.
Fludd, thou art but a bad chip of that block) it was to be expected, if thou
would have the Flux and Reflux to be the Pulse, that it should come from the
Sun, that is reputed the heart of the world, but it comes from the Moon. To
this you answer; That it comes no more from the Moon, then from that fictitious
Anti-selene or Anti-moon, as you venture to call it. You say thus, but prove
nothing. But there is such an apparent connection betwixt this Phenomenon of
the Flux and Reflux, and so constant with the course of the Moon, that it is
even unimaginable but that there should be the relation of cause and effect
betwixt them. But I think you will not say, That the motion of the Sea has any
power or effect upon the course of the Moon; wherefore it must be granted, than
the course of the Moon has an effectual influence upon the Flux of the Sea.
And therefore Fromondus speaks very expressly concerning this matter, and very
peremptorily in these words: Si ex effect is de causa conjectatio valere
potest, tam compertum videtur aestus effici and gubernari a Lunari sydere, quam
calorem ab ignibus effundi, aut lumen a Sole: to this sense; If we can gather
any thing from effects concerning the cause, it seems to be as experimentally
sure, that the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea is made and governed by the Moon,
as that heat flows from the fire, or light from the Sun. For indeed how could
there be kept such inviolable laws, as that the Ocean should always swel at
the Moons ascending; and not only so, but attemperately and proportionably to
her motion, (for she coming every day later and later above the Horizon, the
Flux of the Sea is later and later every time, according to her recession
toward the East in her monthly course) I say, How could these laws be so
accurately observed, Mr. Eugenius, if the Moon were not accessory to, nay, the
principal causer of this Flux and Reflux of the Sea? And if thou be not
wilfully blind, this is enough to convince thee, that that which thou call
the Pulse of thy World-Animal, is from the Moon not from the Sun, nor from
its own inward form. For thou see it is caused and regulated by an external
Agent. But for a more full discovery of this mystery, I send thee to
Descartes in the fourth part of his Principia Philosophiae, or to what I have
taken from thence and made use of in the Notes upon my Philosophical Poems. In
which Poems the intelligent Reader may understand, how far, and in what sense,
any sober Platonist will allow the world to be an Animal. Nor does one part of
it acting upon another, as the Moon upon the Sea, hinder its Animation. For in
men and beasts, one part of the body does plainly act upon another, though all
be actuated by the soul.

And now, Philalethcs, I have taken all thy Outworks, none excepted; out of
which thou have shot many a slovingly shot against me. But thy foul piece has
recoyled against thy self, in all sober men's opinions, and has beat thee
backward into the dirt. And truly, I know not whether I should pity thee, or
laugh at thy childish Arsbut thou have given thy self. For thou railest at me
now thou art down, and threatnest him that is ready to set thee up upon thy
feet, provided thou will not prick up thy ears too, and look too spruntly upon
the business. But thou want no help, thou art a Giant, an invincible man of
war, great Goliath of Gath. I a mere Punie, as thou call me; nay, a Munkey,
a Mouse. What, do thou bid defiance to three at once, Philalethes? I tell
thee, any one of these three would be hard enough for thee. But what will thou
do, now thou art to deal with a man? For I shall fight with thee, only with a
man's weapon, Reason. As for thy raylings and quibblings, I shall not take
notice of them; so that the battle is likely to be the sharper and shorter for
it. Only let us be a little merry at the beginning, it will be like shaking of
hands at the taking up of the cudgells.

OBSERVATION 1.
Art thou the hobling Poet who sometime -- Praised with his quill Plato's
Philosophy? I am the Poet that did, and do with my pen, my mouth, and from my
heart praise that excellent Philosophy of Plato, as the most consistent and
coherent Metaphysicall Hypothesis, that has yet been found out by the wit of
man. But why hobling Poet? thou hobling Ass or Hobbyhorse, choose thee
whether. Thou have so diseased and crazie a brain, that it cannot endure it
seems the least jotting, and so thou had rather be carried in a Sedan, as
those that are rotten with the Neopolitan disease, or else going the way to it;
then be bravely hurryed in my open magnificent chariot, whose tempestuous
wheels dance and leap while they are wearing down the cragginesse and asperity
of Philosophic difficulties into plainness and easiness. But I know the
vulgar, those poor Merchants of eel-skins, that deal with nothing but the
Exuviae of things, words and phrases, are more taken with smooth Nonsense, or
superficial flourishes, then with the deepest knowledge in a careless dress.
Do thou not know that those men, that make it their business to be count and
elegant in their clothes and carriages, commonly have little else but this in
them? And so it is too often with Poems and other writings. But how I slight
your simple censures, O ye skin-sucking flies! ye wasps with rush-stings in
your tayls! ye winged inhabitants of Crowland! I will show you now, not in the
prose of More, but in the very Trot and Loll of Spencer, as this Natural with
his tongue lolling out of his driveling mouth, uncivilly calls it.

As gentle Shepherd in sweet Eventide
When rnddy Phoebus' gins to welk in West,
High on an hill his flock to viewen wide,
Marks which do bite their hasty supper best,
A cloud of cumb'rous Gnats do him molest,
All striving to infix their feeble stings,
That from their' noyance he no where can rest,
But with his clownish hands their tender wings
He brusheth often, and often does mar their murmurings.
Nor have I here called my self Clown by craft, no more then the Poet calls the
Knight so. But thy indiscreet wit cannot distinguish betwixt the Formale and
Materiale, of that whence the similitude is fetched; which made theee so ill
digest thy Philosophic Bacon. It was thine own Magic, Phil. or perverse
imagination that turned thee into an Hog with tusks and bristles, not I. But to
return to the business: O thou judicious Critic! What is the fault? where is
the flaw in what thou have recited?

-- Praise with my quill Plato's Philosophy. Thou do only play with the
feather of the quil. But for what is writ with the inky end thereof, in those
Poems of mine, I challenge thee to show me if thou can, where my fancy or
reason has really tript. Thou indeed have attempted something in the Platonic
way, but I have made it manifest, thou have writ with the quil of a goose. But
I have penned down the praise of Plato's Philosophy in this Canto, with the
skill of a man, as any man that has skill will acknowledge, But thy spirit is
not yet prepared for the knowledge of such divine matters. It is not yet fine,
gentle, and benign enough, to receive so delicious impressions. Put thy soul
into a crysiple, O pragmaticall Chemist, and set it on that fire, that will
excoct and purge out thy dross, and then judge of Platonisme. Art not thou the
Chymicall Monkey that art very busy to little purpose about the glasses of
Harry Blunden, an honest man and an happy Operatour in Chemistry as I hear? But
thou do nothing but lear and look up at the reek of the furnace, and sendest
as high Theomagicall meditations after every fold or curle of smoke that
mounteth up, as the musing Ape after the flur and far flight of every
partridge he let out of the basket. But enough of Levity. Now to expiate the
excess of this mirth with something more solid and sober. I am ready to answer
what thou alleadgest, and to make good that my first observation is no
oversight.

Thou art here mistaken in two things. First, in that thou conceivest that
Reminiscency is so strong an argument to prove the Preexistency of the soul
before her entrance into the body. I say it is not any argument worth the
insisting upon. For though the soul do find truth in her self, questions being
wisely proposed to her; yet she does not perceive that she ever thought of
those things before, and therefore cannot acknowledge any such Reminiscency in
herself. And I appeal unto thine own reason, Eugenius, if God should create an
humane soul, and put it into a body fit and complyable with contemplation,
whether that soul would not be able to answer all the questions propounded in
Plato's Meno, as well as those that are supposed to preexist. And therefore I
have not made use of this argument in all my Platonical Poems. For I tell thee,
Phil. I am a very wary Philosopher, and he must rise betimes that goes about to
impose upon my reason. Thy second mistake is, that thou think I condemn thy
opinion of the Preexistency of the soul, which indeed I might well do as
personating an Aristotelean. But what I really blame there, is thy boldness
and disadvantagious rashness in the proposal of it, thou intimating, as if
the soul descended into the body with her eyes broad wake, which the first page
of thy Praeface to the Reader does plainly imply. Let any one read and judge.
But if any one ask what my opinion is, I answer, It is no matter what my
opinion is, as it is mine, (for what man is (...)) but the discussion of the
truth of these things he may find in my Poems.

Observat. 2.
Here, Philalethes, I charged thee with three absurdities.

The first was affectation of pomp and ceremony in the finding out those things
which can not be hid from the eyes of the meanest capacity. As pretending it
was a whole springs task, to find out this conclusion, viz. That things that
are produced in Nature, are out of something in Nature unlike the things
produced. To this thou answerest; that thou art not to be understood, as if
thou were a whole spring in finding out this conclusion: For thou only say,
I took to task the fruits of one spring. But I say, that one spring may
signify a whole spring, and your making a task of it seems to determine the
words to that sense. And unless thou tookest the pains of examining all the
flowers that grew in the spring, one after another, I mean their kinds, it
would prove no task, or at least be no proof for thy conclusion. And therefore
in all likelihood, one spring should signify here a whole spring.

The second was, that thou art fain to admit of two of Aristotle's Principles,
Matter and Privation. And this I inferred from the foregoing Conclusion. But
thou answerest, That thou have not so much as named Privation, much less
acknowledged it for a Principle. That Is no matter. Though thou hold thy peace
thy observations speak it. That Viola est ex non viola, Rosa ex non Rosa, etc.
Which is the very same thing the Peripateticks observe to be necessarily
included in all generation, and therefore they make a Principle of it, and call
it Privation.

The third absurdity was, that you seemed so simple, as to promise your self
that you would find out the first matter, or the common matter of all things by
experience. To which you answer, That you have now found it out, felt it, and
seen it. Well, Engenius, thou art grown a great Proficient, I perceive, since
the last time I met thee. For then thou wast to seek for this first matter, now
thou have found it and felt it. Have not thou felt the Ephialtes, Phil? or is
not thy fancy as gross and thick as a syrup? I believe thou art as much
Jesuit as I Puritan, tell me truly Philalethes, do not equivocate in this
answer? and understandest by this first Matter, only the first matter of some
things, as meal is the first matter of pudding, and pycrust, and bread, and the
like. But if thou say thou have seen and felt the first matter of all things
whatsoever, thou have pronounced what is impossible to be proved, and therefore
as impossible to be believed by the sober and wise. And yet unless thou
pronounce thus, thou pronouncest nothing to the present purpose. For, by first
Matter, is understood the common matter of all things. But now to rebuke thy
boldness in this assertion: Let me ask thee a sober question or two. This
first Matter, which thou soughtest after, and now have found, whether had
thou any marks to know it by, when thou did light on it? For as Venus in the
Poet, when she sends hue and cry after her little Fugitive, describes him from
his marks;

(...) So what ever is sought for by us, we ought to have an idea of it, that
we may know it when we find it. As he that is to seek an horse in the field, if
he have not an idea of an horse and of a cow, etc. he may bring one for the
other. To be short, he that seeks without an idea of what is sought, seeks for
he knows not what, and he will find it he knows not when. So that it was
necessary for thee to have an idea of the first Matter, in thy mind when thou
wentest about to find it out. Now tell me, what the idea of the first Matter
can be, if not this? A substance out of which all corporeal things are made,
but it self out of nothing. And this is, if thou understandest truth when it is
propounded to thee, as true an idea of the first Matter, as, to have three
angles, is the right idea of a Triangle. But answer me now, Engenius, in good
earnest. Is that matter which thou say thou have seen and handled such as
will fit with this idea? How can thou ever prove but that that matter was
made of some other matter, otherwise modified, as well as other things may be
made of this? But I will deal very heartily with thee, Philalethes: For I would
fain have thee speak some sense. The idea of thy first Matter thou meanest may
happily be this. Matter so prepared and qualified by the Art of Chemistry, that
it is fit to receive any form whatsoever, or Matter that is reduced to such a
temper as it all was of at first, when it lay fitted for receiving of all forms
of what nature so ever, and by this fitness engaged them to lodge in her large
bosom. And thus though this Matter of thine be made of another matter, yet,
because it is reduced to the state it was in first of all, before it received
any forms, and was contrived into this order and distinction of parts, that
constitute the world, it may in this sense be called the first Matter. But tell
me, Eugenius, how know thou that thou have light on such a matter as this?
Thou had no preconceived idea of the color and consistency of this matter,
which thou say thou have felt and and seen, unless somebody has described
it to thee, from certain sensible qualities. But then I would ask both them and
thee, how they know that a body of this consistency and color is the first
matter? It is either because that they observe, that, what ever they resolve by
their Chymicall fires is resolved into this at last, or because they have
observed that all things will arise out of this matter. But for the first: I
say, they have not, nor can make trial of all things by their Art. For how
many things appear above us out of our reach? besides what lie eternally buried
below. They can not distill the stars, as some say, glowworms may be, and make
them lamps of them to study by. Besides, why is that which is left, to be the
first matter more then what is flown away and evaporated? And that which will
not evaporate, I demand whether that is the first matter of air and light? Add
to all this, That you do not so much find this first matter as make it in all
likelihood. For how incredible a thing is it, but that by your fires or heats,
(you putting the body that is under your operation into a perpetual motion, so
that the parts fridge one against another uncessantly) the nature of it should
be quite changed by you. So that you do not by a kind of Analysis discover what
is at the bottom, but by Genesis modifie the matter into a new dress. But
that is no matter you 'll say, so long as it is reduced to such a temper as it
was, when the whole world was to be impregnated with several forms. But there
is no way now left for you to know that you have thus reduced it, unless you
have seen this matter of yours. Vertumnus-like to appear before you in all
shapes. Tell me then, Philalethes, Have you seen it put on the form of a
Sponge? of a Pumex? of Adamant? of Marble? Have you seen it put on the shape of
all plants whatsoever and Animals? to say nothing of metals and mineralls. Have
you played with it in the shape of a dog? or has it roared against you in the
form of a lion? or have you made sport with the mustacho's of it in the figure
of a mouse? Has Paracelsus his homunculus come tumbling out of it, with his
tail upwards in sign of good luck? or have thou conferred with it in the
dress of a wanton Lady, clothed with transparent lawns, or Sybariticall
tiffanies? If thou have not, (and dare thou say thou have?) thou have no
reason at all to say thou have seen and felt the first matter of all things. It
is but vain boasting and bold imposture. Add unto all this; That if there were
any such matter as thou meanest, so fit for all forms, and yet fitted with
none, the Mundus vitae, (or world of Lives and Forms) being every where present
so as it is, this destitute widow, or marriageable Virgin could be no more kept
from being matched with one Form or other, then Danae could be from Jupiter,
who notwithstanding the close custody she was under, descended into her lap in
a golden shower. Wherefore I conclude, that it is not any certain Experience,
but rash juvenilitie and confidence, that makes thee pronounce thou have seen
and felt the first Matter.

Observe. 3.
Here thou would fain carp at my Hymn of Humility and Charity, but thy
pride and unchristian bitterness only makes thee grin at it, it representing
that which is so contrary to thine own nature. But here is nothing said to any
purpose, and therefore it is to no purpose to apply an answer. As for thy
cavills against those expressions of mine, that we are to measure our wisdom
by unprejudicate reason, by humility and purity of mind, and not by devotion;
the sense is, That we are to try how wise we are, or how safely we may conclude
our selves to be wise, by examining whether we have put off all prejudice, and
use our reason impartially, whether we be humble and set free from all
corruption of Flesh and Spirit. For by these we may better and more safely
conclude that we have used our understanding aright, and are not mistaken in
what we conceive, then by long, or hot, or humorous devotions, such as men seem
but to play with God in, and rather show the world what fine heats they have,
then heartily desire the true good from him, whom they seem to solicit for it.
But thou art so galled with the sense, that thou would fain revenge thy self
upon the words.

In what sense I call the disciples of Aristotle orthodox, any body that has
any wit and urbanity in them may easily discern, and then my praises of Plato
and Des-Chartes may consist very well with this passage.

But as for Scaligers making use of Aristotle's text to make good Athanasius his
Creed, I will be very fair with thee, Phil. He did first believe firmly, that
there is such a Trinity, and then made Aristotle speak to that purpose. Now do
thou but first prove strongly thy Philosophical positions by Reason, and then
I give thee leave for further countenance to call in Moses his text.

Observe. 4.
Do you mention no life here, Eugenius? But then Georgius Venetus does for you.
Omne quod vivit, propter inclusum calorem vivit: inde colligitur, caloris
naturam vim habere in se vitalem in mundo passim diffusam, etc. Construe it,
Phil. and be pacified.

Observe. 5.
When you call it so in your own verse. Why it seems then you had a mind to
write poetical Prose, which I am sure Mr. Bust of Eaton had like to have whipped
me for when I was a boy. But I wonder how thou come to stumble on this Stanza
of mine above the rest. Let us bring it all forth entire into view.

The last Extreme the farthest off from light,
That Is Natures deadly shadow, Hyle's cell.
O horrid Cave, and womb of dreaded Night!
Mother of witchcraft and accursed spell,
Which nothing can avail'gainst Israel,
No Magic can him hurt, his portion
Is not divided nature, he does dwell
In light, in holy love, in union,
Not fast to this or that, but free communion.
O! now I see the reason, there is the word Magic named in it. But tell me, O
Magicus! do thou understand what I have writ there? If thou did, as thou
should do, and had an inward sense and feeling of it, thou would make a
bonefire of all thy books of curious Arts, as the Magicians did in the Apostles
time, for joy of finding a better light. But I cannot express what I mean
better then I have already in that Stanza.

Page 40. lin. 20. Prithee, Mastix, what is this subject? I Will tell thee. Nay,
Aristotle shall tell thee: these are his words, Phys. l. 1. c. ult. (...). Thou will not say that this is in nature, neither (...) nor (...), as thou
barbarously speak. And thou must give me leave to correct thy Greek, when
there is need, as well as thou do my English where there is no need. Thy
(...) is a monster, and has one (...) too much, but I will not tread on this
toe of thine too hard. I pass off, and come to thy head, that, I mean, that
should dwell there; if there be any body within, let them answer me. Is not that
defined there by Aristotle, (the sense whereof is sufficiently set out in my
description of the Idea of the first matter) Is it not in nature, neither (...)
nor (...)? I appeal to thine own reason if thou can any ways shift it, but
that thou must conceive a matter variously changed into several succeeding
forms. Therefore that which continues the same numericall substance, though in
its notion incomplete, and sustains the succeeding form, that is a thing in
Nature. But when we precisely conceive it utterly devoid of all forms, that is a
separation made only by the fire of our understanding ((...), the Oracles call
it) not by your Chymicall fire: and this is not in Nature, but in our
apprehension. Whefore your assertion is false, when you say that this matter is
neither (...), nor (...) in Nature. For though the notionall respect be not in
Nature, the thing it self is. And this, I say, is a sober description, and
signifies something. But your horrible empty darkness, which you say here is
the first Matter, does but mock a man's fancy in the dark.

Page 42. line 15. The holy Spirit, say you, is not able to see, etc. I say,
Anthroposophus, that it is you that have put things together so illfavouredly,
as if you implied so much; as the Reader may judge by perpending the ninth page
of your Anthroposophia.

Page 43. line 20. As soon as God was. Where is thy Logic, Eugenius? does that
imply there was a time when God was not? when we say, that one is as wise as a
wisp, does that imply the wisp is wise? I tell thee, a wisp is no wiser then
thou art, Mr. Magicus. So if I say that the light of the Idea's was no later
then the existence of God, that saying does neither stint nor stretch out the
duration of Gods existence, but only it coextends the light of the Idea's with
that duration.

Page 44. line 1. But the water was not so. But what was the horrible empty
darkness? O thou man in the dark! was that ab aeterno, or not? and if that
was, could not the Divine light shine in that darkness? but I will wrestle no
longer with such Lemures in the dark, as thy shifting fancy proves it self, O
Anthroposophus! Let Us go on, and see if we can get into the light.

Observe. 6.
And speak of Rations seminales. Yes, I spoke of them, and moved a very
material question concerning them, to wit, what that Experiment in a glass
could do, for the confirming or confuting the Rations seminales. It had been
your duty here to have satisfied this Quaere, but I perceive your inabilitie,
and pardon you.

Observe. 7.
Line 10. I my self make the Natural Idea no Idea at all. So then,
Anthroposophus, this is the story. There is a twofold Idea, a divine Idea, and
an Idea which is no Idea at all: Ha ha he! Thou had abused me so unmercifully
in this bitter book of thine, that I thought I should never have been able to
laugh again as long as I lived: But this would make a dog burst his halter with
laughing, I must now laugh or die. What, art thou now turned Preacher, Phil?
though no Puritan by no means, and tel'st us of three kinds of Seekers, that
they are either those which are both Seekers and Finders; or those that are
Finders, but no Seekers; or lastly, such as are neither Seekers nor Finders?
Certainly when thou wrotest this book, thou had a plot to eternize thy fame,
and leave thy folly upon record.

Page 46. line 1. Cite him then, and produce his words. Here they are
Philalethes: (...), page 20. He there proves, that there are divine Idea's
before the creation of the visible plants, from that text of Moses, Genesis 2. v.
4, 5. Philo's own words are these upon that text; (...), says he, (...) that
is, Does not he manifestly set before us incorporeall and intellectual Idea's,
which are the seals of Gods sensible works? for before the earth sent forth
herbs, there was even then (Says Moses) herbs, in Rerum Natura; and before the
grass grew, there was invisible grass. Can you desire any thing more plain
and express? But to make thee amends for laughing at thy division of the Idea
which had but one member, and hopped like one of the Monocoli upon a single
leg, I will give thee another Idea besides this out of the same Philo, and
such as may be truly called both an Idea and a natural one, a thing betwixt
thy Ideal vestiment, and the Divine Idea it self: (...) page 6. (...) that is,
But the fruits was not only for nourishment for living creatures, but
preparations also for the perpetual generation of the like kind of plants,
they having in them Seminall Substances, in which the hidden and invisible
forms of all things become manifest and visible by circumvolutions of seasons.
These are the (...), or Rations seminales, the seminall Forms of things.

Observe. 11.
Page 48. line 9. Mastix is delivered of a Bull. This is a Calf of thy own
begetting; but I have forgot all this while to render thee a Calf for a Bull as
I promised thee. I am not toyish enough for thee, my little Phil. Do I say heat
and siccity are Aqua vitae bottles? But may not heat, and siccity, and Aqua
vitae be consentany arguments? what repugnancie is there in it? Answer,
Logician: Therefore there is no Bull here, till thou be grown up to thy full
stature.

Observe. 12.
Here I told you that you incompassing all with the Empyreal substance, you had
left no room for Evening and Morning upon the Mass of the Earth. What do you
answer to this? That the Empyreal substance was a fire which had borrowed its
tincture from the light, but not so much as would illuminate the Mass of it
self. No, Philalethes? Do not you say it retained a vast portion of light? and
is not that enough to illuminate the Mass of it self? Nay, you say it made the
first day without the Sun, but now you unsay it again. Pitiful baffled
Creature! But as for those terrible mysterious radiations of God upon the
Chaos, and dark Evaporations of the Chaos toward God, which thou would fain
shuffle off thy absurdities by; I say, they are but the flarings of thine own
fancy, and the reeks and fumes of thy puddled brain. Do thou tell me this
from Reason or Inspiration, Phil? If from Reason, produce thy arguments; if
from Inspiration, show me thy Miracle.

Page 51. line 25. The clouds are in the Air, not above it, etc. But if the
clouds be the highest parts of the world, according to the letter of Moses,
which is accommodated, as I shall prove, to the common conceit and sense of the
Vulgar; then in the judgment of sober men it will appear, that thy Argument
has no agreement neither with Philosophy nor common sense. Now therefore to
instruct thee, as well as I do sometimes laugh at theee; I will endeavor to
make these two things plain to thee. First, that Scripture speaks according to
the outward appearance of things to sense and vulgar conceit of men.

Secondly, That following this Rule, we shall find the Extent of the World to
be bounded no higher then the clouds, or there about: So that the Firmament,
viz. the Air, (for the Hebrews have no word for the Air, distinct from Heaven
or Firmament, Moses making no distinction) may be an adequate bar betwixt the
lower and upper waters. Which it was requisite for Moses to mention, vulgar
observation discovering that waters came down from above, viz. showers of Rain,
and they could not possibly conceive, that unless there were waters above,
that any water should descend thence. And this was it that gave occasion to
Moses, of mentioning those two waters, the one above, the other beneath the
firmament.

But to return to the first point to be proved. That Scripture speaks according
to the outward appearance of things to sense, and vulgar conceit of men. This I
say is a confessed truth with the most learned of the Hebrews. Amongst whom it
is a rule for the understanding of many and many places of Scripture. Loquitur
Lex secundum linguam filiorum hominum, that is, That the Law speaks according
to the language of the sons of men: as Moses Aegyptius can tell you. And it
will be worth our labor now to instance in some few passages.

Genesis 19. V. 23. The sun was risen upon the Earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
Which implies, that it was before under the Earth: Which is true only
according to sense, and vulgar fancy.

Deuteronom. 30. V. 4. (...) or (...), Implies that the earth is bounded at
certain places as if there were truly an Hercules Pillar, or Non plus ultra. As
it is manifest to them, that understand but the natural signification of (...)
and (...). For those words plainly import the Earth bounded by the blue
Heavens, and the Heavens bounded by the Horizon of the Earth: they touching one
another mutually. Which is true only to sense and in appearance, as any man
that is not a mere Idiot will confess.

Ecclesiastic. cap. 27. V. 12. The discourse of a godly man is always with
wisdom, but a fool changes as the moon. That Is to be understood according to
sense and appearance. For if a fool changes no more then the Moon does really,
he is a wise and excellently accomplished man, Semper idem, though to the sight
of the vulgar different. For at least an Hemisphear of the Moon is always
enlightened, and even then most when she least appears to us.

Hitherto may be referred also that, 2. Chron. 4.2. Also he made a molten Sea
of ten Cubits from brim to brim round in compass, and five Cubits the height
thereof, and a line of thirty Cubits did compass it round about. A thing
plainly impossible that the Diameter should be ten Cubits and the Circumference
but thirty. But it pleases the Spirit of God here to speak according to the
common use and opinion of Men, and not according to the subtilty of Archimedes
his demonstration.

Again Psalm 19. In them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun, which as a
bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run
his race. This, as M. John Calvin observes, is spoken according to the rude
apprehension of the Vulgar, whom David should in vain have endeavored to teach
the mysteries of Astronomy. Haec ratio est. (says he) cur dicat tentorium ei
paratum esse, deinde egredi ipsum ab una coeli extremitate, and transire
celeriter ad partem oppositam; Neque enim argute inter Philosophos de integro
solis circuitu disputat, sed rudissimis quibusque se accommodans, intra
ocularem experientiam se continet; ideoque dimidiam cursus partem que sub
Hemisphaerio nastro non cernitur, subticeti. e. This is the reason, to wit, the
rudeness of the vulgar, why the Psalmist says there is a tent prepared for
the Sun, and then that he goes from one end of the heaven and passes swiftly
to the other: For he does not here subtily dispute amongst the Philosophers of
the entire circuit of the Sun, but accommodating himself to the capacity of
every ignorant man, contains himself within ocular experience; and therefore
says nothing of the other part of the course of the sun, which is not to be
seen as being under our Hemisphear. Thus M. Calvin.

I Will add but one instance more, Joshuah 10 V. 12. Sun stand thou still upon
Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon. Where it is manifest that
Joshuah speaks not according to the Astronomicall truth of the thing, but
according to sense and appearance. For suppose the Sun placed and the Moon at
the best advantage you can, so that they leave not their natural course, they
were so far from being one over Ajalon and the other over Gibeon, that they
were in very truth many hundreds of miles distant from them. And if the Sun and
Moon were on the other side of the Equatour the distance might amount to
thousands.

I might adjoyn to these proofs the suffrages of many Fathers and Modern
Divines, as Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard, Aquinas, etc. But it is
already manifest enough that the Scripture speaks not according to the exact
curiosity of truth, describing things (...), according to the very nature and
essence of them; but (...), according to their appearance in sense, and the
vulgar opinion of men. Nor does it therefore follow that such expressions are
false, because they are according to the appearance of things to sense and
obvious fancy, for there is also a Truth of Appearance.

And thus having made good the first part of my promise, I proceed to the
second; Which was to show that the Extent of the world is to be bounded no
higher then to the clouds, or thereabouts, that it may thence appear, that the
upper waters mentioned in Moses, are the same with those Aquae in coelo stantes
mentioned by Pliny, lib. 31. his words are these, Quid esse mirabilius potest
aquis in coelo stantibus? and these waters can be nothing else, but that
contained in the clouds, which descends in rain; and so the whole Creation will
be contained within the compass of the Air, which the Hebrews call (...)
quasi (...) ibi aquae: because it is seeds nubium, the place of clouds and
rain. And that the world is extended no higher then thus, according to
Scripture, it is apparent. First, because the clouds are made the place of Gods
abode; whence we are to suppose them placed with the Highest. There he lives,
and runns, and rides, and walks. He came walking upon the wings of the wind, in
the 104 Psalm. Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes
the clouds his chariot, and walks on the wings of the wind. Lays the beams
of His chambers in the waters, to wit, the upper waters which are the clouds.
The Almighties lodgings therefore according to the letter, are placed in the
clouds. There about also is his field for exercise and war, Deuteronomy. 33.26.
There is none like to the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heavens for thy
help in his excellency on the sky, that is, upon the upper clouds, as Buxtorf
interprets it, and indeed what can (...) properly signify above, but clouds?
for below it signifies pulvis tenuissimus, small dust; and the clouds are as it
were the dust of heaven. Vatablus also interprets that place of Gods riding on
the clouds. And this agrees well with that of Nahum, chap. 1. V. 3. The Lord
has his way in the whirlwind, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. Here he
is running as swift as a whirlwind, and raises a dust of clouds about him. You
shall find him riding again, Psalm 68.4. and that in triumph; but yet but on
the clouds: sutably to that in Deuteronomy. Sing unto God, sing praises unto his Name,
extol him that rides upon the heavens by his name J A H, and rejoice before
Him. That rides upon the Heavens; the Hebrew is (...), which I would be bold
with Aben Ezraes leave, to translate, that rides upon the clouds: For clouds
cause darkness, and the root from whence (...) is (...), which signifies
obtenebrari, obscurari. But for the ground of this Rabbis interpretation, to
wit, upon the heavens, it is taken out of the 33 verse of the 68 Psalm, To him
that rides upon the heaven of heavens of old. But if we read on there, we
shall find that those heavens of heavens, in all probability, reach no higher
then the clouds. For let us read the whole verse together, To him that rides
upon the heaven of heavens that were of old; Lo, he does send out his voice,
and that a mighty voice: what is that but thunder? and whence is thunder but out
of the clouds? and where then does God ride but on the clouds? The following
verse makes all plain: Ascribe ye strength unto God; His excellency is over
Israel, and his strength is in the clouds: which does notably confirm, that the
Extent of the Heavens, according to the letter of Moses and David too, are but
about the height of the clouds. For here the heaven of heavens is the seat of
thunder, and Gods strength and power is said to be in the clouds. Nor does this
expression of this height, to wit, the heaven of heavens of old, imply any
distance higher. For since all the Firmament from the lower to the upper waters
is called Heaven; it is not a whit unreasonable that the highest part of this
Heaven or Firmament, be called the Heaven of Heavens. And this is my first
argument that the heaven or firmaments Extent is but from the Sea to the
Clouds, because God is seated no higher in the outward phrase of Scripture.

My second argument is taken from the adjoining the heavens with the clouds
exegetically, one with another, for the setting out of that which is exceeding
high, as high as we can express. And this the Psalmist does often, Psalm
36.5. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto
the Clouds. And Psalm 57.10. For thy mercy is great unto the Heavens, and thy
truth unto the Clouds. And Psalm 108.4. For thy mercy is great above the
Heavens, and thy truth reaches above the Clouds. Where heaven and clouds set
off one and the same height, that which is exceeding high, the mercy and truth
of God.

My last argument is from the Psalmists placing the Sun, (...) in the clouds,
or in the cloudy heaven. For the word must so signify as I did above prove,
both from Testimony, and might also from the Etymon of the word. For (...)
signifies comminuere, contundere, to beat to dust: and what are clouds but the
dust of heaven, as I may so speak. Psalm 89. v. 36, 37. His seed shall endure
for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me. It shall be established for
ever as the Moon, and as the faithful witness (...) in heaven: that is, in
the sky, the place where the clouds are. The drawing down therefore of the
Sun, that faithful witness in heaven, so low as the clouds, implies that
the letter of the Scripture takes no notice of any considerable part of the
firmament above the clouds, it terminating its expressions always at that
Extent. And this suits very well with Moses his calling the Sun and the Moon
the great lights, and making nothing as it were of the stars, as is manifest
out of the 16 verse of the first of Genesis. And God made two great lights, the
greater light to rule the day, and the less to rule the night; He made the
stars also. But they come as cast into the bargain, as not so considerable,
when as indeed a star of the first magnitude is (according to the calculation
of the Astronomers) twenty thousand times bigger then the earth, and the earth
five and forty times bigger then the Moon; so that one star of the first
magnitude will prove about nine hundred thousand times bigger then the Moon.
Which notwithstanding, according to the letter of Moses, is one of the two
great lights, the sole Empress of the night. But here the letter of Moses is
very consistent with it self. For since that the Extent of heaven is not
acknowledged any higher then the clouds, or thereabout (wherein as I showed
you, the Sun is, and consequently the Moon, and it will not be more harsh to
make the stars stoop so low too; nay, they must indeed of necessity all of
them be so low, they having no where else to be higher, according to the usual
phrase of Scripture, the appearances of the stars will then to our sight
sufficiently set out their proportions one to another, and the Sun and the Moon
(according to this Hypothesis) will prove the two great lights, and the stars
but scattered sky-pebbles. Wherefore from all this harmony and correspondencie
of things, I think I may safely conclude, that the Extent of the Firmament
according to Moses, is but the distance from the sea to the clouds, or there
abouts, as well as it is to our sight, which cannot discern any intervall of
altitudes betwixt the clouds and the Moon, the Moon and the Sun, and lastly
betwixt the Sun and the fixed Stars. Which interpretation I am confident any
man will admit of, that can bring down the tumor of his Philosophic phansy
unto a vulgar consistencie and fit compliance with the sweetness and
simplicity of Moses his style.

And thus, Philalethes, have I proved that there is no room for thy
interstellar waters within the compass of Moses his Creation, unless they run
into one, and mingle with the rain or clouds.

Observat. 13.
Here I called the Ptolemaick Systeme a rumbling confused Labyrinth. So you did
Philalethes, and I perceive you will do so again. But prithee tell me, do
thou mean the Heavens rumble? and so understandest or rather hear the
rumbling harmony of the Spears? or do thou mean the Labyrinth rumbles? I
perceive the man has now some guts in his brains, and he is troubled with the
rumbling of them in their ventricles, and so thinks there is a noise when there
is none. I tell thee, Philalethes, a wheel-barrow may be said to rumble, for to
rumble is to make an ill-favored ungrateful noise; but no body will say the
heavens or a labyrinth does rumble, but such as are no Englishmen, as you say
somewhere you are not, and so do not understand the language.

Page 53. A confused wheelbarrow is a bull. Is a wheel-barrow a bull? what a
bull is that? But confused, I added not confused to wheelbarrow, that is thy
doing, thou author of confusion!

Line 18. The Epicycles in respect of their orbs are but as a Mite in a cheese.
Do you say so, Mr Lilly? No. Do you say so, Mr Booker? No. Look thee now, Phil,
how thy confident ignorance has abused those two famous Artists. They are
ashamed to utter such loud nonsense. And now they have denyde it, dare thou
venture to say it, Anthroposophus? Tell me then how little and diminutive those
Epicycles will prove in respect of their orbs, that have their diameters equal
to the diameter of the orbit of the earth, or which is all one of the sun.
Thou will answer me with the Cyclops in Erasmus, Istiusmodi subtilitates non
capio. I do not not believe thou understandest the Question, though it be
plainly propounded, and so I shall expect no answer.

But come thy ways hither again, Phil. thou shall not escape thus. I will not
let thee go til I have called thee to an account for thy great bull of Basan as
thou would call it. Thou say, That the Epicycles of Ptolemy though they
are too big to be true, yet that they are very diminutive things in respect
of their orbs that sustein them; as little and diminutive as mites in a cheese
in respect of the cheese. To speak the most favorably of this assertion of
thine that may be, it is sublime Astronomicall Nonsense. And if we could find
any Nonsense sublunary to parallel it, it would be some such stuff as this:
Although the cannon bullets in the tower be as big as mount Athos, yet they
are so little that they will not fill the compass of a walnut. This is a
bundle of falsities and so is that. That is, Both the parts of these compound
Axioms are false, and the composition it self also illegitimate. These are
Discrete Axioms, Eugenius, and both the parts ought to be true, but they are
both false here. And there ought also, especially these notes Quamvis and tamen
being in them, to be only a Discretion of parts, but here is an implacable
Opposition: things put together that imply a contradiction. In the latter of
these Axioms it is manifest, but I will show you, it is so also, in that former
of yours.

For first, the Epicycles of Ptolemy, are not too big to be true. For they do
not suppose them bigger then will be contained, within the thickness of their
own orbs. And you your self say that they are but as mites in a cheese in
respect of their orbs. So that it is plain according to what you your self
grant, as well as according to the Hypothesis of Ptolemy, that they are not too
big to be true.

But secondly, I say they are not as little as Mites in respect of the cheese
they are in. For the semi-diameter of Saturns Epicycle is to the semi-diameter
of his Eccentrick, at least as 1 to 10. and the semi-diameter of Jupiters
Epicycle to the semi-diameter of his Eccentrick more then as 1 to 6. but Mars
his, as 2 to 3, or thereabout, and the semidiameter of the Epicycle of Venus,
to the semidiameter of her eccentrick more then as 2 to 3 by a good deal. And
is it not plain hence Eugenius, that thy mite in a cheese must swell up at
least to the bigness of a Mouse in a cheese, though thy cheese were almost as
little as a trundle bed wheel, or a box of Marmalade: and what a vast
difference is there betwixt a Mite and a Mouse, but thy ignorance emboldens
thee to speak any thing.

But now in the last place, the putting these two falsities together is
contradiction, as well as they are severally false. For it is evident, that if
the Epicycles be too big to be true, they cannot be so little as Mites in a
cheese, in respect of their orbs. For then would they be easily contained
within the crassities or thickness of their orbs. But their not being able to
be contained within the Crassities of their orbs, that is the thing that must
make them too big to be true.

And questionless if we will join the Epicycle with its right office, which is
to bring down the Planet to its lowest Perigee, then the Epicycles of the
planets will be too big to be true. For there will be of them that are half
as big again as their Deiferents, nay five times if not ten times as big. And
of these Epicycles I said (and Ptolemies ought to have been such, unless they
did desert their office) that they were too big to be true. But thou
pronouncest concerning these things thou know not what, and therefore art
easily tossed up and down like a shittle cock thou know not whither. How do I
blow thee about as the dust or the down of thistles?

-- ut plumas avium papposque volantes. Observe. 16.
Thou Moore a(...) As much as a(...) Thou art so drunk and intoxicated with
thine own blood (as Aristotle says of all young men that they are(...)) that
thou see double, two O's in my name for one.

Observe. 19.
See what I answer at observation the 23.

Observe. 20.
Phy, Phy, some rose water. Who speaks like a Puritan now, Phil? but why some
rose water? have thou devoured an Orange like an apple, pulp and pill and all,
and so made thy mouth bitter, O thou man of Wales! But it is to wash hur mouth
from bawdry. Why will thou be so bold then as to name the Lawyers phrase rem in
re! Or have thou a purpose to call all the Lawyers, bawdy Gentlemen, by craft?
I tell thee, Phil. To the pure all things are pure; but thy venerious fancy
which I rebuked in this passage thou exceptedst against, does soil and corrupt
what is chaste and pure.

Observe. 21.
I do, Mastix, I do. Why do thou not then explain it, thou little Mastigia?

Observe. 23.
Here I have you fast, Philalethes, for all your wriggling. For if our vital
and animal spirits, which are as much a part of us, as any other part of our
body is, be fed and nourished by the Air, then the Air is an Element of our
body. But here he would fain save himself, by saying that the Air is rather a
Compound then an Element: but let any man judge how much more it is compounded
then the Earth, and then Water which nourishes by drinking, as well as the
Air can do by breathing.

Observe. 24.
Page 59. line 1. How can darkness be called a Mass? etc. No it cannot. Nor a
thin vaporous matter neither. Thy blindness cannot distinguish Abstracts from
Concrets. Thy soul sits in the dark, Philalethes, and nibbles on words as a
mouse in a hole on cheese parings. But to slight thy injudicious cavil at Mass,
and to fall to the Matter. I charged thee here to have spoke such stuff as
implies a Contradiction. Thou saidest that this Mass (be it black or white,
dark or bright, that is nothing to the Controversy here) did contain in a far
less compass all that was after extracted. I say this implies a
Contradiction. But you answer, this is nothing but Rarefaction and Condensation
according to the common notion of the Schools. I but that Notion it self
implies a Contradiction, for in Rarefaction and Condensation there is the
generation or deperdition of no new Matter, but all matter has impenetrable
dimensions. Therefore if that large expansion of the heavens lay within the
compass of the Mass, that matter occupied the same space that the mass did,
and so dimensions lay in dimensions, and thus that which is impenetrable was
penetrated, which is a contradiicton. What thou alleadgest of the rarefaction
of water into clouds or vapors, is nothing to the purpose. For these clouds
and vapors are not one continued substance, but are the particles of the water
put upon motion, and playing at some distance one from another, but do really
take up no more place then before.

Observe. 26.
To say nothing to thy fond cavil at words in the former Observation, and thy
false accusation that I called thee dog (for I would not dishonor Diogenes so
much as to call thee so) and leaving it to the censure of the world, how plain
and real thy principles are, I am come now to my 26 Observation on the 23 page
of thy Anthroposophia, where thou tellest us, That there is a threefold Earth,
viz Elementary, Celestial, Spiritual. Now let us see what an excellent layer
of the fundamentals of Science thou will prove thy self. And here he begins to
divide before he defines. Thou should first have told us what Earth is in
general before thou divide it. This is like a creature with a cloven foot, and
never a head. But when thou did venture to define these Members, where was
thy Logic?. Ought not every definition, nay, ought not every Precept of Art to
be(...) but I will not vex thy head with these severities. The Magnet is the
second member, the object of this 26 Observation. Here you say, I condemn this
Magnet, but I do not offer to confute it. But I answer, I have as substantially
confuted it as merrily; but thou do not take notice of it. I have intimated
that this precept of art is not (...) nay, that it is plainly false: For it
affirms that which has no discovery by reason or experience, viz. That there
is a certain earth which you call the Magnet, that will draw all things to it
at what distance so ever.

Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi. So far am I from approving thy
Magnet, O Magicus. Nor do the pages thou here citest, of which I give a
favorable censure, prove any such thing. Let the Reader peruse them, and
judge. Indeed certain operations of the soul, are highly and Hyperbolically
there set out by thee; but the Magnet came dropping in at the latter end of the
story. I gave no allowance to that. I will not have my soul so ill taught, as
to attract metal out of men's purses at any distance whatsoever.

Page 64. line 12. Did thou ever hear or know that I was a pick-pocket? If I
had had the least suspicion of thee that thou were so, I would not have called
thee so, for it had been an unmercifull jest. But if thou were as full of
candor and urbanity, as I deem thee clear of that crime, thou would not have
interpreted it malice but mirth. For such jests as these are not uncivil nor
abusive to the person, when the materiality of them are plainly and confessedly
incompatible to the party on whom they are cast.

Observe. 27.
Page 65. line 14. Prithee why a Gallileo's tube, were there more Galileo's
then one? Certainly, Phil. thou do not look through a Galilco's glass, but
through a multiplying glass, that see in my English more Galileos then one.
Go thy ways for the oddest correctour of English that ever I met with in all
my days.

Observe. 28.
Page 67. line 1. For I fear God. The Devils also believe and tremble: But
do thou love God, my Philalethes? If thou did, thou would love thy
brother also. But shall I tell thee truly what I fear? Truly I fear, that thou
have no such precious medicine to publish, which thou make so nice of; and
that thou do only make Religion a cover for thine ignorance. But let me tell
thee this sober truth, That Temperance will prevent more diseases by far, then
thy medicine is like to cure; and Christian Love would relieve more by many
thousands, then thy Philosophers stone that should convert baser metalls into
gold. There is gold enough in the world, and all necessaries else for outward
happiness; but the generations of men make themselves miserable by neglecting
the inward. This is palpably true, and it would astonish a man to see how they
run madding after the noise of every pompous difficulty, and how stupid and
sottish they are to those things, which God has more universally put in their
power, and which would (if they made use of them) redound to their more
general and effectual good.

Observe. 29.
So does S. John prophecy too. But Magicus is too wise to understand him. S.
John tells us of a new Heaven, and of a new Earth. Here, Magicus, having
recourse to his Chymistrie, in the height of his imagination prefigures to
himself not only Crystalline Heavens, but also a Vitrifide Earth. But I
consulting with Scripture, and with the simplicity of mine own plain Spirit,
think of a new Heaven and a new Earth wherein dwells righteousness. He Is for an
Eden with flowery walks, and pleasant trees; I am for a Paradisc,

(...) Where Virtue, Wisdom, and good Order meet. As the Chaldee Oracles
describe it. He is for a pure clear place, I place my happiness in a clear and
pure mind, which is the holy place or temple of God.

Observe. 30.
Tecum habita. I will not urge that Precept too strictly upon thy self, because
I wish thee a better companion.

Observe. 31.
For thy ho! sounds like the noise of a Sowgelder. As much as the celestial
orbs or labyrinth rumble like a wheel-barrow. This is but the crowing of thine
own brain to the tune of the Sow-gelders horn.

Observe. 32.
Here in answer to my objection thou tellest me that Ruach and Nephesh, the
parts whereof the soul of man consists, differ as male and female. All the
mystery then is to make man's soul an Hermaphrodite. Thou should have told us
here what operations were proper to Ruach, what to Nephesh, whether vegetation
belong to the one, reason and sense to the other: or whether in this the divine
life were seated, in that the animal and fleshly reason, and the like. But the
subtlety of thy wit reaches no further then the discrimination of sexes, and
the grossly pointing out of Male and Female.

Page 69. line 9. For your Sodomite Patron Aristotle, allows of it in his
Politics. More wretched beast he if it be so: but I do not remember any such
passage in his Politics, and yet have read them through, but long since; and
it is sufficient for me if I remember the best things in Authors I read, I can
willingly let go the worst. But what thou say of Aristotle is not unlikely;
for he is taxed for this unnatural practice in Diogenes Laertius, whith one
Hermias a foul friend of his, in the praise of whom notwithstanding he has
wrote a very fair and elegant Hymn, which begins thus,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
To this sense,

Virtue! that putst humane race
Upon so hard toil and pains;
Life's fairest prize! Thy lovely face
Bright Virgin, the brave Greek constrains
To undergo with an unwearied mind
Long wasting labors, and in high desire
To throng through many deaths to find
Thee; that do fire
Man's soul with hopes of such immortal fruit
No gold can suit,
Nor love of Parents equalize,
Nor slumbers sweet that softly seize the eyes.
So easy a thing is it for bad men to speak good words.

It is recorded by the same author out of Aristippus, that the same
Philosopher was also so much taken with the conversation of Hermias his whore,
that in lieu of that pleasure he reaped by her, he did the same ceremonies and
holy rites to her, that the Anthenians were wont to do to their goddess Ceres
Eleusinia. From whence it seems that his soul did consist of two parts, Male
and Female, he having to do with both. So that he is more like to prove thy
Patron then mine, Philalethes! for I have to do with neither.

Page 69. line 10. But I am tickled say you. Yes, I say you are so tickled and
do so tickle it up in your style with expressions fetched from the Gynaeceum,
that you are ridiculous in it, and I thought good to show you to be such as you
are. But for mine own part I am moved neither one way nor another with any such
things, but think good to affix here this sober consideration. That there being
generally in Men and Women that are not either Heroically good, or stupidly and
beastly naught, a kind of shame and aversation in the very naming of these
things, that it is a sign that the soul of man does in its own judgment find
it self here in this condition of the body, as I may so speak, in a wrong box,
and has a kind of presage and conscience that better and more noble things
belong unto it, ese why should it be troubled at its own proclivity to that
which is the height and flower of the pleasure of the body as they that are
given to this folly do profess.

(...)
(...)
To this sense.

What life? what sweet without the golden tie
Of Venus? dead to this, straight let me die.
But that there is a natural shame of these acts and the propension to them,
that story of Typhon in Diodorus Siculus is no obscure argument. For when he
had murdered his brother Osiris, that he might more sacramentally bind to him
for his future help and security, his twenty four Accomplices in this act, he
hewed the body of his brother into so many pieces, but was fain to fling the
(...) his Pudendum into the river, they every one being unwilling to take that
for their share. So much aversation is there naturally from these obscenities
that even those that are otherwise execrably wicked, have some sense of it. But
I do not speak this as if Marriage it self were a sin as well as whoredom
and adultery, for questionless it is permitted to the soul in this case she is
in. But if she be not monstrous and degenerate she cannot but be mindful that
she is made for something far better.

Observe. 33.
To this observation thou answerest like a man with reason and generosity and
with a well beseeming wit, how unlike to thy self art thou here, Anthroposophos?

Observe. 34.
I perceive by thy answer to this observation thou art not at all acquainted
with Ramus what ere thou art with the Schoolmen, but I pass over this and come
to what is of more moment.

Page 71. line 19. This is one of your three designs. Yes, it is one of those
three designs I taxed you for in the beginning of my Observations. And here I
make it good out of your own text Anthroposophia page 33. line 1. These are
your words. And now Reader, Arrige aures, come on without prejudice and I will
tell thee that, which never hitherto has been discovered. What can be more
plain if you will but prick up your ears and attend to what you say your self.
But now I have discovered that this is but a boast of yours concerning a known
Notion among the Christian Platonists, you begin to pluck in your ears and
confess your self a Plagiary. In the rest of your answer you do but teach your
Grannam to crack nuts, I go on Magicus to the next.

Observe. 35.
As a flame of one candle can light a thousand candles more. Your answer then
to this Observation is this. That the soul is propagated as light is from
light; That there is a multiplication without decision or division. But for
thine and the Readers fuller satisfaction I shall answer thee here, as thou
somewhere demandest, in the verse of Spencer but in the reason and sense of
More, out of these four Stanzaes in my Canto of the Preexistency of the Soul.

Wherefore who thinks from Souls new Souls to bring
The same let press the sun beams in his fist,
And squeeze out drops of Light, or strongly wring
The Rainbow, till it die his hands well pressed;
Or with uncessant industry persist
The intentionall species to mash and bray
In marble mortar, till he has expressed
A Sovereign eye salve to discern a Fay.
As easily as the first all these effect you may.
Ne may queint Similes this fury damp,
Which say that our souls propagation
Is, as when lamp we lighten from a lamp,
Which done withouten diminution
Of the first light, shows how the soul of man
Though indivisible may another rear
Imparting life. But if we rightly scan
This argument, it comes nothing near.
To light the lamp's to kindle the sulphurous gear
No substance new that act does then produce.
Only the oily atomes't does excite
And wake into a flame. But no such use
There is of humane Sperm. For our free sprite
Is not the kindled seed, but substance quite
Distinct there from. If not: Then bodies may
So changed be by Nature and Stiff fight
Of hungry stomachs, that what erst was clay
Then herbs, in time it self in sense may well display.
For then our Soul can nothing be but blood,
Or nerves, or brains, or body modifyde;
Whence it will follow that cold stopping crud
Hard moldy cheese, dry nuts, when they have rid
Due circuits through the heart, at last shall speed
Of life and sense, look thorough our thin eyes,
And view the Close wherein the Cow did feed
Whence they were milk'd; gross Py-crust will grow wise
And pickled Cucumbers sans doubt Philosophize
Observe. 37.
Bid adieu to thy reputation Mastix. Well, now I perceive that thou think
that thou have hit the nail on the head indeed. But all that thou do or can
collect from what is in my Preface to the Canto concerning the sleep of the
Soul, is but this: that whether we see or imagine that both of these are but
the very Energie of the Soul, and that the Soul does not nor can perceive any
thing immediately but her own Energie. But what of all this? It does not thence
follow that the inward and outward sense is all one, but only unitate generica,
no more then if I should say, that to be an Animal is but to have corporeal
substance, life and sense, it would thence follow that an horse and a man are
all one. Look thee now, Magicus, how I have passed through this huge Mound and
Bulwark of thine, with as much ease and stillness as a gliding Spirit through a
Mud-wall. I will only look back and laugh at thee Magicus, for a man of no
Logic. But if any man doubt whether thou say blind men see in their sleep,
it is apparent that thou do. For in thy Anthroposophia, Page 40. line 1.
thou say, That the visible power is not destroyed as is plain in the dreams of
blind men. Here if thou know what thou say, thou arguest from the effect to
the cause, from the operation to the faculty, but is the operation of the
Visive faculty (for thou do barbarously call it visible) any thing else but
seeing? therefore thou do plainly assert that blind men see in their sleep.
It would be well if they could walk in their sleep too: for then they would
scarce have any loss of their eyes.

Observe. 38.
Magicus, I do not altogether contemn the Symboles and Signatures of nature,
but I believe that Euphrasia or Eyebright that has the signature of the Eye,
sees or feels no more, then the pulp of a wal-nut that has the signature of
the brain, does understand or imagine.

Observe. 39.
What a pitiful account do thou give me here of the difficulties I urged
thee with. My Queres were these, You making two spirits in a man the Rational
and Sensitive. First, Whether the Rational Spirit does not hear and see in a
man? Here you distinguish. The Sensitive Spirit sees the Object (say you) and
the Rational the Species. But I say unto thee, that sensation is nothing else,
but the perceiving of some present corporeal object; and that the rational
soul does. For when two men discourse, that in them that reasons, hears the
words, and sees the party with whom it reasons, does it not? Therefore they
both see the object: But you will say, One sees by a species, the other
without. I say nothing can be discerned without a species, that is, without an
actual representation of the thing discerned. So that that distinction is in
vain. And I would add this further, That every sentient spirit must perceive
by its own species, and not by another. But thou say, This sensitive Spirit
like a glass represents the species of external objects. Then it seems the
Sensitive spirits office is to be the glasses of the soul to see things in, but
glasses themselves, Magicus, are not sentient, nor need this Spirit be so, that
is the souls glass; and it is plain it is not. For if these two were two
different sensitive spirits, then they would have two different Animadversions;
but there is but one animadversive spirit in a man, and therefore but one
Sensitive. And that there is but one animadversive spirit in a Man is plain
from hence, that if the Rational animadversive bestow its animadversion fully
elsewhere, the Sensitive in man cannot perform the thousandth part of that
which is performed in brutes. We should loose our selves in the most trivial
matters, when notwithstanding this sensitive spirit in man, would have as quick
a vehicle as in most brutes. Besides, this sensitive spirit having this
animadversion, would have also a Memory apart, and would be able while the
Rational is busied about something else, to lay up observations such as beasts
do by it self; and then long after to show them to the Rational, to its sudden
amazement and astonishment. But none of these things are. And in my
apprehension it is, in a very gross and palpable way, sensible to me, that
there is but one Animadversive in me, and I think I am no monster; If I be, it
is (it seems) in that I am all rational spirit, and have had the luck to miss
of the sensitive, the beast.

Page 77. line 3. If this be true, then there be two hearing and seeing souls
in a man. This is my second Quere; I asked if there be. To this you answer, Ha
ha he! A very profound answer. This is no laughing matter, my friend. Have I
not already showed you some difficulties, this asserting two sensitive Spirits
in a man, is laden with? Answer them, Phil. I should gladly hear thee use thy
tongue as well as see thee show thy teeth by laughing. For that slender faint
reason that follows thy loud laughing, viz. The objects are different and the
senses are different, that is taken away already. For the sting of my Argument
is not this, that there would be two sensitive souls of the same nature in the
body of a man; but that there should be two sensitive souls at all. And indeed,
considering that the superior soul contains the faculties of the inferior, it
is altogether needless. And that is a very sober truth, Entia non sunt
multiplicanda sine necessitate. Which is to the same sense with that so often
repeated in Aristotle and Theophrastus, (...) God and Nature do nothing in
vain. And the right organization of parts and due temperature of the body, and
proportion of animal spirits, this is all the glass the soul of man wants in
this life, to see by or receive species from. But this glass has no more
sense it self, then an urinall or looking-glass has. Where are you now, Phil.
with your Ha hahe?

Line 10. I could, Mastix, teach thee an higher truth. Yes truly, Magicus, you
are best of all at those truths which dwell in the Highest. You love to soar
aloft out of the ken of sense and reason, that you may securely Raunt it there
in words of a strange sound and no signification. But though thou fliest up so
high, like a Crow that has both his eyes bored out, yet I have thee in a
string, and can pluck thee down for all thy fluttering. Thou say that a soul
may understand all things, sine conversione ad Phantasmata: this I suppose thou
would say to contradict Aristotle; but I do not suspect thee of so much
learning as to have read him. He tells us in his book De Anima, (...) that
there is no understanding without Phantasmes. You say that we may understand
all things without them. What think you of Individualls, Magicus? of which it
is controverted amongst the Platonists, whether there be any Idea's of them or
no. But being you are so confident an assertor, let us hear how stout a prover
you are of your assertions. Know you this you have spoken by Sense, Reason, or
divine Revelation? By this string I have plucked this blind Crow down; I have
him as tame in my hand as a Titmouse: look how he pants, and gapes, and shows
the white tip of his tongue, but says nothing. Go thy ways, Phil. for a pure
Philosophic Thraso.

Observe. 41.
Three quarters of a year have thou spent, etc. O Magicus, Magicus! thou art
youthful and vainglorious, and tellest thy Tutour that this hasty cookery
thou entertainest him with, was dispatched and dressed up some ten days after
the Press was delivered of my Observations. How many ten days do thou
mean, by thy some ten days? Thou would have thy Tutour to stroke thee on the
head for a quick-parted lad, I perceive, Eugenius. But had thou not better
have staid longer, and writ better sense, more reason, and with less railing?
But I poor slow beast! how long do thou think I was viewing and observing
that other excellent piece of thine? I confess, Magicus, because thou forcest
me to play the fool as well as thy self, I was almost three quarters of a
Month about it; and how much more is that then some ten days, though but
twice told over? and I will not be so curiously vainglorious, as to tell thee
how great a share of this time was daily taken from me by necessary
employments. This is to answer thy folly with folly. But I thank God that I
glory in nothing, but that I feel my self an Instrument in the hand of God, to
work the good of Men. The greatest strength of a man is weakness, and the
power of Reason, while we are in this state, depends so much of the organs of
the body, that its force is very uncertain and fickle. Is not the whole
consistency of the body of Man, as a crudled cloud or coagulated vapor? and
his Personality a walking shadow and dark imposture? All flesh is grass, and
the glory thereof as the flower of the field: but the word of the Lord endures
for ever. Verily the people are as grass.

Observe. 42.
Have at you my friends the Independents. The Independents indeed may be thy
friends, Magicus; but I dare say thou art not in a capacity to be theirs, as
having not yet wit and morality enough to be a friend unto thy self. (...) A
bad man cannot be friendly disposed toward himself, as having nothing in
himself amiable and friendly, Aristot. Eth. ad Nicom, lib. 9. cap. 4.

Observe. 43.
Mastix, You denied formerly the Scripture was intended for Philosophy. But
you contending that it was, how fondly do you prefer Agrippa before Moses and
Christ. This you would have called blasphemy; but I have learned no such hard
language.

Observe. 44.
For the natural Queres I put to thee here concerning the nature of Light, the
Rainbow, the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, and the Lodestone; I tell thee thou will never be able to answer sense to them, unless thou turn Cartesian, and
explain them out of that Philosophy. But in the General, I mean, that the
heats which the soul takes from personal admiration, make her neither wise,
nor just; nor good, but only disturb the spirits, and disadvantage Reason.

Observe. 45.
Page 81. line 2. Mastix would gladly put those asunder, whom God has put
together. You mean then that a Protestant and Christian, are termini
convertibiles. What a rare Independent is Magicus! he is an Independent of the
Church of England; which is as good sense as if he should say, he is a
Protestant of the Church of Rome. Truly, Magicus, I think thou art an
Independent in nothing but in thy Reasons and speeches; for in them indeed
there is no dependency at all. They are Arena sine calce, and hang together
like thum-ropes of sand. But before I be merry with thee; and I foresee I
shall be when I come to thy verses, hear this sober Aphorism from me. If that
those things which are confessedly true in Christianity were closely kept to by
men, it would so fill and satisfy their souls with an inward glorious light
and spiritual joy, that all those things that are with destroying zeal and
unchristian bitterness prosecuted by this and that Church, would, look all of
them as contemptibly, as so many rush-candles in the light of the Sun.

Line 15. You fall on my person. Well, I Will let your person go now, and fall on
your Poetry. Where I believe, I shall prove you a notable wagge indeed, and one
that has abused your mother Oxford and all her children very slyly and dryly.

Dry Pumick statues. You make your own brothers of Oxford then so many dry
Pumices, things that have nothing in them at all. I wish you had been so too
Phil, for you have been to me a foul wet Sponge, and have squeazed all your
filth upon my person, as you call it. But if thou knew how real a friend I
am to thy person, excess of kindness would make thee lick it all off again.

Might make a marble weep to bear your verse. It seems then, you of Oxford make
such dull heavy verses, that it would make a Monument of Marble like an
overladen Ass, weep to bear the burden of them.

She heaved your fancies. What heavy leaden fancies are these that want such
heaving. Up heavy heels. But how high did she heave them, Phil? As high as the
other lead was heaved that covers the roof of your Churches and Chapels? Nay
higher. Above the very Pinacles, Mastix! A mavelous height, but the Jack-Daws
of our University sit higher then thus, so it seems that the souls of the
sons of your Mother Oxford are elevated as high as the bodies of the Jackdaws
in the University of Cambridge. What large elevated phansies have your
Academicks that reach almost as far as the eye and sense of an ordinary
Rustic! Your phansie's higher then the Pinacles, his sight higher then the
Clouds, for he may see the Sun and the Stars too, if he be not blind.

Blessed in her Martyrdom had you but shed -- A Tear, etc. The sense is, I
suppose, that your Mother had been burnt for a blessed Martyr if her Sons had
aforehand quenched out the fire with their tears.

-One poor sigh for her last breath -- That we may say she lived before her
death. Here he accuses his Mother for sucking her childrens breath as, they
say, a Cat does young childrens. Go thy ways Phil, for an unmercifull wit. I
perceive thou will not spare neither Father Presbyter, nor thy Mother, nor
thine own Brothers, but thou will break thy jest upon them. Well I now forgive
thee heartily for all thy abuses upon me, I perceive thou will not spare thy
dearest friends.

Observe. 47.
Thou art not well acquainted with Gold thou art not a man of that Metal.
Here, Magicus, thy want of Logic has made thee a little witty. For if thou
had understood that comparison does not always imply any positive degree in
the things compared, this conceit had been stifled before the birth. Thou say
somewhere, that I am a thin, lean Philosopher; but I say, I am as fat as a hen
is on the forehead. Whether do I profess my self lean or fat now? As lean as
thou do. Now when I say as Orient as false gold, do I say that false gold is
Orient. Thou art a mere Auceps syllabarum, Magicus, or to look lower, a
Mousecatcher in Philosophy.

Observe. 48.
Philalethes, say you, writ this book to revenge his death. No, Now I think you
mention his death, only to bring this latin sentence into your Book. Et quis
didicit scribere in lucta lacrymarum and Atramenti.

Observe. 49.
I excluded not thy censure but thy mercy. Thy words are, I expose it not to
the mercy of man but of God. But it is no exposall or hardship at all to be
exposed to mercy, therefore by mercy thou must needs understand censure.

Page 86. line 2. You skud like a dog by Nilus. Here your fancy is handsome
and apposite to what you would express, but that which you would express is
false. For I fear no Crocodile, but the fate of Esops dog who catching at the
shadow lost the substance. Because I more then suspect that there is nothing
real in those places I passed by, but only tremulous shadows of an unsettled
fancy.

Page 87. line 21. Did not I bid thee proceed to the censure of each part? What
is your meaning, Philalethes! That you would have me confute all, right or
wrong? No, Phil, I have done as St George in his combat with the Dragon,
thrust my spear under the Monsters wing, into the parts which are most weak or
least scaly. What I have excepted against was with judgment and reason, and so
good, that all that I have said hitherto, stands as strong and unshaken of thy
weak reasonings and impotent raylings, as rocks of Adamant, and Pillars of
Brass at the shooting off of a Childs Eldern-Gunne against them. Let Us now
see how like a man thou have quit thy self in the ensuing Discourse.

Anima Magica Abscondita.
WEll, Eugenius, I have now perused this second part of thy Answer, which does
not answer at all in proportion to thy first. How lank! how little is it! Thou
have even wearyed thy self with scolding, and now thou art so good natured as
to draw to an end. Faint, Phil, Faint? let me feel thy pulse. Assuredly it
strikes a Myurus, which is a sign thou art languid at the heart. Or is thy
Book troubled with the Cramp, and so has its legs twitch'd up to its breech?
or has it been on Procrustes his bed and had the lower parts of it cut off?
Whatever the Cause is, the Effect is apparent; that thou art wringled up at the
end like a Pigs tail, and shriveled on heaps like a shred of parchment. How
many sober passages of Morality? How many weighty Arguments of Reason? How many
Frolicks of wit have thou slipped over and not so much as mentioned, much less
applyde any suitable answer? But I hope thou will make good use of them silently
with thy self, and rectify thy fancy hereafter by my judgment, though thou
think it as harsh, as standing on the Presbytercall stool: to give me
public thanks. In the mean time, Reader, be contented, that I, only reply to
what he has thought good to oppose. But what he runs away from so cowardly, I
will not run after him with it, nor be so cruel as to force him to abide.

Observe. 1.
Page 91. line 9. It is plain then, that the body and substance of the
definition is contained in these few words, Principium motus and quietis. Why,
Magicus, because you make up he rest with thinking? Suppose thy Picture vere
drawn to the waste, and thou thoughtest of the rest of thy body. Does that
picture therefore contain the full draught of thy body? Away, thou bird of
Athens.

Observe. 2.
You tell me a form can not be known otherwise then by what it can do or
operate. I told thee so Phil, and do tell thee so again. And thou only denyest
it, thou do not disprove it; wherefore Phyllis is mine yet, and not the
willow Garland, but the willow Rod is thine, for not learning this plain lesson
any better all this while. For, (to speak to thy own sense and conceit of the
soul, that it is an intelligent Fire, or Light) thou can not frame any notion
of Intelligent, but from intellectual operations: nor of Light, but from what
it operates upon thy sense, thy sight; which is a truth most evidently plain to
any man that is not stark blind.

Page 92. line 5. You say Mastix, I have not considered the difference added in
the definition of Nature. No, You had not when you cavilled at the Genus, as
angry at it, because it did not monopolize the whole office of the definition
to it self and supply also the place of a Difference. Fond Cavil! But thou
supposed'st, it seems, that I would never deigne to answer, so unclean an
Adversary as thou have shown thy self, and that thy Readers would never take
the pains to see whether thou spoke true or false, and that has made thee say
any thing, and that with undaunted confidence and foulest insultations, that
the simple might be sure to believe thee, without any more ado. Eugenius, enjoy
thou the applause of the simple.

(...) But one wise man to me is as much as ten thousands of such, and infinite
swarms of them, not so much as one. I am fully of Heraclitus his mind for that,
Philalethes.

Observe. 3.
Here, Philalethes, you contemning Definitions made from the proper Operations
of the things defined, I intimate to you, that you necessarily imply, that you
look after the knowledge of a stark-naked substance, which is impossible ever
to be had. What do you answer to this? Nothing. Let the Reader judge else.

Observe. 4.
Let any body compare thy Finihabia with the expositions of those terms (...)
and (...), made by Julius Scaliger (for it is he that is more cunning at
nonsense then the devil, not I) and he shall find that thou have spent a page
and an half here to no purpose, but only to show some few faint flashes of
wit. For at last thou do acknowledge the aptness and significancie of the
words, but still complainest that there is no news of the substance of the soul
in them. To which I answer again, A substance is a thing impossible to be known
otherwise then by its proper operations, or peculiar relations to this or that,
as I have often inculcated. But how do you take away this answer? Only by
making a wry mouth, and crying, Away! away! Have I not already demonstrated
unto thee, that it is impossible to know substances themselves, but only by
their operations? Here he answers again, that that cannot be; For then a
Plowman would be as wise as himself, and mother Bunch as his mother Oxenford.
But to satisfy this inconvenience, (if it be any, to grant a Plowman wiser
then thou art) I say, Thou and thy mother may be wiser then a Plowman in other
things, though not in this; and in this, if your notion be more adequate and
precise then his is, that is, If you are able, according to the Rules of
Logic, to examine whether your assertion may go for an axiom, that is, (...),
or (...), and are able to rest satisfied, by finding your selves to know
according to the capacity of the subject. But now, Phil. you endeavor to go so
far beyond the Plowman, that you fall short of him, and reach at so high
strains, that you have strained your self till you seem half cracked to the
sober. For this truth, That a substance is not to be known, but by its proper
operations, is a truth so clear, that it is clear that he is destitute of sight
and judgment, that does not discern it even at the first proposal.

Observe. 5, 6, 7.
What thou answerest to these 5th, 6th, and 7th Observations is nothing at all
to the purpose, and therefore to no purpose at all to answer any thing to them,
as I have already said in the like case, and I must leave something to the
candor and judgment of the Reader.

Observe. 8.
Page 97. line 1. Mastix, you place the difficulty in the Rudiments or Sperms,
because they are lax and fluid. No, Magicus, but I do not. For I think they are
always so, or else the Ratio Seminalis would have a hard task of it. But when
thou say, that the Anima, in the Matter missing a vent, etc. the difficulty
is how a thing so subtle as a soul is, should miss a vent in so lax matter as
the first Rudiments of life. This is the difficulty, Magicus. But thou
understandest not the force of any thing I propound to thee, thy apprehension
is so out of tune with straining at high things nothing to the purpose. But I
perceive, though thou would dissemble it, Magicus, that I have beat thee from
the Bung-hole, and that rude expression borrowed thence. And now thou art as
busy as a Moth about a candle, to fetch a Metaphor thence. For thou tellest
us, that this union is like that betwixt the candle and the flame. This indeed
for some Poetical illustration may do well: but what Pholosophicall
satisfaction is there in it, Philalethes? For first, the flame is without the
candle, not in it; but the soul within the body, not without it. Secondly, the
flame is an effect of the candle, but the soul is not an effect of the body,
the body is not the pabulum thereof, and the very substance of which it is
made, by superinducing a new modification. Thirdly, and lastly, the soul is
still the same individual soul; but the flame is no more the same flame, then
the water betwixt such and such banks of the river, is still the same water. If
thou had put thy finger into thy nose, and said, Lo the mystery of the union
of the soul and body: it had been as much Philosophical satisfaction as this,
from the union of flame and candle. Thou pitiful puzzled thing! thou art not
yet able to weigh what thou say. And now I have drove thee from the flame of
the candle, thou have scudded away quite into the dark, flown to I know not
what strange obscure expressions, a story of old grand-dame Nature, with a set
Ruff and a gold chain about her neck, which thou call propinquity of
Complexions, and I know not what. I prithee how much does this differ from
Sympathy and Antipathy, which all knowing men call Asylum ignorantiae: and now
I have drove thee thither, I will leave thee in that Sanctuary of fools. What I
have said, I have already made good, that the souls union with the body is more
Theomagicall then Magicus himself is aware of.

Observe. 9.
Page 98. line 19. Both which he makes to be one and the same thing. All that I
say there is, that those verses are understood of the vehicle of the soul, not
of the soul it self; and it is Theupolus his opinion as well as mine, who cites
those verses of Virgil, and gives that sense of them; to wit, that the twofold
vehicle of the soul is there meant, the Ethereall and Spirituous, not the soul
it self, Academic. Contemplat. lib. 4. So that Virgil does not at all patronize
thy gross conceit of making the soul consist of fire and air.

Page 99. line 10. I grant the soul to be a bodily substance that has
dimensions too. Why Phil? Is there any bodily substances without dimensions? I
could very willingly grant thee a mere body without a soul, thou have so little
reason and sense in thee; or if thou have a soul, that it is a corporeal one,
and it may well be so: but my question is meant of souls that have Sense and
Reason in them, whether they be corporeal substances or no? Yes, say you, they
are. They are intelligent Fire and Light. I say, Phil. thou art all fire, but
no light, nor intelligent at all. Thou art the hottest fellow that ever I met
with in all my days, as hot as a Taylours Goose when it hisseth, and yet as
dark. But let us endeavor (if it be possible) to vitrifie thy opake carcass,
and transmit a little light into thee. Do thou know then what fire is? how
it is a very fluid body, whose particles rest not one by another, but fridge
one against another, being very swiftly and variously agitated. In this
condition is the matter of fire. But now I demand of thee; Is there any
substance in this fire thou speak of, (for thou say it is really fire,
and usest no Metaphor) which we may call the essential Form thereof, or no? If
there be, I ask thee whether that Form be Intelligent, or no? If it be, then
that is the soul, and this subtle agitated matter is but the vehicle. But if
thou will say, that the subtle fiery matter it self is the Intelligent Soul,
see what inconveniences thou intanglest thy self in. For fire being as
homogeneall a body as water is, and having all the parts much what alike
agitated; how can this fire do those offices that commonly are attributed to
the soul? First, how can it organize the body into so wise a structure and
contrivement, the parts of this fire tending as much this way as that way or at
least tending only one way, suppose upward. Secondly, how can it inform the
whole body of an Embryo in the womb, and of a grown man? For if it was but big
enough for the first, it will be too little for the latter; unless you suppose
it to grow, and to be nourished. But thus, you will not have the same
Individual Soul you was Christened with, and must be forced to turn not only
Independent, but Anabaptist, that your new soul may be baptized: for it is not
now the same that you was Christened with before. For I say, that ten
spoonfulls of water added to one, should rather individuate the whole, then
that one of that whole number should individuate the ten. Thirdly, how can it
move it self, or the body in a spontaneous way? For all the particles of this
fiery matter wriggling and playing on their own centers, or jointly
endeavoring to tend upwards, makes nothing to a spontaneous motion, no more
then the Atoms of dust that are seen playing in the Sun beams, striking
through a chink of a wall into a dark room, can conspire into one spontaneous
motion, and go which way they please.

Wherefore I say, there ought to be some superintendent Form that takes hold of
all these fiery particles and commands them as one body, and guides them this
way or that way, and must be the (...) of this fiery substance, that is, There
must be such an essence in this fiery matter (and that is noted by the
preposition (...)) as does (...) and (...) that does hold together, that does
drive this way or that way, according to its nature or will, and yet thus
driving does keep possession of this fiery Matter; and what is this but a Soul?
not the indument, the smock or petticote of the Soul as thou call'st it.
Eugenius, thou art old excellent at finding out naked essences, it seems, that
take the garment for the body. Thou art so young that thou can not
distinguish betwixt a living barn, and a baby made of clouts. But this is not
all that I have to say Phil. Fourthly, I say that this fire cannot be the Soul,
because fire is devoid of sense. I but you say you understand an Intelligent
fire. Learnedly answered, and to as much purpose as if you should say, that a
Soul is a Post or a Pillar, and then you should distinguish and tell me, you
meant an Intelligent Post or Pillar, but I say fire has no more sense then a
Post or Pillar has reason. For if it have sense, it must have that which the
Schools call Sensus communis. And now tell me Phil, to which of all the playing
particles of this Ignis fatuus of thine thou will appoint the office of the
Sensus Communis, or why to any one more then to the rest? But if thou appoint
all, there will be as many several sensations, as there are particles. Indeed
so many distinct living things. And thou will become more numerous within, then
the possessed in the Gospel, whose name was Legion, because they were many. But
if thou will pitch upon any one particle above the rest, tell me where it is?
In the middle or at the outside of this fire? I will interpret thee the most
favorably, and answer for thee; In the middle. But I demand of thee, Why shall
this in the middle have the privilege of being the Sensus Communis rather then
any other, or how will it be able to keep it self in the middle in so fluid a
body? And if it were kept there, what privilege has it but what the most of
the rest have, as well as it, to make it fit for the office of a Sensus
Communis? For it must be, either because it is otherwise moved on its Center,
then the other are on theirs, which you can not prove either to be, or if it
were, to be to any purpose: Or it must be, because it has some advantage in
consideration of the joint motion of the particles. Let the joint motion
therefore of the particles be either rectilinear or circular. If rectilinear,
as suppose in a square, let the process of motion be from side to side
parallel. Has not then any particle in a right line that is drawn through the
center of this Square figure, parallel to two of the sides, equal advantage
for this office (the transmission of outward sense being perpendicular to the
said right line) that the middle particle has? For thus it can receive but
what comes in one line, transmission of sense being parallel as is supposed.
Nay, the points of any other inward line parallel to this, will do as well as
the points of this middle line, which is as plainly true, as two and two is
four, if thou understandest sense when it is propounded to thee. Well, but it
may be you may think you can mend your self by supposing the joint motion of
this fiery matter to be circular. I say no. For then that of this motion, that
respects external objects is from the Center to the Circumference, as it is
plain in that ordinary experiment of a Sling. And thus motion is from the
middle particle not toward it. But you should say here, if you could answer so
wisely, that motion bearing forward from this center toward the object, that
reciprocally the object will bear against it; and so there will be a
transmission of sense to the center round about from all the circumferentiall
parts of this fiery Orb which thou calledst the naked soul. But I say, Magicus,
if the middle point of this Orb get the place of the Sensus Communis, because
there is a common transmission of motion from sensible Objects thereunto: I say
then that there be more Sensus Communes in this Orb then One, because such
transmissions as are not perpendicular to this Orb, will meet in several
points distant from the middle point or center of this Orb, and there are
enough such external transmissions as these. I might add also, that the
middle point or particle being though a minute one yet a body, and consequently
divisible, that that will also bid fair for a multiplicity of Common Senses.
But I will add only this, That I hope to see the day wherein thou will be so
wise as to be able to confess, that the Author of Anthroposophia Theomagica,
etc. was the most confident Ignaro that ever wet paper with ink. But before I
leave this fourth argument, let me only cast in one thing more which equally
respects both Hypotheses, either of rectilinear or circular motion. And that is
this. If any one particle of this fiery substance, be the Common sense, it must
be also the principle of spontaneous motion to the whole substance. For we see
plainly that that which has the Animadversive faculty in man, or the office of
Common sense, moves the whole man, or that the motion of him is directed, at
the beck of this. But I prithee Phil, tell me if thou can possibly imagine,
that any one particle in this fiery substance should be able to impresse
spontaneous Motion upon the whole. I know thou can not but think it
impossible. Fifthly, If the soul be fire (fire being so fluid and unsteddy a
substance) how can there be any memory in it? You remember that experssion in
Catullus, whereby he would set forth sudden obliteration and forgetfulness of
things, that it is like writing in the Water or in the Air.

In vento aut rapida scribere oportet aqua.

But what think you of fire then, will that consistency bear more durable
characters? The perpetual fridging and toying of the fiery particles does
forthwith cancel whatever is impressed, and now there is neither Common sense
nor Memory to be found in your fire, we may be secure there is no Reason to be
found there. For the Discursive Faculty requires some (...), something fixed to
tread upon as well as the Progressive. But in your fire all is aflote, nothing
fixed. Sixthly and lastly, If the Soul of man be either fire or air, or both, I
do not see that it will prove immortal; but that its consistency will be
dispersed and scattered like the clouds. It will not be able to conflict with
the boistrous winds, or escape blowing out, or being lost in the thin air, as
other flames are, it once being uncased of the armature of the body. And these
Vehicles which you will have to be the very Soul it self, they being so
changeable and passive within the body, it will not be absurd with Lucretius to
infer that they will be utterly dissolved when they are without.

Haec igitur tantis ubi morbis, corpore in ipso
Factentur, miserisque modis distracta laborent
Cur eadem credis sine corpore, in aere aperto,
Cum validis ventis aetatem degere posse?
To this sense.

If in the body racked with tort'rous pain
And tossed with dire disease they are wearied so;
This shelter lost, how can they then sustain
The strong assaults of stormy winds that blow?
I tell thee Phil, such a soul as thou fanciest would be no more able to
withstand the winds then the dissipable clouds, nor to understand any more
sense then a soul of clouts, or thy own Soul does.

But now I have so fully confuted thy gross opinion of the Soul, it may be
happily expected that I would declare mine own. But Phil, I only will declare
so much, that I do not look on the Soul as a Peripateticall atome, but as on a
spiritual substance, without corporeal dimensions, but not destitute of an
immateriall amplitude of Essence, dilatable and contractible. But for further
satisfaction in this point, I refer to my Philosophical Poems. And do
profess that I have as distinct, determinate, and clear apprehension of these
things, and as wary and coherent, as I have of any corporeal thing in the
world. But Heat and Phantastry to suddled minds, are as good companions as
Caution and Reason to the sober. But the durablenesse of that satisfaction is
uncertain, whereas solid Reason is lasting and immutable.

Observe. 10.
Page 101. line 6. But from a similitude and Symbol of Nature. You are indeed
very good at similitudes Phil. as I have proved heretofore out of your skill in
Zoography. But this is another business. For here you profess to speak, of
the symbolizing and sympathizing of things one with another in Nature, and so
mutually moving to union, by a kind attractive power, according to that saying

(...). Well be it so that there is a mutual attractive power in things that
symbolize one with another (for the attraction is mutual as well as the
similitude mutual) What is this to take away what I have objected? Nothing.
But I will show you how you are hanged in your own chain. For it is as plain,
as one of the (...), that where two things of the same nature act, the greater
is stronger, and the stronger prevails. Wherefore three portions of light
should fetch up two, or five one; rather then one should fetch down three, or
five, or two. This is the bare point of my reason which I covered with a double
comparison. viz. from the greater number of the lincks of a Chain
preponderating the less number, and from the greater portion of Earth
prevailing over the less; as in that instance, when a clod taken from the
earth and let go in the free air, the earth commands it back to it self again,
according to that conceit of Magnetisme. And here the argument was a pari, not
a specie, and there may be a collation of parity even in contraries. And your
ignorance of that Logical Notion, has enabled you to rayl so much, and speak
so little to the purpose on this Observation, as any Logician may very easily
discern.

Observe. 13.
Page 103. line 14. Answer if thou dare to any one of these Questions. Assure
thy self, Eugenius, I can give a very rational answer to every one of them.
But for thy sake I think fit to answer none of them. But what is in my
Philosophical Poems will salve them all.

I will now rather examine what force of Arguments you have to prove that that
which orders Matter into shape and form, is Animadversive and Intelligent.

Your first Argument is; that if there were no Animadversion in the Ratio
Seminalis, ( or call it what you will) that shapes the Matter into Form, the
Agent would mistake in his work.

Secondly, That he would work he knew not what, nor wherefore, and that
therefore all Generations would be blind Casualties.

Thirdly, There would not be that Method, infallibility of Action nor
proportion and Symmetry of parts in the work.

Fourthly and Lastly, That there would be no End nor Impulsive cause to make
him to work.

To all these unsound Reasons, I have already answered very solidly and truly.
That the force of them reached no further then thus. That the Ratio Seminalis
must at least proceed from something that is knowing, and be in some sense
Rational, but not have reason and animadversion in it self. And this is the
opinion of Plotinus, Marsilius Ficinus, and all the Platonists that I have met
with. (...) etc. Ennead. 2. lib. 3. To this sense. For the Ratio Seminalis acts
in the Matter and that which acts thus naturally, neither understands nor sees,
but has only a power to transform the Matter, not knowing any thing but
making only as it were a form or shape in the water. And Ficinus compares this
Ratio Seminalis, to an Artifice cut off from the mind of the Artificer and made
self-subsistent, and able to work upon prepared matter, but without knowledge,
as being disjoined from all animadversive essence. This is the right notion of
the (...). And this fully takes away the force of all your Arguments. For these
being divine art imbodied in Nature and Matter, and working naturally, they will

First, Mistake no more, then a Stone will in its journey downwards, or the
Fire in its course upward; which go always right, if no external obstacle
hinder them. And these will work right if the Matter be duly prepared.

Secondly, Though they work they know not what, yet they work right in virtue
of that cause from whence they came, the divine Intellect: and their operation
is no more casual then the ascent of Fire, and descent of Earth; for it is
natural.

Thirdly, This third falls in with the second, and the same answer will serve
both.

Fourthly, There is an Impulsive cause and End of their working, though unkown
to them, yet not unknown to the Author of them. As in the orderly motion of a
Watch, the Spring knows not the end of its Motion, but the Artificer does. Yet
the watch moves, and orderly too, and to a good End. But this fourth falls in
also with the second or first. And you see now that they are indeed all fallen
to nothing at all. So easily is Confidence overcome when unbacked with solid
Reason.

Observe. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Page 107. line 5. Did ever man scribble such ridiculous impertinencies? Never
any man before Eugenius Philalethes. But why will you scribble such stuff,
Phil. that will put you to the pains of reproaching of it when you have done?
My exception against your definition of the first principle of your Clavis was
as solid as merry. For, One in one, and One from one, is no definition of any
one thing in the world. For definitio, or (...) is a bounding and limiting what
you define. But here is no bounds nor limits at all. For every thing that is,
is One in one, and One from one, viz. in one world and from one God. And then
in your other attempt this way, to definc it, A pure white Virgin walking in
shades and Tiffanies, is a mere foolery in Philosophy, and teaches nothing but
that your fancy is very feminine. Now in answer to all this, you contrive two
ridiculous paralogismes, and then laugh at them when you have done.

Page 108. line 8. Made their God Jupiter an Adulterer. And you Eugenius,
bestow a wife on the God of Israel, and make her after an Adulteress, and then
call me blasphemous for deriding your folly.

Page 109. line 14. Which thou do blasphemously call pitiful services. Yes
Philalethes, And I ought to call them so, in comparison of that high good that
is intended to us by Scripture. They are pitiful things indeed in comparison
of that. And thou art a pitiful fellow to make an Independent of, that have no
more wit nor Christianity in thee then to call this blasphemy. But a man may
easily discern how religious thou art, though by Moonlight, at the latter end
of the 110 page, where thou do display thine own Immodesty, by talking of
displaying of Petticotes.

Observe. 20.
Line 5. The Stars could not receive any light from the Sun. Now you show
how wise you are, in straining at so high a Philosophical notion. I tell thee,
Phil. the Stars cannot receive any light from the Sun, no more then this earth
can from one single star. For the sun to our sight at the distance he is
from the fixed stars, would seem no bigger then they, if so big. For
according to the computation of Astronomers, the stars of the first magnitude
are really far bigger then the sun: yet you see how little light they
impart to the earth, and how very small they appear to us. And yet the lively
vibration of their light shows plainly that it is theit own, not borrowed. So
that it is plain, that if the Sun and Stars be Man and Wife, this immense
distance makes them live in a perpetual divorce.

Observe. 22.
Line 17. Now at last Reader, he perceives his error: Therefore there needed
none of your Correction. And I wish you could of your self perceive yours too,
that you may need none of mine. But I perceive by what follows here, thou do
not know my meaning by Spiritus Medicus. Which I pardon in thee, thou do so
seldom understand thy own.

Observe. 27.
Line 12. Otherwise grass could not grow on the banks of it all the year
long. I said the fringes of Reeds and Flags, and those gayer ornaments of herbs
and flowers, could not grow all the year long on the banks of Yska, if it were
a river in Great Britain or Ireland. What is now become of thy faint Ha ha he?

Line 14. He thinks Yska runs to heaven. Do I so, Phil? why then I gave thee
friendly counsel when I bid thee fling thy self into its stream. For then thou
would with ease have gone along with the stream to heaven, when others are
fain to row hard against the stream, and scarce arive thither when they have
done all they can. I knew thy meaning by thy mumping, Phil. but thou
expressedst it so disadvantageously, that thou gave me good occasion to be
merry with thee. But thou have no mirth nor urbanity at all in thee, but wrath
and foul language, which without any heed or discretion thou flingest upon
every one that comes in thy way. And here in this 114 page, thou bidst fair for
the calling of that noble Philosopher Descartes, knave, as neretofore thou
did call him fool. What Wit, Civility, or Judgment is there in this
Philalethes? Thou art resolved to be recorded to posterity the most immorrall
and ignorant man that ever appeared yet in public. But thou have as much
confuted his Philosophy, by saying it is a Whim and a Wham, as thou have
solidly answered thy Observatour. I have made it apparent, that thou have not
spoke sense scarce to any one thing I objected against thee. But have
discovered thy gross ignorance in Logic and Philosophy so far, that I
profess I did not suspect thou had been any thing near so weak as I have
found thee: but I willingly leave the censure of it to the Judicious. I will
only speak thus much in favor to thee and for thy excuse, that the strength
of thy passion may very well have more then ordinarily weakened thy reason.

Now for that Ingenuous young Gentleman, the smartnesse of whose Poetry has so
wrung thee, and vexed thy guts, that it has brought upon thee the Passio
Iliaca, and made thee so foul mouthed, I will only say so much, Phil. and speak
within compass, that he has more wit and Philosophy in one hair of his head,
then thou have in thy whole noddle. And that his verse was not obedient to my
prose; but the Muses were very obsequious to his wit and humor of representing
thee such as thou art. And in this only he was no Poet, in that he does not
write Fictions as thou do in prose. But it seems he has so paid thee home,
that the sense of my gentle strokes are struck out by his quicker lash. For
thou say I am a good harmless sneaking Observatour, thy Alaz. that is, thy
thou know not what, but no Mastix by no means, but only one that gave thee a
flap with a foxtail. Verily, thou say true, I did not intend to hurt thee,
and thou make me so weak as if I were not able. Why do thou raise then so
mighty Tropheyes upon the victory of so harmless and unable an enemy? For as
inconsiderable as I am, to make himself considerable to the world, he makes a
Colosse, a Giant, a Monster of nine acres long of me. But how can this consist
with thy putting me up into a little box. Parturiunt montes -- or rather,
Dehiscunt montes, tandem intrat ridiculus mus. The Colosse falls, the Mountains
gape, and at length enters in the merry Mouse. An excellent jest my Masters?
But why into a box with wire grates, rather then into an iron cage, as
Tamberlain used Bajazeth, and so carried him up and down in triumph? I wonder
thou did not take this jest by the Turkish Mustachoes, rather then that. But
this it is, to have a wit no larger then a Mouse-catchers; or a fancy heaved
up no higher then the pinacles of Oxenford. Thou will in time, Phil. make a
fellow of a fit size to show the Lions and Rattoon at the Tower; and I suppose
thou fawnest upon the Independents so as thou do, to get their good will for
the next reversion of that office. But enough, my Philalethes, of levity and
folly. I will not abuse my liberty to excess, only let me in some way answer
the expectation of those that may happily expect my censure of thy Magia
Adamica. But I shall not so much answer it, as frustrate it: for I profess, I
take no pleasure in the censuring of any man's writings; I can employ my self
better. I was in a very merry frolic when I ventured upon this; yet the
Judicious may discern that there was sobriety enough at the bottom of all that
mirth. But as for this Magia Adamica, I confess I have not read it; but I do
favorably conjecture, that the Author thereof is as well skilled in those
books of Magic that Adam read by the fireside in winter nights, while Eve
held to him the candle, as any young man is in these European parts. I let
Adamicus alone, my business is only with Anthroposophus, over whom now I
having so full a victory, it will be expected, perhaps, that I lead him about
in triumph. But I must answer my friends in Christian soberness, that I am the
right Philalethes, a lover of truth more then a lover of victory, and of
victory more then of triumph;

-- sat is est prostrasse leoni. Only I will say, not of his Person, but of
that Dispensation and Genius in which he is in for the present; Lo, there lies
the contagious spectrum of Ephesus, which I have discovered to be the pest of
the Commonwealth of learning, and of humane and divine reason, as much as that
demoniacall imposture was the walking plague of that famous city: and now he
has been pelted a little with hard language, as Apollonius commanded the
Ephesians to stone that hypocritical old Mendicant with stones, he appears in
the very same shape with him at the uncovering of the heap, that is, an uggly
huge black Mastife sprawling for life, and foaming forth abundance of filthy
stinking scum, after the manner of mad dogs. And thus have I approved my self
wise as Apollonius, in discovering imposture; and valiant as Hercules, who
over-mastered that (...), as Dionysius calls it, that brazen-barking Cerberus.

And now, O men of Ephesus! I mean all you that reap the fruit of this noble
exploit of mine, rear me up my deserved Trophey, and inscribe this Tetrastich
upon it, for an everlasting monument of your gratitude to me, and love to the
truth:

Religious Heat as yet unpurged quite
From fleshly sense and self, when it makes a stir
About high Myst'ries above Reasons light,
Is at the bottom but a rabid curre.
But that I may conceal nothing from you, O men of Ephesus, I must tell you,
that whether you rear up this monument, or whether you forbear, all is one. For
the truth of these verses is already written in the corner stones of the
Universe, and engraven on the lasting pillars of Eternity. Heaven and earth may
pass away, but not one tittle of this truth shall pass away. High and windy
Notions do but blow up and kindle more fiercely the fire of Hell in the hearts
of men. From whence is Pride, and Contention, and bitter Zeal. This is the pest
and plague of Mankind, and the succeeding torture of the sons of Adam. For
while the mind of man catches at high things, of which she is incapable till
she be refined and purged, she does but fire the frame of her little world by
her overbusie Motion, which burning in gross fuel, fills all with smoke. And
thus the soul is even smothered and stifled in her narrow mansion. Her first
enlargement here must therefore be, by Temperance and Abstemiousnesse: For
without this breathing-hole for fresh air, devotion it self will choke her
still more and more, heating her thick and polluted spirits in such sort, that
they cannot be sufficiently rectified by the power of the brain. But in this
Dispensation especially is lodged a strong voice, weak sense, and a rude
contempt of any thing that will trouble the head, as Reason, Philosophy, or any
but ordinary subtilty in learning. But they love Christ very heartily after
their gross way, as their Protector and Securer from what outward evil
naturally attends so bad an inward condition. But being so immersed in brutish
sense, and yet with conscience of sin; if any body have but the trick to
persuade them that sin is but a name, he will be a very welcome Apostle to
them, and they will find more ease to their beastly nature, in phansying
nothing to be sin, then they did in making their Hypocritical addresses to
an offended Savior. And then (poor souls) through the foulness of the flesh,
are they easily inveigled into Atheism it self. In so great danger are we of
the most mischievous miscarriages, by contemning of those known and confessed
virtues of Temperance, Continence, and Chastity.

But we will suppose Men in a great measure temperate; yet how far off are they
still from real happiness in themselves, or from not disturbing the
happiness of others, so long as Envy, Ambition, Covetousness, and
Self-respect does still lodge in them? Here indeed Reason may happily get a
little more elbow-room; but it will be but to be Patron to those vices, and to
make good by Argument harsh opinions of God, and peremptorily to conclude the
power of Christ weaker then the force of sin. And the Fancy in these
something more refined Spirits, will be more easily figurable into various
conceits, but very little to the purpose. Of which some must go for sober
Truths, and those that are more fully shining, in the midst of a shadowy
Melancholiz'd imagination, must bid fair for Divine Inspiration, though neither
Miracle nor Reason countenance them. But you, O men of Ephesus! if any one tell
you strange devises, and forbid you the use of your Reason, or the demanding of
a Miracle, you will be so wise as to look upon him as one that would bid you
wink with your eyes, that he might the more easily give you a box of the Ear,
or put his hand into your Pockets.

Now out of this second Dispensation, innumerable swarms of Sects rise in all
the world. For Falsehood and Imagination is infinite; but Truth is one. And the
benignity of the Divine Spirit, having no harbor in all this variety of
religious Pageantry; Envy, Covetousness, and Ambition must needs make them
bustle, and tear all the world in pieces, if the hand of Providence did not
hold them in some limits:

Quin laniant mundum; tanta est discordia fratrum: as he says of the winds. In
this Dispensation lodges Anger and active Zeal concerning Opinions and
Ceremonies, Uncertainty and Anxietie touching the purposes of God, and a rigid
injudicious Austerity, of which little comes but the frighting men off from
Religion: which notwithstanding if it be had in the truth thereof, is the most
cheerful and lovely thing in the world. These men having not reached to the
Second Covenant, will also thank any body that could release them from the
First. For whereas true Religion is the great joy and delight of them that
attain to it, theirs is but their burden. And so it is not impossible that
these may be also wound off to the depth of wickedness, and sink also in time
even to Atheism it self. For what is real in them will work, but what is
imaginary will prove it self ineffectuall. Wherefore, is it not far better
for men to busy all their strength in destroying those things which are so
evidently destructive of humane felicity, then to edge their spirits with fiery
notions and strange Phantasmes, which pretend indeed to the semblance of deep
mysterious knowledge, and divine speculation; but do nothing hinder but that
the black dog may be at the bottom, as I said before?

But you will ask me, How shall we be rid of the Importunity of the impostures
and fooleries of this second Dispensation. But I demand of you, Is there any
way imaginable but this? viz. To adhere to those things that are
uncontrovertedly good and true, and to bestow all that zeal, and all that heat,
and all that pains for the acquiring of the simplicity of the life of God, that
we do in promoting our own Interest, or needless and doubtful Opinions. And I
think it is without controversy true to any that are not degenerate below men,
that Temperance is better then Intemperance, Justice then Injustice, Humility
then Pride, Love then Hatred, and Mercifulness then Cruelty. It is also
uncontrovertedly true, that God loves his own Image, and that the propagation
of it is the most true dispreading of his glory, as the Light which is the
Image of the Sun, is the glory of the Sun. Wherefore it is as plainly true,
that God is as well willing, as able to restore this Image in men, that his
glory may shine in the world. This therefore is the true Faith, to believe that
by the power of God in Christ, we may reach to the participation of the Divine
Nature. Which is a simple, mild, benign light, that seeks nothing for it self,
as it self; but does tenderly and cordially endeavor the good of All, and
rejoices in the good of All, and will assuredly meet them that keep close to
what they plainly in their consciences are convinced is the leading to it. And
I say, that sober Morality, conscienciously kept to, is like the morning light
reflected from the higher clouds, and a certain Prodrome of the Sun of
Righteousness it self. But when he is risen above the Horizon the same virtues
then stream immediately from his visible body, and they are the very members of
Christ according to the Spirit. And he that is come hither, is a pillar in the
Temple of God for ever and ever; for he has reached to the Second Covenant,
which he can in no more likelihood break, then lay violent hands on himself to
the taking away of his natural life. Nay, that will be far more easy then
this. For a man may kill himself in a trice, but he cannot extinguish this
Divine life without long and miserable torture. If this be to be a Puritan,
Eugenius, I am a Puritan. But I must tell thee, that by how much more a man
precisely takes this way, the more Independent he will prove. And the pure
simplicity of the life of God revealed in Jesus Christ, will shine with so
amiable a luster in his inward mind, that all the most valuable Opinions that
are controverted amongst Churches and Sects, will seem no more comely then a
fools coat, compared with the uniform Splendor of the Sun. But if thou
meanest by either Puritan or Independent, one in the second Dispensation, I
should dissemble in the presence of Heaven, if I should not say I am above
them; as I am above all Sects whatsoever as Sects. For I am a true and free
Christian; and what I write and speak is for the Interest of Christ, and in the
behalf of the life of the Lamb which is contemned. And his Interest is the
Interest of the sons of men; for he has no Interest but their good and
welfare. But because they will not have him to rule, the Nations of the world
(by a Divine Nemesis) are given up into the hands of Wolves, Foxes, and Lions:
The earth is full of darkness and cruel habitations. Wherefore, Eugenius,
thou do very unskilfully, in endeavoring to tumble me off from the
Independents, to cast me amongst the Puritanes, as thou call them. For it is
not in thy power to cast me so low as any Sect whatsoever; God has placed me
in a Dispensation above them, and will thou throw me down? No, Eugenius, I
shine upon them both as the Sun in the Firmament, who does not wink on one
side, or withdraw his Rays, but looks openly upon all, imparting warmth and
light. Thou have encountered with a Colosse indeed (though thou call me so
but in sport and scorn) far bigger then that stradling Statue at Rhodes, and
that reaches far higher. And yet no Statue neither, but one that will speak
what nothing but Ignorance and Hypocrisy can deny. Wherefore with my feet
lightly standing on the shoulders of all the Sects of the earth (for I would
not tread hard like a statue to hurt them) and with my head stooping down out
of the Clouds, I will venture to try the world with this sober question. Tell
me therefore, O all ye Nations, People, and Kindreds of the earth, what is the
reason that the world is such a stage of misery to the Sons of Men? Is it not
from hence, that that which should be their great Guidance, their Religion and
highest Light of their minds, is but Heat and squabbling about subtle
uncertain points, and foolish affectation of high mysteries, while the
uncontroverted sober truths of Virtue and Piety are neglected, and the
simplicity of the life of God despised, as a most contemptible thing. And I had
no sooner uttered these words in my mind, but me thought I heard an Answer from
all the Quarters of the earth, from East, West, North and South, like the noise
of many waters, or the voice of Thunder, saying, Amen. Halelujah. This is true.

Nor is this any vain Enthusiasme, Philalethes, but the triumph of the Divine
Light in my Rational Spirit, striking out to my exterior faculties, my
Imagination and Sense. For my head was so filled with the noise, that it felt
to me as bound and straitened, as being not able to contain it, and coldness
and trembling seized upon my flesh. But you will say, All this is but a
trivial truth that you are so zealous and triumphant in. But verily, Eugenius,
is it not better to be zealous about those things that are plainly true, then
those that are either uncertain of false? It Is true, what I have said to thy
soaring soul may seem contemptible. But if thou once had the sight of that
Principle from whence it came, thou would be suddenly ashamed of that patched
clothing of thy soul, stitched up of so many unsuitable and heedlesse
figurations of thy unpurged fancy, and would endeavor to put on that
simple uniform light.

And now, Eugenius, that I find my self in an advantageous temper to converse
with thee, come a little nearer me, or rather I will come a little nearer to
thee. Hitherto I have played the part of a personated Enemy with thee, give me
leave now to do the office of an open Friend. I perceive there is in you, as
you have made it manifest to all the world, an eager desire after Knowledge,
and as insatiable thirst after Fame. Both which are to be reputed far above
that dull and earthly pronenesse of the mind of some men, whose thoughts are
bent upon little else but the bed and the board. But I tell thee, that this
desire of thine being kindled so high in thy melancholy complexion, there arise
these three inconvenieuces from this inordinate heat.

First, thy spirits are so agitated, that thou can not soberly and cautiously
consider the Objects of thy mind, to see what is truly consequent, what not;
and so thy reason goes much to wrack.

Secondly, thy melancholy being so highly heated, it makes thee think
confidently thou have a Phantasme or Idea of a thing belonging to this or that
word, when thou have not, which is a kind of inward Frenzy and answers to the
seeing of outward apparitions when there is nothing before the sight. Thus art
thou defeated in thy design of knowledge, in divine and natural things by
this distemper.

But thirdly, the same untamed heat causes Boldness, Confidence and Pride.
And hence arises thy Imprudence. For I tell thee, Eugenius, there is no such
imprudent thing in the world as Pride. Wot'st thou not what the humor of all
men is; how they think themselves no inconsiderable things in the world? You
know the story in Herodotus, how when the Greeks had overcome the Persians and
after it was debated amongst them, to whom the (...) belonged, who should have
the honor of being reputed most valiant in that service, every one did
acknowledge that next to himself Themistocles did best. Wherefore it is plain
that he that will not let any man go before him provokes all men. Here
therefore was thy imprudence, Eugenius, that thou would take the (...) to thy
self without so much as any debate or asking leave, when every Galenist,
Aristotelian, Cartesian, and Theosophist, thinks it belongs to him as much as
to thee. Thus have thou provoked all men against thee, and made shipwreck of
thy fame, as well as fallen short of Learning. But you will say, why? what would
you have me to have done as some others do, who though they be proud, yet put
on a handsome dress of Modesty and squeamish Humility? That I tell thee had
been indeed something more like Prudence, which thy raised heat could not stoop
to, but I must confess it had been but a kind of Moral Sneaking. For as the
bending down of the upper parts of the body, so that the tallness of the
stature thereof is concealed, is the Sneaking of the body: so to make a man's
self more humble then he is, or less high-minded, is the Sneaking of the soul.
But the first point of wisdom is to be really humble indeed. For, an humble
mind is as still as the night, and as clear as the noonday. So that it is able
without any impatiency or prejudice to discern all things, and rightly to judge
of all things. This Christian temper is so sober, and wise, that no Imposture
can surprise it, nor ever will it hurt it felf by rashness and imprudency.
This is the heir of God, the treasury of all humane divine and natural
knowledge, and the delight and praise of men where ever it appears. But the
inseparable companions of haughtiness, are Ignorance, Shame, and Enmity. But
believe it, Eugenius, as this divine Humility is of more worth, so is it of
more labor then to find the Philosophers stone, or the famous medicine you
talk of; I am certain of more consequence by ten thousand times. And methinks
now at length through all those waves and rufflings of thy disordered mind, I
see something at the bottom in thee, O Eugenius, that begins to assent to what
I say, that begins to shine and smile, and look upon me as a very pleasant
Apostle, sent (not without providence) to toy and sport thee into a more sober
temper, and advertise thee of the highest good that the soul of man is capable
of; and thou will I am confident very suddenly say, and that from thy heart,
that better are the wounds of a friend, then the kisses of an enemy. Or if thou
can not yet fancy him a friend that has worn the vizard of a foe so long,
yet I do not mistrust but that thou will be so wise, as, according to Xenophons
Principle, not only, not to be hurt, but also to be profited by thine enemy.

An enemy indeed is not a thing to be embosomed and embraced, as the Satyr
would have done the fire when he first saw it, and therefore was forewarned by
Prometheus to abstain,

(...) But in the mean time, that which it would pain or consume may by
observing the right laws of using it, receive kindly warmth and vigor from it,
and work excellent things in virtue of its heat or light.

Did not Telephus heal his wound by his enemies spear? And had not Jason his
impostume cured by that weapon that was meant for his deadly dispatch? You know
also the story of Hiero, Eugenius, who when his enemy had upbraided him with
his stinking breath, chid his wife when he came home, because she never had
discovered it to him all that time of their living together. But she being very
honest and simple, told her husband that she thought all men's breaths smelt so.
You see then how much more easy it is, to hear what is true concerning us, of
our professed Adversaries, then of our bosom Friends.

But methinks I hear thee answer, that neither a bosom Friend nor an
embittered Enemy can be competent judges of a man's vices or virtues. For the
one would be too favorable, and the other too severe. What then? would thou
have some Third thing, a mean betwixt both, (according to that known Aphorism
(...)) whom thou might hope would prove an impartial judge? why, that is I,
Phil. whom, I dare say thou art confident, to be no friend to thee; and I dare
swear I am no enemy. And therefore why should I despair, but that my sitnesse
and skill may prove as successful in allaying of Eugenius his tumor, as that
unskilful hand was lucky in lancing Jasons impostume.

And being once cured, do not then repine, that there was a time wherein thou
wast unsound no more then Alexander the great, that he was once so little as to
be lodged within the narrow compass of his mothers womb; Or Milo who at
length could lift an ox, that he was once so weak that he could not stir a
lamb.

And what think thou Phil. of Plato, Empedocles, Democritus, Socrates, and
other profound sages of the World, can you imagine that when they had arrived
to that pitch of knowledge, that it was any shame or regret to them, that there
was once a time when they knew not one letter of the Alphabet. Why then should
my Eugenius be troubled, that he was once Childish, Ignorant, Proud and
Passionate, when he is well cured of those distempers. We are what we are, and
what is past is not, and therefore is not to afflict us. But he that is more
anxious concerning Fame then Virtue, and seeks only to seem a gallant and
invincible thing to the world, when in the mean time his mind is very weak and
vulnerable, I know my Eugenius is so wise, that such a man as this, will seem
as irrational to him, as if one having by ill chance cut his shinne, he should
be less solicitous about healing of his leg then mending of his stocken.

FINIS.
An Index of the general heads and more remarkable passages in the foregoing
Reply.
M Astix his Apology for his smart Observations upon Eugenius his
Anthroposophia Theomagica, etc. from page 9, to the 14. That to laugh at the
follies and defeatments of vain men, is lawful in a Christian. p. 14, 15, 16
Eugenius his Title Page, The Man-mouse taken in a Trap, censured. p. 21, 22
Mastix his Answer to two perverse charges of high incivilities gathered out of
his Observations. from p. 23. to p. 32 His Personal Reasons that moved him to
write his Observations. p. 35, 36 Of Platonisme, and of Mastix his
Philosophical Poems, his Song of the Soul, etc. from what Principle they were
writ. p. 36. to p. 41 Of the Philosophy of Descartes, how far above all other
natural Philosophyes, and yet how short of that noble, divine, universalizing
Spirit in Christianity and Platonisme. p. 41, 42, 43, 44 A zealous Invective
against the Atheists of these times, wherein sundry causes of Atheism are
glanced at. p. 44. to 48 Mastix no Enthusiast but speaks according to the
faculties of a man actuated by God. p. 48 A description of an heavenly
Dispensation upon earth, far above either Prophecy or Miracle. p. 39, 40.
and 49, 50 Whether there be any Essential definitions of Substances, and in
what sense. p. 57, 58, 59 Whether the Peripaleticks conceit God to have made
the world, as a Carpenter makes houses of Stone and Timber. p. 59, 60, 61
Eugenius his vizard of high affected Sanctimony fallen off, all the people
laugh at him. p. 63, 64 The ridiculous Analogies Eugenius makes between his
WorldAnimal, and an ordinary Animal. p. 65, 66 The flesh of his World-animal
confuted. p. 66, 67 The pulse of his World-animal confuted. p. 67, 68 Of
Rarefaction and Condensation, and of the miraculous multiplication of the
Superficies of body. p. 70, 71, 72 The Respiration of his World animal
confuted. p. 72, 73, 74 That a Pair of Bellows is an Animal, according to
Eugenius his Zoography. p. 75, 76 The vital moisture of his World-animal
confuted. p. 77, 78 The Animal Spirits of it confuted. p. 78, 79 The causes of
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, and that it cannot be the Pulse of his
World-animal. p. 81, 82, 83 Mastix his Philosophical Poems censured and
defended. p. 85, 86, 87 Reminiscency no Argument for the Preexistencie of the
Soul, p. 88, 89, 90 A large Demonstration that that Matter which Eugenius
asfirms he has often seen and felt, is not the first Matter of all things.
from p. 91. to p. 97 His Assertion that Aristotle's first Matter is in Nature
neither (...) nor (...), confuted. p. 101, 102 Eugenius his Ridiculous division
of an Idea into one part. p. 104 A supply made to this hopping distribution,
out of Philo the few. p. 105, 106 That Eugenius does so surround the Mass with
his ^mpyreall substance that there could be no Morning nor Evening as Moses
text requires p. 107 That the Scripture speaks according to outward sense and
vulgar apprehension, proved by sundry passages of Scripture, and Testimonies of
learned Men. from p. 109, to 113 That the Extent of the world according to
Moses David etc. is but to the Clouds or thereabout, very fully and largely
demonstrated, and so consequently that there is no room for Eugenius his
interstellar waters in Moses his Text, unless he will make them all one with
the Clouds or Vapors that be coagulated into Rain. from p. 113, to p. 120
Eugenius his gross Mistake concerning Orbs and Epicycles, venting three
absurdities in one Assertion. p. 121, 122, 123, 124 In what sense Mastix said
in his Observations, that Epicycles were too big to be true p. 125 That
Rarefaction and Condensation according to the Schools implies a Contradiction
p. 128 What a miserable layer of fundamentalls of Sciences Eugenius is. And in
particular of his Magnet p. 129, 130 S. John's new Heaven and new Earth how
Mastix would interpret it, and how Magicus. p. 132, 133 Aristotle taxed of
Sodomy. p. 134, 135 His Hymn in honor of Hermias, and his doing the same
Rites unto his whore when he had married her, that the Athenians did to their
Goddess, Ceres Eleusinia p. 135, 136 The natural shame in men of obscene
matters notoriously discovered in the story of Osiris and Typhon; and that this
shame is a sign that there is a certain conscience or presage in the soul of
man, that a better condition belongs to her then this in the body. p. 137, 138
That the soul of man is not propagated as light from light. p. 140, 141, 142
That Eugenius does plainly assert that blind men see in their sleep. p. 143
That there is not a Sensitive Spirit distinct from the rational soul in a man.
p. 144, 145, 146, 147 How long Mastix was making his Observations upon Eugenius
his Magical Treatises. p. 149, 150 Eugenius so unlucky in his Poetical
Encomiums of Oxford, that whereas he intends to praise, he seems to abuse that
learned and well-deserving Universitie. p. 153, 154 That the very substance of
a thing cannot be known p. 161, 162, 163. The union betwixt the flame and the
candle, not at all to set out the Union of the soul and body, to any
Philosophical satisfaction. p. 164, 165 That the soul is not Intelligent fire,
proved by sundry Arguments. p. 166, 167, etc. From her Organization of the body
p. 167 From her Information. p. 168 From Spontaneous Motion. p. 168 From
Sensation. p. 169, to 174 From Memory. p. 174 From the Souls Immortality
acknowledged by Eugenius. p. 174, 175 The bare point of Mastix his argument
against Magicus his mysterious chain of light, more plainly discovered. p. 177,
178 Eugenius his four arguments to prove that the Seminal Forms of things are
understanding Agents, propounded and confuted. from page 178, to 181 What a
Ritio Seminalis, or Seminall Form is according to Plotinus and the Platonists.
p. 179, 180 Mastix his exception against Eugenius his definition of the first
Principle of his Clavis magica proved to be as solid as merry. p. 181, 182
Whether the Stars receive any light from the Sun. p. 183 Mastix his friend ^.
T. vindicated. p. 186 His favorable conjecture of the Author of Magia Ada
mica. p. 188 His power of discovering Impostures paralleled with Apolionius.
us. p, 189 His Victory, Trophey, and Inscription. p. 190 His Oration to the Men
of Ephesus. p. 190, 191, etc. A description of a threefold Dispensation under
which Christians are. from p. 191, to 197 The first Dispensation. p. 191, 192
The second Dispensation. from p. 192, to 195 What is the way to be delivered
from the Impostures and Fooleries of the second Dispensation p. 195, 196 The
third Dispensation, or second Covenant. p. 196, 197 In what sense Mastix is
Puritan or Independent. p. 197 That he is above all Sects whatsoever, as
Sects, as being a mere Christian, p. 197, 198 The Transfiguration of his inward
man into a breathing Colosse, speaking from Heaven, and reminding all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, of the true cause of their perpetual Miseries and
Calamities. p. 199 That Mastix is no Enthusiast for all this, but that it is
only the Triumph of the Divine Light in his Rational Spirit, striking through
his exterior faculties, and moving his very body with coldness and trembling.
p. 200 His friendly and faithful Monitions to Eugenius, freely discovering to
him the true causes of his being defeated in his great Designs upon Fame and
Knowledge. from p. 200, to 204 That a wise man will not only not be hurt, but
be profited by his Enemy. p. 205, etc.

Errata.
Page 106. line 3. read (...).

page 125. line 9. read Deferents.

page 145. line 7. read glass.

page 147. line 23. for, in the highest, read, the highest.

page 160. line 20. read (...).

page 177. line 3, 4. read, kind of attractive.


