PHILOSOPHICAL POEMS, BY HENRY MORE: Master of Arts, and Fellow of CHRIST'S
COLLEGE IN CAMBRIDGE.

Avia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius ante
Trita solo, juvat integros accedere fontes.
Lucr. CAMBRIDGE. Printed by ROGER DANIEL Printer to the UNIVERSITY. 1647.

To his dear Father ALEXANDER MORE ESQUIRE.
SIR,
I Know at first sight you will judge me a Novice in the affairs of the World, in
not pitching upon some other Patron: and unacquainted with the Courtship of the
times, that holds it more commendable to toy and complement with a stranger,
then speak truth of a known friend. But I am meditating no Stage Play of
ordinary Apish Civility, but sober Truth: Nor intend this an act of worldly
discretion and advantage, but of Justice and Gratitude. For I cannot hope that
ever any man shall deserve so well of me as your self has done. Besides what
has hitherto commended you to all that know you; your Faithfulness,
Uprightness, Sedulity for the public Welfare of the place wherein you live,
your generous Opennesse and Veracity. Nor can ever that thick cloud you are now
enveloped with, of melancholized old Age, and undeserved Adversity, either dark
the remembrance of your pristine Luster, or hide from me the sight of your
present Worth. Sir, I could wish my self a stranger to your blood, that I might
with the better decorum set out the nobleness of your spirit. But to speak
modestly; You deserve the Patronage of better Poems then these, though you may
lay a more proper claim to these then to any. You having from my childhood
tuned mine ears to Spencers rhymes, entertaining us on winter nights, with that
incomparable Piece of his, The Fairy Queen, a Poem as richly fraught with
divine Morality as Phansy. Your early Encomiums also of Learning and Philosophy
did so fire my credulous Youth with the desire of the knowledge of things, that
your After-advertisements, how contemptible Learning would prove without
Riches, and what a piece of Unmannerlinesse and Incivility it would be held to
seem wiser then them, that are more wealthy and powerful, could never yet
restrain my mind from her first pursuit, nor quicken my attention to the
affairs of the World. But this bookish disease let it make me as much poor as
it will, it shall never make me the less just. Nor will you, I hope, esteem me
the less dutyfull, that without your cognoscence I become thus thankful. For
I never held my self bound to ask leave of any man to exercise an act of
Virtue. And yet am I conscious to my self, there may have some juvenile
Extravagancies passed my pen, which your judgment and gray hairs will more
slowly allow of, and my self may happily dislike by that time I arrive to half
your years. But let it be my excuse, that that which was to be made common for
all, could not be so exactly fitted for any one Age or Person. I am not indeed
much solicitous, how every particle of these Poems may please you. In the mean
time I am sure I please my self in the main; which is, The embalming of his
name to Immortality, that next under God, is the Author of my Life and Being.

Your affectionate Son HENRY MORE

A PLATONIC SONG of the SOUL; Treating, Of The Life of the Soul, Her
Immortality, The Sleep of the Soul, The Unity of Souls, and Memory after
Death.


Nullam majorem afferre solet ignaris inscitia voluptatem quam expeditum
fastidiosumque contemptum. Scal. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by ROGER DANIEL Printer to
the Universitie. 1647.

TO THE READER, Upon this second Edition.
Reader,
IF I seem too bold in presenting my self again so suddenly to public view,
let it excuse me, at least in part, that there is not so much boldness in
this, as in my first adventure. For whereas I had then no encouragement but
mine own well meaning, and carelessenesse of the opinions of men; I have now
(beside that resolved neglect of men's hasty censures) the experience (though
unexpected) of the favorable acceptance of the bravest and best improved
spirits.

For whose sakes, and as many else as are at leisure a while to lay aside the
pleasure or trouble of the world, and entertain their minds with thoughts of a
greater compass then the fetching in of a little wealth or honor; I have
taken the pains to peruse these Poems of the soul, and to lick them into some
more tolerable form and smoothness. For I must confess such was the present
haste and heat that I was then hurried in (dispatching them in fewer months
then some cold-pated-Gentlemen have conceited me to have spent years about
them, and letting them slip from me so suddenly, while I was so immerse in the
inward sense and representation of things, that it was even necessary to forget
the oeconomie of words, and leave them behind me aloft, to float and run
together at random like chaff and straws on the surface of the water) that it
could not but send them out in so uneven and rude a dress. Nor yet can I, (I
profess) ever hope to find leisure or patience so exquisitely to polish them,
as fully to answer mine own curiosity, if I would be also humorous, or the
delicacy of some Lady-wits that can like nothing that is not as composed as
their own hair, or as smooth as their Mistresses Looking-glass. But may these
emendations prove but acceptable to the more generous and manly Genius; I shall
please my self enough, if I prove but tolerable to those female phansies.

But as I would not industriously neglect these, so I hope I have more solidly
gratified the other, by the enlargement of this Poem. For besides the Canto of
the INFINITY of WORLDS, I have also added another of the PRAEEXISTENCY of the
SOUL, where I have set out the nature of SPIRITS and given an account of
APPARITITIONS and WITCHCRAFT, very answerable I conceive to experience and
story, invited to that talk by the frequent discoveries of this very Age. Which
if they were publicly recorded, and that course continued in every Parish, it
would prove one of the best Antidotes against that earthly and cold disease of
Sadducisme and Atheism, which may easily grow upon us, if not prevented, to
the hazard of all Religion, and the best kinds of Philosophy.

I have also enlarged the second Canto of PSYCHOZOIA, and have added (that I
might avoid all suspicion of partiality) to Psittaco and Pithecus diverse other
persons, Pico, Corvino, Graculo, and Glaucis, but am so sensible of that sober
precept in Josephus, which he affirms to be out of Moses, (...), that I would
be very loath to be so far mistaken as to be thought a Censurer or Contemner
of other men's Religions or Opinions, if they serve God in them in the
simplicity and sincerity of their hearts, and have some more precious
substratum within, then inveterate custom or natural complexion. All that I
mean is this: That neither eager promoting of Opinion or Ceremony, nor the
earnest opposing of the same, no not the acuteness of Reason, nor yet a
strong, if naked conceit, that we have the Spirit of God, can excuse a man from
being in any better condition then in the Land of Brutes or in the mere animal
nature. Which conclusion I thought worth my labor to set off with such
Artifice and Circumstance as I have; the gullery and deceit therein, if not
avoided, being of so great and evil consequence. For if we can but once entitle
our opinions and mistakes to Religion, and Gods Spirit, it is like running
quicksilver in the back of a sword, and will enable us to strike to utter
destruction and ruin. But it would prevent a great deal of blood and
bitterness in the Christian world, if we reserved the flower and strength of
our zeal for the undoubted Truth of God and his immutable Righteousness, and
were more mildly and moderately affected concerning the Traditions and
determinations of the Elders.

Furthermore, I have added Notes for the better understanding, not only of my
Psychozoia, but of the Principles of Plato's Philosophy. In both which I would
be so understood, as a Representer of the Wisdom of the Ancients rather then a
warranter of the same. Contemplations concerning the dry essence of the Diety
are very consuming and unsatisfactory. It Is better to drink of the blood of the
grape, then bite the root of the vine, to smell of the rose then, chew the
stalk. And blessed be God, the meanest of men are capable of the former, very
few successful in the latter. And the less, because the reports of them that
have busied themselves that way, have not only seemed strange to the vulgar,
but even repugnant with one another. But I should in charity refer this to
the nature of the pigeons neck, rather then to mistake or contradiction. One
and the same Object in Nature affords many and different (...). And God is as
infinitely various as simple. Like a circle, indifferent, whether you suppose
it of one Uniform line, or an infinite number of Angles. Wherefore it is more
safe to admit all possible perfections in God, then rashly to deny what appears
not to us in our particular posture.

I have also adjoined some few scattering notes to the second part of the Song
of the Soul. Where I have also, beside some subtle considerations concerning
ATOMS and QVANTITY, set out very plainly, the Hypothesis of Pythagoras, or
Copernicus concerning the MOTION of the EARTH, as also opened the mystery of
the FLVX and REFLVX of the SEA. Which two contemplations are not inferior to
any, for either pleasantness in themselves, or conduciblenesse for the finding
out of the right frame of Nature.

Finally, I have cast into this second Edition several smaller Poems, of which
together with all the rest that I have published I would give this general
Advertisement, Est pictura Poesis. Every poem is an Idyllium. And a Poet no
more sings himself, then a Painter draws his own picture. Nor can I by these
assume to my self the honor of being a Platonist, no more then Virgil incur
the suspicion of being an Epicurean by his Silenus, whom notwithstanding
Alexander Severus thought good to style poetarum Plato.

As for a more determinate decision of those many speculations which I have set
on foot in these writings, though I made some kind of promise that way in my
first, I must crave leave a while to defer it, till I find the thing it self
of more consequence, and my self at better leisure. However without that, there
is so great accession made to this second Edition, that I easily hope, that of
as many as I was received favorably before, that I shall now be received with
much more favor.

As for others, whom sensual immersion or the deadness of Melancholy have
more deeply seized upon, I must acknowledge that in my own judgment I can seem
no better to them then a piece of highly inacted folly, they obstinately
preferring that sad ground of incredulity before any thing less then a
Demonstration. For whose satisfaction Mounsieur des Chartes has attempted
bravely, but yet methinks on this side of Mathematical evidence. He and that
learned Knight our own Countryman had done a great deal more if they had
promised less. So high confidence might become the heat and scheme of Poetry
much better then sober Philosophy. Yet has he not done nothing, though not so
much as he raises men's expectations to. And if he had performed less, it had
been enough to souls that have well recovered that divine sagacity and quick
sent of their own Interest. If this sweet ethereall gale of divine breathing do
not quicken and enliven the sent and relish of such arguments as Reason,
Nature, and story will afford, they will all prove weak and useless:
Especially to exercised Wits that have so writhen and wrested their phansies
that they can imagine or disimagine any thing, so weakened it that it is born
down as well with the smallest as greatest weight: so crusted and made hard their
inward (...) by overmuch and trivial wearing it, that that delicate
discrimination and divine touch of the soul is even lost, in so much that it
would be safer to ask the judgment of young lads or Country idiots concerning
the force of Arguments for Gods existence or the Souls immortality, then those
lubricous Wits and overworn Philosophers. And surely if we will but admit of
Providence and her eye to be placed upon man, and this world to be his
instruction, together with the undistorted suggestions of his own heart, these
easy hints and pointings will be found no fallacious directions. And true
opinion is as faithful a Guide, as Necessity and Demonstration.

That obvious conceit of the nature of light and colors, though perhaps false
in it self, yet is an easy and safe conductour to that grand Truth of the
divine Hypostases held up by the whole Christian world for these many hundred
years and by more then have acknowledged themselves Christians. How naturally
are we invited from the appearing of men deceased, to think the soul survives
the body, though we may perversely suppose that those Apparitions are but our
own imaginations, or that some sportfull or over officious spirit puts himself
in the form and fashion of the deceased party? But what was the first and most
easy suggestion, is such a truth as all Ages and Nations without intermission
have embraced it. Nor yet will this be for a Demonstration and win undoubted
assent with austere and melancholic tempers. Nor is reason unback'd with
better principles mathematically satisfiable in matters of this kind. Nor am I
offended that it is not. For would it not be an overproportionated engine, to
the again endangering of Cleombrotus neck, or too forcibly driving men to
obedience if they had their immortality as demonstrable as; That the three
angles in a triangle are equal to two right angles. Besides it would prevent
that fitting trial of the soul, how she would be affected if there were
nothing to come; whence she would not be able so sensibly to discover to her
self her own Hypocrisy or sincerity. Lastly, that loving adherence and
affectionate cleaving to God by Faith and divine sense would be forestalled by
such undeniable evidence of Reason and Nature. Which though it would very much
gratify the natural man, yet it would not prove so profitable to us, as in
things appertaining to God. For seeing our most palpable evidence of the souls
immortality is from an inward sense, and this inward sense is kept alive the
best by devotion and purity, by freedom from worldly care and sorrow, and the
grosser pleasures of the body (otherwise her ethereall vehicle will drink in so
much of earthy and mortal dregs, that the sense of the soul will be changed,
and being outvoted as it were by the overswaying number of terrene particles,
which that ethereal nature has so plentifully imbibed and incorporated with,
she will become in a manner corporeal, (...), as Jamblichus speaks, and in the
extremity of this weakness and dotage will be easily drawn off to pronounce
her self such as the body is, dissolvable and mortal) therefore it is better
for us that we become doubtful of our immortal condition when we stray from
that virgin-purity and unspottednesse, that we may withdraw our feet from these
paths of death, then that Demonstration and Infallibility should permit us to
proceed so far, that our immortality would prove an heavy disadvantage. But
this is meant only to them that are lovers of God and their own souls. For
they that are at enmity with him desire no such instructions, but rather
embrace all means of laying asleep that disquieting truth; that they bear about
with them so precious a charge as an immortal Spirit.

To the Reader.
REader, since it is the fashion
To bestow some salutation,
I greet thee; give free leave to look
And nearly view my opened Book.
But see then that thine eyes be clear
If ought thou would discover there.
Expect from me no Teian strain,
No light wanton Lesbian vein:
Though well I wot the vulgar spright
Such Harmony does more strongly smite.
Silent Secesse, wast Solitude
Deep searching thoughts often renewed,
Stiff conflict against importunate vice,
That daily does the Soul entice
From her high throne of circuling light
To plunge her in infernal Night:
Collection of the mind from stroke
Of this worlds Magic, that does choke
Her with foul smothering mists and stench,
And in Lethaean waves her drench:
A daily Death, drad Agony,
Privation, dry Sterility;
Who is well entered in those ways
Fitt'st man to read my lofty lays.
But whom lust, wrath and fear control,
Scarce know their body from their soul.
If any such chance hear my verse,
Dark numerous Nothings I rehearse
To them; measure out an idle sound
In which no inward sense is found.
Thus sing I to cragg'd clifts, and hills,
To sighing winds to murmuring rills,
To wastefull woods, to empty groves.
Such things as my dear mind most loves.
But they heed not my heavenly passion,
Fast fixed on their own operation.
On chalky rocks hard by the Sea,
Safe guided by fair Cynthia,
I strike my silver-sounded lyre,
First struck my self by some strong fire;
And all the while her wavering ray,
Reflected from fluid glass does play
On the white banks. But all are deaf
Unto my Muse, that is most lief
To mine own self. So they nor blame
My pleasant notes, nor praise the same.
Nor do thou, Reader, rashly brand
My rhythmes before thou them understand.
H. M.

PSYCHOZOIA, OR The first part of the Song of the SOUL, Containing A
Christiano-Platonicall display of LIFE.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Tot vitae gradus cognoscimus, quot in nobismetipsis expedimus. Mars. Ficin.
CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

TO THE READER, Upon the first Canto of PSYCHOZOIA.
THis first Canto, as you may judge by the names therein, was intended for a
mere Platonicall description of Universal life, or life that is omnipresent,
though not alike omnipresent. As in Noah's Deluge, the water that overflowed the
earth was present in every part thereof, but every part of the water was not in
every part of the earth, or all in every part; so the low Spirit of the
Universe, though it go quite through the world, yet it is not totally in every
part of the world; Else we should hear our Antipodes, if they did but whisper:
Because our lower man is a part of the inferior Spirit of the Universe.

Ahad, Aeon, and Psyche are all omnipresent in the World, after the most
perfect way that humane reason can conceive of. For they are in the world all
totally and at once every where.

This is the famous Platonicall Triad: which though they that slight the
Christian Trinity do take for a figment; yet I think it is no contemptible
argument, that the Platonists, the best and divinest of Philosophers, and the
Christians, the best of all that do profess religion, do both concur that
there is a Trinity. In what they differ, I leave to be found out according to
the safe direction of that infallible Rule of Faith, the holy Word.

In the mean time I shall not be blamed by any thing but ignorance and
malignity, for being invited to sing of the second Unity of the Platonicall
Triad, in a Christian and Poetical scheme, that which the holy Scripture
witnesses of the second Person of the Christian Trinity. As that his patrimony
is the possession of the whole earth. For if it be not all one with Christ,
according to his Divinity; yet the Platonists placing him in the same order,
and giving him the like attributes, with the Person of the Son in
Christianity, it is nothing harsh for me to take occasion from hence to sing a
while the true Christian Autocalon, whose beauty shall adorn the whole Earth in
good time; if we believe the Prophets. For that has not as yet happened. For
Christ is not where ever his Name is: but as he is the Truth, so will he be
truly displayed upon the face of the whole Earth. For God does not fill the
World with his Glory by words and sounds, but by Spirit, and Life, and Reality.

Now this Eternal life I sing of, even in the midst of Platonisme: for I
cannot conceal from whence I am, viz. of Christ; but yet acknowledging, that
God has not left the Heathen, Plato especially, without witness of himself.
Whose doctrine might strike our adulterate Christian Professors with shame and
astonishment; their lives falling so exceeding short of the better Heathen. How
far short are they then of that admirable and transcendent high mystery of true
Christianisme? To which Plato is a very good subservient Minister; whose
Philosophy I singing here in a full heat; why may it not be free for me to
break out into an higher strain, and under it to touch upon some points of
Christianity; as well as all-approved Spencer, sings of Christ under the name
of Pan? Saint Paul also transfers those things that be spoken of Jupiter, to
God himself, Arat. (...).

(...). (...).

Those latter words he gives to the Christian God, whom he himself preached. I
will omit the usual course of the Spirit of God in Holy Writ, to take occasion
from things that have some resemblance with Divine things under them to speak
of the true things themselves.

And that I may not seem rather forcibly to break out here out of Platonisme
into Christianisme, then to be fairly and easily led into this digression by
the fit similitude of things, or at least very near correspondency of Names,
which should imply agreement of nature; I have thought good to exhibit to the
Readers eye the grounds of this my deviation founded in this Parallelisme of
Titles, belonging to the second Unity of each Triad.

Platonic. Christian. The Son of the Good. 1 The Son of God. (...). Plotin.
2 (...). (...) 3 (...). John 1. (...) 4 (...) (...) 5 (...). Proverbs. 8. Aeon
6 Eternal Life. (...). Plot. p. 547 7 (...). or (...)

For indeed the Greek (...) is but a Periphrasis of (...) which contains in
(...) the future present, and time past, as Critics observe.

I might add further correspondencies betwixt the Platonic Triad, and diverse
passages of Scripture according to the interpretations of no contemptible
Authors. As Gods making the World by his Word, which is very reasonable, He
being the wisdom of God or the Intellectual World; the Idea of the visible
and natural Creature. And that he is the Redeemer of the lapsed World, viz.
Mankind, while he reduces the right shape and image again into Man, wisdom
and righteousness.

Take in the whole Trinity, you shall find a strange concordance and harmony
betwixt the nature of each Hypostasis in either in their order. Atove or Ahad,
is simply the first Principle of all beings, the Father of all existences, and
the Universal Creation is but his Family; and therefore has he a full right
of imposing Laws on the whole Creature.

(...) (...). As Aristotle observes out of the Poet.

The natural Creature (as David also bears them witness) keeps this Law.
But Man breaks it: however the Law is still propounded to him, which when it
does take hold upon him, strikes him with dread and horror. Hence will he
extrinsecally shape and proportion his actions according to that outward Rule
through fear and force as it were: As if a man should impresse any character,
or stamp upon wax, paste, or any such like matter. And this I conceive is to be
under the Law that makes nothing perfect, and may be called (...). which is
signified also by Diana in the third Canto of Psychozoia. This God vouchsafes
sometime to second with the gift of his Son, who is (...), as Philo the
Platonist calls him. He once come sits not so much on the surface of the soul,
as dives and divides to the depth of the Spirit, and rooting himself there
works out from the very bottom all corruption and filth, cleanses us
thoroughly from our sins, and heals us of our infirmities, shapes us from an
inward vital Principle, (even as the Ratio seminalis figures out a tree) into
a new life and shape, even into the Image of God; that is, inward living
Righteousness and Truth, instructing us continually, and guiding us with his
eye: For he is properly Wisdom and Intellect. And this may be termed (...).
even of the Son of Righteousness. See Philo Judaeus, page 390.391.403, 407.
as also in his (...). page 76.

Of this (...) Trismegist calling him (...), writes thus, (...). The same
which John intimates: As many as receive him become the sons of God. And a
little after, he tells us that this Universal Intellect as it does (...)
cooperate with all things; so it does also (...), resist and oppose the souls
of men hurried on to pleasure and passion by this disadvantagious union with
the body. (...). Trismeg. (...).

But now being thus healed, purged, and illuminated by this Baptism of the
living Word or Intellect, which is Christ, we are no longer under the Law, nor
the terror thereof, but serve willingly, as from a vital Principle in us,
under Christ. Wherefore such ones as are thus eminently good and virtuous in
themselves, even according to the judgment of Aristotle, Politic. lib. 3. are
not under the Law. (...). Against such there is no Law, for they themselves are
a Law. The very same with the words of the Apostle. Gal. cap. 5. verse. 24. Romans
2. verse. 14.15. And a little before, (...) and therefore not to be under the
Law, no more then a Deity can be under their Law, (...). For it is as if they
should take upon them to rule Jupiter himself, and share his kingdom. See
Aristol. Politic. lib. 3.

The last accomplishment of all, and the highest perfection as the Apostle
witnesses, is Love, and this is ever referred to the Holy Ghost, whom Peter
Lombard contends to be Love, lib. 1. distinct, 17. And this agrees ad amussim
with Uranore or Psyche, whom Plotinus calls (...) the celestial Venus, out of
which is born the heavenly Cupid, the divine Love. The same is also Juno the
sister and wife of Jove; that is, of the Divine Intellect, as the same
Philosopher observes. And the Greek name of Juno does fi^ly agree to this
purpose, viz. (...), her name implying Love. And a further sign that Juno and
Venus are all one is that Astronomers have noted one and the same Star by
both their names. (...). Aristot. de Mundo, See Plotin. Ennead. lib. 6.

So then the proper effect of this third Hypostasis in either Trinity is Love,
which compleateth the Circle, and reduces us again to the first Principle of
all, the simple and absolute good which we enjoy by this single Act or Energie
of the Soul, viz. divine Love: and this is (...), to be baptized with the Holy
Ghost.

This trinall effect or spiritual influence on the Soul is experientially
true: But this threefold Hypostasis, viz. Ahad, Aeon, and Psyche, cannot be
known by experience, but is rather concluded by collection of reason. Nor
indeed is reason it self able sufficiently to confirm or confute it, since it
can conceive that one single Essence can perform many and various functions as
does the Soul, that being one, unfolds her self into varieties of operations.

Yet have the Platonists established their Triad upon no contemptible grounds
which I will not be so tedious as here to relate: but give the Reader leave to
peruse Plotinus at his leisure. And I must confess that that mystery seems to
me a thing of it self, standing on its own Basis, and to happen rather to agree
with some Principles of Christianisme, then to be drawn from the holy Scripture.

But the best is, that the happiness of man is not the Essence, but the
Influence of the Divinity; and to be baptized in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, of more consequence then to read and understand all the curious
and acute school-tracts of the Trinity. For this may be permitted to the Devil:
that is the privilege only of the good and pious man. Nor is it any wonder at
all.

For be it so that the contemplation of these things is very sublime and
subtle, yet well I wot they are nothing satisfactory to the soul. For the
exile Theories of the Infinity of God and Trinity, are but as it were the dry
measuring and numbering of the Deity, and profit as much to the soul devoid of
charity, as the Diametre of the Suns body, or the remembrance of that trinall
property in Lux Lumen and Calefaction can warm a man in a cold frosty night.

But if any man would be sufficiently initiated into these mysteries, he must
repair to the ever living Word of God, that subtle and searching fire, that
will sift all the ^anities of dreaming Philosophers, and burn up the vain
^maginations of false-Christians like stubble.

All this out of a tenderness of mind, being exceeding ^oth to give any man
offense by my writings, For though knowledge and theory be better then any
thing but honesty and true piety, yet it is not so good as that I should
willingly offend my neighbor by it.

Thus much by way of preparation to the first Canto of this Poem. I will now
leave thee to thine own discresion, and judgment.

Upon the second Canto.
THis second Canto, before we descend to particular lives, exhibits to our
apprehension, by as fit a similitude as I could light upon, the Universe, as
one simple uniform being from Ahad to Hyle, no particular straightened being as
yet being made; no earth or any other Orb as yet kned together. All
homogeneall, simple, single, pure, pervious, unknotted, uncoacted, nothing
existing but those eight universal orders.

There God has full command, builds and destroys what he lists.

That all our souls are free effluxes from his essence. What follows is so
plain that the Reader wants no direction,

Upon the third Canto.
THere is no knot at all in this last Canto, if men do not seek one. I plainly
and positively declare no opinion, but show the abuse of those opinions there
touched, crouding a number of enormities together; that easily shroud
themselves there, where all sinfulness surely may easily get harbor, if we be
not yet well aware of the Devil, that makes true opinions oftentimes serve for
mischief.

Nothing else can be now expected for the easy and profitable understanding of
this Poem, but the interpretation of the names that frequently occur in it.
Which I will interpret at the end of these Books; (as also the hard terms of
the other Poems) for their sakes whose real worth and understanding is many
times equal with the best, only they have not fed of husks and shells, as
others have been forced to do, the superficiary knowledge of tongues. But it
would be well, that neither the Linguist would contemn the illiterate for his
ignorance, nor the ignorant condemn the learned for his knowledge, For it is
not unlearnednesse that God is so pleased withal, or silliness and emptiness
of mind, but singleness and simplicity of heart.

The Argument of PSYCHOZOIA, Or The life of the Soul.
CANT. I.
This Song great Psyches parentage
With her fourefold array,
And that mysterious marriage,
To the Reader does display.
1
NO Ladies loves, nor Knights brave martial deeds,
Ywrapt in rolls of hid Antiquity;
But the inward Fountain, and the unseen Seeds,
From whence are these and what so under eye
Does fall, or is record in memory,
Psyche, I Will sing Pfyche^ from thee they sprung.
O life of Time, and all Alterity!
The life of lives instill his n^ctar strong,
My soul to inebriate, while I sing Psyches song.
2
But thou, who e're thou art that hear'st this strain,
Or read'st these rythmes which from Platonic rage
Do powerfully flow forth, dare not to blame
My forward pen of foul miscarriage;
If all that is spoke, with thoughts more sadly sage
Does not agree. My task is not to try
What Is simply true. I only do engage
My self to make a fit discovery,
Give some fair glimpse of Plato's hid Philosophy.
3
What man alive that has but common wit
(When skillful limmer 'suing his intent
Shall fairly well pourtray and wisely hit
The true proportion of each lineament,
And in right colors to the life depaint
The fulvid Eagle with her sun-bright eye)
Would wexen wroth with inward choler brent
Cause it is no Buzard or discolored Pie?
Why man? I meant it not: Cease thy fond obloquie.
4
So if what is consonant to Plato's school
(Which well agrees with learned Pythagore,
Egyptian Trismegist, and the antique roll
Of Chaldee wisdom, all which time has tore
But Plato and deep Plotin do restore)
Which is my scope, I sing out lustily:
If any twitten me for such strange lore,
And me all blameless brand with infamy,
God purge that man from fault of foul malignity.
5
The Ancient of days, Sire of Eternity,
Sprung of himself, or rather no wise sprung:
Father of lights and everlasting glee,
Who puts to silence every daring tongue
And flies man's sight, shrowding himself among
His glorious rays, good Atove, from whom came
All good that Penia spies in thickest throng
Of most desireables, all is from that same,
That same, that Atove hight, and sweet Abinoam.
6
Now can I not with flowring fantasy
To drowsy sensual souls such words impart,
Which in their sprights, may cause sweet agony,
And thrill their bodies through with pleasing dart,
And spread in flowing fire their close-twist heart,
All chearing fire, that nothing wont to burn
That Atove lists to save; and his good Art
Is all to save that will to him return,
That all to him return, naught of him is forlorn:
7
For what can be forlorn, when his good hands
Hold all in lise, that of life do partake?
O surest confidence of Loves strong bands!
Love loves all that is made; Love all did make:
And when false life does fail, it is for the sake
Of better being. Riving tortures spite,
That life disjoynts, and makes the heart to quake,
To good the soul does nearer reunite:
So ancient Atove hence all-joyning Ahad hight.
8
This Ahad of himself the Aeon fair
Begot, the brightness of his father's grace:
No living wight in heaven to him compare,
Ne work his goodly honor such disgrace,
Nor lose thy time in telling of his race.
His beauty and his race no man can tell:
His glory darkeneth the Suns bright face;
Or if ought else the Suns bright face excel,
His splend our would it dim, and all that glory quell.
9
This is that ancient Eidos omniform,
Fount of all beauty, root of flowring glee.
Hyle old hag, foul, filthy, and deform,
Cannot come near. Joyful Eternity
Admits no change or mutability,
No shade of change, no imminution,
No nor increase; for what increase can be
To that that is all? and where Hyl' has no throne
Can ought decay? such is the state of great Aeon.
10
Far otherwise it fares in this same Land
Of Truth and Beauty, then in mortal brood
Of earthly lovers, who impassioned
With outward forms (not rightly understood
From whence proceeds this amorous sweet flood,
And choice delight which in their spright they feel:
Can outward Idol yield so heavenly mood?)
This inward beauty unto that they deal
That little beauteous is: Thus into the dirt they reel.
11
Like to Narcissus, on the grassie shore,
Viewing his outward face in watery glass;
Still as he looks, his looks add evermore
New fire, new light, new love, new comely grace
To's inward form; and it displayes apace
It Is hidden rays, and so new luster sends
To that vain shadow: but the boy, alas!
Unhappy boy! the inward naught attends,
But in foul filthy mire, love, life, and form he blends.
12
And this I wot is the Souls excellence,
That from the hint of every painted glance
Of shadows sensible, she does from hence
Her radiant life, and lovely hue advance
To higher pitch, and by good governance
May wained be from love of fading light
In outward forms, having true Cognizance,
That those vain shows are not the beauty bright
That takes men so, but what they cause in humane spright.
13
Far otherwise it fares in Aeons Realm.
O happy close of sight and that there is seen!
That there is seen is good Abinoam,
Who Atove hight: And Atuvus I ween,
Cannot be less then he that sets his eyes
On that abyss of good eternally,
The youthful Aeon, whose fair face does shine
While he his Fathers glory does espy,
Which waters his fine flowring forms with light from high.
14
Not that his forms increase, or that they die:
For Aeon-land, which men Idea call,
Is naught but life in full serenity,
Vigor of life is root, stock, branch, and all;
Naught here increases, naught here has it is fall:
For Aeons Kingdoms always perfect stand,
Birds, Beasts, Fields, Springs, Plants, Men and Mineral
To perfectness naught added be there can.
This Aeon also hight Autocalon and On.
15
This is the eldest son of Hattove hoar:
But the eldest daughter of this aged Sire,
That virgin wife of Aeon, Vranore.
She Vranora hight, because the fire
Of Aethers essence she with bright attire,
And inward unseen golden hew does dight,
And life of sense and fancy does inspire.
Aether's the vehicle of touch, smell, sight,
Of taste, and hearing too, and of the plastic might.
16
Whilome me chanced (O my happy chance!)
To spy this spotless pure fair Uranore:
I spied her, but, alas! with slighter glance
Beheld her on the Atuvaean shore.
She stood the last; for her did stand before
The lovely Autocal. But first of all
Was mighty Atove, deeply covered over
With unseen light. No might imaginall
May reach that vast profunditie.
17
Whiles thus they stood by that good lucid spring
Of living bliss, her fourefold ornament
I there observed; and that is the only thing
That I dare write with due advisement.
Foolhardy man that purposes intent
Far 'bove his reach, like the proud Phaeton,
Who clomb the fiery car and was ybrent
Through his fond juvenile ambition;
The unruly slundring steeds wrought his confusion.
18
Now rise, my Muse, and straight thy self address
To write the pourtraiture of the outward vest,
And to display it is perfect comeliness:
Begin and leave where it shall please thee best.
Nor do assay to tell all, let the rest
Be understood. For no man can unfold
The many plicatures so closely pressed
At lowest verge. Things before our feet yrold,
If they be hard, how shall the highest things be told?
19
Its unseen figure I must here omit:
For thing so mighty vast no mortal eye
Can compass; and if eye not compass it,
The extreme parts, at least some, hidden lie:
And if that they lie hid, who can descry
The truth of figure? Bodies figured
Receive their shape from each extremity.
But if conjecture may stand in truths stead
The garment round or circular I do aread.
20
As for it is color and material,
It silken seems, and of an azure hiew,
If hiew it have or color natural:
For much it may amaz^ man's erring view.
Those parts the eye is near give not the show
Of any color; but the rural Swains,
O easy ignorance! would swear it is blew,
Such as their Phyllis would, when as she plains
Their Sunday cloths, and the washed white with azure stains.
21
But this fair azure colour's foully stained
By base comparison with that blew dust.
But you of Uranore are not disdained,
O silly Shepherds, if you hit not just
In your conceits, so that you are put in trust
You duly do attend. If simple deed
Accord with simple life, then needs you must
From the great Uranore of favor speed,
Though you cannot unfold the nature of her weed.
22
For who can it unfold, and read aright
The diverse colors, and the tinctures fair,
Which in this various vesture changes write
Of light, of duskishnesse, of thick, of rare
Consistences: ever new changes mar
Former impressions. The dubious shine
Of changeable silk stuffs, this passes far.
Far more variety, and far more fine,
Then interwoven silk with gold or silver twine.
23
Lo what delightful immutations
On her soft flowing vest we contemplate!
The glory of the Court, their fashions,
And brave agguize with all their Princely state,
Which Poets or Historians relate
This far excels, farther than pompous Court
Excels the homeliest garb of Country rate:
Unspeakable it is how great a sort
Of glorious glistring shows in it themselves disport.
24
There you may see the eyelids of the Morn
With lofty silver arch displaid ^th' East,
And in the midst the burnisht gold does burn;
A lucid purple mantle in the West
Does close the day, and hap the Sun at rest.
Nor does these lamping she^es the azur quell,
Or other colors: where't beseems best
There they themselves dispose; so seemly well
Does light and changing tinctures deck this goodly veil.
25
But amongst these glaring glittering rows of light,
And flaming Circles, and the grisell gray,
And crudled clouds, with filver tippings dight.
And many other deckings wondrous gay,
As Iris and the Halo, there does play
Still-pac'd Euphrona in her Conique tire;
By stealth her steeple-cap she does assay
To whelm on the earth: So School-boyes do aspire
With coppell'd hat to quelme the Be all armed with ire.
26
I saw pourtrai'd on this sky colored silk
Two lovely Lads, with wings fully dispread
Of silver plumes, their skins more white then milk,
Their lilly limbs I greatly admired,
Their cheary looks and lusty lively bed:
Athwart their snowy breast, a scarf they wore
Of azur hew; fairly bespangeled
Was the gold fringe. Like Doves so forth they fore:
Some message they, I ween, to Monocardia bore.
27
O gentle Sprights, whose careful oversight
Tends humane actions, sons of Solyma.
O heavenly Salems sons! you fend the right,
You violence resist, and fraud bewray;
The ill with ill, the good with good you pay.
And if you list to mortal eye appear,
You thick that veil, and so your selves array
With visibility: O mystery rare!
That thickened veil should maken things appear more bare!
28
But well I wot that nothing's bare to sense,
For sense cannot arrive to the inwardnesse
Of things, nor penetrate the crusty fence
Of constipated matter close compresse:
Or that were laid aside, yet nathelesse
Things thus unbar'd, to sense be more obscure.
Therefore those sons of Love when they them dress
For sight, they thick the vest of Vranure,
And from their center overflow't with beauty pure.
29
Thus many goodly things have been unfold
Of Uranures fair changing ornament:
Yet far more hidden lie as yet untold;
For all to tell was never my intent,
Neither all could I tell if I so meant.
For her large robe all the wide world does fill:
It Is various largeness no man can depaint:
My pen's from thence, my Book my Ink; but skill
From Uranures own self down gently does distill.
30
But yet one thing I saw that I Will not pass,
At the low hem of this large garment gay
Number of goodly balls there pendent was,
Some like the Sun, some like the Moons white ray,
Some like discolored Tellus, when the day
Discries her painted coat: In wondrous wise
These colored ones do circle, float and play,
As those far shining Rounds in open skies:
Their course the best Astronomer might well aggrize.
31
These danced about: but some I did epsy
That steady stood, amongst which there shined one,
More fairly shines not the worlds great eye,
Which from his plenteous store unto the Moon
Kindly imparteth light, that when he is gone,
She might supply his place, and well abate
The irksome ugliness of that foul drone,
Sad heavy Night, yet quick to work the fate
Of murd'red travelers, when they themselves belate.
32
O gladsome life of sense that does adore
The outward shape of the worlds curious frame!
The proudest Prince that ever Scepter bore
(Though he perhaps observes not the same)
The lowest hem does kiss of that we name
The stole of Vranore, these parts that won
To drag in dirty earth (nor do him blame)
These does he kiss: why should he b^ fordone?
How sweet it is to live! what joy to see the S^nne!
33
But O what joy it is to see the Sun
Of Aeons kingdoms, and the eternal Day
That never night o'retakes! the radiant throne
Of the great Queen, the Queen Vranura!
Then she began first the Scepter for to sway,
And rule with wisdom, when Atuvus old,
Hence Ahad we him call, did tie them tway
With nuptial charm and wedding-ring of gold:
Then sagely he the case began to them thus unfold:
34
My first born Son, and thou my D^ughter dear,
Look on your aged Sire, the deep abyss,
In which and out of which you first appear;
I Ahad hight, and Ahad oneness is:
Therefore be one (his words do never miss)
They one became. I Hattove also hight,
Said he; and Hattove goodness is and bliss:
Therefore in goodness be ye fast unite:
Let Unity, Love, Good, be measures of your might.
35
They straight accord: ^hen he put on the ring,
The ring of lasting gold on Uranure;
Then began the youthful lads aloud to sing,
Hymen! O Hymen! O the Virgin pure!
O holy Bride! long may this joy endure.
After the song Atove his speech again
Renews. My Son, I unto thee assure
All judgment and authority sovereign
He spoke as unto one: for one became those twain.
36
To thee each knee in Heaven and Earth shall bow,
And whatsoever wons in darker cell
Under the Earth: If thou thy awful brow
Contract, those of the Ethiopian hell
Shall lout, and do thee homage; they that dwell
In Tharsis, Tritons fry, the Ocean-god,
Iim and Ziim, all the Satyrs fell
That in ^mpse Islands maken their abode:
All those and all things else shall tremble at thy rod.
37
Thy rod thou shall extend from sea to sea,
And thy Dominion to the worlds end;
All Kings shall vow thee faithful fealty,
Then peace and truth on all the earth I Will send:
Nor moody Mars my metalls may mispend,
Of Warlike instruments they plow-shares shall
And pruning hooks efform. All things shall wend
For the best, and thou the head shall be over all.
Have I not sworn thee King? true King Catholicall!
38
Thus far he spoke, and then again respired;
And all this time he held their hand in one;
Then they with cheerful look one thing desired,
That he nould break this happy union:
I happy union break? quoth he anon:
I Ahad? Father of Community?
Then they: That you nould let your hand be gone
Off from our hands: He grants with smiling glee:
So each stroke struck on earth is struck from these same three.
39
These three are Ahad, Aeon, Uranore:
Ahad these three in one does counite.
What so is done on earth the self same power
(Which is exert upon each mortal wight)
Is jointly from all these But she that hight
Fair Uranore, men also Psy^he call.
Great Psyche men and A^g^ls dear delight,
Invested in her stole aethereall,
Which though so high it be, do^^n to the earth does fall.
40
The external form of this large flowing stole,
My Muse so as she might above displaid:
But the inward triple golden film to unroll,
Ah! he me teach that triple film has made,
And brought out light out of the deadly shade
Of darkest Chaos, and things that are seen
Made to appear out of the gloomy glade
Of unseen beings: Them we call unseen,
Not that they are so indeed, but so to mortal eyes.
41
The first of these fair films, we Physis name.
Nothing in Nature did you ever spy,
But there is pourtraid: all beasts both wild and tame,
Each bird is here, and every buzzing fly;
All forrest-work is in this tapestry:
The Oak, the Holm, the Ash, the Aspine tree,
The lonesome Buzzard, the Eagle, and the Py,
The Buck, the Bear, the Boar, the Hare, the Be,
The Brize, the black-arm'd Clock, the Gnat, the Butterfly.
42
Snakes, Adders Hydraes, Dragons, Toads, and Frogs,
The own-litter-loving Ape, the Worm, and Snail,
The undaunted Lion, Horses, Men, and Dogs,
Their number's infinite, naught coth 't avail
To reckon all, the time would surely fail:
And all besprinkled with centrall spots,
Dark little spots, is this hid inward veil:
But when the hot bright dart does pierce these knots,
Each one dispreads it self according to their lots.
43
When they dispread themselves, then gins to swell
Dame Psyches outward vest, as the inward wind
Softly gives forth, full softly does it well
Forth from the centrall spot; yet as confined
To certain shape, according to the mind
Of the first centro, not perfect circ'lar-wise,
It shoots it self: for so the outward kind
Of things were lost, and Natures good device
Of different forms would hidden^ in one agguize.
44
But it according to the impressed Art
(That Arts impression's from; Idea-Lond)
So drives it forth before it every part
According to true Symmetry: the bond
And just precinct (unless it be withstond)
It always keeps. But that old Hag that hight
Foul Hyle mistress of the miry strond,
Often her withstands, and takes great delight
To hinder Physis work, and work her all despite.
45
The self same envious witch with poisoned dew,
From her foul eben-box, all tinctures stains,
Which fairly good be in hid Physis hew:
That film all tinctures fair in it contains;
But she their goodly glory much restrains.
She colors dims; clogs tastes; and damps the sounds
Of sweetest music; touch to scorching pains
She turns, or baser tumults; smells confounds.
O horrid womb of hell, that with such ill abounds.
46
From this first film all bulk in quantity
Does bougen out, and figure thence obtain.
Here eke begins the life of Sympathy,
And hidden virtue of magnetic vein,
Where unknown spirits beat, and Psyche's trane
Drag as they list, upon pursuit or flight;
One part into another they constrain
Through strong desire, and then again remit.
Each outward form's a shrine of its magnetic spright.
47
The ripened child breaks through his mothers womb,
The raving billows closely undermine
The ragged rocks, and then the seas intomb
Their heavy corse, and they their heads recline
On working sand: The Sun and Moon combine;
Then they are at ods in site Diametrall:
The former age to the present place resign:
And what is all this but wafts of winds centrall
That ruffle, touze, and toss Dame Psyche's wrimpled veil?
48
So Physis. Next is Arachnea thin,
The thinner of these two, but thinn'st of all
Is Semele, that is next to Psyches skin.
The second we thin Arachnea call,
Because the spider, that in Princes hall
Takes hold with her industrious hand, and weaves
Her dainty tender web; far short does fall
Of this soft yiedling vest; this vest deceives
The spiders curious touch, and of her praise bereaves.
49
In midst of this fine web does Haphe sit:
She is the center from whence all the light
Dispreads, and goodly glorious Forms do flit
Hither and thither. Of this mirour bright
Haphe's the life and representing might
Haphe's the mother of sense-sympathy;
Hence are both Hearing, Smelling, Taste, and Sight:
Haphe's the root of felt vitality;
But Haphe's mother hight all-spread Community.
50
In this clear shining mirour Psyche sees
All that falls under sense, what ere is done
Upon the Earth; the Deserts shaken trees,
The mournful winds, the solitary won
Of dreaded beasts, the Lybian Lions moan,
When their hot entralls scorch with hunger keen,
And they to God for meat do deeply groan;
He hears their cry, he sees of them unseen;
His eyelids compass all that in the wide world been.
51
He sees the weary traveller sit down
In the waste field oft-times with careful cheer:
His chafed feet, and the long way to town,
His burning thirst, faintness, and Panick fear,
Because he sees not him that stands so near,
Fetch from his soul deep sighs with countenance sad,
But he looks on to whom naught does dispear:
O happy man that full persuasion had
Of this! if right at home, naught of him were ydrad.
52
A many sparrows for small price be sold,
Yet none of them his wings on earth does close
Lighting full soft, but that eye does behold,
Their jets, their jumps, that mirour does disclose.
Thrice happy he that puts his repose
In his all-present God. That Africa rock
But touched with heedlesse hand, Auster arose
With blustering rage, that with his irefull shock
And moody might he made the worlds frame nigh to rock.
53
And shall not He, when his Anointed be
Ill handled, rise, and in his wrathful stour
Disperse, and quell the haughty enemy,
Make their brisk sprights to lout and lowly lowr?
Or else confound them quite with mighty power?
Touch not my Kings, my Prophets let alone,
Harm not my Priests; or you shall ill endure
Your works sad payment and that deadly lone;
Keep off your hand from that high holy Rock of stone.
54
Do not I see? I slumber not nor sleep.
Do not I hear? each noise by shady night
My mirour represents: when mortals steep
Their languid limbs in Morpheus dull delight,
I hear such sounds as Adams brood would fright.
The doleful echoes from the hollow hill
Mock howling wolves: the woods with black bedight
Answer rough Pan, his pipe and eke his skill,
And all the Satyr-routs rude whoops and shoutings shrill.
55
The night's no night to me: What? shall the Owl
And nimble Cat their courses truly steer,
And guide their feet and wings to every hole
So right, this on the ground, that in the air?
And shall not I by night see full as clear?
All sense does in proportion consist,
Arachnea does all proportions bear;
All sensible proportions that fine twist
Contains: all life of sense is in great Haphes lift.
56
Sense and consent, and all abhorrency,
Be variously divided in each one
Partic'lar creature: But antipathy
Cannot be there where fit proportion
Strikes in with all things in harmonious tone.
Thus Haphe feels naught to her self contrair:
In her there is tuned a just Diapason
For every outward stroke: withouten jarre
Thus each thing does she feel, and each thing easly bear.
57
But Haphe and Arachne I Will dismiss,
And that fourth vest, rich Semele display:
The largest of all four and loosest is
This floting flouring changeable array.
How fairly does it shine, and nimbly play,
Whiles gentle winds of Paradise do blow,
And that bright Sun of the eternal day
Upon it glorious light and forms does strew,
And Abad it with love and joy does overflow
58
This all-spread Semele does Bacchus bear,
Impregn'd of Jove or On. He is the wine
That sad down-drooping senses wont to rear,
And chearlesse hearts to comfort in ill tine.
He 'flames chaste Poets brains with fire divine;
The stronger spright the weaker spright does sway;
No wonder then each fancy does incline
To their great mother Semel, and obey
The vigourous impresse of her enforcing ray.
59
She is the mother of each Semele:
The daughters be divided one from one;
But she grasps all. How can she then but see
Each Semels shadows by this union?
She sees and swayes imagination
As she thinks good; and if that she think good
She lets it play by it self, yet looks on,
While she keeps in that large strong-beating flood
That makes the Poet write, and rave as he were wood.
60
Prophets and Poets have their life from hence;
Like fire into their marrow it searches deep,
This flaming fiery flake does choke all sense,
And binds the lower man with brazen sleep:
Corruption through all his bones does creep,
And raging raptures do his soul outsnatch:
Round-turning whirlwinds on Olympus steep
Do cast the soul, that erst they out did catch:
Then stiller whispering winds dark visions unlatch.
61
But not too far, thou bold Platonic Swain:
Strive not at once all myst'ries to discover
Of that strange School: More and more hard remain
As yet untold. But let us now recover
Strength to our selves by rest in duly hour.
Great Psyches Parentage, Marriage, and Weeds
We having song according to our power,
That we may rise more fresh for morning deeds,
Let Us here take Inn and rest our weary sweating steeds.
The Argument of PSYCHOZOIA, Or, The life of the Soul.
CANT. II.
Here Is taught how into Psychanie
Souls from their centrall sourse
Go forth, Here Beirons ingeny
Old Mnemon does discourse.
1
I Sang great Psyche in my former song,
Old Atoves daughter, sister unto On,
Mother of all that nimble Atom-throng
Of winged Lives, and Generation.
When Psyche wedded to Autocalon.
They both to Ahad forthwith straight were wed:
For as you heard, all these became but one,
And so conjoined they lie all in one bed,
And with that fourfold vest they be all overspred.
2
Here lies the inmost Center of Creation,
From whence all inward forms and life proceed:
Here Is that acreall stole, that to each fashion
Of Sensibles is matter for their weed.
This is the ground where God does sow his seed,
And whilst he sows with whispering charms does bid
This flourish long, and that to make more speed,
And all in order by his Word does rid:
So in their fatal round they 'pear and then are hid.
3
Beginning, End, Form and Continuance
The impression of his Word to them does deal,
Occurrences he sees, and minds chance:
But chance has bounds. The Sea cannot over swell
His just precincts. Or rocky shores repel
His foming force; or else his inward life
And Centrall rains do fairly him compel
Within himself, and gently 'pease the strife,
Or makes him gnaw the bit with rore and rage full rife.
4
So fluid chance is set its certain bound,
Although with circling winds it be yrost;
And so the pilots skill does quite confound
With unexpected storms, and men have lost
Their time, their labor, and their precious cost.
Yet there is a Neptune Sovereign of this Sea,
Which those that in themselves put not their trust
To rude mischance did never yet betray:
It Is He, whom both the winds and stormy Seas obey.
5
Now since my wandering Bark so far is gone,
And flitten forth upon the Ocean main,
I thee beseech that just dominion
Have of the Sea, and art true Sovereign
Of working phancie when it floats amain
With full impregned billows and strong rage
Enforces way upon the boiling plain,
That thou would steer my ship with wisdom sage,
That I with happy course may run my watery stage.
6
My mind is moved dark Parables to sing
Of Psyches progeny that from her came,
When she was married to that great King,
Great Aeon, who just title well may claim
To every soul, and brand them with his name.
Its He that made us, and not our own might:
But who, alas! this work can well proclaim?
We silly sheep cannot bleat out aright
The manner how: but that that gives light is light.
7
Then let us borrow from the glorious Sun
A little light to illustrate this act,
Such as he is in his solstitiall Noon,
When in the Welkin there is no cloudy tract
For to make gross his beams, and light refract.
Then sweep by all those Globes that by reflection
His long small shafts do rudely beaten back,
And let his rays have undenied projection,
And so we will pursue this mysteries retection.
8
Now think upon that gay discolored Bow:
That part that is remotest from the light
Does duskish hew to the beholder show;
The nearer parts have color far more bright,
And next the brightest is the subtle light;
Then colors seem but a distinct degree
Of light now failing; such let be the sight
Of his far spreaden beams that shines on high:
Let vast discolored Orbs close his extremity,
9
The last Extreme, the farthest off from light,
That Is Natures deadly shadow, Hyle's cell.
O horrid cave, and womb of dreaded night?
Mother of witchcraft, and the cursed spell,
Which nothing can avail against Israel.
No Magic can him hurt; his portion
Is not divided Nature; he does dwell
In light, in holy love, in union;
Not fast to this or that, But free communion.
10
Dependence of this All hence does appear,
And several degrees subordinate.
But phancie's so unfit such things to clear,
That often it makes them seem more intricate:
And now Gods work it does disterminate
Too far from his own reach: But he withal
More inward is, and far more intimate
Then things are with themselves. His Ideall,
And Centrall presence is in every Atom-ball
11
Therefore those different hews through all extend
So far as light: Let light be every where:
And every where with light distinctly blend
Those different colors which I named whilere
The Extremities of that far shining sphere.
And that far shining sphere, which Center was
Of all those different colors, and bright cheer,
You must unfasten; so o'respred it has,
Or rather deeply filled with Centrall sand each place.
12
Now since that this withouten penetrance
Of bodies may be done: we clearly see
(As well as that pendent subordinance)
The nearly couching of each Realtie,
And the Creatours close propinquitie
To every creature. This be understood
Of differentiall profunditie.
But for the overspreading Latitude;
Why may't not equally be stretched with the Ocean flood?
13
There Proteus wonnes and fleet Idothea,
Where the lowest step of that profunditie
Is pight; Next that is Psyche's out-array:
It Tasis hight: Physis is next degree:
There Psyche's feet impart a smaller fee
Of gentle warmth. Physis is the great womb
From whence all things in the University
Yclad in diverse forms do gaily bloom,
And after fade away, as Psyche gives the doom.
14
Next Physis is the tender Arachnee.
There in her subtle loom does Haphe sit:
But the last vest is changing Semele:
And next is Psyches self. These garments fit
Her sacred limbs full well, and are so knit
One part to other, that the strongest sway
Of sharpest axe, them no'te asunder smite.
The seventh is Aeon with Eternal ray:
The eighth Atove, steady Cube, all propping Adonai.
15
Upon this universal Ogdoas
Is founded every particularment:
From this same universal Diapase
Each harmony is framed and sweet concent.
But that I swerve not far from my intent,
This Ogdoas let 't be an Unity
One mighty quickened Orb of vast extent,
Thoroughly possessed of life's community,
And so those vests be seats of Gods vitality.
16
Now deem this universal Round alone,
And rays no rays but a first all-spred light,
And centrick all like one pellucid Sun;
A Sun that is free, not bound by Natures might,
That where he lists exerts his rays outright,
Both when he lists, and what, and eke how long,
And then retracts so as he thinks meet.
These rays be that particular creature-throng:
Their number none can tell, but that all-making tongue.
17
Now blundring Naturalist behold the spring
Of thy deep-searching soul, that fain would know
Whether a mortal or immortal thing
It be, and whence at first it 'gan to flow;
And that which chiefest is where it must go.
Some fixed necessity thou fain would find:
But no necessity, where there is no law,
But the good pleasure of an untied mind:
Therefore thy God seek out, and leave Nature behind.
18
He kills, He makes alive; the keys of Hell
And Death he has. He can keep souls to woe
When cruel hands of Fate them hence expel:
Or He in Lethe's lake can drench them so,
That they no act of life or sense can show.
They march out at His word, and they retreat;
March out with joy, retreat with footing flow
In gloomy shade, benumbed with pallid sweat,
And with their feeble wings their fainting breasts they beat.
19
But souls that of his own good life partake
He loves as his own self; dear as His eye
They are to Him: He Will never them forsake:
When they shall dye, then God himself shall die.
They live, they live in blessed Eternity.
The wicked are not so; but like the dirt,
Trampled by man and beast, in grave they lie.
Filth and corruption is their rufull sort:
Themselves with death and worms in darkness they disport.
20
Their rotten relics lurk close under ground:
With living w^ight no sense or sympathy
They have at all; nor hollow thundering sound
Of roaring winds, that cold mortality
Can ^ake, ywrapt in sad Fatality.
To horses hoof that beats his grassie door
He answers not: The Moon in silency,
Does pass by night, and all bedew him over
With her cold humid rays; but he feels not Heavens power.
21
O doleful lot of disobedience!
If God should souls thus drench in Lethe lake
But O unspeakable torture of sense,
When sinful souls do life and sense partake,
That those damned Spirits may them anvils make
Of their fell cruelty, that lay such blows
That very ruth does make my heart to quake
When I consider of the dre^y woes,
And tearing torment that each soul then undergoes.
22
Hence the souls nature we may plainly see:
A beam it is of the Intellectual Sun.
A ray indeed of that Aeternity;
But such a ray as when it first out shone,
From a free light its shining date begun.
And that same light when 't list can call it in;
Yet that free light has given a free won
To this dependent ray: Hence comethsin;
From sin dred Death and Hell these wages does it win.
23
Each life a several ray is from that Sphere
That Sphere does every life in it contain.
Arachne, Semel, and the rest do bear
Their proper virtue, and with one joint strain
And powerful sway they make impression plain,
And all their rays be joined into one
By Ahad: so this womb withouten pain
Does flocks of souls send out that have their won
Where they list most to graze; as I shall tell anon.
24
The country where they live Psychania hight,
Great Psychany, that has so mighty bounds,
If bounds it have at all. So infinite
It is of bigness, that it me confounds
To think to what a vastness it amounds.
The Sun Saturnus, Saturn the Earth exceeds
The Earth the Moon; but all those fixed Rounds;
But Psychany those fixed Rounds exceeds,
As far as those fixed Rounds excel small mustard-seeds.
25
Two mighty Kingdoms has this Psychany,
The one self-feeling Autaesthesia;
The other hight god-like Theoprepy,
Autaesthesy's divided into tway:
One province cleped is great Adamah
Which also hight Beirah of brutish fashion;
The other Providence is Dizoia;
There you may see much mungrill transformation,
Such monstrous shapes proceed from Niles foul inundation.
26
Great Michael rules Theoprepia,
A mighty Prince. King of Autaesthesy
Is that great Giant who bears mighty sway,
Father of Discord, Falsehood, Tyranny,
His name is Demon, not from Sciency,
Although he boasts much of skillful pride;
But he is the fount of foul duality,
That wicked witch Duessa is his bride:
From his dividing force this name to him betide.
27
Or for that he himself is quite divided
Down to the belly; there is some unity:
But head, and tongue, and heart be quite discided;
Two heads, two tongues, and eke two hearts there be.
This head does mischief plot, that head does see
Wrong fairly to o'reguild. One tongue does pray,
The other curse. The hearts do never agree
But felly one another do upbray:
An ugly cloven foot this monster does upstay.
28
Two sons great Doemon and Duessa has:
Autophilus the one ycleeped is;
In Dizoie he works wondrous scath;
He is the cause what so there goes amiss,
In Psyches stronger plumed progenies.
But Philosomatus rules Beirah.
This proud puffed Giant whilom did arise,
Born of the slime of Autaesthesia,
And bred up these two sons yborn of Duessa.
29
Duessa first invented magic lore,
And great skill has to join and disunite;
This herb makes love, that herb makes hatred sore:
And much she can against an Edomite;
But naught she can against an Israelite,
Whose heart's upright and does himself forsake.
For he that is one with God no magic might
Can draw or here or there through blind mistake.
Magic can only quell natures Doemoniake.
30
But that I may in time my self betake
To straighter course, few things I will relate,
Of which old Mnemon mention once did make.
A jolly Swain he was in youthful state,
When he men's natures began to contemplate,
And kingdoms view: But he was aged then
When I him saw; his years bore a great date;
He numbered had full ten times ten times ten:
There Is no Pythagorist but knows well what I mean.
31
Old Mnemons head and beard was hoary white,
But yet a cheerful countenance he had:
His vigorous eyes did shine like stars bright,
And in good decent freez he was yclad,
As blithe and buxom as was any lad
Of one and twenty clothed in forest green;
Both blithe he was, and eke of counsel sad:
Like winter-morn bedight with snow and rine
And sunny rays, so did his goodly Eldship shine.
32
Of many famous towns in Beirah,
And many famous Laws and uncouth Rites
He spoke: but vain it is for to assay
To reckon up such numbers infinite.
And much he spoke where I had no insight,
But well I wot that some there present had,
For words to speak to incapable wight
Of foolishness proceeds or frenzy mad.
So always some, I wis, could trace his speeches pad.
33
But that which I do now remember best,
Is that which he of Psittacusa land
Did speak. This Psittacuse is not the least,
Or the most obscure Country that is found
In wastefull Beiron: it is renowned
For famous Clerks yclad in greenish cloak,
Like Turkish Priests. if Amoritish ground
We call 't, no cause that title to revoke.
But of this Land to this effect old Mnemon spoke.
34
I traveled in Psittacusa Land:
The Inhabitants the lesser Adamah
Do call it; but then Adam I have found
It ancienter, if so I safely may
Unfold the antiquity. They by one day
Are elder then old Adam, and by one
At least are younger then Arcadia.
OF the sixth day Adam had's creation;
Those on the fifth, the Arcades before the Moon.
35
In this same Land as I was on the rode,
A nimble traveller me overtook:
Fairly together on the way we yode.
Tho I began closely on his person look;
And eye his garb: He straight occasion took
To entertain discourse, though none I raught,
But unprovoked he first me undertook:
So soon as he began talk, then straight I laughed:
The Sage himself represt, but thought me nigh distraught.
36
His concave nose, great head, and grave aspect,
Affected tone, words without inward sense,
My inly tickled spright made me detect
By outward laughter; but by best pretense
I purged my self, and gave due reverence.
Then he began gravely treat of codicils,
And of Book-readings passing excellence,
And tried his wit in praising gooses quills:
O happy age! quoth he, the world Minerva fills.
37
I gave the talk to him, which pleased him well:
For then he seemed a learned clerk to been,
When none contrary'd his uncontrolled spell,
But I, alas! though unto him unseen,
Did flow with tears, as if that onyons keen
Had pierced mine eyes. Strange virtue of fond joy:
They ought to weep that be in heavy teen.
But naught my lightsome heart did then annoy:
So light it lay, it moved at every windy toy.
38
As we yode softly on, a Yongster gent
With bever cock't, and arm set on one side
(His youthful fire quickly our pace out-went)
Full fiercely pricked on in madcap pride,
The mettle of his horses heels he tried,
He hasted to his country Pithecuse.
Most haste, worst speed: still on our way we ride,
And him overtake halting through hapless bruize;
We help him up again, our help he nould refuse.
39
Then began the learned and aged Don Psittaco,
When he another auditour had got,
To spruse his plumes, and wisdom sage to show,
And with his sacred lore to wash the spot
Of youthful blemishes; but frequent jot
Of his hard setting jade did so confound
The words that he by paper-stealth had got,
That their lost sense the yongster could not sound,
Though he with mimicall attention did abound.
40
Yet some of those faint winged words came near,
Of God, of Adam, and the shape divine,
Which Adams children have; (these pierced his ear)
And how that man is lord of every kind
Of beasts, of birds, and of each hidden mine
Of natures treasures. He to Adams son
The wide world for his kingdom does design:
And ever naming God, he lookd aboven:
Pithecus straight placed God a thought above the Moon.
41
Pithecus, so they call this gentle wight,
The docible young man easily could trace
His masters steps, most quick and expedite.
When Psittaco looked up to holy place,
Pithecus straight with sanctimonious grace
Cast up his eyes; and when the shape divine,
Which Adam had from God, he began to praise,
Pithecus draws himself straight from that line,
And phansies his sweet face with heavenly hiew to shine.
42
He pincht his hat, and from his horses side
Stretched forth his russet legs, himself inclined
Now here, now there, and most exactly eyed
His comely lineaments, that he might find
What ever beauty else he had not mind
As yet in his fair corse. But that full right
And vast prerogative did so unbind
His straighted sprights, that with tyrannick might
He forced his feeble beast, and straight fled out of sight.
43
Then I and Psittaco were left alone;
And which was strange, he deeply silent was:
Whether some inward grief he from that son,
Conceived, and deemed it no small disgrace
That that bold youngster should so little pass
His learned speech; or whether naught to sain
He had then left; or whether a wild chase
Of flitting inconsistent thoughts he than
Pursued, which turned and toy'd in his confused brain.
44
Or whether he was woxen so discreet,
As not to speak till fit occasion.
(To judge the best, that Charity counts meet)
Therefore that Senior sad I began anon
Thus to bespeak: Good Sir, I crave pardon
If so I chance to break that golden twist
You spin, by rude interpellation,
That twist of choicest thoughts, No whit I missed
The mark I aimed at; to speak he had great list.
45
So then his spirits began to come again,
And to enact his corpse and impart might
Unto his languide tongue, and every vein
Received heat, when due conceived right
I did to him; and weend he plainly see it
That I was touched with admiration
Of his deep learning, and quick shifting sight.
Then I began quire of the wide Behiron.
Behiron, quoth that Sage, that hight Anthropion.
46
Anthropion we called; but the holy tongue
(His learning lay in words) that Behiron
Which we Anthropion, calls, as I among
The Rabbis read: but sooth to say, no tone,
Nor tongue, or speech, so sweet as is our own,
Or so significant. For mark the sense:
From (...) is Anthropion;
And we are all of an upright presence;
Nor I Will be drawn from this conceit by no pretense.
47
I praised his steady faith and confidence,
That stood as fast as trunk or rock of stone;
Yet nathelesse, said I, the excellence
Of steadfastness is not to yield to none,
But stiff to stand till moved by right reason;
And then by yielding, part of victory
To gain. What fitness in Anthropion?
Baboons, and Apes, as well as the Anthropi
Do go upright, and beasts grown mad do view the sky.
48
Then marken well what great affinity
There is twixt Ape, mad Beast, and Satyrs wild,
And the Inhabitants of Anthropie,
When they are destitute of manners mild,
And the inward man with brutishness defiled
Has life and love and lust and cogitation
Fixed in foul sense, or moving in false guile;
That holy tongue the better nomination,
So far, I know, may give: It Is guess, not full persuasion.
49
Therefore, O learned Sir, aread aright,
What may this word Behiron signify?
He wondrous glad to show his Grammar-might,
This same word Behiron does signify
The bruti shnature, or brutallitie,
Said he: and with his voice lift up his front.
Then I his skill did gaily magnify,
And blessed me, I an idiot should light on it
So happily, that never was a scholar count;
50
And said, Then holy tongue is on my side;
And holy tongue is better then profane.
He angry at his courtesy, replied,
That learned men ought for to entertain
Discourse of learned tongues, and country swain
Of country 'fairs. But for to answer thee,
This I dare warrant surely to maintain,
If to contrair the holy tongue should be
Absurd, I find enough such contrariety,
51
Then I in simple sort him answered thus,
I ken not the strange guize of learned Schools,
But if Gods thoughts be contrair unto us,
Let not deep wonderment possess our souls,
If he call fools wisemen, and wisemen fools.
If rich he poor men term, if poor men rich,
If crafty Statesmen, filly country gulls,
Beasts men, men beasts, with many other such:
God sees not as man sees, God speaks not in man's speech.
52
Straight he to higher perch, like bird in cage,
Did skip, and sang of etern Destiny,
Of sight and foresight he with countenance sage
Did speak, and did unfold Gods secrecy,
And left untoucht no hidden mystery.
I lowly louting held my cap in hond:
He asked what meant that so sudden coursie.
I pardon crave, said I, for manners fond;
You are Heavens Privy-Counsellour I understond,
53
Which I wist not before: so deep insight
Into the hidden things of God who can
Attain unto, without that quickening spright
Of the true God? Who knows the mind of man
But that same spright that in his breast does won?
Therefore the key of Gods hid secrecy
Is his own spright, that is proper to the Son,
And those of that second nativity,
Which holy Temples are of the Divinity.
54
Therefore as the sacred Seat of the Deity,
I unto you seemly behavior make,
If you be such as you may seem to be.
It is man's nature easily to mistake.
My words his mind did quite asunder break:
For he full forward was all to assume
That might him gild with glory, and partake
With God; and joyed greatly in vain fume,
And prided much himself in his purloined plume.
55
So that full loath he was for to undo
My fairly winded up conclusion;
Yet inwardly did not assent unto
My premises: for foul presumption
He thought, if that a private idiot man
By his new birth should either equallize,
Or else outstrip the bookish nation.
Perhaps some foul deformities disguise
Their life: tush! that to knowledge is no prejudice.
56
But he nould say so: for why? he was bent
To keep the credit which he then had got,
As he conceived: for it had been yblent;
It might have hazarded half of his lot,
To wit his god-like hue withouten spot,
If so be such deep knowledge could consist
With wicked life: but he nould lose one jot
Of his so high esteem, nor me resist.
So I escaped the souse of his contracted fist.
57
And here I think we both as dumb had been
As were the slow-foot beasts on which we rode
Had not Don Psittaco by fortune seen
A place which well he knew though disallowed;
Which he to me with earnest countenance showed
Histing me nearer; nearer both we go
And closely under the thick hedges crowd,
Which were not yet so thick but they did show
Through their false sprays all the whole place and persons too.
58
It was to weet, a trimly decked Close
Whose grassie pavement wrought with even line
Ran from the Morn upon the Evening-close.
The Eastern end by certain steps they climb
To do their holy things, (O sight divine!)
There on the middle of the highest flore
A large geen turf squared out, all fresh and fine
Not much unlike to Altars used of yore
Right fairly was adorned with every glittering flower.
59
At either end of this well raised sod
A stately stalk shot up of Torchwort high
Whose yellow flames small light did cast abroad
But yet a pleasant show they yield the eye.
A pretty space from this we did descry
An hollow Oak, whose navell the rough saw
Long since had clove: so standing wet and dry
Around the stumped top sof^ moss did grow
Whose velvet hue and verdure cushion-like did show.
60
Within the higher hedge of thickn'd trees
A lower rank on either side we saw
Of lesser sh^ubs even-set with artifice.
There the wood-queristers sac on a row
And sweetly sung while Boreas did blow
Above their heads, with various whistling
As his blasts hap to break (now high, now low)
Against the branches of the waving Pines
And other neighbor plants, still rocking with the Winds.
61
But above these birds of more sightly plume
With gold and purple feathers gayly dight
Are ranked aloft. But the Eagle does assume
The highest sprig. For his it is by right.
Therefore in seemly sort he there is pight
Sitting aloft in his green Cabinet
From whence he all beholds with awful sight,
Who ever in that solemn place were met,
At the West end for better view, right stately set.
62
After a song loud chanted by that Quire
Tuned to the whistling of the hollow wind
Comes out a gay Pie in his rich attire
The snowie white with the black satin shined,
On's head a silken cap he wore unlin'd:
When he had hopped to the middle flore
His bowing head right lowly he inclined
As if some Deity he did adore,
And seemly gestures make courting the Heavenly power.
63
Thus cring'd he toward the East with shivering wings
With eyes on the square sod devoutly bent.
Then with short flight up to the Oak he springs
Where he thrice congied after his ascent
With posture changed from the East to th'Occident,
Thrice bowed he down and easily thrice he rose;
Bowed down so low as if 't had been's intent
On the green moss to wipe his swarthy nose.
Anon he chatters loud, but why himself best knows.
64
There we him leave, impatient of stay
My self amazed such actions to see
And pretty gestures amongst those creatures gay:
So unexpected Uniformitie,
And such a semblance of due piety:
For every Crow as when he cries for rain
Did Eastward nod; and every Daw we see
When they first entered this grassie Plain
With shaking wings and bended bills adored the same.
65
O that the spirit of Pythagoras
Would now invade my breast, dear Psittaco!
Said I. In nature he so cunning was
As both the mind of birds and beasts to know,
What meant their voices and their gestures too.
So might we riddle out some mystery
Which lies hid in this strange uncouth show;
But thy grave self may be as wise as he
I wot. Aread then Psittaco what sights these be.
66
Certs, said he, thine eyes be waxen dim
These be the people of wide Adamah
These be no birds, it is true, they are sons of sin
And vessels of Heavens ire, for sooth to say
They have no faith, I fear nor ever may,
But be shaped out for everlasting shame,
Thou ghthey deride us of Psittacusa:
Yet well I wot, we have the only name
Above, and though all foul yet there devoyd of blame.
67
And that green spot which thou may deem a Close
It is to them no Close but holy place
Ycleep'd a Church, whose sight does well dispose
Approaching souls. The rest thy self may trace
By true analogy, But I Will not pass
One thing remarkable, said he to me.
It was Don Pico took the preaching place
A man of mighty power in his own See;
A man, no bird, as he did fondly seem to thee.
68
Mn. Tell then Don Psittaco, what Pico meant
By his three bowings to the setting Sun
And single obesance toward the Orient.
What! were they postures of Religion?
If so; why had those yellow flames but one?
The Eagle three? That The Eagle was his God
It is, said he, a strong presumption,
Whom he first slightly in that holy sod
After adored more fully with a triple nod.
69
Certes, quoth I, such Majesty divine
And seemly graces in the Eagle be
That they the gentle heart may well incline
To all respect and due civility.
But if that worship civil be, said he,
Certes, Don Pico can not well excuse
Himself from fault of impious flattery
His holy gestures streightway thus to use
To mortal man, redoubling thrice the bold abuse.
70
But well observe, said I, the motion.
While he draws lowly back his demure bill
Making it touch the mossie cushion,
His moving Karkas shrinketh nearer still
Toward the sacred sod.
What then, quoth he, was it in Pico's mind
That solemn service with four ducks to fill
But one before, the other three behind.
My duller wit, said I, the mystery cannot find.
71
Ps. But I can find it. Superstition
And flattery, have made Don Pieo blind.
These interfare in fond confusion.
But both conspire to hold up his swollen mind
In supercilious pride and ways unkind.
For he does dominere over Psittacuse.
Dear Psittacuse! when shall thou once outwind
Thy self from this sad yoke? who brings the news
Of Sions full release from scorn and foul abuse?
72
O had we once the power in our hands
How carefully the youth we would catechize,
But bind Gods enemies in iron bands
(Such honor have his Sainrs) and would devise
Set forms of Truth, on Discipline advise
That unto both all men might needs conform.
Mn. But what if any tender heart denies?
Ps. If he will his own fortunes overturn
It cannot well be holp, we must be uniform.
73
Mn. Good reason too, said I. Don Pico grave
The self same doctrine preaches as I hear.
But Reverend Psittaco, let me freedom crave
To ask one question, Is It because 't's so clear
That who so shall dissent shall pay so dear.
Or will you in those things you do not know
But be uncertain, certain mischief bear
To them that due assent cannot bestow?
It is in such, said he, that we for certain know.
74
But how know you those things for certainty?
By Reason, Scripture, or the Spirit divine,
Or lastly by Churches Authority?
With that Don Psittaco cast up his eyes
Brim full of thoughts to solve this knot of mine.
But in the fall of his high-gazing sight
He spide two on the rode he did divine
To be of his acquaintance, them we meet,
Forthwith Don Psittaco the strangers kindly greet.
75
And he them both seemly salutes again.
The one on a lean fiery jade did fit
And seemed a wight of a right subtle brain.
Both clothed as black as jet. But he was fit
With a dry wall-nut shell to fence his wit.
Which like a quilted cap on's head he wore
Lined with whire taffity, wherein were writ
More trimly than the Iliads of yore
The laws of Mood and Figureand many precepts more.
76
All the nice questions of the Schoolmen old
And subtilties as thin as cobwebs bet,
Which he wore thinner in his thoughts yrold.
And his warm brains, they say, were closer set
With sharp distinctions than a cushionet
With pins and needles; which he can shoot out
Like angry Porcupine, where e're they hit.
Certes a doughty Clerk and Champion stout
He seemed and well appointed against every doubt.
77
The other rod on a fat resty jade
That neighed loud. His rider was not lean.
His black plump belly fairly outward swai'd
And pressed somewhat hard on the horses mane.
Most like methought to a Cathedral Dean.
A man of prudence and great courtesy
And wisely in the world he knew to glean.
His sweaty neck did shine right greasily
Top heavy was his head with earthly policy.
78
This wight Corvino, Psittacus me told
Was named, and the other Graculo.
They both of his acquaintance were of old
Though to near freindship now they did not owe.
But yet in generals agreed, I trow.
For they all dearly hug dominion,
And love to hold men's consciences in awe
Each standing stiff for his opinion
In holy things, against all contradiction.
79
But most of all Corvin and Psittaco
Prudentiall men and of a mighty reach
Who through their wisdom sage the events foreknow
Of future things; and confidently preach
Unless there be a form which men must teach
Of sound opinions (each meaning his own)
But to be left free to doubt and count^^^-speech
Authority is lost, our trade is gone
Our Tyrian wares forsaken, we, alas! shall moan.
80
Or at the best our life will bitter be:
For we must toil to make our doctrine good.
Which will empart the firsh and weak the knee.
Our m^nd cannot attend our trencher-food,
Nor be let loose (...) sue the worldly good.
All Is our dear wives, poor wenches! they alone
Mustly long part of night when we withstood
By scrupulous wits must watch to nights high Noon
Till all our members grow as cold as any stone.
81
Heaps of such inconveniences arise
From Conscience-freedome, Christian liberty.
Beside our office all men will despise
Unless our lives gain us Authority.
Which in good sooth a harder task will be.
Dear brethren! sacred souls of Behiron!
Help, help as you desire to liven free
To ease, to wealth, to honor, and renown
And sway the affrighted world with your disguized frown.
82
This is the Genius of Corvino sage
And Psittaco falls little short in wit,
Though short he fall of old Corvino's age,
His steppings with the other footsteps fit.
And heavens bright eye it will aware of it.
But now me lists few passages to show
Amongst us four when we together met
Occasioned first by hardy Psittaco
Who Corvin did accost and nutshell Graculo.
83
Brethren! said he, (and held by holy belt
Corvino grave, ne did his hands abhor't
When he the black filk rope soft fimbling felt
And with his fingers milked evermore
The hanging frienge) one thing perplexeth sore
My reason weak and puzzled thoughts, said he.
Tell then, ye learn^^ Clerks, which of these four
To weet, from Scripture, Church authority,
Gods Spirit, or man's Reason is Faiths Certainty.
84
For, well I wot, our selves must fully assent
To points of Faith we rigidly obtrude
On others, else there is no punishment
Due to gainsayers. Corvin here indewd
With singular gravity this point pursued,
Saying that all belief is solved at last
Into the Church, ne may the people rude
Nor learned wit her honor dare to blast
Nor scrupulous thoughts, nor doubtful queres out to cast.
85
Strait Graculo with eyes as fierce as Ferrit
Replied: If all men's faith resolved be
Into each Church, all nations shall inherit
For ever their Ancestors Idolatry.
An Indian ever shall an Indian be
A Turk a Turk. To this Corvin anon;
I give not this infallibility
To every Church, but only to our own
Full witness to her self of all the truths she will own.
86
Gr. That then is truth what she will say is true.
But not unless her the true Church thou hold.
How know thou then her such, good Corvin show.
Friend Graculo in talk we be too bold.
Let Us go, I fear my self and horse take cold.
But to answer to that question, before we go
The Church is true as she her self me told.
A goodly answer said Don Graculo.
You dispute in a Circle as all Logicians know.
87
Here Psittaco could not but inly smile
To see how Graculo Corvin did orecrow,
And fair replying with demeanance mild,
The truth, said he, the Scriptures only show.
Straight nimble Graculus; But who can know
The sense of Scripture without reason sound?
The Scripture is both key and treasure too
It opes it self (so said that Clerk profound)
This place with that compared. This is the strongest ground.
88
Gr But what with judgment does them both compare?
Is It reason or unreasonablenesse, I pray.
To which grave Psittacus, you so subtle are,
I list not with such cunning wits to play.
Here I stepped in and thus began to say.
Right worthy Clerks, for so you be I ween,
Your queint discourse your breedings does bewray,
Long time you have at learned Athens been
And all the dainty tricks of Art and Science seen.
89
If me a stranger wight it may be beseem
But homely bred, as yet unripe in years,
Who conscious of his weaknesses does deem
Himself unfit to speak among his peers,
Much more unfit for your judicious ears
Whom Age and Arts do equally adorn
And solemn habit no small semblance bears
Of highest knowledge, might I be but born
A word or two to speak, now would I take my turn.
90
Say on said Psittaco. There Is a third, said I,
Nor reason nor unreasonablenesse hight.
Here Graccus. The disjunction you deny.
Then I, There is a third ycleep'd Gods spright
Nor reason nor unreasonablenesse hight.
Corvino straight foamed like his champing jade
And said I was a very silly wight,
And how through melancholy I was mad
And unto private spirits all holy truth betrayed.
91
But I nould with like fury him invade
But mildly as I might made this reply.
Gods Spirit is no private empty shade
But that great Ghost that fills both earth and sky,
And through the boundless Universe dothly,
Shining through purged hearts and simple minds
When doubling clouds of thick hypocrisy
Be blown away with strongly brushing winds;
Who first this tempest feels the Sun he after finds.
92
Thus wise and godly men I hear to teach,
And know no hurt this doctrine to believe.
Certes it much occasion does reach
To leave the world and holily to live.
All due observance to Gods laws to give.
With care and diligence to maken pure
Those vessels that this heavenly dew receive.
But most in point of faith sleep too secure
And want this bait their souls to goodness to allure.
93
For they believen as the Church believes
Never expecting any other light.
And hence it is, each one so loosely lives,
Hopeless of help from that internal spright.
Enough! said Graculo, Corvino's right.
Let Us hear, dispute in figure and in mood.
And stiffly with smart syllogismes fight
That what thou would may well be understood,
But now thou rovest out, and rav'st as thou were wood.
94
Reason I say all Scripture sense must judge
Do thou one reason against this truth produce:
Reason, said I, in humane things may drudge
But in divine thy soul it may seduce.
Gr. Prove that. Mn. I prove it thus. For reasons use
Backed with advantage of all sciences,
Of Arts, of tongues, cannot such light transfuse
But that most learned men do think amiss
In highest points divided as well you know, I wisse.
95
Here Graculo learing up with one eye
Viewed the broad Heavens long resting in a pause
And all the while he held his neck awry
Like listening daw, turning his nimble nose,
At last these words his silent tongue did loose.
What is this spirit, say what is this spirit, man!
Who has it, answered I, he only knows.
It Is the hid Manna and the graven stone.
He canteth, said Corvine, come Grac, let us be gone.
96
But Grac stayed still this question to move.
Does not, said he, reason to us descry
What things soever reasonable prove?
Not so. For the whole world that open does lie
Unto our sight, not reason but our eye
Discovers first, but upon that fair view
Our reason takes occasion to try
Her proper skill and curiously pursue
The Art and sweet contrivance Heaven and Earth do show.
97
There Is no man color smells, or sees a sound,
Nor sucks the labor of the h^^y-bee
With His hungry lugs, nor binds a gaping wound
With His slippery ey-balls. Every feculty
And object have their due Analogy,
Nor can reach further than it is proper sphere.
Who divine sense by reason would descry
Unto the Sunshine listons with his ear.
So plain this truth to me, Don Graco, does appear.
98
How then, said Graco, is the spirit known
If not by reason? To this I replyde,
Only the spirit can the spirit own.
But this, said he, is back again to slide
And in an idle Circle round to ride.
Why so, said I, Is not light seen by light?
Straight Graculo did skilfully divide
All knowledge into sense and reason right.
Be It so, said I, Don Graco, what is this reasons might?
99
If then said he, the spirit may not be
Right reason, surely we must deem it sense.
Yes sense it is, this was my short reply:
Sense upon which holy Intelligence
And heavenly Reason and comely Prudence
(O beauteous branches of that root divine!)
Do springen up, through inly experience
Of Gods hid ways, as he does open the ey'n
Of our dark souls and in our hearts his light enshrine.
100
Here Graculus did seem exceeding glad
On any terms to hear but reason named,
And with great joy and jollity he bad
A dew to me as if that he had gained
The victory. Besides Corvino blamed
His too long stay. Wherefore he forward goes
Now more confirmed his Nutshell-cap contained
What ever any living mortal knows.
Ne longer would he stay this sweet conceit to loose.
101
Thus Psittaco and I alone were left
In sober silence holding on our way.
His musing skull, poor man! was well nigh cleft
By strong distracting thoughts drove either way;
Whom pitying I thus began to say.
Dear Psittaco what anxious thoughts oppress
Thy careful heart and musing mind dismay?
I am perplexed much I must confess
Said he, and thou art author of my heaviness.
102
My self Corvino's Church-Autority
No certain ground of holy truth do deem.
And Scripture the next ground alleged by me
By Graco was confuted well, I ween.
But thou as in these points far deeper seen
Than either Corvin or Don Graculo
Yea than my self, assent does almost win
That Church nor Scripture, cast in reason too
Can to our searching minds truth's hidden treasures show.
103
Wherefore a fourth, sole ground of certainty
Thou did produce; to weet, the Spirit divine.
But now, alas! here is the misery,
That left to doubt we cannot well enjoin
Nor this nor that, nor Faith-forms freely coin
And make the trembling conscience swear thereto,
For we our selves do but guess and divine
What we force other men to swear is true,
Until the day star rise our eyes with light to embew.
104
Which gift though it be given to me and you,
Mn. (Not unto me, courteous Don Psittaco!)
Ps. Yet certainly there be but very few
That so sublime a pitch ascend unto.
Mn. My self, alas! a silly Swain I know
So far from solving these hard knots, said I,
That more and harder my rank brain over grow
And wonder that thy quick sagacity
Does not wind out a further inconveniency.
105
If light divine we know by divine light
Nor can by any other means it see
This ties their hands from force that have the spirit.
How can, said Psittaco, these things agree?
For without force vain is Church-Polity;
Mn. But to use force against men that thing to do
In which they 've not the least ability
May seem unjust and violent; I trow,
Against reason, against Religion, against all sense and law.
106
For it is as if the King of Arragon
Who was well skilled in Astronomy,
Should by decree deprive each Country Clown
Of life, of lands, or of sweet liberty
That would not fully avow each star in sky
Were bigger then the Earth. Here Psittaco
Though what I said did not well satisfy
His grave judicious self, yet he did know
Of whom this talk much 'plause would gain and kindness too:
107
And straight began say. Dear Glaucis! had thou been
At this discourse, how would thy joyous spright
Have danced along. For thou art or well seen
In these queint points, or do at least delight
Exceeding much to hear them opened right.
And, well I wot, on earth scarce can be found
So witty girl, so wily female wight
As this my Glaucis, over all renowned;
I mean for quicker parts, if not for judgment sound.
108
How fit an Auditour would she then proved
To thee, young Mnemon? how had she admired
Thy sifting wit, thy speech and person loved,
Clove to that mouth with melting zeal all fired,
And hung upon those lips so highly inspired?
Mn. Certes she would been a bold immodest wight
To come so near when not at all desired,
Ps. Alas! good Mnemon you mistake me quite
I meant no fond salutes, bu what is just and right;
109
Her due attention on thy wise discourse,
Though what thou deemst, and more then thou did deem
May fit you too. For why? by Natures course
Like join with like: wherefore, right well I ween,
Might I but make the match 't would well beseem.
For your conspiring minds exactly agree
In points, which the wide world through wrath and teen
Rudely divide, I mean free Liberty.
Be 't so, said I, yet may our grounds far different be.
110
For might I but repeat without offense
What I have heard, ill symtomes men descry
In this thy Glaucis, though the nimble wench
So dexterously can pray and prophecy,
And lectures read of drad mortality,
Clasping her palms with fatal noise and shreeks,
Inculcating approaching misery
To sad afflicted houses, when she strikes
With brushing strokes the glassie doors and entrance seeks.
111
Nor does her solemn looks much like her Sire
Or native zeal which she did once derive
From thee grave Psittaco! exalt her higher
Then Earth and Nature: For men do conceive
Black sanguine fumes my spouse do thus deceive
Translating her into fools Paradise
And so of sense and reason her bereave,
And that that melting love which does so please
Her gulled soul, the thawing is of her own grease.
112
The natural spright it self does sweetly hug
In false conceit and ill-deceiving guile,
Sucking fond solace from it is own dear dug,
Like the mistaken Cat that licked the file
And drawing blood, uncessantly did toil
To suck hat sweet, as if there Moses rock
Had swet new milk. Thus Glaucis does beguil
Her likorish taste, als' does delude her flock,
Teaching them suck themselves, their empty souls to mock.
113
Thus they intoxicate with their own blood
Mistaken Elves! deem it no worse a thing
Then pure Ambrosian Nectar fresh and good,
In golden streams that from great Jove did spring:
And count themselves His only choice Offspring
Upon no count but that their count is so.
O sweet conceit! full joy! Soul-ravishing
Delight! Pure faith! Self-love keep close thereto.
Allow but this to us, we'll any thing allow.
114
Besides the fixednesse of the eternal Fates
And Adamantine laws of Gods decree
Whereby immutably he loves and hates
May prove new grounds of Glaucis liberty.
No danger then nor detriment can be
To his own people whom of old he chose
From the out goings of Eternity.
No infecting poison may them ill dispose.
What worthless wit of man this puzling knot may loose.
115
Did not I tell thee what a wily less,
Said Psittace, my daughter Glaux would prove?
And well perceiving how averse I was
From her strange manners, left all suits of love,
And straight began show me how she did improve
Her principles to lewdness and excess:
Secure, no fault, no filth can ever move
Her Maker to dislike, no unrighteousness
Can hurt her soul, ne sorrow needs she to express.
116
Thus in the wicked wench rank fields do grow
Of Rapine, Riot, Lust, and Covetize,
Of Pride, of Sacrilege, and a thousand more
Disorders, which no mortal can devise,
Said I, from ought, but that mistake to arise
Of naked Faith disjoined from Purity.
So with full bitter words he did chastise
His absent child; but whether zeal it be,
Or deep conceived hatred, I no'te well descry.
117
Nor stopped he here, but told me all her guise
How law-lesse quite and out of shape she is grown
Affecting still wild contrarieties,
Averse from what for good all others own.
Preposterous Girl! how often have thou thrown
Thy self into dark corners at Midday,
And then at dead of Night away art flown
To some old barn, thereon to preach and pray
Ending thy dark devotions just at Break of day.
118
When others sleep or weep, then do thou sing
In frosty night on neighbors chimney set,
When others fast 'ginst thou thy revelling;
Thy lustful sparrows greedily do eat,
Which thou by blood and violence do get.
When others eyes plainly can nothing see,
Then thy prodigious lamps by night unwet
And unblown-out, can read right readily
Withouten spectacles, the smallest prints that be.
119
If chance or free election ever brings
Thee to our Churches, then with hooting wild,
Thou causest uproars, and our holy things
Font, Table, Pulpit, they be all defiled
With thy broad mutings and large squirtings vilde.
Mn. Phy; Psittaco! hide such infirmities
From stranger wight: Who would his own dear child
Thus shamefully disgrace? With mine own eyes
Have I thy Glaucis seen, and better things surmise.
120
Good sooth, methinks, she is not so defaced
And all misshapen, and grown out of square,
But that my self most evidently traced
Thy comely feature in her visage bare.
Spare then thy self, if her thou will not spare.
Ill may it seem what thine own strength begot
With foul reproach and shame thus to besmear,
And through thy zeal thine own great name to blot:
To two so worthy wights befall some better lot.
121
Thus in my youth, said Mnemon, did I use
With Reverend Ignorance to sport and toy,
And slily would obnoxious Age abuse;
For I was a crank wit, a brisk young boy;
But naturally abhorred hypocrisy,
And craft the upshot of experienced Age;
And more then life I loved my liberty,
And much suspected all that would engage
My heart to their own sect, and freeborn soul encage.
122
For I even at those years was well aware
Of man's false friendship, and grown subtilty,
Which made me snuf the wind, drink the free air
Like a young Colt upon the mountains high,
And turning tail my hunters all defy.
Ne took I any guide but the innate light
Of my true Conscience, whose voice to deny,
Was the sole sting of my offended spright:
Thus God and Nature taught their rude Cosmopolite.
123
I mean not Natures harsh obdurate light,
The shameless eyebrows of the Serpent old,
That armed with custom will not stick to fight
With God and him affront with courage bold:
But that sweet temper we may often behold
In virgin Youth as yet immaculate,
And unto drudging Policy unsold,
Who do without design, now love, now hate
And freely give and take withouten price or rate.
124
Dear lads! How do I love your harmless years
And melt in heart while I the Morning-shine
Do view of rising virtue which appears
In your sweet faces, and mild modest eyne.
Adore that God that does himself enshrine
In your untainted breasts; and give no ear
To wicked voice that may your souls incline
Unto false peace, or unto fruitless fear,
Least loosened from your selves Harpyes away you bear.
125
Abstain from censure, seek and you shall find,
Drink your own waters drawn from living well,
Mend in your selves what ill elsewhere you mind,
Deal so with men as you would have them deal,
Honor the Aged that it may go well
With you in Age: For I my self indeed
Have born much scorn for these pranks, I you tell,
By boys often bearded, which I deem the meed
Of my abusive youth. But now I will pr^ceed.
126
By this we came into a way that did
Divide it self into three parts; the one
To Leontopolis; that in the mid
Did lead straight forth out of wide Beiron,
That was the way that I might take alone;
The third way led unto Onopolis,
And thitherward Don Psittaco put on.
With both these towns Alopecopolis
Is in firm league, and golden Myrmecopoln.
127
For nothing they attempt without the aid
Of these two Cities. They Will not wagen war,
Nor peace conclude, nor permit any trade,
Nor make decrees, nor slake the civil jar,
Nor take up private wrongs, nor plead at bar,
Nor Temples consecrate, nor Mattins say;
They naught begin divine or secular,
But they advisen with those Cities tway.
Opotent Citizens that bear so great a sway!
128
No truth of justice in Beirah land.
No sincere faith void of she subtilty,
That always seeks it self, is to be found;
But law delusion and false Polity,
False Polity that into Tyranny
Would quickly wend, did not stern Fear restrain
And keep in aw. The Onites Democracy
Is naught but a large hungry tyrant-train:
Oppression from the poor is an all-sweeping rain.
129
A sweeping torrent that beats down the corn,
And wastes the oxens labor, headlong throws
The tallest trees up by the root ytorn,
Its ranging force in all the land it shows;
Woods rent from hence, its rolling rage bestows
In other places that were bare before,
With muddied arms of trees the earth it strows;
The listening shepherd is amazed sore,
While it with swift descent so hideously does rore.
130
Such is the outrage of Democracie,
When fearlesse it does rule in Beirah:
And little better is false Monarchy,
When it in this same country bears the sway.
(Is 't not a part of Autaesthesia?)
So to an inward sucking whirl pools close
They change this swelling torrents surquedry,
Much treasure it draws in, and does enclose
In 'ts winding mouth, but whither then, there is no man knows.
131
O falsest Beironites, what gars you plain
One of another, and vainly accuse,
Of foul offense? when you all entertain
Tyrannick thoughts. You all alike do muse
Of your own private good, though with abuse
Of those you can tread down with safety,
No way to wealth or honor you refuse.
False Oneple does grudge, and groan, and cry,
Because she is denied a greater tyranny.
132
Two of that City whylorn on the way,
With languid lugs, and countenance gravely sad,
Did deeply sigh, and rudely rough did bray
Against Leontopolis. The equal pad
Of justice now, alas! is seldom trad,
Said they; The Lions might is law and right.
Where Is love or mercy now? with that out strad
A little dog, his dames only delight,
And ran near to their tails, and barked with all his might.
133
The surly irefull Onopolitan
Without all mercy kicked with iron heel
The little bawling curre, that at him ran;
It made his feeble corse to the earth to reel,
That was so pierced with the imprinted steel,
That it might grieve a heart of flinty stone.
No herbs, no salves the breach could ever heal;
The good old wife did then keep house alone,
False hearted carles, is this your great compassion?
134
There Is no society in Behirah,
But beastlike grazing in one pasture ground.
No love but of the animated clay
With beauties fading flowers trimly crowned,
Or from strong sympathies heart-striking stound.
No order but what riches strength and wit
Prescribe. So bad the good easily confound.
Is H^^^esty in such unruly fit
(...) ^eld in no rank? they 'steem it not a whit.
135
But I am weary of this uncouth place;
If any man their bad condition
And brutish manners lists for to trace;
We may them read in the creation
Of this wide Sensible; where every passion
Of birds and beasts distinctly do display
To but an ordinary imagination,
The life and soul of them in Behirah:
This Behirah that hight the greater Adamah.
136
The swelling hateful Toad, industrious Ant,
Lascivious Goat, Parrot, or prating Py,
The kingly Lion, docil Elephant,
All-imitating Ape, gay Butterfly,
The crafty Fox famous for subtilty,
Majestic Horse, the beast that twixt two trees
(A fit resemblance of foul gluttonny)
When he has filled his gorge, himself does squeeze
To feed afresh, Court Spaniels, and politic Bees;
137
With many more which I list not repeat;
Some foul, some fair: to the fair the name they give
Of holy virtues; but it is but deceit,
None in Beiron virtuously do live;
None in that land so much as ever strive
For truth of virtue, though sometimes they wont,
As Swine do Swine, their own blood to relieve.
Beiron's all bruits, the true manhood they want,
If outward form you pierce with fancy fulminant.
138
So having got experience enough
Of this ill land, for nothing there was new,
My purpose I held on, and rode quite through
That middle way, and did the extremes eschew.
When I came near the end there was in view
No passage: for the wall was very high,
But there no door to me it self did show:
Looking about at length I did espy
A lively youth, to whom I presently began cry.
139
More willing he is to come then I to call:
Simon he hight, who also's called a Rock:
Simon is that obedientiall
Nature, who boisterous seas and winds does mock;
No tempest can him move with fiercest shock;
The house that is thereon built does surely stand,
Nor blustering storm, nor rapid torrents stroke
Can make it fall; it easily does withstand
The gates of Death and Hell, and all the Stygian band.
140
When I began call, forthwith in seemly sort
He me approch'd in decent russet clad,
More fit for labor then the flaunting Court.
When he came near, in cheerful wise he bad
Tell what I would: then I unto the lad
Began thus reply; alas! too long astray
Here have I trampled foul Behirons pad:
Out of this land I thought this the next way,
But I no gate can find, so vain is mine assay.
141
Then the wise youth, Good Sir, you look too high:
The wall aloft is raised; but that same door
Where you must pass in deep descent does lie:
But he bad follow, he would go before.
Hard by there was a place, all covered over
With stinging nettles and such weedery,
The pricking thistles the hard'st legs would gore,
Under the wall a straight door we descry;
The wall hight Self-conceit; the door Humility.
142
When we came at the door fast locked it was,
And Simon had the key, but he nould grant
That I into that other land should pass,
Without I made him my Concomitant.
It pleased me well, I mused not much upon it,
But straight accord: for why? a jolly Swain
Me thought he was; meek, cheerful, and pleasant.
When he saw this, he thus to me again,
Sir, See you that sad couple? Then I; I see those twain.
143
A sorry couple certainly they be.
The man a bloody knife holds at his heart
With chearlesse countenance, as sad is she.
Or eld, or else intolerable smart,
Which she can not decline by any Art,
Does thus distort and writh her wrinkled face;
A leaden Quadrate swayes hard on that part
That Is fit for burdens; foulness does deface
Her aged looks; with a strait staff her steps she stays.
144
Right well you say, then said that lusty Swain:
Yet this poor couple be my Parents dear;
Nor can I hence depart without these twain:
These twain give life to me, though void of cheer
They be themselves. Then let us all go yfere.
The young man's speech caused sad perplexity
Within my breast, but yet I did forbear,
And faitly asked their names. He answered me:
He Autaparnes hight; but she Hypomone.
145
I Simon am the son of this sad pair,
Who though full harsh they seem to outward sight;
Yet when to Dizoie men forth do fare,
No company in all the land so meet
They find as these. Their pace full well I weet,
Is very flow, and so to youthful haste
Displeasing, and their counsels nothing sweet
To any Beironite: but sweetest taste
Does bitter choler breed, and haste does maken waste.
146
Nor let that breast impierc'd with weeping wound,
An uncouth spectacle, disturb your mind.
His blood's my food: If he his life effund
To utmost death, the high God has designed
That we both live. He in my heart shall find
A seat for his transfused soul to dwell;
And when that is done, this death does eke unbind
That heavy weight that does Hypom'ne quell,
Then I Anautaesthetus hight, which seems me well.
147
So both their lives do vanish into mine,
And mine into Atuvus life does melt,
Which fading flux of time does not define,
Nor is by any Autaesthesian felt.
This life to On the good Atuvus dealt;
In it is all Joy, Truth, Knowledge, Love and Force;
Such force no weight created can repel't.
All strength and livelihood is from this sourse,
All Lives to this first spring have circular recourse.
148
A lecture strange he seemed to read to me;
And though I did not rightly understand
His meaning, yet I deemed it to be
Some goodly thing, and weary of that land
Where then I stood, I did not him withstand
In his request, although full loath I were
Slow-footed eld the journey should command;
Yet we were guided by that sorry pair,
And so to Dizoie full softly we do fare.
The Argument of PSYCHOZOIA, Or The life of the Soul.
CANT. III.
Strange state of Dizoie Mnemons skill
Here wisely does explain,
Ida's strong charms, and Eloim-hill,
With the drad dale of Ain.
1
BUt now new Stories I 'gin to relate,
Which aged Mnemon unto us did tell,
Whiles we on grassie bed did lie prostrate
Under a shady Beach, which did repel
The fiery scorching shafts which Uriel
From Southern quarter darted with strong hand.
No other help we had; for Gabriel
His wholesome cooling blasts then quite restrained.
The Lions flaming breath with heat parched all the Land.
2
Here seemly sitting down, thus began that Sage,
Last time we were together here ymet,
Beirah wall, that was the utmost stage
Of our discourse, if I do not forget.
When we departed thence the Sun was set,
Yet nathelesse we past that lofty wall
That very Evening. The Nights nimble net
That does encompasse every opake ball,
That swim's in liquid air, did Simon naught apall.
3
When we that stately wall had undercrept,
We straightway found our selves in Dizoie:
The melting clouds chill drizzeling tears then wept;
The mistie air swet for deep agony,
Swet a cold sweat, and loose frigiditie
Filled all with a white smoke; pale Cynthia
Did foul her silver limbs with filthy die,
Whiles wading on she measured out her way,
And cut the muddy heavens defiled with whitish clay.
4
No light to guide but the Moons pallid ray,
And that even lost in mistie troubled air:
No tract to take, there was no beaten way;
No chearing strength, but that which might appear
From Dians face; her face then shined not clear,
And when it shines clearest, little might
She yields, yet the goddess is severe.
Hence wrathful dogs do bark at her dead light:
Christ help the man thus closed and imprisoned in drad Night.
5
Overwhelmed with irksome toil of strange annoyes
In stony stound like senseless stake I stood,
Till the vast thumps of massy hammers noise,
That on the groaning steel laid on such lode,
Empierc'd mine ears in that sad stupid mood.
I weening then some harbor to be nigh,
In sorry pace thitherward slowly yode,
By ear directed more then by mine eye,
But here, alas! I found small hospitality.
6
Four grisly Black-smiths stoutly did their task
Upon an anvile formed in Conick wise.
They neither minded who, nor what I ask,
But with stern grimy look do still avise
Upon their works; but I my first emprise
Would not forsake, and therefore venture in.
Or none has list to speak, or none espies,
Or hears; the heavy hammers never lin;
And but a blue faint light in this black shop did shine.
7
There I into a darksome corner creep,
And lay my weary limbs on dusty flore,
Expecting still when soft down-sliding sleep
Should seize mine eyes, and strength to me restore:
But when with hovering wings she 'proch'd, e'remore
The mighty souses those foul knaves laid on,
And those huge bellows that aloud did rore,
Chased her away that she was ever gone
before she came, on pitchy plumes, for fear yflone.
8
The first of those rude rascals Lypon hight,
A foul great stooping slouch with heavy eyes,
And hanging lip: the second ugly sight
Pale Phobon, with his hedghog-hairs disguise.
Aelpon is the third, he the false skies
No longer trusts; The fourth of furious fashion
Phrenition hight, fraught with impatiencies,
The bellows be ycleep'd deep Suspiration:
^ach knave these bellows blow in mutual circulation.
9
There is a number of these lonesome forges
In Bacha vale (this was in Bacha vale)
There be no Innes but these, and these but scourges;
In stead of ease they work much deadly bale
To those that in this lowly trench do trale
Their feeble loins. Ah me! who here would fare?
Sad ghosts often cross the way with visage pale,
Sharp thorns and thistles wound their feeten bare:
^et happy is the man that here does bear a share.
10
When I in this sad vale no little time
Had measured, and often had taken Inn,
And by long penance paid for mine ill crime
Methought the Sun it self began to shine,
And that I Would past Diana's discipline.
But day was not yet come, 'twas perfect night:
I Phoebus head from Ida hill had seen;
For Ida hill does give to men the fight,
Of Phoebus form, before Aurora's silver light.
11
But Phoebus form from that high hill's not clear
Nor figure perfect. It Is inveloped
In purple cloudy veil; and if 't appear
In rounder shape with skouling dreryhed
A glowing face it shows, ne rays does shed
Of lights serenity, yet duller eyes
With gazing on this irefull sight be fed
Best to their pleasing; small things they will prise
That never better saw, nor better can devise.
12
On Ida hill there stands a Castle strong,
They that it built call it Pantheothen.
(Hither resort a rascal rabble throng
Of miscreant wights;) but if that wiser men
May name that Fort, Pandoemoniothen
They would it cleep. It is the strong'st delusion
That ever Doemon wrought; the safest pen
That e're held silly sheep for their confusion.
Ill life and want of love, hence springs each false conclusion.
13
That rabble rout that in this Castle won,
Is irefull-ignorance, Unseemly-zeal,
Strong-self-conceit, Rotten-religion,
Contentious-reproch-'gainst-Michael-
If-he-of- Moses-body-ought-reveal-
Which-their-dull-skonses-cannot-eas'ly-reach,
Love-of-the-carkas, An Inept-appeal-
TO uncertain papyrs, a-False-formall-fetch-
Of-feigned-sighs, Contempt-of-poore-and-sinfull-wretch.
14
A deep self-love, Want of true sympathy-
With all mankind, Th'admiring their own heard,
Fond pride a sanctimonious cruelty
Against those by whom their wrathful minds be stird
By strangling reason, and are so afeard
To lose their credit with the vulgar sort;
Opinion and long speech before life preferred,
Less reverence of God then of the Court,
Fear, and despair, Evil surmises, False report:
15
Oppression-of-the-poore, Fell-rigourousnesse,
Contempt-of-Government, Fierceness, Fleshly lust,
The-measuring-of-all-true righteousness
By-their own-modell, Cleaving unto-dust,
Rash-censure, and despising- of the-just-
That-are-not-of-their-sect, False-reasoning-
Concerning-God, Vain-hope, needless mistrust,
Strutting-in knowledge, Egre slavering-
After hid-skill, with every inward uncouth thing.
16
These and such like be that rude Regiment,
That from the glittering sword of Michae'l fly:
They fly his outstretch'd arm, else were they shent
If they unto this Castle did not hie,
Strongly within its walls to fortify
Themselves: Great Doemon has no stronger hold
Then this high Tower. When the good Majesty
Shines forth in love and light, a vapor cold
And a black hellish smoke from hence does all infold:
17
And all that love and light and offered might
Is thus chok'd up in that foul Stygian steem:
If Hells dark jaws should open in despite,
And breath its inmost breath which foul'st I deem;
Yet this more deadly foul I do esteem,
And more contagious, which this charmed tower
Ever spues forth, like that fell Dragons steem
Which he from poisoned mouth in rage did pour
At her, whose firstborn child his chaps might not devour.
18
But lest the rasher wit my Muse should blame,
As if she did those faults appropriate
(Which I even now in that black list did name)
Unto Pantheothen; The self same state
I dare avouch you will find, where ever Hate
Backed with rough zeal, and bold for want of skill,
All sects besides its own does execrate.
This peevish spright with woe the world does fill,
While each man all would bind to his fierce furious will.
19
O Hate! the fulsome daughter of fell Pride,
Sister to surly Superstition,
That clear out-shining Truth cannot abide,
That loves it self and large Dominion,
And in false show of a fair Union
Would all encroch to 't self, would purchase all
At a cheap rate, for slight Opinion.
Thus cram they their wide-gaping Crumenall:
But now to Ida hill me lists my feet recall.
20
No such enchantment in all Dizoie
As on this hill; nor sadder sight was seen
Then you may in this rufull place espy.
'Twixt two huge walls on solitary Green,
Of funeral Cypress many groves there been,
And eke of Ewe, Eben, and Poppy trees:
And in their gloomy shade foul grisly fiend
Use to resort, and busily to seize
The darker phansied souls that live in ill disease.
21
Hence you may see, if that you dare to mind,
Upon the side of this accursed hill,
Many a dreadful corse ytost in wind,
Which with hard halter their loathd life did spill.
There li^es another which himself did kill
With rusty knife, all rolled in his own blood,
And ever and anon a doleful knill
Comes from the fatal Owl, that in sad mood
With drery sound does pierce through the death-shadowed wood.
22
Who can express with pen the irksome state
Of those that be in this strong Castle thrall?
Yet hard it is this Fort to ruinate,
It is so strongly fenced with double wall.
The fiercest but of Ram no'te make them fall:
The first Inevitable Destiny
Of Gods Decree; the other they do call
Invincible fleshie Infirmity:
But Keeper of the Tower's unfelt Hypocrisy.
23
What Poets phancies feigned to be in Hell
Are truly here, A Vulture Tytius heart
Still gnaws, yet death does never Tityus quell:
Sad Sisyphus a stone with toylsome smart
Does roll up hill, but it transcends his art,
To get it to the top, where it may lie,
On steady Plain, and never backward start,
His course is stopped by strong. Infirmity.
His roll comes to this wall, but then back it does fly.
24
Here fifty Sisters in a sieve do draw
Thorough-siping water: Tantalus is here,
Who though the glory of the Lord ore-flow
The earth, and does incompasse him so near,
Yet waters he, in waters does requere.
Stoop Tantalus and take those waters in.
What strength of witchcraft thus blinds all yfere
Twixt these two massy walls, this hold of sin?
Aye me! who shall this Fort so strongly fenced win!
25
I hear the clattering of an armed troup.
My ears do ring with the strong prancers heels.
(My soul get up out of thy drowsy droop,
And look unto the everlasting Hills)
The hollow ground, ah! how my sense it fills
With sound of solid horses hoofs. A wonder
It is, to think how cold my spirit thrills,
With strange amaze. Who can this strength dissunder?
Hark how the warlike Steeds do neigh, their necks do thunder.
26
All Milkwhite Steeds in trappings goodly gay,
On which in golden letters be ywrit
These words (even he that runs it readen may)
True righteousness unto the Lord of might.
O comely spectacle! O glorious sight!
'Twould easily ravish the beholders eye
To see such beasts, so fair so full of spright,
All in due ranks to prance so gallantly,
Bearing their riders armed with perfect panoply.
27
In perfect silver glistring panoply
They ride, the army of the highest God.
Ten thousands of his Saints approchen nie,
To judge the world, and rule it with his rod.
They leave all plain wherever they have trod.
Each Rider on his shield does bear the Sun
With golden shining beams dispread abroad,
The Sun of righteousness at high day noon,
By this same strength, I ween, this Fort is easily won.
28
They that but hear thereof shall straight obey;
But the strange children shall false semblance make,
But all hypocrisy shall soon decay,
All wickedness into that deadly lake,
All darkness thither shall it self betake.
That false brood shall in their close places fade.
The glory of the Lord shall never forsake
The earth again, nor shall deaths dreadful shade
Return again. Him praise that this great day has made.
29
This is the mighty warlick Michaels host,
That easily shall wade through that foul spue
Which the false Dragon casts in every coast,
That the moon-trampling woman much does rue
His deadly spaul; but no hurt does accrue
To this strong army from this filthy steam.
Nor horse nor man does fear its lurid hew.
They safely both can swim in this foul stream;
This stream the Earth sups up cleft open by Michaels beam.
30
But whiles it bears sway, this poisons might
Is to make sterill or prolong the birth,
To cause cold palsies, and to dull the sight
By sleepy sloth; the melancholic earth
It does increase, that hinders all good mirth.
Yet this dead liquor dull Pantheothen
Before the nectar of the Gods preferr'th.
But it so weakens and disables men,
That they of manhood give no goodly specimen.
31
Here one of us began to interpeal
Old Mnemon. Tharrhon that young ladkin hight,
He prayed this aged Sire for to reveal
What way this Dragons poisonous despite,
And strong Pantheothens inwalling might,
We may escape. Then Mnemon thus began say;
Some strange devise, I know, each youthful wight
Would here expect, or lofty brave assay:
But I Will the simple truth, in simple wise convey.
32
Good Conscience, kept with all the strength and mig!
That God already unto us has given;
A press pursuit of that foregoing light
That eggs us on 'cording to what we have liven,
And helps us on 'cording to what we have striven,
To shaken off the bonds of prejudice,
Nor dote too much of that we have first conceiven;
By hearty prayer to beg the sweet delice
Of Gods all-loving spright: such things I you advise.
33
Can pity move the hearts of parents dear,
When that their hapless child in heavy plight
Does grieve and moan! whiles pinching tortures tear
His fainting life, and does not that sad sight
Of Gods own Son empassion his good spright
With deeper sorrow? The tender babe lies torn
In us by cruel wounds from hostile might:
Is Gods own life of God himself forlorn?
Or was he to continual pain of God yborn?
34
Or will you say if this be Gods own Son,
Let him descend the Cross: for well we ween
That he will not suffer him to be fordonne
By wicked hand, if Gods own Son he been.
But you have not those sacred mysteries seen,
True-crucifying Jews! The weaker thing
Is held in greot contempt in worldly eyes:
But time may come when deep impierced sting
Shall prick your heart, and it shall melt with sorrowing.
35
Then you shall view him whom with cruel spear
You had transfixed, true crucified Son
Of the true God, unto his Father dear,
And dear to you, naught dearer under Sun.
Through this strong love and deep compassion,
How vastly God his Kingdom would enlarge
You Will easily see, and how with strong iron
He Will quite subdue the utmost earthly verge.
O foolish men! the heavens why do you fondly charge?
36
Subtimidus, when Tharrhon sped so well,
Took courage to himself, and thus began say
To Mnemon; Pray you Sir vouchsafe to tell
What Autaparnes and Hypomone
And Simon do this while in Dizoie.
With that his face shone like the rosy Morn
With maiden blush from inward modesty,
Which wicked wights do holden in such scorn,
Sweet harmless Modesty a rose withouten thorn!
37
Old Mnemon loved the Lad even from his face,
Which blameless blush with sanguin light had dyed;
His harmless lucid spright with flouring grace
His outward form so seemly beautified.
So the old man him highly magnified
For his so fit inquiry of those three;
And to his question thus anon replied,
There Is small recourse (till that Fort passed be)
To Simon Autaparnes or Hypomone.
38
For all that space from Behirons high wall
Unto Pantheothen, none dares arise
From his base dunghill warmth; such Magical
Attraction his flagging soul down ties
To his foul flesh: among which, alas! there lies
A little spark of Gods vitality,
But smoreing filth so close it does comprize
That it cannot flame out nor get on high:
This Province hence is hight earth-groveling Aptery.
39
But yet fair semblances these Apterites
Do make of good, and sighen very sore,
That God no stronger is. False hypocrites:
You make no use of that great plenteous store
Of Gods good strength which he does on you pour.
But you fast friends of foul carnality,
And false to God, his tender son do gore,
And plaud your selves, if 't be not mortally;
Nor let you him live in ease, nor let you him fairly die.
40
Like faithless wife that by her frampared guize,
Peevish demeanor, sullen sad disdain
Does inly deep the spright melancholize
Of her aggrieved husband, and long pain
At last to some sharp sickness does constrain
His weakened nature to yield victory:
His scorching torture then counts death a gain.
But when Death comes, in womanish frenzy
That froward femall wretch does shreek and loudly cry.
41
So through her moody importunity
From down right death she rescues the poor man:
Self favoring sense; not that due loyalty
Does wring from her this false compassion,
Compassion that no cruelty can
Well equalize. Her husband lies aghast;
Death on his horrid face so pale and wan
Does creep with ashy wings. He thus embraced
Perforce too many days in deadly woe does wast.
42
This is the love that is found in Aptery
To Gods dear life. If they his Son present
Half live, half dead, handled despightfully,
Or sunk in sickness, or with deep wound rent,
So be he is not quite dead they are well content.
And hope sure favor of his Sire to have.
They have the signs how can they then be shent?
The God of love for his dear life us save
From such conceits, which men to sin do thus inslave.
43
But when from Aptery we were ygone,
And past Pantheothens inthralling power;
Then from the East cheerful Eous shone,
And drove away the Nights dead lumpish stour:
He took by the hand Aurora's vernall hour;
These freshly tripp'd it on the silver hills.
And through all the fields sweet life did shower:
Then began the joyful birds to try their skills;
They skipt, they chirpt amain, they pip'd, they danced their fills.
44
This other Province of Dizoia
Hight Pteroessa. On the flowery side
Of a green bank, as I went on my way
Strong youthful Gabriel I there espide,
Courting a Nymph all in her maiden pride,
Not for himself: His strife was her to win
To Michael, in wedlock to be tide,
He promised she should be Michaels Queen,
And greater things then ear has heard, or eye has seen:
45
This lovely Maid to Gabriel thus replide,
Thanks, Sir, for your good news; but may I know
Who Michael is, that would have me his Bride?
Its Michael, said he, that works such woe
To all that fry of Hell; and on his foe
Those fiends of darkness such great triumphs has:
The powers of sin and death he down does mow.
In this strong Arm of God have thou but faith,
That in great Doemons troops does work so wondrous scath.
46
The simple Girl believed every word,
Nor did by subtle querks elude the might
And proferr'd strength of the soul-loving Lord;
But answered thus. Good Sir, but read aright
When shall I then appear in Michaels sight?
When Gabriel had won her full assent,
And well observed how he had flamed her spright,
He answered, After the complishment
^
47
She willingly took the condition,
And pliable she promised to be;
And Gabriel swear he would wait upon
Her Virginship, whiles in simplicity
His masters will with all good industry
She would fulfill. So here the simple Maid
Strove for her self in all fidelity,
Nor took her self for nothing; but she played
Her part, she thought, as if Indentures had been made.
48
For she did not with her own self gin think
So curiously, that it is God alone
That gives both strengths when ever we do swink:
Graces and Natures might be both from one,
Who is our life's strong sustentation.
Impossible it is therefore to merit,
When we poor men have nothing of our own:
Certes by him alone she stands upright;
And surely falls without his help in per'lous fight:
49
But we went on in Peteroessa land.
The fresh bright Morning was no small repas^
After the toil in Aptery we found,
So that with merry cheer we went full fast:
But I observed well that in this haste
Simon waxed faint, and feeble, and decayed,
In strength and life before we far had past:
And by how much his youthful flower did fade,
So much more vigor to his parents was repai'd.
50
For that old crumpled wight began go upstraight,
And Autaparnes face recovered blood!
But Simon looked pale withouten might,
Withouten cheer, or joy, or livelihood:
Cause of all this at last I understood.
For Autaparn that knife had from him cast,
And almost closed the passage of that flood.
That flood, that blood, was that which Simons taste
Alone could fit; if that were gone the lad did waste.
51
And his old mother, called Hypomone,
Did ease her back from that down-swaying weight,
That leaden Quadrate, which did miserably
Annoy her crasie corse; but that more light
She might fare on, she in her husbands sight
Threw down her load, where he threw down his blade,
And from that time began the pitious plight
Of sickly Simon: so we them persuade
Back to retreat, and do their dying son some aid.
52
Though loath, yet at the length they do assent:
So we return unto the place where lay
The heavy Quadrate, and that instrument
Of bleeding smart. It would a man dismay
To think how that square lead her back did sway;
And how the half-clos'd wound was open tore
With that sharp-pointed knife: and sooth to say
Simon himself was inly grieved sore,
Seeing the deadly smart that his dear parents bore.
53
So we remeasure the way we had gone,
Still fareing on toward Theoprepy.
Great strength and comfort 'twas to think upon
Our good escape from listlesse Aptery,
And from the thraldom of Infirmity.
Now naught perplexed our stronger plumed spright,
But what may be the blameless verity:
Often we conceived things were transacted right:
And often we found our selves guld with strong passions might.
54
But now more feeble far we find their force
Then erst it was, when as in Aptery
To strong Pantheothen they had recourse:
For then a plain impossibility
It was to overcome their cruelty.
But here encouraged by Gabriel
We strongly trust to have the victory.
And if by chance they do our forces quell;
It Is not by strength of arms, but by some misty spell.
55
So bravely we went on withouten dread,
Till at the last we came whereas a hill
With steep ascent highly lift up his head:
To the aged-hoof it worken would much ill
To climb this cliff; with weary ach't would fill
His drier bones. But yet it is smooth and plain
Upon the top. It passes far my skill
The springs, the bowers, the walks, the goodly train
Of fair chaste Nymphs that haunt that place, for to explain.
56
I saw three sisters there in seemly wise
Together walking on the flowery Green,
Yclad in snowy stoles of fair agguize.
The glistring streams of silver waving shine,
Skilfully interwove with silken line,
So variously did play in that fair vest,
That much it did delight my wondering eyne:
Their face with Love and Vigor was ydrest,
With Modesty and Joy; their tongue with just behest:
57
Their locks hung loose, A triple coronet
Of flaming gold and star-like twinkling stone
Of highest price, was on their temples set:
The Amethist, the radiant Diamond,
The Jasper, enemy to spirits won,
With many other glorious for to see.
These three enameld rimmes of that fair Crown
Be these: the first hight Dicaeosyne,
^hilosophy the next, the last stiff Apathy.
58
I gazed, and mused and was well nigh distraught
With admiration of those three maids,
And could no further get, ne further saught;
Down on the hill my weary limbs I laid,
And fed my feeble eyes, which me betrayed
Unto Loves bondage. Simon liked it not
To see me so bewitched, and thus assayed
By wisest speech to loose this Magic knot:
Great pity things so fair should have so foul a spot:
59
What spot, said I, can in these fair be found?
Both spot in those white vests, and eke a flaw
In those bright gems wherewith these Maids be crowned,
If you will but list to see, I Will easily show.
Then I, both Love of man and holy law
Exactly's kept upon this sacred hill;
True Fortitude that truest foes does awe,
Justice and Abstinence from sweetest ill,
And Wisdom like the Sun does all with light over spill.
60
Thanks be to God we are so well arrived
To the long-sought for land, Theoprepy.
Nay soft good Sir, said Simon, you are deceived,
You are not yet past through Autoesthesy:
With that the spot and flaw he bad me see
Which he descried in that goodly array.
The spot and flaw self-sens'd Autopathy
Was hight, the eldest Nymph Pythagorissa,
Next Platonissa hight; the last hight Stoicissa.
61
But this high Mount where these three sisters won,
Said Simon, cleeped is, Har-Eloim.
To these it is said, Do worship to my Son:
It Is right, that all the Gods do worship him,
There Is none exempt: those that the highest climb
Are but his Ministers, their turns they take
To serve as well as those of lower slime.
What so is not of Christ but does partake
Of the Autoesthesian soil, is life Doemoniake.
62
His words did strangely work upon my spright,
And weaned my mind from that I dearly loved;
So I nould dwell on this so pleasing sight,
But down descended, as it me behooved,
And as my trusty guide me friendly moved.
So when we down had come, and thence did pass
On the low plain, Simon more clearly proved,
That though much beauty there and goodness was,
Yet that in Theoprepia did far surpass.
63
So forward on we fare, and leave that hill,
And press still further, the further we go,
Simon more strength, more life and godly will,
More vigor he and livelihood did show;
But Autaparnes wox more wan and woe:
He faints, he sinks, ready to give up ghost,
And aged Hypom'ne trod with footing slow,
And staggered with her load; so ill disposed
Their fading spirits were, that life was well nigh lost.
64
By this in fight of that black wall we came,
A wall by stone-artificer not made:
For it is naught but smoke from duskish flame,
Which in that low deep valleys pitchy shade
Does fiercely the Autopathian life invade,
With glowing heat, and eats out that spot.
This dreadful trial many has dismayed;
When Autaparnes saw this was his lot,
Fear did his sense benum, he wox like earthly clot.
65
In solemn silency this vapor rose
From this drad Dale, and hid the Eastern sky
With its deep darkness, and the Evening-close
Forestalled with Stygian obscurity;
Yet was it not thick, nor thin, nor moist, nor dry;
Nor stank it ill, nor yet gave fragrant smell,
Nor did 't take in through pellucidity
The penetrating light, nor did 't repel
Through gross opacity the beams of Michael.
66
Yet terrible it is to Psyche's brood,
That still retain the life Doemoniake;
Constraining fear calls in their vital flood,
When the drad Magus once does mention make
Of the deep dark Abyss; for fear they quake
At that strong-awing word: But they that die
Unto self feeling life, naught shall them shake;
Base fear proceeds from weak Autopathy.
This dale hight Ain, the fumes hight Anautoesthesy.
67
Into this dismal Dale we all descend.
Here Autaparnes and Hypomone
Their languid life with that dark vapor blend.
Thus perished fading vitality,
But naught did fade of Life's reality.
When these two old ones their last gasp had fet,
In this drad valley their dead corpse did lie;
But what could well be saved to Simon flet.
Here Simon first became spotless Anautoesthet.
68
When we had waded quite through this deep shade,
We then appeared in bright Theoprepy:
Here Phoebus ray in straightest ^^ne was laid,
That erst lay broke in gross consistency
Of cloudy substance. For strong sympathy
Of the divided natures Magic band
Was burned to dust in Anautoesthesie:
Now there is no fear of Death's dart holding hand:
Fast love, fixed life, firm peace in Theoprepia land.
69
When Mnemon hither came, he leaned back
Upon his seat, and a long time respired.
When I perceived this holy Sage so slack
To speak (well as I might) I him desired
Still to hold on, if so he were not tired;
And tell what fell in blessed Theoprepy;
But he nould do the thing that I required,
Too hard it is, said he, that kingdoms glee
To show; who list to know himself must come and see.
70
This story under the cool shadowing Beach
Old Mnemon told of famous Dizoie:
To set down all he said passes my reach,
That all would reach even to infinity.
Strange things he spoke of the biformity
Of the Dizoians; What mongrill sort
Of living wights; how monstrous shaped they be,
And how that man and beast in one consort;
Goats britch, man's tongue, goose head, with monki's mouth distort.
71
Of Centaures, Cynocephals, walking trees,
Tritons, and Mermayds, and such uncouth things;
Of weeping Serpents with fair woman's eyes,
Mad-making waters, sex transforming springs;
Of foul Circean swine with golden rings,
With many such like falsehoods; but the straight
Will easily judge all crooked wanderings.
Suffice it then we have taught that ruling Right,
The Good is uniform, the Evil infinite.
PSYCHATHANASIA OR The second part of the Song of the SOUL, Treating Of the
Immortality of Souls, especially MAN'S SOUL.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...), Empedocles.

Omnia mutantur, nihil interit, Ovid.

(...). Trismegist.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe very nerves and sinews of Religion is hope of immortality. What greater
incitement to virtue and justice then eternal happiness? what greater terror
from wickedness, then a full persuasion of after-judgement and continual
torture of spirit? But my labor is superfluous, Men from their very childhood
are persuaded of these things. Verily, I fear how they are persuaded of them
when they become men. Else would not they whom the fear of hell does not
afright, die so unwillingly, nor wicked men so securely; nor would so many be
wicked. For even naturall-providence would bid them look forward.

Beside some men of a melancholic temper (which commonly distrust and
suspicion do accompany) though otherwise pious, yet out of an exceeding desire
of eternal being, think they can never have security enough for this so
pleasing hope and expectation, and so even with anxiety of mind busy
themselves to prove the truth of that strongly, which they desire vehemently to
be true. And this body, which dissolution waits upon, helps our infidelity
exceedingly. For the soul not seeing it self, judges it self of such a nature,
as those things are to which she is nearest united: Falsely says, but yet
ordinarily, I am sick, I am weak, I faint, I die; when it is naught but the
perishing life of the body that is in such plight, to which she is so close
tied in most intimate love and sympathy. So a tender mother, if she see a knife
struck to her child's heart, would shreek and swound as if her self had been
smit; when as if her eye had not beheld that spectacle, she had not been moved
though the thing were surely done. So I do verily think that the mind being
taken up in some higher contemplation, if it should please God to keep it in
that ecstasie, the body might be destroyed without any disturbance to the soul.
for how can there be or sense or pain without animadversion.

But while we have such continual commerce with this frail body, it is not to
be expected, but that we shall be assaulted with the fear of death and
darkness. For alas! how few are there that do not make this visible world,
their Adonai, their stay and sustentation of life, the prop of their soul,
their God? How many Christians are not prone to whisper that of the Heathen
Poet, Soles occidere and redire possunt;
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
The Sun may set and rise again;
If once sets our short light,
Deep sleep us binds with iron chain,
Wrapped in eternal Night.


But I would not be so injurious, as to make men worse then they are, that my
little work may seem of greater use and worth then it is.

Admit then that men are most what persuaded of the souls immortality, yet here
they may read reasons to confirm that persuasion, and be put in mind, as they
read, of their end, and future condition, which cannot be but profitable at
least.

For the pleasure they will reap from this Poem, it will be according as their
Genius is fitted for it. For as Plato speaks in his Io, (...), or according to
the more usual phrase (...), etc. The spirit of every Poet is not alike, nor
his writings alike suitable to all dispositions. As Io, the reciter of Homers
verses, professes himself to be snatched away with an extradodinary fury or
ecstasie at the repeating of Homers Poesy, but others so little to move him
that he could even fall asleep. So that no man is rashly to condemn another
man's labor in this kind, because he is not taken with it. As wise or wiser
then himself may.

But this is a main piece of idolatry and injustice in the world, that every
man would make his private Genius an universal God; and would devour all men's
apprehensions by his own fire, that glowes so hot in him, and (as he thinks)
shines so clear.

As for this present song of the Immortality of the soul, it is not unlikely
but that it will prove sung Montibus and Sylvis to the waste woods and solitary
mountains. For all men are so full of their own phansies and idiopathies, that
they scarce have the civility to interchange any words with a stranger. If they
chance to hear his exotic tone, they entertain it with laughter, a passion
very incident upon that occasion to children and clowns. But it were much
better neither to embosome nor reject any thing, though strange, till we were
well acquainted with it.

Exquisite disquisition begets diffidence; diffidence in knowledge, humility;
humility, good manners and meek conversation. For mine own part, I desire no
man to take any thing I write, upon trust, without canvasing; and would be
thought rather to propound then to assert what I have here or elsewhere
written. But continually to have expressed my diffidence in the very tractates
themselves, had been languid and ridiculous.

It were a piece of injustice to expect of others, that which I could never
endure to stoop to my self. That knowledge which is built upon humane
authority, is no better then a Castle in the Air. For what man is (...) or at
least can be proved to us to be so? Wherefore the foundation of that argument
will but prove precarious, that is so built. And we have rather a sound of
words signifying the thing is so, then any true understanding that the thing is
so indeed.

What ever may seem strange in this Poem, condemn it not, till thou find
it dissonant to Plato's School, or not deducible from it. But there be many
arguments, that have no strangeness at all to prove the Souls immortality; so
that no man that is not utterly illiterate shall lose his labor in reading
this short Treatise.

I must confess I intended to spin it out to a greater length; but things of
greater importance then curious Theory, take me off; beside the hazard of
speaking hard things to a multitude.

I make no question, but those that are rightly acquainted with Platonisme,
will accept of that small pains, and make a good construction of my labors.
For I well assure thee (Reader) that it will be nothing but ignorance of my
scope, that shall make any do otherwise. I fly too high to take notice of
lesser flaws. If thou see them, I give thee free liberty to mend them. But if
thou regardest not lesser trifles, we be well met.

Farewell. H. M.

The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA. Or The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK I. CANT. I.
Struck with strong sense of Gods good will
The immortality
Of Souls I sing; Praise with my quill
Plato's Philosophy.
1
WHatever man he be that dares to deem
True Poets skill to spring of earthly race,
I must him tell, that he does misesteem
Their strange estate, and eke himself disgrace
By his rude ignorance. For there is no place
For forced labor, or slow industry
Of flagging wits, in that high fiery chase,
So soon as of the Muse they quickened be,
At once they rise, and lively sing like Lark in sky.
2
Like to a Meteor, whose material
Is low unwieldy earth, base unctuous slime,
Whose inward hidden parts ethereall
Ly close upwrapt in that dull sluggish fime,
Ly fast asleep, till at some fatal time
Great Phoebus lamp has fired its inward spright,
And then even of it self on high does climb;
That erst was dark becomes all eye, all sight,
Bright star, that to the wise of future things gives light.
3
Even so the weaker mind, that languid lies
Knit up in rags of dirt, dark cold and blind,
So soon that purer flame of Love unties
Her clogging chains, and does her spright unbind,
She sores aloft; for she her self does find
Well plumed; so raised upon her spreaden wing,
She softly plays, and warbles in the wind,
And carols out her inward life and spring
Of overflowing joy, and of pure love does sing.
4
She sings of purest love, not that base passion
That fouls the soul with filth of lawless lust,
And Circe-like her shape does all misfashion;
But that bright flame that is proper to the just,
And eats away all dross and cankred rust
With its refining heat, unites the mind
With Gods own spright, who raises from the dust
The slumbring soul, and with his usage kind
Makes 't breath after that life that time has not defined.
5
So has he raised my soul, and so possessed
My inward spright, with that unfeigned will
He bears to Psyche's brood, that I nere rest
But ruth or ragefull indignation fill
My troubled veins, that I my life near spill
With sorrow and disdain, for that foul lore
That crept from dismal shades of Night, and quill
Steeped in sad Styx, and fed with stinking gore
Sucked from corrupted corse, that God and men abhor.
6
Such is thy putid muse, Lucretius,
That fain would teach that souls all mortal be,
The dusty Atoms of Democritus
Certes have fallen into thy feeble eye,
And thee bereft of p^rspicacity.
Others through the strong steem of their dull blood,
Without the help of that Philosophy,
Have with more ease the truth not understood,
And the same thing conclude in some sad drooping mood.
7
But most of all my soul does them refuse
That have extinguished natures awful light
By evil custom, and unkind abuse
Of Gods young tender work, that in their spright
He first gins frame. But they with heddy might
Of overwhelming liquour that life drowned,
And reasons eye swell up or put out quite.
Hence horrid darkness does their souls confound;
And foul blasphemous belch from their furd mouth resounds.
8
Thus while false way they take to large their spirit
By vaster cups of Bacchus, they get fire
Without true light, and 'cording to demerit
Infernal blasts blind confidence inspire:
Bold heat to uncouth thoughts is their bad hire.
Which they then dearly hug, and ween their feet
Have clombe, whither vulgar men dare not aspire.
But its the fruit of their burnt sootie spright:
Thus dream they of drad death, and an eternal night.
9
Now in the covert of dame Natures cell
They think they are shrouded, and the mystery
Of her deep secrets they can wisely spell;
And 'pprove that art above true piety;
Laugh at religion as a mockery,
A thing found out to aw the simpler sort:
But they, brave sparks, have broke from this dark tie:
The light of nature yields more sure comfort.
Alas! too many souls in this fond thought consort.
10
Like men new made contrived into a cave
That never saw light, but in that shadowing pit,
Some uncouth might them hoodwink hither drove,
Now with their backs to the dens mouth they sit,
Yet shoulder not all light from the dern pit,
So much gets in as Optic art counts meet
To show the forms that hard without do flit.
With learned quaere each other here they greet:
True moving substances they deem each shadow slight:
11
When fowls fly by, and with their swapping wings
Beat the inconstant air, and mournful noise
Stir up with their continual chastisings
In the soft yielding penitent; the voice
These solemn Sages naught at all accoyes.
It Is common; only they philosophize,
Busying their brains in the mysterious toys
Of flittie motion, wary well advize
On'ts inward principles the hid Entelechies:
12
And whereabout that inward life is seated,
That moves the living creature, they epsy
Passing in their dim world. So they are defeated,
Calling thin shadows true realitie,
And deeply doubt if corporalitie,
(For so they term those visibles) were stroy'd
Whether that inward first vitalitie
Could then subsist. But they are ill accloy'd
With cloddie earth, and with blind duskishnesse annoyed.
13
If roaring Lion or the neighing Horse,
With frisking tail to brush off busy flies,
Approach their den, then happily they discourse
From what part of these creatures may arise
Those greater sounds. Together they advise,
And gravely do conclude that from the thing
That we would term the tail, those thundering neyce
Do issue forth: tail of that shadowing
They see then moved most, while he is whinneying.
14
And so the Lions huge and hideous roar
They think proceeds from his rugg'd flowing mane,
Which the fierce winds do toss and tousell sore;
Unless perhaps he stir his bushie train:
For then the tail will carry it again.
Thus upon each occasion their frail wit
Bestirres it self to find out errors vain
And useless theories in this dark pit:
Pond reasoning they have, seldom or never hit.
15
So soon new shadows enter in the cave,
New entelechias they then conceive
Brought forth of nature; when they passed have
Their gloomy orb (false shades easily deceive)
Not only they that visible bereave
Of life and being, but the hidden might
And moving root, unliv'd, unbeen'd they leave
In their vain thoughts: for they those shadows slight
Do deem sole prop and stay of the hidden motive spright.
16
This is that awful cell where Naturalists
Brood deep opinion, as themselves conceit;
This Errors den where in a magic mist
Men hatch their own delusion and deceit,
And grasp vain shows. Here their bold brains they beat,
And dig full deep, as deep as Hyle's hell,
Unbare the root of life (O searching wit!)
But root of life in Hyles shade no'te dwell.
For God's the root of all, as I elsewhere shall tell.
17
This is the stupid state of drooping soul,
That loves the body and false form admires;
Slave to base sense, fierce against reasons control,
That still it self with lower lust bemires;
That naught believes and much less desires
Things of that unseen world and inward life,
Nor unto height of purer truth aspires:
But cowardly declines the noble strife
Against vice and ignorance; so gets it no relief.
18
From this default, the lust full Epicure
Democrite, or the unthankful Stagirite,
Most men prefer before holy Pythagore,
Divinest Plato, and grave Epictete:
But I am so inflamed with the sweet sight
And goodly beauty seen on Eloim-hill,
That maugre all men's clamours in despite
I Will praise my Platonissa with loud quill;
My strong intended voice all the wide world shall fill.
19
O sacred Nymph begot of highest Jove!
Queen of Philosophy and virtuous lear!
That firest the nobler heart with spotless love,
And sadder minds with Nectar drops do cheer,
That often bedrencht with sorrows while we are here
Exiled from our dear home, that heavenly soil.
Through wandering ways thou safely do us bear
Into the land of truth, from dirtie foil
Thou keepst our slipping feet often wearied with long toil.
20
When I with other beauties thine compare,
O lovely maid, all others I must scorn.
For why? they all rude and deformed appear:
Certes they be ill thew'd and baser born:
Yet thou, alas! of men art more forlorn.
For like will to its like: but few can see
Thy worth; so night-birds fly the glorious morn.
Thou art a beam shot from the Deity,
And nearest art allied to Christianity.
21
But they be sprung of sturdie Giants race,
Allied to Night and the foul Earthy clay,
Love of the carcass, Envy, Spite, Disgrace,
Contention, Pride, that unto the highest does bray,
Rash labor, a Titanicall assay
To pluck down wisdom from her radiant seat,
With mirie arms to bear her quite away.
But thy dear mother Thorough-cleansing virtue hight:
Here will true wisdom lodge, here will she deigne to light.
22
Come, Gentle Virgin, take me by the hand,
To yonder grove with speedy pace we'll hie:
(Its not far off from Alethea land)
Swift as the levin from the sneezing sky,
So swift we'll go, before an envious eye
Can reach us. There I Will purge out the strong steem
Of prepossessing prejudice, that I
Perhaps may have contract in common stream;
And wary well wash out my old conceived dream.
23
And when I Have breathed awhile in that free air,
And cleared my self from tinctures took before,
Then deigne thou to thy novice to declare
Thy secret skill, and hid mysterious lore,
And I due thanks shall plenteously down pour.
But well I wot thou wilt not envassall me:
That law were rudeness. I may not adore
Ought but the lasting spotless verity.
Well thewed minds the mind do always setten free.
24
Free to that inward awful Majesty
Hight Logos, whom they term great son of God,
Who framed the world by his deep sciency,
The greater world. Als' makes his near abode
In the less world: so he can trace the trod
Of that hid ancient path, when as he made
This stately Fabric of the world so broad.
He plainly does unfold his skillful trade,
When he does harmless hearts by his good spright invade.
25
O thou eternal Spright, cleave open the sky,
And take thy flight into my feeble breast,
Enlarge my thoughts, enlight my dimmer eye
That wisely of that burden closely pressed
In my straight mind, I may be dispossessed:
My Muse must sing of things of mickle weight;
The souls eternity is my great quest:
Do thou me guide, that art the souls sure light,
Grant that I never err, but ever wend aright.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, Or, The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK I. CANT. II.
What a soul is here I define,
After I have compared
All powers of life: That stamp divine
Show that brutes never shared.
1
NOw I Will address me to my mighty task,
So mighty task that makes my heart to shrink,
While I compute the labor it will ask,
And on my own frail weakness I gin think.
Like tender Lad that on the rivers brink,
That fain would wash him, while the Evening keen
With sharper air does make his pores to wink,
Shakes all his body, nips his naked skin,
At first makes some delay but after skippeth in:
2
So I upon a wary due debate
With my perplexed mind, after persuade
My softer heart. I need no longer wait.
Lo! now new strength my vitals does invade
And rear again, that carst began to fade,
My life, my light, my senses all revive
That fearful doubts before had ill apaid.
Leap in, my soul, and strongly before thee drive
The fleeting waves, and when thee list to th'bottome dive.
3
For thou can dive full well, and flote aloft,
Dive down as deep as the old Hyle's shade,
Through that slight darkness glid'st thou sly and soft,
Through pitchy cumbring fogs strongly can wade,
Nor in thy flight could thou be ever staid,
If in thy flight thou flewest not from him,
That for himself thine excellent might has made.
Contract desire, repulse strong Magic steem,
Then even in foul Cocytus thou may fearlesse swim.
4
Like that strange uncouth fish Lucerna hight,
Whose won is in the brackish Seas, yet fire
She easily carries and clear native light
In her close mouth: and the more to admire,
In darkest night when she lists to aspire
To the utmost surface of the watery Main,
And opes her jaws, that light does not expire,
But lively shines till she shut up again:
Nor liquid Sea, nor moistened Air this light restrain.
5
Or like a lamp armed with pellucid horn,
Which ruffling winds about do rudely toss,
And felly lash with injury and scorn,
But her mild light they cannot easily cross;
She shines to her own foes withouten loss:
Even so the soul into her self collected,
Or in her native hew withouten dross,
In midst of bitter storms is not dejected.
Nor her eternal state is any whit suspected.
6
As Cynthia in her stouping Perigee,
That deeper wades in the earths duskish Cone,
yet safely wallows through in silency
Till she again her filver face has shown,
And tells the world that she is the self-same Moon,
Not now more listlesse then I was whileare
When I was hid in my Apogeon,
For I my self alike do always bear
^n every circling race: blind ignorance breeds fear.
7
Nor being hid after my monthly wane,
Long keppen back from your expecting sight,
Dull damps and darkness do my beauty stain;
When none I show then have I the most light,
Nearer to Phoebus more I am bedight
With his fair rays. And better to confute,
All vain suspicion of my worser plight,
Mark aye my face, after my close salute
With that sharp-witted God, seem I not more acute?
8
This is the state of the evermoving soul,
Whirling about upon her circling wheel;
Certes to sight she vatiously does roll,
And as men deem full dangerously does reel,
But often when men fear most, her self does feel
In happiest plight conjoy'nd with that great Sun
Of lasting bliss, that does himself reveal
More fully then, by that close union,
Though men, that miss her here, do think her quite undone.
9
But lest we rashly wander out too far,
And be yblown about with wanton wind,
Withouten stern, or card, or Polar star,
In its round little list so close confined:
Let the souls nature first be well defined:
Then we'll procee^. But all the while I crave
When e're I speak cording to Plato's mind,
That you my faultlesse drift do not deprave.
For I the freeborn soul to no sect would inslave.
10
Diverse conceits the wizards of old time
Have had concerning that we here inquire,
And would set forth in an eternal rhyme;
But we list not our dainty Muse to tire
In such foul ways, and plunge her in the mire.
Strange dreams their drowsy scholars they have taught,
The heart, the heart-bloud, brains, fleet air, hot fire
To be the thing that they so presly sought,
Some have defined, some temper, some atoms, some naught.
11
But I must needs decline this wandering path;
For well I wot error is infinite,
But be that simple truth once reached has
Needs not with every single shade to fight:
One stroke will put all falsities to flight.
So soon as Sol his fiery head does rear
Above the Eastern waves his glowing sight
As angry darkness so long rule did bear,
Straight all night-trifling sprights does chase away with fear.
12
Long have I swonk with anxious assay
To finden out what this hid soul may be,
That does her self so variously bewray
In different motions. Other we her see
When she so fairly spreads the branching tree;
Other when as sh' has loosed her self from ground,
And opes her root, and breaths in heaven free,
And does her wants in the wide air resound,
Speaks out her joy, no longer whispers underground.
13
Such is the noise of cheerful chirping birds,
That tell the sweet impressions of the Spring;
Or before some storm, when their quick sprights be stird
With nearer strong appulse and hid heaving,
That fills their little souls, and makes them sing,
Puffed up with joy and o'rflowing delight:
Estsoons with rattling winds the air does ring.
The sturdy storm does make them take their flight
Into thick bush or hedge to save them from heavens spite.
14
From this same sourse of sense are murmuring moans
Of bellowing bullocks, when sharp hunger bites;
Hence whining dog so pitifully groans
When as with knotted whip his Lord him smites;
And every beast when with Deaths pangs he fights.
But senseless trees nor feel the bleaker wind,
That nip their sides, nor the Suns scorching might,
Nor the sharp ax piercing their ruggid rind;
Yet have they soul, whose life in their sweet growth we find.
15
So plants spring up flourish and fade away,
Not marking their own state: they never found
Themselves, when first they 'pear'd in sunny day;
Nor ever sought themselves, though in the ground
They search full deep: Nor are they waked by wound
Of biting iron, to naught are attent
That them befalls, when cold humors abound
And clog their vital heat, or when they 're brent
With Sirius flame, or when through eld they waxen faint.
16
Or whatsoever diseases them betide
That basten death, they naught at all regard:
But when to plantall life quick sense is ti'd,
And progging fancy, then upon her guard
She gins to stand, and well her self to ward
From foes she plainly feels, pursues her joy,
Remembers where she well or ill has fared,
Or swiftly flies from that that does annoy,
Or stoutly strives her fierce destroyer to destroy.
17
Thus have we run through these two degrees
Of the souls working seen in beast and plant;
Reason's the third, of common qualities
The best. Of this the humane race does vaunt
As proper to themselves; But if we skan't
Sans prejudice, it is not in them alone;
The Dog, the Horse, the Ape, the Elephant,
Will all rush in striving to make up one,
And sternly claim their share in use of right reason.
18
But whether brutes do reason and reflect
Upon their reasoning* I Will not dispute;
Nor care I what brisk boys will here object:
Long task it were all fondlings to confute.
But I Will lay down that which will better suit
With that high heavenly spark, the soul of man;
His proper character (I would he knew't)
Is that which Adam lost by wily train
Of the old sly snake that ^^ve beguiled with speeches vain.
19
This was the Image of the highest God,
Which brutes partake not of. This Image hight
True Justice, that keeps ever the even trod,
True Piety that yields to man the sight
Of heavenly beauty, those fair beams so bright
Of the everlasting Deity, that shed
Their sacred fire within the purer spright,
The fruit of Eden wherewith souls be fed,
Man's awful majesty of every beast ydred.
20
Nor is that radiant force in humane kind
Extinguished quite, he that did them create
Can those dull rusty chains of fleep unbind,
And rear the soul unto her pristin state:
He can them so enlarge and elevate
And spreaden out, that they can compass all,
When they no longer be incarcerate
In this dark dungeon, this foul fleshly wall,
Nor be no longer wedged in things corporeal:
21
But raised aloft into their proper sphere,
That sphere that hight the Orb Intellectual,
They quiet sit, as when the flitting fire
That Natures mighty Magic down did call
Into the oily wood, at its own fall
Grows full of wrath and rage, and gins to fume,
And roars and strives against its disquietall,
Like troubled Ghost forced some shape to assume;
But it its holding foe at last does quite consume.
22
And then like gliding spright does straight dispear,
That erst was forced to take a fiery form:
Full lightly it ascends into the clear
And subtle air devoid of cloudy storm,
Where it does steady stand, all-uniform,
Pure, pervious, immixt, innocuous, mild,
Naught scorching, naught glowing, nothing enorm,
Naught destroying, not destroyed, not defiled;
Foul fume being spent, just before its flight it faicly smiled.
23
Thus have I traced the soul in all her works,
And several conditions have displaid,
And showed all places where so ever she lurks,
Even her own lurking's of her self bewrayed,
In plants, in beasts, in men, while here she staid:
And freed from earth how then she spreads on high
Her heavenly rays, that also has been said.
Look now, my Muse, and cast thy piercing eye
On every kind, and tell wherein all souls agree.
24
Here dare I not define't, the Entelechie
Of organized bodies. For this life,
This centrall life, which men take souls to be,
Is not among the beings relative;
And sure some souls at least are self-active
Withouten body having Energie.
Many put out their force informative
In their ethereall corporeity,
Devoid of heterogen^all organity.
25
Self-moving substance, that be the definition
Of souls, that longs to them in general:
This well expresses that common condition
Of every vital center creaturall.
For why? both what hight form spermaticall
Has here a share, as also that we term
Soul sensitive, I Will called form bestiall,
It makes a beast added to plantall sperm;
Add rational form, it makes a man as men affirm.
26
All these be substances self-moveable:
And that we call virtue magneticall
(That what is defined be irreprovable)
I comprehend it in the life plantall:
Among trees there is found life Sympatheticall;
Though trees have not animadversive sense.
Therefore the soul's Autokineticall
Alone. What ere's in this defining sense.
Is soul, what ere's not soul is driven far from hence.
27
But that each soul's Autokineticall,
Is easly shown by sifting all degrees
Of souls. The first are forms Spermaticall,
That best be seen in shaping armed trees,
Which if they want their fixed Centreities,
By which they fairly every part extend,
And gently inact with spread vitalities
The flowring boughs. How Natures work does wend
Who knows? or from what inward stay it does depend?
28
Forthy let first an inward center hid
Be put. That Is naught but Natures fancy ti'd
In closer knot, shut up into the mid
Of its own self: so our own spirits gride
With piercing wind in storming Winter tide
Contract themselves and shrivell up together,
Like snake the country man in snow espied,
Whose spright was quite shrunk in by nipping weather.
From whence things come, by fo-man forced they backward thither
29
The rigid cold had forced into its center
This serpents life; but when the rural Swain
Placed her upon warm hearth, and heat did enter
Into her nummed corpse, she began to strain
And stretch herself, and her host entertain
With scornful hiss, shooting her anchored tongue,
Threatening her venomed teeth; so straight again
She proved a living snake, when she along
Her corse free life had drove from center steddie strong.
30
So does the gentle warmth of solar heat
Easily awake the center seminall,
That makes it softly streak on its own seat,
And fairly forward force its life internal.
That inward life's the impresse imaginall
Of Natures Art, which sweetly flowreth out
From that is cleep'd the Sphere spermaticall:
For there is placed the never fading root
Of every flower or herb that into the air does shoot.
31
Fairly invited by Sols piercing ray
And inward tickled with his chearing spright,
All plants break thorough into open day,
Rend the thick curtain of cold cloying night.
The earths opakents enemy to light,
And crown themselves in sign of victory
With shining leaves, and goodly blossoms bright.
Thus called out by friendly sympathy
Their souls move of themselves on their Centreitie.
32
But it is more plain in animalitie.
When fiery coursers strike the grassie ground
With swift tempestuous feet, that far and nigh
They fill men's ears with a broad thundering sound
(From hollow hoof so strongly it does rebound)
What Is that that twitcheth up their legs so fast,
And fiercely jerks them forth, that many wound
They give to their own mother in their have?
With eager steps they quickly mete the forest wast.
34
That outward form is but a neurospast;
The soul it is that on her subtle ray,
That she shoots out, the limbs of moving beast
Does stretch straight forth, so straightly as she may.
Bones joints and sinews shaped of stubborn clay
Cannot so easily lie in one straight line
With her projected might, much less obey
Direct retractions of these beams fine:
Of force, so straight retreat they ever must decline.
35
But yet they follow in a course oblique,
With angular doublings, as the joints pormit:
So go they up together, not unlike
An iron candle-stick the smith has fit
With many junctures, whom in studious fit
Some scholar set awork: but to return,
Lest what we aimed at we unwares omit;
If souls of beasts their bodies move and turn,
And wield at phansies beck, as we described beforn;
36
Then be the souls of beasts self-moving forms,
Bearing their bodies as themselves think meet,
Invited or provoked, so they transform
At first themselves within, then straight in sight
Those motions come, which suddenly do light
Upon the bodies visible, which move
According to the will of the inward spright.
In the inward spright be anger, hate and love:
Hence claws, horns, hoofs they use the pinching ill to amove.
37
Thus have I plainly proved that souls of beasts
And plants do move themselves. That souls of men
Should be more stupid, and far less releast
From matters bondage surely there is none can
Admit of, though but slightly they do scan
The cause. But for to put all out of doubt,
Let Us take again the same way we have ran,
Break down all obstacles that hinder might
Our future course to make all plain all clear throughout.
38
If there be no self-motion in man's soul,
That she nor this nor that way can propend
Of her own self, nor can no whit control
Nor will of her own self, who can offend?
For no man's self (if you do well perpend)
Guiltie's of ought when naught does from him flow.
Whither do learning, laws, grave speeches tend?
Speaks the rude Carter to the wagon slow
With threatening words, or to the beasts that do it draw?
39
Surely unto the beasts that easily go:
For there is the principle of motion,
Such principle as can it self foreslow,
Or forward press by incitation:
Which though it moved by commination
So stiffly strives, yet from it self it strives,
Bears it self forth with stout contention,
And ever and anon the whip revives
That inward life, so bravely on the Rustic drives.
40
Again, all that sweet labor would be lost
That Gods good spirit takes in humane mind,
So often we courted be so often crossed:
But nor that tender amorous courtship kind
Has any place, where we no place can find
For a self-yielding love; Or if self-will
Be not in us, how easily were declined
All crosses? None could happen us until,
How will I want, and want no cross passes my skill
41
Besides when reason works with fantasy,
And changeable conceits we do contrive,
Purging and pruning with all industry,
What Is dead or useless, less demonstrative,
What Is dull or flaccid, naught illustrative,
Quenching unfitted phantasmes in our brain,
And for our better choice new flames revive;
The busy soul thus does her reason strain
To write or speak what envious tongue may never stain:
42
Or when quite heedlesse of this earthie world
She lifts her self unto the azure sky,
And with those wheeling gyres around is hurld,
Turns in her self in a due distancie
The cering Seven, or a stretched line does tie
Of The silver-bowed moon from horn to horn;
Or finds out Phoebus vast soliditie
By his diametre, measures the Morn,
Girds the swollen earth with linear list, though earth she scorn.
43
All this is done, though body never move:
The soul about it self circumgyrates
Her various forms, and what she most does love
She often before her self stabilitates;
She stiffly stayes't and wistly contemplates,
Or lets it somewhat slowlier descend
Down to the nether Night; she temperates
Her starrie orb, makes her bright forms to wend
Even as she list: Anon she will all with darkness blend.
44
Thus variously she does herself invest
With rising forms, and reasons all the way;
And by right reason does her self divest
Of falser fancies. Who then can gainsay
But she is self-mov'd when she does with self-sway
Thus change herself, as inward life does feel?
If not, then some inspiring sprights bewray
Each reasoning. Yet though to them we deal
First motion, yet our selves ought know what they reveal.
45
But if nor of our selves we moved be
At first, without any invasion
Of stirring forms that into energie
Awake the soul; nor after motion
From its own center by occasion
Does issue forth; then it is not conscious
Of ought: For so 'twill want adversion.
But nothing can animadvert for us:
Therefore all humane souls be self-vivacious.
46
Thus have I proved all souls have centrall motion
Springing from their own selves. But they will object
Against the universalnesse of this clear notion,
That whiles self-flowing sourse I here detect
In plants, in brutes, in men, I ought reject
No soul from wished immortality,
But give them durance when they are resect
From organized corporeitie:
Thus brutes and plants shall gain lasting eternity.
47
It Is true, a never fading durancie
Belongs to all hid principles of life;
But that full grasp of vast Eternity
Longs not to beings simply vegetive,
Nor yet to creatures merely sensitive:
Reason alone cannot arrive to it.
Only souls Deiform intellective
Unto that height of happiness can get;
Yet immortality with other souls may fit.
48
No force of Nature can their strength annoy*
For they be subtiler then the silken air,
Which fatal fire from heaven cannot destroy:
All grossensse its devouring teeth may shear,
And present state of visibles empare;
But the fine curtains of the lasting sky.
Though not of love, yet it perforce must spare,
If they could burn, each spark from flint would try,
And a bright broad-spread flame to either Pole would hie.
49
But if all souls survive their bulks decay,
Another difficulty will straight arise,
Concerning their estate when they are away
Flit from this grosser world. Shall Paradise
Receive the sprights of beasts? or wants it trees,
That their sweet verdant souls should thither take?
Who shall conduct those straggling colonies?
Or be they straightway drenched in Lethe lake?
So that cold sleep their shriveld life from work does slake.
50
Or if that all or some of them awake,
What is their misery? what their delight?
How come they that refined state forsake?
Or had they their first being in our sight?
Whither to serve? what is the useful might
Of these spiritual trees? does fearful hare
Fly the pursuing dog? does soaring kite
Prey upon silly chickins? is there jarre,
Or be those sprights agreed, none to other contraire?
51
If some contraire; then tell me, how is their fight?
What is the spoil? what the stout victors meed?
No flesh no blood whereon to spend their spite,
Or whereupon these hungry souls may feed.
Or does the stronger suck the aerie weed
Wherewith the other did it self invest?
And so more freshly deck it self at need?
An aierie prey for aierie spright is best;
Or ^o they want no food, but be still full and rest?
52
Die they again? draw they in any breath?
Or be they sterill? or bring forth their young?
Beat their light feet on the soft aierie heath?
Express they joy or sorrow with their tongue?
Enough! who ere thou art that thus do throng
My tender Muse with rough objections stout,
Give me but leave to tell thee thou art wrong,
If being of a thing thou call'st in doubt
Cause its more hid conditions shine not clearly out.
53
Who questions but there is a quantity
Of things corporeal, a trinall dimension,
Of solid bodies? yet to satisfy
All doubts that may be made about extension
Would plunge the wisest Clerk. I Will only mention
That quaere, of what parts it does consist,
Whether of Atoms; or what strange retention
Still keeps so much back, that if God list
He could not count the parts of a small linear twist.
54
For his division never could exhaust
The particles, say they, of quantity.
O daring wit of man that thus does boast
It self, and in pursuit of sciencie
Forget the reverend laws of piety.
What thing is hid from that all-seeing light?
What thing not done by his all-potencie?
He can discern by his clear-piercing might
The close-couch'd number of each bigness comes in sight:
55
And so can count them out even part by part;
In number, measure, weight, he all things made;
Each unite he dissevers by his Art;
But here this searching reason to evade,
Each quantum's infinite, straight will be said,
That Is against sense. If it be infinite
Of parts, then tell me, be those parts out-spread?
Or not extent? if extended ou^right
Each fly in summer-Even is higher then Heavens height.
56
If not extended, then that quantum's naught.
Some be extended, others not extent
Already (answers a vain shifting thought)
But those potentiall parts, how be they meint
With those that now be actually distent?
Even thus you grant, that those that actual be
Be plainly finite, against your intent,
Grant me but that, and we shall well agree.
So must slight Atoms be sole parts of quantity.
57
But if it consist of points: then a Scalene
I Will prove all one with an Isosceles:
With as much ease I Will evince clear and clean
That the cross lines of a Rhomboides
That from their meeting to all angles press
Be of one length, though one from earth to heaven
Would reach, and that the other were much less
Then a small digit of the lowest of seven
So as she 'pears to us, yet I could prove them even.
58
And that the moon (though her circumference
Be far more strait then is the earthie ball)
Sometime the earth illumineth at once
And with her grasping rays enlights it all;
And that the Suns great body sphericall
Greater then the earth, far greater then the moon,
Even at midday illumines not at all
This earthy globe in his Apogeon;
So that we in deep darkness sit, though at high noon.
59
Of will, of motion, of divine foresight,
Here might I treat with like perplexity.
But it is already clear that it is not right
To reason down the firm subsistencie
Of things from ignorance of their property.
Therefore not requisite for to determ
The hid conditions of vitalitie
Or shrunk or severed; only I Will affirm
It is, which my next song shall further yet confirm.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA OR The Immortality of the Soul.
Book 1. Cant. 3.
Ore whelmed with grief and pitious woe
For fading life's decays;
How no souls die, from Lunar bow,
A Nymph to me displayes.
1
IN silent night, when mortals be at rest,
And bathe their molten limbs in slothful sleep,
My troubled ghost strange cares did straight molest
And plunged my heavy soul in sorrow deep:
Large floods of tears my moistened cheeks did steep,
My heart was wounded with compassionate love
Of all the creatures: sadly out I creep
From men's close mansions, the more to improve
My mournful plight, so softly on I forward move.
2
Aye me! said I, within my wearied breast,
And sighed sad, wherefore did God erect
This stage of misery? thrice, four times blessed
Whom churlish Nature never did eject
From her dark womb, and cruelly object
By sense and life unto such balefull smart;
Every slight entrance into joy is checked
By that sour step dames threats, and visage tart:
Our pleasure of our pain is not the thousandth part.
3
Thus vexed I was 'cause of mortality:
Her cursed remembrance cast me in this plight,
That I grew sick of the worlds vanity
Ne ought recomfort could my sunken spright,
What so I hate may do me no delight,
Few things (alas) I hate, the more my woe,
The things I love by mine own sad foresight
Make me the greater torments undergo,
Because I know at last they 're gone like idle show.
4
Each goodly sight my sense does captivate
When vernall flowers their silken leaves display,
And open their fragrant bosoms, I that state
Would not have changed but endure for aye;
Nor care to mind that that fatal decay
Is still recured by faithful succession.
But why should ought that is good thus fade away?
Should steady Spring exclude Summers accession?
Or Summer spoil the Spring with furious hot oppression!
5
You cheerful chaunters of the flowring woods,
That feed your careless souls with pleasant lays,
O silly birds! cease from your merry moods:
Ill suits such mirth when dreary deaths assayes
So closely press your sorry carkases:
To mournful note turn your light verilayes,
Death be your song, and winters hoary sprayes,
Spend your vain sprights in sighing Elegies:
I Will help you to lament your woeful miseries.
6
When we lay covered in the shady Night
Of senseless matter, we were well content
With that estate, naught pierced our anxious spright,
No harm we suffered, no harm we meant;
Our rest not with light dream of ill was blent:
But when rough Nature, with her iron hond,
Pulled us from our soft ease, and hither hent,
Disturbing fear and pinching pain we found,
Full many a bitter blast, full many a dreadful stound.
7
Yet life's strong love does so intoxicate
Our misty minds, that we do fear to die.
What did dame Nature brood all things of hate
And only give them life for misery?
Sense for an undeserved penalty?
And show that if she list, that she could make
Them happy? but with spightfull cruelty
Does force their groaning ghosts this house forsake?
And to their ancient Naught their empty selves betake!
8
Thus in deep sorrow and restless disdain
Against the cankered doom of envious fate,
I clove my very heart with riving pain,
While I in sullen rage did ruminate
The Creatures vanity and woeful state;
And night that ought to yield us timely rest,
My swelling griefs did much more aggravate:
The sighs and groans of weary sleeping beast
Seemed as if fleep it self their spirits did molest:
9
Or as constrained perforce that boon to wrest
From envious Nature. All things did augment
My heavy plight, that foully I blamed the best
Of stubborn destiny cause of this wayment.
Even sleep that is for our restoration meant,
As execrable thing I did abhor,
Cause ugly death to the life it did depeint:
What good came to my mind I did deplore,
Because it perish must and not live evermore.
10
Thus wrapped in rufull thought through the waste field
I staggerd on, and scattered my woe,
Bedewed the grass with tears mine eyes did yield,
At last I am arrived wi^h footing slow
Near a black pitchy wood, that strongest throw
Of starry beam no'te easily penetrate:
On the North side I walked to and fro
In solitary shade. The Moons sly gate
Had crossed the middle line: It was at least so late.
11
When the other part of night in painful grief
Was almost spent, out of that solemn grove
There issued forth for my timely relief,
The fairest wight that ever sight did prove,
So fair a wight as might command the love
Of best of mortal race; her countenance sheen
The pensive shade gently defore her drove,
A (...) sweet light shone from her lovely eyne:
She seemed no earthly branch but sprung of stock divine.
12
A silken mantle, colored like the sky
With silver stars in a due distance set,
Was cast about her somewhat carelessly,
And her bright flowing hair was not ylet
By Arts device; only a chappelet
Of chiefest flowers, which from far and near
The Nymphs in their pure Lilly hands had fet,
Upon her temples she did seemly wear;
Her own fair beams made all her ornaments appear.
13
What wilful wight does thus his kindly rest
Forsake? said she, approaching me unto.
What rage, what sorrow boils thus in thy chest
That thou thus spend'st the night in wasting woe?
Often help he gets that his hid ill does show.
Ay me! said I, my grief's not all mine own;
For all men's griefs into my heart do flow,
Nor men's alone, but every mornfull groan
Of dying beast, or what so else that grief has shown.
14
From fading plants my sorrows freshly spring;
And thou thy self that come to comfort me,
Would strongst occasion of deep sorrow bring,
If thou were subject to mortality:
But I no mortal wight thee deem to be,
Thy face thy voice immortal thee proclaim.
Do I not well to wail the vanity
Of fading life, and churlish fates to blame
That with cold frozen death life's cheerful motions tame?
15
Thou do not well, said she to me again,
Thou hurt'st thy self, and do to them no good.
The sighs thou sendest out cannot regain
Life to the dead, thou can not change the mood
Of steadfast destiny. That man is wood
That weetingly hastes on the thing he hates:
Dull sorrow chokes the sprights, congeals the blood,
The bodies fabric quickly ruinates.
Yet foolish men do fondly blame the hasty fates.
16
Come, hasty fates, said I, come take away
My weary life, the fountain of my woe:
When that is extinct or shrunk into cold clay,
Then well I wot that I shall undergo
No longer pain. O! why are you so slow;
Fond speech, said she, nor changed her countenance,
No sign of grief or anger she did show;
Full well she knew passions misgovernance,
Through her clear breast fond passion never yet did lance.
17
But thus spoke on, Since friendly sympathy
With all the creatures thus invades thy breast,
And strikes thine heart with so deep agony
For their decay, 'cording to that behest
Which the pure sourse of sympathy has pressed
On all that of those lovely streams have drunk,
I Will tell thee that that needs must please thee best,
All life's immortal; though the outward trunk
May changed be, yet life to nothing never shrunk.
18
With that she bad me rear my heavy eye
Up toward heaven, I reared them toward the East,
Where in a roscid cloud I did espy
A Lunar rainbow in her painted vest;
The heavenly maid in the mean while surceast
From further speech, while I the bow did view:
But mine old malady was more increased,
The bow began break, and all the gaudy hiew
Dispeared, that my heart the sight did inly rue
19
Thus life does vanish as this bow is gone,
Said I. That sacred Nymph forthwith replied,
Vain shows may vanish that have gaily shone
To feeble sense; but if the truth be tried,
Life cannot perish or to nothing slide:
It is not life that falls under sight,
None but vain flitting qualities are eyed
By wondering ignorance. The vital spright
As surely does remain as the Suns lasting light.
20
This bow, whose breaking struck thy troubled heart,
Of causeless grief, I hope, shall thee recure,
When I have well explained with skillful Art
By its resemblance what things must endure,
What things decay and cannot standen sure.
The higher causes of that colored Ark,
What e're becomes of it, do sit secure.
That so (the body falling) life's fair spark
Is safe, I Will clearly show if you but list to mark.
21
There be six Orders before you do descend
To this gay painted bow: Sols centrall spright
To the first place, to the next we must commend
His hid spread form, then his inherent light,
The fourth his rays wherewith he is bedight,
The fifth that glistring circle of the Moon,
That goodly round full face all silver bright,
The sixth be beams that from her visage shone;
The seventh that gaudy bow that was so quickly gone.
22
The fluid matter was that dewy cloud,
That faild as faithless Hyle wont to fall:
New guest being come, the old she out does crowd;
But see how little Hyle did prevail,
Or sad destruction in this deemed bale!
Sols spright, hid form, fair light and out-gone rays,
The Moons round silver face withouten veil
Do still remain, her beams she still displayes
The cloud but melt, not lost, the bow only decays.
32
This number suits well with the Universe:
The number's eight of the Orbs general,
From whence things flow or wherein they converse,
The first we name Nature Monadicall,
The second hight Life Intellectual,
Third Psychicall; the fourth Imaginative,
Fifth Sensitive, the sixth Spermaticall,
The seventh be fading forms Quantitative,
The eighth Hyle or Ananke perverse, coactive.
24
That last is naught but potentiality,
Which in the lower creature causes strife,
Destruction by incompossibility
In some, as in the forms Quantitative.
All here depend on the Orb Unitive,
Which also hight Nature Monadicall;
As all those lights and colors did derive
Themselves from lively Phoebus life centrall.
Naught therefore but vain sensibles we see caducall.
25
And that the first Every-where-Unitie
Is the true root of all the living creatures,
As they descend in each distinct degree,
That God's the sustentacle of all Natures;
And though those outward forms and gaudy features
May quail like rainbowes in the roscid sky,
Or glistring Parelies or other meteors;
Yet the clear light does not to nothing fly:
Those six degrees of life stand sure, and never die.
26
So now we plainly see that the dark matter
Is not that needful prop to hold up life;
And though deaths engines this gross bulk do shatter
We have not lost our Orb conservative,
Of which we are a ray derivative.
The body sensible so garnished
With outward forms these inward do relieve,
Keep up in fashion and fresh lively-hed;
But this gross bulk those inward lives stands in no sted.
27
Nor can one inward form another slay,
Though they may quell their present energy,
And make them close contract their yielding ray
And hide themselves in their centreity
Till some friendly appulse does set them free,
And call them out again into broad day,
Hence lives gush not in superfluity
Into this world, but their due time do stay,
Though their strong centrall essence never can decay.
28
In Earth, in Air, in the vast flowing Plain,
In that high Region hight Aethercall,
In every place these Atom-lives remain,
Even those that cleeped are forms seminall.
But souls of men by force imaginall
Easly supply their place, when so they list
Appear in thickened Air with shape external
Display their light and form in cloudy mist,
That much it does amaze the musing Naturalist.
29
Wherefore since life so strongly sealed is,
Purge out fond thoughts out of thy weary mind,
And rather strive that thou do naught amiss,
Then God to blame, and Nature as unkind
When naught in them we blamable can find.
When groaning ghosts of beasts or men depart,
Their tender mother does but them unbind
From grosser fetters, and more toilsome smart.
Blessed is the man that has true knowledge of her Art.
30
And more for to confirm this mystery,
She vanished in my presence into Air,
She spread her self with the thin liquid sky;
But I thereat fell not into despair
Of her return, nor wail'd her visage fair,
That so was gone. For I was woxen strong
In this belief. That nothing can empair
The inward life, or its hid essence wrong.
O the prevailing might of a sweet learned tongue!
31
By this the Suns bright wagon began ascend
The Eastern hill, and draw on cheerful day;
So I full fraught with joy do homeward wend
And fed my self with that that Nymph did say,
And did so cunningly to me convey,
Resolving for to teach all willing men
Life's mystery, and quite to chase away
Mind-mudding mist sprung from low fulsome fen:
Praise my good will, but pardon my weak faltring pen.
PSYCHATHANASIA Or The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK I. CANT. 4.
That Hyle or first matter's naught
But potentialitie;
That God's the never-fading root
Of all Vitalitie.
1
WHat I was wisely taught in that still Night,
That Hyle is the Potentialitie
Of Gods dear Creatures, I embrace as right,
And them nigh blame of deep idolatry
That give so much to that slight nullitie,
That they should make it root substantial
Of nimble life, and that quick entitie
That does so strongly move things natural,
That life from hence should spring, that hither life should fall.
2
For how things spring from hence and be resolved
Into this mirksome sourse, first matter hight,
This muddy myst'rie they no'te well unfold.
If it be only a bare passive might
With Gods and Natures goodly dowries dight,
Bringing hid Noughts into existencie,
Or sleeping Somethings into wide daylight,
Then Hyle's plain potentialitie,
Which does not straight infer certain mortality.
3
For the immortal Angels do consist
Of out-gone act and possibility;
Nor any other creature does exist,
Releast from dreary deaths necessity;
If these composures it so certainly
Ensuen must. If substance actual
They will avouch this first matter to be,
Fountain of forms, and prop fiduciall
Of all those lives and beings cleeped Natural;
4
Then may it prove the sphere spermaticall
Or sensitive (if they would yield it life)
Or that is next, the Orb Imaginall,
Or rather all these Orbs; withouten strife
So might we all conclude that their relief
And first existence from this sphere they drew
And so our adversaries, loath or lief
Must needs confess that all the lore was true
Concerning life, that that fair Nymph so clearly show;
5
And that particular Lives that be yborn
Into this world, when their act does dispear,
Do cease to be no more then the snails horn,
That she shrinks in because she cannot bear
The wanton boys rude touch, or heavy cheer
Of stormy winds. The secundary light
As surely shines in the heavens clear,
As do the first fair beams of Phoebus bright,
Lasting they are as they, though not of so great might.
6
So be the effluxes of those six orders,
Unfading lives from fount of livelihood:
Only what next to strifefull Hyle borders,
Particular visibles deaths drearyhood
Can seiz upon. They pass like sliding flood.
For when to this worlds dregs lives downward hie,
They stroy one the other in fell cankred mood,
Beat back their rays by strong antipathie,
Or some more broad-spread cause does choke their energie.
7
But to go on to that common conceit
Of the first matter: What can substance do,
Poor, naked substance, megre, dry, dull, slight,
Inert, unactive, that no might can show
Of good or ill to either friend or foe,
All livelesse, all formlesse? She does sustain.
And has no strength that task to undergo?
Besides that work is needless all in vain:
Each centrall form its rays with ease can well up-stayen.
8
What holds the earth in the thin fluid air?
Can matter void of fixed solidity?
But she like kindly nurse her forms does cheer.
What can be sucked from her dark dugges dry?
Nor warmth, nor moistness, nor fast density
Belong to her. Therefore i will nurse I ween
She Will make, that neither has to satisfy
Young-craving life, nor firmness to sustein
The burden that upon her arms should safely lean.
9
Therefore an useless super fluity
It is to make Hyle substantial:
Only let us term't the possibility
Of all created beings. Lives centrall
Can frame themselves a right compositall,
While as they sitten soft in the sweet rays
Or vital vest of the lives general,
As those that out of the earths covert raise
Themselves, fairly provoked by warmth of sunny days.
10
And thus all accidents will prove the beams
Of inward forms, their flowing energy;
And quantity the extension of such streams,
That goes along even with each quality.
Thus have we dived to the profundity
Of darkest matter, and have found it naught
But all this worlds bare Possibility.
Naught therefore against life's durance can be brought
From Hyles pit, that quenchen may that pleasant thought.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, Or The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK II. CANT. 1.
Man's soul with beasts and plants I here
Compare; Tell my chief end
His immortality's to clear;
Show whence gross errors wend.
1
BUt hitherto I have with fluttering wings
But lightly hovered in the general,
And taught the lasting durance of all springs
Of hidden life. That life hight seminall
Does issue forth from its deep root centrall,
One only form entire, and no'te advert
What steals from it. Beasts life Fantastical
Lets out more forms, and eke themselves convert
To view the various fry from their dark wombs exert.
2
But man's vast soul, the image of her Maker,
Like God that made her, with her mighty sway
And in ward Fiat (if he nould forsake her)
Can turn sad darkness into lightsome day,
And the whole creature before her self display:
Bid them come forth and stand before her sight,
They straight flush out and her drad voice obey:
Each shape, each life does leapen out full light.
And at her beck return into their usual Night.
3
Often God himself here lists to appear,
Though not perforce yet of his own frank will
Sheds his sweet life, dispreads his beauty clear,
And like the Sun this lesser world does fill,
And like the Sun does the foul Pythou kill
With his bright darts, but cheareth each good spright.
This is the soul that I with presser quill
Must now pursue and fall upon downright,
Not to destroy but prove her of immortal might.
4
Nor let blind Momus dare my Muse backbite,
As wanton or superfluously wise
For what is past. She is but justly quit
With Lucrece, who all souls does mortalize:
Wherefore she did them all immortalize.
Besides in beasts and men the affinity
Does seem so great, that without prejudice
To many proofs for th'immortality
Of humane Souls, the same to beasts we no'te deny:
5
But I herein no longer list contend.
The two first kinds of souls I Will quite omit,
And 'cording as at first I did intend
Bestirre me stiffly, force my feeble wit
To rescue humane souls from deaths deep pit;
Which I shall do with reasons as subtle
As I can find; slight proofs cannot well fit
In so great cause, nor phansies florid wile;
I Will win no man's assent by a false specious guile.
6
I only wish that arguments exile
May not seem naught unto the duller eye;
Nor that the fatter fancy my lean style
Do blame: it is fittest for philosophy.
And give me leave from any energie
That springs from humane soul my cause to prove,
And in that order as they list to fly
Of their own selves, so let them freely rove.
That naturally does come does often the stronger move.
7
Self-motion and centrall stability
I have already urged in general;
Als' did right presly to our soul apply
Those properties, who list it to recall
Unto their minds; but now we'll let it fall
As needless. Only that vitality,
That does extend this great Univervall,
And move the inert Materiality
Of great and little worlds, that keep in memory.
8
And how the mixture of their rays may breed
The opinion of uncertain quality,
When they from certain roots of life do spreed;
But their pure beams must needs ychanged be
When that those rays or not be setten free
Thinly dispersed, or else be closely meint
With other beams of plain diversity,
That causes often a strong impediment:
So does this bodies life to the souls high intent.
9
The lower man is naught but a fair plant,
Whose grosser matter is from the base ground;
The Plastic might thus finely did him paint,
And filled him with the life that does abound
In all the places of the world around.
This spirit of life is in each shapen'd thing,
Sucked in and changed and strangely confound,
As we conceive: This is the nourishing
Of all; but spermall form, the certain shapening.
10
This is that strange-form'd statue magical,
That hovering souls unto it can allure
When it is right fitted; down those spirits fall
Like Eagle to her prey, and so endure
While that low life is in good temperature.
That a dead body without vital spright
And friendly temper should a guest procure
Of so great worth, without the dear delight
Of joyous sympathy, no man can reckon right.
11
But here unlucky Souls do waxen sick
Of an ill furfeit from the poisoned bait
Of this sweet tree, yet here perforce they stick
In weak condition, in a languid state.
Many through ignorance do fondly hate
To be released from this imprisonment,
And grieve the walls be so nigh ruinate.
They be bewitched so with the blandishment
Of that fresh strumpet, when in love they first were meant.
12
Others disdain this so near unity,
So far they be from thinking they be born
Of such low parentage, so base degree,
And fleshes foul attraction they do scorn.
They be th'outgoings of the Eastern morn,
Allied unto the eternal Deity,
And pray to their first spring, that thus forlorn
And left in mud, that he would set them free,
And them again possess of pristine purity.
13
But seems not my Muse too hastily
To soar aloft, that better by degrees
Unto the vulgar man's capacity
Might show the souls so high excellencies,
And softly from all corporeities
It heaven up unto its proper seat,
When we have drove away gross falsities,
That do assault the weaker men's conceit,
And free the simple mind from phansies foul deceit,
14
The drooping soul so strongly's colored
With the long commerce of corporeals,
That she from her own self awide is led,
Knows not her self, but by salfe name she calls
Her own high being, and what ere befalls
Her grosser body, she that misery
Does deem her own: for she her self miscalls
Or some thin body, or spread quality,
Or point of quality, or fixed or setten free.
29
But whether thin spread body she does deem
Her self dispersed through this grosser frame;
Or does her self a quality esteem,
Or quient complexion, streaming through the same;
Or else some lucid point her self does name
Of such a quality, in chiefest part
Strongly fixed down; or whether she does clame
More freedom for that point, in head nor heart
Fast seated; yet, says she, the bodies brat thou art.
30
Thence thou arose, thence thou can not depart:
There die thou must, when thy dear nurse decays:
But these false phansies I with reason smart
Shall easily chase away, and the mind raise
To higher pitch. O listen to my lays,
And when you have seen fast sealed eternity
Of humane souls, then your great Maker praise
For his never fading benignity,
And feed your selves with thought of immortality.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, OR, The Immortality of the Soul.
Book. 2. Cant. 2.
Sense no good judge of truth: What spright,
What body we descry:
Prove from the souls inferior might
Her incorp'reitie.
1
WHile I do purpose with my self to sing
The souls incorporeity, I fear
That it a worse perplexity may bring
Unto the weaker mind and duller ear;
For she may deem herself 'stroyd quite and clear
While all corporeals from her we expel:
For she has yet not marked that higher sphere
Where her own essence does in safety dwell,
But views her lower shade, like boy at brink of well;
2
Dotes upon sense, ne higher does arise
Busied about vain forms corporeal;
Contemns as naught unseen exilities,
Objects of virtue Intellectual,
Though these of substances be principal.
But I to better hope would fainly lead
The sunken mind, and cunningly recall
Again to life that long has liggen dead.
Awake ye drooping souls! shake off that drousihead!
3
Why do you thus confide in sleepy sense,
Ill judge of her own objects? who will believe
The eye contracting Phoebus Orb immense
Into the compass of a common sieve?
If solid reason did not us relieve,
The host of heaven always would idle stand
In our conceit, nor could the Sun revive
The neither world, nor do his Lords command.
Things near seem further off; farst off, the nearst at hand.
4
The touch acknowledges no gustables;
The taste no fragrant smell or stinking sent;
The smell does not once dream of audibles;
The hearing never knew the verdant peint
Of springs gay mantle, nor heavens light ylent
That must discover all that goodly pride:
So that the senses would with zeal fervent
Condemn each other, and their voice deride
If mutually they heard such things they never tried.
5
But reason, that above the sense does sit,
Does comprehend all their impressions,
And tells the touch its no fanatic fit
That makes the sight of illustrations
So stiffly talk upon occasions.
But judges all their voices to be true
Concerning their straight operations,
And does by nimble consequences show
To her own self what those wise Five yet never knew.
6
They never knew ought but corporealls:
But see how reason does their verdict rude
Confute, by loosening materials
Into their principles, as latitude
Profundity of bodies to conclude.
The term of latitude is breadthlesse line;
A point the line does manfully retrude
From infinite process; site does confine
This point; take site away its straight a spark divine.
7
And thus unloos'd it equally respects
The bodies parts, not fixed to any one.
Let 't be distused through all. Thus it detects
The soul's strange nature, operation,
Her independency, loose union
With this frail body. So 's this unity
Great, but without that gross extension,
Exceeding great in her high energie,
Extended far and wide from her non-quantity.
8
If yet you understand not, let the soul,
Which you suppose extended with this mass,
Be all contract and close together roll
Into the center of the hearts compass:
As the suns beams that by a concave glass
Be strangely strengthened with their strait constraint
Into one point, that thence they stoutly pass,
Fire all before them withouten restraint,
The high arched roof of heaven with smouldry smoke they taint.
9
But now that grosnesse, which we call the heart,
Quite take away, and leave that spark alone
Without that sensible corporeal part
Of humane body: so when that is gone,
One nimble point of life, that is all at one
In its own self, does wonderfully move,
Indispers'd, quick, close with self-union,
Hor, sparkling, active, mounting high above,
In bigness naught, in virtue like to thundering Jove.
10
Thus maugre all the obmurmurings of sense
We have found an essence incorporeall,
A shifting center with circumference,
But she not only sits in midst of all,
But is also in a manner centrall
In her outflowing lines. For the extension
Of the outshot rays circumserentiall
Be not gone from her by distrought distension,
Her point is at each point of all that spread dimension.
11
This is a substance truly spiritall,
That reason by her glistring lamp has shown:
No such the sense in things corporeal
Can ere find out. May this persuasion,
O sunken souls! slaves of sensation!
Rear up your heads and chase away all fear
How (when by strong argumentation
I shall you strip of what so does appear
Corporeal) that you to naught should vanish clear.
12
The naked essence of the body's this
Matter extent in three dimensions
(Hardness or softness be but qualities)
Withouten self reduplications
Or outspread circling propagations
Of its own presence. These be corporal,
And what with these in such extension
Singly's stretched out, is form material.
Whether our soul be such now to the test we'll call.
13
If souls be bodies, or inanimate
They be, or else endowed with life. If they
Be livelesse, give they life? if animate,
Then tell me what does life to them convey?
Some other body? Here can be no stay.
Straight we must ask whether that livelesse be
Or living. Then, what 'lives it. Thus we'll play
Till we have forced you to infinity,
And make your cheeks wax red at your Philosophy.
14
Again, pray tell me, is this body gross
Or fluid, and thin you deem the soul to be?
If gross, then either strongly it is crossed
From entering some parts of this rigid tree
And so of life they will want their 'lotted fee:
Or if it penetrate this bulk throughout,
It breaks and tears and puts to penalty
This sorry corse. If 't thin and fluid be thought,
How pulls it up those limbs and again jerks them out?
15
Besides, if stretchen corporeity
Longs to the soul, then Augmentation
Must likewise thereto appertain. But see
The absurdities that this opinion
Will drag on with it: for effluxion
Of parts will spoil the steady memory,
And wash away all intellection,
Deface the beauty of that imagery
That once was fairly graven in her fantasy.
16
But often when the weak body's worn and wasted
And far shrunk in, the nimble fantasy
(So far she is from being withered and blasted)
More largely works, and more glitterandly
Displayes her spreaden forms, and cheerfully;
Pursues her sports. Again, the greater corse
Would most be filled with magnanimity:
But often we see the less has greater force,
To fight, or talk; the greater often we see the worse.
17
All which if weighed well, must ill agree
With bodies natures, which merely consist
In a dull, silent, stupid quantity,
Stretching forth mirksome matter, in what list
Or precincts no man knows. No Naturalist
Can it define, unless they add a form
That easly curbs the thing that no'te resist,
And after her own will can it inform.
It still and stupid stands and thinks nor good nor harm.
18
The man is mad, that will at all agree
That this is soul. Or if form bodily
Non-replicate, extent, not setten free,
But straight stretched out in corporeity
(Betwixt these two there is that affinity)
As little wit that man will seem to have.
Which I shall plainly prove by the energie
Of sense, though that same force seem not so brave,
Yet for the present I Will not climb to higher stave.
19
If Souls be substances corporeal,
Be they as big just as the body is?
Or shoot they out to the height Aethereall?
(Of such extent are the sights energies)
If they shoot out, be they equally transmisse
Around this body? or but upward start?
If round the body, Nature did amiss
To lose her pains in half of the souls part,
That part can finden naught that through the earth does dart.
20
Or will you say she is an hemisphere?
But a ridiculous experiment
Will soon confute it: list you but to rear
Your agill heels toward the firmament,
And stand upon your head; that part is bent
Down through the earth, that erst did threat the sky:
So that your soul now upward is extent
No higher then your heels, yet with your eye
The heavens great vastness as before you now discry.
21
You Will say, this souls thin spread exility
Turns not at all. How does it then depend
Upon this body? It has no unity
Therewith, but only does of cur'sy lend
It life, as does the worlds great lamp down send
Both light and warmth unto each living wight;
And if they chance to fail and make an end,
Its naught to him, he shines yet as bright
As ere he did. This shows the soul immortal quite.
22
But if the soul be justly coextent
With this straight body, naught can bigger be
Then is our body, that she does present;
'Cording to laws of Corporeity
So must she represent each realty.
Thus tallest Giants would be often defied
By grovelling Pigmees: for they could not see
The difference, nor mete his manly stride,
Nor ween what matchless strength did in his arms reside.
23
For they must judge him just as their own selves
Of the same stature, of the self-same might:
All men would seem to them their fellow Elves;
Nor little curs would tremble at the sigh:
Of greater dogs; nor hawks would put to flight
The lesser birds. The impression of a seal
Can be no larger then the wax; or right
As big, or less it is. Therefore repeal
This gross conceit, and hold as reason does reveal.
24
Again, if souls corporeal you ween;
Do the light images of things appear
Upon the surface, slick, bright, smooth and sheen
As in a looking glass? Or whether dare
They pass the outside and venture so far
As into the depth of the souls substance?
If this; then they together blended are
That naught we see with right discriminance:
If that, the object gone, away those forms do glance.
25
Thus should we be devoid of memory,
And be all darkness, till the good presence
Of outward objects does the soul unty
From heavy sleep. But this experience
Plainly confutes. For even in their absence
We do retain their true similitude:
So lovers wont to maken dalliance
With the fair shade their minds do still include,
And wistly view the grace wherewith she is endude.
26
But now new reasons I will set on foot,
Drawn from the common sense, that is not extense
But like a center that around does shoot
Its rays; those rays should be the outward sense
As some resemble't. But by no pretense
Would I the outward senses should be thought
To act so in a spread circumference
That the seat of their forms should be distrought,
Or that by reach of quantities dead arms they wrought.
27
For see how little share has quantity
In act of seeing, when we comprehend
The heavens vast compass in our straightened eye;
Nor may the Ox with the Eagle contend,
Because a larger circle does extend
His slower lights. So that if outward sense
In his low acts does not at all depend
On quantity, how shall the common-sense,
That is far more spiritual, depend from thence?
28
But still more presly this point to pursue;
By the smelling, odours; voices by the ear;
By the eye we apprehend the colored hew
Of bodies visible. But what shall steer
The erring senses? where shall they compear
In controversy? what the difference
Of all their objects can with judgment clear
Distinguish and discern? One common-sense:
For one alone must have this great preeminence.
29
And all this one must know, though still but one;
Else't could not judge of all. But make it two;
Then tell me, does the soul by this alone
Apprehend this object that the sense does show,
And that by that; or does it by both know
Both objects? as this color and that sound.
If both knew both, then nature did bestow
In vain one faculty, it does redound:
But if this that, that this, what shall them both compound,
30
And by comparison judge of them both?
Therefore that judge is one. But whether one
Without division, let us now try that troth.
If it be any wise extent, you're gone
By the same reason that before was shown.
Suppose't a line the least of quantity.
Or sound is here, there color, or each one
Of the lines parts receive them both. If we
Grant that, again we find a superfluity.
31
If this part this, and that part that receive,
We are at the same loss we were before,
For one to judge them both, or we bereave
Our souls of judgment. For who can judge more
Than what he knows? It is above his power.
Therefore it is plain the common sense is one,
One individed faculty. But store
Of parts would breed a strange confusion,
When every part might claim proper sensation.
32
If not, nor all could exercise the Act
Of any sense. For could a power of sense
Arise from stupid parts that plainly lacked
That might themselves. Thus with great confidence
We may conclude that the humane souls essence
Is indivisible, yet every where
In this her body. Cause the intelligence
She has of whatsoever happens here:
The aching foot the eye does view, the hand does cheer.
33
What tells the hand or head the toes great grief,
When it alone is pinched with galling shoes?
Do other parts not hurt call for relief
For their dear mates? Ill messenger of woes
That grieveth not himself. Can they disclose
That misery without impression
Upon themselves? Therefore one spirit goes
Through all this bulk, not by extension
But by a total Self-reduplication.
34
Which neither body, nor dispersed form,
Nor point of form dispersed ever could do.
And bodies life or sprite for to transform
Into our soul, though that might this undo,
Yet to so rash conceit to yield unto
Cannot be safe: for if it propagate
It Is self and 'ts passions, yet they free may go
Unmarked, if sense would not them contemplate.
So does the Mundane sprite not heeded circulate.
35
Besides, if from that spirit natural
The nurse of plants, you should dare to assert
That lively inward Animadversall
To springen out, it would surely invert
The order of the Orbs from whence do stert
All several beings and of them depend.
Therefore the Orb Fantastic must exert
All life fantastical, sensitive send
The life of sense; so of the rest unto each end.
36
There Is naught from its own self can senden forth
Ought better then it self. So naught gives sense
That has not sense it self, nor greater worth
Then sense, nor sense, nor better springs from thence.
Nor that which higher is can have essence
Less active, less reduplicate, less free,
Less spiritall, then that is amov'd from hence,
And is an Orb of a more low degree.
Wherefore that centrall life has more activitie,
37
And present is in each part totally
Of this her body. Nor we ought diffide,
Although some creatures still alive we see
To stir and move when we have them divide
And cut in twain. Thus worms in sturdie pride
Do wrigge and wrest their parts divorced by knife;
But we must know that Natures womb does hide
Innumerable treasures of all life;
And how to breaken out upon each hint they strive.
38
So when the present actual centrall life
Of sense and motion is gone with one part
To manage it, strait for the due relief
Of the other particle there up does start
Another centrall life, and tries her art:
But she cannot reign long, nor yet recure
That deadly wound. The plantall life's depart,
And flitten or shrunk spright, that did procure
Her company, being lost, make her she will not endure.
39
And so at last is gone, from whence she came,
For soon did fade that sweet allurement,
The plantall life, which for a while did flame
With sympathetick fire, but that being spent
Straight she is flown. Or may you this content?
That some impression of that very soul
That Is gone, if gone, with plantall spirit meint
The broken corse thus busily may roll.
Long it is till water boild does stranger heat control.
40
Thus have we proved 'cording to our insight
That humane souls be not corporeal
(With reasons drawn from the sensitive might)
Nor bodies, nor spread forms material,
Whether you substances list them to call
Or qualities, or point of these. I Will bring
Hereafter proofs from power rational
In humane souls, to prove the self same thing.
Mount up aloft, my Muse, and now more shrilly sing.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, Or, The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK II. CANT. III.
The souls incorporeitie
From powers rational
We prove; Discern true piety
From bitterness and gall.
1
LIke Carpenter entered into a wood
To cut down timber for some edifice
Of stately structure, whiles he casts abroad
His curious eye, he much perplexed is
(There stand in view so many goodly trees)
Where to make choice to enter his rugg'd saw:
My Muse is plunged in like perplexities,
So many arguments themselves do show,
That where to pitch my wavering mind does yet scarce know.
2
One taller then the rest my circling eye
Has hit upon, which if it be sound at heart
Will prove a goodly piece to raise on high
The heavenly structure of that deemed part
Of man, his soul, and by unerring art
Set his foundation 'bove the bodies frame
On his own wheels, that he may thence depart
Entire, unhurt. So does the Scythian swain
Drive his light moving house on the waste verdant Plain.
3
I Will sing of piety: that now I mean
That Trismegist thus wisely does define,
Knowledge of God. That Is piety I ween,
The highest of virtues, a bright beam divine
Which to the purer soul does sweetly shine.
But what is this beam? and how does it enlight?
What does it teach? It teaches to decline
Self-love, and frampard ways the hypocrite
Does trample in, accloy'd with dirt and dismal night.
4
Not rage, nor mischief, nor love of a sect,
Nor eating irefulnesse, harsh cruelty
Contracting Gods good will, nor conscience checked
Or chok'd continually with impiety,
Fauster'd and fed with hid hypocrisy?
Nor tyranny against perplexed minds,
Nor forced conceit, nor man-idolatry,
All which the eye of searching reason blinds,
And the souls heavenly flame in dungeon darkness binds.
5
Can wars and jarres and fierce contention,
Swollen hatred, and consuming envy spring
From piety? No. It Is opinion
That makes the riven heavens with trumpets ring,
And thundering engine mur'drous balls out-sling,
And send men's groaning ghosts to lower shade
Of horrid hell. This the wide world does bring
To devastation, makes mankind to fade:
Such direful things does false Religion persuade.
6
But true Religion sprung from God above
Is like her fountain full of charity,
Embracing all things with a tender love,
Full of good will and meek expectancy,
Full of true justice and sure verity,
In heart and voice; free, large, even infinite,
Not wedged in strait particularity,
But grasping all in her vast active spright,
Bright lamp of God! that men would joy in thy pure light!
7
Can souls that be thus universalis'd,
Begot into the life of God e're die?
(His light is like the sun that does arise
Upon the just and unjust) can they fly
Into a nothing? and has God an eye
To see himself thus wasted and decay
In his true members? can mortality
Seize upon that that does it self display
Above the laws of matter, or the bodies sway?
8
For both the body and the bodies spright
Does things unto particulars confine,
Teaching them partial friendship and fell spite,
But those pure souls full of the life divine
Look upon all things with mild friendly eyne
Ready to do them good. Thus is their will
Sweetly spread out, and ever does incline
The bent of the first Goodness to fulfill.
Ay me! that dreary death such lovely life should spill!
9
Besides this largeness in the will of man
And winged freeness, now let us think upon
His understanding, and how it does scan
Gods being, unto whom religion
Is consecrate. Imagination
That takes its rise from sense so high ascent
Can never reach, yet intellection
Or higher gets, or at least has some sent
Of God, vaticinates, or is parturient.
10
For ask her whether God be this or that,
A body infinite, or some mighty spright,
Yet not almighty, such vain speech she will hate.
Whether all present, or in some place pight,
Whether part here part there, or every whit
In every point, she likes that latter well:
So that its plain that some kind of insight
Of Gods own being in the soul does dwell
Though what God is we cannot yet so plainly tell.
11
As when a name lodged in the memory,
But yet through time almost obliterate,
Confusely hovers near the fantasy:
The man that is thus affected bids relate
A catalogue of names. It is not that,
Says he, nor that; that is something like to it,
That nothing like, that is likst of all I wot.
This last you named it is not like that a whit;
O that is the very name, now we have rightly hit.
12
Thus if it be lawful least things to compare
With greatest, so our selves affected be
Concerning Gods high essence: for we are
Not ignorant quite of this mystery,
Nor clearly apprehend the Deity,
But in mid state, I called parturient,
And should bring forth that live Divinity
Within our selves, if once God would consent
To show his specious form and nature eminent:
13
For here it lies like colors in the night
Unseen and unregarded, but the sun
Displayes the beauty and the gladsome plight
Of the adorned earth, while he does run
His upper stage. But this high prize is won
By curbing sense and the self-seeking life
(True Christian mortification)
Thus God will his own self in us revive,
If we to mortify our straightened selves do strive.
14
But can ought bodily Gods form receive?
Or have it in its self potentially?
Or can ought sprung of this base body heve
It self so high as to the Deity
To clamber? strive to reach infinity?
Can ought born of this carcass be so free
As to grasp all things in large sympathy?
Can lives corporeal quite loosened be
From their own selves, casheering their centreity?
15
These all ill suit with corporeitie:
But do we not amiss with stroke so strong
All to dispatch at once? needed we fly
So high at first? we might have chose among
The many arguments that close do throng
And tender their own selves this cause to prove
Some of a meaner rank, and then along
Fairly and softly by degrees to move.
My Muse kens no such pomp, she must with freedom rove.
16
And now as chance her guides, compendiously
The heads of many proofs she will repeat,
Which she lists not pursue so curiously,
But leaves the Reader his own brains to beat,
To find their fuller strength. As the souls meat,
Of which she feeds, if, that she fed at all;
She is immortal if she need not eat;
But if her food prove to be spiritall,
Then can we deem herself to be corporeal?
17
The souls most proper food is verity
Got and digest by Contemplation.
Hence strength, enlargement, and activity
She finds, as the body by infusion
Of grosser meats and drinks (concoction
Well perfected) our limbs grow strong by these;
The soul by reasons right persuasion:
But that truths spiritall we may with ease
Find out: For truth the soul from bodies does release.
18
Next argument let be abstraction,
When as the soul with notion precise
Keeps off the corporal condition,
And a naked simple essence does devise
Against the law of Corporeities,
It does divest them both of time and place,
And of all individualities,
And matter does of all her forms uncase,
Corporeal wight such subtle virtue never has.
19
Now shall the indivisibilitie
Of the souls virtues make an argument.
For certainly there is no such quality
Resideth in a body that is extent.
For, tell me, is that quality strait pent
Within a point of that corporeal?
Or is it with some spreaden part distent?
If in a point, then longs it not at all
To the body: in spread part? then it is extentionall.
20
But that some virtue's not extentionall
May thus be proved. Is there no science
Of numbers? Yes. But what is principal
And root of all: have we intelligence
Of Unities? Or else what is sprung from thence
We could not know: what does the soul then frame
Within her self? Is that Idea extense?
Or indivisible? If not: we'll blame
The soul of falsehood, and continual lying shame.
21
Again, if we suppose our intellect
Corporeal, then must we all things know
By a swift touch: what? do we then detect
The truth of bigness, when one point does go
Of our quick mind? (It need not be ^o'reslow
For infinite parts be found in quantity)
Or does it use its latitude? If so
Remember that some things unspreaden be,
How shall it find them out? Or if it use both we'll see.
22
That both be unsufficient I prove.
A point cannot discern loose unity
Freed from all site. That latitude must move
On all the body that it does descry.
So must it be upstretch'd unto the sky
And rub against the Stars, surround the Sun
And her own parts to every part apply,
Then swiftly fridge about the pallid Moon:
Thus both their quantities the mind has strangely won.
23
Add unto these, that the soul would take pains
For her destruction while she does aspire
To reach at things (that were her woeful gains)
That be not corporal, but seated higher
Above the bodies sphere. Thus should she tire
Her self to 'stroy her self. Again, the mind
Receives contrary forms. The feverish fire
Makes her cool brooks and shadowing groves to find
Within her thoughts, thus hot and cold in one she binds.
24
Nor is she changed by the susception
Of any forms: For thus her self contraire
Should be unto her self. But Union
She then possesses, when heat and cold are
Together met: They meet withouten jarre
Within our souls. Such forms they be not true
You Will say. But of their truth lest you despair,
Each form in purer minds more perfect hew
Obtains, then those in matter we do daily view.
25
For there, they are mixed, soild and contaminate,
But truth does clear, unweave, and simplifie,
Search, sever, pierce, open, and disgregate
All ascititious cloggins; then does eye
The naked essence and its property.
Or you must grant the soul cannot define
Ought right in things; or you must not deny
These forms be true that in her self do shine:
These be her rule of truth, these her unerring line,
26
Bodies have no such properties. Again,
See in one cluster many arguments
Comprised: She multitudes can close constrain
Into one nature. Things that be fluent,
As flitting time, by her be straight retent
Unto one point; she joins future and past,
And makes them steady stand as if present:
Things distant she can into one place cast:
Calls kinds immortal, though their singulars do waste.
27
Upon her self she strangely operates,
And from her self and by her self returns
Into her self; thus the soul circulates.
Do bodies so? Her axle-tree it burns
With heat of motion. This low world she spurns,
Raises her self to catch infinity.
Unspeakable great numbers how she turns
Within her mind, like evening mist the eye
Discerns, whose muddy atoms before the wind do fly.
28
Stretches out time at both ends without end,
Makes place still higher swell, often creates
What God near made, nor does at all intend
To make, free phantasms, laughs at future fates,
Foresees her own condition, she relates
The all comprehension of eternity,
Complains she is thirsty still in all estates,
That all she sees or has no'te satisfy
Her hungry self, nor fill her vast capacity.
29
But I Will break off; My Muse her self forgot,
Her own great strength and her foes feebleness,
That she her name by her own pains may blot,
While she so many strokes heaps in excess,
That fond gross fancy quite for to suppress
Of the souls corporal'tie. For men may think
Her adversaries strength does thus her press
To multitude of reasons, makes her swink
With weary toil, and sweat out thus much forced ink:
30
Or that she loves with trampling insultations
To domineere in easy victory.
But let not men dare cast such accusations
Against the blameless. For no mastery,
Nor fruitless pomp, nor any verity
Of that opinion that she here destroys
Made her so large. No, it is her jealousy
Against witching falsehood that weak souls annoyes,
And often does choke those chearing hopes of lasting joys.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, OR The Immortality of the Soul.
Book. 3. Cant. 1.
The souls free independency;
Her drery dreadful state
In hell; Her tricentreity:
What brings to heavens gate.
1
WEll said that man, what ever man that was,
That said, what things we would we straight believe
Upon each slight report to have come to pass:
But better he, that said, Slow faith we give
To things we long for most. Hope and fear rive
Distracted minds, as when nigh equal weights
Cast on the trembling scales, each tug and strive
To pull the other up. But the same sleights
By turns do urge them both in their descents and heights:
2
Thus waves the mind in things of greatest weight;
For things we value most are companied
With fear as well as hope: these strifly fight:
The stronger hope, the stronger fear is fed;
On mother both and the like livelyhed.
One object both, from whence they both do spring,
The greater she, the greater these she bred,
The greater these, the greater wavering
And longer time to end their sturdy struggeling.
3
But is there any thing of more import
Then the souls immortality? Hence fear
And hope we striving feel with strong effort
Against each other: That nor reason clear
Nor sacred Oracles can straight down bear
That sturdy rascal, with black fantasies
Yclad, and clouded with drad dismal cheer;
But still new mists he casts before our eyes,
And now derides our proved incorporieties,
4
And grinning says, That labor's all in vain.
For though the soul were incorporeall,
Yet her existence to this flesh restrain,
They be so nearly linked, that if one fall
The other fails. The ear nor hears our call
In stouping age, nor eye can see ought clear;
Benumming palsies shake the bodies wall,
The soul has lost her strength and cannot steer
Her crasie corse, but staggering on reels here and there.
5
So plain it is (that though the soul 's a spright,
Not corporal) that it must needs depend
Upon this body, and must perish quite
When her foundation falls. But now attend
And see what false conceits vain fears do send:
It Is true, I cannot write without a quill,
Nor ride without an horse. If chance that rend
Or use make blunt, o're-labouring this kill,
Then can I walk not ride, not write but think my fill.
6
Our body is but the souls instrument;
And when it fails, only these actions cease
That thence depend. But if new eyes were sent
Unto the aged man, with as much case
And accuratenesse, as when his youth did please
The wanton less, he now could all things see.
Old age is but the watery bloods disease.
The soul from death and sickness stands free:
My hackney fails, not I; my pen, not sciencie.
7
But as I said, of things we do desire
So vehemently we never can be sure
Enough. Therefore, my Muse, thou must aspire
To higher pitch, and fearful hearts secure
Not with slight fancy but with reason pure.
Evincing the souls independency
Upon this body that does her immure,
That when from this dark prison she shall fly
All men may judge her rest in immortality.
8
Therefore I Will sing the Tricentreity
Of humane souls, and how they wake from sleep,
In which ywrapt of old they long do lie
Contract with cold, and drenched in Lethe deep,
Hugging their plantall point. It makes me weep
Now I so clearly view the solemn Spring
Of silent Night, whose Magic dew does steep
These drowsy souls of men, whose dropping wing
Keeps off the light of life, and blunts each fiery sting.
9
Three centres has the soul; One plantall hight:
Our parents this revive in nuptial bed.
This is the principle that hales on Night,
Subjects the mind unto dull drowsyhed:
If we this follow, thus we shall be led
To that dark straitness that did bind before
Our sluggish life: when that is shrivelled
Into its sunken center, we no more
Are conscious of life: what can us then restore?
10
Unless with fiery whips fell Nemesis
Do lash our sprights, and cruelly do gore
Our groaning ghosts; this is the way, I wisse,
The only way to keep's from Morpheus power.
Both these so dismal are that I do shower
Uncessant tears from my compassionate eyes:
Alas! ye souls! Why should or sleep devour
Sweet functions of life? or hellish cries
To tender heart resound your just calamities?
11
Thus may you all from your dead drowsinesse
Be waked by inward sting and pinching woe,
That you could wish that that same heaviness
Might ever you o'represse, and Lethe flow
Upon your drowned life. But you shall glow
With urging fire, that does resuscitate
Your middle point, and makes it self to gnaw
It self with madness, while 't does ruminate
On its deformity and sterill vexing state.
12
Continual desire that naught effects,
Perfect hot-glowing fervor out to spring
In some good world: With fury she affects
To reach the Land of life, then struck with sting
Of wounding memory, despairs the thing,
And further off she sees her self, the more
She rages to obtain: thus does she bring
More fuel to her flame that scorched sore
With searching fire, she is forced to yell and loudly rore.
13
Thus she devours her self, not satisfies
Her self, naught has she but what is dearly spun
From her own bowels, jejune exilities
Her body's gone, therefore the rising sun
She sees no more, nor what in day is done,
The sporting air no longer cools her blood,
Pleasures of youth and manhood quite are gone,
Nor songs her ear, nor mouth delicious food
Does fill. But I Will have this more fully understood.
14
Three centres has man's soul in Unity
Together joynd; or if you will, but one.
Those three are one, with a Triplicity
Of power or rays. The highest intellection,
Which being waked the soul's in Union
With God. If perfectly regenerate
Into that better world, corruption
Has then no force her bliss to perturbate.
The low'st do make us subject to disturbing fate.
15
But low'st gins first to work, the soul does frame
This bodies shape, employed in one long thought
So wholly taken up, that she the same
Observes not, till she it quite has wrought.
So men asleep some work to end have brought
Not knowing of it, yet have found it done:
Or we may say the matter that she raught
And sucked unto her self to work upon
Is of one warmth with her own spright, and feels as one.
16
And thus the body being the souls work
From her own center so entirely made,
Seated in the heart, for there this spright does lurk,
It is no wonder it is so easly swayed
At her command. But when this work shall fade,
The soul dismisseth it as an old thought.
It Is but one form; but many be displayed
Amid her higher rays, dismissed, and brought
Back as she list, and many come that never were sought.
17
The soul by making this strange edifice
Makes way unto herself to exercise
Functions of life, and still more waked is
The more she has perfected her fine devise,
Has wrought her self into sure sympathies
With this great world. Her ears like hollow caves
Resound to her own spright the energies
Of the worlds spright. If it ought suffered have,
Then presentifick circles to her straight notice gave.
18
We know this world, because our soul has made
Our body of this sensible worlds spright
And body. Therefore in the glassie shade
Of our own eyes (they having the same might
That glass or water has) we have the sight
Of what the Mundane spirit suffers
By colors, figures, or inherent light:
Sun, stars, and all on earth it hurrieth
To each point of it self so far as't circuleth.
19
And where he lights on advantages,
His circulings grow sensible. So hills
That hollow be do audible voices
Resound. The soul does imitate that skill
In framing of the ear, that sounds may swell
In that concavitie. The crystal springs
Reflect the light of heaven, if they be still
And clear; the soul does imitate and bring
The eye to such a temper in her shapening.
20
So eyes and ears be not mere perforations,
But a due temper of the Mundane spright
And ours together; else the circulations
Of sounds would be well known by outward sight,
And the ear would colors know, figures and light.
So that it is plain that when this body 's gone,
This world to us is closed in darkness quite,
And all to us is in dead silence drown.
Thus in one point of time is this worlds glory flown
21
But if it be so, how does Psyche hear or see
That has nor eyes nor ears? She sees more clear
Then we that see but secondarily.
We see at distance by a circular
Diffusion of that spright of this great sphere
Of the Universe: Her sight is tactuall.
The Sun and all the stars that do appear
She feels them in herself, can distance all,
For she is at each one purely presentiall.
22
To us what does diffusion circular,
And our pure shadowed eyes, bright, crystalline,
But vigorously our spright particular
Affect, while things in it so clearly shine?
That Is done continually in the heavens sheen.
The Sun, the Moon, the Earth, blew-glimmering Hell
Scorched Aetna's bowels, each shape you will divine
To be in Nature, every dern cell
With fire-eyed dragons, or what else therein does dwell:
23
These be all parts of the wide worlds excess,
They be all seated in the Mundane spright,
And show just as they are in their bigness
To her. But circulation shows not right
The magnitude of things: for distant site
Makes a deficience in these circulings.
But all things lie ope^right unto the sight
Of heavens great eye; their thin shot shadowings
And lightened sides. All this we find in Natures springs.
24
The worlds great soul knows by Protopathie
All what befalls this lower sprite; but we
Can only know it by Deuteropathie,
At least in sight and hearing. She does see
In our own eyes, by the close unity
Of ours and the worlds life, our passion,
Plainly perceives our Idiopathie,
As we do hers, by the same union;
But we cannot see hers in that perfection.
25
Fresh varnished groves tall hills, and gilded clouds
Arching an eyelid for the gloring Morn,
Fair clustred buildings which our sight so crowds
At distance, with high spires to heaven yborn,
Vast plains with lowly cottages forlorn
Rounded about with the low wavering sky,
Cragg'd vapors, like to ragged rocks ytorn,
She views those prospects in our distant eye:
These and such like be the first centres mystery.
26
Or if you will the first low energie
Of that one center, which the soul is hight,
Which knows this world by the close unity
Concorporation with the Mundane sprite,
Unloos'd from this she wants a certain light,
Unless by true regeneration
She be incorporate with God, unite
With his own spright; so a new mansion
Sh' has got, often saught with deepest suspiration.
27
But robbed of her first clothing by hard fate,
If she fall short of this, wo's me! what pains
She undergoes? when this lost former state
So kindled has life's thirst, that still remains.
Thus her eternity her nothing gains
But hungry flames, raging voracitie
Feeding on its own self. The heavens she stains
With execrations and foul blasphemy.
Thus in fell discontent and smoth'ring fire they fry.
28
Vain man that striv'st to have all things at will!
What will thou do in this sterilitie?
Whom can thou then command? or what shall fill
Thy gaping soul? O depth of misery!
Prepare thy self by deep humility:
Destroy that fretting fire while thou art here,
Forsake this worlds bewitching vanity,
Nor death nor hell then shall thou need to fear.
Kill and cast down thy self, to heaven God shall thee rear.
29
This middle centrall essence of the soul
Is that which still survives asleep or waking:
The life she shed in this gross earthly moul
Is quite shrunk up, lost in the bodies breaking,
Now with slight phantasms of her own fond making
She Is clad (so is her life dry and jejune)
But all flit souls be not in the same taking:
That state this life's proportion does tune,
So as thou live here, such measure must ensuen.
30
But they whose souls deiform summitie
Is wakened in this life, and so to God
Are nearly joined in a firm Unity
(This outward body is but earthie clod
Digested, having life transfused abroad,
The worlds life and our lower vitalitie
Unite in one) their souls have their abode
In Christ's own body, are eternally
One with our God, by true and strong community.
31
When we are clothed with this outward world,
Feel the soft air, behold the glorious Sun,
All this we have from meat that is daily hurld
Into these mouths. But first of all we won
This privilege by our first union
With this worlds body and diffused spright.
In The higher world there is such communion:
Christ is the sun that by his chearing might
Awakes our higher rays to join with his pure light.
32
And when he has that life elicited,
He gives his own dear body and his blood
To drink and eat. Thus daily we are fed
Unto eternal life. Thus do we bud,
True heavenly plants, suck in our lasting food
From the first spring of life, incorporate
Into the higher world (as erst I showed
Our lower rays the soul to subjugate
To this low world) we fearlesse sit above all fate,
33
Safely that kingdoms glory contemplate,
Overflow with joy by a full sympathy
With that worlds sprite, and bless our own estate,
Praising the fount of all felicity,
The lovely light of the blessed Deity.
Vain mortals think on this, and raise your mind
Above the bodies life; strike through the sky
With piercing throbs and sighs, that you may find
His face. Base-fleshly fumes your drowsy eyes thus blind.
34
So has my Muse according to her skill
Discovered the soul in all her rays,
The lowest may occasionate much ill,
But is indifferent. Who may dispraise
Dame Natures work? But yet you ought to raise
Your selves to higher state. Eternity
Is the souls rest, and everlasting days:
Aspire to this and hope for victory
I further yet, shall prove her immortality.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, Or The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK III. CANT. 2.
From many arguments we show
The independencie
Of humane souls: That all Lives flow
From a free Deity.
1
THree apprehensions do my mind divide
Concerning the souls preexistencie,
Before into this outward world she glide,
So has my Muse with much uncertaintie
Expressed her self, so as her fantasy
Strongly inacted guides her easy pen;
I naught obtrude with sow'r anxietie,
But freely offer hints to wiser men.
The wise from rash assent in darksome things abstein.
2
Or souls be well awake but hovering,
Not fixed to ought, but by a Magic might
Drawable here and there, and so their wing
Struck with the steem of this low Mundane sprite
May lower flag and take its stooping flight
Into some plantall man, new edified
By his own plastic point. Or else (deep Night
Drawn on by drooping fancy) she does slide
Into this world, and by her self that skill is tried;
3
Makes to her self this fleshly habitation;
For this worlds spirit has provoked these rays:
Then drown in sleep she works that efformation
Of her own body, all its parts displayes,
As does the senseless plant. The two next ways
Are these: A real tricentreitie.
First center ever wakes, unmoved stays,
Hight Intellect. The next in sleep does lie
Till the last center burst into this open sky.
4
And then the middle wakes. But the last way
Makes but one center, which does sleep likewise
Till its low life has reached this worlds glad day.
A fourth we'll add that we may all comprise.
Take quite away all preexistencies
Of humane souls, and grant they are then first made
When they begin this bodies edifice,
And actually this outward world invade.
None of these ways do show that they must ever fade.
5
The first way might be well occasioned
By what the soul in her self feels and tries.
She works sometime as though she quite had fled
All commerce with these low carnalities
Yet falls she down at last and lowly lies
In this base mansion, is so close contract
That sleep does seize her actualities,
Retains no memory of that strange fact,
Nor of her self that soared in that high heavenly tract.
6
The second way that makes the soul tricentrall,
The highest awake, the other with sleep drowned,
May spring from hence. None would vouchsafe the entrall
Into this life, if they were but once bound
To that vast center where all things are found,
Hight Intellect. The lowest is not awake,
Therefore the midst lies close in sleep upwound.
Three centres made, that souls may quite forsake
This baser world when union with the lowest they break.
7
Again, because this body's fashioned
Without our knowledge, reason does suggest
That it could no wise be thus figured
From our own center, and yet we not pressed
To any adversion. Therefore we are dressed
With this gross clothing by some plantall spright
Centred in Nature. So that glorious vest
The Deiform intellect by our own might's
Not made, But we have rays which each of these will fit.
8
Ardent desire, strong breathing after God,
At length may work us to that better place,
Body or clothing, that high sure abode
That searching weather nor time can deface.
But to go on in our proposed race,
The third and fourth way have the same foundation,
Not multiplying beings to surpass
Their use. What needs that numerous closed centration,
Like wastefull sand ytost with boisterous inundation?
9
Let wiser Clerks the truth dare to define
I leave it loose for men to muse upon
View at their leisure: But yet this call mine;
Though we should grant the souls condition
Before her deep incorporation
Into dull matter to be nothing more
But bare potentiality, yet none
Can prove from thence that she must fade therefore,
When to its earth this earth the trusty fates restore.
10
For though she and her body be at once,
Yet of her body she does not depend
But it of her: she does its members branch,
Pierce, bind, digest, and after makes it wend
At her own will, when she has brought to end
Her curious work, and has consolidate
Its tender limbs which erst did feebly bend
Through weakness; then this world she contemplates,
And life still blazing higher seeks an heavenly state.
11
Breaths after the first fountain of all life,
Her sweet Creator, thither does aspire,
Would see his face, nor will she cease this strife
Till he fulfill her thirsty fierce desire:
Nothing can quench this so deep rooted fire
But his own presence. So he gins despise
This bodies pleasures, cease to admire
Ought fair or comely to these outward eyes:
Or if she do, from hence she higher does arise.
12
But can she higher rise then her own head?
Therefore her spring is God: thence does she pend,
Thence did she flow, thither again she is fled.
When she this life has lost, and made an end
Of this low earthly course, she does ascend,
Unto her circles ancient Apogle
Lifted aloft, not again to descend,
Nor stoups not sets that Sun, but stands free
On never shaken pillars of Aeternitie.
13
But still this truth more clearly to evince,
Remember how all things are from one light,
It shall thy reason forceably convince
That naught but God destroys a centrall spright.
If he sucks in his beams, eternal night
Seiseth upon that life, that it no'te flow
In actual efflux, has no being quite
But Gods own power. He lets his breath out go,
The self-same things again so easily does he show.
14
Let be Noon day, the welkin clear, the Moon
In The nether world, reflecting the Suns rays
To cheer the irksome night. Well! That being done,
Call out some wondrous might, that listlesse stays
In slower phansies. Bid't break all delays;
Surround with solid dark opacity
The utmost beams that Phoebus light displayes,
Softly steal on with equal distancy,
Till they have close clapped up all his explendency.
15
All Is now in darkness: tell me, what is become
Of that infinity of rays that shone?
Where second centres from whence out did come
Other faint beams? what be they all quite flone?
All perished quite? You stiflers now be gone.
Let fall that smoring mantle. Do not straight
All things return? The nether world the Moon,
The Sun enlightens us. The self same light
Now shines, that shone before this deep and dismal Night.
16
If not the same. Then like to flowing stream
You deem the light that passes still away,
New parts ever succeeding. The Sunbeam
Has no reflection then, if it decay
So fast as it comes forth: Nor were there day;
For it would vanish before it could arrive
At us. But in a moment Sol does ray.
One end of his long shafts then we conceive
At once both touch himself and down to us do dive.
17
Beside, this air is not the sustentation
Of spreaden light; for then as it did move
The light would move. And sturdy conflictation
Of struggling winds, when they have fiercely strove,
Phoebus fair golden locks would rudely move
Out of their place; and Eastern winds at morn
Would make more glorious days, while light is drove
From that bright quarter: Southern blasts do burn
From midday sun, but yet Northwinds like light have born.
18
What then must be the channel of this river,
If we'll have light to flow as passing stream?
So plain it is that Nature does dissever
The light and the air, that the air the Suns bright beams
Does not uphold as the warmth of his gleams
Or heat that lodges there. From this firm might
Naught leaning on the Air, well may we't deem
Some subtle body, or some grosser spright
Depending of fair Phoebus, of no other wight.
19
And when these rays were forced to retire
Into their fountain, they were not so gone
But that the same sprung out from the first fire.
So fine spun glittering silk crumpled in one
Changes not 'ts individuation
From what it was, when it was gaily spread
In fluttering winds to the admiration
Of the beholder. Thus is naught so dead
But God can it restore to its old livelyhed.
20
For all the creature's but the out gone-rayes
Of a free sun, and what I meaned most
Of him alone depend. He deads their blaze
By calling in his breath. Though things be tossed
And strangely changed, yet naught at all is lost
Unless he list. Nor then so lost but he
Can them return, In every thing compost
Each part of the essence its centreity
Keeps to it self, it shrinks not to a nullity.
21
When that compounded nature is dissolved,
Each centre's safe, as safe as second light
Or drove into the Sun, or thence out-rol'd.
So all depend on the Universal spright
From hight to depth, as they are ranked right
In their due orders. Lises full pregnancy
Breaks out when friendly sympathy does smite.
The higher rank the higher energie
From natures lowly lap to Gods sublimity:
22
But well may man be called the epitome
Of all things. Therefore no low life him made.
The Highest holds all in His capacity.
Therefore man's soul from Gods own life outray'd,
His outgone Centre's on that center staid.
What disadvantage then can the decay
Of this poor carcass do, when it does fade?
The soul no more depends on this frail clay,
Then on our eye depends bright Phoebus glist'ring ray.
23
But in this argument we'll no longer stay,
Consider now the souls conversion
Into her self. Naught divisible may
Close with it self by revolution.
For then or part in this reflection,
Is drove into a part, or part to the whole,
Or whole to part, or near compression
The whole into the whole does closely roll.
But easily all these ways right reason will control.
24
If part turn into part, part into whole,
Whole into part, the thing does not convert
Into it self; the thing it self is all
Not part of 't self: if all to all revert,
Each part then into each part is insert.
But tell me then how is their quantity
If every part with each part is refert?
Thus swallowed up, they will have no distancy;
So you destroy supposed divisibility.
25
Wherefore that thing is individuous
What ever can into it self reflect,
Such is the soul as has been proved by us
Before, and further now we do detect
By her four wheels: The first hight Intellect,
Wherewith she drives into her Nature deep
And finds it out; next Will, this does affect
Her self found out. Her self then out does peep
Into these acts, she into both does easily creep.
26
But this conversion's from the body free;
B^gins not thence, nor thither does return:
Nor is the soul worse then her energie,
If in her acts she be far higher born
Then they should 'pend on this base corse forlorn:
Then also she ha^h no dependency
Upon this body, but may safely scorn
That low condition of servility,
And blame all that aver that false necessity.
27
If she should issue from this nether spring,
Nearer she kept to her Original
She were the stronger, and her works would bring
To more perfection; but alas! they fall
They fail by near approach. The best of all
Wax weak and faint by too close union
With this foul fount. Might intellectual
Grows misty by this strait conjunction;
The will is woxen weak, its vigor quite is gone.
28
But O! how often when she her self does cut
From nearer commerce with the low delight
Of things corporeal, and her eyes does shut
To those false fading lights, she feels her spright
Filled with excessive pleasure, such a plight
She finds that it does fully satisfy
Her thirsty life. Then reason shines out bright,
And holy love with mild serenity
Does hug her harmless self in this her purity.
29
What grave monitions and sure prophecy
Have men in sickness left? a true testation
Of the souls utter independency
On this poor crasie corse. May that narration
Of Aristotle's move easy persuasion
Of his Endemus, to whom sick at Phere
While sleep his senses bound, this revelation
A gentle youth did bring with goodly cheer,
And jolly blithe deportment, chasing needless fear.
30
Told him that sickness would not mortal prove,
He should grow well er'e long, but deaths drad power
On that towns tyrant should be shortly drove,
Swift vengeance on his cursed head should shower:
Both proved true. I could in plenty pour
Such like examples, as of Pherecyde,
Calanus, him of Rhodes, and others more;
But it is needless, it is a truth well tried,
The higher works the soul the more she is untied.
31
Then quite set loose from this her heavy chain
She is in happiest plight, so far she is
From being naught or perishing. Again,
We find such utter contrarieties
Betwixt the bodies and her qualities
That we can no ways think she pends at all
Of that with which she has such repugnancies.
What thing does fight with its Original?
The spring and stream be always homogeneall.
32
But the high heaven-born soul sprung out from Jove
Ever is clashing with the foolery
Of this dull body, which the sense does love,
And erring fancy. It were long to try
In every thing: O how 'twould magnify
The hight of pleasures that fall under sense.
This well described would prove its Deity.
A vast round body clothed with the excellence
Of glorious glistring light through the wide air extense,
33
Bravely adorned with diverse colors gay,
Even infinite varieties that shine
With wondrous brightness, varnished with the ray
Of that clear light, with motion circuline
Let turn about and stir up sounds divine,
That sweetly may affect the attentive ear.
Add fragrant odours waft with gentle wind,
Add pleasant taste, soft touch to Venus dear;
This is the bodies God, this is its highest sphere.
34
But from far higher place and brighter light
Our reason checks us for this vanity,
Calls to us, warns us that that empty sight
Lead not our soul unto Idolatry,
Make us not rest in easy falsity.
If thou be stirred up by working fire
To search out god, to find the Deity;
Take to thy self not what thine eyes admire
Or any outward sense, or what sense can desire.
35
Behold a light far brighter then the Sun!
The Sun's a shadow if you them compare,
Or gross Cimmerian mist; the fairest Noon
Exceeds not the meridian night so far
As that light does the Sun. So perfect clear
So perfect pure it is, that outward eye
Cannot behold this inward subtle star,
But indisperst is this bright Majesty,
Yet every where out shining in infinity;
36
Unplac'd, unparted, one close Unity,
Yet omnipresent; all things, yet but one;
Not stre^k'd with gaudy multiplicity,
Pure light without discolouration,
Stable without circumvolution,
Eternal rest, joy without passing sound:
What sound is made without collision?
Smell, taste, and touch make God a gross compound;
Yet truth of all that is good is perfectly here found.
37
This is a riddle unto outward sense:
And heavy fancy, that can rise no higher
Then outward senses, knows no excellence
But what those Five do faithfully inspire
From their great God, this world; nor do desire
More then they know: wherefore to consopite
Or quench this false light of bold phansies fire,
Surely must be an act contrary quite
Unto this bodies life, and its low grovelling spright.
38
Wherefore the body's not Original
Of humane soul when she does thus resist
That principle: which still more clearly shall
Be proved. Often when either drowsy mists
Provoke to sleep, or worst of senses lists
To ease his swelling veins, or stomach craves
His wonted food, that he too long has mist,
Or our dry lungs cool liquor fain would have,
Or when in war our heart suggests the fear of grave:
39
Yet high desire of truth, and deep insight
Into Gods mystery makes us command
These low attractions; and our countries right
Bids march on bravely, stout and stiffly stand
In bloody fight, and try't by strength of hand.
Thus truth and honesty so sway our will,
That we no longer doubt to break the band
Of lower Nature, and this body kill
Or vex, so we the Laws of reason may fulfill.
40
This proves the soul to sit at liberty,
Not wedged into this mass of earth, but free
Unloos'd from any strong necessity
To do the bodies dictates, while we see
Clear reason shining in serenity,
Calling above unto us, pointing to
What Is right and decent, what does best agree
With those sweet lovely Ideas that do show
Some glimps of their pure light. So Sol through clouds does flow.
41
How often do we neglect this bodies life,
And outward comely plight, for to adorn
Our soul with virtuous ornaments? and strive
To fat our mind with truth, while it is forlorn,
Squalid, half-nasty, pallid, wan, deform?
Can this desire from the base body spring?
No sure such brave achievements be yborn
Within the soul, tend to her perfecting,
See the independent mind in her self circuling!
42
Best plight of body hinders such like acts.
How does she then upon the body pend?
To do those subtle, high, pure, heavenly facts?
What? does the Sun his rays that he out-sends
Smother or choke? though clouds that upward wend
May raised be by him, yet of those clouds
That he does congregate he no'te depend.
Nor does the soul that in this flesh does crowd
Her self rely on that thick vapor where she is shroud.
43
But still to prove it clearer: If the mind
Without the bodies help can operate
Of her own self, then nothing can we find
To scruple at, but that souls separate
Safely exist, not subject unto fate,
Nothing depending on their carcases,
That they should fade when those be ruinate:
But first perpend well both their properties
That we may better see their independencies.
44
The living body where the soul does 'bide
These functions has, fancy, sense, memory.
How into sense these outward forms do glide
I have already told, and did descry
How presentifick circularity
Is spread through all: there is one Mundane spright
And body, vital corporality
We have from hence. Our souls be co^unite
With the worlds spright and body, with these herself she has dight.
45
Our body struck by evolution
Of outward forms spread in the worlds vast spright,
Our listening mind by its adversion
Does notice take, but nothing is empight
In it. Of old Gods hand did all forms write
In humane souls, which waken at the knock
Of Mundane shapes. If they were naked quite
Of innate forms, though heaven and earth should rock
With roaring winds, they would hear no more then senseless stock.
46
Phansy's the impression of those forms that flit
In this low life: They often continue long,
When as our spright more potently is hit
By their incursions and appulses strong,
Like heated water, though a while but hung
On fiercer fire, an hot impression
Long time retains; so forms more stoutly flung
Against our spright make deep insculption;
Long time it is till their clear abolition.
47
Hence springs that which men call memory,
When outward object does characterize
Our inward common spright; or when that we
From our own soul stir up clear fantasies
Which be our own elicited Idees,
Springing from our own centrall life, by might
Of our strong Fiat as often as we please.
With these we seal that under grosser spright,
Make that our note-book, there our choifest notions write.
48
But since it is not any part of us,
But longs unto the great world, it must
Be changed; for course of Time voraginous
With rapid force is violently just,
Makes each thing pay with what it was in trust.
The common life sucks back the common spright,
The body backward falls into the dust;
It does it by degrees. Hence phancie, sight,
And memory in age do not their functions right.
49
Often disease, or some hard casualtie
Does hurt this spirit, that a man does lose
The use of sense, wit, fancy, memory;
That hence rash men our souls mortal suppose
Through their rude ignorance; but to disclose
The very truth, our soul's in safety
In that distemper, that does ill dispose
Her under spright. But her sad misery
Is that so close she is tied in a prone Unity,
50
Leans on this bodies false security,
Seeks for things there, not in herself, nor higher,
Extremely loves this bodies company,
Trusts in its life, thither bends her desire:
But when it gins to fail, she is left in the mire.
Yet hard upon us hangs the Eternal light
The ever-live-Idees, the lamping fire
Of lasting Intellect, whose nearness might
Illumin, were our minds not lost in that frail spright.
51
That spright and we are plain another thing:
Which now I Will clearly show that we may see
Our independency on his existing,
Which prove I must from eithers property.
That spright has no perceptibility
Of his impressions: Fantasy nor sense
Perceive themselves; often with open eye
We look upon a man in our presence,
And yet of that near object have no cognoscence.
52
And so of Phansies that be fresh enough,
Even deeply sealed upon that lower spright,
Unless we seek them out and pierce them through
With aiming animadversion, they in night
Do lurk unknown to us, though they be bright
In their own selves. Again, some object may
In its great vigor, luster, sweying might
This spirit wound by its fierce riving ray;
Our sight is hurt by the eye of the broad blasing day.
53
Beside the senses each one are restrained
To his own object: so is Fantasy.
That in the spirits compass is contained;
As likewise the low natural memory.
But sooth to say, by a strong sympathy
We both are moved by these, and these do move.
As the light spider that makes at a fly,
Her self now moves the web she subt'ly wove,
Moved first by her own web, when here the fly did rove.
54
Like spider in her web, so do we sit
Within this spirit, and if ought do shake
This subtle loom we feel as it does hit;
Most part into adversion we awake,
Unless we chance into our selves betake
Our selves, and listen to the lucid voice
Of the Intellect, which these low tumults slake:
But our own selves judge of what ere accloyes
Our muddied mind, or what lifts up to heavenly joys.
55
All the five senses, Fancy, Memory,
We feel their work, distinguish and compare,
Find out their natures by the subtlety
Of sifting reason. Then they objects are
Of the understanding, bear no greater share
In this same act then objects wont to do.
They are two realties distinguished clear
One from the other, as I erst did show.
She knows that spright, that spright our soul can never know.
56
Sense, Fancy, Memory, as before was said
Be hurt by stronger objects, or be spoild
By longer exercise: Our soul never fades,
But does her spright commiserate long toild
With agitation, when she feels it moild
Descends to comfort it, and gives it rest;
But she grows quicker, vaster, never foild
With contemplations that this spright molest:
The inward soul's renewed as cannot be expressed.
57
How soul and spright be severed we see,
But how't works by it self is not yet shown;
I mean without this sprights assistencie,
Though not quite by her self. High light does crown
Her summitie, when sleep that spright does drown
^^apt into highest heavens in ecstasie
She sees such things as would low life confound,
Enrage with a tumultuous agony,
Burst this pent spright for want of fit capacity.
58
Then is she joynd with the Eternal Idees,
Which move our souls as sights do here below:
Joynd with the spright of God we gaze on these,
As by the Mundane spright the Out-world we know.
Our soul hangs twixt them both, and there does go
Where either spright does snatch her. Either raise
Her inward forms, which leap out nothing-slow
When sympathy them calls. Thus she displayes
Her inward life, Gods light views with her wakened rays.
59
When we confute a pregnant falsitie
Clothed with strong phantasmes in our snared mind,
As this suppose, The earths stabilitie,
What help can we in our low fancy find,
Possessed of this impression? what shall bind
This stubborn falsehood so inveterate?
That spright so stiffly set cannot be inclined
By ought but by the soul that contemplates
Truth by her self, brings out her forms that be innate?
60
Flies she to sense? sense pleads for Ptolemee.
Flies she to her low fancy? that is so swayd
By sense, and fore-imprest Astronomy,
By botch'd inculcate paradigmes made
By senses dictate, that they will both persuade
That Philolaus and wise Heraclide
Be frantic both, Copernicus twice mad.
She cannot then this question well decide.
By ought but her own forms that in her self reside.
61
Which she calls out unto her faithful aid,
Commands deep silence to fond fantasy,
Whose odious prating truth has often betrayed,
And in her stead brought in rash falsitie,
Seated in sour inert stupiditie.
Then farewell sense, and what from sense has sprung,
Says she, I Will contemplate in purity,
And quit my self of that tumultuous throng:
What then she fin^s shall be unfold in my next song.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA Or The Immortality of the Soul.
BOOK III. CANT. III.
That the earth does move, proofs Physical
Unto us do descrie;
Add reasons Theosophicall,
Als add Astronomy.
1
Blessed souls first Authors of Astronomy!
Who clomb the heavens with your high reaching mind,
Scaled the high battlements of the lofty sky,
To whom compared this earth a point you find;
Your bodies less, what measure has defined?
What art that mighty vastness? Such high facts
The ancient Giants swollen with raging wind
Could not effect. A subtle Parallax,
A dark Eclipse do quite obscure their braving acts.
2
O the great might of man's high Fantasy!
Which with a shade or a divided line,
That naught, this but a thin exilitie,
Can do far more then strength enraged with tine,
Hoysted with haughty pride. That brood combine
To clamber up to heaven. Hill upon hill,
Ossa upon Olympus does recline:
Their brawnie arms redoubled force does fill,
While they their spirits summon to effect their furious will.
3
But all in vain they want the inward skill.
What comes from heaven only can thereascend.
Not rage nor tempest that this bulk does fill
Can profit ought, but gently to attend
The souls still working, patiently to bend
Our mind to sifting reason, and clear light,
That strangely figured in our soul does wend
Shifting its forms, still playing in our sight,
Till something it present that we shall take for right.
4
The busy soul it is that hither hent
By strength of reason, the true distancies
Of the erring Planets, and the vast extent
Of their round bodies without outward eyes
Has viewed, told their proportionalities,
Confounded sense by reasons strange report
(But wiser he that on reason relies
Then stupid sense low-sunken into dirt)
This weapon I have got none from me may extort.
5
O You stiff-standers for aged Ptolemce,
I heartily praise your humble reverence
If willingly given to Antiquity;
But when of him in whom's your confidence,
Or your own reason and experience
In those same arts, you find those things are true
That utterly oppugn our outward sense,
Then are you forced to sense to bid adieu,
Not what your sense gainsayes to holden straight untrue.
6
Though contraire unto sense, though it be new
(But sooth to sayen the earths motion is of tried
Antiquity, as I above did show:
In Philolaus and in Heraclide
Those subtle thoughts of old did close reside)
Yet reason ought to bear away the bell.
But irefull ignorance cannot abide
To be outtopd, reprochfully she 'll yell,
Call's mad, when her own self does with foul fury swell.
7
But let them bark like band-dogs at the Moon,
That mindlesse passes on in silencie:
I Will take my flight above this outward sun,
Regardlesse of such fond malignitie,
Lift my self up in the Theology
Of heavenly Plato. There I Will contemplate
The Archtype of this sun, that bright Idee
Of steddie Good, that does his beams dilate
Through all the worlds, all lives and beings propagate.
8
But yet in words to trifle I will deigne
A while: They may our mind fitly prepare
For higher flight; we larger breath may gain
By a low hovering. These words they are
All found in that old Oracle of Clare.
That heavenly power which Iao hight
The highest of all the Gods thou may declare,
In spring named Zeus, in summer Helios bright,
In autumn called Jao, Aides in brumall night.
9
These names do plainly denotate the sun,
In Spring called Zeus, from life or kindly heat;
In winter, 'cause the day's so quickly done,
He Aides hight, he is not long in sight;
In Summer, cause he strongly does us smite
With his hot darts, then Helios we him name
From Eloim or Eloah so hight;
In Autumn Jao, Jehovah is the same:
So is the word depraved by an uncertain fame.
10
So great similitude twixt Phoebus light
And God, that God himself the Nations deem
The sun. The learned Seventy 've boldly pight
A tent therein for the true Eloim,
The sensible Deity you will reckon him,
If Hermes words bear with you any sway,
Or if you Christian Clerks do ought esteem,
In David's odes they make Gods Christ a day;
His father's then the sun from whence this light does ray.
11
Then by all the wide worlds acknowledgement,
The sunne's a type of that eternal light
Which we call God, a fair delineament
Of that which Good in Plato's school is hight
His T'agathon with beauteous rays bedight.
Let Us now consult with their Theology,
And that Idea with our inward sight
Behold, casheering sensibility
Then in clear reason view this correspondency.
12
One steady Good, center of essencies,
Unmoved Monad, that Apollo hight,
The Intellectual sun whose energies
Are all things that appear in vital light,
Whose brightness passes every creatures sight,
Yet round about him stird with gentle fire
All things do dance; their being, action, might,
They thither do direct with strong desire,
To embosome him with close embracements they aspire.
13
Unseen, incomprehensible He moves
About himself each seeking entity
That never yet shall find that which it loves.
No finite thing shall reach infinity,
No thing dispersed comprehend that Unity,
Yet in their ranks they seemly foot it round,
Trip it with joy at the worlds harmony
Struck with the pleasure of an amorous stound,
So dance they with fair flowers from unknown root ycrownd.
14
Still falling short they never fail to seek,
Nor find they nothing by their diligence;
They find repast, their lively longings e^k
Rekindled still, by timely influence.
Thus all things in distinct circumference
Move about Him that satisfies them all.
Nor be they thus stird up by wary sense
Or foresight, or election rational,
But blindly reel about the leart of Lives centrall.
15
So does the Earth one of the erring Seven
Wheel round the fixed sun, that is the shade
Of steady Good, shining in this Out-heaven
With the rest of those stars that God has made
Of baser matter, all which be arrayed
With his far-shining light. They sing for joy,
They frisque about in circulings unstay'd,
Dance through the liquid air, and nimbly toy
While Sol keeps clear their sprite, consumes what may accloy.
16
Better the indigent be moved, then he
That wants naught: He fills all things with light
And kindly heat: through his fecundity
Peoples the world; by his exciting sprite
Wakens the plants, calls them out of deep night.
They thrust themselves into his fostring rays,
Stretch themselves forth stird by his quickening might.
And all the while their merry roundelayes
(As lightsome phansies deem) each Planet spritely plays.
17
But sooth to say that sound so subtle is
Made by percussion of th'ethereall fire
Against our air (if it be not transmisse
By its exility,) that none ought admire
That we no'te hear what well we might desire
Heavens harmony. 'Cording to others lear
The sound's so big that it cannot retire
Into the windings of a mortal ear;
No more than Egypt can Niles Catadupa bear.
18
There ought to be certain proportion
Betwixt the object and the outward sense.
Rash man that do infer negation
From thy dead ear, or non-experience.
Then let them dance and sing, raise iufluence
From lively motion, that preserves their sprite
From foul corruption: motion's the best sense
To keep off filth in children of cold Night,
Whose life is in dull matter; but the sunne's all Light.
19
Therefore full safely he may steady stond,
Unmoved, at least not removed out of place.
I Will not deny but that he may turn round
On his own center. So the steps we'll trace
Of Essence, Plato's On, which steady stays
And moves at once, that same Iao hight
In that old Clarian Oracle, that says
It is the sun. This answer will aright
To Jove or Plato's On as done those schools descry't.
20
That same first Being, Beauty, Intellect,
Turns to his father (of whom he was born)
In a brief instant. But who can detect
Such hidden mysteries? back mine eyes I Will turn,
Lest in this light like fluttering moth I burn.
Enough is shown of correspondency
Twixt this worlds sun and center of hid Morn,
The radiant light of the deep Deity.
Thus have I fairly proved the suns stability.
21
Then must the earth turn round, or we want day,
Or never be in night. Now I Will descend
Clothed with this truth. As wrathful dogs do bay
At specter solemn Cynthia does send;
So now I backward to the senses wend:
They Will bark at the shape of my disguised mind,
As stranger wights, they wrathfully will rend
This uncouth habit. They no such thing find
Amongst their domestic forms, to whom they are more kind.
22
And weaker reason which they wont misguide
Will deem all this nothing mysterious,
But my strong-winged Muse feeble to slide
Into false thoughts and dreams vertiginous,
And plainly judge us woxen furious,
Thus in our rage to shake the stable earth,
Whirling her round with turns prodigious;
For she does steadfast stand as it appear'th
From the unshaken buildings she so safely bear'th.
23
If she should move about, then would she sling
From of her self those fair extructed loads
Of carved stone: The air aloud would sing
With brushing trees: Beasts in their dark aboads
Would brained be by their own caves; the earth strowd
With strange destruction. All would shattered lie
In broken shivers. What mad frantic mood
Does thus invade wary Philosophy,
That it so dotes on such a furious falsitie?
24
But still more subt'ly this cause to pursue,
The clouds would always seem to rise from the East,
Which sense and oft-experience proves untrue;
They rise from all the quarters, South, North, West,
From every part, as Aeolus thinks best.
Again the Earths sad stupid gravity
Unfit for motion shows her quiet rest:
Lastly an arrow shot unto the sky
Would not return unto his foot that let it fly.
25
Add unto these that contrariety
Of motion, when as the self same things
At the same time do back and forward hie:
As when for speed the rider fiercely dings
His horse with iron heel, lays the loose strings
Upon his neck, westward they swiftly scour,
When as the Earth, finishing her daily rings,
Does Eastward make with all her might and power,
She quite has run her stage at end of twice twelve hours.
26
These and like phansies do so strongly tie
The slower mind to aged Ptolemee,
That shameful madness 't were for to deny
So plain a truth as they deem this to be.
But yet, alas! if they could standen free
From prejudice, and heavy swaying sense
That dims our reason that it cannot see
What Is the pure truth, enough in just defense
Of Pythagore we find though with small diligence,
27
One single truth concerning unity
Of sprights and bodies, and how on Form may
Inact a various Corporeity,
Keep't up together and her might display
Through all the parts, make it constantly obey
The powerful dictates of its centrall spright,
Which being one can variously play:
This lore if we but once had learnd aright,
All what was brought before would vanish at first sight.
28
For that Magnetic might does so combine
Earth, Water, Air, into one animate,
Whose soul or life so sweetly 't does incline,
So surely, easly, as none can relate
But he that is exercised in every state
Of moving life. What? Can the plastic spright
So variously his branching stock dilate
Downward to hell upward to heaven bright,
And strangely figured leaves and flowers send into sight?
29
Can one poor single Center do all this
In a base weed that suddenly decays?
And shall not the earths life that is transmisse
Through sea and air, and with its potent rays
Informs all this (all this on that life stays)
Shall't not obtain the like variety
Of inward ruling motion? Your minds raise,
O sluggish men! single centrality
You Will find shall do, what ere's admit by fantasy.
30
Now see if this clear apprehension
Will not with case repel each argument
Which we rehearsed with an intention
For to refute. The earths swift movement,
Because it is natural not violent,
Will never shatter buildings. With straight line
It binds down strongly each partic'larment
Of every edifice. All stones incline
Unto that Center; this does stoutly all combine:
31
Nor is less natural that circular motion,
Then this which each part to the center drives:
So every stone on earth with one commotion
Goes round, and yet withal right stiffly strives
To reach the center, though it never dives
So deep. Who then so blind but plainly sees
How for our safety Nature well contrives,
Binding all close with down-propensities?
But now we'll answer make to the loud-singing trees.
32
Walls, Towers, Trees, would stir up a strange noise,
If the air stood still, while the earth is hurled round
As does the switch often shak'd by idle boys
That please themselves in varying of the sound.
But this objection we with reason sound
Have well prevented, while we plainly taught
Earth, Water, Air, in one to be fast bound
By one spermatick spright, which easly raught
To each part: Earth, Sea, Air so powerfully has it caught.
33
All these as one round entire body move
Upon their common Poles; that difficulty
Of stirring sounds, so clearly we remove.
That of the clouds with like facility
We straight shall chase away. In the air they ly
And whirl about with it, and when some wind
With violence before him makes them fly,
Then in them double motion we find,
Eastward they move, and whither by these blasts they are inclined.
34
What they pretend of the Earths gravity,
Is naught but a long taken up conceit:
A stone that downward to the earth does hy
Is not more heavy then dry straws that jet
Up to a ring made of black shining jeat.
Each thing does tend to the loud-calling might
Of sympathy. So it is a misconceit
That deems the earth the only heavy weight.
They ken not the strange power of the strong centrall spright.
35
Were there a shiver cut from off the Moon
And cast quite off from that round entire mass,
Would't fall into our mouths? No, it would soon
Make back to the center from whence forced it was:
The same in Mars and Sol would come to pass,
And all the stars that have their proper centres.
So gravity is naught but close to press
Unto one Magic point, there near to enter;
Each sympathetick part does boldly it adventure.
36
Thus in each starry globe all parts may tend
Unto one point, and mean time turn around;
Nor does that sway its circling ought offend:
These motions do not at all confound
One the others course. The Earth's not heavy found,
But from that strong down-pulling centrall sway,
Which hinders not but that it may turn round,
Since that it moves not a contrary way.
Which answre I will bend against the fifth assay:
37
An arrow shot into the empty air,
Which straight returning to the bowmans foot,
The Earths stability must proven clear.
Thus these bad archers do at random shoot,
Whose easy error I do thus confute.
The arrow has one spirit with this sphere,
Forced upward turns with it, moved by the root
Of natural motion. So when backed does bear
It self, still Eastward turns with motions circular.
38
So it is no wonder when it has descended
It falls back to the place from whence it flew,
Since all this while its circular course has bended
Toward the East, and in proportion due
That arcuall Eastern motion did pursue:
Nearer the earth the slower it must go;
These Arks be less, but in the heavens blew
Those Arks increase, it must not be so slow
Thus must it needs return unto its idle bow.
39
Nor ought we wonder that it does conform
Its motions to the circles of the air,
Since water in a wooden bucket born
Does sit it self unto each periphere,
By hight or depth, as you shall change the sphere.
So lowly set more water 't will contain,
'Cause its round tumor higher then does bear
It self up from the brims. So may't be sayen
The lowlier man the larger graces does obtain.
40
But now to answer to the last objection,
It Is not impossible one thing to move
Contrary ways, which by a fit retection
I strongly will evince and clearly prove.
Take but the pains higher for to remove
A clock with hanging plummet. It goes down
At that same time you heave it high above
Its former place. Thus fairly have we won
The field against stupid sense, that reason fain would drown.
41
Now let us go on (we have well cleard the way)
More plainly prove this seeming paradox
And make this truth shine brighter then midday,
Neglect dull sconses mowes and idle mocks.
O constant hearts, as stark as Thracian rocks,
Well grounded in grave ignorance, that scorn
Reasons sly force, its light slight subtle strokes.
Sing we to these wast hills, dern, deaf, forlorn,
Or to the cheerful children of the quick-ey'd Morn?
42
To you we sing that live in purer light,
Escaped the thraldom of down-drooping sense,
Whose nimble spirit and clear piercing sight
Can easly judge of every conference
Withouten prejudice, with patience
Can weigh the moments of each reason brought;
While others in tempestuous vehemence
Blow all away with bitter blasts. Untought
In subtilties, they show themselves in jangling stout.
43
I have the barking of bold sense confuted,
Its clamorous tongue thus being consopite,
With reasons easy shall I be well suited,
To show that P^thagore's position's right.
Copernicks, or whosever dogma't hight.
The first is that that is wisely signified
By Moses Maymons son, a learned wight,
Who says each good Astronomer is tied
To lessen the heavens motions vainly multiplied,
44
And the foul botches of false feigned Orbs:
Whose useless number reason must restrain,
That often the loose luxuriant fancy curbs,
And in just bounds does warily contain:
To use more means then needs is all in vain.
Why then, O busy sons of Prolemee!
Do you that vast star-bearing sphere constrain
To hurl about with such celerity,
When the earth may move without such strange velocity?
45
What needless phansy's this that that huge sphere
In one short moment must thus whirl around,
That it must fly six hundred thousand sheere
Of Germane miles. If that will not confound,
For pomp add forty thousand more, that 'bound;
Three thousand more, if it were requisite,
You might annex, and more if they have found
The measure right; when as the earth's slow flight
One sixteenth of a mile her scarcely does transmit.
46
But if this All be liquid, pervious,
One fine Ethereall (which reason right
Will soon admit: for it is ridiculous
Thus for to stud the heaven with nails bright,
The stars in fluid sky will standen tight,
As men do feign the earth in the soft air
To be unmoved) How will proportion fit?
So vast a difference there does appear
Of motions in those stars that the same bigness bear.
47
Besides that difficulty will remain
Of unconceivable swift motion
In the Equinoctial stars, where some contain
This earthy globes mighty dimension,
Ten thousand times twice told. They hurry on
With the same swiftness I set down before,
And with more pains. A globes extension,
The bigger that it grows, grows still more
Nigh to a flat faced figure, and finds resistance fore.
48
But now that all the heavens be liquid, hence
I Will fetch an argument. Those higher stars
They may as well in water hang suspense
As do the Planets. Venus orb debars
Not Mars, nor enters he with knocks and jars;
The soft fi^e yielding Ether gives admission:
So gentle Venus to Mercurius dares
Descend, and finds an easy intromission,
Casts open that azu^ curtain by a swift discission.
49
That famous star nailed down in Cassiopee,
How was it hammered in your solid sky?
What pinsers pulled it out again, that we
No longer see it, whither did it fly?
Astronomers say 'twas at least as high
As the eighth sphere. It gave no parallax,
No more then those light lamps that there we spy.
But prejudice before her self she will tax
Of holy writ and the heavens she will make a nose of wax.
50
What man will now that is not vertiginous
Hurrie about his head these several lights
So mighty vast, with so voracious
And rapid course whirling them day and night
About the earth, when the earths motion might
Save that so monstrous labor, with less pains,
Even infinitely less? But thoughts empight
Once in the mind do so possess the brains,
That hard it is ^o wash out those deep ancient stains.
51
Two things there be whose reason's nothing clear:
Those cool continual breathings of East wind
Under the line; the next high Comets are,
In which Philosophers three motions find?
Concerning which men hither to are blind,
That have not moved the earth unto their aid;
Diurnall and an annual course they have mind
Like to the suns, beside, by what they are swayed
To North or South. This myst'ry's easly thus displayed.
52
The Ecliptic course, and that diurnall moving,
Is but apparent as the suns, not true:
But that the earth does move, that still wants proving,
You Will say. Then if you will, these Comets show
One proof for her two motions. Whence issue
Those meteors turnings? what shall hale them on,
And guide their steps, that in proportion due
They dance Sols measures? what occasion
Or fruit can be of that strange double motion?
53
Naught but the Earths circumvolution
Does cause this sight, and but in outward show
This sight of double Sunlike motion
Seen in the Comets. For the winds that blow
Under the Aequinoctiall, who does know
Any other cause, that still they breathe from the East?
That constant feat from whence else can it flow,
Save from the Earths swift hurring from the West?
Mid part is strongliest roused the Poles do sleep in rest.
54
Wherefore men under the Aequinoctiall,
Where the earths course most rapid is and swift,
Sensibly 're dashed against that Aereall
Pure liquid essence. That clear air is left
Not snatched away so fast, not quite bereft
Of its own Nature, nor like the other sky
Unmoved quite; but slowpac'd is yeleft
And driven close together; sensibly
So feel we that fine air that seems from East to fly.
55
Those parts be in far greater purity
Devoid of earthy vapors. Thence it is
They Are not so easly turned by sympathy,
The air there having less of earthinesse;
So that they move not with one speediness,
The earth and it. Yet curious men have fun
Something like this, even in the mid-land Seas
Ships four times sooner the same stages run,
When Westward they do fly, then when they there begun.
56
But that disgracement of Philosophy
From flux and reflux of the Ocean main
Their monthly and yearly change; this Theorie
Might take it away and show the causes plain.
Some parts of the Earth do much more swiftness gain,
When as their course goes whirling on one way
With the annual motion, which must needs constrain
The fluid Sea with unexpected sway.
Long time it were this mystery fully to display.
57
Wherefore I Will let it passse, my self betake
Unto some reasons Astronomicall,
To which if it please the nimble mind to awake
And shake off prejudice, that wont forestall
The ablest wit, I fear not but he will fall
Into the same opinion, magnify
That subtle spirit that has made this All,
And has half-hid his work from mortal eye,
To sport and play with souls in sweet philosophy,
58
But with crabb'd mind wisdom will nere consort,
Make her abode with a sour ingenie;
That harmless spright her self will nere disport
With bloody zeal, currish malignitie,
With wrathful ignorance, grave hypocrisy.
Mirth, and Free mindedness, Simplicity,
Patience, Discreetnesse, and Benignity,
Faithfulness, heart-struck Teneritie;
These be the lovely playemates of pure verity.
59
The Eternal Son of God, who Logos hight,
Made all things in a fit proportion;
Wherefore, I wot, no man that judges right
In Heaven will make such a confusion,
That courses of unlike extension,
Vastly unlike, in like time shall be run
By ^he flight stars. Such huge distension
Of place shows that their time is not all one;
Saturn his ring no'te finish as quick as the Moon.
60
Yet if the Earth stand stupid and unmoved,
This needs must come to pass. For they go round
In every twice twelve hours, as is proved
By daily experience. But it would confound
The worlds right order, if it were surely found
A real motion. Wherefore let it be
In them but seeming, but a real round
In the Earth it self. The world so's setten free
From that untoward disproportionalitie.
61
For so the courses of the erring Seven
With their own orbs will fitly well agree;
Their Annual periods in the liquid Heaven
They only finish then: which as they be
Or less or greater, so the time they fly
In their own circlings has its difference.
The Moon a month, Saturn years ten times three;
Those have the least and bigg'st circumference.
So all their times and o^bs have mutual reference.
62
Next light's, the Planets dark opacitie,
Which long time has been found in the low Moon:
Hills, Valleys, and such like asperitie
Through optic glasses thence have plainly shone:
By the same trick it has been clearly shown
That Venus Moon-like grows corniculate
What time her face with flusher light is blown:
Some such like things others have contemplate
In Mercury, about the Sun both circulate.
63
When Venus is the furthest off from us.
Then is she in her full. When in her full,
She seems least; which proves she is exterous
Beyond the Sun, and further off does roll.
But when her circling nearer down does pull,
Then gins she swell, and waxen bug with horn,
But loose her light, parts clad with darkness dull
She shows to us, She and Mercury never born
Far from the Sun, proves that about him both do turn.
64
They both opake, as also is the Moon
That turns about the Earth (so turn those four
'Bout Jupiter, tend him as he does run
His annual course) That Tellus so may scour
Th'Ethereall Plain, and have the self same power
To run her circuits in the liquid sky
About the Sun, the mind that does not lour,
Drooping in earthy dregs, will not deny,
Since we so well have proved the stars opacitie.
65
About the great the lesser lamps do dance,
The Medicean four reel about Jove;
Two round old Saturn without Nominance,
Luna about the earth does nimbly move:
Then all as it does seemly well behove,
About the bigg'st of all great Phoebus hight
With joy and jollitie needs round must rove,
Tickled with pleasure of his heat and light.
What tumbling tricks they play in his farre-piercing sight!
66
Next argument (could I it well express
With Poets pen) it has so mighty force,
That an ingenious man 'twould stoutly press
To give assent unto the Annual course
Of this our earth. But prejudice the nurse
Of ignorance stops all free confession,
Als keeps the way that souls have not recourse
To purer reason, chok'd with that oppression.
This argument is drawn from the stars retrocession.
67
Planets go back, stand still, and forward fly
With unexpected swiftness: What Is the cause
That they thus stagger in the plain-pay'd sky?
Or stupid stand, as if some dull repose
Did numb their spirits and their sinews lose?
Here 'gins the wheel-work of the Epicycle:
Thus patch they Heaven more botch'dly then old cloths
This pretty sport does make my heart to tickle
With laughter, and mine eyes with merry tears to trickle.
68
O daring fancy! that do thus compile
The Heavens from hasty thoughts, such as fall next;
Wary Philosophers cannot but smile
At such feat gear, at thy rude rash context.
An heap of Orbs disorderly perplexed,
Thrust in on every hint of motion,
Must be the wondrous art of Nature, next
Here working under God. Thus, thus vain man
Intitles always God to his opinion;
69
Thinks every thing is done as he conceives;
Would bind all men to his religion;
All the world else of freedom he bereaves,
He and his God must have Dominion,
The truth must have her propagation:
That is his thought, which he has made a God,
That furious hot inust impression
Does so disturb his veins, that all abroad
With rage he roves, and all gainsayers down has trod.
70
But to return from whence my Muse has flown,
All this disordred superfluity
Of Epicycles, or what else is shown
To salve the strange absurd enormity
Of staggering motions in the azure sky;
Both Epicycles and those turns enorm
Would all prove naught, if you would but let fly
The earth in the Ecliptic line yborn,
As I could well describe in Mathematick form.
71
So could I (that is another argument)
From this same principle most clearly prove
In regresse and in progress different
Of the free Planets: Why Saturn should rove
With shorter startings, give back less then Jove;
Jove less then Mars; why Venus flincheth out
More then Mercurius; why Saturn moves
Ofter in those back jets then Jove does shoot;
But Mercury more often then Venus and Mars stout,
72
And why the Sun escaped an Epicycle,
When as the old prodigal Astronomy
On the other six bestowed that needless cycle;
Why Saturn, Jove, and Mars be very nigh
Unto the Earth, show bigger in our eye
At Eventide when they rise Acronicall;
Why far removed with so vast distancy
When they go down with setting Cronicall:
All these will plain appear from the earths course Annual.
73
Many other reasons from those heavenly motions
Might well be drawn, but with exility
Of subtle Mathematics obscure notions,
A Poets pen so fitly no'te agree;
And curious men will judge't a vagrancy
To start thus from my scope. My pitched end
Was for to prove the immortality
Of humane souls: But if you well attend,
My ship to the right port by this bowed course did bend.
74
For I have clearly showed that stout resistance
Of the pure soul against the Mundane spright
And body, that is the lower man's consistence;
How it does quell by force of reason right
Those gross impressions which our outward sight
Sealed in our lower life: From whence we see
That we have proper independent might,
In our own mind, behold our own Idee,
Which needs must prove the souls sure immortality.
The Argument of PSYCHATHANASIA, OR, The Immortality of the Soul.
Book. 3. Cant. 4.
Justice, true faith in the first good,
Our best persuasion
Of blessed eternity unmoved,
The earths conflagration.
1
IT does me good to think what things will follow
That well proved thesis in my former song;
How we in liquid heavens more swift then swallow
Do sail on Tellus lap that does among
The other stars of right not rudely throng,
We have what highest thoughts of man desire:
But highest thoughts of man are vain and wrong.
In outward heaven we burn with hellish fire,
Hats, envy, couetise, revenge, lust, pride and ire.
2
In the eighth sphere Andromeda from chains
Is not releast; fearful Orion flies
The dreadful Scorpion. Alas! what gains
Then is 't to live in the bright starry skies?
It no man can exeem from miseries.
All you that seek for true felicity
Rend your own hearts: There God himself descries
Himself; there dwells his beauteous Majesty;
There shines the sun of righteousness in goodly glee.
3
And you who boldly all Gods providence
Confine to this small ball, that Tellus hight,
And dream not of a mutual influence,
And how that she may shine with beams bright
At a far distance clad with Sols lent light,
As Venus and the Moon; O you that make
This earth Gods only darling dear delight,
All the other orbs merely for this orbs sake
So swiftly for to run with labor never slack,
4
To dance attendance on their Princess Earth
In their quick circuits, and with anger keen
Would bite him, that or serious or in mirth
Doubts the prerogative of your great Queen!
Best use of that your Theory, I ween,
Is this; that as your selves monopolize
All the whole world, so your selves back again
You wholly give to God. Who can devise
A better way? Man's soul to God this closely ties.
5
But if the Earth does thankfully reflect
Both light and influence to other stars,
As well as they to it, where is the defect?
That sweet subordination it mars;
Gods love to us then not so plain appears:
For then the stars be mutually made
One for another: Each all the good then bears
Of the Universe, for 't^s single labor paid
With the joint pains of all that in the heavens wade.
6
Rare reason! why! then God would be too good.
What judges so but envy, and vain pride,
And base contract self-love? which that free flood
Of bounty has so confidently tied
Unto it self alone. Large hearts deride
This pent hypocrisy. Is he good to me?
That grace I would not ere should be denied
Unto my fellow My felicity
Is multiplied, when others I like happy see.
7
But if the rolling stars with mutual rays
Serve one another; sweet fraternity
And humble love, with such like lore we'll raise,
While we do see Gods great benignity
Thus mutually reflected in the sky,
And these round-moving worlds communicate
One with another by spread sympathy:
This all things friendly will concatenate;
But let more hardy wits that truth determinate.
8
It me behooves to hold forward on my way,
Leaving this uncouth strange Philosophy,
In which my lightsome pen too long did play,
As rigid men in sad severity
May deem; but we right careless leave that free
Unto their censure. Now more weighty thought
Does sway our mind, thinking how all does flee
Whatever we have painfully ytaught
So little fruits remain of all my skill has wraught,
9
O th'emptinesse of vain Philosophy!
When thin-spun reason and exile discourse
Make the soul creep through a strait Theory,
Whither the blunter mind can never force
Her self; yet often, alas! the case is worse
Of this so subtle wight, when dangers deep
Approach his life, then his who learnings sourse
Did never drink of, nere his lips did steep
In Plato's springs, nor with low gown the dust did sweep.
10
Certes such knowledge is a vanity,
And has no strength to abide a stormy stour;
Such thin slight clothing, will not keep us dry
When the grim heavens, all black and sadly sour
With rage and tempest, plenteously down shower
Great floods of rain. Dispread exility
Of slyer reasons fails: Some greater power
Found in a lively vigorous Unity
With God, must free the soul from this perplexity.
11
Say now the dagger touched thy trembling breast,
Could thou recall the reasons I have shown
To prove the immortal state of men deceast?
Evolved reason cannot stand at one
Stoutly to guard thy soul from passion.
They pass successively like sand in the glass;
While thou look upon this the other's gone.
But there is a plight of soul such virtue has
Which reasons weak assistance strangely does surpass.
12
The just and constant man, a multitude
Set upon mischief cannot him constrain
To do amiss by all their uprores rude,
Not for a tyrants threat will he ere stain
His inward honor. The rough Adrian
Tossed with unquiet winds does nothing move
His steady heart. Much pleasure he does gain
To see the glory of his Master Jove,
When his drad darts with hurrying light through all do rove.
13
If Heaven and Earth should rush with a great noise,
he fearlesse stands, he knows whom he does trust,
Is confident of his souls after joys,
Though this vain bulk were grinded into dust.
Strange strength resideth in the soul that is just.
She feels her power how't commands the sprite
Of the low man, vigorously finds she must
Be independent of such feeble might
Whose motions dare not 'pear before her awful fight.
14
But yet my Muse, still take an higher flight,
Sing of Platonic Faith in the first Good,
That Faith that does our souls to God unite
So strongly, tightly, that the rapid flood
Of this swift flux of things, nor with foul mud
Can stain, nor strike us off from the unity,
Wherein we steadfast stand, unshak'd, unmoved,
Engrafted by a deep vitality.
The prop and stay of things is Gods benignity.
15
Als is the rule of his Oeconomie.
No other cause the creature brought to light
But the first Goods pregnant fecundity:
He to himself is perfect full delight;
He wants naught, with his own beams bedight
He glory has enough. O blasphemy!
That envy gives to God or sour despite!
Harsh hearts! that feign in God a tyranny,
Under pretense to increase his sovereign Majesty.
16
When nothing can to Gods own self accrue,
Who Is infinitely happy; sure the end
Of this creation simply was to show
His flowing goodness, which he does out send
Not for himself; for naught can him amend;
But to his creature does his good impart,
This infinite Good through all the world does wend
To fill with heavenly bliss each willing heart.
So the free Sun does 'light and 'liven every part.
17
This is the measure of Gods providence,
The key of knowledge, the first fair Idee,
The eye of truth, the spring of living sense,
Whence sprout Gods secrets, the sweet mystery
Of lasting life, eternal charity.
But you O bitter men and sour of sprite!
Which brand Gods name with such foul infamy
As though poor humane race he did or slight,
Or curiously view to do them some despite,
18
And all to show his mighty excellency,
His uncontrolled strength: fond men! areed,
Is It not as great an act from misery
To keep the feeble, as his life to speed
With fatal stroke? The weak shak'd whisling reed
Shows Boreas wondrous strong! but ignorance
And false conceit is the foul spirits meed;
Gods lovely life has there no entrance;
Hence their fond thoughts for truth they vainly do advance.
19
If God do all things simply at his pleasure
Because he will, and not because its good,
So that his actions will have no set measure;
Is It possible it should be understood
What he intends? I feel that he is loved
Of my dear soul, and know that I have born
Much for his sake; yet is it not bence proved
That I shall live, though I do sigh and mourn
To find his face; his creatures wish he will slight and scorn.
20
When I breathe out my utmost vital breath,
And my dear spirit to my God commend,
Yet some foul feign close lurking underneath
My serious humble soul from me may rend:
So to the lower shades down we shall wend,
Though I in hearts simplicity expected
A better doom; since I my steps did bend
Toward the will of God, and had detected
Strong hope of lasting life, but now I am rejected.
21
Nor of well being, nor subsistency
Of our poor souls, when they do hence depart,
Can any be assured, if liberty
We give to such odd thoughts, that thus pervert
The laws of God, and rashly do assert
That will rules God, but Good rules not Gods will.
What ere from right, love, equity, does start,
For ought we know then God may act that ill,
Only to show his might, and his free mind fulfill.
22
O belch of hell! O horrid blasphemy!
That Heavens unblemished beauty thus do stain
And brand Gods nature with such infamy:
Can Wise, Just, Good, do ought that is harsh or vain?
All what he does is for the creatures gain,
Not seeking ought from us for his content:
What is a drop unto the Ocean main?
All he intends is our accomplishment.
His being is self-full, self-joy'd, self-excellent.
23
He his fair beams through all has freely (...)
Purge but thy soul that thou may take them in.
With froward hypocrite he never went,
That finds pretexts to keep his darling sin.
Through all the earth this Sprite takes pains to win
Unto himself such as be simply true,
And with malignant pride resist not him,
But strive to do what he for right does show;
So still a greater light he brings into their view.
24
All Lives in several circumference
Look up unto him and expect their food;
He opes his hand, showrs down their sustinence:
So all things be yfild with their wished good,
All drink, are satisfied from this free flood.
But circling life that yet unsettled is
Grows straight, as it is further still removed
From the first simple Good, obtains less bliss,
Sustains sharp pains inflicted by just Nemesis.
25
But why do I my soul loose and disperse
With mouldring reason, that like sand does flow.
Life close united with that Good, a verse
Cannot declare, nor its strange virtue show.
That Is it holds up the soul in all her woe,
That death, nor hell, nor any change does fray.
Who walks in light knows whither he does go;
Our God is light, we children of the day.
God is our strength and hope, what can us then dismay?
26
Goodness it self will do to us this good,
That godly souls may dwell with him for aye.
Will God forsake what of himself's beloved?
What ever Lives may shrink into cold clay;
Yet good men's souls deaths hests shall not obey.
Where there is no incompossibility
Of things, Gods goodness needs must bear the sway.
You virtuous brood take it for sure verity,
Your souls shall not fall short of blessed eternity.
26
But yet bold men with much perplexity
Will here object against this principle,
Heaping up reasons (strange fecundity
Of ignorance!) that goodly might to quell
Of my last argument, so fairly well
Set down, right strongly the unsettled spright
To have confirmed at my last far-well:
But contrair forces they bring into sight,
And proudly do provoke me with that rout to fight.
27
Whence was it, say they, that God the creature made
No sooner? why did infinite delay
Precede his work? should God his goodness staid
So long a time? why did he not display
From infinite years this out-created ray?
The mighty stars why not in habited,
When God may souls proportion to their clay
As well as to this earth? why not dispred
The world withouten bounds, endless uncompassed?
28
Poor souls! why were they put into this cave
Of misery, if they can well exist
Without the body? Why will not God save
All mankind? His great wisdom if it list
Could so contrive that they would at last desist
From sinning, fallen into some providence
That sternly might rebuke them that have mist
Their way, and work in them true penitence:
Thus might they turn to God with double diligence.
29
Why be not damned souls devoyd of sense,
If nothing can from wickedness reclaim,
Rather then fry in pain and vehemence
Of searching agony? or why not frame
Another form, so with new shape and name
Again to turn to life? One centrall spright
Why may't not many forms in it contain,
Which may be waked by some magnetic might,
'Cording as is the matter upon which they light?
30
For when too several kinds by Venus knit
Do cause a birth, from both the soul does take
A tincture; but if free it were transmit
Unclothed with the others seed, then it would make
One simple form; for then they could not slake
One the others working. Why is the World still
Stark naught, through malice, or through blind mistake?
Why had the first-made-man such a loose will,
That his innumerous offspring he should foully spill.
31
Why was not this unlucky world dissolved
As soon as that unhappy Adam fell?
I itch till of this knot I be resolved:
So many myriads tumble down to hell,
Although partakers of Gods holy spell.
Beside, it is said, they that do not partake
Of Christian lore, for ever they must dwell
With cursed fiends, and burn in brimstone lake.
Such drery drad designs do make my heart to quake.
32
One of a multitude of myriads
Shall not be saved but broyl in scorching woe;
Innumerous mischiefs then to mischiefs adds
This worlds continuance if that be so:
Ill infinitely more then good does grow.
So God would show much more benignity
If he the ribs of heaven about would strew,
Powder the earth; choke all vitality.
Call back the creature to its ancient nullity.
33
But thou who ere thou art that thus do strive
With fierce assault my groundwork to subvert,
And boldly do into Gods secrets dive,
Base fear my manly face no'te make m'avert.
In that odd question which thou first did stert
I Will plainly prove thine incapacity
And force thy feeble feet back to revert,
That cannot climb so high a mystery.
I Will show thee strange perplexed inconsistency.
34
Why was this world from all infinity
Not made? say thou: why? could it be so made
Say I. For well observe the sequency:
If this Out-world continually has wade
Through a long long spun-time that never had
Beginning, then there as few circulings
Have been in the quick Moon as Saturn sad;
And still more plainly this clear truth to sing,
As many years as days or fleeting hours have been.
35
For things that we conceive are infinite,
One the other no'te surpass in quantity.
So I have proved with clear convincing light,
This world could never from infinity
Been made. Certain deficiency
Does always follow evolution:
Nought's infinite but tight eternity
Close thrust into it self: extension
That Is infinite implies a contradiction.
36
So then for ought we know this world was made
So soon as such a Nature could exist;
And though that it continue, never fade,
Yet never will it be that that long twist
Of time prove infinite, though nere desist
From running still. But we may safely say
Time past compared with this long future list
Does show as if the world but yesterday
Were made, and in due time Gods glory out may ray,
37
Then this short night and ignorant dull ages
Will quite be swallowed in oblivion;
And though this hope by many surly Sages
Be now derided, yet they will all be gone
In a short time, like Bats and Owls yflone
At days approach. This will hap certainly
At this worlds shining conflagration.
Fayes, Satyrs, Goblins the night merrily
May spend, but ruddy Sol shall make them all to fly.
38
The roaring Lions and drad beasts of prey
Rule in the dark with pitious cruelty;
But harmless man is master of the day,
Which does his work in pure simplicity.
God bless his honest useful industry.
But pride and covetize, ambition,
Riot, revenge, self love, hypocrisy,
Contempt of goodness, forced opinion;
These and such like do breed the worlds confusion.
39
But sooth to say though my triumphant Muse
Seems to vaunt as in got victory,
And with puissant stroke the head to bruize
Of her stiff foe, and daze his fantasy,
Captive his reason, dead each faculty:
Yet in her self so strong a force withstands
That of her self afraid, sh^'ll not aby,
Nor keep the field. She Will fall by her own hand
As Ajax once laid Ajax dead upon the strand.
40
For thus her self by her own self's opposed;
The Heavens the Earth the universal Frame
Of living Nature God so soon disclosed
As he could do, or she receive the same.
All times delay since that must turn to blame,
And what cannot he do that can be done?
And what might let but by the all-powerfull Name
Or Word of God, the Worlds Creation
More suddenly were made then man's swift thought can run?
41
Wherefore that Heavenly Power or is as young
As this Worlds date; or else some needless space
Of time was spent, before the earth did clung
So close unto her self and seas embrace
Her hollow breast, and if that time surpass
A finite number then infinity
Of years before this Worlds Creation pass.
So that the durance of the Deity
We must contract or strait his full Benignity.
42
But for the cradle of the Cretian Jove,
And guardians of his vagient Infancy
What sober man but sagely will reprove?
Or drown the noise of the fond Dactyli
By laughter loud? Dated Divinity
Certes is but the dream of a dry brain^
God maimed in goodness, inconsistencie;
Wherefore my troubled mind is now in pain
Of a new birth, which this one Canto 'll not contain.
Nihil tamen frequentius inter Autores occurrit, quam ut omnia adeo ex modulo
fere sensuum suorum aestimant, ut ea quae insuper infinite is rerum spariis
extare possunt sive superbe sive imprudenter rejiciant; quin and ea omnia in
usum suum sabricata suisse glorientur, perinde facientes ac si pediculi humanum
caput, aut pulices sinum muliebrem propter se solos condita existimarent, eaque
demum ex gradibus saltibusque suis metirentur.

The Lord Herbert in his De Causis Errorum. De generali totius hujus mundi
aspectabilis constructione ut recte Ph^losophemur duo sunt imprimis observanda:
Unum ut attendentes ad infinitam Dei potentiam and bonitatem, ne vereamur nimis
ampla and pulohra and absoluta ejus opera imaginari: sed e contra caveamus, ne
si quos forte limits nobis non certo cognitos, in ipsis supponanius, non satis
magnifice de creatoris potentia sentire videamur.

Alterum, ut etiam caveamus, ne nimis superbe de nobis ipsis sentiamus. Quod
sieret non modo, si quos limits nobis nulla cognitos ratione, nec divina
revelatione, mundo vellemus assingere, tanquam si vis nostra cogitationis,
ultra id quod a Deo revera factum est ferri posset; sed etiam maxim, si res
omnes propter nos s^los, ab illo creatas esse singeremus.

Renatus Des Carts in his Princip. Philosoph. the third part. Democritus
Platonissans, OR AN ESSAY upon the INFINITY OF WORLDS out of Platonic
Principles. Annexed To this second part of the SONG of the SOUL, as an Appendix
thereunto.

(...).

Plat. Pythagoras Terram Planetam quendam esse censuit qui ^irca solemn in
centro mundi defixum converteretur. Pythagoram secuti sunt Philolaus, Seleucus,
Cleanthes, etc. imo PLATO jam senex, ut narras Theophrastus. Libert. Fromond.
de Orb terrae immobili. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the
Universitie. 1647.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Present to thee here in its proper place what I have heretofore offered to
thee upon less advantage, but upon so little, no where (I conceive) as that I
should despair of thy acceptance, if the overstrangenesse of the Argument prove
no hinderance. INFINITY of WORLDS. A thing monstrous if assented to, and to be
startled at, especially by them, whose thoughts this one have always so
engaged, that they can find no leisure to think of any thing else. But I only
make a bare proposal to more acute judgments, of what my sportfull phancie,
with pleasure has suggested: following my old design of furnishing men's minds
with variety of apprehensions concerning the most weighty points of
Philosophy, that they may not seem rashly to have settled in the truth, though
it be the truth: a thing as ill beseeming Philosophers, as hasty prejudicative
sentence Political Judges. But if I had relinquished here my wonted self, in
proving Dogmaticall, I should have found very noble Patronage for the cause
among the ancients, Epicurus, Democricus, Lucretius, etc. Or if justice may
reach the dead do them the right as to show, that though they be hooted at, by
the Rout of the learned, as men of menstrous conceits, they were either very
wise or exceeding fortunate to light on so probable and specious an opinion, in
which notwithstanding there is so much difficulty and seeming inconsistencie.

Nay and that sublime and subtle Mechanic too, Des-Chartes, though he seem to
mince it must hold infinitude of worlds, or which is as harsh, one infinite
one. For what is his mundus indefinite ext^nsus, but extensus infinite? Else it
sounds enely infinitus quoad nos, but simpliciter finitus. But if any space be
lest out u^stussed with At^ms, it will hazard the dissipation of the whole
frame of Nature into disjoynted dust; as may be proved by the Principles of his
own Philosophte. And that that there is space wherever God is, or any actual
and self-subsistent Being, seems to me no plainer then one of their (...).

For mine own part, I must confess these apprehersions do plainly oppose what
heretofore I have conceived; but I have sworn more faithful frien^ship with
Truth then with my self. And therefore without all ren^rse ^ay battery against
mine own edifice: not sparing to show how week that is, that my self now deems
not impregnably strong. I have at the latter end of the last Canto of
P^ychathanasia, not without triumph concluded, that the world has not
continued ab aeterno from this ground: -- Extension
That Is infinite implies a contradiction.
And this is in answer to an objection against my last argument of the souls
Immortality, viz. divine goodness. Which I there make the measure of his
providence. That ground limits the Essence of the world as well as its
duration, and satisfies the curiosity of the Opposer, by showing the
incompossibilitie in the Creature, not want of goodness in the Creator to
have staid the framing of the Vaiverse. But now roused up by a new Philosophic
fury, I answer that difficulty by taking away the Hypothesis of either the
world or time being finite: defending the infinitude of both. Which though I
had done with a great deal of vigor and life, and semblance of assent, it
would have agreed well enough with the free heat of Poesy, and might have
passed for a pleasant flourish: but theseverity of my own judgment and sad
Genius, has cast in many correctives and coolers into the Canto it self; so
that it cannot amount to more then a discussion. And discussion is no prejudice
but an honor to the truth: for then and never but then is she victorious. And
what a glorious Trophee shall the finite world erect when it has vanquished
the Infinite; a Pygmee a Giant!

H. M.

The Argument of Democritus Platonissans, OR The Infinite of Worlds.
Against boundless time the objections made,
And wast infinity
Of worlds, are with new reasons weighed,
Men's judgments are left free.
1
HEnce, hence unhallowed cars and hearts more hard
Then winter clods fast froze with Northern wind.
But most of all, foul tongue I-thee discard
That blamest all that thy dark strait'ned mind,
Cannot conceive: But that no blame thou find;
Winte're my pregnant Muse brings forth to light,
Sh^'ll not acknowledge to be of her kind,
Till Eagle-like she turn them to the sight
Of the eternal Word all decked with glory bright.
2
Strange sights do straggle in my restless thoughts,
And lively forms with orient colors clad
Walk in my boundless mind, as men ybrought
Into some spacious room, who when they have had
A turn or two, go out, although unbad.
All these I see and know, but entertain
None to my friend but who is most sober sad;
Although, the time my roof does them contain
Their presence does possess me till they out again.
3
And thus possessed, in silver trump I sound
Their guise, their shape, their gesture and array,
But as in silver trumpet naught is found
When once the piercing sound is past away,
(Though while the mighty blast therein did stay,
Its tearing noise so terribly did shrill,
That it the heavens did shake, and earth dismay)
As empty I of what my flowing quill
In heedlesse have elsewhere, or here, may hap to spill.
4
For it is of force and not of a set will.
Ne dare my wary mind afford assent
To what is placed above all mortal skill.
But yet our various thoughts to represent
Each gentle wight will deem of good intent.
Wherefore with leave the infinity I Will sing
Of Time, of Space: or without leave; I Am brent
With eagre rage, my heart for joy does spring,
And all my spirits move with pleasant trembeling.
5
An inward triumph does my soul up-heave
And spread abroad through endless 'spersed air.
My nimble mind this clammie clod does leave,
And lightly stepping on from star to star
Swifter then lightning, passes wide and far,
Measuring the unbounded Heavens and wastfull sky;
Ne ought she finds her passage to debar,
For still the a zure Orb as she draws nigh
Gives back, new stars appear, the worlds walls before her fly.
6
For what can stand that is so badly staid?
Well may that fall whose groundwork is unsure.
And what has walled the world but thoughts unweigh'd
In freer reason? That antiquate, secure,
And easy dull conceit of corporature,
Of matter, quantity, and such like gear
Has made this needless, thanklesse enclosure,
Which I in full disdain quite up will tear
And lay all open, that as things are they may appear.
7
For other they appear from what they are
By reason that their Circulation
Cannot well represent entire from far
Each portion of the Cuspis of the Cone
(Whose nature is elsewhere more clearly shown)
I mean each globe, whether of glaring light
Or else opake, of which the earth is one.
If circulation could them well transmit
Numbers infinite of each would strike our 'stonishd fight;
8
All in just bigness and right colors dight.
But total presence without all defect
'Longs only to that Trinity by right,
Ahad, Aeon, Psyche with all graces decked,
Whose nature well this riddle will detect;
A circle whose circumference no where
Is circumscribed, whose Centre's each where set,
But the low Cusp's a figure circular,
Whose compass is ybound, but centre's every where.
9
Wherefore who'il judge the limits of the world
By what appears unto our failing sight
Appeals to sense, reason down headlong hurld
Out of her throne by giddie vulgar might.
But here base senses dictates they will dight
With specious title of Philosophy,
And stiffly will contend their cause is right
From rotten rolls of school antiquity,
Who constantly deny corporal Infinity.
10
But who can prove their corporalitie
Since matter which thereto's essential
If rightly sifted's but a fantasy.
And quantity who is deemed Original
Is matter, must with matter likewise fall.
What ever is, is Life and Energie
From God, who is the Original of all;
Who being everywhere does multiply
His own broad shade that endless throughout all does lie.
11
He from the last projection of light
Ycleep'd Shamajim, which is liquid fire
(It Ether eke and centrall Tasis hight)
Has made each shining globe and clumperd mire
Of dimmer Orbs. For Nature does inspire
Spermatick life, but of a different kind.
Hence those congenit splendor does attire
And lively heat, these darkness dead does bind,
And without borrowed rays they be both cold and blind.
12
All these be knots of the universal stole
Of sacred Psyche; which at first was fine,
Pure, thin, and pervious till hid powers did pull
Together in several points and did incline
The nearer parts in one clod to combine.
Those centrall spirits that the parts did draw
The measure of each globe did then define,
Made things impenetrable here below,
Gave color, figure, motion, and each usual law.
13
And what is done in this Terrestrial star
The same is done in every Orb beside.
Each flaming Circle that we see from far
Is but a knot in Psyches garment tide.
From that lax shadow cast throughout the wide
And endless world, that low'st projection
Of universal life each thing's derived
What er'e appears in corporeal fashion;
For body's but this spirit, fixed, gross by conspissation.
14
And that which does conpissate active is;
Wherefore not matter but some living sprite
Of nimble nature which this lower mist
And immense field of Atoms does excite,
And wake into such life as best does fit
With his own self. As we change phantafies
The essence of our soul not changed a whit
So do these Atoms change their energies
Themselves unchanged into new Centreities.
15
And as our soul's not superficially
Colored by phantasms, nor does them reflect
As does a looking-glass such imag'rie
As it to the beholder does detect:
No more are these lightly or smeared or decked
With form or motion which in them we see,
But from their inmost Center they project
Their vital rays, not merely passive be,
But by occasion waked rouse up themselves on high.
16
So that they are life, form, sprite, not matter pure,
For matter pure is a pure nullitie,
What naught can act is nothing, I am sure;
And if all act, that is they will not deny
But all that is is form: so easily
By what is true, and by what they embrace
For truth, their feigned Corporalitie
Will vanish into smoke, But on I Will pass,
More fully we have sung this in another place.
17
Wherefore more boldly now to represent
The nature of the world, how first things were
How now they are: This endless large Extent
Of lowest life (which I styled whileere
The Cuspis of the Cone that is every where)
Was first all dark, till in this spacious Hall
Hideous through silent horror torches clear
And lamping lights bright shining over all
Were set up in due distances proportional.
18
Innumerable numbers of fair Lamps
Were rightly ranged in this hollow hole,
To warm the world and chase the shady damps
Of immense darkness, rend her pitchie stole
Into short rags more dustie dim then coal.
Which pieces then in several were cast
(Abhorred relics of that vesture foul)
Upon the Globes that round those torches traced,
Which still fast on them stick for all they run so fast.
19
Such an one is that which mortal men call Night,
A little shted of that unbounded shade.
And such a Globe is that which Earth is hight;
By witless Wizzards the sole center made
Of all the world, and on strong pillars staid.
And such a lamp or light is this our Sun,
Whose fiery beams the scorched Earth invade.
But infinite such as he, in heaven won,
And more then infinite Earths about those Suns do run;
20
And to speak out; though I detest the sect
Of Epicurus for their manners vile,
Yet what is true I may not well reject.
Truth's incorruptible, ne can the style
Of vicious pen her sacred worth defile.
If we no more of truth should deign to embrace
Then what unworthy mouths did never soil,
No truths at all amongst men would finden place
But make them speedy wings and back to Heaven apace.
21
I will not say our world is infinite,
But that infinity of worlds there be.
The Center of our world's the lively light
Of the warm sun, the visible Deity
Of this external Temple. Mercury
Next placed and warmed more thoroughly by his rays,
Right nimbly 'bout his golden head does fly:
Then Venus nothing slow about him strayes,
And next our Earth though seeming sad full sprightly plays.
22
And after her Mars rangeth in a round
With fiery locks and angry flaming eye,
And next to him mild Jupiter is found,
But Saturn cold wons in our outmost sky.
The skirts of his large Kingdom surely ly
Near to the confines of some other worlds
Whose Centres are the fixed stars on high,
'Bout which as their own proper Suns are hurld
Joves, Earths, and Saturns; round on their own axes twurld.
23
Little or nothing are those stars to us
Which in the azure Evening gay appear
(I mean for influence but judicious
Nature and careful Providence her dear
And matchless work did so contrive whileere,
That the Hearts or Centres in the wide world pight
Should such a distance each to other bear,
That the dull Planets with collated light
By neighbor suns might cheared be in dampish night.
24
And as the Planets in our world (of which
The sun's the heart and kernel) do receive
Their nightly light from suns that do enrich
Their sable mantle with bright gemmes, and give
A goodly splendor, and sad men relieve
With their fair twinkling rays, so our worlds sun
Becomes a star elsewhere, and does derive
Joint light with others, cheareth all that won
In those dim duskish Orbs round other suns that run.
25
This is the parergon of each noble fire
Of neighbor worlds to be the nightly star,
But their main work is vital heat to inspire
Into the frigid spheres that 'bout them fare,
Which of themselves quite dead and barren are
But by the wakening warmth of kindly days,
And the sweet dewie nights they well declare
Their seminall virtue, in due courses raise
Long hidden shapes and life, to their great Makers praise.
26
These with their suns I several worlds do call,
Whereof the number I deem infinite:
Else infinite darkness were in this great Hall
Of the endless Universe; For nothing finite
Could put that immense shadow unto flight.
But if that infinite Suns we shall admit,
Then infinite worlds follow in reason right.
For every Sun with Planets must be fit,
And have some mark for his farre-shining shafts to hit.
27
But if he shine all solitary, alone,
What mark is left? what aimed scope or end
Of his existence? wherefore every one
Has a due number of dim Orbs that wend
Around their centrall fire. But wrath will rend
This strange composure backed with reason stout.
And rasher tongues right speedily will spend
Their forward censure, that my wits run out
On wool-gathering, through infinite spaces all about.
28
What sober man will dare once to avouch
An infinite number of dispersed stars?
This one absurdity will make him crouch
And eat his words; Division naught impairs
The former whole, nor he augments that spares.
Strike every tenth out, that which does remain,
An equal number with the former shares,
And let the tenth alone, the whole naught does gain,
For infinite to infinite is ever the same.
29
The tenth is infinite as the other nine,
Or else, nor they, nor all the ten entire
Are infinite. Thus one infinite does adjoyn
Others unto it and still rises higher.
And if those single lights hither aspire,
This strange prodigious inconsistency
Grows still stranger, if each fixed fire
(I mean each star) prove Suns and Planets fly
About their flaming heads amid the thronged sky.
30
For whatsoever that there number be
Whether by seavens, or eights, or fives, or nines,
They round each fixed lamp; Infinity
Will be redoubled thus by many times.
Besides each greater Planet the attendance finds
Of lesser, Our Earths handmaid is the Moon,
Which to her darkened side right duly shines,
And Jove has four, as has heen said aboven,
And Saturn more then four if the plain truth were known:
31
And if these globes be regions of life
And several kinds of plants therein do grow,
Grass, flowers, herbs, trees, which the impartial knife
Of all consuming. Time still down does mow,
And new again does in succession show;
Which also's done in flies, birds, men and beasts;
Add sand, pearls, pebbles, that the ground do strew,
Leaves, quills, hairs, thorns, blooms, you may think the rest
Their kinds by mortal pen cannot be well expressed:
32
And if their kinds no man may reckon well,
The sum of successive particulars
No mind conceive nor tongue can ever tell.
And yet this mist of numbers (as appears)
Belongs to one of these opacous spears,
Suppose this Earth; what then will all those Rounds
Produce? No Atlas such a load upbears.
In this huge endless heap o'rewhelmed, drowned,
Choked, stifled, lo! I lie, breathless, even quite confound.
33
Yet give me space a while but to respire,
And I my self shall fairly well out-wind;
Keep this possession true, unhurt, entire,
That you no greater difficulty find
In this new old opinion here defined
Of infinite worlds, then one world does imply.
For if we do with steady patience mind
All is resolved int' one absurdity,
The grant of something greater then infinity.
34
That God is infinite all men confess,
And that the Creature is some realtie
Besides Gods self, though infinitely less.
Join now the world unto the Deity.
What? is there added no more entity
By this conjunction, then there was before?
Is the broad breasted earth? the spacious sky
Spangled with silver light, and burning Ore?
And the wide bellowing Seas, whose boiling billows roar,
35
Are all these nothing? But you will reply;
As is the question so we ought restrain
Our answer unto Corporeity.
But that that fantasy of the body's vain
I did before unto you maken plain.
But that no man depart unsatisfi'd
A while this Universe here will we feign
Corporeal, till we have gainly tried,
If ought that is bodily may infinite abide.
36
What makes a body saving quantity?
What quantity unless extension?
Extension if 't admit infinity
Bodies admit boundless dimension.
That some extension forward on does run
Withouten limits, endless, infinite
Is plain from Space, that ever paceth on
Unstop'd, unstaid, till it have filled quite
That immense infinite Orb where God himself does sit.
37
But yet more sensibly this truth to show
If space be ended set upon that end
Some strong armed Archer with his Parthian bow,
That from that place with speedy force may send
His fleeter shafts, and so still forward wend.
Where? When shall he want room his strength to try?
But here perversely subtle you will contend
Nothing can move in mere vacuity,
And space is naught, so not extended properly.
38
To solve these knots I must call down from high
Some heavenly help, feather with Angels wing
The sluggish arrow, If it will not fly,
Sent out from bow stiff-bent with even string,
Let Angels on their backs it thither bring
Where your free mind appointed had before,
And then hold on, till in your traveling
You be well wearied, finding ever more
Free passage for their flight, and what they flying bore:
39
Now to that shift that says Vacuity
Is naught, and therefore not at all extent
We answer thus: There is a distancy
In empty space, though we be well content
To balk that question (for we never meant
Such needless niceties) whether that it be
A real being; yet that there is parts distent
One from another, no man's fantasy
Can e're reject if well he weigh't and warily.
40
For now conceive the air and azure sky
All swept away from Saturn to the Sun,
Which eath is to be wrought by him on high.
Then in this place let all the Planets run
(As erst they did before this feat was done)
If not by nature, yet by divine power,
Ne one hairs breadth their former circuit shun
And still for fuller proof, the Astronomer
Observe their hights as in the empty heavens they scour.
41
Will then their Parallaxes prove all one
Or none, or different still as before;
If so, their distances by mortal men
Must be acknowledged such as were of yore,
Measured by leagues, miles, stades, nor less nor more
From circuit unto circuit shall be found
Then was before the sweeping of the floor.
That distance therefore has most certain ground
In emptiness we may conclude with reason sound.
42
If distance now so certainly attend
All emptiness (as also mensuration
Attends distance) distance without end
Is wide dispersed above imagination
(For emptiness is void of limitation)
And this unbounded voidnesse does admit
The least and greatest measures application;
The number thus of the greatest that does fit
This infinite void space is likewise infinite.
43
But what so e're that infinite number be,
A lesser measure will a number give
So far exceeding in infinity
That number as this measure we conceive
To fall short of the other. But I Will leave
This present way and a new course will try
Which at the same mark does as fully drive
And with a great deal more facility.
Look on this endless Space as one whole quantity.
44
Which in your mind in it equal parts divide,
Tens, hundreds, thousands, or what pleases best.
Each part denominate does still abide
An infinite portion, else not all the rest
Makes one infinitude.
For if one thousandth part may be defined
By finite measures easily well expressed,
A myriad suppose of miles assigned
Then to a thousand myriads is the whole confined.
45
Wherefore this wide and wast Vacuity,
Which endless is out stretched thorough all.
And lies even equal with the Deity,
Nor is a thing merely imaginall,
(For it does far men's fantasies forestall
Nothing beholden to our devicefull thought)
This inf'nite voidnesse as much our mind does gall,
And has as great perplexities ybrought
As if this empty space with bodies were yfraught.
46
Nor have we yet the face once to deny
But that it is, although we mind it not;
For all once minded such perplexity
It does create to puzzled reason, that
She says and unsayes, does she knows not what.
Why then should we the worlds infinity
Misdoubt, because when as we contemplate
Its nature, such strange inconsistency
And unexpected sequels, we therein descry?
47
Who dare gainsay but God is every where
Unbounded, measurelesse, all Infinite;
Yet the same difficulties meet us here
Which erst us met and did so sore affright
With their strange vizards. This will follow right
Where ever we admit Infinity
Every denominated part proves straight
A portion infinite, which if it be,
One infinite will into myriads multiply.
48
But with new argument to draw more near
Our purposed end. If God's omnipotent
And this omnipotent God be every where,
Where e're he is then can he easily vent
His mighty virtue thorough all extent.
What then shall hinder but a roscid air
With gentle heat eachwhere be 'sperst and sprent
Unless omnipotent power we will empair,
And say that empty space his working can debar^
49
Where now this one supposed world is pight
Was not that space at first all vain and void?
Nor ought said; no, when he said, Let't be light.
Was this one space better then all beside,
And more obedient to what God decreed?
Or would not all that endless Emptiness
Gladly embraced (if he had ever tried)
His just command? and what might come to pass
Implies no contradictious inconsistentnesse.
50
Wherefore this precious sweet Ethereall dew
For ought we know, God each where did distill,
And thorough all that hollow Voidnesse threw
And the wide gaping drought therewith did fill,
His endless overflowing goodness spill
In every place; which straight he did contrive
Int' infinite several worlds, as his best skill
Did him direct and creatures could receive:
For matter infinite needs infinite worlds must give.
51
The Center of each several world's a Sun
With shining beams and kindly warming heat,
About whose radiant crown the Planets run,
Like reeling moths around a candle light.
These all together, one world I conceit.
And that even infinite such worlds there be,
That inexhausted Good that God is hight
A full sufficient reason is to me,
Who simple Goodness make the highest Deity.
52
Als make himself the key of all his works
And eke the measure of his providence;
The piercing eye of truth to whom naught lurks
But lies wide open unbar'd of all pretense.
But frozen hearts! away! fly far from hence,
Unless you will thaw at this celestial fire
And melt into one mind and holy sense
With Him that does all heavenly hearts inspire,
So may you with my soul in one assent conspire.
53
But what is within, uneath is to convey
To narrow vessels that are full before.
And yet this truth as wisely as I may
I will insinuate, from senses store
Borrowing a little aid. Tell me therefore
When you behold with your admiring eyes
Heavens Canopie all to be spangled over
With sprinkled stars, what can you well devize
Which causen may such careless order in the skies?
54
A peck of peasen rudely poured out
On plaster flore, from hasty heedlesse hond
Which lie all careless scattered about,
To sight do in as seemly order stond,
As those fair glistering lights in heaven are found.
If only for this world they were intended,
Nature would have adorned this azure Round
With better Art, and easily have mended
This harsh disord'red order, and more beauty lended.
55
But though these lights do seem so rudely thrown
And scattered throughout the spacious sky,
Yet each most seemly sits in his own Throne
In distance due and comely Majesty;
And round their lordly seats their servants high
Keeping a well-proportionated space
One from another, doing cheerfully
Their daily task. No blemish may deface
The worlds in several dekt with all art and grace:
56
But the appearance of the nightly stars
Is but the by-work of each neighbor sun;
Wherefore less marvel if it lightly shares
Of neater Art; and what proportion
Were fittest for to distance one from one
(Each world I mean from other) is not clear.
Wherefore it must remain as yet unknown
Why such perplexed distances appear
Among the dispersed lights in Heaven thrown here and there.
57
Again, that eminent similitude
Betwixt the stars and Phoebus fixed light,
They being both with steadiness indu'd
No whit removing whence they first were pight
No serious man will count a reason slight
To prove them both, both fixed suns and stars
And Centres all of several worlds by right,
For right it is that none a sun debar
Of Planets which his just and due retinue are.
58
If stars be merely stars not centrall lights
Why swell they into so huge bignesses?
For many (as Astronomers do write)
Our sun in bigness many times surpass.
If both their number and their bulks were less
Yet lower placed, light and influence
Would flow as powerfully, and the bosom press
Of the impregned Earth, that fruit from hence
As fully would arise, and lordly affluence.
59
Wherefore these fixed Fires mainly attend
Their proper charge in their own Universe,
And only by the by of court'sie lend
Light to our world, as our world does reverse
His thankful rays so far as he can pierce
Back unto other worlds. But far aboven
Further then furthest thought of man can traverse,
Still are new worlds aboven and still aboven,
In th'endlesse hollow Heaven, and each world has his Sun.
60
An hint of this we have in winter-nights,
When reason may see clearer then our eye,
Small subtle stars appear unto our sights
As thick as pin-dust scattered in the sky.
Here we accuse our seeing faculty
Of weakness, and our sense of foul deceit,
We do accuse and yet we know not why.
But the plain truth is, from a vaster hight
The numerous upper worlds amaze our dazzled sight.
61
Now since so sarre as sense can ever try
We find new worlds, that still new worlds there be;
And round about in infinite numbers lie,
Further then reach of man's weak fantasy
(Without suspicion of temerity)
We may conclude; as well as men conclude
That there is air far 'bove the mountains high,
Or that The Earth a sad substance does include
Even to the Center with like qualities indu'd.
62
For who did ever the Earths Center pierce,
And felt or sand or gravel with his spade
At such a depth? what Histories rehearse
That ever wight did dare for to invade
Her bowels but one mile in dampish shade?
Yet I Will be bold to say that few or none
But deem this globe even to the bottom made
Of solid earth, and that her nature's one
Throughout, though plain experience has it never shown.
63
But since sad earth so far as they have gone
They still descry, easily they do infer
Without all check of reason, were they down
Never so deep, like substance would appear,
Ne dream of any hollow horror there.
My mind with like uncurb'd facility
Concludes from what by sight is seen so clear:
That there is no barren wast vacuity
Above the worlds we see, but still new worlds therely,
64
And still and still even to infinity:
Which point since I so fitly have proposed,
Abating well the inconsistency
Of harsh infinitu de therein supposed
And proved by reasons never to be loosed
That infinite space and infinite worlds there be;
This load laid down, I Am freely now disposed
A while to sing of times infinity;
May infinite Time afford me but his smallest fee.
65
For smallest fee of time will serve my turn
This part for to dispatch, since endless space
(Whose perplexed nature well man's brains might turn,
And weary wits disorder and misplace)
I have already passed: for like case
Is in them both. He that can well untie
The knots that in those infinite worlds found place,
May easily answer each perplexity
Of these worlds infinite matters endless durancie.
66
The Cuspis and the Basis of the Cone
Were both at once dispersed every where;
But the pure Basis that is God alone:
Else would remotest sights as big appear
Unto our eyes as if we stood them near.
And if an Harper harped in the Moon,
His silver sound would touch our tickled ear:
Or if one hollowed from highest Heaven aboven,
In sweet still Evening-tide, his voice would hither roame.
67
This all would be if the Cuspe of the Cone
Were very God. Wherefore I rightly 't deem
Only a Creaturall projection,
Which flowing yet from God has ever been,
Filled the vast empty space with its large streem.
But yet it is not total every where
As was even now by reason rightly seen:
Wherefore not God, whose nature does appear
Entirely omnipresent, weighed with judgment clear.
68
A real infinite matter, distinct
And yet proceeding from the Deity
Although with different form as then untinct
Has ever been from all Eternity.
Now what delay can we suppose to be,
Since matter always was at hand prepared
Before the filling of the boundless sky
With framed Worlds; for naught at all debarred.
Nor was His strength ungrown, nor was His strength empair'd.
69
How long would God be forming of a fly?
Or the small wandering moats that play in the sun?
Least moment well will serve none can deny,
His Fiat spoke and straight the thing is done.
And cannot He make all the World as soon?
For in each Atom of the matter wide
The total Deity does entirely won,
His infinite presence does therein reside,
And in this presence infinite powers do ever abide.
70
Wherefore at once from all eternity
The infinite number of these Worlds He made,
And will conserve to all infinity,
And still drive on their ever moving trade,
And steady hold what ever must be staid;
Ne must one mite be minish'd of the sum,
Ne must the smallest atom ever fade,
But still remain though it may change its room;
This truth abides strong from everlasting doom.
71
Ne fear I what hard sequel after-wit
Will draw upon me; that the number's one
Of years, months, days, hours, and of minutes fleet
Which from eternity have still run on.
I plainly did confess awhile agone
That be it what it will that is infinite
More infinites will follow thereupon,
But that all infinites do justly fit
And equal be, my reason did not yet admit.
72
But as my emboldened mind, I know not how,
In empty Space and pregnant Deity
Endless infinitude dares to allow,
Though it begets the like perplexity:
So now my soul drunk with Divinity,
And born away above her usual bounds
With confidence concludes infinity
Of Time of Worlds, of fiery flaming Rounds;
Which sight in sober mood my spirits quite confounds:
73
And now I do awhile but interspire
A torrent of objections against me beat,
My boldness to repress and strength to tire.
But I will wipe them off like summer sweat,
And make their streams straight back again retreat.
If that these worlds, say they, were ever made
From infinite time, how comes't to pass that yet
Art is not perfected, nor metalls fade,
Nor mines of grimie coal low-hid in griefly shade.
74
But the remembrance of the ancient Flood
With ease will wash such arguments away.
Wherefore with greater might I am withstood.
The strongest stroke wherewith they can assay
To vanquish me is this; The Date or Day
Of the created World, which all admit;
Nor may my modest Muse this truth gainsay
In holy Oracles so plainly writ.
Wherefore the Worlds continuance is not infinite.
75
Now lend me, Origin! a little wit
This sturdy stroke right fairly to avoid,
Lest that my rasher rhymes, while they ill fit
With Moses pen, men justly may deride
And well accuse of ignorance or pride.
But thou, O holy Sage! with piercing sight
Who readst those sacred rolls, and have well tried
With searching eye thereto what fitteth right
Thy self of former Worlds right learnedly do write:
76
To weet that long ago there Earths have been
Peopled with men and beasts before this Earth,
And after this shall others be again
And other beasts and other humane birth.
Which once admit, no strength that reason bear'th
Of this worlds Date and Adams efformation,
Another Adam once received breath
And still another in endless repedation,
And this must perish once by final conflagration.
77
Witness ye Heavens if what I says not true,
Ye flaming Comets wandering on high,
And new fixed stars found in that Circle blue,
The one espide in glittering Cassiopie,
The other near to Ophiuchus thigh.
Both bigger then the biggest stars that are,
And yet as far removed from mortal eye
As are the furthest, so those Arts declare
Unto whose reaching sight Heavens mysteries lie bare.
78
Wherefore these new-seen lights were greater once
By many thousand times then this our sphere
Wherein we live, 'twixt good and evil chance.
Which to my musing mind does strange appear
If those large bodies then first shaped were.
For should so goodly things so soon decay?
Neither did last the full space of two year.
Wherefore I cannot deem that their first day
Of being, when to us they sent out shining ray.
79
But that they were created both of old,
And each in his due time did fair display
Themselves in radiant locks more bright then gold,
Or silver sheen purged from all drossie clay.
But how they could themselves in this array
Expose to humane sight who did before
Lie hid, is that which well amazen may
The wisest man and puzzle evermore.
Yet my unwearied thoughts this search could not give over.
80
Which when I Would exercised in long pursuit
To finden out what might the best agree
With wary reason, at last I did conclude
That there is no better probability
Can be produced of that strange prodigy,
But that some mighty Planet that does run
About some fixed star in Cassiopie
As Saturn paceth round about our Sun,
Unusual light and bigness by strange fate had won.
81
Which I conceive no gainer way is done
Then by the seazing of devouring fire
On that dark Orb, which before but dimly shone
With borrowed light, not lightened entire,
But halfed like the Moon.
And while the busy flame did siez throughout,
And search the bowels of the lowest mire
Of that Saturnian Earth; a mist broke out,
And immense mounting smoke arose all round about.
82
Which being gilded with the piercing rays
Of its own sun and every neighbor star,
It soon appeared with shining silver blaze,
And then began first be seen of men from far.
Besides that fiery flame that was so narre
The Planets self, which greedily did eat
The wastning mold, did contribute a share
Unto this brightness; and what I conceit
Of this star does with that of Ophiuchus fit.
83
And like I would adventure to pronounce
Of all the Comets that above the Moon,
Amidst the higher Planets rudely dance
In course perplex, but that from this rash doom
I Am bet off by their beards and tails far strown
Along the sky, pointing still opposite
Unto the sun, however they may roam;
Wherefore a cluster of small stars unite
These Meteors some do deem, perhaps with judgment right.
84
And that the^ tayls are streams of the suns light
Breaking through their near bodies as through clouds.
Besides the Optic glass has shown to sight
The dissolution of these starrie crowds.
Which thing if it once be granted and allowed,
I think without all contradiction
They may conclude these Meteors are routs
Of wandering stars, which though they one by one
Cannot be seen, yet joined cause this strange vision.
85
And yet methinks, in my devicefull mind
Some reasons that may happily repress
These arguments it is not uneath to find.
For how can the suns rays that be transmisse
Through these loose knots in Comets, well express
Their beards or curld tayls utmost incurvation?
Beside, the conflux and congeries
Of lesser lights a double augmentation
Implies, and 'twixt them both a lessening coarctation.
86
For when as once these stars are come so nigh
As to seem one, the Comet must appear
In biggest show, because more loose they lie
Somewhat spread out, but as they draw more near
The compass of his head away must wear,
Till he be brought to his least magnitude;
And then they passing cross, he does repair
Himself, and still from his last loss renewed
Grows till he reach the measure which we first had viewed.
87
And then far distanc'd they bid quite adieu,
Each holding on in solitude his way.
Ne any footsteps in the empty Blew
Is to be found of that farre-shining ray.
Which process since no man did yet bewray,
It seems unlikely that the Comets be
Synods of stars that in wide Heaven stray:
Their smallness eke and numerositie
Increases doubt and lessens probability.
88
A cluster of them makes not half a Moon,
What should such tennis-balls do in the sky?
And few'll not figure out the fashion
Of those round fiery Meteors on high.
Ne ought their beards much move us, that do lie
Ever cast forward from the Morning sun,
Nor back cast tayls turned to our Evening-eye,
That fair appear when as the day is done.
This matter may lie hid in the stars shadowed Cone.
89
For in these Planets conflagration,
Although the smoke mount up exactly round,
Yet by the suns irradiation
Made thin and subtle no where else its found
By sight, save in the dim and duskish bound
Of the projected Pyramid opake,
Opake with darkness, smoke and mists unsound
Yet gilded like a foggie cloud does make
Reflection of fair light that does our senses take.
90
This is the reason of that constant site
Of Comets tayls and beards: And that their show's
Not pure Pyramidall, nor their ends seem straight
But bowed like brooms, is from the winds that blow,
I mean Ethereall winds, such as below,
Men finden under the Equinoctial line.
Their widend beards this air so broad does strew
Incurvate, and or more or less decline:
If not let sharper wits more subtly here divine.
91
But that experiment of the Optic glass
The greatest argument of all I deem,
Ne can I well encounter nor let pass
So strong a reason if I may esteem
The feat withouten fallacy to been,
Nor judge these little sparks and subtle lights
Some ancient fixed stars though now first seen,
That near the ruined Comets place were pight,
On which that Optic instrument by chance did light
92
Nor finally an uncouth after-sport
Of the immense vapors that the searching fire
Had boiled out, which now themselves consort
In several parts and closely do conspire,
Clumper'd in balls of clouds and globes entire
Of crudled smoke and heavy clunging mists;
Which when they have stayed a while at last expire;
But while they stay any may see that lists
So be that Optic Art his natural sight assists.
93
If none of these ways I may well decline
The urging weight of this hard argument,
Worst is but parting stakes and thus define:
Some Comets be but single Planets brent,
Others a synod joined in due consent:
And that no new found Meteors they are,
Ne further may my wary mind assent
From one single experience solitaire,
Till all-discovering Time shall further truth declare.
94
But for the new fixed stars there is no pretense,
Nor beard nor tail to take occasion by,
To bring in that unluckie inference
Which weaken might this new built mystery.
Certes in raging fire they both did fry.
A sign whereof you rightly may aread
Their colors changeable variety,
First clear and white, then yellow, after red,
Then blewly pale, then duller still, till perfect dead.
95
And as the order of these colors went,
So still decreased that Cassiopean star,
Till at the length to sight it was quite spent:
Which observations strong reasons are,
Consuming fire its body did empare
And turn to ashes. And the like will be
In all the darksome Planets wide and far.
Ne can our Earth from this state standen free
A Planet as the rest, and Planets fate must try.
96
Ne let the tender heart too harshly deem
Of this rude sentence: for what rigor more
Is in consuming fire then drowning stream
Of Noah's flood which all creatures chok'd of yore,
Saving those few that were kept safe in store
In that well builded ship? All else beside
Men, birds, and beasts, the lion, buck, and bore
Dogs, kine, sheep, horses all that did abide
Upon the spacious Earth, perished in waters wide.
97
Nor let the slow and misbelieving wight
Doubt how the fire on the hard earth may seize;
No more then how those waters erst did light
Upon the sinful world. For as the seas
Boiling with swelling waves aloft did rise,
And met with mighty showers and pouring rain
From Heavens spouts, so the broad flashing skies
With brimstone thick and clouds of fiery bain
Shall meet with raging Etna's and Vesuvius flame.
98
The burning bowels of this wasting ball
Shall gullup up great flakes of rolling fire,
And belch out pitchie flames, till over all
Having long raged, Vulcan himself shall tire
And (the earth an asheap made) shall then expire:
Here Nature laid asleep in her own Urn
With gentle rest right easly will respire,
Till to her pristine task she do return
As fresh as Phoenix young under the Arabian Morn.
99
O happy they that then the first are born,
While yet the world is in her vernall pride:
For old corruption quite away is worn
As metal pure so is her mold well tried.
Sweet dews, cool breathing airs, and spaces wide
Of precious spicery wafted with soft wind:
Fair comely bodies goodly beautfi'd
Snow-limb'd, rose-cheek'd, ruby-lip'd, pearl-ted, star-eyn'd.
Their parts each fair in fit proportion all combined.
100
For all the while her purged ashes rest
These relics dry suck in the heavenly dew,
And roscid Manna rains upon her breast,
And fills with sacred milk sweet fresh and new,
Where all take life and does the world renew;
And then renewed with pleasure be yfed.
A green soft mantle does her bosom strew
With fragrant herbs and flowers embellished,
Where without fault or shame all living creatures bed.
101
Ne ought we doubt how Nature may recover
In her own ashes long time buried.
For naught can ever consume that centrall power
Of hid spermatick life, which lies not dead
In that rude heap, but safely covered;
And does by secret force suck from above
Sweet heavenly juice, and therewith nourished
Till her just bulk, she does her life improve,
Made mother of much children that about her move.
102
Witness that uncouth bird of Arabie
Which out of her own ruins does revive
With all the exploits of skillful Chymistrie,
Such as no vulgar wit can well believe.
Let universal Nature witness give
That what I sing 's no feigned forgerie.
A needless task new fables to contrive,
But what I sing is seemly verity
Well suting with right reason and Philosophy.
103
But the fit time of this mutation
No man can finden out with all his pains.
For the small spears of humane reason run
Too swift within his narrow compast brains.
But that vast Orb of Providence contains
A wider period; turns still and slow.
Yet at the last his aimed end he gains.
And sure at last a fire will overflow
The aged Earth, and all must into ashes go.
104
Then all the stately works and monuments
Built on this bottom shall to ruin fall.
And all those goodly Statues shall be brent
Which were erect to the memorial
Of Kings, and Kaesars, ne may better 'fall
The boastfull works of brave Poetic pride
That promise life and fame perpetual;
Ne better fate may these poor lines abide.
Betide what will to what may live no longer tide.
105
This is the course that never-dying Nature
Might ever hold from all Eternity
Renewing still the faint decayed creature
Which would grow stark and dry as aged tree,
Unless by wise preventing Destiny
She were at certain periods of years
Reduced back unto her Infancy,
Which well framed argument (as plainly appears)
My ship from those hard rocks and shelves right safely stears.
106
Lo! now my faithful muse has represented
Both frames of Providence to open view,
And has each point in orient colors painted
Not to deceive the sight with seeming show
But earnest to give either part their due;
Now urging th'uncouth strange perplexity
Of infinite worlds and Time, then of a new
Softening that harsher inconsistency
To fit the immense goodness of the Deity.
107
And here by curious men 't may be expected
That I this knot with judgment grave decide,
And then proceed to what else was objected.
But, ah! What mortal wit may dare to areed
heavens counsels in eternal horror hid?
And Cynthius pulls me by my tender ear,
Such signs I must observe with wary heed:
Wherefore my restless Muse at length forbear.
Thy silver sounded Lute hang up in silence here.
FINIS.
ANTIPSYCHOPANNYCHIA OR The third Book of the song of the SOUL: Containing a
Confutation of the sleep of the SOUL after death.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...), Plotin. Ennead. 3.

(...), John 11.

CAMBRIDGE Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

The Preface to the Reader.
TO preface much concerning these little after-pieces of Poetry, I hold
needless, having spoke my mind so fully before. The motives that drew me to
add them to the former are expressed in the Poems themselves. My drift is one in
them all: which is to raise a certain number of well ordered Phantasms, fitly
shaped out and warily contrived, which I set to skirmish and conflict with all
the furious phansies of Epicurisme and Atheism. But here is my disadvantage,
that victory will be no victory, unless the adversary acknowledge himself
overcome. None can acknowledge himself overcome, unless he perceive the
strength, and feel the stroke of the more powerful arguments. But the exility
and subtilty of many, and that not of the meanest, is such (nor can they be
otherwise) that they will (as that kind of thunder which the Poets do commonly
call (...), from its over quick and penetrating energie) go through their more
porous and spongy minds without any sensible impression.

Sure I am that sensuality is always an enemy to subtilty of reason, which
has its rise from subtilty of fancy: so that the life of the body, being
vigorous and radiant in the soul, hinders us of the sight of more attenuate
phantasmes, But that being suppressed or very much castigate and kept under, our
inward apprehension grows clearer and larger. Few men can imagine any thing so
clearly awake, as they did when they were asleep, And what is the reason, but
that the sense of the body is then bound up or dead in a manner?

The dark glasse-windows will afford us a further illustration for this
purpose. Why is it that we see our own faces there by night? What can reflect
the species (as they phrase it) when the glass is pervious and transparent?
Surely reflection in the ordinary apprehension is but a conceit. The darkness
behind the glass is enough to exhibit visibly the forms of things within, by
hiding stronger objects from the eye, which would bury these weak idola in
their more orient luster.

The stars shine and fill the air with their species by day, but are to be
seen only in a deep pit, which may fence the Suns light from striking our
sight so strongly. Every contemptible candle conquers the beams of the Moon, by
the same advantage that the Suns does the Stars, viz. propinquitie. But put
out the candle, and you will presently find the moonlight in the room; exclude
the moon, and then the feeblest of all species will step out into energy, we
shall behold the night.

All this is but to show, how the stronger or nearer (...) does obscure the
weaker or further off; and how that one being removed, the energie of the other
will easily appear.

Now that our comparison may be the fitter, let us consider what Aristotle
says of fancy, that it is (...). Thus much I will take of him, that Fancy
is sense; and add to it that (...) is also (...), and (...) and what I have
intimated in some passages of these Poems, that the soul does always feel it
self, its own actual Idea, by its omniform centrall self. So that the
immediate sense of the soul is nothing else but to perceive its own energie.

Now since that, that which we call outward sense, is indeed the very energie of
the soul, and inward sense which is fancy can be no other, there seems to be
no real and intrinsecall difference betwixt the (...) and (...) of any form;
no more then there is betwixt a frog born by the Sun and mere slime, and one
born by copulation: For these are but extrinsecall relations. Wherefore (...)
and (...) in the soul it self is all one.

But now since it is the same nature, why is not there the same degrees in both?
I say there is, as appears plainly in sleep, where we find all as clear and
energeticall as when we wake.

But here these (...) or (...) (for I have proved them all one) do as greater
and lesser lights dim one another; or that which is nearest works
strongliest. Hence it is that the light or life of this low spirit or body of
ours, stirring up the soul into a perpetual senfuall energie, if we foster
this and unite our minds, will, and animadversion with it, will by its close
nearenesse with the soul dim and obscure those more subtle and exile phantasms
or (...) risen from the soul it self, or occasioned by other men's writings. For
they will be in the flaring light or life of the body as the stars in the
beams of the Sun scarce to be seen, unless we withdraw our selves out of the
flush vigor of that light, into the profundity of our own souls, as into some
deep pit.

Wherefore men of the most tamed and castigate spirits are of the best and most
profound judgment, because they can so easily withdraw themselves from the
life and impulse of the lower spirit of this body.

Thus being quit of passion, they have upon any occasion a clear though still
and quiet representation of every thing in their minds, upon which pure bright
sydereall phantasms unprejudiced reason may safely work, and clearly discern
what is true or probable.

If my writings fall into the hands of men otherwise qualified, I shall gain
the less approbation. But if they will endeavor to compose themselves as near
as they can to this temper; though they were of another opinion then what my
writings intend to prove, I doubt not but they will have the happiness to be
overcome, and to prove gainers by my victory.

To say any thing more particularly concerning these last I hold it needless.
Only let me excuse my self, if any chance to blame me for my (...), as
confuting that which no man will assert. For it has been asserted by some; as
those Mauri whom Ficinus speaks of; and the question is also discussed by
Plotinus in his fourth Ennead, where he distinguishes of, all souls being one,
after this manner, (...). The latter member is that, which my arguments
conclude against. though they were (...) yet were we safe enough; as safe as
the beams of the Sun the Sun existing. But the similitude of Praxiteles broken
glass is brought in, according to the apprehension of such, as make the image
to vanish into nothing, the glass being taken away: and that as there is but
one face, though there be the appearances of many; so though there be the
appearances of many souls, by reason of that ones working in diverse bodies, yet
there is but one soul; and understanding sense and motion to be the acts of
this one soul informing several bodies.

This is that which both Plotinus and I endeavor to destroy, which is of great
moment: For if one only soul act in every body, what ever we are now, surely
this body laid in the dust we shall be nothing.

As for the Oracles answer to Amelius, if any vulgar conceited man think it
came from a devil with Bats wings and a long tail, the Seventies translation of
the eight verse of the 32. chapter of Deuteronomy may make it at least
doubtful. When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam he set the bounds of the people, (...). He did not
then deliver them into the hand and jurisdiction of devils, nor to be
instructed and taught by them.

But if Apollo who gave so good a testimony of Socrates while he was living,
and of Plotinus after his death, was some foul fiend, yet it is no prejudice to
their esteem, since our Savior Christ was acknowledged by the devil.

But I have broke my word, by not breaking off before this. Reader, it is time
now to leave thee to the perusal of my writings, which if they chance to
please thee, I repent me not of my pains; if they chance not to please, that
shall not displease me much, for I consider that I also with small content and
pleasure have read the writings of other men.

Yours H. M.

The Argument of ANTIPSYCHOPANNYCHIA Or The confutation of the sleep of the
Soul.
CANT. I.
Adams long sleep, will, mind compared
With low vitality,
The fondness plainly have unbar'd
Of Psychopannychie.
1
THe souls ever durancy I sung before,
Ystruck with mighty rage. A powerful fire
Held up my lively Muse and made her soar
So high that mortal wit, I fear, she will tire
To trace her. Then a while I did respire.
But now my beating veins new force again
Invades, and holy fury does inspire.
Thus stirred up I Will add a second strain,
Lest, what before was said may seem all spoke in vain.
2
For sure in vain do humane souls exist
After this life, if lulled in listlesse sleep
They senseless lie wrapped in eternal mist,
Bound up in foggy clouds, that ever weep
Benumming tears, and the souls center steep
With deading liquour, that she never minds
Or feels ought. Thus drenched in Lethe deep,
Nor misseth she her self, nor seeks nor finds
Her self. This mirksome state all the souls actions binds.
3
Desire, fear, love, joy, sorrow, pleasure, pain,
Sense, fancy, wit, forecasting providence,
Delight in God, and what with sleepy brain
Might suit, slight dreams, all banished far from hence.
Nor pricking nor applauding conscience
Can wake the soul from this dull Lethargy;
That 'twixt this sleepy state small difference
You Will find and that men call Mortality.
Plain death's as good as such a Psychopannychie.
4
What profits this bare existency,
If I perceive not that I do exist?
Naught longs to such, nor mirth nor misery.
Such stupid beings write into one list
With stocks and stones. But they do not persist,
You Will say, in this dull dead condition.
But must revive, shake off this drowsy mist
At that last shrill loud-sounding clarion
Which cleaves the trembling earth, rives monuments of stone:
5
Has then old Adam snorted all this time
Under some senseless sod with sleep ydead?
And have those flames, that steep Olympus climb
Right nimbly wheeled over his heedlesse head
So often, in heaps of years low buried:
And yet can ken himself when he shall rise
Wakend by piercing trump, that far does shed
Its searching sound? If we our memories
And wit do lose by sickness, falls, sloth, lethargies;
6
If all our childhood quite be waste away
With its impressions, so that we forget
What once we were, so soon as age does sway
Our bowed backs, sure when base worms have eat
His mouldring brains, and spirits have retreat
From whence they came, spread in the common fire,
And many thousand sloping suns have set
Since his last fall into his ancient mire,
How he will ken himself reason may well admire:
7
For he must know himself by some impression
Left in his ancient body unwash'd out,
Which seems strange. For can so long succession
Of sliding years that great Colosses might
Well moulder into dust, spare things ywrought
So slightly as light phantasms in our brain,
Which often one year or month have wrenched out
And left no footsteps of that former stain,
No more then is of a cloud quite melted into rain?
8
And shall not such long series of time,
When Nature has dispread our vital spright
And turned our body to its ancient slime,
Quite wash away what ever was empight
In that our spirit? If flesh and soul unite
Lose such impressions, as were once deep sealed
And fairly glistered like to comets bright
In our blew Chaos, if the soul congeald
With her own body lose these forms as I reveald,
9
Then so long time of their disjunction
(The body being into dust confract,
The spright diffused, spread by dispersion)
And such Lethean sleep that does contract
The souls hid rays that it did nothing act
Must certainly wipe all these forms away
That sense or fancy ever had impact.
So that old Adam will in vain assay
To find who here he was, he will have no memory.
10
Nor can he tell that ere he was before:
And if not tell, he is as if then first born.
If as first born, his former life's no store.
Yet when men wake they find themselves at morn.
But if their memory away were worn
With one nights sleep, as much as does respect
Themselves, these men they never were beforn,
This day's their birth day: they cannot conject
They ever lived till now, much less the same detect.
11
So when a man goes hence, thus may he say,
As much as me concerns I die now quite.
Adieu, good self! for now thou go away,
Nor can I possibly thee ever meet
Again, nor ken thy face, nor kindly greet.
Sleep and dispersion spoils our memory.
So my dear self henceforth I cannot weet.
Wherefore to me it is perfectly to die,
Though subtiler Wits do called but Psychopannychie.
12
Go now you Psychopannychites! persuade
To comely virtues and pure piety
From hope of joy, or fear of penance sad.
Men promptly may make answer, Who shall try
That pain or pleasure? When death my dim eye
Shall close, I sleep not sensible of ought:
And tract of time at least all memory
Will qui^e debar, that reacquainten might
My self with mine own self, if so my self I sought.
13
But I shall neither seek my self, nor find
My self unsought: Therefore not deprehend
My self in joy or woe. Men ought to mind
What longs unto them. But when once an end
Is put unto this life, and fate does rend
Our retinence; what follows naught at all
Belongs to us: what need I to contend,
And my frail spright with present pain to gall
For what I nere shall judge my self did ere befall;
14
This is the uncouth state of sleeping soul,
Thus weak of her own self without the prop
Of the base body, that she no'te out-roll
Her vital rays: those rays Death down does lop,
And all her goodly beauty quite does crop
With his black claws. Wisdom, love, piety,
Are straight dried up: Death does their fountain stop,
This is those sleepers dull Philosophy,
Which fairly men invites to foul impiety.
15
But if we grant, which in my former song
I plainly proved, that the souls energie
Pends not on this base corse, but that self-strong
She by her self can work, then when we fly
The bodies commerce, no man can deny
But that there is no interruption
Of life; where will puts on, there does she hie
Or if she is carried by coaction.
That force yet she observes by press adversion.
16
And with most lively touch does feel and find
Her self. For either what she most does love
She then obtains; or else with cross, unkind
Contrary life since her decease sh' has strove,
That keeps her wake, and with like might does move
To think upon her self, and in what plight
She Is fallen. And nothing able to remove
Deep searching vengeance, groans in this sad Night,
And rores, and raves, and storms, and with her self does fight.
17
But hearty love of that great vital spright,
The sacred fount of holy sympathy;
Prepares the soul with its deep quickening might
To leave the bodies vain mortality.
Away she flies into Eternity,
Finds full accomplishment of her desire;
Each thing would reach its own centrality:
So Earth with Earth, and Moon with Moon conspire.
Our selves live most, when most we feed our Centrall fire.
18
Thus is the soul continually in life
Withouten interruption, if that she
Can operate after the fatal knife
Has cut the cords of lower sympathy:
Which she can do, if that some energie
She exercise (immured in this base clay)
Which on frail flesh has no dependency,
For then the like she will do, that done away.
These independent acts, it is time now to display.
19
All comprehending Will, proportionate
To whatsoever shall fall by Gods decree
Or prudent sufferance, sweetly spread, dilate,
Stretched out to embrace each act or entity
That creep from hidden cause that none can see
With outward eyes. Next Intellect, whose hight
Of working's then, when as it stands most free
From sense and grosser fancy, deep empight
In this vild corse, which to purged minds yields small delight.
20
Both Will and Intellect then works best,
When Sense and Appetite be consopite,
And grosser fancy lulled in silent rest:
Then Will grown full with a mild heavenly light
Shines forth with goodly mental rays bedight,
And finds and feels such things as never pen
Can setten down, so that unexpert wight
May read and understand. Experienced men
Do only know who like impressions sustain:
21
So far's the Soul from a dependency
(In these high actions) on the body base.
And further sign is want of memory
Of these impressions wrought in heavenly place,
I mean the holy Intellect: they pass
Leaving no footsteps of their former light,
When as the soul from thence descended has.
Which is a sign those forms be not empight
In our low proper Chaos or Corporeal spright.
22
For then when we our mind do downward bend
Like things we here should find: but all is gone
Soon as our flagging souls so low descend
As that straight spright. Like torch that droppeth down
From some high tower, held steady clearly shone,
But in its fall leaves all its light behind,
Lies now in darkness on the grail, or stone,
Or dirty earth: That erst so fully shined,
Within a glowing coal has now its light confined.
23
So does the soul when from high Intellect
To grovelling sense she takes her stooping flight,
Falling into her body, quite neglect,
Forget, forgother former glorious sight.
Gross glowing fire for that wide shining light;
For purest love, foul fury and base passion;
For clearest knowledge, fell contentious fight
Sprung from some scorching false inust impression
Which she will call truth, she gains. O witless Commutation!
24
But still more clear her independent might
In understanding and pure subtle will
To prove: I will assay to explain aright
The difference ('ccording to my best skill)
'Twixt these and those base faculties that well
From union with the low consistency
Of this Out-world, that when my curious quill,
Has well described their great disparity,
To the highest we may give an independency.
25
The faculties we deem corporeal,
And bound unto this earthy instrument
(So bound that they no'te operate at all
Without the body there immerse and meint)
Be hearing, feeling, tasting, sight, and sent.
Add lower fancy, Mundane memory:
Those powers be all or more or less ypent
In this gross life: We'll first their property
Set down, and then the others contrariety.
26
This might perceives not its own instrument.
The taste discovers not the spungy tongue;
Nor is the Mundane spright (through all extent)
From whence are sense and lower fancy sprung
Perceived by the best of all among
These learned Five, nor yet by fantasy:
Nor does or this or those so nearly throng
Unto themselves as by propinquity
To apprehend themselves. They no'te themselves descry;
27
Nor e're learn what their own impressions be.
The mind held somewhere else in open sight,
What ever lies, unknown unto the eye
It lies, though there its image be empight,
Till that our soul look on that image right.
Wherefore themselves the senses do not know,
Nor does our fancy; for each furious wight
Has fancy full enough, so full't does show
As sense; nor he, nor's fancy does that fancy know.
28
Age, potent objects, too long exercise
Do weaken, hurt, and much debilitate
Those lower faculties. The Sun our eyes
Confounds with dazeling beams of light so that
For a good while we cannot contemplate
Ought visible: thus thunder deafs the ear,
And age hurts both, that does quite ruinate
Our sense and fancy: so if long we hear
Or see, 't sounds not so sweet, nor can we see so clear.
29
Lastly, the Senses reach but to one kind
Of things. The eye sees colors, so the ear
Hears sounds, the nostrills snuff perfumed wind;
What gross impressions the out-senses bear
The fancy represents, sometimes it dare
Make unseen shapes, with uncouth transformation,
Such things as never in true Nature are.
But all this while the phansies operation
To laws bodily is bound: such is her figuration.
30
This is the nature of those faculties
That of the lower Mundane spright depend.
But in our Intellect far otherwise
We'st see it, if we pressely will attend
And trace the parallels unto the end.
There Is no self-knowledge. Here the soul does find
Her self. If so, then without instrument.
For what more fit to show our inward mind
Then our own mind? But if 't be otherwise defined;
31
Then tell me, Knows she that fit instrument?
if she kens not that instrument, how can
She judge, whether truly it does represent
Her self? there may be foul delusion.
But if she kens this Organ; straight upon
This grant, I Will ask how kens she this same tole?
What? by another? by what that? so go on
Till to infinity you forward roll,
An horrid monster count in Philosophic school.
32
The soul then works by 't self, and is self-liv'd,
Since that it acts without an instrument:
Free motions from her own self derived
Flow round. But to go on. The eyes yblent
Do blink even blind with objects vehement,
So that till they themselves do well recure
Less matters they no'te see. But rays down sent
From higher sourse the mind does maken pure,
Do clear, do subtilize, do fix, do settle sure.
33
That if so be she list to bend her will
To lesser matters, she would it perform
More excellently with more art and skill:
Nor by long exercise her strength is worn;
Witness wise Socrates, from morn to morn
That stood as stiff as any trunck of tree:
What eye could bear in contemplation
So long a fix'dnesse, none so long could see,
Its watery tears would wail its frail infirmity.
34
Nor feeble eld, sure harbinger of death,
Does hinder the free work of the Intellect.
When the eye grows dim and dark that it unneath
Can see through age, the mind then close collect
Into her self, such mysteries does detect
By her far-piercing beams, that youthful hear
Does count them folly and with scorn neglect,
His ignorance concludes them but deceit;
He hears not that still voice, his pulse so loud does beat.
35
Lastly sense, fancy, though they be confined
To certain objects, which to several
Belong; yet sure the Intellect or mind
Apprehends all objects, both corporeal,
As colors, sounds; and incorporeall,
As virtue, wisdom, and the higher spright,
Gods love and beauty intellectual;
So that its plain that she is higher pight
Then in all acts to pend on any earthly might.
36
If will and appetite we list compare,
Like difference we easly their discover,
This pent, contract, yfraught with furious jar
And fierce antipathy. It boyleth over
With fell revenge; or if new chance to cover
The former passion; Suppose lust or fear:
Yet all are tumults, but the will does hover
No whit enslaved to what she finds here,
But in a free suspense her self does nimbly bear.
37
Mild, gentle, calm, quick, large, subtle, serene,
These be her properties which do increase
The more that vigor in the bodies vein
Does waste and waxen faint. Desires decrease
When age the Mundane spright does more release
From this straight mansion. But the will does flower
And fairly spread, near to our last decease
Embraces God with much more life and power
Then ever she could do in her fresh vernall hour.
38
Wherefore I think we safely may conclude
That Will and Intellect do not rely
Upon the body, since they are indew'd
With such apparent contrariety
Of qualities to sense and fantasy,
Which plainly on the body do depend:
So that departed souls may phantasms free
Full well exert, when they have made an end
Of this vain life, nor need to Lethe Lake descend.
The Argument of ANTIPSYCHOPANNYCHIA OR, The Confutation of the Sleep of the
Soul.
Cant. 2.
Bondage and freedom's here set out
By an inverted Cone:
The self-form'd soul may work without
Incorporation.
1
FOuntain of beings! the vast deep abyss
Of Life and Love and penetrating Will,
That breaks through narrow Night. and so transmiss
At last does find it self! What mortal skill
Can reach this mystery? my trembling quill
Much less may set it forth; yet as I may
I must attempt this task for to fulfill.
He guide my pen while I this work assay
Who All, through all himself does infinitely display.
2
My end's loose largeness and full liberty
To finden out; Most precious thing I ween.
When contrall life her outgone energy
Does spreaden forth, unsneep'd by foe-man keen,
And like unclouded Sun does freely shine;
This is right Liberty, whose first Idee
And measure is that holy root divine
Of all free life, hight Ahad, Unity:
In all things He at once is present totally.
3
Each total presence must be infinite:
So is He infinite infinity
Those infinites you must not disunite:
So is He one all spreaden Unity.
Nor must you so outspread this Deity,
But that infinity so infinite
Must be in every infinite: so we
Must multiply this infinite single sight
Above all apprehension of a mortal wit.
4
What is not infinitely infinite,
It is not simply infinite and free:
For straitness (if you do conceive aright)
Is the true daughter of deficiency.
But since there is no defect in Unity,
Or Ahad, ( Ahad this first center hight
In Poetry as yet to vulgar eye
Unpublish'd) Him first freedom infinite
We may well style. And next is that eternal Light;
5
Son unto Ahad, Aeon we him name
(In that same Poem) like his father free,
Even infinitely free I him proclaim
Every where all at once. And so is she
Which Psyche hight: for perfect Unity
Makes all those one. So hitherto we have
Unmeasurable freedom. Semele
Is next, whom though fair fluttering forms embrave,
Yet motion and defect her liberty deprave.
6
Imagination's not infinite,
Yet freer far then sense; and sense more free
Then vegetation or spermatick spright.
Even absent things be seen by fantasy;
By sense things present at a distancie;
But that spermatick spright is close confined
Within the compass of a stupid tree,
Imprisoned quite in the hard rugged rind,
Yet their defective Re'plication we find:
7
Far more defective then in fantasy
Or sense; yet freer is the plastic spright
Then quantity, or single quality,
Like quantity it self out stretched right
Devoid of all reduplicative might:
If any such like qualities there were
So dull, so dead, so all devoid of light
As no communicative rays to bear;
If there be such to Hyle they do verge most near.
8
But Hyle's self is perfect penury,
And infinite straitness: Here we sinden naught,
Nor can do ought. If curiously we pry
Into this mirksome corner quite distraught
From our own life and being, we have brought
Our selves to nothing. Or the sooth to sayen
The subtilest soul her self has never wrought
Into so strait a place, could nere constrain
Herself to enter, or that Hagge to entertain.
9
Lo! here is the figure of that mighty Cone,
From the strait Cuspis to the wide-spread Base,
Which is even all in comprehension.
What Is infinitely nothing here has place;
What Is infinitely all things steady stays
A^ the wide Basis of this Cone inverse,
Yet its own essence does it swiftly chase,
O^etakes at once; so swiftly does it pierce
That motion here is no motion.
10
Suppose the Sun so much to mend his pace,
That in a moment he did round the sky,
The nimble Night how swiftly would he chase
About the earth? so swift that scarce thine eye
Could ought but light discern. But let him hie
So fast, that swiftness has grown infinite,
In a pure point of time so must he fly
Around this ball, and the vast shade of Night
Quite swallow up, ever steady stand in open sight.
11
For that which from its place is not away
One point of time, how can you say it moves?
Wherefore the Sun does always steady stay
In our Meridian, as this reason proves.
And since that in an instant round he roves,
The same does hap in each Meridian line;
For in his instantaneous removes
He in them all at once does fairly shine.
Nor that large stretchen space his freeness can confine.
12
The Sun himself at once stands in each point
Of his diurnall circle: Thus we see
That rest and motion cannot be disjoynt,
When motion's swift even to infinity.
Here contrarieties do well agree,
Eternal shade and everlasting light
With one another here do well comply;
Instant returns of Night make one long Night.
Wherefore infinity is freedom infinite.
13
No hinderance to ought that does arrive
To this free camp of fair Elysium,
But nearer that to Hyle things do dive,
They are more pent, and find much lesser room.
Thus sensual souls do find their righteous doom
Which Nemesis inflicts, when they descend
From heavenly thoughts that from above do come
To lower life, which wrath and grief attend,
And scorching lust, that do the souls high honor blend.
14
Wherefore the soul cut off from lowly sense
By harmless fate, far greater liberty
Must gain: for when it has departed hence
(As all things else) should it not backward hie
From whence it came? but such divinity
Is in our souls that nothing less then God
Could send them forth (as Plato's schools descry)
Wherefore when they retreat a free abode
They Will find, unless kept off by Nemesis just rod.
15
But if kept off from thence, where is she then?
She dwells in her own self, there does reside,
Is her own world, and more or less does pen
Her self, as more or less she erst did side
With sense and vice, while here she did abide.
Steril defect and nere-obtained desire
Create a Cone, whose Cusp is not more wide
Then this worlds Cone. Here close-contracted fire
Does vex, does burn, does scorch with searching heat and ire.
16
Nor easly can she here fall fast asleep
To slake her anguish and tormenting pain:
What drisling mists may here her senses steep?
What foggie fumes benumb her moistened brain?
The flitten soul no sense does then retain.
And sleep arises from a sympathy
With these low sprights that in this flesh remain.
But when from these the soul is setten free,
What sleep may bind her from continual energie?
17
Here they will reply, It is not a gross sleep
That binds the soul from operation.
But since that death all phantasms clean does wipe
Out of the soul, she no occasion.
Can have of Will or Intellection.
The corpse does rot, the spirit wide is spread,
And with the Mundane life fallen into one:
So then the soul from these quite being fled,
Unmoved of ought must lie, sunk in deep drowsihead
18
Naught then she has whereon to contemplate,
Her ancient phantasms melt and glide away,
Her spright sucked back by all-devouring fate
And spread abroad, those forms must needs decay
That were therein imprinted. If they stay,
Yet since the soul from them is disunite,
Into her knowledge they can never ray.
So wants she objects the mind to excite:
Wherefore asleep she lies wrapped in eternal Night.
19
To which I answer, though she corporate
With no world yet, by a just Nemesis
Kept off from all; yet she thus separate
May often be struck with potent rays transmisse
From diverse worlds, that with such mockeries
Kindling an hungry fire and eager will,
They do the wretched soul but Tantalize,
And with fierce choking flames and fury fill,
So vexed, that if she could in rage herself she would kill.
20
If any doubt of this perplexity,
And think so subtle thing can suffer naught:
What Is gnawing conscience from impiety
By highest parts of humane soul ywrought?
For so our very soul with pain is fraught,
The body being in an easy plight.
Through all the senses when you have pressly sought,
In none of them you will find this sting empight:
So may we deem this dart the soul it self to hit.
21
Again, when all the senses be ybound
In sluggish sloth, the soul does often create
So mighty pain, so cruelly does wound
Herself with tearing tortures, as that state
No man awake could ever tolerate.
Which must be in herself; for once returned
Unto her body new resuscitate
From sleep, remembering well how erst she mourned,
Marvels how all so soon to peace and ease is turned.
22
Wherefore the soul it self receives pain
From her own self, withouten sympathy
With something else, whose misery must constrain
To deep compassion. So if struck she be
With secret ray, or some strong energie
Of any world, or Lives that there remain,
She Is kept awake. Besides fecunditie
Of her own nature surely does contain
Innate Idees; This truth more fully I Will explain.
23
Strong forward bearing will or appetite,
A never wearied importunity,
Is the first life of this deep centrall spright:
Thus thrusts she forth before her some Idee
Whereby herself now actual she does see.
Her mighty Fiat does command each form
TO appear: As did that ancient Majesty
This world of old by his drad Word efform,
And made the soul of man thus divine Deiform.
24
Thus in a manner the humane soul creates
The image of her will, when from her center
Her pregnant mind she fairly explicates
By actual forms, and so does safely enter
To knowledge of her self.
Flush light she sends forth, and live Idee's:
Those be the glass whereby the soul does paint her.
Sweet centrall love sends out such forms as please;
But centrall hate or fear foul shapes with evil ease.
25
The manner of her life on earth may cause
Diversity of those cruptions,
For will, desire, or custom do dispose
The soul to such like figurations:
Propension brings imaginations,
Unto their birth. And often the soul lets fly
Such unexpected eructations,
That she her self cannot devisen why,
Unless she do ascribe it to her pregnancy.
26
It is an argument of her forms innate
Which blazen out, perchance when none descry.
This light is lost, sense does so radiate
With Mundane life, till this poor carcass die.
As when a lamp, that men do sitten by,
In some wide hall in a clear winter night,
Being blown out or wasted utterly,
Unwares they find a sly still silver light;
The moon the wall or pavement with mild rays has dight:
27
So when the oil of this low life is spent,
Which like a burning lamp does waste away;
Or if blown out by fate more violent;
The soul may find an unexpected ray
Of light; not from full faced Cynthia,
But her own fullness and quick pregnancy:
Unthought of life her Nature may display
Unto her self; not by forced industry,
But naturally it sprouts from her fecundity.
28
Now since adversion is a property
So deeply essential to the rational soul,
This light or life from her does not so fly,
But she goes with it as it out does roll.
All spirits that around their rays extol
Possess each point of their circumference
Presentially. Wherefore the soul so full
Of life, when it rays out, with press presence
Oretakes each outgone beam; apprends it by advertence.
29
Thus plainly we perceive the activity
Of the departed soul; if we could find
Strong reason to confirm the innate idee,
Essential forms created with the mind.
But things obscure no'te easly be defined.
Yet some few reasons I will venture at,
To show that God's so liberal and kind
As, when as humane soul he does create,
To fill it with hid forms and deep idees innate.
30
Well sang the wise Empedocles of old,
That earth by earth, and sea by sea we see,
And heaven by heaven, and fire more bright than gold
By flaming fire, so gentle love descry
By love, and hate by hate. And all agree
That like is known by like. Hence they confess
That some external species strikes the eye
Like to its object, in the self-same dress.
But my first argument hence I Will begin to press.
31
If like be known by like, then must the mind
Innate idolums in it self contain,
To judge the forms she does imprinted find
Upon occasions. If she does not ken
These shapes that flow from distant objects, then
How can she know those objects? a dead glass
(That light and various forms do gaily stain)
Set out in open streets, shapes as they pass
As well may see; Lutes hear each soaming diapase.
32
But if she know those species out sent
From distant objects; tell me how she knows
These species. By some other? You nere meant
To answer so. For straight the question goes
Unto another, and still forward flows
Even to infinity. Does the object serve
Its image to the mind for to disclose?
This answer has as little sense or nerve:
Now reel you in a circle if you well observe.
33
Wherefore no ascititious form alone
Can make us see or hear; but when this spright
That is one with the Mundane's hit upon
(Since all forms in our soul be counite
And centrally lie there) she does beget
Like shapes in her own self; that energie
By her own centrall self who forth it let,
Is viewed. Her centrall omniformity
Thus easly keeps off needless infinity.
34
For the quick soul by 't self does all things know.
And since withouten apt similitude
Nought's known, upon her we must needs bestow
Essential centrall forms, that thus endew'd
With universal likeness ever transmew'd
Into a representing energie
Of this or that, she may have each thing viewed
By her own centrall self-vitality
Which is her self-essentiall omniformity.
35
If plantall souls in their own selves contain
That vital formative fecundity,
That they a tree with different color stain,
And diverse shapes, smoothness, asperity,
Straightness, acuteness, and rotundity,
A golden yellow, or a crimson red,
A varnished green with such like gallantry;
How dull then is the sensitive? how dead,
If forms from its own center it can never spread?
36
Again, an Universal notion,
What object ever did that form impresse
Upon the soul? What makes us venture on
So rash a matter, as ere to confess
Ought generally true? when nevertheless
We cannot e're run through all singulars.
Wherefore in our own souls we do possess
Free forms and immateriall characters.
Hence it is the soul so boldly general truth declares.
37
What man that is not dull or mad would doubt
Whether that truth (for which Pythagoras,
When he by subtle study found it out,
Unto the Muses for their helping grace
An Hecatomb did sacrifice) may pass
In all such figures wheresoever they be?
Yet all Rectangle Triangles none has
Viewed, as yet, none all shall ever see.
Wherefore this free assent is from the innate Ides.
38
Add unto these incorporeity
Apprehended by the soul, when sense nere saw
Ought incorporeall. Wherefore must she
From her own self such subtle Idols draw.
Again, this truth more clearly still to know,
Let Us turn again to our Geometry.
What body ever yet could figure show
Perfectly perfect, as rotundity
Exactly round, or blameless angularity?
39
Yet does the soul of such like forms discourse,
And finden fault at this deficiency,
And rightly term this better and that worse;
Wherefore the measure is our own Idee,
Which the humane soul in her own self does see.
And sooth to sayen when ever she does strive
To find pure truth, her own profundity
She enters, in her self does deeply dive;
From thence attempts each essence rightly to descrive.
40
Last argument, which yet is not the least.
Wise Socrates dispute with Theaetete
Concerning learning fitly does suggest.
A midwifes son ycleeped Phenarete,
He calls himself: Then makes a quaint conceit;
That he his mothers trade did exercise.
All witless his own self yet well did weet
By his fit questions to make others wise;
A midwife that no'te bear another birth unties.
41
Thus jestingly he flung out what was true,
That humane souls be swollen with pregnancy
Of hidden knowledge, if with usage due
They were well handled, they each verity
Would bringen forth from their fecunditie;
Wise framed questions would facilitate
This precious birth, stir up the inward Idee,
And make it streme with light from forms innate.
Thus may a skillful man hid truth elicitate.
42
What does the teacher in his action
But put slight hints into his scholars mind?
Which breed a solemn contemplation
Whether such things be so; but he does find
The truth himself. But if truth be not signed
In his own Soul before, and the right measure
Of things proposed, in vain the youth does wind
Into himself, and all that anxious leisure
In answering proves useless without that hid treasure.
43
Nor is his masters knowledge from him flit
Into his scholars head: for so his brain
In time would be exhaust and void of wit,
So would the sorry man but little gain
Though richly paid. Nor is it more safe to sam
As fire breeds fire, art art does generate,
The soul with Corporeity't would stain:
Such qualities outwardly operate,
The soul within; her acts there closely circulate.
44
Wherefore the soul it self by her Idee,
Which is her self, does every thing discover;
By her own Centrall Omniformity
Brings forth in her own self when ought does move her;
Till moved a dark indifferency does hover.
But fierce desire, and a strong piercing will
Makes her those hidden characters uncover.
Wherefore when death this lower life shall spill.
Or fear or love the soul with actual forms shall fill.
The Argument of ANTIPSYCHOPANNYCHIA OR, The Confutation of the Sleep of the
Soul.
Cant. 3.
Departed souls by living Night
Sucked in, for pinching woe
No'te sleep; or if with God unite,
For joys with which they flow.
1
MY hardest task is gone, which was to prove
That when the soul die death's cut off from all,
Yet she within her self might live and move,
Be her own world, by life imaginall.
But sooth to sain, 't seems not so natural.
For though a star, part of the Mundane spright,
Shine out with rays circumferentiall
So long as with this world it is unite;
Yet what 't would do cut off, so well we cannot weet.
2
But since our soul with God himself may meet,
Inacted by His life, I cannot see
What scruple then remains that moven might
Least doubt, but that she wakes with open eye,
When Fate her from this body does untie,
Wherefore her choicest forms do then arise,
Rowz'd up by union and large sympathy
With Gods own spright; she plainly then descries
Such plenitude of life, as she could nere devise.
3
If God even on this body operate,
And shakes this Temple when he does descend,
Or with sweet vigor does irradiate,
And lovely light and heavenly beauty lend.
Such rays from Moses face did once extend
Themselves on Sinai hill, where he did get
Those laws from Gods own mouth, man's life to mend;
And from Messiah on mount Saron set
Far greater beauty shone in his disciples sight.
4
Als Socrates, when (his large Intellect
Being filled with streaming light from God above)
To that fair sight his soul did close collect,
That inward luster though the body drove
Bright beams of beauty. These examples prove
That our low being the great Deity
Invades, and powerfully does change and move.
Which if you grant, the souls divinity
More fitly does receive so high a Majesty.
5
And that God does illuminate the mind,
Is well approved by all antiquity;
With them Philosophers and Priests we find
All one: or else at least Philosophy
Linked with Gods worship and pure piety:
Witness Pythagoras, Aglaophemus,
Zoroaster, thrice-mighty Mercury,
Wise Socrates, nothing injurious,
Religious Plato, and vice-taming Orpheus.
6
All these, addicted to religion,
Acknowledged God the fount of verity,
From whence flows out illumination
Upon purged souls. But now, O misery!
To seek to God is held a fantasy,
But men hug close their loved lust and vice,
And deem that thraldom a sweet liberty;
Wherefore reproach and shame they do devise
Against the braver souls that better things emprise.
7
But lo! a proof more strong and manifest:
Few men but will confess that prophecy
Proceeds from God, when as our soul's possessed
By his All-seeing spright; als ecstasie
Wherein the soul snatched by the Deity.
And for a time into high heaven hent
Does contemplate that blessed Divinity
So Paul and John that into Patmos went,
Heard and saw things inestimably excellent.
8
Such things as these, men jointly do confess
To spring from Gods own spirit immediately:
But if that God ought on the soul impresse
Before it be at perfect liberty,
Quite rent from this base body; when that she
Is utterly releast, she will be more fit
To be informed by that divine Idee
Hight Logos, that does every man enlight
That enters into life, as speaks the sacred Writ.
9
Behold a fit resemblance of this truth,
The Sun begets both colors and sight,
Each living thing with life his heat indew'th,
He kindles into act each plastic spright:
Thus he the world with various forms does dight
And when his vigor has framed out an eye
In any living wight, he fills with light
That Organ, which can plainly then descry
The forms that under his far-shining beams do ly.
10
Even so it is with the intellectual sun,
Fountain of life, and all-discovering light,
He frames our souls by his creation,
Als he indews them with internal sight,
Then shines into them by his lucid spright.
But corporal life does so obnubilate
Our inward eyes that they be nothing bright;
While in this muddy world incarcerate
They lie, and with blind passions be intoxicate.
11
Fear, anger, hope, fierce vengeance, and swollen hate,
Tumultuous joy, envy and discontent,
Self-love, vainglory, strife and fell debate,
Unsatiate covetise, desire impotent,
Low-sinking grief, pleasure, lust violent,
Fond emulation, all these dim the mind
That with foul filth the inward eye yblent,
That light that is so near it cannot find.
So shines the Sun unseen on a trees rugged rind.
12
But the clean soul by virtue purified
Collecting her own self from the foul steem
Of earthly life, is often dignified
With that pure pleasure that from God does streem,
Often's enlightn'd by that radiant beam,
That issues forth from his divinity,
Then feelingly immortal she does deem
Her self, conjoynd by so near unity
With God, and nothing doubts of her eternity.
13
Nor death, nor sleep nor any dismal shade
Of low contracting life she then does fear,
No troubled thoughts her settled mind invade,
The immortal root of life she sees clear,
Wishes she were for ever grafted here:
No cloud, no darkness, no deficiency
In this high heavenly life does ere appear;
Redundant fullness, and free liberty,
Easy flowing knowledge, never weary energy,
14
Broad open sight, eternal wakefulnesse,
Withouten labor or consuming pain:
The soul all these in God must needs possess
When there deep-rooted life she does obtain,
As I in a few words shall maken plain.
This bodies life by powerful sympathy
The soul to sleep and labor does constrain,
To grief, to weariness and anxiety,
In fine, to hideous sense of dread mortality.
15
But since no such things in the Deity
Are to be found; She once incorporate
With that quick essence, she is setten free
From ought that may her life obnubilate,
What then can her contract or maken strait?
For ever moved by lively sympathy
With Gods own spright, an ever-waking state
She does obtain. Does heavens bright blazing eye
Ever close, ywrapt in sleep and dead obscurity?
16
But now how full and strong a sympathy
Is caused by the souls conjunction
With the high God, I Will to you thus descry.
All men will grant that spread dispersion
Must be some hinderance to close union:
Als must confess that closer unity
More certainly does breed compassion;
Not that there is passion in the Deity,
But something like to what all men call Sympathy.
17
Now since the soul is of such subtlety,
And close collectednesse, in dispersion,
Full by her centrall omniformity,
Pregnant and big without distension;
She once drawn in by strong attraction
Should be more perfectly there counite
In this her high and holy union
Then with the body, where dispersion's pight:
(But such hard things I leave to some more learned wight)
18
The first pure Being's perfect Unity,
And therefore must all things more strongly bind
Then Lives corporeal, which dispersed be.
He also the first Goodness is defined
Wherefore the soul most powerfully's inclined
And strongly drawn to God. But life that is here,
When into it the soul does closely wind,
Is often sneep'd by anguish and by fear,
With vexing pain and rage that she no'te easly bear.
19
Far otherwise it fares in that pure life
That does result in the souls Unity
With God: For there the faster she does strive
To tie her self, the greater liberty
And freer welcome, brighter purity
She finds, and more enlargement, joy and pleasure
O'reflowing, yet without satietie,
Sight without end, and love withouten measure:
This needs must close unite the heart to that hid treasure.
20
This plainly's seen in that mysterious Cone
Which I above did fairly stell descrive:
Their freeness and incarceration
Were plainly setten forth. What down does dive
Into the straightened Cuspis needs must strive
With stringent bitterness, vexation,
Anxious unrest; in this ill plight they live:
But they that do ascend to the top yflown
Be free, yet fast unite to that fair vision.
21
Thus purged souls be close conjoined to God,
And closer union surer sympathy;
Wherefore so long as they make their abode
In Him, incorp'rate by due Unity
They liven in eternal energie.
For Isreal's God nor slumbers, nor does sleep;
Nor Israel lost in dull lethargy
Must list less ly, while numbing streams do steep.
His heavy head, overwhelmed in oblivion deep.
22
But here more curious men will straight enquire,
Whither after death the wicked soul does go,
That long has wallowed in the sinful mire.
Before this question I shall answer to,
Again the nature of the soul I Will show.
She all things in her self does centrally
Contain; what ever she does feel or know,
She feels or knows it by the innate Idee:
She Is all proportioned by her omniformity.
23
God, heaven, this middle world, deep glimmering hell
With all the lives and shapes that there remain,
The forms of all in humane souls do dwell:
She likewise all proportions does contain
That fits her for all sprights. So they constrain
By a strong pulling sympathy to come,
And straight possess that fitting vital vein
That 'longs unto her, so her proper room
She takes as mighty Nemesis does give the doom.
24
Now (which I would you presly should observe)
Though often I have with tongue balbutient
Prattled to the weaker ear (lest I should sterve
My style with too much subtilty) I nere meant
To grant that there is any such thing existent
As a mere body: For all is life, all spright,
Though lives and sprights be very different.
Three general sprights there be, Eternal Light
Is one, the next our World, the last Infernal Night.
25
This last lies next unto old Nothingnesse
Hight Hyle, whom I termed point of the Cone:
Her daughter Night is full of bitterness,
And strait constraint, and pent privation:
Her sturdy ray's scarce conquered by the moon.
The earths great shade breaks out from this hid spright,
And active is; so soon the Sun is gone,
Does repossesse the air shotten forth right
From its hid centrall life, ycleep'd Infernal Night.
26
In this drad world is scorching Phlegethon;
Hot without flame, burning the vexed sense;
There hateful Styx and sad Cocytus run,
And silent Acheron. All drink from hence,
From this damned spright receiven influence,
That in our world or poison do outspue,
Or have an ugly shape and foul presence:
That deadly poison and that direful hue
From this Nocturnall spright these uggly creatur^^ (...)
27
This is the seat of Gods eternal ire,
When unmixt vengeance he does fully power
Upon foul souls fit for consuming fire:
Fierce storms and tempests strongly does he show
Upon their heads: His rage does still devour
The never dying soul. Here Satanas
Has his full swing to torture every hour
The grisly ghosts of men; when they have pass
From this mid world to that most direful dismal place.
28
Did Nature but compile one mighty sphere
Of this dark Stygian spright, and close collect
Its scattered being, that it might appear
Aloft in the wide heaven, it would project
Dark powerful beams, that solar life ycheckt
With these dull choking rays, all things would die.
Infernal poison the earth would infect,
Incessant showrs of pitchie shafts let fly
Against the Sun with darkness would involve the sky.
29
Nor is my Muse wox mad, that thus gives life
To Night or Darkness, since all things do live.
But Night is nothing (straight I Will end that strife)
Does naught impressions to the sense derive?
If without prejudice you will deigne to dive
Into the matter, as much realty
To darkness as to coldness you will give.
Certes both night and coldness active be
Both strike the sense, they both have real entity.
30
Again. it is plain that that nocturall spright
Sends forth black eben-beams and mirksome rays,
Because her darkness as the Sun his light
More clearly does reflect on solid place,
As when a wall, a shade empighten has
Upon it, sure that shade far darker is
Then is the air that lies in the mid space.
What is the reason? but that rays emisse
From centrall Night the walls reflection multiplies.
31
The light's more light that strikes upon the wall,
And much more strongly there affects the eye,
Then what is spread in the space aereall:
So it is with shadows that amid do lie
In the slight air; there scarce we them descrie,
But when they fall upon the wall or ground,
They gain a perfect sensibilitie.
Scarce ought in outgone light is to be found
But this Nocturnall ray's with like indowments crowned.
32
But why does my half-wearied mind pursue
Dim sculking darkness, a fleet nimble shade?
If Moses and wise Solomon speak true,
What we assert may safely well be said.
Did not a palpable thick Night invade
The Land of Egypt, such as men might feel
And handle with their hands? That darkness ray'd
From nether Hell, and silently did steal
On the enemies of God, as Scripture does reveal.
33
The womb of Night then fully flowred out:
For that all-swaying endless Majesty
Which penetrateth those wide worlds throughout,
This thin spread darkness that dispersed does lie
Summoned by his drad voice, and strong decree.
Much therefore of that spirit close unite
Into one place did strike the troubled eye
With horrid blackness, and the hand did smite
With a clam pitchie ray shot from that Centrall Night.
34
This Centrall Night or Universal spright
Of woe, of want, of balefull bitterness,
Of hatred, envy, wrath, and fell despite,
Of lust, of care, wasting disquietnesse,
Of war, contention, and bloud-thirstinesse,
Of zeal, of vengeance, of suspicion
Of hovering horror, and sad pensiveness,
This Stygian stream through all the world does run,
And many wicked souls unto it self has won.
35
Lo! here is the portion of the Hypocrite,
That serves God but in an outward show.
But his drad doom must pass upon his sprite,
Where it propends there surely must he go.
Due vengeance neither sleeps nor is slow.
Hell will suck in by a strong sympathy
What Is like unto it self: So down they flow,
Devouring anguish and anxietie
Do vex their souls, in piteous pains, alas! they lie.
36
Thus with live Hell be they concorporate,
United close with that self-gnawing sprite:
And this I wot will breed no sleeping state.
Who here descends finds one long restless Night.
May this the dreaming Psychopannychite
Awake, and make him seriously prepare
And purge his heart, lest this infernal might
Suck in his soul before he be well aware.
Kill but the seeds of sin then are you past this fear.
37
Thus have I proved by the souls union
With heaven and hell, that she will be awake
When she from this mid Nature is ygone.
But still more curious task to undertake;
And spenden time to speak of Lethe lake,
And whether at least some souls fall not asleep.
(Which if they do of Hell they do partake)
Whether who lived like plant or grazing sheep,
Who of naught else but sloth and growth does taken keep;
38
Whose drooping fancy never flowred out,
Who relished naught but this gross bodies food,
Who never entertaind an active thought,
But like down-looking beasts was only moved
To feed themselves, whither this drousie mood
So drench the lowering soul and inly steep
That she lies senseless drowned in Lethe flood;
Who will let dive into this mystery deep:
Into such narrow subtilties I list not creep.
39
But well I wot that wicked cruelty,
Hate, envy, malice, and ambition,
Bloud-sucking zeal, and lawless tyranny,
In that Nocturnall sprite shall have their won,
Which like this world admits distinction.
But like will like unto it strongly draw:
So every soul shall have a righteous doom.
According to our deeds God will bestow
Rewards: Unto the cruel he will no mercy show.
40
Where Is Nimrod now, and dreadful Hannibal?
Where Is that ambitious pert Pellean lad,
Whose pride sweld bigger then this earthly ball?
Where Is cruel Nero, with the rest that had
Command, and vexed the world with usage bad?
They Are all sunk down into this nether hell;
Who erst upon the Nations stoutly strad
Are now the Devils footstool. His drad spell
Those vassals does command, though they with fury swell.
41
Consuming anguish, styptick bitterness,
Does now so strangle their imperious will,
That in perpetual disquietnesse
They roll and rave, and roar and rage their fill,
Like a mad bull that the sly hunters skill
Has caught in a strong net. But more they strive
The more they kindle that tormenting ill.
Wo's me! in what great misery they live!
Yet wot I not what may these wretched thralls relieve.
42
The safest way for us that still survive
Is this, even our own lust to mortify;
So Gods own Will will certainly revive.
Thus shall we gain a perfect liberty,
And everlasting life. But if so be
We seek our selves with ardent hot desire,
From that Infornall Night we are not free;
But living Hell will kindle a fierce fire.
And with uncessant pains our vexed soul will tire.
43
Then the wild phanfie from her horrid womb
Will senden forth foul shapes. O dreadful sight.
Overgrown toads fierce serpents thence will come,
Red-scaled Dragons with deep burning light
In their hollow eye^pits: With these she must fight;
Then thinks her self ill wounded, sorely stung.
Old fulsome Hags with scabs and skurf bedight,
Foul tarry spittle tumbling with their tongue
On their raw lether lips, these near will to her clung,
44
And lovingly salute against her will,
Closely embrace, and make her mad with woe:
She Would lever thousand times they did her kill,
Then force her such vile baseness undergo.
Anon some Giant his huge self will show,
Gaping with mouth as vast as any Cave,
With stony staring eyes, and footing slow:
She surely deems him her live-walking grave,
From that dern hollow pit knows not her self to save.
45
After a while, tossed on the Ocean main
A boundless sea she finds of misery;
The fiery snorts of the Leviathan
(That makes the boiling waves before him fly)
She hears, she sees his blazing morn-bright eye:
If here she escape, deep gulfs and threatening rocks
Her frighted self do straightway terrify;
Steel-coloured clouds with rattling thunder knocks,
With these she is amazed, and thousand such like mocks.
46
All which afflict her even like perfect sense:
For waxen mad with her sore searching pain
She cannot easly find the difference,
But toils and tears and tugs, but all in vain;
Her self from her own self she cannot strain.
Nocturnall life has now let open the Idee
Of innate darkness, from this fulsome vein
The soul is filled with all deformity.
But Night does stir her up to this dread energie.
47
But here some man more curious then wise
Perhaps will ask, where Night or Hell may be:
For he by his own self cannot devise,
Since cheerful light does fill the open sky.
And what is the earth to the souls subtilty?
Such men I Would carry to some standing pool,
Down to the water bid them bend their eye,
They then shall see the earth possessed and full
Of heaven, dight with the sun or stars that there do roll.
48
Or to an hill where is some deep hollow Cave
Dreadful for darkness; let them take a glass,
When to the pitchy hole they turned have
Their instrument, that darkness will find place
Even in the open sunne-beams, at a space
Which measures twice the glasses distancy
From the Caves mouth. This well discovered has
How Hell and Heaven may both together lie,
Since darkness safely rays even in the sunny sky.
49
But further yet the mind to satisfy
That various apprehensions bearen down
And to hold up with like variety
Of well framed phantasms, lest she sink and drown
Laden with heavy thoughts sprung from the ground
And miry clods of this accursed earth
Whose dull suffusions make her often sown,
Overcome with cold, till nimble Reason bear'th
Unto her timely aid and on her feet her rear'th:
50
I will adjoyn to those three former ways
To weet, of the Souls self-activity
Of Union with Hell, and Gods high rays
A fourth contrivement, which all souls does ty
To their winged Chariots, wherein swift they fly.
The fiery and airy Vehicles they hight
In Plato's school known universally.
But so large matter can not well be writ
In a few lines for a fresh Canticle more fit.
The Preface to the Reader.
ALthough the opinion of the Praeexistency of the Soul be made so probable and
passable in the Canto it self, that none can slight and contemn it, that do
not ordinarily approve themselves men by Derision more then by Reason; yet so
heavy prejudice lying upon us both from Natural diffidence in so high Points,
and from our common Education, I thought it fit, for seeuring my self, from
suspicion of overmuch lightness, to premize thus much: That that which I have
taken the pains and boldness to present to the free judgment of others, has
been already judged of old, very sound and orthodox, by the wisest and most
learned of preceding Ages.

Which R. Menasseh Ben-Israel, does abundantly attest in his 15. Problem. De
Creatione; Avouching that it is the common Opinion of all the Hebrews, and that
it was never called into controversy, but approved of, by the common consent
and suffrage of all wise men.

And himself does by several places out of the Old Testament (as pat for his
purpose, I think, as any can be brought against it) endeavor to make it good;
but might I confess, have been more fitly furnished, could his Religion have
reached into the New. For Philip. 2. v. 6, 7, 8. John 9. v. 1, 2, 3. John 17.
v. 45. Mark 8. v. 27, 28. all those places do seem so naturally to favor this
Probability, that if it had pleased the Church to have concluded it for a
standing Truth; He that would not have been fully convinced upon the evidence
of these passages of Scripture, would undoubtedly, have been held a man of a
very timorous and Scepticall constitution, if not something worse.

Nor is the feebleness and miserable ineptnesse of Infancy any greater damp to
the belief of this Preexistency then the dotage and debility of old Age, to the
hope of the Souls future subsistency after death,

Nor, if we would fetch an argument from Theology, is Gods Justice, and the
divine Nemesis less set out, by supposing that the Souls of men, thorough
their own revolting from God before they came into the body, have thus in
several measures engaged themselves in the sad, dangerous, and almost fatal
entanglements of this Corporeal World; then it is, by conceiving that they
must needs survive the Body, that the judgment of the Almighty may pass upon
them, for what they have committed in the flesh.

Nor lastly, is it harder to fancy, how these Praeexistent Souls insinuate
into seed, Embryos, or Infants, then how Created ones are insinuated; nor yet
so hard, to determine of their condition if they depart in Infancy, as of the
condition of these.

But mistake me not, Reader; I do not contend (in thus arguing) that this
opinion of the Praeexistency of the Soul, is true, but that it is not such a
self-condemned Falsity, but that I might without justly incurring the censure
of any Vainness or Levity, deem it worthy the canvase and discussion of sober
and considerate men.

Yours H.M.

The Praeexistency of the SOUL.
The Argument:
Of the Souls Praeexistency
Her Orb of Fire and Air,
Of Ghosts, of Goblins, of Sorcery,
This Canto does declare.
1
RIse then Aristo's son! assist my Muse
Let that hie spright which did enrich thy brains
With choice co^ceits, some worthy thoughts infuse
Worthy thy title and the Readers pains.
And thou, O Lycian Sage! whose pen contains
Treasures of heavenly light with gentle fire,
Give leave a while to warm me at thy flames
That I may also kindle sweet desire
In holy minds that unto highest things aspire.
2
For I would sing the Praeexistency
Of humane souls, and live once ore again
By recollection and quick memory
All what is past since first we all began.
But all too shallow be my wits to scan
So deep a point and mind too dull to clear
So dark a matter, but Thou, O more then man!
Aread thou sacred Soul of Plotin dear
Tell what we mortals are, tell what of old we were.
3
A spark or ray of the Divinity
Clouded in earthy fogs, yclad in clay,
A precious drop sunk from Aeternitie,
Spilt on the ground, or rather slunk away.
For then we fell when we began first t'assay
By stealth, of our own selves something to been,
Uncentring our selves from our great stay.
Which fondly we new liberty did ween
And from that prank right jolly wights our selves did deem.
4
For then forthwith some thing beside our God
We did conceive our parted selves to be,
And loosened, first from that simple Good,
Then from great Aeon, then from Plyche free,
We after fell into low fantasy,
And after that into corporeal sense,
And after sense embarkd as in a tree,
(First sown in earthly slime, then sprung from thence)
A fading life we lead in deadly influence.
5
Thus groaping after our own Centres near
And proper substance we grew dark, contract,
Swallowed up of earthly life, ne what we were
Of old, through ignorance can we detect.
Like noble babe by fate or friends neglect
Left to the care of sorry salvage wight,
Grown up to manly years cannot conject
His own true parentage, nor read aright
What Father him begot, what womb him brought to light.
6
So we as stranger Infants elsewhere born
Can not divine from what spring we did flow
Ne dare these base alliances to scorn,
Nor lift our selves a whit from hence below,
Ne strive our Parentage again to know;
Ne dream we once of any other stock,
Since fostered upon Rheas knees we grow,
In Satyrs arms with many a mow and mock
Often danced, and hairy Pan our cradle often has rocked.
7
But Pan nor Rhea be our Parentage
We been the Offspring of all-seeing Jove
Though now, whether through our own miscariage
Or secret force of fate, that all does move
We be cast low, for why? the sportfull love
Of our great Maker (like as mothers dear
In pleasance from them do their children shove
That back again they may recoyl more near)
Shoves of our souls a while, the more them to endear.
8
Or whether Justice and due Equity
Expects the truth of our affection,
And therefore sets us 'twixt the Deity
And the created world, that thereupon
We may with a free resignation
Give up our selves to him deserves us best.
That love is none that is by coaction.
Hence he our souls from his own self releast
And left us free to follow what the most us pleased.
9
And for this purpose did enrich our choice
By framing of the outward Universe.
The framing of this world a meet devise
Whereby Gods wisdom thorough all may pierce,
From hight to depth. In depth is vengeance fierce,
Whereby transgressing souls are sorely scourged
And back again are forced to reverse
By Nemesis deep-biting whips well urged,
And in sad sorrows bath well drenched and soundly purged.
10
Thus nothing's lost of Gods fecundity.
But stretching out himself in all degrees
His wisdom, goodness and due equity
Are rightly ranked, in all the soul them sees.
O holy lamps of God! O sacred eyes
Filled with love and wonder every where!
Ye wandering tapers to whom God descryes
His secret paths, great Psyches darlings dear!
Behold her works, but see your hearts close not too near.
11
But they so soon as vital Orbs were made
That rolled round about each starry fire
Forthwith pursue, and strive them to invade;
Like evening flies that busily conspire
Following a Jade that travail long does tire,
To seize his nodding head and suck his sweat.
But they sucked in into the vital mire
First died and then again revived by heat
Did people all the Orbs by this audacious feat.
12
But infinite Myriads undipt as yet
Did still attend each vital moveing sphere
And wait their turns for generation fit
In airy bodies wafted here and there,
As sight and sympathy away did bear.
These corporate with blood, but the first flight
Of fallen souls, ymeint with slimy gear
Rose from their earth, breaking their filmes slight:
As Stories say, Nile living shapes sends forth to sight.
13
Here their third chariot cleep'd terrestiall
Great Psyches brood did enter; for before
They rode more light; first in celestial
Or fiery chariots, wherein with Uranore
The care and thought of all the world they bore.
This is the Orb of pure quick life and sense
Which the thrice mighty Mercury of yore
Ascending, held with Angels conference
And of their comely shapes had perfect cognoscence.
14
In this the famous Tyanean swain
Lifted above the deadly charming might
Of the dull Carcass could discover plain
From seven-hill'd Rome with speedy piercing fight
What they in Egypt did as Stories write.
This is that nimble quick vivacious Orb
All ear, all eye, with rays round shining bright;
Sphere of pure sense which noe perpessions curb
Nor uncouth shapen Specter ever can disturb.
15
Next this is that light Vehicle of air,
Where likewise all sense is in each part pight.
This is more gross subject to grief and fear
And most what soiled with bodily delight;
Sometimes with vengeance, envy, anger, spite.
This Orb is ever passive in sensation.
But the third wagon of the soul that hight
The terrene Vehicle, beside this passion
Has organized sense, distinct by limitation.
16
These last be but the souls live sepulchers
Where least of all she acts, but afterward
Rose from this tomb, she free and lively fares
And upward goes if she be not debarred
By Adrastias law nor strength empar'd
By too long bondage, in this Cave below.
The purged souls ascent naught may retard;
But earthly mindedness may eath foreslow
Their flight, then near the ground in airy weeds they go;
17
Awaked to life more ample then before,
If they their fortune good could then pursue.
But since unwillingly they were ytore
From their dear carcasses their fate they rue,
And terrene thoughts their troubled minds embue:
So that in languishment they linger near.
Their wonted homes and often themselves they show;
Sometimes on purpose, sometimes unaware
That waked by hasty call they streightway disappear.
18
For men that wont to wander in their sleep
By the fixed light of inward fantasy,
Though a short fit of death fast bounden keep
Their outward sense and all their Organes tie;
Yet forth they fare steared right steddily
By that internal guide: even so the ghosts
Of men deceased bedewed with the sky
And nights cold influence, in sleep yelos'd
Awake within, and walk in their forewonted coast.
19
In shape they walk much like to what they bore
Upon the earth: For that light Orb of air
Which they inact must yielden evermore
To phansies beck, so when the souls appear
To their own selves alive as once they were,
So clothed and conversant in such a place,
The inward eyes of fancy thither stear
Their gliding vehicle, that bears the face
Of him that lived, that men may read what ^ight it was.
20
And often asked what would they, they descry
Some secret wealth, or hidden injury.
That first they broach that overo^^ does ly
Within their minds: but vanish suddenly
Disturbed by bold man's importunity.
But those that on set purpose do appear
To holden talk with frail mortality
Make longer stay. So that there is no fear
That when we leave this earthly husk we perish clear.
21
Or what is like to perfect perishing,
That inert deadliness our souls shall seize,
That neither sense nor phansies fountains spring,
But ever close in dull unactive ease.
For though that Death our spirits does release
From this distinguished organizate sense,
Yet we may hear and see, what, where we please,
And walk at large when we are gone from hence
And with both men and ghosts hold friendly conference;
22
And all in virtue of that airy Waine
In which we ride when that of earth is gone,
Unless no terrene tinctures do us stein,
For then forthwith to heaven we be yflone,
In our swift fiery chariot thither drawn.
But least men deem me airy notions feign:
All stories this sure truth do seem to own.
Wherefore my Muse! some few do not disdain,
Of many, to relate, more firm assent to gain.
23
But first lay out the treasures of the Air
That immense womb from whence all bodies spring.
And then the force of Fantasy declare.
Of Witches wonnes a while then may thou sing
Their Stygian rites, and nightly revelling.
Then to the wished port to draw more near
Als tell of the untimely wandering
Of the sad ghosts of men that often appear
All which to the hard search of truth, joint light do bear;
24
Show fitly how the praeexistent soul
Inacts and enters bodies here below,
And then entire, unhurt, can leave this moul
And thence her airy Vehicle can draw,
In which by sense and motion they may know
Better then we what things transacted be
Upon the Earth; and when they list, may show
Themselves to friend or foe, their fantasy
Moulding their airy Orb to gross consistency.
25
For sooth to sayn, all things of Air consist
And easly back again return to air.
Witness the carkases of man and beast
Which wast though teeth of Wolves them never tear,
Nor Crow nor Vulture do their flesh empare,
Yet all is wast and gone, no relics seen
Of former shape, saving the bones bare,
And the bare bones by Time and Art, I ween,
First into liquour melt to air ychanged been.
26
Besides experience does maken plain
How clouds be but the crudling of the air.
Take a round glass let 't naught but air contain,
Close it with Hermes seal, then cover it over
With cinders warm, only the top discover,
The gentle fire hard at the bottom pight
Thins the low air, which got above does hover
Like a white fume embodying in the hight
^ith cooler parts, then turns to drops all crystal bright.
27
Not much unlike to the experiment
That learned Leech professes to have seen
Amongst the Alps, where the wind violent
Hammered out clouds with his strong blustering keen
Against a steep rock, which straight themselves did teem
Upon the Earth and wet the verdant Plain,
Dissolved by the sight of Phoebus sheen.
But sometimes clouds afford, not only rain
But blood, stones, milk, corn, frogs, fire, earth and all contain.
28
Wherefore all bodies be of air composed
Great Natures all-complying Mercury,
Unto ten thousand shapes and forms disposed:
Like nimble quicksilver that does agree
With gold with brass or with what ere it be
Amalgamate, but brought unto the fire
Into an airy fume it all does fly,
Though you before might turn to earth and mire
What into ancient air so quickly does retire.
29
Wherefore the soul possessed of matter meet
If she has power to operate thereon
Can eath transform this Vehicle to sight,
Dight with due color, figuration.
Can speak, can walk, and then dispear anon
Spreading her self in the dispersed air.
Then if she please recall again what is gone.
Those the uncouth mysteries of fancy are
Then thunder far more strong: more quick then lightning fa^
30
Some heavings toward this strange activity
We may observe even in this mortal state.
Here health and sickness of the fantasy
Often proceed, which working minds create,
And pox and pestilence do malleate
Their thoughts still beating on those objects ill,
Which does the mastered blood contaminate,
And with foul poisonous impressions fill
And last the precious life with deadly dolor kill.
31
And if it be true that learned Clerks do sayen
His fantasy whom a mad dog has bit
With shapes of dogs does all his Urine stain.
Women with child, if in their longing fit
They be differed, their eager appetite
So sharply edges the quick fantasy
That it the Signature does carve and write
Of what she longed for, on the Infants body,
Imprinting it so plain that all the world may see.
32
Those streaked rods placed by that Syrian swain
Before the sheep when they received the ram,
(Whence the best part of Labans flock became
All spotted over, whereby his shepherd wan
The greater wages,) show what fancy can.
And boys ore night when they went to their rest
By dreams grown up to the stature of a man --
And bony shapes in men's sad hearts expressed
Dear image of their love, and wrought by loves unrest:
33
Things far more wonderful then Cippus horn
Who in the field with so much earnestness
Viewing the fight of bulls rose in the Morn
With forked front: for though the fight did cease
Amongst the enraged herds, yet never the less
His working fancy did the war revive.
Which on the blood did make so strong impresse
In dewy sleep that humors did arrive
His knobby head and a fair pair of horns contrive:
34
All these declare the force of fantasy
Though working here upon this stubborn clay.
But the airy Vehicle yields more easily
Unto her beck more nimbly does obey.
Which truth the joint confessions bewray
Of damned Hags and Masters of bold skill
Whose hellish mysteries fully to display
With pitchy darkness would the Heavens fill
The earth would groan, trees sigh, and horror all ore spill.
35
But he that out of darkness gives light
He guide my steps in this so uncouth way
And ill done deeds by children of the Night
Convert to good, while I shall thence assay
The noble souls conditions open to lay,
And show her empire on her ayry sphere
By what of sprights and specters Stories say.
For sprights and specter that by night appear
Be or all one with souls or of a nature near.
36
Up then renowned Wizard, Hermit sage!
That twice ten years did in the desert won,
Convers'dst with sprights in thy hid Hermitage
Since thou of mortals did the commerce shun,
Well seen in these bad arts that have foredone
Many a bold wit, Up Marcus: tell again
That story of thy Thrax, who has thee won,
To Christian faith, the guise and haunts explain
Of all air-trampling ghosts that in the world remain.
37
There be six sorts of sprights. Lelurion
Is the first kind, the next are named from Air
The first a loft, yet far beneath the Moon
The other in this lower region fare.
The third Terrestrial, the fourth Watery are,
The fifth be Subterranean, the last
And worst, Light-hating ghosts more cruel far
Then Bear or Wolf with hunger hard oppressed
But doltish yet and dull like an unweildy beast.
38
If this sort once possess the arteries
Of forlorn man: Madness and stupor seize
His salvag'd heart, and death dwells in his eyes.
Ne is there remedy for this sad disease.
For that unworthy guest so senseless is
And deaf, no Exorcist can make him hear,
But would in vain with Magic words chastise.
Others the thundering threats of Tartar fear
And the drad names of Angels that this office bear.
39
For they been all subject to passion.
Some been so gross they hunger after food,
And send out seed of which worms spring anon,
And love to liggen warm in living blood,
Whence they into the veins do often crowd
Of beasts as well as men, wherein they bathe
Themselves, and sponge-like suck that vital flood,
As they done also in their aerie path
Drink in each unctuous steam, which their dire thirst allayth.
40
Such be the four last kinds, foul, dull, impure
Whose inward life and phansy's more inert
And therefore usually in one shape endure.
But those of air can easily convert
Into new forms and then again revert,
One while a man, after a comely maid,
And then all suddenly to make the stert,
Like leaping Leopard he will thee invade
Then made a man again he will comfort thee afraid.
41
Then straight more quick then thought or cast of eye
A snarling Dog, or brisled Boar he will be;
Anon a jugge of milk if thou be dry,
So easily's turned that aire-consistency
Through inward sport and power of fantasy.
For all things virtually are containd in air.
And like the sun, that fiery spirit free
The internal soul, at once the seed does rear
Waken and ripe at once as if full aged they were.
42
Cameleon like thus they their color change
And size contract, and then dilate again:
Like the soft earthworm hurt by heedlesse chance
Shrinks in her self to shun or ease her pain.
Nor done they only thus themselves constrain
Into less bulk, but if with courage bold
And flaming brond thou strike these shades in twain,
A sudden smart they feel that cannot hold,
Close quick as cloven air. So sang that Wizzard old.
43
And truth he said what ever he was told,
As even this present Age may verify,
If any lists its stories to unfold
Of Hags of Hobgoblings of Incubi,
Abhorred dugs by devils sucken dry,
Of leaping lamps and of fierce flying stones
Of living wool, and such like witchery
Or proved by sight or self confessions
Which things much credence gain to past traditions.
44
Wherefore with boldness we will now relate
Some few in brief, as of the Astorgan lad,
Whose peevish mother in fell ire and hate
Quite drunk with passion, through quick cholar mad
With execrations bold the devil bad,
Take him alive, which mood the boy no'te bear
But quits the room, walks out with spirit sad
Into the court, where, Lo! by night appear
Tall Giants with grim looks, rough limbs, black grizely hair.
45
These in a moment hoist him into the air,
Away him bear more swift then bird can fly,
Straight to the destined place arrived are
Among craggy rocks, and bushy Mountains high,
Where up and down they drag the sorry boy;
His tender skin and goary flesh they tear
Till he began on his Maker call and cry.
Which forced the villains home again him bear,
Where he the story told, restored by Parents care.
46
The walking Skeleton in Bolonia
Laden with rattling chains, that showd his grave
To the watchful Student, who without dismay
Bid tell his wants, and speak what he would have:
Thus cleared he the house by courage brave.
Nor may I pass the fair Cerdinian maid
Whose love a jolly swain did kindly crave,
And often with mutual solace with her stayed;
Yet was no jolly swain but a deceitful shade.
47
More harmless mirth may that mad spright commend
Who in an honest widows house did won
At Salamanca, who whole showers would send
Of stones that swifter then a whirlwind come
And yet where ere they hit no hurt is done.
But cursed cruel be those wicked Hags
Whom poisonous spite, envy and hate have won
TO abhorred sorcery, whose writhled bags
Fould feinds often suck and nestle in their loathsome rags.
48
Such as the Devil woes in homely form
Of swarthy man, or some black shaggy Curre,
Or vermin base, and in sad case forlorn
Them malcontent to evil motions stir,
Proffer their service adding a quick spur
To meditated vengance, and fell teen,
Whose hellish voice they hear without demur,
Abjure God and his Son, who did redeem
The world, give up themselves to Satan and foul sin.
49
Thus 'bodyed into that Stygian crew
Of damned wights made fast by their own blood
To their bad Master, do his service due,
Frequent the assemblies, dance as they were wood
Around an huge black Goat, in loansome wood
By shady night, far from or house or town,
And kiss with driveling lips in frantcik mood
His sacred breech. Catch that catch may anon
Each Feind has got his Hag for copulation.
50
O loathsome law! O filthy fond embrace!
The other root of cursed sorcery.
For if the streams of this bad art we trace
They lead to two foul springs, the one Venerie
And coarsest Lust, the other near does lie
And is ycleeped Vengeance, Malice, Hate,
Or restless Envy that would all destroy.
But both but from one seed do germinate
Hight uncurb'd Will, or strong Desire inordinate.
51
Wherefore I needs must humbly here adore
Him whose chaste soul enwombd in Virgin chaste,
As chaste a body amongst mortals wore,
Who never woman knew, ne once did taste
Of Hymen's pleasures while this life did last.
Ah! my dear Lord! dread Sovereigne of souls
Who with thy life and lore so warmed have
My wounded heart, that when thy Storie's told,
Sweet Love, methinks, in's silver wings me all infolds.
52
How do I hang upon thy sacred lips
More sweet then Manna or the hony-dew!
Thy speech, like rosy drops does cool my wits
And calm my fierce affections untrue,
And win my heart unto obeisance due.
Blessed O thrice blessed be that holy hill
Whereon thou did instruct thy faithful crew
In ways of peace, of patience and good will
Forbidding base self-love, revenge and speeches ill.
53
Meek Lamb of God! the worlds both scourge and scorn!
How done the infernal feinds thy face envy!
Thou light, they darkness, they Night, thou the Morn!
Mild chariot of Gods lovely Majesty!
Exalted Throne of the Divinity!
As thou with thine make through the yielding air
How do thy frighted foes before thee fly!
And grin and gnash their teeth for spite and fear
To see such awful strength quite to themselves contraire.
54
Ho! you vain men that follow filthy lust
And swallow down revenge like pleasant wine.
Base earthly spirits! fly this sinful dust.
See with what hellish Comrades you combine.
Als see whose lovely friendship you decline.
Even his whose love to you more strong then death
Did death abide, foul shame and evil tine.
But if sweet love your hearts may move uneath
Think how one fatal flame, shall burn all underneath.
55
Pans pipe shall then be mute, and Satyrs heel
Shall cease to dance ybrent in scorching fire;
For pleasure then each earthly spright shall feel
Deep searching pain; Revenge and base desire
Shall bear due vengeance, reap their worthy hire*
From thee, great Prince of souls! shall be their doom.
Then thou and thy dear Saints ascending higher
Shall fly the fate* and quit this stinking room
With smouldry smoke, fierce fire, and loathsome stench o'rerun.
56
Go now you cursed Hags, salute your Goat
Whether with driveling lips or taper end,
Whereby at last you fire his hispide coat,
And then the deadly dust on mischief spend
As your Liege Lord these ashes does commend
For wicked use, thundering this precept drad,
Revenge, revenge, or I shall on you send
Due vengeance: Thus dismissed the Assembly bad
Hoyst up into the Air, fly home through clammy shade.
57
Which stories all to us do plainly prove
That airy sprights both speak, and hear, and see.
Why do not then the souls of mortals move
In airy Chariots but stupid lie
Locked up in sloth and senseless Lethargy.
Certes our soul's as well proportionate
To this aeriall weed as spirits free:
For neither can our souls incorporate
With naked Earth, the Air must ever mediate.
58
Which that bold Art which Necromancy hight
Does know too well, and therefore does prepare
A vap'rous vehicle for the intended spright,
With reek of oil, meal, milk, and such like gear,
Wine, water, honey; Thus souls fitted are
A grosser Carkas for to reassume.
And though Thessalian Hags their pains do spare
Sometimes they enter without Magic fume;
Witness ye Cretick wives, who felt their fruitless spume.
59
And therefore to prevent such hellish lust
They did by laws Municipall provide
That he that dared to rise out of his dust
And thus infest his wife, a stake should gride
His stubborn heart and's body burn beside.
Hereto belongs that story of the spright
Of fell Asuitus noted far and wide,
And of his faithful comrade Asmund hight;
Twixt whom this law was made, as Danish Records write:
60
Which of them two the other did survive
Must be entombed with his fellow in one grave.
Dead Asuit therefore with his friend alive
His dog and horse all in one mighty Cave
Be shut together, yet this care they have,
That faithful Asmund, be not lost for meat:
Wherefore he was well stored his life to save
And lived sometime in that infernal seat
Till Errick King of Sweads the door did open break.
61
For well he ween'd there was some treasure hid
Which might enrich himself, or's Army pay.
But when he had broke open the brazen lid
Naught but a sorry wight they finden may,
Whom out of darkness brought to open day
The King beheld, dight with most deadly hue,
His cheek all gore, his ear quite bit away.
Then began the King command the cause to show,
To which Asmundus answers, as does here ensue:
62
Why gaze you thus on my sad squalid face,
The alive needs languish must amongst the dead,
But this sore wound that further does deface
My wasted looks, Asuitus (who first fed
On's horse and dog, and then with courage dred,
At me let fly) Asuit this wound me gave,
But well I quit my self, took off his head
With this same blade, his heart nayl'd to the Cave:
Thus I my self by force did from the monster save.
63
The soul of Naboth lies to Ahab told,
As done the learned Hebrew Doctors write,
His foe in mischief thereby to infold.
Go up to Ramoth Gilead and fight,
Go up and prosper, said the lying spright
The angry ghost of Naboth whom he slew
Unjustly, and possessed his ancient right.
Hence his revengefull soul with speech untrue
Sat on his Prophets lips, and did with lies embue.
64
Ne may I pass that story sad of Saul
And Samuels ghost, whom he in great distress
Consulted, was foretold his final fall
By that old man, whom Endors sorceresse
Awaked from pleasant vision and sweet ease,
Straitning a while his wonted liberty
By clammy air more close and thick compresse,
Then began the mantled Sage Saul's destiny
To read, and thine with his, dear Jonathan! to tie.
65
That lovely less Pausanias did kill
Through ill surmise she meant him treachery
How did her angry spirit haunt him still
That he could no where rest, nor quiet ly.
Her wronged ghost was ever in his eye.
And he that in his anger slew his wife,
And was exempt by Law from penalty,
Poor sorry man he led a weary life
Each night the Shrow him beat with buffes and boxes rife.
66
And love as well as hate the dead does reach,
As may be seen by what Albumaron
Did once befall, that learnd Arabian Leach.
He of a late deceased Physician
Upon his bed by dream or vision
Received a sovereign salve for his sore eye,
And just Simonides compassion
Unto the dead that did unburied ly
On washed shore, him saved from jaws of destiny.
67
For he had perished in the unruly waves,
And sudden storm, but lo! the thankful spright
Of the interred by timely counsel saves,
Warning him of the danger he would meet
In his intended voyage,
Simonides desists by 's counsel won:
The rest for want of faith or due foresight,
A prey to the devouring Seas become,
Their dashed bodies welter in the weedy scum.
68
In Artick Climes, an Isle that Thule hight
Famous sor snowy monts, whose hoary head's
Sure sign of cold, tyet from their siery feet
They strike out burning stones with thunders dread,
And all the Land with smoke, and ashes spread:
Here wandering Ghosts themselves have often shown,
As if it were the region of the dead,
And men departed met with whom they have known
In seemly sort shake hands, and ancient friendship own.
69
A world of wonders hither might be thrown,
Of Sprights and specter, as that frequent noise
Often heard upon the Plane of Marathon,
Of neighing horses and of Martial boys.
The Greek, the Persian, nightly here destroys
In hot assault, embroiled in a long war.
Four hundred years did last these dreadful toys,
As does by Attick Records plain appear,
The seeds of hate, by death so little slaked are.
70
Nor lists me speak of Remus Lemures,
Nor haunted house of slain Cal^gula,
Nor Julius stern Ghost, who will, with ease
May for himself of old or new purvey.
Thousand such stories in men's mouths do stray.
But since it much perplexeth slower minds
To think our souls unhurt can pass away
From their dear corpse so close thereto confined,
From this unweildy thought let us now their wits unbind.
71
For if that spirits can possess our veins
And arteries (as usual stories tell)
Use all our Organes act our nerves and brains
And by our tongue can future things foretell,
And safely yet keep close in this warm cell
For many years and not themselves impare
Nor lose ymeint with the blood where they dwell,
But come out clever when they conjured are
And nimbly pass away soft gliding through the air:
72
Why escape not then the souls of men as clear
Since to this body they are no better joined
Then thorough it to feel, to see, to hear
And to impart the passions of the mind?
All which done by the usurping spright we find.
As witness may that maid in Saxony,
Who meanly born of rude unlearned kind,
Not taught to read, yet Greek and Latin she
Could roundly speak and in those tongues did prophecy.
73
Timotheus sister down in childbed laid
Distur'b, all - phrantick thorough deadly pain
Tearing the clothes, which much her friends dismayed,
Mumbling strange words as confused as her brain
At last was proved to speak Armenian.
For an old man that was by chance in town
And from his native soil Armenia came
The woman having heard of his renown
Sent to this aged Sire to this sick wight to come.
74
Lo! now has entered the Armenian Sage
With scalp all bald, and skin all brown and brent,
The number of his wrinkles told his age.
A naked sword in his dry hand he hent.
Thus standing near her bed strong threats he sent
In his own language, and her fiercely chid.
But she well understanding what he meant
Unto his threats did bold defiance bid.
Ne could his vaunts as yet the sturdy spirit rid.
75
Then began he sternely speak and heave his hond
And feigned himself enraged with hasty ire
As ready for to strike with flaming brond,
But she for fear shrunk back and did retire
Into her bed and gently did respire,
Muttering few easy words in sleepy wise.
So now whom erst tumultuous thoughts did tire
Comp^s'd to rest does sweetly close her eyes,
Then waked, what her befell, in sober mood descryes.
76
Now, Thrax! thy Story add of Alytas
Who got his friend into a Mountain high
Where he with him the loansome night did pass
In Stygian rites and hellish mystery.
First twiches up an herb that grew thereby,
Gives him to taste, then does his eyes besmear
With uncouth salves, wherewith all suddenly
Legions of spirits flying here and there
Around their cursed heads do visibly appear.
77
Lastly into his mouth with filthy spaul
He spot, which done, a spirit like a Daw
His mouth did enter, and possessed all
His inward parts. From that time he began know
Many secret things, and could events foreshow.
This was his guerdon this his wicked wage
From the inwoning of that Stygian Crow.
But who can think this bird did so engage
With flesh that he no'te escape the ruin of the cage.
78
No more do souls of men. For stories sayen
Well known amongst country folk, our spirits fly,
From twixt our lips, and thither back again,
Sometimes like Doves, sometime like to a Be,
And sometime in their bodies shape they be;
But all this while their carkase lies asleep
Drown in dull rest son of mortality;
At last these shapes returned do slily creep
Into their mouth, then the dead clouds away they wipe.
79
Nor been these stories all but Country fictions.
For such like things even learned Clerks do write,
Of brazen sleep and bodi's derelictions.
That Proconnesian Sage that Atheus hight
Did often himself of this dull body quit,
His soul then wandering in the easy air.
But as to smoking lamp but lately light
The flame caught by the reek descends from far,
So would his soul at last to his warm blood repair.
80
And Hermotime the Clazomenian
Would in like sort his body leave alone,
And view with naked soul both Hill and Plain
And secret Groves and every Region,
That he could tell what far and near was done:
But his cursed foes the fell Cantharidae
Assault his house when he was far from home,
Burn down to ashes his forsaken clay.
So may his wandering ghost for ever freely stray:
81
And it is an art well known to Wizards old
And wily Hags, who often for fear and shame
Of the coarse halter, do themselves withold
From bodily assisting their night game.
Wherefore their carcasses at home retain.
But with their souls at those bad feasts they are,
And see their friends and call them by their name
And dance around the Goat and sing, har, har,
And kiss the Devils breech and taste his deadly cheer.
82
A many stories to this purpose might
Be brought of men that in this Ecstacy
So senseless ly that coals laid to their feet
Nor nips nor whips can make them open their eye.
Then of a sudden when this fit's gone by,
They up and with great confidence declare
What things they heard and saw both far and nie,
Professing that their souls unbodied were
And roam'd about the earth in Countries here and there.
83
And to confirm the truth of this strange flight
They often bring home a letter or a ring
At their return, from some far distant wight
Well known to friends that have the ordering
Of their forsaken corpse that no live thing
Do tread or touched, so safely may their spright
Spend three whole days in airy wandering.
A feat that is often done through Magic might,
By the Norvegian Hags as learned Authors write.
84
But now well wearied with our too long stay
In these Cimmerian fogs and hateful mists
Of Ghosts of Goblins and drad sorcery,
From nicer allegations we'll desist.
Enough is said to prove that souls dismissed
From these gross bodies may be clothed in air
Escape free (although they did not praeexist,)
And in these airy orbs feel, see, and hear
And moven as they list as did by proof appear.
85
But that in some sort souls do praeexist
Seems to right reason nothing dissonant
Since all souls both of trees, of men and beast
Been indivisible; And all do grant
Of humane souls though not of beast and plant:
But I elsewhere, I think, do gainly prove
That souls of beasts, by reasons nothing scant,
Be individuous, ne care to move
This question of a new, men's patiences to prove.
86
But if men's souls be individuous
How can they ought from their own substance shed?
In generation there is naught flows from us
Saving gross sperm yspent in Nuptial bed
Drained from all parts throughout the body spread,
And well concocted where me list not name.
But no conveyances there be that lead
To the souls substance, whereby her they drain
Of loosened parts, a young babe-soul from thence to gain.
87
Wherefore who thinks from souls new souls to bring
The same let press the Sun beams in his fist
And squeez out drops of light, or strongly wring
The Rainbow, till it die his hands, well pressed.
Or with uncessant industry persist
The intentionall species to mash and bray
In marble mortar, till he has expressed
A sovereigne eye salve to discern a Fay.
As easily as the first all these effect you may.
88
Ne may queint similies this fury damp
Which say that our souls propagation
Is as when lamp we lighten from a lamp.
Which done withouten diminution
Of the first light, shows how the soul of man
Though indivisible may another rear
Imparting life. But if we rightly scan
This argument, it comes nothing near.
To light the lamp's to kindle the sulphurious gear.
89
No substance new that act does then produce
Only the oily atoms 't does excite
And wake into a flame, but no such use
There is of humane sperm. For our free sprite
Is not the kindled seed, but substance quite
Distinct therefrom. If not, then bodies may
So changed be by nature and stiff fight
Of hungry stomachs, that what erst was clay
Then herbs, in time it self in sense may well display.
90
For then our soul can nothing be but blood
Or nerves or brains, or body modifide.
Whence it will follow that cold stopping crud,
Hard moldy cheese, dry nuts, when they have rid
Due circuits through the heart at last shall speed
Of life and sense, look thorough our thin eyes
And view the Close wherein the Cow did feed
Whence they were milk'd, gross Pie-crust will grow wife,
And pickled Cucumbers sans doubt Philosophize.
91
This all will follow if the soul be naught
But the live body. For men's bodies feed
Of such gross meat. and if more fine be brought,
Suppose Snipes heads, Larks heels for Ladies meet
The broth of Barley, or that oily Sweet
Of the unctious Grape, yet all men must confess
These be as little capable of wit
And sense, nor can be so transformed, I wisse.
Therefore no soul of man from seed traducted is.
92
Ne been they by the high God then first create
When in this earthly mansion they appear.
For why should he so soon contaminate
So unspotted beauties as men's spirits are
Flinging them naked into dunghills here?
Soil them with guilt and foul contagion?
When as in his own hand they spotless were
Till by an uncouth strange infusion
He plunged them in the deep of Malediction.
93
Besides unworthily he does surmise
Of Gods pure being and bright Majesty
Who unto such base offices him ties,
That He must wait on lawless Venery
Not only by that large Causality
Of general influence (for Creation
More special concourse all men deem to be)
But on set purpose He must come anon,
And ratify the act which often men wish undone.
94
Which is a rash and shameless bad conceit,
So might they name the brat Adeodatus,
What ever they in lawless love beget.
Again, what is still far more prodigious
When men are stung with fury poisonous
And burn with flames of lust toward brute beasts,
And overcome into conjunction rush,
He then from that foul act is not releast,
Creates a soul misplacing the unhappy guest.
95
Wherefore man's soul's not by Creation.
Nor is it generate as I proved before.
Wherefore let 't be by emanation
(If fully it did not praeexist of yore)
By flowing forth from that eternal store
Of Lives and souls ycleep'd the World of life,
Which was, and shall endure for evermore.
Hence done all bodies vital fire derive
And matter never lost catch life and still revive.
96
And what has once sprout out does never cease
If it enjoy it self, a spray to be
Distinct and actual, though if God please
He can command it into the ancient tree.
This immense Orb of wast vitality
With all its Lives and Souls is every where,
And does, where matter right prepared does lie,
Impart a soul, as done the sun beams clear
Insinuate themselves, where filth does not debar.
97
Thus may the souls in long succession
Leap out into distinct activity:
But sooth to say though this opinion
May seem right fair and plausible to be
Yet toils it under an hard difficulty.
Each where this Orb of life's with every soul;
Which does imply the souls ubiquity.
Or if the whole Extent of Natures's full
Of several souls thick set, what may the furthest pull?
98
What may engage them to descend so low
Removed far from the steam of earthly mire?
My wits been here too scant and faith too slow.
Ne longer lists my wearied thoughts to tire.
Let bolder spirits to such hight aspire.
But well I wot, if there admitted were
A praeexistency of souls entire,
And due Returns in courses circular
This course all difficulties with ease away would bear.
99
For then suppose they wore an airy sphere
Which choice or Nemesis sucked lower down,
Thus without doubt they will leave their carcass clear;
Like dispossessed spright when death does come
And by rude exorcisme bids quit the room.
Ne let these intricacies perplex our mind
That we forget that ere we saw the sun
Before this life. For who can call to mind
Where first he here saw sun or felt the gentle wind.
100
Besides what wonder is 't, when fierce disease
Can so empair the strongest memory,
That so full change should make our spirits leese
What before they had impressed in fantasy.
Nor does it follow thence that when we die
We naught retain of what passed in these days.
For Birth is Death, Death Life and Liberty.
The soul's not thence contract but there displayes
Her loosened self, does higher all her powers raise.
101
Like to a light fast locked in lanthorn dark
Whereby, by night our wary steps we guide
In slabby streets, and dirty channels mark,
Some weaker rays through the black top do glide,
And flusher streams perhaps from horny side.
But when we have past the peril of the way
Arrived at home, and laid that case aside,
The naked light how clearly does it ray
And spread its joyful beams as bright as Summers day.
102
Even so the soul in this contracted state
Consigned to these strait instruments of sense
More dull and narrowly does operate.
At this hole hears, the sight must ray from thence,
Here tastes, there smells; But when she is gone from hence,
Like naked lamp she is one shining sphere.
And round about has perfect cognoscence
What ere in her Horizon does appear.
She is one Orb of sense, all eye, all airy ear.
103
Now have I well established the fourth way
The souls of men from stupid sleep to save,
First Light, next Night, the third the souls Self-ray
Fourth the souls Chariot we named have
Whether moist air or fire all sparkling brave
Or temper mixed. Now how these four agree,
And how the soul her self may dip and lave
In each by turns; how no redundancy
There Is in them, might we tell, nor scant deficiency.
104
But cease my restless Muse be not too free,
Thy chiefest end thou have accomplished
Long since, shak'd of the Psychopannychie
And roused the soul from her dull drowsiehed.
So nothing now in death is to be dred
Of him that wakes to truth and righteousness.
The corpse lies here, the soul aloft is fled
Unto the fount of perfect happiness.
Full freedom joy and peace she lively does possess.
ANTIMONOPSYCHIA Or The fourth part of the Song OF THE SOUL, Containing A
confutation of the Unity of Souls.

Whereunto is annexed a Paraphrase upon Apollos answer concerning Plotinus his
Soul departed this life.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...).

CAMBRIDGE Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

The Argument of ANTIMONOPSYCHIA OR, Confutation of the Unity of SOULS.
The all-devouring Unity
Of Souls There disprove;
Show how they bear their memory
With them when they remove.
1
WHo yields himself to learning and the Muse,
Is like a man that leaves the steady shore,
And skims the Sea. He naught then can refuse
What ever is designed by Neptunes power,
Is fiercely drove in every stormy stoure,
Slave to the water and the whisling wind:
Even so am I, that whylom meant recover
The wished land, but now against my mind
Am driven fiercely back, and so new work do find.
3
What though the Rational soul immortal be,
And safely does exist this body gone,
And lies broad wake in her existency
Itall souls that exist do prove but one.
Or, though a number, if oblivion
Of all things past, put them in such a state
That they can no-wise guess that ere upon
This earth they trod, even this seems to abate
Their happiness. They Will deem themselves then first create.
3
Wherefore to ease us of this double doubt,
With mighty force great Phoebus does inspire
My raving mind. He Will bear me strongly out,
Till I have perfected his own desire;
Nor will he suffer me once to respire
Till I have brought this song unto an end.
O may it be but short though a quick fire!
Such rage and rapture makes the body bend,
Does waste its fading strength and fainting spirits spend.
4
Now comes the story of Praxiteles
Into my mind, whom looking in a glass,
With surly countenance, it did much displease,
That any should so sourely him outface;
Yet whom he saw his dogged self it was:
Tho he with angry fist struck his own shade.
Thus he the harmless mirior shattered has
To many shivers; the same shapes invade
Each piece, so numbers he of surly vizards made.
5
These shapes appeard from the division
Of the broke glass: so rasher phansies deem
That Rational souls (whom they suppose but one)
By the divided matter many seem:
Bodies disjoind broke glasses they esteem:
Which if they did into one subflance flow,
One single soul in that one glass would shine,
If that one substance also were ygo,
One only soul is left, the rest were but a show.
6
Well is their mind by this similitude
Explaind. But now lets sift the verity
Of this opinion, and with reason rude
Rub, crush, toss, rifle this fine fantasy,
As light and thin as cob-webs that do fly
In the blew air, caused by the Autumnall sun,
That boils the dew that on the earth does lie.
May seem this whitish rag then is the scum,
Unless that wiser men make it the field-spiders loom.
7
But such deep secrets willingly I leave
To grand Philosophers. I Will forward go
In my proposed way. If they conceive
There Is but on soul (though many seem in show)
Which in these living bodies here below
Does operate (some such opinion
That Learned Arab held hight Aven-Roe)
How comes't to pass that she is so seldom known
In her own self? In few she thinks her self but one.
8
Seems not this Soul or Intellect very dull,
That in so few she can her self discover
To be but one in all, though all be full
Of her alone? Besides, no soul does love her
Because she sucks up all: but what should move her
Thus to detest her self, if so that she is
But one in all? right reason surely drove her
Thus to condemn this lonesome Unity
Of soul: which reasons her own operations be.
9
Thoughts good and bad that Universal mind
Must take upon it self; and every ill,
That is committed by all humane kind,
They are that souls. Alas, we have no will,
No free election, nor yet any skill,
But are a number of dull stalking trees
That the universal Intellect does fill
With its own life and motion: what it please
That there it acts. What strange absurdities are these?
10
All plotted mischief that sly reason wrought,
All subtle falsities that nimbly fly
About the world, that soul them all has brought;
Then upon better thoughts with penalty
Does sore afflict her self, does laugh and cry
At the same time. Here Aristophanes
Does maken sport with some spruse Comedy;
There with some Tragic strain sad Sophocles
Strikes the Spectatours hearts, makes many weeping eyes.
11
Such grief this soul must in her self conceive
And pleasure at one time. But here you will say
We ought not grief or pleasure for to give
Unto the soul. To what then? This live clay?
It feels no grief if she were gone away:
Therefore the soul at once does laugh and cry.
But in this Argument I Will no longer stay,
But forward on with swifter course will hie,
And finden out some grosser incongruity.
12
Let now two men conceiven any form
Within their selves, suppose of flaming fire;
If but one soul does both their corpse inform,
There Is but one only species entire.
For what should make it two? The Idee of fire,
That is but one, the subject is but one,
One only soul that all men does inspire.
Let one man quench that form he thought upon,
That form is now extinct and utterly ygone;
13
So that the other man can think no longer,
Which all experience does prove untrue.
But yet I Will further urge with reason stronger,
And still more clearly this fond falsehood show.
Can contraries the same subject imbew?
Yes; black and white, heat, cold may both possess
The mind at once; but they a nature new
Do there obtain, they are not gross qualities,
But subtle sprights that mutually themselves no'te press.
14
But contradiction, can that have place
In any soul? Plato affirms Idees;
But Aristotle with his pugnacious race
As idle figments stiffly them denies.
One soul in both does thus Philosophise,
Concludes at once contradictoriously
To her own self. What man can here devise
A fit escape, if (what is sure verity)
He grant but the souls indivisibility?
15
Which stiffly is maintaind in that same song
Which is ycleeped Psychathanasie,
And safely well confirmed by reasons strong:
Wherefore I list not here the truth to try,
But wish the Reader to turn back his eye,
And view what there was faithfully displaid.
Now if there be but one centrality
Of the Universal soul which does invade
All humane shapes; how come these contradictions made?
16
For that one soul is judge of every thing,
And hears all Philosophers dispute;
Herself disputes in all that jangling,
In reasoning fiercely does her self confute,
And contradictions confidently conclude:
That is so monstrous that no man can think
To have least show of truth. So this pursuit
I well might now leave off: what need I swink
To prove what is clearly true, and force out needless ink.
17
Again, she would the same thing will and nill
At the same time. Besides, all men would have
The self-same knowledge, art, experience, skill;
The frugall parent might his money save,
The Pedagoge his pains: If he engrave
His Grammar precepts but in one boys mind,
O^ decent manners: He does thus embrave
With single labor all the youth you will find
Under the hollow Heavens, they will be alike inclined.
18
And every man is skilled in every trade,
And every silent thought that up does spring
In one man's breast, does every man invade;
No counsel-keeper, nor no secret thing
Will then be found; They Will need no whispering
Not louder voice. Let Orators be dumb,
Nor need the eager auditors make a ring;
Though every one keep himself close at home,
The silent Preachers thoughts through all the world will roam,
19
Find each man out, and in a moment hit
With unavoided force: Or sooth to sain
They all begin at once to think what is fit,
And all at once anon leave off again.
A thousand such incongruities vain
Will follow from the first absurdity,
Which does all souls into one center strain,
And make them void of self-centrality.
Strange soul from whence first sprung so uncouth falsity.
20
Now all the arguments that I have brought
For to disprove the souls strange solitude,
That there is not one only soul, well might
Be urged (and will with equal strength conclude)
To prove that God his creature has indew'd
With a self-centrall essence, which from his
Does issue forth, with proper rays embew'd,
And that not all the very Godhead is:
For that would straight beget the like absurdities.
21
For he is indivisibly one being,
At once in every place and knows all;
He is omnipotent, infinite in seeing:
Wherefore if Creatures intellectual
(And in that order humane souls will fall)
Were God himself, they would be alike wise,
Know one another thoughts imaginall,
Which no man does: such falsehoods would arise
With many more, which an idiot might well despise.
22
Nor will men's souls that now be different
Be God himself hereafter, and all one:
For thus they were quite lost; their life ylent
And subtle being quite away are flone.
This is a perfect contradiction,
They are all one with God, and yet they are.
If they be one with God, then they alone
Did make themselves, and every rolling star:
For God alone made these, and God himself they are.
23
Before the Sun and all the host of heaven,
The earth, the sea, and man's deep centrall spright;
Before all these were made, was not God even
With his own self? what then him moven might
To waste his words and say, Let there be light.
If the accomplishment of all things be,
That all be God himself. This is not right.
No more perfection, no more Entity
There Is then, then was in that eternal Silency.
24
Or will you say, that God himself delights
To do and undo? But how can this stand
With self-sufficiency? There Is naught that might
Add to His happiness (if I understand
His nature right.) But He with open hand
Does easly feed the Creature that he made
As easly. Wherefore if the truth be scand
This Goodness would that naught should be decayed;
His mind is all should live; no life he would should fade.
25
But if the final consummation
Of all things make the Creature Deiform,
As Plato's school does phrase it; there is none
That thence need fear to come to any harm:
For God himself will then inact, inform,
And quicken humane souls at the last day;
And though the Devil rore, and rage, and storm,
Yet Deaths drad power shall be done away,
Nor living Night on men her poisonous beams shall ray.
26
He hasten it that makes that glorious day!
For certainly it is no fearful thing
But unto pride, and love of this base clay:
Its their destruction, but the perfecting
Of the just souls. It unto them does bring
Their full desire, to be more close unite
With God, and utter cleans'd from all their sin.
Long was the world involved in cloudy Night,
But at the last will shine the perfect Christian light.
27
Thus the souls numerous plurality
I Have proved, and showed she is not very God;
But yet a decent Deiformity
Have given her: thus in the middle trod
I safely went, and fairly well have rowed
As yet. Part of my voyage is to come,
Which is to prove that the souls new abode
In heaven or hell (what ever is her doom)
Naught hinders but past forms even there again may bloom.
28
Which if they did not, she could never tell
Why she were thus rewarded, wherefore ill
Or good she does enjoy, whether ill or well
She lived here. Remembrance death did spill.
But otherwise it fares; as was her will
And inclination of her thirsty spright,
Impressions of like nature then does fill
Her lively mind, whether with sad affright
Disturbed, which she long feared; or in hop'd-for delight.
29
The life that here most strongly kindled was
(Since she awakes in death) must needs betray
The soul to what nearest affinity has
With her own self, and likenesses do sway
The mind to think of what ever did play
In her own self with a like shape or form;
And contraries do help the memory:
So if the soul be left in case forlorn,
Remembrance of past joy makes her more deeply mourn.
30
It Is also worth our observation,
That higher life does ever comprehend
The lower vital acts: sensation
The soul some fitten hint does promptly lend
To find out plantall life; sense is retaind
In subtiller manner in the fantasy;
Als reason fantasies does well perpend:
Then must the souls highest capacity
Contain all under life. Thus is their Memory.
31
This faculty is very intimate
And near the Center, very large and free,
Extends it self to whatsoever that
The soul peracts. There is no subtilty
Of Intellect, of Will, nor Fantasy.
No Sense, nor uncouth strange impression
From damned Night, or the blessed Deity,
But of all these she has retention,
And at their fresh approach their former shapes can own.
32
This memory the very bond of life
You may well deem. If it were cut away
Our being truly then you might contrive
Into a point of time. The former day
Were naught at all to us: when once we lay
Our selves to sleep, we should not know at morn
That e're we were before; nor could we say
A whit of sense: so soon as off we turn
One word, that is quite forgot. Coherence thus is torn.
33
Now since it is of such necessity,
And is the bundle of the souls duration,
The watchman of the soul, lest she should fly
Or steal from her own self, a sure fixation
And Centrall depth it has, and free dilation,
That it takes notice of each energie
Of Fancy, Sense, or any Cogitation.
Wherefore this virtue no dependencie
Has of this body, must be safe when it does die.
34
But if dispersed life's collection,
Which is our memory, safely survive
(Which well it may, since it depends not on
The Mundane spirit) what can fitly drive
It into action? In heaven she does live
So full of one great light, she has no time
To such low trifles, as past sights, to dive,
Such as she gathered up in earthly slime:
Foreknowledge of herself is lost in light divine.
35
But can she here forget our radiant Sun?
Of which its maker is the bright Idee,
This is His shadow; or what she has done
Now she is rewarded with the Deity?
Suppose it: Yet her hid Centralitie
So sprightly's quickened with near Union
With God, that now life's wished liberty
Is so increased, that infinitely sh' has fun
Herself, her deep'st desire unspeakably has won.
36
And deep desire is the deepest act,
The most profound and centrall energie,
The very selfnesse of the soul, which backed
With piercing might, she breaks out, forth does fly
From dark contracting death, and does descry
Herself unto herself; so thus unfold
That actual life she straightwayes says, is I.
Thus while she in the body was infold,
Of this low life, as of herself often tales she told.
37
In dangerous sickness often says, I die;
When naught does die but the low plantall man,
That falls asleep: and while Nature does tie
The soul unto the body; she nere can
Avoid it, but must feel the self-same pain,
The same decay, if hereto she her mind
Do bend. When stupid cold her corse oreran,
She felt that cold; but when death quite does bind
The sense, then she herself does dead and senseless find.
38
Or else at least just at the entrance
Of death she feels that sly privation,
How now it spreads ore all: so living sense
Perceives how sleep creeps on, till quite overcome
With drowsiness, animadversion
Does cease: but (lower sense then fast ybound)
The soul bestows her adversion
On something else: So often strange things has found
In sleep, from this dull carcass while she was unbound.
39
So though the soul, the time she does advert
The bodies passions takes her self to die;
Yet death now finished, she can well convert
Herself to other thoughts. And if the eye
Of her adversion were fast fixed on high,
In midst of death 'twere no more fear or pain,
Then 'twas unto Elias to let fly
His useless mantle to that Hebrew Swain,
While he rode up to heaven in a bright fiery wain.
40
Thus have I stoutly rescued the soul
From centrall death or pure mortality,
And from the listlesse floods of Lethe dull,
And from the swallow of drad Unity.
And from an all-consuming Deity.
What now remains, but since we are so sure
Of endless life, that to true piety
We bend our minds, and make our conscience pure,
Lest living Night in bitter darkness us immure.
FINIS.
THE ORACLE OR, A Paraphrasticall Interpretation of the answer of Apollo, when
he was consulted by Amelius whither Plotinus soul went when he departed this
life.
I Tune my strings to sing some sacred verse
Of my dear friend; in an immortal strain
His mighty praise I loudly will rehearse
With hony-dewed words: some golden vein
The stricken chords right sweetly shall resound.
Come, blessed Muses, let us with one joint noise,
With strong impulse, and full harmonious sound,
Speak out his excellent worth. Advance your voice,
As once you did for great Aeacides,
Rapt with an heavenly rage, in decent dance,
Moved at the measures of Meonides.
Go to, you holy Quire, let us all at once
Begin, and to the end hold up the song,
Into one heavenly harmony conspire;
I Phoebus with my lovely locks ymong
The midst of you shall sit, and life inspire.
Divine Plotinus! yet now more divine
Then when thy noble soul so stoutly strove
In that dark prison, where strong chains confine,
Keep down the active mind it cannot move
To what it loves most. Those fleshly bands
Thou now have loosed, broke from Necessity.
From bodies storms, and frothie working sands
Of this low restless life now setten free,
Thy feet do safely stand upon a shore,
Which foaming waves beat not in swelling rage,
Nor angry seas do threat with fell uprore;
Well have thou swommen out, and left that stage
Of wicked Actours, that tumultuous rout
Of ignorant men. Now thy pure steps thou stay'st
In that high path, where Gods light shines about,
And perfect Right its beauteous beams displayes.
How often, when bitter wave of troubled flesh,
And whirl-pool-turnings of the lower spright,
Thou stoutly strov'st with, Heaven did thee refresh,
Held out a mark to guide thy wandering flight!
While thou in tumbling seas did strongly toil
To reach the steddie Land, struckst with thy arms
The deasing surges, that with rage do boil;
Stear'd by that sign thou shunn'st those common harms.
How often, when rasher cast of thy souls eye
Had thee misguided into crooked ways,
Wast thou directed by the Deity?
They held out to thee their bright lamping rays:
Dispersed the mistie darkness, safely set
Thy feeble feet in the right path again.
Nor easy sleep so closely ere beset
Thy eyelids, nor did dimnesse ere so stain
Thy radiant sight, but thou such things did see
Even in that tumult, that few can arrive
Of all are named from Philosophy
To that high pitch, or to such secrets dive.
But since this body thy pure soul divine
Has left, quite risen from her rotten grave,
Thou now among those heavenly wights dost^shine,
Whose won this glorious luster does embrave:
There lovely Friendship, mild-smiling Cupid's there,
With lively looks and amorous suavitie,
Full of pure pleasure, and fresh flowring cheer;
Ambrosian streams sprung from the Deity
Do frankly flow, and soft love-kindling winds
Do strike with a delicious sympathy
Those tender spirits, and fill up their minds
With satisfying joy. The purity
Of holy fire their heart does then invade,
And sweet Persuasion, meek Tranquillity,
The gentle-breathing Air, the Heavens naught sad,
Do maken up this great felicity.
Here Rhadamanthus, and just Aeacus,
Here Minos wonnes, with those that lived of yore
In The golden age; here Plato vigorous
In holy virtue, and fair Pythagore.
These been the goodly Offspring of Great Jove,
And liven here, and who so filled the Quire
And sweet assembly of immortal Love,
Purging their spirits with refining fire;
These with the happy Angels live in bliss,
Full fraught with joy, and lasting pure delight,
In friendly feasts, and life-outfetching kiss.
But, ah! dear Plotin, what smart did thy sprite
Endure, before thou reach'st this high degree
Of happiness? what agonies, what pains
Thou underwent'st to set thy soul so free
From baser life? She now in heaven remains
Among the pure Angels. O thrice-happy wight!
That now art got into the Land of Life,
Fast placed in view of that Eternal Light,
And sitt'st secure from the foul bodies strife.
But now, you comely virgins, make an end,
Break off this music, and deft seemly Round,
Leave off your dance: For Plotin my dear friend
Thus much I meant my golden harp should sound.
AN ADDITION of some few smaller POEMS, BY HENRY MORE: Master of Arts, and
Fellow of CHRIST'S COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE.
CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

Cupids Conflict. Mela. Cleanthes.
Cl. MEla my dear! why been thy looks so sad
As if thy gentle heart were sunk with care?
Impart thy case; for be it good or bad
Friendship in either will bear equal share.
Mel. Not so; Cleanthes, for if bad it be
My self must bleed afresh by wounding thee:
But what it is, my slow, uncertain wit
Cannot well judge. But thou shall sentence give
How manfully of late my self I quit,
When with that lordly lad by chance I strive.
Cl. Of friendship Mela! let us that story hear.
Mel. Sit down Cleanthes then, and lend thine ear.
Upon a day as best did please my mind
Walking abroad amidst the verdant field
Scattering my careful thoughts in the wanton wind
The pleasure of my path so far had tilled
My feeble feet that without timely rest
Uneath it were to reach my wonted nest.
In secret shade far moved from mortals sight
In lowly dale my wandering limbs I laid
On the cool grass where Natures pregnant wit
A goodly Bower of thickest trees had made.
Amongst the leaves the cheerful Birds did fare
And sweetly carol'd to the echoing Air.
Hard at my feet ran down a crystal spring
Which did the cumbrous pebbles hoarsly chide
For standing in the way. Though murmuring
The broken stream his course did rightly guide
And strongly pressing forward with disdain
The grassie flore divided into twain.
The place a while did feed my foolish eye
As being new, and eke mine idle ear
Did listen often to that wild harmony
And often my curious fancy would compare
How well agreed the Brooks low muttering Base,
With the birds trebbles pearch'd on higher place.
But senses objects soon do glut the soul,
Or rather weary with their emptiness;
So I, all heedlesse how the waters roll
And mindlesse of the mirth the birds express,
Into my self 'gin softly to retire
After hid heavenly pleasures to enquire.
While I this enterprise do entertain;
Lo! on the other side in thickest bushes
A mighty noise! with that a naked swain
With blew and purple wings straight rudely rushes
He leaps down light upon the flowery green,
Like sight before mine eyes had never seen.
At's snowy back the boy a quiver wore
Right fairly wrought and gilded all with gold.
A silver bow in his left hand he bore,
And in his right a ready shaft did hold.
Thus armed stood he, and betwixt us tway
The laboring brook did break its toilsome way.
The wanton lad whose sport is others pain
Did charge his bended bow with deadly dart,
And drawing to the head with might and main,
With fell intent he aimed to hit my heart.
But ever as he shot his arrows still
In their mid course dropped down into the rill.
Of wondrous virtues that in waters been
Is needless to rehearse, all books do ring
Of those strange rarities. But never was seen
Such virtue as resided in this spring.
The noveltie did make me much admire
But stirred the hasty youth to ragefull ire.
As heed less fowls that take their per'lous flight
Over that bane of birds, Avern^ lake,
Do drop down dead: so dead his shafts did light
Amid the stream, which presently did slake
Their fiery points, and all their feathers wet
Which made the youngster Godling inly fret.
Thus lustful Love (this was that love I ween)
Was wholly changed to consuming ire.
And eath it was, since they are so near a kin
They be both born of one rebellious fire.
But he suppressed his wrath and by and by
For feathered darts, he winged words let fly.
Vain man! said he, and would thou wer'st not vain
That hid'st thy self in solitary shade
And spil'st thy precious youth in sad disdain
Hating this life's delight! Has God thee made
Part of this world, and wilt not thou partake
Of this worlds pleasure for its makers sake?
Unthankful wretch! Gods gifts thus to reject
And maken naught of Natures goodly dower.
That milders still away through thy neglect
And dying fades like unregarded flower.
This life is good, what is good thou must improve,
The highest improvement of this life is love.
Had I (but O that envious Destiny,
Or Stygian vow, or thrice accursed charm
Should in this place free passage thus deny
Unto my shafts as messengers of harm!)
Had I but once transfixt thy froward breast,
How would thou then -- I staid not for the rest;
But thus half angry to the boy replide:
How would thou then my soul of sense bereave!
I blinded, thee more blind should choose my guide!
How would thou then my muddied mind deceive
With fading shows, that in my error vile,
Base lust, I love should term; vice, virtue style.
How should my wicked rhymes then idolize
Thy wretched power, and with impious wit
Impute thy base born passions to the skies,
And my souls sickness count an heavenly fit,
My weakness strength, my wisdom to be caught,
My bane my bliss, mine ease to be o'rewraught.
How often through my fondly feigning mind
And frantic fancy, in my Mistress eye
Should I a thousand fluttering Cupids find
Bathing their busis wings? How often epsy
Under the shadow of her eyebrows fair
Ten thousand Graces sit all naked bare?
Thus haunted should I be with such feat fiends,
A pretty madness were my portion due.
Foolish my self I would not hear my friends.
Should deem the true for false, the false for true.
My way all dark more slippery then ice
My attendants, anger, pride, and jealousies.
Unthankful then to God I should neglect
All the whole world for one poor sorry wight,
Whose pestilent eye into my heart project
Would burn like poisonous Comet in my spright.
Aye me! how dismal then would prove that day
Whose only light sprang from so fatal ray.
Who seeks for pleasure in this mortal life
By diving deep into the body base
Shall loose true pleasure: But who gainly strive
Their sinking soul above this bulk to place
Enlarged delight they certainly shall find,
Unbounded joys to fill their boundless mind.
When I my self from mine own self do quit
And each thing else; then an all-spreaden love
To the vast Universe my soul does fit,
Makes me half equal to All-seeing Jove.
My mighty wings high stretched then clapping light
I brush the stars and make them shine more bright.
Then all the works of God with close embrace
I dearly hug in my enlarged arms,
All the hid paths of heavenly Love I trace
And boldly listen to his secret charms.
Then clearly view-I where true light does rise,
And where eternal Night low-pressed lies.
Thus lose I not by leaving small delight
But gain more joy, while I my self suspend
From this and that; for then with all unite
I all enjoy, and love that love commends.
That all is more then loves the partial soul
Whose petty love the impartial fates control.
Ah son! said he, (and laughed very loud)
That trickst thy tongue with uncouth strange disguize,
Extolling highly that with speeches proud
To mortal men that humane state denies,
And rashly blaming what thou never knew;
Let men experienced speak, if they will speak true.
Had I once lanc'd thy froward flinty heart
And cruddled blood had thawn with living fire
And pricked thy drousie sprite with gentle smart
How would thou wake to kindle sweet desire!
Thy soul filled up with overflowing pleasures
Would dew thy lips with honey dtopping measures.
Then would thou caroll loud and sweetly sing
In honor of my sacred Deity
That all the woods and hollow hills would ring
Reechoning thy heavenly harmony.
And eke the hardy rocks withfull rebounds
Would faithfully return thy silver sounds.
Next unto me would be thy Mistress fair,
Whom thou might setten out with goodly skill
Her peerlesse beauty and her virtues rare,
That all would wonder at thy graceful quill.
And lastly in us both thy self should raise
And crown thy temples with immortal bays.
But now thy riddles all men do neglect,
Thy rugged lines of all do ly forlorn.
Unwelcome rhymes that rudely do detect
The Readers ignorance. Men holden scorn
To be so often non-plus'd or to spell,
And on one stanza a whole age to dwell.
Besides this harsh and hard obscurity
Of the hid sense, thy words are barbarous
And strangely new, and yet too frequently
Return, as usual plain and obvious,
So that the show of the new thick-set patch
Marres all the old with which it ill does match.
But if thy haughty mind, forsooth would deign
To stoop so low as to hearken to my lore,
Then would thou with trim lovers not disdeign
To adorn the outside, set the best before.
Nor rub nor wrinkle would thy verses spoil.
Thy rhymes should run as glib and smooth as oil.
If that be all; said I, thy reasons slight
Can never move my well established mind.
Full well I wot always the present sprite,
Or life that does possess the soul, does blind,
Shutting the windows against broad open day
Lest fairer sights its ugliness bewray.
The soul then loves that disposition best
Because no better comes unto her view.
The drunkard drunkenness, the sluggard rest,
The Ambitious honor and obeisance due.
So all the rest do love their vices base
'Cause virtues beauty comes not into place.
And looser love against Chastity divine
Would shut the door that he might sit alone.
Then wholly should my mind to him incline,
And woxen strait, (since larger love was gone)
That paultry spirit of low contracting lust
Would fit my soul as if 't were made for 't just.
Then should I with my fellow bird or brute
So strangely metamorphiz'd, either ney
Or bellow loud: or if 't may better suit
Chirp out my joy pearch'd upon higher spray.
My passions fond with impudence rehearse,
Immortalize my madness in a verse.
This is the sum of thy deceiving boast
That I vain ludenesse highly should admire,
When I the sense of better things have lost
And changed my heavenly heat for hellish fire.
Passion is blind: but virtues piercing eye
Approaching danger can from far epsy.
And what thou do Pedantickly object
Concerning my rude rugged uncouth style,
As childish toy I manfully neglect,
And at thy hidden snares do inly smile.
How ill alas! with wisdom it accords
To sell my living sense for livelesse words.
My thought's the fittest measure of my tongue,
Wherefore I Will use what is most significant,
And rather then my inward meaning wrong
Or my full-shining notion trimly skant,
I Will conjure up old words out of their grave,
Or call fresh foreign force in if need crave.
And these attending on my moving mind
Shall duly usher in the fitting sense.
As often as meet occasion I find.
Unusual words often used give less offense;
Nor will the old contexture dim or mar,
For often used they are next to old, threadbare.
And if the old seem in too rusty hew,
Then frequent rubbing makes them shine like gold,
And glister all with color gayly new.
Wherefore to use them both we will be bold.
Thus lists me fondly with fond folk to toy,
And answer fools with equal foolery.
The meaner mind works with more nicetie
As Spiders wont to weave their idle web,
But braver spirits do all things gallantly
Of lesser failings naught at all affred:
So Natures careless pencill dipped in light
With sprinkled stars has spattered the Night,
And if my notions clear though rudely thrown
And loosely scattered in my poesy,
May lend men light till the dead Night be gone,
And Morning fresh with roses strew the sky:
It is enough, I meant no trimmer frame
Nor by nice needle work to seek a name.
Vain man! that seek name amongst earthly men
Devoid of God and all good virtuous lere;
Who groping in the dark do nothing ken;
But mad, with griping care their souls do tear,
Or Burst with hatred or with envy pine,
Or burn with rage or melt out at their eyne.
Thrice happy he whose name is writ above,
And does good though gaining infamy;
Requiteth evil turns with hearty love,
And recks not what befalls him outwardly:
Whose worth is in himself, and only bliss
In his pure conscience that does naught amiss.
Who places pleasure in his purged soul
And virtuous life his treasure does esteem;
Who can his passions master and control,
And that true lordly manliness does deem,
Who from this world himself has clearly quit,
Counts naught his own but what lives in his sprite.
So when his spright from this vain world shall flit
It bears all with it whatsoever was dear
Unto it self, passing in easy fit,
As kindly ripened corn comes out of th'ear.
Thus mindlesse of what idle men will say
He takes his own and stilly goes his way.
But the Retinue of proud Lucifer,
Those blustering Poets that fly after fame
And deck themselves like the bright Morning-starre,
Alas! it is but all a crakling flame.
For death will strip them of that glorious plume,
That airie bliss will vanish into fume.
For can their careful ghosts from Limbo Lake
Return, or listen from the bowed sky
To hear how well their learned lines do take?
Or if they could; is Heavens felicity
So small as by man's praise to be increased,
Hells pain no greater then hence to be eased?
Therefore once dead in vain shall I transmit
My shadow to g^zing Posterity;
Cast far behind me I shall never see it,
On Heavens fair Sun having fast fixed mine eye.
Nor while I live, heed I what man does praise
Or underprize mine unaffected lays.
What moves thee then, said he, to take the pains
And spenden time if thou contemn'st the fruit?
Sweet fruit of fame, that fills the Poets brains
With high conceit and feeds his fainting wit.
How pleasant it is in honor here to live
And dead, thy name for ever to survive!
Or is thy abject mind so basely bent
As of thy Muse to maken Merchandise?
(And well I wot this is no strange intent.)
The hopeful glimps of gold from chattering Pies,
From Daws and Crows, and Parots often has wrung
An unexpected Pegaseian song.
Foul shame on him, quoth I, that shameful thought
Does entertain within his dunghill breast,
Both God and Nature has my spirits wrought
To better temper and of old has blessed
My lofty soul with more divine aspires,
Then to be touchd with such vile low desires.
I hate and highly scorn that Kestrell kind
Of bastard scholars that subordinate
The precious choice induements of the mind
To wealth or worldly good. Adulterate
And cursed brood! Your wit and will are born
Of the earth and circling thither do return.
Profit and honor be those measures scant
Of your slight studies and endeavors vain,
And when you once have got what you did want
You leave your learning to enjoy your gain.
Your brains grow low, your bellies swell up high,
Foul sluggish fat ditts up your dulled eye.
Thus what the earth did breed, to the earth is gone,
Like fading herb or feeble drooping flower,
By feet of men and beast quite trodden down,
The muck-sprung learning cannot long endure,
Back she returns lost in her filthy source,
Drowned, chok'd or slocken by her cruel nurse.
True virtue to her self's the best reward,
Rich with her own and full of lively spirit,
Nothing cast down for want of due regard,
Or 'cause rude men acknowledge not her merit.
She knows her worth and stock from whence she sprung,
Spreads fair without the warmth of earthly dung,
Dew'd with the drops of Heaven shall flourish long;
As long as day and night do share the sky,
And though that day and night should fail yet strong,
And steddie, fixed on Eternity
Shall bloom for ever. So the soul shall speed
That loves virtue for no worldly meed.
Though sooth to say, the worldly meed is due
To her more then to all the world beside.
Men ought do homage with affections true
And offer gifts, for God does there reside.
The wise and virtuous soul is his own seat
To such what is given God himself does get.
But earthly minds whose sight's sealed up with mud
Discern not this flesh-clouded Deity,
Ne do acknowledge any other good
Then waht their mole-warp hands can feel and try
By groping touch; (thus worth of them unseen)
Of nothing worthy that true worth they ween.
Wherefore the prudent Lawgivers of old
Even in all Nations, with right sage foresight
Discovering from far how clums and cold
The vulgar wight would be to yield what is right
To virtuous learning, did by law design
Great wealth and honor to that worth divine?
But nought's by law to Poesy due said he,
Ne does the solemn Statesmans head take care
Of those that such impertinent pieces be
Of common-weals. Thou Would better then to spare
Thy useless vein. Or tell else, what may move
Thy busy Muse such fruitless pains to prove.
No pains but pleasure to do the dictates dear
Of inward living nature. What does move
The Nightingall to sing so sweet and clear
The Thrush, or Lark that mounting high above
Chants her shrill notes to heedlesse ears of corn
Heavily hanging in the dewy Morn.
When Life can speak, it cannot well withold
TO express its own impressions and hid life.
Or joy or grief that smoothered lie untold
Do vex the heart and wring with restless strife,
Then are my labors no true pains but ease
My souls unrest they gently do appease.
Besides, that is not fruitless that no gains
Brings to my self. I others profit deem
Mine own: and if at these my heavenly flames
Others receiven light, right well I ween
My time's not lost. Art thou now satisfide
Said I: to which the scoffing boy replide.
Great hope indeed thy rhymes should men enlight;
That be with clouds and darkness all o'recast,
Harsh style and harder sense void of delight
The Readers wearied eye in vain do wast.
And when men win thy meaning with much pain,
Thy uncouth sense they coldly entertain.
For wotst thou not that all the world is dead
Unto that Genius that moves in thy vein
Of poetry! But like by like is fed.
Sing of my Trophies in triumphant strein,
Then correspondent life, thy powerful verse
Shall strongly strike and with quick passion pierce.
The tender fry of lads and lasses young
With thirsty ear thee compassing about,
Thy Nectar-dropping Muse, thy sugared song
Will swallow down with eager hearty draught;
Relishing truly what thy rhymes convey,
And highly praising thy soul-smiting lay.
The mincing maid her mind will then bewray,
Her heart-bloud flaming up into her face,
Grave matrons will wax wanton and betray
Their unresolv'dnesse in their wonted grace;
Young boys and girls would feel a forward spring,
And former youth to eld thou back would bring.
All Sexes, Ages, Orders, Occupations
Would listen to thee with attentive ear,
And easily moved with thy sweet persuasions,
Thy pipe would follow with full merry cheer.
While thou thy lively voice did loud advance
Their tickled blood for joy would inly dance.
But now, alas! poor solitary man!
In lonesome desert thou do wander wide
To seek and serve thy disappearing Pan,
Whom no man living in the world has eyde:
For Pan, is dead but I am still alive,
And live in men who honor to me give:
They honor also those that honor me
With sacred songs. But thou now singst to trees
To rocks to Hills, to Caves that senseless be
And mindlesse quite of thy hid mysteries,
In the void air thy idle voice is spread,
Thy Muse is music to the deaf or dead.
Now out alas! said I, and wele-away
The tale thou tellest I confess too true.
Fond man so doteth on this living clay
His carcass dear, and does its joys pursue,
That of his precious soul he takes no keep
Heavens love and reasons light lie fast asleep.
This bodies life vain shadow of the soul
With full desire they closely do embrace,
In fleshly mud like swine they wallow and roll,
The loftiest mind is proud but of the face
Or outward person; if men but adore
That walking sepulcher, cares for no more.
This is the measure of man's industry
To wexen some body and getten grace
To's outward presence; though true majesty
Crownd'd with that heavenly light and lively rays
Of holy wisdom and Seraphick love,
From his deformed soul he far remove.
Slight knowledge and less virtue serves his turn
For this design. If he has trod the ring
Of pedling arts; in usual pack-horse form
Keeping the rode; O! then 't's a learned thing.
If any chanced to write or speak what he
Conceives not, 't were a foul discourtesie.
To cleanse the soul from sin, and still diffide
Whether our reasons eye be clear enough
To intromit true light, that fain would glide
Into purged hearts, this way's too harsh and rough:
Therefore the clearest truths may well seem dark
When sloathfull men have eyes so dim and stark.
These be our times. But if my minds presage
Bear any moment, they can never last long,
A three branched Flame will soon sweep clean the stage
Of this old dirty dross and all wex young.
My words into this frozen air I throw
Will then grow vocal at that general thaw.
Nay, now you are perfect mad, said he, with scorn,
And full of foul derision quit the place.
The sky did rattle with his wings ytorn
Like to rent silk. 'But I in the mean space
Sent after him this message by the wind
Be It so I Am mad, yet sure I am you are blind.
By this the out-stretch'd shadows of the trees
Pointed me home-ward, and with one consent
Foretold the days descent. So straight I rise
Gathering my limbs from off the green pavement
Behind me leaving then the slooping Light.
Gl. And now let us up, Vesper brings on the Night.
Fides Fluctuans.
O Deus aeterno lucis qui absconditus Orb
Humanos fugis aspectus! da cernere verum,
Da magnum spectare diem non mobilis Aevi.
Da contemplari nullius in infera noctis
Lapsurum solemn. Spissas caliginis umbras
Adventu dispelle tuo. Pernicibus alis,
Ocyus advolitans, animam tu siste solutam
Mobilitate sua; rapidae quam cursus aquai
Deturbat secum atque in caeco gurgite condit.
Sed tamen ex fluxu hoc rerum miseroque tumultu
En! vultus attollo meos; tu porrige dextram,
Exime ut excelso figam vestigia saxo.
O Deus! O Centrum rerum! te percita motu
Arcano circumvolitant cuncta atque requirunt
Nequicquam, quoniam aeterna te contegis umbra.
Attamen insano exerces mea pectora amore,
Et suspirantem volupe est tibi ludere mentem
Ignibus occultis. Non talibus aestuat Aetna,
Intima cum accensas eructet flamma favillas
Before, and lato spargat sua viscera campo.
Omnia solicita mecum quae mente revolvi
Somnia sunt? stulteque animi satagentis inane
Figmentum? spes nostra perit radicitus omnis?
Expectata diu vacuas vita exit in auras?
Hei mihi! quam immensae involvor caligine noctis!
Subsido, pereo, repeto jam materiai
Infensas tenebras and ahenae vincula mortis.
Quae me intemperies agitat! Rescindito coelos
Sum Deum, tantosque animi componito fluctus.
Resolution.
Where Is now the objects of thy fears:
Needless sighs and fruitless tears?
They be all gone like idle dream
Suggested from the bodies steam.
O Cave of horror black as pitch!
Dark Den of Specter that bewitch
The weakened phansy sore affright
With the grim shades of grisely Night.
What Is Plague and Prison? Loss of friends?
War, Dearth and Death that all things ends?
Mere Bug-bears for the childish mind
Pure Panick terrors of the blind.
Collect thy soul into one sphere
Of light and 'bove the earth it rear.
Those wild scattered thoughts that erst
Lay losely in the World dispersed
Call in: thy spirit thus knit in one
Fair lucid orb; those fears be gone
Like vain impostures of the Night
That fly before the Morning bright.
Then with pure eyes thou shall behold
How the first Goodness does infold
All things in loving tender arms:
That deemed mischiefs are no harms
But sovereign salves; and skillful cures
Of greater woes the world endures;
That man's stout soul may win a state
Far raised above the reach of fate.
Then will thou say, God rules the World,
Though mountain over mountain hurled
Be pitched amid the foaming Maine
Which busy winds to wrath constrain.
His fall does make the billows start
And backward skip from every part.
Quite sunk, then over his senseless side
The waves in triumph proudly ride.
Though inward tempests fiercely rock
The tottering Earth, that with the shock
High spires and heavy rocks fall down
With their own weight drove into ground;
Though pitchy blasts from Hell up-born
Stop the outgoings of the Morn,
And Nature play her fiery games
In this forced Night, with fulgurant flames,
Baring by fits for more affright
The pale dead visages, ghastly sight
Of men astonished at the stoure
Of Heavens great rage, the rattling showers
Of hail, the hoarse bellowing of thunder
Their own loud shreekes made mad with wonder:
All this confusion cannot move
The purged mind freed from the love
Of commerce with her body dear
Cell of sad thoughts, sole spring of fear.
What ere I feel or hear or see
Threats but these parts that mortal be.
Naught can the honest heart dismay
Unless the love of living clay
And long acquaintance with the light
Of this Outworld and what to sight
Those two officious beams discover
Of forms that round about us hover.
Power, Wisdom, Goodness sure did fra
This Universe and still guide the same.
But thoughts from passions sprung, decei^
Vain mortals. No man can contrive
A better course then what is been run
Since the first circuit of the Sun.
He that beholds all from on high
Knows better what to do then I.
I Am not mine own, should I repine
If he dispose of what is not mine.
Purge but thy soul of blind self-will
Thou straight shall see God does no ill.
The world He fills with the bright rays
Of his free goodness. He displayes
Himself throughout. Like common air
That spirit of life through all does fare
Sucked in by them as vital breath
That willingly embrace not death.
But those that with that living Law
Be unacquainted, cares do gnaw;
Mistrust of Gods good providence
Does daily vex their wearied sense.
Now place me on the Libyan soil,
With scorching sun and sands to toil,
Far from the view of spring or tree,
Where neither man nor house I see.
Place me by the fabulous streams
Of Hydaspes; In the Realms
Where Caucasus his lofty back
Does raise in wreaths and endless tract.
Commit me at my next remove
To icy Hyperborean Jove.
Confine me to the Arctick Pole
Where the numbd heavens do slowly roll:
To lands, where cold raw heavy mist
Sols kindly warmth and light resists.
Where louring clouds full fraught with snow
Do sternly scoul, where winds do blow
With bitter blasts, and pierce the skin
Forcing the vital spirits in;
Which leave the body thus ill bested
In this chill plight at least half dead:
Yet by an Antiperistasis
My inward heat more kindled is:
And while this flesh her breath expires
My spirit shall suck celestial fires
By deep-fetchd sighs and pure devotion.
Thus waxen hot with holy motion,
A^ once I Will break forth in a flame;
Above this world and worthless fame
I Will take my flight, careless that men
Know not, how, where I die or when.
Yea! though the Soul should mortal prove
So be Gods life but in me move
To my last breath: I Am satisfide
A lonesome mortal God to have did.
Devotion.
GOod God! when thou thy inward grace do shower
Into my breast,
How full of light and lively power
Is then my soul!
How am I blessed!
How can I then all difficulties devour!
Thy might
Thy spright
With ease my combrous enemy control.
If thou once turn away thy face and hide
Thy cheerful look,
My feeble flesh may not abide
That dreadful stound,
I cannot brook
Thy absence. My heart with care and grief then gride
Does fail,
Does quail,
My life steals from me, at that hidden wound.
My phansie's then a burden to my mind,
Mine anxious thought
Betrays my reason, makes me blind:
Near dangers drad
Make me distraught.
Surpised with fear, my senses all I find.
In hell
I dwell
Oppressed with horror, pain and sorrow sad.
My former Resolutions all are fled,
Slip't over my tongue,
My Faith, my Hope, and Joy, are dead.
Assist my heart
Rather then my song
My God! my Savior! when I Am ill bested
Stand by,
And I
Shall bear with courage, undeserved smart.
Aphroditus.
Synes. hymn. 2. and 3. Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Sum Pater! rerum fixa inconcussaque seeds!
Omnia qui fulcis mundo non fictus Adonis.
Fundamen coelorum! immobile Sustentamen
Telluris! magnumque quies secura Deorum!
Omniparens Amor! In dias tu luminis oras
Omnia producis vastus quae continet orbis.
Innumera tu prole tua terrasque feraces,
Era que immensum comples camposque natantes.
Saeclorum Pater es, Matter pia, sedula Nutrix.
Te circum quoniam ludunt humana propago,
Quos nisi tu sistis, nutricis more, patenti
In gremio, and circumjectis tutare lacertis,
Protinus heu! pereunt, priscas repetendo tenebras,
Submersosque suo claudit Styx lurida, fundo.
Lurida Styx, summi quam oderunt tangere Olympi
Incolae, inextinctum spirantes semper amorem;
Hujus enim horrendas nemo quisquam petet umbras
Fluminis, accensus lucenti pectora ab igni.
Nos tamen interea charis dum amplecteris ulnis
Materno sistisque genu, te cernere contra
Vix cupimus, blandosve tuos advertere vultus.
Sed veluti lactens infantulus ubera matris
Quaeritat, and cunctas complet vagitibus aedeis
Ni sedet and mollem sibi nudam vest mamillam
Exhibet: Haec igitur properat, saevumque tyrannum
Demulcet dictis, atque oscula dulcia figit.
Ille autem non dicta moratur, nec pia matris
Oscula, non hilares oculos vultumque serenum
Attendit, pulchros neque, amantum rete, capillos.
Nulla mora est, quo caeca fames vocat, instat, in uber
Involat, and niveum sitienti fauce liquorem
Haurit, and alterno jactans sua cruscula motu
Maternum refricat gremium, dulcedine sensus
Exultans, tenerum succo feriente palatum.
Sic nos, magna Parens! quorum provectior aetas,
Sic tua sic avidis premimus sacra ubera labris,
Sed formam vultumve tuum quis conspicit? Omneis
Caecus amor quo tractat and expectata voluptas
Auferimur, plenoque una devolvimur alveo.
Verum ego si possim! neque enim deprendere possum
Divinam speciem; nimio tua pignora lusu
Namque soles lassare and gratam avertere formam.
At cum conatu longo defessus ocellos
Adduco and facilis vineit mea tempora somnus;
Tu tamen interea vigilas and membra sopore
Dulci extensa vides and amico lumine mulces.
Haec, Venus alma! animus, nebulas, noctemque malignam
Somniat obfusus, neque enim poti' cernere quicquam est;
Sed furit and caeco rerum perculsus amore
Evomit insanum turbato pectore carmen.
Out of the Anthologie a Distick.
(...).
In English thus:
WHen the strong Fates with Gigantean force,
Bear thee in iron arms without remorse
Bear and be born. But if with pievish struggle
Thou writhe and wrest thy corse, thou do but double
Thy present pain, and spend thy restless spright,
Nor thou more heavy art, nor they more light.
Or thus:
If Chance thee change, be changed and change thou it
To better, by thy well complying wit.
If thou repine, thou do but pain and grieve
Thy self, and Chance will change thee without leeve.
RIght well I wot, my rhymes seem rudely dressed
In the nice judgment of thy shallow mind
That mark'st expressions more then what is expressed,
Busily billing the rough outward rind,
But reaching not the pith. Such surface skill's
Unmeet to measure the profounder quill.
Yea I alas! my self too often feel
Thy indispos'dnesse; when my weakened soul
Unstedfast, into this Outworld does reel,
And lies immerse in my low vital mold.
For then my mind, from the inward spright estranged,
My Muse into an uncouth hew has changed.
A rude confused heap of ashes dead
My verses seem, when that caelestiall flame
That sacred spirit of life's extinguished
In my cold breast. Then gin I rashly blame
My rugged lines: This word is obsolete;
That boldly coynd, a third too often does beat
Mine humourous ears. Thus fondly curious
Is the faint Reader, that does want that fire
And inward vigor heavenly furious
That made my enraged spirit in strong desire
Break through such tender cob-web niceties,
That often entangle these blind buzzing flies.
Possessed with living sense I inly rave,
Careless how outward words do from me flow,
So be the image of my mind they have
Truly expressed, and do my visage show;
As does each river decked with Phoebus beams
Fairly reflect the viewer of his streams.
Who can discern the Moons asperity
From of this earth, or could this earths discover
If from the earth he raised were on high
Among the stars and in the sky did hover?
The Hills and Valleys would together flow
And the rough Earth, one smooth-faced Round would show.
Nor can the lofty soul snatched into Heven
Busied above in the Intellectual world
At such a distance see my lines uneven,
At such a distance was my spirit hurld,
And to my trembling quill thence did endite,
What he from thence must read, who would read right.
Fair Fields and rich Enclosures, shady Woods,
Large populous Towns, with strong and stately Towers,
Long crawling Rivers, far distended Floods,
What ever's great, its shape these eyes of ours
And due proportions from high distance see
The best; And Paro! such my Rhyme's to thee.
Thy grovelling mind and moping poreblind eye,
That to move up unmeet, this to see far,
The worth or weakness never can descry
Of my large winged Muse. But not to spare
Till thou can well disprove, proves well enough
Thou art rash and rude how ere my rhymes are rough.
Necessitas Triumphata. Seu, Humanam voluntatem ad unum necessario non
determinari.
O Dea! quae clavum manibus cuneumque superbis
Gestas, and stricta liquidi compagine plumbi
Cuncta premis, duramque soles imponere legem,
Usque adeone tuo indulges, saevissima rerum!
Imperio, astringas trist^ tibi ut omnia nodo?
Terra tua est and quos sub verno tempore flores
Proruit, and quicquid tenebrosa in viscera condit.
Amnes quo tu cunque vocas salsaeque lacunae
Pergunt, and lati palantia sydera mundi.
Aer sub ditione tua est, nimbique ruentes,
Quaeque boant rauco metuenda tonitrua caelo.
Et nimis angustum si forte haec omnia regnum
Infernas moderare umbras, sedesque silentum,
Horrificosque suis ructantem e faucibus aestus
Tartaron. His addas brutum genus omne animantum
Innumeras pecorum species atque Altivolantum.
Mancipium Natura tuum est; sen tristior illa
Quam Nox ima premit caeca in caligine, sive
Quam matutinis radiis fovet Aetherius Sol.
Omnibus his dare jura potes, durasque catenas
Nectere, and ad rigidum nodis mordentibus Unum
Stringere. At hac stupida non torpent caetera lege.
Liberum enim est genus humanum, veluti innuba virgo
Quae nondum ullius thalamis addicta mariti est.
Multi hanc ergo viri precibus blandisque loquelis
Facundos quos fecit amor noctisque cupido
Solicitant. Nostras alios ita manibus imis
E mediis alios, alios e sedibus altis
Impugnasse procos animas sentimus, and ipsum
Delcendisse Jovem casto in praecordia lusu, ut
Virtutem inspiret sanctumque accendat amorem.
Scilicet haec fiunt quoniam men's libera nostra est
Legibus aeterni fati Uniusque severi.
Quod si animae motus solido Dea ferrea clavo
Praefixos jam olim, determinet; illius omnes
Fictitii assensus, libertas nil nisi inane
Commentum: quod qui est ausus fabricare, necesse est
Aestuet implicitus nodis quos consuit ipse,
Et Ch^ysippeum sudet volvendo cylindrum.
Exorcismus.
What Is this that in my breast thus grieves and greanes
Rives my close-straitned heart, distends my sides
with deep fetched sighs, while the other in fell pride
Resists and choaks? O hear the dreadful moanes
Of thy dear son, if so him cleep I may.
If there be any sense 'twixt Heven and Earth,
If any mutual feeling sure this birth
May challenge speed, and break off all delay.
You Winged people of the unseen sky
That bear that living Name in your pure breast,
Chariots of God in whom the Lord of rest
Does sit triumphant, can not you espy
The self same Being in such jeopardy?
Make haste make haste if you Gods army been,
Rescue his son, wreak your revengefull teen
On his fast holding Enemy.
Has Nature only sympathy?
What? may I deem you self-exulting sprights
Locked up in your own selves, whose inward life
Is self-contenting joy, withouten strife
Of doing good and helping woeful weights.
Then were you empty carres and not the throne
Of that thrice-beautious sun the god of love
The Soul of souls and heart of highest Jove,
If you to others good were not most prone.
Open thou Earth; unclose thou fast bound ball
Of smoring darkness! The black jaws of Hell
Shall issue forth their dead, that direful cell
Of miscreant Lives that strive still to enthrall,
Shall let him go at last, and he ore all
Shall triumph. Then the gladsome Progeny
Of the bright Morning star shining on high,
Shall fill the Round aetheriall
With sound of voices musical.
Nor yet this breath's quite spent. Swift flight of wing
Has shot my soul from th'hight to th'depth again
And from the depth to th'height. The glistring Main
Of flowing light and darknesses cursed spring
I Have moved with sacred words: (the extreme worlds
In holy rage assaulted with my spell)
I Will at the middle Movable as well
As those, and powerful magic against it hurl.
You waving aires! and you more boistrous winds!
Dark Zaphons sons, who with your swelling blasts
Thrust out the ribs of heaven, and that orepast
Leave Nature languid to her wont confind,
Suppress your spright and be at his command
Who on the troubled Galilean lake
Did wind and storm to him obedient make.
Let still serenity the land
Enclose about with steady hand.
And you heaven-threatning rocks, whose tops be crowned
With wreaths of woolly clouds, fall into dust.
And thou, O Ida kill! thy glory must
Consume, and thou lie equal with the ground.
Over quick-ey'd Ida! thou which see the Sun
Before day spring? those Eastern spatterd lights
And broad spread shinings purpling the gay Night,
And that swoln-glowing ball; they will all be gone.
You summer neezings when the Sun is set
That fill the air with a quick fading fire,
Cease from your flashings, and thou Self-desire
The worst of meteors, cursed Voraginet!
The wind of God shall rend thee into naught
And thou shall vanish into empty air,
Nor shall thy rending out leave any scarre.
Thy place shall not be found though sought
So perish shall all humane thought.
Deliquium.
VIres deficiunt abitque vita.
Virtutem revoca, O Deus! fugacem.
O sol justitiae, atque origo vitae!
Vitae, qua reficis tuos alumnos,
Inspira, obsecro, spiritum suavem
Venis languidulis, meosque ocellos
Lucis vivica novo vigore,
Perculsum saliat novoque amore
Pectus, compositas agat choreas
Laetum cor, cupidis prematque in ulnis
Quae tu cunque facis, Pater Deorum!
Immensique opifex perite mundi!
Cuncta exosculer ambitu benigno and
Injectis teneam fovens lacertis.
Nam jucunda cluent, cluent amena
Ni nubes animum gravent acerbum
Atque urat dolor intimus medullam.
Ergo magnanimam piamque mentem
Sedatam, facilemque, callidamque
Concedas quae hominum sciat feratque
Mores omnimodos bonos malosque.
Nec cor concutiant superbiarum
Fluctus turgidulum; furor dolorque
Vitae ne obsideant vias misell ae
Soffocentque suis feris catenis.
Mentem praebe humilem at simul serenam,
Mentem praebe hilarem at simul severam,
Te circum choreas leves agentem,
Pulsantem citharam at tibi canentem.
IT was the time when all things quiet lay
In silent rest; and Night her rusty Carre
Drawn with black teem had drove above half way.
Her curbed steeds foaming out lavering tar
And finely trampling the soft misty air
With proner course toward the West did fare.
I with the rest of weak mortality
For natures due relief lay stretched on bed.
My weary body lay out-stretch'd, not I.
For I, alas! from that dead corse had fled.
Had left that slough, as erst I doft my clothes,
For kindly rest that very Evening-close.
Free as in open Heaven more swift then thought
In endless spaces up and down I fly,
Not carried on wings, or as well taught
To row with mine own arms in liquid sky:
As often men do in their deceiving sleep
Hovering over Waters, Woods, and Valleys sleep:
But born on the actual efflux of my will
Without resistance thither easly glide
Whither my busy mind did breathe until,
All-suddenly an uncouth sight I spide,
Which meanly as I may I will propound
To wiser men to weigh with judgment sound.
Behold a mighty Orb right well compiled
And kned together of opacous mould.
That neither curse of God nor man defiled,
Though wicked wights as shall anon be told
Did curse the ill condition of the place,
And with foul speech this goodly work disgrace.
But vain complaints may weary the ill tongue
And evil speeches the blasphemer stain,
But words Gods sacred works can never wrong,
No^ wrongful deeming work dame Natures bane.
Who misconceives, conceives but his own ill,
Brings forth a falsehood, shows his want of skill.
This globe in all things punctually did seem
Like to our earth saving in magnitude:
For it of so great vastness was, I ween,
That if that all the Planets were transmewd
Into one Ball, they would not exceed this Round
Nor yet fall short though close together bound.
At a far distance from this sphere was pight
(More then the journey of ten thousand year
An hundred times told over, that swiftest flight
Of bird should mete, that distance did appear)
There was there pight a massy Orb of light
Aequall with this dark Orb in bigness right.
Half therefore just of this dark Orb was dight
With goodly glistre and fair golden rays,
And ever half was hid in horrid Night.
A duskish Cylindre through infinite space
It did project, which still unmoved staid,
Strange sight it was to see so endless shade.
The Diametre of that Nocturnall Roll
Was the right Axis of this opake sphere.
On which eternally it round did roll.
In Aequinoctiall posture 't did appear,
So as when Libra weighs out in just weight
An equal share to men of Day and Night.
Thus turning round by turns all came in view
What ever did that massy Ball adorn.
Hills, Valleys, Woods, themselves did plainly show,
Towns, Towers, and holy Spires to Heaven born,
Long winding Rivers, and broad foaming Seas.
Fair Crystal springs fierce scorching thirst to appease.
And all bespread were the huge Mountains green
With Fleecy flocks and eke with hairy goats.
Great fields of Corn and Knee-deep grass were seen,
Swine, Oxen, Horses, Carriages, Sheep-cotes,
What ere the Country or the walled town
Can show with us, the like things there were shown.
And look what ever that Half-sphear of light
Did bear upon it (the Ball turning round)
The same into the Hemisphear of Night
Were carried. And look what things were found
In that dark Hemisphear, were brought anon
To the Hemisphear the light did shine upon.
For sooth to say, they both make up one Ball.
The self same parts now dipped in deepest Night
Anon recovered from their former fall
Do shine all glorious decked with gladsome light.
And often PANGAION as it turned, I red
In mighty characters decyphered.
The Inhabitants of this big swollen sphere
Were of two kinds, well answering unto
The diverse nature of each Hemisphear.
One foul, deformed, and ghastly sad in show,
The other fair and full of lively mirth,
These two possessed this Universal Earth.
They both had wings: The foul much like a Bat
Or forged Fiend and of a pitchy hew,
And ovall eyes like to a blinking Cat.
The fair had silver wings all-glistering new
With golden feathers set, shaped like a Doves
Or lovely Swans, that in Meander moves.
In other parts most like to spotless man
Made out in comely due proportion.
Both with their wings uncessantly did fan
The agil air, but never light upon
The moving Orb, but in suspense they hovered.
Therefore Light these, eternal Night those covered.
For though the Globe does move, it moves them not;
Passing as water underneath a brig.
Yet what thus passes by, they deem their lot,
Both of their deemed lots together lig,
To wit, that Sphere with all its ornaments.
Nor yet that sphere them both alike contents.
For they on the dim side with fell uprore
Do hideously houl and Nature blame
For her ill works. Enraged with fury sore
Often God himself they curse; blaspheme his Name.
And all his creatures, as they passen by
In goodly pomp, they view with scornful eye.
Instead of hymns they bold invectives make
Against the Maker of that Universe.
My quivering quill, and palfied hand do quake
Now I recall to mind the wicked verse
Which those bad men had framed in fell despite,
And foul detraction to the God of light.
And while with hollow howlings they did chaunt
That hellish Ode. Ravens more black then pitch
And fatal Owls, Dragons, and what so wont
To do or token mischief; every such
Came flying round about to increase the sound,
Such sound as would with madness man confound.
When they had made an end of this ill ditty,
As execrable thing they would for sake
This work of God, and out of dear self-pitty
Fly from the creatures, and themselves betake
To higher region: but their labout's vain
Fly never so high, Night does them still contain.
For the projection of that endless Roll
Cast to unmeasured infinity,
Wearies to death their ill-deceived soul:
For naught but darkness and obscurity
They finden out by their high tedious flight,
But now I Would turned me to the land of Light.
There might I see with lovely pleasant look
And mild aspect, the people all things view,
In terpreting right what ever seemed crook.
Crooked for crook'd is right; and evil hew
For evil shaped mind, that fear may breed.
Good often does spring from evil-seeming seed.
Viewing the works of God they ever smiled
As seeing some resemblance of that face
That they so dearly loved, that undefiled
And spotless beauty, that sweet awful Grace
Where Love and Majesty do always sit
And with eternal joy the viewer greet.
Ravished with heavenly mirth and pure delight
They sing a sacred song with cheerful voice.
It kindles holy pleasure within my spright
As often I think on that Angelick noise.
The living Spring of bliss they loudly praise
Bless all His creatures in their pious lays.
And while the creatures goodness they descry
From their fair glimps they move themselves up higher
Not through contempt or hate they from them fly
Nor leave by flying, but while they aspire
To reach their fountain, them with sight more clear
They see. As newly varnished all appear.
This is the mystery of that mighty Ball
With different sides. That side where grisly Night
Does sit bold men Melampronaea call,
The other side Lampropronaea hight,
Logos that Orb of light, but Foolishness
(To speak plane English) the Roll does express.
These words I read or heard, I know not whether.
Or thought, or thought I thought. It was a dream.
But yet from dreams wise men sound truth may gather
And some ripe scatterings of high knowledge glean.
But where, or heavy passions cloud the eyes,
Or prejudice, there is nothing can make wise.
QUae vis nunc agitat meas medullas?
Et cor, molliculo ferire motu
Ceptat? percutiunt novi furores
Mentem, concipio novos amores.
Ah! nunc me fluidos abire in igneis
Totum sentio. Flamma mollis artue
Dulcis, vivida, permeavit omneis,
Jucundumque ciet calore sensum
Toto corpore spirituque toto.
Bellam hic laud suam efferat Fabullam
Formosam ille suam canat Corinnam.
Me leni Monocardia urit igni
Et sacrum instituit suum poetam.
Pulchra O Simplicitas! beata virgo!
Tu vincis radios nitore Phoebes,
Tu stellas superas decore cunctas.
Nam quis pectora? quis sinus apertos?
Candorisve tui potest tueri
Thesauros niveos eburneosve?
Quin Luna imbrifera tepentis Austri
Nube obscurior, atque sydus omne
Sit nigrum magis ac imago noctis
Et Hyles tenebris, nives eburque.
Quod si orbs hilares amabilesque
Lucentesque tuor faces, amorum
Blandas illecebras, ruit statim Sol
Et lati species perit Diei
Submersa in tenebris Meridianis.
O princeps Charitum! Dea O Dearum!
Coeli splendour! and unica O voluptas
Humani generis! catena nodis
Auratis, homines ligans Deosque!
Te circumvolitant leves Olympi
Alati juvenes, tuosque gressus
Sustentant manibus suis tenellos,
Et firmant tua crura mollicella,
Dulcis cura Deum Venusque coeli!
O fons laetitiae piique lusus!
O ter pulchra puella! blanda virgo!
Nostris molliter insidens medullis
Coelestemque animo fovens amorem
In coetu superum locas Deorum.
SIng aloud His praise rehearse
Who has made the Universe.
He the boundless Heavens has spread
All the vital orbs has kned;
He that on Olympus high
Tends his flocks with watchful eye,
And this eye has multiplide
Midst each flock for to reside.
Thus as round about they stray
Touches each with out-strecth'd ray,
Nimble they hold on their way,
Shaping out their Night and Day.
Summer, Winter, Autumn, Spring,
Their inclined Axes bring.
Never slack they; none respires,
Dancing round their Centrall fires.
In due order as they move
Echo's sweet be gently drove
Thorough Heavens vast Hollownesse,
Which unto all corners press:
Music that the heart of Jove
Moves to joy and sportfull love;
Fills the listening sailors ears
Riding on the wandering Spears.
Neither Speech nor Language is
Where their voice is not transmisse.
God is good, is Wise, is Strong,
Witness all the creature-throng,
Is confessed by every Tongue.
All things back from whence they sprung,
As the thankful Rivers pay
What they borrowed of the Sea.
Now my self I do resign,
Take me whole I all am thine.
Save me, God! from Self-desire,
Deaths pit, dark Hells raging fire,
Envy, Hatred, Vengeance, Ire.
Let not Lust my soul bemire.
Quit from these thy praise I Will sing,
Loudly sweep the trembling string.
Bear a part, O Wisdoms sons!
Freed from vain Religions.
Lo! from far I you salute,
Sweetly warbling on my Lute.
Indie, Egypt, Arabie,
Asia, Greece, and Tartarie,
Carmel-tracts, and Lebanon
With the Mountains of the Moon,
From whence muddie Nile does run
Or where ever else you won;
Breathing in one vital air,
One we are though distant far.
Rise at once let us sacrifice
Odours sweet perfume the skies.
See how Heavenly lightning fires
Hearts inflamed with high aspires!
All the substance of our souls
Up in clouds of Incense rolls.
Leave we nothing to our selves
Save a voice, what need we else!
Or an hand to wear and tire
On the thankful Lute or Lyre.
Sing aloud His praise rehearse
Who has made the Universe.
Charity and Humility.
Far have I clambred in my mind
But naught so great as love I find:
Deep-searching wit, mount-moving might
Are naught compared to that good spright.
Life of delight and soul of bliss!
Sure source of lasting happiness!
Higher then Heaven! lower then hell!
What is thy tent? where may thou dwell?
My mansion hight humility,
Heavens vastest capabilitie.
The further it does downward tend
The higher up it does ascend;
If it go down to utmost naught
It shall return with that it sought.
Lord stretch thy tent in my strait breast,
Enlarge it downward, that sure rest
May there be pight; for that pure fire
Wherewith thou wontest to inspire
All self-dead souls. My life is gone,
Sad solitude 's my irksome won.
Cut off from men and all this world
In Lethes lonesome ditch I Am hurld.
Nor might nor sight does ought me move,
Nor do I care to be above.
O feeble rays of mental light!
That best be seen in this dark night,
What are you? what is any strength
If it be not laid in one length
With pride or love? I naught desire
But a new life or quite to expire.
Could I demolish with mine eye
Strong towers, stop the fleet stars in sky,
Bring down to earth the pale-faced Moon,
Or turn black midnight to bright Noon:
Though all things were put in my hand,
As parched as dry as the Libyan sand
Would be my life if Charity
Were wanting. But Humility
Is more then my poor soul durst crave
That lies intombd in lowly grave.
But if 't were lawful up to send
My voice to Heaven, this should it rend.
Lord thrust me deeper into dust
That thou may raise me with the just.
THE TRIUMPH, OR A Paraphrase upon the ninth Hymn of Synesius, written in
honor of Jesus, the Son of Mary, the SAVIOR of the World.
O Lovely Child, with Glory great arraid!
Sweet Offspring of the Solymeian Maid!
Thee would I sing, and thy renowned Acts:
For thou did rid the boundless flowery tracts
Of thy dear Fathers Garden from the spoils
Of the false Serpent, and his treacherous toils:
When thou had once descended to this earth
A stranger wight amongst us of humane birth;
After some stay new voyage thou did take
Crossing cold Lethe and the Stygian Lake,
Arriv'st at the low fields of Tartara
There where innumerable flocks do stray
Of captive souls, whom pale-faced Death does feed
Forced under his stiff Rod, and churlish Reed.
Straight at thy sight how did that surly Sire
Old Orcus quake, and greedy Dog retire
From's usual watch! whiles thou from slavish chain
Whole swarms of souls, to freedom do regain.
Then 'ginst thou with thy immortal Quire to praise
Thy Father, and his strength to Heaven to raise.
Ascending thus with joy, as thou do fare
Through the thin Sky, the Legions of the Air
Accursed Fiends, do tremble at thy sight,
And starry Troops wax pale at thy pure light.
But Ather master of queint Harmonies
With smiling look on's Music does devise,
Tunes his seven-corded Harp, more trimly strung;
Then strikes up loudly thy Triumphall song.
Lucifer laughs bright Nuncio of the Day,
And golden Hesperus, to hear him play.
The Moon begins a dance, great Queen of Night,
Her hollow horns filled up with flusher light.
Titan his streaming locks along does strew
Under thy sacred feet more soft to go,
Does homage to thee as to Gods dear Son,
And to the Spring whence his own light does run.
Then thou, drad Victour! thy quick wings did shake
And suddenly ascend'st above the back
Of the blew Sky. In the Intellectual spears
Dispreadst thy self: Where the still Fount appears
Of inexhausted Good, and silent Heaven
Smiles without wrinckle, ever constant, even.
Unwearied Time this mansion connot seize
Nor Hyles worm, importunate Disease.
Here Aeon wons that cannot wexen old,
Though of his years the numbers no'te be told.
Youthful and aged at once here does he live,
And to the Gods, unmoved duration give.
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
FINIS.
Notes upon Psychozoia.
Canto 1. Stanz. 1.
Verse. 6. Psyche I Will sing etc. THe fittest station to take a right view of the
Song of the Soul, is Psyche, or the soul of the Universe. For whatsoever is
handled in Psychozoia, and the three other parts of this song has a meet
relation to Psyche as the subject of the whole Poem. For the whole Poem is
spent either in her Parentage, Marriage, Clothing or Offspring.

The three first are dispatched in the first Canto of Psychozoia, the last in
the two latter Cantoes and three following parts of the Poem. For in the second
Canto the manner of the production of Souls is set out till the 24 Stanza. Then
all the residue of that and the whole Canto following in the description of
their habitation. But their habitation being the Land of life, that is, the
several states of the Soul in good and evil, for this cause chiefly, as also
in part, for the description in the first Canto of that life derived from Ahad
and Aeon to Psyche, and that which flows from her (...) to the lowest skirts of
the Universe, do I call this first part of the Song of the Soul, Psychozoia.

Verse. 7. O life of time and all Alterity! For what is time but the
perseverance of the motion of the soul of the world, while she by her restless
power brings forth these things in succession, that Eternity has at once
altogether. For such is the nature of Aeon or Eternity, viz. A life exhibiting
all things at once, and in one. (...), but distance of life makes time, and the
prorogation of life continues time, the praeterition of life is the
praeterition of time, but Psyche is the fountain of this evolved life, whence
she is also the very life of time.

And all Alterity. It may be thus shadowed out. The seed of a plant has all
the whole tree, branches, leaves, and fruit at once, in one point after a
manner closed up, but potentially. Eternity has all the world in an
indivisible indistant way at once, and that actually.

Psyche or the Soul of the world, when she begins this world, begets a grosser
kind of Alterity, and dispersed diversity (...). etc. as the seminall form
spreads out it self, and the body it inacts into distant branches from the
quiet and silent seed, making that actual in time and succession which could
not be here below in bodies at once. See Plotin Ennead. 3. lib. 7. cap. 10.
where the nature of time is more fully described.

Verse. 8. The life of lives. Viz. God himself, (...) Of minds thou art the
Mind. (...) The Soul of souls. (...) And Nature of each natures kind.
Synes. Hymn. 4.

STANZ. 5. Verse. 9. That same that Atove hight. The deepest Center of all
things, and first root of all beings; the Platonists call (...) and (...), that
is, the Good, and the One. See Plot. Ennead. 1. lib. 7. cap, 1. Mercur.
Trismeg. Sermon. Univers. ad Aesculap. This is the simple and naked essence of
God, utterly devoid of division and plurality, and therefore not to be known by
reason or Intellect, but (...), as the Oracle speaks, by the flower, or the
summity of the Intellect. (...), that is, (...) as Mich. Psellus expounds it,
by the unitive power of the Intellect, or by a certain simple and tactuall
Energie of the soul when it is roused into act.

For so is the expression of Plotinus, Ennead. 6. l. 9. c. 7. (...) For he is
present to him that can touch him, but to him that cannot, he is not present:
and in the 9. Cap. describing more lively the state of our union with Atove, or
the eminent absolute Good, (...), etc. And there lies our happiness, says
he, and to be removed from hence, is but to partake less of being. Here is the
rest of the soul, set out of the reach of all evils, ascended into a place
devoid of all danger and mischief. Here she becomes intellectual, Here she is
impassible, Here she truly lives indeed. But this life that we live disjoined
from God is but a shadow, and umbratil imitation of that. But that (...),
intellectual energie, an energie that begets Gods (...) in that still and
silent tactuall conjunction with this Universal Good. It begets beauty, it
begets righteousness, it begets valor; for these does the soul bring forth,
being once impregned of God, and filled as it were with his sacred seed. And in
the 10. Chap. describing further this Union, he says, that God and the soul
does as it were (...), join centres, and centres do wholly swallow up one
another, so that this union is even more then touch.

This tactuall conjunction of the soul with God surely in the Christian phrase
is no more then divine love, as S, John speaks. God is love, and he that is in
love is in God and God in him. And Plotinus does plainly acknowledge it, when
as he says, Every soul is a Venus and has her Cupid born with her, an
heavenly Cupid with an heavenly Venus, till she be defiled with earthly love,
(...), made common and as it were become an Harlot: but that the soul in the
purity of her own nature, loves God and desires to be joined with him, as a
beautiful virgin to a beautiful man, (...), for so I think the text is to be
read, and not (...). See the whole ninth book of the sixth Ennead. For the
nature of Atove or Ahad and the manner of the conjunction of the soul with him
is there exquisitly set out.

STANZA. 6, 7. Now can I not, etc. It being acknowledged both in the purest
Philosophy and in Christianity, that the root of all things is goodness it
self, the most genuine consequence of this is, That his providence being
measured by himself, goodness it self is the measure thereof: so that all
Melancholic and dismal dreams of idly affrighted men, may well vanish in the
clearness of this light and truth; as also the envious, malicious, and bloody
minded man may here consider, how far he has wandered from the will of God, and
the root of his own being.

STANZA 8. This Ahad of himself the Aeon fair, etc. This Aeon is all things
essentially and truly as Ahad or Atove above all things. It is the very
intellectual world, Eternal life, united ever with the father that brought
him forth. The (...) of God, his understanding, or explicit inward
comprehension of all things ab aeterno, infinite and every where, differing
only from his fountain in this, that he is one simple Unity, this one
ever-actuall omniformity, (...). as the Oracle speaks, being the very Essence
or Idea of all things, at once, not successively or in part. See Plotin.
Ennead. 3. lib. 7. where he does acknowledge Aeon and On all one: at the fourth
Chapter.

STANZ. 9. This is the ancient Eidos omniform Fount of all beauty, etc. The
description of Aeon, which is the first form also or pulchritude, is largely
set out: Ennead. 5. lib. 8. (...), where the condition of that Eternal life is
thus delineated. (...) etc. that is, It is an easy life they live there, for
truth is their mother, nurce, substance, and nourishment, and they see all
things (not in which generation is but essence) and themselves in others. For
all is pellucid, nothing dark or impervious, but every one to every one is
perspicuous, and all to every one as light to light. For every one has in him
all things, and again sees all things in others. So that all things are every
where, and all is all, and every thing all, and the splendor infinite. For
every thing there is great, since what is little must be also great: the Sun
there is all the stars, and again every star the Sun, and all things: but
every thing is more eminently some one thing, and yet all things fairly shine
in every thing, etc. See Plotin. Ennead. 5. lib. 8. cap. 4.

STANZ. 13. Far otherwise it fares in Aeons realms. This is in reference to
Narcissus story Stanz. 12. that sets out the hazard of loving earthly beauty,
and of the desire of conjunction with it: but there is no such danger in Aeon
land, for the objects there are perfective and not destructive, better then the
soul, not baser: and chiefly Abinoam or Ahad which is as it were the Sun of
that world, which Aeon does always behold steady and unmoved, and with him all
they that arrive thither. Aeons self is also an unspeakable plenitude of life,
and it is an unexpresseable perfection of the mind to be joined with him, so
that there is plainly no danger or hurt to desire earnestly the enjoyment of
these divine forms, though union with corporeal features may deface the soul.

STANZ, 14. For Aeon land which men Idea call Is naught but life, etc. So
Plotin. (...). that is.

The nature of Intellect and On is the true and first world, not distant from
it self, not weak by division or dispersion, nothing defective. But all of it
is life, and all intellect living in one and at once understanding. A part
exhibits the whole, and the whole is friendly to it self, not separated one
part from another, nor become another alone; and estranged from others. Whence
one part is not injurious to another nor contrary. Wherefore every where being
one and perfect every where, it stands unmoved and admits no alteration. See
Ennead 3. lib. 2. cap. 1,

STANZ. 5. That Virgin wife of Aeon Vranore. Vranore or Psyche the wife of
Aeon, the daughter of Ahad. For indeed all things come from him, but (...);
First (...) or Ahad, that is a simple unity: then Aeon, that is (...) an actual
unmovable Omniformity: Lastly, (...), that is Vranore, or Psyche, viz, capable
of that stable Omniformity, that Fullness of life even all things, and of him
that is above all things: but it is not of her Essence to be all things
actually and steddily. See Plotin. (...). Ennead. 5. lib. 1. cap, 8. But
nothing can be more plain than what he has written, Ennead. 5. lib. 6. cap. 4.
where speaking of Ahad, Aeon, and Psyche (...) (says he) (...). that is, And
we may resemble the first, viz. Ahad, to lux or light, the next to the Sun;
the third viz. Psyche, to the Moon, borrowing her light of the Sun. For
Psyche has but an adventitious Intellect, which does as it were color her,
made Intellectual. But Intellect or Aeon, has in himself proper Intellectual
life, not being that light only, but that which is in his essence illuminated
by Ahad: but that which imparts this light, viz. Ahad, is light alone, and
nothing else beside, exhibiting a power to him to be what he is.

STANZ. 4. 5. Because the fire Of Aethers essence, -- etc. That the Intellect
in man is clothed with the soul, the soul with fire or spirit; and that through
that instrument it governs and orders this gross body, is the Opinion of
Trismeg. in his Clavis; and the like instrument he ascribes to the Maker of the
whole World (...). The Maker of the Heavens uses fire to his work. But I
conceive indeed that the pure Heavens or Ether, which is from (...) to burn,
is nothing else but attenuate fire (...), a subtle fiery liquor or liquid
fire; as I have else where intimated.

Verse. 6.7. And inward unseen golden hew does dight, And life of Sense, etc. I
cannot better declare this matter then the Philosopher has already, Ennead. 5.
lib. 1. cap. 2.

Let any particular soul says he, quietly by her self conceive the whole
Universe devoid of life, form, and motion; let the Earth be still and stupid,
the Sea, the Air, and the Heaven: anon an universal soul flow into this
torpent mass, inwardly infused, penetrating throughout, and illuminating all,
as the beams of the Sun does some Cloud (...), making a golden show by their
gilding light. Such is the entrance of Psyche into the body of the Universe,
kindling and exciting the dead mist, the utmost projection of her own life into
an Aethereall vivacity, and working in this, by her plasmaticall Spirits or
Archei, all the whole world into order and shape, fitting this sacred Animal^
for perfect sense, establishing that in being, which before was next to
nothing, Verse. 8. Aether's the vehicle of touch, smell, sight: Of taste, etc.

This is true in the Microcosme as well as in the Macrocosme above described,
viz. that the more subtle, fiery and attenuate spirits in man's body, are the
medium whereby the soul is joined to and does work in the body.

STANZ. 16. -- May reach that vast profundity. Synesius also calls it (...),
the paternall depth Hymn. 2.

STANZ. 18. Now rise my Muse, etc. From this STANZ. to the 33. is contained a
description of the visible World.

Verse. 2. The outward vest. To make all this visible World the garment of
Psyche is no forced or new fancy; since the Sibyll has apparrelled God
therewith, Sibyll. Orac. lib. 1.

(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
That is, I am JEHOVAH, well my words perpend,
Clad with the frory Sea, all mantled over
With the blew Heavens, shod with the Earth I wend,
The Stars around me dance, the Air does me cover.


Moses also (if we will believe Philo the Jew) made Aarons garment a symboll of
the visible World, and it agrees well with this of the Sibylls. For first upon
the top, on his Mitre was the (...) JEHOVAH; The shoulder-pieces might
represent the Heavens; The two Precious-stones there, the two Hemispheres; The
twelve names engraven, the twelve signs of the Zodiac; The blew Robe, the
Air; (...)or the flowery work at the hemme of the garment, the earth; (...), the
Pomegranets (with an allusion to (...) fluo) the water; (...) the Bells, the
harmony, that is, the mixture of earth and water for generation. But as for
(...) there is nothing answers to it in the Hebrew Text, and why should (...)
be Emblems of the water, and not rather of the whole Globe of the Earth and
Water, it being a round fruit, and representing the seminall fulness of the
Earth, by its scissure in the side, full of kernells or seeds? Peradventure had
Philo been as well instructed in Pythagorisme, as in Platonisme, and had mist
the Septuagints (...), he would hit of another harmony, then the mixture of
Water and Earth does make: I mean the noise of those Balls mentioned STANZ. 30.
And so the order of having every Bell joined with a Pomegranet, would have
signified the many and numerous Globes at the several depths of the World,
with their concomitant sounds in their motion, or at the least proportionable
velocities, and consequently Pythagoras harmony would have been ratified from
Aarons robe: but I hold not this Argument apodicticall. Phil. de vita Mosis.

Verse. 7. The many Plicatures. Every particular body is esteemed but a knot or
close folding of that one entire Out-garment of Psyche.

STANZ. 19. verse. the 9. The garment round. etc. It is too too probable the
world is round if it be not infinite, the reasons be obvious; but to conclude
it finite or infinite is but guess, man's imagination being unable to represent
Infinity to Reason to judge on.

STANZ. 30.31. But yet one thing I saw, etc At the low hem, etc. A glance at
Copernicus opinion, as at theirs also that make the fixed stars so many
Suns, and all the Planets to be inhabited: for by their inhabitants they will
be deemed the lowest part of this visible world, be it Saturn, Mars, Jupiter,
or what Planet soever else discovered, or, as yet not discovered; wherefore
according to this conceit, it is said,

At the low hem of this large garment-gay. That is, at the places that seem
low, and these are all inhabited Planets supposing there be any inhabited.

STANZ. 33.34. Did tie them twain, etc. Aeon and Psyche here become one, not as
though they were one and the same essence, but nearer after that kind of manner
that the body and soul become one man. For Aeon is the Entelechia of Psyche, as
I may say, but closer unite then any form or soul to any body, and never to be
separate. Because the universal soul of the world finds all things in Aeon,
and knows also exactly inferior things. For her animadversion is not fixed or
determined to one, as man's soul is, but free, every where at once, above and
below, so that she cannot possibly leave off this state, but is one, ever
firmly united with Aeon.

STANZ. 36. To thee each knee, etc. A Christian mystery wrapped up in a
Platonicall covering, the reduction of the world to conformity with the
Eternal Intellect, and the soul of the world. For these move still, to this
very day, to win men to be governed by them, and not by their own perverse and
dark will. Or rather to speak in the Christian Idiom, the Son of God, and the
Holy Ghost do thus stir men up, and invite them to true and lively obedience
to the eternal will of God, and to forsake their own selves, and their blind
way, and to walk all in one everlasting way of light and saving health.

STANZ. 39. Ahad these three in one, etc. Here we see Ahad, Aeon. and Psyche
all one, which is to be understood not of Essence, but Person (as I may so
speak) and that they move and act upon the creature, as one man.

STANZ. 41. We Physis name. Physis is nothing else but the vegetable World, the
Universal comprehension of Spermaticall life dispersed throughout. This
seminall World is neither the very Intellect it self, though it be stored with
all forms, nor any kind of pure soul, though depending of both, (...), A kind
of life eradiating and resulting both from Intellect and Psyche.

This enters and raises up into life and beauty, the whole corporeal world,
orders the lowest projection of life, viz. the real ^uspis of the Cone
infinitely multiplied, awaking that immense mist of Atoms into several
energies, into fiery, watery and earthly; and placing her Magic attractive
points, sucks hither and hither to every center a due proportion, and rightly
disposed number of those Cuspidal particles, knedding them into Suns, Moons,
Earths, etc. and then with a more curious artifice, the particular Archei frame
out in every one such inhabitants and ornaments, as the divine Understanding
has thought fit. For Physis (as I said) is not the divine Understanding it
self, but is as if you should conceive, an Artificers imagination separate from
the Artificer, and left alone to work by it self without animadversion. Hence
Physis or Nature is sometimes puzzeld and bungells in ill disposed matter,
because its power is not absolute and omnipotent. See Plot. Eunead. 3. lib. 2.

STANZ. ^9. In midst of this fine web does Haphe sit. Every sense to be a kind
of touch, was the opinion of the ancient Philosophers, as you may see in
Theophrastus (...). Every sense in Psyche is plainly and perfectly Touch, or
more then Touch rather, I mean, a nearer union. But this present Stanza
respects more properly the nature of sense in particular Animals (so far had
my pen started aside) where Touch is the center as it were from whence the soul
discerns in the circumference all manner of Forms and Motions, She is the
center from whence all the light
Dispreads, and goodly glorious forms do flit
Hither and thither.


Thus: for there is first a tactuall conjunction as it were of the
representative rays of every thing, with our sensorium before we know the
things themselves, which rays we really feeling, perceive those things at
distance by this communication. For these rays always convey the distance or
place, as well as the color. Hence do we discern figure, viz. the ray of every
Atom of the object representing the site of its Atom. For figure is nothing
else but the order or disposition of those Atoms. Thus have we all figures,
colors, and shapes in a whole Horison conveyed to our sight by a centrall
Touch of those rays of the objects round about us.

STANZ. 49. But Haphes Mother hight all-spread community. As is plain in the
communication of rays. For I cannot think that union simply with this sensible
world, of it self can make us know things at distance, though Plotinus seem
inclinable to that Opinion. See Psychathan, lib. 3. Cant. 1.

STANZ. 55. All Sense does in proportion consist. Somethings are so light that
the weight is indiscernable to some, as the Fly that sat upon the Bulls horns
and apologized for her self, as having wearied him, as it is in the Arabian
fable, some smells too weak to strike the nostrills of others, and some objects
too obscure to be seen of the eyes of othersome. But Arachne is proportioned to
all whatsoever is any way sensible to any; because Psyche does inact this All
or Universe as a particular Soul does the body.

Verse. 9. All life of Sense is in great Haphe's lift. It must needs be so. For
no living soul is sensible of ought in this out-World, but by being joined in a
living manner to it. Therefore Psyche being joined to it all, must needs
perceive all forms and motions in it, that are presented to any particular
soul. For these representations be made in some particular body, which is but a
part of the whole, a knot as it were of Psyches outward stole, but the
universal body of the World, is one undivided piece, wherefore nor Owl, nor
Bat, nor Cat, nor any thing else can possibly see, but Psyche sees ipso facto,
for it is part of her body that has those representations in it; wherefore man
is transfixt through and through by the rays of the divine Light, besides that
more incomprehensible way of omnisciency in God.

STANZ. 5.6. Sense and Consent, etc. As Psyche sees all natural things, so she
does allow of them. For contrariety of Spirits is only betwixt particulars,
and ugliness, and ill-favourednesse are but such to some kinds, nor is poison
poison to all, else would the Spider be her own death, and all venomous
monsters would save man the labor of encounter.

STANZ. 57. Rich Semele display, Till we come to Psyches self, motion and
mutabilitie have place; But in Aeon and Ahad is steady and unalterable rest,
(...). And there has Psyche the one eye placed as well as the other below,
beholding all things, and that which is above all things, as also the shadows
and projections of all things without distraction, at once, as easily as our
eyes discern many colors at once in one thing.

STANZ. 59. The mother of each Semele. How she is the mother of them, see the
second Canto of this book at the 23. Stanz.

Verse. 3. But she grasps all. The Mundane spirit (of which every body has its
part) inacted by Psyche, if any particular soul exert any imaginative act,
needs must for a time at least be colored as it were or stained with that
impression; so that Psyche must needs perceive it, since it affects her own
spirit. See Psychath. lib. 3. Cant. 2. Stanz. 46.47. Besides this, every
particular soul as all things else depending so intimately on Psyche as being
effluxes from her, it is inconceivable that the least motions of the mind, or
stillest thought should escape her.

But if any man be puzzled how the fantasy of a man's soul should make an
impression upon any part of the universal spirit of the world, and Semele
should not, let him consider, that the imaginative operations of Psyche are
more high, more hovering and suspense from immersion into the grosser spirits
of this body, which is little or nothing conscious of what is done so far
above, and so not receiving the impresse of so high acts, it ordinarily happens
(even in the exaltation of our own fancy) that memory fails. And besides
this, as the vigor of sense debilitates or quite extinguisheth the ordinary
imaginations of the soul, so does her ordinary imaginations, or sense, or both,
hinder the animadversion of the impresses of Semele. But particular
imaginations and the vigor of sense weakened or extinct in sleep, or near
death, the energies of the soul of the world are then more perceptible,
probably, even in the very spirit of our body, as well as in the naked soul:
hence come prophetic dreams and true predictions before death.

But to go back to the apprehensions of Psyche. Every sensible object and every
sensitive and imaginative act appear before her, and whatsoever is in her
sight, is also in the sight of Aeon. Because the union betwixt Aeon and Psyche
is much more near then between Psyche and the Mundane spirit. And whatsoever is
represented in Aeon is also clearly in the view of Ahad; by reason of the
unexpresseable close unity of these two; so that Ahad knows every individual
thing and motion, as clearly, nay more clearly then any mortal eye can view
any one thing, let it look never so steddily on it.

Thus the thoughts of all men's minds and motions of heart arise up into the
sight and presence of the all-comprehending Divinity, as necessarily and
naturally as reek or fume of frankincense rouls up into the open air. For the
spirit of the Lord fills all the world, and that which contains all things
has knowledge of the voice, yea of the outward shape, gestures, and thoughts
too. Wisd. 1, 7.

Nor is Eternity changed or obscured by the projection of these low shadows.
For infinite animad version can discern all things unmixtly and undisturbedly,
not at all loosing it self, though gaining nothing by the sight of inferior
things. Nor can I assent to that passage in Plotin taken in one sense, nor is
it (I think) necessary to take it in that sense, the words are these, (...).
that is, But that such a kind of inclining himself to himself, being as it were
his energie and abode in himself, makes him to be what he is, the contrary
supposed does argue. For if he should incline to that which is without him, he
would lose that being which he is. But this is to be considered, that God being
infinitely infinite, without stooping or inclining, can produce all things, and
view always his work, keeping his own seat that is himself: for so says the
Philosopher in another place, (...). that is, That Intellect or On, or the
Intellectual world is the first energie of God, is the first substance from
him, he abiding in himself. See Plotin. Ennead. 6. lib. 8. cap. 16. also
Ennead. 1. lib. 8. c. 2.

But now to take a short view of what I have run through in my notes on this
Canto. Ahad, Aeon, Psyche, the Platonic Triad, is rather the (...) then (...),
the Divinity rather then the Deity. For God is but one indivisible unmovable
self-born Unity, and his first born creature is Wisdom, Intellect, Aeon, On,
or Autocalon, or in a word, the Intellectual world, whose measure himself is,
that is simple and perfect Goodness. (...). that is. For he is without need,
self-sufficient, wanting nothing, the measure and term of all things, yielding
out of himself Intellect or On, and Psyche.

And speaking of Intellect, (...). That intellect is taken up about him,
employed in a kind of vital operation about him, living in him.

But of Psyche (...). But Psyche something removed and without, danceth about
the Intellect, busily beholding it, and looking into it, sees God through it.
So that Ahad is the vital perfection of Aeon or Intellect, and Aeon and Ahad
the happiness of Psyche and her vital accomplishment. Ennead. 1. lib. 8. And
both Aeon and Psyche, and all things else are from Ahad, (...), that is with
abatement, and farthest off from the fountain the weaker and darker, as is more
fully set forth in the next Canto. Stanz. 7, 8. etc.

And that the world is inacted by Psyche, and so is (which Trismegist and Plato
are not nice to grant) one entire Animal, and that therefore nothing can escape
the knowledge of that universal soul, no more then any sensation, imagination,
or motion of man can be hid from the soul of man, if she be at leisure to
observe it. That Psyche is at leisure being incapable of distraction, as whose
animadversion is infinite, entirely omnipresent, and every where at once.

And now I have taken the pains so accurately to describe the Deity, me thinks,
I have made my self obnoxious to almost a just censure of too much boldness
and curiosity.

But give me leave to answer, that I have not taken upon me so much to set out
the absolute nature of God, as those Notions that Plato's School have framed of
Him, Which I hold neither my self nor any man else engaged to embrace for
Oracles, though they were true, 'till such time as they appear to him to be so.
But how ever, I think all men are to interpret both Plato and all men else at
the best, and rather mark what of undoubted truth they aim at, then quarrel
and entangle themselves in disputes about the manner of expressing that which
no man can reach unto. As for example, I had rather fill my mind with that
unquestionable truth exhibited in their Triad, viz. that God is as fully
Goodness, Wisdom, and powerful Love, as if there were three such distinct
Hypostases in the Deity, and then that he is as surely one with himself as if
there were but one only Hypostasis, then to perplex my mind with troublesome
questions of Three and One, and One and three, etc.

For the mind of man being so unable to conceive any thing of the naked being
of God, those more gross and figurate representations of Him, so be they be
suitable to and expressive of His unquestionable Attributes, are not only
passable but convenient for created understandings, to lead them on in the
contemplation of God in easy Love and Triumph. Whereas by endeavoring more
Magisterially and determinately to comprehend and conclude that which is so
unconcludible and incomprehensible to the understanding of man, we work our
selves into anxietie and subtle distemper and dry up the more precious
outflowings of the Divinity in our souls, by this hellish thirst and
importunate desire of dealing with the very naked essence of God. But let every
modest Philosopher but read that Inscription in Isis Temple, a notable monument
of the great wisdom of the Ancients: (...), and then pronounce whether there
be not room enough in the Deity for every man to speak diversely one from
another, in the representation thereof, and yet no man nor all men together to
set out accurately and adequately the nature of God.

Notes upon Psychozoia.
Canto 2.
STANZ. 6. Its he that made us. YEt not excluding Ahad. See what is written upon
the 23. Stanza of this Canto.

STANZ. 9. The last extreme, the fardest of from light Plotinus Ennead. 4. lib.
3. cap. 9. describes the production of the corporeal world after this manner,
Psyche cannot issue out into any external vivificative act, unless you
suppose a body, for that's her place properly, and naturally. Wherefore if she
will have place for any vital act, she must produce her self a body. So she
keeping steddily her own station, (...), or rather, (...), like a plentiful
flame shining out in the extreme margins of the fire begot a fuliginous
darkness; which she seeing streightway actuated with life and form, (...), so
that darkness becoming a variously adorned aedifice is not disjoined from its
builder, but depends thence as being the genuine and true energie of the soul
of the World. This I conceive is the sense of the Philosopher, whose conceit I
have improved and made use of, as here in this Canto for many Stanzas together,
so also else where in Psychathanasia.

Verse. 2. Hyles cell. What I understand by Hyle, see the Interp. Genesis It Is
lower then this shadow that Plotinus speaks of, and which makes the body of
the World. For I conceive the body of the World to be nothing else but the
real Cuspis of the Cone even infinitely multiplied and reiterated. Hyle to be
nothing else but potentiality: that to be an actual Centrality, though as low
as next to nothing. But what inconvenience is in Tasis, or the corporeal
sensible nature, to spring from Hyle, or the scant capacity, or
incompossibility of the creature.

STANZ. 10. Dependence of this All hence does appear. (to the 17. Stanz. The
production of the World being by way of energy, or emanation, has drawn
strange expressions from some of the Ancients, as Trismeg. cap. 11. Men's ad
Mercur. (...). that is, For God being the sole Artificer, is always in his
work, being indeed that which he makes. According to this tenor is that also
in Orpheus.

(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
That is,

Jov's first, Jov's last, drad Thunderer on high,
Jov's head, Jov's navell. Out of Jove all is made.
Jov's the depth of the Earth, and starry Sky.
Jove is a man, Jov's an immortal Maid.
Jove is the breath of all, Jove's restless fire,
Jov's the Seas root, Jove is both Sun and Moon,
Jov's King, Jov's Prince of all and awful Sire:
For having all hid in himself, anon
He from his sacred heart them out does bring
To cheerful light, working each wondrous thing.
Aristot. De Mundo. cap. 7. And this Hyperbolicall expression of the close
dependence that all things have on God, is not mis-beseeming Poetry. But
Trismeg. is as punctual in this excess as the Poet, Ad Tat. cap. 5. (...).

Hence is the strange opinion of God being all, and that there is nothing but
God. But it is not at all strange that all things are the mere energie of God,
and do as purely depend on him, as the Sunbeams of the Sun. So that so far
forth as we may say the body, lux and lumen of the Sun, all put together is
the Sun; so far at least we may be bold to say that God is all things, and
that there is nothing but God. And that all this may not seem to be said for
nothing, the apprehension of what has been writ on this 1. verse of the 10.
Stanz. will also clear well the 6. 7. and 8. verses of the 15. Stanz. where the
whole Universe is exhibited to the mind as one vital Orb, whose center is God
himself, or Ahad.

Verse. the 9. In every Atom-ball. That is, Ahad and Aeon are in every Cuspiall
particle of the world.

STANZ. 12. Why may't not, etc. By differentiall profundity is understood the
different kinds of things descending (...) or abatement from the first cause of
all things. But by latitude is understood the multitude of each kind in
Individuo, which whether they be not infinite in spiritual beings where there
is no (...) or justling for elbow-room I know not, unless you will say there
will be then more infinites then one. But those are numbers, and not one. I but
those numbers put together are equal to that One. But yet that One may be
infinitely better then all: For who will not say that Space or Vacuum is
infinitely worse, then any real thing, and yet its extension is infinite, as
Lucretius stoutly proves in his first Book, De^natura rerum.

STANZ. 15. Thoroughly possessed of life's community. That the World or Universe is
indewed with life, though it be denied of some, who prove themselves men more
by their risibility, then by their reason, yet very worthy and sober
Philosophers have asserted it. As M. Anton. (...), lib. 10. where he calls this
Universe, (...) a complete Animal, good, just, and beautiful. And Trismeg.
cap. 12. de Commun. Intellectu. ad Tat. (...), etc. This Universe a great Deity
(which I conceive he speaks in reference to Psyche, upon whom such divine
excellency is derived) and the image of a greater, united also to him, and
keeping the will and ordinances of his Father, is one entire fulness of life.
(...). For there neither was, nor is, nor shall be any thing in the World
devoid of life. And Plotin. Ennead. 4. lib. 3. cap. 10. shows how Psyche by her
vital power, full of form and vigor, shapes, and adorns, and actuates the
World, (...), as the seminall forms or Archei form and shape out particular
Animals, as so many little Worlds.

Verse. 9. And all the Vests be Seats, etc. i.e. Degrees. STANZ. 16. That
particular creature throng: In contradistinction to the Universal creature
Aeon, Psyche, Physis, Tasis, the center as it were, and more firm essence of
the particular creatures. For I must call these universal Orders of life,
creatures too, as well as those, and only one God, from whence is both the
sensible and Intellectual All, and every particular in them both, or from them
both.

STANZ. 23. Each life a several ray is from that Sphere, Arachne, Semel, etc.
Not as if there were so many souls joined together, and made one soul, but
there is a participation of the virtue at least of all the life that is in the
universal Orb of life, at the Creation of Man's soul, of which this place is
meant, whence man may well be termed a Microcosme, or Compendium of the whole
World.

STANZ. 24. Great Psychany. The abode of the body is this Earth, but the
habitation of the soul her own energy, which is exceeding vast, at least in
some. Every man has a proper World, or particular Horizon to himself, enlarged
or contracted according to the capacity of his mind. But even Sense can reach
the stars; what then can exalted fancy do, or boundless Intellect? But if
stars be all inhabited, which Writers no way contemptible do assert, how vast
their habitation is, is obvious to any fancy. Beside some inhabit God
himself, who is unspeakably infinite.

STANZ. 25. Two mighty Kingdoms etc. Let Psychanie be as big or little as it
will, Autaesthesia, and Theoprepia be the main parts of it, and exhaust the
whole. Let souls be in the body or out of the body, or where they will, if they
be but alive, they are alive to God, or themselves, and so are either
Theoprepians, or Autaesthesians.

Verse. 4. Autaesthesie's divided into tway. Now they that are alive unto
themselves, are either wholly alive unto themselves, or the life of God has
also taken hold upon them; they that are wholly alive to themselves, their
abode is named Adamah, which signifies the corrupt natural life, the old
Adam, or Beirah, because this Adam is but a brute, compared to that which
Plotinus calls the true Man, whose form, and shape, and life, is wisdom, and
righteousness: That which is above, is, says he, (...). but that low life in
the body is but a Leonine, or rather a mixture of all brutish lives together,
and is the seat or sink of wickedness. (...), as Trismegist. speaks. For vice
is congenit or connaturall to beasts. See Plotin. Ennead. 1. cap. 1. whence it
is manifest why we call one thing by these two names of Adamah, and Beirah.

The other part of Autaesthesia is Dizoia, their condition is as this present
Stanza declares, mungrill, betwixt Man and Beast. Light and Darkness, God and
the Devil, Jacob and Esau struggle in them.

STANZ. 26. Great Michael rules, etc. Theoprepia, is a condition of the soul,
whereby she does that which would become God himself to do in the like cases,
whether in the body, or out of the body. Michael rules here, that is, the
Image or likeness of God, the true Man, the Lord from Heaven. For the true man
indeed, viz. the second Adam, is nothing else but the Image of the God of
Heaven. This is He of whom the soul will say when He comes to abide in her,
and when He is known of her (...) who is like unto God, for either beauty, or
power? who so comely or strong as He?

Verse. 5. His name is Demon. Demon the Prince of Autaesthesie, i. e. of
self-sensednesse, it is the very image of the Devil, or the Devil himself, or
worse if ought can be worse: it is a life dictating self-seeking, and bottoming
a man's self upon himself, a will divided from the will of God, and centred in
its self.

Verse. 7. From his dividing force, etc. All divisions both betwixt God and Man,
and Man and Man, are from this self-seeking life.

STANZ. 28. Autophilus the one yoleeped is. Autophilus, is the souls more
subtle and close embracements of her self in spiritual arrogance, as
Philosomatus, the love of her body; wherefore the one rules most in Dizoia,
the other in Beirah.

Verse. 8. Born of the slime of Autaesthesia. Demon, that is, the author of
division of man from God, born of self-sensednesse. See Plotin. Ennead. 5. lib.
1. cap. 1. where he says, the first cause of evil to the soul was, (...), that
they would be their own or of themselves. So delighted with this liberty, they
were more and more estranged, till at last like children taken away young from
their parents, they in process of time grew ignorant both of themselves and of
their parents.

SANZ. 29. Duessa first invented Magic lore. Duessa is the natural life of
the body, or the natural spirit, that, whereby we are liable to Magic
assaults, which are but the sympathies and antipathies of nature, such as are
in the spirit of the world, (...). The true Magic (says he) is nothing else
but the concord and discord in the Universe, and he, viz. the the world is the
first Magician and Enchanter, others do but learn of him by imitation:
wherefore they that are established in a principle above the world, and are
strong in God, which are the true and perfect Israel, are exempt from the
danger of this Enchantment. (...). For neither Astrall spirit nor Angel can
prevail against one ray of the Deity; as Aesculapius writes to King Ammon.
Plotinus soul was come to that high and noble temper, that he did not only
keep off Magical assaults from himself, but retorted them upon his enemy
Olympius, which Olympius himself, who practiced against him, did confess to be
from the exalted power of his soul, Porphyr. de Vita Plot.

STANZ. 30. Ten times ten times ten. The number of ten among the ancients
called (...), is an emblem of perfection: for it comprehends all numbers,, since
we are fain to come back again to one, two, etc. when we are past it. So that
ten may go for perfection of parts in the holy life: but the raising of it into
a cube by multiplication, perfection of degrees in a solid, and unshaken manner.

STANZ. 33, Amoritish ground. (...) Philo interprets (...) and it is indeed
from (...) dixit, the Land of talkers.

STANZ. 34. Psittacusa land, id est, the land of talkers or Parots. See Don
Psittaco, Intepret. Genesis STANZ. 35. There Is no Society, etc. This Stanza briefly
sets out the Beironites condition as concerning their Society and friendship,
the bond whereof and exercise, is either feasting and tippling; or a
complacency in the well-favourednesse of this mortal body, or some astrall
concordance or hidden harmony of spirits, which also often knits in wedlock
those that are far enough from beauty.

Verse. 2. But beastlike grazing, etc. Aristotle defines very well and like a
Philosopher the genuine society that should be among men, viz. in the
communication of reason and discourse. (...). For that in men is right society,
and not as in beasts, to graze in the same pasture. Moral. Nicom. lib. 9. cap.
8.

How unlike to these Beironites was the divine communialty of Pythagoras
followers (as Iamblicus describes it, de vita Pythag. lib. 1. cap. 33.) not
only supplying friendly one another in the necessities of life, but mutually
cherishing in one another the divine life of the soul, and maintaining an
inviolable concord in the best things: (...). For they often admonished one
another not to dissipate the Deity in them: Wherefore their friendship wholly
in words and works seemed to aim at a kind of commixtion and union with God,
and communion with the divine Intellect and Soul.

STANZ. 136. The swelling hateful toad. This Stanza sets out the nature of
each Beironite singly considered by himself, which is referable to some bird or
beast, who are sometime lightly shadowed out even in their very countenances.

STANZ. 137. None in Beiron virtuously do live. True virtue I make account is
founded in true knowledge of God, in obedience and self-denial, without which,
those seeming virtuous dispositions, are but mockvirtues, no other then are
found in some measure among the brutes.

Verse. 9. If outward form you pierce, For as Cicero from Plato, says, Men's
cujusque is est quisque, The soul is the man, not the outward shape. If she
live therefore but the life of a Brute, if her vital operation, her vigorous
will, and complacency be that which a Beast likes, I cannot see that she is any
more then a living Brute, or a dead Man, or a Beast clad in man's cloths. See
the 48. Stanza of this Canto.

STANZ. 138, 139. From the 34. Stanz. to the 138. are the Religion, Polity,
Freindship, or familiar Society and single natures of the Beironites set out.
Here now begins the discovery of the way of escape from this brutish
condition, which is by obedience. Now obedience consists in these two,
Self-denial Autaparnes, and Patience Hypomone. Obedience discovers to us the
door of passage out of this pure brutality, viz. Humility. For it is
self-conceit and high presumption that we are all well, and wise already, that
keeps us in this base condition.

STANZ. 144. The young man's speech caused sad perplexity, etc. That a man in
confuso, or in general, is more easily drawn to entertain obedience, but when
it is more punctually discovered to him in self-denial and patience, it is
nothing so welcome.

STANZ. 146. For understanding of this Stanza, see Autaparnes in the Interpr.
Genesis as also in the 64, 65, 66, 67. Stanz. of the third Canto of this book.

STANZ. 147. Into Atuvus life does melt. Ice, so long as it is, is a thing
distinct, suppose, from the Ocean, but once melt by the warmth of the Sun it
becomes one with the rest of the sea, so that no man can say, at least, not
perceive it is different from the sea. This state of union with God Plotinus
(as all things else) describes excellently well. (...), Wherefore then the mind
neither sees, nor seeing discerns, nor phansies too, but as it were become
another, not her self nor her own, is there, and becoming His is one with Him,
as it were joining center with center. Ennead. 6. lib. 9. cap. 10. And that
this may not seem a Chimoera, I will annex what the noble Philosopher writes of
his own experience, Ennead. 4. lib. 8. cap. 1. (...), etc. I often awaking out
of the body into my self, and being without all things but within my self, do
then behold an admirable beauty, and become confident of my better condition,
having then so excellent a life, and being made one with the Deity: in which I
being placed do set my self above all other Intellectual beings. But after
this my station and rest in God, descending out of Intellect into reason, I am
perplexed to think both how I now descend, and how at first my soul entered this
body, she being such as she appeared to be by her self, although being in the
body. Such an union as this that Plotinus professes himself to have been
acquainted with, though it be the thing chiefly aimed at in this Stanza, yet I
do not confine my Theoprepia to it; nor think I the soul of man disjoined from
God, that is not in that sort united to him. But if a man have lost his
self-will, and self-love, being wholly dead to himself, and alive to God,
though that life exert it self in successive acts, if a man I say, be but
affected as God himself, if he were in the flesh would be affected, he is also
truly and really in Theoprepia.

Cant. 3.
STANZA. 1. Shafts which Vriel, verse. 5. and verse. 7. No other help we had for
Gabriel. URiel, (...) ignis Dei, Angelus Meridionalis, He that rules in the
power of the Meridian Sun. Quatuor Angeli praesidentes cardinibus Coeli,
Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Vrieb. For Gabriel in this place bears only a
natural notion, elsewhere it is the strength of the Lord revealed in the soul.
But as for those terms it was rather chance then choice that cast me upon them;
being nothing solicitous whether there be any such Presidents or no. I conceive
they be some old Rabbinicall inventions or traditions, by the gross mistake in
them.

For when as they assign to Michael the East, and the West to Raphael, they
seem never to have dreamed of any East or West but what belonged to their own
Horizon, when as, where ever East is, West is also to some Inhabitants, so that
both these Angels will have the same province, Cornel. Agrip. de Occult.
Philos. lib. 2. cap. 7.

STANZ. 3, 4, 5. The first estate of man, when he begins to make conscience of
the law of God, which I call Diana, which is the Moon, as not affording life
and vigor though some small light. Small I deem it in comparison of the
daystarre, the Sun of righteousness himself. This estate is set out in these
4. Stanzas.

STANZA. 6, 7, 8, 9. The penitent, perplexed, and passionate estate of one that
has the true sight and sense of his sin, and corruption, but is not rid of
them.

STANZ. 10, Me thought the Sun it self, etc. The condition of him whose
spirits indeed are unpurged, though the fire has got hold on them, and burns,
and glows, as in fowl rubbish. This estate is set out by the appearance of the
sun from Ida hill, the description whereof follows in the next Stanz.

STANZ. 11. But Phoebus form, etc. A sad image of bitter zeal and praecipitant
wrath against all those that are not in the same sad condition with our selves,
that is, that are either better or worse in life, and different in opinion.

Verse. 8. Small things they will prize, etc. Such men scarce got into the
spirit of Elias; yet esteem their temper above the meekness of Christ's own
spirit, because they never yet had experience of it.

STANZ. 18. All sects besides his own does execrate. This was the disease of
the Gnostics in Plotinus time, who contemned all beside their own sect, to
whom the incomparable Philosopher, gravely and more like a Christian, then
those that call themselves by that name, writes to this sense, That if they
were so much better then all the world, they ought to be so much the more mild
and modest, and not so full of ferocity and rudeness, and to think that there
may be room with God for others also. (...). And not in placing themselves
only next to God, to sore as it were in a dream, to fly in their sleep.

STANZ. 35. Whom with cruel spear. The difficulty here is how the eternal
Son of God may suffer, he being everlasting and immortal life it self, and
not contradict what was written, Canto. 1. Stanz. 9, 14, 35, 36, 37. For to the
impassible eternal being is the inheritance of the world there promised, but
here to that which is passible and mortal. I answer, that the eternal and
immortal son of God is to take possession of the world, by that which after
a manner is mortal and extinguishable, which is the energie of himself,
exerted upon the souls of men, or a kind of life diffused in man's heart and
soul, whereby God does inact us, and is our (...), as the soul is the (...) of
the body and governs and guides it. And if Aeon as he is the son of Ahad or
Atove (to speak Platonically) that is, the simple and free good, or in brief as
he is the son of God, who is the simple good without all self-nesse or
straitness, even pure and perfect Light it self (for this Aeon contains in him
also the whole creature and is the essence or Idea of all things) I say if he
as he is the son of God be in us by his imparted life, he then takes
possession of the world, and God by him. But he has not yet enquickened men
generally with this Deiform life, but it has lain dead to them or they to it,
that influx being rather suspended then absolutely destroyed, but as the soul
to its body, or any part of her body that is numb and dead. But when that life
shall flow into them, as the vital rays of the soul into this mortal body,
He shall then as truly govern, rule, and possess the world as any soul does
her body.

And that there is an eternal son of God, immortal impassible, and not
only in the souls of men, but that fills the whole universe, the Evangelist I
think will confirm. For he ascribes the creation of all things to him, yea and
calls him God, which makes me wonder that the Turks have so high an esteem of
this Gospel of S. John, unless they will interpret, (...) according to the
same tenor that (...) is to be interpreted, neither place then signifying,
unity or identity, but union only and conjunction.

But to prove the thing in hand (John the 1. verse. 10.) He was in the world and
the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.

By world must be understood either the whole universe, or men inhabiting it,
and they either the godly or the wicked.

If the Universe, he is then the eternal principle whereby God made the whole
creation. If the godly only (as he may be said in some more special manner to
be their maker) how came they not to know him, when he was in them and alive in
them; (...). If the wicked only, he made them not wicked, so that if he made
them at all, he made their natural being, soul, and body, and if them why not
all the world? whence a man may reasonably conclude, that the (...), that is
the Word is eternal and immortal, and invulnerable. And if any Authority will
now be worth looking after (S. John's testimony being so plain) Philo the Jew
speaks out to this purpose, (...). p. 3. It is manifest that the Archetypal
seal, which we call the intellectual world, is the very word of God, the
Archetypall Paradigme, the Idea of Ideas, or Form of Forms. And in, his (...)
He plainly ascribes the government of the Universe, Heavens, Stars, Earth,
Elements, and all the creatures in them, to that which he terms (...). that
is, the upright word of God, his firstborn son. Which is pure Platonisme, and
may for ought I know go for right Christianisme, so long as the first chapter
of S. John for Gospel.

Verse. 2, 3. True crucified Son Of the true God. For the life that is in him
and should flow into us, is hindered in its vital operation. But if any man
make it a light matter that God himself or the Word himself is not hurt, let
him consider that he that can find of his heart to destroy the deleble image of
God, would, if it lay in his power, destroy God himself, so that the crime is
as high and as much to be lamented.

STANZ. 38. Earth grovelling Aptery From Beirons wall to Pantheothen dwell the
Apterites, that is, such as have souls without wings, or (...), as the
Platonic phrase is, souls that have their feathers moult off of them, and so
are fain to flag among the dirty desires of the world, though sometime full of
sorrow and vexation for their gross vices, but yet in a kind of Hypocritical
humility, acknowledging that to be their destined condition, and that it is
worse then that condition, to believe that a man by the help of God may get out
of it.

STANZ. 44, 45, 46. Hight Pteroessa The land betwivt Pantheothen and the valley
of Ain, is Pteroessa, because the Inhabitants have wings whereby they raise
themselves above the mire and dirt of the corrupt body. One of the wings is
Faith in the power of God against the forces of the Prince of darkness. The
other Love and desire of appearing before God. See the 8. verse of 45. Stanza
and the 5, 6, 7. verses of the 46. Stanza.

STANZ. 47. And Gabriel swear, etc. Gabriel is the strength of God, which will
certainly assist them that walk in the precepts of God with simplicity of heart.

STANZ. 49. But I observed well etc. And it is well worth our observation that
the main danger of Pteroessa is the making too much haste, or a slubbering
speed, promoving our selves into a greater liberty, or gaping after higher
contemplations than we are fitted for, or we can reap profit from, or are
rightly capable to conceive.

STANZ. 50. And Autaparnes face. etc. See Interpr. Genesis

STANZ. 5^ Verse. 9. Back to retreat, etc. That is, to reassume that more
punctual and vigilant care over our ways in thought, word, and deed, with a
kind of austerenesse of life, crossing our own desires many times even in
things indifferent, and to reattempt a perfect mortification of the old man
throughout, giving no unseasonable liberty to our deceitful body. For is it
not Hypocrisy or partiality to avoid that our selves, which we often impose
upon our young children, whom we often abridge of things, that are not hurtful
of themselves, to break them off their stubborn wills. And believe it; a grown
man's body is but a boy or brute, and must be kept under severely by the lash of
reason and holy discipline.

STANZ. 57. The Jasper enemy to spirits won. This kind of stone the Caspian sea
affords, as Dionysius After writes, who ascribes this virtue to it.

(...)
(...).
It sends forth Crystal and the Jasper green
Foe to Empusa's and all specter seen.
And this stone is none of the meanest jewels in the Platonic Diadem.
Certainly the purging of our natural spirits and raising our soul to her due
hight of purity, weaning her from the love of this body, and too tender a
sympathy with the frail flesh, begets that courage and Majesty of mind in a
man, that both inward and outward fiends will tremble at his presence, and fly
before him as darkness at lights approach. For the soul has then ascended her
fiery vehicle, and it is noon to her at midnight, be she but awake into her
self.

STANZ. 59. But love of man etc. Those virtues there recited are refulgently
conspicuous in Platonisme, Pythagorisme, and Stoicisme. Where Is then the
defect? But I Will first set out their virtues. Plotinus, Ennead. 1. lib. 2.
(...), raises virtue to her hight by these 4. degrees. The first are Virtutes
politicae, the second Purgatoriae, the third Animi jam purgati, the fourth and
last Paradigmaticae.

Now for the better understanding of those degrees, we are to take notice of
the first and second motions that be in us.

The first are such as surprise our body or living beast (as I may so call it)
by some outward objects represented to sense and natural imagination before
reason has consulted of them, or it may be fancy clearly apprehended them.
Such are present frights and pleasant provocations.

The second consist in the pursuit or declining of these objects represented
after the animadversion of our supernall fancy and consultation of reason.
Mars. Ficin. upon Plotin.

Now those virtues that do only amputate, prune, and more handsomely
proportionate these second motions in us, are called Political, because a
common citizen, or vulgar man ordinarily exercises this degree of virtue,
perhaps for his credit, profit, or safety-sake.

But those virtues that do not only prune but quite pluck up those second
enormous motions of the mind are called Purgative.

Thirdly those that do both extirpate the second irregular motions, and also
tame the first in some good measure, are the virtues of the soul already purged.

Fourthly and lastly, those virtues that put away quite and extinguish the
first motions, are Paradigmaticall, that is, virtues that make us answer to the
Paradigme or Idea of virtues exactly, viz. the Intellect or God.

These four degrees of virtues make so many degrees of men, if I may call them
all men.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)


Virtues Political Man. Purgative God-man. Animi jam purgati Angel-god.
Paradigmaticall God.


And this he does plainly confess, acknowledging that the motions, or passions
of the mind are not sins, if guided, directed and subjected to reason, (...).
But our endeavor must be not only to be without sin, but to become God, that
is, impassible, immateriall, quit of all sympathy with the body, drawn up
wholly into the intellect, and plainly devoid of all perturbation. And who
would not be thus at ease? who would not crowd himself into this fafe castle
for his own security? I can not quite excuse the old man of self-love for that
round elegancie (...). It does not run so well in plain English. It is better
thy son be wicked then thou miserable, that is, passionate. Epictet.
Enchirid. cap. 16. Yet to speak the truth, Stoicisme, Platonisme, and
Pythagorisme are gallant lights, and a noble spirit moves in those Philosophers
vains, and so near-Christianisme, if a man will look on them favorably, that
one would think they are baptized already not only with water, but the holy
Ghost. But I not seeing humility and self-denial and acknowledgement of their
own unworthiness of such things as they aimed at, nor mortification, not of
the body (for that is sufficiently insisted upon) but of the more spiritual
arrogative life of the soul, that subtle ascribing that to our selves that is
Gods, for all is Gods; I say, I not seeing those things so frequently, and of
purpose inculcated in their writings, thought, I might fitly make their
Philosophy, or rather the life that it does point at (for that is the subject of
this Poem) a Type of that life which is very near to perfection, but as yet
imperfect, having still a smack of arrogation, and self-seeking. But believe
it, a man shall often meet with frequent Testimonies of their charity and
universal love, of meekness and tranquillity of mind, of common care of men,
of hearty forgiveness of offenses. Temperance, Justice, and contempt of death,
are obvious and trivial; also their Prayer to God, and belief that he helps,
both in finding out of Truth, and improvement of Virtue. So that I reserve as
the true and adequate Character of Christianisme, the most profound and
spiritual humility, that any man can have experience of, and a perfect
self-deadnesse, which is the begetter indeed of the former. For where
selfenesse is extinguished, all manner of arrogation must of necessity be
extinct; and this is the passage through the valley of Ain. So that it must be
acknowledged, that though there have been many brave and generous lights risen
upon the Earth, yet none so plainly perfect, so purely amiable and lovely, as
that sweet life of the Messiah, to whom the possession of the World is promised.

STANZ. 59. Verse. 7, 8, 9. True fortitude that truest foes does aw,
Justice and abstinence from sweetest ill,
And wisdom like the Sun does all with light orespill.
This ravishing beauty and love, is lively set out by Plotinus, lib. 6. cap. 5.
Ennead. 1. (...). And when you behold your selves beautiful within, How are
you affected? How are you moved and ravished? and gathering your selves from
your bodies, desire more nearly and closely to embrace your naked selves? For
thus are they affected that are truly amorous, when they either contemplate in
themselves, or behold in others that gallantry and greatness of soul, that
constant garb of Justice, pure and undefiled Temperance, manly, and awfull-eyed
Fortitude, Gravity and Modesty gently mooving in all peaceable stillnesse and
steady Tranquillity and a god-like Understanding, watering and varnishing all
these Virtues, as it were with golden showers of luster and light.

STANZ. 63. But Autaparnes wox more wan, and woe, etc. See Autaparn. Interpr.
Genesis STANZ. 66. This dale hight Ain, etc. This valley of Ain is nothing else
but self deadness, or rather self-nothingnesse: wherefore the fume rising
thence must needs be Anautesthesie, that is self-senslesnesse, no more feeling
or relishing a man's self, as concerning himself, then if he were not at all.

STANZ. 67. Here Autaparnes, etc. See Autaparn. Interpr. Genesis Notes upon
Psychathanasia.
Lib. 1. Canto 1.
STANZ. 10. Like men new made contrived into a Cave. SEE Jamblich, Protrept.
cap. 15.

STANZ. 12. Verse. 4. Calling thin shaddows, etc. (...). Merc. Trismeg. 6.

STANZ. 16. This Errors den. The condition of the soul in this life is so
disadvantagious to her, that the Philosopher in the 3. Chapter of the 8, Book
of his 4. Ennead. falls into these expressions, (...). That the body is but a
prison and sepulcher to the soul, and this World a Den and Cave.

Verse. 6. As deep as Hyles Hell. The Materia prima; such as the schools
ordinarily describe. Else where Hyle signifies mere potentiality.

STANZ. 17. That loves the body, etc. (...). Jambli^h. Protrept. cap. 3. page
80. Also Plat. Phaed.

STANZ. 18. The unthankefull Stagirite. There is notorious testimony of
Aristotle's pride, conceitednesse, and unthankfulness toward Plato. Aelian.
Var. Histor. lib. 3. cap. 19. as also lib. 4. cap. 9. The Title of that Chapter
is, (...). Of Plato's humility, and Aristotle's ingratitude

Verse. 3. Most men prefer before holy Py thagore. See Jamblich. De Vita Pythag.
where the purity and holiness of his spirit is sufficiently evidenced from the
Character of his manners, cap. 2. page 30. where it is said that what ever he
did or spoke, he did it, (...), with inimitable serenity, and sedarenesse of
mind, never surpised with anger laughter, zeal, contention, or any other
precipitancy or perturbation.

STANZ. 21. Love of the Carcas. (...), Wherefore the love of Mortality, is the
Mother of Ignorance, especially, in divine things, for we cannot cleave to
both; (...). Mercur. Trismeg. 4. page 21.

Verse. 9. Here will true wisdom lodge. (...), etc. Paemandr. page 7.

Cant. 2.
STANZ. 5. Or like a Lamp, etc, See Plotin. 'Ennead. 4. lib. 1. cap. 8. and 12.

STANZ. 24. Withouten body having energie. It Is the opinion of Plotinus. (...).
Ennead. 4. lib. 1.

STANZ. 57. But if it consist of points then a Scalene I Will prove all one with
an Isosceles, etc. If quantity consists of Indivisibles or Atoms, it will
follow that a Scalenum is all one with an Isosceles, etc.

Before I prove this and the following conclusions, it will be necessary to set
down some few Axioms and Definitions:

Axioms.
1.That a Line has but two ends.

2.That Lines that consist of an equal number of Atoms, are equal.

3.That it is indifferent where we pitch upon the first Line in a superficies,
so that we fill the whole Area, with Lines parallel to what first we choose.

4.That no Motion goes on less, then an Atom at a time, or the breadth of a
Mathematical Line.

Definitions.
1.An Isosceles, is a Triangle having two equal sides.

2.A Scalenum, is a Triangle having all sides unequal.

Theorem. 1.
That a Scalenum, and an Isosceles, be all one.

diagram

Let ABC be a Scalenum; The same ABC is also an Isosceles. For fill the whole
Area ABC with Lines parrallell to AC by the 3. Axiom. There is then as many
points in BA as in BC by the 1. Axiom; and therefore by the second, BA is
equal to BC. and consequently by the 1. Definition. ABC is an Isosceles.

Appendices.
The same reason will prove. 1. That every Triangle is an Isopleuron or
equilaterall Trirngle. 2. That the Diametre of a Quadrangle is equal to any of
its sides. 3. That the Chord of a segment of a Circle, is equal to the Ark,
etc.

Verse. 4. That the cross Lines of a Rhomboids, That from their meeting to all
corners press, be of one length. Theorem. 2.
That the diagoniall Lines of a Rhombeids be equal.

diagram

Let ACBD be a Rhomboides, and AB stretched out in infinitum, after the
infinite productions of CB and AD. I say, that DC will be equal to AB. For EC
is equal to EA, and ED to EB, by the precedent Theorem. Wherefore DC and AB
are equal.

The same is also as briefly proved by the first or second Appendix of the
precedent Theorem.

STANZ. 58. And with her grasping rays, etc. Theorem. 3.
That the Moon sometimes enlightens the whole Earth, and the Sun sometimes
enlightens not the Earth at all.

To prove this, I must set down some received Propositions in Optics and
Astronomy.

Propositions Opticall.
1. SPhaeriodes luminosum minus si propinquius est opaco, minorem portionem
illustrat quam si remotius existat.

2. Sphaeroides luminosum majus e propinquo ampliorem partem opaci irradiat
quam e remoto. Aguilon. lib. 5.

Propositions Astronom.
1.THe greatest distance of the Full or New Moon, from the Center of the Earth,
is 64. semidiameters of the Earth.

2.The least distance of the Moon New or Full, from the Center of the Earth, is
54. semidiameters of the Earth: so that there is five Diameters difference.

3.The Sun in his Apogee, is distant from the Center of the Earth 1550
semidiameters of the Earth, but in his Perigee 1446. So there is 52. Diameters
difference.

Now let B be the Moons Perigee, A her Apogee, CEGD, the Earth enlightened so
far as DE, by the Moon at B. Let the Moon be now removed from B into A. By
this removal into A, the Earth CEGD will be more enlightened lunar diagram by
the first propositions Opticall. But I say CEGD is enlightend all over by the
Moon in A, for the distance AB is five times bigger then the Diameter CG from
the Consect. of the first and second propositions Astronomicall. But HG is but
part of CG, so that AB will be above five times bigger then GH, to which also
EG is but equal by the first and second Axiom, or the third appendix of the
first Theorem. Wherefore there is above five times as many Atoms in AB as in
EG. But in every Atom remove from B toward A, the light, has gaind an Atom in
EG by the fourth Axiom. Therefore the Moon at B has enlightened the Earth CDGD
even unto the utmost point G, long before it be removed to A: so that CDGD when
the Moon has got to A will be swallowed over and over again into the Moons
rays.

But now for the second part of the Theorem. That the Sun sometimes
enlightens not the earth at all.

Let the Sun be in his Perigee A, enlightening the Earth CEHD so far as FG.
Remove him from A to his Apogee B. In his recession to B the Earth CEHD is
less and less enlightened by the second Opticall Proposition, I say, it is not
enlightened at all.

For suppose he had gone back but the length of IC, then had FCG been devoyd of
light, because that CG has no more points in it then IC has, by the first and
second Axiom. or third Appendix of the first Theorem. And the light cannot go
off less then an Atom a time by the fourth Axiom. Much more destitute
therefore is the Earth CHED of light, the Sun being in B, when as the
distance AB will measure above fifty times CH (which yet is bigger then IC) by
the Consect. of the third proposition Astrnomicall, so that day will hang in
the sky many thousand miles off from us, fastigiated into one conicall point,
and we become utterly destitute of light.

solar diagram

A man might as well with placing the Sun in B first prove him to enlighten
all the Earth at once, and make perfect day.

As also the Moon if you place her in her Apogee first, that she enlightens not
the least particle of the Earth though in her full.

Lastly, if you place them in K you might prove they do enlighten every part
and never a part of the Earth at once, so that a perfect Universal darkness
and light would possess the World at the same time, which is little better
then a pure contradiction. Thematter is very plain at the first sight.

STANZ. 28. In every place, etc. (...). Ennead 2. lib. 9. cap. 7.

Lib. 2. Cant. 1.
STANZ. 10. This is that strange framed statue, etc. REad Plotin. Ennead. 6.
lib. 4. cap. 14. And cap. 15. (...), etc. And a little after he says, that the
corporeal substance being thus prepared, catches life and soul from the Mundus
vitae, as Ficinus calls it. (...). Read the 14. and 15. chap. of that fourth
Book.

Cant. 2.
STANZ. 12. The naked essence of the bodi's this. See Body Interpr. Gener.
STANZ. 26. But like a Center that around does shoot, etc. (...), Ennead. 4.
lib. 7. cap. 6.

Cant. 3.
STANZ. 3, Knowledge of God. (...). Merc. Trismeg. 9. p. 37.

Lib. 3. Cant. 1.
STANZ. 14. Three Centres has man's soul, etc. PLotinus. (...). The opinion of
the Philosopher is here, methinks, something perplexed. Nor can we easly gather,
whether he makes three essences, or only three general faculties. If three
essences, why says he (...), one nature in many faculties? If but one essence
and three faculties, how comes that supernall faculty to be ever employed in
intellectual and divine speculations, and we seldom or never perceive it? See
Ennead 2. lib. 9. cap. 2.

STANZ. 22. She sees more clear, etc. Since God moves all things, and all
things immediately depend of him, or if you will is all things, it cannot be
but he must have the sense of all things in the nearest and most immediate
manner: as you may see more at large in Merc. Trismeg. in his (...)9. page
39.40.

Cant. 2.
STANZ. 2 By his own plastic point, or else deep Night Drawn on, etc. PLotinus
mentions also a middle way. That the great soul of ths World does at least
inchoate, and rudely delineate the fabric of our body at first. The particular
soul afterward accomplishes it. (...), (...), etc. See Ennead. 6. lib. 7. cap.
7. He seems also in his second Ennead to intimate that our bodies are made by
the soul of the World. (...). lib. 9. cap. 18.

STANZ. 5. By what the soul in her self feels and tryes, etc. Plotinus
professes himself to have frequent experience of this, Ennead 4. lib. 8. cap. 1.

STANZ. 16. Then like to flowing stream, etc. This seems to be the opinion of
that learned Knight in his Book of Bodies. But I cannot satisfy my self in
some difficulties it is entangled with. How it can be possible that any fiery
Atom or thin particle should be capable of so strong an impetus impressed on
it, as to carry it so many thousand miles, and not to cease from motion or be
extinct. Nor can the particles that follow drive on the former. For there is
still the same difficulty that was before. Besides our sense shall then discover
only those particles of light that are in our eye, so that the Sun will seem
to have neither distance nor due figure. There Is the same reason in colors.

Mounsier des Chartes his gentle (...) or renixus of the Aethereall Vortices
against the Organ of sight, is far more solid and ingenuous, agreeing exactly
with all the properties of light, The contending in this and the following
stanzes for the received way of species is but a (...). These rays are here
used for illustration rather then Proof.

STANZ. 20. Yet naught at all is lost. See Merc. Trismeg. (...). 8,

STANZ. 21. When that compounded nature is dissolved Each Centre's safe. (...),
11. p. 57.

Canto 3.
STANZA. 12. One steady good center of Essences. See Trismeg. page 41, 52, 68,
69. Edit: Turneb.

STANZ, 38. Nearer the Earth the slower it must go,
These Arks be less, but in the Heaven blew
Those Arks increase, it must not be so slow.
Thus must it needs return unto its idle Bow.
An Arrow shot up into the sky, the higher it goes, the faster it circuleth
toward the East because the Arches it there moves in are larger, as plainly
appears out of the following figure.

Where let B be the earth. A the East. Let an arrow fly in the line BC. let DE
be several hights of the air. Let the arrow K keep in BC the same line of the
air or earthly magnetic spirit. So that BF, BG, BH etc. are not new lines of
the air but of immovable imaginary space. which spaces let be aequall one with
another. Now let the arrow K moving upward or downard in BC make also toward
the East A in a circular motion. I say then it goes faster in E then in D. For
the ark DA is divided into parts of the same proportion to the whole D A that
the parts of EA to the whole EA. Now EA is far greater then DA, and therefore
must the parts of EA be far greater then the parts of DA. And yet in the same
time does the arrow K pass thorough the portion of EA that it does of DA.
otherwise it would not keep in the line BC which is contrary to our hypothesis,
and indeed to ordinary experience. For our eye finds the arrow come down in the
same line it went up. Therefore it must needs go faster in EA then DA.

But this may seem strange and uncouth that the arrow should thus moderate it
self in its motion, and proportion its swiftness to the ark it is in. But I
conceive it is no more wonderful then that water should figure it self
according to the variety of its situations in hight and depth.

STANZ. 39. Nor ought we wonder that it does conform
Its motion to the circles of the air
Since water in a wooden bucket born,
Does fit it self unto each Periphere, etc.
The truth and sense of this stanza will appear thus. Water is a heavy body,
and therefore will get so near the center as it can. That all the parts may get
as near as they can, they must of necessity cast themselves into a sphaericall
figure. For any other figure though it may happily let some parts nearer then
they be in a sphere, yet it necessarily bears others further off from the
Center then the furthest would be, were they all cast into a sphericall, as
plainly appears in the following Scheme.



Where let DA be a proportion of water casting it self into a rectilinear
figure. FG the same proportion casting it self into a sphaericall. It Is plain
that though DA be nearer the Center at the point C and thereabout then FG at B
or any where else, yet the highest point in the furface of FG is not so high,
or so far removed from the center I, as any betwixt DK or HA, wherefore all the
particles of the proportion of water DA are not brought to the nearest position
to the center I, till they conform with the circle CLM. which we suppose the
same proportion of water FG to have done. wherefore the lubricous particles of
the water DA, will never cease tumbling, as being placed in an undue hight,
till the surface thereof be concentricall with I.



This being premised, let E be a vessel of water in several situations of
hight. The first and highest situation of this vessel let be BAB which is
plainly the biggest circle. Let CBC be the next, a less circle then BAB. The
tumor at B is bigger then, then at A. let BCB be the third, lesser then any of
the former, the tumor at C is then highest of all, and so on still. There will
ever be a new conformation of the surface of the water, according to the
distance from the Center of the earth, as is plain from the praemized Theorem.

STANZ. 4^. venus Orb debarres not Mars etc. That the Planets get into one
another supposed Orbs, is plain from their greatest and last distances from
the center of the Earth.

Mars his least distance 556 Semidiam. Venus greatest distance 2598 Semidiam.
Venus least distance 399 Semidiam. Mercuries greatest distance 2176 Semidiam.
Now they that make solid Orbs, must of necessity make the Orb of the Planet as
high or as low as the Planet it self is at least. Wherefore the lowest distance
of an high Planet being much lower then the highest distance of a lower Planet,
as appears out of Landsbergius his calculation in his Vranometria, it must
needs be that their supposed solid orbs will run one into another. But you will
say it is foul play to appeal to Landsbergius his Calculation, since he is a
party. But I see no man distrust his conclusions, though they mislike his
Hypothesis.

How ever that this objection may be taken away. The fluidnesse of the
Planetary heavens is acknowledged even by them that are against the motion of
the Earth. As by Tycho that famous Astronomer who has made such a System of
the world, even the earth standing still, as may well agree with the
conclusions of Landsbergius about the distances of the Planets from the Center
of the earth. For there Mars his least distance must needs be lower then Venus
greatest distance, and Venus lest distance must needs be lower then Mercuries
greatest distance. As you may see in the Paradigme. Where it is very plain that
Venus sometime is nearer the earth then Mercury, that Mars is sometime nearer
the earth then Venus, which cannot be without penetration of dimensions in
solid Orbs.



But what an untoward broken system of the would this of Tycho's is in
comparison of that of Copernicus will appear even at first sight, if we do but
look upon them both.

I have set down this scheme of Copernicus because it is useful also for the
better understanding of some following passages.

Copernicus System of the World as it is described in Galilaeo, page 242.



It is plain to any man that is not prejudiced that this System of the world is
more natural and genuine then that of Tycho's. No enterfaring or cutting of
circles as in Tycho's, where the course of the Sun cuts Mars his circuit. No
such vast excentricity as there, nor disproportionatednesse of Orbs and
motions. But I Will leave these things rather for the beholder to spy out then to
spend needless words in an easy matter.

STANZ. 56. But that disgracement of Philosophy
From Flux and Reflux of the Ocean main
Their monthly and yearly change, etc.
How the Flux and Reflux of the sea depends on the motion of the earth I shall
endeavor to explain as follows.



About the Center A, describe the circumference of the Earths annual course
HBC from West to East. In the point B describe the globe of the earth, DEFG
running also from West to East in its diurnall course; that is, from G to D,
from D to E, and so on till it come to G again. Here we may observe that every
part of the earth at several times has a contrary motion.

As for example. Those parts at D^tending toward E have a contrary motion to
what they have when they come to F and ascend toward G. So the parts twixt GD
as they go on toward E, move contrary to the motion they are moved betwixt E F
going on toward G. But the parts about D move one way with the annual motion,
so that the swiftness of the motion of those parts of the earth is increased,
the annual and diurnall motion going in one, and tending Eastward. But the
parts about F go Westward toward G, so that much of the annual swiftness is
taken of by the diurnall motion in these parts, they going a contrary way to
the annual.

The parts about E and G go not either Westward or Eastward, but are
inconsiderable in the annual motion.

Now, says Galilaeus, the sea being in his channel as water in a movable
vessel the acceleration or retardation of the motion of the Earth will make
the sea fluctuate or swill, like water in a shaken vessel, which must needs
come to pass twice in every four and twenty hours because of the great
swiftness at D and extraordinary slownesse at F.

What the cause is of the daily flux and reflux of the sea according to
Galilaeos mind is now conspicuous. viz. The addition or subduction of the
Earths diurnall motion from the annual, which according to that Authors
compute is thrice swifter then the diurnall.

Now as the daily Flux and Reflux consists in this addition and subduction, so
the monthly and yearly changes and variations of this Flux and Reflux consist
in the variation or change of proportion in those additions and subductions:
they bearing sometime less, sometime greater proportion to the annual motion.

Finally, this variation of proportions arises either from a new swiftness or
slownesse in the annual motion of the Earth; or else, from the various
position of the Axis thereof; it sometimes conspiring more fully with the
annual motion then other sometimes. Whenc it comes to pass that the compound
motion is not always of the same swiftness or slownesse. But we shall better
understand this by applying our selves to a figure. And first of the monthly
variation at full and new Moon.

Let A be the Sun. C the Earth. C E F C the annual circle of the Earth. B
the Moon in conjunction. D in opposition or full Moon. Now we will suppose that
which Galilaeo proves in his fourth dialogue. That in circular motion the same
impetus being in the moveable, the movable will move swifter if it be reduced
to a lesser circle, as is plain in Pendents, and in the balance of a clock. For
the nearer you place the lead to the center the swifter the balance moves.
Again he considers the moon peculiarly and inseparably joined with the Earth
and so necessarily to move together. And that the position of the moon in D
lengthens out the semidiametre of the Orbis magnus of the earth which is then H
G. The position of the moon in B shortens it, that reaches but to C. And the
Moon in B is as the weight laid nearer to the Center in the balance of the
clock. Therefore the whole B C must move much swifter, then C D, the Moon being
in D: there being in both places the same impetus of motion, or inward moving
principle.

But here I must profess it seems to me very hard, how the swiftness of the
Moon in B, or her slownesse in the Ark H D G should engage the Earth in C, in
the like slownesse and swiftness, there being no such solid and stiff
continuation from A to D as there is in a balance of a clock.

Again supposing this conceit to hold good. How will it answer to the history
of the Flux and Reflux of the sea. Which is increased much, as well when the
Moon is in B as when she is in D. That the Flux should be greater the Moon
being in D is reasonable, because C being then much retarded in the annual
motion, the subduction and addition of the diurnall will bear a greater
proportion to the annual, and so consequently cause a greater alteration in
the Flux and Reflux. But when as the Moon being in B makes the annual motion
of C swifter, the subduction and addition of the diurnall will bear a less
proportion to the annual, and so the Flux and Reflux shall be rather
diminished then increased, which is against experience and the history of the
Flux and Reflux of the sea.

But now in the third place, to find out the reason why at certain points of
the years period the Flux and Reflux should be increased. We must observe that
this is according to the several positions of the Axis of the Earth, not but
that it is always parallel to it self, but in reference to the Ecliptic. For
such is its position in the Solstitiall points that there the diurnall motion
added or subducted bears a greater proportion to the annual then elsewhere. In
the Equinoctial points a less. As will appear in the following scheme.



Let ADCB be the Ecliptic, Let the circles GCFE cut ADCB to right angles. Let
the annual motion of the Earth be from C to B, from B to A, etc. the diurnall
CAEC and CBEC. The Earth at A in her Solstitiall point: at B in her
Equinoctial. It is plain at first sight that CAEC complies much more with the
motion BAD, then CBE does with CBA. It is not worth more curious proposal and
proof: since the truth thereof is so far from giving a reason of the yearly
alteration in the Flux and Reflux, that it is quite repugnant with the history
thereof. For according to this device of Galilaeo the greatest Flux and Reflux
should be in the solstices, But according to the observation of Writers it is
in the Aequinoxes.

But however it was a witty attempt of Galilaeo, though not altogether so
solid. Mounsieur Des Chartes in my judgment is far more successful in his
Hypothesis, who renders the causes of all these (...) after the manner
following.

For your more fully understanding of what I am now about to premise, I must
refer to you Des Chartes his Principia Philosophiae. Mean while peruse this
present Scheme.



Where CDBE is that great Vortex, in which, and by which the Planets are
carried from West to East, according to the order of CDBE. Let A be the Sun,
the Center of this great Vortex, about which all the liquid matter of our
Heaven is carried about, as gross water in a whirlepooll; and with it the
Planets like corks or strawes. Let F be the Planet, we are in, viz. the Earth,
which is the Center of a lesser Vortex HDGI. Let M be the Moon carried about
the earths Vortex in her monthly course. This Vortex of the earth is not
perfect sphericall, but comes nearer the figure of an Ellipsis.

Because as Chartesius gives you to understand, that part of the Vortex, which
is the Circuit KL is more like the matter of the Vortex HDGI, then that matter
which is above or below at D and I; and therefore DHIG, gives out more easily
and naturally toward K and L.

Perhaps this reason may be added: That all the parts of the Vortex CDBE
endeavoring through their circular Motion to recede from their Center A, and
thereby to widen one from another; I mean the parts of any one Circle; suppose
KL: and yet all the Circles urging one another (...), from A, to CDBE, they
will easily give place in their Circles, as in KL, and the rest, but rather
press close in the Diametre, as in DI. So that the Diametre of the Vortex of
the Earth DI, shall be lesser then its Diametre GH. In so much that when the
Moon M, is in D, or I, she will straiten the stream of the V^^tex a great deal
more, then when she is in G or H, which will make it run more swiftly, and bear
down the Air and Water of the Sea more strongly.

But now that we may come more nearly to our business in hand, and apply our
selves wholly to the Earths Vortex, in which the mystery of the Flux and Reflux
of the Sea is to be discovered.

Let therefore this Vortex of the earth be ABCD. The Earth her self EFGH. 1234.
the surface of the sea, wherewith for greater perspicuity, let the whole Earth
be covered: Let 5678. be the surface of the Air, encompassing the Sea.



And now let us consider, that if there were no Moon in this Vortex, the point
T, which is the Center of the earth, would be in the point M the Center of the
Vortex; but the Moon being at B, this Center T must be betwixt M and D: because
seeing that the ethereall matter of this Vortex is something swiftlier moved,
then the Moon or Earth which it bears along with it, unless the point T, be
somewhat more distant from B then D, the Moons being there would hinder the
ethereal matter from flowing so freely betwixt B and T, as betwixt T and D.
Wherefore the position of the Earth in this Vortex not being determined, but
from the equality of force of the sethereall matter that flows about it, it is
manifest that she must come somewhat nearer toward D.

And after the same manner when the Moon is in C, the Center of the Earth must
be betwixt M and A; and thus always will the Earth recede somewhat from the
Moon. Furthermore, because that from the Moons being in B, not only that space
which is betwixt B and T but also that betwixt T and D is made narrower; hence
comes it to pass that the ethereall matter flows swiftlier in those places,
and therefore presses harder both upon the surface of the Air, in 6. and 8. as
also upon the waters surface in 2. and 4. then if the Moon were not in the
Diametre BD. And sithence the bodies of Air and Water be fluid, and easily
yielding to that pressure, they must needs abate more in their height upon the
parts of Earth, at FH; then if the Moon were out of the Diametre BD. But
contrary wise, they must become higher at G and E, in so much that the surface
of Water 1.3. and of Air 5.7. will be there protuberant.

But now because that part of the Earth, which at this moment is in F (over
against B) where the Sea is at the lowest, will after six hours be in G (over
against the point C) where it is at the highest, and after other six hours in
H over against D, and so on. Or rather, because the Moon her self also in the
interim, makes some little progress from B toward C, as finishing her whole
Circle ABCD in the space of a month; that part of the Earth which is now in F
over against the body of the Moon, after six hours and about 12. minutes, will
have reached the point G in a Diametre of the Vortex ABCD which cuts that
Diametre BD in which the Moon then is, to right angles, and then will the water
be at highest there, viz. at F. And after other six hours and twelve minutes,
F will have reached the point H, where the water will be at lowest ebb, etc.
Whence we may clearly understand, that the water of the sea must in the same
place ebb and flow every twelve hours and 24. minutes.

Furthermore it is to be noted that this Vortex ABCD is not exactly round, but
that diametre of it in which the Moon is at full and change to be shorter then
that which is cut by it to right angles, as is above demonstrated. Whence it
follows that the Flux and Reflux of the sea ought to be greater at new and full
Moon then in the intermediate seasons.

We may also note, that whereas the Moon is always in a Plain near to the
Plain of the Ecliptic, and the earth is in her diurnall motion, turned
according to the Plane of the Aequatour, which Planes intersect one another in
the Aequinoxes, but be much distant from one another in the Solstices, that the
greatest Flux and Reflux will be about the beginning of Spring and Autumn.

And these principles of Mons. des Chartes as they are plain and perspicuous in
themselves, so are they also exactly agreeable with the (...) of Nature. So
that though I was mistaken with Galilaeo in the manner, yet in the main I am
not mistaken: The cause of the Flux and Reflux of the sea lying in the motion
of the earth.

STANZ. 62. That Venus Moon-like, etc. This ensuing Diagram will explain all
what is said of Venus in this and the following stanza.

First, that she increases and decreaseth like the Moon (it being supposed
that she is opake, which is discovered also by the optic glass) is plainly
shown in this figure. For in B she is not half lighted, in C she is even in the
full.

Secondly, that when she is farthest of she is in her full, as appears by the
line AC.



Thirdly, that she then seems less though in her full, because she is so
much removed from us, even further then the Sun himself, as appears by the said
line AC.

Fourthly, that she must appear bigger when she least is enlightened, because
she is then so very near us, in respect of that ren^otenesse in her full, as
also appears plainly if you compare AB and AC together.

Lastly, here is set forth how she rounds the Sun in her circuits continually,
as also does Mercurius, which is confirmed by their never being far from the
Sun. Hence it is that Venus is the Morning and Evening star. Either to rise
not long before the Sun, and so to praenunciate the Day, or to set not long
after him and so to lead on the Night.

STANZ. 65. The Medicean four reel about Jove. See Copernic. System. at Stanz.
48.

STANZ 67. and 70. Planets go back stand still and forward fly
With unexpected swiftness, etc.
Before we can well understand the sense of these stanzas we must have a right
apprehension of the epicycle, and the station, direction, and retrogradation of
Planets, And all these depend one of another.

Let BDHF be an Epicycle. The order of the signs GCE. The line touching the
Eastern side ADE.

Now the line of the true motion of a Planet is twofold. One is referred to the
center of the Epicycle, the other to the body of the Planet. According to the
latter sense are the following descriptions.

A Planet is direct when the line of true motion goes on with the order of the
Signs.

Retrograde when it goes contrary to the order of the Signs.

Stationary, when this line seems not to move either backward or forward.



The line of true motion of the Epicycle which is AC always goes with the
order of the Signs. But the line that strikes through the Planet it self goes
in the upper part of the Epicycle FBD with the order of the signs, but in the
lower part DHF contrary to that order. This is the nature of the Epicycle and
of retrogradation and station of Planets. Which superfluous motions or stands,
as needless botchings Copernicus his System admits not of; the motion of the
Earth so fitly salving all such (...), as the following figure will make plain.



Let the circuit of the earth be AGA about the Sun standing still at the
Center Z. Let AN be a twelfth part of Jupiters circle that he moves in about
the Sun. For Jupiter finisheth his course but in twelve years. Divide the
circuit of the earth AGA into twelve equal parts. By that time the earth has
gone through all these, Jupiter will have gone the twelfth part of his own
circuit, viz. AN. Divide AN into twelve equal parts, according to the number
of parts in the Earths circuit before described. That while the Earth passes
thorough one twelfth of her whole circle AGA, Jupiter may also dispatch a
twelfth of the ark AN, Let both these twelves be signed with the same letters,
ABCDEFGHIKLMN.

Now place the Earth at the point A. Let it go forward till it come to B.
Jupiter has also gone forward in his circuit and appears in the starry
firmament at B, going forward on his way suppose with the order of the signs:
Let the Earth proceed to C, then is Jupiter also come to C, and appears yet
direct in the highest C. so he does in D and in E, but in F he appears
Stationary betwixt F E. Let the Earth proceed to G. Here Jupiter has skip'd
back in appearance as far as from F to G. Let the earth go on to H, in
appearance he has gone back as far as from G to H. Let her still move forward
till she reach I, there Jupiter becomes Stationary again in IH. Put her on
further to K, then he is again direct. So is he in L and M and N which is the
entire finishing of the Earths annual course.

Thus according to Copernicus his supposition, is the station and repedation of
the Planets, at least the three highest, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, plainly
discovered to be an appearance only; and that the Heavens are not guilty of
any such real irregularity of motion. Which coneinnity, nor Ptolemees, nor
Tycho's Hypothesis can afford us.

But lest any mistrust that the same seeming irregularity, will not fall out in
Mercury, and Venus, which are betwixt the Sun and our Earth; The following
scheme will show how there is a station and repedation in them too, according
to this Hypothesis of Copernicus.



Set the Earth at some certain point of its annual circle, viz. at O. Let
ABCDEFGHIKLM divide the circle of Venus or Mercury into equal parts. Mercury
and Venus will be in all these sites in respect of the Earth before they can be
in conjunction with the Earth again, though the Earth be not fixed in the point
O. Now draw a line from the point O into every section, you shall find
direction, station, and repedation in these Planets as well as in the other
higher Planets. For supposing the order of the Signs to go according to (...):
place Venus first in A, then let her Proceed to B. She has taken a long journey
backward contrary to the series of the Signs, and recoyled from A in the
starry firmament to B. Let her go on to C. She has given another skip back into
C, but a very little one. In DEFGHIKL she is direct; but then at M she goes
backward again, and in ABC, till she come at D again. This for the
Retrogradation, and direction. As for the station of this Planet, it is betwixt
B and D, and M and K, as the figure plainly discovers. What has been said of
Venus is also appliable to Mercury, as was intimated at first.

STANZ. 71. Why Saturn should rove
With shorter startings, give back less then Jove
Jove less then Mars, Why Venus flincheth out
More than Mercurius.


Let ABCDEF be the circles of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Tellus, Venus, Mercury.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars let them all ly in one line GH. The Earth be at the point
I. It is plain that the nearest the Earth flies of the widest, and so in
order. The same happens in Venus and Mercury, supposing the Earth at the
point K. This matter is very plain even at the first sight.

STANZ. 72. Why Saturn Jove and Mars be very nigh
Unto the Earth, show bigger in our eye
At eventide, etc.
Why Saturn Jupiter and Mars, when they rise Acronychall, that is, at the
beginning of the night seem bigger and be indeed nearer us, then when they
follow the Sun close, and set Acronychall. The reason of this is very evident
in Copernicus his Hypothesis, as you may see in this Diagram.



Mars when he rises Acronychall is distant from the Earth, but the space of
AB. But when he sets Acronychall he is distant the space of HB. So Jupiter,
when he rises Acronychall, is distant but AC from the Earth, but when he
sets he is distant the space of HC, the like (...).

Cant. 4.
STANZ. 13. Is confident of his souls after joys. THe condition of the bad and
good soul in reference to their estate after death Plotinus has very
Philosophically set out as follows. (...). Ennead. 4. lib. 4. cap. 45.

Notes upon The Infinity of Worlds.
STANZ. 8. and 66. A Circle whose Circumference no where
Is Circumscribed, etc.
The Cuspis and the Basis of the Cone.
Were both at once, etc.
WHen I speak of God this Mathematical way, (which is no new thing; for the
Ancients also have defined Him to be a Circle whose Center is every where and
Circumference no where. And Synesius calls him (...), the Center of Centres,) I
say when I speak thus of God, I then set out that modification of his Being
which answers to quantity in Bodies. But God is so perfect that no one
appellation or resemblance can exhaust that Treasure of Attributes in him, He
being so fully all things in himself. So that if we will venture to call Him
all that He eminently contains, we must be forced upon at least seeming
inconsistencies.

And now we endeavor to set out that which answers in God to Quantity, we fall
into disagreeing terms of Center, and Basis of a Cone. But why we adumbrate the
divine Entity by this representation you shall compendiously conceive in the
following figure: and see in what respect he is a Center, and in what the Basis
of a Cone, as also what that is we call the Cuspis of the Cone.



Let KIHK be the whole Orb of beings. The Center A. Ahad or Atove, BCDEFGH
Aeon, Psyche, Semele, Arachne, Physis, Tasis, Hyle. I say that Ahad in respect
of those subsequent Effluxes BCD, etc. is fitly termed a Center, and is as the
Sun in respect of the Light and Rainbow. But now all things flowing from him
(...) with abatement as is most discernable in the Extremes (for the point A is
in every point of the whole Orb KIHK, and so is as large as the whole Orb.

As for example, The point A is at the point G and every where else as well as
at A; but the point G is only at G, or if it be at L it is only then at L,
and not at G nor any where else) therefore A though in respect of the
Universal orders of Beings which flow from him may be the Center of a Circle,
yet in respect that these orders fall short of his large Ubiquity (some of them
at least, all of his perfection and excellency) and the last real efflux is
contracted after a manner to a mere mathematical point, for such is the nature
of the Orb G, or corporeal substance, as I have intimated. For this reason I
say, may A rightly be called the largest Basis of the Cone, whose Diametre is
IM, or NL, as the descent of these Degrees and Beings from Ahad or Atove may
fitly resemble a Conicall figure whose Cuspis is G.

And here I may seasonably appeal unto the apprehensions of men, whether the
divine fecundity A flowed out per saltum, and produced only the Orb G, or
whether there being a possibility of more excellent intermediate Orbs, (I will
not stand upon this number I have assigned) he did not produce BCD, etc. And if
he produced G only, whether that Orb G be not either an arbitrarious or
natural efflux from A. i.e. depends on him as closely and intimately, as a
Ray does on the Sun. And if so, why the nature of Atove should be less
fruitful, then the imaginations of men, who can in reason, and distinct notion
place several Orbs betwixt A and G. Or why the free will of Atove or Ahad
should be less bountiful then the minds of well meaning men, who if it were
in their power as it is in the arbitrarious power of Ahad, (it clashing with no
other good attribute) would fill up that empty gulf betwixt A and G. Wherefore
as far as free reason and authority of Platonisme will reach, the mystery of
the Cone will hold good, though my drift at this time was rather to explane it,
then confirm it.

But if any should be so adventrous as to deny such an Ubiquity as I have
described, yet in some sort this adumbration of the Cone, will still hold good.
For there will be a latitude and contraction of power, if not of presence. And
this will be ground enough for this expression.

But it is to be noted, that if we forsake this apprehension of the omnipo^ency
of Ahad, God and all things else will prove mere bodies. And then must God, if
he can, make himself up in several parcells and pieces. And God administering
the affairs of the Earth, will scarce know what God does in Saturn, or at least
many millions of miles distant, which conceit seems to me far below the light
of Nature and improved Reason. But to conceive God not only a body, but a body
devoid of life, sense, and understanding, is so dark and melancholic a
fancy, that I profess, I think I could with far less pain and reluctance,
suffer my body to be buried alive in the cold Earth, then so stark and stupid
conceit to entombe my soul.

STANZ. 85. Besides the Conflux and Congeries Of lesser Lights, a double
augmentation Emplies, and 'twixt them both a lessening coarctation. The
difficulty that their opinion is entangled with that hold the Comets to be
nothing but a conflux of lesser stars, is this. That they must then seem first
bigger, then lesser; then bigger again, which will evidently appear in the
following Scheme.

Where let the closest meeting of the Stars, DFBEGC be at A. I say before they
come to A, they will make the show of a broad light; suppose, when come all to
the

Circle I. But afterward this light will be less and less, till they come to
the Center A, where it will be least of all, they coming there closest of all
one to another. But then they holding on still in their several Arks, they will
pass by one another, and the Comet will grow bigger, and bigger, till they
have reached the Circle I again, where the Comet is as big as at the biggest
before. But then disjoyning themselves more wide one from another, their
several Circles so carrying them, they cease to be seen of us.

This would be the (...) of a Comet, if it did consist of a conflux of Stars.
But since there is no such thing observed in Comets it is very probable they
arise not from this cause.

Notes upon The Philosophers Devotion.
Nimbly they hold on their way
Shaping out their Night and Day.
Summer, Winter, Autumn, Spring,
Their inclined Axes bring.
TO show how Day and Night. VVinter and Summer arise from Copernicus his
Hypothesis, will not only explane these verses but exceedingly set out the
fitness and genuinenesse of the Hypothesis it self. Which I will therefore do
out of Galilaeo for the satisfaction of the unprejudiced and ingenuous Reader.

Let the Circle (...) be the Ecliptic, where, by the way, we may take notice
that when the Earth is in the sign (...), the Sun will appear in the opposite
sign (...), when in (...), in (...) etc. And so while the Earth does really
pass through the Signs, the sun seems to pass through the Signs opposite
to those the Earth is really passing through; whence this annual motion
through the Zodiac has been ascribed unto him.

Let now the center of the Earth be placed in the point of (...). Let the Poles
and Axis of the earth be AB, inclining upon the Diametre of Capricorn and
Cancer 23 degrees and an half. We must also suppose this inclination
immutable; the upper pole A, to be the North pole, the South-pole, B.

Now imagine the Earth turned round on her Axis in 24 hours from West to East:
then will every point in the semicircle ADB describe a parallel Circle. We'll
for the present take notice only of that great circle CD, and two other
removed from this, 23. gr. and an half, viz. OF. and GN, the one above, the
other below, and lastly two other furthermost circles IK and LM equidistant
from the Poles AB.

Furthermore we are to understand that while the Earth moves on, that her Axis
keeps not only the same inclination upon the Plane of the Ecliptic, but also
one constant direction toward the same part of the Universe or Firmament,
remaining always parallel to it self.

Now this immutability of inclination and steady direction of her Axis
presupposed, place the Earth also in the first points of Aries Cancer and
Libra, according as you see in the present Scheme.

We will go thorough all the four figures, and first that in Capricorn. In
which, because the Axis AB declines from a perpendicular, upon the Diametre of
Capricorn and Cancer, 23. grad. and an half, toward the Sun O, and the Ark
AI, is 23. grad. and an half, (the Sun enlightening an Hemisphere of the Earth
divided from the dark Hemisphere by the Circle KL which Galilaeo calls
Terminator lucis) this Terminator lucis KL must divide CD as being a great
circle, into equal parts, but all the other as being lesser circles into
unequal; because KL passes not through AB the poles of all these Circles. And
the parallel IK with all the parallels described within IK even to the pole A
will be wholly in the enlightened part of the Earth, as all the opposite
parallels from LM to the pole B, wholly in the dark. Furthermore whereas the
Ark AK is equal to the Ark EC, and the Ark AE common: these two, KIE and AEC
will be equal, and each of them make a quadrant. And because the whole Ark KEL
is a Semicircle, the Ark LE will be a quadrant and equal to the other EK, and
therefore the Sun O shall in this posture of the Earth be vertical at Noon to
all them that live in the Parallel OF which is the Tropic of Cancer described
by the Earths turning upon her own Axis in that posture. And thus arises the
height of Summer to all them that dwell on this side of the Tropic of Cancer.

Moreover we see plainly, that of all the parallel circles we may imagine drawn
betwixt IK and LM. CD is only divided into equal parts by the circle of light
KL: in such sort that the diurnall arks of the parallels above CD are bigger
then the Nocturnall, but under CD, lesser.

Also that the differences of the arks grow bigger and bigger by how much
nearer and nearer they come to the Poles, till IK be wholly taken in to the
enlightened part of the Earth and make day there, of 24 hours long, and
contrariwise, the parallel LM be wholly covered in the dark part, and make
night of 24. hours long. So that from hence we may see how the true
differences of the lowest and shortest days and nights are caused to the
Inhabitants of several parallels of the Earth.

Lets now consider the third figure the center of the earth placed in (...)
from whence the sun will appear in the first point of Capricorn. Now it is
manifest, being that the inclination and direction of the Earths Axis AB is
utterly the same it was before, it remaining parallel to it self, that the
situation of the Earth is the same, saving that that Hemisphere which was
before enlightened is now in the dark, and that which was in the dark before, is
now in the light, and so the differences of days and nights are quite contrary
to what they were. In what parallel was the longest day before is now the
shortest, and in what the shortest now the longest, as is plain to fight.

For now IK is wholly in the dark which before was in the light wholly, and LM
in the light that was before in the dark etc. And the Sun is now vertical to
the Inhabitants of GN as before it was to them of OF. And as it was the height
of Summer before to OF and to all on this side OF: so it is now the depth of
winter to them and to all on this side of them. Eor the Sun seems to have
descended, or is removed from them, or they from, it by the whole arch FDN that
is 47. degrees.

All which mutation proceeds from the immutable posture of the axis of the
Earth, remaining still in the same inclination to the Plane of the Ecliptic
and continuing ever parallel to it self. For so it must needs decline as much
from the Sun O in the point (...) as it inclined to him in the point (...). For
as, if the Axis AB were supposed parallel to the Axis of the Plane of the
Ecliptic the Sun will be vertical to D and to C. So IA the inclination of
the Axis toward the Sun, will make the Sun vertical at E in the point
(...), and the declination of the said Axis, from the Sun at the point (...)
will make the Sun vertical to N.

But now if we consider the Earth placed in the point (...) the Sun O will
appear in the beginning of (...). And whereas the Axis of the Earth which in
the first figure at (...) stands inclined upon the Diametre of Capricorn and
Cancer, and therefore understood to be in a Plane which cutteth the Plane of
the Ecliptic along the Diametre of Capricorn and Cancer, being erected
perpendicularly to the said Plane of the Ecliptic; This Axis kept still
parallel to it self, will also here be in a Plane, erected perpendicular to
the Plane of the Ecliptic, and parallel to the forenamed Plane which cut the
Plane of the, Ecliptic to right angles along the Diametre of Cancer and
Capricorn. And therefore a Line going from the Center of the Sun to the
Center of the Earth, such as the Line O tending to (...) Libra, will be
perpendicular to the Axis AB. But a Line drawn from the Suns Center, to the
Center of the Earth is always perpendicular to the Circle of illumination;
therefore shall the Circle of Illumination, or the Terminator Lucis pass
through the Poles AB in this Figure, and the Axis AB shall be in the Plane of
this Circle. But a great Circle passing through the Poles of the parallells
will divide them all into equal parts. Therefore IK, OF, CD, GN, LM, the
diurnall Arches be all semicircles, and days and nights be of equal length to
all the Inhabitants of the Earth.

Lastly, seeing that a Line drawn from the Center of the Sun, to the Center
of the Earth is perpendicular to the Axis AB, to which the greatest of the
parallel Circles CD is also perpendicular; this Line thus drawn will
necessarily pass along the Plane of the parallel CD, and cut its
circumference in the midst of the diurnall Arch of that Circle CD. And
therefore the Sun will here be vertical to them that live in the parallel
CD.



And what has been said of the Earth at this point of Libra (...), will agree
exactly to her placed in the point (...). There is no difference, saving that
the dark side turned from the Sun is represented in this last posture as the
light side in the former. The nocturnall semicircles here, as there the
Diurnall. And so we see how Spring and Autumn comes about as well as how
Winter and Summer.

Finally, whereas the Earth being in the Solstitial points the Polar Circles
IK, LM, one of them is in the Light, the other in the dark; but being in the
Equinoctial points, the halfs only of the Polar Circles be in the light or
dark: it is easy to understand how the Earth passing, suppose from Cancer
(where the parallel IK is wholly in the dark) to Leo (...), one part of the
parallel IK toward the point K begins to enter into the light, and the Circle
of Illumination to bear back toward the Pole A, and more inward toward the Pole
B, cutting the Circle ACBD no longer in KL, but in two other points betwixt AK
and LB, whence the Inhabitants of the Circle IK begin to enjoy the light, and
the Inhabitants of LM, to be conveyed into Night.

The Interpretation General.
IF any man conceive I have done amiss in using such obscure words in my
writings, I answer, That it is sometime fit for Poetical pomp sake, as in my
Psychozoia: Othersome time necessity requires it, Propter egestatem linguae,
and rerum novitatem, as Lucretius pleads for himself in like case. Again, there
is that significancie in some of the barbarous words (for the Greeks are
Barbarians to us) that, although not out of superstition, yet upon due reason I
was easily drawn to follow the Counsel of the Chaldee Oracle, (...), Not to
change those barbarous terms into into our english tongue. Lastly, if I have
offended in using such hard names or words, I shall make amends now by
interpreting them.

A
ABinoam (...) Pater amoenitatis, Father of delight.

Acronychall. See Cronychall.

Adamah. (...) Earth, The earthly or natural man's abode.

Adonai. (...) The Lord, or the sustainer of all things, from (...) the Basis
or foot of a pillar.

Aelpon. (...), not hoping, or without hope.

Aeon (...), Eternity.

Ether. (...), from (...) to burn. The fluid fiery nature of heaven, the same
that (...) which signifies as much, viz. a fiery fluour, or fluid fire.

Africa Rock. See Pompon. Mel. lib. 1. cap. 8. Romans 9.33. 1. Cor. 10.4 1. Pet.
2.5. Revel 5.10. Psalm. 105.15.

Ahad. (...). One, or The One. The Platonists call the first Original of all
things, (...) and (...), for these reasons: (...), or One, because the
multitude or plurality of Beings is from this One, as all numbers from an
unite: (...), or The Good, (...), or (...), because all things are driven,
drawn, or make haste to partake of it. (...), Procl. Theo. log. Plat. lib. 2.
cap. 4.

Aides. (...), It ordinarily signifies Orcus or Pluto; here the Winter Sun:
the etymon fits both, (...) Hell is dark, and the Sun in Winter leaves us to
long nights.

Ain, Not to be, To be nothing; from (...) Non, nihil, or nemo.

Alethea-land, That is, the land of truth, (...), as the Platonists call it.

Alopecopolis, (...). The foxes city, or polity.

Ananke, (...). The same that Hyle is. But the proper signification of the word
is Necessity. See Hyle.

Anautaesthetus, (...), One that feels not himself, or at least relisheth not
himself.

Anautaesthesie, (...), Without self-sensednesse, or relishing ones self.

Animadversall. That lively inward animadversall. It is the soul it self, for I
cannot conceive the body does animadvert; When as objects plainly exposed to
the sight are not discovered till the soul takes notice of them.

Anthropion, The same with Adamah: Only Adamah signifies earthlinesse;
Anthropion from (...), uprightness of body or looking up.

Apathie, (...). To be without passion.

Apogee, (...), is that absis or ark of the circle of a Planet, in which the
Planet is further off from the earth, as the word it self intimates.

Apterie, (...), from (...) negative, and (...) a wing. It signifies the want
of wings.

Arachnea has its name from (...), a spider.

Atom-lives. The same that Centrall-lives. Both the terms denotate the
indivisibilty of the inmost essence it self; the pure essential form I mean,
of plant, beast, or man, yea of angels themselves, good, or bad.

Atove. See Hattove.

Autaparnes, (...), from (...) and (...). Simon, Autaparnes and Hypomone are
but the soul, thrice told over. Autaparnes is the soul denying it self:
Hypomone the soul bearing the anguish of this denial of it self: From these
two, results Simon, the soul obedient to the spirit of Christ. Now there is no
self-denial where there is no corrupt or evil life to be suppressed and
satisfied; nor any Patience or Hypomone, where there is no agony from the
vexation of self-denial. So that the soul as long as it is Autaparnes or
Hypomone, is a thing complex or concrete, necessarily including the corruption
of that evil life or spirit, which is the souls self for a time. Hence is that
riddle easily opened; How the strength of Autaparnes is the weakening of Simon
and the destruction of him and Hypomone in the valley of Ain Simons
consummation and perfection, or rather his translation, or (...).

Autaestthesia, (...), Self-sensednesse.

Autokineticall, (...), That which moves it self.

Autopathia, (...), Denotates the being self-strucken, to be sensible of what
harms us, rather then what is absolutely evil.

Autophilus, (...), A lover of himself.

B
BAcha, Weeping, Bacha Vale is the Valley of tears; from (...) Flevit.

Beirah, or Beiron, The brutish life, from (...) brutum.

Body. The ancient Philosophers have defined it (...). Sext. Emperic. Pyrrhon.
Hypotyp. lib. 3. cap. 5. Near to this is that description, Psychathan. Cant. 2.
Stanz. 12. lib. 2. Matter extent in three dimensions: But for that (...),
simple trinall distension does not imply it, wherefore I declined it. But took
in matter according to their conceit that fancy a Materia prima, I
acknowledge none; and consequently no such corpus natural as our Physiologist
make the subject of that science. That (...) is nothing but a fixed spirit, the
conspissation or coagulation of the cuspidall particles of the Cone, which are
indeed the Centrall Tasis, or inward effence of the sensible world. These be an
infinite number of vital Atoms that may be wakened into diverse tinctures, or
energies, into Fiery, Watery, Earthy, etc. And one divine Fiat can unloose them
all into an universal mist, or turn them out of that sweat, into a dry and
pure Ethereall temper. These be the last projections of life from the soul of
the world; and are act or form though debil and indifferent; like that which
they call the first matter. But they are not merely passive, but meet their
information half way, as I may so speak: are radiant ab intimo, and awake into
this or the other operation, by the powerful appulse of some superadvenient
form. That which change of phantasmes is to the soul, that is alteration of
rays to them. For their rays are ab intrinseco, as the phantasmes of the
soul. These be the real matter of which all supposed bodies are compounded,
and this matter (as I said) is form and life, so that all is life and form what
ever is in the world, as I have somewhere intimated in Antipsychopan. But how
ever I use the term Body ordinarily in the usual and vulgar acception. And for
that sense of the Ancients, nearest to which I have defined it in the place
first above mentioned, that I seem not to choose that same as most easy to
proceed against in disproving the corporeity of the soul, the Arguments do as
necessarily conclude against such a natural body as is ordinarily described in
Physiologie (as you may plainly discern if you list to observe) as also against
this body composed of the Cuspidall particles of the Cone. For though they be
Centrall lives, yet are they neither Plasticall, Sensitive, or Rational; so
far are they from proving to be the humane soul, whose nature is there
discust.

C
Center, Centrall, Centrality. When they are used out of their ordinary sense,
they signify the depth, or inmost Being of any thing, from whence its Acts and
Energies flow forth. See Atom:lives.

Chaos, In our blew Chaos, that is, In our corporeal spirit: for that is the
matter that the soul raises her phantasmaticall forms in, as the life of the
World, does bodily shapes in the Heavens or Air.

Circulation. The term is taken from a toyish observation, viz. the circling of
water, when a stone is cast into a standing pool. The motion drives on
circularly, the first rings are thickest, but the further they go, they grow
the thinner, till they vanish into nothing. Such is the diffusion of the
Species audible in the stricken Air, as also of the visible Species. In brief,
any thing is said to circulate that diffuseth its Image or Species in a round.
It might have been more significantly called orbiculation, seeing this
circumfusion makes not only a Circle, but fills a Sphere, which may be called
the Sphere of activity: Yet Circulation more fitly sets out the diminution of
activity, from those rings in the water, which as they grow in compass, abate
in force and thickness. But sometimes I use Circulate in an ordinary sense to
turn round, or return in a Circle

Clare, Claros, a City of Jonia, famous for Apollo's Temple, and answers,
amongst which was this, which I have interpreted in Psychathanasia.

(...),
(...),
(...).
Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Cone; Is a solid figure made by the turning of a rectangular Triangle, about;
one of the sides that include the right angle resting, which will be then the
Axis of the completed Cone. But I take it sometimes for the comprehension of
all things, God himself not left out, whom I term the Basis of the Cone or
Universe. And because all from him descends, (...), with abatement or
contraction, I give the name of Cone to the Universe. And of Cone rather then
Pyramid, because of the roundnesse of the figure; which the effluxes of all
things imitate.

Cronychall, or Acronychall, that is, (...), vespertine, or at the beginning of
night. So a star is said to rise or set Acronychall, when it rises or
sets at the Sunne-setting; For then is the beginning of Night.

Cuspis of the Cone. The multiplide Cuspis of the Cone is nothing but the last
projection of life from Psyche, which is a liquid fire, or fire and water,
which are the corporeal or material principles of all things, changed or
disgregated (if they be centrally distinguishable) and again mingled by the
virtue of Physis or Spermaticall life of the World; of these are the Sun and
all the Planets, they being kned together, and fixed by the centrall power of
each Planet and Sun. The volatile Ether is also the same, and all the bodies
of Plants, Beasts and Men. These are they which we handle and touch, a
sufficient number compact together. For neither is the noise of those little
flies in a Summer-evening audible severally: but a full Quire of them strike
the ear with a pretty kind of buzzing. Strong and tumultuous pleasure, and
scorching pain reside in these, they being essential and centrall, but sight
and hearing are only of the Images of these, See Body.

D
Demon, Any particular life, any divided spirit; or rather the power ruling in
these. This is (...) divido.

Daemoniake, That which is according to that divided life or particular spirit
that rules for it self.

Deuteropathie, (...), is a being affected at second rebound, as I may so say.
We see the Sun not so properly by sympathy, as deuteropathie. As the mundane
spirit is affected where the Sun is, so am I in some manner; but not
presently, because it is so affected, but because in my eye the Sun is
vigorously represented. Otherwise a man might without question see the Sun if
he had but a body of thin Air.

Diana, The Moon, by which is set out the dead light, or letter of the Law.

Dicaeosyne, (...), Justice or Moral righteousness.

Dizoia, (...), Double-livednesse.

Duessa, Division, or duality.

E
EIdos (...), Form or Beauty.

Eloim or Eloah, (...) signify properly the strong God.

Energie, it is a peculiar Platonicall term, I have elsewhere expounded it,
Operation, Efflux, Activity: None of those words bear the full sense of it. The
examples there are fit, viz. the light of the Sun, the phantasmes of the soul.
We may collect the genuine sense of the word, by comparing several places of
the Philosopher. (...). For every being has its Energie, which is the image of
it self, so that it existing that Energie does also exist, and standing still
is projected forward more or less. And some of those Energies, are weak and
obscure, others hid or undiscernable, other some greater and of a larger
projection, Plotin. Ennead. 4. lib. 5. cap. 7. And again, Ennead. 3. lib. 4.
(...). And we remain above by the Intellectual man, but by the extreme part of
him we are held below, as it were yielding an efflux from him to that which is
below, or rather an Energie, he being not at all lessened. This curiosity
Antoninus also observes ( lib 8. Meditat.) in the nature of the Sunbeams,
where although he admits of (...), yet he does not of (...) which is (...). The
Sun, says he, is diffused, and his fusion is every where but without effusion,
etc. I will only add one place more out of Plotinus Ennead. 3. lib. 6. (...).
The natural Energie of each power of the soul is life not parted from the soul
though gone out of the soul, viz. into act.

Comparing of all these places together, I cannot better explain this Platonic
term, Energie, then by calling it the rays of an essence, or the beams of a
vital Center. For essence is the Center as it were of that which is truly
called Energie, and Energie the beams and rays of an essence. And as the Radi^
of a circle leave not the Center by touching the Circumference, no more does
that which is the pure Energie of an essence, leave the essence by being called
out into act, but is (...) a working in the essence, though it flow out into
act. So that Energie depends always on essence, as Lumen on Lux, or the
creature on God; Whom therefore Synesius in his Hymns calls the Center of all
things.

Entelechia, (...): It is nothing else but forma, or actus, and belongs even to
the most contemptible forms, as for example to Motion, which is defined by
Arist. in the third of his physics, (...). Scaliger in his 309 exercitation
against Cardan, descants very curiously upon this word: Cum igitur formam
dixeris (that is (...)) intelliges immaterialitatem, simplicitatem, potestatem,
perfectionem, informationem. Hoc enim est (...): quod innuit maximus Poetarum,
Totosque infusa per artus. Hoc est, (...): quia est ultima forma sub
coelestibus, and princeps inferiorum, finis and perfectio. Hoc est (...),
posse. This goodly mystery and fit significancy seems plainly forced or
fictitious, if you compare it with what was cited out of Arist. about Motion.
So that when we have made the best of (...), it is but the form of any thing in
an ordinary and usual sense. If we stood much upon words, (...) would prove
more significant of the nature of the Soul, even according to Scaligers own
Etymon, from (...), and (...): from its permeation, and colligation or keeping
together the body from defluxion into its ancient principles, which properties
be included in (...) and (...) moves forward the body thus kept together: (...)
intimates the possession or retention of the body thus moved, that it is rather
promov'd by the Soul, than moved from the Soul. But of these words enough, or
rather too much.

Eternity is the steady comprehension of all things at once. See Aeon
described in my Notes upon Psychozoia.

Euphrona, (...), The night.

F
FAith. Platonic faith in the first Good. This faith is excellently described
in Proclus. where it is set above all ratiocination, nay, Intellect it self.
(...). But to them that endeavor to be joined with the first Good, there is no
need of knowledge or multifarious cooperation, but of settlednesse, steadiness
and rest, lib. 1. cap. 24. Theolog. Platon. And in the next chapter, (...).

For we must not seek after that absolute or first good cognoscitively or
imperfectly, but giving our selves up to the divine light, and winking (that is
shutting our eyes of reason and understanding) so to place our selves steddily
in that hidden Unity of all things: After he preferres this faith before the
clear and present assent to the (...), yea and the (...), so that he will not
that any intellectual operation should come in comparison with it. (...). For
the operation of the Intellect is multiform, and by diversity separate from her
objects, and is in a word, intellectual motion about the object intelligible.
But the divine faith must be simple and uniform, quiet and steddily resting in
the haven of goodness. And at last he summarily concludes, (...). See Procl:
Theolog. Platonic. lib. 1. cap. 25.

G
GAbriel, The strength of God from (...) and (...).

Glaucis, Glaux, (...), an Owl.

H
HAphe. (...), The touch.

Har-Eloim, (...) The mount of Angels, Genii, or particular spirits.

Hattove, (...), the Good, or that eminent Good, or first Good from whence all
good is derived. See Ahad.

Helios, (...), The Sun.

Heterogeneall, is that which consists of parts of a diverse nature, or form:
as for example, a man's body, of flesh, bon^s, nerves, etc.

Homogeneall, That whose nature is of one kind.

Hyle, Materia prima, or that dark fluid potentiality of the creature, the
straitness, repugnancy, and incapacity of the creature: as when its being
this, destroys or debilitates the capacity of being something else, or after
some other manner. This is all that any wary Platonist will understand by (...).

Hypomone, (...), Patience. See Autaparnes.

I
JAo, A corruption of the Tetragrammaton. Greek writers have strangeely mash'd
this word (...), some calling it (...), others (...), some (...). It is very
likely that from this (...) came Bacchus his apellation (...). and the Maenades
acclamations (...) in his Orgia. Which suits well with the Clarian Oracle,
which says that in Autumn, the Sun is called (...), which is the time of
vintage.

(...). See Fullers Miscel.

Ida. See Pompon. Mel. lib. 1. cap. 17.

Ideas, or Idees, sometimes they are forms in the Intellectual world, viz. in
Aeon, or On; other sometimes, phantasmes or representations in the soul. Innate
Idees are the souls nature it self, her uniform essence, able by her Fiat to
produce this or that phantasme into act.

Idea Land. The Intellectual world.

Idiopathie, (...), is ones proper peculiar (...), my or thy, being affected
thus or so, upon this or that occasion; as (...), is this or that man's proper
temper. But this propriety of affection may also belong unto kinds. As an
Elephant has his idiopathy, and a man his, at the hearing of a pipe; a Cat and
an Eagle at the sight of the Sun; a Dog and a Circopithecus at the sight of
the Moon, etc.

Idothea, The fleet passage of fading forms; from (...), Forma, and (...),
curro.

Intellect. Sometimes it is to be interpreted Soul. Sometimes the intellectual
faculty of the Soul. Sometimes Intellect is an absolute essence shining into
the Soul: whose nature is this. A substance purely immateriall, impeccable,
actually omniform, or comprehending all things at once: which the soul does
also being perfectly joined with the Intellect. (...). Plot. Ennead 1. lib. 1.
cap. 8.

Isosceles, A triangle with two sides equal.

L
LAmpropronaea, The bright side of Providence.

Lelurion, Nocturnall fire, from (...) and (...)

Leontopolis (...), The Lions city or Polity.

Life. The vital operation of any soul. Sometimes it is the Soul it self, be
it sensitive, vegetative, or rational.

Logos, (...), The appellation of the Son of God. It is ordinarily translated
the Word, but has an ample signification. It signifies Reason, Proportion,
Form, Essence, any inward single thought, or apprehension; is any thing but
matter, and matter is nothing.

Lower man, The lower man is our enquickned body, into which our soul comes, it
being fully prepared for the receiving of such a guest. The manner of the
production of souls, or rather their non-production is admirably well set down
in Plotinus, See Ennead 6. l. 4. c. 14.15.

Lypon, from (...), sorrow.

M
Magical, that is, attractive, or commanding by force of sympathy with the
life of this natural world.

Melampronoea, the black side of providence.

Memory. Mundane memory. Is that memory that is seated in the Mundane spirit of
man, by a strong impression, or inustion of any phantasme, or outward sensible
object, upon that spirit. But there is a memory more subtle and abstract in
the soul it self, without the help of this spirit, which she also carries away
with her having left the body.

Michael, who like unto God? from (...) quis and (...) similitudinis, and (...)
Deus.

Moment. Sometimes signifies an instant, as indivisible, as (...), which in
motion answers to an instant in time, or a point in a line, Arist. Phys. In
this sense I use it, Psychathan. lib. 3. cant. 2. stanz. 2.16. But in a moment
Sol does ray. But Cant. 3. stanz 45. verse. 2. I understand, as also does
Lansbergius, by a moment one second of a minute. In Antipsych. Cant. 2. stanz.
10. verse. 2. by a moment I understand a minute, or indefinitely any small time.

Monad, (...), is Unitas, the principle of all numbers, an emblem of the
Deity: And the Pythagoreans call it (...), God. It is from (...), because it is
(...), stable and immovable, a firm Cube of it self, One time one time one
remains still one, See Ahad.

Monocordia, (...), from (...) and (...), Single-heartednesse.

Mundane, Mundane spirit, is that which is the spirit of the world, or
Universe. I mean by it not an Intellectual spirit, but a fine, unfixt,
attenuate, subtle, ethereall substance, the immediate vehicle of plasticall or
sensitive life.

Myrmecopolis, (...), the city or polity of Pismires.

N
NEurospast, (...), a Puppet or any Machina that is moved by an unseen string or
nerve.

O
OGdoas, (...), numerus octonarius, the number of eight.

Omniformity, the omniformity of the soul is the having in her nature all
forms, latent at least, and power of awaking them into act, upon occasion.

On, (...). The being.

Orb. Orb Intellectual, is nothing else but Aeon or the Intellectual world.
The Orbs general mentioned, Psychathan. lib. 1. cant. 3. stanz. 23. verse. 2. I
understand by them but so many universal orders of being, if I may so term
them all; for Hyle has little or nothing of being.

Out-World, and Out Heaven. The sensible World, the visible Heaven.

P
PAndemoniothen, (...), all from the devil; viz. all false persuasions, and
ill effects from them.

Panoply, (...), Armor for the whole body.

Pantheothen, (...), All from God. Which is true in one sense, false in
another, You Will easily discern the sense in the place you find the word. This
passage of Pantheothen contains a very savory and hearty reproof of all, be
they what they will, that do make use of that intricate mystery of fate and
infirmity; safely to guard themselves from the due reprehensions and just
expostulations of the earnest messengers of God, who would rouse them out of
this sleep of sin, and stir them up seriously to seek after the might and
spirit of Christ, that may work wonderfully in their souls to a glorious
conquest and triumph against the devil, death and corruption.

Parallax, (...), is the difference betwixt the true and seeming place of a
star; proceeding from the sensible difference of the center, and the height of
the superficies of the earth in reference to the star, and from the stars
declining from the Zenith.

Parelies, (...), are rorid clouds which bear the image of the Sun.

Parturient. See Vaticinant.

Penia, (...), Want or poverty.

Perigee, (...), is that absis or ark of a Planets circle, in which it comes
nearer to the earth.

Periphere, Peripheria, it is the line that terminates a circle.

Fantasy, Lower fantasy, is that which resides in the Mundane spirit of a
man, See Memory.

Phantasme, (...), any thing that the soul conceives in it self, without any
present external object.

Philosomatus, (...), a lover of his body.

Phobon, from (...), fear.

Phrenition, anger, impatiency, fury; from (...), frenzy or madness. Ira
furor brevis est.

Physis, (...), Nature vegetative.

Pithecus, (...), an Ape.

Pithecusa, the land of Apes.

Plastic. (...), is that efformative might in the seed that shapes the body in
its growth.

Protopathy, (...). It is a suffering or being affected at first, that is,
without circulation. If any man strike me, I feel immediately; because my soul
is united with this body that is struck: and this is protopathy. If the air be
struck aloof of, I am sensible also of that, but by circulation or propagation
of that impression into my ear; and this is deuteropathy. See Deuteropathy.

Proteus, Vertumnus, changeab lenesse.

Psittaco. Don Psittaco, from Psittacus a Parot, a bird that speak significant
words, whose sense notwithstanding it self is ignorant of The Dialogue betwixt
this Parot and Mnemon sets out the vanity o^ superficial conceited
Theologasters, that have but the surface and thin imagination of divinity, but
truly devoid of the spirit and inward power of Christ, the living wellspring
of knowledge and virtue, and yet do pride themselves in prattling and
discoursing of the most hidden and abstruse mysteries of God, and take all
occasions to show forth their goodly skill and wonderful insight into holy
truth, when as they have indeeed scarce licked the outside of the glass
wherein it lies.

Psittacusa, the land of Parots.

Psychania, the land of Souls.

Psyche, (...), Soul, or spirit.

Psychicall, Though (...) be a general name and belongs to the souls of beasts
and plants, yet I understand by life Psychicall, such centrall life as is
capable of Aeon, and Ahad.

Pteroessa, (...), the land of winged souls; from (...), a wing.

Q
QUadrate. A figure with four equal sides, and four right angles. The
rightnesse of the angles, is a plain emblem of erectnesse or uprightness of
mind. The number of the sides, as also of the angles, being pariter par, that
is, equal divisible to the utmost unities ((...), as it is in Aristotle)
intimates equity or justice. The sides are equal one with another, and so are
the angles; and the number of the sides and angles equal one with another.
Both the numbers put together are a number pariter par again, and constitute
the first cube which is eight: That adds steadiness and persevererance in true
justice and uprightness toward God and man. Hypomone bears all this, that is,
all that dolor and vexation that comes from the keeping our perverse heart to
so strait and straight a rule.

Quantitative. Forms quantitative, are such sensible energies as arise from the
complexion of many natures together, at whose discretion they vanish That Is the
seventh orb of things, though broken and not filling all as the other do. But
if you take it for the whole sensible world, it is entire and is the same that
Tasis in Psychozoia. But the center of Tasis, viz. the multiplication of the
real Cuspis of the Cone (for Hyle that is set for the most contract point of
the Cuspis is scarce to be reckoned among realities) that immense diffusion of
atoms, is to be referred to Psyche, as an internal vegetative act, and so
belongs to Physis the lowest order of life. For as that warmth that the soul
does afford the body, is not rational, sensitive or imaginative, but
vegetative; So this, (...) that is, liquid fire, which Psyche sends out, and is
the outmost, last, and lowest operation from her self, is also vegetative.

R
Rays. The rays of an essence is its energie. See Energie.

Reason. I understand by Reason, the deduction of one thing from another, which
I conceive proceeds from a kind of continuity of phantasmes; and is something
like the moveing of a cord at one end; the parts next it rise with it. And by
this concatenation of phantasms I conceive, that both brutes and men are moved
in reasonable ways and methods in their ordinary external actions.

Reduplicative. That is reduplicative, which is not only in this point, but
also in another, having a kind of circumscribed ubiquity, viz. in its own
sphere. And this is either by being in that sphere omnipresent it self, as the
soul is said to be in the body tota in toto and tota in qualibet part; or else
at least by propagation of rays, which is the image of it self; and so are
diverse sensible objects Reduplicative, as light, colors, sounds. And I make
account either of these ways justly denominate any thing spiritual. Though the
former is most properly, at least more eminently spiritual. And whether any
thing be after that way spiritual saving the Divinity, there is reason to
doubt. For what is entirely omnipresent in a sphere, whose diametre is but
three foot, I see not, why (that in the circumference being as fresh and entire
as that in the center) it should stop there and not proceed, even in infinitum,
if the circumference be still as fresh and entire as the center. But I define
nothing.

Rhomboides, is a parallelogrammicall figure with unequal sides and oblique
angles.

S
SCalen, a triangle with all sides unequal.

Self reduplicative. See Reduplicative.

Semele, Imagination; from (...) imago.

Simon, intimates obedience, from (...) obedivit.

Solyma, or Salem, from (...) Peace.

Soul, when I speak of man's soul, I understand that which Moses says was
inspired into the body, (fitted out and made of Earth) by God, Genesis 2. which is
not that impeccable spirit that cannot sin; but the very same that the
Platonists call (...), a middle essence betwixt that which they call (...) (and
we would in the Christian language call (...)) and the life of the body which
is (...), a kind of an umbratil vitalitie that the soul imparts to the body in
the enlivening of it: That and the body together, we Christians call (...), and
the suggestions of it, especially in its corrupt estate, (...). And that that
which God inspired into Adam was no more then (...), the soul, not the spirit,
though it be called (...) Spiraculum vitae; is plain out of the text; because
it made man but become a living soul, (...). But you will say, he was a dead
soul before, and this was the spirit of life, ye the spirit of God, the life of
the soul that was breathed into him.

But if (...) imply such a life and spirit, you must acknowledge the same to be
also in the most stupid of all living creatures, even the fishes (whose soul is
as but salt to keep them from stinking, as Philo speaks) for they are said to
be (...) chap. 1. v. 20.21. See 1. Cor. chap. 15. v. 45, 46. In brief
therefore, that which in Platonisme is (...); is in Scripture (...); what (...)
in one, (...), the brute or beast in the other, (...) the same in both.

Sperm. It signifies ordinarily seed. I put it for the (...), the ratio
seminalis, or the invisible plasticall form that shapes every visible creature.

Spermaticall. It belongs properly to Plants, but is tranferred also to the
Plasticall power in Animalls, I enlarge it to all magnetic power whatsoever
that does immediately rule and actuate any body. For all magnetic power is
founded in Physis, and in reference to her, this world is but one Plant, one
(...) giving it shape and corporeal life) as in reference to Psyche, one happy
and holy Animal.

Spirit. Sometimes it signifies the soul, othersometime, the natural spirits
in a man's body, which are Vinculum animae and corporis, and the souls vehicle:
Sometimes life. See Reduplicative.

T
TAgathon, (...), The Good; the same with Hattove.

Tasis, (...), extension.

Tricentreity. Center is put for essence, so Tricentreity must imply a Trinity
of essence. See Center and Energie.

V
VAticinant The soul is said to be in a vaticinant, or parturient condition,
when she has some kind of sense, and hovering knowledge of a thing, but yet
cannot distinctly and fully, and commandingly represent it to herself, cannot
plainly apprehend, much less comprehend the matter. The phrase is borrowed of
Proclus, who describing the incomprehensiblenesse of God, and the desire of all
things toward him, speaks thus; (...). Theolog. Platon. lib. 1. cap. 21. See
Psychathan. lib. 3. cant. 3. stanz. 12. and 14.

Vranore. The light or beauty of heaven, from (...), and (...), or (...)
pulchritudo.

Z
ZAphon, Aquilo. The North.

Zeus, (...), Jupiter, from (...), serveo, or (...), vivo.

THus have I run through the more obscure terms in the preceding Poems. But for
the many points a man may meet withal therein, though I did heretofore make
some slight promise of speaking more determinately of them, I hope I may
without offense decline the performance as yet, till I abound more with leisure
and judgment. For as I am certain I have little enough of the one, so I can
not but doubt (Nature having lavished so much upon all men else, even to the
infallible Determining of mutual contradictions) whether I have got any share
at all of the other. But yet I hope, without breach of modesty, I may presume
to understand the purpose of my own writings. Which, as I have heretofore
signified was no other then this, to stir men up to take into their thoughts
these two main considerations. The hearty good will of God to mankind, even in
the life of this world, made of the commixture of light and darkness, that he
will through his power rescue those souls, that are faithful in this their
trial, and prefer the light before the dark; that he will, I say, deliver
them from the power of living Death, and Hell, by that strong arm of their
salvation, Jesus Christ, the living God enthroned in the heart of man, to whom
all the Genii of the Universe, be they never so goodly and glorious shall
serve. They and all their curious devices and inventions shall be a spoil,
prey, and a possession to Him that is most just, and shall govern the nations
in righteousness and equity. And that, beside this happiness on earth, every
holy soul hereafter shall enjoy a never-fading felicity in the invisible and
eternal Heaven, the Intellectual world. Which if it be not true, I must needs
confess, it seems almost indifferent whether any creature be or no. For what
is it to have lived, suppose 70 years, wherein we have been dead or worse above
two third parts of them? Sleep, youth, age and diseases, with a number of poor
and contemptible employments, swallow up at least so great a portion: that as
good, if not better, is he that never was, then he is, that has but such a
glance or glimpse of passing life to mock him.

And although the succession of righteousness upon earth may rightly seem a
goodly great and full spread thing, and a matter that may bear an ample
correspondencie even to the larger thoughts of a good and upright man; yet, to
say the truth, no man is capable of any large inheritance, whose life and
existence is so scant that he shall not be able so much as to dream of the
least happiness once seized on by death.

But there are continually on earth such numbers of men alive, that if they
lived well it would be an Heaven or Paradise. But still a scant one to every
particular man, whose days are even as nothing. So that the work of God seems
not considerable, in the making of this world, if humane souls be extinguished
when they go out of it. You will say that those small particles of time that is
thus scattered and lost among men in their successions, are comprehended and
collected in God who is a continual witness of all things.

But, alas! what does the perpetual repetition of the same life or deiform
Image throughout all ages add to Him, that is at once infinitely himself, viz.
good, and happy?

So that there is nothing considerable in the creation, if the rational
creature be mortal. For neither is God at all profited by it, nor man
considerably. And were not the Angels a great deal better employed in the
beholding the worth of their Creator, then to deminish their own happiness,
by attending those, whom nothing can make happy? looking on this troubled
passing stream of the perishing generations of men, to as little purpose
almost, as idle boys do on dancing blebs and bubbles in the water.

What design therefore can there be in God in the making of this world that
will prove (...), worthy of so excellent a goodness and wisdom; but the
trial of the immortal spirit of man? It seems the deepest reach of his
counsel in the creation; and the life of this world but a prelude to one of
longer durance and larger circumference hereafter. And surely it is nothing
else but the heavy load of this body, that keeps down our mind from the
reaching to those so high hopes, that I may not say from a certain sense and
feeling of that undisturbd state of immortality.

And thus much I have ventured to speak boldly without Scepticisme in Faith and
Sense, that the first Principle of all things is living Goodness, armd with
Wisdom and all-powerfull Love. But if a man's soul be once sunk by evil fate or
desert from the sense of this high and heavenly truth, into that cold conceit;
that the Original of things does lie either in shuffling Chance, or in that
stark root of unknowing Nature and brute Necessity; all the subtle cords of
Reason, without the timely recovery of that divine touch within the hidden
spirit of man, will (...) ^ack, out of that abhorred pit of Atheism and
Infidelity. So much better is Innocence and Piety then subtle Argument, and
earnest and sincere Devotion then curious Dispute.

FINIS.
Errata
Page Stanz. lin. Pro Lege 12 43 9 Hiddenly Hidden lie 15 56 1 censent concent
22 20 2 weight wight 22 20 5 Can make Can wake 37 79 7 Countrey-speech
Counterspeech 46 125 9 preceed proceed 58 21 5 There lives There lies 81 3 1
eanst can 97 11 8 wild mild 126 17 8 truths truth's 142 11 6 So he gins so
she 'gins 145 24 4 Nor part Not part 153 57 6 Wrapped Rapt 162 30 7 binds It
binds 175 5 8 for it is for 'ts 194 14 1 conpissate conspissate 199 33 3
possession position 203 48 9 debare debar 212 84 1 these their 242 4 4 though
through 246 20 2 stell well 260 19 9 night wight 260 20 3 over often overmost 264
36 7 of thy to thy 286 6 4 toss touze 314 33 two efficious too officious 318
21 Haec Venus Haec, Venus 322 17 vivica vivifica 340 32 Stanz. 5. Stanz. 15.
341 26 Stanz. Verse. 346 18 Stanz. 59. Stanz. 49. 368 4 Stanz. 28. Stanz. 38.
369 3 Stanz. 50. Stanz. 51. 383 24 Stanz. Stanz. 2. 388 8 Stanz. 84. Stanz. 48.
412 17 Omnipotency Omnipraesency.


