SIR WILLIAM MORE'S CASE.
Borough of Haslemere in Surrey.
THE Right of Electing in the said Borough, is in such Freeholders, who are
also Inhabitants; as was Adjudged this Parliament, in the Case of George Evelyn
Esquire

The Number of such at the time of this present Election, was not above 27 at
most, one whereof gave no Voice.

Of these, 23 Voluntarily, and without any Soliciation, Invited Sir William
More, who is Lord of the said Borough, to accept of an Election.

After which the Petitioner, Sir Philip Lloyd, being a mere Stranger, comes
into the said Borough, and by Insinuations, Promises, and other Indirect means,
works off six of those Electors, who had before freely offered their Voices for
the said Sir William More; which, with two Voices more turned over to him, by
Mr. Dereham (who was also a Competiter in the said Election) and one more,
being an Ale-house-keeper, where he Lodged his Provisions, and made his
Entertainments, in all make nine, one of which was Excommunicated: Besides
these, Sir Philip Polls three more, who have no right to Elect, as will be
proved.

Sir William More is Returned by the Bayliffe, and 17 more, who have undoubted
Right to Elect. Pro MORE.
William Rapley, Bailiff. Peter Hull, John Billinghurst, John Case, John
Carter, Sen. John Dudman, John Maunt, John Carter, Jun. John Wakeford, John
Habens, Robert Jackman, Richard Valor, Robert Billinghurst, William Ride, Sen.
Thomas Overington, Thomas Dennier, Edward Ride, Henry Holt.


Pro LLOYD.
Edmund Upton, The Ale-house-keeper. Abraham Upfold, George Osborne,
These turned over by Dereham. William Marks, James Fig, Will. Ride, Jun.
William Chitty, John Bredah, Richard Bradfold, Excommunicated.
These six had before freely offered their Voices for Sir Willam More Rob.
Billinghurst, Thomas Boxall, Will, Haslegrove.
These had no Right to Vote in the Election.
By all which it appears that Sir Philip Lloyd had but Eight Voices at most,
that can pretend to be due Electors: And Sir William More had Seventeen Legal
Electors.


