OBSERVATIONS UPON ANTHROPOSOPHIA THEOMAGICA, AND Anima Magica Abscondita.

By ALAZONOMASTIX PHILALHTHES

Psalm.

They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits
end.

Printed at Parrhesia, but are to be sold, by O. Pullen at the Rose in Paul's
Churchyard, 1650.

To Eugenius Philalethes the Author of Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima
Magica Abscondita.
SIR,
THE Great deserved fame that followed this noble work of yours (the due
recompense of all eminent performances) engaged me to peruse the same, with
much eagerness of mind, and yet with no less attention; I being one of
those, that profess themselves much more willing to learn, then able to teach.
And that you may see some specimen of the fruits of your labor and my
proficiency, I thought fit to present you with these few Observations. Which,
considering the barrenness of the Matrix, (as you Chemists love to call it) in
which they were conceived, may be termed rather many then few: And that
imputed to the alone virtue, or Magical Multiplication, or Theomagicall
fecundity of your Divine Writings, not at all to the sterility of my
disfurnished Brain. Which now notwithstanding, having gathered both warmth and
moisture from the heat and luxuriancy of your youthful fancy, finds it
self after a manner transformed into your own complexion, and translated into
the same temper with your self. In so much that although I cannot with the
height of a protestation in the presence of my glorious God (as your self has
gallantly done ( in page 50. lin. 17. of Anthropos. Theomag.) affirm that the
affection and Zeal to the truth of my Creator has forced me to write, yet I
dare profess in the word of an honest man, that nothing but an implacable
enmity to immorality and foolery, has moved me at this time to set pen to
Paper. And I confess my indignation is kindled the more, having so long
observed that this disease is grown even Epidemicall in our Nation. viz. to
desire to be filled with high-swoln words of vanity, rather then to feed on
sober truth, and to heat and warm our selves rather by preposterous and
fortuitous imaginations, then to move cautiously in the light of a purified
mind and improved reason. Wherefore I being heightened with the same Zeal of
discountenancing of vanity and conceitednesse, that your self is of promoting
the truth, you will permit to me the same freedom in the prosecution thereof.
For as we are grown near akin in temper and complexion, so we ought mutually
to allow each other in our actings alike, according to our common temper and
nature, and the accustomed liberty of the Philalethean Family. In confidence
whereof, till we meet again in the next page, I take leave and subscribe my
self,

A Chip of the same Block Alazonomastix Philalethes.

Observations upon Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima Magica Abscondita.
AND now, brother Philalethes; that we are so well met, let us begin to act
according to the freeness of our tempers, and play the Tom Telltroths. And you
indeed have done your part already. My course is next. Which must be spent, in
the Observations I told you of, upon those profound Treatises of yours,
Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima Magica Abscondita.

And my first and general Observation is this, That the genius of my brother
Eugenies Magical discourse is such, that Simon Magus-like, he seems to have a
very liquoursome desire to be thought to be (...), some great man in the World.
And for the prosecution of this main end, he lays himself out chiefly in these
three subordinate designs. First, to be thought to have found out some new
concerning truths, hitherto undiscovered. Secondly, to be more learned and
knowing then Aristotle, that great light of these European parts for these many
hundred years together: and not only so, but to be so far above him, that he
may be his Master, that he may tew him, and lugge him, and lash him more
cruelly, then any Orbilius or choleric Pedagogue, his puny scholars. Thirdly
and lastly, that he may strike home for the getting of a fame of profound
learning indeed, he does most affectedly and industriously raise in the Reader
a strong surmise and suspicion that he is very deeply seen in Art Magic, and
is a very knowing Disciple of Agrippa, and puts in as far for the name of a
Magician, as honesty will permit, and safety from that troublesome fellow,
Hopkins the Witch-finder.

And indeed the very clatter of the title of his Book, Anthroposophia
Theomagica, sounds not much unlike some conjuration, or charm, that would
either call up, or scare away the Devil. And Zoroaster forsooth, at the
bottom of the page, that old reputed Magician, must stand as an Assistent to
this preludiall Exorcism; with this Oracle in his mouth, (...), Audi ignis
vocem. That is in plain English, Hear the voice or noise of fire. Methinks I
smell out a Gunpowder-plot. What can this voice of fire be? Why! how now
Anthroposophus! you intend certainly to make the Rosy Brotherhood merry with
squibs and crackers. For certainly your Mysteriousnesse does not mean those
lesser or greater fire-squirts, Carbines or Cannons. So might the Fratres R. C.
be received with like solemnity that those Apostles at Rome, the Cardinals. But
the word (...), (which implies a subsultation, or skipping this way and that
way) which is in the context of this Oracle, seems to allude to, and
prognosticate of fire-crackers and squibs rather then Cannons or Carbines. But
how ever if this dog-trick fail, Anthroposophus has another as puerile and
innocent a present, to entertain that Reverend Fraternity. And that is a very
queint and trim Latin Epistle, which he, like a good Schoolboy, to show them
what a good Proficient he is grown in his Latin Grammar, presents to their
assembled Gravities. It Is a good child, Anthroposophus! and it is well done. Qui
necit obedire nescit imperare. He that knows not how to submit himself in the
form of a breeching boy to the Fratres R. C. how can he know so unmercifully to
whip and domineer over poor Aristotle?

Surely, Anthroposophus! when the Rosy brethren, ride swooping through the Air
in their Theomagicall chariots, they will hail down sugar plums, and Carua's on
thy blessed pate, if thou haft but the good hap at that time, to walk abroad
with thy hat off, to cool thy heated nodle.

But stay a while, I am afraid I am mistaken. It may well be, that
Anthroposophus rides along with them, as being the Proloquutour of their
Assembly. For he writes himself Oratoris vestri. How can that belong to a
short Epistle, unless it were some title of office? But it may be my
Gentleman, being not so dextrous and quick in Latin as in English, measured
the length o^ it more by his labor then the lines, and thought that that which
took him so much pains could not prove so little as an Epistle; and therefore
would insinuate that it was an Oration made to the Fratres R. C. I suppose at
their meeting at Friar Bacons brazen head in Oxford.

Well! be it what it will be, my observation here, Anthroposophus, is, that you
would also by your address to the Fratres R. C. make the world believe, that
you are now mellowing apace, and are not much unripe for admission into that
Society. And then Anthroposophus would be a rare Theomagician indeed. But
enough of this vein of mirth and levity.

Now Philalethes! your brother Tel-troth, intends to fall more closely on your
bones, and to discover whether you have not a greater mind to seem to be wise
then to be so indeed, or to make others so. But yet you may assure your self, I
will only find flaws not make any in you; but rather heartily pass over what
may receive any tolerably good interpretation, nor touch the soar any where,
but where I may hope to heal it, either in your self or others. And that this
may be done without any tedious taking a pieces of what you have put together,
I shall fairly pass from page to page without any Analytical Artifice.

And truly from the first page to middle of the fourth page of you to the
Reader, there be many pretty, smart, elegant, humorous contextures of phrases
and things. But there, presently after Friar Bacons Fool and his fellow, you
fall upon our Peripateticks as such superficial Philosophasters, because they
cannot lay open to you the very essence of the soul. Why! Anthroposophus! can
you tell the very essence of any substantial thing? Hereby you show your self
very raw and unexercised in meditation, in that you have not yet taken notice
what things are knowable, what not. And thus may you have as ill a trick put
upon you, for want of this discerning, as the old dim and doting woman had,
that with her rotten teeth endeavored to crack a round pebble stone instead of
a nut, which was a thing impossible. Nor will any man's understanding, be it as
sharp as it will, enter the bare essence of any thing. But the nearest we can
get, is, to know the powers, and operations, the respects and fitnesses that
things have in themselves or toward others. Which is so true, that any man in a
little search, will presently satisfy himself in the evidence thereof.

From the middle of this fourth page to the middle of the six, is continued a
dance of Anticks, or various ridiculous shiftings and postures of fancy, to
make Aristotle and his followers contemptible. But such general railings, as
they are mis-beseeming the Writer, so they teach the Reader nothing but that
the Author of them is a Mome, or a Mimick, and more like an Ape by far then
him that he compares to one. If this man clap the wings so when he has really
got the foil (for hitherto he has charged Aristotle with no particular piece
of ignorance, but of what is impossible to be known) what would he do if he
had the victory?

The second particular taxation (for generals I hold nothing, Dolosus ambulat
in universalibus) is that the Peripateticks fancy God to have made the World,
as a Carpenter of stone and timber. But this is false: because they give an
inward principle of motion to all natural bodies, and there is one continuity
of all, as much as of the parts of water among themselves. But their grand
fault is, that they do not say the World is Animate. But is not yours far
greater, Anthroposophus! that gives so ridiculous unproportionable account of
that Tenet? The whole World is an Animal, say you, whose flesh is the earth,
whose blood is the water, the air the outward refreshing spirit in which it
breaths, the interstellar skies his vital waters, the Stars his sensitive
fire. But are not you a mere Animal your self to say so? For it is as
irrational and incredible, as if you should tell us a tale of a Beast whose
blood and flesh put together, bears not so great a proportion to the rest of
the more fluid parts of the Animal, suppose his vital and animal spirits, as a
mite in a cheese to the whole globe of the earth. And beside this, how shall
this water which you call blood, be refreshed by the air that is warmer then
it? And then those waters which you place in the outmost parts toward his
dappeld or spotted skin the coelum stellatum, what over-proportionated plenty
of them is there there? In so much that this creature you make a diseased
Animal from its first birth, and ever laboring with an Anasarca. Lastly, how
unproperly is the air said to be the outward refreshing spirit of this Animal,
when it is ever in the very midst of it? And how rashly is the Flux and Reflux
of the Sea assimilated to the pulse, when the pulse is from the heart not the
brain, but the flux and reflux of the Sea from the Moon not the Sun, which they
that be more discreetly fantastical then your self, do call Cor Mundi.
Wherefore, Anthroposophus! your phansies to sober men, will seem as vain and
puerile, as those of idle children that imagine the fortuitous postures of
spaul and snivell on plaster-walls, to bear the form of men's or dogs faces, or
of Lions and what not.

And yet see the supine stupidity and senslesnesse of this man's judgment, that
he triumphs so in this figment of his as so rare and excellent a truth, that
Aristotle's Philosophy must be groundless superstition and popery in respect of
it, this the primevall truth of the creation; when as it is a thousand times
more froth, then His is vomit. My friend Anthroposophus! is this to appear for
the truth in a day of necessity? Certainly she will be well help at a dead
lift, if she find no better champions then your self.

Verily Philalethes if you be no better in your Book then in your Preface to
the Reader, you have abused Moses his Text beyond measure. For your Principles
will have neither heaven nor earth in them, head nor foot, reason nor sense.
They will be things extra intellectum, and extra sensum, mere vagrant
imaginations seated in your own subsultorious and skip-jack phansy only. But
what they are we shall now begin to examine, according to the number of pages.

Anthroposophia Theomagica.
Page 2.
Lio. 11. So have all souls before their entrance, etc. But hear you me Mr.
Anthroposophus! are you in good earnest that all souls before their entrance
into the body have an explicit methodicall knowledge? and would you venture to
lose your wit so much by inprisoning your self in so dark a dungeon, as to be
able to write no better sense in your Preface to the Reader? But I Will excuse
him, it may be he was riding before his entrance into the body on some
Theomagicall jade or other, that stumbled and flung him into a mystical
quagmire against his will, where he was so soused and doused and bedaubed and
dirtyed, face and eyes and all, that he could never since the midwife raked
him out all wet and dropping like a drowned mouse, once see clearly what was
sense and what nonsense to this very day. Wherefore we will set the saddle on
the right Horse; and his Theomagick Nag shall bear the blame of the miscarriage.

Page 3.
Lin. 3. I took to task the fruits of one Spring, etc. Here Anthroposophus is
turned Herbalist for one whole Spring, damned to the grass and fields like
Nebuchadnezzar when he went on all four among the Beasts. But see how slow this
Snail amongst the herbs is, in finding out the truth; when he confesses it was
the work of one whole Spring to find out, that the Earth or seeds of flowers
are nothing like the flowers. There Is not any old Gardenweeder in all London,
but without a pair of spectacles will discover that in four minutes, which he
has been a full fourth part of a year about. But certainly, he intends a
great deal of pomp and ceremony, that will not take up such a conclusion as
this, ( viz. That things that are produced in Nature are out of something in
Nature which is not like the things produced) but upon the full experience and
meditation of one entire Spring. And now after this whole Springs meditation
and experience, he is forced to turn about to him whom he so disdainfully
flies, and confess two of the three principles of the Aristotelean Physics,
viz. Matter and Privation, that homo is ex non homine, arbor ex non arbore,
etc. But this Matter, he says (and it is the wisest word he has spoken yet) he
knows not what it is. But presently blots his credit again with a new piece of
folly, intimating he will find it it out by experience. Which is as good
sense as if he should say, he would see it when his eyes are out. For it is
alike easy to see visibles without eyes, as to see invisibles with eyes. But
he flies off hence, and is in quest after a substance which he smells out like a
nosegay in Natures bosom. Which substance he hopes to see by Art. Why!
Eugenius are you so sharp sighted that you can see substances? A kind of
Philosophic Hog, he can see the wind too I warrant you. But how can you hope
to see that substance when Nature only exposes it to her own vital celestial
breath? And tell what this Breath is, and do not amaze us with strange words,
or else keep your breath to your self to cool your poctage.

Page 4.
Here a fit of devotion has taken him, and I am neither so irreligious nor
uncivil as to interrupt him. But now Sir you have done, I hope it will not be
any offense to address my discourse to you again. And it will not be
unseasonable to tell you, that truth is not to be had of God Almighty for an
old song, no nor yet for a new one. And that no man is to measure his wisdom by
his devotion, but by his humility and purity of mind and unprejudicate reason;
nor that any man is wiser by making others seem more contemptibly foolish, as
your juvenility has thought good to deal with poor Aristotle, and his Orthodox
Disciples all this time. Nay, and that you may not take Sanctuary at Moses his
Text, let me also tell you, that before you prove any thing thence, you ought
first to make good, that Scripture is intended for natural Philosophy as well
as a divine life. But we need not arm our selves so well yet; for from the
fourth page to the eight page nothing is said, but that God from a knowing
Principle made the World. Which Aristotle also seems to assert, while he is so
frequent in telling the ends of natural things, which could not be sense,
unless he supposed that Nature was guided by a knowing Principle, which is to
acknowledge a God after the best manner. And that subtle Philosopher Julius
Scaliger uses no contemptible arguments to prove, that Aristotle's Philosophy
furnishes us also with the knowledge of a Trinity in God, so that
Anthroposophus is very unkind and uncivil to so good a Master.

Pages 8. and 9.
What an Aristotelean would dispatch in a word or two, viz. that life is
always accompanied with a natural warmth, he is mysteriously sumbling out
and drayling on to the length of almost two whole pages.

Page 9.
Lin. 10. the divine light pierced the bosom of the matter, etc. This compared
with what is at the bottom of the fourth page, we see that this rare
philosopher tells us, that the matter is an horrible empty darkness. And me
thinks his description is an hideous empty fancy, and conveys not so much to
the understanding as Aristotle's description of the Matter, which he would
describe to be, The first subject out of which every thing is. This latter is
more clean and sober, the other more slabby and fantastical. And to call it
Primitive waters (...)s but yet metaphors and poetry. For you do not mean
waters such as we wash our hands in. But they must be waters and dark, that you
may bring in the conceit of the light shining in them that like rivers and
pooles the images of trees and birds, and clouds and stars, and what not, may
be seen in them. And this must help us coconceive, that upon the breaking
through of the light, the divine idea's shone in the waters, and that the holy
Spirit, not being able to see till then, by looking then upon those images,
framed the matter into form. But I pray you tell me, Mr. Anthroposophus! that
would be so wise as if you stood by while God made the world, do not you think
that God can now see in the dark or behold his own idea's in the depth of the
Earth? You Will say you do not mean this natural light but a divine light. If
so, was ever the matter so stiff and clammy dark, as to be able to keep it
out? So that the divine idea's shone in the water so soon as God was, and the
Spiritus Opifex could see to begin his work ab cmni retro aeternitate. And it
could never be dark in your blind sense. Is it not so Anthroposophus?

Lin. 25. Si plantam quasi momento nasci, etc. If Anthroposophus had such a
device a(...) this in a glass, what a fine gew-gaw would it be for the lad?
What fine sport would he make with his companions? He would make them believe
then that he was a Conjurer indeed. But what other use there would be of it,
Anthroposophus! truly I do not know. For it would not state one controversy
in Philosophy more then what may be done without it. For whether there be any
such things as rations seminales, or whether these forms visible arise from
heat, which is motion, and the conspiracy of fitted particles, is as well and
safely determined from your experiments of one spring, as from this strange
whimwham in a glass. But weak stomachs and weak wits long most after rarities.

Page 10.
Lin. 4. Twofold idea, divine, natural, etc. Anthroposophus! Your natural
idea, is but an idea of your own brain. For it is no more an idea then a sheath
is a knife, or the spittle that wets the seal the seal, or the grease the Saw,
or the water the Grindle-stone. But you must strike betwixt this and the divine
idea, or else you will miss of your natural one. And so will be forced to do
that of penury, which he did of choice, and for brevity sake, divide your Text
into one part. But your quotation of Moses here near the bottom of the page, is
either nothing to your natural idea, or if you mean it of the divine is no new
notion, but nimmed out of Philo the Jew. And yet in the beginning of the
following page you magnify your self, as one that concerning this primitive
supernatural part of the Creation as you call it, though you have not said so
much as you can say by far, (as being a Nip-crust and Niggard of your precious
speculations) yet you have produced not a little new.

Page 11.
Lin. 5. Some Authors, etc. And the reason why the world is beholden to this
Gentleman more then to any for new discoveries of mighty truths, is, that
whereas some Authors have not searched so deeply into the Center of Nature, and
others not willing to publish such spiritual mysteries, this new Writer is the
only man, that is both deeply seen into the Center of Nature, and as willing
also to publish these spiritual mysteries. So that he goes beyond them all. O
brave Anthroposophus! What a fine man would you fain appear to the World?

In the residue of this page, Anthroposophus his fancy is pudled so and
jumbled in the limbus or Huddle of the matter, that he cannot distinguish
betwixt God and the Creature. For he knows not whether the Chaos be created or
uncreated. How much wiser are you now then Aristotle, Mr. Eugenius! that made
the World eternal. If you can admit this; by the rule of proportion, you might
swallow the greatest Gudgeon in Aristotle without kecking or straining.

Page 12.
Lin. 11. Fuliginous spawn of Nature. A rare expression! This Magician has
turned Nature into a Fish by his Art. Surely such dreams sloat in his
swimmering brains, as in the Prophets, who tells us so Authentic stories of his
delicious Albebut.

Lin. 12. The created Matter. Before the Matter was in an hazard of not being
created but of being of it self eternal. Certainly Eugenius! you abound with
leisure that can thus create and uncreate, do and undo, because the day is
long enough.

Lin. 21. A horrible confused qualm, etc. Here Nature like a childbearing
woman, has a qualm comes over her stomach, and Eugenius like a man-midwife
stands by very officiously to see what will become of it. Let her alone,
Eugenius! it is but a qualm, Some cold raw rheune. Margret will escape well
enough. Especially if her two Handmaids Heat and Siccity do but help, with
their Aquavitae botles. What a rare mode or way of Creation has Eugenius set
out? Certainly it cannot but satisfy any unreasonable man, if there be any men
without reason. And I begin to suspect there is, for Eugenius his sake, such as
feed as savourly on the pure milk of fancy, as the Philosophers Ass on
Sow-thistles.

Page 13.
This page is spent in extracting from the Chaos, a thin spiritual celestial
substance to make the Coelum Empyreum of and the body of Angels, and by the by,
to be in stead of a Sun for the first day. But then in the second Extraction
was extracted the agill air fitting all betwixt the Mass and the Coelum
Empyreum. But here I have so hedg^ed you in Mr. Anthroposophus that you will
hardly extricate your self in this question. The Empyreall substance
encompassing all, how could there be Morning and Evening till the fourth day?
For the Mass was alike illumined round about at once. And for your
interstellar water you do but fancy it employed in Moses text, and can never
prove that he drives at any thing higher in the letter thereof, than those
hanging bottles of water, the clouds.

Page 14.
Lin. 12. A rumbling confused Labyrinth. It Is only Erratum Typographicum. I
suppose you mean, a rumbling Wheel-Barrow, in allusion to your Wheel-work and
Epicycles aforementioned. But why small diminutive Epicycles? Eugenius! you are
so profound a Magician, that you are no Astronomer at all. The bigness of them
is as strong a presumption against them, as any thing. They are too big to be
true.

Lin. 26. This is cribrum Naturaes. (...) I warrant you. The very sive that
Jupiter himself pisses through, as Aristophanes sports it in his Comedies.

Page 15.
Lin. 20. Equally possessed the whole Creature. Therefore again I ask thee, O
Eugenius! how could there be Evening and Morning, the light being all over
equally dispersed?

Lin. 29. Like a baffled Giant. Poetical Eugenius! Is this to lay the sober
and sound principles of Truth and Philosophy?

Page 16.
Lin. 1. A Black Bag. I tell thee Eugenius! Thy fancy is snap't in this
Femall Black-bag, as an unwary Retiarius in a Net. Does Madam Nature wear her
Blackbag in her middle parts? (for the Earth is the Center of the World) or on
her head as other Matrons do? That Philalethes may seem a great and profound
Student indeed, he will not take notice whether a black-bag be furniture for
Ladies heads or their haunches: Well! let him enjoy the glory of his affected
rusticity and ignorance.

Lin. 5. Good Lord deliver us. How the man is frighted into devotion by the
smut and griminesse of his own imagination!

Lin. 15. Earth and water, etc. Concurrunt elementa ut Materia, ergo duo
sufficient, says Cardan. It Is no new-sprung truth, if true, Mr. Eugenius! But
seeing that AEtherial vigor and celestial heat with the substance thereof
(for, Coelum pervadit omnia) is in all things, and the air excluded from few or
no living Creatures, if we would severely tug with you, Mr. Anthroposophus! you
will endanger the taking of the foil.

Page 18.
Lin. 22. Both in the same bed. Why did you ever sneak in, Eugenius, and take
them, (...) in the very act? (...) as the Lawyers speak? This is but poetical
pomp in prose. And Ovid Philosophizes better in verse, where speaking of heat
and moisture, he expresses himself apertly and significantly. Quippe ubi
temperiem sumpsere humorque calorque
Concipiunt, and ab his generantur cuncta duobus.


Lin. 27. Spiritus aquae invisibilis congelatus melior est quam terra Universa.
Now as you are Philalethes, tell me truly if you understand any determinate and
useful sense of this saying. If you do, why do you not explain it? if you
do not, for ought you know, it may be only a charm to fox fishes. And I pray
you, Philalethes! make trial of the experimrnt.

Page 19.
Lin. 29. It is the Magicians Back-doore. Here I cannot but take notice at the
great affectation of Philalethes to appear to be deeply seen in Magic. But I
suppose if he were well searched, he would be found no Witch, nor all his
Back-doore of air worth the wind of an ordinary man's back-doore.

Page 20.
Lin. 2. The air is our Animal oil, the fuill of the vital. Now Eugenius! you
are so good natured as to give Aristetle one of his two elements again, that
you wrested from him. If this be our animal oil, and fuel of the vital, it
is plain our animal and vital spirits are from the air, and that the air is
one element amongst the rest. And your moist silent fire that passes through al
things must be a principle of all things, and may well be attempered heat to
your forenamed oil. So that Aristotle and you that before seemed as disagreeing
as fire and water, now in a love fit again embrace as close as your Apulejus
his Psyche and Cupid. But why will you be thus humorous Mr. Eugenius! and be
thus off and on to the trouble of others and your self?

Page 21.
Lin. 9. Performed an exposition of the World. An excellent performance! Which
if a man take a narrow view of, he will find to amount to no more then this,
That God made a dark Mass of Matter, out of which he extracted, (Chemist
like) first an Empyreall body, then an Aereall, etc. Which is a very lank
satisfaction to the noble reason of man. Nay, Anthroposophus! I believe you
have spoke such stuff that will amount to little better then a contradiction to
free reason. For you make as if the Mass did contain in a far less compass
above all measure, all that was after extracted. Where fore there was, (for
these are all bodies) either a penetration of dimensions then, or else a vacuum
now: and the ascending particles of the Mass, lie some distance one from
another. Besides I observe that in you, that I do in all others, that
Phantastically and superstitiously force Philosophy out of the sacred Writ
(which is intended curtainly for better purposes) For like Ovid in his
Metamorphoses, (who after a long pursuit of a Fabulous story, at last descends
to something in Nature and common use, as that of Daphne turned into a Laurel,
which tree is in Nature and according to the accustomary conceit of the
Heathens, was holy to Apollo) so these running a Wild-Goose chase of Melancholy
imaginations and phansies, think it evidence enough for what they have said, to
have the thing but named in some Text of Scripture. Nay even those that are so
confident they are inspired, and live of nothing but the free breathings of the
Divine Spirit, if you observe them, it is with them as with the Lark, that is
so high in the air, that we may better hear her then see her, as if she were
an inhabitant of that Region only and had no alliance to the Earth, yet at last
you shall see her come down and pick on the ground as other birds. So these
pretended inspired men though they fly high, and seem to feed of nothing but
free truth, as they draw it from Gods own breathing, yet they took their ground
first from the Text, though they ran a deal of phansyfull division upon it, and
if a man watch them, he shall find them fall flat upon the Text again, and be
but as other Mortals are for all their free pretensions, and extraordinary
assistences. But lets leave these Theosophists (as they love to be called) to
themselves, and trace on the steps of our Anthroposophus!

Page 22.
He exhorts us in the foregoing page to be curious and diligent in this
subsequent part of his discourse, as being now about to deliver the
Fundamentalls of Science. But Anthroposophus! you are so deeply Magical that
you have conjured your self down, below the wit of an ordinary man. The
Fundamentalls of Science should be certain, plain, real and perspicuous to
reason; not muddy and imaginary as all your discourse is from this to your 28
page. For in this present page and the former, setting aside your superstitious
affectation of Trinities and Triplicities, which teach a man nothing but that
you are a very fantastical and bold man, and lift at that which is too heavy
for you, you do nothing but scold very cholerickly at the Colliers and
Kitchen-maides, and like a dog return again to the Vomit, I mean that vomit you
cast awhile ago on Aristotle. Is that so elegant an expression that you must
use it twice in so little a space? where is your manners Anthroposophus!

Page 23.
Lin. 14. and 24. The Magnet, the Mystery of Union. Not one of ten thousand
knows the substance or the use of this Nature. Yet you tell it us in this
page, that it will attract all things Physical or Metaphysicall, at what
distance soever. But you are a man of ten thousand, Anthroposophus! and have
the Mystery, questionless, of this Magnet. Whence I conclude you King or
Prince of the Gypsies, as being able at the farthest distance to attract
metal out of men's purses. But take heed that you be not discovered, lest this
Jacobs Ladder raise you up with your fellow Pick-pockets to Heaven in a string.

Page 24.
This page is filled with like Gypsy gibberish, as also the 25th. yet he
pretends to lend us a little light from the Sun and Moon. Which he calls the
great Luminaries and Conservatours of the great World in general. How great,
Anthroposohus! do you think would the Moon appear if your Magic could remove
you but as far as Saturn from her? will she not appear as little as nothing?
Besides, if Fugenius ever tooted through a Galileo's Tube, he might discover
four Moons about Jupiter, which will all prove competitours with our Moon for
the Conservatour-ship of the Universe. But though Eugenins admits of but one
great broad-faced Sun and Moon, yet he acknowledges many Mimules or
Monky-faced Suns and Moons, which must be the Conservatricules of the many
Microcosms in the great World. Certainly Anchroposophus! the speculum of your
understanding is cracked, and every fragment gives a several reflection, and
hence is this innumerable multitude of these little diminutive Suns and Moons.
But having passed through much canting language, at the bottom of the page we
at last stumble on the Philosophers Stone, which he intends I suppose to fling
at Aristotle and brain the Stagirite at one throw.

Lin. ult. A true Receipt of the Medicine, R. Limi coelestis parts, etc. Come
out TomFool from behind the hangings, that peaks out with your Devils head and
horns, and put off your vizard and be apert and intelligible, or else why do
you pretend to lay the Fundamentalls of Science, and crave our diligence and
attention to a non-significant noise and buzze? Unless you will be understood,
it may as well, for ought any body knows, be a plaster for a gauld horses
back, or a Medicine for a Mad-dog, as a receipt of the Philosophers Stone.

Page 27.
In this page Magicus prophesies of a vitrification of the Earth, and turning
of it into a pure diaphanous substance. To what end? Magicus! That the Saints
and Angels at each pole of the Earth may play at Boepeep with one another
through this crystallized Globe? Magicus has rare imaginations in his noddle.

Page 28.
At the end of this page Magicus begins to take to task the explication of man's
nature. But Magicus you must first learn better to know your self, before you
attempt to explain the knowledge of man to others.

Page 29.
Lin. 10. The Philosophical Medicine. This is the Philosophers stone. And they
that are ignorant in this point are but Quacks and Pispot Doctors. Ho! Dr. H.
Dr. P. Dr. R. Dr. T. and as many Doctors more as will stand betwixt London and
Oxenford, if you have not a slight of Art to Metamorphize your selves into
Triorchises, and have one stone more then Nature has bestowed upon you (which
is forsooth the Philosophers Stone) have amongst you blind Harpers, Magicus
will not stick to teem Urinals on your heads, and crown you all one after
another, with the Pispot, and honor you with the Title of Quack-salvers. What?
Magicus! Is it not sufficient that you have no sense nor wit, but you will have
no good manners neither?

Page 30.
This thirtieth page teaches that the soul of man consists of two parts, Ruach
and Nephesh, one Masculine and the other Feminine. And Anthroposophus is so
tickled with the Application of the conceit unto Marriage, which he very
feelingly and savourly pursues, that he has not the patience to stay to tell us
how these two differ, he being taken up so with that powerful charm and
thence accrewing Faculty, of Crescite and Multiplicamini.

Page 31.
This page has the same Legend that the Alcoran has concerning the envy of the
Angels. But all goes down alike with him, as if every thing printed were
Gospel. In so much that I am persuaded, that he doubts not but that every
syllable of his own Book it true, now it has passed the Press.

Page 32.
This page ridiculously places Peter Ramus amongst the Schoolmen against all
Logic and Method. And at the last line thereof bids us arrigere aures, and
tells us he will convey some truth never heretofore discovered, viz. That the
sensitive gust in a man is the forbidden fruit: with the rest of the
circumstances thereof. Which Theory is so far from being new, that it is above
a thousand years old. It is in Origin and every where in the Christian
Platonists.

Page 38.
Lin. 27. It is part of Anima Mundi. Why! is Anima Mundi (which you say, in men
and beasts can see, feel, taste and smell) a thiug divisible into parts and
parcells? Take heed of that Anthroposophus! lest you crumble your own soul into
Atoms, iudeed make no soul, but all body.

Page 39.
Lin. 22. Blind Peripateticall forms. What impudcnce is this O Magicus! to
call them so, unless you make your Anima Mundi more intelligible. This is but
to rail at pleasure, not to teach or confute.

Page 40.
Lin. 2. As it is plain in dreams. Blind men see in their sleep it seems, which
is more then they can do when they are awake. Are you in jest Eugenius! or in
good earnest? If you be, I shall suspect you having a faculty to see when you
are a sleep, that you have another trick too, that is, to dream when you are
awake. Which you practiced I conceive very much in the compilement of this
book, there being more dreams then truth by far in it.

Lin. 11. Represent the eyes. How phansiful and poetical are you Mr. Magicus!
I suppose you allude to the herb Euphrasia or Eyebright. Which yet sees or
feels as little light or heat of the Sun, as your soul does of reason or
humanity.

Lin. 27. Angelical or rational spirit. Does not this see and hear too in
man? If it do not, how can it judge of what is said or done? If it does; then
there is two hearing and seeing souls in a man. Which I will leave to
Anthroposophus his own thoughts, to find out how likely that is to be true.

46, 47, 48, 49. Pages.
Truly, Anthroposophus! these pages are of that nature, that though you are so
unkind to Aristotle, as to acknowledge nothing good in him, yet I am not so
inveterate a revengefull assertor of him, but I will allow you your lucida
intervalla. What you have delivered in these pages, bating a few Hyperboles,
might become a man of a more settled brain then Anthroposophus. But while you
oppose so impetuously what may with reason be admitted, and propound so
magisterially what is not sense, I must tell you Anthroposophus! that you
betray to scorn and derision even those things that are sober in the way that
you affect, and hazard the soiling of the highest and most delicate truths, by
your rude and unskilful handling of them: And now the good breath that guided
you, forthese four pages together, is spent, you begin to rave again after the
old manner, and call Galen Antichrist in

Page 50.
And quarrel again with the Peripateticks, and provoke the School-divines. And
then you fancy that you have so swinged them, that in revenge they will all fall
upon you at once, and so twerilug you: when as they good men feel not your
strokes, and find themselves something else to do, then to refute such crazy
discourses as this. It is only, it is I, your brother Philalethes, that am
moved with pity toward you, and would if I could by carefully correcting you
in your distempers, bring you to a sober mind, and set you in your right sense
again. And I beseech you brother Philalethes! forbear this swearing, An honest
man's word is as good as his Oath. No body will believe you more for swearing,
then he would do without it, but think you more melancholic and distracted.

Lin. 21. Whiles they contemn mysteries, etc. In this heat all that Philalethes
writes must be termed holy mysteries. His project certainly is, now neither
Episcopacy nor Presbyteri can be settled, to get his book established jure
divino. A crafty colt! Ha, ha, he. Philalethes, Are you there with your bears?

Lin. 29. Next to God I owe all I have to Agrippa. What? more then to the
Prophe(...) and Apostles, Anthrosophus? The business is for your fame-sake,
you have more desire to be thought a Conjurer then a Christian.

Page 53, 54.
Great glorious penman! A piping hot p(...) per of verses indeed
Anthroposophus! But say truly! What can you do in or out of this heat more
then other men. Can you cure the sick? Rule and counsel States and Kingdoms
more prudently for the common good? Can you find bread for the Poor? Give a
rational account of the Phenomenon of Nature, more now then at another time?
or more then other men can do? Can you tell me the Nature of light? the causes
of the Rainbow? what makes the flux and reflux of the Sea? the operations of
the Loadstone, and such like? Can you tell us in a rational, dependent, and
coherent way the nature of such things as these, or foretell to us what will be
hereafter, as certainly and evidently as the Prophets of old? But if there be
neither the evidence of Reason, nor the testimony of notable effect, you can
give us, you must give me leave Anthroposophus! to conjecture; That all this
is but a friske and dance of your agitated spirits, and firinesse of your
fancy, of which you will find no fruit, but a palsied, unsteddy apprehension,
and unsound judgment.

Page 55.
From this page to the 62. your Theomagicall Nag has been pretty sure-footed,
Philalethes! And it is a good long lucidum intervallum you have ambled out. Nay
and you have done very well and soberly in not plainly pretending any new thing
there. For they are both old and well seasoned, if the Church be so pleased to
esteem of them. But what you have toward the latter end of the 62 page, that
is, a word of your self, and another of the common Philosophy, has in it a
spice of the old malady, pride and conceitednesse: as if you had now finished
so famous a piece of work, as that all the world would stand amazed, and be
inquisitive after you, asking who is this Philalethes, and what is he?
Presbyterian or Independent? Sir, may it please you, He is neither Papist,
though he bad fair enough for purgatory in his Exposition of St. Peter in the
foregoing page; nor Sectary, though he had rather style himself a Protestant
then a Christian: but be he what he will be, he is so great in his own conceit,
that though you have not the opportunity to ask his judgment, yet he thinks it
fit unasked to set himself on the seat of Judicature, and disgorge his sentence
on our ordinary Philosophy He means you may be sure the Aristotelean in use for
so many hundred years in all the Universities of Europe. And he pronounces of
it, that it is An inconsistent Hotch-potch of rash conclusions, built on mere
imagination without the light of Experience. You must suppose he means
Chymicall experiments, for you see no small pretensions to that in all his
Treatise. And his very Title page, the first of the book, has the privilege to
be first adorned with this magnificent term of Art, Protochymistry. But tell
me, Mr. Alchymist! in all your skill and observation in your Experiments, if
you have hit on any thing that will settle any considerable point controverted
amongst Philosophers, which may not be done as effectually at less charges.
Nay, whether you may not lose Nature sooner then find her by your industrious
vexing of her, and make her appear something else then what she really is:
Like men on the rack or overwatched witches, that are forced many times to
confess that which they were never guilty of. But it being so unsatisfactory
to talk in general, and of so tedious purpose to descend to particulars, I
will break off this discourse. Only let me tell you thus much Mr. Philalethes!
that you are a very unnatural son to our mother Oxenford, and to her sister
University; for if they were no wiser then you would make them, you would
hazard them and all their children to be begged for fools. And there would be
a sad consequent of that. But your zeal and heated melancholy considers no
such things, Anthroposophus!

Page 65.
Lin. 3. I have now done, Reader! but how much to my own prejudice I cannot
tell. Verily nothing at all Philalethes! For you have met with a friend that
has impartially set out to you your own follies and faults. And has distorted
himself often into the deformities of your postures, that you may the better
see your self in another, and so for shame amend.

Lin. 8. Paint and trim of Rhetoric. How modest are you grown Philalethes!
Why? this affectation of humor and Rhetoric is the most conspicuous thing in
your book. And shines as oriently, as false gold and silver lace on a
linsy-woolsy coat.

Lin. 22. Of a brothers death. Some young man certainly that killed himself by
unmercifull studying of Aristotle. And Philalethes writ this book to revenge
his Death.

Lin. 18. I expose it not to the mercy of man, but to God. See, the man affects
an absolute Tyranny in Philosophy. He Will be accountable to none but God. You no
Papist Philalethes? Why! you would be a very Pope in Philosophy, if you would
not have your Dictates subject to the canvase of man's reason.

Observations upon his Advertisement to the Reader.
THe first thing you require is, that he that attempts your book, should make
a plain and positive Exposition of all the passages. Why man? that is more
assuredly then your self can do. For you are so weak and supine in many
things that are intelligible that I am confident you are worse in tha: which
you have made less intelligible. For as Socrates reading an obscure Author,
when he found all things he understood very good, did charitably conclude, what
be understood not was much better: so I finding in this obscure Treatise of
yours, many things very ill, I also in charity will think you had the wit, to
conceal those things which are the worst; or which will serve the turn, that
you understand them not your self. But have an itching desire that some Reader
skilfuller then your self, should tell you whether you have wrote seuse or
nonsense. Like the Country clown, that desired his young Master to teach him to
write, and being asked how he would be able to read his own writing, being as
yet never acquainted so much as with the christcrosse-row, made answer, he would
get some body else to read it for him. And so you Philalethes! though you can
read your own writing, yet you desire to get some body else to understand it
for you, or to interpret to you what you have writ.

Your second Request is not much unlike the former, and too big a business for
your self to do, and therefore you beg it of another.

Your third Request is, to have your book handled after your own manner and
method. Which is as ridiculous, as if you should request your enemy to smite
softly, or to strike after such a fashion, and at such a part as you will
appoint him. Can it be reasonable for you to expect from an Aristotelean (for
you must think it would be they of all men that would fly about your ears
first) when you have used their Master Aristotle, as they would not, to be used
of them as you would? But notwithstanding Philalethes! you see I have been very
fair with you, and though provoked I shall continue the same candor in my
observations on your following piece. But before I pass, I must take notice of
your two admonitions to the ingenuous Reader, for I suppose you mean me,
Philalethes! The first is, that I would not despise your endeavors, because of
your years, for they are but few. Why man! who knew that but your self, if you
could have kept your own counsel? Your name is not at your book, much less
your age. But indeed many things are so well managed of you, that if you had
not told us so, we might have shrewdly suspected, you have scarce reached the
years of discretion. But you are so mightily taken with your own performance,
that to increase admiration, and for the bringing in a phrase or sentence out
of Proclus, you could not withold from telling us that you are but a young
man, and so we easily believe it. But the more saucy boy you to be so bold with
Reverend Mr. Aristotle, that grandevall Patriarch in points of Philosophy. For
the second admonition, it is little more then a noise or clatter of words, or
if you will, a mere rattle for a boy to play with. And so I leave it in your
hand to pass away the time, till I meet you again in your Anima Magica
Abscondita.

Upon the Preface to the Reader.
NOw God defend! what will become of me! In good faith, Philalethes! I do not
know what may become of you in time. But for the present, me thinks, you are
become a fool in a play, or a Jack-pudding at the dancing on the Ropes, a thing
wholly set in a posture to make the people laugir. Phy! Phy! Philalethes! Do
these humorous and Mimicall schemes of speech, become so profound a
Thecmagician, as your self would seem to be? Does this ridiculous levity become
a man of your profession? You do not a little disparage your self by these
boyish humors, my good Philaletbes!

For mine own part I am neither so lightheaded nor light-footed, as to dance
the Morisco with you measure to measure, through this whole toy of yours to the
Reader. I shall dispatch what I have to say at once. Your main drift here is to
prove Agrippa's Dogs no Devils, and their Master no Papist, and consequently
your self no unlawful Magician or Conjurer.

And truly if the Assembly of Divines be no more suspicious of you then my
self, I am abundantly satisfied, that you are rather a giddy Fantastic then
an able Conjurer. So that without any offense to me you may take Wierus his
office if you will, and for want of better employment, lead about Agrippa's
beagles in a string. In the mean time I shall busy my self almost to as little
purpose in the perusal of your Anima Magica Abscondita.

Upon Anima Magica Abscondita.
And here Philalethes! in the very threshold you begin to worrey the poor
Peripateticks more fiercely then any English Mastive, and bark and scold into
the air (that is in general) more cursedly and bitterly then any butter-quean,
but at last in the 25. line of the second page, you begin to take to task some
particular Documents of Aristotle's. viz. The Description of Nature, of Form,
and of the Soul. Whereby we shall understand of what great judgment and
perspicacity you are in other points of Philosophy. And first of the Definition
of Nature, which you say is defined, Principium motus and quietis. A little
thing serves your turn, Anthroposophus! Is this the entire Definition of
Nature, in Aristotle? But what you unskilfully take no notice of, I willing ly
wink at, and will deal with you only about those things that you produce and
oppose.

Page 3.
Lin. 19. Nature is a Principle. Here you cavil that Nature is said to be a
Principle, because you cannot find out the thing defined by this general
intimation. But here, Philalethes! you are a pitiful Logician, and know not so
much in Logic as every Freshman in our University does, viz. that that part of
the Definition which is general does not lead us directly home unto the thing
defined, and lay our hand upon it, but it is the difference added, that does
that. As if so be we should say only that, Homo est animal, that assertion is
so floting and hovering, that our mind can settle on nothing, which it may
safely take for a man, for that general notion belongs to a flea or a mite in
a cheese as well as to a man; but adding rationale, then it is determined and
restrained to the nature of man. And your allegation against the difference
here annexed in the Definition of Nature, is as childish. For you only allege
that it tells us what nature does, not what it is. My dear Philalethes!
Certainly thou have got the knack of seeing further into a Millstone, then any
living mortal else. Thou have discovered, as thou think, Dame Nature stark
naked, as Actaeon did Diana; but for thy rash fancy deservest a pair of Asses
ears, as well as he did his Bucks-horns for his rash sight. Can any
substantial form be known, otherwise then by what it can do or operate. Tell
me any one substantial form that thou know any better way then this, and
Phyllida solus habeto, take Phyllis to thy self, and her black-bag to boot.
Thou art, good Anthroposophus! I perceive a very unexperienced novice in the
more narrow and serious search and contemplation of things.

Page 4.
Lin. 23. This is an express of the office and effect of forms but not of
their substance or essence. Why! Philalethes! as I said before, have you ever
discovered the naked substance or essence of any thing? Is color, light,
hardness, softness, etc. is any of these or of such like, essence and
substance it self? If you be so great a Wizard, show some one substantial form
in your Theomagicall glass. Poor Kitling! how do thou dance and play with
thine own shadow, and understandest nothing of the mystery of substance and
truth!

Page 5.
Here in the third place you cavil at Aristotle's Definition of the Soul, and by
your slubbering and barbarous translating of the term (...) smother the
fitness of the sense. What more significant of the nature of a soul, then what
this term (...) is compounded of? viz. (...) and (...) -- Totosque insusa per
artus Men's agitat Molem.



Or if we read the word as Cicero, (...) it will be more significant, as being
made up of (...) And that which does inwardly pervade and penetrate, that which
does hold together and yet move this way and that way, and lastly still moving
possess and command an organicall body, etc. what is this but a Soul, or what
better Definition can be given of it it then this? But here this peremptory
opposer, does still inculcate the same cavil, that the naked substance or
essence of the soul, is not set out by this, but its operations. But still out
of the same ignorance, supposing that a substantial form can be better known
then by its proper operations. And this ignorance of his makes him so proud,
that he does Fellow at every word, if not, Sir, Prince Aristotle, because he
has not done that which is impossible to do, unbare to us the very substance
of a Form. What an imperious boy is this! a rangling child in Philosophy, that
screams and cries after what is impossible, as much as peevish babes, after
what is hurtful. And in this humorous straining and wrigling, bemarres both
his Mother and his Aunt, both the Universities at once, casting dirt and filth
upon their education of youth, as if they taught nothing, because they cannot
teach what is impossible to be learned.

Page 8.
Here Anthroposophus begins to be something earnest and rude with Nature, not
content any longer to use his adulterous fancy, but to break open with his
immodest hands her private closet, search her cabinet, and pierce into her very
Center. What rare extractions he will make thence I leave to himself to enjoy.
Sure I am, that if any skillful Cook, or Chemists should take out Philalethes
brains, and shred them as small as mincemeat, and tumble them never so much up
and down with a trencher-fork, he would not discover by this diligent
discussion any substantial form of his brains whereby they may be
distinguished from what lies in a Calves head. Nay, if they were stewed betwixt
two dishes, or distilled in an Alembeck, neither would that extraction be any
crystalline mirror to see the substantial form stark naked in, and discover
the very substance of that spirit, that has hit upon so many unhappy
hallucinations. But you are a youth of rare hopes, Anthroposophus!

Page 9.
Lin. 20. Where by the way I must tell you, etc. viz. That the heavens are not
moved by Intelligences. Who can not tell us that? But indeed you are forward to
tell us any thing, that does but seem to sound high, or make any show. There Is
no body now but would laugh to hear, that a particular Angel turns about every
Orb as so many dogs in wheels turn the spit at the fire. So that it seems far
below such a grand Theomagician as you are, to tell us such incredible
fopperies as these to be false.

Page 10.
Lin. 10. For the Authors credit and benefit of the Reader. Good Philalethes!
What credit do you expect from your scribbling, though it be the only thing you
aim at in all your Book? when yet nothing of truth but this aim of yours is
understood in all this writing: saving that you are also a confident
Fantastic and vanting Mountebank. This is your greatest credit, and the
greatest profit of the Reader, to observe you to be so.

Lin. 15. This Anima retained in the matter and missing a vent, etc. A
similitude, I suppose, taken from the bung-hole of a barrel; or more
compendiously from bottled bear; or it may be from the corking up close the
urine of a bewitched party, and setting it to the fire. For Anthroposophus will
not be less then a Magician in all things, nor seem less wise then or witch
or devil. But me thinks, Anthroposophus! your expression of the nature of this
Anima, that must do such fine feats in the world, by the efformation of things
and organizing the matter into such useful figuration and proportion in living
creatures, had been as fitly and as much to your purpose expressed; if you had
phansied her tied up like a pig in a poke, that grunting and nudling to get out
drove the yielding bag out at this corner and that corner, and so gave it due
order and disposition of parts. But, Oh thou man of mysteries! tell me I pray
thee, how so subtle a thing as this Anima is, can be either barrel'd up or
bottled up, or tide up in a bag, as a pig in a poke! when as the first
material rudiments of life be so laxe and so fluid, how can they possibly
hopple or incarcerate so thin and agil a substance as a Soul? so that the union
betwixt them is of some other nature, then what such gross expressions can
represent, and more Theomagicall then our Theomagician himself is aware of.

Page 11.
Here Anthroposophus tells us rare mysteries concerning the soul, that it is a
thing slitched and cobled up of two parts. viz. of aura tenuissima, and lux
simplicisfima. And for the gaining of credence to this patched conceit, he
abuses the authority of that excellent Platonist and Poet Virgilius Maro,
taking the fag end of three verses which all tend to one drift, but nothing at
all to his purpose. AEneid. 6. Donec long a dies perfecto temporis orb
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
AEthereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.


This is not spoken of the soul it self but of the AEthereall Vehicle of the
soul, and so is nothing to your purpose Mr. Philalethes! You tell us also in
this page in what shirts or sheets the souls wrap themselves when they apply to
generation, (as your phrase is) as if you were groom of their bedchamber if
not their pander. You tell us also of a radical vital liquor, that is of like
proportion and complexion with the superior interstellar waters, which is as
learnedly spoken, as if you should compare the sack at the Globe-Tavern, with
certain supernall Wine-bottles hung round Orions girdell. Which no man were
able to smell out, unless his nose were as Atlantic as your rauming and
reaching fancy. And yet no man that has not lost his reason, but will think
this as grave a truth in Philosophy as your interstellar waters. But
Interstellar, indeed, is a pretty word and sounds well, and it is pity but there
were some fine Philosophic notion or other did belong to it. But now,
Philalethes! if I would tyrannize over you as you do over Aristotle, for the
manner of your declaring the nature of the Soul, where you pretend to show us
the very naked essence of it and first principles whereof it does consist, you
have laid your self more bare to my lash, then you endeavored to lay bare the
soul to our view. For you do plainly insinuate to us, That either the soul is
Light, or else a thin Air, or that it is like to them. If only like these
bodies of light and air, how pitifully do you set out the nature of the Soul,
when you tell us the principles of it only in a dry metaphor Is not the nature
of the Soul far better known from the proper operations thereof (as Aristotle
has defined it) then from this fantastical metaphorical way? But if you will
say that the soul is properly Light or Air, then be they never so thin, or
never so simple (unless you will again use a metaphor) the Soul must be a
Body. And how any corporeal sustance thick or thin, fluid or dry, can be able
to think, to reason, to fancy, etc. nay to form matter into such cunning and
wise frames and contrivancies as are seen in the bodies of living Creatures, no
man of less ignorance and confidence then your self will dare to endeavor to
explain, or hold any way probable.

Page 12.
In this page you are curiously employed in making of a chain of Light and
Matter, surely more subtle and more useless then that that held the Flea
prisoner in the Mechanics hand. But this is to hold the Anima, the passive
Spirit and celestial water together. Our Theomagician here grows as imperious,
as wrathful Xerxes. Will you also fetter the Hellespont Philalethes? and bind
the wind and waters in chains? But let us consider now the links of this
miraculous chain of his, Light. Matter. Anima of 3 of 1 portions Passive spirit
2 2 Celestial waters 1 3

This is your chain, Philalethes! Now let us see what Apish tricks you will play
with this your chain. The three portions of light must be brought down by the
two, the two, (if not indeed five, the two and three being now joynd) brought
down by one, and so the whole chain drops into the water. But would any Ape in
a chain if he could speak, utter so much incredible and improbable stuff, with
so much munky and mysterious ceremony? His very chain would check his both
thoughts and tongue. For is it not far more reasonable that three links of a
chain should sway down two, and two or five one, then that one should sway two
or five, or two, three? Or do we find when we fling up a clod of earth, that
the whole ball of the Earth leaps up after that clod, or the clod rather
returns back to the Earth, the greater ever attracting the less, if you will
stand to magneticall Attraction. But truly Philalethes! I think you do not
know what to stand to, or how to stand at all; you are so giddy and intoxicated
with the steam and heat of your disturbed fancy and vain mind.

Page 13.
Lin. 8. But meethinks Nature complains of a prostitution, etc. Did not I tell
you so before, that Philalethes was a pander? and now he is convinced in his
own conscience and confesses the crime, and his ears ring with the clamours and
complaints of Madam Nature, whom he has so lewdly prostituted. Sad
Melancholist! thou art affrighted into the confession of crimes that thou art
not only not guilty of, but can not be guilty of if thou would. Is there
never a one of our City Divines at leisure to comfort him and compose him? I
tell thee, Madam Nature is a far more chaste and discreet Lady, then to lie
obnoxious to thy prostitutions. These are nothing but some unchaste dreams of
thy prurient and polluted fancy. I dare quit thee of this fact, Philalethes!
I warrant thee, Thou have not Iaid Madam Nature so naked as thou supposest,
only thou have, I am afraid, dream'c uncleanly, and so have polluted so many
sheets of paper with thy Nocturnall Canundrums, which have neither life, sense,
nor shape, head nor foot that I can find in them.

Page 14.
Here Philalethes is taken like a Fly in a Spiders Web. He is altogether for
subtilties. But spins but a thick thread from them, such as any Rusticks hand
would draw out as well as his one. viz. That Spiders have some light of
knowledge in them. Who knows not that Philaletbes? But in the

Page 15.
He is so lavish, of what he has so little of himself, that he bestows it on
every plastic material From; and not a Rose can grow in Nature but some
seeing and knowing Hyliad with his invisible pencill must draw it, and thus by
his mere rash dictate does he think he has dashed out that long and rational
dogma in Philosophy of the particular (...) or rations seminales. Whose
fondness in this groundless assertion it were easy to confute, but he that
will not bring any reasons for what he says, is not worthy to have any reasons
brought against him. For as for that only slight reason which he intimates,
that the matter being contrived into such a rational or artificial disposure
of parts, the immediate Artificer thereof must have animadversion and reason in
it, is only said, not proved, and will reach no further, but that the ratio
seminalis, must at least proceed from something that is knowing, and be in some
sense rational, but not have Reason and Animadversion in it self. The like
confidence and ignorance is repeated and insisted upon in the 16 and 17 pages:
but I let them pass.

Page 18, 19.
These pages contain a certain preachment, which would have done well if it had
been from some one that had more wit in knowing when to preach and when to hold
his peace, and more charity to abstain from such undeserved chidings of
Aristotle. But your unmeasureable and unmercifull chastisings of him, and so
highly advancing and soothing up your self in your own windy conceits and
fluttering follies make all your serious applications ridiculous and
neffectuall.

Page 20.
Petition of St. Augustine, A logica libera nos Domine, lin. 7. Assuredly,
Philalethes ever since the Church Litanie was put down has used this of St.
Augustine, and that with such earnestness and devotion that he has even
extorted from Heaven the full grant of his Petition, and has become as free and
clean from all sense and reason, as he is luxuriant and encumbred with
disturbed and unsettled fancies and undigested imaginations.

Page 21.
Lin. 3. These three Principles are the Clavis of all Magic, etc. Here
Philalethes like the Angel of the bottomless Pit, comes jingling with the
Keys of Magic in his hands. But he opens as Hokus Pokus does his fists,
where we see that here is nothing and there is nothing. But something he will
seem to say, viz. That the first Principle is one in one, and one from one. He
that has so many years so devoutly prayed against Logic, do you expect when
he speaks to hear reason? This is as much as to say nothing. One in one and one
from one? Suppose a ripe Apple should drop into the rotten hollow of the tree
that bore it. Is this Apple your mysterious Magical principle? It may be that
as well as any thing else by this description. For it is one Apple in one
hollow, from one tree. O but he adds. It is a pure white Virgin. Some
religious Nun I warrant you. No she may not be a Nun neither. For she is uxor
Dei and stellarum. It seems then, there is a kind of Plato's Commonwealth,
betwixt God and the Stars, and they have community of wives amongst them. But
if she be so pure a Virgin wife as you make her, how come some of her Husbands
to wear horns as they do, viz. Aries, Capricorn and others? But is this to
Philosophize or to play the Theomagician, Philalethes! thus to tell us of
virgins, or wives with white peticoats, or to tell us that from this one there
is a descent into four, etc. This is but idle treading of the air, and only a
symptom of a light swimmering fancy that can have patience to write such
hovering undeterminate stuff, as this, that belongs either almost to any
thing, or nothing. You even weary your Reader out, Philalethes! with such
Metaphysicall dancings and airy fables.

Page 22.
Lin. 5. This is a Labyrinth and wild of Magic where a world of Students have
lost themselves, And you, Philalethes! have not escaped scot-free. For you have
lost your reason before as I told you, and your so much and so confidently
conversing with mere Unities and Numbers, which in themselves design nothing,
will teach you in time, to speak words without any inward phantasm of what you
say. So that you shall bid fair for the loosing of your fancy too, and then
you will be as you are near it already, Vox, praeterea nihil a mere noise and
clatter of words.

Lin. 13. It moves here below in shades and tiffanies, etc. What a description
is this of the Magicians fire? I suppose you mean the Magicians Thais. It moves
in shades, that is, (for the text is very dark and wants a Commentary) in the
Evening or Twilight. Tiffanies, is plain English, but white etheriall vestures,
must be white Peticoats and white Aprons, or else white Aprons upon Blew
Peticoats, and that she is exposed to such a public prostitution passing
through all hands every one having the use of her body; this Theomagicians fire
seems to me to be no other, then some very common strumpet. But if you mean any
thing but a Strumpet, you have a wondrous infected fancy, that dresses up
your Theomagicall notions in such whorish attire. But of a sudden my
Theomagician has lest those more gross and palpable expressions, and now
dances very high in the air quite out of the Ken of our eye, like some
Chymicall Spirit that has broke its Hermeticall prison, and flown away out of
the Artist's sight and reach: being far more invisible and thin now, then the
finest Tiffany that ever took his sight, and more arid and slight, then the
faintest shade. I tell you once more; Anthroposophus! that Ternaries, and
Quaternaries, and Decads, and Monads, and such like words of number have no
useful sense nor signification, nor virtue, if unapplyed to some determinate
substance or thing. But our great Theomagician having no project in this
writing that I see, but to amaze the world, contents himself only to rattle
his chain, and to astonish the rude and simple as if some Spirit or Conjurer
was at hand, and so those words that are most sonorous and consist of the
greatest number of syllables, please him better, then what have more solid
signification, and a more settled and sober sense.

Page 24.
Lin. 17. He with the black Spaniell. As for your adored Magus with the black
Spaniell, and that dark Disciple of Libanius Gallus, what I have said to you
already will serve here too. But my controversy is with you only,
Philalethes! a sworn enemy of Reason and Aristotle, and me thinks you are very
like your self still in the

27 Page
Lin. 22. I am certain the world will wonder I should make use of Scripture to
establish Philosophy, etc. Here, Philalethes, you seem self-condemned even from
your own speech, being conscious to your self, that all the world will be
against you in this superstitious abuse of the Scripture. For are you wiser
then all the world beside in this matter, because you have prayed away all your
Logic in St. Augustines Letanie? What profane boldness is this to distort
that high Majesty of the holy Scripture to such poor and pitiful services, as
to decide the controversies of the World and of Nature? As well becoming it is,
as to set pies and pasties into the oven with the sacred leaves of the bible?
This is but a fetch of imperious Melancholy and Hypocritical superstition,
that under pretense of being more holy would prove more Tyrannical, and leave
the understanding of man free in nothing at all, but bring in a philosophy too,
Jure Divino! And I can further demonstrate to you (beside what I have intimated
from the transcendency of the Scripture and high scope and aim thereof) that
the Scripture teaches no secret or principle of Philosophy, of which there is
any doubt amongst men in their wits. For either (as where it seems to speak ex
prefesso of any such things) it does it so obscurely that men rather father
their own notions fetched from elsewhere, upon the Scripture; or else if it
speak more plainly and literally, yet it being allowed by all sober men as well
Jews as Christians, (as it is indeed undeniably evident from the passages
themselves in Scripture) that it speaks so ordinarily according to the rude
and vulgar use and apprehension of men, there can be no deciding collections
in matters of Philosophy safely gathered out of it. Though I will not deny but
that some Philosophic truths may have an happy and useful illustration and
countenance from passages in Scripture. And their industry is not to be
vilified that take any pains therein. But I do not believe that any man that
has drove the proper use of the Scripture home to the most full and most
genuine effect of it in himself, but will be so wise and so discreet, that he
will be ashamed in good earnest to allow any such Philosophic abuse of. But
questionless the Scripture is the beginner, nourisher and emprover of that
life and light which is better then all the Philosophy in the world. And he
that stands in this light the firmer and fuller he is possessed of it, he is
the more able to judge both of Nature, Reason, and Scripture it self. But he
that will speak out of his own rash heat, must needs run the hazard of talking
at randum, And this I make the bolder in charity to pronounce, because I
observe that the reverentiall abuse, and religious mis-application of the holy
Writ to matters of Philosophy, for which it was not intended, does in many
well-meaning men eat out the use of their reason, for the exercise whereof
Philosophy was intended. And hence so much spurious and fantastic knowledge
multiplies now adays, to the prejudice of man's understanding, and to the
intangling him in vain and groundless imaginations, fortuitously sprung up
from uncircumspect Melancholy, dazzled and stounded with the streamings and
flashes of its own pertinacious fancy. Which sometime is so powerful as to
over-master the Melancholist into a credulity, that these flarings of false
light in his dark Spirit are not from himself, but from a Divine Principle, the
Holy Ghost. And then bidding a dieu to Reason, as having got some Principle
above it, measnres all truth merely by the greatness and powerfulness of the
Stroke of the Phantasme. What ever fills the imagination fullest, must be the
truest. And thus a rabble of tumultuary and crasse representations must go for
so many Revelations, and every heaving up by an Hypochondricall flatulency must
be conceited a rapture of the Spirit; they professing themselves to receive
things immediately from God, when they are but the casual figurations of their
anxious fancy, busily fluttering about the Text; which they always eye
(though they dissemble it) as Hauks and Buzzards, fly they never so high, have
their sight bent upon on the Earth. And indeed if they should not forge their
phansies into some tolerable suteablenesse with the letter of the Scripture,
they would never be able to believe themselves, or at least to beget belief in
others, that they are inspired. And so that high conceit insinuated into them
by that wonderful yet ordinary imposterous power of Melancholy would fall to
nothing, and they appear not so much as to themselves either Prophets or
inspired. But this I have touched upon elsewhere. I will let it go. Only let
me cast in thus much: that he that mis-beleeves and lays aside clear and
cautious reason in things that fall under the discussion of Reason, upon the
pretense of hankering after some higher principle, (which a thousand to one
proves but the infatuation of Melancholy and a superstitious hallueination) is
as ridiculous as if he would not use his natural eyes about their proper
object till the presence of some supernatural light, or till he had got a
pair of Spectacles made of the Crystalline Heaven, or of the Coelum Empyreum,
to hang upon his Nose for him to look through. The truth is, he that lays
aside Reason, casts away one of the most Sovereign Remedies against all
melancholic impostures. For I conceive it would be very hard for men either
to be deluded themselves, or to delude others by their conceited inspirations,
if they would expect that every Revelation should be made good either by sound
Reason, or a palpable and conspicuous Miracle. Which things if they were
demanded of the inspired people when they come to seduce, surely they would
sneak away like the common Fiddlers, being asked to play a Lesson on the Organs,
or on the Theorbo.

Page 28, 29.
In the former page you could not part till you had made God and Nature
mysteriously kiss. In this, you metamorphize Mercury and Sulphur into two
Virgins, and make the Sun to have more Wives then ever Solomon had Concubines.
Every Star must have in it, Vxor Solis. But what will become of this rare
conceit of yours if the Stars themselves prove Suns? And men far more learned
then your self are very inclinable to think so. But now he has phansied so
many Wives he falls presently upon copulation helter skelter, and things done
in private betwixt Males and Females, etc.

Verily, Anthroposophus! if you had but the patience to consider your own Book
seriously, and examine what Philosophic truth you have all this while
delivered since your contemning of Aristotle's definition of Nature, Form, and
Soul, you shall find in stead of his sober description from the proper
operations and effects of things, nothing but a dance of foolish and lascivious
words: almost every page being hung with Lawns and Tiffanies, and such like
Tapestry: with black Shadowing hoods, white Aprons and Peticoats, and I know
not what. And this must be a sober and severe Tractate of Anima Abscondita. As
if the Soul were dressed in woman's apparel, the better to be concealed, and
to make an escape. And to as much purpose is your heaps of liquorsome
Metaphors, of Kissing, of Coition, of ejection of Seed, of Virgins, of Wives,
of Love-whispers, and of silent Embraces, and your Magicians Sun and Moon,
those two Universal Peers, Male and Female, King and Queen Regen ts, always
young and never old; what is all this but a mere Morris-dance and Maygame of
words, that signify nothing, but that you are young, Anthroposophus! and very
sportfull, and yet not so young but that you are marriageable, and want a good
wife that your sense may be as busy as your fancy about such things those,
and so peradventure in due time, the extravagancy of your heat being spent, you
may become more sober.

Page 30.
Lin. 8. It is light only that can be truly multiplied. But if you tell us not
what this light is, we are still but in the dark. I do not mean whether Light
be a Virgin or a Wife, or whose Wife, or what clothes she wears, Tiffanies or
Cobweblawns, but in proper words what the virtue and nature of it is. Whether
Corpin or Spiritus, Substance or Accident, etc. But, Anthroposophus! you do
noe desire at all to be understood, but pleas your self only to rant it in
words' which can procure you nothing but the admiration of fools. If you can
indeed do any thing more then another man, or can by sound reason make good
any more truth to the World then another man can, then it is something; if not,
it is a mere noise and buzze for children to listen after.

Page 31.
From this 31 page to the 41, you have indeed set down the most courageous and
triumphant testimonies, and of the highest and most concerning truth that
belongs to the soul of man, the attainment whereof is as much beyond the
Philosophers Stone, as a Diamond is beyond a pebble stone. But the way to this
mystery lies in a very few words, which is, a peremptory and persistent
unravelling and releasing of the soul by the power of God, from all touch and
sense of sin and corruption. Which every man by how much the more he makes it
his sincere aim, by so much the more wise and discret he will appear, and will
be most able to jndge what is sound and what is flatuous. But to deal plainly
with you, my Philalethes! I have just cause to suspect that there is more wind
then truth as yet in your writings. And that it is neither from reason nor from
experience, that you seem to turn your face this way; but high things, and
fiery and sonorous expressions of them in Authors, being suitable to your
Youthfulness and poetical fancy, you swagger and take on presently, as if,
because you have the same measure of heat, you were of the same Fraternity with
the highest Theo magicians in the World. Like as in the story, where the Apples
and Horsdung were carried down together in the same stream, the Fragments of
Horsdung cried out, Nos poma natamus. Pardon the homeliness of the comparison.
But you that have slung so much dirt upon Aristotle, and the two famous
Universities, it is not so unjust if you be a little pelted with dung your
self.

Page 42.
Lin. 12. I know some illiterate SchoolDivines, etc. He cannot be content to
say any thing that he thinks is magnificently spoken, but he must needs
trample upon some or other by way of triumph and ostentation, one while
clubbing of Aristotle, another while so pricking the Schoolmen and provoking
the Orthodoxe Divines, that he conceits they will all run upon him at once, as
the Jews upon the young Martyr St. Steven, and stone him for his strange
mysteries of his Theomagick stone. Truly, Anthrosophus there are some good
things fall from you in your own style, and many cited out of considerable
Authors, but you do so soil and bemar all with your juvenile immoralities and
phantastries, that you lose as much in the one as you get in the other.

Page 44.
Lin. 4. The Scripture is obscure and mystical, etc. And therefore say I,
Philalethes! a very uncertain foundation to build a Philosophy on; but indeed
such a mystical Philosophy as you would build, may be erected upon any ground,
or no ground, may hang as a castle in the air.

Page 45.
Lin. 3. I never met in all my reading but with six Authors, etc. But how do
you know that these six did perfectly understand the Medicine, and this
stupendous mystery, unless you understood it perfectly your self? So that you
would intimate to the world that you do perfectly understand it.

Lin. 25. After this the material parts are never more to be seen. This is
the Nature of the Medicine, not to rectify a visible body but to destroy it.
Like the cure of the head ache, by cutting off the neck. Death indeed will cure
all diseases. But you will say this is not death but a change or translation.
Nor the other a medicine, but Spiritus medicus. So that in multitude of words
you do but obscure knowledge.

Page 46.
Lin. 5. Boy me out of countenance, etc. Here Philalethes is mightily well
pleased to think that one of his greenness of years should arive to this
miraculous ripeness and maturity of knowledge in the most hidden mysteries of
Theosophy. And comparing himself with the Reverend Doctors, finds the
greatest difference to be this, that they indeed have more beard, but he more
wit. And I suppose he would intimate unto us, that they have so little wit that
they know not the use of their own limbs. For if he make their beards their
crutches, they cannot escape going on their heads, as if they were not inverted
but rightly postured Plants, or walking Stipites. In good truth you are a
notable Wagg, Philalethes!

Lin. 10. Let me advise thee I say not to attempt any thing rashly. And I
commend your wit, Anthroposophus! in this point. For you are so wary of putting
your finger into the fire, that like the Monkey you will rather use the Cats
foot then your own, as you will evidently show anon.

Lin. 22. Orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano. Keep your self there
Philalethes! It Is a great deal better piece of devotion then that of Augustine,
A logica libera nos Domine.

Page 48. 49.
Lin. 22. This is the Christian Philosophers Stone, And, this is the white
Stone. Which you, Philalethes! have covered over with so much green moss, that
you have made it more hidden then ever before. Having little will and less
power to show it, but in all likelihood a great purpose of ostentating your
self.

Page 49.
Lin. 10. But Reader! be not deceived in me, I am not a man of any such
faculties, etc. I warrant you, Anthroposophus! I am not so easily deceived in
you. You have walked before me in very thin transparent Tiffanies all this
while; or, if you will, danced in a net. I suspected you from the very first
that you would prove so good and so wise as you now plainly profess your self.
But that you are no better then you are, you say is because God is no debtor of
yours. Why! does God Almighty run so much in some men's Arrears that he is
constrained to pawn to them that precious Jewel, or to give them the White
Stone to quit scores with them? How far is this from Popery Philalethes! that
you seem elsewhere so much to disclaim?

Lin. 13. I can affirm no more of my self, etc. Right! Philalethes! Right! Your
fancy was never so happy as in transsiguring your self into a Wooden
Mercury, that points others the way, which it self knows not, nor can ever go,
but stands stock still.

Lin. 18. Show me but one good Christian, etc. Why then! it seems
Philalethes! that you are no good Christian your self, and incapable of the
secret you are so free to impart to others. Or it is your discretion to attempt
nothing your self rashly, but as I said before, to do as the Ape or Monkey,
take the (...) foot to (...) the Chestnut out of the (...). But (...) (...)
solicitous of seeming a profound (...)ralist then a good Christian, he tells
us in the

50 Page
An obscure AEnigmaticall story of attaining the Natural celestial Medicine,
and that without any retractation, as if he himself had been a potent and
successful Operatour in the mystery. But let me once more take notice of the
foundnesse of this affected obscurity in words, that no man be any whit taken
with that sleight of Imposture, and become guilty of that passion of fools,
causeless admiration. For the most contemptible notion in the World, may be
so uncertainly and obscurely set out by universal and hovering terms taken
from Arithmetic and Geometry, which of themselves signify no real thing, or
else from the catachresticall use of the terms of some more particular and
substantial Science, that the dark dress thereof may bring it into the
creditable suspicion of proving some venerable mystery, when as, (if it were
but with faithfulness and perspicuity discovered and exposed to the judgment
and free censure of sober men) it would be found but either some sorry
inconsiderable vulgar truth, or light conjecturall imagination, or else a
ghastly prodigious lie. But say in good sadness, Philalethes! is not all this
that you tattle in this page, a mere vapor and tempestuous buzze of yours?
made out of words you meet in Books you understand not? and casual phansies
sprung from an heedlesse Brain? Is it any thing but the activity of your desire
to seem some strange mysterious Sophist to the World? And so to draw the eyes
of men after you? Which is all the Attraction of the Star-fire of Nature you
aim at, or can hope to be able to effect. Did your Sculler, or shittle Skull
ever arrive at that Rock of Crystal you boast of? Or did you ever saving in
you fancy, soil that bright Virgin Earth? did your eyes, hands or Experience
ever reach her? Tell me what Giant could ever so lustily show you
Lincoln-Galves, or hold you up so high by the ears, as to discover that Terra
Maga in AEthere Clarificata? Till you show your self wise and knowing in
effect, give me leave to suspect you a mere ignorant boaster from your Airy
unsettled words. And that you have nothing but fire and wind in your Brains,
what ever your Magical Earth has in its belly.

Page 51.
Lin. 6. He can repeal in particular. Now, Anthroposophus! you make good what
I suspected, that is, that you do not tell us any thing of this celestial
natural Medicine, of your own Experience. For you being conscious to your
self of being no good Christian, as you confessed before, and God having not
given so full a charter to the Creature but he may interpose and stop
proceedings, surely at least you had so much wit, as not to try where there was
so just cause of fear of frustration and miscarriage. So that you go about to
teach the World what you have not to any purpose learned your self.

Lin. 27. And who is he that will not gladly believe, etc. A most rare and
highly raised notion. You resolve then that holy expectancy of the Saints of
God concerning the life to come, into that fond kind of credulity and pleasant
self-flattery, Facile credimus quod fieri volumus, and yet you seem to unsay it
again toward the end of this Period. And we will permit you, Anthroposophus! to
say and unsay, to do and undo; for the day is long enough to you, who by your
Magic and colestial Medicine are able to live till all your friends be weary
of you.

Page 52.
In this whole page Anthroposophus is very Gnomicall, and speaks Aphorisms very
gracefully. But as moral as he would seem to be, this is but a prelude to a
piece of Poetic ostentation, and he winds himself into an occasion of
showing you a Paper of verses of his. If you do but trace his steps, you shall
see him waddle on like some Otter or Water-Rat and at last flounce into the
River Vsk. Where notwithstanding afterward he would seem to dress himself like
a Water-Nymph at those crystal streams, and will sing as sweet as any Siren or
Mermayde. And truly, Master Anthroposophus! if that heat that enforces you to
be a Poet, would but permit you in any measure to be prudent, cautiously
rational, and wise, you would in due time prove a very considerable Gentleman.
But if you will measure the truth of things by the violence and overbearing of
fancy and windy Representations, this Amabilis insania, will so intoxicate
you, that to sober men you will seem little better then a refined Bedlam. But
now to the Poetry it self.

Page 53.
It Is day my Crystal Vsk, etc. Here the Poet begins to sing, which being a
sign of joy is intimation enough to us also to be a little merry. The four
first verses are nothing else but one long-winded goodmorrow to his dear Yska.
Where you may observe the discretion and charity of the Poet, who being not
resaluted again by this Master of so many virtues, the River Usk, yet learns
not this ill Lesson of clownishnesse, nor upbrayds his Tutor for his Rusticity.
Was there never an Echo hard by, to make the River seem affable and civil, as
well as pure, patient, humble and thankful?

Lin. 17. And weary all the Planets with mine eyes. A description of the most
impudent Star-gazer that ever I heard of, that can outface all the Planets in
one Night. I perceive then, Anthroposophus! that you have a mind to be thought
an Astrologian as well as a Magician. But methinks, an Hill had been better for
this purpose then a River. I rather think that your head is so hot, and your
mind so ill at ease, that you cannot lie quiet in your bed as other Mortals
do, but you sleeping waking are carried out, like the Noctambuli in their
dreams, and make up a third with Will with the Wisp, and Meg with the Lanthorn,
whose natural wanderings are in marish places, and near Rivers sides.

Lin. ultima. Sure I will strive to gain as clear a mind. Which I dare swear
you may do at one stroke! would you but wipe at once all your fluttering and
fortuitous phansies out of it. For you would be then as clearly devoid of all
show of knowledge, as Aristotle's Abrasa Tabula, or the wind, or the flowing
water of written characters.

Page 54.
Lin. 3. How I admire thy humble banks! Why! be they lower then the River it
self? that had been admirable indeed. Otherwise I see nothing worthy admiration
in it.

Lin. 4. But the same simple vesture all the year. This River Yska then I
conceive, according to your Geography, is to be thought to crawl under the
AEquatour or somewhere betwixt the Tropicks. For were it in Great Britain or
Ireland, certainly the palpable difference of seasons there, would not permit
his banks to be alike clad all the year long. The fringe of reed and flagges,
besides those gayer Ornaments of herbs and flowers, cannot grow alike on your
Yskaes banks all Summer and Winter. So that you fancy him more beggarly then
he is, that you may afterward conceit him more humble then he ought to be.

Lin. 5. I Will learn simplicity of thee, etc. That Is your modesty,
Anthroposophus! to say so: For you are so learned that you may be a Doctor of
Simplicity your self, and teach others.

Lin. 9. Let me not live, etc. How mightily the man is ravished with the
contemplation of an ordinary Watercourse. A little thing will please you I
perceive, as it does children, nay amaze you. But if you be so much inamoured
on your Yska, do that out of love that Aristotle did out of indignation,
embrace his streams, nay drown your self, and then you will not live. You are
very hot Anthroposophus! that all the cool air from the River Yska will not
keep you from cursing your self, with such mortal imprecations.

Lin. 11. Why should thy floods enrich those shores, etc. Why! how now! what is
the matter, Philalethes! that you and the banks no better agree? If you could
so soon fall into the River as you fall out with the shore, you would to your
great honor, like Aristotle, be drowned indeed. In good truth you a very
fickle-headed Gentleman, Philalethes! thus in a moment to reproach what you did
so highly admire even now, viz. the banks of Yska, which you then made so
simple, so humble, and so innocent, that you phansied them an eximious pattern
of those virtues for your self to imitate. But now all of a sudden, your
Poetical rapture I suppose spoiling your memory, you fling dirt on those banks
that before you looked on as holy ground; and accuse them of injury, tyranny,
and cruelty against the streams of your beloved Yska. But any ordinary Advocate
may easily make good the Banks part against the River. For I say unto thee, O
thou man of light imaginations! that the banks of Yska are just, in keeping but
the ground that ever was alloted them; but where ever they have lost ground, it
is the violence and the usurpation of the injurious River, that has worn them
away and overrunne them in an hostile manner. Besides I say, that the Banks
aforesaid are very charitable and pious as well as just, and do not return
revenge for injury. For whereas the aforesaid River, both by open force and
secret undermining, does daily endeavor to wear away and destroy the Banks and
encroach upon the neighboring ground, (which attempt is as sottish and foolish
as unjust, for so the River would be lost and drunk up by the Earth, Nor can
there be any River without banks, more then an Hill without a valley;) yet
notwithstanding all this provocation of the River aforesaid, the banks are so
patient, charitable, and of so Christian-like nature, that they preserve in
being and good plight their inveterate enemy, and keep up that carefully and
stoutly in its right form and perfection that daily practices and plots their
expected destruction. What do you answer to this Philalethes! All that virtue
and piety which you fancy in the River, you see now plainly growing upon the
banks. So that you may gather it, if you have a mind to it, without wetting
your finger.

Lin. ultima. Help me to run to Heaven, as thou do there. Ha, ha, he! Why!
I pray thee, does Yska run to Heaven there? No it runs down into the Sea, as
the Devils and the Heard of Swine did; whither I hope you do not desire to go
for company, Philalethes! But I wonder you being a whole day and a night on the
banks of Yska, that no fish not so much as a small Stittlebag has leapt up into
your fancy all this time. You might have learned many rare Lectures of
morality from them too. As for example; instead of due vigilance you might
learn from the fishes eyes never closing, to sleep and dream waking; or instead
of being as mute as a fish when you have nothing to say, to say nothing to the
purpose, or to express your self as unintelligibly as if you had said nothing.
But these and the like accomplishments naturally growing in you, you wanted no
outward emblemes to reminde you of them, so that I hold you here excusable. But
before I leave this rare Poem of yours, let me only take notice thus far: that
your Levity and Phantastry does much eclipse the glorious suspicion of your
Theomagicall Faculty. For it will seem very incredible that so light and
phansifull a Poet, should ever prove a grave and wonder-working Magician.

Page 55.
Lin. 1. This is the way I would have thee walk in etc. viz. In Majestic
Groves, and Woods, and by River sides. You are not then I perceive, an
Anti-Peripatetick, Philalethes! though you be so violent an Anti-Aristotelean.
But with such pompous gravity to give such slight Precepts as of walking by
Rivers sides and in Groves, etc. argues more then enough of moping distempered
Melancholy in you, and that it may, if you take not heed, make you indulge so
much to delusive fancy, that you will be never able to set your eye again
upon solid Reason, but range and ramble like one lost in a Wood.

Lin. 9. To trust no Moderns but Mich Sendivow, and Physica Restituta. How
mightily are these two beholden to you, Philalethes! if you had but so many
grains of judgment and discretion as to make you able to pass sentence upon
any considera ble Author. But what do you mean by trusting? To give faith and
credence to them as to Holy Writ? If so, I perceive you have also a Triplicity
of Bibles, viz. the usual one, Mich. Sendivow, and Physica Restituta. But we
ordinary Mortals hope to be as wise and as happy with our single one, as you
with your advantage of three.

Lin. 13. With the Whymzies of Descartes. This young man, has as little
manners as wit, to speak thus reproachfully of the most admirable Philosophy,
that ever yet appeared in these European parts since Noah's flood. Certainly,
Anthroposophus! you are set upon it to demonstrate your self a pure pitiful
Novice in Knowledge, whom only Ignorance makes so magisterially confident. But
for thy want of due sagacity, I will take thee by the Nose, O Philalethes! with
this one Dilemma, which shall pinch thee as hard, as St. Dunstan did the
roaring Fiend with a red-hot pair of tongs. Thus; Either thou have read Des
Carts his natural Philosophy, or thou have not. If thou have read it, thus to
contemn it and term it a Whymzie, (whereas there was never any thing proposed
to the World, in which there is more wary, subtle, and close contexture of
reason, more coherent uniformity of all parts with themselves, or more happy
conformity of the whole with the Phenomenon of Nature) is to proclaim to all
that understand DesCarte's Philosophy, that thou have a very broken, impatient,
and unsteddy Apprehension, or a very dull and slow wit, and such as cannot
discern when it lights upon what is most exactly rational, and when not. But
what is most exactly rational, as his Philosophy indeed is to any competent
Judge of Reason, is least of all whymzicall; but whymzies more naturally lodge
in their brains that are loosly phansifull, not in theirs that are
Mathematically and severely wise. So that this reproach returns upon thine own
addle pate, O inconsiderate Philalethes! But if thou did never read his
Philosophy, and yet pronouncest thus boldly of it; that is not only impudently
uncivil, but extremely and insufferably unjust.

Page 56.
Lin. 6. I will now withdraw and leave the Stage to the next Actour. Exit Tom
Fool in the play.

Lin. 8. Some Peripatetick perhaps whose Sic probo shall serve me for a
Comedy. So it seems if a man had seriously argued with you all this time, you
would only have returned him laughter instead of a solid answer, and so from
Tom Fool in the Play, you would have become a natural Fool. But we have had
the good hap to prevent you, and instead of Sic probo's to play the Fool for
company, that is, to answer a fool according to his foolishness, that is, to
rail and call names, and make ridiculous. Into which foolish postures as often
as I have distorted my self, so often have I made my self a fool that you may
become wise, and amend that in your self, that you cannot but dislike in me.
Nor would I ever meddle with you, as merry as I seem, but upon this and the
like serious intentions. And must needs reckon it amongst the rest of your
follies, that you expected that some severe Peripatetick would have laid
battery against you, with syllogism upon syllogism, and so all confuted your
Book, that there had not been left one line entire. But assure your self
Philalethes! the Peripateticks are not altogether given so much to scolding,
that they will contest with a shadow, or fight with the wind. Nor so good
marks-men as to level at a Wild goose flying. You are so fluttering and
unsettled in your notions, and obscure in your terms, that unless you will be
more fixed, and sit fair, and draw your Woodcocks head out of the bush or
thicket, they will not be able to hit your meaning. Which I suspect you will
never be persuaded to do, that you may keep your self more secure from Gunshot.

Lin. 13. And the best way to convince fools, etc. How wise Anthroposophus is
to what is evil! Here he makes sure of calling him fool first who ever shall
attempt to write any thing against his Book. But it is no such mischief,
Anthroposophus! to be called fool. The worst jest is when a man is so indeed.
And if you had but the skill to winnow away all the chafe of humorous words,
and uncouth freaks and fetches of fancy, and affected phrases, which are
neither the signs nor causes of any wisdom in a man, all that will be left of
this learned discourse of yours; will prove such a small moity of that
knowledge your presumptuous mind conceited to be in her self, that you would
then very sadly of your own accord (which would be your first step to become
wise indeed) confess your self a Fool. And this I understand of your knowledge
in Nature. Now for that in Morality; It is true you often take upon you the
gravity to give precepts of life, as especially in the 52 and 55 pages of this
Tractate. But you do it so conceitedly, with such chiming and clinching of
words, Antithetall Librations, and Symphonicall rappings, that to sober men you
cannot but seem rather like some idle boy playing on a pair of Knick-knacks, to
please his own ear and fancy, then a grave Moralist speaking wholesome words
and giving weighty counsel of life and manners. So that the best that you do,
is but to make the most solemn things ridiculous, by your Apish handling of
them. I suppose because a Religious Humor has been held on in some Treatises,
with that skill and judgment, or at least good success, that it has won the
approbation and applause of most men, an eager desire after fame has hurried
you out upon the like attempt. And though you would not call your Book Religio
Magici, as that other was Religio Medici: yet the favorable conceit you had of
your own Worth, made you bold to vie with him, and in imitation of that, you
have stuffed your Book here and there with a tuft of Poetry, as a Gammon of
Bacon with green herbs, to make it taste more savourly. But all will not do,
poor Magicus! For now your design is discovered, you are as contemptible as
any Juggler is before him, that knows all his tricks aforehand. And you run the
same fortune that AEsops Ass, who ineptly endeavoring to imitate the
Courtship and winning carriage of his Masters fawning and leaping Spaniell, in
stead of favor found a club for his rude performance. But you, Magicus! do not
only paw ill-favouredly with your fore-feet, but kick like mad with your
hinder-seet, as if you would dash out all the Aristoteleans brains. And do you
think that they are all either so faint-hearted, that they dare not, or so
singularly moralized, that Socrates like, if an Ass kick, they will not kick
again? Yes certainly next to your self they are as like as any to play the
Asses, and to answer you kick for kick, if you will but stand fair for them.
But you have got such a Magical sleight of hiding of your head, and nipping in
your buttocks, like the Hob-gobling that in the shape of an Horse dropped the
children off one by one of his tail into the water, that they cannot find you
out nor feel where about you would be, else certainly they would set a mark
upon your hinder parts. For if I, my dear Eugenius! who am your brother
Philalethes, am forced out of care and judgment to handle you so seeming
harshly and rigidly as I do, what do you think would become of you, st
incideres in ipsas Belluas, if you should fall amongst the irefull
Aristoteleans themselves? would you be able to escape alive out of their hands?
Wherefore good brother Philaletbes! hereafter be more discreet, and endeavor
rather to be wise then to seem so, and to quit your self from being a fool,
then to fancy the Aristoteleans to be such.

FINIS.
Upon the Authors generous design, in his Observations, of discovering and
discountenancing all mysteriously masked nonsense, and impostorous fancy;
the sworn Enemies of Sound-Reason, and Truth.
NObly designed! let not a Sunday suit
Make us my Gasser and my Lord salute:
Nor his Saints clothes deceive, O comely dress!
Like to a Long-Lane Doublets wide excess.
How like a Sack it sits? Less far would fit,
Did he proportion but his garb and Wit.
The Wight mistakes his size, each Wiseman sees
His men's Fourteens shrink to a childrens Threes.
Fill out thy title, man! think thou can daunt
By pointing to the sword of John of Gaunt?
Thou can not wield it yet; an empty name
Does no more feats then a mere painted flame.
Rare Soul! whose words refined from flesh and blood
Are neither to be felt nor understood:
But if they sacred be, because not sense,
To Bedlam, Sirs! the best Divines come thence.
Your newfound Lights may like a falling Star
Seem heavenly Lamps, when they but Gellies are.
And high swollen Wombs bid fair, but time grown nigh
The promised birth proves but a Tympanic.
Should Superstition, what it most does fly,
Seek to take shelter in Philosophy?
And Sacred Writ, sole image of sure truth,
Be pulled by the nose, by every idle youth?
And made to bend as seeming to incline
To all the fooleries he will call Divine?
Find out the Word in Scripture; all is found:
Swarms of Conceits buzze up from this one ground,
As if the Cobbler all his crade would show
From mention made of Gibeon's clouted shoe:
Or Bakers their whole Art at large would read
From the (...) record of the moldy Bread,
Is this the Spirit? thus confusedly mad?
Antipodall to him the Chaos had?
Fell boyst ous blast! that with one Magic puss
Turns the Schools Glory to a Farthing snuff:
And against that ancient Sage the World adores,
Like to a Lapland Whirlewind loudly roares.
Yet from thy Travels in the search of things,
Ridiculous Swain! what shallow stuff thou bring'st!
What clothes they wear, Vaiss, Tiff'nies, do relate,
Thou art Philosophies Tom Cortat.
Else brave Des Carts, whom fools cannot admire,
Had nere been singed by thy wild Whimzy fire.
Poor Galen's Antichrist, though one Purge of his
Might so unmagick thee as make thee wise.
Physic cures phrenzy, knows inspired wit
Often proves a mere Hypochondriack fit.
Agrippa's Dog sure kennels in thy weambe,
Thou yelpest so and barkest in a dream;
Or if awake, thou do on him so fawn,
And bite all else, that hence his Dog the art known.
But I will spare the lash! 'twas my friends task
Who rescuing Truth engaged, put on this mask.
Thus does some careful Prince disguised go,
To keep his Subjects from the intended blow;
Nor could his lofty soul so low descend
But to uncheat the World; a noble end!
And now the night is gone, we plainly find
'T was not a Light but rotten Wood that thin'd.
We owe this day (my dearest friend) to thee,
All Eyes but Night-birds now the Imposaure see.
J. T.

FINIS.

