PSYXODIA PLATONICA: OR A Platonicall Song of the SOUL, Consisting of four
several Poems; viz. PSYXOOIA PSYXATHANASIA ANTIPSYXOPANNYXIA ANTIONOPSYXIA


Hereto is added a Paraphrasticall Interpretation of the answer of Apollo
consulted by Amelius, about Plotinus soul departed this life.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Nullam majorem afferre solet ignaris inscitia voluptatem (...) expeditum
factidiosumque contemptum.

Scal. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1642.

To the Reader.
But whom lust, wrath, and fear control,
Scarce know their body from their soul,
If any such chance hear my verse,
Dark numerous Nothings I rehearse
To them, measure out an idle sound
In which no inward sense is found.
Thus sing I to cragg'd clifts and hills,
To sighing winds, to murmuring rills,
To wastefull woods, to empty groves,
Such things as my dear mind most loves.
But they heed not my Heavenly passion,
Fast fixed on their own operation.
On chalky rocks hard by the Sea,
Safe guided by fair Cynthia,
I strike my silver-sounded lyre,
First struck my self by some strong fire;
And all the while her wavering ray
Reflected from fluid glass does play
On the white banks. But all are deaf
Unto my Muse, that is most lief
To mine own self. So they nor blame
My pleasant notes, nor praise the same.
Nor do thou, Reader, rashly brand
My rhymes before thou them understand.
H. M.

PSYXOOIA, OR A CHRISTIANO-PLATONICALL display of LIFE, Written in the
beginning of the year of our LORD 1640. and now published for all free
Phisophers and well-willers to the true Christian Life.

(...),

Trismeg. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie, 1642.

TO THE READER, upon the first Book of PSYCHOZOIA.
THis first book, as you may judge by the names therein, was intended for a
mere Platonicall description of Universal life, or life that is omnipresent,
though not alike omnipresent. As in Noah's Deluge, the water that overflowed the
earth was present in every part thereof, but every part of the water was not in
every part of the earth, or all in every part; so the low Spirit of the
Universe, though it go quite through the world, yet it is not totally in every
part of the world; Else we should hear our Antipodes, if they did but whisper:
Because our lower man is a part of the inferior Spirit of the Universe.

Ahad, Aeon, and Psyche are all omnipresent in the World, after the most
perfect way that humane reason can conceive of. For they are in the world all
totally and at once every where.

This is the famous Platonicall Triad: which though they that slight the
Christian Trinity do take for a figment; yet I think it is no contemptible
argument, that the Platonists, the best and divinest of Philosophers, and the
Christians, the best of all that do profess religion, do both concur that
there is a Trinity. In what they differ, I leave to be found out, according to
the safe direction of that infallible Rule of Faith, the holy Word.

In the mean time I shall not be blamed by any thing but ignorance and
malignity, for being invited to sing of the second Unity of the Platonicall
Triad, in a Christian strain and Poetical scheme, that which the holy
Scripture witnesses of the second Person of the Christian Trinity. As that his
patrimony is the possession of the whole earth. For if it be not all one with
Christ, according to his Divinity (although their attributes suit exceeding
well: For that second Unity in the Platonicall Triad, is called Filius Boni,
The Son of the Good; The Christian second Person, The Son of God; He, (...)
That, the (...), the first beauty or luster; He, the (...) that, the first
(...), and sometime (...): As in Trismeg: (...) He, the Truth; That, the (...)
or true platform according to which every thing was made and ought to be made:
That Aeon; He, Eternal life: He, the wisdom of God; That the Intellect: He
(...) that the (...).) Yet the Platonists placing him in the same order, and
giving him the like attributes, with the Person of the Son in Christianity,
it is nothing harsh for me to take occasion from hence to sing a while the true
Christian Autocalon, whose beauty shall adorn the whole Earth in good time; if
we believe the Prophets. For that has not as yet happened. For Christ is not
where ever his name is: This opinion, though it have its moments of reason, yet
every man's judgment is left free, and will ever be, where there is no
demonstration to bind it to assent.
but as he is the Truth, so will he be truly displayed upon the face of the
whole Earth. For God does not fill the world with his glory by words and
sounds, but by spirit, and life, and realtie.

Now this Eternal life I sing of, even in the midst of my Platonisme: for I
cannot conceal from whence I am, viz. of Christ; but yet acknowledging, that
God has not left the Heathen, Plato especially, without witness of himself.
Whose doctrine might strike our adulterate Christian professors with shame and
astonishment; their lives falling so exceeding short of the better Heathen. How
far short are they then of that admirable and transcendent high mystery of true
Christianisme? To which Plato is a very good subservient Minister; whose
Philosophy I singing here in a full heat, why may it not be free for me to
break out into an higher strain, and under it to touch upon some points of
Christianity; as well as all-approved Spencer sings of Christ's under the name
of Pan? Saint Paul also transfers those things that be spoken of Jupiter, to
God himself, Arat. (...). (...)
(...).
Those latter words he gives to the Christian God, whom he himself preached. I
will omit the usual course of the Spirit of God in holy Writ, To take occasion
from things that have some resemblance of divine things, under them to speak of
the true things themselves.

All this out of a tenderness of mind, being exceeding loath to give any man
offense by my writings. For though knowledge and theory be better then any
thing but honesty and true piety, yet it is not so good, as that I should
willingly offend my neighbor by it.

Thus much by way of preparation to the first piece of this Poem. I will now
leave thee to thine own discretion and judgment.

Upon the second Book.
THis second Book, before we descend to particular lives, exhibits to our
apprehension, by as fit a similitude as I could light upon, the Universe as one
simple uniform being, from Ahad to Hyle: no particular straightened being as yet
being made; no Earth or any other Orb as yet kned together. All homogeneall,
simple, single, pure, pervious, unknotted, uncoacted, nothing existing but
those eight universal orders,

There God has full command, builds and destroys what he lists.

That all our souls are free effluxes from his essence, what follows is so
plain that the Reader wants no direction.

Upon the third Book.
THere is no knot at all in this last Book if men do not seek one. I plainly
and positive^y declare no opinion, but show the abuse of ^ose opinions there
touched, crouding a number ^f enormities together, that safely shroud
themselves there, where all sinfulness surely may easi^y get harbor, if we be
not well aware of the ^evil, that makes even true opinions oftentimes ^rve for
mischief.

Nothing else can be now expected for the easy and profitable understanding of
this Poem, but ^e interpretation of the names that frequently ^ccur in it.
Which I will interpret at the end of ^ese Books, (as also the hard terms of the
other ^oems) for their sakes whose real worth and ^nderstanding is many times
equal with the ^est, only they have not fed of husks and shells, ^s others
have been forced to do, the superficiary ^nowledge of tongues. But it would be
well, that neither the Linguist would contemn the illiterate ^r his ignorance,
nor the ignorant condemn the ^arned for his knowledge, For it is not
unlearndnesse that God is so pleased withal, or sillines ^f mind, but
singleness and simplicity of heart.

H. M.

THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHOZOIA. Lib. 1.
This song great Psyches parentage
With her fourefold array,
And that mysterious marriage,
To the Reader does display.
1
NOr Ladies loves, nor Knights brave Martial deeds,
Ywrapt in rolls of hid Antiquity;
But the inward Fountain, and the unseen Seeds,
From whence are these and what so under eye
Does fall, or is record in memory,
Psyche, I Will sing, Psyche! from thee they spreng.
O life of time, and all Alterity!
The life of lives instill his nectar strong,
And Psych' inebriate, while I sing Psyches song.
2
But thou, who e're thou art that hear'st this strain,
Or read'st these rimes which from Platonic rage
Do powerfully flow forth, dare not to blame
My forward pen of foul miscarriage;
If all that is spoke, with thoughts more sadly sage
Does not agree. My task is not to try
What Is simply true. I only do engage
My self to make a fit discovery,
Give some fair glimps of Plato's hid Philosophy.
3
What man alive that has but common wit
(When skillful limmer 'suing his intent
Shall fairly well pourtray and wisely hit
The true proportion of each lineament,
And in right colors to the life depaint
The fulvid Eagle with her sun-bright eye)
Would woxen wroth with inward cholar brent
Cause it is no Buzard or discolored Pie?
Why man? I meant it not: Cease thy fond obloquie.
4
So if what is consonant to Plato's school,
(Which well agrees with learned Pythagore,
Egyptian Trismegist and the antique roll
Of Chaldee wisdom all which time has tore
But Plato and deep Plotin do restore)
Which is my scope, I sing out lustily.
If any twitten me for such strange lore,
And me all blameless brand with infamy,
God purge that man from fault of foul malignity.
5
The Ancient of days, sire of Aeternitie,
Sprung of himself, or rather nowise sprung.
Father of lights and everlasting glee,
Who puts to silence every daring tongue
And flies man's sight, shrouding himself among
His glorious rays, good Hattove, from whom came
All good that Penia spies in thickest throng
Of most desired things, all is from that same,
That same, that Hattove hight and sweet Abinoam.
6
Now can I not with flowring fantasy
To drowsy sensual souls such words impart,
Which in their sprights may cause sweet agony,
And thrill their bodies through with pleasing dart,
And spread in flowing sire their close-twist heart,
All-chearing fire, that nothing wont to burn
That Hattove lists to save: and his good Art
Is all to save that will to him return,
That all to him return, naught of him is sorlorn.
7
For what can be forlorn, when his good hands
Hold all in life, that of life do partake?
O surest confidence of Loves strong bands!
Love loves all that is made; Love all did make
And when false life does fail, it is for the sake
Of better being. Riving tortures spite,
That life disjoints, and makes the heart to quake,
To good the soul does nearer reunite:
So ancient Hattove hence all-joyning Ahad hight.
8
This Ahad of himself the Aeon fair
Begot, the brightness of his fathers grace:
No living wight in heaven to him compare,
Ne work his goodly honor such disgrace,
Nor lose thy time in telling of his race.
His beauty and his race no man can tell:
His glory darkeneth the Suns bright face;
Or if ought else the Suns bright face excel,
^is splendor would it dim, and all that glory quell.
9
This is that ancient Eidos omniform,
Fount of all beauty, root of flowring glee.
Hyle old hag, foul, filthy and deform,
Can not come near. Joyful Eternity
Admits no change or mutability,
No shade of change, no imminution,
No nor increase; for what increase can be
To that that is all? and where Hyl' has no throne
^n ought decay? such is the state of great Aeon.
10
Far otherwise it fares in this same land
Of truth and beauty, then in mortal brood
Of earthly lovers, who impassioned
With outward forms (not rightly understood,
From whence proceeds this amorous sweet flood,
And choice delight which in their spright they feel:
Can outward idol yield so heavenly mood?)
This inward beauty unto that they deel
^at little beauteous is: Thus into the dirt they reel.
11
Like to Narcissus, on the grassie shore,
Viewing his outward face in watery glass;
Still as he looks, his looks add evermore
New fire, new light, new love, new comely grace
To 's inward form; and it displayes apace
It Is hidden rays, and so new luster sends
To that vain shadow: but the boy, alas!
Unhappy boy! the inward naught attends,
(...) in foul filthy mire, love, life and form he blends.
12
And this I wot is the Souls excellence,
That from the hint of every painted glance
Of shadows sensible, it does from hence
Its radiant life and lovely hue advance
To higher pitch, and by good governance
May wained be from love of fading light
In outward forms, having true Cognizance,
That those vain shows are not the beauty bright
That takes men so, but that they cause in humane spright.
13
Far otherwise it fares in Aeons realm.
O happy close of sight and that there is seen!
That there is seen is good Abinoam,
Who Hattove hight: And Hattubus I ween,
Cannot be less then he that sets his eyes
On that abyss of good eternally,
The youthful Aeon, whose fair face does shine
While he his Fathers glory does espy,
Which waters his fine flowring forms with light from hi^
14
Not that his forms increase, or that they die.
For Aeon Land, which men Idea call,
Is naught but life in full serenitie,
Vigor of life is root, stock, branch, and all;
Naught here increases, naught here has its fall:
For Aeons kingdoms always perfect stand,
Birds, beasts, fields, springs, plants, men and mineral,
To perfectness naught added be there can.
This Aeon also hight Autocalon and On.
15
This is the eldest son of Hattove hoar:
But the eldest daughter of this aged sire,
That virgin wife of Aeon, Uranore.
She Uranora hight, because the fire
Of Aethers essence she with bright attire,
And inward unseen golden hew does dight,
And life of sense and phancie does inspire.
Aether's the vehicle of touch, smell, sight,
Of taste and hearing too, and of the plastic might.
16
Whylom me chanced (O my happy chance!)
To spy this spotless pure fair Uranore.
I spied her, but, alas! with slighter glance
Beheld her on the Hattubaean shore,
She stood the last: for her did stand before
The lovely Autocal. But first of all
Was mighty Hattove, deeply covered over
With unseen light. No might Imaginall
^ay reach that vast profunditie.
17
Whiles thus they stood by that good lucid spring
Of living bliss, her fourefold ornament
I there observed; and that is the only thing
That I dare write with due advisement.
Foolhardy man that purposes intent
Far 'bove his reach, like the proud Phaeton,
Who clomb the fiery car and was yshent
Through his fond juvenile ambition:
^h' unruly flundring steeds wrought his confusion.
18
Now rise, my Muse, and straight thy self address
To write the pourtraiture of the outward vest,
And to display its perfect comeliness:
Begin and leave where it shall please thee best.
Nor do assay to tell all, let the rest
Be understood. For no man can unfold
The many plicatures so closely pressed
At lowest verge. Things before our feet yrold,
^they be hard, how shall the highest things be told?
19
Its unseen figure I must here omit:
For thing so mighty vast no mortal eye
Can compass; and if eye not compass it,
The extreme parts, at lest some, hidden lie:
And if that they lie hid, who can descry
The truth of figure? Bodies figured
Receive their shape from each extremity.
But if conjecture may stand in truths stead
^he garment round or circular I do aread.
20
As for its color and material,
It silken seems, and of an azur hew,
If hew it have or color natural:
For much it may amaze man's erring view.
Those parts the eye is near give not the show
Of any color: but the rural Swains,
O easy ignorance! would swear it is blew,
Such as their Phyllis would, when as she plains
Their Sunday-cloths, and the washed white with azur sta^
21
But this fair azur colour's foully stained
By base comparison with that blew dust.
But you of Uranore are not disdained,
O silly Shepherds, if you hit not just
In your conceits, so that you're put in trust
You duly do attend. If simple deed
Accord with simple life, then needs you must
From the great Urauore of favor speed,
Though you can not unfold the nature of her weed.
22
For who can it unfold, and read aright
The diverse colors, and the tinctures fair,
Which in this various vesture changes write
Of light, of duskishnesse, of thick, of rare
Consistences: ever new changes mar
Former impressions. The dubious shine
Of changeable silk stuffs this passes far.
Far more variety, and far more fine,
Then interwoven silk with gold or silver twine.
23
Lo what delightful immutations
On her soft flowing vest we contemplate!
The glory of the Court, their fashions,
And brave agguize with all their Princely state,
Which Poets or Historians relate
This far excels, farther then pompous Cour^:
Excels the homeliest garb of Country rate:
Unspeakable it is how great a sort.
Of glorious glistring shows in it themselves disport.
24
There you may see the eyelids of the morn
With lofty silver arch displaid in the East,
And in the midst the burnisht gold does burn;
A lucid purple mantle in the West
Does close the day, and hap the Sun at rest.
Nor do these lamping shows the azur quell,
Or other colors: where 't beseems best
There they themselves dispose; so seemly well
^th light and changing tinctures deck this goodly veil.
25
But amongst these glaring glittering rows of light,
And flaming circles, and the grisell gray,
And crudled clouds with silver tippings dight,
And many other deckings wondrous gay,
As Iris and the Halo, there does play
Still-pac'd Euphrona in her conique tire;
By stealth her steeple-cap she does assay
To whelm on the earth: So school-boyes do aspire
^ith coppell'd hat to quelm the Be all armed with ire.
26
I saw portrayed on this Sky-colored silk
Two lovely lads, with wings fully dispread
Of silver plumes, their skin more white then milk,
Their lilly limbs I greatly admired,
Their cheary looks and lusty livelyhed:
Athwart their snowy breast a scarf they wore
Of azur hew, fairly bespangoled
Was the gold fringe. Like Doves so forth they fore:
^me message they, I ween, to Monocardia bore.
27
O gentle sprights, whose careful oversight
Tends humane actions, sons of Solyma!
O heavenly Salems sons! you send the right,
You violence resist, and fraud bewray;
The ill with ill, the good with good you pay.
And if you list to mortal eye appear,
You thick that veil, and so your selves array
With visibility: O mystery rare*
That thickened veil should maken things appear more bare*
28
But well I wot that nothing's bare to sense;
For sense cannot arrive to the inwardnesse
Of things, nor penetrate the crusty fence
Of constipated matter close compresse:
Or that were laid aside, yet nathelesse
Things thus unbar'd, to sense be more obscure.
Therefore those Sons of Love when they them dre^
For sight, they thick the vest of Uranure,
And from their center overflow't with beauty pure.
29
Thus many goodly things have been unfold
Of Uranures fair changing ornament:
Yet far more hiddenly, as yet untold;
For all to tell was never my intent,
Neither all could I tell if I so meant.
For her large robe all the wide world does fill:
Its various largeness no man can depaint:
My pen's from thence, my books, my ink; but skill
From Uranures own self down gently does distill.
30
But yet one thing I saw that I Will not pass,
At the low hem of this large garment gay
Number of goodly balls there pendent was,
Some like the Sun, some like the Moons white ray,
Some like discolored Tellus, when the day
Discries her painted coat: In wondrous wise
These colored ones do circle, float and play,
As those far-shining Rounds in open skies:
Their course the best Astronomer might well aggrize.
31
These danced about: but some I did epsy
That steady stood, amongst which there shined one,
More fairly shines not the worlds great eye,
Which from his plenteous store unto the Moon
Kindly imparteth light, that when he is gone,
She might supply his place, and well abate
The irksome ugliness of that foul drone,
Sad heavy night, yet quick to work the fate
Of murdered travelers, when they themselves belate.
32
O gladsome life of sense that does adore
The outward shape of the worlds curious frame!
The proudest Prince that ever Scepter bore
(Though he perhaps observes not the same)
The lowest hem does kiss of that we name
The stole of Uranore, these parts that won
To drag in dirty earth (nor do him blame)
These does he kiss: why should he be fordonne?
(...) sweet it is to live! what joy to see the Sun!
33
But O what joy it is to see the Sun
Of Aeons kingdoms, and the eternal day
That never night o'retakes* the radiant throne
Of the great Queen, the Queen Uranura!
Then she began first the Scepter for to sway,
And rule with wisdom, when Hattubus old,
Hence Ahad we him call, did tie them tway
With nuptial charm and wedding-ring of gold:
^n sagely he the case began to them thus unfold:
34
My first born Son, and thou my' daughter dear,
Look on your aged Sire, the deep abyss,
(...) which and out of which you first appear;
(...) Ahad hight, and Ahad oneness is:
Therefore be one; (his words do never miss)
They one became. I Hattove also hight,
^id he; and Hattove goodness is and bliss:
therefore in goodness be ye fast unite:
^nitie, Love, Good, be measures of your might.
35
^hey straight accord: then he put on the ring,
^he ring of lasting gold on Uranure;
^en began the youthful Lads aloud to sing,
^men! O Hymen! O the Virgin pure!
^holy Bride! long may this joy endure.
^er the song Hattove his speech again
^news. My Son, I unto thee assure
(...) judgment and authority sovereign*
^ake as unto one: for one became those twain.
36
To thee each knee in Heaven and Earth shall bow,
And whatsoever wons in darker cell
Under the Earth: If thou thy awful brow
Contract, those of the Ethiopian hell
Shall lout, and do thee homage; they that dwell
In Tharsis, Tritons fry, the Ocean-god,
Iam and Ziim, all the Satyrs fell
That in empse Islands maken their abode:
All those and all things else shall tremble at thy rod.
37
Thy rod thou shall extend from sea to sea,
And thy Dominion to the worlds end;
All Kings shall vow thee faithful fealty,
Then peace and truth on all the earth I Will send:
Nor moody Mars my metalls may mispend,
Of warlike instruments they plow-shares shall
And pruning hooks efform. All things shall wend
For the best, and thou the head shall be over all.
Have I not sworn thee King? true King Catholicall!
38
Thus far he spoke, and then again respired;
And all this time he held their hands in one;
Then they with cheerful look one thing desired,
That he nould break this happy union.
I happy union break? quoth he anon:
I Ahad? Father of Community?
Then they: That you nould let your hand be gone
Off from our hands. He grants with smiling glee:
So each stroke struck on earth is struck from these same (...)
39
These three are Ahad, Aeon, Uranore:
Ahad these three in one does counite.
What so is done on earth, the self-same power
(Which is exert upon each mortal wight)
Is jointly from all these. But she that hight
Fair Uranore, men also Psyche call.
Great Psyche men and angels dear delight,
Invested in her stole ethereall,
Which though so high it be, down to earth does fall.
40
The external form of this large flowing stole,
My Muse so as she might above displaid:
But the inward triple golden film to unroll,
Ah! he me teach that triple film has made,
And brought out light out of the deadly shade
Of darkest Chaos, and things that are seen
Made to appear out of the gloomy glade
Of unseen beings: Them we call unseen,
Not that they 're so indeed, but so to mortal eyes.
41
The first of these fair films, we Physis name.
Nothing in nature did you ever spy
But there is pourtraid: all beasts both wild and tame,
Each bird is here, and every buzzing fly;
All forest work is in this tapestry:
The Oak, the Holm, the Ash, the Aspin tree,
The lonesome Buzzard, the Eagle, and the Py,
The Buck, the Bear, the Boar, the Hare, the Be,
The Brize, the black-arm'd Clock, the Gnat, the Butterfly;
42
Snakes, Adders, Hydraes, Dragons, Toads, and Frogs,
The own-litter-loving Ape, the Worm and Snail,
The undaunted Lion, Horses, Men and Dogs;
Their number's infinite, naught does 't avail
To reckon all: the time would surely fail:
And all besprinkeled with centrall spots,
Dark little spots, is this hid inward veil:
But when the hot bright dart does pierce these knots,
Each one dispreads it self according to their lots.
43
When they dispread themselves, then gins to swell,
Dame Psyches outward vest, as the inward wind
Softly gives forth, full softly does it well
Forth from the centrall spot; yet as confin^d
To certain shape, according to the mind
Of the first center, not perfect circlar wise,
It shoots it self: for so the outward kind
Of things were lost, and Natures good devise
Of different forms would hiddenly in one agguize.
44
But it according to the impressed Art
(That Arts impression's from Idea Land)
So drives it forth before it every part
According to true symmetry: the bond
And just precinct (unless it be withstond)
It always keeps. But that old hag that hight
Foul Hyle mistress of the miry strond,
Often her withstands, and takes great delight
To hinder Physis work, and work her all despite.
45
The self same envious witch with poisoned dew,
From her foul eben-box, all tinctures stains
Which farely good be in hid Physis hew:
That film all tinctures fair in it contains;
But she their goodly glory much restrains;
She colors dims; clogs tastes; and damps the sounds
Of sweetest music; touch to skorching pains
She turns, or baser tumults; smells confounds.
O horrid womb of hell, that with such ill abounds.
46
From this first film all bulk in quantity
Does bougen out, and figure thence obtain.
Here eke begins the life of Sympathy,
And hidden virtue of magnetic vein,
Where unknown spirits beat, and Psyche's trane
Drag as they list, upon pursuit or flight;
One part into another they constrain
Through strong desire, and then again remit.
Each outward form's a shrine of its magnetic spright.
47
The ripened child breaks through his mothers womb,
The raving billows closely undermine
The ragged rocks, and then the seas intombe
Their heavy corse, and they their heads recline
On working sand: The Sun and Moon combine,
Then they are at ods in site diametrall:
The former age to the present place resign:
And what is all this but wafts of winds centrall
That ruffle, touze, and toss Dame Psyche's wrimpled ve^
48
So Physis. Next is Arachnea thin,
The thinner of these two, but thinn'st of all
Is Semele, that is next to Psyches skin.
The second we thin Arachnea call,
Because the spider, that in Princes hall
Takes hold with her industrious hand, and weaves
Her dainty tender web; far short does fall
Of this soft yielding vest; this vest deceives
The spiders curious touch, and of her praise bereaves.
49
In midst of this fine web does Haphe sit:
She is the center from whence all the light
Dispreads, and goodly glorious Forms do flit
Hither and thither. Of this miroir bright
Haphe's the life and representing might
Haphe's the mother of sense-sympathy;
Hence are both hearing, smelling, taste and sight:
Haphe's the root of felt vitality;
^ut Haphe's mother hight all-spread Community.
50
In this clear shining miroir Psyche sees
All that falls under sense, what ere is done
Upon the earth; the deserts shaken trees,
The mournful winds, the solitary won
Of dreaded beasts, the Lybian Lions moan,
When their hot entrals skorch with hunger keen,
And they to God for mea^ do deeply groan;
He hears their cry, he sees of them unseen;
^is eyelids compass all that in the wide world been.
51
He sees the weary traveller sit down
In the waste field ofttimes with careful cheer:
His chafed feet, and the long way to town,
His burning thirst, faintness, and Panick fear,
Because he sees not him that stands so near,
Fetch from his soul deep sighs with countenance sad,
But he looks on to whom naught does dispear:
O happy man that full persuasion had
Of this! if right at home, naught of him were ydrad.
51
A many sparrows for small price be sold,
Yet none of them his wings on earth does close
Lighting full soft, but that eye does behold,
Their jets, their jumps, that miroir does disclose.
Thrice happy he that puts his repose
In his all-present God. That Africa rock
But touched with heedlesse hand, Auster arose
With blustering rage, that with his irefull shock
And moody might he made the worlds frame nigh to roc^
53
And shall not He, when his Anointed be
Ill handled, rise, and in his wrathful stour
Disperse and quell the haughty enemy,
Make their brisk sprights to lout and lowly lour?
Or else confound them quite with mighty power?
Touch not my Kings, my Prophets let alone,
Harm not my Priests; or you shall ill endure
Your works sad payment and that deadly lone;
Keep off your hand from that high holy rock of stone.
54
Do not I see? I slumber not nor sleep.
Do not I hear? each noise by shady night
My miroir represents: when mortals sleep
Their languid limbs in Morpheus dull delight,
I hear such sounds as Adams brood would fright.
The doleful echoes from the hollow hill
Mock houling wolves: the woods with black bedight
Answer rough Pan, his pipe and eke his skill,
And all the Satyr-routs rude whoops and shoutings shrill.
55
The night's no night to me: What? shall the Owl
And nimble cat their courses truly steer,
And guide their feet and wings to every hole
So right, this on the ground, that in the air?
And shall not I by night see full as clear?
All sense does in proportion consist,
Arachnea does all proportions bear:
All sensible proportions that fine twist
Contains: all life of sense is in great Haphes list.
56
Sense and concent, and all abhorrency,
Be variously divided in each one
Partic'lar creature: But antipathy
Cannot be there where fit proportion
Strikes in with all things in harmonious tone.
Thus Haphe feels naught to her self cont raire:
In her there is tuned a just Diapason
For every outward stroke: withouten jar
Thus each thing does she feel, and each thing easly bear.
57
But Haphe and Arachne I Will dismiss,
And that fourth vest, rich Semele display:
The largest of all four and loosest is
This floting flouring changeable array.
How fairly does it shine, and nimbly play,
Whiles gentle winds of Paradise do blow,
And that bright Sun of the eternal day
Upon it glorious light and forms does strew,
And Ahad it with love and joy does overflow!
58
This all-spread Semele does Bacchus bear,
Impregn'd of Jove or On. He is the wine
That sad down-drouping senses wont to rear,
And cheerlesse hearts to comfort in ill tine.
He 'flames chaste Poets brains with fire divine;
The stronger spright the weaker spright does sway:
No wonder then each fancy does incline
To their great mother Semel, and obey
The vigorous impresse of her enforcing ray.
59
She is the mother of each Semele:
The daughters be divided one from one;
But she grasps all. How can she then but see
Each Semels shadows by this union?
She sees and swayes imagination
As she thinks good; and if that she think good
She lets it play by 't self, yet looks on,
While she keeps in that large strong-beating flood
That gars the Poet write, and rave as he were wood.
60
Prophets and Poets have their life from hence;
Like fire into their marrow it searches deep.
This flaming fiery flake does choke all sense,
And binds the lower man with brazen sleep:
Corruption through all his bones does creep,
And raging raptures do his soul outsnatch:
Round-turning whirlwinds on Olympus steep
Do cast the soul, that erst they out did catch:
Then stiller whispering winds dark visions unlatch.
61
But not too far, thou bold Platonic Swain!
Strive not at once all myst'ries to discover
Of that strange school: More and more hard remain
As yet untold. But let us now recover
Strength to our selves by rest in duly hour.
Great Psyches parentage marriage and weeds
We having song according to our power,
That we may rise more fresh for morning deeds,
Let Us here take Inn and rest our weary sweating steeds.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHOZOIA. Lib. 2.
Here Is taught how into Psychanie
Souls from their centrall sourse
Go forth. Here Beirons ingeny
Old Mnemon does discourse.
1
I Sang great Psyche in my former song,
Old Hattoves daughter, sister unto On,
Mother of all that nimble Atom-throng
Of winged lives, and generation.
When Psyche wedded to Autocalon,
They both to Ahad forthwith straight were wed:
For as you heard, all these became but one,
And so conjoined they lie all in one bed,
And with that fourfold vest they be all overspred.
2
Here lies the inmost center of Creation,
From whence all inward forms and life proceed:
Here Is that aereall stole, that to each fashion
Of sensibles is matter for their weed.
This is the ground where God does sow his seed,
And whilst he sowes with whispering charms does bid
This flourish long, and that to make more speed,
And all in order by his word does rid:
So in their fatal round they 'pear and then are hid.
3
Beginning, end, form and continuance
The impression of his word to them does deal.
Occurrences he sees, and minds chance:
But chance has bounds. The Sea cannot ^'reswell
Its just precincts; or rocky shores repel
Its foming force; or else its inward life
And Centrall rains do fairly it compel
Within it self, and gently 'pease the strife,
Or makes it gnaw the bit with rore and rage full rife.
4
So fluid chance is set its certain bound,
Although with circling winds it be ytost;
And so the Pilots skill does quite confound
With unexpected storms, and men have lost
Their time, their labor, and their precious cost.
Yet there is a Neptune Sovereigne of this Sea,
Which those that in themselves put not their trust
To rude mischance did never yet betray:
Its He, whom both the winds and stormy seas obey.
5
Now since my wandering Bark so far is gone,
And flitten forth upon the Occan main,
I thee beseech that just dominion
Have of the Sea, and art true Sovereigne
Of working fancy when it floats amain
With full impregned billows and strong rage
Enforces way upon the boiling plain,
That thou would steer my ship with wisdom sage,
That I with happy course may run my watery stage.
6
My mind is moved dark Parables to sing
Of Psyche's progeny that from her came,
When she was married to that great King,
Great Aeon, who just title well may claim
Of every soul, and brand them with his name.
Its He that made us, and not our own might:
But who, alas! this work can well proclaim?
We silly sheep cannot bleat out aright
The manner how: but that that gives light is light.
7
Then let us borrow from the glorious Sun
A little light to illustrate this act,
Such as he is in his solstitiall noon,
When in the welkin there is no cloudy tract
For to make gross his beams, and light refract.
Then sweep by all those globes that by reflection
His long small shafts do rudely beaten back,
And let his rays have undenied projection,
And so we will pursue this mysteries retection.
8
Now think upon that gay discolored bow:
That part that is remotest from the light
Does duskish hew to the beholder show;
The nearer parts have colors far more bright,
And next the brightest is the subtle light;
Then colors seem but a distinct degree
Of light now failing, such let be the sight
Of his far spreaden beams that shines on high:
^et vast discolored orbs close his extremity.
9
The last extreme, the fardest off from light,
That Is natures deadly shadow, Hyle's cell.
O horrid cave, and womb of dredded Night!
Mother of witchcraft and the cursed spell,
Which nothing can avail against Israel.
No Magic can him hurt; his portion
Is not divided nature; he does dwell
In light, in holy love, in union:
Not fast to this or that, but free communion.
10
Dependence of this All hence does appear,
And several degrees subordinate.
But phansie's so unfit such things to clear,
That often it makes them seem more intricate:
And now Gods work it does disterminate
Too far from his own reach: But he withal
More inward is, and far more intimate
Then things are with themselves. His ideall
And centrall presence is in every atom-ball.
11
Therefore those different hews through all extend
So far as light: Let light be every where:
And every where with light distinctly blend
Those different colors which I named whilere
The extremities of that far shining sphere.
And that far shining sphere, which center was
Of all those different colors, and bright cheer,
You must unfasten; so o'respred it has,
Or rather deeply filled, with centrall sand each place.
12
Now since that this withouten penetrance
Of bodies may be done: we clearly see
(As well as that pendent subordinance)
The nearly couching of each realtie,
And the Creatours close propinquitie,
To every creature. This be understood
Of differentiall profundity.
But for the overspreading latitude;
Why may't not equally be stretched with the Ocean flood*
13
There Proteus wonnes and fleet Idothea,
Where the low'st step of that profunditie
Is pight; Next that is Psyche's out array:
It Tasis hight: Physis is next degree:
There Psyche's feet impart a smaller fee
Of gentle warmth. Physis is the great womb
From whence all things in the Universitie
Yclad in diverse forms do gaily bloom,
And after fade away, as Psyche gives the doom.
14
Next Physis is the tender Arachne;
There in her subtle loom does Haphe sit:
But the last vest is changing Semele:
And next is Psyches self. These garments fit
Her sacred limbs full well, and are so knit
One part to other, that the strongest sway
Of sharpest axe, them no'te asunder smite.
The seventh is Aeon with eternal ray:
The eighth Hattove, steady cube, allpropping Adonai.
15.
Upon this universal Ogdoas
Is founded every particularment:
From this same universal Diapase
Each harmony is framed and sweet consent.
But that I swerve not far from my intent,
This Ogdoas let be an unity
One mighty quickened orb of vast extent,
Thoroughly possessed of life's community,
And so those vests be seats of Gods vitality.
16
Now deem this universal round alone,
And rays no rays but a first all-spread light,
And centrick all like one pellucid Sun;
A Sun that is free, not bound by natures might,
That where it lists exerts his rays outright,
Both when it lists, and what, and eke how long,
And then retracts so as it thinks meet.
These rays be that particular creature-throng:
Their number none can tell but that all-making tongue.
17
Now blundring Naturalist behold the spring
Of thy deep-searching soul, that fain would know
Whether a mortal or immortal thing
It be, and whence at first it began to flow;
And that which chiefest is where it must go.
Some fixed necessity thou fain would find:
But no necessity, where there is no law,
But the good pleasure of an untied mind:
Therefore thy God seek out, and leave nature behind.
18
He kills, He makes alive; the keys of hell
And death he has. He can keep souls to woe
When cruel hands of fate them hence expel:
Or He in Lethe's lake can drench them so,
That they no act of life or sense can show.
They march out at His word, and they retreat;
March out with joy, retreat with footing slow
In gloomy shade, benumbed with pallid sweat,
And with their feeble wings their fainting breasts they beat.
19
But souls that of his own good life partake
He loves as His own self; dear as His eye
They are to Him: He Will never them forsake:
When they shall dye, then God Himself shall dye.
They live, they live in blessed eternity.
The wicked are not so; but like the dirt;
Trampled by man and beast, in grave they ly:
Filth and corruption is their rufull sort:
Themselves with death and worms in darkness they disport
20
Their rotten relics lurk close under ground:
With living wight no sense or sympathy
They have at all; nor hollow thundering sound
Of roaring winds, that cold mortality
Can wake, ywrapt in sad fatality.
To horses hoof that beats his grassie door
He answers not: The Moon in silency,
Does pass by night, and all bedew him over
With her cold humid rays; but he feels not heavens po^
21
O doleful lot of disobedience!
If God should souls thus drench in Lethe lake.
But O unspeakable torture of sense,
When sinful souls do life and sense partake,
That those damned spirits may the anvils make
Of their fell cruelty, that lay such blow^
That very ruth does make my heart to quake
When I consider of the drery woes,
And tearing torment that each soul then undergoes.
22
Hence the souls nature we may plainly see:
A beam it is of the intellectual sun,
A ray indeed of that eternity;
But such a ray as when it first out shone,
From a free light its shining date begun.
And that same light when it list can call it in;
Yet that free light has given a free won
To this dependent ray: hence comes sin;
From sin drad death and hell: these wages does it win.
23
Each life a several ray is from that sphere
That sphere does every life in it contain.
Arachne, Semel, and the rest do bear
Their proper virtue, and with one joint strain
And powerful sway they make impression plain,
And all their rays be joined into one
By Ahad: so this womb withouten pain
Does flocks of souls send out that have their won
Where they list most to graze^ as I shall tell anon.
24
The country where they live Psychania hight,
Great Psychany, that has so mighty bounds,
If bounds it have at all: so infinite
It is of bigness, that it me confounds
To think to what a vastness it amounds;
The Sun Saturnus, Saturn the earth exceeds
The earth the Moon; but all, those fixed rounds;
But Psychany those fixed rounds exceeds,
(...) far as those fixed rounds excel small mustard-seeds.
25
Two mighty kingdoms has this Psychany,
The one self-feeling Autaesthesia;
The other hight god-like Theoprepy.
Autaesthesy's divided into tway:
One Province cleeped is great Adamah,
Which also hight Beirah of brutish fashion;
The other Province is Dizoia:
There you may see much mungrill transformation,
^h monstrous shapes proceed from Niles foul inundation.
26
Great Michael rules Theoprepia,
A mighty Prince. King of Autaesthesy
Is that great Giant who bears mighty sway,
Father of discord, falsehood, tyranny,
His name is Demon, not from Sciency,
Although he boasts much in skillful pride;
But he is the fount of foul duality,
That wicked witch Duessa is his bride:
^m his dividing force this name to him betide.
27
Or for that he himself is quite divided
Down to the belly; there is some unity:
But head and tongue and heart be quite discided;
Two heads, two tongues, and eke two hearts there be.
This head does mischief plot, that head does see
Wrong fairly to o'reguild. One tongue does pray,
The other curse. The hearts do never agree
But felly one another do upbray:
(...) uggly clo^en foot this monster does upstay.
28
Two sons great Demon of Duessa has:
Autophilus the one ycleeped is;
In Dizoie he works wondrous scath:
He is the cause what so there goes amiss,
In Psyches stronger plumed progenies.
But Philosomatus rules Beirah.
This proud puffed Giant whilom did arise,
Born of the slime of Autaesthesia,
And bred up these two sons yborn of Duessa.
29
Duessa first invented magic lore,
And great skill has to join and disunite:
This herb makes love, that herb makes hatred sore;
And much she can against an Edomite;
But naught she can against an Israelite,
Whose heart's upright and does himself forsake.
For he that is one with God no magic might
Can draw or here or there through blind mistake.
Magic can only quell natures Daemoniake.
30
But that I may in time my self betake
To straighter course, few things I will relate,
Of which old Mnemon mention once did make.
A jolly Swain he was in youthful state,
When he men's natures began to contemplate,
And Kingdoms view: But he was aged then
When I him saw: his years bore a great date;
He numbered had full te^ times ten times ten:
There Is no Pythagorist but knows well what I mean.
31
Old Mnemons head and beard was hoary white;
But yet a cheerful countenance he had:
His vigorous eyes did shine like stars bright,
And in good decent freez he was yclad,
As blithe and buxom as was any lad
Of one and twenty clothed in forest green;
Both blithe he was, and eke of counsel sad:
Like winter morn bedight with snow and rine
And sunny rays, so did his goodly eldship shine.
32
Of many famous towns in Beirah,
And many famous laws and uncouth rites
He spoke: but vain it is for to assay
To reckon up such numbers infinite.
And much he spoke where I had no insight;
But well I wot that some there present had;
For words to speak to incapable wight
Of foolishness proceeds or frenzy mad.
(...) always some, I wis, could trace his speeches pad.
33
But that which I do now remember best,
Is that which he of Psittacusa land
Did speak. This Psittacuse is not the least,
Or the most obscure Country that is found
In wastefull Beiron: it is renownd
For famous clerks yclad in greenish cloak,
Like Turkish Priests: if Amorilish ground
We called, no cause that title to revoke.
^t of this Land to this effect old Mnemon spoke.
34
I traveled in Psittacusa land:
The Inhabitants the lesser Adamah
Do call it; but then Adam I have found
It ancienter, if so I safely may
Unfold th'antiquity They by one day
Are elder then old Adam, and by one
At least are younger then Arcadia;
O'th'sixth day Adam had's creation;
^ose on the fifth, the Arcades before the Moon.
35
In this same land as I was on the rode,
A nimble traveller me overtook:
Fairly together on the way we yode.
Tho I began closely on his person look,
And eye his garb, and straight occasion sook
To entertain discourse: He likewise saught,
Though none could find; yet first me undertook:
^o sone as he began talk, then straight I laughed:
^e sage himself represt, but thought me nigh distraught.
36
His concave nose, great head, and grave aspect,
Affected tone, words without inward sense,
My inly tickled spright made me detect
By outward laughter; but by best pretense
I pur'gd my self, and gave due reverence.
Then he began gravely treat of codicils,
And of Book readings passing excellence,
And tried his wit in praising gooses quills:
O happy age! quoth he, the world Minerva fills.
37
I gave the talk to him, which pleased him well:
For then he seemed a learned cleark to been,
When none contrayr'd his uncontrolled spell,
But I alas! though unto him unseen,
Did flow with tears, as if that onyons keen
Had pierced mine eyes. Strange virtue of fond joy:
They ought to weep that be in evil teen.
But naught my lightsome heart did then annoy:
So light it lay, it moved at every windy toy.
38
As we yode softly on, a youngster gent,
With bever cockt and arm set on one side
(His youthful fire quickly our pace out-went)
Full fiercely pricked on in madcap pride,
The mettle of his horses heels he tried.
He hasted to his country Pithecuse.
Most have worst speed: still on our way we ride,
And him overtake halting through hapless bruise;
We help him up again, our help he nould refuse.
39
Then began the learned and aged Don Psittaco,
When he another auditour had got,
To spruse his plumes, and wisdom sage to show,
And with his sacred lore to wash the spot
Of youthful blemishes; but frequent jot
Of his hard setting jade did so confound
The words that he by papyr-stealth had got,
That their lost sense the youngster could not sound,
Though he with mimicall attention did abound.
40
Yet some of those faint-winged words came near,
Of God, of Adam, and the shape divine,
Which Adams children have; (these pierced his ear)
And how that man is Lord of every kind
Of beasts, of birds, and of each hidden mine
Of natures treasures. He to Adams son
The wide world for his kingdom does design:
And ever naming God, he looked aboven:
^thecus straight placed God a thought above the Moon.
41
Pithecus, so they call this gentile wight,
The docible young man easily could trace
His masters steps, most quick and expedite.
When Psittaco looked up to holy place,
Pithecus straight with sanctimonious grace
Cast up his eyes; and when the shape divine,
Which Adam had from God, he began to praise,
Pithecus draws himself straight from that line,
and phansies his sweet face with heavenly hew to shine.
42
He pinch't his hat, and from his horses side
Stretched forth his russet legs, himself inclined
Now here, now there, and most exactly eyed
His comely lineaments, that he might find
What ever beauty else he had not mind
As yet in his fair corse. But that full right
And vast prerogative did so unbind
His straited sprights, that with tyrannick might
^e forct his feeble beast, and straight fled out of sight.
43
Then I and Psittaco were left alone;
And which was strange, he deeply silent was:
Whether some inward grief he from that fone
Conceived, and deemed it no small disgrace,
That that bold youngster should so little pass
His learned speech; or whether naught to sayn
He had then left; or whether a wild chase
Of flitting inconsistent thoughts he than
^rsu'd, which turned and toy'd in his confused brain:
44
Or whether he was woxen so discreet,
As not to speak till fit occasion.
(To judge the best, that Charity counts meet)
Therefore that Senior sad I began anon
Thus to bespeak, Good Sr, I crave pardon
If so I chance to break that golden twist
You spin, by rude interpellation,
That twist of choicest thoughts. No whit I missed
The mark I aimed at; to speak he had great list.
45
So then his spirits began to come again,
And to enact his corpse and impart might
Unto his languid tongue, and every vein
Received heat, when due conceived right
I did to him; and weend he plainly see it
That I was touched with admiration
Of his deep learning, and quick shifting sight:
Then I began quire of the wide Behiron.
Behiron, quoth that sage, that hight Anthropion.
46
Anthropion we called; but the holy tongue
(His learning lay in words) that Behiron,
Which we Anthropion, calls, as I among
The Rabbis read: but sooth to say no tone,
Nor tongue, or speech, so sweet as is our own,
Or so significant. For mark the sense:
From (...) is Anthropion;
And we are all of an upright presence;
Nor I Will be drawn from this conceit by no pretense.
47
I praised his steady faith and confidence,
That stood as fast as trunk or rock of stone;
Yet nathelesse, said I, the excellence
Of steadfastness is not to yield to none,
But stiff to stand till moved by right reason;
And then by yielding, part of victory
To gain. What fitness in Anthropion?
Baboons and Apes, as well as the Anthropi
Do go upright, and beasts grown mad do view the sky.
48
Then marken well what great affinity
There is twixt Ape, mad Beast, and Satyrs wild,
And the inhabitants of Anthropie,
When they are destitute of manners mild;
And the inward man with brutishness defiled
Has life and love and lust and cogitation
Fixed in foul sense, or moving in false guile;
That holy tongue the better nomination,
^arre I know, may give: It Is guess not full persuasion.
49
Therefore, O learned Sr, aread aright,
What may this word Beiron signify?
He wondrous glad to show his grammar might,
This same word Behiron does signify
The brutish nature, or brutality,
Said he: and with his voice lift up his front.
Then I his skill did gayly magnify,
And blessed me, I an idiot should light on it
^happily, that never was a scholar count;
50
And said, then holy tongue is on my side;
And holy tongue is better then profane.
He angry at his courtesy, replied
That learned men ought for to entertain
Discourse of learned tongues, and country Swain
Of country fairs. But for to answer thee,
This I dare warrant surely to maintain,
^f to contrair the holy tongue should be
^urd, I find enough such contrariety.
51
Then I in simple sort him answered thus,
(...) ken not the strange guize of learned schools,
But if Gods thoughts be contrair unto us,
Let not deep wonderment possess our souls,
If he call fools wisemen, and wisemen fools.
If rich he poor men term, if poor men rich,
If crafty Statesmen silly country gulls,
Beasts men, men beasts, with many other such:
(...) sees not as man sees, God speaks not in man's speech.
52
Straight he to higher perch, like bird in cage,
Did skip, and sang of etern destiny,
Of sight and foresight he with countenance sage
Did speak, and did unfold Gods secrecy,
And left untoucht no hidden mystery.
I lowly louting held my cap in hand:
He asked what meant that so sudden coursie.
I pardon crave, said I, for manners fond;
You are heavens privy counselor I understand,
53
Which I wist not before: so deep insight
Into the hidden things of God who can
Attain unto without that quickening spright
Of the true God? who knows the mind of man
But that same spright that in his breast does won?
Therefore the key of Gods hid secrecy
Is his own spright, that is proper to his Son,
And those of that second nativitie,
Which holy Temples are of the divinity.
54
Therefore as the sacred seat of the Deity,
I unto you seemly behavior make,
If you be such as you may seem to be
(It is man's nature easily to mistake)
My words his mind did quite asunder break:
For he full forward was all to assume
That might him gild with glory, and partake
With God; and joyed greatly in vain fume,
And prided much himself in his purloined plume,
55
So that full loath he was for to undo
My fairly winded up conclusion;
Yet inwardly did not assent unto
My premises: for foul presumption
He thought, if that a private idiot man
By his new birth should either equalize,
Or else outstrip the bookish nation.
Perhaps some foul deformities disguise
Their life: pshah! that to knowledge is no prejudice,
56
But he nould say so: for why? he was bent
To keep the credit which he then had got,
As he conceived: for it had been yblent;
It might have hazarded half of his lot,
To wit his godlike hew withouten spot,
If so be such deep knowledge could consist
With wicked life: but he nould lose one jot
Of his so high esteem, nor me resist.
^ I escaped the souse of his contracted fist.
57
By this we came into a way that did
Divide it self into three parts: the one
To Leontopolis; that in the mid
Did lead straight forth out of wide Beiron,
That was the way that I mote take alone;
The third way led unto Onepolis:
And thitherward Don Psittaco put on.
With both these towns, Alopecopolis
^in firm league, and golden Myrmecopolis.
58
For nothing they attempt without the aid
Of these two Cities. They Will not wagen war,
Nor peace conclude, nor permit any trade,
Nor make dec^ees, nor slake the civil jar,
Nor take up private wrongs, nor plead at bar,
Nor Temples consecrate, nor Mattins say;
They naught begin divine or secular,
But they advisen with those cities tway.
(...) potent citizens that bear so great a sway!
59
No truth of justice in Beirah land:
No sincere faith void of sly subtlety,
That always seeks it self, is to be found:
But law-delusion and false policy,
False policy that into tyranny
Would quickly wend, did not stern fear restrain
And keep in aw. The Onites democracie
Is naught but a large hungry tyrant-train:
^ppression from the poor is an all-sweeping rain.
60
A sweeping torrent that beats down the corn,
And wastes the oxens labor, headlong throws
The tallest trees up by the root ytorn,
Its ranging force in all the land it shows;
Wood rent from hence its rolling rage bestows
In other places that were bare before,
With muddied arms of trees the earth it strows:
The listening shepherd is amazed sore,
While it with swift descent so hideously does rore.
61
Such is the outrage of Democracy,
When fearlesse it does rule in Beirah:
And little better is false Monarchy,
When it in this same country bears the sway.
(Is It not a part of Autaesthesia?)
So to an inward sucking whirlpools close
They change this swelling torrents surquedry
Much treasure it draws in, and does enclose
In'ts winding mouth, but whether then, there is no man kno^
62
O falsest Beironites, what gars you plain
One of another, and vainly accuse
Of foul offense? when you all entertain
Tyrannick thoughts. You all alike do muse
Of your own private good, though with abuse
Of those you can tread down with safety,
No way to wealth or honor you refuse.
Faise Onople does grudge, and groan, and cry,
Because she is denied a greater tyranny.
63
Two of that City whilom on the way,
With languid lugs, and countenance gravely sad,
Did deeply sigh, and rudely rough did bray
Against Leontopolis. The equal pad
Of justice now, alas! is seldom trad,
Said they; The Lions might is law and right.
Where Is love or mercy now? with that out strad
A little dog, his dames only delight,
And ran near to their tails, and barked with all his might.
64
The sourly irefull Onopolitan
Without all mercy kicked with iron heel
The little bawling curre, that at him ran;
It made his feeble corse to the earth to reel,
That was so pierced with the imprinted steel,
That it might grieve an heart of flinty stone:
No herbs, no salves the breach could ever heal;
The good old wife did then keep house alone.
^alse hearted carles, is this your great compassion?
65
There Is no society in Behirah,
But beastlike grazing in one pasture ground:
No love but of the animated clay
With beauties fading flowers trimly crowned,
Or from strong sympathies heart-striking stound:
No order but what riches strength and wit
Prescribe. So bad the good easily confound.
Is honesty in such unruly fit
That it is held in no rank? they 'steem it not a whit.
66
But I am weary of this uncouth place;
If any man their bad condition
And brutish manners lists for to trace,
We may them read in the creation
Of this wide sensible: where every passion
Of birds and beasts distinctly do display,
To but an ordinary imagination
The life and soul of them in Behirah:
This Beirah that hight the greater Adamah.
67
The swelling hateful Toad, industrious Ant,
Lascivious Goat, Parrot, or prating Pie,
The kingly Lion, docil Elephant,
All-imitating Ape, gay Butterfly,
The crafty Fox famous for subtilty,
Majestic Horse, the Beast that twixt two trees
(A fit resemblance of full gluttony)
When he has filled his gorge, himself does squeeze
To feed afresh, Court Spaniels, and politic Bees;
68
With many more which I list not repeat;
Some foul, some fair: to the fair the name they give
Of holy virtues; but it is but deceit,
None in Beiron virtuously do live;
None in that land so much as ever strive
For truth of virtue, though sometimes they wont,
As swine do swine, their own blood to relieve.
Beiron's all bruits, the true manhood they want,
If outward form you pierce with fancy fulminant.
69
So having got experience enough
Of this ill land, for nothing there was new,
My purpose I held on, and rode quite through
That middle way, and did the extremes eschew.
When I came near the end there was in view
No passage: for the wall was very high,
But there no door to me it self did show:
Looking about at length I did espy
A lively youth, to whom I presently began cry.
70
More willing he is to come then I to call:
Simon he hight, who also's called a Rock:
Simon is that obedientiall
Nature, who boisterous seas and winds does mock;
No tempest can him move with fiercest shock;
The house that is thereon built does surely stand:
Nor blustering storm, nor rapid torrents stroke
Can make it fall; it easily does withstand
The gates of death and hell, and all the Stygian band.
71
When I began call, forthwith in seemly sort
He me approch'd in decent russet clad,
More fit for labor then the flaunting Court:
When he came near, in cheerful wise he bad
Tell what I would: Then I unto the lad
Began thus reply, alas! too long astray
Here have I trampled foul Behirons pad:
Out of this land I thought this the next way,
But I no gate can find, so vain is mine assay.
72
Then the wise youth, Good Sr, you look too high:
The wall aloft is raised; but that same door
Where you must pass in deep descent does lie:
But he bad follow, he would go before.
Hard by there was a place, all covered over
With stinging nettles and such weedery,
The pricking thistle the hard'st legs would gore,
Under the wall a strait door we descry:
The wall hight Self-conceit; the door Humility.
73
When we came at the door fast locked it was,
And Simon had the key, but he nould grant
That I into that other land should pass,
Without I made him my concomitant.
It pleased me well, I mused not much upon it,
But straight accord: for why? a jolly Swain
Methought he was; meek, cheerful and pleasant.
When he saw this, he thus to me again,
(...), See you that sad couple? Then I, I see those twain.
74
A sorry couple certainly they be.
The man a bloody knife holds at his heart
With cheerlesse countenance, as sad is she.
Or eld, or else intolerable smart,
Which she cannot decline by any Art,
Does thus distort and writhe her wrinkled face;
A leaden quadrate swayes hard on that part
That Is fit for burdens; foulness does deface
^er aged looks; with a straight staff her steps she stays.
75
Right well you say, then said that Iusty Swain:
Yet this poor couple be my Parents dear:
Nor I can hence depart without these twain:
These twain give life to me, though void of cheer
They be themselves. Then let us all go* yfere.
The young man's speech caused sad perplexity
Within my breast, but yet I did forbear,
And fairly asked their names. He answered me,
^c Autaparnes hight; but she Hypomene.
76
I Simon am the son of this sad pair,
Who though full harsh they seem to outward sight;
Yet when to Dizoie men forth do fare,
No company in all the land so meet
They find as these; their pacefull well I weet
Is very slow, and so to youthful haste
Displeasing, and their counsels nothing sweet
To any Beironite: but sweetest taste
Does bitterst choler breed, and haste does maken waste.
77
Nor let that breast impierc'd with dropping wound,
An uncouth spectacle, disturb your mind.
His blood's my food: If he his life effund
To utmost death, the high God has designed
That we both live. He in my heart shall find
A seat for his transfused soul to dwell:
And when that is done, this death does eke unbind
That heavy weight that does Hypom'ne quell,
Then I Anaut aesthetus hight, which seems me well.
78
So both their lives do vanish into mine,
And mine into Hattubus life does melt:
Which fading flux of time does not define,
Nor is by any Autaesthesian felt.
This life to On the good Hattubus dealt:
In it is all joy, truth, knowledge, love and force;
Such force no wight created can repel't.
All strength and livelihood is from this sourse,
All lives to this first spring have circular recourse.
79
A lecture strange he seemd to read to me;
And though I did not rightly understand
His meaning, yet I deemed it to be
Some goodly thing, and weary of that land
Where then I stood, I did not him withstand
In his request, although full loath I were
Slow-footed eld the journey should command;
Yet we were guided by that sorry pair,
And so to Dizoie full softly we do fare.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHOZOIA. Lib. 3.
Strange state of Dizoie Mnemons skill
Here wisely does explain,
Ida's strong charms, and Eloim-hill,
With the drad dale of Ain.
1
BUt now new Stories I 'gin to relate,
Which aged Mnemon unto us did tell,
Whiles we on graffie bed did lie prostrate
Under a shady beach, which did repel
The fiery skorching shafts which Uriel
From Southern quarter datted with strong hand.
No other help we had; for Gabriel
His wholesome cooling blasts then quite restrained.
^e Lions flaming breath with heat parcht all the land.
2
Here seemly sitting down thus began that Sage,
Last time we were together here ymet,
Beirah wall, that was the utmost stage
Of our discourse, if I do not forget:
When we departed thence the Sun was set,
Yet nathelesse we past that lofty wall
That very evening. The nights nimble net
That does encompasse every opake ball,
that swims in liquid air, did Simon naught apall.
3
When we that stately wall had undercrept,
We straightway found our selves in Dizoie:
The melting clouds chill drizzeling tears then wept;
The misty air swet for deep agony,
Swet a cold sweat, and loose frigidity
Filled all with a white smoke; pale Cynthia
Did foul her silver limbs with filthy die,
Whiles wading on she measured out her way,
and cut the muddy heavens defiled with whitish clay.
4
No light to guide but the Moons pallid ray,
And that even lost in misty troubled air:
No tract to take, there was no beaten way;
No chearing strength, but that which might appear
From Dians face: her face then shined not clear,
And when it shines clearest, little might
She yields, yet the Goddess is severe.
Hence wrathful dogs do bark at her dead light:
Christ help the man thus closed and imprisoned in drad nig^*
5
Overwhelmed with irksome toil of strange annoyes
In stony stound like senseless stake I stood,
Till the vast thumps of massy hammers noise,
That on the groaning steel laid on such load,
Empierc'd mine ears in that sad stupid mood.
I weening then some harbor to be nie,
In sorry pace thitherward slowly yode,
By ear directed more then by mine eye,
But there, alas! I found small hospitality.
6
Four grisly black-smiths stoutly did their task
Upon an anvile formed in conick wise:
They neither minded who, nor what I ask,
But with stern grimy look do still avise
Upon their works; but I my first emprise
Would not forsake, and therefore venture in.
Or none has list to speak, or none espies,
Or hears: the heavy hammers never lin;
And but a blew faint light in this black shop did shi^.
7
There I into a darksome corner creep,
And lay my weary limbs on dusty flore,
Expecting still when soft down-sliding sleep
Should seize mine eyes, and strength to me restore:
But when with hovering wings she proch'd, e'rmore
The mighty souses those foul knaves laid on,
And those huge bellows that aloud did rore,
Chased her away that she was ever gone
Before she came, on pitchy plumes, for fear, yflone.
8
The first of those rude rascals Lypon hight,
A foul great stooping slouch with heavy eyes,
And hanging lip: the second ugly sight
Pale Phobon, with his hedgehog-haires disguise:
^elpon is the third, he the false skies
No longer trusts: The fourth of furious fashion
^hrenition hight, fraught with impatiencies,
The bellows be ycleep'd deep Suspiration:
^h kanve these bellows blow in mutual circulation.
9
There is a number of these lonesome forges
^n Bacha vale (this was in Bacha vale)
There be no Innes but these, and these but scourges;
In stead of ease they work much deadly bale
To those that in this lowly trench do trale
Their feeble loins. Ah me! who here would fare?
^ad ghosts often cross the way with visage pale,
^harp thorns and thistles wound their feeten bare;
^happy is the man that here does bear a share.
10
When I in this sad vale no little time
Had measured, and often had taken Inn,
And by long penance paid for mine ill crime
Methought the Sun it self began to shine,
And that I had past Dians discipline.
^ut day was not yet come, 'twas perfect night:
Phoebus head from Ida hill had seen;
^or Ida hill does give to men the sight,
Phoebus form, before Aurora's silver light.
11
^ut Phoebus form from that high hill's not clear
Nor figure perfect. It Is inveloped
(...) purple cloudy veil; and if it appear
(...) rounder shape with skouling dreary head
(...) glowing face it shows, ne rays does shed
Of lights serenity, yet duller eyes
With gazing on this irefull sight be fed:
^est to their pleasing, small things they will prize,
(...) never better saw, nor better can devise.
12
On Ida hill their stands a Castle strong,
They that it built call it Pantheothen.
Hither resort a rascal rabble throng
Of miscreant wights: but if that wiser men
May name that fort, Pandaemoniothen
They would it cleep. It is the strong'st delusion
That ever Demon wrought; the safest pen
That e're held silly sheep for their confusion.
Ill life and want of love, hence springs each false concl^
13
That rabble rout that in this Castle won,
Is Irefull-ignorance, Unseemly-zeal,
Strong-self-conceit, Rotten-religion,
Contentious-reproch-'gainst-Michael-
If-he-of-Moses-body-ought-reveal-
Which-their-dull-skonses-cannot eas'ly-reach,
Love-of-the-carkas, An inept-appeal-
TO uncertain papyrs, A-false-formall-fetch-
Of-seigned-sighes, Contempt-of poore-and-sinfull-wretch.
14
A deep self-love, Want of true sympathy-
With all mankind, The admiring their own heard,
Fond pride, A sanctimonious cruelty-
Against those, by whom their wrathful minds be stirred*
By strangling reason, and are so aseard-
To lose their credit with the vulgar sort;
Opinion and long speech before life preferred,
Less reverence of God then of the Court,
Fear and Despair, Evil surmises, False report.
15
Oppression-of-the-poore, Fell rigourousnesse,
Contempt-of-Government, Fiercenes, Fleshly lust,
The-measuring-of all-true righteousness
By-their own-model, Cleaving unto-dust,
Rash-censure, and despising-of-the-just-
That-are-not-of-their-sect, False-reasoning-
Concerning-God, Vain-hope, Needless mistrust,
Strutting-in knowledge, Egre slavering-
After hid-skill, with every inward fulsome thing.
16
These and such like be that rude regiment,
That from the glitering sword of Michael fly:
They fly his outstretch'd arm, else were they shent
If they unto this Castle did not hie,
Strongly within its walls to fortify
Themselves. Great Demon has no stronger hold
Then this high Tower. When the good Majesty
Shines forth in love and light, a vapor cold
^d a black hellish smoke from hence does all infold.
17
And all that love and light and offered might
Is thus chok'd up in that foul Stygian steem:
If hells dark jaws should open in despite,
And breathe its inmost breath which foul'st I deem;
Yet this more deadly foul I do esteem;
And more contagious, which this charmed tower
Ever spues forth, like that fell Dragons steem
Which he from poisoned mouth in rage did pour
(...) her, whose firstborn child his chaps might not devour.
18
But lest the rasher wit my Muse should blame,
As if she did those faults appropriate
(Which I even now in that black list did name)
Unto Pantheothen; The self same state
I dare a vouch you will find, where ever hate
Backd with rough zeal, and bold through want of skill,
All sects besides its own does execrate.
This peevish spright with woe the world does fill,
^hile each man all would bind to his fierce furious will.
19
O Hate! the fulsome daughter of fell Pride,
Sister to surly Superstition,
That clean out-shining truth cannot abide,
That loves it self and large Dominion,
And in false show of a fair Union
Would all encroch to 't self, would purchase all
At a cheap rate, for slight Opinion.
Thus cram they their wide-gaping Crumenall:
^t now to Ida hill me lists my feer recall.
20
No such enchantment in all Dizoie
As on this hill; nor sadder sight was seen
Then you may in this rufull place espy.
'Twixt two huge walls on solitary green,
Of funeral Cypress many groves there been,
And eke of Ewe, Eben, and Poppy trees:
And in their gloomy shade foul grisly fiend
Use to resort, and busily to seize
The darker phansied souls that live in ill disease.
21
Hence you may see, if that you dare to mind,
Upon the side of this accursed hill,
Many a dreadful corse ytost in wind,
Which with hard halter their loathd life did spil.
There lies another which himself did kill
With rusty knife, all rolled in his own blood,
And ever and anon a doleful knill
Comes from the fatal Owl, that in sad mood
With drery sound does pierce through the death-shadow^ (...)
22
Who can express with pen the irksome state
Of those that be in this strong Castle thrall?
Yet hard it is this Fort to ruinate,
It is so strongly fenced with double wall.
The fiercest but of Ram no'te make them fall:
The first Inevitable Destiny
Of Gods Decree; the other we do call
Invincible fleshly infirmity:
But Keeper of the Tower, Unfelt Hypocrisy.
23
What Poets phansies feigned to be in hell
Are truly here. A vultur Tityus heart
Still gnaws, yet death does never Tityus quell:
Sad Sisyphus a stone with toylsome smart
Does roll up hill, but it transcends his art,
To get it to the top, where it may lie.
On steady plain, and never backward start:
His course is stopped by strong Infirmity:
His roll comes to this wall, but then back it does fly.
24
Here fifty Sisters in a sieve do draw
Through-sipping water: Tantalus is here,
Who though the glory of the Lord oreflow
The earth, and does incompasse him so near,
Yet waters he in waters does requere.
Stoop Tantalus and take those waters in.
What strength of witchcraft thus blinds all yfere
Twixt these two massy walls, this hold of sin?
^ye me! who shall this Fort so strongly fenced win!
25
I hear the clattering of an armed troup:
My ears do ring with the strong pransers heels.
(My soul get up out of thy drousie droop,
And look unto the everlasting hills)
The hollow ground, ah! how my sense it fills
With sound of solid horses hoofs. A wonder
It is to think how cold my spirit thrills
With strange amaze. Who can this strength dissunder?
^rk how the warlik steeds do neigh their necks do thunder
26
All milkwhite steeds in trappings goodly gay,
On which in golden letters be ywrit
These words (even he that runs it readen may)
True righteousness unto the Lord of might.
O comely spectacle! O glorious sight!
'Twould easily ravish the beholders eye
To see such beasts, so fair, so full of spright,
All in due ranks to pranse so gallantly,
^aring their riders armed with perfect panoply.
27
In perfect silver glistring panoply
They ride, the army of the highest God:
Ten thousands of his Saints approchen nie
To judge the world, and rule it with his rod:
They leave all plain where ever they have trod.
Each rider on his shield does bear the Sun
With golden shining beam dispread abroad,
The Sun of righteousness at high day noon,
(...) this same strength, I wene, this Fort is easly won.
28
They that but hear thereof shall straight obey;
But the strange children shall false semblance make,
But all hypocrisy shall soon decay,
All wickedness into that deadly lake,
All darkness thither shall it self betake:
That false brood shall in their close places fade.
The glory of the Lord shall never forsake
The earth again, nor shall deaths dreadful shade
Return again. Him praise that this great day has made.
29
This is the mighty warlick Michaels host,
That easily shall wade through that foul spue
Which the false Dragon casts in every cost,
That the moon-trampling woman much does rue
His deadly spaul; but no hurt does accrue
To this strong army from this filthy steam:
Nor horse nor man does fear its lutid hew,
They safely both can swim in this foul stream:
This stream the earth sups up cleft open by Michaels beam*
30
But whiles it bears sway, this poisons might
Is to make sterill or prolong the birth,
To cause cold palsies, and to dull the sight
By sleepy sloth; the melancholic earth
It does increase that hinders all good mirth.
Yet this dead liquor dull Pantheothen
Before the nectar of the Gods preferr'th:
But it so weakens and disables men,
That they of manhood give no goodly specimen.
31
Here one of us began to interpeal
Old Mnemon. Tharrhon that young ladkin hight,
He prayed this aged Sire for to reveal
What way this Dragons poisonous despite,
And strong Pantheothens inwalling might,
We may escape. Then Mnemon thus began say,
Some strange devise, I know each youthful wight
Would here expect, or lofty brave assay:
But I Will the simple truth, in simple wise convay.
32
Good Conscience, kept with all the strength and might
That God already unto us has given;
A press pursuit of that foregoing light
That eggs us on 'cording to what we have liven,
And helps us on 'cording to what we have striven,
To shaken off the bonds of prejudice,
Nor dote to much of that we have first conceiven;
By hearty prayer to beg the sweet delice
(...) Gods all-loving spright: such things I you advise.
34
Can pity move the heart of parents dear,
When that their hapless child in heavy plight
Does grieve and moan? whiles pinching tortures tear
His fainting life, and does not that sad sight
Of Gods own Son empassion his good spright
With deeper sorrow? The tender babe lies torn
In us by cruel wounds from hostile might:
Is Gods own life of God himself forlorn?
(...) was he to continual pain of God yborn?
34
Or will you say if this be Gods own Son,
Let him descend the cross: for well we ween
That he will not suffer him to be fordonne
By wicked hand, if Gods own Son he been.
But you have not those sacred mysteries seen,
True-crucifying Jews! the weaker thing
Is held in great contempt in worldly eyes:
But time may come when deep impierced sting
^all prick your heart, and it shall melt with sorrowing.
35
Then you shall view him whom with cruel spear
You had transfixed, true crucified Son
Of the true God, unto his Father dear,
And dear to you, naught dearer under sun.
Through this strong love and deep compassion,
How vastly God his kingdom would enlarge
You Will easly see, and how with strong iron
He Will quite subdue the utmost earthly verge.
^foolish men! the heavens why do you fondly charge?
36
Subtimidus, when Tharrhon sped so well,
Took courage to himself, and thus 'gan say
To Mnemon, Pray you Sr. vouchsafe to tell
What Antaparnes and Hypomene
And Simon do this while in Dizoe.
With that his face shone like the rosy morn
With maiden blush from inward modesty,
Which wicked wights do holden in such scorn,
Sweet harmles modesty a rose withouten thorn.
37
Old Mnemon loved the Lad even from his face,
Which blameless blush with sanguin light had dyed;
His harmless lucid spright with flouring grace
His outward form so seemly beautifyed.
So the old man him highly magnified
For his so fit enquiry of those three;
And to his question thus anon replied,
There Is small recourse (till that Fort passed be)
To Simon Autaparnes or Hypomene.
38
For all that space from Behirons high wall
Unto Pantheothen, none dares arise
From his base dunghill warmth; such magical
Attraction his flagging soul down ties*
To his foul flesh: amongst which, alas! there lies
A little spark of Gods vitality,
But smoreing filth so close it does comprize
That it cannot flame out nor get on high:
This province hence is hight earth-groveling Aptery.
39
But yet fair semblances these Apterites
Do make of good, and sighen very sore,
That God no stronger is. False hypocrites!
You make no use of that great plenteous store
Of Gods good strength which he does on you pour:
But you fast friends of foul carnality,
And false to God, his tender son do gore,
And plaud your selves, is it be not mortally;
Nor let you him live in ease, nor let you him fairly die.
40
Like faithless wife that by her frampard guize,
Peevish demeanor, sullen sad disdain
Does inly deep the spright melancholize
Of her aggrieved husband, and long pain
At last to some sharp sickness does constrain
His weakened nature to yield victory:
His skorching torture then count death a gain.
But when death comes, in womanish phrensy
^at froward femal wretch does shreek and loudly cry.
41
So through her moody importunity
From downright death she rescues the poor man:
Self-favouring sense; not that due loyalty
Does wring from her this false compassion,
Compassion that no cruelty can
Well equalize. Her husband lies aghast;
Death on his horrid face so pale and wan
Does creep with ashy wings. He thus embraced
^rforce too many days in deadly woe does wast.
42
This is the love that is found in Aptery
To Gods dear life. If they his son present
Half live, half dead, handled despightfully,
Or sunk in sickness or with deep wound rent,
So be he is not quite dead they are well content.
And hope sure favor of his sire to have.
They have the signs how can they then be shent?
The God of love for his dear life us save
^om such conceits, which men to sin do thus inslave.
43
But when from Aptery we were ygone,
And past Pantheothens inthralling power;
Then from the east cheerful Eous shone,
And drove away the nights dead lumpish stour:
He took by the hand Aurora's vernall hour;
These freshly tripp'd it on the silvered hills,
And through all the fields sweet life did shower:
Then began the joyful birds to try their skills;
^hey skipt, they chirpt amain, they pip'd they danced their fills.
44
This other Province of Dizoia
Hight Pteroessa; on the flowery side
Of a green bank, as I went on my way
Strong youthful Gabriel I there espide,
Courting a nymph all in her maiden pride,
Not for himself: His strife was her to win
To Michael in wedlock to be tide.
He promised she should be Michaels Queen,
And greater things then care has heard or eye has seen*
45
This lovely maid to Gabriel thus replide,
Thanks, Sr, for your good news; but may I know
Who Michael is that would have me his bride.
Its Michael, said he, that works such woe
To all that fry of hell; and on his foe
Those fiends of da^knesse such great triumphs has:
The powers of sin and death he down does mow.
In this strong arm of God have thou but faith,
That in great Demons troops does work so wondrous (...)
46
The simple girl believed every word,
Nor did by subtle querks elude the might
And profer'd strength of the soul-loving Lord;
But answered thus, Good Sr, but read aright
When shall I then appear in Michaels sight?
When Gabriel had won her full assent,
And well observed how he had flamed her spright,
He answered, After the complishment
Of his behests, and so her told what hests he meant.
47
She willingly took the condition,
And pliable she promised to be:
And Gabriel swear he would wait upon
Her virginship, whiles in simplicity
His masters will with all good industry
She would fulfill. So here the simple maid
Strove for her self in all fidelity,
Nor took her self for nothing; but she played
Her part, she thought, as if indentures had been made.
48
For she did not with her own self ginthink
So curiously, that it is God alone
That gives both strengths when ever we do swink:
Graces and natures might be both from one,
Who is our life's strong sustentation.
Impossible it is therefore to merit,
When we poor men have nothing of our own:
Certes by him alone she stands upright;
And surely falls without his help in per'lous fight.
49
But we went on in Pteroessa land.
The fresh bright morning was no small repast
After the toil in Aptery we found,
So that with merry cheer we went full-fast:
But I observed well that in this haste
Simon waxed faint, and feeble, and decayed
In strength and life before we far had past:
And by how much his youthful flower did fade,
So much more vigor to his parents was repaid.
50
For that old crumpled wight began go upstraight,
And Autaparnes face recovered blood;
But Simon looked pale withouten might,
Withouten cheer, or joy, or livelihood:
Cause of all this at last I understood.
For Autaparn that knife had from him cast,
And almost closed the passage of that flood.
That flood, that blood, was that which Simons taste
Alone could fit: if that were gone the lad did waste.
51
And his old mother, called Hypomene,
Did ease her back from that down-swaying weight,
That leaden quadrate, which did miserably
Annoy her crazy corse; but that more light
She might fare on, she in her husbands sight
Threw down her load, where he threw down his blade.
And from that time began the pitious plight
Of sickly Simon: so we ^m persuade
Back to retreat, and do the dying son some aid.
52
Though loath, yet at the length they do assent:
So we return unto the place where lay
The heavy quadrate, and that instrument
Of bleeding smart: it would a man dismay
To think how that square lead her back did sway;
And how the halfeclos'd wound was open tore
With that sharpe-pointed knife: and sooth to say
Simon himself was inly grieved sore,
Seeing the deadly smart that his dear parents bore.
53
So we remeasure the way we had gone,
Still faring on toward Theoprepy.
Great strength and comfort 'twas to think upon
Our good escape from listlesse Aptery,
And from the thraldom of Infirmity.
Now naught perplexed our stronger plumed spright,
But what may be the blameless verity:
Often we conceived things were peracted right;
And often we found ourselves guld with strong passions might*
54
But now more feeble far we find their force
Then erst it was, when as in Aptery
To strong Pantheothen they had recourse:
For then a plain impossibility
It was to overcome their cruelty.
But here encouraged by Gabriel
We strongly trust to have the victory.
And if by chance they do our forces quell;
It Is not by strength of arms but by some misty spell.
55
So bravely we went on withouten dread,
Till at the last we came whereas a hill
With steep ascent highly lift up his head:
To the aged foot it worken would much ill
To cl^mb this cliffe; with weary ache 'twould ^ill
His drier bones. But yet it is smooth and plain
Upon the top. It passes far my skill
The springs, the bowers, the walks, the goodly train
Of fair chaste nymphs that haunt that place for to explain
56
I saw three sisters there in seemly wise
Together walking on the flowery green,
Yclad in snowy stoles of fair agguize.
The glistring streams of silver waving shine,
Skillfully interwove with silken line,
So variously did play in that fair vest,
That much it did delight my wondering eyne:
Their face with love and vigor was ydrest,
^ith modesty and joy, their tongue with just behest.
57
Their locks hung loose. A triple coronet,
Of flaming gold and star-like twinkling stone
Of highest price, was on their temples set:
The Amethyst, the radiant Diamond,
The Jasper, enemy to spirits won,
With many other glorious for to see.
These three enameld rimmes of that fair crown
Be these: the first hight Dicaeosyne,
^ilosophy the next, the last stiff Apathy.
58
I gazed, and mused, and was well nigh distraught
With admiration of those three maids,
And could no further get, ne further saught;
Down on the hill my weary limbs I laid,
And fed my feeble eyes, which me betrayed
Unto loves bondage: Simon liked it not
To see me so bewitchd, and thus assayed
By wisest speech to loose this magic knot:
Great pity things so fair should have so foul a spot.
59
What spot, said I, can in these fair be found?
Both spot in those white vests, and eke a flaw
In those bright gems wherewith these maids be crowned,
If you 'll but list to see I Will easly show.
Then I, both Love of man and holy law
Exactly 's kept upon this sacred hill;
True Fortitude that truest foes does awe,
Justice and Abstinence from sweetest ill,
And Wisdom like the sun does all with light o'respill.
60
Thanks be to God we are so well ariv'd
To the long-sought for land, Theoprepy.
Nay soft good Sr, said Simon, you are deceived,
You are not yet past through Autaesthesy:
With that the spot and flaw he bad me see
Which he descried in that goodly array.
The spot and flaw self-sens'd Autopathy
Was hight, the eldest nymph Pythagerissa,
Next Platonissa hight, the last hight Stoicissa.
61
But this high mount where these three sisters won,
Said Simon, cleeped is, Har-Eloim.
To these its said, Do worship to my Son:
Its right, that all the Gods do worship him,
There Is none exempt: those that the highest climb
Are but his Ministers, their turns they take
To serve as well as those of lower slime.
What so is not of Christ but does partake
Of the Autaesthesian soil, is life Daemoniake.
62
His words did strangely work upon my spright,
And weaned my mind from that I dearly loved;
So I nould dwell on this so pleasing sight,
But down descended, as it me behooved,
And as my trusty guide me friendly moved.
So when we down had come, and thence did pass
On the low plain, Simon more clearly proved,
That though much beauty there and goodness was,
Yet that in Theoprepia did far surpass.
63
So forward on we fare, and leave that hill,
And press still further; the further we go,
Simon more strength, more life and godly will,
More vigor he and livelihood did show;
But Autaparnes wox more wan and woe:
He faints, he sinks, ready to give up ghost,
And aged Hypomne trod with footing slow,
And staggerd with her load; so ill disposed
Their fading spirits were, that life was well nigh lost.
53
By this in sight of that black wall we came,
A wall by stone-artificer not made:
For it is naught but smoke from duskish flame,
Which in that low deep valleys pitchy shade
Does fiercely the Autopathian life invade,
With glowing heat, and eats out that spot.
This dreadful trial many has dismayed:
When Autaparnes saw this was his lot,
^ear did his sense benumme, he wox like earthly clot.
54
In solemn silency this vapor rose
From this dread dale, and hid the eastern sky
With its deep darkness, and the evening close
Forestalled with Stygian obscurity,
Yet was it not thick, nor thin, nor moist, nor dey;
Nor stank it ill, nor yet gave fragrant smell,
Nor did't take in through pellucidity
The penetrating light, nor did't repel
Through gross opacity the beams of Michael.
55
Yet terrible it is to Psyche's brood,
That still retain the life Daemoniake;
Constraining fear calls in their vital flood,
When the drad Magus once does mention make
Of the deep dark abyss; for fear they quake
At that strong-awing word: But they that die
Unto self-feeling life, naught shall them shake:
Base fear proceeds from weak Autopathy.
This dale hight Ain, the fumes hight Anautaesthesy.
56
Into this dismal dale we all descend:
Here Autaeparnes and Hypomene
Their languid life with that dark vapor blend.
Thus perished fading vitality,
But naught did fade of life's reality.
When these two old ones their last gasp had fer,
In this drad valley their dead corpse did lie;
But what could well be saved to Simon flet.
Here Simon first became spotless Anautaesthet.
68
When we had waded quite through this deep shade,
We then appeard in bright Theoprepy:
Here Phoebus ray in straightest line was laid,
That erst lay broke in gross consistency
Of cloudy substance. For strong sympathy
Of the divided natures magic band
Was burnt to dust in Anautaesthesie:
Now there is no fear of deaths dart-holding hand:
Fast love, fixed life, firm peace in Theoprepia land.
69
When Mnemon hither came, he leaned back
Upon his seat, and a long time respired.
When I perceived this holy Sage so slack
To speak (well as I might) I him desired
Still to hold on, if so he were not tired,
And tell what fell in blessed Theoprepy;
But he nould do the thing that I required,
Too hard it is, said he, that kingdoms glee
To show; who list to know himself must come and see.
70
This story under the cool shaddowing beach
Old Mnemon told of famous Dizoie:
To set down all he said passes my reach,
That all would reach even to infinity.
Strange things he spoke of the biformity
Of the Dizoians; what mongrill sort
Of living wights; how monstrous shaped they be,
And how that man and beast in one consort;
Goats britch, man's tongue, goose head, with monki's mouth disto^*
71
Of Centaures, Cynocephals, walking trees,
Tritons and Mermaydes, and such uncouth things;
Or weeping Serpents with fair women's eyes,
Mad making waters, sex trans-forming springs;
Of foul Circean swine with golden rings,
With many such like falsehoods; but the straight
Will easly judge all crooked wanderings,
Suffice it then we have taught that Ruling-right*
The good is uniform, the evil infinite.
PSYXATHANASIA PLATONICA: OR Platonicall Poem of the Immortality of Souls,
especially Man's Soul.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...)
(...),
Empedocles. Omnia mutantur, nihil interit,
Ovid. (...),
(...),
Trismegist. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie:
1642.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe very nerves and sinews of Religion is hope of immortality. What greater
incitement to virtue and justice then eternal happiness? what greater
terriculament from wickedness, then a full persuasion of after-judgement and
continual torture of spirit? But my labor is superfluous. Men from their very
childhood are persuaded of these things. Verily, I fear how they are persuaded
of them when they become men. Else would not they, whom the fear of hell does
not affright, die so unvvillingly, nor wicked men so securely; nor would so
many be wicked. For even naturall-providence would bid them look forvvard.

Beside, some men of a melancholic temper (which commonly distrust and
suspicion do accompany) though otherwise pious, yet out of an exceeding desire
of eternal being, think they can never have security enough for this so
pleasing hope and expectation, and so even with anxiety of mind busy
themselves to prove the truth of that strongly, which they desire vehemently
to be true. And this body, which dissolution vvaits upon, helps our
infidelity exceedingly. For the soul not seeing it self, judges it self of
such a nature, as those things are to which she is nearest united: Falsely
says, but yet ordinarily, I am sick, I am weak, I faint, I die; when it is
nough: but the perishing life of the body that is in such plight, to which she
is so close tied in most intimate love and sympathy. So a tender mother, if she
see a knife struck to her child's heart, would shreek and swound as if her self
had been smit; whenas if her eye had not beheld that spectacle, she had not
been moved though the thing were surely done. So I do verily think that the
mind being taken up in some higher contemplation, if it should please God to
keep it in that ecstasie, the body might be destroyed without any disturbance
to the soul. For how can there be or sense or pain without animadversion?

But while we have such continual commerce with this frail body, it is not to
be expected but that we shall be assaulted with the fear of death and
darkness. For alas! how few are there that do not make this visible world,
their Adonai, their stay and sustentation of life, the prop of their soul,
their God? How many Christians are not prone to whisper that of the Heathen
Poet, Soles occidere and redire possunt;
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
The Sun may set and rise again;
If once sets our short light,
Deep sleep us binds with iron chain,
Wrapped in eternal Night.


But I would not be so injurious, as to make men worse then they are, that my
little work may seem of greater use and worth then it is.

Admit then that men are most what persuaded of the souls immortality, yet here
they may read reasons to confirm that persuasion, and be put in mind, as they
read, of their end, and future condition, which cannot be but profitable at
least.

For the pleasure they will reap from this Poem, it will be according as their
Genius is fitted for it. For as Plato speaks in his Io, (...), or according to
the more usual phrase (...), etc. The spirit of every Poet is not alike, nor
his writings alike suitable to all dispositions. As Io, the reciter of Homers
verses, professes himself to be snatched away with an extraordinary fury or
ecstacie at the repeating of Homers Poesy, but others so little to move him
that he could even fall asleep. So that no man is rashly to condemn another
man's labor in this kind, because he is not taken with it. As wise or wiser
then himself may.

But this is a main piece of idolatry and injustice in the world, that every
man would make his private Genius an universal God; and would devour all men's
apprehensions by his own fire, that glowes so hot in him, and (as he thinks)
shines so clear.

As for this present song of the immortality of the soul, it is not unlikely
but that it will prove sung Montibus and Sylvis to the waste Woods and solitary
Mountains. For all men are so full of their own phansies and idiopathyes, that
they scarce have the civility to interchange any words with a stranger. If they
do chance to hear his exotic tone, they entertain it with laughter, a passion
very incident upon that occasion to children and clowns. But it were much
better neither to embosome nor reject any thing, though strange, till we were
well acquainted with it.

Exquisite disquisition begets diffidence; diffidence in knowledge, humility;
humility, good manners and meek conversation. For mine own part, I desire no
man to take any thing. I write upon trust, without canvasing; and would be
thought rather to propound then to assert what I have here or elsewhere
written. But continually to have expressed my diffidence in the very tractates
themselves, had been languid and ridiculous.

It were a piece of injustice to expect of others, that which I could never
endure to stoup to my self. That knowledge which is built upon humane
authority is no better then a Castle in the Air. For what man is (...) or at
least can be proved to us to be so? Wherefore the foundation of that argument
will but prove precarious, that is so built. And we have rather a sound of
words signifiing the thing is so, then any true understanding that the thing is
so indeed.

What ever may seem strange in this Poem, condemn it not, till thou find it
dissonant to Plato's school, or not deducible from it. But there be many
arguments, that have no strangeness at all to prove the souls immortality; so
that no man that is not utterly illiterate shall lose his labor in reading
this short treatise.

I must confess I intended to spin it out to a greater length; but things of
greater importance then curious theory, take me off; beside the hazard of
speaking hard things to a multitude.

I make no question, but those that are rightly acquainted with Platonisme,
will accept of that small pains, and make a good construction of my poetry. For
I will assure thee (Reader) that it will be nothing but igorance of my scope,
that shall make any do otherwise I fly too high to take notice of lesser
flaws. If thou see them, I give thee free liberty to mend them. But if thou
regardest not lesser trifles, we be well met.

Farewell.
H. M.

THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA.Book 1. Cant. 1.
Struck with strong sense of Gods good will
The immortality
Of souls I sing; Praise with my quill
Plato's Philosophy.
1
VVHatever-man he be that dares to deem
True Poets skill do spring of earthly race,
I must him tell, that he does misesteem
Their strange estate, and eke himself disgrace
By his rude ignorance. For there is no place
For forced labor, or slow industry
Of flagging wits, in that high fiery chase,
So soon as of the Muse they quickened be,
At once they rise, and lively sing like lark in sky.
2
Like to a meteor, whose material
Is low unwieldy earth, base unetuous slime,
Whose inward hidden parts ethereall
Ly close upwrapt in that dull sluggish fime,
Ly fast asleep, till at some fatal time
Great Phoebus lamp has fired its inward spright,
And then even of it self on high does climb;
That erst was dark becomes all eye, all sight,
Bright star, that to the wise of future things gives light:
3
Even so the weaker mind, that languid lies
Knit up in rags of dirt, dark cold and blind,
So soon that purer flame of love unties
Its clogging chains, and does its spright unbind,
It sores aloft; for it it self does find
Well plumed; so raised upon its spreaden wing,
It softly plays, and warbles in the wind,
And carols out its inward life and spring
Of overflowing joy, and of pure love dothsing.
4
It sings of purest love, not that base passion
That fouls the soul with filth of lawles lust,
And Circe-like its shape does all misfashion;
But that bright slame that is proper to the just,
And eats away all dross and cankred rust
With its refining heat, unites the mind
With Gods own spright, who raises from the dust
The slumbering soul, and with his usage kind
Makes't breath after that life that time has not desin'd.
5
So has he raised my soul, and so possessed
My inward spright, with that unfeigned will
He bears to Psyche's brood, that I never rest
But ruth or ragefull indignation fill
My troubled veins, that I my life near spill
With sorrow and disdain, for that foul lore
That crept from dismal shades of night, and quill
Steeped in sad Styx, and fed with stinking gore
Sucked from corrupted corse, that God and men abhorr^.
6
Such is thy putid muse, Lucretius,
That fain would teach that souls all mortal be:
The dusty Atoms of Democritus
Certes have fallen into thy feeble eye,
And thee bereft of perspicacity.
Others through the strong steem of their dull blood,
Without the help of that philosophy,
Have with more ease the truth not understood,
And the same thing conclude in some sad drooping mood.
7
But most of all my soul does them refuse
That have extinguished natures awful light
By evil custom, and unkind abuse
Of Gods young tender work, that in their spright
He first gins frame. But they with heddy might
Of overwhelming liquour that life drowned,
And reasons eye swell up or put out quite.
Hence horrid darkness does their souls confound,
And foul blasphemous belch from their furd mouth resounds
8
Thus while false way they take to large their spirit
By vaster cups of Bacchus, they get fire
Without true light, and 'cording to demerit
Infernal blasts blind confidence inspire:
Bold heat to uncouth thoughts is their bad hire.
Which they then dearly hug, and ween their feet
Have clombe, whither vulgar men dare not aspire.
But its the fruit of their burnt sootie spright:
Thus dream they of drad death, and an eternal night.
9
Now in the covert of dame Natures cell
They think they are shrouded, and the mystery
Of her deep secrets they can wisely spell;
And 'pprove that art above true pretty;
Laugh at religion as a mockery,
A thing found out to aw the simpler sort:
But they, brave sparks, have broke from this dark tie:
The light of nature yields more sure comfort.
Alas! too many souls in this fond thought consort.
10
Like men new made contrived into a cave
That never saw light, but in that shadowing pit,
Some uncouth might them hoodwink hither drove,
Now with their backs to the dens mouth they sit,
Yet shoulder not all light from the dern pit,
So much gets in as Optic art counts meet
To show the forms that hard without do flit.
With learned quaere each other here they greet:
True moving substances they deem each shadow slight:
11
When fowls fly by, and with their swapping wings
Beat the inconstant air, and mournful noise
Stir up with their continual chastisings
In the soft yielding penitent; the voice
These solemn sages naught at all accoyes.
It Is common; only they philosophize,
Busying their brains in the mysterious toys
Of flittie motion, wary well advize
On'^ inward principles the hid Entelechyes.
12
And whereabout that inward life is seated,
That moves the living creature, they epsy
Passing in their dim world. So they are defeated,
Calling thin shadows true realitie,
And deeply doubt if corporalitie,
(For so they term those visibles) were stroy'd
Whether that inward first vitalitie
Could then subsist. But they are ill accloy'd
With cloddie earth, and with blind duskishnesse annoyed.
13
If roaring lion or the neighing horse,
With frisking tail to brush off busy flies,
Approach their den, then happily they discourse
From what part of these creatures may arise
Those greater sounds. Together they advise,
And gravely do conclude that from the thing
That we would term the tail, those thundering neyes
Do issue forth: tail of that shadovving
They see then moved most, while he is whinneying.
14
And so the lions huge and hideous roat
They think proceeds from his rugg'd flowing mane,
Which the fierce winds do toss and tousell sore;
Unless perhaps he stir his bushie train:
For then the tail will carry it again.
Thus upon each occasion their frail wit
Bestirres it self to find out errors vain
And useless theories in this dark pit:
Fond reasoning they have, seldom or never hit.
15
So soon new shadows enter in the cave,
New entelechias they then conceive
Brought forth of nature; when they passed have
Their gloomy orb (false shades easily deceive)
Not only they that visible bereave
Of life and being, but the hidden might
And root of motion unliv'd unbeen'd they leave
In their vain thoughts: for they those shadows light
Do deem sole prop and stay of the hidden motive spright.
16
This is that awful cell where Naturalists
Brood deep opinion, as themselves conceit;
This errors den where in a magic mist
Men hatch their own delusion and deceit,
And grasp vain shows. Here their bold brains they beat
And dig full deep, as deep as Hyle's hell,
Unbare the root of life (O searching wit!)
But root of life in Hyles shade no'te dwell.
For God's the root of all, as I elsewhere shall tell.
17
This is the stupid state of drooping soul,
That loves the body and false forms admires;
Slave to base sense, fierce against reasons control,
That still it self with lower lust bemites;
That naught believes and much less desires
Things of that unseen world and inward life,
Nor unto height of purer truth aspires:
But cowardly declines the noble strife
Against vice and ignorance; so gets it no relief.
18
From this default, the lustful Epicure
Democrite, or the unthankful Stagirite,
Most men prefer before holy Pythagore,
Divinest Plato, and grave Epictete:
But I am so inflamed with the sweet sight
And goodly beauty seen on Eloim-hill,
That maugre all men's clamours in despite
I Will praise my Platonissa with loud quill;
My strong intended voice all the wide world shall fill.
19
O sacred Nymph begot of highest Jove!
Queen of Philosophy and virtuous lear!
That firest the nobler heart with spotless love,
And sadder minds with Nectar drops do cheer,
That often bedrencht with sorrows while we are here
Exiled from our dear home, that heavenly soil.
Through wandering ways thou safely do us bear
Into the land of truth, from dirtie foil
Thou keepst our slipping feet often wearied with long toil.
20
When I with other beauties thine compare,
O lovely maid, all others I must scorn.
For why? they all rude and deformed appear:
Certes they be ill thew'd and baser born:
Yet thou, alas! of men art more forlorn.
For like will to its like: but few can see
Thy worth; so night-birds fly the glorious morn
Thou art a beam shot from the deity,
And nearest art allied to Christianity.
21
But they be sprung of sturdie Giants race,
Allied to Night and the foul Earthie clay,
Love of the carcass, Envy, Spite, Disgrace,
Centention, Pride, that unto the highest does bray,
Rash labor, a Titanicall assay
To pluck down wisdom from her radiant seat,
With mirie arms to bear her quite away.
But thy dear mother Thorough-cleansing virtue hight:
Here will true wisdom lodge, here will the deigne to light.
22
Come, Gentle Virgin, take me by the hand,
To yonder grove with speedy pace we will hie:
(Its not far off from Alethea land)
Swift as the levin from the sneezing sky,
So swift we will go, before an envious eye
Can reach us. There I Will purge out the strong steem
Of prepossessing prejudice, that I
Perhaps may have contract in common stream,
And wary well wash out my old conceived dream.
23
And when I Have breathed awhile in that free air,
And cleared my self from tinctures took before,
Then deigne thou to thy novice to declare
Thy secret skill, and hid mysterious lore,
And I due thanks shall plenteously down pour.
But well I wot thou wilt not envaffall me:
That law were rudeness. I may not adore
Ought but the lasting spotless verity.
Well thewed minds the mind does always setten free.
24
Free to that inward awful Majesty
Hight Logos, whom they term great son of God,
Who framed the world by his deep sciency,
The greater world. Als makes his near abode
In the less world: so he can trace the trod
Of that hid ancient path, when as he made
This stately Fabric of the world so broad.
He plainly does unfold his skillful trade,
When he does harmless hearts by his good spright invade.
25
O thou eternal Spright, cleave open the sky,
And take thy flight into my feeble breast,
Enlarge my thoughts, enlight my dimmer eye
That wisely of that burden closely pressed
In my straight mind, I may be dispossessed:
My Muse must sing of things of mickle weight;
The souls eternity is my great quest:
Do thou me guide, that art the souls sure light,
Grant that I never err, but ever wend aright.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA.Book 1. Cant. 2.
What a soul is here I define,
After I have compared
All powers of life: That stamp divine
Show that brutes never shared.
1
NOw I Will address me to my mighty task,
So mighty task that makes my heart to shrink,
While I compute the labor it will ask,
And on my own frail weakness I gin think.
Like tender Lad that on the rivers brink,
That fain would wash him, while the evening ^een
With sharper air does make his pores to wink,
Shakes all his body, nips his naked skin,
At first makes some delay but after skippeth in:
2
So I upon a wary due debate
With my perplexed mind, after persuade
My softer heart. I need no longer wait.
Lo! now new strength my vitalls does invade
And rear again, that erst began to fade,
My life, my light, my senses all revive
That fearful doubts before had ill apaid.
Leap in, my soul, and strongly fore thee drive
The fleeting waves, and when thee list to the bottom dive.
3
For thou can dive full well, and flote aloft,
Dive down as deep as the old Hyle's shade,
Through that slight darkness glid'st thou sly and soft,
Through pitchy cumbring fogs strongly can wade,
Nor in thy flight could thou be ever staid,
If in thy flight thou flewedst not from him,
That for himself thine excellent might has made.
Contract desire, repulse strong Magic steem,
Then even in foul Cocytus thou may fearlesse swim.
4
Like that strange uncouth fish Lucerna hight,
Whose won is in the brackish Seas, yet fire
She easily carries and clear native light
In her close mouth: and the more to admire,
In darkest night when she lists to aspire
To the utmost surface of the watery main,
And opes her jaws that light does not expire,
But lively shines till she shut up again:
Nor liquid Sea, nor moistened air this light restrain.
5
Or like a lamp armed with pellucid horn,
Which ruffling winds about do rudely toss,
And felly lash with injury and scorn,
But her mild light they cannot easly cross;
She shines to her own foes withouten loss:
Even so the soul into its self collected,
Or in her native hew withouten dross,
In midst of bitter storms in no^ ejected,
Nor her eternal state is any whit suspected.
6
As Cynthia in her stouping Perigee,
That deeper wades in the earths duskish Cone,
Yet safely wallows through in silency
Till she again her silver face has shown,
And tells the world that she is the self-same Moon,
Not now more listlesse then I was whileare
When I was hid in my Apogeon,
For I my self alike do always bear
In every circling race: blind ignorance breeds fear.
7
Nor being hid after my monthly wane,
Long keppen back from your expecting sight,
Dull damps and darkness do my beauty stain;
When none I show then have I the most light,
Nearer to Phoebus more I am bedight
With his fair rays. And better to confute,
All vain suspicion of my worser plight,
Mark aye my face, after my close salute
With that sharp-witted God, seem I not more acute?
8
This is the state of the ever-moving soul,
Whirling about upon its circling wheel;
Certes to sight it variously does roll,
And as men deem full dangerously does reel,
But often when men fear most, it self does feel
In happiest plight conjoined with that great Sun
Of lasting bliss, that does himself reveal
More fully then, by that close union,
Though men, that miss her here, do think her quite undone.
9
But lest we rashly wander out too far,
And be yblown about with wanton wind,
Withouten stern, or card, or Polar star,
In its round little list so close confined:
Let the souls nature first be well defined;
Then we'll proceed. But all the while I crave
When ever I speak 'cording to Plato's mind,
That you my faultlesse drift do not deprave.
For I the freeborn soul to no sect would inslave.
10
Diverse conceits the wizards of old time
Have had concerning that we here inquire,
And would set forth in an eternal rhyme;
But we list not our dainty Muse to tire.
In such foul ways, and plunge her in the mire.
Strange dreams their drowsy scholars they have taught,
The heart, the heart-blood, brains, fleet air, hot fire
To be the thing that they so presly sought,
Some have defined, some temper, some a^omes, some naught.
11
But I must needs decline this wandering path;
For well I wot error is infinite,
But he that simple truth once reached has
Needs not with every single shade to fight:
One stroke will put all falsities to flight.
So soon as Sol his fiery head does rear
Above the Eastern waves his glowing sight
As angry darkness so long rule did bear,
Straight all night trifling sprights does chase away with fear.
12
Long have I swonk with anxious assay
To finden out what this hid soul may be,
That does herself so variously bewray
In different motions. Other we her see
When she so fairly spreads the branching tree;
Other when as sh' has loosed her self from ground,
And opes her root, and breaths in heaven free,
And does her wants in the wide air resound,
Speaks out her joy, no longer whispers underground.
13
Such is the noise of cheerful chirping birds,
That tell the sweet impressions of the Spring;
Or before some storm, when their quick sprights be stird
With nearer strong appulse and hid heaving,
That fills their little souls, and makes them sing,
Puffed up with joy and o'rflowing delight:
Eftsoons with rattling winds the air does ring.
The sturdy storm does make them take their flight
Into thick bush or hedge to save them from heavens spite.
14
From this same sourse of sense are murmuring moans
Of bellowing bullocks, when sharp hunger bites;
Hence whining dog so pitifully groans
When as with knotted whip his Lord him smites;
And every beast when with death pangs he fights.
But senseless trees nor feel the bleaker wind,
That nip their sides, nor the Suns scorching might,
Nor the sharp ax piercing their ruggid rind;
Yet have they soul, whose life in their sweet growth we find.
15
So plants spring up flourish and fade away,
Not marking their own state: They never found
Themselves, when first they 'pear'd in sunny day;
Nor never sought themselves, though in the ground
They search full deep: Nor are they waked by wound
Of biting iron, to naught they are attent
That them befalls, when cold humors abound
And clog their vital heat, or when they are brent
With Sirius flame, or when through eld they waxen faint.
16
Or whatsoever diseases them betide
That hasten death, they naught at all regard:
But when to plantall life quick sense is ti'd,
And progging fancy, then upon her guard
She gins to stand, and well her self to ward
From foes she plainly feels, pursues her joy,
Remembers where she well or ill has ^r'd,
Or swiftly flies from that that does annoy,
Or stoutly strives her fierce destroyer to destroy.
17
Thus have we run through these two degrees
Of the souls working seen in beast and plant;
The third hight reason, of common energies
The best: of this the humane race does vaunt
As proper to themselves. But if we ska^'t
Sa^s prejudice, it is not in them alone;
The dog, the horse, the ape, the elephant,
Will all rush in striving to make up one,
And sternly claim their share in use of right reason.
18
But whether brutes do reason and reflect
Upon their reasoning, I Will not dispute;
Nor care I what brisk boys will here object
Long task it were all fondlings to confute.
But I Will lay down that which will better suit
With that high heavenly spark, the soul of man;
His proper character (I would he knew't)
Is that which Adam lost by wily train
Of the old sly snake that Eve beguiled with speeches vain.
19
This was the Image of the highest God,
Which brutes partake not of. This Image hight
True Justice, that keeps ever the even trod,
True Piety that yields to man the sight
Of heavenly beauty, those fair beams so brigat
Of the everlasting Deity, that shed
Their sacred fire within the purer spright,
The fruit of ^den wherewith souls be sed,
Man's awful majesty of eyery beast ydred.
20
Nor is that radiant force in humane kind
Extinguished quite, he that did them create
Can those dull rusty chains of sleep unbind,
And rear the soul unto her priftin state:
He can them so enlarge and elevate
And spreaden out, that they can compass all,
When they no longer be incarcerate
In this dark dungeon, this foul fleshy wall,
Nor be no longer wedged in things corporeal:
21
But raised aloft into their proper sphere,
That sphere that hight the Orb Intellectual,
They quiet sit, as when the flitting fire
That Natures mighty Magic down did call
Into the oily wood, at its own fall
Grows full of wrath and rage, and gins to fume,
And roars and strives against its disquietall,
Like troubled Ghost forced some shape to assume;
But it its holding foe at does last quite consume.
22
And then like gliding spright does straight dispear,
That erst was forced to take a fiery form:
Full lightly it ascends into the clear
And subtle air devoid of cloudy storm,
Where it does steady stand, all-uniform,
Pure, pervious, immixt, innocuous, mild,
Naught scorching, naught glowing, naught enorm,
Naught destroying, not destroyed, not defiled;
Foul fume being spent, just before its flight it fairly smiled.
23
Thus have I traced the soul in all its works,
And several conditions have displaid,
And showed all places where so ever she lurks,
Even her own lurkings of her self bewrayed,
In plants, in beasts, in men, while here she staid*
And freed from earth how then she spreads on high
Her heavenly rays, that also has been said.
Look now, my Muse, and cast thy piercing eye
On every kind, and tell wherein all souls agree.
24
Here dare I not define't, the Entelechy
Of organized bodies. For this life,
This centrall life, which men take souls to be,
Is not among the beings relative;
And sure some souls at least are self-active
Withouten body having Energie.
Many put out their force informative
In their ethereall corporeity,
Devoid of heterogeneall organity.
25
Self-moving substance, that be the definition
Of souls, that longs to them, in general:
This well expresses that common condition
Of every vital center creaturall.
For why? both that hight form spermaticall
Has here a share, as also that we term
Soul sensitive, I Will called form bestiall,
It makes a beast added to plantall sperin;
Add rational form, it makes a man as men affirm.
26
All these be substances self-moveable:
And that we call virtue magneticall
(That what is defined be irreproveable)
I comprehend it in the life plantall:
Among trees there is found life Sympatheticall;
Though trees have not animadversive sense.
Therefore the soul's Autocinelicall
Alone. What ere's in this defining sense
Is soul, what ere's not soul is driven far from heace.
27
But that each soul's Autocineticall,
Is easly shown by sitting all degrees
Of souls. The first are forms Spermaticall,
That best be seen in shaping armed trees,
Which if they want their fixed Centreities,
By which they fairly every part extend,
And gently inact with spread vitalities
The flowring boughs. How Natures work does wend
Who knows? or from what inward stay it does depend?
28
Forthy let first an inward center hid
Be put. That Is naught but Natures fancy ti'd
In closer knot, shut up into the mid
Of its own self: so our own spirits gride
With piercing wind in storming winter tide
Contract themselves and shrivell up together,
Like snake the country man in snow espied,
Whose spright was quite shrunk in by nipping weather.
From whence things come, by foman forced they backward thither
29
The rigid cold had forced into its center
This serpents life; but when the rural Swain
Placed her upon warm hearth, and heat did enter
Into her ^ummed corpse, she began to strain
And stretch herself, and her host entertain
With scornful hiss, shooting her anchored tongue,
Threatening her venomed teeth; so straight again
She proved a living snake, when she along
Her corse free life had drove from center steddie strong.
30
So does the gentle warmth of solar heat
Easily awake the center seminall,
That makes it softly streak on its own seat,
And fairly forward force its life internal.
That inward life's the impresse imaginall
Of Natures Art, which sweetly flowreth out
From that is cleep'd the sphere spermaticall:
For there is placed the never fading root
Of every flower or herb that into the air does shoot.
31
Fairly invited by Sols piercing ray
And inward tickled with his chearing spright,
All plants break thorough into open day,
Rend the thick curtain of cold cloying night,
The earths opakenes enemy to light,
And crown themselves in sign of victory
With shining leaves; and goodly blossoms bright.
Thus called out by friendly sympathy
Their souls move of themselves on their Centreitie.
32
But it is more plain in animalitie,
When fiery coursers strike the grassie ground
With swift tempestuous feet, that far and nigh
They fill men's ears with a broad thundering sound
(From hollow hoof so strongly it does rebound)
What Is that that twitcheth up their legs so fast,
And fiercely jerks them forth, that many wound
They give to their own mother in their have?
With eager steps they quickly mete the forest wast.
34
That outward form is but a neurospast;
The soul it is that on her subtle ray,
That she shoots out, the limbs of moving beast
Does stretch straight forth, so straightly as she may.
Bones joints and sinews shaped of stubborn clay
Cannot so easily lie in one straight line
With her projected might, much less obey
Direct retractions of these beams fine:
So straight retreat they must of necessity decline.
35
But yet they follow in a course oblique,
With angular doublings, as the joints permit:
So go they up together, not unlike
An iron candle-stick the smith has fit
With many junctures, whom in studious sit
Some scholar set a work: but to return,
Lest what we aimed at we unwares omit;
If souls of beasts their bodies move and turn,
And wield at phansies beck, as we described beforn;
36
Then be the souls of beasts self-moving forms,
Bearing their bodies as themselves think meet,
Invited or provoked, so they transform
At first themselves within, then straight in sight
Those motions come, which suddenly do light
Upon the bodies visible, which move
According to the will of the inward spright.
In the inward spright be anger, hate and love:
Hence claws, horns, hoofs they use the pinching ill to amove.
37
Thus have I plainly proved that souls of beasts
And plants do move themselves. That souls of men
Should be more stupid, and far less releast
From matters bondage, surely there is none can
Admit of, though but slightly they do scan
The cause. But for to put all out of doubt,
Let Us take again the same way we have ran,
Break down all obstacles that hinder might
Our future course to make all plain all clear throughout.
38
If there be no self-motion in man's soul,
That it nor this nor that way can propend
Of its owe self, nor can no whit control
Nor will of its own self, who can offend?
For no man^self (if you do well perpend)
Guiltie's of ought when naught does from him flow.
Whither do learning, laws, grave speeches tend?
Speaks the rude carter to the wagon slow
With threatening words, or to the beasts that do it draw?
39
Surely unto the beasts that easily go:
For there is the principle of motion,
Such principle as can it self foreslow,
Or forward press by incitation:
Which though it moves by commination,
So stiffly strives, yet from it self it strives,
Bears it self forth with stout contention,
And ever and anon the whip revives
That inward life, so bravely on the Rustic drives.
40
Again, all that sweet labor would be lost
That Gods good spirit takes in humane mind,
So often we courted be so often crossed:
But nor that tender amorous courtship kind
Has any place, where we no place can find
For a self-yielding love; Or if self-will
Be not in us, how easily were declined
All crosses? None could happen us until,
How will I want, and want no cross passes my skill.
41
Pesides when reason works with fantasy,
And changeable conceits we do contrive,
Purging and pruning with all industry,
What Is dead or useless, less demonstrative,
What Is dull or flaccid, naught illustrative,
Quenching unfitted phantasmes in our brain,
And for our better choice new flames revive;
The busy soul thus does her reason strain
To write or speak what envious tongue ^e may never stain:
42
Or when quite heedlesse of this earthie world
She lifts her self unto the azure ski^,
And with those wheeling gyres around is hurld,
Turns in herself in a due distancie
The erring seven; or a stretched line does the
Of The silver-bowed moon from horn to horn;
Or finds out Phoebus vast soliditie
By his diametre, measures the morn,
Girds the swollen earth with linear list, though earth she scorn.
43
All this is done, though body never move:
The soul about it self circumgyrates
Her various forms, and what she most does love
She often before her self stabilitates;
She stiffly stayes't and wistly contemplates,
Or lets it somewhat slowlier descend
Down to the nether Night; she temperates
Her starrie orb, makes her bright forms to wend
Even as she list: Anon she will all with darkness blend.
44
Thus variously she does herself invest
With rising forms, and reasons all the way;
And by right reason does herself divest
Of falser phancies. Who then can gainsay
But she is self-mov'd when she does with self-sway
Thus change herself, as inward life does feel?
If not, then some inspiring sprights bewray
Each reasoning. Yet though to them we deal
First motion, yet our selves ought know what they reveal.
45
But if nor of our selves we moved be
At first, without any invasion
Of stirring forms that into energie
Awake the soul; nor after-motion
From its own center by occasion
Does issue forth; then it is not conscious
Of ought: For so 'twill want adversion.
But nothing can animadvert for us:
Therefore all humane souls be self-vivacious.
46
Thus have I proved all souls have centrallmotion
Springing from their own selves. But they will object
Against the universalnesse of this clear notion,
That whiles self-flowing sourse I here detect
In plants, in brutes, in men, I ought reject
No soul from wished immortality,
But give them durance when they are resect
From organized corporeitie:
Thus brutes and plants shall gain lasting eternity.
47
It Is true, a never fading durancie
Belongs to all hid principles of life;
But that full grasp of vast Eternity
Longs not to beings simply vegetive,
Nor yet to creatures merely sensitive:
Reason alone cannot arrive to it.
Only souls Deiform intellective
Unto that height of happiness can get;
Yet immortality with other souls may fit.
48
No force of Nature can their strength annoy.
For they be subtiler then the silken air,
Which fatal fire from heaven cannot destroy.
All grossness its devo^ing teeth may sheare,
And present state of visibles empare;
But the fine curtains of the lasting sky,
Though not of love, yet it perforce must spare*
If they could burn, each spark from flint would try,
And a bright broad-spread flame to either Pole would hi^
49
But if all souls survive their bulks decay,
Another difficulty will straight arise,
Concerning their estate when they are away
Flit from this grosser world. Shall Paradise
Receive the sprights of beasts? or wants it trees,
That their sweet verdant souls should thither take?
Who shall conduct those straggling colonies?
Or be they straightway drenched in Lethe lake?
So that cold sleep their shriveld life from work does slake.
50
Or if that all or some of them awake,
What is their misery? what their delight^
How come they that refined state forsake?
Or had they their first being in our sight?
Whither to serve? what is the useful might
Of these spiritual trees? does fearful hare
Fly the pursuing dog? does soaring kite
Prey upon silly chickins? is there jarre,
Or be those sprights agreed, none to other contraire?
51
If some contraire; then tell me, how is their fight?
What is the spoil? what the stout victors meed?
No flesh, no blood whereon to spend their spite,
Or whereupon these hungry souls may feed.
Or does the stronger suck the aierie weed
Wherewith the other did it self invest?
And so more freshly deck it self at need?
An aierie prey for aierie spright is best;
Or do they want no food, but be still full and rest?
52
Die they again? draw they in any breath?
Or be they sterill? or bring forth their young?
Beat their light feet on the soft aierie heath?
Express they joy or sorrow with their tongue?
Enough! who ere thou art that thus do throng
My tender Muse with rough objections stout,
Give me but leave to tell thee thou^rt wrong,
If being of a thing thou call'st in doubt
Cause its more hid conditions shine not clearly out.
53
Who questions but there is a quantity
Of things corporeal, a trinall dimension,
Of solid bodies? yet to satisfy
All doubts that may be made about extension
Would plunge the wisest Clerk. I Will only mention
That quaere, of what parts it does consist,
Whether of Atoms; or what strange retention
Still keeps so much back, that if God list
He could not count the parts of a small linear twist.
54
For his division never could exhaust
The particles, say they, of quantity.
O daring wit of man that thus does boast
It self, and in pursuit of sciencie
Forget the reverend laws of piety.
What thing is hid from that all-seeing light?
What thing not done by his all-potencie?
He can discern by his clear-piercing might
The close-couch'd number of each bigness comes in sight:
55
And so can count them out even part by part;
In number, measure, weight, he all things made;
Each unite he dissevets by his Art;
But here this searching reason to evade,
Each quantum's infinite, straight will be said,
That Is against sense. If it be infinite
Of parts, then tell me, be those parts out-spread?
Or not extent? if extended outright
Each fly in summer even is higher then Heavens hight.
56
If not extended, then that quantum's naught.
Some be extended, others not extent
Already (answers a vain shifting thought)
But those potentiall parts, how be they meint
With those that now be actually distent?
Even thus you grant, that those that actual be
Be plainly finite, against your intent,
Grant me but that, and we shall well agree.
So must slight Atoms be sole parts of quantity.
57
But if it consist of points: then a Scalene
I Will prove all one with an Isosceles:
With as much ease I Will evince clear and clean
That the cross lines of a Rhomboides
That from their meeting to all angles press
Be of one length, though one from earth to heaven
Would reach, and that the other were much less
Then a small digit of the lowest of seven
So as she'pears to us, yet I could prove them even.
58
And that the moon (though her circumference
Be far more straight then is the earthie ball)
Sometime the earth illumineth at once
And with her grasping rays enlights it all;
And that the Suns great body sphericall
Greater then the earth, far greater then the moon,
Even at midday illumines not at all
This earthie globe in his Apogeon;
So that we in deep darkness sit, though at high noon.
59
Of will, of motion, of divine foresight,
Here might I treat with like perplexity.
But it is already clear that it is not right
To reason down the firm subsistencie
Of things from ignorance of their property.
Therefore not requisite for to determ
The hid conditions of vitaliti^
Or shrunk or severed; only I Will affirm
It is, which my next song shall further yet confirm.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 1. Cant. 3.
Ore whelmed with grief and pitious woe
For fading life's decays;
How no souls die, from Lunar how,
A nymph to me displayes.
1
IN silent night, when mortals be at rest,
And bathe their molten limbs in slothful sleep,
My troubled ghost strange cares did straight molest,
And plunged my heavy soul in sorrow deep:
Large floods of tears my moistened cheeks did steep,
My heart was wounded with compassionate love
Of all the creatures: sadly out I creep
From men's close mansions, the more to improve
My mournful plight, so softly on I forward move.
2
Aye me! said I, within my wearied breast,
And fighed sad, wherefore did God erect
This stage of misery? thrice, fouretimes blessed
Whom churlish Nature never did eject
From her dark womb, and cruelly object
By sense and life unto such balefull smart;
Every slight entrance into joy is checked
By that sour step-dames threats, and visage tart:
Our pleasure of our pain is not the thousandth part.
3
Thus vexed I was 'cause of mortality:
Her cursed remembrance cast me in this plight,
That I grew sick of the worlds vanity.
Ne ought recomfort could my sunken spright,
What so I hate may do me no delight.
Few things (alas) I hate, the more my woe,
The things I love by mine own sad foresight
Make me the greater torments undergo,
Because I know at last they are gone like idle show.
4
Each goodly sight my sense does captivate
When vernall flowers their silken leaves display,
And open their fragrant bosoms, I that stare
Would not have changed but endure for aye;
Nor care to mind that that fatal decay
Is still recured by faithful succession.
But why should ought that is good thus fade away?
Should steady Spring exclude Summers accession?
Or Summer spoil the Spring with furious hot oppression?
5
You cheerful chaunters of the flowring woods,
That feed your careless souls with pleasant lays,
O silly birds! cease from your merry moods:
Ill suits such mirth when dreary deaths assayes
So closely press your sorry carkases:
To mournful note turn your light verilayes,
Death be your song, and Winters hoary sprayes,
Spend your vain sprights in sighing Elegies:
I Will help you to lament your woeful miseryes.
6
When we lay covered in the shady Night
Of senseless matter, we were well content
With that estate, naught pierced our anxious spright,
No harm we suffered, no harm we meant;
Our rest not with light dream of ill was blent:
But when rough Nature, with her iron ho^d,
Pulled us from our soft ease, and hither hent,
Disturbing fear and pinching pain we found,
Full many a bitter blast, full many a dreadful stound.
7
Yet life's strong love does so intoxicate
Our misty minds, that we do fear ^o die.
What did dame Nature brood all things of hate?
And only give them life for misery?
Sense for an undeserved penalty?
And show that if she list, that she could make
Them happy? but with spightfull cruelty
Does force their groaning ghosts this house forsake?
And to their ancient naught their empty selves betake!
8
Thus in deep sorrow and restless disdain
Against the cankered doom of envious fate,
I clove my very heart with riving pain,
While I in sullen rage did ruminate
The Creatures vanity and woeful state;
And night that ought to yield us timely rest,
My swelling griefs did much more aggravate:
The sighs and groans of weary sleeping beast
Seemed as if sleep it self their spirits did molest:
9
Or as constrained perforce that boon to wrest
From envious Nature. All things did augment
My heavy plight, that foully I blamed the hest
Of stubborn destiny cause of this wayment.
Even sleep that is for our restoration meant,
As execrable thing I did abhor,
Cause ugly death to the life it did depeint:
What good came to my mind I did deplore,
Because it perish must and not live evermore.
10
Thus wrapped in rufull thought through the waste field
I staggred on, and scattered my woe,
Bedewed the grass with tears mine eyes did yield,
At last I am ariv'd with footing slow
Near a black pitchy wood, that strongest throw
Of starry beam no'te easly penetrate:
On the North side I walked to and fro
In solitary shade. The Moons sly gate
Had crossed the middle line: It was at least so late.
11
When the other part of night in painful grief
Was almost spent, out of that solemn grove
There issued forth for my timely relief,
The fairest wight that ever sight did prove,
So fair a wight as might command the love
Of best of mortal race; her countenance shee^
The pensive shade gently before her drove,
A mild sweet light shone from her lovely eyne:
She seemed no earthly branch but sprung of stock divine.
12
A silken mantle, colored like the sky
With silver stars in a due distance set,
Was cast about her somewhat carelessly,
And her bright flowing hair was not ylet
By Arts device; only a chappelet
Of chiefest flowers, which from far and near
The Nymphe in their pure lilly hands had set,
Upon her temples she did seemly wear;
Her own fair beams madd all her ornaments appear.
13
What wilful wight does thus his kindly rest
Forsake? said she, approaching me unto.
What rage, what sorrow boils thus in thy chest
That thou thus spend'st the night in wasting woe?
Often help he gets that his hid ill does show.
Ay me! said I, my grief's not all mine own;
For all men's griefs into my heart do flow,
Nor men's alone, but every mourn full groan
Of dying beast, or what so else that grief has shown.
14
From fading plants my sorrows frshly spring:
And thou thy self that come to comfort me,
Would strongst occasion of deep sorrow bring,
If thou were subject to mortality:
But I no mortal wight thee deem to be,
Thy face thy voice immortal thee proclaim.
Do I not well to wail the vanity
Of fading life, and churlish fates to blame
That with cold frozen death lifs cheerful motions tame?
15
Thou do not well, said she to me again,
Thou hurt'st thy self, and do to them no good.
The sighs thou sendest out cannot regain
Life to the dead, thou can not change the mood
Of steadfast destiny. That man is wood
That weetingly hastes on the thing he hates:
Dull sorrow chokes the sprights, congeals the blood,
The bodies fabric quickly ruinates.
Yet foolish men do fondly blame the hasty fates.
16
Come, hasty fates, said I, come take away
My weary life, the fountain of my woe:
When that is extinct or shrunk into cold clay,
Then well I wore that I shall undergo
No longer pain. O! why are you so slow!
Fond speech, said she, nor changed her countenance,
No sign of grief or anger she did show;
Full well she knew passions misgovernance,
Though her clear breast fond passion never yet did lance.
17
But thus spoke on, since friendly sympathy
With all the creatures thus invades thy breast,
And strikes thine heart with so deep agony
For their decay, cording to that behest
Which the pure sourse of sympathy has pressed
On all that of those lovely streams have drunk,
I Will tell thee that that needs must please thee best,
All life's immortal; though the outward trunk
May changed be, yet life to nothing never shrunk.
18
With that she bad me rear my heavy eye
Up toward heaven. I reared them toward The East,
Wherein a roscid cloud I did espy
A Lunar rainbow in her painted vest;
The heavenly maid in the meanwhile surceast
From further speech while I the bow did view:
But mine old malady was more increased,
The bow began break, and all the gaudy hew
Dispeared, that my heart the sight did inly rue.
19
Thus life does vanish as this bow is gone,
Said I: That sacred Nymph forthwith replied,
Vain shows may vanish that have gayly shone
To feeble sense; but if the truth be tried,
Life cannot perish or to nothing slide:
It is not life that falls under sight;
None but vain flitting qualities are eyed
By wondering ignorance. The vital spright
As surely does remain as the Suns lasting light.
20
This bow, whose breaking struck thy troubled heart,
Of causeless grief, I hope shall thee recure,
When I have well explained with skillful Art
By its resemblance what things must endure,
What things decay and cannot standen sure.
The higher causes of that colored Ark,
What e're becomes of it, do sit secure.
That so (the body failing) life's fair spark
Is safe, I Will clearly show if you but list to mark.
21
There be six Orders before you do descend
To this gay painted bow: Sols centrall spright
To the first place, to the next we must commend
His hid spread form, then his inherent light,
The fourth his rays wherewith he is bedight,
The fifth that glistring circle of the Moon,
That goodly round full face all silver bright,
The sixth be beams that from her visage shone;
The seventh that gaudy bow that was so quickly gone.
22
The fluid matter was that dewy cloud,
That faild as faithless Hyle wont to sail:
New guest being come, the old she out does crowd;
But see how little Hyle did prevail,
Or sad destruction in this deemed bale!
Sols spright, had form, fair light and out-gone rays,
The Moons round silver face withouten veil
Do still remain, her beams she still displayes,
The cloud but melt, not lost, the bow only decays.
23
This number saits well with the Universe:
The number's eight of the Orbs general,
From whence things flow or wherein they converse,
The first we name Nature Monadicall,
The second hight Life Intellectual,
Third Psychicall, the fourth Imaginative,
Fifth Sensitive, the sixth Spermaticall,
The seventh be fading forms Quantitative,
The eighth Hyle or Ananke perverse, coactive.
24
That last is naught but potentiality,
Which in the lower creature causes strife,
Destruction by incompossibility
In some, as in the forms Quantitative.
All here depend on the Orb Unitive,
Which also hight Nature Monadicall;
As all those lights and colors did derive
Themselves from lively Phoebus life centrall.
Naught therefore but vain sensibles we see caducall.
25
And that the first Every-where-Unitie
Is the true root of all the living creatures,
As they descend in each distinct degree,
That God's the sustentacle of all Natures;
And though those outward forms and gaudy features
May quail like rainbowes in the roscid sky,
Or glistring Parelies or other meteors;
Yet the clear light does not to nothing fly:
Those six degrees of life stand sure, and never die.
26
So now we plainly see that the dark matter
Is not that needful prop to hold up life;
And though deaths engines this gross bulk do shatter,
We have not lost our Orb conservative,
Of which we are a ray derivative.
The body sensible so garnished
With outward forms these inward do relieve,
Keep up in fashion and fresh lively-hed;
But this gross bulk those inward lives stands in no sted.
27
Nor can one inward form another slay,
Though they may quell their present energy,
And make them close contract their yielding ray
And hide themselves in their centreity
Till some friendly appulse does set them free,
And call them out again into broad day.
Hence lives gush not in superfluity
Into this world, but their due time do stay,
Though their strong centrall essence never can decay.
28
In Earth, in Air, in the vast flowing Plain,
In that high Region hight Aethereall,
In every place these Atom-lives remain,
Even those that cleeped are form^ seminall.
But souls of men by force imaginall
Easly supply their place, when so they list
Appear in thickened Air with shape external
Display their light and form in cloudy mist,
That much it does amaze the musing Naturalist.
29
Wherefore since life so strongly sealed is,
Purge out fond thoughts out of thy weary mind,
And rather strive that thou do naught amiss,
Then God to blame and Nature as unkind
When naught in them we blamable can find.
When groaning ghosts of beasts or men depart,
Their tender mother does but them u^ind
From grosser setters, and more to ^some smart.
Blessed is the man that has true knowledge of her Art.
30
And more for to confirm this mystery,
She vanished in my presence into Air,
She spread her self with the thin liquid sky;
But I thereat fell not into despair
Of her return, nor wail'd her visage fair,
That so was gone. For I was wo^en strong
In this belief, That nothing can empair
The inward life, or its hid effenc^ wrong.
O the prevailing might of a sweet learned tongue!
31
By this the Suns bright wagon began ascend
The Eastern hill, and draw on cheerful day;
So I full fraught with joy do homeward wend,
And fed my self with that that Nymph did say,
And did so cunningly to me convey,
Resolving for to teach all willing men
Life's mystery, and quite to chase away
Mind-mudding mist sprung from low fulsome fen:
Praise my good will, but pardon my weak faultring pen.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 1. Cant. 4.
That Hyle or first matter's naught
But potentialitie;
That God's the never-fading root
Of all Vitalitie.
1
What I was wisely taught in that still Night,
That Hyle is the Potentialitie
Of Gods dear Creatures, I embrace as right,
And them nigh blame of deep idolatry
That give so much to that slight nullitie,
That they should make it root substantial
Of nimble life, and that quick entitie
That does so strongly move things natural,.
That life from hence should spring, that hither life should fall
2
That all that springs from hence should be resolved
Into this mirksome sourse, first matter hight,
This muddie myst'rie they no'to well unfold.
If it be only a bare passive might
With Gods and Natures goodly dowries dight,
Bringing hid Noughts into existencie,
Or sleeping Somethings into wide daylight,
Then Hyle's plainly potentialitie,
Which does not straight infer certain mortalitic.
3
For the immortal Angels do consist
Of outgone act and possibility;
Nor any other creature does exist,
Releast from dreary deaths necessity,
If it potent^alnesse so certainly
Ensuen must. If substance actual
They will avo^ch this first matter to be,
Fountain of forms, and prop fiduciall
Of all those lives and beings cleeped Natural;
4
Then may it prove the sphere spermaticall,
Or sensitive (if they would yield it life)
Or that is next, the orb Imaginall,
Or rather all these orbs; withouten strife
So might we all conclude that their ^elief
And first existence from this sphere they drew:
And so our adversaries, loath or lief,
Must needs confess that all the lore was true
Concerning life, that that fair Nymph so clearly show;
5
And that particular lives that beyborn
Into this world, when their act does dispear,
Do cease to be no more then the snails ^orn,
That she shrinks in because she cannot bear
The wanton boys rude touch, or heavy cheer
Of stormi^ winds. The secundarie light
As su^ely shines in the heavens clear,
As do the first fair beams of Phoebus bright,
Lasting they are as they, though not of so great might.
6
So be the efs^uxes of those six orders,
Unfading lives from fount of live^ihood:
Only what next to strifefull Hyle borders,
Particular visibles deaths dreary^ood
Can seize upon. They pass like sliding flood.
For when to this worlds dregs lives downward hie,
They stroy one the other in fell cankred mood,
Beat back their rays by strong antipathie,
Or some more broad-spread cause do choke their energie.
7
But to go on to that common conceit
Of the first matter: What can substance do,
Poor, naked substance, megre, dry, dull slight,
Inert, unactive, that no might can show
Of good or ill to either friend or so,
All livelesse, all formlesse? She does sustain.
And has no strength that task to undergo?
Besides that work is needless all in vain*
Each centrall form its rays with ease can well up-stayen.
8
What holds the earth in the thin fluid air?
Can matter void of fixed soliditie?
But she like kindly nurse her forms does cheer.
What can be sucked from her dark dugges dry?
Nor warmth, nor moistness, nor fast densitie
Belong to her. Therefore ill nurse I ween
She Will make, that neither has to satisfy
Young-craving life, nor firmness to susteen
The burden that upon her arms should safely leen.
9
Therefore an useless superfluity
It is to make Hyle substantial:
Only let us term't the possibility
Of all created beings. Lives centrall
Can frame themselves a right compositall,
While as they sitten soft in the sweet rays
Or vital vest of the lives general,
As those that out of the earths covert raise
Themselves, fairly provoked by warmth of sunnie days.
10
And thus all accidents will prove the beams
Of inward forms, their flowing energie;
And quantity the extension of such streams,
That goes along even with each quality.
Thus have we dived to the profunditie
Of darkest matter, and have found it naught
But all this worlds bare Possibility.
Naught therefore' against life's durance can be brought
From Hyles pit, that quenchen may that pleasant thought.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 2. Cant. 1.
Man's soul with beasts and plants I here
Compare; Tell my chief end
His immortality's to clear;
Show whence gross errors wend.
1
BUt hitherto I have with fluttering wings
But lightly hovered in the general,
And taught the lasting durance of all springs
Of hidden life. That life hight seminall
Does issue forth from its deep root cent all,
One only form entire, and no't^ advert
What steals from it. Beasts life Fantastical
Lets out more forms, and eke themselves convert
To view the various fry from their dark wombs exert.
2
But man's vast soul, the image of its Maker,
Like God that made it, with its mighty sway
And inward Fiat (if he nould forsake he^)
Can turn sad darkness into lightsome day,
And the whole creature before it self display:
Bid them come forth and stand before its sight,
They straight slush out and her drad voice obey:
Each shape each life does leapen out full light,
And at her beck return into their usual Night.
3
Of God himself here lists to appear,
Though not perforce yet of his own frank will
Sheds his sweet life, dispreads his beauty clear,
And like the Sun this lesser world does sill,
And like the Sun does the foul Python kill
With his bright darts, but cheareth each good spright.
This is the soul that I with presser quill
Must now pursue and fall upon downright,
Not to destroy but prove it of immortal might.
4
Nor let blind Momus dare my Muse backbite,
As wanton or superfluously wise
For what is past. She is but justly quit
With Lucrece, who all souls does mortalize:
Wherefore she did them all immortalize.
Besides in beasts and men the affinity
Does seem so great, that without prejudice
To many proofs for the immortality
Of humane Souls, the same to beasts we no'te deny.
5
But I herein no longer list contend.
The two first kinds of souls I Will quite omit,
And' cording as at first I did intend
Bestirre me stiffly, force my feeble wit
To rescue humane souls from deaths deep pit;
Which I shall do with reasons as subtle
As I can find: slight proofs cannot well fit
In so great cause, nor phansies florid wile;
I Will win no man's assent by a false specious guile.
6
I only wish that arguments exile
May not seem naught unto the duller eye;
Nor that the fatter fancy my lean style
Do blame: it is fittest for philosophy.
And give me leave from any energie
That springs from humane soul my cause to prove,
And in that order as they list to fly
Of their own selves, so let them freely rove.
That naturally does come does often the stronger move.
7
Self-motion and centrall stabilitie
I have already urged in general;
Als did right presly to our soul apply
Those properties, who list it to recall
Unto their minds; but now we'll let it fall
As needless. Only that vitalitie,
That does extend this great Universal,
And move the inert Materialitie
Of great and little worlds, that keep in memory.
8
And how the mixture of their rays may breed
The opinion of uncertain quality,
When they from certain roots of life do spreed;
But their pure beams must needs ychanged be
When that those rays or not be setten free
Thinly dispersed, or else be closely meint
With other beams of plain diversity,
That causes often a strong impediment:
So does this bodies life to the souls high intent.
9
The lower man is naught but a fair plant,
Whose grosser matter is from the base ground;
The Plastic might thus finely did him paint,
And filled him with the life that does a^ound
In all the places of the world around.
This spirit of life is in each shapen'd thing,
Sucked in and changed and strangely confound,
As we conceive: This is the nourishing
Of all; but spermall form, the certain shapening.
10
This is that strange-form'd statue magical,
That hovering souls unto it can allure
When it is right fitted; down those spirits fall
Like Eagle to her prey, and so endure
While that low life be in good temperature.
That a dead body without vital spright
And friendly temper should a guest procure
Of so great worth, without the dear delight
Of joyous sympathy, no man can reckon right.
11
But here unlucky Souls do waxen sick
Of an ill surfeit from the poisoned bait
Of this sweet tree, yet here perforce they stick
In weak condition, in a languid state.
Many through ignorance do fondly hate
To be released from this imprisonmen^,
And grieve the walls be so nigh ruinate.
They be bewitched so with the blandishment
Of that fresh strumpet, when in love they first were meant.
12
Others disdain this so near unity,
So far they be from thinking they be born
Of such low parentage, so base degree,
And fleshes foul attraction they do scorn,
They be the outgoings of the Eastern morn,
Allied to God and his vitalitie,
And pray to their first spring, that thus forlorn
And left in mud, that he would set them free,
And them again possess of pristine purity.
13
But seems not my Muse too hastily
To soar aloft, that better by degrees
Unto the vulgar man's capacity
Might show the souls so high excellencies,
And softly from all corporeities
It heaven up unto its proper seat,
When we have drove away gross falsities,
That do assault the weaker men's conceit,
And free the simple mind from phansies foul deceit.
14
The drooping soul so strongly's colored
With the long commerce of corporealls,
That she from her own self awide is led,
Knows not herself, but by false name she calls
Her own high being, and what ere befalls
Her grosser body, she that misery
Does deem her own: for she herself miscalls
Or some thin body, or spread quality,
Or point of quality, or fixed or setten free.
29
But whether thin spread body she does deem
Her self, dispersed through this grosser frame;
Or does herself a quality esteem,
Or queint complexion, streaming through the same;
Or else some lucid point herself does name
Of such a quality, in chiefest part
Strongly fixed down; or whether she does clame
More freedom for that point, in head nor heart
Fast seated; yet, says she, the bodies brat thou art.
16
Thence thou arose, thence thou can not depart:
There die thou must, when thy dear nurse decays:
But these false phansies I with reason smart
Shall easily chase away, and the mind raise
To higher pitch. O listen to my lays,
And when you have seen fas^ sealed eternity
Of humane souls, then your great Maker praise
For his never fading benignity,
And feed your selves with thought of immortality.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 2: Cant. 2.
Sense no good judge of truth: What Is spright,
What body we descrie:
Prove from the souls inferior might
Her incorp'reitie.
1
WHile I do purpose with my self to sing
The souls incorporeitie, I fear
That it a worse perplexity may bring
Unto the weaker mind and duller ear;
For she may deem herself 'stroyd quite and clear
While all corporealls from her we expel:
For she has yet not marked that higher sphere
Where her own essence does in safety dwell,
But views her lower shade, like boy at brink of well;
2
Dotes upon sense, and its base energie,
Busied about vain forms corporeal;
Contemnes as naught unseen exilities,
Objects of virtue Intellectual,
Though these of Substances be principal.
But I to better hope would fainly lead
The sunken mind, and cunningly recall
Again to life that long has liggen dead.
Awake ye drooping souls! shake off that drousi head!
3
Why do you thus confide in sleepy sense,
Ill judge of her own objects? who will believe
The eye contracting Phoebus Orb immense
Into the compass of a common sieve?
If solid reason did not us relieve,
The host of heaven always would idle stand
In our conceit, nor could the Sun revive
The nether world, nor do his Lords command.
Things near seem further off; farst off, the nearst at hand.
4
The touch acknowledges no gustables;
The taste no fragrant smell or stinking sent;
The smell does not once dream of audibles;
The hearing never knew the verdant peint
Of springs gay mantle, nor light from heaven sent
That does discover all that goodly pride:
So that the senses would with zeal fervent
Condemn each other, and their voice deride
If mutually they heard such things they never tried.
5
But reason, that above the sense does sit,
Does comprehend all their impressions,
And tells the touch its no fanatic sit
That makes the sight of illustrations
So stiffly talk upon occasions,
But judges all their voices to be true
Concerning their straight operations,
And does by nimble consequences show
To her own self what those wise five yet never knew.
6
They never knew ought but corporealls:
But see how reason does their verdict rude
Confute, by loosening materials
Into their principles, as latitude
Profundity of bodies to conclude.
The term of latitude is breadthlesse line;
A point the line does manfully retrude
From infinite process; site does confine
This point; take site away its straight a spark divine.
7
And thus unloos'd it equally respects
The bodies parts, not fixed to any one.
Let't be diffused through all. Thus it detects
The soul's strange nature, operation,
Its independency, loose union
With this frail b^. So is this unity
Great, but without that gross extension,
Exceeding great in her high energie,
Extended far and wide from her non-quantity.
8
If yet you understand not, let the soul,
Which you suppose extended with this mass,
Be all contract and close together roll
Into the center of the hearts compass:
As the suns beams that by a concave glass
Be strangely strengthened with their strait constraint
Into one point, that thence they stoutly pass,
Fire all before them withouten restraint,
The high arched roof of heaven with smouldry smoke they taint.
9
But now that grosnesse, which we call the heart,
Quite take away, and leave that spark alone
Without that sensible corporeal part
Of humane body: so when that is gone,
One nimble point of life, that is all at one
In its own self, does wonderfully move,
Indispers'd, quick, close with selfe-union,
Hot, sparkling, active, mounting high above,
In bigness naught, in virtue like to thundering Jove.
10
Thus maugre all the obmur^urings of sense
We have found an essence incorporeall,
A shifting center with circumference,
But she not only sits in midst of all,
But is also in a manner centrall
In her outflowing lines. For the extension*
Of the outshot rays circumferentiall
Be not gone from her by distrought distension,
Her point is at each point of all that spread dimension.
11
This is a substance truly spiritall,
That reason by her glistring lamp has shown:
No such the sense in things corporeal
Can ere find out. May this persuasion,
O sunken souls, slaves of sensation,
Rear up your heads and chase away all fear
How (when by strong argumentation
I shall you strip of what so does appear
Corporeal) that you to naught should vanish clear.
12
The naked essence of the body's this
Matter extent in three dimensions
(Hardness or softness be but qualities)
Withouten self reduplications
Or outspread circling propagations
Of its own presence. This being's corporal,
And what with this in such extension
Singly's stretched out, is form material.
Whether our soul be such we'll now bring unto trial.
13
If souls be bodies, or inanimate
They be, or else endowed with life. If they
Be livelesse, give they life? if animate,
Then tell me what does life to them convey?
Some other body? Here can be no stay.
Straight we must ask whether that livelesse be
Or living. Then, what 'lives it. Thus we'll play
Till we have fore'd you to infinity,
And make your cheeks wax red at your Philosophy,
14
Again, pray tell me, is this body gross
Or fluid, and thin you deem the soul to be?
If gross, then either strongly it is crossed
From entering some parts of the outward body,
And so they want their due vitality;
Or if it penetrate this bulk throughout,
It breaks and tears and puts to penalty
This sorry carcas If It thin and fluid be thought,
How pulls it up those limbs and again jerks them out?
15
Besides, if stretchen corporeity
Longs to the soul, then Augmentation
Must likewise thereto appertain. But see
The absurdities that this opinion
Will drag on with it: for effluxion
Of parts will spoil the steady memory,
And wash away all intellection,
Deface the beauty of that imagery
That once was fairly graven in her fantasy.
16
But often when the weak body's worn and wasted
And far shrunk in, the nimble fantasy
(So far she is from being withered and blasted)
More largely works, and more gli^terandly
Displayes her spreaden forms, and cheerfully
Pursues her sports. Again, the greater corse
Would most be filled with magnanimity:
But often we see the less has greater force,
To fight, or talk; the greater often we se^ the worse.
17
All which if weighed well, must ill agree
With bodies natures, which merely consist
In a dull, silent, stupid quantity,
Stretching forth mirksome matter, in what list
Or precincts no man knows. No Natura list
Can it define, unless they add a form
That easly curbs the thing that no'^e resist,
And after its own will can it inform.
It still and stupid stands and thinks nor good nor harm.
18
The man is mad, that will at all agree
That this is soul: Or if form bodily
Non-replicate, extent, not setten free,
But straight stretched out in corporeity
(Betwixt these two there is that affinity)
As little wit that man will seem to have.
Which I shall plainly prove by the energic
Of sense, though that same force seem not so brave,
Yet for the present I Will not climb to higher stave.
19
If souls be substances corporeal,
Be they as big just as the body is?
Or shoot they out to the height Aethereall?
(Of such extent are the sights energies)
If they shoot out, be they equally transmisse
Around this body? or only upward start?
If round the body, Nature did amiss
To lose her pains in half of the souls part,.
That part can finden naught that through the earth does dart
20
Or will you say she is an hemisphere?
But a ridiculous experiment
Will soon confute it: list you but to rear
Your agill heels toward the firmament,
And stand upon your head; that part is bent
Down through the earth, that erst did threat the sky:
So that your soul now upward is extent
No higher then your heels, yet with your eye
The heavens great vastness as before you now discry.
21
You Will say, this souls thin spread exility
Turns not at all. How does it then depend
Upon this body? It has no unity
Therewith, but only does of cur'sy lend
It life, as does the worlds great lamp down send
Both light and warmth unto each living wight;
And if they chance to fail and make an end,
Its naught to him, he shines yet as bright
As ere he did. This shows the soul immortal quite.
22
But if the soul be justly coextent
With this straight body, naught can bigger be^
Then is our body, that she does present;
'Cording to laws of Corporeity
So must she represent each realty.
Thus tallest Giants would be often defied
By grovelling Pygmees: for they could not see
The difference, nor mete his manly stride,
Nor ween what matchless strength did in his arms reside.
23
For they must judge him just as their own selves
Of the same stature, of the self-same might;
All men would seem to them their fellow Elves;
Nor little curs would tremble at the sight
Of greater dogs; nor hawks would put to slight
The lesser birds. The impression of a seal
Can be no larger then the wax; or right
As big, or less it is. Therefore repeal
This gross conceit, and hold as reason does reveal.
24
Again, if souls corporeal you ween;
Do the light images of things appear
Upon the surface, slick, bright, smooth and sheen
As in a lookingglasse? Or whether dare
They pass the outside and venture so far
As into the depth of the souls substance?
If this; then they together blended are
That naught we see with right discriminance:
If that; the object gone, away those forms do glance.
25
Thus should we be devoid of memory,
And be all darkness, till the good presence
Of outward objects put in energie
Our sleeping soul. But this experience
Plainly confutes For even in their absence
We do retain their true similitude:
So lovers wont to maken dalliance
With the fair shade their minds do still include,
And wistly view the grace wherewith she is endude.
26
But now new reasons I will set on foot,
Drawn from the common sense, that is not extense
But like a center that around does shoot
Its rays; those rays should be the outward sense
As some resemble them. But by no pretense
Would I the outward senses should be thought
To act so in a spread circumference
That the seat of their forms should be distrought,
Or that by reach of quantities dead arms they wrought.
27
For see how little share has quantity
In act of seeing, when we comprehend
The heavens vast compass in our straitend eye;
Nor may the ox with the Eagle contend,
Because a larger circle does extend
His slower lights. So that if outward sense
In its low acts does not at all depend
On quantity, how shall the common-sense,
That Is far more spiritall, have thence l^s dependence?
28
But still more presly this point to pursue;
By the smelling, odours; voices by the ear;
By the eye we apprehend the colored hew
Of bodies visible. But what shall steer
The erring senses? where shall they compear
In controversy? what the difference
Of all their objects can with judgment clear
Distinguish and discern? One common-sense;
For one alone must have this great preeminence.
29
And all this one must know, though still but one;
Else't could not judge of all. But make it two;
Then tell me, does the soul by this alone
Apprend this object that the sense does show,
And that by that; or does it by both know
Both objects? suppose this color and that sound.
If both knew both, then nature did bestow
In vain one faculty, it does redound:
But if this that, that this, what shall them both compound,
30
And by comparison judge of them both?
Therefore that judge is one. But whether one
Without division, le^s now try that troth.
If it be any wise extent, you're gone
By the same reason that before was shown.
Suppose't a line the least of quantity.
Or sound is here, there color, or each one
Of the lines parts receive them both. If we
Grant that, again we find a superfluity.
31
If this part this, and that part that receive,
We are at the same loss we were before,
For one to judge them both, or we bereave
Our souls of judgment. For who can judge more
Than what he knows? It is above his power.
Therefore it is plain the common sense is one,
One individed faculty. But store
Of parts would breed infinite confusion,
When every part might claim proper sensation.
32
If not, nor all could exercise the Act
Of any sense. For could a power of sense
Arise from stupid parts that plainly lacked
That might themselves. Thus with great confidence
We may conclude that the humane souls essence
Is indivisible, yet every where
In this her body. Cause the intelligence
She has of whatsoever happens here:
The aching foot the eye does view, the hand does cheer.
34
What tells the hand or head the toes great grief,
When it alone is pinched with galling shoes?
Do other parts not hurt call for relief
For theirown fellow? Ill messenger of woes
That grieveth not himself. Can they disclose
That misery without impression
Upon themselves? Therefore one spirit goes
Through all this bulk, not by extension
But by a total self-reduplication.
35
Which neither body, nor dispersed form,
Nor point of form dispersed ever could do:
And bodies life or spright for to transform
Into our soul, though that might this undo,
But yet so rash conceit to yield unto
Cannot be safe: for if it propagate.
It Is self and 'ts passions, yet they free may go
Unmarked, if sense would not them contemplate.
So does the mundane spright not heeded circulate.
35
Besides, if from that spirit natural
The nurse of plants, you should dare to assert
That lively inward Animadversall
To springen out, it would surely invert
The order of the orbs from whence do stert
All several beings and of them depend.
Therefore the orb Fantastic must exert
All life fantastical; sensitive send
The life of sense; so of the rest unto each end.
36
There Is naught from its own self can senden forth
Ought better then it self. So naught gives sense
That has not sense it self, nor greater worth
Then sense, nor sense, nor better springs from thence.
Nor that which higher is can have essence
Less active, less reduplicate, less free,
Less spiritall, then that is amov'd from hence,
And is an orb of a more low degree.
Wherefore that centrall life has more activitie,
37
And present is in each part totally
Of this her body. Nor we ought diffide,
Although some creatures have vitalitie,
And stir and move when we have them divide
And cut in twain. Thus worms in sturdie pride
Do wrigge and wrest their parts divorced by knife;
But we must know that Natures womb does hide
Innumerable treasures of all life;
And how to breaken out upon each hint they strive.
38
So when the present actual centrall life
Of sense and motion is gone with one part
To manage it, straight for the due relief
Of the other particle there up does start
Another centrall life, and tries its art:
But it cannot reign long, nor yet recure
That deadly wound. The plantall life's depare,
And flitten or shrunk spright, that did procure
Her company, being lost, make her she will not endure.
39
And so at last is gone, from whence she came,
For soon did fade that sweet allurement,
The plantall life, which for a while d^d flame
With sympathetick fire, but that being spent
Straight she is flowne. Or may you this content?
That some impression of that very soul
That Is gone, if gone, with plantall spirit meint
The broken corse thus busily may roll.
Long it is till water boild does stranger heat control.
40
Thus have we proved 'cording to our insight
That humane souls be not corporcall
(With reasons drawn from the sensitive might)
Nor bodies, nor spread forms material,
Whether you substances list them to call
Or qualities, or point of these. I Will bring
Hereafter proofs from power rational
In humane souls, to prove the self same-thing.
Mount up aloft, my Muse, and now more shrilly sing.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 2: Cant. 3.
The souls incorporeitie
From powers rational
We prove; Discern true piety
From bitterness and gall.
1
LIke Carpenter entered into a wood
To cut down timber for some edifice
Of stately structure, whiles he casts abroad
His curious eye, he much perplexed ^s
(There stand in view so many goodly trees)
Where to make choice to enter his rugg'd saw:
My Muse is plunged in like perplexities,
So many arguments themselves do show,
That where to pitch my wavering raind does yet scarce know.
2
One taller then the rest my circling eye
Has hit upon, which if it be sound at heart
Will prove a goodly piece to raise on high
The heavenly structure of that deemed part
Of man, his soul, and by unerring art
Set his foundation 'bove the bodies frame
On its own wheels, that it may thence depart
Entire, unhurt. So does the Scythian swain
Drive his light moving house on the waste verdant plain.
3
I Will sing of piety, that now I mean
That Trismegist thus wisely does define,
Knowledge of God. That Is piety I ween,
The highest of virtues, a bright beam divine
Which to the purer soul does sweetly shine.
But what is this beam? and how does it enlight?
What does it teach? It teaches to decline
Self-love, and frampard ways the hypocrite
Does trample in, accloy'd with dirt and dismal night.
4
Not rage, nor mischief, nor love of a sect,
Nor eating irefulnesse, harsh cruelty
Contracting Gods good will, nor conscience checked
Or chok'd continually with impiety,
Fauster'd and fed with hid hypocrisy;
Nor tyranny against perplexed minds,
Nor forced conceit, nor man-idolatrie,
All which the eye of searching reason blinds,
And the souls heavenly flame in dungeon darkness binds.
5
Can wars and jarres and fierce contention,
Swollen hatred, and consuming envy spring
From piety? No. It Is opinion
That makes the riven heavens with trumpets ring,
And thundering engine murderous balls out-sling,
And send men's groaning ghosts to lower shade
Of horrid hell. This the wide world does bring
To devastation, makes mankind to fade:
Such direful things does false religion persuade.
6
But true religion sprung from God above
Is like its fountain full of charity,
Embracing all things with a tender love,
Full of good will and meek expectancy,
Full of true justice and sure verity,
In heart and voice; free, large, even in finite,
Not wedged in straight particularity,
But grasping all in its vast, active spright,
Bright lamp of God! that men would joy in thy pure light!
7
Can souls that be thus universalis'd,
Begot into the life of God e're die?
(His light is like the sun that does arise
Upon the just and unjust) can they sly
Into a nothing? and has God an eye
To see himself thus wasted and decay
In his true members? can mortality
Seize upon that that does it self display
Above the laws of matter, or the bodies sway?
8
For both the body and the bodies spright
Does things unto particulars confine,
Teaching them partial friendship and fell spite.
But those pure souls full of the life divine
Look upon all things with mild friendly cyne
Ready to do them good. Thus is their will
Sweetly spread out, and ever does incline
The bent of the first Goodness to fulfill.
Ay me! that dreary death such lovely life should spill!
9
Besides this largeness in the will of man
And winged freeness, now let us think upon
His understanding, and how it does scan
Gods being, unto whom religion
Is consecrate. Imagination
That takes its rise from sense so high ascent
Can never reach, yet intellection
Or higher gets, or at least has some sent
Of God, vaticinates, or is parturi^nt.
10
For ask it whether God be this or that,
A body infinite, or some mighty spright,
Yet not almighty, it condemns such chat;
Whether all present, or in some place pight,
Whether part here part there, or every whit
In every point, it likes that latter well:
So that its plain that some kind of insight
Of Gods own being in the soul does dwell,
Though what God is we cannot yet so plainly tell.
11
As when a name lodged in the memory,
But yet through time almost obliterate,
Confusely hovers near the fantasy:
The man that is thus affected bids relate
A catologue of names. It is not that,
Says he, nor that; that is something like to it,
That nothing like, that is like of all I wot,
This last you named it is not like that a whit;
O that is the very name, now we have rightly hit.
12
Thus if it be lawful least things to compare
With greatest, so our selves affected be
Concerning Gods high essence: for we are
Not ignorant quite of this mystery,
Nor clearly apprehend the Deity,
But in mid state, I called parturient,
And should bring forth that live Divinity
Within our selves, if once God would consent
To show his specious form and nature eminent:
13
For here it lies like colors in the night
Unseen and unregarded, but the sun
Displayes the beauty and the gladsome plight
Of the adorned earth, while he does run
His upper stage. But this high prize is won
By curbing sense and the self-seeking life
(True Christian mortification)
Thus God will his own self in us revive,
If we to mortify our straightned selves do strive.
14
But can ought bodily Gods form receive?
Or have it in its self potentially?
Or can ought sprung of this base body heve
It self so high as to the Deity
To clamber? strive to reach infinity?
Can ought born of this carcass be so free
As to grasp all things in large sympathy?
Can lives corporeal quite loosened be
From their own selves, casheering their centreitie?
15
These all ill suit with corporeitie:
But do we not amiss with stroke so strong
All to dispatch at once? needed we fly
So high at first? we might have chose among
The many arguments that close do throng
And tender their own selves this cause to prove,
Some of a meaner rank, and then along
Fairly and softly by degrees to move.
My Muse kens no such pomp, she must with freedom rove
16
And now as chance her guides, compendiously
The heads of many proofs she will repeat,
Which she lists not pursue so curiously,
But leaves the reader his own brains ^o beat,
To find their fuller strength. As the souls meat,
Of which she feeds, if that she feed at all;
She is immortal if she need not eat;
But if her food prove to be spiritall,
Then can we deem herself to be corporeal?
17
The souls most proper food is verity
Got and digest by Contemplation.
Hence strength, enlargement, and activitie
She finds, as does this bulk by infusion
Of grosser meats and drinks (concoction
Well perfected) the body is strong by these;
The soul by reasons right persuasion:
But that truth's spiritall we may with ease
Find out: For truth the soul from bodies does release.
18
Next argument let be abstraction,
When as the soul with notion precise
Keeps off the corporal condition,
And a naked simple essence does devise
Against the law of Corporeities,
It does divest them both of time and place,
And of all individualities,
And matter does of all her forms uncase.
Corporeal wight such subtle virtue never has.
19
Now shall the indivisibilitie
Of the souls virtues make an argument.
For certainly there is no such quality
Resideth in a body that is extent:
For, tell me, is that quality strait pent
Within a point of that corporeal?
Or is it with some spreaden part distent?
If in a point, then longs it not at all
To th'body: in spread part? then it is extentionall.
20
But that some virtue's not extentionall
May thus be proved. Is there no science
Of numbers? Yes. But what is principal
And root of all: have we intelligence
Of Unities? Or else what is sprung from thence
We could not know: what does the soul then frame
Within her self? Is that Idea extense?
Or indivisible? If not: we'll blame
The soul of falsehood, and continual lying shame.
21
Again, if we suppose our intellect
Corporeal, then must we all things know
By a swift touch: what? do we then detect
The truth of bigness, when one point does go
Of our quick mind? (It need not be o'reslow
For infinite parts be found in quantity)
Or does it use its latitude? If so
Remember that some things unspreaden be,
How shall it find them out? Or if it use both we'll see.
22
That both be unsufficient I prove.
A point cannot discern loos^ unity
Freed from all site. That latitude must move
On all the body that it does descry.
So must it be upstretch'd unto the sky
And rub against the stars, surround the sun
And her own parts to every part apply,
Then swiftly fridge about the pallid moon:
Thus both their quantities the mind has strangely won.
23
Add unto these, that the soul would take pains
For its destruction while it does aspire
To reach at things (that were her woeful gains)
That be not corporal, but seated higher
Above the bodies sphere. Thus should she tire
Her self to 'stroy her self. Again, the mind
Receives contrary forms. The feverish fire
Makes her cool brooks and shadowing groves to find
Within her thoughts, thus hot and cold in one she binds.
24
Nor is she changed by the susception
Of any forms: For thus her self contraire
Would be unto her self. But Union
She then possesses, when heat and cold are
Together met: They meet withouten jarre,
Within our souls. Such forms they be not true
You Will say. But of their truth lest you despair,
Each form in purer minds more perfect hew
Obtains, then those in matter we do daily view.
25
For there, they are mixed, soild and contaminate,
But truth does clear, unweave, and simplifie,
Search, sever, pierce, open, and disgregate
All ascititious cloggings; then does eye
The naked essence and its property.
Or you must grant the soul cannot define
Ought right in things; or you must not deny
These forms be true that in her self d^ shine:
These be her rule of truth, these her unerring line.
26
Bodies have no such properties. Again,
See in one cluster many arguments
Comprised: She multitudes can close constrain
Into one nature. Things that be fluent,
As flitting time, by her be straight retent
Unto one point; she joins future and past,
And makes them steady stand as if present:
Things distant she can into one place cast:
Calls kinds immortal, though their singulars do waste.
27
Upon her self she strangely operates,
And from her self and by her self returns
Into her self; thus the soul circulates.
Do bodies so? Her axle-tree it burns
With heat of motion. This low world she spurns,
Raises her self to catch infinity.
Unspeakable great numbers how she turns
Within her mind, like evening mist the eye
Discerns, whose muddy atoms before the wind do fly.
28
Stretches out time at both ends without end,
Makes place still higher swell, often creates
What God nere made, nor does at all intend
To make, free phantasms, laughs at future fates,
Foresees her own condition, she relates
The all comprehension of eternity,
Complains she is thirsty still in all estates,
That all she sees or has no'te satisfy
Her hungry self, nor fill her vast capacity.
29
But I Will break off; My Muse her self forgot,
Her own great strength and her foes feebleness,
That she her name by her own pains may blot,
While she so many strokes heaps in excess,
That fond gross fancy quite for to suppress
Of the souls corporal'ty. For men may think
Her adversaries strength does thus her press
To multitude of reasons, makes her swink
With weary toil, and sweat out thus much forced ink:
30
Or that she loves with trampling insultations
To domineere in easy victory.
But let not men dare cast such accusations
Against the blameless. For no mastery,
Nor fruitless pomp, nor any verity
Of that opinion that she here destroys
Made her so large. No, it is her jealousy
Against witching falsehood that weak souls annoyes,
And often does choke those chearing ho^es of lasting joys.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 3. Cant. 1.
The souls free independency;
Its drery dreadful state
In hell; Its tricentreity:
What brings to heavens gate.
1
WEll said that man, whatever man that was,
That said, What things we would we straight believe
Upon each slight report to have come to pass:
But better he, that said, Slow faith we give
To things we long for most* Hope and fear rive
Distracted minds, as when nigh equal weights
Cast on the trembling scales, each ^ug and strive
To pull the other up. But the same sleights
By turns do urge them both in their descents and heights:
2
Thus waves the mind in things of greatest weight;
For things we value most are companied
With fear as well as hope: these stiffly fight.
The stronger hope, the stronger fear is fed;
One mother both and the like livelyhead,
One object both, from whence they both do spring,
The greater she, the greater these she bred,
The greater these, the greater wavering
And longer time to end their sturdy struggeling.
3
But is there any thing of more import
Then the souls immortality? Hence fear
And hope we striving feel with strong effort
Against each other; That nor reason clear
Nor sacred Oracles can straight down bear
That sturdy rascal, with black fantasies
Yclad, and clouded with drad dismal cheer;
But still new mists he casts before our eyes,
And now derides our proved incorporeities,
4
And grinning says, That labor's all in vain.
For though the soul were incorporeall,
Yet its existence to this bulk restrain,
They be so nearly linked, that if one fall
The other fails. The ear nor hears our call
In stouping age, nor eye can see ought clear;
Benumming palfies shake the bodies wall,
The soul has lost its strength and cannot steer
Its crasie corse, but staggering on reels here and there.
5
So plain it is (that though the soul's a spright,
Not corporal) that it must needs depend
Upon this body, and must perish quite
When her foundation falls. But now attend
And see what false conceits vain fears do send.
It Is true, I cannot write without a quill,
Nor ride without an horse. If chance that rend
Or use make blunt, o're-labouring this kill,
Then can I walk not ride, not write but think my sill
6
Our body is but the souls instrument;
And when it fails, only these actions cease
That thence depend. But if new eyes were sent
Unto the aged man with as much ease
And accuratenesse, as when his youth did please
The wanton less, he now could all things see.
Old age is but this fading bulks disease:
The soul from death and sickness stands free:
My hackney fails, not I; my pen, not sciencie.
7
But as I said, of things we do desire
So vehemently we never can be sure
Enough. Therefore, my Muse, thou must aspire
To higher pitch, and fearful hearts secure
Not with slight fancy but with reason pure,
Evincing the souls independency
Upon this body that does her imn ure,
That when from this dark prison she shall fly
All men may judge her rest in immortality.
8
Therefore I Will sing the tricentreity
Of humane souls, and how they wake from sleep,
In which ywrapt of old they long do ly
Contract with cold, and drenched in Lethe deep,
Hugging their plantall point. It makes me weep
Now I so clearly view the solemn Spring
Of silent Night, whose Magic dew does steep
These drousie souls of men, whose dropping wing
Keeps off the light of life, and blunts each siery sting.
9
Three centres has the soul; One plantall hight:
Our parents this revive in nuptial bed.
This is the principle that hales o^ Night,
Subjects the mind unto dull drow siehead:
If we this follow, thus we shall be led
To that dark straitness that did bind before
Our sluggish life: when that is s^ rivelled
Into its sunken center, we no more
Are conscious of life: what can us then restore?
10
Unless with fiery whips fell Nemesis
Do lash our sprights, and cruelly do gore
Our groaning ghosts; this is the way, I wisse,
The only way to keep's from Morpheus power.
Both these so dismal are that I do shower
Uncessant tears from my compassionate eyes:
Alas! ye souls! why should or s^eep devour
Sweet functions of life? or hellist cries
To tender heart resound your just calamities?
11
Thus may you all from your dead drow sinesse
Be waked by inward sting and pinching woe,
That you could wish that that same heaviness
Might ever you o'represse, and Lethe flow
Upon your drowned life. But you shall glow
With urging fire, that does resuscitate
Your middle point, and makes it self to gnaw
It self with madness, while't does ruminatc
On its deformity and sterill vexing state.
12
Continual desire that naught effects,
Perfect hot glowing fervor out to spring
In some good world: With fury it affects
To reach the Land of life, then struck with sting
Of wounding memory, despairs the thing,
And further off it sees it self, the more
It rages to obtain: thus does she bring
More fuel to her flame that scorched sore
With searching fire, she is forced to yell and loudly rore.
13
Thus she devours her self, not satisfies
Her self, naught has she but what is dearly spun
From her own bowels, jejune exilties:
Her body's gone, therefore the rising sun
She sees no more, nor what in day is done,
The sporting air no longer cools her blood,
Pleasures of youth and manhood quite are gone,
Nor songs her ear, nor mouth delicious food
Does fill. But I Will have this more fully understood.
14
Three centres has man's soul in Unity
Together joynd; or if you will, but one.
Those three are one, with a Triplicity
Of power or rays. The highest intellection,
Which being waked the soul's in Union
With God. If perfectly regenerate
Into that better world, corruption
Has then no force her bliss to perturbate.
The low'st do make us subject to disturbing fate.
15
But low'st gins first to work, the soul does frame
This bodies fabric, employed in one long thought
So wholly taken up, that she the same
Observes not, till she quite has wrought.
So men asleep some work ^o end have brought
Not knowing of it, yet have found it done:
Or we may say the matter that she taught
And sucked unto her self to work upon
Is of one warmth with her own spright, and feels as one.
16
And thus the body being the souls work
From her own center so entirely ^ade,
Seated in the heart, for there this spright does lurk,
It is no wonder it is so easly swayed
A^ its command. But when this work shall fade,
The soul dismisseth it as an old thought.
It Is but one form; but many be displayed
Amid her higher rays, dismissed, and brought
Back as she list, and many come that never were sought.
17
The soul by making this strange edifice
Makes way unto it self to exercise
Functions of life, and still more waked is
The more she has perfected her fine devise,
Has wrought her self into sure sympathies
With this great world. Her ears like hollow caves
Resound to her own spright the energies
Of the worlds spright. If it ought suffered have,
Then presentifick circles to her straight notice gave.
18
We know this world, because our soul has made
Our body of this sensible worlds spright
And body. Therefore in the glassie shade
Of our own eyes (they having the same might
That glass or water has) we have the sight
Of what the Mundane spirit suffers
By colors, figures, or inherent light:
Sun, stars, and all on earth it hur^eth
To each point of it self so far as't circuleth.
19
And where it lights on advantages,
Its circulings grow sensible. So hills
That hollow be do audible voices
Resound. The soul does imitate that skill
In framing of the ear, that sounds may swell
In that concavitie. The crystal springs
Reflect the light of heaven, if they be still
And clear; the soul does imitate and bring
The eye to such a temper in her shapening.
20
So eyes and ears be not mere perforations,
But a due temper of the Mundane spright
And ours together; else the circulations
Of sounds would be well known by outward sight,
And the ear would colors know, figures and light.
So that it is plain that when this body's gone,
This world to us is closed in darkness quite,
And all to us is in dead silence drown.
Thus in one point of time is this worlds glory flowne.
21
But if it be so, how does Psyche hear or see
That has nor eyes nor ears? She sees more clear
Then we that see but secundarily.
We see at distance by a circular
Diffusion of that spright of this great sphere
Of th'Universe: Her sight is tactuall.
The sun and all the stars that do appear
She feels them in herself, can distance all,
For she is at each one purely presentiall.
22
To us what does diffusion circular,
And our pure shadowed eyes, bright, crystalline,
But vigorously our spright particular.
Affect, while things in it so clearly shine?
That Is done continually in the heavens sheen.
The sun, the moon, the earth, blew-glimmering hell,
Scorched Aetna's bowels, each bulk you can divine
To be in Nature, every dern cell
With fire-eyed dragons, or what else therein does dweil:
23
These be all parts of the wide worlds excess,
They be all seated in the Mundane spright,
And show just as they are in their bigness
To her. But circulation shows not right
The magnitude of things: for distant site
Makes a deficience in these circulings.
But all things lie ope-right unto the sight
Of heavens great eye; their thin shot shadowings
And lightened sides. All this we find in Natures springs.
24
The worlds great soul knows by Protopathie
All what befalls this lower spright; but we
Can only know it by De^eropathie,
At least in sight and hearing. She does see
In our own eyes, by the close unity
Of ours and the worlds life, our passion,
Plainly perceives our Idiopathie,
As we do hers, by the same union;
But we cannot see hers in that perfection.
25
Fresh varnished groves, tall hills, and gilded clouds
Arching an eielid for the gloring morn,
Fair clustred buildings which our sight so crowds
At distance, with high spires to heaven yborn,
Vast plains with lowly cottages forlorn
Rounded about with the low wayering sky,
Cragg'd vapors, like to ragged rocks ytorn,
She views those prospects in our distant eye:
These and such like be the first centres mystery.
26
Or if you will the first low energie
Of that one center, which the soul is hight,
Which knows this world by the close unity
Concorporation with the Mundane spright,
Unloos'd from this she wants a certain light,
Unless by true regeneration
She be incorporate with God, unite
With his own spright; so a new mansion
Sh'has got, often sook with deepest suspiration.
27
But robbed of her first clothing by hard fate,
If she fall short of this, wo's mel what pains
She undergoes? when this lost former state
So kindled has life's thirst, that still remains.
Thus her eternity her nothing gains
But hungry flames, raging voracitie
Feeding on its own self. The heavens she stains
With execrations and foul blasphemy.
Thus in foul discontent and smoth'ring fire they fry.
28
Vain man that striv'st to have all things at will!
What will thou do in this sterilitie?
Whom can thou then command? or what shall fill
Thy gaping soul? O depth of misery!
Prepare thy self by deep humility:
Destroy that fretting fire while thou art here,
Forsake this worlds bewitching vanity,
Nor death nor hell then shall thou need to fear.
Kill and cast down thy self, to heaven God shall thee rear.
29
This middle centrall essence of the soul
Is that which still survives asleep or waking:
The life she shed in this gross earthly moul
Is quite shrunk up, lost in the bodies breaking,
Now with slight phantasms of her own fond making
She Is clad (so is her life dry and jejune)
But all flit souls be not in the same taking:
That state this life's proportion does tune,
So as thou live here, such measure must ensuen.
30
But they whose souls deiform summitie
Is wakened in this life, and so to God
Are nearly joynd in a firm Unity
(This outward body is but earthie clod
Digested, having life transfused abroad,
The worlds life and our lower vitalitie
Unite in one) their souls have their abode
In Christ's own body, are eternally
One with our God, by true and strong community.
31
When we are clothed with this outward world,
Feel the soft air, behold the glorious Sun,
All this we have from meat that is daily hurld
Into these mouths. But first of all we wunne
This privilege by our first union
With this worlds body and diffused spright.
In The higher world there is such communion:
Christ is the sun that by his c^earing might
Awakes our higher rays to join with his pure light.
32
And when he has that life elici^ed,
He gives his own dear body and his blood
To drink and eat. Thus daily we are fed
Unto eternal life. Thus do we bud,
True heavenly plants, suck in our lasting food
From the first spring of life, incorporate
Into the higher world (as erst I showed
Our lower rays the soul to subjugate
To this low world) we fearlesse sit above all fate,
33
Safely that kingdoms glory contemplate,
Overflow with joy by a full sympathy
With that worlds spright, and bless our own estate,
Praising the fount of all felicity,
The lovely light of the blessed Deity.
Vain mortals think on this, and raise your mind
Above the bodies life; strike through the sky
With piercing throbs and sighs, that you may find
His face. Base fleshly fumes your drowsy eyes thus blind.
34
So has my Muse according to her skill
Discovered the soul in all her rays,
The lowest may occasionate much ill,
But is indifferent. Who may dispraise
Dame Natures work? But yet you ought to raise
Your selves to higher state. Eternity
Is the souls rest, and everlasting days:
Aspire to this, and hope for victory.
I further yet shall prove her immortality.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 3. Cant. 2.
From many arguments we show
The independencie
Of humane souls: That all lives flow
From a free Deity.
1
THree apprehensions do my mind divide
Concerning the souls preexistencie,
Before into this outward world she glide,
So has my Mule with much uncertaintie
Expressed herself, so as her fantasy
Strongly inacted guides her easy pen;
I naught obtrude with sour anxietie,
But freely offer hints to wiser men.
The wise from rash assent in darksome things abstein.
2
Or souls be well awake but hovering,
Not fixed to ought, but by a Magic might
Drawable here and there, and so their wing
Struck with the steem of this low Mundane spright
May lower flag and take its stooping flight
Into some plantall man, new edified
By its own plastic point. Or else (deep Night
Drawn on by drooping fancy) it does slide
Into this world, and by its self that skill is tried;
3
Makes to it self this fleshly habitation;
For this worlds spirit has provoked these rays:
Then drown in sleep it works that efformation
Of its own body, all its parts displayes,
As does the senseless plant. The two next ways
Are these: A real tricentreitie.
First center ever wakes, unmoved stays,
Hight Intellect. The next in sleep does lie
Till the last center burst into this open sky.
4
And then the middle wakes. But the last way
Makes but one center, which does sleep likewise
Till its low life has reached this worlds glad day.
A fourth we'll add that we may all comprise.
Take quite away all preexistencies
Of humane souls, and grant they are then first made
When they begin this bodies edifice,
And actually this outward world invade.
None of these ways do show that they must ever fade.
5
The first way might be well occasioned
By what we feel in the souls energies.
She works sometime as though she quite had fled
All commerce with this bulks vitalities,
Yet falls she down at last and lowly lies
In this base mansion, is so close contract
That sleep does seize her actualities,
Retains no memory of that strange fact,
Nor of her self that soared in that high heavenly tract.
6
The second way that makes the soul tricentrall,
The highest awake, the other with sleep drowned,
May spring from hence. None would vouchsafe the entrall
Into this life, if they were but once bound
To that vast cintre where all things are found,
Hight Intellect. The lowest is not awake,
Therefore the midst lies close in sleep upwound.
Three centres made, that souls may quite forsake
This baser world when union with the lowest they break.
7
Again, because this body's fashioned
Without our knowledge, reason does suggest
That it could no wise be thus figured
From our own center, and yet we not pressed
To any adversion. Therefore we are dressed
With this gross clothing by some plantall spright
Centred in Nature. So that glorious vest
The Deiform intellect not by our own might
Is made, But we have rays which each of these will fit.
8
Ardent desire, strong breathing after God,
At length may work us to that better place,
Body or clothing, that high sure abode
That searching weather nor time can deface.
But to go on in our proposed race,
The third and fourth way have the same foundation,
Not multiplying beings to surpass
Their use. What needs that numerous closed centration,
Like wastefull sand ytost with boisterous inundation?
9
Let wiser clerks the truth dare to define
I leave it loose for men to muse upon
View at their leisure: But yet this call mine;
Though we should grant the souls condition
Before its deep incorporation
Into dull matter to be nothing more
But bare potentiality, yet none
Can prove from thence that it must fade therefore,
When to its earth this earth the trusty fates restore.
10
For though she and her body be at once,
Yet of her body she does not depend
But it of her: she does its members branch,
Pierce, bind, digest, and after makes it wend
At her own will, when she has brought to end
Her curious work, and has consolidate
Its tender limbs which erst did feebly bend
Through weakness; then this world she contemplates,
And life still blazing higher seeks an heavenly state.
11
Breaths after the first fountain of all life,
Her sweet creator, thither does aspire,
Would see his face, nor will she cease this strife
Till he fulfill her thirsty fierce desire:
Nothing can quench this so deep rooted fire
But his own presence. So she gins despise
This bodies pleasures, cease to admire
Ought fair or comely to these outward eyes:
Or if she do, from hence she higher does arise.
12
But can she higher rise then her own head?
Therefore her spring is God: thence does she pend,
Thence did she flow, thither again she is fled.
When she this life has lost, and made an end
Of this low earthly course, she does ascend,
Unto her circles ancient Apogie
Lifted aloft, not again to descend,
Nor stoups nor sets that sun, but stands free
On never shaken pillars of Aeternity.
13
But still this truth more clearly to evince,
Remember how all things are from one light,
It shall thy reason forceably convince
That naught but God destroys a centrall spright.
If he sucks in his beams, eternal night
Seiseth upon that life, that it no'te flow
In energie, and has no being quite
But Gods own power. He lets his breath out go,
The self-same things again so easily does he show.
14
Let be noon day, the welk in clear, the moon
In The nether world, reflecting the suns rays
To cheer the irksome night. Well! That being done,
Call out some wondrous might, that listlesse stays
In slower phansies. Bid't break all delays;
Surround with solid dark opacity
The utmost beams that Phoebus light displayes,
Softly steal on with equal distancy,
Till they have close clapped up all his explendency.
15
All Is now in darkness: tell me, what is become
Of that infinity of rays that shone?
Were second centres from whence out did come
Other faint beams? what be they all quite flone?
All perished quite? You stiflers now be gone.
Let fall that smoring mantle. Do not straight
All things return? The nether world the moon,
The sun enlightens us. The self fame light
Now shines, that shone before this deep and dismal night.
16
If not the same. Then like to flowing stream
You deem the light that passes still away,
New parts ever succeeding. The sunne-beam
Has no reflection then, if it decay
So fast as it comes forth: Nor were there day;
For it would vanish before it could arrive
At us. But in a moment Sol does ray.
One end of his long shafts then we conceive
At once both touch himself and down to us do dive.
17
Beside, this air is not the sustentation
Of spreaden light; for then as it did move
The light would move. And sturdy conflictation
Of struggling winds, when they have fiercely strove,
Phoebus fair golden locks would rudely move
Out of their place; and eastern winds at morn
Would make more glorious days, while light is drove
From that bright quarter: southern blasts do burn
From midday sun, but yet northwinds like light have born.
18
What then must be the channel of this river,
If we'll have light to flow as passing stream?
So plain it is that Nature does dissever
The light and the air, that those bright sunny beams
Be not upheld by it, as the warm gleems
Or heat that lodges there. From this firm might
Naught leaning on the air, well may we are deem
Some subtle body, or some grosser spright
Depending of fair Phoebus, of no other wight.
19
And when these rays were forced to retire
Into their fountain, they were not so gone
But that the same sprung out from their first fire.
So fine spunne glittering silk crumpled in one
Changes not '^s individuation
From what it was, when it was gaily spread
In fluttering winds to the admiration
Of the beholder. Thus is naught so dead
But God can it restore to its old livelyhead.
20
For all the creature's but the out gone-rayes
Of a free sun, and what I meaned most
Of him alone depend. He deads their blaze
By calling in his breath. Though things be tossed
And strangely changed, yet naught at all is lost
Unless he list. Nor then so lost but he
Can them return. In every thing compost
Each part of the essence its centreity
Keeps to it self, it shrinks not to a nullity.
21
When that compounded nature is dissolved,
Each centre's safe, as safe as second light
Or drove into the sun, or thence out-rol'd.
So all depend on the Universal spright
From hight to depth, as they are ranked right
In their due orders. Life's full pregnancy
Breaks out when friendly sympathy does smite.
The higher rank the higher enegie,
From natures lowly lap to Gods sublimity:
22
But well may man be called the epitome
Of all things. Therefore no low life him made.
The highest holds all in his capacity.
Therefore man's soul from Gods own life outray'd,
His outgone Centre's on that center staid.
What disadvantage then can the decay
Of this poor carcass do, when it does fade?
The soul no more depends on this frail clay,
Then on our eye depends bright Phoebus glist'ring ray.
23
But in this argument we'll no longer stay,
Consider now the souls conversion
Into it self. Naught divisible may
Close with it self by revolution.
For then or part in this reflection
Is drove into a part, or part to the whole,
Or whole to part, or near compression
The whole into the whole does closely roll.
But easly all these ways right reason will control.
24
If part turn into part, part into whole,
Whole into part, the thing does not convert
Into it self; the thing it self is all
Not part often self: if all to all revert,
Each part then into each part is insert.
But tell me then how is their quantity
If every part with each part is refert?
Thus swallowed up, they will have no distancy;
So you destroy supposed divirsibilitie.
25
Wherefore that thing is individuous
What ever can into it self reflect,
Such is the soul as has been proved by us
Before, and further now we do detect
By its four wheels: The first hight Intellect,
Wherewith she drives into her Nature deep
And finds it out; next Will, this does affect
Her self found out. Her self then out does peep
Into these acts, she into both does easly creep.
26
But this conversion's from the body free;
Begins not thence, nor thither does return:
Nor is the soul worse then its energie,
If in its acts it be far higher born
Then they should pend on this base bulk forlorn:
Then also she has no dependency
Upon this body, but may safely scorn
That low condition of servility,
And blame all that aver that false necessity.
27
If she should issue from this nether spring,
Nearer she kept to her original
She were the stronger, and her works would bring
To more perfection; but alas! they fall
They fail by near approach. The best of all
Wax weak and faint by too close union
With this foul fount. Might intellectual
Grows misty by this strait conjunction;
The will is woxen weak, its vigor quite is gone.
28
But O! how often when she her self does cut
From nearer commerce with the low delight
Of things corporeal, and her eyes does shut
To those false fading lights, she feels her spright
Filled with excessive pleasure, such a plight
She finds that it does fully satisfy
Her thirsty life. Then reason shines out bright,
And holy love with mild serenity
Does hug her harmless self in this her purity.
29
What grave monitions and sure prophecy
Have men in sickness left? a true testation
Of the souls utter independency
On this poor crasie corse. May that narration
Of Aristotle's move easy persuasion
Of his Eudemus, to whom sic^ at Phere
While sleep his senses bound, this revelation
A gentle youth did bring with goodly cheer,
And jolly blithe deportment, chacing needless fear.
30
Told him that sickness would not mortal prove,
He should grow well ever long, but deaths drad power
On that towns tyrant should be shortly drove,
Swift vengeance on his cursed head should shower:
Both proved true. I could in plenty pour
Such like examples, as of Pherecyde,
Calanus, him of Rhodes, and others more;
But it is needless, it is a truth well tried,
The higher works the soul the more it is untied.
31
Then quite set loose from this bulks heavy chain
She is in happiest plight, so far she is
From being naught or perishing. Again,
We find such utter contrarieties
Betwixt the bodies and her energies,
That we can no ways think she pends at all
Of that with which she has such repugnancies.
What thing does fight with its Original?
The spring and stream be always homogeneall.
32
But the high heaven-born soul sprung out from Jove
Ever is clashing with the foolery
Of this dull body, which the sense does love,
And erring fancy. It were long to try
In every thing: O how 'twould magnify
The height of pleasures that fall under sense.
This well described would-prove its Deity.
A vast round body clothed with the excellence
Of glorious glistring light through the wide air extense,
33
Bravely adorned with diverse colors gay,
Even infinite varieties that shine
With wondrous brightness, varnished with the ray
Of that clear light, with motion circuline
Let turn about and stir up sounds divine,
That sweetly may affect the attentive ear.
Add fragrant odours wast with gentle wind,
Add pleasant taste, soft touch to Venus dear;
This is the bodies God, this is its highest sphere.
34
But from far higher place and brighter light
Our reason checks us for this vanity,
Calls to us, warns us that that empty sight
Lead not our soul unto Idolatry,
Make us not rest in easy falsitie.
If thou be stirred up by working sire
To search out God, to find the Deity.
Take to thy self not what thine eyes admire
Or any outward sense, or what sense can desire.
35
Behold a light far brighter then the Sun!
The Sun's a shadow if you them compare,
Or gross Cimmerian mist; the fairest Noon
Exceeds not the meridian night so far
As that light does the Sun. So perfect clear
So perfect pure it is, that outward eye
Cannot behold this inward subtle star,
But indisperst is this bright Majesty,
Yet every where out shining in in finitie;
36
Unplac'd, unparted, one close Unity,
Yet omnipresent; all things, yet but one;
Not streaked with gaudy multiplicity,
Pure light without discolouration,
Stable without circumvolution,
Eternal rest, joy without passing sound:
What sound is made without collision?
Smell, taste, and touch make God a gross compound;
Yet truth of all that is good is perfectly here found.
37
This is a riddle unto outward sense:
And heavy fancy, that can rise no higher
Then outward senses, knows no excellence
But what those five do faithfully inspire
From their great god, this world; nor do desire
More then they know: wherefore to consopite
Or quench this false light of bold phansies fire,
Surely must be an act contrary quite
Unto this bodies life, and its low grovelling spright.
38
Wherefore the body's not original
Of humane soul when it does thus resist
That principle: which still more clearly shall
Be proved. Often when either drowsy mists
Provoke to sleep, or worst of senses lists
To ease its swelling veins, or stomach craves
Its wonted food, that it too long has mist,
Or our dry lungs cool liquor fain would have,
Or when in war our heart suggests the fear of grave:
39
Yet high desire of truth, and deep insight
Into Gods mystery makes us command
These low attractions; and our countries right
Bids march on bravely, stout and stiffly stand
In bloody fight, and try't by strength of hand.
Thus truth and honesty so sway our will,
That we no longer doubt to break the band
Of lower Nature, and this body kill
Or vex, so we the Laws of reason may fulfill.
40
This proves the soul to sit at liberty,
Not wedged into this mass of earth, but free
Unloos'd from any strong necessity
To do the bodies dictates, while we see
Clear reason shining in serenity,
Calling above unto us, pointing to
What Is right and decent, what does best agree
With those sweet lovely Ideas that do show
Some glimps of their pure light. So Sol through clouds does flow.
41
How often do we neglect this bodies life,
And outward comely plight, for to adorn
Our soul with virtuous ornaments? and strive
To fat our mind with truth, while it is forlorn,
Squallid, half-nasty, pallid, wan, deform?
Can this desire from the base body spring?
No sure such brave achievements be yborn
Within the soul, tend to her perfecting,
See the independent mind in her self circuling!
42
Best plight of body hinders such like acts.
How does she then upon the body pend?
To do those subtle, high, pure, heavenly facts?
What? does the Sun his rays that he out-sends
Smother or choke? though clouds that upward wend
May raised be by him, yet of those clouds
That he does congregate he no'te depend.
Nor does the soul that in this flesh does crowd
Her self rely on that thick vapor where she is shroud.
43
But still to prove it clearer: If the mind
Without the bodies help can operate
Of its own self, then nothing can we find
To scruple at, but that souls separate
Safely exist, not subject unto fate,
Nothing depending on their carcases,
That they should fade when those be ruinate:
But first perpend well both their energies,
That we may better see their independencies.
44
The living body where the soul does 'bide
These functions has, fancy, sense, memory.
How into sense these outward forms do glide
I have already told. Vitality
And presentisick circularity
Is spread through all: there is one Mundane spright
And body, vital corporality
We have from hence. Our souls be counite
With the worlds spright and body, with these herself she has dight.
45
Our body struck by evolution
Of outward forms spread in the worlds vast spright,
Our listening mind by its adversion
Does notice take, but nothing is empight
In it. Of old Gods hand did all forms write
In humane souls, which waken at the knock
Of Mundane shapes. If they were naked quite
Of innate forms, though heaven and earth should rock
With roaring winds, they would hear no more then sensles stock.
46
Phansy's the impression of those forms that flit
In this low life: They often continue long,
When as our spright more potently is hit
By their incursions and appulses strong.
Like heated water, though a while but hung
On fiercer fire, an hot impression
Long time retains; so forms more stoutly flung
Against our spright make deep insculption;
Long time it is till their clear abolition.
47
Hence springs that which men call memory,
When outward object does characterize
Our inward common spright; of when that we
From our own soul stir up clear fantasies
Which be our own elicited Idees,
Springing from our own contrall life, by might
Of our strong Fiat as often as we please,
With these we seal that under grosser spright,
Make that our note-book, there our choicest notions write.
48
But since it is not any part of us,
But longs unto the great world, it must
Be changed; for course of time voraginous
With rapid force is violently just,
Makes each thing pay with what it was entrust.
The common life sucks back the common spright,
The body backward falls into the dust;
It does it by degrees. Hence phancie, sight,
And memory in age do not their functions right.
49
Often disease, or some hard casualtie
Does hurt this spirit, that a man does lose
The use of sense, wit, fancy, memory;
That hence rash men our souls mortal suppose
Through their rude ignorance; but to disclose
The very truth, our soul's in safety
In that distemper, that does ill dispose
Her under spright. But her sad misery
Is that so close she is tied in a prone Unity.
50
Leans on this bodies false vitalitie,
Seeks for things there, not in herself nor higher,
Extremely loves this bodies company,
Trusts in its life, thither bends her desire.
But when it gins to fail, she is left in the mire.
Yet hard upon us hangs the Eternal light
The ever-live Idees, the lamping fire
Of lasting Intellect, whose nearness might
Illumine, were our minds not lost in that frail spright.
51
That spright and we are plain another thing:
Which now I Will clearly show that we may see
Our independence on its existing,
Which I must prove by eithers energie.
That spright has no preceptibilitie
Of her impressions: Fantasy nor sense
Perceive themselves; often with open eye
We look upon a man in our presence,
And yet of that near object have no cognoscence.
52
And so of Phansies that be fresh enough,
Even deeply sealed upon that lower spright,
Unless we seek them out and pierce them through
With aiming animadversion, they in night
Do lurk unknown to us, though they be bright
In their own selves. Again, some object may
In its great vigor, luster, sweying might
This spirit wound by its fierce riving ray;
Our sight is hurt by the eye of the broad blasing day.
53
Beside the senses each one are restraind
To its own object: so ^s Fantasy.
That in the spirits compass is containd;
As likewise the low natural memory.
But sooth to say, by a strong sympathy
We both are moved by these, and these do move.
As the light spider that makes at a fly,
Her self now moves the web she subt'ly wove,
Moved first by her own web, when here the fly did rove.
54
Like spider in her web, so do we sit
Within this spirit, and if ought do shake
This subtle loom we feel as it does hit;
Most part into adversion we awake,
Unless we chance into our selves betake
Our selves, or listen to the lucid voice
Of th'intellect, which these low tumults slake:
But our own selves judge of what ere accloyes
Our muddied mind, or what lifts up to heavenly joys.
55
All the five senses, Fancy, Memory,
We feel their work, distinguish and compare,
Find out their natures by the subtlety
Of sifting reason. Then they objects are
Of the understanding, bear no greater share
In this same act then objects wont to do.
They are two realties distinguished clear*
One from the other, as I erst did show.
She knows that spright, that sprigh* our soul can never know.
56
Sense, Fancy, Memory, as before was said
Be hurt by stronger objects, or be spoild
By longer exercise: Our soul never fades,
But does its spright commiserate long toild
With agitation, when it feels it moild
Descends to comfort it, and gives it rest;
But she grows quicker, vaster, never foild
With contemplations that this spright molest:
The inward soul's renewed as cannot be expressed.
57
How soul and spright be severed we see,
But how't works by it self is not yet shown;
I mean without this sprights assistencie,
Though not quite by its self. High light does crown
Its summitie, when sleep that spright does drown
Wrapped into highest heavens in ecstasie
It sees such things as would low life confound,
Enrage with a tumultuous agony,
Burst this pent spright for want of fit capacity.
58
Then it is joynd with the Eternal Idees,
Which move our souls as sights do here below:
Joynd with the spright of God we gaze on these,
As by the Mundane spright the out-world we know.
Our soul hangs twixt them both, and there does go
Where either spright does snatch her. Either raise
Her inward forms, which leap out nothing-slow
When sympathy them calls. Thus she displayes
Her inward life, Gods light views with her wakened rays.
59
When we confute a pregnant falsitie
Clothed with strong phantasms in our snared mind,
As this suppose, The earths stabilitie,
What help can we in our low fancy find,
Possessed of this impression? what shall bind
This stubborn falsehood so inveterate?
That spright so stiffly set cannot be inclined
By ought but by the soul that contemplates
Truth by her self, brings out her forms that be innate?
60
Flies she to sense? sense pleads for Ptolemee?
Flies she to her low fancy? that is so swayd
By sense, and fore-imprest Astronomy
By botch'd inculcate paradigmes made
By senses dictate, that they will both persuade
That Philolaus and wise Heraclide
Be frantic both, Copernicus twice mad.
She cannot then this question well decide
By ought but her own forms that in her self reside.
61
Which she calls out unto her faithful aid,
Commands deep silence to fond fantasy,
Whose odious prating truth I ath often betrayed,
And in its stead brought in rash falsitie,
Seated in sour inert stupiditie.
Then farewell sense, and what from sense has sprung,
Says she, I Will contemplate in purity,
And quit my self of that tumultuous throng:
What then she finds shall be unfold in my next song.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 3. Cant. 3.
That the earth does move, proofs Physical
Unto us do descrie;
Add reasons Theosophicall,
Als' add Astronomy.
1
Blessed souls first Authors of Astronomy!
Who clomb the heavens with your high reaching mind,
S^al'd the high battlements of the lofty sky,
To whom compared this earth a point you find;
Your bodies less, what measure has defined?
What art that mighty vastness? Such high facts
The ancient Giants swollen with raging wind
Could not effect. A subtle Parallax,
A dark Eclipse do quite obscure their braving acts.
2
O the great might of man's high Fantasy!
That with a shade or a divided line,
That naught, this but a thin exilitie,
Can do far more then strength enraged with tine,
Hoysted with haughty pride. That brood combine
To clamber up to heaven. Hill upon hill,
Ossa upon Olympus does recline:
Their brawnie arms redoubled force does fill,
While they their spirits summon to effect their furious will?
3
But all in vain they want the inward skill*
What comes from heaven only can there ascend.
Not rage nor tempest that this bulk does fill
Can profit ought, but gently to attend
The souls still working, patiently to bend
Our mind to sifting reason, and clear light,
That strangely figured in our soul does wend
Shifting its forms, still playing in our sight,
Till something it present that we shall take for right.
4
The busy soul it is that thither hent
By strength of reason, the true distancies
Of the erring Planets, and the vast extent
Of their round bodies, without outward eyes
Has viewed, told their proportionalities,
Confounded sense by reasons strange report
(But wiser he that on reason relies
Then stupid sense low-sunken into dirt)
This weapon I have got none from me may extort*
5
O you stiff-standers for aged Ptolemee,
I heartly praise your humble reverence
If willingly given to Antiquity;
But when of him in whom's your confidence,
Or your own reason and experience
In those same arts, you find those things are true
That utterly oppugn our outward sense,
Then are you forced to sense to bid adieu,
Not what your sense gainsayes to holden straight untrue.
6
Though contraire unto sense, though it be new
(But sooth to sayen the earth^ motion is of tried
Antiquity, as I above did show:
In Philolaus and in Heraclide
Those subtle thoughts of old did close reside)
Yet reason ought to bear away the bell.
But irefull ignorance cannot abide
To be outtopd, reprochfully 'twill yell,
Call's mad, when its own self does with foul fury swell.
7
But let them bark like band-dogs at the moon,
That mindlesse passes on in silencie:
I Will take my flight above this outward sun,
Regardlesse of such fond malignitie,
Life my self up in the Theology
Of heavenly Plato. There I Will contemplate
The Archtype of this sun, that bright Idee
Of steddie Good, that does its beams dilate
Through all the worlds all lives and beings propagate.
8
But yet in words to tried I will deigne
A while: They may our mind fitly prepare
For higher flight; we larger breath may gain
By a low hovering. These words they are
All found in that old Oracle of Clare.
That heavenly power which Iao hight
The highest of all the Gods thou may declare,
In spring named Zeus, in summer Helios bright,
In autumn called Iao, Aides in brumall night.
9
These names do plainly denotate the sun,
In Spring called Zeus, from life or kindly heat;
In winter, 'cause the days so quickly done,
He Aides hight, he is not long in sight;
In Summer, 'cause he strongly does us smite
With his hot darts, then Helios we him name
From Eloim or Eloah so hight;
In Autumn Jao, Jehovah is the same:
So is the word depraved by an uncertain fame.
10
So great similitude twixt Phoebus light
And God, that God himself the Nations deem
The sun. The learned Seventy have boldly pight
A tent therein for the true Eloim,
The sensible Deity you will reckon him,
If Hermes words bear with you any sway,
Or if you Christian Clerks do ought esteem,
In David's odes they make Gods Christ a day;
His father's then the sun from whence this light does ray.
11
Then by all the wide worlds acknowledgement,
The sunne's a type of that eternal light
Which we call God, a fair delineament
Of that which Good in Plato's school is hight,
His T'agathon with beauteous rays be dight,
Let Us now consult with their Theology,
And that Idea with our inward sight
Behold, casheering sensibility
Then in clear reason view this correspondency.
12
One steady Good, center of essencies,
Unmoved Monad, that Apollo hight,
The Intellectual sun whose energies
Are all things that appear in vital light,
Whose brightness passes every creatures sight,
Yet round about him stird with gentle fire
All things do dance; their being, action, might,
They thither do direct with strong desire,
To embosome him with close embracements they aspire.
13
Unseen, incomprehensible he moves
About himself each seeking entity
That never yet shall find that which it loves.
No finite thing shall reach infinity,
No thing dispersed comprend that Unity,
Yet in their ranks they seemly foot it round,
Trip it with joy at the worlds harmony
Struck with the pleasure of an amorous stound,
So dance they with fair flowers from unknown root ycrownd.
14
Still falling short they never fail to seek,
Nor find they nothing by their diligence;
They find repast, their lively longings eke
Kindled, continued, by timely influence.
Thus all things in distinct circumference
Move about him that satisfies them all.
Nor be they thus stird up by wary sense
Or foresight, or election rational,
But blindly reel about the heart of lives centrall.
15
So does the earth one of the erring seven
Wheel round the fixed sun, that is the shade
Of steady Good, shining in this out-heaven
With the rest of those stars that God has made
Of baser matter, all which be arrayed
With his far-shining light. They sing for joy,
They frisque about in circulings unstay'd,
Dance through the liquid air, and nimbly toy -cloy.
While Sol keeps clear their spright, consumes what may ac-
16
Better the Indigent be moved, then He
That wants naught: He fills all things with light
And kindly heat: through his fecundity
Peoples the world; by his exciting spright
Wakens the plants, calls them out of deep night.
They thrust themselves into his fostring rays,
Stretch themselves forth stird by his quickening might.
And all the while their merry roundelayes
(As lightsome phansies deem) each Planet sprightly plays.
17
But sooth to say that sound so subtle is
Made by percussion of the ethereall fire
Against our air (if it be not transmisse
By its exility,) that none ought admire
That we no'te hear what well we might desire
Heavens harmony. 'Cording to others lear
The sound's so big that it cannot retire
Into the windings of a mortal ear;
So cannot the Egyptian Niles Catadupa bear.
18
There ought to be certain proportion
Betwixt the object and the outward sense.
Rash man that do infer negation
From thy dead ear, or non-experience.
Then let them dance and sing, raise influence
From lively motion, that preserves their spright
From foul corruption: motion's the best fense
To keep off filth in children of cold Night,
Whose life is in dull matter; but the sunne's all Light.
19
Therefore full safely he may steady stond,
Unmoved, at least not removed out of place.
I Will not deny but that he may turn round
On his own center. So the steps we'll trace
Of Essence, Plato's On, which steady stays
And moves at once, that same Iao hight
In that old Clarian Oracle, that says
It is the sun. This answer will aright
To Iehova or first essence, as Plato school desery't.
20
That same first Being, Beauty, Intellect,
Turns to his father (of whom he was born)
In a brief instant. But who can detect
Such hidden mysteries? back mine eyes I Will turn,
Lest in this light like fluttering moth I burn.
Enough is shown of correspondency
Twixt this worlds sun and center of hid Morn,
The radiant light of the deep Deity.
Thus have I fairly proved the suns stability.
21
Then must the earth turn round, or we want day,
Or never be in night. Now I Will descend
Clothed with this truth. As wrathful dogs do bay
At specter solemn Cynthia does send;
So now I backward to the senses wend:
They Will bark at the shape of my disguised mind,
As stranger wights, they wrathfully will rend
This uncouth habit. They no such thing find
Amongst their domestic forms, to whom they are more kind.
22
And weaker reason which they wont misguide
Will deem all this nothing mysterious,
But my strong-winged Muse feebly to slide
Into false thoughts and dreams vertiginous,
And plainly judge us woxen furious,
Thus in our rage to shake the stable earth,
Whirling it round with turns prodigious;
For it does steadfast stand as it appear'th
From the unshaken buildings it so safely bear'th.
23
If it should move about, then would it sting
From of it self those fair extructed loads
Of carved stone: The air aloud would sing
With brushing trees: Beasts in their dark aboads
Would brained be by their own caves; the earth strowd
With strange destruction. All would shattered lie
In broken shivers What mad frantic mood
Does thus invade wary Philosophy,
That it so dotes on such a furious falsity?
24
But still more subt'lie this cause to pursue,
The clouds would always seem to rise from the East,
Which sense and oft-experience proves untrue;
They rise from all the quarters, South, North, West,
From every part, as Aeolus thinks best.
Again the earths sad stupid gravity
Unfit for motion shows its quiet rest.
Lastly an arrow shot unto the sky
Would not return unto his foot that let it fly.
25
Add unto these that contrariety
Of motion, when as the self same things
At the same time do back and forward hie:
As when for speed the rider fiercely dings
His horse with iron heel, lays the loose strings
Upon his neck, westward they swiftly scour,
When as the earth, finishing her daily rings,
Does eastward make with all her might and power,
She quite has run her stage at end of twice twelve hours.
26
These and like phansies do so strongly tie
The slower mind to ancient Ptolemee,
That shameful madnesse't were for to deny
So plain a truth as they deem this to be.
But yet, alas! if they could standen free
From prejudice, and heavy swaying sense
That dims our reason that it cannot see
What Is the pure truth, enough in just defense
Of Pythagore we find though with small diligence,
27
One single truth concerning unity
Of sprights and bodies, how one spirit may
Inact a various Corporeity,
Keep't up together and its might display
Through all the bulk, make it constantly obey
The powerful dictates of that centrall spright,
Which being one can variously play:
This lore if we but once had learnd aright,
All what was brought against us would vanish at first sight.
28
For that Magnetic might does so combine
Earth, Water, Air, into one Animate,
Whose soul or life so sweetly't does incline,
So surely, easly, as none can relate
But he that is exercised in every state
Of moving life. What? Can the plastic spright
So variously it and its bulk dilate,
Downward to hell upward to heaven bright,
And strangely figured leaves and flowers send into sight?
29
Can one poor single Center do all this
In a base weed that suddenly decays?
And shall not the earths life that is transmisse
Through sea and air, and with its potent rays
Informs all this (all this on that life stays)
Shall't not obtain the like variety
Of inward ruling motion? Your minds raise,
O sluggish men! single centrality
You Will find shall do, what ere's admit by phantasy.
30
Now see if this clear apprehension
Will not with ease repel each argument
Which we rehers'd with an intention
For to refute. The earths swift movement,
Because it is natural not violent,
Will never shatter buildings. With straight line
It binds down strongly each partic'larment
Of every edifice. All stones incline
Unto that Center; this does stoutly all combine.
31
Nor is less natural that circular motion,
Then this that each part to the center drives:
So every stone on earth with one commotion
Goes round, and yet with all right stiffly strives
To reach the center, though it never dives
So deep. Who then so blind but plainly sees
How for our safety Nature well contrives,
Binding all close with down-propensities?
But now we'll frame an answer to the loud-singing trees.
32
Walls, towers, trees, would stir up a strange noise,
If the air stood still, while the earth is hurled round.
As does the switch often shak'd by idle boys
That please themselves in varying of the sound.
But this objection we with reason sound
Have well prevented, while we plainly taught
Earth, water, air in one to be fast bound
By one spermatick spright, which easly raught
To each part: Earth, sea, air so powerfully has it caught.
33
All these as one round entire body move
Upon their common Poles; that difficulty
Of stirring sounds, so clearly we remove.
That of the clouds with like facility
We straight shall chase away. In the air they ly
And whirl about with it, and when some wind
With violence before him makes them fly,
Then in them double motion we find,
Eastward they move, and whither by those blasts they are inclined.
34
What they pretend of the Earths gravity,
Is naught but a long taken up conceit:
A stone that downward to the earth does hy
Is not more heavy then dry straws that jet
Up to a ring made of black shining jeat.
Each thing does tend to the loud-calling might
Of sympathy. So it is a misconceit
That deems the earth the only heavy weight.
They ken not the strange power of the strong centrall spright
35
Were there a shiver cut from off the Moon
And cast quite off from that round entire mass,
Would't fall into our mouths? No, it would soon
Make back to the center from whence forced it was:
The same in Mars and Sol would come to pass,
And all the stars that have their proper centres.
So gravity is naught but close to press
Unto one Magic point, there near to enter;
Each sympathetick part does boldly it adventure.
36
Thus in each starry globe all parts may tend
Unto one point, and mean time turn around;
Nor does that sway its circling ought offend:
These motions do not at all confound
One the others course. The earth's not heavy found,
But from that strong down-pulling centrall sway,
Which hinders not but that it may turn round,
Since that it moves not a contrary way.
Which answer I will bend against the fifth assay:
37
An arrow shot into the empty air,
Which straight returning to the bowmans foot,
The earths stability must proven clear.
Thus these bad archers do at random shoot,
Whose easy error I do thus confute.
The arrow has one spirit with this sphere,
Forced upward turns with it, moved by the root
Of natural motion. So when backed does bear
It self, still Eastward turns with motion circular.
38
So it is no wonder when it has descended
It falls back to the place from whence itflew,
Since all this while its circular course has bended
Toward the East, and in proportion due
That arcuall Eastern motion did pursue:
Nearer the earth the slower it must go;
These Arks be less, but in the heavens blew
Those Arks increase, it must not be so slow.
Thus must it needs return unto its idle bow.
39
Nor ought we wonder that it does conform
Its motion to the circles of the air,
Since water in a woden bucket born
Does fit it self unto each periphere,
By hight or depth, as you shall change the sphere.
So lowly set more water 't will contain,
'Cause its round tumor higher then does bea^
It self up from the brims. So may't be sayen
The lowlier man the larger graces does obtain.
40
But now to answer to the last objection,
It Is not impossible one thing to move
Contrary ways, which by a fit retection
I strongly will evince and clearly prove.
Take but the pains higher for to remove
A clock with hanging plummet. It goes down
At that same time you heave it high above
Its former place. Thus fairly have we won
The field against stupid sense, that reason fain would drown.
41
Now let us go on (we have well cleard the way)
More plainly prove this seeming paradox
And make this truth shine brighter then midday,
Neglect dull sconses mowes and idle mocks.
O constant hearts, as stark as Thracian rocks,
Well grounded in grave ignorance, that scorn
Reasons sly force, its light slight subtle strokes.
Sing we to these wast hills, dern, deaf, forlorn,
Or to the cheerful children of the quick-ey'd Morn?
42
To you we sing that live in purer light,
Escaped the thraldom of down-drooping sense,
Whose nimble spirit and clear piercing sight
Can easly judge of every conference
Withouten prejudice, with patience
Can weigh the moments of each reason brought
While others in tempestuous vehemence
Blow all away with bitter blasts. Untought
In subtilties, they show themselves in jangling stout.
43
I have the barking of bold sense confuted,
Its clamorous tongue thus being consopite,
With reasons easy shall I be well suited,
To show that Pythagore's position's right.
Copernicks, or whosoever dogma't hight.
The first is that that is wisely signified
By Moses Maymons son, a learned wight,
Who says each good Astronomer is tied
To lessen the heavens motions vainly multiplied,
44
And the foul botches of false feigned Orbs:
Whose useless number reason must restrain,
That often the loose luxuriant fancy curbs,
And in just bounds does warily contain:
To use more means then needs is all in vain.
Why then, O busy sons of Ptolemee!
Do you that vast star-bearing sphere constrain
To hurl about with such celerity,
When the earth may move without such strange velocity?
45
What needless phansy's this that that huge sphere
In one short moment must thus whirl around,
That it must fly six hundred thousand sheere
Of Germane miles. If that will not confound,
For pomp add forty thousand more, that 'bound;
Three thousand more, if it were requisite,
You might annex, and more, if they have found
The measure right; when as the earth's flow flight
In that time, of a mile goes but the sixteenth bit.
46
But if this All be liquid, pervious,
One fine Ethereall (which reason right
Will soon admit: for it is ridiculous
Thus for to stud the heaven with nails bright,
The stars in fluid sky will standen tight,
As men do feign the earth in the soft air
To be unmoved) How will proportion fit?
So vast a difference there does appear
Of motions in those stars that the same bigness bear.
47
Besides that difficulty will remain
Of unconceivable swift motion
In the Equinoctial stars, where some contain
This earthy globes mighty dimension,
Ten thousand times twice told. They hurry o^
With the same swiftness I set down before,
And with more pains. A globes extension,
The bigger that it grows, grows still more
Nigh to a flat faced figure, and finds resistance sore.
48
But now that all the heavens be liquid, hence
I Will fetch an argument. Those higher stars
They may as well hang in fluid essence,
As do the Planets. Venus orb debars
Not Mars, nor enters he with knock and jars;
The soft fine yielding Ether gives admission:
So gentle Venus to Marcurius dares
Descend, and finds an easy intromission,
Casts open that azur curtain by a swift discission.
49
That famous star nailed down in Cassiopee,
How was it hammered in your solid sky?
What pinsers pulled it out again, that we
No longer see it, whither did it fly?
Astronomers say 'twas at least as high
As the eighth sphere. It gave no parallax,
No more then those light lamps that there we spy.
But prejudiced minds before themselves they will tax
Of holy writ and the heavens they will make a nose of wax.
50
What man will now that is not vertiginous
Hurrie about his head these several lights,
So mighty vast with so voracious
And rapid course whirling them day and night
About the earth, when the earths motion might
Save that so monstrous labor, with less pains,
Even infinitely less? But thoughts empight
Once in the mind do so possess the brains,
That hard it is to wash out those deep ancient stains.
51
Two things there be whose reason's nothing clear:
Those cool continual breathings of East wind
Under the Line; the next high Comets are,
In which three motions Philosophers do find,
Concerning which men hitherto are blind,
That have not moved the earth unto their aid;
Diurnall and an annual course they have mind
Like to the suns, beside, by what they are swayed
To north or South. This myst'ry's easly thus displayed.
52
The Ecliptic course, and that diurnall moving,
Is but apparent as the suns, not true:
But that the earth does move, that still wants proving,
You Will say. Then if you will, these Comets show
One proof for her two motions. Whence issue
Those Meteors turnings? what shall hale them on,
And guide their steps, that in proportion due
They dance Sols measure? what occasion
Or fruit can be of that strange double motion?
53
Naught but the earths circumvolution
Does cause this sight, and but in outward show
This sight of double Sunlike motion
Seen in the Comets. For the winds that blow
Under the Aequinoctiall, who does know
Any other cause, that still they breathe from the East?
That strange effect from whence else can it flow,
Then from the earths swift hurring from the West?
Mid partis strongliest roused, the Poles do sleep in rest.
54
Wherefore men under the Aequinoctiall,
Where the earths course most rapid is and swift,
Sensibly 're dashed against that Aereall
Pure liquid essence. That clear air is left
Not snatched away so fast, not quite bereft
Of its own Nature, nor like the other sky
Unmoved quite; but slow paced is yclef:
And driven close together; sensibly
So feel we that fine air that seems from East to fly.
55
Those parts be in far greater purity
Devoid of earthy vapors. Thence it is
They Are not so easly turned by sympathy,
The air there having less of earthinesse;
So that they move not with one speediness,
The earth and it. Yet curious men have fun
Something like this, even in the mid-land sea;
Ships four times sooner the same stages run,
When westward they do sly, then when they there begun.
56
But that disgracement of Philosophy
From flux and reflux of the Ocean main
With its spread arms, we by this Theorie
Might take it away and show the causes plain.
Some parts of the earth do much more swiftness gain,
When as their course goes whirling on one way
With the annual motion, which must needs constrain
The sluid sea with unexpected sway.
Long time it were this mystery fully to display.
57
Wherefore I Will let it pass, my self betake
Unto some reasons Astronomicall,
To which if it please the nimble mind to awake
And shake off prejudice, that wont forestall
The ablest wit, I fear not but he will fall
Into the same opinion, magnify
That subtle spirit that has made this All,
And has half-hid his work from mortal eye,
To sport and play with souls in sweet philosophy.
58
But with crabb'd mind wisdom will nere consort,
Make its abode with a sour ingenie;
That harmless spright it self will nere disport
With bloody zeal, currish malignitie,
With wrathful ignorance, grave hypocrisy.
Mirth, and free mindedness, simplicity,
Patience, Discreetnesse, and benignity,
Faithfulness, heart-struck teneritie;
These be the lovely play-mates of pure verity.
59
The Eternal Son of God, who Logos hight,
Made all things in a fit proportion;
Wherefore, I wot, no man that judges right
In heaven will make such a confusion,
That courses of unlike extension,
Infinitely unlike, in like time shall be run
By the flight stars. Such vast distension
Of place shows that their time is not all one;
Saturn his ring no'te finish as quick as the Moon.
60
Yet if the Earth stand stupid and unmoved,
This needs must come to pass. For they go round
In every twice twelve hours, as is proved
By daily experience. But it would confound
The worlds right order, if it were surely found
A real motion. Wherefore let it be
In them but seeming, but a real round
In the earth it self. The world so's setten free
From that untoward disproportionalitie.
61
For so the courses of the erring Seven
With their own orbs will fitly well agree;
Their Annual periods in the liquid heaven
They only finish then: which as they be
Or less or greater, so the time they fly
In their own circlings has its difference.
The moon a month, Saturn years ten times three;
Those have the least and bigg'st circumference.
So all their times and orbs have mutual reference.
62
Next light's, the Planets dark opacitie,
Which long time has been found in the low moon:
Hills, valleys, and such like asperitie
Through optic glasses thence have plainly shone:
By the same trick it has been clearly shown
That Venus moon-like grows corniculate
What time her face with flusher light is blown:
Some such like things others have contemplate
In Mercury, about the Sun both circulate.
63
When Venus is the furthest off from us,
Then is she in her full. When in her full,
She seems least; which proves she is exterous
Beyond the Sun, and further off does roll.
But when her circling nearer down does pull,
Then gins she swell, and waxen bug with horn,
But loose her light, parts clad with darkness dull
She shows to us. She and Mercury never born
Far from the Sun, proves that about him both do turn.
64
They both opake, as also is the Moon
That turns about the earth (so turn those four
'Bout Jupiter, tend him as he does run
His annual course) Then Tellus so may scour
The Ethereall plain, and have the self saine power
To run her circuits in the liquid sky
About the Sun, the mind that does not lour,
Drooping in carthie dregs, will not deny,
Since we so well have proved the stars opacitie.
65
About the great the lesser lamps do dance,
The Medicean four reel about Jove;
Two round old Saturn without Nominance,
Luna about the earth does nimbly move:
Then all as it does seemly well behove,
About the bigg'st of all great Phoebus hight,
With joy and jollitie needs round must rove,
Tickled with pleasure of his heat and light.
What tumbling tricks they play in his far piercing sight!
66
But my next argument (could I't well express
With Poets pen) it has so mighty force,
That an ingenious man 'twould stoutly press
To give assent unto the Annual course
Of this our earth. But prejudice the nurse
Of ignorance stops all free confession,
Als keeps the way that souls have not recourse
To purer reason, chok'd with that oppression.
This argument is drawn from the stars retrocession.
67
Planets go back, stand still, and forward fly
With unexpected swiftness: What Is the cause
That they thus stagger in the plain-pav'd sky?
Or stupid stand, as if some dull repose
Did numb their spirits and their sinews lose?
Here'gins the wheel-work of the Epicycle;
Thus patch they heaven more botch'dly then old cloths.
This pretty sport does make my heart to tickle
With laughter, and mine eyes with merry tears to trickle.
68
O daring fancy! that do thus compile
The heavens from hasty thoughts, such as fall next;
Wary Philosophers cannot but smile
At such feat gear, at thy rude rash context.
An heap of orbs disorderly perplexed,
Thrust in on every hint of motion,
Must be the wondrous art of Nature, next
Here working under God. Thus, thus vain man
Intitles always God to his opinion;
69
Thinks every thing is done as he conceives;
Would bind all men to his religion;
All the world else of freedom he bereaves,
He and his God must have Dominion,
The truth must have her propagation:
That is his thought, which he has made a God,
That furious hot inust impression
Does so disturb his veins, that all abroad
With rage he roves, and all gainsayers down has trod.
32
But to return from whence my Muse has flown,
All this disordred superfluity
Of Epicycles, or what else is shown
To salve the strange absurd enormitie
Of staggering motions in the azure sky;
Both Epicycles and those turns enorm
Would all prove naught, if you would but let sly
The earth in the Ecliptic line yborn,
As I could well describe in Mathematick form.
71
So could I (that is another argument)
From this same principle most clearly prove
In regresse and in progress different
Of the free Planets: Why Saturn should rove
With shorter startings, give back less then Jove;
Jove less then Mars; why Venus flincheth out
More then Mercurius; why Saturn does move
Ofter in those back jets then Jove does shoot;
But Mercury more often then Venus and Mars stout:
72
And why the Sun escaped an Epicycle,
When as the old prodigal Astronomy
On the other six bestowed that needless cycle;
Why Saturn, Jove, and Mars be very nigh
Unto the earth, show bigger in our eye
At eventide when they rise Acronycall;
Why far removed with so vast distancie
When they go down with setting Kronycall:
All these will plain appear from the earths course Annual.
73
Many other reasons from those heavenly motions
Might well be drawn, but with exilitie
Of subtle Mathematics obscure notions,
A Poets pen so fitly no'te agree;
And curious men will judge't a vagrancy
To start thus from my scope. My pitched end
Was for to prove the immortality
Of humane souls: But if you well attend,
My ship to the right port by this bowed course did bend.
74
For I have clearly showed that stout resistance
Of the pure soul against the Mundane spright
And bulk, whereof's the lower man's consistence;
How it does quell by force of reason right
Those gross impressions which our outward sight
Sealed in our lower life: From whence we see
That we have proper independent might,
In our own mind, behold our own Idee,
Which needs must prove the souls sure immortality.
THE ARGUMENT OF PSYCHATHANASIA. Book 3. Cant. 4.
Justice, true faith in the first good,
Our best persuasion
Of blessed eternity unmoved,
The earths conflagration.
1
IT does me good to think what things will follow
That well proved thesis in my former song;
How we in liquid heavens more swift then swallow
Do sail on Tellus lap. That does among
The other stars of right not rudely throng,
We have what highest thoughts of man desire:
But highest thoughts of man are vain and vvrong.
In outvvard heaven we burn with hellish fire,
Hate, envy, covetise, revenge, lust, pride and ire.
2
In the eighth sphere Andromeda from chains
Is not releast; fearful Orion flies
The dreaded Scorpion. Alas! what gains
Then is it to live in the bright starrie skies?
It no man can exeem from miseries.
All you that seek for true felicity,
Rend your own hearts: There God himself descryes
Himself; there dvvells his beauteous majesty;
There shines the sun of righteousness in goodly glee.
3
And you who boldly all Gods providence
Confine to this small ball, that Tell us hight,
And dream not of a mutual influence,
And how that she may shine with beamsbright
At a far distance clad with Sols lent light,
As Venus and the Moon; O you that make
This earth Gods only darling dear delight,
All the other orbs merely for this orbs sake
So swiftly for to run with labor never slack,
4
To dance attendance on their Princess Earth
In their quick circuits, and with anger keen
Would bite him, that or serious or in mirth
Doubts the prerogative of your great Queen!
Best use of that your Theory, I ween,
In this, that as your selves monopolize
All the whole world, so your selves back again
You wholly give to God. Who can devise
A better way? Man's soul to God this closely ties.
5
But if the earth does thankfully reflect
Both light and influence to other stars,
As well as they to it, where is the defect?
That sweet subordination it mars;
Gods love to us then not so plain appears:
For then the stars be mutually made
One for another: Each all the good then bears
Of the Universe, for 'ts single labor paid
With the joint pains of all that in the heavens wade.
6
Rare reason! why! then God would be too good
What judges so but envy, and vain pride,
And base contract self-love? which that free flood
Of bounty has so confidently tied
Unto it self alone. Large hearts deride
This pent hypocrisy. Is he good to me?
That grace I would not ere should be denied
Unto my fellow: My felicity
Is multiplied, when others I like happy see.
7
But if the rolling stars with mutual rays
Serve one another; sweet fraternity
And humble love, with such like lore we'll raise,
While we do see Gods great benignity
Thus mutually reflected in the sky,
And, these round-moving worlds communicate
One with another by spread sympathy:
This all things friendly will concatenate;
But let more hardy wits that truth determinate.
8
It me behooves to hold forward on my way,
Leaving this uncouth strange Philosophy,
In which my lightsome pen too long did play,
As rigid men in sad severity
May deem; but we right careless leave that free
Unto their censure. Now more weighty thought
Does sway our mind, thinking how all does flee
Whatever we have painfully ytaught.
So little fruit remains of all my skill has wraught.
9
Oth' emptiness of vain Philosophy!
When thin-spunne reason and exile discourse
Make the soul creep through a strait Theory,
Whither the blunter mind can never force
It self; yet often, alas! the case is worse
Of this so subtle wight, when dangers deep
Approach his life, then his who learnings sourse
Did never drink of, nere his lips did steep
In Plato's springs, nor with low gown the dust did sweep.
10
Certes such knowledge is a vanity,
And has no strength to abide a stormy stoure;
Such thin slight clothing will not keep us dry,
When the grim heavens, all black and sadly sour
With rage and tempest, plenteously down shovver
Great floods of rain. Dispread exility
Of slyer reasons fails: Some greater power
Found in a lively vigorous Unity
with God, must free the soul from this perplexity.
11
Say now the dagger touched thy trembling breast,
Could thou recall the reasons I have shown
To prove the immortal state of men deceast?
Evolved reason cannot stand at one
Stoutly to guard thy soul from passion.
They pass successively like sand in the glass;
While thou look upon this the other's gone
But there is a plight of soul such virtue has
Which reasons weak assistance strangely does surpass.
12
The just and constant man, a multitude
Set upon mischief cannot him constrain
To do amiss by all their uprores rude,
Not for a tyrants threat will he ere stain
His inward honor. The rough Adrian
Tossed with unquiet winds does nothing move
His steady heart. Much pleasure he does gain
To see the glory of his Master Jove,
When his drad darts with hurrying light through all do rove.
13
If heaven and earth should rush with a great noise,
He fearlesse stands, he knows whom he does trust,
Is confident of his souls after joys,
Though this vain bulk were grinded into dust.
Strange strength resideth in the soul that is just:
It feels the power how't commands the spright
Of the low man, vigorously finds it must
Be independent of such feeble might
Whose motions dare not 'pear before its awful sight.
14
But yet, my Muse, still take an higher flight,
Sing of Platonic Faith in the first Good,
That Faith that does our souls to God unite
So strongly, tightly, that the rapid flood
Of this swift flux of things, nor with foul mud
Can stain, nor strike us off from the unity,
Wherein we steadfast stand, unshak'd, unmoved,
Engrafted by a deep vitality.
The prop and stay of things is Gods benignity.
15
Als is the rule of his Oeconomie.
No other cause the creature brought to light
But the first Goods pregnant fecundity:
He to himself is perfect full delight;
He wants naught, with his own beams bedight
He glory has enough. O blasphemy!
That envy gives to God or sour despite!
Harsh hearts! that feign in God a tyranny,
Under pretense t'encrease his sovereigne Majesty.
16
When nothing can to Gods own self accrue,
Who Is infinitely happy; sure the end
Of this creation simply was to show
His flowing goodness, which he does out send
Not for himself; for naught can him amend;
But to his creature does his good impart,
This infinite Good through all the world does wend
To fill with heavenly bliss each willing heart.
So the free Sun does 'light and 'liven every part.
17
This is the measure of Gods providence,
The key of knowledge, the first fair Idee,
The eye of truth, the spring of living sense,
Whence sprout Gods secrets, the sweet mystery
Of lasting life, eternal charity.
But you O bitter men and sour of spright!
Which brand Gods name with such foul infamy
As though poor humane race he did or slight,
Or curiously view to do them some despite;
18
And all to show his mighty excellency,
His uncontrolled strength: fond men! areed,
Is It not as great an act from misery
To keep the feeble, as his life to speed
With fatal stroke? The weak shak'd whisling reed
Shows Boreas wondrous strong! but ignorance
And false conceit is the foul spirits meed;
Gods lovely life has there no entrance;
Hence their fond thoughts for truth they vainly do advance.
19
If God do all things simply at his pleasure
Because he will, and not because its good,
So that his actions shall have no set measure;
Is It possible it should be understood
What he intends? I feel that he is loved
Of my dear soul, and know that I have born
Much for his sake; yet is it not hence proved
That I shall live, though I do sigh and mourn
To find his face; his creatures wish he will slight and scorn.
02
When I breath out my utmost vital breath,
And my dear spirit to my God commend,
Yet some foul feign close lurking underneath
My serious humble soul from me may rend:
So to the lower shades down we shall wend,
Though I in hearts simplicity expected
A better doom; since I my steps did bend
Toward the will of God, and had detected
Strong hope of lasting life, but now I am rejected.
21
Nor of well being, nor subsistency
Of our poor souls, when they do hence depart,
Can any be assured, if liberty
We give to such odd thoughts, that thus pervert
The laws of God, and rashly do assert
That will rules God, but Good rules not Gods will.
What ere from right, love, equity, does start,
For ought we know then God may act that ill,
Only to show his might, and his free mind fulfill.
22
O belch of hell! O horrid blasphemy!
That Heavens unblemished beauty thus do stain,
And brand Gods nature with such infamy:
Can Wise, Just, Good, do ought that is harsh or vain?
All what he does is for the creatures gain,
Not seeking ought from us for his content:
What is a drop unto the Ocean main?
All he intends is our accomplishment.
His being is self-full, self-joy'd, self-excellent.
23
He his fair beams through all has freely sent:
Purge but thy soul that thou may take them in.
With froward hypocrite he never went,
That finds pretexts to keep his darling sin.
Through all the earth this spright takes pains to win
Unto it self such as be simply true,
And with malignant pride resist not him,
But strive to do what he for right does show;
So still a greater light he brings into their view.
24
All lives in several circumference
Look up unto him and expect their food;
He opes his hand, showrs down their sustinence:
So all things be yfild with their wished good,
All drink, are satisfied from this free flood.
But circling life that yet unsettled is
Grows straight, as it is further still removed
From the first simple Good, obtains less bliss,
Sustains sharp pains inflicted by just Nemesis.
24
But why do I my soul loose and disperse
With mouldring reason, that like sand does flow.
Life close united with that Good, a verse
Cannot declare, nor its strange virtue show.
That Is it holds up the soul in all its woe,
That death, nor hell, nor any change does fray.
Who walks in light knows whither he does go;
Our God is light, we children of the day.
God is our strength and hope, what can us then dismay?
25
Goodness it self will do to us this good,
That godly souls may dwell with him for aye.
Will God forsake what of himself's beloved?
What ever lives may shrink into cold clay;
Yet good men's souls death hests shall not obey.
Where there is no incompossibility
Of things, Gods goodness needs must bear the sway
You virtuous brood take it for sure verity,
Your souls shall not fall short of blessed eternity.
26
But yet bold men with much perplexity
Will here object against this principle,
Heaping up reasons (strange fecundity
Of ignorance!) that goodly might to quell
Of my last argument, so fairly well
Set down, right strongly the unsettled spright
To have confirmed at my last far-well:
But contraire forces they bring into sight,
And proudly do provoke me with that rout to sight.
27
Whence was it, say they, that God the creature made
No sooner? why did infinite delay
Precede his work? should God his goodness staid
So long a time? why did he not display
From infinite years this out-created ray?
The mighty stars why not inhabited,
When God may souls proportion to their clay
As well as to this earth? why not dispred
The world withouten bounds, endless, uncompassed?
28
Poor souls! why were they put into this cave
Of misery, if they can well exist
Without the body? Why will not God save
All mankind? His great wisdom if it list
Could so contrive that they would at last desist
From sinning, fallen into some providence
That sternly might rebuke them that have mist
Their way, and work in them true penitence:
Thus might they turn to God with double diligence.
29
Why be not damned souls devoyd of sense,
If nothing can from wickedness reclame,
Rather then fry in pain and vehemence
Of searching agony? or why not frame.
Another form, so with new shape and name
Again to turn to life? One centrall spright
Why may't not many forms in it contain,
Which may be waked by some magnetic might,
Cording as is the matter upon which they light?
30
For when two several kinds by Venus knit
Do cause a birth, from both the soul does take
A tincture; but if free it were transmit
Unclothed with the others seed, then it would make
One simple form; for then they could not slake
One the others energie. Why's the world still
Stark naught, through malice, or through blind mistake?
Why had the first-made-man such a loose will,
That his innumerous offspring he should foully spill.
31
Why was not this unlucky world dissolved
As soon as that unhappy Adam fell?
I itch till of this knot I be resolved:
So many myriads tumble down to hell,
Although partakers of Gods holy spell.
Beside, it is said, they that do not partake
Of Christian lore, for ever they must dwell
With cursed fiends, and burn in brimstone lake.
Such drery drad designs do make my heart to quake.
32
One of a multitude of myriads
Shall not be saved, but broyl in scorching woe;
Innumerous mischiefs then to mischiefs adds
This worlds continuance if that be so;
Ill infinitely more then good does grow.
So God would show much more benignity
If he the ribs of heaven about would strew,
Powder the earth, choke all vitality,
Call back the creature to its ancient nullity.
33
But thou, who ere thou art, that thus do strive
With fierce assault my groundwork to subvert,
And boldly do into Gods secrets drive,
Base fear my manly face no'te make m'avert.
In that odd question which thou first did stert,
I Will plainly prove thine incapacity,
And force thy feeble feet back to revert,
That cannot climb so high a mystery:
I Will show thee strange perplexed inconsistency.
34
Why was this world from all infinity
Not made? say thou: why? could it be so made?
Say I. For well observe the sequency:
If this out world continually has wade
Through a long long-spun time that never had
Beginning, then there as few circulings
Have been in the quick Moon as Saturn sad;
And still more plainly this clear truth to sing,
As many years as days or flitting hours have been.
35
For things that we conceive are infinite,
One the other no'te surpass in quantity.
So I have proved with clear convincing light,
This world could never from infinity
Been made. Certain deficiency
Does always follow evolution:
Nought's infinite but tight eternity
Close thrust into it self: extension
That Is infinite implies a contradiction.
36
So then for ought we know this world was made
So soon as such a Nature could exist;
And though that it continue, never fade,
Yet never will it be that that long twist
Of time prove infinite, though nere desist
From running still. But we may safely say
Time past compared with this long future list
Does show as if the world but yesterday
Were made, and in due time Gods glory out may ray.
37
Then this short night and ignorant dull ages
Will quite be swallowed in oblivion;
And though this hope by many surly Sages
Be now derided, yet they will all be gone
In a short time, like Bats and Owls yflone
At days approach. This will hap certainly
At this worlds shining conflagration.
Fayes, Satyrs, Goblins the night merrily
May spend, but ruddy Sol shall make them all to fly.
38
The roaring Lions and drad beasts of prey
Rule in the dark with pittious cruelty;
But harmless Man is master of the day,
Which does his work in pure simplicity.
God bless his honest useful industry.
But pride and covetize, ambition,
Riot, revenge, self-love, hypocrisy,
Contempt of goodness, forced opinion;
These and such like do breed the worlds confusion.
39
But whither am I gone? The eagre mind
Impatiently expects I should proceed
Unto the next objection; that defined,
Then thorough on. His vote it must not speed,
Danger of plenteous speech is the sure meed,
And Cynthius pulls me by my tender care,
Such signs I will observe with wary heed.
Therefore my restless Muse at length forbear,
Thy silver sounded Lute hang up in silence here.
ANTIPSYXOPANNYXIA, OR A Confutation of the sleep of the SOUL after death;
ANTIONOPSYXIA, OR That all SOULS are not one; A Paraphrase on Apollo's answer
concerning Plotinus SOUL.

By H. M. Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...),

Plotin. Ennead. 3. (...),

John 11. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1642.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO preface much concerning these little after-pieces of Poetry, I hold
needless, having spoke my mind so fully before. The motives that drevv me to
add them to the former are expressed in the Poems themselves. My drift is one in
them all: which is to raise a certain number of well ordered Phantasms, fitly
shaped out and warily contrived, which I set to skirmish and conflict with
all the furious phansies of Epicurisine and Atheism. But here is my
disadvantage, that victory will be no victory, unless the adversary
acknovvledge himself overcome. None can acknovvledge himself overcome, unless
he perceive the strength, and feel the stroke of the more powerful arguments.
But the exility and subtletie of many, and that not of the meanest, is such
(nor can they be otherwise) that they will (as that kind of thunder which
the Poets do commonly call (...), from its over quick and penetrating energie)
go through their more porous and spongie minds without any sensible impression.

Sure I am that sensuality is alvvayes an enemy to subtilty of reason, which
has its rise from subtilty of fancy: so that the life of the body, being
vigorous and radiant in the soul, hinders us of the sight of more attenuate
phantasms. But that being suppressed or very much castigate and kept under, our
inward apprehension grows clearer and larger. Few men can imagine any thing so
clearly awake, as they did when they were asleep. And what is the reason, but
that the sense of the body is then bound up or dead in a manner?

The dark glasse-windows will afford us a further illustration for this
purpose. Why is it that we see our own faces there by night? What can reflect
the species (as they phrase it) when the glass is pervious and transparent?
Surely reflection in the ordinary apprehension is but a conceit. The darkness
behind the glass is enough to exhibit visibly the forms of things within, by
hiding stronger objects from the eye, which would bury these weak idola in
their ^ore orient luster.

The stars shine and fill the air with their species by day, but are to be
seen only in a deep pit, which may fence the Suns light from striking our
sight so strongly. Every contemptible candle conquers the beams of the Moon, by
the same advantage that the Suns does the Stars, viz. propinquitie. But put
out the candle, and you will presently find the moonlight in the room; exclude
the moon, and then the feeblest of all species will step out into energie, we
shall behold the night.

All this is but to show, how the stronger or nearer (...) does obscure the
weaker or further off; and how that one being removed, the energie' of the
other will easily appear.

Now that our comparison may be the fitter, let us consider what Aristotle
says of fancy, that it is (...). Thus much I will take of him, that Fancy
is sense; and add to it that (...) is also (...), and (...) and what I have
intimated in some passages of these Poems, That the soul does always feel it
self, its own actual Idea, by its omniform centrall self. So that the
immediate sense of the soul is nothing else but to perceive its own energie.

Now since that, that which we call outward sense, is indeed the very energie of
the soul, and inward sense which is fancy can be but the very energie of the
soul, there seems to be no real and intrinsecall difference betwixt the (...)
and (...) of any form; no more then there is betwixt a frog born by the Sun
and mere slime, and one born by copulation: For these are but extrinsecall
relations. Wherefore (...) and (...) in the soul it self is all one.

But now since it is the same nature, why is there not the same degree of
energie in both? I say there is, as appears plainly in sleep, where we find all
as clear and energeticall as when we wake.

But here these (...) or (...) (for I have proved them all one) do as greater
and lesser lights dim one another; or that which is nearest works
strongliest. Hence it is that the light or life of this low spirit or body of
ours, stirring the soul into a perpetual sensual energie, if we foster this
and unite our minds, will, and animadversion with it, will by its close
nearness with the soul dim and obscure those more subtle and exile phantasms
or (...) risen from the soul it self, or occasioned by other men's writings. For
they will be in the flaring light or life of the body as the stars in the beams
of the Sun, scarce to be seen, unless we withdraw our selves out of the
flush vigor of that light, into the profunditie of our own souls, as into some
deep pit.

Wherefore men of the most tamed and castigate spirits are of the best and most
profound judgment, because they can so easily withdraw themselves from the
life and impulse of the lower spirit of this body.

Thus being quit of passion, they have upon any occasion a clear though still
and quiet representation of every thing in their minds, upon which pure bright
sydereall phantasms unprejudiced reason may safely work, and clearly discern
what is true or probable.

If my vvritings fall into the hands of men otherwise qualified, I shall gain
the less approbation. But if they will endeavor to compose themselves as
near as they can to this temper; though they were of another opinion then
what my writings intend to prove, I doubt not but they will have the
happiness to be overcome, and to prove gainers by my victory.

To say any thing more particularly concerning these last I hold it needless.
Only let me excuse my self, if any chance to blame me for my (...), as
confuting that which no man will assert. For it has been asserted by some; as
those Mauri whom Ficinus speaks of; and the question is also discussed by
Plotinus in his fourth Ennead, where he distinguishes of, all souls being one,
after this manner, (...). The latter member is that, which my arguments
conclude against. Though they were (...) yet were we safe enough; as safe as
the beams of the Sun the Sun existing. But the similitude of Praxiteles
broken glass is brought in, according to the apprehension of such, as make the
image to vanish into nothing, the glass being taken away: and that as there is
but one face, though there be the appearances of many; so though there be the
appearances of many souls, by reason of that ones vvorking in diverse bodies,
yet there is but one soul; and understanding sense and motion to be the acts of
this one soul informing several bodies.

This is that which both Plotinus and I endeavor to destroy, which is of
great moment: For if one only soul act in every body, what ever we are now,
surely this body laid in the dust we shall be nothing.

As for the Oracles answer to Amelius, if any vulgar conceited man think it
came from a devil with bats vvings and a long tail, the Seventies translation
of the eighth verse of 32 chapter of Deuteronomie may make it at least
doubtful. When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam he set the bounds of the people, (...). He did not
then deliver them into the hand and jurisdiction of devils, nor to be
instructed and taught by them.

But if Apollo who gave so good a testimony of Socrates while he was living,
and of Plotinus after his death, was some foul fiend, yet it is no prejudice to
their esteem, since our Savior Christ was acknowledged by the devil.

But I have broke my word, by not breaking off my speech before this. Reader,
it is time now to leave thee to the perusal of my vvritings, which if they
chance to please thee, I repent me not of my pains; if they chance not to
please, that shall not displease me much, for I consider that I also with small
content and pleasure have read the vvritings of other men.

Yours H. M.

THE ARGUMENT OF ANTIPSYCHOPANNYCHIA. Cant. I.
Adams long sleep, will, mind compared
With low vitality,
The fondness plainly have unbar'd
Of Psychopannychie.
1
THe souls ever durancy I sung before,
Ystruck with mighty rage. A powerful sire
Held up my lively Muse and made her soar
So high that mortal wit, I fear, she will tire
To trace her. Then a while I did respire.
But now my beating veins new force again
Invades, and holy fury does inspire.
Thus stirred up I Will add a second strain,
Lest, what before was said may seem all spoke in vain.
2
For sure in vain do humane souls exist
After this life, if lulled in listles sleep
They senseless lie wrapped in eternal mist,
Bound up in foggy clouds, that ever weep
Benumming tears, and the souls center steep
With deading liquour, that she never minds
Or feels ought. Thus drenched in Lethe deep,
Nor misseth she her self, nor seeks nor finds
Her self. This mirksome state all the souls actions binds.
3
Desire, fear, love, joy, sorrow, pleasure, pain,
Sense, fancy, wit, forecasting providence,
Delight in God, and what with sleepy brain
Might suit, slight dreams, all banished far from hence.
Nor pricking nor applauding conscience
Can wake the soul from this dull Lethargy;
That 'twixt this sleepy state small difference
You Will find and that men call Mortality.
Plain death's as good as such a Psychopannychie.
4
What profits this bare existency,
If I perceive not that I do exist?
Naught longs to such, nor mirth nor misery,
Such stupid beings write into one list
With stocks and stones. But they do not persist,
You Will say, in this dull dead condition.
But must revive, shake off this drow sie mist
At that last shrill loud-sounding clarion
Which cleaves the trembling earth, rives monuments of stone.
5
Has then old Adam snorted all this time
Under some senseless sod with sleep ydead?
And have those flames, that steep Olympus climb,
Right nimbly wheeled over his heedlesse head
So often, in heaps of years low-buried:
And yet can ken himself when he shall rise
Wakend by piercing trump, that far does shed
Its searching sound? If we our memories
And wit do lose by sickness, falls, sloth, lethargies;
6
If all our childhood quite be waste away
With its impressions, so that we forget
What once we were, so soon as age does sway
Our bowed backs, sure when base worms have eat
His mouldring brains, and spirits have retreat
From whence they came, spread in the common fire,
And many thousand sloping suns have set
Since his last fall into his ancient mire,
How he will ken himself reason may well admire:
7
For he must know himself by some impression
Left in his ancient body unwash'd out:
Which seems strange. For can so long succession
Of sliding years that great Colosses might
Well moulder into dust, spare things ywrought
So slightly as light phantasms in our brain,
Which often one year or month have wrenched out
And left no footsteps of that former stain,
No more then is of a cloud quite melted into rain?
8
And shall not such long series of time,
When Nature has dispread our vital spright
And turned our body to its ancient slime,
Quite wash away what ever was empight
In that our spirit? If bulk and soul unite
Lose such impressions, as were once deep sealed
And fairly glisterd like to comets bright
In our blew Chaos, if the soul congeald
With her own body lose these forms as I reveald,
9
Then so long time of their disjunction
(The body being into dust confract,
The spright diffused, spread by dispersion)
And such Lethean sleep that does contract
The souls hid rays that it does nothing act
Must certainly wipe all those forms away
That sense or fancy ever had impact.
So that old Adam will in vain assay
To find who here he was, he will have no memory.
10
Nor can he tell that ere he was before:
And if not tell, he is as if then first born.
If as first born, his former life's no store.
Yet when men wake they find themselves at morn.
But if their memory away were worn
With one nights sleep, as much as does respect
Themselves, these men they never were beforn,
This day's their birth day: they cannot conject
They ever lived till now, much less the same detect.
13
So when a man goes hence, thus may he say,
As much as me concerns I die now quite.
Adieu, good self! for now thou go away,
Nor can I possibly thee ever meet
Again, not ken thy face, nor kindly greet.
Sleep and dispersion spoils our memory.
So my dear self hence forth I cannot weet.
Wherefore to me it is perfectly to die,
Though subtiler Wits do called but Psychopannychie.
12
Go now you Psychopannychites! persuade
To comely virtues and pure piety
From hope of joy, or fear of penance sad.
Men promptly may make answer, Who shall try
That pain or pleasure? When death my dim eye
Shall close, I sleep not sensible of ought:
And tract of time at least all memory
Will quite debar, that reacquainten might
My self with mine own self, if so my self I sought.
13
But I shall neither seek my self, nor find
My self unsought: Therefore not deprehend
My self in joy or woe. Men ought to mind
What longs unto them. But when once an end
Is put unto this life, and fate does rend
Our retinence; what follows naught at all
Belongs to us: what need I to contend,
And my frail spright with present pain to gall
For what I nere shall judge my self did ere befall?
14
This is the uncouth state of sleeping soul,
Thus weak of its own self without the prop
Of the base body, that it no'te out-roll
Its vital rays: those rays death down does lop,
And all its goodly beauty quite does crop
With its black claws. Wisdom, love, piety,
Are straight dried up: death does their fountain stop.
This is those sleepers dull Philosophy,
Which fairly men invites to foul impiety.
15
But if we grant, which in my former song
I plainly proved, that the souls energic
Pends not on this base corse, but that self-strong
She by her self can work, then when we sly
The bodies commerce, no man can deny
But that there is no interruption
Of life; where will puts on, there does she hie.
Or if she is carried by coaction,
That force yet she observes by press adversion.
16
And with most lively touch does feel and find
Her self. For either what she most does love
She then obtains; or else with cross, unkind
Contrary life since her decease she has strove,
That keeps her wake, and with like might does move
To think upon her self, and in what plight
She Is fallen. And nothing able to remove
Deep searching vengeance, groans in this sad Night,
And rores, and raves, and storms, and with her self does fight.
17
But hearty love of that great vital spright,
The sacred fount of holy sympathy,
Prepares the soul with its deep quickening might
To leave the bodies vain mortality.
Away she flies into Eternity,
Finds full accomplishment of her strong desire;
Each thing would reach its own centrality:
So Earth with Earth, and Moon with Moon conspire.
Our selves live most, when most we feed our Centrall fire.
18
Thus is the soul continually in life
Withouten interruption. If that she
Can operate after the fatal knife
Has cut the cords of this bulks sympathy:
Which she can do, if that some energy
She exercise (immured in this base clay)
Which on this bulk has no dependency.
For then the like she will do, that done away,
These independent acts, its time now to display.
19
All comprehending Will, proportionate
To whatsoever shall fall by Gods decree
Or prudent sufferance, sweetly spread, dilate,
Stretched out to embrace each act or entity
That creep from hidden cause that none can see
With outward eyes. Next Intellect, whose hight
Of working's then, when as it stands most free
From sense and grosser fancy, deep empight
In this vild corse, which to purged minds yields small delight.
20
Both Will and Intellect-then works best,
When sense and appetite be consopite,
And grosser fancy lulled in silent test:
Then Will grown full with a mild heavenly light
Shines forth with goodly mental rays bedight,
And finds and feels such things as never pen
Can setten down, so that unexpert wight
May read and understand. Experienced men
Do only know who like impressions sustain.
21
So far's the soul from a dependency
(In these high actions) on the body base.
And further sign is want of memory
Of these impressions wrought in heavenly place,
I mean the holy Intellect: they pass
Leaving no footsteps of their former light,
When as the soul from thence descended has.
Which is a sign those forms be not empight
In our low proper Chaos or Corporeal spright.
22
For then when we our mind do downward bend
Like things we here should find: but all is gone
Soon as our flagging souls so low descend
As that straight spright. Like torch that droppeth down
From some high tower, hold steady clearly shone,
But in its fall leaves all its light behind,
Lies now in darkness on the grail, or stone,
Or dirty earth: That erst so fully shined,
Within a glowing coal has now its light confined.
23
So does the soul when from high Intellect
To grovelling sense she takes her stooping flight,
Falling into her body, quite neglect,
Forget, forgo her former glorious sight,
Gross glowing fire for that wide shining light;
For purest love, foul fury and base passion;
For clearest knowledge, fell contentious fight
Sprung from some scorching false inust impression
Which she will call truth, she gains. O witless Commutation!
24
But still more clear her independent might
In understanding and pure subtle will
To prove: I will assay to explain aright
The difference ('cording to my best skill)
'Twixt these and those base faculties that well
From union with the low vitality
Of this out-world, that when my curious quill,
Has well described their great disparity,
To the highest we may give an independency.
25
The faculties we deem corporeal,
And bound unto this earthy instrument
(So bound that they no'te operate at all
Without the body there immerse and meint)
Be hearing, feeling, tasting, sight, and sent.
Add lower fancy, Mundane memory:
Those powers be all or more or less ypent
In this gross life: We'll first their property
Set down, and then the others contrariety.
26
This might perceives not its own instrument.
The taste discovers not the spungy tongue;
Nor is the Mundane spright (through all extent)
From whence are sense and lower fancy sprung,
Perceived by the best of all among
These learned five, nor yet by fantasy:
Nor does or this or those so nearly throng
Unto themselves as by propinquity
To apprehend themselves. They no'te themselves descry;
27
Nor ever learnd they their own energie.
The mind held somewhere else in open sight,
What ever lies, unknown unto the eye
It lies, though there its image be empight,
Till that our soul look on that image right.
Wherefore themselves the senses do not know,
Nor does our fancy; for each furious wight
Has fancy full enough, so full't does show
As sense; nor he, nor's fancy does that fancy know.
28
Age, potent objects, too long exercise
Do weaken, hurt, and much debilitate
Those lower faculties. The Sun our eyes
Confounds with dazeling beams of light so that
For a good while we cannot contemplate
Ought visible: thus thunder deafs the ear
And age hurts both, that does quite ruinate
Our sense and fancy: so if long we hear
Or see, 't sounds not so sweet, nor can we see so clear.
29
Lastly, the Senses reach but to one kind
Of things. The eye sees colors, so the ear
Hears sounds, the nostrills snuff perfumed wind;
What gross impressions the out-senses bear
The fancy represents, sometimes it dare
Make unseen shapes, with uncouth transformation,
Such things as never in true nature are.
But all this while the phansies operation
Is bound to law of bodies: such is her figurat on.
30
This is the nature of those faculties
That of the lower Mundane spright depend.
But in our Intellect far otherwise
We'st see it, if we pressely will attend
And trace the parallels unto the end.
There Is no self-knowledge. Here the soul does find
Her self. If so, then without instrument.
For what more fit to show our inward mind
Then our own mind? But if it be otherwise defind;
31
Then tell me, Knows she that fit instrument?
If the kens not that instrument, how can
She judge, whether truly it does represent
Her self? there may be foul delusion.
But if she kens this organ; straight upon
This grant, I Will ask how kens she this same tole?
What? by another? by what that? so go on
Till to infinity you forward roll,
An horrid monster count in Philosophic school.
32
The soul then works by it self, and is self-liv'd,
Since that it acts without an instrument:
Free energies from her own self derived
Flow round. But to go on. The eyes yblent
Do blink even blind with objects vehement,
So that till they themselves do well recure
Less matters they no'te see. But rays down sent
From higher sourse the mind do maken pure,
Do clear, do subtilise, do fix, do settle sure.
33
That if so be she list to bend her will
To lesser matters, she would it perform
More excellently with more art and skill:
Nor by long exercise her strength is worn;
Witness wise Socrates, from morn to morn
That stood as stiff as any trunck of tree:
What eye could bear in contemplation
So long a fix'dnesse, none so long could see,
Its watery tears would wail its frail infirmity.
34
Nor feeble eld, sure harbenger of death,
Does hinder the free work of the Intellect.
When the eye grows dim and dark that it unneath
Can see through age, the mind then close collect
Into it self, such mysteries does detest
By its far-piercing beams, that youthful heat
Does count them folly and with scorn neglect,
His ignorance concludes them but deceit;
He hears not that still voice, his pulse so loud does beat.
35
Lastly sense, fancy, though they be confined
To certain objects, which to several
Belong; yet sure the Intellect or mind
Apprehends all objects, both corporeal,
As colors, sounds; and incorporeall,
As virtue, wisdom, and the higher spright,
Gods love and beauty intellectual;
So that its plain that she is higher pight
Then in all acts to pend on any earthly might.
36
If will and appetite we list compare,
Like difference we easly there discover,
This pent, contract, yfraught with furious jar
And fierce antipathy. It boyleth over
With fell revenge; or if new chance to cover
The former passion. Suppose lust or fear.
Yet all are tumults, but the will does hover
No whit enslaved to what she finds here,
But in a free suspense her self does nimbly bear.
37
Mild, gentle, calm, quick, large, subtle, serene,
These be her properties which do increase
The more that vigor in the bodies vein
Does waste and waxen faint. Desires decrease
When age the Mundane spright does more release
From this strait mansion. But the will does flower
And fairly spread, near to our last decease
Embraces God with much more life and power
Then ever it could do in its fresh vernall hour.
38.
Wherefore I think we safely may conclude
That Will and Intellect do not rely
Upon the body, since they are indew'd
With such apparent contrariety
Of qualities to sense and fantasy,
Which plainly on the body do depend:
So that departed souls free energie
May well exert, when they have made an end
Of this vain life, nor need to Lethe Lake descend.
The Argument of ANTIPSYCHOP ANNYCHIA. Cant. 2.
Bondage and freedom's here set out
By an inverted Cone:
The self-formd soul may work without
Incorporation.
1
FOuntain of beings! the vast deep abyss
Of life and love and penetrating Will,
That breaks through narrow Night, and so transmisse
At last does find it self! What mortal skill
Can reach this mystery? my trembling quill
Much less may set it forth; yet as I may
I must attempt this task for to fulfill.
He guide my pen while I this work assay
Who All, through all himself does infinitely display.
2
My end's loose largeness and full liberty
To finden out. Most precious thing I ween.
When centrall life its outgone energie
Does spreaden forth, unsneep'd by foe-man keen,
And like unclouded Sun does freely shine.
This is right Liberty, whose first Idee
And measure is that holy root divine
Of all free life, hight Ahad, Unity:
In all things He at once is present totally.
3
Each total presence must be infinite:
So is he infinite infinity.
Those infinites you must not disunite:
So is he one all-spreaden Unity.
Nor must you so out-spread this Deity,
But that infinity so infinite
Must be in every infinite: so we
Must multiply this infinite single sight
Above all apprehension of a mortal wit.
4
What is not infinitely infinite,
It is not simply infinite and free:
For straitness (if you do conceive aright
Is the true daughter of deficiencie.
But since there is no defect in Unity,
Or Ahad, Ahad this first center hight
In Poetry as yet to vulgar eye
Unpublish'd) him first freedom infinite
We may well style. And next is that eternal light;
5
Son unto Ahad, Aeon we him name
(In that same Poem) like his father free,
Even infinitely free I him proclaim
Every where all at once. And so is she
Which Psyche hight: for perfect Unity
Makes all those one. So hitherto we have
Unmeasurable freedom. Semele
Is next, whom though fair fluttering forms embrave,
Yet motion and defect her liberty deprave.
6
Imagination's not infinite,
Yet freer far then sense; and sense more free
Then vegetation or spermatick spright.
Even absent things be seen by fantasy;
By sense things present at a distancie;
But that spermatick spright is close consigned
Within the compass of a stupid tree,
Imprisoned quite in the hard rugged rind,
Yet there defective reduplication we find:
7
Far more defective then in fantasy
Or sense; yet freer is the plastic spright
Then quantity, or single quality,
Like quantity it self out stretched right
Devoid of all reduplicative might:
If any such like qualities there were
So dull, so dead, so all devoid of light
As no communicative rays to bear;
If there be such to Hyle they do verge most near.
8
But Hyle's self is perfect penury,
And infinite straitness: Here we finden naught,
Nor can do ought. If curiously we pry
Into this mirksome corner quite distraught
From our own life and being, we have brought
Our selves to nothing Or the sooth to sayen
The subtilest soul herself has never wrought
Into so strait a place, could nere constrain
Herself to enter, or that hagge to entertain.
9
Lo! here is the figure of that mighty Cone,
From the strait Cuspis to the wide-spread Base,
Which is even all in comprehension.
What Is infinitely nothing here has place;
What Is infinitely all things steddie stays
At the wide Basis of this Cone inverse,
Yet its own essence does it swiftly chase,
Oretakes at once; so swiftly does it pierce
That motion here is no motion.
10
Suppose the Sun so much to mend his pace,
That in a moment he did round the sky,
The nimble Night how swiftly would he chase
About the earth? so swift that scarce thine eye
Could ought but light discern. But let him hie
So fast, that swiftness has grown infinite,
In a pure point of time so must he fly
Around this ball, and the vast shade of Night
Quite swallow up, ever steddie stand in open sight.
11
For that which from its place is not away
One point of time, how can you say it moves?
Wherefore the Sun does always steddie stay
In our Meridian, as this reason proves.
And since that in an instant round he roves,
The same does hap in each Meridian line;
For in his instantaneous removes
He in them all at once does fairly shine,
Nor that large stretchen space his freeness can confine.
12
The Sun himself at once stands ^n each point
Of his diurnall circle. Thus we see
That rest and motion cannot be disjoynt,
When motion's swift even to infinity.
Here contrarieties do well agree,
Eternal shade and everlasting light
With one another here do well complie;
Instant returns of Night make one long Night.
Wherefore infinity is freedom infinite.
13
No hinderance to ought that does arrive
To this free camp of fair Elysium:
But nearer that to Hyle things do dive,
They are more pent, and find much lesser room.
Thus sensual souls do find their righteous doom
Which Nemesis inflicts, when they descend
From heavenly thoughts that from above do come
To lower life, which wrath and grief attend,
And scorching lust, that do the souls high honor blend.
14
Wherefore the soul cut off from lowly sense
By harmless fate, far greater liberty
Must gain: for when it has departed hence
(As all things else) should it not backward hie
From whence it came? but such divinity
Is in our souls that nothing less then God
Could send them forth (as Plato's schools descrie)
Wherefore when they retreat a free abode
They Will find, unless kept off by Nemesis just rod.
15
But if kept off from thence, where is she then?
She dwells in her own self, there does reside,
Is her own world, and more or less does pen
Her self, as more or less she erst did side
With sense and vice, while here she did abide.
Steril defect and nere obtaind desire
Create a cone, whose Cusp is not more wide
Then this worlds Cone. Here close-contracted fire
Does vex, does burn, does scorch with searching heat and ire.
16
Nor easly can she here fall fast asleep
To slake her anguish and tormenting pain:
What drisling mists may here her senses steep?
What foggie fumes benumb her moistened brain?
The flitten soul no sense does then retain.
And sleep arises from a sympathy
With these low sprights that in this bulk remain.
But when from these the soul is setten free,
What sleep may bind her from continual energie?
17
Here they will reply, It is not a gross sleep
That binds the soul from operation.
But since that death all phantasms clean does wipe
Out of the soul, she no occasion
Can have of Will or Intellection.
The corpse do rot, the spirit wide is spread,
And with the Mundane life fallen into one:
So then the soul from these quite being fled,
Unmoved of ought must lie, sunk in deep drowsihead.
18
Naught then she has whereon to contemplate,
Her ancient phantasms melt and glide away,
Her spright sucked back by all-devouring fate
And spread abroad, those forms must needs decay
That were therein imprinted. If they stay,
Yet since the soul from them is disunite,
Into her knowledge they can never ray.
So wants she objects the mind to excite:
Wherefore asleep she lies wrapped in eternal Night.
19
To which I answer, though she corporate
With no world yet, by a just Nemesis
Kept off from all; yet she thus separate
May often be struck with potent rays transmisse
From diverse worlds, that with such mockeries
Kindling an hungry fire and eagre will,
They do the wretched soul but Tantalize,
And with fierce choking flames and fury fill,
So vexed, that if she could in rage herself she would kill.
20
If any doubt of this perplexity,
And think so subtle thing can suffer naught:
What Is gnawing conscience from impiety
By highest parts of humane soul ywrought?
For so our very soul with pain is fraught,
The body being in an easy plight.
Through all the senses when you have presly sought,
In none of them you will find this sting empight:
So may we deem this dart the soul it self to hit.
21
Again, when all the senses beybound
In sluggish sloth, the soul does often create
So mighty pain, so cruelly does wound
It self with tearing torture, such a state
Brings on herself, that none could tolerate.
Which must be in herself; for once returned
Unto her body new resuscitate
From sleep, remembering well how erst she mourned,
Marvels how all so soon to peace and ease is turned.
22
Wherefore the soul it self receives pain
From her own self, withouten sympathy
With something else, whose misery must constrain
To deep compassion. So if struck she be
With secret ray, or some strong energie
Of any world, or lives that there remain,
She Is kept awake. Besides fecunditie
Of her own nature surely does contain
Innate Idees; This truth more fully I Will explain.
23
Strong forward bearing will or appetite,
A never wearied importunity,
Is the first life of this deep centrall spright:
Thus thrusts she forth before her some Idee
Whereby herself now actual she does see.
Her mighty Fiat does command each form
TO appear: As did that ancient Majesty
This world of old by his drad Word ^Form,
And made the soul of man thus divine Deiform.
24
Thus in a manner the humane soul creates
The image of her will: When from her center
Her pregnant mind she fairly explicates
By actual forms, and so does safely enter
To knowledge of her self.
Flush light she sends forth, and live Idees:
Those be the glass whereby the soul does paint her.
Sweet centrall love sends out such forms as please;
But centrall hate or fear foul shapes with evil ease.
25
The manner of her life on earth may cause
Diversity of those eruptions,
For will, desire, or custom do dispose
The soul to such like figurations.
Propension brings imaginations,
Unto their birth. And often the soul lets fly
Such unexpected eructations,
That she her self cannot devisen why,
Unless she do ascribe it to her pregnancy.
26
It is an argument of her forms innate
Which blazen out, perchance when none descry
This light is lost, sense does so radiate
With Mundane life, till this poor carcass die.
As when a lamp, that men do sitten by,
In some wide hall in a clear winter night,
Being blown out or wasted utterly,
Unwares they find a sly still silver light;
The moon the wall or pavement with mild rays has dight.
27
So when the oil of this low life is spent,
Which like a burning lamp does waste away;
Or if blown out by fate more violent;
The soul may find an unexpected ray
Of light; not from full faced Cynthia,
But her own fullness and quick pregnancy:
Unthought of life her Nature may display
Unto her self; not by forced industry,
But naturally it sprouts from her fecundity.
28
Now since adversion is a property
So deeply essential to the rational soul?
This light or life from her does not so fly,
But she goes with it as it out does roll.
All spirits that arround their rays extol
Possess each point of their circumference
Presentially. Wherefore the soul so full
Of life, when it rays out with press presence,
Oretakes each outgone beam; apprends it by advertence.
29
Thus plainly we perceive the energie
Of the departed soul: if we could find
Strong reason to confirm the innate idee,
Essential forms created with the mind.
But things obscure no'te easly be defind,
Yet some few reasons I will venture at,
To show that God's so liberal and kind
As, when an humane soul he does create,
To fill it with hid forms and deep idees innate.
30
Well sang the wise Empedocles of old,
That earth by earth, and sea by sea we see,
And heaven by heaven, and fire more bright than gold
By flaming fire, so gentle love descry
By love, and hate by hate. And all agree
That like is known by like. Hence they confess
That some external species strikes the eye
Like to its object, in the self-same dress.
But my first argument hence I Will begin to press.
31
If like be known by like, then must the mind
Innate idolums in it self contain,
To judge the forms she does imprinted find
Upon occasions. If she does not ken
These shapes that flow from distant objects, then
How can she know those objects? a dead glass
(That light and various forms do gaily stain)
Set out in open streets, shapes as they pass
As well may see; Lutes hear each foaming diapase.
32
But if she know those species outsent
From distant objects; tell me how she knows
These species. By some other? You nere meant
To answer so. For straight the question goes
Unto another, and still forward flows
Even to infinity. Does the object serve
Its image to the mind for to disclose?
This answer has as little sense or nerve:
Now reel you in a circle if you well observe.
33
Wherefore no ascititious form alone
Can make us see or hear; but when this spright
That is one with the Mundane's hit upon
(Since all forms in our soul be counite
And centrally lie there) she does beget
Like shapes in her own self; that energie
By her own centrall self who forth it let,
Is viewed. Her centrall omniformity
Thus easly keeps off needless infinity.
34
For the quick soul by it self does all things know.
And since withouten apt similitude
Nought's known, upon her we must needs bestow
Essential centrall forms, that thus endew'd
With universal likeness ever transmew'd
Into a representing energie
Of this or that, she may have each thing viewed
By her own centrall self-vitality
Which is her self-essentiall omniformity.
35
If plantall souls in their own selves contain
That vital formative fecundity,
That they a tree with different color stain,
And diverse shapes, smoothness, asperity,
Straightness, acuteness, and rotundity,
A golden yellow, or a crimson red,
A varnished green, with such like gallantry?
How dull then is the sensitive? how dead,
If forms from its own center it can never spread?
36
Again, an Universal notion,
What object ever did that form impresse
Upon the soul? What makes us venture on
So rash a matter, as ere to confess
Ought generally true? when nevertheless
We cannot ever run through all singulars.
Wherefore in our own souls we do possess
Free forms and immateriall characters.
Hence it is the soul so boldly general truth declares.
37
What man that is not dull or mad would doubt
Whether that truth (for which Pythagoras,
When he by subtle studdy found it out,
Unto the Muses for their helping grace
An Hecatomb did sacrifice) may pass
In all such figures wheresoever they be*
Yet all Rectangle Triangles none has
Viewed as yet, none all shall ever see.
Wherefore this free assent is from the innate idee.
38
Add unto these incorporeity
Apprehended by the soul, when sense nere saw
Ought incorporeall. Wherefore must she
From her own self such subtle idols draw.
Again, this truth more clearly still to know,
Let Us turn again to our Geometry.
What body ever yet could figure show
Perfectly perfect, as rotundity
Exactly round, or blameless angularity?
39
Yet does the soul of such like forms discourse,
And finden fault at this deficiency,
And rightly term this better and that worse;
Wherefore the measure is our own idee,
Which the humane soul in her own self does see.
And sooth to saye^ when ever she does strive
To find pure truth, her own profundity
She enters, in her self does deeply dive;
From thence attempts each essence rightly to descrive.
40
Last argument, which yet is not the least,
Wise Socrates dispute with Theaetete
Concerning learning fitly does suggest.
A midwifes son ycleeped Phenarete,
He calls himself: Then makes a quaint conceit,
That he his mothers trade did exercise.
All witless his own self yet well did weet
By his fit questions to make others wise;
A midwife that no'te bear another birth unties.
41
Thus jestingly he flung out what was true,
That humane souls be swollen with pregnancy
Of hidden knowledge, if with usage due
They were well handled, they each verity
Would bringen forth from their fecunditie,
Wise framed questions would facilitate
This precious birth, stir up the inward idee,
And make it streme with light from forms innate.
Thus may a skillful man hid truth clicitate.
42
What does the teacher in his action
But put slight hints into his scholars mind?
Which breed a solemn contemplation
Whether such things be so; but he does find
The truth himself. But if truth be not signed
In his own soul before, and the right measure
Of things proposed, in vain the youth does wind
Into himself, and all that anxious leisure
In answering proves useless without that hid treasure.
43
Nor is his masters knowledge from him flit
Into his scholars head: for so his brain
In time would be exhaust and void of wit,
So would the sorry man but little gain
Though richly paid. Nor is it more safe to sain
As fire breeds fire, art art does generate,
The soul with Corporeity 't would stain:
Such qualities outwardly operate,
The soul within; her acts there closely circulate.
44
Wherefore the soul it self by her idee,
Which is her self, does every thing discover;
By her own Centrall omniformity
Brings forth in her own self when ought does move her;
Till moved a dark indifferency does hover.
But fierce desire, and a strong piercing will
Makes her those hidden characters uncover.
Wherefore when death this lower life shall spill,
Or fear or love the soul with actual forms shall fill.
THE ARGUMENT OF ANTIPSYCHOPANNYCHIA. Cant. 3.
Departed souls by living Night
Sucked in, for pinching woe
No'te sleep; or if with God unite,
For joys with which they flow.
1
MY hardest task is gone, which was to prove
That when the soul by death's cut off from all,
Yet she within her self might live and move,
Be her own world, by life imaginall.
But sooth to sain, 't seems not so natural.
For though a star, part of the Mundane spright,
Shine out with rays circumferentiall
So long as with this world it is unite;
Yet what 't would do cut off, so well we cannot weet.
2
But since our soul with God himself may meet,
^nacted by his life, I cannot see
What scruple then remains that moven might
Least doubt, but that she wakes with open eye,
When fate her from this body does untie.
Wherefore her choicest forms do then arise,
Rowz'd up by union and large sympathy
With Gods own spright; she plainly then descries
Such plenitude of life, as she could nere devise.
3
If God even on this body operate,
And shakes this Temple when he does descend,
Or with sweet vigor does irradiate,
And lovely light and heavenly beauty lend.
Such rays from Moses face did once extend
Themselves on Sinai hill, where he did get
Those laws from Gods own mouth, man's life to mend;
And from Messiah on mount Saron set
Far greater beauty shone in his disciples sight.
4
Als Socrates, when (his large Intellect
Being filled with streaming light from God above)
To that fair sight his soul did close collect,
That inward luster through the body drove
Bright beams of beauty. These examples prove
That our low being the great Deity
Invades, and powerfully does change and move.
Which if you grant, the souls divinity
More fitly does receive so high an energy.
5
And that God does illuminate the mind,
Is well approved by all antiquity;
With them Philosophers and Priests we find
All one: or else at least Philosophy
Linked with Gods worship and pure piety:
Witness Pythagoras, Aglaophemus,
Zoroaster, thrice-mighty Mercury,
Wise Socrates, nothing injurious,
Religious Plato, and vice-taming Orpheus.
6
All these, addicted to religion,
Acknowledged God the fount of verity,
From whence flows out illumination
Upon purged souls. But now, O misery!
To seek to God is held a fantasy,
But men hug close their loved lust and vice,
And deem that thraldom a sweet liberty;
Wherefore reproach and shame they do devise
Against the braver souls that better things emprise.
7
But lo! a proof more strong and manifest:
Few men but will confess that prophecy
Proceeds from God, when as our soul's possessed
By his all-seeing spright; als ecstasie
Wherein the soul snatched by the Deity,
And for a time into high heaven hent
Does contemplate that blessed Divinity.
So Paul and John that into Patmos went,
Heard and saw things inestimably excellent.
8
Such things as these men jointly do confess
To be from Gods immediate energie,
But if that God ought on the soul impresse
Before it be at perfect liberty,
Quite rent from this base body; when that she
Is utterly releast, she will be more fit
To be informed by that divine Idee
Hight Logos, that does every man enlight
That enters into life, as speaks the sacred Writ.
9
Behold a fit resemblance of this truth,
The Sun begets both colors and s^ght,
Each living thing with life his heat indew'th,
He kindles into act each plastic spright:
Thus he the world with various forms does dight,
And when his vigor has framed out an eye
In any living wight, he fills with light
That organ, which can plainly then descry
The forms that under his far-shining beams do ly.
10
Even so it is with the intellectual sun,
Fountain of life, and all-discovering light,
He frames our souls by his creation,
Als he indews them with internal sight,
Then shines into them by his lucid spright.
But corporal life does so obnubilate
Our inward eyes that they be nothing bright.
While in this muddy world (...)
They lie, and with blind passions be intoxicate.
11
Fear, anger, hope, fierce vengeance, and swollen hate,
Tumultuous joy, envy and discontent,
Self-love, vainglory, strife and fell debate,
Unsatiate covetise, desire impotent,
Low-sinking grief, pleasure, lust violent,
Fond emulation, all these dim the mind
That with foul filth the inward eye yblent,
That light that is so near it cannot find.
So shines the Sun unseen on a trees rugged rind.
12
But the clean soul by virtue purified
Collecting its own self from the foul steem,
Of earthly life, is often dignified,
With that pure pleasure that from God does streem,
Often's enlightened by that radiant beam,
That issues forth from his divinity,
Then feelingly immortal she does deem
Her self, conjoynd by so near unity
With God, and nothing doubts of her eternity.
13
Nor death nor sleep nor any dismal shade
Of low contracting life she then does fear,
No troubled thoughts her settled mind invade,
The immortal root of life she sees clear,
Wishes she were for ever grafted here:
No cloud, no darkness, no deficiency
In this high heavenly life does ere appear;
Redundant fullness, and free liberty,
Easy flowing knowledge, never weary energy,
14
Broad open sight, eternal wake fullness,
Withouten labor or consuming pain:
The soul all these in God must needs possess
When there deep-rooted life she does obtain,
As I in a few words shall maken plain.
This bodies life by powerful sympathy
The soul to sleep and labor does constrain,
To grief, to weariness and anxiety,
In fine, to hideous sense of dread mortality.
15
But since no such things in the Deity
Are to be found; She once incorporate
With that quick essence, she is setten free
From ought that may her life obnubilate,
What then can her contract or maken strait?
For ever moved by lively sympathy
With Gods own spright, an ever-waking state
She does obtain. Does heavens bright blazing eye
Ever close, ywrapt in sleep and dead obscurity?
16
But now how full and strong a sympathy
Is caused by the souls conjunction
With the high God, I Will to you thus descry.
All men will grant that spread dispersion
Must be some hinderance to close union:
Als must confess that closer unity
More certainly does breed compassion;
Not that there is passion in the Deity,
But something like to what all men call Sympathy.
17
Now since the soul is of such subtlety,
And close collectednesse, indispersion,
Full by her centrall omniformity,
Pregnant and big without distension,
She once drawn in by strong attraction
Should be more perfectly there counite
In this her high and holy union
Then with the body, where dispersion's pight.
(But such hard things I leave to some more learned wight)
18
The first pure Being's perfect unity,
And therefore must all things more strongly bind
Then lives corporeal, which dispersed be.
He also the first Goodness is defined
Wherefore the soul most powerfully's ^nclin'd,
And strongly drawn to God. But life that is here,
When into it the soul does closely wind,
Is often sneep'd by anguish and by fear,
With vexing pain and rage that she no'^ easly bear.
19
Far otherwise it fares in that pure life
That does result in the souls Unity
With God: For there the faster she does strive
To tie herself, the greater liberty
And freer welcome, brighter purity
She finds, and more enlargement, joy and pleasure
Overflowing, yet without satietie,
Sight without end, and love withouten measure:
This needs must close unite the heart to that hid treasure.
20
This plainly's seen in that mysterious Cone
Which I above did fairly well descrive:
There freeness and incarceration
Were plainly setten forth. What down does dive
Into the straightened Cuspis needs must strive
With stringent bitterness, vexation,
Anxious unrest; in this ill plight they live:
But they that do ascend to the top yflown
Be free, yet fast unite to that fair vision.
21
Thus purged souls be close conjoynd to God,
And closer union surer sympathy;
Wherefore so long as they make their abode
In Him, incorporate by due Unity
They liven in eternal energie.
For Isreal's God nor slumbers, nor does sleep;
Nor Israel lost in dull lethargy
Must listlesse lie, while numbing streams do steep
His heavy head, overwhelmed in oblivion deep.
22
But here more curious men will straight enquire,
Whither after death the wicked soul does go,
That long has wallowed in the sinful mire.
Before this question I shall answer to,
Again the nature of the soul I Will show.
She all things in herself does centrally
Contain; what ever she does feel or know,
She feels or knows it by the innate Idee:
She Is allproportion'd by her omniformitie.
23
God, heaven, this middle world, deep-glimmering hell
With all the lives and shapes that there remain,
The forms of all in humane souls do dwell;
She likewise all proportions does contain
That sits her for all sprights. So they constrain
By a strong pulling sympathy to come,
And straight possess that fitting vital vein
That 'longs unto her, so her proper roon
She takes as mighty Nemesis does give the doom.
24
Now (which I would you presly should observe)
Though often I have with tongue balbutient
Prattled to the weaker care (lest I should sterve
My style with too much subtlety) I nere meant
To grant there is any such thing existent
As a mere body: For all is life, all spright,
Though lives and sprights be very different.
Three general sprights there be, ^ternall light
Is one, the next our World, the last Infernal Night.
26
This last lies next unto old Nothingnesse
Hight Hyle, whom I termed point of the Cone:
Her daughter Night is full of bitterness,
And strait constraint, and pent privation:
Her sturdie ray's scarce conquered by the moon.
The earths great shade breaks out from this hid spright,
And active is; so soon the Sun is gone,
Does repossesse the air shotten forth right
From its hid centrall life, ycleep'd Infernal Night.
26
In this drad world is scorching Phlegel^n,
Hot without flame, burning the vexed sense;
There hateful Styx and sad Cocytus run,
And silent Acheron. All drink from hence,
From this damned spright receiven influence,
That in our world or poison do outspue
Or have an uggly shape and foul presence:
That deadly poison and that direful hue
From this Nocturnall spright these uggly creatures drew.
27
This is the seat of Gods eternal ire,
When unmixt vengeance he does fully power
Upon foul souls fit for consuming fire:
Fierce storms and tempests strongly does he shower
Upon their heads: His rage does still devour
The never-dying soul. Here Satanas
Has his full swing to torture every hour
The grisly ghosts of men, when they have pass
From this mid world to that most direful dismal place.
28
Did Nature but compile one mighty sphere
Of this dark Stygian spright, and close collect
Its scattered being, that it might appear
Aloft in the wide heaven, it would project
Dark powerful beams, that solar life ycheckt
With these dull choking rays, all things would die,
Infernal poison the earth would infect,
Incessant showrs of pitchie shafts let fly
Against the Sun with darkness would involve the sky.
29
Nor is my Muse wox mad, that thus gives life
To Night or Darkness, since all things do live.
But Night is nothing (straight I Will end that strife)
Does naught impressions to the sense derive?
If without prejudice you will deigne to dive
Into the matter, as much realtie
To darkness as to coldness you will give.
Both Night and Coldness have their energie,
Both strike the sense, they both have real entitie.
30
Again, it is plain that that nocturnall spright
Sends forth black eben-beams and mirksome rays,
Because her darkness as the Sun his light
More clearly does reflect on solid place.
As when a wall, a shade empighten has
Upon it, sure that shade far darker is
Then is the air that lies in the mid space.
What is the reason? but that rays emisse
From centrall Night the walls reflection multiplies.
31
The light's more light that strikes upon the wall,
And much more strongly there affects the eye,
Then what is spread in the space aereall:
So it is with shadows that amid do lie
In the slight air; there scarce we them descrie,
But when they fall upon the wall or ground,
They gain a perfect sensibilitie.
Scarce ought in outgone light is to be found
But this Nocturnall ray's with like indowments crowned.
32
But why does my half-wearied mind pursue
Dim sculking darkness, a fleet nimble shade?
If Moses and wise Solomon speak true,
What we assert may safely well be said.
Did not a palpable thick Night invade
The Land of Egypt, such as men might feel
And handle with their hands? That darkness ray'd
From nether Hell, and silently did steal
On the enemies of God, as Scripture does reveal.
33
The womb of Night then fully flowred cut:
For that all-swaying endless Majesty
Which penetrateth those wide worlds throughout,
This thin spread darkness that dispersed does lie
Summoned by his drad voice, and strong decree.
Much therefore of that spirit close u^te
Into one place did strike the troubled eye
With horrid blackness, and the hand did smite
With a clam pitchie ray shot from that Centrall Night.
34
This Centrall Night or Universal spright
Of woe, of want, of balefull bitterness,
Of hatred, envy, wrath, and fell despite,
Of lust, of care, wasting disquietnesse,
Of war, contention, and bloud-thirstinesse,
Of zeal, of vengeance, of suspicion
Of hovering horror, and sad pensiveness,
This Stygian stream through all the world does run,
And many wicked souls unto it self has won.
35
Lo! here is the portion of the Hypocrite,
That serves God but in an outward show.
But his drad doom must pass upon his spright,
Where it propends there surely must he go.
Due vengeance neither sleeps nor is slow.
Hell will suck in by a strong sympathy
What Is like unto it self: So down they flow,
Devouring anguish and anxietie
Do vex their souls, in piteous pains, alas! they lie.
36
Thus with live Hell be they concorporate,
United close with that self-gnawing spright:
And this I wot will breed no sleeping state;
Who here descends finds one long restless Night
May this the dreaming Psychopannychite
Awake, and make him seriously prepare
And purge his heart, lest this infernal might
Suck in his soul before he be well aware.
Kill but the seeds of sin then are you past this fear.
37
Thus have I proved by the souls union
With heaven and hell, that she will be awake
When she from this mid Nature is ygone.
But still more curious task to undertake;
And spenden time to speak of Lethe lake,
And whether at least some souls fall not a sleep.
(Which if they do of Hell they do partake)
Whether who lived like plant or grazing sheep,
Who of naught else but sloth and growth does taken keep;
38
Whose drooping fancy never flowred out,
Who relished naught but this gross bodies food,
Who never entertaind an active thought,
But like down-looking beasts was only moved
To feed themselves, whither this drousie mood
So drench the lowering soul and inly sleep
That she lies senseless drowned in Lethe flood;
Who will let dive into this mystery deep:
Into such narrow subtilties I list not creep.
39
But well I wot that wicked cruelty,
Hate, envy, malice, and ambition,
Bloud-sucking zeal, and lawless tyranny,
In that Nocturnall spright shall have their won,
Which like this world admits distinction.
But like will like unto it strongly draw:
So every soul shall have a righteous doom.
According to our deeds God will bestow
Rewards: Unto the cruel he will no mercy show.
40
Where Is Nimrod now, and dreadful Hannibal?
Where Is that ambitious pert Pellean lad,
Whose pride sweld bigger then this earthly ball?
Where Is cruel Nero, with the rest that had
Command, and vexed the world with usage bad?
They Are all sunk down into this nether hell;
Who erst upon the Nations stoutly strad
Are now the Devils footstool. His drad spell
Those vassals does command, though they with fury swell.
41
Consuming anguish, styptick bitterness,
Does now so strangle their imperious will,
That in perpetual disquietnesse
They roll and rave, and roar and rage their fill,
Like a mad bull that the sly hunters skill
Has caught in a strong net. But more they strive
The more they kindle that tormenting ill.
Woe's me! in what great misery they live!
Yet wot I not what may these wretched thralls relieve.
42
The safest way for us that still survive
Is this, even our own lust to mortify;
So Gods own Will will certainly revive
Thus shall we gain a perfect liberty,
And everlasting life. But if so be
We seek our selves with ardent hot desire,
From that Infernal Night we are not free;
But living Hell will kindle a fierce fire.
And with uncessant pains our vexed soul will tire.
43
Then the wild fancy from its horrid womb
Will senden forth foul shapes. O horrid sight.
Overgrown toads fierce serpents thence will come,
Red-scaled Dragons with deep burning light
In their hollow eye-pits: With these she must fight;
Then thinks her self ill wounded, sorely stung.
Old fulsome hags with scabs and skurf bedight,
Foul tarry spittle tumbling with their tongue
On their raw lether lips, these near will to her clung,
44
And lovingly salute against her will,
Closely embrace, and make her mad with woe;
She Would lever thousand times they did her kill,
Then force her such vile baseness undergo.
Anon some Giant his huge self will show,
Gaping with mouth as vast as any cave,
With stony staring eyes, and footing slow:
She surely deems him her live-walking grave,
From that dern hollow pit knows not her self to save.
45
After a while, tossed on the Ocean main
A boundless sea she finds of misery;
The fiery snorts of the Leviathan
(That makes the boiling waves before him fly)
She hears, she sees his blazing morn-bright eye:
If here she escape, deep gulfs and threatening rocks
Her frighted self do straightway terrify;
Steel-coloured clouds with rattling thunder knocks,
With these she is amazed, and thousand such like mocks.
46
All which afflict her even like perfect sense:
For waxen mad with her sore searching pain
She cannot easly find the difference,
But toils and tears and tugs, (...) all in vain;
Her self from her own self she cannot strain.
Nocturnall life has now let open the idee
Of innate darkness, from this fulsome vein
The soul is filled with all deformity.
But Night does stir her up to this dread energie.
47
But here some man more curious then wise
Perhaps will ask, where Night or Hell may be:
For he by his own self cannot devise,
Since cheerful light does fill the open sky.
And what is the earth to the souls subtilty?
Such men I Would carry to some standing pool,
Down to the water bid them bend their eye,
They then shall see the earth possessed and full
Of heaven, dight with the sun, or stars that there do roll.
48
Or to an hill where is some deep hollow cave
Dreadful for darkness; let them take a glass,
When to the pitchie hole they turned have
Their instrument, that darkness will find place
Even in the open sunne-beams, at a space
Which measures twice the glasses distancy
From the caves mouth. This well discovered has
How Hell and Heaven may both together lie,
Since darkness safely rays even in the sunnie sky.
49
But cease, my restless Muse, be not so free;
Thy chiefest end thou had accomplished
Long since, shak'd of the Psychopannychie;
And roused the soul from her dull drousiehead;
So nothing now in death is to be dred
Of him that wakes to truth and righteousness:
The bulk lies here, the soul aloft is fled
Unto the fount of perfect happiness.
Full freedom, joy, and peace she lively does possess.
The Argument of ANTIMONOPS YC HIA.
The all-devouring Unity
Of souls I here disprove;
Show how they bear their memory
With them when they remove.
1
WHo yields himself to learning and the Muse,
Is like a man that leaves the steady shore,
And skims the sea. He naught then can refuse
What ever is designed by Neptunes power,
Is fiercely drove in every stormy stoure,
Slave to the water and the whisling wind:
Even so am I, that whylom meant recover
The wished land, but now against my mind
Am driven fiercely back, and so new work do find.
2
What though the Rational soul immortal be,
And safely does exist this bulk being gone,
And then existing has full energie
Perfectly wake, if all souls be but one?
Or, though a number, if oblivion
Of all things past, put them in such a state
That they can no-wise guess that ere upon
This earth they trod, even this seems to abate
Their happiness. They Will deem themselves then first create.
3
Wherefore to ease us of this double doubt,
With mighty force great Phoebus does inspire
My raving mind. He Will bear me strongly out,
Till I have perfected his own desire;
Nor will he suffer me once to respire
Till I have brought this song unto an end.
O may it be but short though a quick fire!
Such rage and rapture makes the body bend,
Does waste its fading strength and fainting spirits spend.
4
Now comes the story of Praxitele:
Into my mind, whom looking in a glass,
With surly countenance, it did much displease,
That any should so sourely him outface;
Yet whom he saw his dogged self it was:
Tho he with angry fist struck his own shade.
Thus he the harmless miroir shattered has
To many shivers; the same shapes invade
Each piece, so he a many surly sad faces made.
5
These shapes appeard from the division
Of the broke glass: so rasher phansies deem
The Rational soul (whom they suppose but one)
By the divided matter many to seem:
Disjoined bulks broke glasses they esteem:
Which if they did into one substance flow,
One single soul in that one glass would sheen;
If that one substance also were ygo,
One only soul is left, the rest were but a show.
6
Well is their mind by this similitude
Explaind. But now lets sift the verity
Of this opinion, and with reason rude
Rub, crush, touze, rifle this fine fantasy,
As light and thin as cob-webs that do fly
In the blew air, caused by the Antumnall sun,
That boils the dew that on the earth does lie.
May seem this whitish rag then is the scum,
Unless that wiser men make it the field-spiders loom.
7
But such deep secrets willingly I leave
To grand philosophers. I Will forward go
In my proposed way. If they conceive
There Is but one soul (though many seem in show)
Which in these living bodies here below
Does operate (some such opinion
That Learned Arab held hight Aven-Roe)
How comes't to pass that she is so seldom known
In her own self? In few she thinks her self but one.
8
Seems not this soul or Intellect very dull,
That in so few she can her self discover
To be but one in all, though all be full
Of her alone? Besides, no soul does love her
Because she sucks up all: but what would move her
Thus to detest her self, if one she be
In all men's bodies? right reason surely dtove her
Thus to condemn this lonesome Unity
Of mind or soul: which reason's her own energy.
9
Thoughts good and bad that Universal mind
Must take upon it self; and every ill,
That is committed by all humane kind,
They are that souls. Alas, we have no will,
No free election, nor yet any skill,
But are a number of dull stalking trees
That the universal Intellect does fill
With its own life and motion: what it please
That there it acts. What strange absurdities are these?
10
All plotted mischief that sly reason wrought,
All subtle falsities that nimbly fly
About the world, that soul them all has brought;
Then upon better thoughts with penalty
Does sore afflict her self, does laugh and cry
At the same time. Here Aristophanes
Does maken sport with some spruse Comedy;
There with some Tragic strain sad Sophocles
Strikes the Spectatours hearts, makes many weeping eyes.
11
Such grief this soul must in her self conceive
And pleasure at one time. But here you will say
We ought not grief nor pleasure for to give
Unto the soul. To what then? This live clay?
It feels no grief if she were gone away:
Therefore the soul at once does laugh and cry.
But in this argument I Will no longer stay,
But forward on with swifter course will hie,
And finden out some grosser incongruity.
12
Let now two men conceiven any form
Within their selves, suppose of flaming fire;
If but one soul does both their corpse inform,
There Is but one only species entire.
For what should make it two? The idee of fire,
That is but one, the subject is but one,
One only soul that all men does inspire.
Let one man quench that form he thought upon,
That form is now extinct and utterly ygone;
13
So that the other man can think no longer,
Which all experience does prove untrue.
But yet I Will further urge with reason stronger,
And still more clearly this fond falsehood show.
Can contraries the same subject imbew?
Yes; black and white, heat, cold may both possess
The mind at once; but they a nature new
Do there obtain, they are not gross qualities,
But subtle sprights that mutually themselves no^e press:
14
But contradiction, can that have place
In any soul? Plato affirms Idees;
But Aristotle with his pugnacious race
As idle figments stiffly them denies.
One soul in both does thus philosophise,
Concludes at once contradictoriously
To her own self. What man can here devise
A fit escape, if (what is sure verity)
He do but grant the souls indivisibility?
15
Which stiffly is maintaind in that same song
Which is ycleeped Psychathanasie,
And safely well confirmd by reasons strong:
Wherefore I list not here that truth to try,
But wish the Reader to turn back his eye,
And view what there was faithfully displaid.
Now if there be but one centrality
Of the Universal soul which does invade
All humane shapes; how come these contradictions made?
16
For that one soul is judge of every thing,
And hears all Philosophers dispute;
It self disputes in all that jangling,
In reasoning fiercely does it self confute,
And contradictions confidently conclude:
That is so monstrous that no man can think
To have least show of truth. So this pursuit
I well might now leave off: what need I swink
To prove what is clearly true, and force out needless ink.
17
Again, she would the same thing will and nill
At the same time. Besides, all men would have
The self-same knowledge, art, experience, skill;
The frugall parent might his money save,
The Pedagoge his pains: If he engrave
His Grammar precepts but in one boys mind,
Or decent manners: He does thus embrave
With single labor all the youth you will find
Under the hollow heavens, they will be alike inclined.
18
And every man is skilled in every trade,
And every silent thought that up does spring
In one man's breast, does every man invade;
No counsel-keeper, nor no secret thing
Will then be found; They Will need no whispering
Nor louder voice. Let Orators be dumb,
Nor need the eager auditors make a ring;
Though every one keep himself close at home,
The silent Preachers thoughts through all the world will roam,
19
Find each man out, and in a moment hit
With unavoyded force: Or sooth to sain
They all begin at once to think what is sit,
And all at once anon leave off again.
A thousand such incongruities vain
Will follow from that first absurdity,
Which does all souls into one center strain,
And make them void of self-centrality.
Strange soul from whence first sprung so uncouth falsity.
20
Now all the arguments that I have brought
For to disprove the souls strange solitude,
That there is not one only soul, well might
Be urged (and will with equal strength conclude)
To prove that God his creature has indewd
With a self centrall essence, which from his
Does issue forth, with proper rays embewd,
And that not all the very Godhead is:
For that would straight beget the like absurdities.
21
For he is indivisibly one being,
At once in every place, and knows all;
He is omnipotent, infinite in seeing:
Wherefore if Creatures intellectual
(And in that order humane souls will fall)
Were God himself, they would be alike wise,
Know one another thoughts imaginall,
Which no man does: such falsehoods would arise
With many more, which any idiot might well despise.
22
Nor will men's souls that now be different
Be God himself hereafter, and all one:
For thus they were quite lost; their life ylent
And subtle being quite away are flone.
This is a perfect contradiction,
They are all one with God, and yet they are.
If they be one with God, then they alone
Did make themselves, and every rolling star:
For God alone made these, and God himself they are.
23
Before the Sun and all the host of heaven,
The earth, the sea, and man's deep centrall spright;
Before all these were made, was not God even
With his own self? what then him moven might
To waste his words and say, Let there be light,
If the accomplishment of all things be,
That all be God himself. This is not right.
No more perfection, no more energie
There will be then, then at the former nullity.
24
Or will you say, that God himself delights
To do and undo? But how can this stand
With self-sufficiency? There Is naught that might
Add to his happiness (if I understand
His Nature right.) But he with open hand
Does easly feed the Creature that he made
As easly. Wherefore if the truth be scand
This Goodness would that naught should be decayed;
His mind is all should live; no life he would should fade.
25
But if the final consummation
Of all things make the Creature Deiform,
As Plato's school does phrase it; there is none
That thence need fear to come to any harm:
For God himself will then inact, inform,
And quicken humane souls at the last day;
And though the devil rore, and rage, and storm,
Yet deaths drad power shall be done away,
Nor living Night on men its poisonous beams shall ray.
26
He hasten it that makes that glorious day!
For certainly it is no fearful thing
But unto pride, and love of this base clay:
It Is their destruction, but the perfecting
Of the just souls. It unto them does bring
Their full desire, to be more close unite
With God, and utter cleans'd from all their sin.
Long was the world involved in cloudy Night,
But at the last will shine the perfect Christian light.
27
Thus the souls numerous plurality
I have proved, and showed she is not very God;
But yet a decent Deiformity
Have given her: thus in the middle trod
I safely went, and fairly well have rowed
As yet. Part of my voyage is to come,
Which is to prove that the souls new abode
In heaven or hell (what ever is her doom)
Naught hinders but past forms even there again may bloom.
28
Which if they did not, she could never tell
Why she were thus rewarded, wherefore ^ll
Or good she does enjoy, whether ill or well
She lived here. Remembrance death did spill.
But otherwise it fares; as was her will
And inclination of her thirsty spright,
Impressions of like nature then does fill
Her lively mind, whether with sad affright
Disturbed, which she long feared; or in hop'd-for delight.
29
The life that here most strongly kindled was
(Since she awakes in death) must needs betray
The soul to what nearest affinity has
With her own self; and likenesses do sway
The mind to think of what ever did play
In her own self with a like shape or form;
And contraries do help the memory:
So if the soul be left in case forlorn,
Remembrance of past joy makes her more deeply mourn.
30
It Is also worth our observation,
That higher life does ever comprehend
The lower energie: sensation
The soul some fitten hint does promptly lend
To find out plantall life; sense is retaind
In subtiller manner in the fantasy;
Als reason fantasies does well perpend:
Then must the highest of all vitality
Contain all under life. Thus is there Memory.
31
This faculty is very intimate
And near the Center, very large and free,
Extends it self to whatsoever that
The soul peracts There is no subtilty
Of Intellect, of Will, no energy
Of Sense, nor uncouth strange impression
From damned Night, or the blessed Deity,
But of all these she has retention,
And of their former being makes a prompt agnition.
32
This memory the very bond of life
You may well deem. If it were cut away
Our being truly then you might contrive
Into a point of time. The former day
Were naught at all to us: when once we lay
Our selves to sleep, we should not know at morn
That e're we were before; nor could we say
A whit of sense: so soon as off we turn
One word, that is quite forgot. Coherence thus is torn.
33
Now since it is of such necessity,
And is the bundle of the souls duration,
The watchman of the soul, lest it should fly
Or steal from its own self, a sure fixation
And Centrall depth it has, and free dilation,
That it takes notice of each energie
Of intellect, sense, or imagination:
Wherefore this virtue no dependencie
Has of this body, must be safe when it does die.
34
But if dispersed life's collection,
Which is our memory, safely survive
(Which well it may, since it depends not on
The Mundane spirit) what can fitly drive
It into action? In heaven it does live
So full of one great light, it has no time
To such low trifles, as past sights, to dive,
Such as she gathered up in earthly slime:
Foreknowledge of herself is lost in light divine.
35
But can she here forget our radiant Sun?
Of which its maker is the bright idee,
This is her shadow; or what she has done
Now she is rewarded with the Deity?
Suppose it: Yet her life's Centralitie
So sprightly's quickened with near Union
With God, that now wished for vitalitie
Is so increased, that infinitely sh' has fun
Herself, her deep'st desire unspeakably has won.
36
And deep desire is the deepest act,
The most profound and centrall energie,
The very selfnesse of the soul, which backed
With piercing might, she breaks out, forth does fly
From dark contracting death, and does descrie
Herself unto herself; so thus unfold
That actual life she straightwayes says, is I.
Thus while she were in this live bulk infold,
Of this low life, as of herself often tales she ^old.
37
In dangerous sickness often says, I die;
When naught does die but the low plantall man,
That falls asleep: and while Nature ^oth tie
The soul unto the body; she nere can
Avoid it, but must feel the self-same pain,
The same decay, if hereto she her mind
Do bend. When stupid cold her corse ^reran,
She felt that cold; but when death quite does bind
The sense, then she herself does dead and senseless find.
38
Or else at least just at the entrance
Of death she feels that sly privation,
How now it spreads ore all: so living sense
Perceives how sleep creeps on, till quite overcome
With drowsiness, animadversion
Does cease: but (lower sense then fast ybound)
The soul bestows her adversion
On something else: So often strange things has found
In sleep, from this dull carcass while she was unbound.
39
So though the soul, the time she does advert
The bodies passions takes her self to die;
Yet death now finished, she can well convert
Herself to other thoughts. And if the eye
Of her adversion were fast sixth on high.
In midst of death 'twere no more fear or pain,
Then 'twas unto Elias to let fly
His useless mantle to that Hebrew Swain,
While he rode up to heaven in a bright fiery wain.
40
Thus naved stoutly rescued the soul
From centrall death or pure mortality,
And from the listlesse floods of Lethe dull,
And from the swallow of drad Unity,
And from an all-consuming Deity.
What now remains, but since we are so sure
Of endless life, that to true piety
We give our minds, and make our conscience pure,
Lest living Night in bitter darkness us inmure.
FINIS.
A Paraphrasticall Interpretation of the answer of Apollo, when he was
consulted by Amelius whither Plotinus soul went when he departed this life.
I Tune my strings to sing some sacred verse
Of my dear friend; in an immortal strein
His mighty praise I loudly will rehearse
With hony-dewed words: some golden vein
The stricken chords right sweetly shall resound.
Come, blessed Muses, let us with one joint noise,
With strong impulse, and full harmonious sound,
Speak out his excellent worth. Advance your voice,
As once you did for great Aeacides,
Wrapped with an heavenly rage, in decent dance,
Moved at the measures of Meonides.
Go to, you holy quire, let us all at once
Begin, and to the end hold up the song.
Into one heavenly harmony conspire;
I Phoebus with my lovely locks y^ong
The midst of you shall sit, and life inspire.
Divine Plotinus! yet now more divine
Then when thy noble soul so stoutly strove
In that dark prison, where strong chains confine,
Keep down the active mind it cannot move
To what it loves most. Those fleshly bands
Thou now have loosed, broke from Necessity.
From bodies storms, and frothie working sands
Of this low restless life now setten free,
Thy feet do safely stand upon a shore,
Which foaming waves beat not in swelling rage,
Nor angry seas do threat with fell uprore;
Well have thou swommen out, and left that stage
Of wicked Actours, that tumultuous rout
Of ignorant men. Now thy pure steps thou stay'st
In that high path, where Gods light shines about,
And perfect Right its beauteous beams displayes.
How often, when bitter wave of troubled flesh,
And whirl-pool-turnings of the lower spright,
Thou stoutly strov'st with, heaven did thee refresh,
Held out a mark to guide thy wandering flight,
While thou in tumbling seas did strongly toil
To reach the steddie Land, struckst with thy arms
The deafing surges, that with rage do boil;
Stear'd by that sign thou shunn'st those common harms.
How often, when rasher cast of thy souls eye
Had thee misguided into crooked ways,
Wast thou directed by the Deity?
They held out to thee their bright lamping rays:
Dispersed the mistie darkness, safely set
Thy feeble feet in the right path again.
Nor easy sleep so closely ere beset
Thy eyelids, nor did dimnesse ere so stain
Thy radiant sight, but thou such things did see
Even in that tumult, that few can arrive
Of all are named from philosophy
To that high pitch, or to such secrets dive.
But since this body thy pure soul divine
Has left, quite risen from her rotten grave,
Thou now among those heavenly wights do shine,
Whose won this glorious luster does embrave:
There lovely friendship, mild-smiling Cupid's there,
With lively looks and amorous suavitie,
Full of pure pleasure, and fresh flowring cheer;
Ambrosian streams sprung from the Deity
Do frankly flow, and soft love-kindling winds
Do strike with a delicious sympathy
Those tender spirits, and sill up their minds
With satisfying joy. The purity
Of holy fire their heart does then invade,
And sweet persuasion, meek tranquillity,
The gentle-breathing air, the heavens naught sad,
Do maken up this great felicity.
Here Rhadamanthus, and just Aeacus,
Here Minos wonnes, with those that lived of yore
IN the golden age; here Plato vigorous
In holy virtue, and fair Pythagore.
These been the goodly of spring of Great Jove,
And liven here, and whosoever filled the quire
And sweet assembly of immortal Love,
Purging their spirits with refining fire;
These with the happy Angels live in bliss,
Full fraught with joy, and lasting pure delight,
In friendly feasts, and life-outfetching kiss.
But, ah! dear Plotin, what smart did thy spright
Endure, before thou reach'st this high degree
Of happiness? what agonies, what pains
Thou underwent'st to set thy soul so free
From baser life? It now in heaven remains
Among the pure Angels. O thrice-happy wight!
That now art got into the Land of Life,
Fast placed in view of that Eternal Light,
And fitt'st secure from the foul bodies strife.
But now, you comely virgins, make an end,
Break off this music, and deft seemly Round,
Leave off your dance: For Plotin my dear friend
Thus much I meant my golden harp should sound.
The interpretation of the more unusual names or words that occur in the
foregoing Poems.
IF any man conceive I have done amiss in using such obscure words in my
writings, I answer, That it is sometime fit for Poetical pomp sake, as in my
Psychozoia: Othersome time necessity requires it, Propter egestatem linguae,
and rerum novitatem,
as Lucretius pleads for himself in like case. Again, there is that
significancie in some of the barbarous words (for the Greeks are Barbarians to
us) that, although not out of superstition, yet upon due reason I was easily
drawn to follow the Counsel of the Chaldee Oracle, (...), Not to change those
barbarous terms into our English tongue. Lastly, if I have offended in using
such hard names or words, I shall make amends now by interpreting them.

A
AHad. (...), One, or, The One. The Platonists call the first Original of all
things (...) and (...) for these reasons: (...) or One, because the multitude
or plurality of Beings is from this One, as all numbers from an unite: (...)
or The Good, (...), or (...), because all things are driven drawn or make haste
to partake of it. (...), Procl. Theolog. Plat. lib. 2. cap 4. Abinoam. (...),
Pater amoenitatis, Father of delight. Autocalon, (...), The very beauty.
Arachnea has its name from (...), a spider. Adonai. (...). The Lord, or the
sustainer of all things, from (...), the Basis or foot of a pillar.
Autaestthesid, (...), Self sensednesse. Adamah. (...) Earth, The earthly or
natural (...) abode. Autophilus, (...), a lover of himself. Anthropion, The
same with Adamah: Only Adamah signifies earthlinesse; Anthropion from (...),
uprightness of body or looking up. Alopecopolis, (...). The fo^es city or
polity. Autaparnes, (...), from (...) and (...). Simon, Autaparnes and
Hypomene are but the soul, thrice told over. Autaparnes is the soul denying it
self; Hypomone the soul bearing the anguish and agony of this denial of it
self: From these two results Simon, the soul obedient to the spirit of Christ.
Now there is no self-denial where there is no corrupt or evil life to be
suppressed and unsatisfied; nor any Patience or Hypomone, where there is no
agony from the vexation of self-denial. So that the soul, so long as it is
Autaparnes or Hypomone, is a thing complex or concrete, necessarily including
the corruption of that evil life or spirit, which is the souls self for a time.
Hence is that riddle easily opened, How the strength of Autaparnes is the
weakening of Simon; and the destruction of him and Hypomone in the valley of Ain
Simons consummation and perfection, or rather his translation or (...).
Anautaesthetus, (...), One that feels not himself, or at least relisheth not
himself. Aelpon, (...), not hoping, or without hope. Apterie, (...), from a
negative, and (...), a wing. It signifies the want of wings. Apathie, (...), To
be without passion. Autopathie, (...), denotates ^he being self-strucken, to be
sensible of what harms us, rather then what is absolutely evil. Ain, Not to be,
To be nothing; from (...) Non, nihil, (...) nemo. Anautaestthesie, (...),
Without self-sensednesse, or relishing ones self. Aeon, (...), Eternity.
Ether, (...), from (...) to burn. The fluid fier^ nature of heaven, the same
that (...) which signify as much. viz. a fiery fluour, or a fluid fire.
Aides. (...), It ordinarily signifies O^cus or Pluto; here the* winter Sun:
the etymon fits both, (...). Hell is dark, and the Sun in winter leaves us to
long nights. Apogee, (...), is that absis or ark of the circle of a Planet, in
which the Planet is further off from the earth, as the word it self intimates.
Autocineticall, (...), That which moves it self. Africa Rock. See Pompon. Mel.
lib. 1. cap. 8. Romans 9. 33. 1. Cor. 10. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 5. 10. Psalm.
105. 15. Ananke, (...), The same that Hyle is. But the proper signification of
the word is Necessity. See Hyle. Alethea-land, That is, the land of truth,
(...), as the Platonists call it. Acronychall. See Cronychall.
B
BEirah or Beiron, The brutish life, from (...). brutum. Bacha, Weeping. Bacha
vale is the valley of tears; from (...) flevit.
C
CHaos. In our blew Chaos, that is, In our corporeal spirit. For that is the
matter that the soul raises her phantasmaticall forms in, as the life of the
world does bodily shapes in the heavens or air. Cronychall or Acronychall,
that is, (...), vespertine, or at the beginning of night. So a star is said
to rise or set Acronychall when it rises or sets at the sunne-setting; For
then is the beginning of night. Clare. Claros a city of Ionia, famous for
Apollo's temple and answers, amongst which was this, which I have interpreted
in Psychathanasia: (...). (...), (...), Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 18.

D
DIzoia, (...), Double-livednesse. Demon, any particular life, any divided
spirit; or rather the power ruling in these. This is (...) ^ivido. Duessa,
division or dualitie. Daemoniake, That which is according to that divided life
or particular spirit, that rules for it self. Dicaeosyne, (...), Justice or
moral righteousness. Diana, the Moon, by which is set out the dead light or
letter of the law. Deuteropathie, (...), is a being affected at second rebound,
as I may so say. We see the Sun not so properly by sympathy as
deuteropathie. As the mundane spirit is affected where the Sun is, so am I in
some manner; but not presently, because it is so affected, but because in my
eye the Sun is vigorously represented. Otherwise a man might see the Sun if
he had but a body of thin air.
E
EIdos, (...), Form or Beauty. Eloim. or Eloah, (...) signify, properly the
strong God. Entelechia, (...): It is nothing else but forma, or actus, and
belongs even to the most contemptible forms, as for example to Motion, which is
defined by Arist* in the third of his Physics, (...). Scaliger in his 307
exercitation against Cardan descants very curiously upon this word: Cum igitur
Formam dixeris (that is (...)) intelliges immaterialitatem, simplicitatem,
potestatem, perfectionem, informationem. Hoc enim est (...): quod innuit
maximus Poetarum, Totosque infusa per artus. Hoc est, (...): quia est ultima
forma sub coelestibus, and princeps inferiorum, finis and perfectio. Hoc'est
(...), posse. This goodly mystery and fit significancie seems plainly forced
or fictitious, if you compare it with what was cited out of Arist, about
Motion, so that when we have made the best of (...), it is but the form of any
thing in an ordinary and usual sense. If we stood much upon words, (...) would
prove more significant of the nature of the soul, even according to Scaligers
own etymon, from (...) and (...): from its permeation and colligation or
keeping together the body from defluxion into its ancient principles, which
properties be included in (...) and (...) moves forward the body thus kept
together: (...) intimates the possession or retention of the body thus moved,
that it is rather promov'd by the soul then amov'd from the soul. But of these
words enough, or rather too much. Energie, (...). It is the operation, efflux
or activity of any being: as the light of the Sun is the energie of the
Sun, and every phantasm of the soul is the energie of the soul. Euphro^a,
(...), The Night.
G
GAbriel, The strength of God; from (...) robustus fuit, and (...) Deus.
H
HYle, Materia prima, or that dark fluid potentiality of the Creature; the
straitness, repugnancy and incapacity of the Creature: as when its being this,
destroys or debilitates the capability of being something else, or after some
other manner. This is all that any wary Platonist will understand by (...). in
Plutarchs (...). Hattove, (...), the Good, or that eminent Good or first Good
from whence all good is derived. See Ahad. Haphe, (...), The touch. Hypomone,
(...), Patience. See Autaparnes. Har-Eloim, (...). The mount of Angels, Genii,
or particular Spirits. Helios, (...), The Sun. Heterogeneall, is that which
consists of parts of a diverse nature or form: as for example, a man's body of
flesh, bones, nerves, etc. Homogeneall, That whose nature is of one kind.
I
IDea-Lond, The Intellectual world. Idothea, The fleet passage of fading
forms; from (...), Forma, and (...), curro. Ida. See Pompon. Mel. lib. 1. cap.
17. Isosceles, A triangle with two sides equal. Idiopathie, (...), is ones
proper peculiar (...), mine or thine, being affected thus or so upon this or
that occasion; as (...), is this or that man's proper temper. But this property
of affection may also belong unto kinds. As an Elephant has his idiopathy and
a man his, at the hearing of a pipe; a cat and an Eagle at the sight of the
Sun; a dog and a Circopithecus at the sight of the Moon, etc. Iao. A
corruption of the Tetragrammaton. Greek writers have strangely mash'd this word
(...), some calling it (...), others (...), some (...). It is very likely that
from this (...) came Bacchus his appellation (...), and the Maenades
acclamations (...) in his Orgia. Which suits well with the Clarian Oracle,
which says that in Autumn, the Sun is called (...), which is the time of
vintage. (...). See Fullers Miscel. 2. Book.
L
LOgos, (...), The appellation of the Son of God. It is ordinarily
translated, the Word, but has an ample signification. It signifies Reason,
Proportion, Form, Essence, any inward single thought or apprehension; Is any
thing but matter, and matter is nothing. Leontopolis, (...), The Lions city or
Polity. Lypon, from (...), sorrow.
M
MOnocardia, (...), from (...) and (...), singleheartednesse. Myrmecopolis,
(...), The City or Polity of Pismires. Michael, Who like unto God? from (...),
and (...) similitudinis, and (...) Deus. Monad, (...), is unitas, the principle
of all numbers, an emblem of the Deity; And so the Pythagoreans call it (...),
God. It is from (...), because it is (...), stable and immovable, a firm Cube
of it self. One time one time One remains still one. See Ahad.
N
NEurospast, (...), a Puppet or any Machina that is moved by an unseen string or
nerve.
O
ON, (...), The Being. Ogdoas, (...), numerus octonarius, the number of ^ight.
Onopolis, (...), The asses City or Polity.
P
PSyche, (...), Soul or spirit. Penia, (...), Want, or poverty. Physis, (...),
Nature vegetative. Proteus, Vertumnus, changeableness. Psychania, The land of
Souls. Philosomatus, (...), A lover of his body. Psittacusa, The land of
Parots. Pithecusa, The land of Apes. Pithecus, (...), an Ape. Phobon, from
(...), Fear. Phrenition, Anger, impatiency, fury; from (...), frenzy or
madness. Ira furor brevis est. Pantheothen, (...), All from God. Which is true
in one sense, false in another. You Will easly discern the sense in the place you
find the word. This passage of Panthcothen contains a very savory and hearty
reproof of all, be they what they will, that do make use of that intricate
mystery of fate and infirmity, safely to guard themselves from the due
reprehensions and just expostulations of the earnest messengers of God, who
would rouse them out of this sleep of sin, and stir them up seriously to seek
after the might and spirit of Christ, that may work wonderfully in their souls
to a glorious conquest and triumph against the devil, death and corruption.
Pandemoniothen, (...), All from the devil; viz. all false persuasions and ill
effects of them. Panoply, (...), Armor for the whole body. Pteroessa, (...),
The land of winged souls; from (...) a wing. Perigee, (...), Is that absis or
ark of a Planets circle, in which it comes nearer the earth. Psychicall, Though
(...) be a general name and belongs to the souls of beasts and plants, yet I
understand by life Psychicall, such centrall life as is capable of Aeon and
Ahad. Parelies, (...), are rorid clouds which bear the image of the Sun.
Psittaco, Don Psittaco, from Psittacus a Parot, a bird that speaks significant
words, whose sense notwithstanding it self is ignorant of. The dialogue betwixt
this Parot and Mnemon sets out the vanity of all superficial conceited
Theologasters, of what sect soever, having but the surface and thin imagination
of divinity, but truly devoid of the spirit and in ward power of Christ, the
living wellspring of knowledge and virtue, and yet do pride themselves in
prattling and discoursing of the most hidden and abstruse mysteries of God, and
take all occasions to show forth their goodly skill and wonderful insight into
holy truth, when as they have indeed scarce licked the outside of the glass
wherein it lies. Plastic, (...), is that (...) might in the seed that shapes
the body in its growth Phantasme, (...), Any thing that the soul conceives in
it self, without any present external object. Parallax, (...), is the distance
betwixt the true and seeming place of a star; proceeding from the sensible
difference of the center, and the height of the superficies of the earth in
reference to the star, and from the stars declining from the Zenith.
Protopathy, (...). It is a suffering or being affected at first, that is,
without circulation. If any man strike me I feel immediately; because my soul
is united with this body that is struck: and this is protopat^y. If the air be
struck aloof off, I am sensible also of that, but by circulation or propagation
of that impression unto my ear; and this is deuteropathy. See, Deuteropathy.
Periphere, Peripheria, it is the line that terminates a circle.
Q
QUadiate, A figure with four equal sides and four right angles. The
rightnesse of the ^ngles, is a plain emblem of erectnesse or uprightness of
mind: The number of the sides, as also of the angles, being pariter par, that
is equally divisible to the utmost unities ((...), as it is in Aristotle)
intimates equity or justice. The sides are equal one with another and so are
(...) angles; and the number of the sides and angles equal one with another.
Both the numbers put together are a number pariter par again, and constitute
the first cube which is eight: That adds steadiness and perseverance in true
justice and uprightness toward God and man. Hypomone bears all this, that is,
all that dolor and vexation that comes from the keeping our perverse heart to
so strait and straight a rule.
R
RHomboides, is a parallelogrammicall figure with unequal sides, and oblique
angles.
S
SPerm. It signifies ordinarily seed. I put it for the (...), the ratio
seminalis, or the invisible plasticall form that shapes every visible creature.
Solyma, or Salem from (...), Peace. Simon, intimates obedience from (...),
obedivit. Semele, Imagination; from (...), imago. Scalen, a triangle with all
sides unequal.
T
TAsis, (...), extension. Tagathon, (...), The Good; the same with Hattove.
U
URanore, The light or beauty of heaven, from (...), and (...) lux, or (...)
pulchritudo.
Z
ZEus, (...), Jupiter, from (...), ferveo, or (...), vivo.
THus have I briefly run through the more obscure terms in my Poems, which I
shall God willing hereafter, if men's acceptance of these my first endeavors
invite me to it, and mine own occasions permit, expound more sully, and speak
more determinately of those speculations, which I now have but proposed to men's
more serious considerations, to weigh freely and warily, not so little a moment
as the inconsiderable assent of the author cast in, to prejudice their
judgments.

The drift of the whole book is this, to stir men up to take into their
thoughts, these two main points; The hearty good will of God to mankind, even
in the life of this world, made of the commixture of light and darkness, that
he will through his power rescue those souls, that are faithful in this their
trial, and prefer the light before the dark; that he will, I say, deliver
them from the power of living Death, and Hell, by that strong arm of their
salvation, Jesus Christ, the living God enthroned in the heart of man, to whom
all the Geni^ of the Universe, be they never so goodly and glorious shall
serve. They and all their curious devices and inventions shall be a spoil,
prey, and a possession to Him that is most just, and shall govern the nations
in righteousness and equity. And that, beside this happiness on earth, every
holy soul hereafter shall enjoy a never-fading felicity in the invisible and
eternal Heaven, the Intellectual world. Which if it be not true, I must needs
confess, it seems almost indifferent whether any creature be or no. For what
is it to have lived suppose 70 years, wherein we have been dead or worse above
two third parts of them? Sleep, youth, age and diseases, with a number of poor
and contemptible employments, swallow up at least so great a portion: That as
good, if not better, is he that never was, then he is, that has but such a
glance or glimps of passing life to mock him.

And although the succession of ^ighteousnesse upon earth may rightly seem a
goodly great and full spread thing, and a matter that may bear an ample
correspondencie even to the larger thoughts of a good and upright man; yet, to
say the truth, no man is capable of any large inheritance, whose life and
existence is so scant that he shall not be able so much as to dream of the
least happiness once seized on by death.

But there are continually on earth such numbers of men alive, that if they
lived well it would be an heaven or Paradise. But still a scant one to every
particular man, whose days are even as nothing. So that the work of God seems
not considerable, in the making of this world, if humane souls be extinguished
when they go out of it. You will say that those small particles of time that is
thus scattered and lost among men in their successions, a^e comprehended and
collected in God who is a continual witness of all things.

But, alas! what does the perpetual repetition of the same life or deiform
image throughout all ages add to Him, that is at once infinitely himself, viz.
good, and happy?

So that there is nothing considerable in the creation if the rational
creature be mortal. For neither is God at all profited by it, nor man
considerably. And were not the Angels a great deal better employed in the
beholding the worth of their Creator, then to diminish their own happiness,
by attending those, whom nothing can make happy? looking on this troubled
passing stream of the perishing generations of men, to as little purpose
almost, as idle boys do on dancing blebs and bubbles in the water.

What design therefore can there be in God in the making of this world that
will prove (...), worthy of so excellent a goodness and wisdom; but the
trial of the immortal spirit of man? It seems the deepest reach of his
counsel in the creation; and the life of this world but a prelude to one of
longer durance and larger circumference hereafter. And surely it is nothing
else but the heavy load of this body, that keeps down our mind from the
reaching to those so high hopes, that I may not say from a certain sense and
feeling of that clear and undisturbd state of immortality. I will close all
with the praise of those two main indowments of the mind, viz. Charity and
Humility, which certainly will make us meet eternal mansions for the
ever-living Deity. But without these, man's soul after this life becomes but a
den of devils, a dungeon of dark and restless phantasms, being incorporate
into the ever-gnawing and corroding spirit of Hell.

An hymn in the honor of those two despised virtues, Charity and Humility.
Far have I clambred in my mind
But naught so great as love^ find:
Deep-searching wit, mount moving might
Are naught compared to that good spright.
Life of delight and soul of bliss!
Sure source of lasting happiness!
Higher then Heaven! lower then hell!
What is thy tent? where may thou dwell?
My mansion hight humility,
Heavens vastest capabilitie.
The further it does downward tend
The higher up it does ascend;
If it go down to utmost naught
It shall return with that it sought.
Lord stretch thy tent in my stra^ breast,
Enlarge it downward, that sure rest
May there be pight; for that pure fire
Wherewith thou wontost to inspire
All self-dead souls. My life is gone
Sad solitude is my irksome won.
Cut off from men and all this world
In Lethes lonesome ditch I am hurld.
Nor might nor sight does ought me move,
Nor do I care to be above.
O feeble rays of mental light!
That (...) be seen in this dark night,
What are you? what is any strength
If it be not laid in one length
With pride or love? I naught desire
But a new life or quite to expire.
Could I demolish with mine eye
Strong towers, stop the fleet stars in sky,
Bring down to earth the pale-faced Moon,
Or turn black midnight to bright noon:
Though all things were put in my hand,
As parched as dry as the Libyan sand
Would be my life if Charity
Were wanting. But Humility
Is more then my poor soul durst crave
That lies intombd in lowly grave.
But if it were lawful up to send
My voice to Heaven, this should it rend.
Lord thrust me deeper into dust
That thou ^ayst raise me with the just.
(...).
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Psychozoia.

P. 5. l. 16. read ybrent. p. 17. l. 36. rage full rise. p. 19. l. 24. with
all. p. 39d. 31. drearyhead. p. 47. l. 7. counts.

Psychathanasia.

P. 1. l. 11. to spring. p. 6. l. 36. do. p. 17. l. 23. moved. p. 27. l. 291.
where in. p. 63. l. 9. fell discontent. p. 71. l. 9. divisibilitie. p. 9. l.
22. lap, that. p. 100. l. 15. is.

Antipsychopannychia.

P. 5. l. 20.-ruption, if. p. 9. l. 23. detect.

Antimonopsychia.

P. 43. l. 30. His.


