THE BAPTIST AND Independent Churches (So called) Set on Fire. By a bright
shining LIGHT revealed from Heaven. Their PASTORS and TEACHERS, scorching in
the flame of it, Gnashing and Blaspheming God and his Tabernacle; As their
Principles rash and judging, herein recorded, do demonstrate; which are
answered for the vindicating of Truth, and the satisfying of the simple. In
which they are found to be children of them who killed the Just, and have
drunken of the Cup of Fornication, who also must drink of the Cup of
Indignation at the hand of the Lord. Wherein also is an Exhortation unto all
people, to examine themselves in what state and condition they are, and to meet
the Lord by repentance, before that great Day of wrath that is come, and coming
to overtake them, and they perish for ever. In which all flesh shall QVAKE and
TREMBLE. Wherein also are some of the everlasting Truths of God revealed,
whereby all that have desires and breathings after God, and to be partakers of
the Divine Nature of Christ, and would be acquainted with the one Faith, and
one Baptism, and with the way that leads into it, and the Kingdom of God, may
be directed into it. Whereby every Particular may, by an infallible testimony,
according to the Law and Testimony, come to know whether they are in the one
truth, and in it walking. In it also is a Word of Comfort to the JEWS. Likewise
is showed when all Carnal Ordinances (which stood in time and outward things,
and had a limitation of time) ended to every one that believes, which were
types and figures, and what they did prefigure, is proved by the holy
Scriptures of truth.

By one who is laboring and seeking the Redemption of all mankind in Christ
Jesus, who would not that any should perish, but come to the knowledge of the
Yruth. THOMAS MORFORD.

Isa 10 17. And the Light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy One for a
flame, and it shall burn and devour his thorns and briars in one day.

Rev. 16.9,10. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name
of God, which has power over these Plagues, and they repented not to give him
glory, etc. And they gnawed their tongues for pain.

Hosea 4.15. I will go, and reurn to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and they seek me in their afflictions.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign
of the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins l'Grand. 1660.

The heads of things contained in this BOOK.
1. EDward Whale Priest of Waterford, his Doctrine -- That none was ever free
from sin in this life, answered, page 1. 2. Robert Carr, Baptist, Pastor of
Clonmel, his Doctrine -- Tha^ the Scripture is the Rule of Life and Faith; and
the more sure Word of Prophecy, and the Law and Testimony) answered and
confuted; and the true and perfect Rule and Guide, and the Law and Testimony
showed, what, and where it is. p. 9. 3. The said Priest Whale, and Priest
Millard of Passage, affirming -- That the Light within us is darkness, are here
answered. p. 11. 4. An answer to Samuel Wade, Baptist-Teacher, who says -- He
believes that the Quakers are under the highest delusion, in magnifying the
Light within, in opposition to Christ without, and the Scriptures. p. 12. 5. An
answer to an affirmation of Joseph Parsons, a Teacher of the Free-willers, viz.
-- That God would purge the Tribe of Levi, to offer sacrifices external, as of
old: p. 22. 6. A rash Judgment of William Lee, Baptist, Teacher and Governor
of Waterford, reproved and found false, and so proved according to the Law and
Testimony; Wherein also is a true Testimony of the operation of the Eternal
Power and Spirit of the Lord in the work of Regeneration, etc. p. 24. 7. An
objection, That we observe not the Ordinances of Christ, as Baptism, etc.
answered, What that Baptism Matthew. 28. was, viz. A threefold Ministration, by
the same spirit. John's Baptism, a figure, fulfilled and ended. Baptism into
Christ is another thing then that of water, the figure. William Lee, and
William Lamb, their gross actions of violence, manifesting their fruitless
baptism. p. 28. 8. Breaking of Bread a figure, carnal and perishing, continuing
only till he came, who is come, the end of all figures. The form not to be
used in imitation without power. p. 32 9 The Doctrine of Pastor Hunt Baptist.
against Perfection, answered. Of Imitation, which is Idolatry. Truth purifieth
and perfecteth. A silence of flesh must be, before God's Teaching can be
received. But the Spirit being poured out, both Sons and Daughters may
prophecy. p. 34
To the impartial and unprejudiced REDER.
READER,
WHoever thou art that art enquiring after the Good old Way, to walk there, and
have desires to be directed therein, but art a stranger unto that, or know
not where to have it, which should give thee an entrance therein, here in this
following Book, is that plainly demonstrated, according to the holy Scriptures
of Truth which should give thee an entrance therein, and also where it is,
illustrated by infallible testimonies; by one who has wandered from Mountain to
Hill, to seek the Lord, breathing and panting after him as the chased Heart
after the Brooks of water, but found him not until he came to wait at the true
Door, which is CHRIST the LIGHT, which gives the true entrance into the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. And seeing,
according to the Scriptures of Truth, perilous times are come, and many are
crying, Lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, whereby the simple-hearted
(which have true hungerings and thirstings after God, and would be acquainted
with the One Truth, one Faith, and one Baptism, and one Lord Jesus Christ) know
not which way to turn, by reason of the many inventions of man, and voices that
are in the world, each one esteeming hie own (his invention that he worshippeth
his God with) to be the best way.

Therefore in the fear of God, in the cool and calm spirit, read over this
Book, wherein thou shall find many of the Principles and Doctrines of some of
the eminentest Professors, Pastors and Teachers, who have a form of godliness,
but deny the Power; the which I was an ear witness of; and when I heard it, I
said in mine heart, Great men are not always wise in the wisdom of God: But in
the grief of my soul I said, Men of high degree are a lie, and men of low
degree are vanity.

Wherein also is an Answer thereunto according to the holy Scriptures of Truth,
by which their folly is made manifest, though not with enticing words, or in
the form or method of the Serpents wisdom, unto whom it is not directed; nor
for their sakes who by his wisdom are acted, is it written.

Therefore let that noble spirit be in thee, as was in the Bereans, Search the
Scriptures, and compare them together, and see whether the things herein be
true; let that of God in thee judge. The matter is great and weighty which
concerns everlasting salvation; And why should it be thought an incredible
thing, That Christ should now be manifested in mortal flesh, qnickening them
that were even dead in sins and trespasses; for verily I I have written no
other thing concerning him or of the operation of his Eternal spirit, then what
in measure I have really (not imaginarily) seen and handled, and felt of his
work and glory; for I dare not speak of that which the Lord has not wrought in
me, and by me, or to boast in other men's lines; for all the world have a form
of worship, talking of Christ's words, and the Prophets and Apostles words, but
are out of their Life and Power.

Behold what headiness and high-mindedness, treachery and betraying one
another! and will be yet far worse, by evil men and seducers, etc. What
incontinence, men and women burning in their lusts one toward another! What
eating and drinking, and rising up to play, etc! and yet all covered with a
Profession of God and Christ. But how can any better fruits be expected, when
Pastors and Teachers tell People for Doctrines, they cannot get victory over
sin on this side the Grave; which herein is plainly proved false; and the
everlasting way of Truth discovered, which leads out of sin, and gives power
against sin on this side the Grave, and to live pure and holy, even as God is
holy. Think it not impossible, with the Lord all things are possible.

And what I have here written, is not to render any man odious, or to discover
their nakedness, but for the bringing of Gods truth to Light; for I having had
something lying on me a long time, to give forth amongst the Professors and
Baptists, who have any true desires after God; and as in obedience to the
movings of the Lord, I passing amongst them, seeing their PRACTICES, and
hearing their DOCTRINES, it was now laid on me of the Lord, to give it forth as
an Answer thereunto, which I have done for the clearing of my Conscience in
tender love, that all who love their souls may be warned while time is: For the
dispensation of the fullness of time is come nigh, for the gathering together
all in ONE, even in Christ, whether things in Heaven, or things in Earth: The
Parable of the Field is fulfilled; the Pearl is found; Father, Mother, Husband,
or Wife, House or Land, all is forsaken, if the Lord calls, and followed, even
to the end of the earth, for the gathering into the unity with the Father and
the Son. This is the only desire of him, whom the Lord has called into his
labor, which seeks your Eternal good. With the measure of God's spirit try
all things, and let not any motion pass away, that seeks truly after God, that
you may come to have an infallible testimony of the spirit of the Lord in you,
to lead you, and guide you: For he that believes has the witness in himself.

T. M.

THE BAPTIST AND INDEPENDENT CHURCHES (So called) Set on Fire: By a bright
shining Light revealed from Heaven. Their PASTORS and TEACHERS scorching in the
flame of it, gnashing and blaspheming God and his Tabernacle; As their
Principles rash and judging, herein recorded, do demonstrate; Which are
answered for the vindicating of Truth, and the satisfying of the simple. In
which they are found to be children of them which killed the Just, and have
drunken of the Cup of Fornication, who also must drink of the Cup of
Indignation, at the hand of the Lord.
1. EDward-Whale (accounted an Independent Teacher, Priest of Waterford)
affirmed -- That the godliest man that ever was on the earth, did not get the
victory over sin, or lived free from sin on this side the Grave -- He did not
except Christ. This he affirmed in his Pulpit before the whole Congregation, in
the Idol-Temple, formerly a Masse-House, with a Cross on the top of it, and
another at the end of it on the 21. day of the 6th. Month, 1659. in the City of
Waterford.

Answ. He that is born of God, does not commit sin, because Christ the Seed of
God, is in him; and as he abides in him, he cannot sin, though he may be
tempted to sin, as Christ was, yet not overcome with the temptation of sin, but
thorough Faith in Christ, gets the victory over sin and temptations on this
side the grave, 1 John 3.9. chapter 5. ver. 4. Sin is of the Devil; and he that
commits it, and pleads for it, is taken captive by the Devil at his will, 1 Timothy 2.26. 1 John 3.5.8.
And for this purpose, Christ the eternal Son of God, was made manifest to take
away sin, and to destroy sin. Heb. 2.14,15.
And forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, Christ
himself also partaked of the same, that thorough the death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them, who
(thorough fear) were all their life time subject to bondage; which Christ
redeemed them from; for says the Apostle, He was made to us wisdom and
redemption, etc. 1 Cor. 3.50
And the Apostle did witness through Christ, victory over sin on this side the
grave: For says he, O death! where is thy sting? O grave, or hell! where is
thy victory? The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the the Law: but
(take notice) thanks be unto God which gives us the victory thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.54,55,56,57. And so Priest Whale has preached another
Doctrine then Christ or his Ministers, and has (as it were) blasphemously
charged Christ, his holy Prophets and Apostles, with sin; for he did not except
them when he said, -- The godlinst man that ever was, did not get the victory
over sin, on this side the grave. -- And so by the holy Scriptures of this
truth he is corrected, and taken with a lie in his mouth, and as it were
denying the very purpose, work and office of God in Christ, which was to save
from sin, and (thorough ^ath) to destroy sin and death, and to take it away,
narling it to the cross, etc.

And this testimony I give unto all the World, for the Lord God and his truth,
That it is possible in and thorough CHRIST JESUS the light of the world, that
lights every one that comes into the World, that all that it love and follow
in the daily Cross, I say, That thorough Faith in the Blood of Christ ( who is
our example, whose steps many of us are following, (according to our measures)
who did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, etc.) it is possible to
live free from sin, and to live a pure, righteous, and holy life, even perfect
as he is perfect in this present World, before this earthly Tabernacle go down
to the grave; and at this let none stumble, but in the cool and calm spirit,
and in the Light and fear of God search the Scriptures, for they testify, that
the members of the true Church, so lived in the days of old; and many thousands
(blessed be the Lord) in this day, are living so, and coming so to live, Christ
being the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; (For says the Apostle, What
manner of love has the Father bestowed on us, that we should be called the
sons of God; therefore the world knows us not, (mark the reason) because it
knew him not, but said, He was Joseph's son, a sinner, and has a Devil, and
deceives the people, Why hear ye him? Even as Teachers and Professors
generally cry out this day (against his servants whom he has sent forth to
bear witness of his true Light) that it is a natural Light, and not sufficient
to lead out of sin, etc. But says John, Beloved, now are we the sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall
appear, (and blessed be the Lord, he is appeared in his Saints, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Col. 1.27. Romans 8.10.) We shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is; And
every one that has this hope in him, purifieth himself (mark that) even as he
is pure; 1 John 3.1.2.3. And herein was Love made perfect, and gives boldness
in the day of Judgment, because (say they) even as he is, (take notice of
that) so are we in this world, 1 John 4.17. He that can receive it, let him;
for he was, and is without sin, and bare our sins in his body on the Tree, etc.
Therefore says the Apostle, If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall live ^im. Now Christ was dead to sin, and the Gospel did wi^s some of
them dead to sin, and could no longer live therein, but live unto Christ, in
newness and righteousness of Life; for a dead man that is really dead, cannot
move, act, or speak; so he that is really dead to sin, cannot act or commit
sin; and Paul did say, That himself ahd others were dead to sin, and free from
sin, Romans 6.2.7. the old man crucified, and the body of sin destroyed.
Therefore, says he, Romans 6.11. Ver. 14.
Reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God; thorough
our Lord Jesus Christ; for sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not
under the Law but under Grace; which Crace taught them to deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live truly like God in this present world: Therefore
says Peter, (...). 8.11,12.
Forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, for he that has suffered in the flesh, (as Old
England, and New England, and many other places can witness, how much many of
the faithful servants of the Most High God have suffered in their flesh, to the
loss of life, and spoil of Goods, for the Testimony of Jesus, and the wicked
actions on record will testify to generations to come) I say, Pet. 4.12.
He that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased (mark) from sin, that he no
longer should live to the lust of the flesh, or will of man, the rest of his
time, but to the will of God, etc. And says Paul, Romans 6.17.
God be thanked ye were (take notice, not that then they were) the servants of
sin, but having obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered
you, (mark) ^. 18.
being made free from sin, became the servants of Righteousness. So here,
according to the holy Scripture, the Apostle did testify, ^om. 17.
that the Romans (thorough the Gospel he preached unto them) had freedom and
victory over sin on this side the Grave. Cor. 15.54.57.
And the Gospel he preached, was CHRIST the LIGHT in them, and to that was he
sent to turn their minds; for, what may be known of God (he told them) was
manifest in them, Romans 1.19. And his Doctrine was, Cor. 2.4,5,6.
not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit
and power of the Lord, that their Faith might not stand in the wisdom of men,
(by which wisdom they knew not God) but in the power of the Lord. Howbeit,
says he; We preach wisdom (...) them that are perfect; according to Christ's
Doctrine, w^d, Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect: And Paul
was not ashamed of this Gospel, for it was, and is the Power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes and follows the Light of Christ; ^om.
1.16,17.
for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith; ^oh. 5.4.
by which faith, the faithful came to get the victory over sin, and freedom
from sin, and became servants to God, and brought forth fruits unto holiness of
life; Rom 6.22,23.
the end of which was, and is, everlasting peace; ^atth. 25.46.
but the wages of sin living and dying in it, is everlasting death, and
punishment.

Obj. But did not Paul say, O wretched man! etc. And so (though a man may say,
some be freed from the guilt of sin: yet it cannot be, that men may be free
from the acting or committing of sin, whilst they are on earth, etc. but by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them, they shall he saved that believe in
Christ, etc.

Answ: He that acts or commits sin, is under the guilt and condemnation
for sin; for he that commits sin is of the Devil, and the Light will be his
condemnation; and whosoever abides in him (says John,) sins not, whosoever
sins, has not seen him, neither knows him; for he dyed for sinners and
ungodly ones, but not to live in sin, but unto himself, which dyed for them, 2
Cor: 5: 15 and the righteousness of Christ, imputed to any that live in sin,
and daily act and commit sin, that will stand them in little stead, in the day
of the Lords account, when he shall give to every one according to the deeds
done in the body: And although the Scripture says; Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed unto him for righteousness; yet it does not say, that the
righteousness of Christ shall be imputed to them, which daily live and abide in
sin. Abraham believed, and also obeyed the command of God; now that which was
written, concerning Abraham's righteousness that was imputed unto him, was not
written for his sake alone, as says the Scripture, but for us also to whom
(take notice of that) it shall be imputed, if we believe; (mark and take
notice) if ye believe, it shall be imputed unto you for righteousness; if ye
say, ye do believe, then ye shall not abide in sin; if ye believe and follow
the Light of Christ in you, then you shall not (says Christ) abide in
darkness, sin, or evil, but shall have the Light of Life. Compare John 8.12.
John 12.46. to Romans 4.23,24,25. And as for Paul's saying, O wretched man! etc.
I do affirm in the fear of God, according to what I have received of the Lord,
and shall make it to appear, by the aforegoing words of the Apostle to the
Romans, and also by the words following, that it was not the Apostles then
present condition, when he said, O wretched man that I am! etc. but a condition
that he had once passed through, which through Christ, he did witness a freedom
from Romans 8,12: only it was the manner of the Prophets and Apostles when they
writ to the people, and for the condescending to the low estate or condition,
that those they writ unto were in, to rank themselves with them, to wit, in
using the word We, or Us; as for instance, if we say, we have nosin, or have
not sinned etc. And in mamy things we offend all; And as Isaiah says, Lord why
have thou caused us to err from thy ways. James. 3.2. 1 John. 1.8. Isaiah.
36.17. But Paul, as is a fore showed, affirmed, they were really dead to sin
Romans 6.2. and he gives an infallible reason for it; for says he, Know ye not,
that so many of us, as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death,
that like as Christ was raised from the grave, so they were to walk in newness
of life Romans 6.1. to the 8. and so they came from under the dominion of sin,
and from under the Condemnation of the Law. Romans 6.14.15 Chap. 8.1. but whiles
a man lives, the Law has Power over him: He that has an ear to hear, can hear
and understand; Romans 5.14
but he over whom, and in whom death reigns, though he may talk of Christ and
his righteousness, of Faith and Grace etc. yet not being turned to the Light,
which is the Law; Romans 5.13,14.
he is not come so far as the pure law of God, neither knows he it in
righteousness and truth, but is a stranger unto it; for says Paul, Know ye
not, my brethren how that the Law has dominion over a man so long as he
lives; for I speak to them, (says he,) that know the Law, for the woman that
has an husband, is bound by the Law to her husband, so long as he lives; but
if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of her husband: so that she
is no adulteress, thoughshe be married to another. Wherefore says he, my
brethren, ye also are (not that ye shall) become dead to the Law, by the body
of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to Christ who is raised
from the dead thorough whom they brought forth fruits unto God; for says he,
when they were in the flesh, (he did not then say they now are in the flesh, or
following the motions of the flesh) the motions of sin which were by the Law,
wrought in their members sin, and brought sorth fruits unto death; but now he
said, they were delivered from the Law, that they should serve in newness of
spirit; Rom 6.15.
What shall we say then, (says he) Romans 7.7.
Is the Law sin? God forbid; for he had not-known sin, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not covet. But sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in
him all manner of Concupiscente. For he was alive (mark and take notice of
that) ONCE. He there told them what he was once, but by the receiving of the
Law, which caused sin to abound and appear exceeding sinful, he cried out, O
wretched man! etc. So there was a time Paul saw his sin to abound by the Law,
etc. and there was a time he did witness he was dead to sin; And there was a
time he told them, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, had freed him
from the Law of Sin and Death: And that was Paul's then present condition; for
says he, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, or its motions; for they that so do, cannot please God;
But says he, Romans 8.1, to 10.
Ye are not in the stesh, but in the Spirit, if the Spirit of God dwells in
you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: he gives
a character of them that have this Spirit, whereby in the Light of the Son of
God they may judge and examine themselves; for if the Spirit of Christ be in
thee, the body is dead, because of sin; but the Spirit is Life, because of
Righteousness: So that through this Spirit of Life, Paul did witness a freedom
from sin, and a Victory over sin, on this side the grave, and thanked God for
it, and said, He had fought the good sight, he had finished his course, he had
kept the Faith, which gave victory over the world, or sin, and henceforth
(says he) 2 Cor. 12 7 8,9.
there is laid up for me a Crown of Glory and Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not only to me, but unto all
them which love his appearance. And although Paul did cry out of the thorn in
the flesh, and of the buffeting of Satan, lest he should be exalted above his
measure; Tit. 2.11,12.
the Lord did not impute that unto him, as sin, but said, My grace is
sufficient for thee; which Grace taught Paul and the Saints to deny sin, and
ungodliness; whereby they lived like God in that present world.

So that it is evident by the Scriptures of Truth, that the Apostles and Saints
in Light did witness a redemption from sin, and were regenerated, washed and
cleansed, and sanctified on this side the grave. Read and compare these
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 6.2.7.22. Chapter 7.6. Romans 8.2. to 10. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Chapter 15.55,56,57. 2 Timothy 4.7,8. 1 Pet. 4.1,2.

So I being cast into Prison, that very day that Priest Whale thus affirmed,
not giving any just offense in word or action; as Priest Whale passed by the
Prison, I required him to prove where man should be made free from sin? seeing
that he had affirmed -- That the godliest man that ever was, did not get the
victory over sin, on this side the grave.

His Answer was -- They should be cleansed in heaven. -- O wretched man! How
have thou darkened the Counsel of the most High God? uttering words without the
true knowledge of God, from thy wisdom, which is from beneath; which is earthly,
sensual and brutish; and how have thou deceived thousands of souls (Woe is me
for thee! the Controversy of the Lord will be great with thee and you all) and
have taken their moneys for that which is not Bread, and have made them spend
their labor all the days of their lives, for that which does not profit their
immortal souls, which will be required at thine, and such blind guides hands, as
thou art. May not the People and State, which have given thee a great house and
150 l. a year ( some say 200 l. a year) truly say, It is for naught? for if
people can never be made free from sin, or get the victory over sin, on this
side the grave (the contrary I have proved by the Scripture of Truth) is it not
then plainly made manifest, that thou have taken the peoples money for naught,
and deceived them, and so have clothed thy self with the fine of the wool (
and thy wife her garments laced with silver and gold, from the neck down to the
foot (the poor ready to perish with hunger and nakedness) 1 Timothy 1.2 1 Timothy
2.9,10.
lace upon lace, some near as broad as four fingers, which is not according to
the ornaments of the holy women of old, which were not laced with silver or
gold, or plaiting of the hair, but covered with the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price) and have fed thy
self with the fat; and neither thou, nor any of you all have fed the poor and
needy, nor bound up that which is broken, nor healed at the bottom that which
was sick, nor brought again that which was driven away, but with fierce wrath
and cruelty have ye ruled. And now to cover thy wickedness and deceit, thou
Priest Whale say, They must be cleansed from sin in Heaven, which is also
contrary to the Scripture, which says, No unclean thing, Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, effeminate persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
covetous persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, or any that
defiles, or works abomination, or that makes a lie, shall inherit the kingdom
of God, or enter into that holy City; and as the tree falls, so it lies, Eccl.
1.3. 1 Cor. 6.9 Rev. 21.27. But says Paul, such were (take notice) some of
you; But they came to be washed, cleansed, and sanctified by the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of their God, before ever they entered God's
Kingdom; which is joy, righteousness, and peace in the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.9.
to the 11. Romans 14.17. And now let that of God in you all judge, Whether that
Doctrine Priest Whale preached, be according to the Scriptures; and all people
beware of them; to wit, such Teachers as Priest Whale, and come out from
amongst them, lest ye partake of their plagues, and consider your paths and
ponder your ways, and what you have benefitted in the things of God, by
following and learning of such Teachers, and cease from them, and mind that of
God in you; and as you come to mind and obey that, it will lead you unto God
the Father of Life, and open your understandings, and as you come to wait on
the Lord, it will reveal the true knowledge and glory of God in you, in the
face of Jesus Christ; the key of which your Teachers have taken from you, and
caused you to err from the right way of the Lord, even CHRIST the LIGHT; who is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

2. The Principles and judging of Robert Car Baptist, Pastor in Clonmell.
He affirmed the 10 th. day of the 5 th month, 1659, -- That the Scripture was
the Rule of Life and Faith to Salvation; And that the Scripture was the more
sure word of Prophecy, that Peter spoke of, and the Law and Testimony -- And
for us, that are called Quakes, to affirm, that the Spirit of truth from God
received, was the true rule of life to salvation, etc. he said -- It was a
fiction of the Devil.

Answ. The true and everlasting Rule of life to Salvation, and the Author of
Faith, which is Christ, the holy Scripture is a true declaration of, which is
Christ the Eternal son of God, the Spirit of life and truth, which lights
every one that comes into the world, that all men through him might believe;
Joh. 16.13.
which whosoever loves, and follows the Light of the son of God, comes to
receive, the Spirit of Life and truth, which leads into all truth, and the
Light and Spirit of truth, is the Law, and Testimony, which was before the
writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John; for ^aith Isaiah, Isa. 8.26.
To the Law, and to the Testimony. Now when Isaiah spoke those words, the
Evangelists writings were not written; Jer. 32.40. Heb. 8.10. Ier. 31.33. Prove.
6 23
therefore the Law and Testimony is another thing, and within man; for says
God, I will make an everlasting Covenant with the house of I srael, I will put my
Law and fear in their hearts, and write it in their inward parts. Now the Law
is the Light, which they that believe in, and follow, come to receive the
spirit of Life and truth, as I said before, and that is the Testimony of Jesus;
for the Testimony of Jesus (says John,) is the spirit of Prophecy Rev. 19.10.
And this Spirit the Apostle did witness was come amongst them, and bare witness
to their Spirits, that they were the sons of God; for says he, because ye are
sons, God has given forth the Spirit of his Son into your (take notice)
hearts, Gal. 4 6. And by this Spirit and Light, they came to be led out of the
lusts of the flesh, and through the Cross of Christ knew a crucifying of it;
and that life in them, that stood in outward signs and things that perished
in the using, which Paul gloried not in, neither desired to glory in any thing,
save the Cross of Christ; for he knew, and said, Gal. 6.15.
Circumcision, though it was in its time serviceable, and commanded of the
Lord, yet it availed them nothing; yea, he told them, Gal. 5.2.
If they were Circumcised, Christ would profit them nothing. But the new was to
be accepted, which was the only work of the Spirit of the Lord, through its
eternal working and operation in their hearts, circumcising of it, and
cleansing of it; Gal. 5.6.
whereby they who abides its working, comes to receive the faith of God's
Elect, which works by love, into the obedience to the Spirit of Truth, and the
sure word of Prophecy, which is nigh them, even in their hearts and mouths;
which divides the evil motions, and the evil words, from the good, and gives
power against them, as they do appear; whereby all that come to obey and take
heed unto that more sure Word, come to know their sanctification, and so the
New Creature they come to know, and the Mercy and Peace of God comes to be
mustiplied in them, and on them walking according to that Rule. And Peter did
not say, the Writings of the Evangelists were that more sure Word, than that
they heard in the Mount, which was the living Word of the Lord that abides for
ever, which by the Gospel was preached unto them; and of this Living Word must
all be born that ever come to know salvation; which Word is in the heart, and
is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword; even to the
dividing of the joints and marrow, soul and spirit, and the thoughts and
intents of the heart: And this WORD David said he had hid in his heart, out of
which came the Issues of life. So Peter told them of another Word than the
Words heard in the Mount: Read and compare these Scriptures: The spiritual man
compares spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Pet. 1.23,24,25. 2 Pet. 1.17, to
21. Joh. 1.1. Rev. 10.13. Romans 10 6,7,8. Heb. 4.12. So they which put the
Letter which kills, for the Rule of Life and Faith unto Salvation, in stead
of the Spirit which quickneth, are in the ( if I may speak Robert Carrs words)
fictions of the Devil, and out of the true Faith and Truth of Jesus, and not
guided by that holy Spirit which righteous Abel, Enoch and Abraham were, before
the Scriptures were written, and shall be for ever, when Scripture shall be no
more.

3. The Principles of Edward Whale, Priest of Waterford, and Priest Millard of
Passage near Waterford.
Each of them affirmed in the Pulpit, in the Idol Temple of Waterford, -- That
that Light, which we (called Quakers) bear testimony unto, which Christ has
enlightened every man withal that comes into the world, they say (say the
Priests) they have a Light within them, but how great is that darkness. This
they both affirmed before the people.

Answ. Here ye Priests have brought your selves under the WOE, which call the
true LIGHT which lights every one that comes into the world, great darkness;
for WOE is to them that call Light darkness, and darkness Light, Isa. 5.20. for
I am the Light of the world, says Christ, and he bids them walk in the Light,
he that walks in the Light, stumbles not; but he that walks in the dark
stumbles, and knows not where he goes, because there is no Light in him; for
the Light of the wicked, which rebel against the Light, shall be put out. I am
come a Light into the world, says Chaist, and he bids them walk in the Light;
for he that believes in the Light, and follows it, shall not walk or abide in
darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; Jo. 8 12,
and no other Light than Christ, do we testify of, which God said, Isa. 42.9.
he would give for a Light, to lighten the Gentiles, and for a Covenant to the
people, and for salvation to the ends of the earth. And Paul a true Minister of
God, Act. 26.18
was sent to turn from darkness to the Light, and from Satan's power to the
living God. Romans 9.18 19.
And he told them what might be known of God, was manifest in them, And Elihu
said, if the wicked confess their sin, God will deliver their soul from going
down to the pit, and their life shall see the Light, and be enlightened again
with the Light of the living, Jo. 12.46. Job 18.5. cha. 24. chap. 23.26. to the
31. And John, a man sent of God, came to bear testimony of the Light, and said,
That was the true Light that lighted every one that comes into the world, Jo.
1.9, So ye Priests, and ye all, who deny the Light, that lights every one
that comes into the world, are found to preach another doctrine than Christ and
his Apostles preached, and so are not to be received into the house, neither
bid God speed, for they that so do, will partake of your plagues, 2 Jo. 9,10,11.

4. The Principles and Judgment of Captain Samuel Wade Baptist Teacher, given
under his hand, as follows.
-- I do believe those people called Quakers are under the highest delusion in
the world, etc. in the magnifying the Light within, and stands in opposition to
Christ without and the Scriptures. And the first rise of the Quakers was in
London about the year 1647, as witness S. Wade.

Ans. It is agreeable, and according to the Scriptures, to magnify and exalt
God in man, and the Spirit in man, and Christ the Light in man; for says the
Apostle, What may be known of God (who is Light) is manifest in man, Romans 1.18.
1 Jo. 1.5. And Christ said, I am the Light, which is within, except ye be
reprobates, and this Light shined in the dark heart of man, but the darkness
comprehended it not; but the Lord now by his eternal power has caused, and
commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, and has shined (take notice) in
our hearts; and has given the true knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.5. chap. 13.5. Jo. 1.1. to 9. And the Scripture
says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ in him, he is none of his; but
if the Spirit of Christ be in you, the body is dead, and the Spirit is life
because of righte^usness. And this testimony I give for the Lord, and his
truth, that the same Spirit of Light and Truth, that raised Jesus from the
grave, is in us; and by it has God quickened, and is quickening our mortal
flesh, even by his Spirit, that dwells in us; which is that mystery that has
been h^d since the long night of Apostasy, these many generations, even Christ
in us the hope of Glory, Col. 1.25,26,27. Romans 8. ver. 9.10.11. and God is a
Spirit, and all that ever come to worship God in truth, must worship him with,
and in the Spirit of truth: And therefore let that of God in all Judge, whether
it be delusion to be led and guided by the Spirit of truth, or in opposition
against Christ and the Scriptures, to extol and magnify the Light, or Spirit
within, for says Christ, when he was with his Disciples, if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come; but If I go away, I will send you the Comforter, even
the Spirit of truth, which shall lead you and guide you into all truth. And
Paul said unto the Galatians, because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his son (take notice) into your hearts, etc. Jo. 16 13. Gal. 4.6.

And therefore thou Samuel Wade, and all you Professors of the world, that talk
of Christ in your fleshly wisdom, which is from beneath, and is sensual and
brutish, your knowledge must perish, and dye, if ever the true Comsorter, the
Spirit of life and truth from God ye come to know, or enjoy; for that is but a
knowing Christ in the flesh, or flesh glorying in Christ, but an enmity to the
Cross of Christ; and I can truly say, as Paul did, though I have known Christ
in the flesh, yet henceforth I desire to know him so no more. To Gods witness
in you all I speak, which did never change or consent to sin, unto which, as
your minds come to be turned, and by it to be lead and guided, it will cause
you to cease from your own words, and to know the time to keep silent; for a
time of silence (if ever ye come to minister from the Spirit of truth) shall ye
Baptists (will ye, nill ye) and all Professors on the face of the earth, come
to know; 1 Cor. 12.7.
and so as in the measure of Gods Spirit, (which is given to every one of you,
to profit withal,) ye come to wait, in the pure fear of the Lord, that will be
a bridle to your tongue; and a limit to your airy Spirit, and so as your minds
come to be staid in the measure of Gods Spirit, and receive a word by the
inspiration of the Almighty, to declare, for the edifying or building up the
members of that body, of which Christ is the head, according as you receive
(mark, it must be your own, and only your own and not an others) So ye are to
minister as good stewards of the manifold gifts and graces of God; and then let
him be accursed that should it seek to quench; For if one had the tongues of
men and Angels, and could speak all the mysteries of Kingdom of God, in that
mind which is not guided by the Spirit of Truth, not in the life of truth, that
is but death and hell, talking of the same of wisdom, but a stranger, as to
the enjoying of the thing, and must be silent, and peradventure death reigning
over him, and not come so far, as to the receiving of the righteous Law of God,
where the Thunders Voices and Earthquakes are felt, seen and heard, for so
dreadful was thy presence (says Moses) that I exceedingly quake and tremble,
for where the Law is not received within, death reigns and has dominion, and
the day not yet known that makes the strong man to bow, and the keepers of the
house to tremble; For I came not to destroy the Law (says Christ) but to
fulfill it, and Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or one tittle
of the Law shall pass away till all be fulfilled; So all come to the Light and
follow the Light, which to the life will lead, the Law for to fulfill; The Law
is Light says Solomon, and David said, I delight to do thy will O God (mark)
thy Law is in my heart, and the mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, his
tongue talks of judgment, the Law of his God is in his heart, Psalm.
37.30,31. Psalm. 40 8. Prove. 6.23. and Christ said I in them and thou in me;
that they all may be made perfect in one, Jo 17.22,23. chap 16.13. and he that
believes on the Son of God (1 Jo. 5.10.) has the witness in himself. And when
John and Peter wrote to the Churches, concerning the seducers, that would have
seduced them from the anointing of God within them; they told them, there were
false Prophets amongst the people; as there should be also amongst them, who
privily should bring in damnable heresies (take notice ye that deny the Light
and Spirit within) even denying the Lord that bought them; and many shall
follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil
Spoken of (I am the Way and the Truth says Christ) such were and are they that
have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, without natural
affection; filthy dreamers which defile the flesh; speaking evil of dignities,
and despise dominion, the higher power Christ the power of God, unto whomall
power in heaven and earth is given; who have eyes full of adultery, pleading
animpossibility of being made free from sin on this side the grave; living in
pride and vanity, lovivg pleasure, eating and drinking, and rising to play; for
which God slew twenty three thousand in one day, 1 Cor. 10. and found in Cains
way, Core and Balaams way, loving the wages of unrighteousness; and cringing
and bowing according to the fashions of the world, which must pass away; and
worshipping and serving the Creature more than the Cteator, Who is God blessed
for ever. Now in the Light of the son of God, Examine your selves ye Baptists
whether you are not guilty of these sins; and t^ansgressing the doctrine and
commands of Christ, calling men master; and are called master; and swearing and
pleading for it; and seeking the favor and friendship of the world; which is
enmity against God, and taking thought what to eat, or what to drink, and what
to put on, read Mat. 5.23. What then are you baptized unto? And whereas some of
you say -- That every one is not enlightened with saving Light, -- Do you think
it would stand with the justice of the Almighty; seeing the Scripture has
concluded, and testisteth, That all men have sinned) for to save some in sin,
and condemn others in sin? I tell you nay: therefore let every mouth (which
would so say) be stopped before the impartial God, for he would not that any
should perish: for as all have sinned and come short of obedience: to the
spirit and grace of God, in the first Adam, in the fall; the Lord is therefore
calling all men every where to repentance: and has called some to repentance
not to be repented of; and has given to every man a measure of his Spirit,
Light and Grace though it is not yet made manifest or known to every man; and
for the time of ignorance God winked; and has now sent forth, and is sending
his faithful messengers (which love not their lives to the death) to the four
quarters of the earth, to preach his everlasting Gospel: and repentance, and
remission of sins, through faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, and to turn men's
minds from vanities, and dumb idols, to the Light of the living, which he has
enlightened them withal: he that believes and receives their testimony which is
Christ the truth, and it follows, shall be saved; but he that receives not, nor
obeys, shall be condemned; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and this will
be the condemnation of the world: to wit, the Light in man: which shows him his
evil deeds, of which the impartial God (as I said before) a measure has given
to every man on the face of the whole earth, whom he would have to be saved,
and come to the knowledge and obedience of the truth; this the witness of God
in all consciences shall witness to be true: Disobedience and Unbelief in Christ
the Light within will be the cause of destruction to all that perish.

Neither do we (as some imagine) put creatures on works and duties, according
to the first Covenant, for life and salvation: The Law indeed says, do this
and live: but it is one thing to work for life, etc. and another thing to work
or act in obedience to the life and power of God received: For God has first
given a measure of his Spirit unto man before he requires ought of him, and so
his work is before him, and his reward is with him: even the presence of the
Lord of Life; which makes glad the hearts of the upright which follow him in
the regeneration: For says David, in the day of thy power thy people shall be
a willing people; So in the Light which from the life of Christ does come, and
up to the life of Christ it leads all that follow it: Is the power in man, but
not of man. It is the gift of God: unto it is man required to be obedient: and
what ever the Lord requires of man, is a Cross to man in the fall, and contrary
to the will of man: So that I say and affirm in the fear of God: we do not put
any on works, or duries, according to the first Covenant; for life and
salvation: for by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified. But a
measure of Gods Light, Grace, and Spirit of truth being first given freely to
every man: to it obedience is required, which as I said before, is a Cross to
the will of man: through which Cross is the power of God felt to the slaying of
the enmity, and the cleansing of the heart, whereby the faith of Gods Elect
comes to be received, which works by love in obedience to what the Lord
requires; and so by the same power as Christ was raised from the grave, comes
the Creature to be quickened, even his mortal body, by the Spirit of Christ,
that dwells in him; and so comes to be changed to walk in newness of Life:
through obedience to the Life of God in man, for Christ himself learned
obedience in the days when he was manifest in flesh, and being made perfect
through sufferings, became the author of eternal salvation to all them that
obey him, Heb. 5.8,9 and so to press the Creature to obedience to the Light and
Spirit of Life and Truth within, it is not against Christ, nor contrary to the
Scripture, nor a setting man to work for Life: but to work in obedience to the
Life received, is according to the doctrine of Christ: and is the beginning of
the ground work of salvation.

But I must once more return to my present work, to wit to the magnifying of
the Light and anointing within: for says John, when he writ to the Saints,
concerning those which would have seduced them from the Light and anointing he
exhorted them to abide in that of God in them; for says he, I have not writ
unto you, because ye know not the truth; but because ye have known it that ye
might abide in it; Let that therefore abide (mark) in you, which ye have heard
from the beginning, If that which ye have heard from the beginning (take
notice) shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Father and in the
Son: and the anointing which ye have received of him (mark that) abides in you:
and ye need not that any should teach you; but as the same anointing teaches
you of all things, and is truth and is no lie, and as it has taught you ye
shall abide in him, 1 Jo. 2.21. to 27. and so to magnify the Light and Spirit
within, and walk in obedience to it, is not Spiritual delusion nor against
Christ, nor in opposition to the Scripture which is largely proved by the
Scriptures of truth: But they that are not guided by the Light and Spirit of
truth within, are in the Spiritual delusion. And whereas thou S. W. speaks --
of magnifying the Light within against Christ and in opposition to the
Scriptures of truth -- Paul says, when he writ to the Philipians, I would ye
should understand, Brethren, that the things which have hapened unto me; have
fallen out rather to the furtherance of the Gospel, so that my bonds in Christ
are manifest, etc. for I know that it shall turn to my salvation, through your
prayers: and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. according to my
expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: but that with all
boldness as always (take notice of that) so now also, Christ shall be magnified
in my body, etc. And there is not any one thing in all the whole Scripture more
clear to be proved, then the magnifying of Christ, the Law, Light, and Spirit
of Truth in man.

And as for the first Rise of us (which scorners call Quakers) which S. W.
says -- was in London about the year 47 -- it is no more true; then his
charging of us -- that the magnifying of the Light within, stands in opposition
to Christ and the Scripture --: But as for the eternal power of the Lord God
of hosts; which in righteousness has been revealed, and made manifest amongst
us: more then has been of late ages, through the long night of Apostasy; by
which proud flesh has exceedingly quaked and trembled, that was not first in
London (as S.W. dreameth) but in the North of England; as many faithful
witnesses can testify if required; and the first that ever was known to give
us that name of Quakers (as I heard out of the mouth of a true and faithful
witness of the Lord) was a persecuting Justice, in Darby Shire, Gervas Bennet;
(as I remember) about the year 1652. yet the power of the Lord was witnessed,
before that time, amongst our friends in the North. Yet that was not the first
rise of the Quakers or Quaking which S. W. says was in London, which plainly
manifests to all the Children of Light; that Captain Wade is no Minister of
Christ? neither following him in the regeneration: for they that follow Christ,
in their mouths is found no guile (mark that) neither do they speak a lie, for
quaking was thousands of years before that: For says Moses, so dreadful was
thy presence that I did exceedingly quake and tremble, Heb. 12.21 And Isaac,
which was before Moses hundreds (if not thousands) of years, did witness
quaking or trembling; for when he heard the voice of Esau, the cunning Hunter;
he exceedingly trembled, Gen 27.33. And in the holy war, in the days of old,
the Host of Israel, and the Garrison; and the spoylers (mark ye spoylers, who
make a prey and spoil of the Lords servants, and their outward substance, a Day
of horror and perplexity is coming on you) and the spoylers also did quake and
tremble; and there was a great trembling and quaking in the Host in the field,
1 Samuel 14.15. And David said his flesh did tremble, he was afraid of the
judgments of the Lord, Psalm. 119.120. And Daniel that holy Prophet, when he
saw the Vision, and heard the voice of the Lord, stood trembling, and a great
quaking fell on them that stood by, Dan, 10.7, to the 11. And Habbakuck when he
heard the Decree of the Lord, against the wicked, who built towns with blood,
and established Cities by iniquity; and that gave drink to their neighbors,
till they were drunken and their nakedness seen, etc. and violence was done on
men's blood: and they taught lies, and trusted in dumb Idols (take notice) and
their rejoicing was to devour the poor secretly: for the which the man of God
saw the Lord would be avenged of them, in the day he would invade them with his
troops (or compass them about with his terrible army with displayed banners)
the which when the Prophet heard, his belly trembled, and his lips quivered,
rottenness entered into his bowel^: he trembled, that he might rest; in that day
of trouble, such a man (as says Isaiah) Isa. 66.2, to the 5.
has the Lord regard unto: which is of meek and humble Spirit, that trembles
at his Word, Habak. 2.8. to the end chap. 3.

See thou S. W. and you all that despises quaking do plainly manifest you are
not come to the opening of the Book in which the mystery of God have been
sealed, and hid from the Vultrous eye, etc. And I beheld (says John) when he
had opened the sixth seal, and lo there was a great Earthquake ( Rev. 6.12) but
thou must come to know; the pouring out of the vialls, by the seven Angels,
which is pouring forth, the wrath of God on the earth, as you may read, Rev.
16. the whole world that lies in wickedness shall feel what is contained in
that Chapter: much there lies in it, which I am not permited to speak; And when
the seventh Angel poured forth (mark ye airy Spirits) his vial into the air,
and there came a great voice out of the Temple saying, it is done, and there
were Voices and Thunders, and Lightnings; and there was a great Earthquake,
such as was not since men were on the earth: so mighty an earthquake: and so
great, Rev. 16.17. This has been truly witnessed, and is witnessing amongst
those whom the Lord has redeemed and is redeeming: For the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah has roared out of Sion; who will not fear? And the Lord has spoken,
who can but Prophecy? his everlasting power is made manifest and his glory is
revealing, and he will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he come to reign
whose right it is: Christ Jesus the King. of Kings, and Lord of Lords. the
only Potentate of heaven and earth, and he in man shall rule and reign over
all the world in righteousness: whereby true judgment shall be set up in the
earth, and executed on all transgressors without respect of Persons; for he
will rule the Heathen with a rod of Iron: and all that gather against his
chosen ones, shall be broken in pieces like a potters vessel, and no weapon
formed against them shall prosper, and every tongue that rises against them
shall be condemned; for in Christ our righteousness are we established and
establishing: And he that rides on the white horse, is goneforth Conquering and
to Conquer; and with the rod of his lips will he smite and is smiting the
earth; and with the Spirit of his mouth, and bright glorious appearance is
consuming the Spirit of perdition: and the pride and glory of all flesh he is
marring and staining; for Christ is come in his ten thousands, etc. For so I
have read it: in an old Arrianish Testament I saw in Clonmell: in these very
express words as follows, and of these Prophesied Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, saying, behold our Lord is come in his holy thousands to do judgment
against all, and to reprove all the impious, of all the works of their impiety,
whereby they have done impiously; and of all the hard things which impious
sinners have spoken against him, Jude 41.15.

Therefore Awake, awake, ye that are resting in forms, without the power,
feeding on the husk, the letter which kills, and are covered, but not with
the Spirit of the Lord, The all seeing eye is opened before whom the secrets,
and intents of all hearts are naked and bare; your bed is to short, and your
covering will not hide you: you are weighed in an equal balance, and
comprehended as half a span, by him who has measured the waters in the hollow
of his hand, and meted out heaven with a span, and weighed the mountains in
scales: and the hills in a balance, from which in vain is salvation hoped.
Therefore Arise, Arise, ye Baptists, that is not your true rest ye now are in,
it is polluted, and will be your great destruction, except ye speedily repent,
for the glory of the Lord is departed from you: because you have forsaken your
first love: to wit, the true desires, and breathings after God in sincerity:
that was (I witness) in many of you about 12 years ago. Woe is me for you will who
were as it were persecuted for Christ's sake; and now are turned persecutors; as
will be made appear as follows. For if the Lord send any of his innocent
servants amongst you to speak a word in season, you cry out, you are disturbed,
Priest-like: limiting the Spirit of the Lord to an hour Glass: Or if any speak
a word, as moved of the Lord in the time you are speaking the divination of
your own brains, then some of you have laid violent hands, and haled out of
doors, and shut the door: this many of you in England and Ireland can witness;
Oh tremble, tremble, and be ashamed ye careless ones I many days shall ye be
troubled, the mouth of the Almighty have spoken it: And in the Light of the Son
of God examine your selves: whether riches and friendship of the world, which
is enmity unto God, and the glory of the world, have not blinded the eye of
your understanding, and so Adam the old man by the earthly mindedness has
stopped up, or choked that of God in you, which should give you the true
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; which if ever ye
Baptists come to be partakers of in truth, by the powerful operation of Gods
Spirit working in you, must you feelingly know through judgment that part
removed, till that which cannot be shaken, be raised in dominion to reign in
you: for yet once more will the Lord by his mighty power shake, not only the
earth, but heaven also, etc. And will ye nill ye, shall ye all know, (who are
of Gogs number making war against the Lamb and his followers) a Day of quaking:
for in my jealousy, and the fire of my wrath, have I spoken, says the Lord;
Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking, so that the Fishes of the
Sea, the fowls of the heaven; and the beasts of the field, and all creeping
things, that creep upon the earth: and all men that are upon the face of the
earth, shall shake at my presence: and the mountains shall be thrown down, and
the steep places, and walls shall fall to the ground, and I will call for a
sword against him throughout all my mountains, says the Lord God, every man's
sword against his Brother, and I will plead against him with pestilence and
blood, and rain great hailstones, sire and brimstone: thus will I magnify my
self and sanctify my self: and I will be known in the eyes of all Nations; and
they shall know, that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 38.19. to the end; So the judgment
of Captain Sam. Wade concerning the first rise of quaking; and magnifying the
Light within, to be in opposition to the Scriptures, is altogether proved
false, and a Spiritual delusion. This have I written only for the sake of the
simple: and the clearing of false reports against the truth; and those that
have desires after it, God knows I lie not.

5 The Principles and Judgment of Joseph Parsons, Pastor and Teacher to those
people called Freewillers; he affirmed before his flock; -- That the Lord would
purge, etc. the Tribe of Levy to offer sacrifices and offerings; -- I demanded
whether he meant Carnal sacrifices, etc. to wit the blood of bulls and goats,
etc. as in the Leviticall Priesthood; he answered -- Yea, as in the former days
of old; and as in the years past.
Answ. Here Joseph Parsons would go to make Christ, the one offering (by which
he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified) to be of none effect; by
which one offering, he changed both Law and Priesthood; disannulled the
Commandments, which stood in meats and drinks and Carnal washings, and the
sacrificing and offering of the blood of bulls and goats, etc. which never made
those that were the actors thereof, clean or perfect: as pertaining to the
conscience: which were but types and figures, and stood in time, and had a
limitation of time; to wit, till the time of reformation, Heb. 9.9.10 and
though there was a time, the Lord had regard unto those sacrifices, etc. And
that they were as a sweet savor unto him, and he delighted in them, and in
those that offered them. Yet when their hearts went a whoring after other
lovers, And turned that which once the Lord required of them, into Idolatry,
then the Lord loathed it, and them; and their solemnities-were a burden unto
him; and he sent his Prophets, rising early to cry against them: And by the
mouth of the Prophets, the Lord told them, he had not required these things at
their hands, but it was abomination unto him, Isa. 1.11. to the 15. As says
the Lord, I have not caused thee O Jacob, to serve with offerings: neither have
thou honored me with thy sacrifices; but thou have made me to serve with thy
sins: as says the Apostle, Sacrifices and Carnal offerings thou would not
O God, but a body have thou prepared me etc. So that when that body of Christ
Jesus was offered up; which came to do the will of God according as it was
written in the Volume of the Book he (mark) for ever perfected and sanctified
them; which believed and followed him, and changed that Law and Priesthood, and
is the end of it for righteousness sake, etc.

And so I say, if the work of Christ in this the mighty day of his Power and
Judgment, in which he is come and coming as a refiners fire to purge and
purify the Sons of Levy: that they might offer an offering in righteousness,
etc. I say if it were to offer Carnal Sacrifices as in the days of old, it
would be a building again that which he has changed, and I says the Lord,
change not, but the Apostles (amongst whom that day of Judgment first began)
for one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, etc. they plainly shows what
that offering was: which the Prophet Mal. spoke of which should be pleasant;
unto the Lord as in the days of old, and in former years, etc. for says the
Apostle to them which had tasted that the Lord was gracious; ye also as Living
stones, are built up, (take notice of the offering that should be pleasant)
etc. a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices:
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; this was, and is, the everlasting offering
that is offered up by the members of the Church and first fruits unto God since
the long night of Apostancy, who as living stones are built up a spiritual
house, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, that the Lord
has called out of darkness into the mavelous Light; to show forth his praise
who has lead and is leading through the judgment, and the fire: whereby
(blessing and glory, glory to the Lord in the highest;) many are purged and
purified; even as fine gold; through which they are come into the pure Life of
Jesus, from which an offering, a sweet odor, a savor acceptable unto the
Lord, as in the days of old, and years past, in righteousness is offered unto
the Lord. So Joseph Parsons has manifested himself, to be amongst the
Babylonish foolish builders: and ignorant of the Scriptures: not dividing the
word aright: The words of the Prophet Jeremiah are fulfilled in the Pastors:
for says he, the Pastors are become brutish, and have not known the Lord in
rightousness, therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be
scattered, Jer. 10.21.

And when the Prophet spoke of that day of the Lord, in which the Lord would be
(and now is) a swift witness against the forcerer, the false prophet, and false
swearers, adulterers and oppressors, etc. and also of the offering that should
be pleasant, etc. He does not speak there of the Carnal offerings of the
Leviticall Priesthood, but of the offerings of Judah, etc. Heb. 7.14. Mal. 3.4.
And the Scripture says it is evident that our Lord sprungout of Judah; of
which there was nothing spoke concerning Priesthood; So this day that Scripture
is fulfilled in your ears, for the offering of Judah, according to the Spirit:
and Jerusalem which is come down from God out of heaven, and is free, the
mother of us all, is pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old and years
past, compare Mat. 3.4. 1 Pet. 2.4. Gal. 4.25.26. Rev. 21.2. And they are not
all Israel, who are of Israel, after the flesh; but they are of the true
Israel, that are born of the immortal Word of God that lives and abides for
ever; in whose mouth is found no guile, neither tells a lie: and he made all
nations on the face of the whole earth, of one flesh and blood; Jo. 1.17. Rev.
14 5 Act. 17.26.
and in Christ Jesus there is no difference, whether Jew or Gentile, male or
female, circumcision, uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free, for ye
(mark that) are all one in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, Gal. 3.28. Col.
3.11. for Israel after the flesh stumbled at Christ the chief corner stone, as
many of the Pastors and Teachers now do, at Christ the Light within; so he is
not a Jew, who is one outwardly, but he is a true Jew who is one inwardly,
following the Lamb in the regeneration, whose praise is of God, and not of man;
yet a bundantly will the Lord be glorified, in the Jews according to the flesh,
the day of whose redemption draws near, and their captivity hastneth to be at
an end; and that is the Word of the Lord God of hosts to the Jews.

6 The rash Judgment of William Lee Baptist Teacher, Governor of Waterford
reproved and found false, and so proved according to the Law and Testimony;
wherein also is a true testimony, of the operation of the eternal power and
Spirit of the Lord, in the work of regeneration, etc.
On the 4 day of the 6 month 1659. I being at And. Richets house, then Mayor of
Waterford, about my releasing out of prison being, then a prisoner for the
testimony of Jesus. And there being present he called Colenell William Lee, and
William Lamb a Baptist Pastor, this did occasion some conference about the
things of God: I earnestly contending for the faith of Gods Elect once
delivered to the Saints; which gives victory over sin and bearing my testimony
to Gods righteous Law and Spirit of Truth in man; which largely before is proved
by the Scriptures of truth, for all men by it to be guided; having received a
measure thereof; this was the substance of what I there declared. That of God
in them bears me record; which is the everlasting truth of God.

But William Lee Teacher, and William Lamb Pastor, strongly opposed me, crying
out, The Ordiances of Christ: The Ordinances of Christ: to wit, the Supper of
the Lord, and water Baptism, which stood in time, and were Ordinances of God
and Christ; But had a limitation of time, and are ended in Christ the
everlasting substance, to every one that believes and follows, as will be
proved by the Scriptures of truth;

So he called Colonel Will. Lee, governor and Baptist Teacher, affirmed in
the presence of Will. Lamb Pastor, the Mayor and Aldermen so called, and
several Captains and other men of quality in the worlds account, both Baptists
and Independants -- That I was absolutely damned and did not believe the truth;
nor abide in the Doctrine and Ordinances of Christ --

Now I appeal to Gods witness in the consciences of all who cry out that the
Quakers do Judge; when did any of the Quakers (that are so in truth;) give such
rash Judgment as to say any man was absolutely damned; which is a secret
belonging only to God, except the unbeliever confess it out of his own mouth;
or that the fruits of his Life make it appear?

But blessed be the Lord God and Father of Light, through his eternal Love in
Christ Jesus, I do believe, and follow the Truth, which is Christ Jesus the
Light of the world, that Lighted every one that comes into the world; and am
dead with Christ, buried with him in Baptism in measure, and cannot be subject
to Ordinances that perish in the using; and he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. And this testimony I
give to all the world, and sons of men, on the face of the whole earth. I do
believe that Jesus Christ the Savior of the souls of mankind, was the eternal
Son of God, born of a Virgin; whose name and interpretation I truly in my
measure witness, even the Emmanuel, God with us; who made a good confession
before Pontius Pilate, that he was Crucified and Buried, and by the mighty
Power and Glory of God the Father of Life, was raised again, and appeared unto
his Disciples and was received up to eternal Glory, and Glorified with the
Father, with the same Glory he had before the world began; And much more do I
believe in him and of him; according as it is recorded in the holy Scriptures
of Truth concerning him, which I may not now declare.

And this Testimony I give for the Lord God, and his truth, unto all who have
breathings after Christ, and are hungering and thirsting after his
righteousness; But are gazing abroad and seeking him in outward observations,
etc. that Christ Jesus the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, is come the
second time without sin unto salvation, in his chosen thousands: Therefore turn
in your minds to that of God in you, Romans 1.19. and remember the woman that
lost the groat and could not find it, until she had Lighted a Candle (the
Candle of the Lord is the Spirit of man: the Light of Christ Lightneneth it)
and swept her house, and when she found it, she called her Neighbors and
rejoiced; read the Parable who can.

And I can truly say, as Paul did, he is come to save sinners of which I was
chief; which lived in Pride, Lust, Vanity, blaspheming his holy name, but have
obtained mercy because it was in the time of ignorance and unbelief; not
through works that I have done, but of his everlasting free Love; Yet have born
his Just and Righteous Judgments, and deeply have drank of the cup of his
fierce wrath and indignation; and can truly say, I am washed, cleansed,
sanctified and Justified (in my measure) by the water, the blood and the
Spirit; which three agree in one, in the work of regeneration, and so through
the faith of God; which works by love, am brought in obedience to the Doctrine
of Christ, and his commands, and in it to abide, and this is his Doctrine:
Blessed be the poor in Spirit, blessed be the meek, blessed be they that mourn,
etc. Thou have heard that it has been said of old time thou shall not forswear
thy self; but I say unto you swear not at all; and when thou prayest, be not
like the Hypocrites which stand praying (in Pulpits) and call no man master,
neither be ye called of man master; and Love your enemies, give to him that
asks, and from him that would borrow, turn not away, that you may be children
of your heavenly Father; for he makes his Sun to shine on the evil, and on
the good, and sends rain on the Just and unjust: and he that looks on a
woman to Lust after her, has already Committed adultry with her in his heart,
etc. And lay not up for your selves treasure in the earth, where the moth and
Canker do corrupt; but lay up for your selves, treasure in heaven, where
neither moth nor rust do corrupt, nor thievs break through and steal. And I say
unto you, says Christ, swear not at all, but in all your Communications, let
your yea, be yea, and your nay be nay; for whatsoever is more then that, comes
of evil; and take no thought what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or
wherewithal ye shall be clothed; and take no thought for to morrow, But first
seck the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, etc. And be ye perfect even as
your heavenly Father is perfect; and his Ministers bid try all things, and hold
fast that which is good, flee youthful Lusts of Vanity, abstain from every
appearance of evil, quench not the Spirit; but if any thing be revealed to him
that stands by, let the first hold his peace, etc. Now whether thou William Lee
and ye Baptists, which cry out, the Ordinances of Christ, and the Commands of
Christ, be in the obedience to those weightier Commands and Ordinances, which
is fulfilled through faith, mercy, and Judgment upon the head of the
transgressor, I say whether you Baptists, or we despisedly called Quakers, be
in the obedience to those Commands, etc. And many other which might be
mentioned, of Christ, and his Ministers, and abides in their Doctrine: Let that
of God in all Judge, which the least of those, or any of his Commands
knowningly or wilfully I dare not disobey, if I might gain the whole world,
God is my record, I lie not, And he that says he knows God (mark that you
Baptists) and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in
him, 1 Jo. 2.4. So the truth of Christ, and his Doctrine, I do believe, and
abide in: through his mercy and Power.

Obj. But thou do not practice the Ordinances of bread, and baptising of
water. Well, let us reason together.

Answ. I do require and challenge all the Baptists in the Nation, to prove by
express words, (for he that adds or diminishes to, or from the words written
in the Book, God will add to him the Plagues written therein) where ever
Christ did baptize with Water, or command any to baptize with Elementary Water;
That Matthew. 28,19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. does not speak of
Elementary Water; and it is evident, the Scripture does speak of other Baptism
then John's, which was only Elementary Water, which I also do believ was a
Command of God to John, though sometimes practiced by the Disciples, but
fulfilled, and ended by, and in Christ, to every one that believes and follows
the Light of Christ within, which leads to the one Baptism, the weightier
matter, spoken of Ephesians. 4.5. And I have a Baptism to be baptized with, (says
Christ) and how am I straitened ti^l it be accomplished, Luke 12.50. Now Christ
had fulfilled John's Baptism, as to himself, before he spoke those words, and
was before that baptized of John, as you may read Luke 3.2. And himself did
prophecy the decreasing of his Ministration; For (says he) I baptize with
water unto repentance; but he that comes after me, who is mightier then I, he
shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire: He does not say, Christ
should baptize with Water, but with the Holy Ghost, etc. And he shall increase
(says John) but I shall decrease. And when the Apostle came to Ephesus, finding
certain Disciples which had (take notice) been baptized before that unto John,
he said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they
said, We have not so much as heard, whether there be any Holy Ghost, Then says
Paul, ( who was not sent to baptize with water; for I baptized none, says he,
except Crispus and Paulus, etc. and the household of Stephanus) To what were ye
baptized? They said, Unto John, Then says he, John verily baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying, That they should believe on him that should come
after him, Christ Jesus: When they heard that, they were baptized into Christ;
and Paul laid his hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost, Acts 19.1.
to the 6. So it is evident, as I said before, there is another Baptism then
Water Baptism, as true experience of many can witness, who are now baptized,
and baptizing into the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, or into Christ's death,
according to the Scriptures of Truth; for says the Apostle, Know ye not, that
so many of us, as have been baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death,
etc. Romans 6.3. And he said unto the Galatians, As many of you as have been
Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. So the Scripture does not
say, any where, that they that are baptized into the Father, are baptized with
water, or they that are baptized into the Son and Holy Ghost are baptized with
Elementary water, which only was a type or figure of the inward washing, and
sanctifying; for the baptism of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is three
distinct things, of a various operation, though wrought by one and the same
spirit; the one, a ministration of Terror and Condemnation; the second, of
Salvation, or washing and cleansing from sin; and the third, a Sanctifying and
Glorifying, with the same Glory, that was with the Father before the world or
sin began. And so I do affirm in the fear of the Lord, which is according to
the Scriptures of Truth, That Christ is the end of the Law, and of John's
ministration for righteousness sake, to every one that believes in the Light,
which Christ has enlightened every one withal; that whosoever (I say) believes
in the Light of Christ in them, it leads, as they follow it into the one
baptism, Ephesians. 4.5: and daily Cross of Christ, to the Crucifying and slaying, of
the Lusts of the flesh, Pride of Life, envyings, wrath, strife, adulteries,
Idolatry, witchcraft, variance, emulation, seditions, heresy, Drunkenness,
murders, self-willedness, etc. the which they that live in, are not Christ's,
neither are such actions the fruits of the members of the true Church; And
whether many of those sins be not standing amongst you Baptists, Let that of
God in you all Judge: for I, standing peaceably in a meeting, amongst the
Baptists in Waterford where William Lee was Preaching; and when he had done, I
stood upon a form to speak the Word of the Lord that was in my heart, as fire,
desiring their moderation, I speaking no other things then what is contained in
the Scriptures of Truth; but Will. Lee came out of his Pulpit, and laid violent
hands on me, and thrust me down, gnashing his teeth on me. Another member of
that Church, Sergeant Wilson, Constable of the Town, laid violent hands on me,
and haled me out of the room, and said, That I deserved to be stoned to death;
and another time, I walking peaceably in the next room to their meeting, came
Geo. Caldron, called an Alderman, and told me, It was their hired house, and if
I did stay there, it should be to my peril; and the day aforesaid, when I was
with the Mayor, when Will. Lamb Pastor was taking his leave of the Mayor, he
bowed hat and knee, saying -- Your humble servant Sir -- according to the
fashion of the world which passes away; for which I reproving him, he came and
laid hands on my hat, and took it off my head, and threw it violenton the
ground; which some of his Brethren would have had him taken up again, but he
would not; so because I know they were ashamed of the brutishness of their
Pastor, one of them took up my hat and ran after me, and put it on my head,
which was said to be Captain Boulton; And that same day, because I testified
the writings of the Prophets and Apostles were not the Word of God, but I said
that which was spoken from the Spirit of God, were the Words of God; but Christ
is the Word, Bov. 19. Jo. 1.1. So Will. Lamb was speaking with the rest, and
would have had me to been taken hold of, for he said there was an Act of
Parliament, that if any should say the Scripture was not the Word of God, they
should suffer, etc. And being sometime after that, amongst the Baptists of
Waterford, Jo. Deck a Teacher of them, was whispering with some of his
Brethren, and came presently unto me, and held up the Bible in his hand, and
asked me. -- whether that was not the Word of God? -- Judas-like to betray or
ensnare me; I asked him whether that was the Word of God, which Rabshaka and
Sennacherib spoke, blaspheming and reproaching the Living God, and that the
Devil spoke to Christ? his answer was -- That it was --; And Roger Mokell,
which that day was preaching, I being moved of the Lord to give my testimony
against him, which by good and fair words (they were good words us they were
spoken from the holy men of God, but the deceiver taking them to cover his
deceit) thereby deceives the simple; so after that, in my conference with R. M.
he said he had not an Infallible Spirit, but was subject to err; so this makes
good my testimony for the Lord, that he spoke not from the mouth of the Lord,
but spoke the good words, as I said before, from an erring spirit; for all that
speak not from an infallible spirit, or measure thereof, speak from an erring
spirit: So let that of God in all Judge, what Pastors and Teachers these be;
Many other such like passages might I relate, which would be too large to write,
neither do I write it out of prejudice or envy unto any, God knows I lie not;
but it is only that all who are concerned therein, may thoroughly search
themselves, and with that of God in them, see, what they have Profited in the
things of God, by such Pastors and Teachers, and into what you are baptized;
for where the old man and its fruits are standing; to wit, Pride, Lust, Envy,
etc. You are not come so far as John's Baptism the true figure, which was to
repentance, nor the answer of a good conscience, by the resurrection of the
Just; but have need to be taught the first Principles of the true Christian
Religion; to wit, turn to the Light of Christ in you, which would lead you to
repentance and from dead works, etc. and to go on to perfection, Heb. 6.1.2.
And into the daily Cross, as I said before, to the crucifying of the old man and
his deeds, and so to know as Panl did, a daily dying, and baptized into the
death of Christ, buried with him in baptism; that Like as Christ, was raised by
the Power and Glory of God the Father of Life, from the Grave, so to be raised
and changed, into newness of Life, and so the fruits and effects of the Spirit
of Truth will be brought forth; which are meekness, Long-suffering, Brotherly
kindness, Gentleness, Temperance, Love, Faith, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost: Now if these fruits and effects are brought forth by you Baptists, let
that of God in all Judge: for Christ said, false Prophets should come, and ye
shall know them by their fruits, and now false Prophets and brutish Pastors are
known by their fruits, who cry out, the Ordinances of Christ. The Ordinances of
Christ! etc. Even as the false Prophets did in the days of old, The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of Lord, but mocked the messengers of the Lord God, and
despised his Words, and killed and mis-used his Prophets; against such Christ
himself cried, and Prophesied the destruction of that Temple, and said, God his
Father was a Spirit, and in the Spirit, and in the Truth would he be
worshipped, And told his Disciples when he was with them, That except he did go
away, the Comforter would not come, But if he did go away, he would send the
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth which should lead and guide them into all
Truth, and show them things to come.

8 Therefore that very night he was betrayed, as a Pledge of his Love, knowing
that his Disciples were but weak (The Holy Ghost not being then given amongst
them) though he had done many glorious works and miracles amongst them, he left
them a remembrance of himself, which was the figure of the Spiritual breaking
of Bread, as will be showed; I say, that very night Christ was betrayed, He
took Bread and broke it, and blessed it, saying, This is my Body, which is
broken for many, etc. And Likewise the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood, etc. which was to be done only in remembrance of him,
says the Apostle, (mark the Limitation of time) till he come; who blessed be
the Lord many do witness to be come in great Power and Glory, and when his good
Spirit was come unto the Apostles, it was their great work to bring the Saints
off, from outward things that were seen, Carnal Ordinances that perished in
the using; for Bread is seen, and Wine is seen, and Elementary Water is seen,
and they all are Carnal, and perish in the using, 2 Cor. 4.17.18. Col. 2.22.
Therefore says the Apostle, If ye be dead with Christ, why as though Living,
are ye Subject to Ordinances which all are to perish in the using after the
Commandments of men? threrefore he bid them beware, Least any man spoil them
through Philosophy and vain deceit, and traditions of men, after the rud ments
of the world, and not after Christ, Col. 2.8. to the end of the Chap. And bid
them if they were risen with Christ, to seek those things which were above
Carnal Ordinances which perished in the using, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God, etc.

And this testimony I give to all the world, That you baptists and other, that
are found practicing those ordinances, Baptism, and breaking Bread, etc. you
are not to be parallelled or compared to the Saints and Apostles, that did
practice those things, in their purity or first institution by Christ, and not
from tradition or command of man's for whatever Christ or his Prophets or holy
Apostles did practice, as is recorded in the Scripture, is no ground for any
one now to practice, except commanded or moved immediately, by the same spirit
that lead them unto it; for they that so do, will be found in the rudiments of
the World, walking in traditions, and although they may say, They have eaten
and drunken at the Table of the Lord, and prophesied in his Name, and done many
wonders, etc. yet when God's righteous Witness comes to be raised in Power to
judgment, it will be said, Who required those things at your hands, etc? For
since the long Night of Apostasy that Antichrist has reigned, through his
subtle working, has gotten into all these outward Ordinances, Practices, and
Forms that were practiced by the Primitive Church, but the Power he had not,
which did then, even in the days of the Apostles, begin to work with all
Power, Signs and lying Wonders, in them that perish; whom now by the second and
glorious appearance of Christ in man is revealing the man of sin, and Mystery
of Iniquity, and by the Power of his Spirit, and brightness of his coming, is
destroying and consuming of him, which has a long time reigned in man, the
Temple of God: And therefore ye Baptists, you are found in the Traditions and
Rudiments of the World; for the Pope, Jesuits, and all his Friars, and all that
they call Christendom, are baptizing and breaking bread, crying out, The
Ordinances of the Lord, etc.

But the Spirit of Life from God, which is eternal, and not carnal, nor seen
with the carnal eye; he, I say, that has this spirit, is come to the end of
all those shadows, and knows himself as he abides in it, a member of the body
of which Christ is the the Head, and a member of the true Church in God, with
the Saints in Light, and so comes truly to say, as the Apostles did, We being
many, are one body, and one bread; I speak as to the wise in God, to judge what
I say: The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood, the Life of Jesus Christ? And the Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? etc. For all are partakers of that one Bread;
I am the Bread of Life, (says Christ) he that has an ear to hear, let him
hear; and he that eats thereof, shall never dye:

So I say, in this the day of God's eternal Power, his children who meet
together, sitting in the heavenly high places, waiting on the Lord in the
measure of his spirit, and in the Spirit of Truth are worshipping him; they
being many are one body, and come to be partakers of that spiritual Bread of
life, which is broken amongst them by the Divine hand, through the Power of the
Lord, and so are come to the substance of the shadow or outward sign, which was
to be done in remembrance by the Disciples, till he come, etc. (but not
commanded to be practiced by succeeding Generations, as a traditional rudiment)
the which did prefigure the spiritual communion of the Saints, in the
dispensation of times, which is come, for the gathering together all in one,
even in CHRIST, Ephesians. 1.10. And those that were baptized unto Moses, etc. They
also eat of this Spiritual Bread, and drank of that Spiritual Rock which
followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.2.4. Therefore in the Power
and Authority of the Spirit of the Lord, I bear testimony, That all the
children of the Lord that are taught of him, and in his righteousness, in their
measures are established, are come to the end of all those shadows, types and
figures, which stood in meats, drinks, and diverse washings, and such carnal
Ordinances, baptising with Water, and breaking natural Bread, etc. Outward
Offerings, and sacrificing of Beasts, etc. are carnal, (and the Apostle said, I
Paul testify unto you, if you be circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing:
What Scripture had the Apostle to prove that, seeing there was a time Scripture
required it?) I say, although these Ordinances and commands were instituted by
the Father and the Son, they stood in time, until he that was before time, and
for ever will remain, when time shall be no more, was manifest the second time,
etc. even Christ in them the hope of glory; and he that believes, has the
witness of truth in himself, and so is come in truth, according to the
Scriptures of truth, to the end of those carnal Ordinances, which were imposed
on them (take notice of the limitation of time) until the time of Reformation,
Heb. 9.10,11. Romans 10.4.

9 And this testimony I give for the Lord's Truth, and his chosen ones, whom he
has called to labor in his Vinyard, that we (called Quakers) do not deny the
Ordinance of God and Christ to wit, Baptism and breaking of bread, etc. as they
stood in their time and place, as is aforeshewed; but for any to take them up,
by tradition or imitation, (according to the Doctrine of Pastor Hunt Baptist,
which said in the high place in their meeting at Kilkenny, -- That none could
follow Christ, to be as perfect as he was -- Therefore says he, They must be
as perfect as they can, and follow him so well as they can, and by imitation --
And so he would make the Doctrine of Christ and his Ministers, to be of none
effect by his imitation and traditions; for his Doctrine and Ministry was for
the perfecting of the Saints, etc. and they preached wisdom amongst them that
were perfect, and they labored to present every man perfect in Christ; and
Epaphras prayed they might stand perfect. And the Apostle said, They were
complete in Christ, and come to mount Sion, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. And Christ said, Whosoever
will be my Disciple, he must take up his daily Cross and follow me: He does not
say -- Follow me as well you can, etc. but his Disciples said, We have followed
thee in the regeneration, etc. and they received the Light of Life through
which they loved one another; and said, Herein was their love made perfect, and
therein was their boldness, because even as he was (mark the reason) in the day
of Judgment, even so were they in the present, and were and are perfect; and
so they witnessed his Command and Doctrine fulfilled, which said, Be ye
perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect. And for any, as I said
before, to take up any Ordinance, (except moved of the Lord by imitation or
tradition, I manifestly affirm, It is absolute Idolatry and Witchcraft, drawing
the minds of creatures into outward observations, contrary to the law and
Testimony; and that is the only Work of Antichrist, crying, Lo here, lo there;
(and Christ says, Go not forth) to keep the minds of creatures in outward
things, which perish in the using, from the Light of the Son of God within,
which he has enlightened every one that comes into the world withal, that all
men through him might believe and walk in the Light, which would lead unto the
one baptism, to be baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, through which
the heart comes to be purified, and the Faith of God's elect comes to be
received, which gives the victory over the world, and the mercy and peace from
God comes abundantly to be multiplied in, and on the new creature, who is
changed and raised to newness of life by the same power and glory that raised
the Lord Jesus from the Grave. So in the Light of the Son of God, examine your
selves ye Baptists, whether you are come to know a real change of life, and to
be new creatures, and old things past a way, or passing away; if not, I
testify unto you in the Name of the most High God, your baptism avails you
nothing and you are not yet come to the true repentance not to be repented of.
And as sure as the Lord lives, his just and righteous Judgment must you all
come to feel revealed in you and upon that nature that has disobeyed his
Gospel, through which Gods Righteousness comes to be revealed from Faith to
Faith, etc. through which Revelation of his Righteous Judgments in flames of
fire, comes the creature to know the purging away the filth of the flesh, and
the consuming of the man of sin, which has a long time sat in the Temple of
God, and exalted himself above God, even the mystery of iniquity comes to be
revealed, which has a long time reigned through the Power of darkness, which
has wrought with signs and lying wonders, which (glory, glory for ever to the
Lord) he is now consuming with the Spirit of his Wrath, and the brightness of
his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and look within; for all your preaching, and praying,
and seeming holiness, being not moved or guided by, and from the spirit of the
Lord, is the spiritual wickedness, which the Apostles vvarred against, whose
Weapons were not carnal, as theirs are that lay violent hands on the creature,
and would have stoned him to death.

And so, will ye, nill ye, a day of silence (if ever you come to enjoy the
Lords Truth, in the truth of it) shall you know, that is Gods truth to you
all; For your prayers and sacrifices are as the strange fire unto the Lord,
that was offered by Nadab and Abihu, (mark) which he commanded them not, for
which fire went forth from the Lord, and devoured them, that they dyed before
the Lord; and for that very cause (God bears me record) we the servants of
the Lord, when moved of him to come amongst you, cannot join or bovv to your
imaginary prayers, in which time some or most of you are sitting at ease, and
the Pastor or Teacher, standing praying many times in a Pulpit, (Priest-like,
taking a Text of Scripture, preaching by an Hourglass) and so you plainly
show you are not come in righteousness to glorify God with one mouth, and
one mind; for when your Teacher stands praying and you fitting, it is a true
testimony, you are not brought into the true humility; (but are in the stubborn
rebellious nature; at ease in Sion, which the woe is to) nor to the Covenant of
Life to perform, and fulfill the oath of God, which said, As I Live, (mark ye
stiff necked) every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess unto me,
says the Lord, and the Apostles and members of the true Church kneeled down to
prayer by the Sea shore.

And so I say, it is not out of contempt as to your Persons, or as denying
prayer, that we cannot join with you in it, as is before showed, for the prayers
of the faithful as the Lord leads to it, by and from the breathings, and
movings of his eternal Spirit, we own in all humility, as may be expressed,
etc.

Yea sometimes, God knows I lie not, were it not for giving and offending his
holy Spirit, for the oppressed seed sake, that it might arise amongst you, to
praise the Lord, I could even bow down amongst you, when the Lord has sent me
amongst you; but knowing the terrors of the Lord, and having felt his Righteous
Judgments, and bore the Indignation of his wrath, dare not do it, but have
many times stood bearing a heavy burden, a witness for the Lord against you.
For Israel in the days of old, bowing to the Sacrifices of the Gods of Baal,
the Anger of the Lord was therefore kindled against them, and Moses said unto
the Judges of Israel, that the fierce anger of the Lord might be taken away,
slay ye, says Moses, every one his men that were joined to Baalpeor, Numb.
25.1. to the 6. and therefore as I said before, a day of silence, shall ye
Baptists and all professors of the earth know, that make mention of the name of
the Lord but in the unrighteousness which is sin.

The Lord God of heaven and earth has a controversy with you all, for your
manifold transgressions, and for rejecting his counsel, and misusing his
messengers which he has sent, rising early, coming from far unto you, and you
would none of his counsel, but hate and despise his servants, who reprove sin
in the gate, and you abhor them that speak uprightly; Woe is me for you! my soul
mourns for you in secret; Oh! repent ye backsliders repent ye backsliders,
who have forsaken the Lord of Life, and have settled your selves on the Lees,
and think in your hearts because many of you have gotten great possessions and
treasure in the earth, ye shall not be moved: Oh! again I say unto you, meet
the Lord by speedy repentance, before the day of your visitation be past away,
and you find not a day of repentance, though you seek it with tears as Esau
did; for the mighty day of the Lord God over all the world is come and coming,
such as has not been known since the world began; a day, wherein your solemn
solemnities, and breaking Bread that perishes in the using, etc. will be a day
of great and thick darkness, felt even as the Egyptian darkness; in it your
Prudent must keep silence, mourning even as a woman mourns over her only
son, for he that formed the mountains and created the winds, and shows to man
his thoughts, will plead with you, and all flesh by fire, and by sword, and
great will the slain of the Lord be, yea they shall cast out their dead bodies,
with silence; for says David, Let the wicked be put to silence, in the Grave;
and all that makes mention of the name of the Lord our God, who is a consuming
fire, must depart from iniquity. And as you, and all people on the face of the
earth, come to wait on the Lord in the way of his Judgments, you will sensibly
come, truly and gladly to say, blessed be he that comes in the Truth, and in
the name of the Lord, for he keeps the feet of his Saints (mark that) but the
wicked shall be silent in darkness: and David said, Let the wicked lips be put
to silence, (mark and take notice ye that despise the Light, and speak proudly
against the Light, and Spirit of God in man, to be the Rule and Guide of Life,
etc.) That speaks proudly, grievous things, contemptuously against the
Righteous, Psalm. 31.17.18. for the Lord is arisen, and has appeared in his
Temple, Let the earth, and all flesh keep silence before him; And therefore I
say unto you, who despise the servants of the Lord, who preach silence to all
flesh, who sit silently waiting on the Lord, speaking as they are moved, if
ever the true joy in God, you come to be partakers of, it must be by returning
in your minds into that of God in you, waiting in the silence of all flesh; for
let the Islands keep silence before me (mark) that the people may renew their
strength, Isa. 41.1. and thousands who are come to know the honorable silent
waiting on the Lord, do witness daily strength renewed. And when the seventh
Seal was opened, there was silence in heaven half an hour; And so to preach
silence to all flesh, is according to the practice of the holy men of old; they
spoke as they were moved, of the Holy Ghost, and so according as they had
received they ministered, as good stewards of the manifold gifts and graces of
God, and Christ bid his Disciples go and wait at Jerusalem, till they were
endued with power from on high.

And this has been the substance of my testimony from the Lord unto you
Baptists, That the Lord requires you to wait for the powerings forth of his
eternal Spirit, and to feel its operation and movings in you; until then, in
the dread, power and authority of the Spirit of the Lord, again I say unto you,
Let all flesh keep silence, Gods witness in every one of you shall eternally
witness me to be true; for through the operation of Gods eternal Power and
Spirit of Life; Life and Immortality is brought to Light, through which the
Immortal soul comes to be refreshed, and the seed of God raised out of death.

And that Life and seed is but one in all, in the male and in the female, so if
Gods Spirit move in son or daughter to speak in the Church of Christ; it is not
lawful to quench it. But if any thing else speak, whether in male or female,
and not the Spirit of the Lord, or its movings, that which speaks in male or
female, being in the sin and transgression, that is the woman, or sorrowful
sinful man, that must be silent, and ask the husband at home; which (if she
continue in the faith, Patience, Godliness, Sobriety, and Charity until the
man-child be born; or brought forth in Dominion to Reign, to Rule the
transgressing part with a rod of Iron) she may be saved: he that can receive it
let him, for where sin and evil is standing, there is woe and sorrow, whether
in male or female; and all must be silent in the Church till sin and iniquity
is blotted out; but who are come to know remission of sin, through faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ, there is glad tidings, Joy and Peace, and all that ever
ministers, from the Spirit of Truth, in the Church of Christ, must first be a
partaker of the fruits of the Kingdom of God in measure; for says the
Apostle, The husbandman that labors must first bepar taker of the fruits (
viz. of that he ministereth, to wit, of the Joy or Glory he testifies of)
therefore says he to Tymothy consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding, etc.

And male and female, is all one in Christ, and each must come to know the
Travel and Anguish which makes all faces gather paleness, before that Child be
brought forth: Wherefore says the Prophet Jeremiah, Ask ye now, and see
whether a man does travel with Child, wherefore do I see every man with his
hands upon his Loins as a woman in travel, and all faces are turned into
paleness, etc. Jer. 30 6. This is a mystery, Christ in man; And so I say, when
the Life of Christ is brought forth in power, in son or daughter, it is Lawful
for either to speak in the Church of Christ, as Miriam and the holy women did,
in the days of old, teach and instruct in the Congregation of the Lord, and
Miriam taught Israel to sing praises to the Lord; and Deborah a Prophetess
Judged Israel, and instructed Barack and taught the people to praise the Lord;
and Huldah the Prophetess spoke the Word of the King, saying, Thus says the
Lord: And Priscilla with Aquila her Husband, took Apollo a man of Alaxandria,
and instructed him more perfectly in the way of the Lord; And Paul commends
those women to the Philippians which labored with him in the Gospel: And do
the Baptists think the Apostle would commend those women in one place, or to
one people, and reprove them or write against them to another people, and
command them to be silent; because Paul says, I suffer not a woman to teach,
or to usurp authority over the man, But be silent, and ask her Husband at
home? etc. and therefore you will not willingly (if the Lord send his handmaids
or daughters amongst you) suffer them to speak, on whom the Lord promised he
would pour out of his Spirit in the last days, and they should Prophecy; I
tell you there is a great mystery in those words, I suffer not a woman to
teach, but to be in silence, etc.

The Lord of Hosts is the Husband of his Church; and as Peter said, Our beloved
brother Paul writ in all his Epistles somethings hard to be understood, which
they that are unlearned, in the Doctrine and mysteries of Christ; wrest, as
they do all other Scriptures, to their own destruction; Therefore take heed all
ye that are stumbling at the Lords speaking in his handmaids, as in ages past,
who is the same for ever. Least ye are found perverting the Truth of the Lord,
and quenching his Spirit; For Anna a Prophettess, a woman of great age, that
had lived with an Husband, seven years from her Virginity; a widow of about
fourscore years of age, that served God in Fastings and Prayers, she coming
into the Temple, that instant when the Child Jesus was in the Temple, she gave
thanks, and preached in the Temple redemption by Jesus Christ to all them that
looked for it, in Jerusalem; And Christ himself, bid Mary Magdalen, to whom
first he appeared after his Resurrection, out of whom he had cast seven
Devils, Go and tell (or preach) to my Brethren, that he is arisen, says the
Angel, and go to Gallalee, there shall they see me, says Christ; And so I say
unto you, where ever the seed, which is Christ, to which all the promises of
God are Yea and Amen (and all that ever come to be blessed, it must be in the
seed) is brought forth in power to Reign, it is lawful to speak, whether in
male or female: quench it not for in Christ Jesus, there is no difference, in
him all is one, Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.28.

Therefore again I say unto you, quench not the Spirit of the Lord; but try all
things, and hold fast that which is good, and despise not reproof of
Instruction, but receive the Truth in the Love of it, to wit, the Light, and
Spirit of Truth within, as is largely before proved; according to the Scripture
of Truth, as it is in Jesus: And take heed, least for your not receiving the
Truth in the Truth, in the Love of it, God give you wholly over to reprobate
minds, to work uncleanness with greediness and so he Justly send you stronger
delusions, that ye all may be damned! who will not believe, and receive the
Truth in the Love of it; And then in that day of trouble and Anguish when you
cry and call; even you who have caused the simple to err, keeping them in that
which perishes in the using, from the measure of of God in them, bringing all
the Arguments and strong Reasons, to pervert and persuade from the Truth, and
to stop Gods Righteous witness, from arising in the simple, of which many
would hear and receive the Truth, but having not strength are afraid of being
cast out from amongst you, as it was amongst the envious Jews, who ever of them
did confess Christ, was to be cast out: But the day is near come, that such
fears shall be cast out of them, who breath after God in righteousness and
Truth, and they shall come to know one (if you cast them out) will receive
them; even as Christ received him, whom the Jews cast out; and the Lord will
bring them by a way they have not known, and in paths they have not trodden
(that which is high, rough, and crooked, will the Lord bring low, and make it
straight and plain) so that a fool shall not err therein, and when the poor
and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I
the God of Israel, says the Lord, will not forsake them, I will open rivers in
high places, and fountains in the midst of the Valleys, etc. Isa. 41.17,18. And
many of them which ye brutish Pastors, and Teachers, have kept in bondage, a
Day when God's witness comes to be raised up in them in Power, a swift witness
will the Lord make them against you, That is God's Truth unto you; and in that
day, as I said before, shall ye that have caused the simple to err, etc. (Who
are scorching in the flame and ye know it not, Gnashing and Blaspheming God and
his Tabernacle, who keep the Commands of Jesus, according to the Law and
Testimony; to wit, the Light within, which is the Law, and the Spirit of Jesus,
which is the Testimony, by which his faithful ones are moved and Guided; which
you say, is the Spirit of the Devil, woe is me for you! cry unto the Lord, and
he will not hear you, except ye speedily Repent, to whom repentance is offered;
for you would none of his reproof, neither did choose the pure fear of the
Lord, but have hated the true knowledge of the Lord, and have chosen that
wherein he delights not, but are rebelling, and rejecting the Counsel of the
Lord, doing evil continually before me, says the Lord. Therefore shall ye bow
down to the slaughter, and my servants whom ye despise, shall eat abundantly,
and drink, and be satisfied, and sing for Joy of soul; but you who are
accounted as Ambassadors of Peace, shall weep and howl for vexation of Spirit,
and eat the fruit of your own doings, and not be satisfied; the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it.

Thus I have, in obedience to the movings of the Lord, in tender Love to all
your souls; not shunned to declare and make manifest the way to everlasting
salvation, as one that am truly sensible, of the state, and want of Christ that
all professors of the world are in; I say unto every particular, whose desires
is after God, and would walk in the good old way, the way into it, is plainly
made known, which is Jesus Christ, the Light within, which all that believe,
and follow, it will lead, in the daily Cross of Christ, which will slay the
enmity in man, which has separated him from God, by which man, will again come
to an entrance into the everlasting inheritance, to sit down in our Fathers
House amongst those that are sanctified, where is bread enough; And whereas
thou Will. Lee have said, that I am absolutely damned; Is not the cause of
Damnation unbelief, not believing in Christ the Light which Lights every one
that comes into the world, which Light is within, and Spirit of Truth within,
and Christ the hope of Glory within, except thou art a reprobate? and whether
the cause of Judas's damnation was not because he betrayed the Just into the
hands of murderers? Therefore take heed Will. Lee, that the Judgment thou and
others have given unto the Innocent, take heed it be not executed on your own
pates; for thou and the rest of you are in danger of it, because ye have Judged
before the time; for because Judgment is not presently executed, the misery of
man is great that goes on in his wickedness; take notice of that Will. Lamb
Pastor, that boasted the Quakers had Judged thee long ago, and it is not yet
come to pass; for with what measure you have meted to others, will be meted to
you again, good weight, pressed down, and running over, into your bosoms will
men give unto you, and in the day of your perplexity remember you were
forewarned in the Life time of your Prosperity.

Written in Clonmell the 8 month, 1659. when ye were at ease, saying, Peace and
Safety. And had been published abroad long ere this time but Satan has
hindered, through keeping my body in bonds. Neither is it now published to
exasperate evil men against any of you Baptists, in this day of Trial that is
come, and yet more coming upon you; But it is laid on me, to set it forth, that
ye may see how ye have rejected the Truth, and despised instruction, for which
you must feel the hand of God. T. M.

THE END.

