More News from the FLEET.
BEING A brief and true Account of the late Nobel, and Heroic exploit,
performed against the Dutch, on the 8th-9th. and 10th. of this present month of
August; by Captain Sr. Robert Holmes, Sr. Philip Howard, and Sr. William
Jennings; having under their command, about 900. Seamen, and Soldiers, and
120. Volunteers; The burning and destroying of at least eightscore Merchant
Ships, in the Vlie of about 200 Tun a piece, the burning of the chief Town upon
the Schelling, consisting of above a thousand fair built Houses. The bringing
away the Plate, and Jewels, and other rich Commodities, to the great enriching
of our Seamen and Soldiers, and to the honor of our Nation, the Cabins of
the ships being filled with Plate like a Goldsmiths shop.

Tune is, The King enjoyes his own again.
depiction of land and naval battle

OF English Acts I intend to write,
Help me ye Muses to invite,
Their valor and their courage bold,
In Meeter I will here unfold,
How boldly they did venture
On the Holland Coast to enter,
And do such Warlike brave exploits,
The Dutch were put to flight
And the Ships burned down outright
Whilst Town and Harbor is all our own,
The God of War fought on our side,
To quell the Dutch-mans swelling pride;
And they that lately on our Coast,
With open mouth did brag and boast;
Our Land they did divide
To those on their own side,
Imagining all was their own,
In the pit which they did deep,
Themselves may go and fleep,
For the Dutchmen now are all forlorn.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.
THe cowardly Dutchmen must not think
To make the English courage shrink
Though on the rocks and among the waves,
Many valiant hearts have found their graves,
yet honor and renown
(though Neptune seem to frown)
They Will seek through perils on the main,
when the Billows brush the Sky,
and the Ships are tossed on high,
The Dutchmen loose, but English gain.
But i will no longer now delay
To tell you the good news to day;
And here now lets admiring stand,
At the action that was took in hand,
on the eighth of August last
our Men and Ships they past
From the Uly unto Schelling Road,
nine hundred Men in all,
and forty fly Boats small,
A small number to go a board.
The valiant Generals, whose cares
Were always great in such affairs,
This great Employment to commit
To Sr. Robert Holms did think it fit,
that valiant noble heart,
who through fear did never start
Either on Land or on the Seas,
both Seamen and Soldiers,
besides many Volunteers,
This expedition did them please.
This valiant Company set sail
Having a swift and prosperous gale,
In the Uly they descryed
Eight score and ten fair Ships there lied,
which made our Men to smile,
hoping they should beguile
The Dutchmen of their mighty Fleet,
to fulfill their intent,
their Fire'Ships in they sent,
Who made an end of all they meet.
Here God his mercy to us showed;
In that the wind still for us blowed;
That very few escaped the fire;
All things against them did conspire;
The next day we withdrew,
The wind full high it blew,
And forced us into Schelling road,
Where quickly we perceived
Our Enemies were grieved,
By their running to and fro, abroad,
Some Horse and Foot, appeared in sight,
But by one shot were put to flight;
Such terror in their breasts it struck,
The Cowards durst not turn to look;
Away they run for fear,
Crying, Who a devil's there,
What kill men in their own Country.
But still they Keep on;
And run as they begun,
Not staying to hear the reason why.
Next morning our men in battle array,
March on to find the Runaway,
Where the chief Town they quickly spy
Where all the people fast did fly;
Poor children and old folk,
Were left to endure the stroke,
But Englishmen such deeds do scorn,
Amboyna's Laws we slight,
To kill such as cannot fight,
For Englishmen are better born.
All England now has cause to rejoice,
And praise our God with heart and voice
Sea-men's Wives and Sweet-hearts too
May more rejoice than others do;
Good store of plunder's got,
Their Cabbin's like a sho.
Of rich prized plate in Gold Smiths row;
Hold up your aprons Girls,
Here Is Jewels, Diamonds, Pearls;
And other precious stones to show.
Finis.
With Allowance. London, Printed for T. Passenger, on London Bridge.


