

ARMILOGIA SIVE ARS CHROMOCRITICA.

THE Language of Arms BY THE COLORS and METALS: BEING Analogically, handled
according to the Nature of Things, and fitted with apt Motto's to the Heroical
Science of Herauldry in the Symbolical World.

WHEREBY Is discovered what is signified by every Honorable Partition,
Ordinary, or Charge, usually born in Coat Armor, and Mythologized to the
Heroical Theme of HOMER on the Shield of ACHILLES.

A WORK of this Nature never yet extant.

By SYLVANUS MORGAN Arms-Painter.

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra. LONDON. Printed by T. Hewer for
Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhil, and Henry Eversden at the Greyhound in
S. Paul's Churchyard, 1666.

blazon of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DISPONIENDO ME NO MVDAN DO ME.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Earl of MANCHESTER, etc. Lord Chamberlain to
the King's most Excellent MAJESTY, one of the Commissioners for the Office of
Earl-Marshal of England, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and one of his MAJESTY'S Privy
Counselors, etc.
Right Honorable,
THis Arrogant desire of mine, grounded more on your Heroic Virtues, then my
private Ends, promises me your Honors Acceptance of this Expression of my
self in these Faculties; not much besides my Profession, indebted more to love
then ability, sets my ambition a pitch higher then my nature, in presuming to
present to your Honors hands these unworthy labors. The Language of your Arms
speaks you every way a good Patron, the Griffon representing a good Guardian,
the Eagle a noble President, and the Lozengies are Symbols of Nobility; the
quickness of whose Luster shows from what Rock they were hewn. Vouchsafe then,
Great Mount-acute, as the generous Eagle, at once, to view and protect, under
the wings of your Honors Name, this Infant of mine, which was consecrated
yours in the first Conception, wishing it no other fate, then that if it
deserve not to live with your Name and Memory, it may dye by the Marshal Law of
your dislike: and though for the want of that Law many have sown Dragons teeth,
Crescitque seges clypeata virorum, this Land has abounded with Men Armed,
assuming to themselves these Ensigns of Honor: yet seeing your Eagle seems to
resume her youthful habit, and triumph over Time and Ruin, and the best part
of my Endeavors stand engaged to your generous Fraternity, I hope your
indulgent Pardon and Acceptance, choosing much rather to lay my self down at
your Honors feet, then to be brought before you as a Criminal to Honor, who
always was

Your Honors in all Duty and Service to be commanded, SYLVANUS MORGAN.

To the READER.
A Gentleman of the first Head, Hermaelogi^
says one, (except while the Spaniard swells, in being the Son of his own
right hand) is seldom known to refuse the Herald, more than the Nobles of
Rome could Virgil, after he had so solemnly sung their Extraction from Elysium;
and Caesar's from the Gods.

-- Deus Nobis haec otia fecit. Aeneid. 6.
And, if in my Armilogia I have seemed to gratify all, and flattred many, by
the opinions of Good Bearings; I hope they will bear also with Me, if I take
Leave to talk of whole Fields of Gold and Silver possessed by the Heroes: I
hope they will accept of the Golden Branch from Sibylla; Painters and Poets are
to be excused upon Ben Johnsons account; -- Poet never Credit gained
By writing Truth; but things like truth well feigned.
Mira canunt, sed non credenda Poetae.


There were three most noted Epoches, or Computations of Times amongst the
Ancients; higher than which Profane Story gives no light.

The first was the Expedition of the Argonautes to Colchis for the Golden
Fleece, Dr. Symson.
which happened in the fifteenth year of Gideon, and of the World 2743: and
before our Savior 1260.

The second was from the Theban War, which was 42 years after: and the last
from the Trojan War, which was undertaken by the Greeks, in the 19th year of
Iair, Judge of Israel, in the year of the World 2812, before Christ's time 1191:
These three Memorable Expeditions administered Matter to the Heroic Muses of
diverse famous Wits; the Gests of the first were celebrated by the Greek Muse
of Apollonius Rhodius, and by the Latin of Valerius Flaccus; the Theban War
was sung by the Sublime Papinius Statius; and the Trojan War was the Theme of
the Great Homer, a Subject of Arms and Blazon.

Shields Thickened with opposed Shields, Targets to Targets Nailed,
Healmes stuck to Healmes, and Man to Man, grew they so close assailed.
And afterward imitated by Virgil, the Prince of the Latin Poets, in whose
Aeneis you have a Pattern of Virtue, and of Arms, the Ensigns of Virtue and
Nobility; Mill vides Galeas, Clypeosque, insignia mill: you have also in
Homer the Lineall Genealogies of Greeks and Trojans, wherein Aeneas himself
Sings his Genealogy from Jove, which Married Electra, Sister of Morges, King of
Italy; which Jupiter was called Cambo Blascon, and was King of Italy, by the
Gift of Morges his Wifes Brother; he was Son of Atlas, or Ketim, or Jupiter of
Creet, called Italus; he was the Son of Dodoneus, who was called Saturn of
Creet; and he was the Son of Tharsus, who was the Son of Ketim or Helisan; he
was the Son of Javan, Father of the Graecians, whom Berosus calls Ion; and
Iavan was Son of Iaphet, second Son of Noah; he was also called Iapetus: and
the Britains, by their ancient manner of Fight, seem to derive their Genealogy
from Aeneas, as well as the English, who claim to be descended of the ancient
Saxons: and though I have heard that bruit of Brute cried down by many, well
seen in Antiquity, as well as the Tale of Troy; yet Virgil being so perfect an
Idiome of Heroical Actions, I cannot but allow both in my Herauldy: Though I
must confess, with Dr. Case, that Ruina Bangoriensi gloria Walliae nebulata
fuit: ^a Praeface ad Ethick.
And Chronologers scarcely agree, when Troy was taken. If there be any so
valiant as the Greeks, as to wage War against the Britains, as Trojans, for
their usurpation of the Lady Truth, and Prevail; yet I fear they will hardly
find her there: though in the Story of Jeffery of Monmouth there be a brave
Theme for one that would much vindicate the Reputation of his Contrymen;
and, whether the Britains have had the same Fortune of the Trojans, I shall
leave to Chronology, Palae Albion*
Aut venit, aut videt, aut vicit Brutus! Amoenoe
Albioni impositum a Bruto Brytania Nomen.
Whether Brute at Brutania anchor cast,
Coasted or Ken'd, or conquered last.


Or whether the Trojans were the Planters of Italy, shall not trouble; me only,
if it gratify Caesar and the Romans, as an Exhortation from Effeminacy, and
stir up to Manly Exercises, it is the Proper Work of Herauldry; and Arms do
Speak, there being nothing borne in Arms but may be found on that Shield of
Achilles; nor any thing, of Noble Extraction, but is Sung by the Bard Virgil in
the Genealogy of Aeneas; and if I have not the Applause of a Pencil, that
Painting is able to teach others to Paint; I may assume that of a Cole, that
draws the dead Lines, which first pourfoil the Design; which, though they be
expunged by the Colors, and lost in the Picture, yet they lose not their
Virtue of prescribing Order to the Colors, and giving a Rule to the Design. In
Magnis voluisse sat est; Ajax wore his Shield of Hides without Ornament;
horridly negligent Achilles, that had his Studded with Diamonds, was not
therefore less strong, because more beautiful: none is to abandon the
Enterprise for the Difficulty in the beginning; If I, like Geographers, in
their Protractions upon Maps, make the same use, as Plutarch does (in the Life
of Theseus) in excuse of his Pen, draw obscure Lines at Random, and Write Terra
incognita; I may very well obtain your favor, having so many Fields to
Surveigh (for when he began to Write of the Lives of the Noble Hero's, he could
not one by one particularize the Enterprises with which they acquired the
Grandeur of their Names, and the Glory of Immortals, because Antiquity, and
Oblivion its follower, rendered many places unknown, many parts of their Lives
hid and obscure) even my Sphere of Gentry has moved it self round.

Think no more on what is past,
Since Time in Motion makes such have,
It has no leisure to discry
The Errors which are passed by.
I have purposely writ this small Tract as a Supplement to that Sphere of
Gentry, and by the way have brought in those Mottoes, used by the Abbot of
Picinelli in his Mondo Symbolico, because the whole Art of Herauldry is nothing
else but the Symbolical World, and every Charge on the Shield is the Language
of the Creature, not understood till they were most judiciously Blazoned by the
Natural Philosophy of Solomon in his words that he spoke of the Heavens 99. the
Earth 97. the Elements 101. the Sun 141. Moon 142. Stars 148. Planets 141.
Comets 155. Meteors 154. Beasts 177. Birds 163. Fish 172. Fowl 169. Insects and
Herbs with Trees 130. Plants 132. Mines 136. Minerals 134, etc.

Ridley's View.
Skill in Armoury, although it be a thing now almost proper to the Heralds of
Arms, who were in old Times called Feciales or Caduceatores, because they were
messengers of war and peace; yet the ground they have is from the Civil Law, to
whom belongs the ranging every man into his Room of Honor, according as his
place requires, only the Heralds do give Notes as it were of their Ranks and
Degrees, noting by those Ensigns, as it were, the Law Civil, in respect of
Treaties between Prince and Prince, in Marshal Causes, concerning Captains and
Soldiers, and concerning the Bearing of Arms, as some being of public Dignity
and Office, as of Bishops, Admirals, etc. or of especial Dignities, as of Kings
and Princes; so lastly of private men.

As by Trumpets and Drums; That there be Solemn Denouncing of the War
intended, to the end, that all dissenters may withdraw in time: and, to divert
other Nations from adhearing, that it be prosecuted by just and Honorable
ways; without Treachery, Corruption, Breach of Faith, Poison, or Secret
Assassination; which the Gallant Romans did disdain to act, though for never so
great a Victory. By Crosses and Saltires; That all Articles and Capitulations
made, be strictly kept and observed by Christians, even toward Turks, Pagans,
Jews, or Infidells. By plain lines; That they be Interpreted in the plainest
and most equitable sense, without any Art, or subtilty at all. By Honorable
Ordinaries; That an Enemy, after he has yielded himself, be not killed; but
kept alive for Ransom: that, what is gotten from the Enemy, is good and
lawful Purchase, though it was newly taken from some of our own People, or
Confederates; so that it was once brought safe into the Enemies quarters.
Quartring Coats; As Right to Kingdoms, or Provinces by Donation, last Will,
Successor, or Marriage. Portcullises; Community, or Property of the Sea, and
the Right of Fishing and Trading. By Checkers, Cantons, etc. That the Enemies
Country, when it offers to yield, be not laid Wast, Burnt or Destroyed. By
Battlements; That when a Town is to be stormed, Women, Children, Aged,
Ecclesiastical Persons, so far as is possible, may be spared. By Torteauxes;
Plates, Besants, Gunstones, etc. That it be free to Friends, or Confederates,
to Trade with the Enemy, so they carry neither Victuals, Money, Arms, or
Ammunition. By Fretts and Frette; That Strictness and Severity of Discipline,
greater than in Peace, be maintained within the Camp; and that neither Friends
Goods, coming in an Enemies Bottom, nor a Friends Ship, though carrying
Enemies Goods in Her, be taken as Prize. By Augmentations and several sorts of
Arms; That Privileges be granted to Soldiers beyond other men; and that the
Valiant be advanced to Honor, and admitted to partake of the Spoil, which he
did help to get. By Rebatements; That the Cowardly be disgraced, the
Disobedient rigorously Chastised; the Incorrigible cashiered: and, that
Military Offenses, or Contracts and Promises made between Soldier and
Soldier, the Cognizance thereof be in the Court-Marshall, and to be Tried by
the Laws of Arms only. By Pa^^y, Bendy, and such like; Latitude of Territory
and Jurisdiction, by Sea or Land. By Crowns and Garlands; That the Aged and
Worne-out Soldier be dismissed to ease, with Reward and Honor: And lastly, By
Doves, Green Branches, and such like Ensigns of Peace; That Heralds., or
Messengers, sent from the Enemy, be received, and dismissed with safety.

And though in the Beginning Arms and Colors were proper to men of War, Use of
Arms.
to avoid confusion in the Host, to discern one Company from another page 13.
yet when it came to be a matter of Honor, it was challenged no less by men of
peace 103. and as these signs were taken from things natural, as is noted
before: so also from things artificial, as Colors simple 5. and mixed 18.
divided by half 26. or quarters 27. or by lines direct cross 28. overthwart 29.
wherein Art must follow Nature, as is showed in the second Chapter, this whole
Book being nothing else then an account of what Silvester de Petra Sancta in
his Epistle gives you in these words, Dum universam artem tesserariam
expositurus, studui indagare originem ejus, dividere ac decussare Scutiariam
25. taenias and lemniscos 5. in ea varios ducere, Aves 157. Feras 177. Vndas
29. Nubes 34. Astra 145. Stirpes 132 Flores 121. Arma 23.2 Moles 209. Machinas
212. and quas non alias rerum formas exarare, aptare, insuper galeas 2^2. seu
apertas seu clatratas 231. seu rectas 231. seu versas and obliquatas 231.
fastigiare Serto seu Corona 122. inumbruare plumis and corimbis 168. Crucibus
76. Monilibusque 137. and Vexillis inornare munire Atlantibus 164. Denique
Palliolis 232. atque tentoriis prorsus ad Majestatis specimen velare. In all
which things you may find out the Civil usage of these so commonly called Coats
under the military word Arms, of which Sir Henry Spelman has learnedly treated
of in Latin, and under the Greek name of Aspilogia, and joined with Vpton de
studio Militari in four Books, and also a Treatise of Johannes de Os Guilford
in a M. S. of the Bishop of Canterbury.
Vado Aureo, of Arms, all which are commented on by Sir Edward Bishe, now
Clarenceaux King of Arms: but because the Title of the former does not differ
from mine, so much as Palma to Pugnus, part of the same thing more large, only
the same thing perhaps much less to be considered, in relation to the
undertaker, wherein I do not so much insist upon the rightness of the way, as
the virtue of the race, which is directly contrary to Antiquity, as leaving the
rules of Blazon to what is already published (only in the margin I have done
that also) and in this, laboring to signify the occult Qualities of the
Bearers; For the bearing of Images was the proper Ensign of Nobility among the
Romans, Arms having took their original from those Images, and Colors being
much used in civil Entertainments at home, were also used in the Circellan
plays, and also were of much use in warlike Expeditions, as to distinction of
the wellborn: so also for excitation of others to noble Exercises, every
Chapter beginning with a several Color, Shield and Border, with the Letter
that stands for that Color.

Felix qui tantis animum natalibus aequas,
Et partemtituli non summam ponis in illis.
Now as they are things without us, and perhaps at first, and now too often
assumed either without advice of the Judges of Arms, the Kings and Heralds, or
upon men's voluntary assumption, it is not possible I should find out the cause
of the Bearing, or a mystery in all Arms, least like Chrysippus, in laboring
to find out a Stoical assertion of Philosophy in every fiction of the Poets, I
should light on a labor in vain. Nevertheless I have in some given thee the
probable reason, in others the absolute reason of the Bearing, and in the
sympathy betwixt the Arms and the Bearer I have bent the Shield of Achilles, as
the Standard through this Work, having on it the example of all Bearings, the
use of which was the same of Arms to preserve the memory of the Dead, the same
that Thetis craved, and Vulcan wished to accomplish: To hide him from his heavy
death, when fate shall seek for him,
As well as with renowned Arms to fit his goodly Limb.


For as Dr. Fuller observes, that through time or sacrilege many a dumb
monument has lost his Tongue (the Epitaph) yet by the Escutcheous it has
spoke and told you who lay there.

In the Translation of Virgil I have made use of Mr. Ogleby, and of Horace,
Stapletons Translation: neither have I omitted to make use of Mr. Sands his
Translation of Ovids Metamorphosis. I have at the end annexed a Table of the
material things borne in Arms, as in the whole Field of Nature, from the
Empereal Heaven, succeeding through the seven Orbs of the Planets, and the
four Eliments, according to the Days Works of the Creation, till the
Honorable Man was made; who, in Imitation of Nature, does adorn his Shield
with all the preceding things; and also his adornments by liberal Sciences,
not omitting his Mechanic, whereby he becomes useful to the World.

It is a Saying of Divine Plato, that Man is Natures Horizon, dividing between
the upper Hemisphere of immaterial Intellects, and this lower of Corporiety,
and Nobility, is that upper Hemisphere, bedecked with Glorious Bodies,
differing in degrees (as the Apostle speaks) whereas Gentry is that lower Rank,
which also are differed from the rest by Coat Armor; and has this Prerogative
in it, that it makes them differ from the baser sort of People: Now, the King,
as the Horizon is the limiter of our sight, and honor is the Meddal of
Majesty, thrown abroad among the people, some of Gold, and others of meaner
Metal.

Vulcans rich Present, take the like before;
Never Human Eyes beheld, nor Mortal wore.
ARMILOGIA SIVE ARS CHROMOCRITICA: OR, The Language of Arms by the Colors and
Metal.
CHAP. I.
Of the matter of Arms, viz. of Metal and Color, as the first Elements of
Heraldry, with their Analogies to things.

HAving proposed to my self to fix the dignity of Coat Armor, Ten, a Border
Gobonated, Sable and Argent.
whereby it might be brought into a rule, so as to distinguish the goodness of
one Coat from another, hitherto not treated of by any Arms, being ordained at
the first for order sake, wherein Nature it self does plainly demonstrate, that
there is Nobility of kind. I have therefore taken to my self Naturam ducem,
intending plainly to demonstrate the principles of Nobility or Noscibilis,
remarkable or notable from the essential dignities and rebatements, that by
long experience have been discerned to be eminently good or bad bearings,
either according to the nature of the natural Charge, or Created being, or
happening through the coherence of the Color, or Metal, Line, or Charge.

Color upon Color is false Heraldry, and was palpable even at the first
Creation, when darkness was upon the face of the deep: for that was Color
without a Metal; When Jove hides Heaven in Clouds, and sullen Night
Makes no distinction 'twixt the Black and White.


Metal upon Metal is false Heraldry, because they invade each others dignity,
both OR and ARGENT, being of celestial extraction, and in their own Houses have
more essential dignities then in each others; for then there is a Metal without
a Color.

Frigida cum calidis pugnant, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Now because Heraldry is conversant about the very same things as Nature is (a
Gentleman being no other then a Son of the Earth, yet is raised by the same
degrees) I shall first propose as our Learned Countreyman in his Glass of
Universal Causes has done, dividing the Field of Nature Actu divino repletae,
God having filled the Shield of the Universe (or as we say he bears the Field
Charged) with either Animal, Vegetative, or Mineral Bodies. I shall endeavor
to show both the rise, increase, and vigor of every bearing, as also the
decrease, termination, and fall in its next cause; so that in this Chapter, I
shall first show the Esse Materiale, in the constitution of Colors, and in the
next the Esse Formale the disposition of Lines, and then proceed to the Nexus
Materiae cum forma.

Dr. Browns Vulgar Error.
[The Field is] that is to say, the Color of the Shield; Color being nothing
else in general, but that under whose gloss and varnish are all things seen, of
which no man yet has beheld the true nature: which while some ascribe to the
mixture of the Elements, others to the graduality of opacity and light, they
have left our endeavors to grope them out by twilight; nevertheless by those
small hints Art becomes helpful to Nature, so as to prefer one Color or
Field before another: Digby of Bodies, Cap. 29.
For if you consider the Colors Elementarily, then the Black or SABLE is to be
preferred Propter antiquitatem and fundamentum; but if in the second notion in
the graduity of opacity and light, then the Red Color or GULES being made by a
greater proportion of light mingled with darkness, must be preferred before the
AZURE or Blew, being mingled with a less proportion of light mingled with
darkness, as may be seen by the following Scheme; and consequently VERT or
Green, being compounded out of two original Colors, becomes by that mixture
the lower degree of Dignity; so that what we understand by the color of the
Shield or Field, is nothing else then the power that that body has of
reflecting light unto the Eye in a certain order and position, being the very
superficies of it; and the reason why no Coat of Arms can be said to be good
without Metal, is because Light of all all things in the World is the most
powerful Agent upon our Eye, either by it self, or what comes in with it;
Digby of Bodies. Boyls Experimen.
for where Light is not, Darkness is, all agreeing that Colors are inherent
and real Qualities, Light does but disclose, and not concur to produce. White
things are generally cold and dry, and are therefore by Nature ordained to be
receptacles and conservers of heat and moisture, as Physicians note; and so
naturally the Fire or heat flies uppermost, and is above the Air, that having
a degree of moisture more then it: Contrariwise Black, and Green, which is near
of Kin to Black, are growing Colors, and are the Dye of heat incorporated in
abundance of wet. The Chemists, (those Spiritual Heralds) do deliver, that the
Salt of natural Bodies does carry a powerful stroke in the Tinctures and
Varnish of all things, yielding delectable and various Colors; and as Nature
is ingenious and subtle in all her operations, so she has left an Art endowed
with the like subtilty and industry; for Heralds after the example of
Chemists, finding that nothing can display its own virtue, until the confusion
of the excrements and impurities be throughout banished, have made choice as it
were (after the example of Nature) of Water and Fire her Coadjutors in the
Generation of Metals, which are so much the more perfect, as they have been
better mundified and digested in the stomach of the Earth. Hence it is that OR
and ARGENT is preferred among Metals, and GULES, AZURE, and SABLE among the
Colors, the others of VERT and PURPURE being mixed, and so of less dignity: So
that you see that Color is nothing else but Light mingled with Darkness, which
ingeniously they have declared by rational Lines obumbrating as it were the
Field; which Lines I therefore call rational, because Natura effectum suum
attingit Lineis rectis iisque brevissimis, and therefore the most plain Coat is
the most honorable: and because Color and Lux sub eodem sunt genere, ergo apta
sunt in se agere, as you shall plainly perceive by this Scheme of Colors,
described by Kercher in his Ars Magna, lib. 1. cap. 2. and Analogized, wherein
the prime Original Colors are opposed by the mixed.

Homer.
Neptunum contra bellabat Phoebus Apollo,
Adversus Martem certabat Pallas Athenae.
Phoebus Apollo there with Neptune jars,
Pallas of Athens foul with Mars at Wars.
color chart ARGENT SABLE CINERIVS VERT FVSCVS INCARNATVS OR AVREVS PVRPVRE
PVRPVREVS SVBRVBEVS SVBAIBVM SVBCAERVIEVM


ALBUS Lux pura Lux Dulce Ignis Pueritia Intellectus Deus



FLAVUS Lux tincta Umbra tenuissima Dulce temperatum Aer vel Ether
Adolescentia Opinio Angelus



RUBEUS Lux colorata Umbra moderata (...) Aurorae medium Juventus Error Homo



CAERULEUS Umbra Umbra densa Acidum Aqua Virilitas Pertinacia Brutum



NIGER Tenebrae Tenebrae Amarum Terra Senectus Ignorantia Planta.





Though Black be in the last place, yet because it is the foundation of Matter,
it is accounted Honorable; and according to the Stoical Principle of the
beginning of the World, by reason it does proceed as it were from the Hyle or
confused matter, it is accounted but the base point, without being joined with
Metal, so that every Color without Metal is Essence without Quality, and
Quality is more or less noble accordingly.

This Analogical Table constituting as it were a Lable of five Points, the
usual note of the Eldest House, while the Grandfather is living, born over the
whole Field. The Field Corpus luminosum est a quo utcunque lumen profunditur,
or the ground on which every line is drawn or thing born: The first blazon of
arms is the Light, Argent plain.
and in this Art is called Argent. It is expressed immaculatum, unspotted,
because it consists of very much Light, and it is laudable, because it is the
Messenger of Peace; and deserves the first place, because Lumen Qualitatum
omnium prima and nobil ssima. It is called in Hebrew by a name that signifies
to desire; it simply signifies the everlasting charity of the Almighty; and in
moral Virtues Piety, Virginity, clear Conscience and Charity; with Gules,
boldness in all honesty; with Azure, courageous and discreet; with Sable,
wholly studious in the contemplation of Divine things, yielding up all
pleasure; with Green, virtuous in youth; with Purple, Judicature with
Magistracy by the favor of the people. It is preferred among Persons eminent
for purity, Quia color albus praecipue decorus Deo est, Raleigh's History of
the World.
God being acknowledged by the wisest men to be a Light by abundant Clarity,
invisible, an Understanding which it self only can comprehend; Deus est
amictus lumine sicut vestimento. They that bare Argent among the Greeks were
called Argyrasp^des; and those that bare Or Chrysorspides; the Gold being
tinctured with Red and Yellow, participating both of heat and light in an
extraordinary manner, was therefore accounted the most noble Metal lying next
the Light, by which Occultum fit manifestum.

OR, powdered.
blazon of arms Or is described by several Points, Pricks, or Atoms, to show
there is no perfection beneath the Skies; for as one says, It was the silly
fondness of Mankind, which made gilded and misled Error more prudentially
useful in the world, then sober and naked Truth. White is debased, as you may
perceive, when it is tinctured with Yellow, making the Subalbum; and mixed with
Red, makes the Carnation; with Blew, it composeth the Ash Color; and being in
direct opposition to Black, is most fair: nevertheless the Esteem that Gold
has gained, is for its more perfect digestion. Sermo Dei (says David)
purgatissimus est, Psalm. 18.31.
and clypeus omnibus, qui se recipient ad eum. And as Pliny defines Clypeus to
be a part of the Ecliptic, so called from being chafed or engraven: it is a
fit bearing for dignified persons; in God it signifies Illum regnare Majestate
indutum and celsitudine; Psalm. 93.1.
He being clothed with Majesty and Might, of it self it betokens Wisdom,
Justice, Riches, and Elevation of mind, and joined with Gules, to spend our
blood for the riches and welfare of his Country. Joined with Azure, to be
worthy matters of Trust and Treasure. With Sable, most rich, constant in every
thing. With Vert most glittering, and splendid in youth. And joined with
Purpure, it betokens Magnificence. You may perceive in composition it makes a
kind of Fuscus or Smoke Color, and so is debased. But having spoke of Metals,
it now remains that I speak of Colors which are known also by their tincture:
Men's agitat molem, Metal and Color make a perfect Coat Armor; Boyl's
Experimen.
and Color is a modification of Light. Now, Omnis color mundi diciturnobilior
vel inferior duobus modis, vel secundum se, aut secundum quod magis participat
de albedine vel minus; and in order blazon of arms next is the Gules lying in
the central point or point of Honor, Gules, paly.
between the light and darkness; and because it represents the fire, it is
signified by Lines drawn Palewayes or upright, the fire being the Esse formale,
or Vitae actus, flying upward, being air exalted by agitation; as when Vulcan
blew the Coals to form the Shield for Ulysses.

Through twenty holes made to his Hearth at once
Blew twenty pair, Hom. Il. lib. 18.

That fired his Coals sometimes with soft,
Sometimes with vehement Air.
It is the Note of Power, Constitue rem in sua claritate, and restitue
figmentum in suum locum: and presents magnanimity; it is debased by being
mingled with Azure, and so produces the Purple, and with Black the Subrubeus,
and it is exalted by the Martial Man. The Azure being preferred among
Ecclesiastical Persons, as one says, Multum convenit Episcopis and caeteris
viris Ecclesiasticis, being fit for contemplative Persons, Quia per ipsum
representatur nobilis Aer.

Azure, barry.
blazon of arms AZURE is distinguished by right lines drawn barwise or
Horizontal, by reason that line represents the upper face of the Water, wherein
darkness was upon the face of the deep, yet lying in position higher then the
deep, representing the Lap of Nature, and is called caeruleus, quasi caeluleus.

Blue Seas the figured Skies, the Moon unhorn'd,
The Heaven with all its sparkling fires adorned.
If it be mingled with Yellow, it constitutes the Green, and is debased by
mixing with Black, causing the Subcaeruleum; and though the Sable claim
antiquity; yet I shall not presume to determine whether it were before the
White, seeing the Kingly Prophet says, Psalm. 18.12. Job 22.12.
Splendore ejus praesentiae, nubes and aquae tenebrosae fugerunt: and the
Prophetical King says, Densae nubes sunt latibulum ei. Neither whether it may
be said to be a Color, though it is preferred among Monastical Persons. blazon
of arms Omnis privatio est tenebrae, says the Philosopher. Sable, checky
SABLE they expressed by Lines crossing one another at right Angles, whereby
Nature seemed checkered, begetting the Corpus, the Body, the Nexus Materiae cum
forma by this manner of Bearing, denoting the Omniscience of the Almighty, Nox
ei ut dies perlustrat, and tenebrae ut ipsa lux; seeing he brought light out of
darkness. It signifies Fortitude, Antiquity, Constancy and Immutability.

Under the Wind below in SABLE shade
There the Black winged Night her first Egg laid.
Erat umbra infinita in excelso. Coelus and Vesta having yet no Issue, Truth
being yet in the cave of Time, till old Time fetched her forth: Black is the
Color of Wisdom, hidden counsel, Densae nubes sunt latibulum ei, Job 22.12.
White represents Eternity, a part Ante, and Black Time a part Post; It Is
preferred because of its direct Opposition to Light, Umbra prima est absent^a
primi luminis. And when the Creatout blazon of arms was pleased to stir up both
to an actual heat, it produced VERT the Color of Love and Generation; Vert,
Bendy Dexter.
it is composed of Yellow and Blue, as you may see by the Scheme, and in Lines
is described Bendy toward the right hand, because it is according to the
motion of the Air. Job 38.
Lux aurea venit ab Aqu^lone, the right hand way being that of Virtue, meeting
in the midst of the former figure, constituting Pythagoras his Y, in Moral
Virtues: it signifies temporance mirth, youth and gladness.

Of humane life a Scheme to us propose Virgil.

Of Virtu^s path on the right hand does lie.
This way tending to Generation is called Bendy Dexter, when that on the left
hand tending to Corruption becomes the Color of Mourning, as the same Poet
notes, -- From its Summit the deluded fall,
And dashed amongst rocks find there a Funeral.


The Green is the sacred Color among the Turks, who expect carnal delights in
green Fields; it is much affected by young persons, because Pallent omnis
amans, and hic est Color aptus amanti.

Of it self it signifies Bountifulness in God, Spiritus Jehovae implet orbem
terrarum. It has its Exaltation by participating of Gold, becoming thereby
most glittering, representing that felicity which the Heroes enjoy in the
Elysian fields, at whose entrance Aenaeas fixed his golden Branch.

Largior hic campos ether and lumine vestit
Purpureo. --
Which larger skies clothed with a Purple Hue.
Purple being of a magisterial Dignity and Honor, yet coming so near to
Mourning, that it is not esteemed in the Shields of the Nobles, it being a
Color of an ill Omen; as Aeneas is said to cover the body of Mysenus with
Purpureaesque super vestis velamina nota,
And over him his Purple garment spread.


Which ever since has been the Mourning for Kings. Where the Field is Metal,
it is as the Light; and where it is Color, it is as the Splendor; the one as
the first Light, and the other as the second. And what is expressed by these
Colors and Metals, is nothing else then to strive to excel in Virtue; the
Argent Piety, the Or Justice, the Gules Magnanimity, the Azure Prudence, the
Vert Temperance, the Black Fortitude, the Purpure having Sparks of
Magnificence, has a tincture of all the Elementary Parts of the world, of
Spirit, Fire, Air, Water and Earth, understood severally under the names of
Jupiter, Vulcan, Minerva, Oceanus and Ceres.

blazon of arms Purple or PURPURE was described by Lives drawn from the left
hand, Purpure Bendy Sinister.
as tending toward Corruption; and this way is called Bendy Sinister. And thus
God has made all things double, there are two and two one against another:
these last lines crossing one another in the Center, represents the Animal
Spirit of the World. According to Plato, the Agyptians by the Letter X signify
the same thing, that is Processus animae mundi. And these are the ordinary
ways of all Separations, which kind of Seqarations do aim at no other Mark in
Coats of Arms, then to sequester as it were the pure Substance (the Gentleman)
from the corrupt excrements of the Vulgar, that men should be distinguished by
certain Marks of Honor and Virtue, and so to stir them up to the Imitation of
Virtue, and raise them from the lumpish and heavy Metal'd terrestrious
thickness to a more ingenious pureness and by this means come to the excellency
of those their Ancestors; for it is the property of Nature, Quicquid genuit in
suo genere perfectum esse voluit.

-- Quos ignea Virtus Lucan.

Innocuos vita patientes aetheris imi
Fecit, and aeternos animum collegit in ignes:
-- Whose virtuous ardour guided well,
On earth, in everlasting glory dwell.
The Agatho-Demon was that letter by which the Egyptians did signify Bonus
Ager, and was the same from which the Greeks borrowed D which was that space of
ground in the field that was taken in, when the bird Ibis stepped along, the
legs extended, meeting in the twist, formed a Triangle, whence was the advice
of a Catholic Writer, Pone Delta ante oculos tuos, ut been sit animae tuae,
that is, Set the Fields of your Ancestors before you, to excite you to the
imitation of their divine Virtue, mark their steps. The Field being the Orus
the Pasture or the Grass to maintain and nourish the man at Arms to forage in;
and though being without a Charge, it has Vitae Pabulum; yet consisting of
Metal and Color, it makes a perfect good Coat, the Metal being the Spiritus
or Mercury, and the Color being the Genus generalissimum, the general and
common Genus of all the Genera, comprehended under several names, as follows.

ARGENT Argenteum. Candidum.
OR Luteum, Croceum, Flavum, Galbineum, Fulvum, Aureum.
AZURE Cyaneum, Caeruleum, Glaucum, Caesium.
VERT Viride, Pransinum, Chelidonium, Smanagdinum.
GULES Rubeum, Puniceum, Coccineum, Conciliatum, Ostrium, Mineo, Tyrium,
Roseum, Blatteum, Purpureum.
SABLE Nigrum, Furvum, Pullum, Atrum, Sabulum.
PURPURE Jacinthinum, Violateum, Molochinum, Ferrugineum.

So that Color is the Genus, and is Notio ad plures differentias pertinens,
and all these words among the Latins do but declare a different tincture of
the same original Colors; wherein the Salts, the Colors of Bodies are
sensibly qualified, and receive Degrees of Luster or Obscurity, D^. Brown
and is dispersed both in Animal, Vegetal, and Mineral Bodies, all which
Heralary is conversant about, and takes there three sorts of Blazon; that of
Planets from the first, the Blazon of Colors from the Vegetative, and by
Precious Stones from the Mineral: So that Blazon is no other then apt Phrases
to signify powerful Nature, arming Mercury with wings, to show his readiness
and volatile Nature, by which he mounteth to Heaven, and after descends to
acquire and obtain the virtue of things both superior and inferior,
qualifying every Bearing answerable to the Bearers: Igneus est illis vigor, and
coelest is origo, etc.
Whose seeds have fiery vigor, heavenly Spring,
So far as Bodies hinder not with fullness,
Or earthly dying member clog with dullness.


So that to be full of Charge, is to be empty of Honor; for that which is to
be a Sign or an Armorial Mark to a Man, ought to be very conspicuous, and easy
to be discerned, which is impossible without Light, and where it is clogged
with fullness. So that the plain Coat is accounted best, Quia potest in loco
distantiori and remotiori perspici and videri. Now there was three ways of
propagating knowledge; by representative Symbols, by Speech, and by Letters,
which three ways are made use of in this Heroical Science, Arms being nothing
else but the Symbolical way of knowledge by Colors, and Blazon, apt
expressions by Speech, and the third way by Letters. As by O, we understand OR,
which is the Color of the Sun, the Symbol being the same among the
Egyptians, and was called Mundi Dominus. By A we understand Argent, id est,
Bonus Demon, this Letter representing the Wings of Divine Love, opened
downward: by G we understand GULES, or Red, Gamma among the Egyptians
signifying a Rule to measure the uprightness of all our Actions, the Color
gules being drawn upright, By B, we understand Azure, the Letter Beta being
taken from the form of a Rams head, i. e. foecunditas, the Color of Jupiter,
whom the Egyptians called Amun.

Est que Dei seeds, ubi terra, ubi pontus and aer,
Et coelum, and virtus; superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Lucan. lib. 8.
Jove sits where earth, where air, where sea and shore,
Where Heaven and virtue is; why ask we more?
By n we understand Vert or Green, the g Ypsilon signifying Processus
inferiorum ad superiora. By S or S we understand Sable, the figure whereof
turning as well toward Generation as Corruption, as the Black Color tends,
and so it is said to be Lunae Symbolum, Sigma dicitur Visio. By P or P Py we
understand Purpure, the form of which Letter is taken from that grapling iron
by which the Egyptians drew the body of Osiris out of the water, when it was
covered over with the Purple pa^l of Corruption. The Hebrews call their Letter
Elements, quasi Hylementa, hoc est, Characteres formales in Hylae seu principii
deformis atque tetri superf^cie materiali Spiritu Dei aeterni conditor is igneo
delineati; and indeed as Galileus says, Admirandarum omnium inventionum
humanarum Signaculum, it is the chiefest of all humane inventions. The Jews
attribute the invention of their Letters to Moses, the Agyptians to Thoyt or
Mercury, Origines Sacrae, l. 1.
the Graecians to Cadmus, the Phaenicians to Taautus, the Latins to Saturn,
others to the A^thiopians; and least the Pigmies should be without, some think
they were found out a gruum volatu, from the flying of Cranes. It being very
manifest, that the Greek Letters were translated by Cadmus out of Agypt into
Greece, Kercher.
by reason of the great correspondence there is between their Characters, the
first column in this Scheme being made from the form of Beasts, the second
being the vulgar Letters, and the third being the Affinity of the Greek Letters
with the Egyptian. Zeta dicitur, id est, Vita, drawn from the figure of a
Serpent Erect. TH Theta dicitur, id est Litera Thoth, made in the form of a
Serpent creeping round the Globe. PH Phi; id est amor, made after the form of
Pyramids incorporated. Mi Aquae Litera est, and is made waved. ^ XI, id
Primaeua sisterarum Aegyptiarum fabrica and institutio facta a Tauto sieve
Mercurio Trismegisto.
I. ^ ^ A II. ^ ^ G III. ^ ^ D IV. ^ ^ Y V. ^ ^ O VI. ^ ^ L VII. ^ ^ VIII. ^ ^
Lunae Symbolum S IX. ^ Magnum O X. ^ ^ O S XI. ^ ^ XII. ^ ^ XIII. ^ ^ TH TH
XIV. ^ ^ PH ph XV. ^ ^ mi XVI. ^ ^ ^ XVII. ^ ^ N ni XVIII. ^ ^ P ^ XIX. ^ ^ O
XX. ^ ^ S XXI. ^ ^ T Characler Zoographus Figura Literarum Vulgaris Gracorum ad
cas affinitas est, Catena, and signifies Succession, which to be broke
signifies Ruin. Again, N Litera idem est ac processus rerum Elementarium,
sive vegetabilium processus. O was the Character of the Sun, as S was that of
the Moon; the T being the same as Tau among the Hebrews. Letters in Arms
signifying men of much Judgment, the Arms of Toft being a Cheveron between
three Text Tees, perhaps no otherwise then that of Thoth to signify his Name
and Quality, the Alphabet of the Hebrews ending with the Letter Tau, signifying
full Perfection, it is advanced in chief in the Coat of Drury. In the holy
Tongue it signifies a Mark, and three of them are borne by the Name of Grymes,
Nullis praesentior ether. It is a special Note of Gods Favor, Apud Aegyptios
singulae Litetae singulis verbis serviebunt.
and an especial Ensign in the Coat of Talk of Sussex, who bears the same
Cross, with three Crowns of Thorn, in chief denoting therein Compassi ut
conregnabimu^, and the whole Alphabet does afford fit Bearings for the
Judicious and Learned; and among Military Signs Letters were Notes of their
Order, as H, Hastatorum, P, Principium, T, Triariorum. And among the Hebrews,
Hermanus Hugo de Origin Scribend.
Aleph signifies a prince; Beth, id est, Domus; Gimel, id est, Camelus;
Daleth, id est, Porta, Zain, as Zen, id est, Arma; He and Teth and Cheth being
so denominated from their sound, Jod, Manus, as Caninus; Caph Palmam
interpretat. Lamed, id est, Stimulo; Mem, Macula, and Nun, Piscem
interpretatur; Samech, Basis, as Caninus says; A^jn, Fons; Pe, Os seu vultus;
Tsade, Hamus; Coph, Simium; Resch, quasi Ros, that is a Head; Schin, quasi
Scen, id est, Deus. Letters being the first Signs of Bodies, Bodies being the
first Ensigns of Spirits, by which outward Signs the minds of men became
understood, Signature being the only universal Character, and Color the Paper
on which they are written; and because Lucis proprium est Color, ejusque
perpetuus comes, cui cum nulla sit Materia, neque Colori erit. Therefore the
Field of Metal, as it represents Light, is to be preferred before that of
Color, because that every man is to prefer his own Country as the Common
Good; nevertheless as the Metal is the Spirit, without which the Shield i^ as a
dead Letter. Where it is superior on the Field, it has an Exaltation, because
that Light overcame Darkness; and wherever there is an Exaltation, we shall
allow our Dignity more then its proper place: hence it is that Metal is named
before Color, Argent and Sable being most Fair, Or and Sable most Rich, Or and
Vert most Glittering, and are preferred when they come nearest to the Unity of
Matter in the perfect things of the Creation, every thing having a nobility of
Color, or when or where they come nearest to the Unity of Form, as to bear
things uniform and conspicuous by Metal: now if you look back to the Scheme of
Colors, in this Chapter you shall find that we allow the first and chief Place
to the Argent or Unity as the Form, Why Metal upon M^tal is false He^aldry.
and the next to the OR corporeal Matter being understood by the number two:
but because both Metals are allowed, in Arms we will admit them to be both
Unites, the one of the Form, and the other of the Matter: now as from one
issues two, so from the first an Ethereal Metal Argent issues, OR making two
Unites; and if you take one of those Unites for the Beginning, and another for
the Middle, then there wants an end, making Metal upon Metal. Again, if you put
a Unite in the Beginning, and another for the End, then you have rwo Extremes,
but no Mean or Middle; for seeing Gules is the first Unity of Colors, and
Azure next this is imperfect also, because then it is Color upon Color. Again,
if you place one Unite for a Mean, and the other for the End, here also is
imperfection, because it wants a Beginning. The formal fountain of Light begins
with God, and terminates with Man, who is in the Sphere of Equality, or Honor
Point in the mid Heaven, viz. Gules penetrating to the Center of the Earth or
Abyss, whose Basis is in the Earth, or Center of Darkness, whereby Black and
White become most ancient, and I have set all down from the Square of three, by
adding one, which in all is ten Chapters, beyond the which, as Aristotle
affirms, no man has found out any number: this first is of Colors, which in
consideration of the Painters Art is no incroachment in me to write of, in
which you may principally observe with the Honorable Robert Boil, Boyl's
Experiments.
that there are but few Simple and Primary Colors, from whose various
Compositions all the rest do as it were result, being sufficient to exhibit a
variety and number of Colors. Such as those that are altogether strangers to
the Painters pallets, can hardly imagine.

Thus (for instance) Black and White differingly mixed make a vast company of
Darker Grayes.

Blue and Yellow make a huge variety of Greens.

Red and Yellow make Orange Tawny.

Red with a little White makes a Carnation.

Red with an Eye of Blue make a Purple; and as by these simple Compositions
again compounded among themselves, the skillful Painter can compound a great
many more then there are yet names for: so by the Composition of Color and
Metal Lines and Charges are produced infinite variety of Arms, the Corpuscles
whereof they consist must be such as do not destroy one another Texture, but
remains as plain as may be. Tin calcined by fire affords a White, and Lead
calcined a Red, and Copper a very Black or dark Powder, and Iron may be by the
action of reverberated flames be turned into a Color almost like that of
Saffron. Gold is preferred before all Metals, being the Symbol of Peace, which
nourishes Love, Sands Coment. Me^am. l. 1.
and Lead of Poverty, which starves it.

blazon of arms Perfect Coat Armor you see must consist of a Color and a
Metal, which meeting in the Center is called Gyrony, the Spirit of the World
moving after this manner of Figure. It is called a Gyron, because it
represents a Thigh, wherein is supposed the Seminal Virtue; besides it
consists of a right Angle, constituted by the numbers of 3, 4, and 5. found out
by Pythagoras, the Centre-point being the Radix or Root, or the Virtual Point,
the Middle Point in Heraldry being called the Honor Point; and therefore the
Man at Arms as Vigetius testifies, was instructed not to make his Blows either
downright, or Tranc, because that kind of Blow was not mortal, but rather to
make a thrust at the Middle Point, where the Vital Power is assembled: and for
this cause some learned Men affirm the middle of the earth to be the most
precious part of the whole, because all the Celestial Virtues are there united,
and can pass no further, which being so assembled and united, are of infinite
Power, because their influence to that place is continual; and because they
proceed and flow from Bodies which in Virtues are infinite, Meaning of plain
Lines.
this manner of Shield representing the four sorts of Blows, dealed upon the
Shield of Nature, and being received upon the Shields of Warriors, was
accordingly painted, as their Cognizance; and being Metal has a resemblance to
the fire, it has the first place allotted in Blazon.

Forthwith up sprang the quick and weightless fire, Met. l. 1.

Whose flames unto the highest Arch aspire.
The next in levity and place is Air,
Gross Elements to th cker Earth repair.
Self cl^gg'd with weight the waters flowing round,
Possess the last, and solid Tellus Bound.
blazon of arms A Canton is a part of a whole Field laid out as a reward to
Military Persons, and a Border is a Fence to that which a man counts his own.
Hence it is that even these dead things of Tincture and Difference do excite
the Bearers thereof to Courage. In the Eleventh Book of the Code there is a
Title De Fundis Limitrophis, of Border-Ground, which some refer to Constantine
the Great, who Enacted for the benefit of his Soldiers, That such Lordships
and Lands as before time they had their wages out of, should pass over unto
their Heirs, and be appropriate to their Family or Stock. So that they found
and maintained continually a certain number of Soldiers Borders, therefore are
proper Military Bearings, although among the French they are used as
Differences for younger Brothers; and the ancient Bordred Grounds of the Romans
was a portion laid out to their Soldiers. Now as soon as the Metal began to be
stirred up, Lustrans universa in circuitu pergit Spiritus, says the Wise Man's
Ecles. 1. The first enlightening of the Shield being by Border, which drove the
dark Clouds into the Middle, Splendour ejus praesentiae nubes and aquae
tenebr^sae fugerunt, Light did proceed from the Canton, in which are usually
given augmentation of Honor, Shields of themselves signifying Protection and
Borders, vivification or quickening; the indented Border makes both a Sun and a
Shield, and so signifies Divine Presence, and so the Shield Ornat and Armat.
But because the Light did as it were cut the Darkness, and was still succeeded
by the Darkness, and so became mixed with all Matter; therefore the Gobbonated
Border is accounted as a spurious difference, in Heraldry usually assigned to a
Bastard.

In our Disquisition into the formal Causes of any thing, the knowledge of the
nature of Colors is necessary to complete the science, in which sense Color
is as much formal as the Line which distinguishes the Form, and Matter as it
arises from Unity, is said to have Magnitude, and Magnitude is no other then
that which arises from a Point which is said to have no parts, and in Greek is
called (...), i. e. Signum, a Sign externally made to signify that which is
conceived in the mind, being the same as Unity in Number, an Instant in Time,
or a Sound in Music; and Armorial Marks so much in use with us at this Day,
are called Insignia, under which word is comprised all Signs, Marks and Tokens
of Honor, being externally made to signify that which was conceived in the
mind of the Bearer; and that I may proceed to this ARMILOGIA, or universal
Signature, which has been found imprinted in the minds of all Nations
(declaring thereby the Nobility of the minds of men, who aim in these Notio^s
to be immortallized; I shall next show the Ratio Formal is of every good Coat,
according as it is bounded by Lines; for the Form is evidently distinguished by
Division, Division being an eminent Property of Matter; now because it is most
agreeable to Reason, that Names should carry in them a suitableness to the
things they express, I shall endeavor all along briefly to show also the
Dignity of every Bearing usually born, complicating and twisting in the apt
Mottoes of the Abbot of Pichinelli, in his Mondo Symbolico, serving to express
the nature of every thing by way of Rebus.

Every Coat of Arms as a Sign of Honor is to be considered in a twofold
Notion, either Military or Civil, because that Reason wills, and Equity
ordains, that men having done good service for their Prince or Country,
either in war or peace, should be distinguished from the Vulgar; and these
distinctions in the first Notion is properly called ARMS, and in the second a
COAT, though indeed it is called a Coat properly from being worn over the Arms
of the Commander in Chief, and Arms from being worn on his Shield, by which he
did Arm and defend himself. Mars and Arms being an agrammatically one, that by
these signs he might be known in Battle, by those that were under him, and
knew his bearing, and so the more plain this was, the more conspicuous also it
was, whereby his men were not so apt to incur a danger by mistakes, Reason why
plain Arms are best from the use.
which the overcharging of the Coat might cause, by reason of its confounding
their sight. And because the Shield of Achilles, was intended as a pattern to
all other, I shall propose it as t is blazoned by Homer; but first framed by
Vulcan, at the intercession of Thetis for her Son.

To embrace thy knees for new defense Stapletons Translation of Homer, lib. 18.

To my Loved Son alas,
His life prefixed so short a date, had need
Spend that with Grace
A Shield then for him and a Healm,
Fair Greves and Currets such
As may renown thy Workmanship,
And honor him as much.
Vulcan having framed a perfect Shield, Homer first blazon^ by Metal.

He Tin, hard Brass, rich Gold and Silver cast,
Amidst the fire then his huge Anvill plac d.
Moses representing the Shield of the Creation in three terms, says, Tenebra
super faciem abyssi fuerunt, darkness, face, and deep, answerable to which, the
Ancients did represent the Earth by a Cubicall Body, on which as an Anvill, all
other things were framed, hoc est tesseram. Octo augul rum, et Sex Laterum
terram significare tradidit Plato, by which figure, was represented the Harmony
of the whole Sphere, having six plain Faces, or Superficies twelve lines: Eight
solid Angles, and 24 plain, out of which did arise these proportions, 6 to 12
Duplum or Diapason, 6 to, 8 Sesqui altrum, or Diapente, 12 to 8. Sesquitertiam
diatessaron 8 ad 24. Triplam Diapason Diapente, 6 ad 24 Dupla diapente, the
Shield being first made after a square form, to denote immobility and
constancy, signified by Checkie, Sa and Argent, quem deus fundavit super bases
blazon of arms suas ne demoveretur in seculum. So much for the Figure, the
faces of the Cube compounding the first Honorable Ordinary, vide, the plain
Cross being the exact middle point, called the Honor point, Propter
fundamentum, as I noted before B the exact middle chief, A the dexter chief
point, O the sinister chief point, V the exact middle bass, G surmounting the
chief, the dexter and sinister base being without the limits of the Cross,
become more debased, and so are less in Dignity: which eight points answers to
the eight solid Angles of the Cube, as the 6 Quadralaterial sides, represent
the faces of the same: the first visible Coat being Checkered, though the
internal Coat was Gyrony, and proceeded from the Center, and so constituted 24
plain Angles still answerng its first proportion, and these 6 faces became the
constant and firm matter or field for every good Coat, and while it stood
without a charge, it is alluded to by Ovid.

Stat vi terra suo, vi stando Vesta vocatur. Fastorum.

Earth stands alone, and therefore Vesta called.
The Vestal or Virgin fire being nothing else then that pure light, without
which there was no color, Heaven, Earth, Water, and darkness appearing in an
instant, Holy History.
as the Field on which all the effects of a most amorous and sage prodigality
were to be displayed; and this heap of Water and Earth was the Object of him
who alone was able to chase away its shadows, and convert its dust into Gold
and Crystal; for as Bricks take their Original from Clay, so does Nobility
from mean Extraction: Tin and Brass are Metals of Alloy, while the Golden
Shield-bearer is the Heroical Person, as the same Poet notes in the description
of the same Shield.

-- Which being forged of Gold,
Must needs have Golden Furniture, and men might so behold,
They represented Deities, the People Vulcan forged,
Of meaner Metal where that was to be urged.
For though Honor is the reward of Virtue, yet the Mechanic may not vie with
the Eldest Son of Honor for his Achievement; it is not only the Shield but
the Adornment of the same, that Thetis craved, and Vulcan wished to accomplish,
so as to preserve his Honor from base Oblivion.

To hide him from his heavy death, when fate shall seek for him.
As well as with Renowned Arms to fit his Golden Limb.
By what you may observe in the former lines, it is plain, that the first Rule
of Blazon, is to name the Field first, and then to observe the points of the
Escoutcheon, whether dexter or sinister.

On the broad Stock his Tongues in his left hand,
His right a Massy Hammer does command.
First Forged and strong, and Ample Shield of Hew,
Most rarely diverse round about he threw.
Next observe to name the partisians and charge.

Three radient Rings, a silver lore behind
The Shield charged with five files in which his mind
Expressed in Divine variety.
Which brings me to the form or Division by line.

Whose several files bound by the aeternal hand,
Wrap the Infant World in her first Swadling-band.
The Conclusion of the Chapter.
To the Honorable Robert Boil, Fellow of the Royal Society, who bears Party
per Bend Crenele, Argent and Gules.
SIR,
THis Chapter claims a great part of it Light from You, You having given Form
to the Matter: and the formal Metal laying hold on the material Color,
creates a good Coat, whereby the refracted Line makes five Consecutions. And
if the Analogy of Kercher hold good, that by Argent is signified God, and by
Gules Man, your Coat represents the good hold You have taken in your Seraphick
Love, by fixing both your Arms to the Poles of the World, You have brought that
Light to the World both in Your Experiments of Colors, and Metalline
Solutions. I must conclude, That till then Darkness was upon the face of the
Earth.

CHAP. II.
The Form of Arms, or Division by Lines, showing the Formal Reason of every
Partition.

IN the dividing the Field, it makes it more fruitful; SAUCIATA FERACIOR;
Sanguine a Border compony, Argent and Sa.
though the first Shield was plain NON SEMPER INUTILIS is the benefit of
Education.

By the Esse formale, I understand the manner of Bounding by lines, which lines
are either straight or curved, and are properly reducible to the Elements; for
the first operation of the Elements is Division, Digby.
from whence proceeds local Motion; and those Coats that are further removed
from their Simplicities, fall into more perplexed Considerations, and so
require a subtiler Act of Reason to distinguish and call forth their Natures;
and thus though a man understood the general Nature of Colors, Vulgar Er. l.
6. c. 10.
yet were it no easy Problem to resolve why Grass is Green; and though I
pretend to teach the Language of Arms, yet you must know, that this, as many
things in Nature, cannot speak, which yet have a mighty persuasion in their
Nature: Silver is silent and speechless, yet a potent Orator; it cannot move
it self, yet how does it blazon of arms move passions in the minds of men. As
you may observe in this Coat of Boil, wheree the Cre^ele Line signifies the
very Battlements of Heaven, or 12. Houses of the same, and running curved thus
from the dexter Chief to the sinister Base, did signify men of power, and
speedy execution, the Lightning of Jupiter proceeding from that Angle.

Among the Agyptians, how much did they understand by Form? They observed eight
and forty Constellations, whereof four and twenty were placed in the Southern
Hemisphere, which as Plutarch testifies, they called Urnam lucis, Osiridis
regnum, dextrum mundi latus, salubre beneficium: and as many on the Northern
part, which they count the left side of the world, Malignum, venisicum,
foemininum, tenebrarum originem, which according to Zoroaster, is described by
several Lines Pyramidically ascending and descending, intermixing a Color and
Metal together. Lucan having prepared a Field for the Spirit of Pompey, shows,
-- Sequitur convexa tonantes;
Cicero de Oratore. Party per Fesse.
-- Up to the round it hies,


Where SABLE air does kiss the star-bearing skies.

Forma est Notio, cujus differentia ad caput generis, and quasi blazon of arms
fontem referri potest. The first line lay along, and was the Partition per
fess, girting the world, and separating the upper from the nether Hemisphere,
by which Line was understood the Horizon, and Limiter of the Sight, Regnum
Osiridis; it represents the prima Materia, having a potentiality tam ad
aliquid, tam ad nihil, as well to be depressed, as to be lift up. Party per Bend.
Upon a Shield it signifies a Cut received, blazon of arms while the next Line
which was per Bend Dexter represented a Slash, and in the world it represented
the Axis. And this was among the A gyptians Salubre beneficium; for the
benefits of the gods bestowed as they were from the right hand, they proceeded
to us from that Angle as was against our left hand; Cujus pars suprema est
Polus Articus seu Borealis, vel Aquilo, qui in altum versus coelorum cacumen
sublimatur; ejus vero terminus oppositus est, quasi Polus Antarcticus seu
Australis, qui versus profundum terrae deprimitur. According to which Job 26.7.
Aquilonem extendit Deus in altum super inane and vacuum, hoc est, Party per
Bend, by that Position denoting Power.

The uptight Line called Parted, or Party per Pale, was a blazon of arms
downright Blow, Party per Pale.
and by this Line they understood the Meridian, or Line of Midday, being a
Circle passing from North to South; the Egyptians counted the right hand
toward the North, the Astronomers looked toward the South, the Divine toward
the East, and the Poet toward the West, according to these Verses; Ad Boream
terra, sed coeli mensor ad Austrum,
Praeco Dei Exortum, videt Occasum Poeta.


Per Pale is the Line of Justice, balancing as it were the world, whereas to
decline to the left hand was malignum venificum blazon of arms seminum
tenebrarum originem, Party per Bend Sinister.
which is the Reason that the Bend sinister is accounted spurious and base;
albeit it is not so, except it be Humit and cut off, for then it hinders
Succession; by the cutting of the Line it is called per Bend sinister; and
while it is whole, dividing the Shield in two equal parts, it represents the
Equator, making the Days and Nights equal, being at right Angles with the Pol
s: but by reason of its Position, inclining to fall down into its first Matter,
it is not accounted so Honorable. It denotes Condescension.

blazon of arms Again, if these Lines cross at right Angles, Party per Cross.
making Quarterly, then it has reference to the four Cardinal Points of East,
West, North or South, the name of Adam being comprehended among the Greeks in
Anatole, Dysis, Arctos, Mesembria; and in moral Virtues those that are
Cardinal, according to the Analogy of the Metal and Color, these Lines
signifying Reason not at all prevaricated; but when they crossed at oblique
Angles it signified his Fall, and then represented a Thigh, because then man
was fain to enter into Covenant, blazon of arms which was done by putting the
hand under the Thigh: and this denotes the Composition of Man, according to
Elementary Qualities, whereby he was more apt to rise, Party per Saltire.
and is called Party per Saltire. And thus the right Line had the pre-eminence
over the other, because it signified no commotion or disturbed passions of the
soul, moving in a right Line; Sursum aut deorsum ascendere, vel descendere, in
Dextram aut in Levam ferri; and where they met in a right blazon of arms Angle,
Party per Cheveron. Sable and Argent.
it made the Division of parted Percheveron, which was Division by Rule, as it
were Norma, having the right Angle in the Honor Point, constituting the
Geometrical Square, the Wise Creator having made every thing in Number, Weight
and Measure; and where the Escutcheon comes to be otherwise divided, though it
debase the Coat, yet it honors the Bearer, by becoming Distinct. Bearing, it
represents one that levels at just Actions, and all parted Fields represent a
Diaphanous Body, letting the Light of the Field pass through, Umbrae tamen and
Lucis aeque receptivum. This Bearing signifies Experience.

Per Fesse and per Bend.
blazon of arms When A Coat is parted per Fess and per Bend counterchanged, it
follows the very Order of Nature; for it is an Axiom, Natura quod alibi
tollit, alibi restituit. And therefore if a man have received either of these
four Sorts of Blows, vid. Cut, Slashed, Parted or Tranch upon his Shield, or
have won it from his Enemy in the field, it is called an Achievement.

These Lines again are more or less Noble, according to the agitation or
activity of the Spirit thereof; and if according to Thales and the wisest
Philosophers, Aquam esse primam rerum materiam, The first Division that was
made by the Elements, the next after the plain Line, whose Dignity (RECTA
DIFFUNDITUR) is that of the Water, which indeed is Congregatio aquarum in locum
suum, whereby the fluid Matter runs Barwise or Bendwise.

Hic Undas imitatur, habet quoque nomen ab undis. blazon of armsIt is called
UNDY, Barry undy.
and it represents one whose virtue is excited up by a word of Command, or by
Example; Fought with them on the River Side, where both
give mutualblows,
With well pil'd, darts among them all perverse
contention rose,
Among the Tumult was enraged, among them ruinous Fate
Had her red finger, some they took in an unhurt estate,
Some hurt, yet living, some quite slain, and those they tug to them
By both the feet, stripped off and took their weeds, wi^d all the stream
Of blood upon them, that their steels had manfully let out.


Servius says, That on the Grecians Shields Neptune was figured, and on the
Trojans, Minerva, they being called Cecropidae true Trojans that were of the
ancient Blood, who being led by the Queen of Martials, feared not to meet their
enemies the Graecians, Minerva.
-- Within a Vale close to a flood, whose stream,
Used to give all their Cattle drink, they there enambush'd them.


And a little after the Greeks having received the Alarm; -- Being then in
Counsel set,
Then they start up, take horse, and soon their enemies met.


Wherein is excellently described the Cavalry and Infantry, dealing indented
Lines on the Shields of the Opposers, described on the warlike City; Two Cities
in the Spacious Shield he built with goodly State
Of diverse Languages, men the one did nuptial celebrate,
Observing at them Solemn Feast.


Wherein first is the Office of the Herald, to record Marriages, and Civil
Rights due to the Nobility, and by noting them by certain Signs of Armory, Arms
what.
which is defined to be no other thing then the Seal and visible Character of
Nobility, which is the most glorious recompense that either our own virtue, or
that of our Predecessors could acquire us. Stirring us up to the Imitation of
Virtue; for as another well observes, that when men have once fortified
themselves with a settled Fortune of Wealth, they naturally look upward; for
though the Myrmidons trembled at the sight of Achille's Shield, the precious
Metal of the Arms was such: yet the noble Bearer thereof, upon the sight of
it, was excited in Courage; -- Fata aspera rumpes,
Stern Anger entered in his Eyes as if the Day Star rose.


For beside the outward Splendour of the first City, he saw the glorious
Achievements of the Martial City.

The other City otherwise employed as busily,
Two Armies glittering in Arms of one Confederacy,
Besieged it, and parley had, with those within the Town,
Two ways they stood resolved to see the City overthrown;
Or that the Citizens should heap in two parts all their Wealth,
And give them half, they neither like but Arm themselves by stealth.
It being the just Law of Arms to defend a man's Country, the plain Border in
token of him that was besieged, and the waved Border in token of the Besieger;
for Waters are either described ut fluant agmine tranquillo, with a peaceable
motion with reference to the Political City, Sicut spiritus ferebat blazon of
arms super faciem aquarum, or else Dauncetty, Dauncetty of six pieces.
as we call it, with reference to the Martial City, declaring a great power or
force, aqua viderit Jehovam et timuerit concitataque sit abyssus, Psa. the 47.
And this seems to take denomination from Dans et redundans, giving in a
plentiful or redounding manner; and as Rivers run to the Sea, Water signifies
in general operation, SERVANTVR MOTV, and does admonish the idle person,
because QVIESCENDO TABESCVNT: unde Argent and Sable, signifies rest in God,
QVIESCIT IN PLANO: where the Water is black, unde Sable and Argent is the
Emblem of Contrition, where the Water is white, VT SORDES DILVAT. Vnde Argent
and Gules, is the Emblem of Charity, Aquae multae non potuerunt extinguere
Charitatem, Cant 8. Ver. 7. unde Azure and Argent is the Waters above and
below, COELI REFERT IMAGINEM, that is Conformity: I here observe the conformity
of this Coat to the name, (viz.) Samford, or the freshford, NEC SAPOREM
IMMUTANT, that though the Water of it self is fluctuable, yet this is the
Emblem of an immutable mind, OSCULATUR LIMITS, he kisseth his bounds, it
signifies no Sectary in Religion, but one that goes the ancient way. Again,
Sandford, that is the Sandyford, bears in conformity the Field quarterly
Ermine and Azure, and indented in the midst, signifying first the purity, then
the nature of Water, that though it run into Sandy places, OBVIA QUAE
QUETRAHIT, it removes all obstacles, it will penetrate the Center, NEC RETRO
REVOLVUNT: it is the Emblem of a generous Soul, RUMPIT MORAS, it will break
through the Sand; and if Moses speak, it will flow from a Rock ALTIOR NON
SENIOR, blazon of arms though the Rock be the higher, the Water is the
antienter, Party per Pile ingrailed.
though Waterhouse lays his Pile far, yet the Water sets its teeth home; for
this manner of Line is called ingrailed, quasi ingredere, to enter, AURA
CRISPATURTENVI, and this is the effect of the Element of Water. DISSOCIAT,
SOCIAT, that which is solid, it holds, OPTIMA QUAEQUE RAPIT, It Is the Emblem of
humane life. FUGIENS blazon of arms ABIT; Bendy Undy
there is no ancient House but has felt the teeth of time; and Bendy Undy,
signifies some notable Enterprise done by force of Water, as testifies
Boswell.

Met. l. 15
Tempus edax rerum tuque invid of a vetustas,
Omnia destruitis, vitiatis dentibus aevi.
The Pile that lies in the Water, is the Emblem of immortal virtue, because it
remains PERPETUO SONITU, it argues patience. INUNDATIONE FERAX, it is the
nature of an Heroical mind, Brown 's Enquiry l. 7. c. 17.
ANGUSTIIS ELEV ATUR and indeed, the true Ather, though it be as Liquid as
Water, yet it has in it the fierce principle of Fire.

The Greeks to express the great Waves, do use the number of three, that is,
the word (...), which is a concurrence of three Waves in one, whence arose the
Proverb (...), nay now a trifluctuation of evils which Erasmus renders, Malorum
fluctus decumanus, and though the terms are different, yet they are made to
signify the same thing, the number 10. to explain the number of three, and the
single number of one wave, the collective concurrence of more, so by all these
Lines dividing of the Fields: this manner of way is understood the watery
Element waved, being a proper bearing for Seamen, and for the most part,
consists of Argent and Azure.

The shore they leave, and cover all the deep, Aen. l. 3.

And silver foam from Azure billows sweep.
If the Water come from the Fountain Head, OMNIBUS AFFLUENTER, and signifies
Bounty, and is not drawn dry, NEC ACTU NEC HAUSTU; if it descend MOTU PERENNI,
it signifies divine Grace; if it ascend, SURGIT NE DETUR INANE. So that to bear
Dauncete, signifies LATET IGNIS IN UNDA, there is in it sparks of Magnificence,
having passed dangerous Seas, is a Coat rewarded with this sort of bearing from
the King, LATE DIFFUNDITVR, who as he is the Fountain of Honor, NUNQUAM
SICCABITUR ASTU, as he is the Ocean, DEJICIT ET EXTOLLIT, deserving men are
known by the Coat they bear, and though Water be the Emblem of the multitude
that are like the foaming Sea that SORDIDA VOMIT, yet FRENANT ARENAE; for
though Death and Hell, NON DICUNT SUFFICIT: Hercules his clrusing of the Augean
Stable being so performed.
yet the Water is the Emblem of a liberal person, as the wise man notes,
Proverbs the 5th, Deriventur fontes tui for as and in plate is aquas tuas
divide; how have the Romans immortalized their names by aquaeducts. Hercules
his cleansing of the Augean Stable, being so performed; that Family which among
us does bear SABLE; a Bend OR between six Fountains proper, does employ the
golden means procured by the River of Stourse arising in Wiltshire, from six
Fountains passing through the Town of Stourton in Dorcetshire, giving both Name
and Arms to the Ancient Barons of that Name; the Name of Swale in Yorkshire,
bearing a Bend. Waved Silves through an Azure Field, but in token of the River
Swale; and if I should search further into the Mysteries of these Lines, I
should plainly find some Footsteps of the reason of their bearings: as for
example, the name of Snow bears on a Fess between two Cotises Nebule, a Lion
Passant, signifying, that though the Sun has the greatest force in Leo, yet
that being past, or Passant, the Weather is inclined to more Clouds, Snow being
above in the middle Region, and so forming another manner of Line called
Nebule, from Nubes, which because it is of a higher degree then the Water,
participateth of the nature of the Clouds, IN ALTIS HABITAT; and is the Emblem
of Fame.

Sands Ovid. l. 12.
Amidst the World between Air, Earth and Seas,
A place there is, the Confines to all these;
To all that's done, though far removed appear,
And every whisp^r penetrates th^ear:
The house of Fame who in the highest Tower
Her Lodging takes.
And as the Translator of the former verses writes in Virgil, Lib. the 4th,
where the former Lines are a comment.

-- Fame grows by motion, gains by flying force
Kept under first by fear, soon after shrouds,
Walking on Earth, her head among the Clouds.
Nebule OR and Sable.
blazon of armsThis kind of Bearing being born in the Shield of Blunt ( Nebule
OR and Sable) he was Captain General of the Footmen to King William the
Conqueror, marching like Turnus, of whom the Latin Poet; His dasling Shield
IO in Gold adorns,
Hair clothes her Limbs, her Head is decked with horns:


Virgil. l 7.
A Cloud of Foot did follow the whole Strands, Shield bearing Squadrons hid the
Argive bands. There being this Analogy between this and Turnu^ his Shield,
Blunts name signifying Yellow, and so called from the bright color of his
hair, Blunt bearing also the head of I O to his Creast, viz. a pair of Horns.
Clouds of foot signify the vulgar and common Soldier, who followed their
General, who was known from them all by his Creast, or cogniscance, that --
Breathed Aetnaean fire,
Strangely it roars, and flames more fiercely grows,
When in the Batta I blood in Rivers flows.


Black Clouds do signify Labor and Travail, USQUE IN OCCIDENTEM PARIT, thus
of the Bearers of this Coat that were descended from this first man, which was
not content till he had brought forth in our Western Isle, bearing this Coat
properly, having been by Office Master of the Ordinance; and which once
kindled, MICAT ARDENTIUS, the blacker Cloud is attended with the hotter fire,
PRAEMISSA DAMNA TIMORI: if the chief be of the flecked Line, which is another
manner of Line of the nature of the Air: it is a Messenger of Peace, SERENITATIS
NUNCIA. If A olus have let loose the Winds to rage the Sea, Neptune appears,
and puts the Winds in his bagg.

So did his presence calm the troubled main,
Then through clear Skies Neptune with gentle rein
Wheels his swift Chariot.
blazon of arms This represents the Rainbow, and is always flecked upward,
Per Chief flecked.
Arcus fit ex repercussione radiorum Solis in nube aquosa. Rays then of Light
signify Divine Grace, and Clouds dispersed fall down in Stars: so the Insignia
of the Family of Blackborn bears Argent a Fesse Nubile between three Stars,
to denote SPLENDOUR PATERNAE GLORIAE, being so denominated from a Black Water
that graced his Field, MEDIIS PAX FVLGET IN ARMIS. Fresh Waters are a Blessing
to a Nation, and are best above. So that Lines that are derived from the watery
Element signify some memorable Benefits received from the Bearers, either in
making Rivers Navigable, or finding out fresh Springs, or draining Fens or
Marshes which may be the reason of Lilburn's Coat being Argent, three
Water-budgets Sable, having been anciently Wardens of the Marches; the
Water-budget became serviceable to the Army as soon as Aeneas had landed: Some
seek the hidden seed of fire that slept
In veins of flint; Beasts shady holds, the Woodss
Others cut down, and find concealed Floods.


Bornes anciently springing out of the Earth; and so Lilb^rne is as Shirborne,
interpreted by Cambden, Fons Limpidus, sive clarus, whence they take both Name
and Arms. Shierborne bears Argent a Lion Rampant Vert: Out of the Eater came
meat was Sampson's Riddle, and out of the Mouth came drink, he was able to
testify, the Ancients conveighing Water by Lions mouths. Neither has the
Green Lion a small part in Chemical Herauldry in displaying the liquid Benefits
that are attained by Coition; for the Water-budget was anciently in the Family
of Bourchier, Spelman.
which were also called Boursor and Bousor, Earls of Bath, as bearing the Purse
for the common good; Boursor aevum qui it Provinciae, hoc est, rem pecuniariam
administrat; as he is called the Pursor of a Ship that lays out for the
necessaries thereon, though it is rather Boursor: and so the Name seems to be
the Original of the Coat, as the Kings of Castle bear a Castle, that of Lions a
Lion that of Granado a Pomegranate. So that sometimes there are Names declared,
sometimes Actions; as when the famous fiery Drake had girt the World, like to
A^neas and his Companions, he left his Old Coat of the Drake: Sails struck, we
row, our lusty Seamen sweep
The Azure Pavement of the Briny-deep.


Being rewarded with a Fess Undy between two Stars, in memory of his so famous
girting the World, leaving his own Country in so famous a design, in following
the two Pole Stars (intercepted by the Ecliptic, or rather finding out Castor
and Pollux) when one must sit if the other rise. Mortumar's Coat was a dead
Sea, as the Name signifies, till it was divided by Bars and Pallets, for that
he has the leading of the voward to William the Conqueror, and bears two
Squies in chief to denote, that all Noble Designs are of high agitations; and
rather then there shall be a Vacuum in Nature, Water will ascend upwards, and
be kindled INTERIORIS REFLEXU, to bear PALES or Pally waved, is a Noble blazon
of arms Bearing, Pally waved of six Sab. and Argent.
indented is not so much to show Teeth, as to show the extent, it is
distributive Justice, CUIQUE SUI; COMETA PAUCIS MINATUR, OMNIBUS FULGET, it
matters not whether by fire or water. So that DEDUCET IN PORTUM it is called
indented having teetharguing antiquity. Ironit self is worn away by rust, and
consumed by the deef file of Time; stately Edifices now appearing like
Fragments of broken Walls. Water and Fire are both Emblems of Virginity,
because they both purge and cleanse; and though Water has the smoother face,
it has the sharper teeth; PALAM VENIT SECRETO REVERTITUR. Time and Place is
the Commanders Motto, DUCUNT IN ALTUM is the benefit of Occasion, and Palei you
see ADMOTA ACCENDITUR: They are good Masters, but ill Servants; for where the
Conqueror comes it is OMNIBUS IDEM. The General to Duke William bare Argent a
pale Ingraild between two Cortisses Sable: Bellasis.
but to show the expedition and the invitation A LONG. And he that sails from
his own Country to gain another, ETIAME FLUMINE FLAMMAM, Pales signifying a
man at Arms, and Palets Honor and Profit. It he set to Sea, AURA DUCENTE NON
UNDA, he follows his Occasion. If he gain Honors its PRECIUM VIRTUTIS. The
General, whether on Sea or Land, had need be in a standing posture, TE STANTE
TUTA; and he leading the others, follow by Example A REGIMINE MOTUS. The Family
of Manduit have Pally Indented, as leading to high Enterprises, QUA DUXERIS
SEQVITVR. And this has given Occasion to many to assume something of their
Lords Arms. The Family of Mackworth bare Parted per Pale Indented, Sable and
Ermine, and was augmented for especial Service (with a Cheveron Gules fretted
OR) done to the Lord Audley, part of whose Arms was a Fret, that is, Nodus and
crux interpretum. It signifies sometime the Law of Necessity, which though it
has no law of it self, of all Laws is most binding, QVOD NON SOLVITVR
SCINDITVR. It reptesents also the faith of a Commander, a strict Oath, a Net
cast into the River Styx. It is sometimes called a True-Lovers-Knot, In se
contexta recurrit. For the binding Property in shape it represents a Net: and
therefore the Family of Warnitts in Sussex bear a Stag within a Frett or
Straight: it has been in request ever since Gilbert Nevile came in with the
Conqueror, and was his Admiral; for says one, Wise Princes have Nets blazon of
arms of Gold and Purple, Sable a Frett Argent, otherwise called Harington's
Knot.
wherewith they fish for men of Wisdom and Worth. Mittite retitiam in
Capturam, was the word of Command to S. Peter, ut ex omnibus congregetis. The
Christian Soldier must do his endeavor, though the success be not always the
same, though the Joints thereof be charged with Plates, as in Platts Coat or
Bezawts: as in Trussells, yet NON SEMPER TRIPODEM, it is not a Socrates that
ways draws up Gold; for it many times happens to the Wise man as to the
fool, though Nets are Emblems of Wit. The Nets that the Apostles did use to
catch men, was not that they should perish, but that they should be preserved
and drawn out of the deep into the mavelous Light, says St. Ambrose. And so
it is a fit Bearing for a Disciple of our Lord. And St. Peter being honored
with this Office, to become a Fisher of men, he is said to have suffered upon
this kind of Cross, with his head downward, that he might imitate his Master,
AT IMAGO PER INVERSAM, and so became Admiral of the Sea Apostolical. From this
kind is also taken the Portcullis, denoting the power of the King in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil, both in the Sea, and the Port, signifying Dominium
Maris, used by King Henry the Seventh, to show his power on the Sea to open and
shut; and his power on the Land, VT ERRANTES DETINET. In imitation of those
Fishermen that were Defenders of the Faith, and in memory of which Service the Sea of York bears the Keys in Saltire with a Crown: To bear the Cross, and
wear the Crown,
Shows Grace is Glory in the Blome.


The Sea of Winchester bears the Keys and Sword Fretted together, to denote his
valor as well as power, that Prelate being a Count Palatine, and Prelate of
the Noble Order of the Garter. Peterborough bears the Keys crossed between
Crosses. Gloucester and St. Asaph bear the Keys also. And in relation to St.
Peter's Land-Service all the Bishops bear the Pastoral Staff, which is the
Leading-staff of the Church, Great Spirits do nothing mean, says Plutarch,
Because that sharp and active Spirit that is in them, can never lie at rest by
reason of its vigor, but they are tossed up and down as it were in a tempest,
till they come to a settled composed life. They that bear Fretts, do denote
witty and ingenious men in the Law Civil and Ecclesiastical. They that bear
Indented, do denote the hardship of the Man of Arms. Mountacut^s bearing
Lozenges is to show the sharpness of the Rock they climb by; and from whence
Diamonds are dug and naturally formed, whence their name* in like manner
Dautry, or De Alta R pa, which was of right worth thy esteem in the County of
Sussex bear the same Lozenges or Diamond forms in their Arms, to Symbolize
whence his Noble Name; who can look upon the Bars waved with the ^ressants
Sable in the Coat of Watterton, if he be acquainted with any Antiquity, but
that he may easily conjecture that the Planter of that Family seemed to take
his name from the same reason that the Pelasgi did, the ancient Inhabitants of
the Grecian Isles, of whose Antiquity, because the Arcadians could give none
but a slender account, boasted to be descended from the Moons. In like manner
Ellis in Yorkshire have the Cross charged with five Cressants, and to their
cognizance a naked Woman or Helen, with this Motto HUIC HABEO NON TIBI. What
does it imply, but some fair Woman as Helen was, was in strife for, and for
whom the Greeks and Trojans produced so great a war, love of Ladies producing
the Bearing of Maiden-heads: Hom. Il. lib. 3.
That they were forced (though whispering) to say what man can blame,
The Greeks and Trojans to endure for so admired a Dame.


But to bring it nearer home in the honor of Christian Soldiers, who will not
think but that this Coat was gained in the holy Land, when the Christian Cross
was rewarded by the Cressants. And albeit Montanus derives the name Elis from
whence he supposes the Greeks called (...), from Elishas (eating himself in
Greece) who was Japhets eldest Son. Origines Sacrae.
Homer calls those that were under the conduct of Achilles Hellens, as well
from a City called (...), founded by (...) the Son of Deucalion: and though
perhaps you may say as once an Eminent King of Arms said, That these are
pleasant Vanities; yet it plainly demonstrateth, that as men gave names to
Towns and Cities, so they gave names to men, and so become reciprocal; for I do
this but only to hint at some reason of the Bearing, which every one desires
to hear of, Lines being promiscuously drawn, and to the vulgar seem nothing
without a charge or Bearing thereupon. Lamprides in the life of Alexander
Severus says, That he gave such Lands as he won out of the Enemies hands to
his Lords, Marchers, and his Soldiers, that they should be theirs and their
Heirs for ever, so they would be Soldiers; neither should they come at any
time into the hands of any private person, saying, They would more lustily
serve if they fought for their own land; which opinion comes next to the
ancient Bordered Ground among the Romans. This manner of dividing the Field by
halfs or quarters, or by Lines direct, cross, overthwart, or such other,
declares how Art must follow Nature of that which it dorh figure, and not
otherwise. What reason can be given why the three Brothers of Warren, Gourney,
and Mortimer, should every one bear a several Coat, and derive their Sirnames
to posterity, all of them yet retaining the Metal and Color of OR and AZURE,
the one Checky the other Pally, and the other Barry; But chiefly for
distinction, as Aristotle notes, Formam esse qua res ab alia differt, these
being as it were several dissections of Jupiter's Brain by the Man Midwife,
though these divisions also might have an eye to the Heroes of Old; Helms of
high proof, the Work and Shields complete,
With Sallow wrought.


Checky being wrought on their Shields by the weaving of Sallow, to corroborate
and strengthen them. Earl Warren had Checky in his Field. Again, Sir Ancell
Gourney, who was at the winning of Acome with King Richard the First, where he
took Prisoner the King of the Moors, bare Pally of fix pieces OR and Azure, and
in remembrance of his so noble Achievement, he bare the said King armed in
Mail, rendering up of his sword: and parted in the Girdle-place counterchanged,
was given by Sir Richard Gourney late Lord Mayor of London: This claps on Mail
which finest gold did guild,
Then takes his faithful sword, and solid Shield.


The Counterchanging of a Coat signifies a captivated Enemy, CONVERTUNT NON
EVERTVNT; for the Pale is still the same, though it be counterchanged; Omne
naturaliter fugiat ab adversario, simile vero delectetur. It signifies Interest
also, when a man will forsake his own Interest for the good of his Country.
Mortimer's Coat represents as it were a great Marsh, divided by several Lines
or Rivulets, his Descendants being Lords, Wardens of the Marches, or if you
will, as they were men of power and wisdom, so their Coat denotes, being
Barry of Six and a Chief, etc. the Bars denoting more properly Power, and the
blazon of arms Chief the reason of a man. Per Chief Crenelle.
Sometimes the Chief is divided by another sort of Line, and HIC MVRVS AHENEVS
ESTO. And this is called Battelle, for that it represents the Battlements of
a Tower: it is of the nature of fire, enduring the hottest onset. The Romans
rewarding him with a Crown Mural, who first assailed and took the Enemies
Walls. Berecinthia was said to be Turrita, and was crowned by this sort of
Crown. Servius is of Opinion, that by Magna Matter, or the Mother of the Gods
crowned with a Battled Crown, is meant the Earth, the proper Basis of all
Edifices.

Great stately Transomes stood a lofty Tower
Of great defense, against this with all their power,
The Italians draw, this work to overthrow,
Became the whole endeavor of the foe.
Ovid speaking of Cybilla says, Quod promis turris urbibus illa dedit, and is
therefore attributed to the Builders of Cities; this Line being raised by
twelve Battlements among the Egyptians did signify Duodecim Mansiones Arcus
Magn^, the twelve Houses of Heaven: as by the waved Line they understood the
Element of Water and Abundance, whence the Greeks had the Letter M My, and from
this manner of Line they took also their Letter Z Zeta, id est, Vita,
signifying Life. If it fly upward, it is more particular fire; if downward and
bending, hunder, ET FRAGORE FERIT. It Is the Symbol of Generosity, MICAT
ARDENTIVS, because it comes from the Battlements of Heaven: if fire seem to lie
dead in the Coals, DETECTAE MICABVNT; and it is the Nature of Virtue to
discover it self; the Ingraild Line is Earthly, but yet active, and therefore
signifies Ingreder^; for being stirred VIGET VIRTUES. The ancient Ensign of the
Scythians was a Shield parted per Gyron and Crenelle, or Batled, with a
Thunderbolt winged in the midst thereof, as testifies Casaneus, Thunder being
said to be left handed, because it is feigned to be flung by the right hand of
Jupiter. If one Line be in the upper part blazon of arms of the Escutcheon, is
is called the Chief, Parted per Chief.
because it represents the Head, the Intellectus, the understanding, Sensum
Membris reliquis tradit, it represents a man of Brain. And because the Chief
consists of one Line only, it properly falls to be discussed in the place of
Form only, dividing the Field, and is called Parted, except it be charged
upon, and then it is called a Chief, id est, a Head, a Chief, a Commander, one
in supreme Authority: it is chiefly attributed to the Virtues of the Mind. To
men of a contemplative life, Aquae supra coelum laudant Deum, the Chief
representing the Firmament or the Line of the separation of the Waters that
were above from those that were below. Quare post aquarum superiorum
manifestationem prima creatura (vid.) Lux condita est, hoc est, suprema aquarum
portio est illuminata, quae Creatura omnium composita est ex radiis Spiritus
increati aetern. etc. ex aqua subtilissima, the Metald Chief being to be
preferred before the Colored. Lumen de lumine is science informed; when a
Chief is charged with Heurts, it signifies discretion; wherein Minerva is said
to descend from Juno to refrain the wrath of Achilles; Gray eyed Minerva
answering him again,
I Am come from Heaven thine anger to restrain.


Argent a Chief, Azure VERTETUR IN DIEM, the Azure being of the nature of the
Light, RECTA DIFFUNDITUR, and is the Color of Justice; therefore attributed to
Jupiter. Sometimes the Chief is Nobile, to show the benefits we receive from
above: Tum Pater Omnipotens, etc. --
Almighty Ether in a fatning shower,
Dropped in the lap of his sweet Spouse.


Party per Chief Nebule.
blazon of armsThat Chief that is Nebule denotes ^a Preacher of Righteousness:
UT IN ORB PLUIT, or a bountiful Prince, DIVES IN OMNES. By this kind of
Serpentine Line the Agyptians did denote a progressive Vivification of a Deity,
CLARO AB AETHERE PAVOR. It is accounted a Noble Bearing, because it comes so
near the active Light. It may well be called the Chief, being so much augmented
by Sovereign Ensigns, as in the Coat of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Rutland, who bare the Chief quarterly: Jupiter and Mars, on the first and last
two Flower-de-luces; Sol on the second, and third a Lion Passant, Gardant of
the third; As being descended from the blood Royal, from the Sister of King
Edward the Fourth. Also it is used as the chief Ensign of Spiritual Knighthood,
those of the Order of the Templers ensigning their Paternal Coat Armor with a
Chief Argent, charged with a cross Gules. Furthermore how are Companies and
Societies, incorporated by his Majesty, as a peculiar Badge of his Royal
Favor, augmented in Chief as the Artilery, Military, East India, Staple,
Adventurers, Russia, Elbing, Spain, etc. besides many peculiar Families,
wherein is plainly denoted the Royal Ensigns? Per Chief Sable, and Argent is
modesty in Virtue; ELEVATVR IN VMBRAM. Azure a Chief Argent RETVLIT IN MELIVS.
OR a Chief Vert is the labor of a Bishop, VT GERMINET. Gules a Chief Argent, a
noble Captain, TE DVCE EGREDIAR. A Chief Argent and Sable represents one whose
chief care is in a solirary life, to pay recognizance to Heaven, MVNERIS HOC
TVI. Azure a Chief OR is the Emblem of Dignity, ELEVOR VTFVLGEAM. Sir Westons
Brown being Knighted by Ferdinand King of Aragon, is augmented in Chief by
addition of the Eagle to his Arms, Dated in Civitat. Burgien. the 15. Sept. An.
1511. Upton says, That when the Chief seems to have as it were a whole Coat,
it does well become a man who has large Possessions by his Mother, and small
Patrimony from his Father, bearing his Fathers Arms; notwithstanding wholly on
the Chief his Example is, Portat unum signum capitale de nigro, and tres Rosas
rubeas in Campo aureo cum uno capite rubeo, and tribus talentis in codem. And
an instance of the like Bearing is brought by Guiliam in the Coat of Minors.

Thus as the Earth is divided, so is the Shield into Continent and Islands, the
Continent being that quantity that we call the Field, not separated by any
Divisional Line, the Islands being environed round about with some Sea, either
by Plain, Ingrailed, or Indented Lines, or Borders, whose Nature is,
CIRCVMSTANT NON MERGVNT; and these again are divided into Peninsulaes,
Istmus's, and blazon of arms Promontories: Argent a Pile in Point Sable.
Peninsulas when the Field is almost encompassed by a Border, yet terminates at
the Chief, and is so joined to the Field, the Earth extending it self out into
Promontories in high Mountains, parting Per Cheveron TONITRV CALCAT; or else
shooting it self into the Sea in Piles, INCONCVSSA MANET; the outmost end of
which makes as it were a Fore-land, and is called a Pile in Point. Who would
not think but that the Bearer of three Anchors on a Pile, is arrived at the
Cape of good Hope, or else that it denotes the Bearers blazon of arms Name to
be Bide, Argent a Canton Sable.
IMMOTA TRIUMPHANS! Did you ever see the Pile ingrailed with the force of
Water, IMMOTVS FRANGIT, and emplyes, that hardship is made easy through hopes
of Victory, PROBANTVR FORTES IMPETV. Cantons bound but one Corner of the Field,
and is a singular reward for the study of Virtue: so the Virtuosi in a Canton
bear the Arms of England as a Badge of his Majesty's favor to the Propagators
of Sciences; for as it is reason that distinguishes Man from Beast; So it is a
nobleness of temper and Generosity of Spirit that distinguishes us from one
another. He that imployes his utmost reason in quest of what is best,
accompanied with a generous resolve to pursue it, is the most worthy Person,
having Jus imaginum, in whose places are come in Badges of Families Coat
Armor, which are born as Ensigns of their Ancestors Virtue, which first
merited them, and are provocatives to Posterity to a generous imitation of
them, and becomes justifiable in Religion, and as in the mixture of Colors,
each loses its proper beauty, and a different third results from both: So
those that acting on their own fancies, refusing the strait Lines, do make a
great many deformities, forsaking the sober foundations of Antiquity.

Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri. blazon of arms Imbelishments are not
always Ornaments, Sable an Escoutcheon Argent.
but sometimes transform one into deformity; take a plain Escoutcheon on
another, or bounded by another, it is the property of a good Soldier that keeps
a clear and quiet conscience in his Breast, which otherwise will gnaw out the
roots of all Valor. Black and White are the Ornaments of Nature, and the first
Fields in Heraldry, though indeed Gules is the proper Field of a Soldier, who
refuses not the bloody Coat of his Adversary, since it is an argument of
manhood: -- Rapiens immania pondera balthei and
Quo nunc Turnus ovat spolio, gaudetque potitus.


Now what I have said concerning all the Fields before going, are said to be
parted, but cannot properly be said to be charged, because there is neither
Metal nor Color predominant. But when these Lines limit a space above the
Field, they do constitute certain Charges or Honorable Ordinaries which I come
next to treat of, as the Nexus Materiae cum forma. But when these Divisions are
charged with any thing of Sovereignty, it denotes high merit from the Prince,
and are called augmentation of Honor, though it take from the first Bearing.
Frederick the Fourth Emperor of Germany, giving to Laurence Hutton of Hutton
John in Westmorland, a Canton charged with a Falchion in Bend Proper, as a
parcel of the Arms of Soliman the Second; for that in the Wars of Hungary he
had won in the Field the Standard of the said Solomon) joined to his own Arms,
which was Gules a Fesse OR, between three Cushions Argent tassled gold, and
charged with three Flower-de-luces, and to his Crest parcel of the Imperial
Arms, viz. On a Wreath Gold and Azure, two Eagles heads and necks in Saltire,
couped Sable issuing through a Coronet gold, and were by especial favor
declared to be added to his own Coat, Cushions signifying rest and repose. By
what has been said that God did in the beginning cause a double property in
one Essence, whereby the one was potential, and no ways yet Enacted by the
brightness of his Emanation, and in that respect is termed Darkness, Privation,
Voluntity, opposite to Light, and a friend to Death and rest; and the other was
actual and pure Brightness, which is termed Light, Position and Voluntity a
friend to Life and Action. So that Matter without the third Unity of the
informed Light could not be endued with the title of Goodness; nor can the
Matter of Arms be good till it shall be able to undergo all the Changes and
Alterations that the active Form of the Metals and Lines can put upon it,
whereof upon it the plain Line is like the first shadow, and the curved like
the second; as that Umbra prima est absentia primae lucis, secunda secundae,
and sic deinceps.

Conclusion of this Chapter,
To Sir Henry Blunt of Tettenhanger in the County of Hartford, Knight,
SIR,
The Nebule Line in your Coat has already enrolled you in the House of Fame:
your Travels having made you far famous, have lifted your Head above the
Clouds. Nevertheless what is now mounted in the Air, was at first in Plano,
viz. Lozengy OR and Sable, as Matter and Form compounded together, for the
Honor of so good a House, and is removed from its first Simplicity, for the
distinction of a numerous Progeny, and the Field you bear shows your Ancestors
were men of high Agitations.

CHAP. III.
Of the Matter and Form of Coat Armor, conjunct in the Honorable Ordinaries.

AN Ordinary Charge on a Field is an opake Body born upon it: Brusk a Border Ch
cky Argent and Sable.
Opacum corpus est lumine impervium, which by reason of its solidity, it
suffers not the light of the Field to appear through; and these that follow are
called Honorable Ordinaries, quasi EX COMMUNIBUS NON COMMUNE: and as they are
more ordinarily used as tokens of Honor, or else for that those were called
ORDINARII, that in a Battle led on the Battalia's, and being charged with other
Ordinaries by way of Augmentation, are like those Augustales, that by Augustus
were joined to the Ordinary; and among all Military blazon of arms Ornaments
there was none of higher esteem then that of the Fesse or Cingulum Militare,
Fesse.
being worn in the Place of the Girdl, and signifies Naturalis Facultas, the
natural Faculty of a man, because it does as it were gird the Loins, being also
an Emblem of Chastity, Truth, Resolution and Readiness to Action, Virtues
required in the Service of God. Moreover, the Heart and Parts which God
requires are divided from the inferior Organs by the Gi dle, whereby is
implied a Memento unto Purification. Among married people. It is Vinculum
conjugale; it is also an Ornament of the Church, it is an Hieroglyphick of
Temperance and Moderation; it is to be worn on all solemn Occasions and Seats of
Magistracy, viz.

Rex Solium, Doctor Cathedram, Judexque Tribunal
Possidet, ac Sedem Praesul Praetorque Curale.
The Military man only being girt in a standing posture, and in the Heroical
Age it was of great esteem, as may principally be seen in Homer, Qui Atridarum
Balthea aurea facit, Hectoris puniceum, Diomedis discolorem. it being a reward
for great Warriors and Military Captains, in which sense Joab had a reward of
ten Shekels, and an Arming Belt. The Augmentation Coat born by Pelham was in
memory of the disarming his Enemy in the Field, when he cut the Belt off, and
took him Prisoner, retaining the Buckles on it. In like manner West, as a
cognizance of his Valor, continues to wear the Chape of the Sword; Aulica
quippe Comes rexi patrimonia clarus,
Et me a patricio fulserunt Cingula cultu.


It is rewarded with sovereign Ensigns in the Coat of some of the Earls of
Worcester, in testimony of their Extraction from Henry Beauford Duke of
Somerset, Great Granchild of John, so named of Beauford in France, who was Son
of John of Gaunt. It consists of the third part of the Field, and is as it
were the path to Virtue; TRAMITE RECTA. It is also the especial Ornament of
Knighthood, Unde Militari Cingulo decorare dicitur pro Militem facere, And as
Sir Henry Spelman notes further, Tribunorum enim Baltheis conscriptus fuit
Militum numerus, qui sub ipsis stipendium merebant, in which sense also the
Scripture speaks of St. Peter's military Girdle; When thou were young thou
girdest thy self, and went wherever thou would (So that to girt is a Tyron
or Prentice to Arms) and in imitation of his Lord in the Holy War he carried
nothing in his Girdle, Mat. 10. Neque aurum neque Argentum, being nor only
with St. Paul ready to be bound, but to die. Also hence it is that so many have
assumed the Fesse, ut accinguntur omnes operi. So that the Fesse is quasi
fasciatus, Girt to the holy Land; First Kings proceed, and Captains follow
then, Dr. Fuller on Frontie-piece.

The Helmet waits upon the Diadem.


The great House of Austria bears Gules a Fesse Argent, in memory of the
Valor of Leopoldus at the Siege of Ptolemais, who fought so long in the
assaulting of that City, till his Armor was all over gore-blood, save the
place that was covered with his Belt, and so left his old Arms, which were Six
golden Larks, having this Coat assigned him by the Emperor in the year 1191.
Gore also bears the Field all over. Gore Blood accompanied with this Military
Girdle between three Croslets Fitched, in memory of the like enterprise; Gules
a Fesse OR, representing martial Honor, which is represented by Gold that
Honorable Metal, which while it is tried, NON LAEDITUR SED PROBATUR; Me
cinctus Lauro perducit ad astra triumphus. Sil. Ital.


Argent a Fesse Gules represents MENTEM ET CARNEM. The Fesse Cotissed
signifies correspondency, STRINGIMVS DVM STRINGIMVR. It is so Noble an
Ordinary, that it represents both Nations, Tribes and Families, becoming good
Armory for the plainness thereof; For when the Tribes are fighting all alone,
Grantham's Translation of Homer lib. 3.

You Will then d scern the valor of each one.


And though the Bend seems to have a degree above the Fesse, it being more
raised up and esteemed as it is the Symbol of Victory; yet they seem to have
VNA VTRIQVE ANIMA with this difference only, the Bend is accounted as the
Scarf, and the Fesse as the Girdle, both of them Military rewards, but
differing in Position, and is often charged by Achievements; -- For since I
follow Mars, my warl^ke Stars bestow,
Besides those Darts, Helms and Bost Targetss Croslets from the Foe.


Yet let not him that puts on his Armor, boast like him that puts it
off; for the Fesse is a preparation to Battle, the Band or Belt the token of
Victory, in which sense our Lord and Savior after his Triumph over the World,
Rev. cap. 13.
Sin, and Death is said to wear a Golden Belt about his Papps, whereas the
Girdle was worn about the middle, as Sir Henry Spelman observes: Nam haec sub
vestimentorum appellatione venit; ille inter arma censetur. Zonam perdere is an
argument of Poverty and Captivity; to be ungirt is to be unblessed: Ibit eo quo
vis, qui Zonam perdidit, inquit.

It seems to be loosned in the Coat Armor of Masham, who bears it Humit in
token of leading Captive. Josephus in his Antiquity of the Jews, speaking of
the Girdle of the High Priest, says, Zonae circulus significat Oceanum, qui
utique cuncta suo Limbo circumdat. The waved Fesse is agreeable to what I spoke
before of the Bearing in Sir Francis Drake's Coat. Casaneus says concerning
the Girdle of the High Priest, that it represents the four Elements in Colors;
and that Fesse that is, Black argues it to be the Canonical part of the
Panoplia, or complete Armor of a Christian, the Girdle of Verity. It signifies
also Virginity, from whence the proverb Zonam solvere, is used for the loss of
Virginity. Argent a Fesse Sable is like worldly felicity, LV MINE ET VMBRA.
Gules a Fesse Argenr denotes Virginity, VIRET IN ARIDO. Red and White is
Beauties chief Ornament, as well in the Fesse as in the Face; therefore those
that are without fear or shame, are said to be impudent, ALBI ET PUDICI
NESCIUS; All Colors taking to invite;
But modest Red, and spotless White.


blazon of arms Bars are of the nature of the Scarf, Argent two Bars Gules.
which as they are worn as well upon the Neck, or Arm, or Middle, have obtained
their Position in any place of the Shield; only they are never alone, as the
Fesse is, but strengthened with an other, Et fortitudinem notat munimentum:
properly such persons as either with Arms or Counsel will defend their Nation,
but will bar out all disloyalty. The French call all Bars running the
Horizontal way Fasces, which we call Bars, to distinguish it from the Fesse,
which is always born in the Girting place; and Bars are sometimes born with
Gemelles, and has the relation to the Bearers, as the Zones have to the
Sphere, that is Limits, or Ba s, which are never alone, Vbicunque vena Argenti
inventa est, Pliny.
non procul inveniuntur alia. Fasces represent the Bundle of Rods carried
before the Consuls. OR two Bars Gules, that is, Love and Honor, wherein the
Field is predominant to the Charge; Dulcis amor patriae, quo non praestantius
ullum.

For in the bearing of Arms Propria patria videtur major and praestantior.
Bars, says Sir Henry Spelman, denotes strength and fortitude, Viros summos
designat, qui vel armis vel consiliis tutantur Rempublicam. An eminent Example
whereof may be seen in the Coat of Farfax, whose Coat at first was Argent a
Cheveron between three Hinds heads erased proper, denoting their Forestership
at Ainestdy (hence all Coats by the Names of Porster, that have either Deer, or
Broad-arrow heads, or Bugle horns, denote it to be a Guardian or Forester) But
Sir Guy Farfax of Stetton, the Kings Sergeant at Law, Judge of the Kings Bench,
was the first as bore the Black Lion over three Bars in the time of Edward the
Fourth, altering it a little after to Bars Gemelle or broken, with the Lion
over all, to signify the liberty of the Subject, which was strongly asserted
(by the two Judges, Father and Son) and recovered from strong hands by their
means; and to the said Sir Guy for his wisdom sake was referred the Title of
the Crown betwixt the two Houses of York and Lancaster, as testifies the Right
Honorable the Earl of Mulgrave; in which respect also it is supposed that the
White Rose anciently on the shoulder of the Lion was a testimony of his
fidelity to the House of York. The Black Lion, says Fern, as his Color
cannot be changed, signifies Constancy, Gravity, and Courage: and joined with
the Bars Wisdom, Policy, and Providence, to stop the Devices and Practices of
the Enemy. Lacie 's Nobil. page 31, and 84.
The silver Field is an allusion to the Name of Farfax, which in the English
Saxon Orthography was as much as Fairlocks, and were so denominated A pulchro
Capillitio, Juno.
says Cambden. When Pallas was sent from Heaven by the white-wristed Queen to
assuage the wrath of Achilles against Agamemnon; Achilles by the Yellow Curls
she took,
Standing behind him, only gave a look.


The worthy Family of Barret of Aveley in the County of Essex, bears in
allusion to their Name; the Field Argent two Bars Gules per Pale
counterchanged., and so opposing vim vi; for counterchanged seems to allude to
the Shield of Minerva that astonished the Beholders; Daughter of Jove, which
does his Buckler bear, Grantham 's Translat. of Hom. l. 1.

Tell me why thou descendest from thy Sphere.


By the two Bars Gules is signified the force of War; Two Gates there be
styled the Ports of War, Ogleby's Virgil. l. 7.

Sacred to Mars with reverential fear.


Barry representing Strength, Security, and Safety; so Ovid; Centum aerei
claudunt vectes, aeternaque ferri
Robora, etc.
Shut with a hundred iron and brass Bands,
There in the Porch bifronted Janus stands.


So that by Bars counterchanged is signified Prudence, to provide against and
to kill Monsters, to whom must be exposed the Crystal Shield of Minerva
(against the many-headed Monster of Treason, War, Jealousies and Fears) and the
strong Bars of Fortitude is to be, not only shut, but Barred against such
Hydra's as is born in Barret's Creasts; The Devil himself at this Hag shuts his
Gate,
This Monster the infernal Furies hate.


Lastly by Bars are signified Metam and Limits uon transiliendos, therein
imitating the good General (acknowledging God the Generalissimo of all Armies)
not exceeding his Bars of reason: and though he find opportunity, yet will
make a Bridge of Gold for his flying Enemy, wherein eminent is the President of
T. Manlius Son to the Consul his Father, who exceeding his Bounds, though he
gained a considerable Victory, and presented his Father the Consul with the
spoils of his Enemies in these words; That all may know Sir that I am the Son
of so worthy a Father, I present you with these spoils, which when challenged,
I took from the slain Enemies. Yet the Son was condemned to death by the
Father; for exceeding his Bars in these words; I think (says he) that even
though thy self (if thou have any of my blood running in thy veins) wilt not
refuse to restore by thy Punition that Military Discipline which by thy fault
thou have destroyed. Go Lictor, do thy Office; -- saevumque securi
Aspice Torquatum. --


Behold Torquatus, that bears the bloody Axe, to admonish the Bearers to be
good in their Office, the Girdle keeping men from running from one extreme to
another; the late Cardinal of France, Mazarine, bearing the Axe and Bundle of
Rods, over all a Military Girdle, charged with Mullets, as a Note of his high
Administrations; Militiae decus hoc est grati nomen honoris,
Symbola Ausoniacum cingere digna Latus.


Ovid speaking of the Girdle of Venus says; Sum Cytheriaco mediatum Nectare
Ceston,
Ussit amatorum Balthaeis ille Jovem.


But methinks I hear the Man at Arms all this while but boasting like one that
puts on his Armor, and like Agamemnon's Vision is called upon; Grantham's
Translat. of Hom. Il. lib. 2.
Sleeps Agamemnon who does the War-horse tame,
It Is far unfit a General of thy fame
Should sleep all night; how can thou careful be
Of those great Armies that are under thee?


So now to raise the Fesse to the Bend, is to lift up the Soldiers head to the
Battle with Victory, which is to bring him off as well as I brought him on:
When on his shoulders that unhappy Belt Aen. l. 12.

With golden Studs most glorious he beheld
Which Pallas had when him first Turnus killed.


blazon of arms Scroope never scrupled to bear the Golden Bend, Azure a Bend OR.
since it was the token of Triumph and Victory: and if it be ingrailed, it
shows there has been some hacking for it: -- Fresh Garlands to the Virgins
temples crowned,
The Youths Gilt swords wore at their Thighs with silverr Bawdrick bound.


Zona suspensa ad humeros Victoria est argumentum; Pugnaturi enim ad lumbos
adaptant ensem per Zonam, post Victoriam autem ad humeros religatur. The manner
of a Victor being such, that first disarming of his Foe, throws it over his own
shoulder in a more propense manner; His dying body, which the foot of his
triumphant foe
Opened, and stood upon his breast, and off his arms did go.


The Bend by Sir Henry Spelman is called Baltheum triumphale, and is the Belt
of Phoebus, who is said to rejoice as a Giant to run his course, this Ordinary
representing the Zodiac, OBLIQUE ET UBIQUE, containing the third part of the
Field. It is the Symbol of Perseverance, INDECLINABILI GRESSU: it never
swerves though it be to the right and left; it is as it were a scaling Ladder
in the Coats of Ratcliffe and Culpepper, prepared for assault in the ingrailing
thereof. When Jacob had seen this Vision, he Scaled Heaven, and covenanted with
God, HINC NON RECEDAM. It is the Ecliptic Line of the Sons of Honor: it
signifies an old Soldier; Senex ita cingebatur. And though it seem to incline,
yet it is as constant as the Zodiac, RECEDO NON DECEDO. The old Soldier may
repose, but not deviate. If it appear cottised, its like the Sun between the
Tropicks, and TEMPERAT AESTUE. It is rewarded by Sovereign Ensigns most
eminently in the Coat of Th^mas Howard Duke of Norfolk, who gave the overthrow
to James King of Scots at Pl^dden Field, in memory of which so signal service,
the King gave the Addition to his Arms, Dated the first of Feb. An. 5. H. 8*
viz. On an Escoutcheon O. R a Demilion in a double Tressure Counterflory, with
an arrow in the mouth Gules, which was part of the Regal Arms of Scotland,
their Lion having been wounded in the mouth with the English Archery, all which
was born upon the Triumphal Belt: sometimes the Bend is adorned with Golden
Buckles, like that of Aeneas in Virgil: Eurialus, Phalaris, Rhamnetis, and
aurea bullis
Cingula. --


Buckles being also Symbols of Triumph and Victory, and in memory of the signal
Fidelity of the City of Hereford to his Late Majesty, King Charles the First,
when David Lesley the General of the Scots lay before it with all his Force:
after a long Siege his Majesty disarmed his Belt, which was charged with three
Buckles, Hereford Arms.
and bestowed them as a reward for their invincible fidelity on the necks of
the Lions Gardant, as supporter to the Arms of that City, and compassing the
said Coat which was Gules three Lions passant Gardant Argent, with a Border
Azure, charged with Scotch Crosses.

Reason of bearing Mother coats on a Bend.
To bear the Mothers Coat upon the Fathers by the Heir on Bend is commendable by
Vpton, an example whereof is instanced by Guilime in the Coat of Latime; and
where there is a reason to be given, though the Coat be more charged; yet it is
a Philosophical Tenet, Quod facit tale, est magis tale; so that if the Bearer
of this Shield claim Nobility from Ancestry on his Mothers Side, he has a
President of it in Antiquity: Achilles retteats to his Grandfather Aeacus, and
his Father Peleus, and his Mother Thetis, which Aeneas testifies though he had
never seen the Shield before: -- Fame sounds thy worthiness,
From famous Peleus, the Sea Nymph that has the lovely Tress,
Thetis thy Mother.


Knowing at the very sight of the Shield which had so much of his Silver-footed
Mother and infernal A acus, as plainly did declare by the Metal and Color of
the same, that he was no less then the great Grandchild of Jove.

blazon of arms The Bend sinister is not accounted so honorable as the other
Bend, OR a Bend sinister Azure.
by reason it is by the Ignorant confounded with a Battone, which is a note of
Illegitimacy, and is cut off from joining to the Chief sinister and the dexter
Base Points of the Escoutcheon, and so denotes cutting off of Succession,
whereas the Bend sinister does still continue, and is an Honorable Bearing, by
what the Author of la Science Heroique says, Fuerit vero Militare Cingulum
fortasse Pharetres ferendis aptum, quemadmodum hodieque simile Cingulo utuntur
Milites geslandis ab humero pendulis ahenis, fistulis longioribus quas vulgo
(CHARABINAS) appellant, it being that the Flask or Spanner is said to hang by,
which Bearing though it be not usual among us, yet is accounted a noble Bearing
in foreign parts, Gules a Bend sinister OR, by the name of Stotkheimes in
Hassia, and by Bossucio in France, and Hemini of the same Country, Argent a
Bend sinister Gules, Rappach in the Empire, Gul^s a Bend sinister Argent,
Meerger in Austria: and by the name of Weiler in Franconia, Wildedsteine, in
the same Province.

If the Bend be subdivided into smaller pieces, it is called a Scarp or
Scarffe, which are said to be Ornamentum quoddam mulieb^e, which, says the
Commentator on the Iliads, were no unusual wear for Soldiers; he translates
(...) Scarffe, and not Funda a Sling, which was not so much as named in all the
Iliads. When Helenus was wounded through the hand it is said; The wounded hand
within a Scarf he bore it, which the Squire,
Had ready for him, yet the wound would needs he should retire.


It being a fit thing to hang his Arm in, and likely that his Esquire had ready
for him, either as a favor of his own Mistress, or of his Masters, or for
either Ornament; and so Hector appeared armed: -- This said,
With Daybright Arms, White Plume, White Scarf his goodly limbs arrayed.


The Bend is the charging posture of the Lance by which the man at Arms gives
the Onset. So when Achilles had shook his Lance in vain at Aeneas, he stands
prepared at a charging posture, exciting them to be sharers, and to bear Bendy
with him: The Grecian Orders every man (of which the most look on
To see their fresh Lord shake his Lance) he thus put charge upon;
Divine Greeks stand not thus at gaze, but man to man apply
Your several valors, it is a task laid too unequally On me.


Cedant arma t^g^, the Muses give place to Mars; yet the Olive Branch of
Minerva is to be preferred before the Spear of Achilles, though that was made
of Ash, because peace is to be preferred before war, the Pale being the Lance
of the blazon of arms Military Knight in his standing posture; and that I may
with this Ordinary raise your thoughts upright, Argent a Pale Gules.
it seems by its very situation to denote an upright man, one whom merit has
raised. See thou a man that is d ligent in his Calling? he shall stand before
Kings. The standing posture denotes vigilance and diligence. It is very
convenient (says Vigetius) that the youths should be exercised ad palum, or at
Stakes, whereby they learn to strike at the sides, feet or head with a
downright blow or pointwise; the one assails the heart, the other the head. In
the Military standing posture it is that of the Sentinel which was not to lie
down, SINE OCCASU FELIX. It denotes vigilant Captains or Generals; and it has
the place of the second Principal or Lieutenant General, and is sometimes
cottized as Adjutant Generals: the place of the Generals being on the Dexter
Chief side or right wing, while the left side showed the benefit of Council of
War, or laying their heads together; goodness sanctifies greatness, and
greatness supports his goodness. The Commander on the left wing represented by
the sinister Chief, says Vegetiue, to be a wise, foreseeing, and a provident
man, because greater dangers attend always that side the cottise is but weak;
where it is not united to the back bone, the sinister Canton is often rewarded
by the way of augmentation for dangers foreseen and prevented. Such a Canton
was added to Sir John ^lark, who took in lawful wars Lewis de Orleance Duke of
Longevile at the journey of Bomy by Tyrovane, the sixteenth of August, in the
fifth year of King Henry the Eighth, in memory whereof the Coat of the said
Duke was (marshalled with his own by especial command from the King) being
Azure a Demi Ram mounting Argent, armed OR, between two Flower-de-luces, of the
last over all a Batton dexterwise of the second, which he wore with his own
Coat which in Blazon is Argent on a Bend Gules between three Pellets, as many
Swans proper, in which Coat Mars and the Muses agree, it arguing them to be as
well learned Clerks as experienced Soldiers. The whole achievement of a
Knight is most exquisitely described by our Poet in the preparation of Paris to
encounter Menelaus: -- He first makes fast his Greaves
With silver Buckles to his Legs, then on his breast receaves
The Curets that Lycaon wore (his Brother) but made fit,
For his fair body, next his Sword he took and fastened it
All damaskad underneath his Arms, his Shield then grave and great,
His shoulders wore, and on his head his glorious Healme he set;
Topt with a Plume of Horses hair, that horribly did dance,
And seem to threaten as he moved; at last he took his Lance.


FERN in his Glory of Generosity says, that though a man be no gentleman of
Blood, or Coat Armor, yet having captivated in lawful WARS, any Gentleman,
great Lord or Prince, Winning of Arms.
he may bear the Shield of that Prisoner, jure gentium, saving in a Civil war
in which the Romans allowed no triumph, and there was good reason for it,
because their own power was lessened; but to gain from an Enemy was the best
manner of bearing; there were never but three. says my Author, which the
Roman Histories make mention to have wone the Spolia opima, vid. Romulus who
slew Acron King of the Canienses, Spolia opima us^et.
and Aulus Cornelius Cossus who slew Lars Tolumnius, and Marcellus who slew
Bridomarus or Virdomarus the Gauls General in the head of his, Army that is on
the top of the Pale; the Spol a opima were so called either ab opibus the
riches of them, or ab opere, because it was a work, or extraordinary deed: or
for that opimum was all one with Amplum. Livy defines them to be Spolia Dux
quae Duci detraxit, those spoils or Arms which one general has taken from
another which he has slain with his own hands; to bear three Pales, is the
bearing of the W^seman, Prove. 9. Sapientia domum suam aedificaverit excisis
columnis suis septem.

The Pale is taken for a Column, Pierius.
and is the Symbol of Stability, it consists of the third part of the
Escoution and represents fortitude, and sublime Glory. The main reason of
erecting pillars to memory of men, was that their names might be lifted up
above the vulger. Quantam statuam faciet populus Romanus, quantam Columnum,
quae res tuas gestas loquatur! Hercules set up his two pillars with a non plus
ultra, as if one Hero could have limited the ocean only, between the the
streights of Pallets of his own atcheivements: but how are the Pallets of right
Reason, enlarged by Columbus, Pallets less then Pales.
having discovered a new world unknown to to the Ancients, and both for Art and
Arms beeng famed!

Et lituo pugnas insignis obibat and hasta. He having obtained the privilege
from the King of Castile, Columbus his discovery.
to quarter the Arms of his house, with the addition of the new world he had
discovered; neither were the English any way behind in their famous long
navigation, and though Hercules was a man of metal, he neither discovercd the
American Gold, nor the British Tin in the Isles thereof, which was the true
Casiterides, from whence that metal came to the Greeks: albeit that Pliny
writes that Midacritus first carried Lead from Cassiteres, Howel insert of
Hist. 721. Britain known to the Phenicians
which Dionysius mentions under the name of Hesperides, which are proved to
be no other then the British Isles, and were known in the Heroical times long
before Homer, who makes mention of that Metal in the Shield of Achilles.

Nomen and Arma locum servant. -- He says moreover that Metal was bought of
the Phaenicians by the Greeks, and fetched from the Islands of Silly, off from
the promontory of Cornwall, eight leagues in number, 145 being the same, that
from their plenty of Tin were called Cassiterides, and from their site
Hesperides, and so the ancient Britains had as much reason to set up pillars to
their sublime glory, as ever Hercules had; for it is very well observed, that
there wants not some minds with great wings, and wits with large sails, if
there were any to show the lure to them that flies, or to open the Port to
those that would lance out, Alexander called Achilles fortunate, because from
himself he had valor, and from Homer Encomiums; from him Self merit, and from
Homer glory.

Argent a pale Sable has reference to the funeral Pale of the Ancients, built
of Oak and pitch Trees, Homer making that of Patroclus to be 100 foot in length.

-- Piceae
-- Piceaen, flammis alimenta supremes.
It was built in form of an Altar, whose every spark flies upward, Gules a Pale
OR is the flame of a noble soul.

Ditantur flammae, non unquam opulentior illo
Ante cinis --
The flames are precious made, no dust before was ere so rich, Gems crackle
massy Ore dissolves.

-- Et pictis exsudant vestibus aurum. Gules a pale Argent, what better does it
represent then as Haniball in the Funeral of Paulus Aemilius, having first
condoled his death, he to the flames commits his purple vest, and Souilders
Coats.

Aeneas also (whom like arms invest
By his example does excite the rest.
For to bear the Pale is to admonish the mind to be raised to that pitch of
Royal fortitude, that neither the Surprisalls of Love, nor the Assaults of
malice, nor the Sieges of hope, nor the Batteries of desperation, nor the the
Scaladoes of Audacity; Finally that neither Arms, nor Arts, or any affliction
shall force the Royal Heart to surrender or yield, either at discretion or
Articles, in all which Aeneas was an eminent example. Whence came that
incomparable speech of Aeneas to his Son.

Et Pater Aeneas and Avunculus excitet Hector.
-- let thy Fathers Fame
and Uncle Hector to brave acts inflame.
That is, stand upright to the fame of your Ancestors; for the Mother of
Ascaneus was sister to Hector.

The Pale is often charged with sovereign Ensigns, and in particular in the
coat of the honorable Lionel, Lord Cranfield Earl of Middlesex, who bears OR
on a pale AZURE three flower de Liz of the field, this charge in Virgils words,
being as it were struere ingentem piram, becoming an honorable Augmentation, or
an ordinary of honor: and though the Lilly of the field, neither sow nor reap:
yet good husbandry may as well stand with great honor, as breadth consist with
height; the Pale then represents a Pillar of the Commonwealth, which because he
is great will not bear the less: for can that be too low for a Lord, that is
high enough for a King, the Kings of Arragon bearing D'OR a quatre pel's de
gueules in memory, that one of the Kings thereof dipping his finger in the
blood of new slain Sarracens, and with it drawing upon the Shield those bloody
marks which now it has.

Pales waved represent Securitas Augusti, and he that bears them may be
thought to have done service on the narrow Seas: Pales ingrailed and indented,
seem to denote him, who first assaults the Pall^sado, so gaining Corona valaris
sive Palaris; the Pale is placed about the Castle and ditch, to secure the
place, and in that sense the bearers are taken for Patrones and Protectors.

Hunc cingit Muralis honos, hunc Civica quercus
Nexuit, hunc d^mitis ambit Rostrata Carinis.
Thus Englished by Ogleby.

This Murall honor crowns, that Civick Boughs,
This wreathes his head with conquered Gally prowes.
Flanches.
blazon of arms Did you ever see a Pale seem to be bowed in at the ends which
yet spreads both at Front and Rear? it signifies that where the Flanches are
oppressed, there the front will be enlarged. Augustiis Elevatur, valor does
swell when it is crushed between two extremes; and then often times goes beyond
her self in her Achievements; this was experimentally found many times in the
Holy Land: especially after the taking of Antioch, when the sword peirced, and
famine begun to pine the small guts; they then resolve rather to lose their
lives by whole sale, then to retaile them out by retaile: and having
strengthened their imaginations, on some thing founded on Religion, having by
chance found in the Church of St. Peter, the Lance wherewith our Savior was
peirced, they take this for their Bearing with them in the Field the Lance,
representing a Pale, which though strait of it self, yet rather then not
believe victory from such an Ensign they will bow it to their own conceit: and
having got a noble conquest did then and there mount St. George, having seen
him that time by the Spectacles of their sancie, with an Army of white Horses
fighting for them, the English then choosing him for their Patron.

Is the Field Checky between two Flanches Ermine? it signifies a wise man, who
though he be crushed on all sides with the uncertain Game of the World, yet
keeps himself upright, Statum servare is to keep one standing. And among the
Romans, Stare in Senatu, was to prevail in the Senate, whose distinctions were
into Senatores Majorum, like unto the Pale and Senators minorum Gentium, like
the Pallets:

Checky between two Flanches signifies a wise and prudent Magistrate, who keeps
the multitude in as the Flanks of a man do the small Guts. It Is so born by
Sherington, is the Flanches Ermine, with a Star in the Black Field. It
signifies a wise Clerk, and is born by H^bart. It Is a reward says Leigh, for
Virtue and Learning, a Bearing fit for Nicodemus, one that came by night; or if
you will rather allow it the same sense our former Herald does, it is an
especial reward for Service in an Embassage, and so with the former Field and
Star it might represent those wise men who had seen the Star in the East.
Neither must I forget that learned man Sir Henry Spelman, whose Aspil^gia is
nothing else then the Language of Arms, wherein his Shield speaks for it self,
Clypeique insigne decorum, as Virgil says, he bearing Sable Plates 123 from
the center to the front, and rear between two Flanches Argent, the Flanches
denoting Virtue and Learning, and the Plates the reward thereof; for what more
durable inheritance can we leave then the endowments of the Mind, and the pure
Silver Balls, whose melody sounds like the Bells of Aaron? and how are they
better commemorated then in Arms, which has the same property of Poesy?

Notitiam serae posteritatis habet. Some indeed make a difference between the
Flasks and the Flank, implying that the first is a Degree above the other,
deriving the word from the French, Fleschier, to bend or bow: albeit there is
but an Anagrammatical difference between Tend and Bend, only it seems the
one is bowed more, and so is proved by the Stress: Arcus and arma tuae tibi
sint imitanda Dianae;
Si nunquam cesses tendere, mollis erit.


The Voider, says my Author, consists of an Arch line of a Bow unbent, and
is a reward for service by a Gentlewoman. So that it seems Custom will not
allow the Feminine Gender to bow the Bow to the height, though she be a
Virago: and the repose of a Military man is a Bow unbent, which as the Italian
says, MI REPOSO NO ES FLAQUEZZ, according to Plutarch's Morals, Lyram and
arcum remittimus quo melius possit tendi: and if we give way to ease it is but
to return with more vigor. If you do allow the Voider to the Lady, though she
be obstinate, Lentescunt tempore. Clark of Derbyshire bears the Flanches
perhaps as a reward of Clerkship, whence they took their Name: and Arrow heads,
in the Field, because Oration humilitantis se nubes penetrabit. And so David's
tongue became as the Pen of a ready Writer. Dakyns of Yorkshire bears the
same, perhaps as a reward of Embassage, being augmented with a Lion of England:
it is born by Tho. Dochen, in a field Ermine between two Flanches, rewarded with
two Cottisses, as a reward of his Learning, he being a Doctor of Physic, and
Student of Magdalen College in Oxford, whose Ensign is Loxengy Ermine and
Sable in a Chief of the second, three Lillies of the first and Jupiter three
flower-de-liz in Pale Sol, between two Flanchs Ermine, charged with a Rose
Mars, was as an augmentation of especial favor to the Lady Katherine Howard,
Wife to Henry the Eighth, which was done by the Advice of the Heralds: He knew
for what they came, Heralds said he,
Of Gods and Men, come nearer unto me.


blazon of arms Come I now to the Cheveron, A Cheveron.
constituted of a right Angle, the Bend dexter and sinister meeting in the
Honor Point, it is Tectum sine fundamento: and though it be but low in it self,
it signifies the Top-rafter of an established House, and for Antiquity may
justly claim the pre-eminence, from the Egyptians, for the Greeks borrowed
their letter Gamma G from the Head and Bill of the Bird Ibis, who call it by a
name which signifies a Rule, and we call it Cheveron from the French word
Chaperon, a Headstall or Tire, one who is known by his Conus or crooked
Top-piece of his Helmet. It may denote a courageous Warrier, a man of high
attempts, though but low of stature, such as was the valiant Tydeus, of whom
Statius sings: Celsior ille gradu, etc. --

Made English by Mr. Stephens.

The Theban was the taller, and had told
More Suns then he; but Tydeus was as bold
And equaled him in courage; gives him merit;
In a less room there reigned a greater Spirit.
The Aediles curales were the Masters of the Works among the Romans. And by a
Cheveron it signifies the Top-raster of an established House, denoting the
Bearer thereof to have accomplished some memorable work; and if it be attended
with Couple Closes, it is like St. George, that by the good help of his Horse
killed the Dragon, that is, by the assistance of Sciences. And so it denotes
one who is a good Architect; so that to finish a difficult Structure is said
Fastigium addere. And the Cheveron charged with Bezants denotes Treasurers,
Masters of the works, which among the Romans sat in Chairs of State. Neither
is it any disparagement to bear any thing in Arms which may seem Mechanic; for
the Romans flourishing in Military prowess, in great wisdom exercised both
their Legions and Coherts in time of Peace to withstand idleness, by casting of
Dikes, making of High ways, baking of Bricks, building of Bridges, says
Cambden, answering to which works are Borders, Pales, and Cheverons.

For there is no Legion that went on any Expedition without their Harpigoes,
which they called Lupi, and instruments with double teeth, Axes and Saws, with
which the wood and Pales were smoothed and sawed; so that Cheverons are
Military Ensigns as well as Civil Implements, and may signify either Bridges
erected or dissected, according to Military necessity.

It denotes also Great Name and Estimation, Ut Fastigium attollere pro augere
nomen and existimationem, in which sense the great and noble Name of Stafford
bears in a Field OR, a Cheveron Gules. It is called by Pliny and Columel
Cantherium and Jugum: by Caesar, Fastigium: by Upt^n Signum capitale, as Sir
Henry Spelman notes in his Aspilogia. And in the moneys of M. Platorii, Hoc
ipsum Signum bellissime habetur, aedes significans, quas ipse sacras
condiderat. It denotes a House and Family of an Ancient Patrimony. It denotes
says Aspilogia the first Bearer thereof to have been a Laical Person, which if
his Son had increased his Patrimony, he took another Cheveron; for by Novus
Homo among the Romans was understood he who had been dignified with any of the
greater Magistracies, who had the right of Images, equivalent with Arms, as
evident demonstration of Virtue. The French Tresor says, A Cheveron is the
Spur of the Chevaleir: and there are others again by the Cheveron understand
Ecclesiastical Persons, who wanting those evident demonstrations, and requiring
them of the Heralds, has it given him from the King of Arms, either one, or
two, or three at the most. The Family of Archdeacon in Devonshire bear Argent
three Cheverons Sable, having at first perhaps taken that Name from their
Ecclesiastical Dignity, and now is become the Paternal Coat, and not the Coat
of the Dignity: for as the same Author observes, hence you may observe the
difference of Heirs and Successors: Heirs may add or diminish the number of
Cheverons, according to the increase or diminution of their House. But they
that bear them in succession ought to bear them as their Predecessors; and the
reason is, because Haeredes portant Arma suorum Parentum, Episcopi vero and
Abbates portant Arma suarum Ecclesiarum: and if the Cheveron be transposed, it
signifies the Bearer thereof to have lost part of his Substance, but yet is in
hope of recovery again. The ancient Earls of Henault bear OR three Cheverons
Sable, which with the Area of the Field make seven Paths, or Spaces, which is
said to commemorate those seven famous Passages that lead directly into all
parts of France, from a Pillar in the City of Beauvais, erected first by
B^onhild, who was contemporary with David King of Israel. But the first time I
meet with this Bearing in a Shield, is on the Seal of one of the Earls of
Flanders about the year 1091. for though it seem to denote the first Bearers to
be men of low For^une, yet signifies a raised mind, like to that of Fabricius:
-- contentus honesto
Fabricius parvo, spernebat Munera regum.
With a small but well raised estate content,
Fabricius slights what Kings to him present.


It also by its position may denote the Generals Tent, or the head-quarter of
the Army: being staked down at the bottom, and ending in a point, and
therefore may justly be called Signum Capitale; and where is the Generals Tent
more safe then in the midst? as the Cheveron is placed, from whence is Counsel
best infused? so that to smite in the Tent, denotes surprisal, that though
their Rafters seem to be established, yet to pluck up their Stakes and Pales is
to give the heveron, and he that raises a siege, may justly bear this Sign, or
he that by fortification shall strengthen the besieged, whereby they may justy
enjoy their houses; for this is the justice of the law Military. Quia dominum
rerum justo bello captarum in victorem transfertur. And so very often the Coat
which is gained in the Field, may be born on the Cheveron: albeit the causes
thereof may not be manifest, as also upon all the other Stationary Symbols, or
Ordinaries of honor, which have their determinated place in the Field; but
what is spoken here, is but to note how honorable they may be accounted,
according to that of Homer; Paris is now returned from the fight,
And in his Chamber loves to take delight
On his sweet Beds; he is so fair you will say,
He came not from the War, but from a Play.


When the Heralds were sent to demand Briseis.

-- just as they went,
They found Achilles sitting in his Tent.
The lawmaker did thus provide for the encouragement of men, of action, that
the victor should be rewarded in this or that manner. So the Chief signifies
in general, a Chief, a head, a Commander. By the Bend was signified a
Triumpher, by the Fess, a Tiro, or one that girts on his Arms; by a Cheveron,
a workman: (though some will have it the tire for a woman's head) without whose
aid, no difficult matter could be brought about; for the Romans had Tribunos
Plebis as well as Militum, by the Saltire they did denote the whole Field of
Artillery: having the Generals quarters in the midst, which though the Angles
of this ordinary be oblique, yet such was the motion of the Animal Spirit of
the world, according to Plato; for in the field of War, the Tessera or word of
command blazon of arms issued Saltire-wise, Gules a Saltire A^gent.
being conveyed by the Tessararii, whereby the Angles were not ignorant of
what was designed in the Center: so as to obedience, this is an Achievement of
manhood, and is called a Salter, as if it were an Engine to assault, or gain,
p^r Saltum: by which a man leaps or rises to gain an enemies Fortress, it is
understood an accessory; and hence you may observe (though I would not detract
from the honor of any Nation) that those Nations that were obliquely engaged
in the holy War, such as the Spanish, Scots, etc. bore their Cross oblique,
whereas those more noble manly Nations of the Germans, English, and French, who
made it their business, bare their Cross at right Angles, however the honor of
this Crux decussata, is in its Antiquity the Elder Brother being born by the
Egyptians on the breast of Serapis, being the same which Jacob made in the
crossing of his hands; and the same from whence the Greeks had their letter X
id est, processus animae mundi, and, since Christianity, it claims its
original from Constantine: and Vincentius says in his Speculo Historiali, that
the Cross was sent from Heaven, when an Angel brought unto the blessed man
Mercury, all Armor necessary with a Shield Azure, thereupon a cross flowery
between four Roses gold, according to the French Tressor, this is the Guidon of
the Chevaliere: and this kind of Bearing, denotes brave and valiant men; who
as they are better for number or valor, so they seem to fight quadrata front:
after the first manner of fighting, and, according to Vigetius his advice, he
that thinks himself inferior in number, let him with his right wing assault
the Enemy on the left; and he that thinks his right wing to be the strongest,
Vigetius de Re Milit. lib. 3. cap. 26
let him therewith set upon the left wing of his Enemy: but he that has good
Horse, let him assault both wings, placing his Auxilaries before the midst of
the Battle, as a Reserve behind the right and left wing; representing the
Dexter or Sinister Base of the Field.

As Rampire to his General power, he in the Rear disposed;
The slothful and the least of spirit, he in the midst enclosed.
That such as wanted noble wills, base need might force to stand,
His horse troops that the vanguard had, he strictly does command.
The Saltire is principally born by the Scotch Nation, in sign of their Patron
St. Andrew who was crucified upon two Trees, etc. and is an especial note of
Martyrdom, as of St. Laurence, and of St. Alban who suffered Anno 286. Who bore
Azure, a Saltire OR. And, as I have noted in my Sphere of Gentry, that though
the ingrailed Saltire be sharp to the ascendant, yet it is firm in the
foundation, and may justly be called an honorable Ordinary; for, in a Legion,
they were called Ordinarii, that in a Battle led on the first Battalia: so the
Saltire does seem as it were the Ordinary of Ordinaries, and the first Leader
of the Cross; and whereas they were called Augustales, that by Augustus was
joined to the Ordinary; so the Saltire of it self signifies a man at Arms, CAP
APE; and being rewarded by sovereign Ensign is more August and Ample,
signifying one of those lesser Tribunees, who acquired their place by industry:
whereas the greater Tribunes are recommended thereunto by Sacred Letters from
the Emperor. So that by the By, you may take notice of the bearing of Billets
in Arms, they being nothing else but Letters commendatory, or rather according
to Hugo de notis Tesserariis from Turn^bus lib. 19. cap. 26. Tesse^em, a Crae^o
(...) dictum puto, id est, Quatuor: Erant enim tesserae olim frustilla lignea
quadrata. A thing being every way square, a watchword, a privy sign or
token, whereby Enemies are discerned from fellows in Arms, a Tally, whence the
name of Billets, as being made of pieces of Wood; and they are rendered Letters
also, for that the same word signifies Tokens or Bills of exchange given to
men, (according to Livy, Tesserae nummariae, vel frumentariae, by which they
shall receive a certain sum of money, or measure of corn; whereof the Tessera
militaris, tabella erat latiuscula inscripta quae sole occiduo a Tribuno
accepta, ferebatur ad signorum principes, rursumque ad Tribunum redibat, unde
is omnibus esse datum signum cognoscebat; and the Tessera frumentaria (had)
ce^to frumenti numero inscripto gratis dabitur populo. So that by Billets, may
be signified Notarii Militantes if they be Gules, Notarii Secretorum if they be
Sable, Notarii Principum if they be Gold, Et soli dicuntur habere dignitatem,
if Argent, Tribuni Notariorum, which we call Secretaries.

Furthermore, what the Saltire wants in the height, it has in the breath: like
Ulysses; who, being espied by King Priam.

-- he said; Loved daughter, what is he,
That lower then great Atreus Son, seems by the head to be,
Yet in his shoulders, and big breasts presents a broader show?
His A^mour lies upon the earth, he up and down does go
To see his Soldiers keep their Ranks;
It then represents a prudent man at Arms, as is neatly replied in the answer
of Helen to King Priam.

High Jove and Laedas fairest seed to Priam thus replies,
This is the Old Laertes Son, Ulysses called the wise.
For by the Saltire is signified an Engine or Trap for wild beasts, and serves
the Man at Arms, for his execution of his Strategems: denoting the bearer
thereof to be a politic Person, and not a covetous person, as Leigh notes,
except it be, Upon a Purse of Gold, Wars surest nerve,
Whose every Cross, is intrested to serve.
In The holy Wars the gains (alas) no more,
Then Crosses Gules instead of Crosses OR.


And though indeed the Family of Nevile, have their Saltire Silver, yet the
Field is Red, and that for valor; as our Countryman Michael Draiton, on the
Barrons War, Upon his Surcot, valiant Nevile bore,
A Silver Saltire upon Martial Red.


Where the Rose is upon their Saltire, it is to denote them to be descended
from the sixth Brother, of the house of Bergaveny: which house is now the prime
Barony of the Kingdom,

This Ordinary consists of the fifth part of the Field, and Ingenii Largitor,
necessity being the Minister of Policy: for if the Saltire be charged, it shall
be enlarged to a third part.

Did you ever see two Laurel Branches in Saltire Ragule? it is to denote
FLAMMESCITUTERQUE it enflames both: one noble Nature stirs up another: and this
Ensign was used in the Martial Enterprise of the Duke of Burgundy, and in
Lawrences Coat, allusive to the Name of Laurentum (the Eldest City of Latium)
so called, of the Laurel wood that grew near it; the Cross Laurel, or Raguled
being rubbed together, producing that flame* which consumed the Martyr St.
Lawrence; and is a Species of the plain Cross, which makes blazon of arms
Right Angles, consisting of the fifth part of the Field, Argent a Cross Gules,
if uncharged, as the Saltire does, if charged increased, also as that is; it
is called Crux, a cruciando as Guiliame notes; because of the Torment they
undergo, who suffer this kind of Death: it is rendered a Cross, because it
directly goes averse to the Grain, and is often sent, as well as taken up, to
abate proud thoughts: so you shall hear Juno chiding Jove, for protecting the
Trojans after they had been Truce breakers.

Go on, but ever go resolved, Iliad. l. 4.
all other Gods have vowed.
To Cross thy partial course, for Troy in all that makes it proud.
The vitiousnesse of the undertakers being made one of the great impediments of
the success in the Holy Land: Fuller's Holy War, l. 5. c. 24.
where Saladine the great Conqueror of the East could boast of nothing but a
Black shirt that he bore to his Grave; and that Famous General, and first
Christian Worthy, Godfrey of Bulloine chose rather the Cross then the Crown:
and, though it was born before in Arms, it was most commonly and generally
used since the Holy War, the plain Cross, or as we call it St. George his
Cross, being the Mother of all the rest; and we have it from Lucius Marinus
Siculus, that St. George appeared in white Armor with a flaming Cross upon his
breast to Peter of Arragon, by whose help he obtained a Memorable victory
against the M^ors; which Shield he assumed for that of Arragon, adding four
Moors Kings heads that were slain in that Battle, which happened about the
year 1096.

Hierom Blancas reports that Garsia Ximen^s, first King of the Suprarbienses.
when his Army was shrewdly put to it in the year of our Lord 724. saw in the
Air a Red Cross as it were in a golden Shield upon a Green Oak, whereupon he
took that for his own and the Kingdoms Arms.

Inigo also tells us, That when Arista the fifth King of the Suprarbienses was
fighting against the Moors, there appeared to him a silver sharp-pointed Cross
in the right Angle of an Azure Shield, and that it was then made that King's
Arms. And, as the Author of the Holy War observes, That as by the
Transposition of a few letters a world of words are made: so by the varying of
this Cross, either in Fo^m, Color, or Metal are made infinite several Coats.
Patee, when the ends are broad; Fichee, whose bottom is sharp to be fixed on
the Ground; Wavee, which those may justly challenge who sailed thither through
the miseries of the Sea, or Sea of miseries; Molinee, because like to the Rind
of a Mill; Flo^id or Garlanded with Flowers, crossed, being crossed at every
Extreme, potent from the similitude that the ends have to a Crutch; and this
sort of Cross was that of Jerusalem, most frequently used in this War, being
Party.

Argent a potent Cross between four Crosses OR.
blazon of arms Say not, this is false Heraldry in this Coat, because it is
Metal upon Metal, seeing the words of the Wise are as Apples of Gold upon
Pictures of Silver; for as Johannes a Kempis says, Dispose and order all
things according to thine own will, and yet thou shall never find but thou
shall always suffer one thing or other, either willingly, or by constraint,
and so thou shall always find a Cross, wherein constraint will traverse thy
will so to all the varieties of Fortune: so that to bear the Cross is an
Heroical Bearing, it being the proper and true Badge or Cognizance of all
those, that being mustred, do war in the Church Militant to the Worlds end; it
being the only Badge that was sent from Heaven at the first, when the Angel
set a Mark upon the Lintel of the doors of the Israelites, since which it is
had in sacred esteem among the Egyptians themselves in their Hieroglyphics,
in signification of the life to come, as testifies Orus Apollo: neither could
they render any other reason for it, then that it seemed to them to be certain
sign of some Divine Mystery. The Greeks borrowed the letter T from them, who
called it the letter Tauti Dei, who is said to be the Inventor of their
Characters. It was praefigured in the Brazen Serpent, erected by Moses, the
Conductor of the Israelites through the Wilderness, in imitation of which
Cross, that of the Potent is assumed, and is born with Metal upon Metal, that
all the Nations of the World might participate of it in their Coats, bearing
either the Metals of OR or Argent.

England bearing Gules a Cross Argent.

Ireland OR a Cross Gules.

France OR a Cross Azure.

Scotland Azure a Saltire Argent, etc.

And so Jerusalem is the praise of the whole Earth, the main Cross in the
middle attended by the four Crossets or little Crosses, typifying the Cross and
Martyrdom of our Savior, extended to the four parts of the World, Haec
alienatos Deo conjunxit. Nicholas Upton de studio Militari in his fourth Book
accounts the Cross the most worthy of all Bearings, and to have the precedence,
and making use of the words of John Chrysostom in his Sermon on the Cross has
these words, Crux nobis totius beatitudinis causa est, haec nos a caecitate
erroris liberavit. So the Christian Soldier runs not from his Colors, Haec
debellatos quieti sociavit. The crouched Friars came into England about 1244.
and were so called from wearing a Cross on their staves and backs, haec
peregrinos cives ostendit, and so they went out Pilgrims, and returned Palmers;
Crux spes est Christianorum, and therefore signed with it in Baptism;
Resurrectio Mortuorum, and therefore born flowred; Dux caecorum, vita d
seratorum, baculus claudorum, consolatio pauperum, Gube ^atrix navigantium. The
Seaman can never sail safe without the Cross-yard, nor the poor be sustained
without the potent Cross of Providence. Lastly, he concludes it to be Portus
periclitantium, and so born anchored. It is ^^^us obsessorum, and so born
fitched: and though even in the Church of God some have superstitiously dreamed
this figure to be a healthful sign, yet Suscipere Crucem is used as a Phrase to
signify the going to the Holy Land, haec ratio tentandi aditus, this is the
way to enter into glory; Una enim eademque ad Virtutem via patet omnibus. And
the imitation of our Ancestors Virtue is a brave spur to Honor. But how many
pretend the C^o^^, whose Ancestors never were at the Holy Land, or never
returned to leave their Bearings to boast on. But among Sovereign Rewards the
Cross it self is a Noble one, and a sign of Sovereign Favor, the Noble City of
London bearing it first plain, till augmented (by the signal service of Sir
William Walworth) with the Dagger, the famous City of York bearing the same
Field and Cross, rewarded with five Lions of England; and that of Lincoln the
same with one Lion, in the Center virtually, as much as the other five. The
University of Camb idge a Cross Ermine [charged with a Fo^k, to show the purity
of those Springs of Learning: and very many Companies and Corporations, as the
Artillery, the Military Societies: and by all which you may perceive plainly by
the Coats the Language of the Bearing. I could insist upon many Noble Families,
whose Bearing denotes their Achievements, signally that of the Viliers Duke
of Buckingham, being five Escalop shells on a plain Cross, speaking his
Predecessors valor in the Holy War. For Sir Nicholas Villiers Knight followed
Edward the First in his Wars in the Holy Land, and then assumed that Coat,
whereas before he bare Sable three Cinque foils Argent. Upsall Captain of the
Crossbow-men to the Conqueror bare Argent a Cross Sable. And Painell Captain
of 300. Foot bare Gules a Cross flory Argent. At the same time Seward an
English man Victualler of the Camp to the said William the First, bearing A
gent a Cross Florie Salle. And Stephen Son to the Earl of Campaigne, who was
made Earl of Awmarle by William the Conqueror bare Gules a Cross Flory Varry.
And Ivon Lord Vessy, who came into England with Duke William bare OR a Plain
Cross Salle. Jeffery Botetort Lord Botetort bare OR a Cross ingrailed Sable.
And in what esteem the Cross was before the Conquest, may plainly be seen in
the Coats of the Saxon Kings; Egbert nineteenth King of the West Saxons, and
first Monarch of English men, bearing Azure a Cross Patonce OR. Edelbert
Brother to Edelhald Azure a Cross Form; OR. Edelbred Brother and Successor to
Edelbert OR a Cross Form flowery Azure. Edward surnamed Senior, Son to King
Alfred, bare Azure a Cross Patonce, between four Crowns, the flowring Cross
being the Emblem of future Glory.

Athelston eldest Son to King Edward the Senior, bare per Saltire, Gules and
Azure, a Cross Botton OR; Eldred Brother of King Edmond bare Vert, a Cross
pattee fitched Argent: and in the Dexter Canton the Virgin in a Glory. Edwin
his successor the same of King Egbert, Edgar surnamed Pacifius, Azure a Cross
Pattee between 4 Marlets OR; Edward the Son of King Edgar the same Cross
between 5 Martle^s. Edeldred Son to King Edgar by his second wife: bare only OR
a C oss potent fitched Azure; and Edmond surnamed Ironside eldest Son to King
Edeldred by his first wife, bare Azure, a Cross patonce between four Martlets;
St. Edward the Confessor Son to King Edeldred bare the same Cross with five
Martlets: and for the esteem that the English Nation has of the plain Cross,
it is easily discerned, seeing they have always used it in their Standards and
Ensigns to this day. King Edward the third joining it before the Arms of
England and France, in his institution of the Garter, the Cross denoting all
Divine and Moral virtue, as, OR a Cross gules denotes Faith; HAC PACIS FOEDERA
FIRMES, OR a Cross vert denotes Hope. Seth plantavit ramum Arboris vitae, ex
qua arbore deinde Moses virgam suam fabricavit; says, Raby Jochnides, Argent
a Cross gules signifies Charity, or a cross Sable is Fortitude: Argent a
Cross Azure is prudence; Azure a Cross Argent, is the color and Metal of
Justice. for when Astrea left the Earth, she was fixed in Heaven; Argent a
Cross Vert denotes Temperance, it is a bearing of much reason, because it is
right Angled, and if you please hear the reason of the bearing among the
A^gyptians Abnephi delivers in these words; ^rucem autem circulatam Misraim a
Noe per Patrem Cham accepit ille, ab Adame, quae quidem nihil aliud est, nisi
character Mysteriosus, cujus epe Angelus Raziel Adamum maxima quaevis Mysteria
edocebat, qui Character per continuam successionem posteris temporibus per Noe
ad Cham and ab hoc per Misraim ad Aegyptos pervenit, Cham quoque in usum
magicum convertit, and multa eo Miracula and prodigia edidit. But should I seek
the reasons of all bearing of the Cross, I should either lose my self in
Egyptian darkness, or Cross the Readers expectation; Antiquity buried those
with their Legs a Cross, who took upon them the Cross, and were marked with
the Cross; who took upon them Sacred warfare, to recover the Holy Land from the
Mahometans and Turks, in which respect the Umfrauviles bear on their
Escoutcheon. Crusilie, a Noble man of which Family lies buried Croslegged in
the ancient Minster of Hexteldesham in Northumberland. The Bohuns under King
Henry the First, which flourished unto King Henry the Seventh's days, bare (as
Cambden testifies) a Cross Azure in a Field OR, and they were by inheritance
the Kings Sprigurnels, that is, the Sealers of his Writs. The Inhabitants of
the Town of Colchester affirm, That Flavia Julia Helena, Mother of Constantine
the Great, was born and bred there, being the Daughter of King ^oel, and in
memory of the Cross which she found, they give for their Arms a Cross Enraguled
between four Crowns, Azure, three Crowns in Pale, by King Edmond Son of Edward
the senior.

Many times Coats have more then one Ordinary, and are joined with Honorable
Partitions, and have very much significancy in them; for if we may believe the
Author of the life of Chaucer, the Coat of Jeffery Chaucer our famous English
Poet was taken from his skill in Geometry, grounded on the blazon of arms 27.
and 28. Proposition of the First Book of Euclid, which is, If a right Line fall
on two other right Lines, and make the alternate Angels equal to one another,
those right Lines shall be parallel to one another, etc. Sometimes the Cross is
joined to a Chief, sometimes depressed with a Bend, and sometimes Voided, all
which have particular Denominations, Honorable Ordinaries being the third
Unity, the Field being first by a Line, secondly a superficies; and being
charged with an Ordinary, becomes a solid. The Potential or first Colors was a
Plain Nihil, or Aliquid in Potentia and Actu, that is, without the Form or
Shape of any perfect things: so that what is perfect does consist of a third
Unity, the material proportions proceeding on even numbers, as Party, Paly,
Bendy, Barry, etc. and the more the matter was multiplied into it self, the
darker and thicker it grew, so that charge upon charge became obscure, whereas
again the nearer it is to the Metal, as to the Unity of Light, it is the more
noble by the actual and pure brightness thereof, producing the formal
Proportions of the Fesse, the Bend, the Pale, answering to the odd Numbers of
3. 9. 27, etc. three being the first Number of Perfection, and the radical
Number of Form in the course of Nature, consisting of the longitude, latitude,
and profundity of the Matter or Shield, the Chief consisting of the third part
of the Field; So also the Fesse and Bend, the Cross and Saltire being in
proportion, as five parts of the whole Shield to nine. Now because there are
four principal Colors, namely, Gules, Azure, Sable and Vert, containing most
perfect proportions in musical Symphonies, joined with their Metals, White and
Black is as Diatessaron, as 4. to 3. OR and Sable, is as Disdiapason, as four
to one: Argent and Gules is Diapason, as two to one, or four to two: OR and
Gules Diapente as three to two: Argent and Azure as four to one: OR and Azure
as five to two: Argent and Vert as three to one. So that to bear 4. 3. 2. 1. is
perfect Coat Armor, as likewise 3. 2. 1. of any thing, being increased from
Unity to Ten; and where there is a multiplication of Forms, so as to fill the
whole Field, it may properly be called Semi, saving when it is of Crosses, it is
named Crusilie, assumed first at Jerusalem.

blazon of arms Such as that of Jerusalem is, such is this of Gore, where the
Crosses are crossed, and called Croslets; and being pointed is called fitched,
having a Fess between, as being girt to the Holy Land. Neither does the plain
Fess only signify such Persons, but the Dauncette also, those who as Dr.
Fuller observes, either sail thither through a miserable rough Sea, or a Sea
of miseries, wherein they met with a Trifluctuation of Evils, the Valvasors
blazon of arms bearing this as their Girdle) And the Sumners being girt with
the same Belt Ermin in the Field of Venus. The ingenious Mr. William Sumner in
his Antiquities of Canterbury, his Treatise of Gavel-kind, and other Treatises
of Antiquity, having made his Paths in the deep Waters, suffers me not to
forget, but to mention him as a Lover of Heraldry. And thus the sum of all the
Ordinaries is this, they are Ensigns of the Man at Arms; the Chief is his
Helmet, the Fess is his Girdle, the Bend is his Scarf, the Pale is his Lance,
the Cross is his Sword, the Inesc utcheon is his Shield, the Bars is his
Breast Plate, the Saltire is his Guidon, the Cheveron is his Spur, the Mantle
is his Covering, and the Creast is his Cognizance, whereby he is known to his
Companions in Arms, that and his oat being the only visible Characters of his
own Person, and being born Ordinarily by Persons of Honor, became to be called
Honorable Ordinaries, and Mantle, Helm, Coat, and Creast became the Hatchments
of a Gentleman; and the Sword, Shield, Spurs, Gantlets, and Standard the
Achievements of a Knight, being Stationary Symbols.

Conclusion of this Chapter
To William Gore of Cambridge Esquire and Barrister of Grayes Inn, fourth Son of
Sir John Gore of Gilston in Hertfordshire.
SIR,
AS you were thought fit to be remembered in the Sphere of Gentry, So I thought
it unfit you should be forgot in this Armilogia, least your Arms should speak
and tell the World, I forgot since you suffered with me (at the firing of my
House) and may th se Crosses your Ancestors took up at the Holy Land, be born
by you, and those that shall descend from you, till they return to the Holy
Land, which is above, where there shall need neither Material Field, nor Formal
Charge, and though here we meet with Cross upon Cross, yet what has hitherto
been said, is but a preparation to Adam's Shield, being charged with the
visible Creation, as Ensigns of Nobility, and Ordinaries of Honor. Your Field
is the same Ground that Adam was taken out of, charged with three Cross
Croslets: and the Fesse represents the Girdle of Verity, a Bearing fit for
Angels and Men; for so the Seraphims took delight to bear the Cross from
Aceldama, and the Christian Knight was Girt to bear the same. Your Fathers
Motto was, Compassi ut con^egnabimus. Gules has reference to the first
sufferings for Christianity, and OR has reference to the Glorious Reward that
follows, here then is your Sword and Shield in your Military Affairs in this
life, and your Crown is reserved to the Life to come; for those whose constancy
to Truth keeps under the Sense by the Girdle of Reason: and as you are a
Student of Law, you study Reason. And so Sir I submit my self to your Trial,
having brought in all I have hitherto writ as a praeexistent Matter without
Form, and come now to the Works of the Creation.

CHAP. IV.
Of the visible Charges of the first Days Work in the Creation, under the
Regiment of Saturn, or the Black Shield.

SAble was the first Field, especially representing old Time and the first face
of the Cube. But I having already showed the Matter and Form of Arms apart, and
the Dominion that the Form has over the Matter in those Forms that are
Stationary Symbols, having their place assigned them in the Escoutcheon, and
are called Honorable. Come I now to the Logical Substances or created Beings,
usually applied as Honorable Charges, either in the Field or on the Ordinary.
I purpose for the better methods sake to proceed (as in my Sphere of Gentry)
with the particular Days works in the Creation. Aristotle says in his Eighth
Book of Physics, Natura non agit inordinate, neque operationibus suis facit
saltum, unde causa ordinis, and rerum ipsarum, quae ratione constant and
ordine. I shall take my beginning with Saturn or Time, and that because
experienced old Age deservedly challenges respect and honor. He is described
with a half extinguished Light, his face as it were meagre and pale, for that
the best of the Blood is exhausted in the operations of the mind, and the face
thereby left exsanguine and discolored; and therefore Nazianzen calls
paleness pulchrum sublimium virorum florem, as a note of men of profound and
studious contemplations, and therefore aptly by Metal and Colors are
represented the minds of the Bearers; God having cemented the minds of men
(says Plato) with Metals into the Pesant, Iron; into those of Princes, Gold;
and into every one else between these he has infused their Metal proper to
their State.

Aridam vocavit Deus terram, that is the Field whereon all other Charges are to
be displayed, the most ancient Field being that of Saturn, or the Earth of
quality cold and dry, not altering the Coldness as a quality Active, but his
Dryness as a quality Passive, so that this Field does become a Soldier as well
as a Scholar, for many good Scholars make brave Soldiers. To bear Argent and
Sable is to be in his own House, and to bear Sable; and OR, is to be in its
Exaltation, the one being most fair, with reference to Truth, which does not
love concealment; and the other most Rich, with reference to Nobility, said to
be naught else but ancient Riches, which indeed is Occulta Qualitas in the
Field of the first Day: The Matter first God out of nothing drew,
And then adds Beauty to that Matter new.


Now the Seminal Form of all things lay round, and contracted at first, but
spread, when they bring any part of the Creation into Act, as Drops of Rain
spread, when they are fallen to the Ground: so that the first Charge that
presents it self, is that of Drops, whereof some are of the nature of fire,
dissolved only by the Calcination and Sublimation. Others of that of Water,
viz. Distillation and Dissolution; that which has reference to Dissolution is
those Drops which are of Water, called Gutta de Eau, of Color White, seu aqua
in lucem condita. It is of heavenly Extraction, and signifies Divine Grace;
for Rain, says one, is the Pledge of Gods favors, and Dew the Symbol of his
Grace. Behold, hear the Anvil on which all other Shields are formed: Haec est
Matter universalis rerum omnium; quippe in cujus ventre spermata rerum
continentur, videlicet Coelorum, Astrorum, Animalium, Vegetabilium, Gemmarum
and Metallorum. Heaven and Earth having been in obscurity, behold the Break of
Day, and those delightful Colors that play upon the Water, a Day which having
first received the Light, gives glory and splendor to all Days. Behold this
first Figure divided after the manner of the immutable property of Light, which
is such, that issuing from the Center, it carries together with it Rectitude.
So that it neither knows nor can diffuse it self any otherwise then by right
Lines, called Gyrony.

Seraphim

Thrones Dominions Virtues Powers Principalities Archangells Angels Cherubims
The Chromatism of Drops.




Behold again, that Light not only illustrateth and reveals it self, but is
as a Rule, whereby the windings and crookedness of error may be discovered. In
this Figure you have the ingrailed Line of the Earth, the waved Line of the
Water, the nebule Line of the Air, and the indented line of the Fire; in the
four Angles thereof you have each charged with a Drop of the Creation. You have
the proper Charges of the first Days Nobility in the Hierarchy of Angels,
handled at large in the Sphere of Gentry. And that I may come more particularly
to the bearing of Drops, I shall begin with a Drop Sable; Gutta de Poix:
it is called Gutta de Poix, or Drops of Pitch. Saturn's cold Star suits with
the Pitchy night, this kind of Bearing being suitable to Saturnine men, men of
profound thoughts. ARDORE LIQUESCO is the property of Pitch, and is proper for
Monastical persons, or rather a Penitent. But that there should be Drops of
Pitch in the Creation, may seem to be strange. Nevertheless what was the Black
Water other? Tam gluten and connexio omnium Elementorum atque elementatorum
Palpabilium: and as the Earth does connect the Matter and the form, so does
every Drop adhere to its first Principle: and as the Globular part thereof
shows it to be a Body, and to tend downward: so the pointed or spired part
thereof shows the Anima and lively parts ascending upward; as in the Border of
the first Letter of this Chapter, which is Sable a Border Gutte de Poix: --
Piceae flammis alimenta supremis.

The Funeral Pile among the Romans was erected with Oak and Pitch Trees, as
most combustible materials; according to the quality of the Person deceased,
according to Virgil, they did struere ingentem pyrum, as it were 4.3.2.1.
lessening upward its Form, whereas the Pile of Matter terminated in Point.

Argent a Pile waved Gules, issuing from the Dexter Corner.
blazon of arms Fire ascends in Flames, and Light descends in Beams, descending
from the dexter Canton, and signifies persons of clear understanding, such as
Major Generals ought to be, who bear this sign in their Ensigns, MIHI CANDOR AB
ALTO; Though the Matter be unmovable of it self. Dr. Stylle bears Gutta de
Eau distilling, with three White Roses in the Black Field, INFUSSA FAECUNDAT.
The Family of Cornwallis bears Sable Gutta de Eau, Gutte de Eau.
to denote the thankful mind, ACCIPIT ET REDDIT. or a bountiful Person, OMNIBUS
AFFLUENTUR. If you draw water out of Vegetables, CLARESCUET IN FLAMMIS. Such a
Bearing denotes also a learned Preacher, MIRUM CONGESTA LIQUOREM. In a
Pythagorical sense it signifies the Preexistency of the Soul according to that
in Synesius Hymns: (...) An Heavenly DROP I fell
(...) Spilt on this lowly ground:
(...) Thy flitting Vagabond restore
(...) Unto that Well
(...) Whence first she did redound.


E NUBIBUS ETE MONTIBUS is Grace and Cooperation. All Drops at first came down
from above, either in silver Dew or golden Rain. The Cardinal of Turnon used
for a sign or Symbol silver Drops, to signify Manna, and thereby heavenly
food, expressing his desire thereby; NON QUAE SVPER TERRAM. And these Bearings
of Drops, as Guil^am denotes, does well become a Soldier of that Christian
Legion called Fulminatrix, at whose Prayer, in a great drought, as Eusebius
notes, as the Prayer of Eliah, Heaven was opened. So Sampson being hard
bestead for mavelous thirst, called on God, and found Fons Invocationis,
Water issuing out of the jaw bone of an Ass, wherewith before he had slain one
thousand men: so that by the way you may note, that any thing whatever, be it
never so simple, is capable of the grace of God: and though Drops to the
Vulgar, may seem to be very mean, yet therein is contained many miseries. Drope
sometimes Mayor of London, bare Gutte and on a Chief a Lion, to denote his
Name, as well as Fame, in founding the Aquaduct in Cornhill, communicating
those Drops from his Well Head, usually issuing from Lions mouths; and this
leads me to the other sort of Drop, viz. that of Gold, which are known by their
weight, PONDVS ABVNDIS. Some Rivers abound with golden Sand, each Drop whereof
is Gutte de OR; which is golden Rain, and PENDENT ONVSTAE, Gold being the most
digested Metal; therefore every Drop MATVRITATE INCLINANTVR; and being
understood to be molten, PERFICITVRIGNE. Golden Rain is a fine speculation in
artificial Fireworks, which IN TENEBRIS LVCET. De stercore aurum colligere, is
the work of a prudent Preacher, in the words of Jeremy, PRETIOSVM A VILI. It is
made liquid by fire, HVMOR ABIGNE, and may signify an anxious Lover, whose
passions are excellently expressed in these Verses: Aspice quam variis
distringar Vestia curis;
Uror, and heu nostro manat ab igne liquor.
Sum Nilus, fumque Aetna simul, restringuite flammam,
O lacrymae! lacrymas ebibe flamma meas.


Which the Eclogue seems to construe in other Verses, and is rendered in English
by Ogilby thus: Betwixt extremes is there no mean he says,
Love has regard to no such things as these,
Not Love with tears. --


FLETVS AERVMNAS LEVAT and are sometimes ease to a Martial mind, which often
feels the scorching Drops of Loves Flame, according to which in the Argument of
the 10. Eclogue of Virgil's Bucolicks: The wise and valiant men often feel the
flames
Of cruel Love, and follow wanton Dames.


Jupiter descended on Danae in a golden shower; the Amber Drops that were
pressed from the Poplar Trees on the Shield of Thetis, were Gutte de OR: From
these clear Dropping Trees Tears yearly flow, Met. lib. 2.

They hardened by the Sun to Amber grow.


So the Family of Harbotle bears three golden Drops, perhaps in affectation
of those Amber Drops that dangled from the Tresses of his fair Thetis, being
Bend-wise in a field Jupiter, in commemoration of that golden shore that Jove
let fall into the Lap of Nature. But methinks I hear the Martial Man calling
upon me, You have praised the OR and Argent. But what do you say of the Gutte
de Sang? what do you say of noble Blood? To which I answer, That though
Nobility may be said to be rather in the Brains then in the Veins, seeing that
the Flesh, Bones and Blood of all men are alike; yet to bear Gutte de Sang is
very noble, quia ex guttis sanguinis constant; and to bear OR or Argent so
charged, what can it signify but expense of Blood and Treasure. Sir Thomas
Player bears a Bloody Lance, or rather, a pale Gutte de Sang. Adam was of Red
Earth, yet was the golden Head. Saturn was of black Aspect, yet lived in the
golden blazon of arms Age. Fitz (signifies a Son, Sable a pale OR Gutte de Sang.
and by consequence descended from the first Adam, or Saturn) bare Argent Gutte
de Sang a Cross Gules, which beside that most precious Blood that was shed on
the Cross, may denote, that as this humor is the Principal whereby the life of
all Animals is nourished and continued; so the Son can boast his Nobility no
longer then the Blood is continued in its pristine purity: and Ancestors add
not to Blood of the Descendants, but where the Virtue derives; for he has made
of one Blood, says the Apostle Acts 11.) all nations of men, thereby pointing
at their Genealogies, and has determined the bounds of their habitation,
thereby pointing out their distinctions, Gentlemen taking their names from
their Habitations. Repentance (says one) is the younger Brother of Innocence,
which brings me to those Drops, or humor of the Blood also, which for the
similitude of Color are called Gutte de Larmes, or Tears: they are of Color
Azure, and fit for a Jeremia,h one who mourns in secret, a Saint Maur, one
whose eyes are as a fountain of Tears, Gutte de Larmes.
and so bears Gutte de Larmes, quia ex Lacrymis Guttis constant. This is a
humor sometimes distilling from a magnanimous mind. So it is said Cyrus wept
when he saw so vast an Army from a Hill, and in so small a time there should be
none left. Mary Magdalen's Tears gave Love its perfect Work, INCREMENTA SVIS
ACCIPIT A LACRYMIS. Sometimes the Tears of Orphans and oppressed rouz up the
magnanimous Lions to revenge the shedders of the Blood of War in peace. Drops
of Oil being the Emblem of peace, are called Gutte de Vert, these being the
signs of Industry; for in the first Age some were Gardeners, like Adam; some
Husbandmen like, Noah; some Fishermen, like Peter; some made Tents, like Paul,
as advised by his inclination or dexterity, ^r. Fuller History of Abbeys.
as accounting nothing base that was found beneficial. Some much delighted in
making Hives, the true Emblem of a Covent for Order and Industry, wherein the
Bees under a Master the Abbot, have several Cells, and live and labor in a
regular Discipline: thus Gutte de Vert is born, according to Virgil; The Driver
of the slow Ass often loads
His back with Oil, or fruit, or else does fetch
From Town a Handmil, or a Mass of Pitch.


Hence you may observe the usefulness and commendableness of Industry, that
makes the Gentleman. Oil gladdeth the heart of man, and is the Symbol of
Consecration, prophetically spoken of our Savior, who was anointed with Oil of
Gladness above his Fellows. So that to anoint Guttatim Drop-meal, by the way of
Distillation, id est, FOE CVNDITATEM INFVNDVNT. The memory of Jacob's setting
up the Stone he had rested on for a Pillar, and pouring Oil upon it, and
calling it Bethel, was preserved under the anointing Stones, which the
Phoenicians from Bethel call (...), from whence came the anointing Stones among
the Heathen, which Arnobius calls Lubricatum Lapidem, and ex Olivae unguine
sordidatum. So that the anointing Stones then with Oil was the Symbol of
Consecration, all Drops indeed signifying Persons set apart to several Works,
DE COELO EXPECTANS PLVVIAM; Many Works better in cold night are done,
Or when the pearly Morning brings the Sun:
Night to mow Stubble, and dry Meddows choose,
Night not neglects to pay refreshing Dews.


The account of Time was anciently by Drops of water in Glasses, called
Clepsidrae, Dable Gutte de Eau^ 4, 3, 2, 1.
whereas those by Sand were called blazon of arms Clepsammini. They are usually
born in Arms, either Sans Number, called Gutte only, or else if they are
numbered, they proceed from Ten, viz. 4. 3. 2. 1. which contain virtually all
Numbers, Ten being all that rude Mankind told upon his singers; And
Arithmeticians discover it by calling them Digits to this Day. They are
sometimes born Six, viz. 3. 2. 1. which Number of Six is accounted a perfect
Number, because its parts are equal to it self, viz. the sixth part is one, the
third part is two, and the half is three, all which added together make but
Six, there being but ten such Numbers betwixt one and 1000000000000. By this it
is wonderful to conceive how that there is so few of them. So of perfect men,
however the Bearing of Six or Ten of any thing in Arms thus disposed is very
good Armoury; for this very cause of perfection, being a sign of perfection of
the Bearer. Neither does this come into the rule of being overcharged; for that
Shield that has no Charge upon it, is rather Aspis then Clypeum; the first
Colors being black and white were the very Ornaments of Nature, representing
Innocence and Patience, the Field lying undiscovered, till the Light appeared
as the Metal. And now of thee, O glorious Creature, it may be said, If thou
had never been, the beauty of the World had been as nothing; as Du Bartas:
Gods eldest Daughter, O how thou art full
Of grace and goodness! O how beautiful.


The Metal and the Color being so equally mingled in the first Days Creation,
that it might be said to be Day and Night at the same instant of time, which
made one say, That the first Darkness was not Loco divisae, sed plane depulsae
a luce, ut nusquam essent. And so the first and the most absolute Rebatement
blazon of arms in Heraldry is that we call a Delph Ten, both of obscure
Color and Extraction, being shut into the middle Point, so as to be severed
from all parts; and therefore not to be accounted of. It represents one that
revoketh his Challenge, or eats his words. It seems to be the mouth of the
Cave of Time, wherein Truth lay concealed till the Light brought forth the
Truth. Some will have the Light of the first Day to be a spiritual Light, and
so under this Days Work they comprehend the Creation of Angels, which is the
reason, that in the Blazon of such Bearings, I have placed it in the first Day
Work, Cherubims heads being born by the Chalinors, and others representing
Persons prepared and active in the service of God, or his Country. So the
last-named Gentleman having been the active Instrument of finding out, and
improving of the Alumn Mines in Yorkshire, extracting the Truth of that Soil
out of the Delph to his extreme care and cost, eserves not to be forgot, but as
he bears Cherubims heads, denotes them to be ministering Spirits to the
service of men; Cherubim vero arcam slexibus ambientes coelestes illas mentes,
ac beatos illos Spiritus denotat, qui Divinam Majestatem promptissimae
celeritatis obsequiis, velutati alato ac veloci ministerio amb^unt ac stipant.
Others will have it a natural and material Light, and so it has reference to
the Metal of Argent; for that Light which at first made all things appear, was
no spiritual Light, but such as the same now is in the Globe of the Sun: so
that what I have now spoken of here, I may conclude with Saint Austine,
Materies adhuc erat corporearum rerum informis, sine Ordine, sine Luce, being
an informed matter of corporeal things without Order, without Light, had not
the Spirit of God cherished it with Heat and Light. Where the Field was
Bordered, it was Gutte and separate; and where it was charged, it was B^lliti,
as the first Characters and Letters missive of the Almighty, IN TENEBRIS LVCET,
is applicable to Magnanimity, Virtue and Prudence, the mount Aetna PROPRIA LVCE
REFVLGET, as the Ensign of a man's proper Valor: and the Mount Olympus, NVBES
EXCEDIT, as a note of Excellency; the cubical Body of the Earth, SVO SE PONDERE
FIRMAT; and the superficies thereof being but as an Isthmus NEUTRI ADHARENDUM,
which if the Bowels thereof be torn up, SAUCIATA FELICIUS. And the next Days
Work adds Honor to the first, STABILIS QUE MANENS DAT CUNCTA MOVERE: This then
is not the World, 'twas but the matter, D^ B^rtas fi st Day.

The Nursery, whence it should issue after;
Or rather the Embrio that within a week
Was to be born; for that huge lump was like
The shapeless burden in the mothers womb,
Which does in time unto good fashion come.


Conclusion of this Chapter
To Sir Thomas Player junior.
SIR,
AMong the Romans, for ought that I have read, there is but one Order of
Knights (as testifies Sir Thomas Ridley) and they are next in degree to the
Senators themselves; as with us they are next to the Peers, though indeed
Cujacius following our Modern French Heraldry, makes three sorts; one whereof
he calls Chevalliers, the other Bannerets, the third Bachilers, but sets
down no proper difference of the one from the other, though our Use does
demonstrate the same. However it was the Honor of the first Knights, that they
were Citizens of Rome, Et Custos and Pugnax. Your Father being Knight and
Chamberlain, your Self being Knight and Lt. Colonel, has entitled you both,
to the bearing of the Pale, as the Lance of the Chevallier, and Gutte de Sang,
as being willing to spend your Bloods for your Country. This is what your Coat
does admonish, when the Field of your Nativity shall be obscured in Sable
Weeds, to be raised up to that pitch of fortitude as the noble Romans were in
preferring their own Country before their Lives. And this is the use of your
Arms, the Ensigns of Gentility.

CHAP. V.
Of the visible Charges of the Second Days Work, in the Creation, under the
Regiment of Jupiter, or the Blue Shield.

BLue or Azure is extended as the Firmament is, or parted per Chief, Azure a
Border OR, Entoyre of eight Heurts.
the waters above and below.

Number and Position are two of the first Elements of Arms. This Day the Earth
was in Base, and the Firmament in Chief. The first superior face of the Cube
was that of Azure, lying next above the Water, the Seat of Jupiter, who is said
to espouse Juno, or the Air, the upper Region whereof was called Ether, and
the lower Air, and was of the same birth with Dies.

By the Almighty Architect it was decreed,
That Night the Day, the Day should Night succeed.
Heaven and Light being the Symbols of the same thing: so Jove and Juno are
said to have dominion in the Air, called by some Lux aurea, having in it both
Light and Heat; and therefore Jupiter is so called from Juvans Pater. This
Chapter is parted per Chief, as it is said in Job, God binds up his Waters in
thick Clouds, and the Clouds are not rent under them. And in Moses his
description it is said, God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the
Waters, etc. And God called the Firmament Heaven, which in our Saxon
Orthography signifies lifted up, or exalted, the Second Day being no less
glorious then that wherein God created Light, in which says one, God chose to
raise up, the Firmament like a Globe of Gold and Azure, which might serve to
divide the seven Orbs of the Planets from the Imperial Heaven, disposing in
every Annulet a solid corporeal Gem, this Day being the Creation of corporeal
Matter, the Charge whereof was Roundells, being more or less noble according to
the Bodies they represent, every Rundle this Day representing a Cressant, being
enlightened but in part, and so it becomes the difference for the second
Brother, as this is the second Day, being receptaculum tam lucis quam
tenebrarum. I have chose to put every Roundle in its Field. And because Light
was made by God worthy of the chief Praise, not because it is beautiful in it
self, but because every thing it sees it makes beautiful. I have parted this
Scheme in Chief as the principal seat of the Intellect, divided by a several
Line of plain flecked, Nebule, Wavy, Ingrailed, Crenele, Invecked, Indented.

Partisions per Chief.
Flecked Nebule Wavy Ingrayled Crenelle Invecked Dancette Maine Chief




Now as every one of these Lines differ from one another, as the several
Passions of the soul, so are they more or less in esteem; and though the Brain
has no sense, as Cassidore affirms; yet for that the Nerves, as so many
several Lines, are fixed in it, and from it receive the Spirits for the noblest
operations of the Soul, sensum membris reliquis tradit. I shall therefore note
to you by the way how every Line is as a Beam in the great Chamber of Heaven,
and every Charge is as a Gem in the Imperial Crown of the Almighty, qui fecit
lapidem angularem; and seeing numeri and figurae notant Ideas rerum, I shall
proceed to the Round Form, representing Dominion; therefore born by Kings in
the Mound, signifying his own Orb: Heaven, Earth, and Seas, each in his proper
bound,
The Moons bright Orbs with all the Spangled round.


By the Battelled Line the Egyptians did signify the Battlements of Heaven,
which compasses about the Scheme, representing Discretions Arch: Towering
beyond the Spheres, and all on fire
Throned above Jove, far brighter and far higher.


The Element of Fire being the most superior Element, by the Nebule Line the
Air, and by the Waved Line the Water, and by the Ingrailed Line the Earth. Now
for the Charge of this Day, being either Anulets or Globes, the Horizon being
an Anulet Sable; the Zodiac is an Anulet OR, and the Meridian Azure, every
Ball differing in Color, having a different Name. Kercher delivers it as an
Axiom, That Lux Colores illustrans, undique repercutitur, and Colores
illustrati radiant in Orbem, ut Lux ipsa, utpote Correlativa, the Round Form
being the most perfect Form in the World, signifying Heaven and Eternity,
VINCENTI DABO CALCULUMALBUM. Plates.
The Silver comes out of the Fire as a pure Plate, having no impression thereon
but the purity thereof, which quality was diffused through the whole Heavens.
It is called a Plate, because it is a piece unstamped, God having said, Let
there be a Firmament, hoc est, coelestis Campus, the Field of Jupiter being the
pure Air: This said, he brings forth eternal Fire,
Almighty Vesta, and her pure Attire.


The Silver having this property, NON LAEDITVR SED PROBATVR; and the Pila alba
signifies Rem probatam. The Egyptians to express their Eneph or Creator of
the World, described an old man in a blue Mantle, with an Egg in his Mouth,
which was the Emblem of the world, every Roundle in Gods hand being yet
imperfect, Sicut Moneta est informis, donec imago Regis ei per Cuneum
imprimatur: ita ratio nostra deformis est, donec per Gratiam Dei illustretur.
Plates signifying one of a clear Conscience, SI DESIT OMNIA NIHIL. This Day had
three conspicuous Globes, Heaven, Earth and Sea: Tu mihi Terra Deus, mihi Mare,
tu mihi Coelum,
Denique cuncta mihi es, te sine cuncta nihil.


Money, says Solomon, answers all things; and Penney of Hartfordshire bare
three in his Girdle. And though Silver of it self, QUIES CENDO NIGRESCIT, which
every one has experience of, even in the displaying of his Arms; yet being in
use, PVRVM CANDESCIT, by adding a Number to a Cipher you may make of it what
you will, and of a Plate you may make a Penny, IMPRIMOR ET VALEO, Argent three
penny yard Pence, is born by the Name of Spence, this having an impression
thereon. The Mussards or Delayers (as Cambden defines them, might well bear
three Plates in signification, they were loath to part with their money, or else
to speak for them, NULLA VIS CONTRA: and indeed without it in humane Policy
INDEBELITVR. So that Plates in Chief are of more prevalency then Gustons,
Ogresses Pellets Gunstons.
though indeed they are FIRMIVS ADOPVS, and are fit Bearings for a Soldier,
because OBDVRES CIT; for Ogresses are formed of Iron, and represents a man made
malleable IN QVASCVNQVE FORMAS, even a Gown-man may bear Pellets: Ardeat Orator
si vult incendere Plebem.

And the Emperor speaking of the Benefit of Advocates, says thus: Advocates
which break the doubtful fates of Causes; and with the strength of their
defense, sundrytimes, as well in public Causes, as in private, raise up those
that are fallen, and relieve those which are weary, do no less good unto
Mankind, then if by War or Wounds, they saved their Parents or Country; For we
(says he) do not count that they only do war for our Empire, which we do
labor with Sword, and Shield, and Target, but also our Advocates; for indeed
the Advocates or Patrons of Causes do war, who by confidence of their glorious
Voice do defend the Hope, Life, and Posterity of such as be in danger: and
thereupon comes that distinction of Castrense peculium, and quasi castrense
peculium, signifying thereby, that albeit Counselors to the State, Lawyers,
and such like, be not actual Warriors, yet they are representative Warriors,
and do no less serve the Commonwealth then they: the Soldier rises betimes in
the Morning, that he may go forth to his exploit, The Advocate, that he may
provide for his Clients Cause: he wakes by the Trumpet, the other by the Cock:
he orders the Battle, the other his Clients Business: he takes care his
Tents be not taken, the other that his Client's Cause be not overthrown. So
then either of them is a Warrior; the one abroad in the Field, the other at
Home in the City. How valid blazon of arms are the ten Plates in Sir Orlando
Bridgeman's Coat, Sable ten Plates, 4, 3, 2, 1. on a Chief Argent a Li^ passant
of the first.
when the Stamp of the Kings Authority has made him as a Lion in Chief, to
defend the Cause of the Poor, he being Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas!
The bearing of Ogresses came in request about the time of King Henry the Fifth;
for when the Dolphin of France sent him in derision to his Youth a Tun of
tennis Balls, Argent six Gu^stons 3, 2, 1.
as fitter to play with, then to manage Arms, blazon of arms he promised by an
Oath that it should not be long ere he would toss such Iron Balls among them,
that the best Arms in France should not be able to hold a Racket to return
them. The Cabalists say, Deus Legem suam in Globum igneum conscripserit per
ignem fuscum super ignem candidum. So to David the Law of God was more pure
then the fine Gold, which RVBIGINIS EXPERS, Bezants.
the Beazant having in it the Original Talent of all other Metals, which though
none knows that of another, yet this in actual accomplishments may be another
Superior; and yet the other may have made a more proportioned improvement, and
so be accounted more generous and worthy. And so the Plate may be preferred
before the Bezant, having much more of actual accomplishment in its Harmony.
And though the second Day is said not to be blessed, because it carried with it
divisibility, two being an even Number, and therefore feminine, whereas one or
an odd Number carries with it indivisibility, and impassibility, and activity;
yet this Day adding visible Charges, became as Augmentations of Honor, every
Day tending to a more proportionable improvement: Wherefore bright Coelus over
Saturn's face,
Having the Curtain drawn, resumes his place
To show perfection beneath the sky,
Henceforth to look will be a vanity.


The golden Ball was esteemed the inestimable price of Beauty: the giving away
thereof from Juno was one of the main Causes why she hated the Trojans, being
cast in the contention of Beauty in the judgment of Paris, Pryam's Son.
Bezants being the Emblems of Perfection, as well for their Matter as Form,
which NVNQVAM JACET, while it is moved AGILITATE ET PONDERE, it argues a
constant mind in an unstable condition; for every Roundle STAT DVM VOLVITVR;
and therefore are called Roundles, when they are counterchanged, EXCITO DVM
EXCITOR, and so is propounded for an example, The words of the Wise are as
Apples of Gold (IN PVNCTO) in tables of Silver; and being once spoken, CVRRIT
NON CADIT. It signifies one that is the same he seems for, QUO QVO VERTAS; for
Bezants are the Revenues that diminish not with use, nor consume with time,
being always in the same esteem and equally beneficial. It is an Argument of
Trust, and denotes a faithful Person: he that was faithful in one Talent, was
made Lord of all; for such a Cause perhaps it was that Pitts Teller of the
Exchequer, bare a Fess Checky between three Bezants, to denote both his Office
and Fidelity; it represents also Faith: Scilicet, ut fulvum spectatur in
ignibus aurum:
Tempore sic duro est inspicienda fides.


It signifies also Tribunos aerarii, or Martial Treasurers, which did receive
the Soldiers Pay, and takes its Denomination from Bizantium, where it had its
first impression. It is said to weigh one hundred and four pounds, two ounces,
and yet SVA PONDERA NESCIT. It is formed Round NON VNO ICTU, denoting
perseverance, VSQVE PERFICITUR, the most eminet Name of Zouch being rewarded
with a Canton Ermine, as an Euge boni servi, for the improvement of a single
Talent unto ten, William Mortimer taking the Name of la Zouch, in testimony of
favors received from the Lord Zouch of Ashbye, his Name denoting him to be of
an ancient Stock, and so Ex bono Nomine oritur b na praesumptio. Byfield
bears five Bezants, and a Chief OR, to denote his Prudence that sold all to
purchase the Field, man himself being no otherwise then Pyroboli, a Ball of
active fire; or if you will, a Ball of Red Earth, SEMPFR IDEM, Torteauxes, are
red Balls.
fetching his Original from Clay hardened by fire; so Job says, Thou have
curdled me as milk. This sort of Red Roundle being derived from Placenta, which
is rendered by Pliny Libum farinaceum caseo addito, and signifies Plenty, and is
called in French Torteau; quaere if it were not the occasion of the Arms of
Wake, bearing three in Chief, either as a thin Cake, used in Sacrifices or
Vigils, or of one made of Honey, Meal, and Oil at the time of Wakes, reique
frumentariae copiam significare aiunt, according to Sir Henry Spelman. Sed quid
(says he) Rubeus Color flavae Cereris; whereas it may serve as a reason both
for the Bearing and the Color, in what the learned Hermanus Hugo de prima
scribendi origin says in the Chapter De occulta literarum missione, that
among other things, which by reason of the occult materials, they had wont to
include Military Letters in, this was one way of sending in Cakes; his words,
are these, Placentae plumbeam Epistolam inseruit Polycrete capta a Drogneto
Duce Erythraeorum, misitque ad fratres suos. Or it may be a fit Bearing for
Graduates at the University, or Houses of Law, who use to stain their Cakes of
Bread as their Trenchers, grounded perhaps on that of Aeneas, who had arrived
at the Land designed for him by the Oracle; he took it as a certain sign of the
end of all his Travels, being sat down on the Banks of Tyber: Then to refresh
on verdant Grass being set,
Viands they lay on Cakes of purest wheat,
Making with juicy fruit their Biscuit swell.


Whereby they become colored with the juice of the Grape: Then round about
their wheaten Plates invade,
We eat our Trenchers too, Ascanius said.


Aeneas taking of the words, remembers what his Father Anchises had long before
told him: When thou, dear Son, on foreign shoars being set,
Sharp hunger Trenchers shall enforce to eat,
Then let the weary rest; remember there
To build a City and strong Bulwarks rear.


So that it denotes rest from labor and travail, and signifies Courtiers.
This Bearing came most in use with us about the time of King Henry the Sixth,
yet born by Courtney long before. In a Military Consideration it may be called
a Torteaux, from Torqueo, to be bowed as a Granado, carrying fire; and so being
Orbs Rubri, were used ad terrorem; for as White was anciently a note of
Absolution, and Black Balls of Condemnation: So the Color of Red was used by
Martial men, TERRORQUE TIMORQUE, Sir blazon of arms Thomas Bloudworth, Argent
three Bars Sable in Chief, as many Torteauxes, all within a Border Ermin.
bearing three in Chief, and a Border Ermine. The Red struck terror and fear
into their Enemies, which made it esteemed the only Martial Color, though the
Green Field is the Military Man's Bed; yet by reason he is not to take his rest
there. It is counted the lowest Color. The Azure Ball being the next we are to
treat of is the Color of Jupiter, whose head if it be opened, Heurts are Blue
Balls.
DANT VULNERA FORMAM; though he receive a Heurt, ANIMVM ACCENDAT: For Minerva
is the Issue of Jupiter's Brain, and Pallas comes forth armed: Virgo armata
decens rerum sapientia Pallas,
Aethereus fons men's, and solertia fati, etc.
Pallas thou armed Virgin, Wisdom's wonder,
Fate judging fair fount of A thereal Light,
Worlds Understanding, and Arbitress of Thunder,
Arts Ardor, Spring wherein man clears his sight.


Heurts chiefly signify Wisdom, as being the Issue of Jupiter's Brain. Heurts
in a Martial Man's Shield are as so many Scars in his Body, esteemed more
Honorable then that Beauty wherewith at first he was adorned. So Menelaus
having received a Hurt (from Pandarus) wherehence; The blood of Menelaus down
to the Calves, and Ancles to the Ground,
For nothing decks a Soldier so as does an honored wound.


The Shield of Walmesley seems to have a reference to that Minerva, it being
Gules on a Chief Ermine two Heurts, these Blue Balls being as it were the eyes
of Minerva; for these whose eyes are of this kind of Aereal Color, Tanquam
Minervae filii, are said to be most ingenious, Unde Minerva Glaucopis dicatur.
Hence it is that the Owl is dedicated to her, and signifies prudent men.
Wisdom says, Ego rotunditatem Coelorum circumivi sola, Ecles. 24. Et in
profunditatem Abyssorum ambulavi, in fluctibus maris, and in tota terra. Marcus
Agrippa was honored with an Azure Banner from Augustus, after a Victory
obtained by him in the Sicilian Sea. Again, if you consider the Martial Field,
she comes forth armed with a Crystal Shield; for God having made man unarmed,
gave him therefore a perspicuous understanding and reason to arm himself, the
Chief representing the most superior part of Man, the natural power of the
inferior Air being nothing else but Vita vaporis, which if we follow the
common Path by this Line, separating it from the starry Heaven, we may find
that the Shield as well as the Air has three Regions, whereof the highest is
exceeding hot, fitly represented by the Chief indented, by reason of its
Vicinitude to the fiery Element and Stars, by the force of whose Beam it
receives heat; and so being charged upon, may signify one whose active heat
has kindled his undertakings. The second or middle Region, which is always
cold, is fitly represented by the Nebule or waved Line; for that as that Region
of its own nature would be warmer, were it not cooled by a cold Occasion, by
the reflection of the Sun Beams. So this may aptly signify a Person, whose
fortune frowns, and keeps him under, though IN ANGVSTIIS ELEVATVR. The lower
Region is something contrary to the former; for it is said to be hot and moist,
fitly represented by the ingrailed Line, hot, by reason of the Sun Beams,
meeting with the Earth, and moist, by reason of the proper Nature of the Air,
being partly indented, and partly waved. And thus very fitly by these
Elementary Qualities are signified men of different Qualities, and by each of
these Charges is signified men's several Talents, all Meteors being of three
sorts, either fiery, watery, or airy, to which Lines are suited in the SPHERE
of GENTRY, and are of several fashions, according to diverse disposing of the
Matter: so the reward was always suited to the Bearer: The Heralds made the
people peace, the Seniors then did bear
The voiceful Heralds scepters, sat within a sacred Sphere
On polished stones, and gave by turns their sentence in the Court,
Two Talents Gold were given to him that judged in justest sort.


So that here is the just Law of Arms in the Court of Honor, having a Penny of
Plate for the just Plaintiff, and a Bezant of Gold for the just Judge, polished
Stones, Torteauxes, Heurts, Pomises, and Gunstons; for in the Shield of
Achilles there was two Cities; that of Political Nobility, and that of Martial
Ornament, bestowing Military Rewards on Military Persons, and honorable Robes
on Persons of civil Endowments, Princes and Nobles bearing Ermine, as Ensigns
of Magistracy, and Ornaments of Entertainments; and Globes and Mounds as Signs
of Government and Conquest.

-- The one did Nuptial celebrate,
Observing at them solemn Feasts. --
Other where: A solemn Court of Law was kept, where throngs of people werr,
The Question was a Five imposed on one that slew
The Friend of him that followed it, and for the Fine did sue,
Whieh the other pleaded he had paid, the adverse part denied,
And openly affirmed he had no penny satisfied,


Now if there be any rest unsatisfied, why these Rounds have such different
appellations, let him but consider the variety of Colors, and those Roundles
which are of a Green Color, may fitly represent the fruit of terrestrial
Paradise, which was fair to the sight, Pommac^s are Green Balls.
and it may tempt him to pluck and eat. It is called a Pommace from the French
word Pomme; and according to the Aspilogia, Plagas and vibices virides Poma
aiunt significare. Our first Father Adam, while he was in Paradise, says John
Fern, Advocate of Paris, bare Gules, as a sign of Nobleness, till he
transgressed the Commandment, and then it was charged with a Black Ball, or
Apple, to denote the condition of the Bearer: and which, says he, is the
reason that our Predecessors hold it for a general Rule, That Color upon
Color is false Heraldry, and tales Pilas portare (says Johannes de Of
Guilford.
Vado aureo) significat, quod portans suam acquisivit substantiam solo labor:
and a little farther, Et ubique tres Pilas inveneris, sine aliquis differentiis
aliis, dic quod ille qui eas portat, vel suus Antecessor Laborarius erat, which
his Successors have acknowledged ever since in that old Adage: When Adam
Dug, and Eve Span,
Who was then the Gentleman.


Military persons conveyed intelligence hidden in Apples, as Hugo testifies.
The Surname of Smith, bears three Pommaces in his Shield, Green being the
Color of Love and Generation, which is attributed to Venus, but must be
excited up by the active heat of Vulcan, the Firmament being this Day the
Scutum or round Buckler, and the Charge the Malum orbiculatum, that Apple, by
which man being in Honor, became like the Beast that perished, who then that
he might be armed, had Annuli Loricae, his Shirt of Mails, and betakes himself
to his Clypeus, that is, Eo quod clepat totum Corpus, a Shield being part of
the Eclipt^ck, Gulps are purple Balls
having something graven thereon, as Pliny notes, of which in their Order. But
there is yet a Purple Ball, which among the Romans did signify egregious and
famous Senators: but in Aspilogy thus, In Militiam notent ascriptum, in manu
enim sicuti and brachio Tyrones ita olim signabant: and those that travel to
Jerusalem, bring home a Mark of this Color to this Day, the Colors in these
Bodies, proceeding not so much from the Elementary Qualities, as in Bodies
perfectly mixed, as in Herbs or Stones, but only by the falling of Light upon
Shadow, or Darkness. So making Cressants of several Colors, di^fering
according to the composure of the Cloud or Air. Some are White, when the matter
it consists of is very subtle. Some yellowish, when more thick, as may be
seen by the Scheme of Colors. Some Black, when very thick. And some Greenish,
when more watery then ordinary. And thus the Armiloger may by a diligent
Observation of these Colors, as easily judge of the disposition of the first
Bearer, Chremotisme of Cressants.
and with as much certainty as Astronomers may judge of fair or foul Weather,
all Roundles signifying Mutability, Non uno stant fata loco in mente omnia
circum.

Volvuntur, nec fas una est consistere part,
Ut coepit cursus, verum est pars cuilibet aequae:
And see, -- Queis sunt humanum terrestria curae.

The Naturalist does attribute to the Second Days Work, the appearances of many
Suns, and fiery Pillars, and Beams, and Rainbows, etc. But because they are
effects of the fourth Days Work, I shall refer them thither, only by the way
note this as of the Chief, as of a chief Commander. It represents Dignity,
ELEVOR UT FULGEAM. If there be an Augmentation in Chief, the Sun draws up the
Cloud, QUIA RESPEXIT, and if it breaks forth into Beams, DISSOLVAR UT SOLVAM.
If the Field or Chief be enlightened by Sun or Star, it is by grace and favor,
SPLENDOUR EX ME. If with Roundles, it represents innocence, IN ALTIS HABITAT;
those of the pure Element of Fire representing generosity, OPES, NON ANIMUM:
for the noble mind is like the Snow Ball, DUM AGITUR, AUGETUR. And to bear
Plates or Bezants is the two marks which Machivel propounds, viz. Riches and
Glory: which as Sir Walter Raleigh says, Whoever will shoot at, must set on,
and take off an iron Back to a weak wooden Bow, that it may fit both the
strong and the feeble: for the weak in counsel have often as good success as
those of the best judgment, as may be seen by the judgment of Paris, which
gave the golden Ball to Venus rather then Pallas. So that though Honor and
Riches differ in themselves: yet round Forms are attributed to Wisdom and
Fortune, whereof Athenaeus: From Wisdom, Fortune differs far,
And yet in works most like they are.


In the first three Days God gave every thing its proper Form; that of Levity,
to that ascended; and to that which descended the Form of Gravity, in
separating Light from Darkness, dividing Waters from Waters, and gathering the
Waters under the Firmament into one Field or Place: so that the Chief became
exalted by an extended distance and space, as the Waters above us are more
solid and condense. But how the first Matter should be Subjectum F^rmarum,
which is understood to precede the Form, is hard to be understood; only it may
be said, that originally there is no more difference betwixt Matter and Form,
then between heat and fire. Hence it blazon of arms is that where Roundles are
divided, Parley per Bend Argent and Sable 3 Roundles in Bend counterchanged.
it signifies a conjunction of both, and is the same of Proteus (or the first
Matter) that could change himself into all shapes, wheerby is signified his
crafty head, as Jupiter is said to be transformed into showers of Gold, Eagles,
Bulls, Birds, and Beasts. So Roundles are often transformed by Girons, making
as it were so many Rombs or points of the Compass on the Globe. So those that
bare Letters were called Gerones, A gerendis Epistolis, every Line representing
a several high Way through the whole Field of Nature: and so Gerony was a fit
Bearing for the Foresters of Flanders, wherein the Shield in the midst
represents the head City thereof: and the several dissections show Minerva,
Mill Dea est operum. And now by this Days Work we find benefit of Light, Lux
naturae primogenea qualitas omnia in actum deducens: The Days bright eye,
Colors distinction,
Best Judge of Measure and Proportion.


Proportion attracting the eyes, and Color delighting the Fancy, the Metal
giving the lively motion by its bright eye, and the Line the orderly
disposition of every good Coat: and where the Charge has a suitable invention,
it both allures the mind, and charms the senses of the Bearer to do naught but
noble:

Sable 3 Bezants between as many Billets Argent.
blazon of arms Now if you compare the square Figure with the Round, you shall
find that Billets being right-angled are the Emblems of Constancy and Equity:
and Round Forms, as being the most perfect Figure, represents Wisdom: He with
the Oceans swelling billows steeled.
And the vast Margin of this wondrous Shield.


Conclusion of this Chapter
To the Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgman Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, etc.
Honored Sir,
BEtween Knights and Doctors of the Law has ever been Question for Precedence,
since either of them has been in credit in Commonweals (as testifies that
learned Knight and Doctor of the Civil Law Sir Thomas Ridley) as may appear
both by the comparison that Tully makes between Lucius Murena a Knight of
Rome, and Publius Sulpitius a Lawyer, either of them standing for the
Consulship; which although it be disputable in foreign Countries, where the
Civil Law is in credit: yet here among us, where all preferments taken from it,
and the Professors thereof are shut up, as it were, into a narrow Corner of
their Profession, it is without controversy, and the Prioity thereof
indubitable. But this is the Resolution of those which are learned in the
Point, that in such Acts as concern Learning, a Doctor is to be preferred
before a Knight: but in Acts that concern Military Knowledge, a Knight takes
place before a Doctor. But in other Acts that are neither proper to the one nor
to the other, first are preferred such Doctors as attend about the Prince.
Secondly, such Knights as wait upon the Prince. Thirdly, such Doctors, as being
not about the Prince, are excellent in Learning. Fourthly, come Knights without
any place of preferment. Lastly, Doctors of meaner gifts and places. and what
esteem the Law has; for Justice sake, my Lord, is not unknown, since the
Doctor of Law gives place only to the Divine Oracles of God; and it is Justice
only that bears the Scales to balance the whole world by, and that which
makes it Standard is the Kings Authority, by which you act. Fabius was
accounted the Shield (of Rome) for defending it by Wisdom, the Round Form
being the Emblem. And Marcellus was accounted the Sword for his Valor. Both
being the proper Ensigns of a Knight, both being put in your Hands, and in your
Arms, they are not only the Hand of Power, but the Ensigns of Valor and
Wisdom. And so the Advocate is a man at Arms.

CHAP. VI.
Of the visible Charges of the third Days Work in the Creation, under the
Regiment of Mars, or the Red Shield.

GUles was the proper illumination of the third Days Work, Gules a Border OR
Verdey of Trefoils Vert.
and the Partition was Party per pale Color and Metal. Though it be hard to
know the disposition of the first three Days Work, which was before the
Creation of the Sun; yet by the Creation of Light, there was a manifest
division of the Field per pale, whereby the Waters were commanded into one
place. So that the Field of this Day consisted of dry Land and Sea; and in the
last three Days God adorned, beautified and replenished the World, setting in
the Firmament of Heaven the Sun, Moon, and Stars, filling the Earth with
Beasts, the Air with Fowl, and the Sea with Fish, giving to Creatures
Vegetative and growing their seeds in themselves, of all which in their Order.
And having already seen the dry Land, parted by Springs and Rivers, Lines and
Ordinaries, which are called Honorable; for that like Royal Rivers they have
navigable Fountains; Come I now to the Earth, is it is adorned with all manner
of Plants, with the plenty and pleasure thereof, which by the virtue of Gods
command, INCULTA SYLVESCIT.

Fert Casia non culta seges, totosque per agros
Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis:
Where Casia springs unsown, throughout the field,
And to sweet Roses unforced birth does yield.
Grass.
The first thing that represents it self to the eye, as a Charge, is Grass, and
is born by Til ssey of Lancashire; and that it is a good Bearing, you have the
Testimony of Sacred Writ, And God saw that it was good: this Bearing
representing Humility, as the Grass is trodden down and neglected, yet is
advanced to crown even the temples of Caesar. How often have we seen, that from
neglected seed has sprung up many great Palms! though the Thunder of an evil
Tongue no Laurel can resist, nor greatness of Merit exempt, which made Scipio
Africanus change his Profession of Warrior to Husbandman; and with the
self-same hand which in the parching sand of Africa, he had planted glorious
Palms of Victory, he did cultivate a little Farm, the noble Romans accounting
it an honor to be called Lentulus, Piso, Fabius, etc. from flowers and fruits,
answerable to which we have Lilly, Rose, Pear, Nut, etc. whose Arms declare
their Names. Pliny was of opinion, that Nature before she set her self to make
the Lilly, did prepare her self as it were by making the rough Draught and
Model Convolunce, a white and simple flower.

Leaves.
IN UMBRAM ERIGITUR, is the Trefoils Motto, and Trefoils are the Heralds of the
Spring, and stand upright before a storm, Leaves ushering in Blossoms, and
Blossoms falling with a happy end, do knit in Fruit. What then is signified by
it, but hopeful Youth, promising Fruit; or industrious Old Age gathering into
the Barn, Green Trefoils being the Emblems of Expectation, and White of
Fruition? for if you look but upon the decoction of Simples, which bear the
visible Colors of Bodies decocted, how dead and invalid they are without the
commixture of Allom, Argal, and the like; You may learn how without life every
Color is without a Metal. Turton bears ten Trefoils Vert, 4, 3, 2, 1. with a
Canton Gules, as a reward of his labor; and Mandevil bears three Argent in a
Chief indented, as having reposed himself after all his Travels. Champion bears
blazon of arms three, in token of Victory, because it is always found so. Sable
u Cheveron between 3 Trefoils, OR.
Mead bears the same Herb, as a Token of the Latin name called Medica,
because it was first brought into Greece by the Medes, the Britains being so
called from Scurvygrass. Sir John Lewis of Mar, Knight and Baronet, bears a
Cheveron between 3 Trefoils. The Name of Hervy bears three Trefoils on a
triumphal Belt, I mean a Bend and Palmer on the same, to show they went out
Pilgrims, returned Palmers. And look what variety of Colors the spirits of
Salt-peeter will project from the like spirits of the Earth, from whence
perhaps the Plants thereof acquire their Verdure; So look how many different
Spirits there are in the world, you will not wonder why there should be Blue,
Red, White or Yellow Trefoils: for as Naturalists observe, Cinaber becomes Red
by the acid Exhalation of Sulphur, which otherwise represents a pure White; So
Martial Spirits being sulphurated, produce the Grass to become Red, and is like
Spirit of Salt upon Blue Paper, making an Orient Color, even as Tarter or
Vitreol upon an infusion of Violets affords a delightful Crimson; though the
Field of this Day be Gules; yet No Dragons teeth this Land no Helmets bears,
Nor horrid shows with crops of Soldiers spears:
But luscious Fruit and rich Wine fill the Press,
And Olive Plants a lasting Spring possess.


For though by Mars or Arms which is all one, is represented vis impulsiva
vigor, yet how many Soldiers have been as it were the Delight of Mankind? and
it is possible for a man to discover a correspondence between the Agent and the
Patient, betwixt the Figure and the Form of each Individuum. So that a learned
Herald may by ratiocination easily discern both a substantial and figurative
similitude betwixt the Agent and the Patient (the Bearer and the Bearing) in
all things that operate one upon another. Whence does arise an Analogical
Signature, determined by figure, how much blazon of arms may be picked out from
the Cinquefoil or five-leaved Grass; Or a Cinque foil Sable.
if you read Dr. Browns Cyrus his Garden, or Quincunx, they are the Muses
Livery, and will never be forgot in Oxford, while they pray for All Souls, the
Founder whereof was Henry Chichley, Archbishop of Canterbury, and bare OR a
Cheveron between three Cinque Foils Gules; and as they are admonished of
Heroical Actions by several Heroes being turned into Flowers; So also they are
advised to begin betimes; they were called (...) by the Greeks which did
obtain. And among the Romans Hortensius sounded as Gardener: Beans sow in
Spring, then the rich furrow takes
Clave-grass and Millit annual care awakes.


Pythagoras forbad the use of Beans, only to hint to his Scholars to avoid
ambition for Magistracy: though the man that sits on the Banks of Flowers in
peace, may prepare his Shield, as in the Coat of Sir Thomas Chambrelan, being a
white Escoutcheon within an Orle of Cinquefoils, according to Virgil's Advice:
Remember to provide, if the Divine
Glory of Tillage thou intendest thine.


NOCTIS NON DEFICIT HUMOR, is the Glory of Generosity, the Semper vive, DUM
OPPRIMITUR CRESGIT. The Burrage is a Blue Cinquefoil, ET FERT GAUDIA CORDI.
While the Narcissus is of golden Color, and signifies beautiful Youth. Sedges
is born in Arms by the Name of Sickes. and Sylvanus.

Comes adorned with rural Boughs,
Lillies and Fennel dangling on his Brows.
The noble Plantagenet is a Caterfoil, Caterfoils.
which HIEME FLORET, and is born by the noble Duke of Albemarle, as a Slip of
the same Plant which Scotland tried IN DIE FRIGORIS, his fidelity being still
verdant, DUM CAETERA LANGUENT; yea at such a time, VT REMOTISSIMO SOLE, And
though Honor like a Flower, BREVIS EST VSVS, yet the remembrance of his Name,
like the lovely Amaranthus, NVNQVAM LANGVESCIT. The Cinquefoil is the
Gillyflower of Heraldry, IN QVOSCVNQVE COLORES. Cinquefoils.
If it be Metal, FVLCIT ET ORNAT. Salts are the Colors of all Bodies, whence
they receive their Degrees of Luster or Obscurity. All Flowers are Emblems of
this mortal Life, STATIM LANGVENT, while some Leaves are notwithstanding
Symbols of Immortality, FOLIVM EJVS NON DEFLVIT. And what Laurel leaves
signify it is plain, VINCENTI DABITVR. Augustus and Germanicus, Titus and
Adrian, Antonius Philosophus, Alexander, Constantine and Theodosius were all
crowned with a double Laurel, as Sages and as Emperors, Chaplets being always
signs of Mastership; Chaplets.
and therefore to this Day are Masters of Societies elected by Laurel Chaplets
about their Brows, Laurel.
the crowning of Sages and Poets proceeding from a kind of Example of it, which
was under the old Roman Emperors, the giving of Crowns of Laurel to them as
the Ensigns of Degrees of Mastership in Poetry, and that by Imperial Authority,
either by the Emperors themselves, or by Counts, Palatines, or others, having
such delegate Authority, having continued ever since the time of Frederick the
First, with Laurel, a Ring also being given them, as in the Letters Testimonial
of Reasner, and Jacobus Grasserus, both Counts Palatine to Michael Bartchios
Julii 8. 1618. Imperiali authoritate fronti ejus ingeniosissimae Lauream
Poeticam imposuimus, Crowning of Poets.
and dextram in diviniore hac Poeseos harmonia exercitatissimam annulo aureo
exornavimus. And in those of Reasner to Casparus Wagnerus December. 29. 1593. Te
per Laurus impositionem and annuli traditionem Poetam Laureatum fecimus. And as
Mr. Seldom farther observes, as from the use of the old Empire, the latter
took their Example of Crowning with Laurel, being anciently received into
England. John Skeleton had the title of Laureat under Henry the Eighth. And at
the same time Robert Whittington called himself Grammaticae Magister and
Protovates Angliae in florentissima Oxoniensi Academia Laureatus. And under
Edward the Fourth John Kay, by the title of his humble Poet Laureat, dedicateth
to him the Siege of Rhodes in Prose, the custom of Crowning Poets continuing
unto the time of Theodosius, as it is observed upon Ausonius, who lived then
and writes: Tu pene ab ipsis orsus incunabulis
Dei Poeta nobilis,
Sertum Coronae praeferens Olympiae,
Puer celebrasti Jovem.


Corona Olympica denoting here the Quercus Capitolina, or Crown of Oak, or
Tarpeia Quercus, as Martial long before called it in that to Collinus: O cai
Tarpeias licuit contingere Quercus,
Et meritas prima cingere fronde comes.


The Name of Moorwood bears an Oke-tree, Acorns.
in signification of his Name, every Acorn MAXIMAM FACIT. And where it is born
by the Name of Wood, PONDERE FIXASVO. Did ever any Roman merit this Garland,
'twas for that SERVANTI CIVEM. L. Siccius Dentatus obtained 14. of this sort,
8. of beaten gold, and 3. mural.

The Olive Branch was the Emblem of Peace ever since the Doves return to the
Ark; and it is sacred to Minerva: Hoc pro supplicibus ramis, pro fronde
Minervae,
Hoc Carmen pro Thure damus. --
This for Minerva's supplicating Bough,
This Verse for Incense we bestow.


RAMVMQVE PRECANTIS MINERVA. Heralds Rods.
The Cadduces and Rods of the Greeks were made of Olive Branches, and that of
the Romans of Vervine. John Gower in the time of Richard the Second, lies
buried in St. Mary Overs Church, has his Statue crowned with Ivy mixed with
Roses, Duplici nota insignem, Bale cent. 7 Scrip. 23.
nempe aurea torque and haederacea Corona Rosis interserta, illud militis, hoc
Poetae Ornamentum. Perhaps the Name of Nithingale bears the Rose, as a sign
of Knighthood, and parted of York and Lancaster, in having been a faithful
servant to both Houses, or to King Henry the Seventh, in whom they were united
(and so the Field is honored with Ermine) in faithfulness and charity. Hulling
bears a Rose within a Chaplet, perhaps in imitation of that frequent Speech
of Cicero: Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea linguae:
That Arms should yield to Arts it is fit,
Stoop then the Laurel to the Wit.


Gules three Crowns, and on a Chief OR, three Laurel leaves proper.
blazon of arms And he was saluted by Pliny the Elder: Hail thou (quoth he)
that first deservest a Triumph for the Gown, and a Garland for thy Tongue,
which salutation I cannot but give to Sir John Berkenhead, Knight and Doctor of
Law, and Master of the Faculties, and one of the Masters of Request, having his
Temples crowned in Chief for his Mastership in the Gown, and the three Crowns
in the Field for his knowledge in those Faculties, which (as Dr. Fuller says)
are signified by the three Crowns in Oxford Arms, viz. Grammar, Philosophy, and
Divinity, the three Professions which King Alfred there founded.

The Rose.
rose The Rose is an honorable Bearing, First, Because Amicus Bellatoribus
quippe aculeis, quasi telis armata, and veluti cruore perfusa. Under the Rose
be it spoken, is as much as be secret in Counsel, and so it is the Symbol of
Taciturnity and honest Actions, it being an Enemy to the impure Swine, and the
filthy Dung-flie. And so it was aptly given to Noah Bridge Clerk of the
Parliament to the late King at Oxford, the Kings Majesty having given power to
the King of Arms to confer any of his Royal Badges in remuneration of fidelity,
according to the Example of his Royal Progenitors. So Harding had a Rose and
two Flower-de-liz na Canton sinister, in memory of his fidelity to the King his
Master. And his Majesty that now is has conferred a Rose and Crown on his
Master Cook, who is of the Name of Sawyer, and bears a Cheveron between three
Wood-peckers, with Analogy to his Name: the Chancellor of the Garter, the
Judges of Law, the Kings of Arms, Esquires, etc. all of them bearing the Roses
in their Col.er of S. S. may be said to be NON SEMPER NEGLECTA, and is the
Emblem of the Martyrs.

blazon of arms The Lilly of Virginity, Azure a Flower de liz Argent.
and the Saffron of Confessors: and so the Church is as a Garden of Flowers,
representing several Graces, and among the rest, Saltem Lillia suavissimi sunt
flores, ae prae aliis grati, vel ideo, quia col^re atque odore suo delectant,
absque metu vel periculo injuriae, eoque etiam superant Spinus, obsitas Rosas,
and are all three born in our Sovereigns Badges. It Is called the Flower of
Juno, and is the Symbol of Hope, because it had its Original from Heaven, and
is the Arms of France, joined with England, INSCRIPTVS NOMINA REGIS. Edmond of
Langley was the first that took the white Rose, and John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster the red, The Red and the White Rose.
as being born before his time by Edmond Crowchback, second Son to King Henry
the Third, who was first Earl of Lancaster, and King Henry the Seventh united
both. And so in that Match, REDOLET ET SANAT, King Edward the Third being the
first that joined the Lilly and the Rose, uniting England and France COMMVNE
NOMEN VTRIQVE. And King James joining the Thistle to the Rose, it was FORTITUDO
ET DECOR. So that you see Flowers represent virtuous persons, SEMPER SUAVE. The
Rose is Mercy and Justice, CUM LENITATE ASPERITAS. The Lilly of the Church
Militant, HUMILIBUS DAT GRATIAM. The Rose of the State Political, TUENTUR
HONORES QUOS SOCIANT. But now to show you the other Achievements of Mars that
charge the Fields of this Days Work: Aspicies porro campis quae plurima apricis,
Sylvis umbriferis, hortis nascuntur and arvis,
Arboreos foetus, and suaveolentia mala;
Aurea Punica, Persica mala, Cydonia mala,
Nunc Europaeis vulgo quae mensa secunda,
Indum victoris, ne dulcia dona Lyaei
Subticeam, botrum est qui gaudeat usurpare;
Lillia Rex Celtis sibi ab olim vindicat; inde
Purpureas luteasque Rosas, Violas, Hyacinthos,
Atque alios sumit flores sibi. --


Garlands.
Where there was a collective number of Flowers, and bound up in Garlands, it
was to denote Excellency, ELECTUS EX MILLIBUS, and were rewards of Generals of
Armies, EX UNIONE DECOR; that that was of Oken Boughs, OB CIVES SERVATOS. That
of Laurel ALITARTES, Branches being much used among the sacred and solemn Rites
of the Egyptians. The Spring was anciently represented by a Basket of Flowers,
the Summer by Ears of Corn, the Autumn by a Cornucopia of Fruit, and the Winter
by a naked Tree. You shall see the Coat Armor of Spring dapled with
Cinquefoils; that of Summer being a Green Field girt with a Girdle, or silver
Rivulet, to add to the pleasure of the same. Autumn has its part in the Coats
of Apletons, and Winter in that of Blackstock, who bears three starved
Branches. These being Emblems of mortal life; for Youth like Flowers flourish,
yet STATIM LANGUENT, according to Saint Ambrose, Hodie videas Adolescentem
validum, pubescentem atatis virtute, florentem grata specie, suavi color;
crastina die tibi facie and ore mutatus occurret. So David in the 103. Psalm,
thus says, Totus splendour generis humani, honores, potestates, divitiae,
minae, tumores, flos foeni est, wherein the Flower of the Grass has reference
to the Leaves of Honors. Ob. 857.
We have already spoken of Edolwolf the twentieth Monarch of England bare Ermin
on a Bend Sable, three Cinquefoils OR. And since his death Edolph of Kent has
assumed the Coat only in allusion of Name, Flower bearing the Cinquefoil
slipped, as Just gathered. The name of Young bears Roses, as if they should
always be young, though Saint Ambrose says, Momento cuncta praetereunt, and
saepe honor abiit antequam venerit, and like the first appearing Blossoms, they
scarce appear before they begin not to be. The few Ears of Corn in Lealand's
Coat show, whence he had his Name and Arms, and the Garbs in Otteleys Coat show
the same, neither is the Shield of Achilles wanting: To these the Fiery Artizan
did add a new Eared Field,
Large and thrice plowed, the Soil soft being, and of a wealthy Yeald,
And many men at plow he made, etc.


Denoting the benefits of Peace, and the Plow being no other then the Symbol of
a well grounded Peace: -- Of all the ample Close
The Soil turned up behind the Plough, all Black like Earth arose,
Though forged of nothing else but Gold, and lay in show as Light
As if it had been plowed indeed, miraculous to sight.
There grew by this a Field of Corn high ripe where Reapers wrought
And let thick handfulls fall to Earth, for which some others brought
Bands, and made Sheaves.


Azure a Garb, OR banded Gules.
blazon of arms Sheaves showing the Bearers thereof to have yearly Revenues.
Weeds indeed EXALTANTVR INANES, while the Corn has ALTERA VITA and is bound up
in Sheaves, in the Coat of Wheatly. And in single Ears, in Eyres Coat, SPEM
RENOVATANNI, and is a good Bearing for a Husbandman. And thus Garbs and Fruits
of the Earth become honorable Bearings: so that the Artist has expressed the
joy of the King, and has brought the Scepter to the Mattock. Benedices Coronae
anni benignitatis tuae.

-- The King stood pleased at heart,
Said not a word, but's Scepter showed, and from him much apart.
His Harvest Bailiffs undernearh an Oak a Feast prepared,
And having killed a mighty Ox stood there to see him shared.
So here you may see the Scepter is the sign of Grace and Favor, as well as of
Authority and Rule, the Scepter at first being Branches, which as Kercher
says, Symbolum primi nutrimenti, ut sciat vulgus fructus quidem omnino
germinare and augeri, longissimo tempore permanere; se autem accepisse exiguum
vitae tempus, and de causa volunt dari Ramos. So we see the Kings Scepter is
always flowred, ut semper Augustus. Every peculiar Grain has its Color; Grain.
the Wheat is OR, when the Rye is Gules: the Barley is Argent, and the Bean
Sheaves are Black In Blake's Coat. Kempe signifies a Combat-fighter, and
bears three Garbs Gold within a Border ingrailed, or a hedge of Thorns, as
the Italian word signifies: and though a Soldiers (...) is in many
difficulties, yet he shall be gathered to his Father in a good old age, like a
Shock of Corn in his season. Garbs signify also community, fellowship and
fortitude, which is the reason so many Cheshire Families took Wheat Sheaves, in
imitation of Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester in time of the Conquest, and continue
those Bearings as Fellow Soldiers, he holding their Lands by the Sword, as the
Conqueror did by the Crown. Alexander Comine King of Scotland bare Garbs, in
token of Community. The falling of the Seed is the Emblem of immortal Fame,
whose virtue IN FUNERE PERENNITAS; and the first Blossoms of a promising fruit,
DABIT IN TEMPORE.

blazon of arms The Pomegranate is the Arms of the Kingdom of Granado, Sable a
Pomegranate OR sliped Vert.
and is born as an Augmentation in the Coat of Sir Henry Guilford, by Ferdinand
King of Spain. So also has Aston a Canton of a Rose and Pomegranate, with
reference to England and Spain, for Service done. The Thistle and Rose
conjoined in the Coat of Nicholas de Moline, a noble Senator of Venice, was in
reward of his Embassage to our late Sovereign King James, as the Union of
England and Scotland. Winchester College bears the Lillies, in token of its
Founder, who bare three in Chief, and the Bishops thereof bare the Rose in a
Garter, as a Royal Placate. King Edward the Third bare for his device a golden
Trunk of a Tre^, in token of Fortitude; for as the Oak is the Eagle, so the
Palm is the Phoenix. Among the Trees the Greek word Phoenix signifying a Palm
Tree, Vir justus ut Phoenix florebit, is rendered by Tertullian a blazon of arms
Palm Tree. The figures of Italus and Prince Sabinus were cut in Cedar, because
it was a wood not subject to worm-eating. OR a Palm Tree Vert;
Hence Cedro digna locutus was put for worthy to be preserved in writing to
(...) posterity, Records being preserved in ^his Wood: the Oak and Palm being
the Emblem of Fortitude and Uprightness; PONDERA FIXA SUO is the one, AD OMNIA
VTILIS is the other: where the Root is left, HABET SPEM: and where the Trunk is
hung with a Shield, SPOLIATIS ARMA SVPERSVNT. Trees many times serve NE VIATOR
ABERRET. Trees.
And it is hard if a man know not his own Coat. Burnet bears three Holly
Leaves; and the property of the Tree is, that NOCENTIA FVGAT. The Bay Tree is
VICTRIX TEMPORIS. The Orange DILECTAT, SAPIT, NVTRIT. The Balsom VULNERE
VULNERA SANAT. The Cedars DELECTANT ET JUVANT. The Holm Oak is ROBUR IN ARMIS,
three of them being born by Thornholm of Yorkshire, and represents a man of
Arms. The Cypress is Deaths Emblem, IRREPARABILIS DAMNO. The Quince FRAGANTIA
DURAT. The Ivy represents constant Love, NEQUE MORS SEPARABIT. The Fig Tree
SENECTUTE FAECUNDIOR, and represents a profitable Person, and is the
Prognosticator of Summer. The Ashes STANT PROCUL AB UMBRA. The Mulberry Tree
SERO FLORET, CITO MATURAT. And you know who said, TEMPUS MEUM NON ADVENIT. The
Pomegranate SOLUM CORONA CONSPICUUM, and is born by the Names of Granger and
Gardener. It represents a true Soldier, VULNERATA PERFICITVR. Heurts.
So that some reckon a Heurt in the former Chapter to be one of these Seeds, or
rather a Heurtleberry. However it signifies a liberal Person, NEMINE SUA
MUNERA CLAUDIT. The Turpentine Tree is the pattern of Patience, ILLAESA
SERVATA. The Almond Tree EDULCABITUR. The Myrrh is the Emblem of Mercy, EMITTIT
SPONTE. It Is the Muses Tree, and the Emblem of Poesy, GENIO ET VOLUPTATI. The
Nut Tree SUB CORTICE MITIS. The Elm, QUOD OPERIT NUTRIT. The Palm teaches
Perseverance, NUNQUAM MUTATA FRONDE. The Peach TRANSLATU PROFICIT. The
Pineapple is a worthy Bearing, HINC FRUCTUS ET ODOR. It Is like a profitable
Person, SEMPER FERTILIS, abounding in good works. The Partree OBUMBRAT ET
RECREAT. The Apple Tree PROTEGIT ET NUTRIT, and MATURA blazon of arms
DELIGITUR. The Oak CIBUM ATQUE SALUTEM. Argent an Oak Tree eradicated Vert
fruited OR
And he that bears Acorns may know MINIMA MAXIMAM FACIT. So Senoke bears seven
Acorns, in memory of the small Town that gave him Birth, who came afterward to
be Mayor of London. The Willow CEDENDO VINCIT. And the Thorn PUNGENDO STIMULAT.
Some Fruits AETATE MATURANI, and others NIXU GRAVIORE RE SURGUNT. Of which
nature are the Sarvices, and the Cork Trees. The Ewe Tree LAEDENTEM LAEDO. The
Vine SESE SUFFICIT ALTERUM, and gives Fruit to be born both by the names of
Vines and Levines, UT ABUNDANTIUS HABET. It has a Tincture of Honor, AT
SALTEM ILLUSTROR. The Vintners Arms are of old to show, that in the goodness of
Wine, VETUSTATE PROFICIT.

The Phytian Grapes best dried, Lageos strong,
Which soon will try your feet, and tie your tongue.
The precious Grapes want neither odor nor fragrancy; and therefore was an
Ornament in our Shield: He set near this a Vine of Gold that cracked beneath
the weight
Of Bunches black, which being ripe to keep, which at the height
A silver Rail ran all along, and round about it flowed
An azure Mote, etc.


As if in Blazon he should say, he bore in a Field OR on an Escoutcheon Azure a
Vine Branch of the first, between three Bunches of Grapes proper. Neither shall
I omit the Olive Tree because Wine and Oil IN OPORTVNITATE UTRVMQVE; for the
Olive represents a noble soul, VULNERA, NON VERBERA GAVDET. The whole Wood of
Trees EXVLAT AESTVS, Woods.
and being cut down CEDENDO VINCIT. The Trunk ALIENIS SPOLIIS is proper Valor.
Aaron's rod budded, Trunk.
INSPERATA FLORET, and is born on the Shekel of the Sanctuary; and VNO AVULSO
NON DEFICIT ALTER: Stock.
and every young Siens of a noble Stock has HVMOR AB ALIO. Thus having done
with lofty Trees, if we turn our eyes to the lowest Shrubs, amongst Herbs we
shall find the Bears foot, DEPRESSA RESVRGIT. The Jerusalem Rose VIRTUS HINC
MAJOR. Herbs.
The Basil QVO MOLLIUS EO SVAVIVS. The Borage, FERT GAVDIA CORDI. The Maiden
hair NVNQVAM MARCESCIT. Capers IN ARIDO VIRET. The Thistle, that Badge of
Scotland says, NEMO ME IMPVNE LACESSIT. The Colwort FRIGORE PERFICITVR. Onions
NON TEGMINA DFSVNT. Fenecreke FRVCTVM AFFERT IN PATIENTIA. Corn represents
Gratitude, PLUS QVAM ACCEPERIT, and by Gods Blessing CRESCIT IN CENTVPLVM. A
Mushrom represents humane Life, CITO VANESCIT. The Flax ASPERITATE POLITVM. And
Hampson bears three Hemp Breks, as the Emblem of indefatigable labor and
travel, in bringing to pass things necessary, which FRACTA PERFICITVR. Turnips
are sometimes born in Arms, as Guilium notes, and its virtue is, DANT OMNIBVS
ESCAM. The Housleek, though it has no ground to grow on, NON DEFICIT HUMOR:
and the Saffron CALCATA VIRESCIT. The Goar ET CORTEX AD USUM. Pirton bears
three Pears, and so does Perry; and they that understand English know the
reason why. So also does Abbot, but to show as before how they spent their time
in a Cloister. Some were Husbandmen, and some were Gardners. And thus I have
brought you safe through the Woods into the open Field, and from thence into
the Garden, where APES EXPECTANT, Flowers.
and the Flowers therein VIRTUTEM ET ODORES EMITTUNT. Where also you may see
their use, Raro dentur flores nigri and virides, Chromotism of Flowers.
quid primum in vegetativa gradum obtinent folia: secundum flores. Hence it is
that Green is the first Color among Plants and Flowers in the Garden of all
Colors, DECORANT ET PROSUNT. Some are of that nature, that NUNQUAM
LANGUESCUNT, and so represents Perseverance, NEC GELV NEC AESTV: so the
Aramanthus. There are other LANGVESCVNT IN VMBRA. So the Tulip. The
Gilly-flower, IN QUOSCVNQVE COLORES; and the Gesemine VESPERE FLORET. The
Hyacinth, ET PALLET ET PLACET. The Flowerdeliz and Rose contend for both
COELESTI SEMINE NATA: the one PRESIOSIOR INTVS, the other INTIMIS AVRVM: the
one SERVABIT ODOREM, and the other ETIAM RECISA REDOLET, and both representing
Perseverance. The Sun-flowers FLECTENTES ADORANT, and is a Bearing for a
Divine, VBI AMOR IBI OCVLI. The Indian Flower represents pious Youth,
FLAGRATORIENTE: and the Spanish LVX OBVIA CLAVDET. The Popge PONDERE VICTVS:
and the Pyony MVLTIPLEX MOX NVLLA.

Spring cloth the Woods with Leaves, and Groves attires,
Earth swells with Spring, and Genital seed requires,
In fruitful showers the Almighty from above
Descends in the lap of his delighted Love.
Minerals.
Whereby the precious stones attain their virtue: and to this Days Work is
referred Lozengies, Nam omnis Vegetabilium generatio contingit. For by the
Lozenge is represented a Celestial blazon of arms Womb: OR a Bend Lozengy Sable.
Nam semen primo terrae mandatum, purifactumque pulatim ad vitam disponitur,
quo facto in surculos, folia, flores, mox prorumpit. Denique Solis virtute in
fructus novos, quo est ultimus Vegitationis scopus annuo spacio decoquitur,
quem circularem Vegetationis motum haudquaquam, etc. The noble flower of the
Sun having his seed of Lozenge form: and the bearing of Lozengies in a man's
Shield does denote, that Mars nihil aliud est quam vis illa activa res ipsas
coaptans, by whose active heat is stirred up the Powers of Vegetatives and
Minerals; for though the Sun was not created till the fourth Day, yet certum
est ignem sub lucis nomine comprehendi: and so precious stones come to be
generated, that of the Lozenge form being born by the Mountagues, and others.
What does it signify then that the Bearers are men of Business, according to
that of Cicero, Quid negotii geritur, in quo ille tot and tales viros desat
gat? Fucils born by women, and Mullets by men.
The Facil for the bearing of the Facil is attributed to the female Sex for the
cause star before, and that of the Pontagon or Mullet form to the Male, as a
spur to excite and stir up. It is called in Heraldry a Mullet, but by
Naturalists an Astroides, for the form it has to a Star in Heaven. It is
attributed to the third Brother, as the proper Work of the third Day, and it
signifies Prudence, as being the Mullet of benevolent Jove. It is the
Pentalpha on the money of Antiochus Soter (that ancient Antiochus from whom the
other Kings of Syria were afterward called Antioch^) who being about to fight
against the Galatians, saw in a nocturnal representation Alexander standing by
him, who charged him that he should give the word (...) for the Tessera of his
Soldiers (the Hicroglyphick blazon of arms of which word was a threefold
Triangle, complicated within it self of five equal Lines, touching each other
in the point) which when immediately he did, and put this Pentagram both in
their Shields, and all other Military Harnasses, he obtained an Admiral
victory; Antiochus his silver being stamped with this impression with (...) in
the intervals, and in the wars of the Emperor, especially those of
Constantinople. The Order of Footmen called Propugnatores, bore an Azure Shield
bordered about with Purple, but the middle was Green, made within a Pentalph,
and all the other space between that and the Lines that limited that Pentalph
was of a Purple. Hence it is observable, that the Mullet is the sign of Safety;
and being born at the heel of the Martial man, TRANSGRESS A JVVAT; nay more,
ETIAM CVRRENTIBVS APTA. The Order of the Bethelemites which begun An. 1252,
wearing a five-pointed Mullet on their Backs, in token of the Star that stood
over our Saviors Birthplace, since which time we write ANNO SALVTIS,
Chromotism of Stones.
that Mullet appearing like a spur to the Wise men, EXCITAT ET DIRIGIT. No Gems
are perfectly white or black, Quia album and nigrum omnis transparentiae
incapaces esse, nevertheless the Diamond and Pearl represent both Colors.

Blazon by precious Stones.
The blazon by precious stones began on this Day, wherein the Amber represented
a painful Preacher, TRAHAM SI CALEAM: the Asbestos that indures the fire, UNICE
ET SEMPER. The Loadstone represents Constancy, UNDEQUAQUE ADIDEM. Many Waters
cannot quench Love, which is of the nature of Camphire NEC EXTINGVITVR. The
Carbunckle, that has many Rays, CVNCTIS SPLENDIDIOR, and is the Emblem of
Charity. The Thunderstone GRANDINE CREVIT: and the Coral represents Modesty,
ELATA RVBESCIT. The Whetstone HEBETAT ET ACVIT: to blazon by Crystal what does
it signify but OCCVLTA APPARENTIBVS RESPONDENT: by Diamond but SEMPER
CONSTANS. By Pearl but VIRTUES EXPOSITA PROBATVR. The Emrald represents the
State of the Blessed, NON SATIANS OCVLOS IMPLET: and the Sapphire a heavenly
Reward PIVM REDDIT: the Jasper represents the Sacred Trinity VNVS SED TRICOLOR:
and the Saints are Gods Jewels, and their estimation in PVRITATE PRETIVM. Stone
bears to his Arms three flints, ART POLITVR: and Dymon bears five Diamonds
between three Annulets RADIIS ADVERSA REFULGET, IN AVRO NITIDIOR. Some bear
Carbunckles, representing Sceptres, INTER TENEBROSOS MAGIS LVCETIS. It Is the
Scepter of Pluto, or the God of Riches, for so signifies Lozengies, Mascles,
Buckles, Rings, Carbunckles, being Symbols of outward Blessings and Nobleness,
God having given the fairest tincture to the Ruby, and the quickest light to
the Diamond.

Chaplet



Lozenge



Mascle



Buckles



Ring



Escarbuncle



And in infinite Wisdom has distinguished his Angels, by degrees has given
greater and lesser Lights to Heavenly Bodies, has made a difference between
Beasts and Birds; the Eagle and the Fly, the Cedar and the Shrub: has also
ordained Kings, Dukes, and Leaders of the people, Magistrates, Judges, and
other Degrees among men; and as Honor is left to posterity for a mark and
Ensign of the virtue and understanding of their Ancestors, so these Notes are
as Symbols of their Nobility. Plato preferring first Bodily Health. Secondly,
Form and Beauty. And lastly, Riches, which is not to raise our Buildings out of
other men's Ruins, but by our own Achievements. Chaplets were rewards to the
Muses, and Gems to the Graces. The A^gyptians, when they erected their
Obelisks, made them of several sorts of stones, Et per Pyrei quidem Coloris
particulas ignem, per Crystallinas and Amethystinas Pellucidas aerem, Coeruleam
Lympham per Coeruleas, per nigras denique particulas terram. Thus you may see,
that as Plants, apt to grow wild, etc. may be by Husbandry and cultivating
become Noble; So the Seeds of Virtue may by the Art and Husbandry of good
Counsel, produce better and more beautiful fruit, then the strength of nature
and kind could have done; and the water and the air are the two Elements,
whence all Plants do derive their variety of Color: Short is man's life,
irreparable time,
But men by virtue to high honor climb.


Conclusion of this Chapter
To Sir John Berkenhead Knight, Master of the Faculties, and one of the Masters
of Requests.
SIR,
IN this, as in the Story of other Nations, Armis militaribus donare, or
Cingulo militari, and such Phrases are the same with Militem facere, or to make
a Knight, (as the learned Seldom observes) and was a Courtly Ceremony, whereas
Consecrare militem was a Sacred Ceremony, which was all one as to make a Knight
also, the one was by giving of Robes, Arms, Spurs, and the like; and the other
was performed with holy Devotions, and what else was used in the Church at or
before the receiving of the Dignities. Sunt and Belli sicut and Pacis Jura. For
as Dr. Wiseman observes of the Civilians Work, that it is to draw into one
Body and Systeme, the Testimonies of the ancient Philosophers Historians,
Poets, and Orators, in what they are all as it were by the light of Nature,
consenting in one and the same judgment. Also what has been delivered by the
ancient Fathers, and most approved Canons of the Church on that Subject, and
what has been continually practiced by the most Heroic Nations, as the
Graecians, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Lacedaemonians, Carthaginians, and
especially the Romans, with whom, for experience and Discipline in War, and
Justice, and Bravery toward their Enemies, no Nation is to be compared, and by
which helps the Laws of war in use at this day have been made and perfected,
only through che Civilians pains and industry. How much therefore does your
Coat deserve the reward of the Crown, and your Temples the Laurel, to whose
Chief of Reason I submit these my Concessions.

CHAP. VII.
Of the visible Charges of the fourth Days Work under the Regiment of Sol, or
the Golden Shield.

OMicron was the Symbol of the Sun among the A gyptians, Sol a Border, Saturn
Entoyr of eight Estoil Luna.
this Planet dividing the Universe per Bend, as it appears quo ad nos. And
Drax in his Exposition of the Symbol of the Wheel, says, That some persons
made a representation of their actions to others, not only by Speech, but
Symbols. So did Joseph understand by the Sun and Moon his Father and Mother,
and by the Stars his Brethren, even before he was sold to the Agyptians, whose
solemn Custom it was to wrap up all their little knowledge under mystical
representations, which were unavoidably charged with two inconveniences,
either obscurity or ambiguity, which took not up only a great deal of time to
gather such Symbolical matter. But when they were pitched upon, they were
liable to great variety of interpretation, as among the golden Images of their
Gods, two Dogs, a Hawk, and an Ibis, by the Dogs some understood the Tropicks,
others the two Hemispheres, by the Hawk some understood the Sun, others the
Aequinoctial by the Ibis, some the Mo n, others the Zodiac, and what a deal
ado (says my Author) is made about that famous Hieroglyphick of Diospolis,
where there was a Child, to express coming into the world, an old man, for
going out of it; a Hawk for God, and an Hippotamus for hatred; all to express
this venerable Apophthegme, O ye that come into the world, and that go out of
it, God hates impudence: and among their other Hieroglyphics, Ignis Symbolum
est iracundiae, and the Thunderbolt among the Egyptians did signify fire,
sive biponti dominio inferiora: and therefore fire is the Symbol of Royalty,
and their great and stupendous Obelisks were called by a name that did sign
fie D^gitos Solis, they being formed apiece, to denote the fourfold
Dominion of the Sun in the Elementary world. They were dedicated also to the
Sun, both by the A^gyptians and the Phoenicians, with a pointed Vertex, for the
Analogy it has to the Sunbeams, the Kings of Egypt erecting them in a
certain emulation one to exceed the other; Sun, Moon, and Stars then signify
conspicuous persons. So Jacob and Joshua was signified by the Sun in sacred
Writ, as Fathers of Families and Countries. So that if you will blazon by
Planets, see how Sol and Luna perficiunt, Saturnus frigefacit, Jupiter
calefacit, Mars siccat, Venus humectat, Mercurius conglutinat. In a word, the
Sun is here in the midst of the Planets, as the Soul of the World, according to
that Pythagorical saying of Virgil, animating and quickening every thing from
the Spirit within, the Sun in this figure, being placed in the midst, which
Euripides, a Disciple of Anaxagoras, calls Auream Glebam, Plotinus Naturae
lucernam, Anaxagoras Candefactum Ferrum, ex quo omne gignitur; Orpheus calls
it Vivificum ac aeterni Coeli Oculum, Luminis Fontem: and Heraclitus, Cor
Coeli. The Symbolical Names and Arms are those of Bright Day, Clear, St.
Clear, Dyson, Pearson, etc.

Argent a Mullet of six points.

OR an Estoil Azure.

Argent an Estoil perforated Gules.

Azure the Sun proper.

OR an increscent Vert.

OR a decrescent purpure.

Sable a Crescent Argent.




Omnia quae natura, vel art fiunt, aliqua ratione fiunt, unde opus naturae,
opus intelligentiae. The Ancients usually described the Sun by twelve Beams,
and was called by as many Names as its several Operations on inferior things;
The operations of the Sun and Moon.
for it was called 1. Jupiter, vis penetrativa Vniversi. 2. Apollo, vis
radiorum calefactiva. 3. Pluto, vis effectiva Mineralium. 4. Aeolus, vis
effectiva Ventorum. 5. Mars, vis Bilis excitativa. 6. Pan, vis genitalis totius
Vniversi. 7. Neptunus, vis in Naturam humidam. Sun.
8. Aesculapius, vis Solis sulutifera. 9. Hercules, vis Solis corroborativa. 10.
Mercurius, vis attractiva vaporum. 11. Bacchus, vis in liquores and vinum
concoctiva. 12. Saturnus, vis temporum effectiva.


And the Moon also had several Denominations according to her Operations.

Moon.
1. Ceres, vis productiva fructuum. 2. Luna, vis benevola luminis. 3. Flora, vis
productiva vegetabilium. 4. Diana, vis in Sylvas, feras, arbores. 5. Minerva,
calor Lunae salutiferus. 6. Thetis, vis Lunae in maria omnia humida. 7. Hecate,
vis Lunae insubterranea. 8. Bellona, vis Lunae, Domitrix rerum. 9. Proserpina,
vis Lunae, herbarum Productrix. 10. Juno, vis Lunae, illuminativa Aeris. 11.
Venus, vis seminalis Lunae. 12. Rhaea, omne influxui Solari subjectibile.
By all which, as the Sun is properly masculine, so the Moon is the genuine
Symbol of the feminine sex, the Cressant, Incressant, Decressant, fitly
represented by that of Prudentius: -- Terque suas eadem variare figuras,
Denique dum Luna est, etc. --
Three times she turns her shape,
She is the Moon when bright her shape does show,
Latona's Daughter when she hunts below.
But thronged in hell she Pluto's wife, and awes
The Furies, giving stern Megara Laws.


Thus by Crescents are represented the glory of the Parents, still emulating
the clarity of their Sire: Crescents.
and by Stars are represented magnanimous Sons. The first King of Egypt, after
the death of Moses, was Memphis; he was said to be Vir magni animi, and
paternarum traditionum assertor acerrimus, who after he had reigned forty
years, left a Son called Sothis, a name of Mercury among the Egyptians, that
is, the Son of a Star, Mercury being the Symbol of the Element of Air. Neither
is it ignoble to bear Black, or Blue, or Red Stars in Arms; for what do they
signify otherwise, then these Plane-Virtues, quae sunt in Archetypo mundi:
Saturnus, Aequitatis. Jupiter, Benevolentiae. Mars, Veritatis. Venus,
Voluptatis. Mercurius, Sapientiae. Luna, Divitiarum.


This Day produces the Shield of Urania, id est, humanae intelligentiae
sublimitas; and hitherto is to be referred Blazon for great Kings, and Princes,
and Nobles. Joseph having married the Daughter of the Priest of Heliopolis, the
City of the Sun, where Mitres held his Royal seat, learning there the first
Hieroglyphics, being the very Letters that the A^gyptians use themselves, and
these indeed are the Characters of the great God, that were made for signs, and
for seasons, and for days, and for years. Kercher delivers it as his first
Axiom in his Ars magna lucis and umbrae, that lux compressa (as in the body of
the Sun) fortior est quam disgregata, and consequenter illuminat vehementius,
longiussque defunditur, for which cause the gold is accounted the most noble
Metal, and Sol of all the Planets, imperium sine fine dedit, the fourth Day
being the Dies triumphalis, to the glory of the Creator. Here you may see
Phoebum in medio consistere aure a coma fulgentem, and tanquam Regem atque
Imperatorem mundi sceptrum tenere, being placed between the first and seventh
Day in the Honor point, so that in medio consistit Virtus. The Talismans that
derived their virtues from the Stars were called by the Jews David's Bucklers,
and the Planetary Deities among the Chaldeans had such repute, that they had no
other Gods but the Stars, they made Statutes and Images to the golden Sun, and
to the Moon silver: so that to blazon the Sun or Moon proper, does imply the
Metals of OR and Argent: and for the rest of the Planets, the Metal dedicated
to them, those Images derived an influence from the Stars to which they were
erected. Sunbeams.
The Palladium of Troy is supposed to be one, Sol efficit ut omnia floreant.
Rays of the Sun represent serenity and tranquillity under a gracious Prince.
So Edward the Third King of England bare for his device, the Rays of the Sun
dispersing themselves out of a Cloud, as in other places a golden trunk of a
Tree, as well to show the illustriousness of his descent, as the stability of
his Stock. Henry the Fourth used also the Sunbeam. The like did Edward the
Fourth and Fifth, charged with a white Rose, as the badge of York. The like did
Richard the Third, Henry the Seventh, uniting them in the Sunbeams. The like
did King Henry the Eighth. And as one says excellently of man, as he came
first out of Gods hand, was the reflection of God himself on a dark Cloud, the
Iris of the Deity, the similitude being the same, but the substance different,
God having made the Prerogatives of Princes (like that of the Sun, and Moon,
and Stars) usually folded up in Mists, and carried in the Clouds, whereby they
become superstitiously reverenced, distinctness of apprehension taking off
admiration, for Truths clearly understood have not that prevalent influence
upon vulgar Spirits, as when in shadowed Pictures there is something of
ignorance left obscurely, to flutter upon their imagination. Hence it is that
more admire the reason of their Bearing, then know the true ground of Blazon by
the study of Virtue, the light it self having hitherto been but Lumen inform,
quod quarto die formatum est. And though the Moon by some is called crescent
Occulum sinistrum mundi; yet he that has but one eye, can see by the light
thereof, why Deluna bears a Crescent, and why Sterling bears Stars; and what
indeed is signified by this kind of Bearing but men who are as the Watchmen of
the World? And if you consider quae ordine pulchro exoriuntur, A Crestent.
stationem servant, and noctu, voluti excubias agunt, You will find a great
deal of reason why they very well become Military persons. These Bearings in
sacred Scripture are called the Host of Heaven. And civil persons are placed
over us for our good; they denote solitude and silence, the indivisible
companions of Study: their work is lucere and ardere, in whom the light is
united with the fire, and the heat with the splendour, as Christ said of the
great Baptist, Lucerna ardens and lucens; the filii lucis called, as Beda
interprets, by the illustrious white star name of Day, An Estoit pierced.
Psalm. 19. White Stars signify the fire of a spritely wit. Azure, of a
Benevolent nature. Gules a Martial Sentinel. And Sable a profound Person. OR,
est dives in omn^s. If the Charges of this Day be born on Fess, CONTENTUS
MEDIO: if a Fess between, SEMPER IDEM SVB EODEM: if on a Pale, NVNQVAM
DECLINAT: if on a Bend, OBLIQVE ET VBIQVE: if on a Chief, CELERES
EXPLICATIONIS: if on a Cross, ET LUMEN CIRCVMQVAQVE DIFFVNDVNT. If the Cross
between IN FRAGMENTIS INTEGER: if the Sun be born in a Canton, as in Thomson's
Coat, IN ORTU TOTUS LUCIDUS.

Armatus radiis Elementa liquentia lustrans:
Armed with Rays he views the watery Planes.
In which manner the Sun views Nicholson's Coat, Raleigh's History.
and signifies one that is a subordinate Magistrate, the Laws of men binding
after the same manner of the Stars: for though Kings and Princes do by their
Laws decree, that Thieves or Murderers shall suffer death, which though they
are duly executed by Magistrates (the Stars of Kings) yet they do not deprive
the Prince of his natural or princely compassion, or prerogative. The figured
sky affords brave Shields in Heraldry for the Conspicuous: The never wearied
Sun, the Moon unhorn'd,
And Heaven with all his sparkling fires adorned.


Here is the Hieroglyphics of the Illustrissemi, the Sun of the Clarissimi,
the Moon of the Spectabilissimi, the Stars of the Superl-llustrissimi, quibus
Coelum coronatum est; here is a Crown both for Ariadne and Thetis: The
Pleiades, Hyades, Orion stout,
The Bear sirnam'd the Wane that wheels about.


Orion wearing three Stars in Fess, and as many in Bend, the Bear having two in
Chief, called the Gards: And the Cross crescent moon is a celestial
Constellation to bear a Crescent Moon, is something of Sovereignty in it; for
it is so called from Crescere, Incressant.
to increase, and therefore given to younger Sons, as added to the Family. The
Dutch Title of Emperor, as Seldom notes, is at this day understood no
otherwise then if it came from Augeo, which in the common Notion signifies no
otherwise then actually to increase, hence is the Name of Augustus. It were to
be prayed for, that the Ottaman Crescent might become Decrescent, and that the
Christians Sun might again rise, though it be now darkened: With Clouds of
disadvantage time will be,
Fuller on the Frontispiece.
When such poor things shall triumph over thee;
And their old prophecy shall be made good,
Thy Moon shall then be turned into blood.


The Jewish women wore round Tires, like the Moon, as the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, As a Bearing that the Land mourned for. And the Agyptians gave Divine
Honors to the Sun and Moon under the names of Osirus and Isis, as is testified
both by Sacred and profane Authors; Mizraim the Son of Cham in the Egyptian
Dialect, being called Mesramuthisin, quasi diceres Mesra, sive Osiri, and Matre
Isi genitum. And Plutarch affirms, that the Sun in the Persian Language gave
name to Cyrus. And the same Author says, that the Amazon Women bare Moons like
Shields; and Crescents are as genuine a Bearing for Christians, occasioned by
purchase in the Holy Land, as any other Ordinary, where the feminine Sex
presumed to show their Lozenge Bearings in that design: Each one appears a
Pallas in the field, Fullers Frontispiece.

Dropped newly from Joves brain with Spear and Shield.


Among the Romans the Crescent was a note of a Senator, because it formed a C,
the Character of a Hundred, which the Senate consisted of. And among the
Egyptians it is the Symbol of the Moon: and it were too much for me to show
you how many of our Senate bear Crescents, whereof Hervey bears three in a
Chief indented, and so is like to that lively Crown that appears about this
Planet: Ecce levis summo de vertice visus Iuli:
Behold the lively Crown
Of soft Iulus head,
With Light was circled round,
A flame his Tempels fed.


Azure a Crescent silver by the name of Luce, Quo magis a Phoebo distat soror,
hor magis nobis fulget. And therefore is compared by Guiliam to light Huswifes,
that are more light when their Husbands are farthest off. It may well be called
a Crescent, because A SUPERIORI PART LUMINE CARET. Minshulls Crescent, MICAT
INTER OMNES, because his Predecessor made the Ottoman family bow, to deliver up
his Arms. And Vears Mullet that lit on the top of his Lance, which gave light
to the Christians to pursue their Victory, is now become Cor Le^nis, Fixed
Stars.
or rather Oculus Tauri. In the first Quarter of his Arms he being a Stars of
the first Magnitude, to denote RADIIS VENIET FERVIDIORIBUS: and such is the
property of Virtue, IN TENEBRIS MAGIS, and like the Moon, PROXIMITATE
DECRESCIT. St Paul desiring to become nothing, that he might come nearer to the
Sun of Righteousness, and so he became MAJOR QUIA HUMILIOR. In which sense the
Moon is called one of the greater Lights, and is born as a known Badge to the
Earl of Northumberland. The three Crescents were said to be the ancient Arms of
France. The Moon is like that Star which divides it self into two, ET SEQVITVR
ET PRAECVRRIT. So the Coat of Stephen Bright in Yorkshire shows the same Star
with a Bend between, and Party per Pale, to signify VESPERE ET MANE; and
whether it shine in the Morning or Evening, it is LUMINE SOLIS. Three Stars
make a Constellation, as well as ten, HACITER AD SVPEROS. To bear Mullets or
Stars denotes E COELO SAPERE. And Alston bears ten Stars OR 4, 3, 2, 1. and
in that is like the links of the Chain fastened to Jupiter's Chair, the present
Bearer whereof Sir Edward Alston, being one of his Majesty's Physicians,
Sapiens adjuval six-pointed star it opus Astrorum, A Star of 6 points.
quemadmodum Agricola terrae naturam. And Ptolomy says, Sapiens, and omina
sapientis Medici dominabuntur Astris; a wise man, and the ominous Art of a wise
Physician shall prevail against the Stars. Immortal Virtue is like that of the
Pole, SINE OCCASV FELIX, the Stars representing privy Counselors, The Lord
Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, bears 3 Stars and a Chief iamong the Nobility,
Wandering Stars.
the three black Stars in Mordant's Coat s like that of Saturn, TARDISSIME
VELOX. The white Star, that of Venus, PROXIMA SEMPER. The red one, that of
Mars, SEMPER CIRCA SOLEMN. The golden one is like the Sun, CVM LUCE SALUTEM.
Chronotism of Stars.
That of blue like benevolent Jove, LUCET ET INFLUIT. To conclude, Stars are
significators of military Stratagems, all Writers agreeing, that the taking of
Troy was by night, when the silence of the Stars became a thousand witnesses:
and if God has given virtue to Springs and Fountains, to cold Earth, to Plants
and Stones, Rawleigh's History.
Why should we rob the beautiful Stars of their working powers, seeing they are
many in number, and of eminent beauty and magnitude? ELEVOR VT FVLGEAM; else
the Dog Star had never been placed in Heaven; QVO VOCAT VSQVE SEQVOR; in token
of fidelity; DVLCE NITET SEMPER, and is therefore placed upon the Cloaks of the
Pears of the Garter; the Sun draws up the Cloud, QVIA RESPEXIT. And if it
breaks forth into Beams, DISSOLVARVI SOLVAM. If the Shield or Field be
enlightened by Sun or Star, it is by Divine Grace, SPLENDOUR EX ME. If with
Mullets, that also IN ALTIS HABITAT. Those of the pure Element of fire
represent Generosity, OPES NON ANIMVM. The noble mind, DVM AGITVR AVGETVR. Now
if we consider that there is but one Sun, and yet in many Coats there is three
or four, We shall examine the natural cause thereof, and then you will be
satisfied that it is a good Bearing. What does Peirson's Coat seem to signify
then MVNERIS HOC TVI, the same that it received its multiplication from one
Sun? though there appear three in his Shield, Causes of many Suns.
whose signification is either natural or supernatural: in their natural
signification they betoken moist Weather: in their supernatural they appear as
pretenders of changes in States, and may signify in the first and natural
signification men who by their Princes favors are advanced to Nobleness,
wherein as one would say, if it rain upon the Prince, it shall drop upon him:
and in the second and supernatural signification, it signifies Competitors, as
not long before the contention between Galba, and Otho, and Vitellius for the
Empire of Rome, there appeared three Suns, as it were pointing out the strife
that followed between them three. As also in the year 1233. on the 7. of April,
four Suns appeared, besides the natural, at which time there was much debate
stirred up between King Henry the Third, and the Barons of this Kingdom. Also
in the year 1440. three Suns appeared, the day before the three Earls of
Pembrook, and Wiltshire, and Edward Earl of Marsh fought the great Battle at
Mortimer's Cross, which might be the reason of bearing the Cross between four
Suns by Waltham. And again in the year 1526. three Suns marched out, betokening
the three Princes, which strove for the Kingdom of Hungaria, after the
slaughter of Lewis the Second. But you may say, these are allusions, but are
not rherefore conclusions. To which I answer, that where indeed there is three
or four Suns many times in a Shield, yet there can be but one true: so it
signifies no more but a Champion that rejoices as a Giant to run his course.
However it is the Emblem of Princes, by reason of the Majestickness of its
Beams. For the principal Significator of Honors is derived from the
disposition of Sol, according to Astronomers: and the Bearings of this Day
signify Humanity or Courtesy. As first, that they shine not to themselves,
but are profitable to all, being full of Candor and Veracity, Truth being the
Light. And secondly, having Concord and Mildness, shining together in a silent
Harmony; for as a wise man is said to govern the Stars, so a generous mind has
power over himself, and lives quietly with Fellow-citizens and
Chamber-fellows, as these do in the blazon of arms great Chamber of Heaven,
Argent on a Chief Gules two Mullets OR.
where Saturn is pale as lead, Jupiter bright as Tin, Mars ruddy as Iron, Venus
lovely as Copper, and Mercury glittering as Quicksilver; and where the Stars
or Mullets are of the Metals or Colors of the greater Lights, and in Chief, as
in this Coat of St. John, it denotes the Nobility of the Bearets, and is the
visible Character of their Conspicuousness, shining so much above the Vulgar,
with the two most noble Metals of OR and Argent, esteemed with Sol and Luna.

How clear the Stars shine in a dark night, I leave to your own experience; and
how they, as all other Bearings, may be varied, I shall give you these examples.

1. Sable a Mullet Argent. 2. Sable two Mullets in Chief Argent. 3. Sable three
Mullets perforated or pierced Argent. To bear Mullets perforated, is properly a
Spur-rowel, the Planet Mars appearing so. 4. Sable three Mullets in Fesse
Argent. 5. Sable three Mullets in Pale Argent. 6. Sable five Mullets perforated
in Cross. So likewise are they born in all the Ordinary ways of an Ordinary,
as in Bend in Saltire, etc. and on or between the several Ordinaries you have
examples following; Argent on a Fesse Sable, three Mullets pierced of the
Field. Argent on a Pale, three Mullets pierced of the First. Argent on a Cross,
five Mullets perforated of the Field. Sable a Fesse between three Mullets
Argent. Sable a Pale between two Mullets Argent. Sable a Cross between four
Mullets Argent, perforated of the First. Argent on a Bend Sable, three Mullets
pierced OR. OR on a Bend sinister Sable, three Mullets pierced Argent. Argent
on a Saltire Sable, five Mullets OR. Sable a Bend OR, between two Mullets
Argent. Sable a Bend sinister OR, between two Mullets Argent. Sable a Saltire
Argent between four Mullets OR, pierced of the Field, and sic ad infinitum.
Behold how every Hieroglyphick is a Symbol, yet how every Symbol is not an
Hieroglyphick. Suns denote conspicuous Fathers, and Stars egregious Sons; for
among us how are the Names of Bright, Day, St. Clear, etc. signified by their
Arms; and where the Prince would make a man's name known by his Coat, there they
are both allusions and conclusions, as in Pierson's Coat of Yorkshire, his Coat
not only alluding to the Name in the Creast, the Sun appearing on the Peir of
a Rock, but in the Coat three Suns between two Pallets waved, directly agreeing
with the Naturalists Observation of the causes thereof, which is, when a smooth
watery Cloud, which is of equal thickness, quiet and still, is placed on the
sides of the Sun, then it will appear as if there were three Suns, though
indeed there is but one. And this Bearing seems to point out his profession,
as well as name (viz.) an Astronomer, or one who by speculation or Practice
finds out the Parahelii, the Pears of the Sun; or, as if one would say, apud
Solemn. The Coat of Thompson, by the Sun in the Canton, denotes the Father; and
by the Stars on the Fesse, the three Sons, all of them considerable Persons.
Now if we turn our eyes to those other Meteors that are born in Arms, which
Naturalists refer to the 2 Day, Meteors.
though indeed Meteors are effected by the power and operation of the Sun, we
shall find that some have been seen to bear Rainbows, and have pleased
themselves VARIETATE JUCUNDA; Others to show their hopes of better Days, AB
IMBRE SERENUM; for to Noah it was NUNCIA SERENITATIS, and to me it is the
Emblem of a true friend, SI FUERINT NUBILA. The Coat of Thunder is a Fesse
between two Thunderbolts, plainly denoting the Name of the Bearer, and in its
quality signifies Boanerges, as Saint James was USQUE IN OCCIDEMTEM PARIT. It
denotes also a Traveller, EXPIABIT AUT OBRUET. If it be born by a Prince,
TERRET UNDE FULGET. So it was born winged by the Scythians. If by a Soldier,
TONITRU RUIT, VELOCIOR ICTVS. If by a private person, HUMILIORA MINUS; and so
it is devolved unto my self by the Daughter and Heir of Delahay, who bare the
Star of Mars, and married the Daughter and Heir of Thunder, and SUMMA PETIT,
though indeed my own fortune never arised above my Calling, who acknowledge
with Seneca; Minus in parvis fortuna ferit.

The Lightning TONITRUA PARAT, and in that sense represents worldly felicity,
which though it shine with OR or Argent, yet it is but BREVIS SPLENDOUR. Comets
PAUCIS MINANTUR, OMNIBUS FULGENT. Comets.
Planets have their Name from Error, and Stars are the inseparable Companions
of the Travelers. The Sun is said to be winged, and had Bow and Arrows given
it this Day. It Is winged by reason of its warmth, and armed with Arrows,
because the Beams thereof fly about the World, and so correspondent to this Day
has Heraldry allotted the Ma^^^ for the difference of the four Brethren, which
become Travelers, and on their winged speed compass the world, being without
feet, saving the crutches of Providence, by whose wings they are sustained. In
alarm tuarum umbra canam. And I proceed to the winged Choristers, whose
Tallons become Arms, and whose Heads became Crests to the Man at Arms, the next
Field being that of Elysium, of which Tibullus sweetly and briefly describes;
Sed me quod, etc.
But Venus me (because to love inclined)
Shall lead into Elyzium, where refined,
Music and Balls please, where the winged Quire
Of chirping Birds do entertain the ear.


Conclusion of this Chapter
To Benjamin St. John Son of John, of Cold-Overton in Liecestershire Esquire.
SIR,
YOur Chief does denote your Ancestors were men in the Acts of Reason above
the Vulgar, and your Charge declares they were eminen^ly conspicuous. Mullets
are among the Stars of the first Magnitude, and the greater Planets have
Concomitants to wait upon them. It Is better to be on, then in Chief; the la er
is subject to Error, whereas the former is bounded by a Rational Line. Riches
and Honor are the two Twins, born at once in your House, nursed up by Virtue,
and preserved in your self to this Day. Your Grandfather being Francis, fourth
Son, and afterward became the second House of Oliver. First, Lord St. John of
Blet so has entitled you to that of Esquire, who by the common Name we give
him in Latin, seems to have his Origin, either for that he carried the Armor
of the King, Duke, or other great Personages, Patroclus being Achilles his
Armor Bearer; or rather, as some suppose, the Footman himself armed in the
field: however they were always men of good account, as those that won
themselves credit out of the Wars, and so their estimation remained in their
Posterity: and as those were in time before, so are these which are in our
days, as descending, for the most part, from their worthy Ancestors esteemed
the Prime sort of Esquires, who are descended of Nobles.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the visible Charges of the Fifth Days Work, under the Regiment of Venus,
or the Green Shield.

VErdure is a state of happiness and felicity, Vert a Border OR, Enaluron of 4
Marilets Sable, and Eatoyre of as many Escalops Gales.
the Golden branch, growing at the entrance of Elyzium, where Venus Doves are
as honorable as Joves Eagle. Concerning the Bearing of Birds, if I should say
no more than that of the old Eagle, PROVOCAT EXEMPLO; It were enough to stir
you all up to the imitation of virtue, the Eagle be^ring PRAESIDIA MAJESTATIS,
deserving the first place; because in the War of the Giants an Eagle supplied
Jove with Arms: Jupiter and Saturn were kings, and waged War upon a difference
of Land; to which Jupiter Marching out, saw the prediction of an Eagle, by
which, when he had overcome, it was reported, that the Eagle brought him
weapons: from this good luck it was that the Eagle is in the Emperial Ensigns.

Sic Aquilae clarum firmavit Jupiter omen. It is borne in a threefold manner
(viz.) Procidens, Volaus; Erectus vel Expausus: In the first posture it is made
Bearing the Arms of Jupiter, and among the Romans, in the fourth Legion of the
Decemani, and in the Shields of the Elder Constantine in the East; and on many
ancient Military Ensigns of the Romans: In which posture it is borne among us
by Roper (of Derbyshire) quasi, de Rubro spado; it argues generosity: NIL
FULMINA TERRENT. And where the Wing and the Sword go together, it is to show
that Art can do as much as Arms, as Emanuel Thesaurus notes on Caesar's
Commentaries; Quae modo fulmineum vibrabat dextera ferrum,
Pacatos calamos sanguinolent^a regit.


In the second posture of Volant it is also found, among all the Roman Legions,
being a Golden Eagle, with the Wings Elevated, upon the top of a silver Spear;
the Bearers whereof were called Aquiliseri: It was anciently borne in the
Shields of the younger Herculani, and in this prepared posture it is said to
descend to the Table of Augustus.

Ab Jove consuerat divisam sumere Mensam;
Te Similem cernens credidit esse Jovem.
blazon of arms And from hence did the Eagle assume two heads, Quam Jovi, and
Caesari aucilatus: Richard, second Son of King John (in the ninth year of King
Henry the Third, his brother) being Crowned King of the Romans, Via p. 136.
writ himself Semper Augustus; had his Arms Carved on the Breast of the Roman
Eagle: he bare Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules Crowned OR, within a Border Sable,
Bezant^ His Posterity, of the Surname of Cornwall, bearing that Coat, as
descended from his natural Son Richard, Father of Sir Geffery Cornwall Knight.

Some suppose that this kind of Bearing with two Heads, was in memory of the
two inauspicious birds, or Ravens, that hovered over the head of Caesar, and
were struck to the ground by the Eagle: others again attribute it to the
division of the Empire into the East and West, by Constantine the Great;
Translating his Seat to Constantinople, making as it were two head Cities under
one Emperor, like the prow of Aenaeas Ship.

Aeneas Ship, the Admiral before
Upon her Prow two Phrygian Lions bore:
Which denoted the Ensign of the Ship; those of Burden carrying them on their
Masts, as the Eagle was carried on a Staff, far above, for more
conspicuosness: But Justus Lipsius observes, upon that Military Ensign, which
is seen in Rome, upon the Column of Antonius, that then it could not have
reference to the division of the Empire, much less could it belong to any
Soldier; but that rather it had respect to one and the same Roman Emperor,
with the Wings expanded or displayed; where the right wing is spread over the
Eastern parts, and the left over the Western parts thereof; and, two heads is
no more than Counsel, or Advice: The Roman Consuls being two (joined to the
Body of the People of Rome, and were) so called a Consulendo: and in Caesar the
two heads signified no otherwise than the Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
in him, with his Wings expanded, to Protect the People of his Empire. So you
see why the Black Eagle is preferred before other; and for the other Colors,
see my Sphaere of Gentry: it is a reward for Service in many English Coats, as
in that of Laurence Hutton of Hutton John in Cumberland, having the two heads
thereof, in Reward, circled about with a Crown, by Fredrick the Fourth Emperor
of Germany, for the Honor that he gained in his Wars in Hungary, against
Soliman the Second: having gained the Standard of the Enemy, with the Honor of
the Day. So also the Coat of Brown has the Eagle displayed in chief, for
some special Service performed by the first bearer thereof, in Embassage to the
Emperor, as testifies Guilime. If you turn your eyes to several other
Nations, you shall find the Persians bore it, from the time of Cyrus to the
overthrow of that Monarchy: the Eagle being principally taken for an aspicious
and fortunate Omen. The Silver Eagle is preferred with the Sable, Qu a sit
fulgentior atque conspectior; and of any other Color it is noble, ET VISU ET
VOLATU, and is therefore a proper bearing for Men of an accurat and clear
Judgment, as is noted in the bearing of Edward Cook Esquire; being a Man of
great Estimation and Admiration in his perspicuous knowledge of the Law, worthy
to be a Judge; who was among them, as the Eagle among other Birds. So Julius
Caesar is said to bear a Sphinx, a bird with a human face (whose subtilties
could not be discovered but by an Oedipus) only to show the clearness of his
understanding. To bear more Eagles than one, is called Eaglets; and among the A
gyptians, Per Aquilam and falconem rem maximae velocitates, says Keecher, and
so does the Cross between the four Falcons in the Coat of the Right Honorable
Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, and Lord Treasurer of England; whose
Falcons, if they rouse their wings, is equal to the swiftness of the Eagles.

Una Aquila innumeras Exagitabit aves. But before I pass from the Eagle with
two heads, methinks I hear some say, Why those Monstrosities in Heraldry? while
Dr. Brown is content to tolerate Flying Horses, Black Swans, Hydras, Centaurs,
Harpyes and Satyers; for (says he) As they are either Monstruosities,
Rarities, or Fictions, so their shadowed Morality requite their substantial
falcities, wherein indeed we must not deny a liberty; nor is the hand of the
Painter more restrained then the pen of the Poet; for, when the real Works of
Nature are veritable acts, digressions are aberrations: as to say, an Eagle
Rampand, were intolerable; whereas to say a Griffin Sergeant is proper: it
being a digression from a natural Eagle, compounded by the same Painter and
Poet, blazon of arms to denote, Vert a Griffon Sergeant Argent.
that though the Griffon have an intolerable shape, yet it has an allowable
Morality, making out the properties of a Guardian, or any person entrusted: the
Ears implying attention, the Wings celerity of execution; the Lyon-like-shape
courage and audacity; the hooked Bill reservance and tenacity: it is also the
emblem of Magnanimity and valor, being compounded of a Lion and Eagle, the
noblest Animals in their kind; it represents also Ecclesiastical and Civil
Jurisdiction.

Homer is said (by Alexander Paphius, as Estachius testifies) to be born of
Egyptian Parents: his Nurse being a certain Prophetess, and the daughter of
Oris, Isis Priest; from whose breasts oftentimes honey flowed in the mouth of
the Infant, after which, in the night he is said to have utred nine several
Notes of voices of fowls (viz.) of a Swallow, a Peacock, a Dove, a Crow, a
Partrich, a Red-Shanks, a Staire, a Blackbird, and a Nightingal; and being a
little Boy, was found playing in his bed with nine Doves: the Moral whereof may
be this; By the Swallow was signified his Industry and Promptness, and
readiness; and such is the nobleness of this birds mind, V^ VITAM POTIUS QUAM
LIBERTATEM. Speed bears two Swallows in Chief, as a note of his mind, and
industry in his Chronicle; and, why it is borne in the Coat of Arundell, is
declared at large in my Sphere of Gentry: by the Swallow also is signified his
noble Muse, TENDAM PAULUM MODO TOLLAR IN ALTUM, Poesy like; the Swallow must be
free AMICA NON SERVA, it brings tidings of the Spring. By the Peacock is
denoted the property of proper valor, SIBI MET PULCHERRIMA MERCES, and spreads
the Tail of Troy, (UT SIC PULCHRIOR) and so admires himself, TRAHIT MUTATQUE
VICISSIM: Homer tells both their glory and their woe together, ET CANTU MAEROR.
Though indeed the Grecians had this property of the Peacock, to be admirers of
themselves, being encouraged by Jun^; they are borne by Smith perhaps, because
Vulcan was an enemy to the Trojans.

Mulciber in Trojam pro Troja stabat Apollo. By the Tail of this bird is also
signified the night, Argus his Eyes being placed therein, Doves.
by which is signified how vigilant Military Persons ought to be. Others
signify by the Peacock Noble Persons, Qui secum habent Pulchras Caudas, id
est, familias tales ducunt legati; Et vadunt cum tanto exercitu, quod
invidetur, quod in expeditione vadunt; It has a good report after death, by
reason of the flesh which NUNQUAM PUTRESCET; Argus his Eyes being placed in the
Peacocks Tale, signify the bearer to be wise and circumspect. Now if you
consider the Bird of VENUS, the same that was Borne by Aeneas, it is INTUS ET
EXTRA, being the proper note of True virtue; ET SIBI ET ALIIS. Doves being both
fortunate to Aeneas and Caesar, lighting on that Golden Branch of virtue to the
first, and building in that Palm, where the second had encamped.

-- Two Doves from Heavens ethereal round
Stooping light gently on the verdant Ground.
The Elysian Fields having a Wood near for none but pure and pious Birds, from
which all Ravenous and Obscoen ones were driven away: so that what is signified
by the Dove is plain; and though it be true that Aquila non generat, etc.

Yet when an Eagle brought a young Stock-Dove and laid it in the Cradle of
Diadumenus, the Son of Macrinus, it signified that he should be Emperor,
because that day he was born, an old Woman brought his Mother a Present of
Pigeons. Sir John Frederick bears three of these Birds in a Chief, and the
field of the same Metal of Aeneas his branch; and how far the Symbol of his
Name has suited with his Moderation in Government when he was Lord Major, let
even his enemies speak; Where one desired Boughs, they perch when Rays
Through Branches of discolored Gold displayes.


The Crow is a contrary color to the Dove, Crow.
and was placed on the fist of Minerva for the Ingenuity thereof. LABOR ET
INDUSTRIA; Even as the Geese were placed on the Shield of Aeneas for their
vigilance, when time should come, giving notice of the approach of the Gauls,
enemies to the Romans, in memory whereof the Picture of a Goose was kept in the
Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. And why Corbet bears a Raven in a field Or,
is, as Camden says, because the name signifies a Raven: it is a very fair
Coat, seeing every Crow thinks his own Bird fairest; it is the Symbol of
Garulity (and the Hierroglyphick of Long life, and so Homer has perpetuised
the honor of his Contrymen:) And though Birds of a chattering nature do
much interrupt the Meditation of the Mind, yet the Crow was never discharged
from the service of Minerva, till her unacceptable intelligence: Truth not
seldom being obnoxious to danger, and a Raven of all other birds is sacred to
Apollo, being its voice is articulate and significant.

By the voice of the Partridg which Homer imitated, Partridge.
was signified one of excellent invention, whence the Fable, that Perdix
rejoicing at the miseries of Dedalus, while he buried his Son, Dedalus envying
the Boys invention of the Saw and Compasses at twelve years of Age, threw him
from the top of Minervaes Tower; he was supported by the Goddess, and by her
converted into a bird of that Name. There being no envy so great and deadly as
is betwixt Men of the same Profession, This the Author has experience of as
well from those who have formerly writ of this Science as those who were his
licensers.
for to remove the rival of their Praises; and ever since the Partridg never
flies high, INTER CURAS TRANQUILLE DEGENTEM.

Great height, great downfalls, balance still;
Be Great and Glorious they that will.
MANUS SUB PENNIS was the Animals of Ezechiel, to show, that the Works of the
hand and the desires of the Mind ought to go together: this made Handcock bear
three Cocks in Chief, and a Hand beneath, to show the vigilance and the labor
of the bearer: for, one that is agitated by generous thoughts, had rather by
himself trace out a way to Heaven, than to tread in others Tracts on Earth!
Plurimum enim ad inveniendum contulit qui sperav^t posse reperire. The Crane,
what does it signify but Pietas erga parents and venenatoribus gratae; Hearne.
So also is the Hearne. He that bears the Redshank has overcome
incendiaries. QUOD SIS ESSE VELIS is proper to the Cornish Chough; and they
that bear them are such, who, like Aeneas, have overcome many dangers of the
Harpyes; Virgill gives you this account.

No Monster like to these, no Plague more sell,
Nor sharper vengeance Heaven ere called from Hell:
The Foul have Virgin faces and hooked Claws,
Still purging bellies, always greedy Mawes.
Choughe.
The Cornish Chough amongst us denotes more especially West-Countrey Gentlemen,
where these birds are more frequent, Cornwallis bearing three on a Fesse, as
being originally of Cornwall, whence they have their Denomination as well as
the Bird which is black of Body, but with red legs. By the mystical conjunction
of Hawk and Lion in the Griffin, the Egyptians did signify the genial or
syderious Sun, the great celerity thereof, and the strength and vigor of it in
its operations, and its activity in Leo. By it also the Genius of Nilus was
understood, according to Kercher; and to bear Birds of prey, or Monstruosities,
is but with Hercules to overcome Centaurs, or the unclean Birds of the
Stymphanian lake; Harpyes.
in the one Carnales affectus virtute animi mortificat, in the other Libidinem
velut pestem fugit. So that to bear a Bird with a Woman's face, as the Earl of
Oxford does, and likewise the Families of Astley and Moodys, does denote men of
subtle and aenigmatical Wits, who prevail more in their minds then bodies,
according to that of Ovid, Met. lib. 11.

Virtutem antiquam majores corpore vires. The Parrot, Avis argutula atque etiam
humanitus garriens. Parrots.
How many younger Brothers shall we find, who with the Martlet have raised
themselves by the wing, Martlets. Difference of the fourth Brother: These are
attributed to these Princes by Speed and others.
rather then by the help of their legs, that is, by sailing and becoming
Merchant men, Quin and longas peregrinationes edocet, and soris, vel equo, vel
industria victum honoremque quaeritat. And therefore it was born in the Shields
of Edgar, surnamed Pacificus, and of Edward the Martyr, and of Edmond surnamed
Ironside, and of St. Edward the Confessor.

INTAMINATIS FULGET HONORIBUS. Ella the first King of the Mercians, An. Christi
488. bare six Martlets, 3, 2, 1.

The Black Bird, or Ousle is born by those of the same name in
Northamptonshire, AESTATE CANIT, HIEME BALBUTIT; and like the Nightingal, Black
Bird.
TEMPORE REDDET, the music of whose voice EDOCTA SVAVIVS. That Homer was found
playing with nine Doves, could signify nothing but the nine Muses. Nitingal.
Why Jupiter honored the Eagle, is already told, and why Juno the Peacock. The
Birds of Mars is the Cock and Crow, of Minerva the Vulture. The Red Coat is for
Captains of War, and the White for Patrons of Learning. blazon of arms PLUS
VIGILA

Gallus candidus nota est Deo dedicata. To bear Cranes signifies wise and
provident Leaders, Cranes.
who are chosen by the multitude, and whom they follow: they march in array,
set Sentinels, give a Watchword by their manner of Cry. The Cranes are
Companions in Winter, and the Storks in Summer. Some affirm constantly, that
the Storks have no Tongues, and are highly regarded for killing of Serpents, as
the Ibis is among the Egyptians, Stork.
Gruem praeterea vigilem alitem, Ducibusque idcirco and fortibus viris amicam
adjicio, says Sylvester, and he also testifies that Lycurgus bore a Crane:
Kercher lib. 4. Obliscor.
Quis nescit Volusi Bithynice qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? Crocodilon adorat,
Pars haec illa fovet, fovet Serpentibus Ibin.


The Egyptians taking the form of fourteen of their Letters blazon of arms
from parts of Animals; the first Letter A taken from the Leg, crossed by its
Bill: OR a Vulture Sable.
the Neck and Bill at right Angles formed their Gamma: the Bill opened upward,
the V or Greek Y: the Neck turned in a spiral line, the O: the Legs opened like
a pair of Compasses, the L Lambda: the Legs open downward, and the Bill opened
upward, formed the X. And they derived the Characters of the Sun and Moon from
the Hawks Head and Bill. By a Vulture they signified Nature, because in that
Bird no male is found, their Hieroglyphics being nothing else quam rei sacrae
Symbolum materiae cuidam incisae, as Becanus testifies, the wisdom of the
Egyptians being divided into five Orders. The first designat Genethliacos, and
was called Chasdim. The other was Asaphim, or Philosophers, or Magi, Hartumim,
Inchanters, Mecascaphim, Diviners. By intrails, Gazarim, or Soothsayer. They
did signify by the several Colour-feathers in the Head of the Lapwing, by the
white feather the rational Faculty, by the yellow the Sensitive, by the blue
the Vegetative, and by the black the Inanimate: to which Colors they
attributed also the Complexions, the Seasons, and the Elements. The first prime
Numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4. the hot and moist, the hot and dry, the cold and moist,
the cold and dry. The ages of man and the winds, viz. To the first Zephyrus,
Subsolanus, Auster, Septentrio; and by those seven feathers the variety of
things: Septem igitur Colores habet Upupa, quibus verisimile est Aegyptios
significasse septem Planetarum radios, Lapwing.
the Lapwing being the Emblem of Tyranny, and is born by the Terwits. And as
all Birds were wont to be known by their Creast, so was the man at Arms;
Vertitur in Volucrem, cui stant in vertice Cristae, Kercher l. 4. de id ea
Hieroglyph.

Prominet immodicum pro longa cuspide rostrum,
Nomen Epos Volucri facies armata videtur.


Peter Read of Grimingham in Norfolk, though his Coat be very full, having
three Birds on a triumphal Bend waved within a Border, yet is honored with a
Canton of Barbary, for his service at Tunis. Camden 's Remains.
The Hawk and Eagles head signified Vision, and Gods all-seeing Power, Et per
accipitris imaginem Naturam Universi, s^u spiritum Mundi intelligebant; per
aquilam and falconem rem maximae velocitatis ob summam harum avium pernicitatem
figurabant. I shall leave the application to the worthy Bearers thereof, viz.
Aubrey and Honeywood, cum multis aliis. Birds denote swiftness in the Wings,
and therefore Mercury is called Mercurius pennatus, being winged cap a pe.
Feathers.
Now for Feathers, those of the Estrich have had the esteem, ever since Edward
the Black Prince gained them at the Battle of Poytiers, and have honored the
Coat of Drax in a Chief, and Clarendon on a Bend, who was natural Son to the
black Prince, both serving under that victorious Prince, Son to King Edward the
Third; they were ancient military Ornaments, as appears by that of Virgil;
Cujus Olorinae surgunt de vertice pennae.

Hugo de prim. scrib.
Cham the Tartarian, because his life was saved by an Owl, would have his
people wear their Feathers. And among the Romans, their Posts that were swift
Runners of long journeys, did wear Feathers, to signify their swift blazon of
arms flight. Gules an Ostrich Regardant Argent
And indeed what was signified by the Feathers in this Princes Arms was no
other then his speedy execution in all his services. For as the wings help the
legs of the Ostriches; So was he swift both in Sea and Land, CVRSV PRAETERVEHOR
OMNES. And while the Crow cries CRAS, CRAS; This Bird NIHIL PROCRASTINANS. The
nature of the wings PORTANTEM PORTANT. And to bear them as the Honorable
Family of the Seamours OR; Wings.
what does it denote but EXPANSAE SVBLIMEN, and are the wings of an Eagle,
while Ridgway bears them silver, as those of a Dove. Wingham wears them in
token of his Name, AD SIDERA VOLVVNT. Wingfield bears three pair on a Bend
between Cotisses, in sign of protection of the Field of Battle by the wings
thereof. If the wind dishevel the Feathers, TVRBANT, SED EXTOLLVNT. The Hern in
time of a storm surmounts the Clouds in its serenity: the feeblest Bird
NOCENTIA FVGIT, Hern.
and the noble Ph^nix EST VICTRIX TEMPORIS. The Pelican denotes a Lover of his
Country, PRO LEGE ET PRO GREGE. The Crain STVDIO ET VIGILANTIA, and
represents the Sentinel posture, When it holds a stone, ME STANTE NIL
TIMENDVM, representing the vigilency of a blazon of arms Bishop. Stork.
The Stork is born by Starkey, in token of Gratitude, PAR PARI REFERVNT.
Wolrich bears three Swans, VNIVS COLORIS, A Swans head erased on a wreath.
in token of sincerity and learning, it being the Muses Bird, MORIENS MODVLOR,
singing before its death, Musicam alitem anteire choros Canoros Volucrum
ceterarum, tum etiam quia Cignus, par ira viribusque, vel saltem felicitate
pugnandi, and having a Crown about the Neck, as in Baker's Coat, COLLO
SUPEREMINET. Birds of prey are said to be armed, ET CUSTOS ET PVGNAX. If not of
prey, they are said to be membred. Birds legs.
It is often seen, that even Birds legs are born in Arms, as in that of Bray
being a Cheveron between three Eagles Tallons, and is an Argument of a
Masculine Spirit. Kercher says, that the Scarabaeus was worn in Rings by
Captains in War for this cause, ut totus luceat armis Scarabaeus, uti Martio
quodam fulgere perstringat se intuentes: and that it signifies hominem animo
debere esse virili, Kercher l. 4. Obilis.
and non effoeminato, sicuti Scarabaeus Masculus tantum est, foeminae nescius:
and to this does that of Horace seem to allude; Tyrtaeus mares animos in Martia
bella
Versibus exeruit. --


And as the same Poet testifies, that Vulcan the Armor-bearer of the
Egyptians, was signified by the Scarabaeus; his words are these; Vulcanum
indicantes Scarabaeum, and Vulturem pingunt, Scarabee and the Valthre.
Minervam vero; Vulturem and Scarabaeum. And as Caelius Calcaginus notes upon
this nicity, I know not, says he, Quid inconvenientiae importat and
incongruitatis; quomodo enim uni duo Symbola inter se opposita responderent?
which the learned Kercher has thus ingeniously varied; Vulcanum indicantes,
Scarabaeum pingunt; Minervam vero simul cum Vulcano, Vulturem and Scarabaeum.
By reason that Art and Arms ought to go together, because that neither Saturn,
nor Jupiter, nor Mars, nor Venus, nor Love are of any power, unless they be
helped by industry, and Mechanical Arts. In the Coat of Sewell there is a Ch
veron between three Scarabees, perhaps to denote, as Peter Servius in his
Chapter of the Toga virilis, according to the Proverb, Sua unicuique Minerva;
for, says he, Etiamsi omnia ad Arma spectent, Togam tamen tractare and licet
and libet; for the winged and laborious Be shows whence he derives his
Pedigree, and thus I have showed you one part of the Creation on this Day, viz.

Gestatorum avium Regem numenque verendum,
Phaebeum Cignum, Samiae, Paphiaeque volucrem
Et quam Pallas amat. --
And the reason why Birds are of all Colors, Chromotism of Birds.
is as Kercher says, because Originem suam partim ex aqua, partim ex aere
trahant. And I now pass from the Air, or Juno to Seaborn Venus, and take a
short view of those Creatures in the waters, whose increase is admirable; and
therefore the Hebrews did account their Letter He to be the Conjugal Letter,
being the fifth in the Alphabet; and the Symbol of Conjugal affection was the
Annulet attributed to the fifth Brother:

The Owl among the Hieroglyphics, Owl.
Signum est sapientiae and acquisitae, quoniam sicuti Noctua nocte operatur,
and de die quiescit: ita sapientes qui fugiunt tumultum negotiorum mundi,
tranquillam vitam agunt in contemplationibus suis, sicuti nocte, and silentio
noctua.

Now for the Ensigns of this Day that yet remain, viz. of Fish: Fish.
-- Varia hinc insignia and illinc
Syrenas, Delphinas, itemque immania Cete,
Atque Physeteras, quodcunque not aequore aperto, and
Fluminibus; Nilus regnatorum Crocodilum.


The Seahorse is a particular Bearing, Seahorse.
appropriate to Merchants and Merchants Societies, and is born by Tuckers of
Devonshire, by Wilkinson, holding of an Escalop shell; and for the same cause
is born Mairmen or Maids. The Earl of Sandwich bears Sea supporters, to denote
his Dominion on the Sea, signifying for the most part conversation in the deep
waters: and for the Dolphin it is the King of Sea Animals, Dolphins.
and was born in the Shield of Ulysses, and is testified by Plutarch to be in
memory of the Dolphin, by whom his Son Telemachus was preserved. It was born
also in the Shield of Aeneas, according to Virgil, Aen. lib. 8.

About the Ring bright silver Dolphins glide,
Brush with their Sterns the deep and waves divide.
blazon of arms Sterns of Fish signify a careful Pilet in the deep waters,
HINC LVDVS ET ESCA. Sable two Dolphins endorsed and Hauriant betwee six
Croslets fitched Argent.
Its proper Color is Argent, and is sociable to Mankind, SERVIT NON SAEVIT. In
the Shield of Hercul^s there were silver Dolphins pursuing brazen Dolphins.
Among the A gyptians it signified the watery Element, and was therefore used in
all the Ensigns of Neptune: and why the Fishmongers bear them crowned, I need
not tell you, having for reason St. Peter, as well as St. James. It is born by
the name of James, curved in the Back, as it is seen in many ancient Coins
among the Romans, and it signifies Dominion on the Sea, and swift Navigation.
salutem denique and incolumitatem. Caesar is said to give the Dolphin to the
Delphinates, because they assisted him against the Gauls. The name of Whaley
bears three Whales heads, Whales.
either to show their strength at Sea; or perhaps for the same cause, that the
Olive was preferred to Minerva for the Oil thereof; for Whales, says one, swim
in a Sea of water, and have in them a Sea of Oil, MOLE RUIT SVA. Fishes in
general among the Egyptians were the Hieroglyphics of Death and Envy; more
especially the Eele, because of all other it has the least society with blazon
of arms its own kind: but among the Christians Fishes was the Emblem of the
Church, and the Unity of it; Sable throe Roches Nutant Argent.
for some were more certain Symbols of the name. Peter de Rupibus Bishop of
Winchester, in King John's time, bare Sable three Roches Naiantes Argent. All
Fishes have different qualities, and are found in a Shoal: and as Fishes are
mute, so are they understood for Emblems of silence, and also of agility, VIX
NATI NATANT. The Escalop shell is the particular Ensign of St. James, and is
born in the Coats of Peter and James, as a note of Pilgrimage; for to them, as
a little suffices, so much is troublesome, SOLO GAUDET COELO, having left the
riches of this blazon of arms world to follow their Master, Quarterly Argent
and Sable a Cross between four Esca^op Shells couaterchanged.
QVA DIVES NVNC MISERA. Though this appear as an empty Shell, yet 'twas a
peculiar Bearing of the Holy Land, as Hook bears it with a Cross. But how
many are there that bear these in their Arms, which notwithstanding can boast
no more of their Achievements then Caligula, who demanded Triumph for having
vainly caused his soldiers to gather Cockle-shells on the shore?
Notwithstanding they may bear them as Emblems of good Husbandry, according to
Virgils Georgicks in setting Plants: Let Shells and Limestones guard it with a
Pale.

And such a Coat with three Escalops on a Pale is born by the name of Stone:
Escalops.
and Pollard of Devonshire bears three Mullets, or Pollard-Fishes, being of
the shape of a Star, and its nature is AD LVCEM VENIVNT. Luce bears three
Lucies, ASTV NONVI. Lucies.
And Gascoign bears the head thereof on a Pale; it is cut off NON VI SED ART.
Crabb bears three Crabs, Crabs.
and Bridger bears them RETROCEDENTES ACCEDIT. The Mottos, both for Fowl and
Fish are already printed in the Sphere of Gentry. And to conclude, this
Chapter, as one says, the Sea is the Stable of the Horse-fish, the Stall of
the Kine-fish, the Sty of the Hog-fish, the Kenel of the Dog-fish, and in all
things the Sea is the Ape of the Land. Egg bears to his Creast the Sea Horse
head, Sea Horse.
in memory of his Discovery of Greenland Trade, and the Eagle to denote the
height of the Enterprise, every Bearing being an Ensign of Nobility,
Grasshoppers
as among the Athenians they bare golden Grasshoppers, from the opinion of not
knowing their own Originals. So though we know not the Original of many
navigable Rivers, yet we know AGITATIONE PVRGANTVR. And beautiful Venus is
drawn on the water by Swans, having even a green Field under the water,
yielding many precious Plants, GERMINANS DE PROFVNDO: neither is the Field Vert
otherwise then a good Bearing, though not so frequent, and is that of Venus,
the green Field representing the Princes Colors; -- Nullas recipit tua gloria
metas,
Hinc Maria, hinc Montes, hinc totus denique Mundus.
Vix agit hinc hominem pecudum volucrumque libido.


Conclusion of this Chapter
To Robert Hook Gentleman, Fellow of the Royal Society, and Geometry Reader in
Gresham College.
SIR,
THe main end of your Philosophical Transactions being for the cherishing of
ingenious Endeavors and Undertakings; and for the inviting others for to
search, and try, and find out new things, does appear to me a noble design* And
though you have for the prosecution of natural knowledge already appointed
several Committies, according to the several inclinations and studies of their
members to execute the said design; yet I have often wondered, that the visible
marks of Honor, I mean Arms, the knowledge thereof among Gentlemen (or as the
French call them les Gentlehommes) whose proper Ensigns are Coat Armours, by
which they are distinguished from the Vulgar) should be so little sought into,
that the Micrographia thereof (of which in Nature you have given us so ample a
testimony) is not so much as once sought into: and though Gentlmen have their
beginning either of Blood, as that they are born of worshipful Parents, or that
they have done something worthily in peace or war, yet none know how they come
by their Arms; yet it is apparent how they all proceed from small beginnings;
dain then to give one Microscopical View, both upon the Fantastical and
Metalline Colors, which this Art has made, and out of which Heroical Science
may be collected a faithful History of Nature, and know that the Escalop-shell
had this honor, Ut Julius Caesar ejus usum nisi certis personis and aetatibus,
perque certos dies ademit, according to Tranquillus; and the reason may be
propter speciosam venustatem: and they that took up the Cross with this Shell
did at the first Bearing find their fortune counterchanged. And in these
divisions of Shields there is the Mathematics of Honor (as worthy your
Examination, as des Carts his Hypothesis of Colors) by which it will appear,
that Heraldry is a study for the Virtuosi, wherein there is nothing so vile,
rude, and course, but shows abundance of curiosity and excellent Geometry,
and Mechanism, as you may see in the next Chapter, where the Gentleman shall
assume Arms, not only from the works of Mature, which hitherto has adorned
his Shield buc from Arts improvement of Nature, in Animals, Vegetatives, and
Minerals, and how the Liberal Arts contribute to the Ensigns of the Noble
Person, from his skill in Arithmetic, Music, Geometry, Painting, Perspective,
Astronomy, Fortification, Cosmo^raphy, etc. and frrm the Mechanics for
improvements of Sciences.

CHAP. IX.
Of the visible Charges of the Sixth Days Work, under the Regiment of Mercury,
or the Purpure Shield.

PUrpure is a color of Aloy, as proper also is; no Creature in Arms, Purpure,
a Bordure Quarterly, the first Gules, Enurny of three Lioncels passant Gardant
OR, the second Purpure, Ermyne.
being born proper, is accounted good bearing, except it be a Creature of one
of the perfect colors in Armory, and then it has pre-eminence: and the reason
is because Umbra plena and perfecta dicitur ad quam nullus radius corporis
luminosi pertingit: and is obscure by the mixture of shadows; which Creatures
differ in their Native Color.

The Period of the Fifth Day being finished, wherein we have Treated of
Creatures living in the Air and Water: come I now to the Conclusion of the
whole Creation, by every Species, in such as live upon the Earth, which are of
two sorts, the Brute Beasts, and Man as the Colophon, or conclusion of all
things else: in whose Nature is placed the greatest Dignity of any visible
Creature, Who bears them all in Shield Coat Armor, or otherwise, where and
when he pleases, without let, molestation, or hinderance, according to the Law
of Arms, with their due differences, according to his first Letters Patents,
let him have dominion, etc. Gerere potestatem: id est Magistratum, says Cicero
ad Herennium. The Lion being the emblem of Power: the first Beast that I shall
present is that of the Lion, whose color, or metal, though it be not that of
nature, is yet more noble and sovereign.

En vexilla feris depicta Leonibus, albis,
Fulvis, coeruleis, rubeis, nigrisque, minaci
Ungue and hiante ORE, --
Two Lions Argent and Combitant was said to be on the Shield of Achilles
(according to that of Sir Jacob Garrad) thus described by Homer; Two horrid
Lions Rampt' and seized, and tug and below still,
Both Men and Dogs came; yet they tore the head, and lapt their fill
Of Black Blood.


Deus cuique dat Arma; and in this blazon you have the word Rampant for
Magnanimity, the word Seized for Saliand, Tore for Erased, and for Armed and
Langued, They tore and Lapt their fill: So that to bear the White Lion Rampant
signifies one like S. Jerome that brave Lion, which from the Cave of Bethelem
made the Roaring of his voice be heard through the World, to the Terror of
Heresy, and the astonishment of vice: Hercules his wearing of the Lions Skin
being but to show the subduing of vice by virtue, Dum superbiam and iram vera
domat mansuitudine. At the Death of Pandarus Aeneas seems to Blazon the Coat
of one of the Conquerors of Northwales thus, Bold as a Lion of his strength, he
hid him with his Shield,
Shook round his Lance, and horribly did threaten all the Field.


Making as it were a Border ingrailed from the proper Strokes of valor: The
Lion Rampant was born both by Caesar and Pompey; and though the Lion is the
proper Ensign of Majesty, yet it must be made always Armed, because that
Majesty is unsafe that is not secured by Power: so that the Lion is atributed
to Princes, Presidents, Generals, and all Heroical Commanders; and as Dr.
Brown notes probably, upon some Celestial account, the Great Mogull, or
Indian King, does bear for his Arms a Lion and a Sun, both Gold: the Dormant
Lion is the Emblem of Vigilance, ET DORMIO ET VIGILO, and so is the Sign Leo
in Heaven; if it be Roused FORTIBUS RESISTIT, and becomes Passant, SUB PEDIBUS
TERRAM: and in every one of these predsients you shall find UBIQUE Leo; the
first is Couchant, as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, TERTIA DIE RESURGIT, it
represents Watchfulness, Regni Clementia Custos.

lion 1 Couchant.



lion 2 Rampant.



lion 3 Passant.



lion 4 Passant Gardant.



lion 5 Saliant.



lion 6 Seiant.



lion 7 Regardant^



lion 8 Double headed.



lion 9 Double-Queen, and Crowned.



The Second is Rampant Argent, in a field Gules, ET LUX ADDET VIRES: The Third
is Passant, which, NON MUTAT FORTUNA GENUS: The Fourth is Passant Gardant, and
signifies a strong and prudent Person, FORTITUDINEM MEAM AD TE CUSTODIAM: The
Fifth is Saliant, and signifies Diligence, INDUSTRIA ET LABOR: The Sixth is
Seiant, Kercher obilis lib. 2. cap. 5.
and signifies Magnanimity, PUSILLA NEGLIGIT, Sedere denotat Humilitatem,
circumactio prudentiam. The Seventh Rampant Regardant, representing a Noble
Mind however, which NEC ASPICIT, NEC TORVE VULT ASPICI, and though it turn the
neck, Se non fugere, sed utilitatem a tergo positam sequitur: The Eighth is a
Lion Double Headed, Azure in a field OR, and is a singular bearing of prudence,
FORTITUDINEM PRUDENTIA; and the last is Double Queve, or Forked Tail, and
Crowned UT SCIAT REGNARE; Double Queve.
So the Arms of Bohemia was changed from an Eagle to a Lion with two tails,
in token of the League of Friendship between Uladislaus King of Bohemia, and
Frederick Barbarosa; for, having been both the Head and Tail of the Victory,
obtained by the means of Ulaudislaus, in assisting Fredrick with Men and Money
against Milayne: and as Barthol de Saxofer in his Tract of Arms testifies, he
had this bearing given him by the King of Bohemia, Ut Ego (says he) and
caeteri de Agnatione mea Leonem rubeum cum caudis duabus in campo aureo
portaremus. Neither may I here forget my own Lion, thus borne, for that PRETIUM
IPSA SIBI, in memory of the Daughter, and one of the Heirs of Ivan ap Rese ap
Ivor, who bare Argent, Herbert Morgan.
a Lion Rampant, Sable crowned Gules; and was descended to William Morgan of
Arkston, who bare * Per pale Azure and Gules, three Lions Rampand Argent; and
by reason of the division of the Family between the two Brothers of Thomas and
David, they did show it, by dividing the Tail thereof, so that the Forked
Tail signifies more particularly Confederacy and Strength; as when Rezin and
Aram joined themselves against Israel, the Holy Writ calls them two Tails:
and that the Tail signifies also Alliance to other Families, may be seen by
what I have before spoke of the Peacock; but, before I pass from hence, it is
necessary also that I speak of the double-Head Lion. Double-head Lions. Horas
is here the Author of this Sentence, as the latter part is the saying of
Herodotus
Leonis anterior a membra pingunt quod haec ei ex toto corpore robustissima
sint; Ita Horas. Posteriora Leonis uti and Omnium opera Deorum judicant; Ita
Herodotus: and the Egyptians did further understand by the diverse parts of a
Lion diverse operations, Id est, uti robur Solis in terra, ita posteriora
ejusdem effectum solidationis expresserant; the custom to adorn Aquaducts by
Lions Heads was of Egyptian Genealogy, under a symbolical illation, because
when the Sun was in Leo, the Flood Nilus was in the full. The Egyptian
Hieroglyphick preserved among Kerchers; Rarities was a right hand extended, to
signify Beneficia Superna (and a fucil) Et Coeleste, as a Celestial Womb, with
a Serpent curving about a Globe, Omnia ambientis and vivificantis numinis vi;
the other part being the Mophta Niloticus, having the former parts like a Lion,
and the hinder-parts Twisting about, to denote aequali proportione incrementum:
and lastly, a double dancette line, to show humidi dispensat. And though
introducing false Ideaes, of things perverts and deformes the face of truth,
yet truly to bear Red Lions, as it is a Martial color, is a noble bearing,
DANT ANIMOS PLAGAE; it many times argues nothing but the complexion of the
bearer.

Black, Red and White: and near the crimson deep,
The Arabian fountain makes crimson Sheep.
The joining of two heads is but to signify united Government; for when Saturn
fled into Italy, he was entertained by Janus, and was a partner in his
Kingdom, Stamping on their Quoine a Head with two Faces. The Prow of Aeneas
Ship, where he and Pallas sat advising, having for its Ensign two Phrygian
Lions, which united in the head, signified Council, heads signifying reason
also; so the Leopards head looking right forward signifies Jurisdiction and
Justice, and next the whole bearing is most honorable HORRORET DECORUS; OR
three Lions passant Sable.
the Bearing of Demi-Lions in the Field of Ammon, blazon of arms what does it
signify but Men of a timely maturity for the War? so Leopards Heads, Terror
hic est hominum, qui hunc gerit est Agamemnon; The Soil of Egypt producing
Creatures alive in the Head only, as some Authors averr.
the Fields of Egypt producing the fore-parts after the fall of Nile. The
black Lion is the Syrian Lion, as testifies Pliny: and though it be a vulgar
error to think that one Lion be better than three, yet three Lions is equally
as Honorable: which if we consider in his Majesty's Achievement, either as
composed out of the ancient British Arms, the Arms of Brute being OR, a Lion
passant, Gardant Gules: giving to Locrine his eldest Son the aforesaid Arms,
and to Albanack his second Son the same Lion Rampant, retained yet as the Arms
of Scotland, only added thereto by the double Treasure of France, in memory of
the League between Achius King of Scots and the French King.

Spelmans Aspilogia.
To his third Son Cambria, in a field Argent, two Lions passant regardant, Gules
Armed, and langued Azure, SI NON VIRES ANIMOS: these Arms being borne for a
long time by the Princes of Wales, after that division of the Empire of
Britain, until Belinus, who took three golden Crowns in a field Azure: and
after him Eldred King of England bare three Crowns in a field Gules.

These three Lions being united again in our Sovereign Lord the King, Heir
both to the British, Saxon, and Norman blood. William the Conqueror bearing in
a field Gules two Lions, Leopards.
blazoned Leopards whose property is A MACULIS DECOR, its posture being passant
Gardant ET VELOX ET RECTA, and was borne also by his Sons, Robert Curtos, and
William Rufus, his successor Henry the First also: the Lion of Aquitaine was
added by King Henry the Second; and says one, That King of England bore three
Leopards, as a King, a Duke, and an Earl: King Stephen his Predecessor bearing
the Sagittarius, OR in a Field Gules, because the Sun was in that Sign when he
gained that Kingdom; and ever since all since him have borne the three Lions
passant Gardant, till such time as King Edward the Third, Arms of England.
who why he put the Lions in the second Quarter is already mentioned in my
Sphere of Gentry; and the union of the Scotch Lion with these three is not
unknown to any English Man: thus you see Libera per vacuum posui vestigia
princeps; Sen. Epist. 19.
Non aliena meo pressi pedi; the Arms of England having been continually
altered: Alfred, the youngest Son of King Edelwulph, bare Checkie OR and Gules,
in a Chief a Lion passant gold: and Canut the Dane bare OR, semi of Men's
hearts, three Lions passant Azure, being still the Arms of Denmark. Harold
bare Gules, a Lion Rampant holding a Battle Axe: Canut the second the same,
quartred with the first. And Herald, blazon of arms Son to Goodwin, Earl of
Kent, bare Gules, two bars between six Leopards fa^es 3, 2, 1, OR: Sable, a
Cheveron between three Leopards heads, OR.
Thus you see the full face does show Regal admonishment, Rex eris si recte
facias, it is FORTITER RESISTENDUM, and the Lion in Princes Arms SERVIRE
NESCIT; but you may say then, What means the Chain about the neck of the
Unicorn in Scotland? Vulgar Error.
Oh, say some, it is because they were false to the Crown: hold there, Nemo plus
impetrat a libero, quam qui servire non cogit: it is the reward rather of
acceptable Service, according to the Romans and others, who gave Chains and
Bracelets of Gold: neither was Manases false to himself when he was in Chains;
repentance in him being like that in that King of Scotland, who wore a Chain
ever after his Fathers death, because he was suspected to have a hand therein,
which it may be was the cause of the Chain upon that Supporter of Scotland,
notwithstanding it is joined to a Princes Coronet for the more honor of it:
and so OBNOXIA PELLIT, Chains and Crowns.
the Kings Majesty that now is, having that in his Act of Oblivion, as the
borne of this Beast has CONTACTU SALUBRES; and to wear a Crown and Chain of
the Kings gift is an honor to the Lion: as in the Coat of Philips of Wales,
King Edward the First having Chained the Lions of Llewillin ap Griffith, the
last Prince of British blood, by swearing fealty from him to his Son as Prince
of Wales: King Richard the Second bearing to his Supporters two white Hearts
Chained and colored, with Crowns and Atired Gold: Henry the Fourth bearing an
Antilope and a Swan for Supporters, both honored in the same manner: Henry the
Fifth and Sixth bearing the Antilope Chained and Accolled, with a Crown, and
the Lion on the left side: and time was when the Lion of England was chained;
1192
even King Richard the First, being taken Prisoner in Austria, keeping him in
Bands, the rude sort that before would shake at the Tail of this Lion, durst
now laugh at his Face now he was in a Grate; and as this Richard was famous for
his Sword, 1340
so was ( Richard, Earl of Cornwall, Brother to King Henry the Third) for his
Purse being so well Monyed, that for ten years together he might for every day
expend a hundred Marks, in testimony of whose Birth and Riches he bare a Lion
Rampant within a Border Besaunty; he Writ himself King of the Romans, and
always Augustus: the Arms of Philip of Alsack, sixth Earl of Flanders, was a
Lion Rampant, Sable in a field OR, being gained in the Field Anno 192,
Guilianus.
from Nobilion King of Albania, a Turk: Joscelin of Lovan, a younger son to the
Duke of Brabant, having Married Agnes the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Percy,
who was so named from Percy Forest in the County of Maine, though he took that
Name to his Posterity, yet notwithstanding did retain the Lion Rampant, to
show from whom they descended: to this day in the Coat of the Earl of
Northumberland, Pickering bears also the blew lion in a field Ermine, as
being supposed to be descended from the Heir of Roger de Mypthorp: and though
Nature produces no blew lions more than green, or blew horses, Chromatisme of
Beasts.
as Kercher observes in his Book De Chromatismis rerum naturalium; yet by the
Colors in Arms are sometimes signified the Complexions of the Bearers; as by
white the sanguine, by Gold color the choleric, by blew the phlegmatic, and
by black the Melancholy; and sometimes the ages, of Childhood, Youth, Manhood
and old Age, and how Coats are different from one another, both by color,
division and charge, were an endless labor to show, seeing that those that
were descended from one Stem, reserving the principal charge, took Borders,
Bends, Quarters, etc. Others following the Paternal Coat of their Lords Hardres
in Kent, bearing a Lion Rampand Ermin debrused with a Cheveron OR, as holding
their Manor of Hardres by Knight Service, of the Castle of Tunbridge, Camdens
Remains.
the ancient Seignory of the Clares, who did bear OR, three Cheverons: and many
other Coats in Kent were taken up alluding to these Lords of Tunbridge; as the
Averings, Everings, Houghtons, Creythorns, Cryolls. So also the Lord Leyborne
of Leyborne Castle, bearing six lioncells Rampant, was imitated by Sherland
with a canton Ermin, and Rokisley with a Fess; and Kirkby of Horton Kirkby,
with a Canton and Mullet: Neither is any Arms to be disliked in respect of its
Original or Signification; for neither the Original can Grace the bad, nor the
Signification disgrace the good; for the low are descended from the high, and
the high from the low: and if there has been both good and bad Bearings, both
good and bad have borne them. Lions paws are borne not for rapine, but as
significators of Strength, Lions Paws*
and so by a Senechoch the parts are put for the whole: when the Lion is angry,
it tears the ground with its ^oot; and when it sleeps, it has its eyes open;
so Lions heads signify vigilance, and Erassed Martial Power, the legs
execution.

Est Leo sed custos oculis qui dormit apertis. And according to H. Spelman, the
Passant Lion Mansuetudinem and clementiam significat: and for the Hair and
Nails, hear what Kercher says it signifies, Ungnes and Crines (says he)
Symbola propinquicrum, Ob. lib. 2. cap. 5. A Lion in a Chief signifies one that
masters his own Reason, and on a Fesse his Sense. Si vis omnia tibi subjice,
subjici te Rationi; the Lion Rampant Imperat ipse sibi, The noble Marquess of
Dorchester bearing a Lion Rampant within Cinquefoiles.
and the Couchant Parendo imperat. The Lion having a divided foot, is called
therefore Armed; while the next Creature that I shall speak of is the Warlike
Horse, and in the Foot is called Unguled; it is the Emblem of War, according
to that of Virgil; Bello armantur equi, bella haec armenta minantur. --

Chromatisme of the Horse.
Colores maxim communes ei, sunt albus, niger, rufus, says Kercher: It was
Sacred both to Mars and Neptune, and was born among the Military Ensigns of
the Romans, and of the Warlike Saxons, who entered this Nation under the Conduct
of Hengest and Horsus, Anno 450 It is the Emblem of Celerity, whose best
posture is Saliant; and being stamped on silver, it became Current Money; it
was taken for a Good omen in the Foundation of Carthage: Horse heads
Dug a Horse head, which sign great Juno gave,
How well in War they should themselves behave.


The Horse head is borne both by Marsh, Horsey, Heigham, and many others: and
by the Lloyds, Heilius, and several British Families; it is often borne
bridled, to denote a prudent Martial Man, INFRENABIT APOLLO: and to show the
Virtue of Education; for the Bridle DOCET COMPONERE GRESSUS; and further,
TUTIOR IN FRAENIS.

-- Est in Equis Patrum virtus, etc. Virtus.

Dapled with White, and two white feet before
A Star on's Creast in stately manner bore.
When they are Current, it signifies Perseverance, DONEC AD METAM; and
represents the Bearers thereof to spend themselves in the Service of an
other; ALIIS INSERVIENDO CONSUMOR: and being Barded ADDIT ANIMUM; though the
Trojan Horse was SPECIE RELIGIONIS, yet Bucephalus was SOLI CAESARI; and as I
said before, the Martial Man's Auxiliary: for, in the Martial City described by
Homer, when the Greeks had received the Alarm, -- being then in Council set,
They then start up, take horse, and soon their enemies met.


The indefatigable labor of the Man at Arms being like that of this Creature,
NULLA META LABORIS; so says the Wise Man, As the Horse is prepared for the
Battle, so Man is prepared to labor and Travail: By Diomedes his wild horses
was signified Hercules his eighth labor: Dum Justitiam vindicativam servat in
delinquentibus. Cyrus his Thirst for blood was quenched with what he loved.

Figure of four Creatures diffre^ by their feet.



Hearts. Staggs.
The Heart, or Stagg, represents hominem agilem, and qui laborious suis requiem
interponit; it has a cloven foot; and such a bearing was borne by Secretary
Moriston, and according to Pierius it signifies Vivacity, Friendship, and
Perfections; being borne with the Cross between, as in Parkhurst Coat, it
represents a young Person in Exercises of Arms, ABIT A CONCEPTU: and in its
current Posture INSTRVIT EXEMPLO. I write to thee, O blazon of arms Theophilus,
says the chief Physician: and whether should the Heart fly, but to him who
MEDICAMINE PLENVS EST; neglecting the lower Stars to be above^ and while below
denotes the bearers perfection, friendship and vivacity; and is the Coat of
Doctor Baldwin Hamey being current in chief, MERGIT IN AMNE SITIM, S. Clemans
East-Cheap-Church being leaded at his proper cost.
and has fixed his Mullets on the top of Gods House: The Hind also is borne in
Arms; and as it is the only Female used, so also it of all other is
dis-armed, PROCEDAMUS IN PACE. The Moon had sometimes Staggs, and sometimes
Horses (for her Chariot) or rather Mules, by reason of her borrowed light;
Stags, as Governors of the Woods: By Hercules his taking the Heart with the
golden horns, was signified Occasiones vitiorum studiose declinat, using Policy
rather than Strength: A^tires of Staggs.
The Male of this Creature is not said to be Armed, but Attired; and the
Attires thereof are borne in Arms, to signify one that makes a Good End, JAM
TIMOR OMNIS ABEST: But when I come to the bottom of the Escutcheon, there I
meet a Dragon, Dragon:
of Beasts the most terrible, as appears by its Claws; and what good do you
expect from hurtful Animals? first it signifies a vigilant Pastor, NON
DORMITABIT: next Magnanimity, ARDUUS INSURGIT: Thirdly it denotes the bearer
thereof to overcome all his Enemies: Hurtful Animals.
King Henry the Third looking upon it with the same Omen before the Battle of
Lewis; Hurtful Animals.
and the red Dragon has since been honored by Henry the Seventh, Henry the
Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary; only Queen Elizabeth changed it into
gold, MICAT ORE; when the mouth is inflamed, it signifies eloquence. The
Cockatrice, though it be a harmfull Serpent, yet signifies the bearer to render
vengeance, IN CAPUT AUTHORIS; the Hydra was overcome, NON FERRO SED IGNE: and
by this labor of Hercules, Dum quicquid parem todere potest evitat. Three
Toads was the ancient Arms of France, in memory of a Victory obtained in a
field of Toads. Quae exteriora sui signa dat ingenii: He has no need of help,
that is wounded by Achilles Spear, to bear the Scorpion; VULNUS, OPEMQUE GERIT;
the sting of Scorpions being remedied by the flesh thereof; it is borne in
Arms as a note of revenge; this Creature has CAUDA SEMPER IN ICTU, and is
aplicable to one who injoyes a Misers Estate; QUI VIVENS LAEDIT MORTE MEDETUR.
The Serpent is the Symbol of adoration, and is a note of a Consecrated Place,
according to Perseus; Pinge duos angues; pueri sacer est locus.

serpent Azure, a Serpent Torqued in pale OR.

The Scorpion is a sign in Heaven, and so is the Dragon; this being a
Principal Standard among the Romans: and Hercules is said to bear a hundred
Snakes in token of his young virtue, having strangled two in his Cradle, and
following virtues tract SPOLIATA ILLUSTRIOR: It casts off its old Coat, UT
MELIOREM INDVAM; and is the emblem of prudence, IN SILENTIO MORDET, when it
Tempted our first Parents: and it is the Emblem of the year among the
Agyptians, when it compasses an Annulet with its Tail in the mouth, EXTREMA
COPULAT, FINIS QUE AB ORIGIN PENDET. The VIPER, VERTIT IN MEDELAM; by the Wise
Man, though NECAT AMANTEM, the Amphibisten ET RETORSUM ASPICIT. Cogitavi dies
antiquos, says David. CAVENDO TUTUS is a Noble Man's Motto, which bears a Snake
to his Creast; and it is the wisest course, MENTEM CAVE CVM LAEDITUR AURIS, for
there are those that will speak fair, yet have the poison of Asps under their
lips: the Chimaera breathes Etherian Fire on the Creast of Turnus; Ante Leo,
post terga Draco, Medioque Capella.

By Hercules his binding of Cerberus, blazon of arms or the triple-headed Dog,
Per bend sinister Gules and Sable, a Chymere Argent.
was signified, Gulam, Vanaum glortam and invidiam virtute contraria ligat; and
by his spoiling of the Garden of the Hesperides, is signified Virtutum fructus
non capit, nisi vitiorum impedementa tollantur. What was signified by Binding
Gerions Oxen, and his setting confines to the then unknown World, but that
Terra marique anime magnitudinem probat?

That Martial Men should always affect things of courage, is no wonder; and
among the Agyptians it is said, that Osiris had two sons, unequal in virtue,
Anubis and Macedon; Prosecuti sunt; uterque Armis usus est insignibus, aliquo
animali haud ab little natura dissimili; nam Anubis Canem, Macedon Lupum insigne
armorum tulit; the Wolf is used among the Ensigns of the Romans as a part of
the shield of Aeneas. Wolf.


Mars pregnant Wolf in a green covert lay,
And hanging on her breasts, two Infants play.
The Egyptians figuring by it Rapine and Spoil; and impatient of Hunger, as
the nature of it shows; it is dedicated to Mars, Peregrinum etiam notare:
they further note, that by the head of a Wolf was signified the time past, Quia
animal est sum obliviosum (such a bearing was borne by Hugh Lupus) by the
head of a Lion the time present, Ob ejus fortitudinem and potentiam: and by the
head of a Dog the time to come: Quod nobis semper canum more abbland^ens ad se
cum spe invitet: the name of Lovet, quasi Lupellus, bears two Wolfes in a
field of Mars; and Love, quasi lupus bears a demi D^g; the one being nothing
more kind, and the other SUA ALIENAQUE PIGNORA NUTRIT: Mallovel, that is Malus
lupellus, as Camden testifies; and Maleverer (bares three Greyhounds, Dogs.
which it seems are none of the best) from being evil hunters: but of all
Military Ensigns Pierius interprets the Dog to have a generous mind, as the
symbol of gratitude; it was in great worship among the Egyptians, Canis etiam
Proserpinam designabat; and its generosity is seen, Qui nec aversos morte
sterneret, nec imbecilles, nec inermes, nee foeminas, nec pueros provocaret;
its proper posture is sitting; which posture denotat humilitatem, Circumactio
prudentiam, etc. its vigilance is much, giving warning, EX ORE SALUTEM; it
uses perseverance, DONEC CAPIAM; its Animosity is VICTORAM NON PRAEDAM: It is
insatiable of Honor, EXPETIT ID QUOD ABEST; it is in all things DOMINO
MANDANTE: it is the Symbol of Fidelity, INCORRUPTA FIDE; if it be rewarded
with a collar, Dogs Collar.
MAJORA EXPBCTA^, and PROHIBET ET INDICAT; now I have showed Et equis
Canibusque Lupisque; let me further show you other noble bearings still behind.

-- Et Barris, ac Tigribus, ursis,
Et Pardis, Tauris. --
Mitibus atque ovibus: Referam ne coetera bruta,
Quadrupedis Genus omne vides.
Elephant.
It is called Barris in Latin, as signifying Strength; for such is the
Elephant; it is called Elephas ab Elphio in Greek, for the great quantity of
its body; it has understanding and memory, even excelling Men, embracing
goodness, honesty, prudence and equity, having a delight both in Love and
Glory: UT PURUS ADOREM; they wash and salute the Moon; SIC ARDUA PETO, and it
is borne Gold in a field Gules, by the name of Elphingston, and by the Royal
Company Trading into Africa, with reverence to their Merchandise of Elephants
Teeth, which ASPERITAS POLIT; it signifies the bearer to be Great and Good,
Ivory.
IN OMNIBUS VICTOR PRAELIIS. Many times the Proboscide thereof is born in Arms,
as to signify INFESTUS INFESTIS; and the heads are often born NEQVE VORAX
NEQVE RAPAX, according to the example of Samuel, NIL RAPVISSE PROBANS* all
which is enough to prove the Bearing thereof to signify honest Qualities.

The Tiger is most fierce in nature, and so is the Leopard, Tiger. Leopard.
but subtle, using policy where it wants strength. It is born in the Coat of
Tattershall (and others) looking in Mirors VITREAE PROPRIAE TARDATUR IMAGINE:
and as they are bred in India, they may properly be born by Merchants, trading
into those Countries, which many times expect great matters, and with the
Tiger, FALLITUR IMAGINE. The Tiger was pictured on the Prow of the Second Rate
Ship of Aeneas, according to Virgil: In The brazen Tiger Massicus first stands,
From Clusus he a thousand Youths commands. Ogle. Aen. lib. 10.



The Eagle that carried away Ganymed, and the Bull which carried Europa, being
nothing else then Ships bearing these Ensigns in their Prows, where we contrary
to the Ancients, carry them in our Sterns: and as one says, all Ships are
descended from the Loins or Ribs of Noah's Ark. So this Age begat all these
Ensigns both Military and Civil on Sea and Land, the River Tygris being so
called from its swift Current, this being a Beast virtute and velocitate
mirabilis, and is a proper Bearing for Merchants.

The Panther is the Emblem of a good name, which is as precious ointment, this
creature having so lovely a sent, as it is very desirable, Panther.
(and of such variety of Colors as is delightful, from its mouth proceeds
that kind of Aromatic smell, ut OMNIA TRAHAM, by which scent other beasts are
drawn to follow it, and many times BLANDIMENTO PRAEDATVR, the looks of it being
so terrible, that it hides its head. It is a watery creature, as is the
Mountain-cat, Cat of Mountain,
the Cat being so called from catat, Cat.
id est, videt, says Upton. It is impatient of captivity, and is bo^^ in
several English Coats; and it is of that nature, CUM LUDIT LAEDET. It is an
Emblem also of polite and neatness, having much of the nature of the Leopard,
violent subtle, and born passant. Gardant is their proper posture, ET UELOXET
RECTA: neither is the blue Cat an unworthy Bearing in the Field Ermine, seeing
it denotes a wise foreseeing man, and one that will, as we say, keep his foot
out of the fire, and out of the water too; and so in a field of such purity it
denotes the Bearer to be one who is willing to sleep in a whole skin. It is
also of Colors undeterminate, Adams.
sometimes black, sometimes white, sometimes yellow, sometimes spotted, etc. It
was in esteem among the Egyptians as a sacted Hieroglyphick, and among all
creatures this, as well as the Tiger and Panther, are the only Beast, that for
their variety of spotted skins and furrs are in great request, the Panthers
skin being all white, making vary in the spots, and the Cameleopardus furr is
vary of white, spots upon a red ground representing the Bearer of these furrs
to be persons more for sight then any wild nature: Vary is the skin of Beasts.
Fox.
however, though the Fox bears a soft skin, yet it is of that subtilty, that
it plainly shows, FRONTI NULLA FIDES, denoting the Bearer to use stratagems in
war, AUT APERTE AUT INSIDIIS, which is justificable in War, though not in
Religion, according to Plutarch, Hosts in bello fallere non justum solummodo,
valdeque gloriosum, sed etiam suave and lucresum esse: so that furrs in a civil
sense signifies good warm persons, well lined, and honorable: Vir been
vestitus pro vestibus esse peritus.

Furrs in Arm.
And in a military sense, those that arm themselves with the spoils of others,
have gone through the fortune of the Wars, vary of all colors, and at last
show a good Coat, though it have as many black as white spots, and has as much
Gules as OR, notwithstanding ORNATET ARMAT. The Potent fur is able to sustain
the Bearer, as well as the Pilgrims staff from the Holy Land; Camel.
neither will there need a Camel to bring home their Goods, which creature
SUSTINET ET ABSTINET, representing a good Prelate, whose indefatigable
perseverance is such, that NEC JEJUNIO NEC VIA, but FLEXIT AD PONDUS. Lynx.
Hyena.
The Lynx INVISIBILE LVSTRAT, and is eminent for sight. The Hyena chancres its
eyes into all manner of Col urs, JAM PARCE SEPULTO. It is an Emblem of a cruel
Enemy, which will not let the Dead lie still in their Graves. These two last
having their forcemost in their teeth, Rhinoceros.
whereas the Rhinocercos has it on the horn, or its nose (being an enemy by
nature to the Elephant) and whets its horn, PUGNAE UT PARATIOR, and teaches
the Discipline of War, JUS ARMORUM DOCERE.

The Bear is a wild beast, which NATURA POTENTIOR ART. It is not found in any
of the Imperial Ensigns, Bear.
notwithstanding it is an apt Ensign of the sury of War; being born bridled, as
in the Coat of Sir James Langham, represents the effects of true Philosophy,
NEC SINET ESSE FEROS. It is a sign in Heaven, divided into two Constellations,
the great and the less, and why placed there, see my Sphere of Gentry. It
represents also Persons, who by maturity and deliberation do form the Embrio
ABARTE PERFECTIO: and its Nobility is tried more by baiting, GENEROSIOR ABICTU;
and it has one alone virtue proper to true love, that is, CRESCET DUM VIVET.
The name of Mills bears Bears to his Arms: -- Bears that never yet
Durst in the Ocean bathe their silver fe^t.


By reason that they are said (nor observed) to set below the Horizon in our
Northern Hemisphere, a property that it has from its near situation to the
Axis, admonishing the Bearers thereof, that true Honor binds them to the
Honor point, IPSA ALIMENTA SIBI. The Bull, says the Aspilogian, is robustum
Animal and aptum pugnae, and by it was signified labor. Bull^
According to Plutarch it bears the yoke, SVAVIT ATE NON VI, and being
gelded, MUTATUS ABILLO, and is said to signify a man of Arms wounded by a
Lance in the Genitals; notwithstanding painted heads or horns are not to be
feared, as Perillus his Bull, whose terror was so great, that there was none
to try the experiment on but the Inventor thereof, VENTURE NON CORNVTIMENDVM,
denoting the just desert of the contrivers of evil, INGENIO EXPERIOR FVNERA
DIGNA MEO. Horas.
The Horn is Fortitude, HIS SECVRVS, and was born on the Helmets of many worthy
Captains, as a peculiar cognizance. And the Prince of Salerna having builded a
sumptious Palace in Naples, on a Pinnacle whereof in the forefront he erected a
pair of horns, with a Motto in Italian, which in English is rendered: I wear the
horns which each man sees by view,
And some men wears them too, yet scarce believe it true.


Implying thereby to quip a certain Nobleman, who talked dishonourably of a
Lady, having himself a Wife suspected, CONDIGNA MERCES. Bugle horns.
As for the Bugle horn, it is born by the Counts of Horn as an Emblem of
Forestership; and among us both by Forsters, Huntleys, Waits, and many other,
as Guardians, and as having free Warren of the Kings gift. As for Oxen, Oxen.
they are born either whole, as in Oxendens Coat, as a note of men of great
possessions. In the Heroical times Homer not mentioning money, but so many
Beeves, who says, that the golden Armor of Glaucus was worth a hundred Beeves;
and the copper Armor of Diomedes worth nine, and the incomparable Shield of
Achilles Vulcan had framed: A herd of Oxen then he carved with high raised
heads, forged all
Of Gold and Tin for Color mixed, and bellowing from their stalls;
Four Herdsmen followed after nine, Mastiffs went in herd;
For all the herd upon a Bull that deadly bellowed.


blazon of arms The Bull supported the Arms of King Edward the Fourth and
Fifth; Argent an Ox passant Sable, with a Collur Enmene, and a Chain OR,
and also Richard the Third, who used also the white Boar.

The Ox was the Ensign of the Carthaginians as well as Egyptians: and the
Minotaur was among the Ensigns military of the Romans, quia non minus, inquit
Festus, occulta esse debent concilia ducum, quam fuit domicilium ejus
labyrinthus. Hercules his dragging the Cretan Bull by the horns, what is
signified but CRETAE INFENSVM, and in all his labors tended to Virtue: by this
was signified in particular literatam Virtutem summo studio amplectitur. And by
his cleansing of the Augean Stable, that held the dung of three thousand Oxen
for thirty years together, he showed how he malitiam voluntatis Virtutum studio
in bono inflectit. The heads of Bulls are born either caboched, that is,
fore-right, as in the Coat of Morgan of Tredeger, and of Sanders in Surrey;
Bulls heads.
or else joined with part of the Neck, which is either Erased or Couped, all
which are Ensigns as well of Reward as Labor; for in the digging the
foundation of Carthage, there was found the head of an Ox, which was a presage
of a fruitful Soil, and of a City laborious, and always subjected, both which
qualities are implied in the Shield of Oxewick, whose Cheveron, as it yoketh
the Ox heads, it is between. So by the benevolence of Jupiter it springs with
Cinquefoils, Bovis putrefacti sobolem esse apes: And if thou Herds and Steers
delightst to keep,
Or Goats that burn the Corn or fleecy Sheep,
Seek pleasant Groves.


The Golden Fleece is the Ensign of Jason: and Lambert bears three Lambs
Argent, it being the signification of the name, Lambs.
viz. fair Lamb; would the last had been PARENTI SIMILLIMA PROLES. Some will
have the name to signify famous, the Captain of the flock wants not Arms; for
an an onset he makes a retreat, UT VALIDIVS: and many times leaves his Fleece
behind, VELLERA PRO DAPIBVS. The Egyptians worshipped Jupiter Hammon under the
form of a Ram, Rams.
denoting the first Bearer to be a man pious and humble: Duxque gregis dixit,
sit Jupiter unde recurris,
Ovid. Me* lib. 5.
Nunc quoque formatus Lybis est cum cornibus Ammon.


And from the strength of the head of this Creature is taken the military
Engine called a Ram, three whereof are born by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Lindsey; and as the Ox is the Symbol of Agriculture, and the Goat of Fecundity:
so this is of strength, and the Lamb is of meekness and utility, whose wool is
not the spoil, but the reward they owe to man, who causes it to be died in the
several Colors whereof he makes his Coat, even from the Crown of the head to
the sole of his feet, making him esteemed as honorable even from the goodness
of his Coat, and quicquid in eo reperitur.

Hunc homines decorant quem vestimenta decorant. Which if it be adorned with
Gold, it shows him to be noble, or some invincible Hero: -- Vni siquidem nil
deperit auro
Ignibus. --


Even in this fiery Artizans Shield this Bearing was obvious as appears
farther: Then in a passing present Vail the famous Artsman fed
Upon a goodly pasture ground iich Flocks of white fleeced sheep,
Built Stables, Cottages and Coats that did the Shepherds keep.


Dove-coats being in the Coat of Sap-coats, Dove-Coats.
but as an Ensign of an ancient Mansion House. And Yates bears three
field-gates, as the preservers of their flocks from stray.

The Ass is called Asinus, as Nicholas Vpton notes, The Ass.
from A or sine without, and sinus which is sense. It is an ancient Bearing
appropriate to Mars: and though Scipio the head of the Cornelian Family was
thought to affront the Judge to whom he offered a Shee-ass for security, the
unlading of it made him rather smile then take it amiss, paying ready money for
his Land, and purchasing to himself the name of Asinius. It denotes the Bearer
thereof to be hominem pium and mansuetum verbis and operibus suis blandientem;
forgetful of injuries, and prepared to suffer much improbious and unjust
calumnies, SEMPER ADONVS; but being laden with gold it is able to enter the
strongest Fort, and so may signify one that overcame by present pay, which
though TARDE, SED TVTE; for though the Ears were the reward of Midas for
stupidity, they also are the Cognizance of Dimock, as a Champion. The first of
the Scipio's was Master of the Horse, as this of the Ass, which brings to mind
the Boar, who above blazon of arms all other Animals is armed Cap a Pe, Sable a
Boar passan^ Argent, tusked and crined OR
this Labor of Hercules overcoming the Erimanthian Boar, being non of the
least, at the sight whereof having astonished King Erithonius, by which was
signified Virtutis constantia omnes superat difficultates.

All his twelve Labors, if he had not performed, he could not have become
immortal, TV NE CEDE MALIS, sed contra audentior ito. It is called Verres among
the Latins, quod grandes habet vires: it signifies the Bearers to be subtle
and strong Warriors, whose property is rather to dye in Battle, then to save
its life by flight, MORI POTIVS QVAM DESERERE; and it is a numerous Bearing in
the Shields of Martial men, for that very cause, DEPASCITVR ET EXTERMINAT is
the effects of War. The Phrygians bare a Boar, and Mesala Corvinus a Sow.
Coneys.
The Coney is a little Creature, yet build its holes in the rocks; denoting
little in power, yet prudent in domestic occasions: Hares.
and the Hare in its current posture notes FVGA SALVTEM; and it has this
property, ASCENSV LEVIOR. It Is born both by Coney and Conesbye, as a Rebus to
their Names, Squiril.
and as persons being long dwellers in their ancient possessions, accomplishing
great things by small beginnings. Neither may the Squiril be forgot among the
small Creatures, born in Arms by the Lovells, Creswells, and Woods, Kelseyes
and others, it being a little Creature that is satisfied with small things, and
knows how to sail with every wind, ALTERAM INVASIT SPIRITVS. It also signifies
an industrious person, that cracks the shell to come at the kernel; VINCIT
SOLERTIA VIRES, to teach the Bearer that of Aemilius lib. 1. Ingenium hominis
omnia domat: and to bear such small Creatures is, Gerere aliquid priva^im.

He that bears an Ape may imply one that happily has destroyed such a one
that COMPLECTENDO NECAT; Ape.
or else one that like the Alchymist, who in trying to imitate Nature, SE IPSAM
SEDVCIT, that either embraces the world so close, that he hurts the issue of
his better parts; or else so prodigal as to spend his estate to purchase to
himself the title of a Philosopher by fire.

Opposite to the Ape is the Ermine; Ermine.
the one being nasty and treacherous, the other pure and innocent, whose skin
is worn as an honorable covering, because IN PVRO TANTVM. It is the Arms of
Britainy, and is a white creature, having but one spot on the tail thereof, and
has this property, POTIVS MORI QVAM FOEDARI. It principally signifies
virginity of mind with beauty of body; Rara est adeo concordia formae, atque
pudicitiae says Juvenal. Quere whether or no Teudor remaining with the Duke of
Britain all the time of Edward the Fourth and Fifth, did not occasion their
bearing of their Lion OR, and the Field parted per Bend sinister Ermine, and
Erminees as remaining under the bounty of the Duke: and though half the field
was black with white Ermins, as being under the sinister fortune of Princes;
yet the Lion being raised and Rampant, became victorious under King Henry the
Seventh. The Lion denotes power, and the Ermine honor, and so aestimatio
genere valet, non magnitudine.

The Mole or Want may represent one who has been condemned to perpetual
imprisonment; Imperfect Animals.
or such who all their life-times were servants, but were at liberty in death,
though indeed Twisleton bears them in point of good Husbandry, as may be seen
by the hand and Mole Spade in the Crest: and we know what Solomon concluded,
when he went by the field that was grown over with weeds. The Want has
fingers, Mole:
least the Idleman should want: and it has no eyes, that the Husbandman might
see to that. It has a black and a soft skin, who is always born proper, while
others bear terrestrial Tortoises with a white and a hard shell. Tortoise.
So does Gaudy in a green field, as a sign of a blessing to the Meek; for they
shall inherit the Earth. MANNER DOMI ET TACITAS is modest prudence, GRADITVR
NON EGREDITVR. And when his King or Country requires, CVM TEMPORE REDIT. As
for the Urchins, Hedg-hog.
they are born also in point of possession by Abrahall of Vrchinfield in
Herefordshire. And the Herris's of Shropshire armed on the defensive part
UNDIQUE TUTUS. Porcupine:
And the Porcupine is VNDEQV AQVE MVNITVS; Claxton bearing three Porcupines,
and augmented with a Canton, for the proper valor of one of that name. SPES ET
TVTAMEN IN ARMIS; for he that has much has care, and he that has little has
hope, par est fortuna labori. The man of Honor will not so soon part with his
Arms, Beaver. Otters.
as the Beaver with its Stones, VT VITAM REDIMAT; and why should Proud boast of
three Otters in his Arms, seeing SAEVIT IN OMNES, every one threatening present
death to the Fishes in their mouths, and death can persuade where none can:
Ovid. Ele. lib. 32.
Omnibus obscuras injicit illa manus:

And which is more.

Virg. Geor.
-- Beasts fly his fiery darts,
Deject with trembling fear the proudest hearts.
Badger.
To bear the Badger or Brock is in memory of some stratagem performed in the
night, as some of the family of Broght^n of Staffordshire affirm. But I rather
believe it to be in allusion to their name, as Broke bears it; or else for
the delight the Bearers had in hunting of the Badger, in following the advice
of Virgil: Often hunt the Hare and Deer with full-mouthed Hounds,
And thrust forth Boars sheltred in wood-land Grounds.


Such is the Honor of Arms, that the Muse of Virgil all along has advanced
Rural Exercises even with the Gentility, and so is duly placed upon his
Monument: -- Cecini Pascua, Rura, Duces;
-- Swains, Tillage, Arms I sung.


Himself also sings the Rise of Gentility in the first Book of his Georgicks:
None to the scorned Plow due honor yields,
Swains pressed for Soldiers leave neglected fields,
And crooked Syths to Swords transformed are.


Hay of Scotland, from whom the Earl of Carlisle, bearing three Escoutcheons
Gules, and a Plow yoke, in memory of him and his two Sons, that with their
Plow-yokes in their hands, repulsed the whole Army of his Countrymen flying
from the face of their Enemy, and in a narrow passage caused them to return, by
which means they gained a notable Victory; only this by the way, that where
Beasts of prey are born in Arms, it is a sign of some achievement in the field;
and where domestic things are born, it is a sign of peace.

Under a spreading Beech thou Tityrus set
On slender reeds do rural Notes repeat.
As for other imperfect Animals that were the work of this Day: What is
signified by the Be, Be.
but SIC VOS NON VOBIS, and they that rob them of their Honey, PRO BONO MALUM?
If they take Arms, PRO REGE EXACUUNT, and at beat of Drum, CONGREGANTVR SONITV,
and in the time of peace MELIORA LEGIT. Silkworm. Scarbee.
The Silkworm MVNDI SEMINA SERVAVIT. He that bears the Scarbee, shows he is
one that has quelled sedition MAGNO CVM MVRMVRE. Catedpillar-Cameleon. Snail.
Grasshopper.
And the wicked are like to the Caterpillar, DONEC CONFICIAT. The Camelion NEC
SPE NEC METV. And the Snail is the Emblem of Virtue, FERT OMNIA SECVM. The
Grasshopper PRAEVIDERE NESCIT, and signifies a musical Person which has A
PECTORE VOCES; yet because it sung in Summer, the Ant bid it go hop in Winter;
Go to the Ant thou sluggard, says the Wise man, QVOSCVNQVE POTEST: and it is
so prudent, that CONDIT IN ANNVM. The Spider NVNQVAM OCIATVR; and though they
be but small, DISCINDVNT MAGNA. Salamander.
The Salamander represents integrity, which will last in the sire of
affliction: Nempe illaesa manet semper and integritas.

Frog. Horsleech. Wasp. Mice. Fly. Glowworm. Moth. Toads.
Mecoenas had a Frog to his device that lived both on land and water. True love
is like the Salamander, whose Motto is DVRABO, and the Horsleech MORDENDO
SANAT. Calumny is like a Wasps sting, NON PENETRANT. Mitford bears three
Mice, and represents the condition of a wicked man, FORIS PVGNAE, INTVS
TIMORES: and so the Mole-want, ATRIS OBSCVRA TENEBRIS. The Fly is the Emblem of
Impudence, ET ABACTA REDIT. The Glowworm IN TENEBRIS LVCET: and the Moth that
plays with the light, represents BREVIS ET DAMNOSA VOLVPTAS. The Toads were
born in the French Arms, in memory of a Victory obtained in a field full of
them.

Thus have I run through Adam's Shield charged with the whole reation, of which
you have the testimony of Holy Writ, that all things God had made was good. So
that if the Gentleman thinks not his Coat good enough, neither in the Metal nor
Color, let him now see the first Monarch in the world without a Coat, yet
adorned with red Earth, as a Color, and like unto his Maker, and so DIVES SINE
AVRO, He had a rich soul, holding the whole world in capite from his Creator,
and having every creature in his subjection, the whole Creation being the Great
Seal of Heaven, Great Seal:
and man the Privy Seal, who in imitation of his Maker did also at first ordain
Rings as Symbols of the Heavens, without any thing graven thereon, and
afterward assumed Arms thereon, Privy Seal:
and so DISTINGVIT ET EXPRIMIT, which after they began to be in use and
request, There was none at Rome under the degree of a Knight or Gentleman that
carried Rings on their Fingers; insomuch as a man might know a Gentleman from a
Commoner by his Ring, like as a Senator was distinguished (from Gentlemen
wearing Rings) by his Coat embroidered with broad Gards of Purple, such kind of
Borders being, as it were charged with Sovereign Ensigns, did distinguish the
nobleness of the Bearers, though it did diminish the Bearing: Hamlyne
Plantaginet, base Son to King Henry the Second bearing a Border with Lions,
called Enurny, a word proper for Beasts, born in a Border. And Henry Courtney
Earl of Devonshire, and Marquess of Exceter bare Enurny of Lions, and Verdoy of
Flower de liz, as an augmentation of Honor. Verdoy is a word proper for any
kind of Vegetable. Jasper Earl of Pembrook, half Brother to King Henry the
Sixth, bare a Border Enaluron of Martlets. And Henry Fitzroy, base Son to King
Henry the Eighth, bare a Border quarterly, Purflew, and Counter-compony.
Enaluron is proper for Birds, and Purflew for Honorable blazon of arms Furrs,
bordering Garments, as the Judges, Doctors, etc. and plain Borders may well be
born by such among us, Sable a Border Argent.
as answer to the Tribunus plebis (among the Romans) or Protector of the
Commons, the Field being enclosed by it. And there is another sort of Borders
which charged with Bezants, or called Entoyre, born by Richard Earl of
Cornwall, and King of the Romans, all of them being Ensigns of Nobility of
their Parents, and distinctions of Honor. All the Senators did not wear gold
Rings; for many of them (as Pliny noted) as had born the Praetorship to their
dying day, wore no other Rings but of Iron: and certes these Rings signify the
middle degree between the Commons and Nobles, Rings.
as mankind is between the Angels and Brutes. The Decuries of Judges in
criminal matters wore only iron Rings, and were simply called Judges, and not
men of Arms, which was appropriate to those Troops that served on horsback,
Plin. l. 33. cap. 2, 3.
none being allowed to wear Rings but such as were freeborn: and for Seals
they had sundry figures, pourtraitures engraven thereon. And among the Greeks
Kercher says, Graeci porro Symbolum vocabant Annulum, Kercher Obil. l. 2. c. 5.
and Latini signum, quod vasis literisque imprimere solebant, ad judicandum rem
alienam, non aperiendam; unde and sigilla originem duxisse videntur, antiquorum
ad nostra usque tempora deducta. So that by all which I have spoken from the
agreeableness of the principles of Nature with this Art it is enough to prevail
with any candid and ingenious Nature, to allow certain marks of Gentry and
Rebatements, where there is cause; the Delfe for him that eats his words, the
reversed Escoutcheon for him who evilly entreats a woman, the Point dexter for
one that is his own Trumpeter, the Point Champain for him that shall kill his
Prisoner, the plain Point for him that tells a lie, the Gore sinister for
Cowardice, the Gusset for him that is given to effeminacy, and the sloathfull
person is rewarded with an Escoutcheon perforated: but man being in honor
became like the beast that perishes, which is the reason I have placed the
Rebatements here.

rebatements Rebatements in Heraldry.



Quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.
Who after his Fall did recover himself by the most accomplished liberal
Sciences of Arithmetic, Music, Geometry, Perspective, Pictor, Fortification.
The Sciences of Motion and Time, Cosmography, Astronomy, Geomancy. And so it is
easy to discern what was the Color, and which was the Metal, and he needed no
Arms, while he did want no Coat, the Creatures being subject to him, while now
he is become subject to them in the succession of the Signs, as Manlius has
it: Namque Aries Capiti, Taurus Cervicibus haeret,
Brachia sub Geminis censentur, Pectora Cancro;
Te Scapulae Nemaee vocant, teque Ilia Virgo;
Libra colit Clunes, and Scorpius Inguine gaudet;
Et femur Arcitenens, genua and Capricornus amavit,
Cruraque; defendit Juvenis vestigia Piscis.


But methinks I hear the little World claim his Gentility from his Sovereign,
Et formavit Dominus Deus hominem expulverem de terra, and insufflavit in faciem
ejus spiraculum vitae, and fuit homo in animam viventem. And as if he were yet
ignorant in Heraldry, blaming his Descendents for bringing him in the last
place, to whom by virtue of his Charter, to rule over the etc. He is Gods
Vicegerent, Genesis 2.
qui habet honorem Coeli, and Terrae, and Solis, and Lunae: and being able to
know the Creatures by name, is able also best to know the Language of Arms; for
I know not which the complete world to call,
The senseless world, or man the rational.
One claims complete in bigness and in birth,
Says she is complete for man, was last brought forth.
Man speaks again, and stands in his defense,
Because he is ruled by reason, not by sense.
But reason wont prevail, the senseless arm
Thinking that naked man can do no harm.
But he by reason pla nly does denote
He can both Arm and likewise thrash their Coat,
Bearing their spoils upon his glitring Shield,
And hence it comes we say he bears the Field,
Whereon perhaps some savage Beast was slain,
And by this means did an Achievement gain.
Virtue with Vice are vary, and do note,
Armed with virtue is the better Coat.
Bucol: Eclt 4.
"And great Achievements of thy Parents learn,
"And what true virtue if thy self discern.


Selden's Titles of Honor.
Nobility or Gentry is nothing else but an inheritance of remarkable estate,
and virtue derived from Ancestors, which in the considerations of Philosophers
was grounded on natural and moral Nobility, or on that which was as
proportionable to what we in the later times call Nobilitas Christiana, as the
height of virtue in Paganism could be to the best exercise of Religion. The
Names of God in Scripture were preserved among the Phoenician Theology,
translated by Philo Biblius, as witnesses Origines sacrae, the darkness on the
face of the deep: the Creation of Angels, and of Mankind out of the Earth. Yet
there can be no question (as Seldom farther observes) but that they handled
civil Nobility or Gentry, which by the Academicks, or Platonicks, and
Peripateticks, especially reckoned among external things that are good, and by
the Stoics among such as are indifferent only. Vossius conceived, That the
memory of Adam was preserved among the old Germans, of whom Tacitus speaks,
Celebrant antiquis carminibus Tuistonem Deum terra editum, and filium Mannum,
originem gentis conditoresque. Either by Tuisto Adam is understood, who was
formed of the Earth, and by Mannus Noah: or otherwise by Tuisto God may be
understood; and by Manus Adam: Corns, or Saturn, under which name the Greeks
preserved the memory of Adam, all confessing to have been a Man, and that the
first of Men: Saturn, they say, was the son of Heaven and Earth; that is, a
Metal and a Color, a Hero, he taught Men Husbandry; so did Adam, beside the
power which Saturn had, and was deposed from, does fitly set out the Dominion
of Man in the Golden Age, which he lost by his own folly: all Ensigns of wild
beasts, Instruments of labor, being then useless.

No Earth shall Harrowes feel, nor Vine the Hook, The Golden Age.

And hardy Plowmen shall their Steers unyoke;
Nor Wool deceive with artificial dye;
But in the Meadows Rams in Scarlet lie:
Or else their Silver fleeces turned to Gold,
And Princely Purple simple Lambs infold.
And as Adam is said to hide himself after he had sinned, so Saturn was so
called from Sator, to hide the memory of Caine; was preserved under the name of
(...), or (...): the first Contryman, or Husbandman, who with his brother (...)
built Houses; and the foundation of a City, is attributed to Caine: the memory
of his Wife was preserved under Vesta, both because she was the Daughter of
SATURN, i. e. Adam; and that she is said to find out the first way of Building
Houses, and the necessity thereof, Masons work in Edifices.
was OPES NON ANIMUM; every Man's House being his, Castle, PERIMIT ET TUETUR:
and where Houses and Castles were increased MOENIA SURGENT, it became a City;
every Tower whereof VIRES ANIMUMQUE MINISTRAT; and every Column the emblem of
constancy, RECTITUDINE ROBUR; and every Spire shows PER ARDUA VIRTUS:
Castleward is signified by Sir John Robinsons new Coat, being a Lion of England
on a Tower, etc. Port bears three Ports, every Gate thereof SECURITAS ALTERA;
the TEMPLE and the Exchange PATENT OMNIBUS; and the Bridge MOLE SOLIDATUR
Trou-Bridge; having the Water current under the Arches: and thus at first
Ensigns of Nobleness arise out of the dirt; and like the Lime thereof
PERFICITUR IGNE, that Tubal Caine gave first occasion to the name and worship
of Vulcan; the first being the instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron:
Vulcan working at Forge for Honors sake, The Smiths Craft.
quenched not the Coals, but POTIUS AUGETUR: the Anvile is borne by the name
of Smith, ICTUS REPELLIT. The Bellows are borne by the name of Belgrave,
PRESSIONE SPIRITUS: The Hammer that forms the Crown deserves the Crown in
the Black-Smiths Arms, PONDERE QUOQUE: The Axe was a Roman Ensign of Justice
LENT ET BEEN. It Is easy to conjecture why a Cardinal bears Hinges, INNIXA
VOLVITVR; Clovile bears Nails, because VALLANT ET VULNERANT: The name of
blazon of arms Lock bears three Locks; Gules across double clave Argent.
and the Pope two Keys; and, wanting the Supremacy, is as if the Lock of
Christendom can never be unlocked by his Holiness; NEC SINE TERTIA. Law is a
Lock of three Keys, kept by King, Lords and Commons: thus much for the Smiths
Art. Now for the brother of Vulcan, as near relation as Apollo had to Vulcan,
Jabal had to Tubal-Cain, Science of Music.
who was the Inventor of Music, the Father of such as handle the Harp and
Organ, which the Greeks attribute to Apollo; by observing the strokes of the
Hammer he found out the Harp, MINORA MAJORIBVS, the benefit blazon of arms of
concord: The Organ Pipes, borne by the old Lord Williams of Tame, Gules, three
Sufflues OR by Greenvill, Earl of Bath.
what did they signify, being joined with four Crosses, but VARIETATE
CONCENTUS? The Consent of Christian Religion, with David's Harp, in His
Majesty's Dominions of Great Britain and Ireland, whose blessed return adds to
the Music VOCEM DABIT ALTERA CONCORS; where every one may now sit under his
own Vine, first planted by Noah, whose Memory was preserved under the names of
Janus and Bacchus: Bacchus, according to Diodorus, was the first Planter of
Vines; and Janus was represented in old Quoin with two Faces, having seen both
the Times before and after the Flood; and on the reverse the fore or hinder
part of a Ship: hence comes the Ensigns both of Merchants and Mariners,
Mercury being the President of Merchants; Canaan, the son of Cham, was the same
with Mercury, the son of Jupiter: and, as his Curse was, That he should always
be under Servile Employments; so Mercury his Wings were the Ships of the
Phoenicians, VELIS REMISQUE; They fetch their Pedigree from Canaan, and his
being the God of Trade, shows the great Marchandice of the Phoenicians, to
bear the Anchor ET JACTA SALUTEM, and to bear the Ship as Meires does,
Navigation.
AETERNUM FLUCTUAT NEC REQUIES ULLA, where there is much is care; where there
is little, there is hope: he that sits at Stern, DIRIGIT; and he that Sails
by the Chart, blazon of arms IGNOTAS DOCET USQUE VIAS; the color of Purple is
attributed to Mercury, as the Tyrian Merchant; and the Flower deluce is the
difference for the sixth Brother, and on the top of the Scepter shows the
power of his Caduceus, he being the Father of Eloquence, and of Astronomy;
Astronomy.
the Level OMNIA AEQUAT, and the Plummet DIRIGIT DUM GRAVAT, and the Scales
RERUM PONDERA LIBRAT, and the Globe COELESTE MONSTRAT.

Reverence and admiration are the first spurs to knowledge, Nobility arising
(like springs, of poor Originals, and mean Beginnings) and Gradually increasing
to a greater magnificence and splendour, till it arive to the degree of Princes:
Neither (as Seldom says) Can I imagine, that any expression does more
summarily denote the conceptions of the Philosophers concerning Gentry, as also
the estimation that it had in their civil considerations, than that
Quadriparted division of it in the Scho^l of Plato; as first, such as were
borne of Good and Just Parents: so the Phoenicians Antiquities seem to have
preserved the memory of Abraham sacrificing his Son, Scripture Truths under
Profane Story.
out of that Story which Eusebius produces, where he relates, how Saturn, whom
the Phoenicians call Israel, when he reigned in those parts, and had an only
Son, called Jeoud of a Nymph called Anobert, being under some great calamity,
did sacrifice that Son of his being clothed with a Royal Habit, where is
described a Royal Person, called Israel: and that Abram should be counted a
King in those times is nothing strange, considering his Wealth, and what petty
Royalties there was in those times, which was the second consideration, When
the Parents were men of Power, or Governors, their children also they called
Nobles: God commanding Abraham to sacrifice his only son: Jehid is the same
with Jeoud, and that Sarah was meant by Anobret; the Original of the Name
implies i. e. Ex gratia concipient. Saturns dividing his Kingdom between his
three Sons, Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, having peculiar resemblance to Shem,
Ham and Japhet: Those were also called Noble whose Ancestors had Command in
the Wars, or from any of those Games, wherein Crowns were rewards to the
Victor: Whence came the Wreath, worn on the Helmit of Atcheivements: Nimrod or
Belus was the most ancient Mars: the memory of Josua and Sampson was preserved
under Hercules Tyrius; the memory of Jacobs long Perigrination was preserved
under Apollo's banishment; and, being a Shepherd under Admetus, Callimacus
mentions a strange increase of Cattle under Apolloes care; so was it with
Jacob; the memory of Joseph in Egypt was preserved under the Egyptian Apis,
in the form of an Ox, or Golden Bull, for the great Benefits received from
him: there being no symbol so proper, it being the custom of the Egyptians
to preserve the memories of their great Benefactors by some symbol to
Posterity; hence they are called Insignia; Instruments of Husbandry.
the Ox plowing of the Ground signifies labor: and by the Plow HINC blazon
of arms FRUGES, ET OPES; the Flaile PREMIT UT PURGET; Gules, a Plow Argent, and
a Chief Ermin.
the Harrow AEQUAT DUM LACERAT, and is the emblem of Justice* the Sith JUVENES
CERE COGIT; to bear the yoke with Joseph SERVIENDO REGNO: and Serapis had a
Bushel upon his head, to signify MINVS CVM MAGIS; and so Joseph was advanced,
the wheels of his fortune CONVERTVNT NON EVERTVNT, and like the Mill roinds,
signify though they are turned round; yet, in Turners Coat, it signifies Men
fixed to their Center, Mill roinds.
and such as wear themselves to serve their Country: Septuans bears three
Fanns to Winnow with, QUIDQUID LEVE EST REJICIT; Joseph learned no vice in
Pharaohs Court: Naamah may come in for Minerva, as the inventer of Spinning and
Weaving, whose Wheel ROTANDO PERFICIT.

Lastly, him they called Noble, that had his own inbred Dignity and Greatness
of Spirit, of all which this is the best kind of Nobility; among whom Moses
(there having been never any, no more than a Man, more Noble than Moses, for
greatness of Spirit; refusing the Crown, while a Child, and born in Servitude
in Egypt) whose memory is fresh among the Canaanites in the Story of Bacchus;
a Dog being made the companion of Bacchus, which was the signification of
Caleb, who so faithfully adheared to Moses, all whose Atcheivements in the
Sacred Story being exactly Traced in the Origines Sacrae. So that what has
been said among the bearers of Arms, some bear them as notes of their Parents
Merit, others as signs of their own Spirit; some are stirred up by the
Imitation of Ancestors, to magnificence and splendour, like the several days
Creation, wherein every one had an Honorary Attribute; the First Day being as
you have seen Egregius: the second Spectabilis: the third Perfectissimus: the
fourth Clarissimus: the fifth Illustris; and the sixth Superillustris, by
reason of the Nobleman. And you may plainly see (as Politicians speak) there is
a Nobility without Heraldry; a natural Dignity, Gentility without Heraldry.
whereby one Man is Ranked with another, and Filed before him, accordingly to
the Quality of his deserts, and pre-eminence of his good Parts: Religio Medici.
Though the corruption of these Times, and the Bias of this present Practice
wheels an other way; thus it was in the first and Primitive Commonwealth, and
is yet in the Integrity and Cradle of well-ordered Politics, till corruption
gets ground; ruder desires laboring after that which wiser considerations
contemn; every one having liberty to amasse, to heap up Riches, and therewith
a license or faculty to do, or Purchase any thing.

Perit omnes in illo cujus Lous est in Origin Sola. Conclusion of this Chapter
To Doctor Baldwin Hamey Esquire, and of the Physicians College London.
SIR,
THe Physicians of the Princes Body, Constantine in old time honored with the
Title of Earls; whereof those that had been Professors of Law, and other
Sciences twenty years together, deserved by the Law to be made Earls, by the
twelfth Book of the Code: and though now they are without that Dignity, yet
Divinity, Law and Physic, are as it were the three Graces of Humane life; and
are set in Prima cera, in the first place of the Table; and to honor the
Physician is a debt. Precedence at first proceeding from priority of Birth,
among Men that were of equal Dignity; and afterward Priority of Choice, or
Creation, among men of the same dignity, gave the Precedence: as the several
Eminency, or Honor in secular Offices was esteemed by the nature of the
Employment, by the long or short Robe, by the Usefulness of them to the State,
and of the Power joined with them. Of how much use the Physician is, is not at
all doubted; and of what honor may appear by that Instrument of Doctorship of
Philosophy and Physic, produced by the learned Seldom, etc. wherein, beside
all the Privileges and Honors due to a Doctor of Philosophy, and Physic, it
is also granted, Sibique libros clusos and apertos, biretrum in capite, annulum
in digito, osculum pacis, ac sedem sive cathredam, omniaque and singula
Doctoratus infignia: All these you having received, made you one of the Long
Robe; and the Paludamentum of your Ancestors show Ut acccinguntur omnes operi:
and as a Chief in your Profession the Roe is current above the Fesse, (and the
Nature of the Stars is submitted to your Candid Interpretation; and like a
Mullet of Six Points Excitat and dirigit) it hastening to things above; and it
is your happiness to be born and framed to virtue, and to grow up from the
seeds of Nature, rather than the inoculation, and forced Graffes of Education.

Of Precedence.
NOw, having thus Run through all the Natural Charges usually borne, or that
possibly may be borne on the Shield of Nobles; there yet remains the Nobleman
himself, as the Emperor and King; who, though he be reckoned among his
Nobility, because he should not be puffed up with the Glory of his Place, and
conceive, he were of more Excellent Mould than the rest; though indeed we are
all one: yet, he is, both by the Ordinance of God and Man (...) (as the Apostle
terms him) among them, that is, Supreme Sovereign above the rest: I have
therefore reserved the last Chapter for himself only; who, as the Head has
vouchsafed to make them, as it were, Members of his Body, and so by them
derives the power of his Government; the King having the Precedence and
Protoclisie, or fore-sitting in all Assemblies: and such others as have
Precedence, As the Lords Treasurer, President of the Council, Privyseal, Great
Chamberlain, High Constable, Earl Marshall, L. Admiral, L. Steward of the
House, L. Chamberlain etc.
or Fore-sitting, have it by the Princes indulgence. The Queen Shining by his
beams, has the like Prerogative as Himself has: after Them, next in Place,
are the Kings Children; among whom the Male is ever Preferred before the
Female: and among the Male the Eldest have the Preheminency in going, sitting,
speaking, respect, etc. after the Kings Children follow in the next Rank Dukes,
then Marquisses, then Earls, then Viscounts; and lastly Barons: all which have
Dignities either Heritable or Granted, by the Bounty of the Prince, whereupon
their Nobility was founded; even as the first Man Adam's was in Paradise, as
follows.

Now a New Race from Heaven descends to Earth
O Chaste Lucina aid the blessed Birth.
Adam

Seth

Enos

Cainan

Mahalaeel

Iared

Enoch

Methuselah

Lamech

Noah Tithia

Shem Iaphet Cham

Eve

Cain

Henoch

Iared

Methusael

Lamech



Spes in Coelis, Pes in Terris. CHAP. X.
Of Man, in consideration of his Ecclesiastical and Civil Jurisdiction, as
the end of the Creation; and considered in his Military and Political
Profession, both in an un-Armed and naked condition, and an Armed and Clothed
Indowment.

AMong the Noble Romans they did always set the Statues of their Ancestors
before their houses; Argent, an Orle Gules.
Ut eorum virtut s^non solum posteri legerent sed etiam imitarentur: and at
Funeral occasions caused them to be carried before the Hearse. The like example
shall I set before them that claim Gentility from Adam, whose Spade pleades for
the Ancient Trojan Shield: Neither does it disparage Gentility to ask, Who was
the Gentleman when Adam dug?

Serranus to the Plough did set his hand; Boys Translation of Claudian, in 6
Aeneid.

Thatched Houses were by the Lictor entered, and
The Fasces hung on Willow Posts; the Corn
Inn'd by a Consul; and he who had worn
The Trabea tilled the Ground.
And Eves Spindle pleads for the Lozeng bearing of the Lady; the Man's
Atcheivement being gained in the Field abroad, and the Woman's at home.

Whilst his dear Wife her web weaves fine and strong,
Shortning long labor with a pleasant song.
Ridley's View.
The Daughters of Great Houses, so long as they Marry to any that are in degree
of Peers, retain their Fathers dignity; but if they Marry under the degree,
then they lose their Fathers Place, and follow the degree of their Husbands;
which notwithstanding is practiced otherwise amongst us: though indeed Homo
mensura omnium rerum: Parts of Man.
his head is the symbol of right reason, being the seat of his soul; ANIMA
INTERNA RECLUDIT: the Heart is the fortress of Fidelity; HIC MURUS AHENEUS
ESTO: the Hand admonishes the bearer FIDE ET VIDE; so as to look to himself:
the open hand is PROCUL AB ICTU; and the Clutched Fist HIS GRAVIORA: an
extended hand denotes Reason; a Clutched Hand force; Rhetoric can persuade,
Philosophy convince: the extention of the Right Hand is in signification of a
Peacemaker, according to Quintilian, Fit and ille habitus, qui esse in statuis
Pacificator solet, qui protenso Brachio manum inflexo pollice extendit: and, as
Kercher says, Per manum dextram extensosque digitos hominem liberalem and
sincerum: The Roman Ensign, under Romulus, was a bundle of Grass tied to a
Pole, which was called Manipulus, and was afterward changed into a left hand;
and the Soldiers which were under one Ensign were called Manipulares; of
which Ovid Fastor. Lib. 3.

Pertica suspensos portabant longa Maniplos,
Unde Maniplaris nomina miles habet:
blazon of arms According to Tully, Fidem publicam dare, id est, Dextram:
Argent, a sinister Hand Gules extended in pale.
Under the Ensign of the Red Hand are all our Baronets to this day; whether to
signify the Sons of Adam, or else as Plutarch has it, that since Noah's Flood
that Neoptolemus, the son of Achilles, having made a Plantation in the Realm
of Epirus) as these did in Ireland, the Auxilary help by the Open Hand, or more
truly, it being the Arms of the Ancient Kings of Vlster in Ireland; however,
to be distinguished by Colors is honorable, as appears by the same story of
Achilles his son, having left behind him a succession of Kings, which from him
was called Pyrides, as much as to say Red, and the Father was surnamed Aspetos,
that is to say, Mighty or Great; PROBANTUR FORTES IMPETU: the benefits of the
Gods were expressed by a Right Arm naked, and their Anger by a Left Hand
Armed: Naked shows innocence; in his hands was no instruments of Cruelty. The
first Man being Quartermanus, bearing four hands, viz. Male and Female; and
Tremain, three, as a note of Power; or as Maynard or Maine bears it in sign
of sincerity, Per Statuas judicum manibus carentium oculosque in terram
dejectos, and per oculum apertum hominem bonum and justitiae servatorem. The
Eye is the Index of the Mind, and signifies wisdom; Polyphemus was feigned
to have but one Eye in the midst of his forehead, and near the throne of the
Understanding; which being put out by Ulysses, denotes his being overcome by
greater Wisdom, PLUS MENTEM QUAM MANUS; and as Plutarch says, like as
Painters make no reckoning of any other part of the body, so they take the
lively countenance, in which consists the judgment of their Manners, or
Dispositions; so they must give us leave to seek out the Signs and Tokens of
the Mind, only by these Armorial marks, referring you to others to Write the
Wars, Battails, and other things they did: The Welsh Men will persuade you
that the Coat of Griffith is 3 English Men's heads, answering to those of the
Gauls, when they would have surprised the Capitol described on the Shield of
Aeneas: and Tudor claims part of the same Atcheivement, Campus Anthropomorphus.
the one being Armed, the other Dis-armed; and both described proper, only the
English Man has more Metal: Their Beards were Golden, Golden was their Hair.

The French Man had more color, being in Arms.

They in brancht Cassocks shine with gold, their fair necks be adorned. Others
again among the Britains bear Childrens heads, Contrary to Hercules, who
strangled Snakes in his Cradle; whereas these contrarily, are like to be
strangled by the Snakes about their necks; whose Tradition is, that a Child
was borne so in that Family: but I rather think it from the name Vachan, that
is little in the British language.

PREMAT NE PERIMAT is to crush the Serpent betimes, and to use the Foot, before
it grow too strong for the Arms; which if Eve had done there had never been
any, Naked Women borne in Arms, no, not the Head of a Maiden: but, since they
are borne by Marrow, it shows the power of Love with Beauty; and by Thirkeld,
as having released a Lady from Imprisonment, as themselves relate. Thus have I
showed you the Human parts disjoined, and naked by which you may perceive, that
MEN'S UNA SAPIENS PLURIUM VINCIT MANUS. Now I shall proceed to show you them
joined, and Armed with Clothes; so that in the middle of the Scheame you see
our First Parents standing impailed, the Man being Baron, and the Woman the
Femme side: Honorable Furrs.
and on the Man's side you have the Choice of Shields to defend, being
honorable Furrs, or Skins of Beasts: and on the Woman's side you have as many
Lo^engies, call them Spindles if you please: the first side is Ermin, Ermines
Erminois, and vary: the Woman's, the first is Togam splendentem candidam:
Suppose it if you please a Linen Garment, first Spun from Flax (before the use
of Wool) PULCHRITVDINEM COMPLENT, Vestments Ecclesiastical.
making a Garment fit for her Beloved: Quis est iste, qui venit de Edome, says
the Prophet Isaiah, tinctus vestibus de Bosra? valde speciosus est in stola
sua. Linen Vestments being used both by the Hebrews and Egyptians, were made
by Women, and was accounted more clean and pure than that was flaid off other
Animals; and therefore worn by the Priests: the Orale was a Linen Veil to
cast over his head; his Miter was of Linen, as the Poet testifies;

Nunc Dea Linigera colitur celeberrima turba. The Flamins wore a Cap, in the
top whereof was a Rod, with a little wool upon it; and the Tunica, or long Coat
was weaved at Dalmatia, and figured a Cross: the Succinctorum was a Linen
Girdle, and the Phanon was a Towel or Handkercher, to be worn in Church. Among
the Romans the Praetexta was worn till seventeen years of Age, Garments
Political.
being of party colors, as Joseph's was; and the Toga Vipilis was not
imbroydred with Purple, and was called Liber, and is a sign of Virility among
the Romans, and fitness of Business, it being more large than the Pretexta:
there was also Sagum Andromidis, and Cuculli, Cassocks, Mantles and Coats; the
Cassocks being continued, as also the Coat and Mantles, as peculiar to Man; and
the Lozenge bearing to be in the second Garment, peculiar imbroydred for
Honorable Women, as we shall find in old Monuments: parts of Garments are
worn blazon of arms also in Arms, Argent, a Manch Sable.
as the Virgins Sleeve is said to be for a Love cause, as testifies Sir Henry
Spelman, concerning the Coat of the Hastings's; Quam Clypei author cum olim in
amore esset ut atrocius vindicaretur in Hostem dominae gratia protulisse fertur
in aciem; it is the symbol of Youth and Maidens: neither was it wanting in the
Shield of Achilles, wherein the Arts-man had framed a Dancing place full of
Turnings.

That was like the Admirable Maze
For fair Haired Ariadne made by Dedalus,
And in it Youths and Virgins Danced, all young and beauteous,
And glewed in one an others Palms Weeds, which the Wind did Toss
The Virgins Wore.
How the Arms of Women ought to be borne.
The difference being this, that Maidens wear their Coats of Arms in a Lozenge
single, and in their Sleeves, Nobilitas sub amore jacet, according to Ovid; and
the Mourning for Maidens being worn, joined to the sleeve under Love: Neither
are Married Women denied their Coat, though both are denied a Helm, or Crest;
they being fitter for the Spindle than the Sword.

Apta quidem telae, sed inepta est faemina telo:
Indignumque viro subdere cola collo.
Therefore the lone Woman, or Widow bears her Arms also in a Lozenge, but
under Covert Barn, joined with her Husbands.

-- Nec Turpe marito est
Aspera pro charo bella tulisse thoro.
And therefore is that side of the Woman also joined to his Sleeve, as it were
for Protection from his Arms; and he must have Coverings from her Art, the
Reele for her Yarne IMPLICATA DISTINGUIT, and signifies negotiation.

Molilitate viget, viresque ACQUIRIT EUNDO. Three Hanks of Cotton is born by
the name of Cotton, and makes a good Coat: Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis
oves.

As of Daughters, so of Widows of Peers, Ridley 's View.
while they live sole and unmarried, they retain the nobility of their
husbands; but if they marry, then they are invested with the condition of their
second Husbands, be it honorable or otherwise, which notwithstanding is
practiced contrarily amongst us. Investure is the same that we call Creation,
Adam having a Grant of Tenure to the whole Creation, with all Rites and
Solemnities thereunto belonging, so long as he bare Allegiance to his Lord; and
his Posterity have right of Succession, about which Heraldry is conversant: and
when every one knows his own Coat, The Fates conspiring with eternal doom
Said to their Spindles Let such Ages come.


Fitz William his Coat what does it signify but a Texture of Art and
Ingenuity, ALBESCIT UTROQUE? Garment.
and Lozengy is a pavement of Mosaic work. Crew's Coat is a type of the Golden
Age, being fretty, and embroidered with Caterfoils, as a Coat of Cloth of Gold,
NON PLUS QUAM OPORTET; for such had Honorable Persons their Mantles of, either
Cloth of Gold or Silver. Lozengy also represents the foundation of Sciences in
the Golden Age, Omnibus Natura fundamentum dedit, semenque virtutum; omnes ad
ista omnia nati sumus. Take the true Gentleman habited with virtue, By his Hat
is signified Christian Religion, ESERVITVTE LIBERTAS: and his Shoe signifies
his military Profession, TERRETVR ET TVETVR; and he that follows the steps of
his Ancestors VESTIGIA PONIT, sicut qui ad patriam tendit. And he or she that
inherits the Mothers virtue, has a right to Quarter their Mothers Coat. The
Litvits skin was of pure white Furr, and the Episcopal Pall is a Garment worn
over the shoulders, made of Lambs skins, to denote Innocence, and it is the
form of a Y, as the Symbol of Virtue. Thus have we found the first man
clothed, and hence the Coat. But now let us see him armed, Deus exaltavit eum
virtute Brachii sui. To bear the naked Arm shows the power of Divine
Assistance. The Armed is an augmentation of Honor. The armed Arms is a fit
Bearing for Armstrong, and the armed Legs for the Isle of Man, not only
representing the form thereof, but the Dominion of Man, both in the Vegetative,
Mineral, and Animal world, every Leg being armed with a Spur, which EXCITAT ET
DIRIGIT, Art helping Nature in the Kingdom of Minerals by distillation, MOVET
ET IMPELLIT, and from the Lymbick of his study endeavors COLLIGERE UTILIA,
helps Nature in the Kingdom of Vegetatives by Science, and grafting of Trees.
Hence comes pruning hooks to be born in Arms, and cultivating of the Earth.
Hence come Spades, Shovels, Plows, Harrows, which if you would find the
applicable Motto's, see my Sphere of Gentry, and Art supplies Nature in the
Kingdom of Animals, in the Generation of Bees, hatching of Eggs, administration
of Physic. Hence comes the Bearing of Bee-hives, yokes for Oxen, every thing
being subjected under his feet, and then man is Augustus, take him in his
Regalia. The Crown signum est legis and regiminis: Regalia. Crowns.
and Wisdom says, Accipient regnum decoris and diadema speciei de manu
Domini. It is a blazon of arms reward to Virtue, and so is REGNI DECORA
POTENTIS. Or on a Pale Battelled Sable an Imperial Crown proper.
The Imperial Crown MANET VLTIMA COELO. But those of Dukes, Marqueses, Earls,
Viscounts, or Lords pass away, SIC OMNIS GLORIA MUNDI. The mural and naval
Crowns were VICTORI DEBITA both by Land and Sea: and as they were made of Gold
were taken out of Pluto's Arcana. And Saturn, though he was King in the Golden
Age, has devoured his Children, and hid their Coats in the dark corners of
Antiquity, has notwithstanding left among the many prerogatives of Princes
Crowns, a right to be in a large capacity of doing good, and bestowing
Sovereign Ensigns upon deserving men, then which there is none can possibly be
more gratifying to an ingenious nature, then these marks of Honor, whereby
this Art is able to prevail with those candid natures, so as to allow there was
Nobility in Adam's time, who was a King: and though the Scepter of old was
OLIMARBOS, Scepter:
yet it had POTEST AS DEO, and bears it SERVIENDO REGNAT: and now for Honors
sake it is made of Gold, and flowred on the top, to show man's threefold
Dominion; his Scepter is IN OMNES CASUS; Virga and Sceptrum rectricis
potestatis, qua regitur.

-- And Conquerours laws ordains,
For willing Realms, and Heaven with valor gains.
The Mound NE COMPLETE ORBEM, Mound:
though it represents the world, and is now an Augmentation in the Coat of the
Lord Bennet, as a Secretary of State. The purple Robe represents increase of
Prosperity, Power, and Honor, even in the very swaddling clothes of the Child
of Honor; the Ring LIGAT ET DE^ORAT, Ring:
and the King's Seal QVOD DONAVIT NONAMITTIT. The Prince is created with a Ring
and a Virge, to espouse and govern. The Chancellor bears the Purse, as the
peculiar Ensign of his Office, which RETINET ADUSUM. The Lord Great Chamberlain
bears the Keys of the Kingdom, Notes of Administration.
and the Lord Chamberlain of the Household, neither of them for Pontificial
Authority, but as the Ensigns of matters of Trust and Authority. The Constable
or Master of the Soldiers among the Romans, being next in Authority to the
Consulship, before whom was born the Fasces, like as before the Chamberlains
and Treasurers is born the white Staff, White Staff.
all whose Arms I have ensigned with the Note of blazon of arms
Administrations: as first Edward Earl of Clarendon, bears Azure a Cheveron
between three Lozengies OR, ensigned with a Mace and Purse, as Chancellor.

blazon of arms 2. Algernon Earl of Northumberland bears Quarterly, Percy,
and Lucy, within a Garter, ensign'd with a Staff as Constable pro tempore at
the Coronation.

blazon of arms 3. Thomas Earl of Southampton bears within a Garter ensigned
with a Staff, as Lord High Treasurer, his Arms ut ante page 160.

blazon of arms 4. James Duke and Marquess of Ormond bears OR a Chief
indented Azure, within a Garter, and ensigned with a white Staff as Lord
Steward.

blazon of arms 5. Mountague Earl of Lindsey, bears within a Garter Argent
three battering Rams proper, armed and banded OR, his Ensign the Cross Keys, as
Lord Great Chamberlain, and Staff.

blazon of arms 6. Edward Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain, bears his
Arms within a Garter the white Staff and Key, as a note of his Administration.
And the Staff also is proper to Sir Charles Berkley, as Treasurer of the
Household, and to Sir Hugh Pollard Knight and Baronet, Controller: neither are
these Notes proper to Political Government only, but to man as he is in a
double capacity of governing, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. His first
consideration I have already touched, but take him as a sacred person. So Seth
at the ALTAR is SOLI DEO, crowned with a Miter, Ecclesiastical Instruments.
LIBRATA REFVLGET. The Crosiers staff, ERRANTES DETINET. The Bells of the
Sanctuary, DAT PULSATA SONVM. So Porter bears three Bells; it may be on a
Religious account, choosing rather to be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, then
to dwell in the Tents of the wicked. The Lamps in Lamplew's Coat CVNCTIS AEQVE
LVCET. And the Incense-pot of Aaron DUM ARDET REDOLET. And the military
Christians fights under the sign of the Cross IN HOC SIGNO, furnish them Arms,
and blazon of arms INVENIENT MANUS: Vert three Arrows OR slighted and headed
Argent.
furnish him with a Quiver, HAERENT SVB CORD SAGITTAE: with a Shield NE
LAEDAR: with one Arrow INFRINGIT SOLIDO: with more OMNES IN ALBVM. If
Arbalaster bear a Cross-bow in a field Ermine, it may signify he may shoot
before the King, as well as Archer, alias Boys, the first bearing it with
reference to his name, and the second changing his name with reference to his
skill in Archery: Boasting at once his skill and sounding Bow,
Hear suddenly what great things did foreshew.


Acestes having shot before Aeneas his Arrow fired, and was rewarded by him
with a chaffed Cup of Anchises: as Argenton bears three Cups in token of an
honorable Tenure of Wimondley in Hartfords, which our Lawyers term Grand
Sergeancy, namely, that the Lords thereof should serve unto the Kings of
England upon their Coronation Day the first Cup, as it were the Kings
Cup Bearer, which Office is now divolved on the Allingtons. Littleton where he
treats of Feuds or Tenures, so far forth as they are used in England; such as
are all those that are called in Latin Feuda militaria, Several Tenures:
and Feuda Scutiferorum, which are by the Laws of the Land termed by the names
of Knight Service and Escuage, whereof some are temporal, others are perpetual.
Temporal are such as are annuities to Lawyers for Counsel: Pensions to
Physicians, Fees for keeping of Towers and Castles, etc. And perpetual, are
such as a man has by Grant from the Sovereign or Lord of the Soil, to have,
hold, use, occupy or enjoy Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
to him and his heirs, upon condition that the said party, his heirs and
successors do homage and fealty to his Lord, his heirs or successors for such
honors, etc. Of Feuds Regal some are Ecclesiastic, as for Archbishops and
Bishops, who holding them, have right to bear Miters and Crosiers, Staves,
Palls, etc. Others are Civil, as Dukedomes, Earldomes, Viscounts and Lords, to
whom belongs part of the Regalia, as Crowns, Swords, Staves of Authority,
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.

Cup.
The Cup being the Symbol of Royal Dainties, is here a military Reward. The
Arrow-head what does it signify but a setting apart to the Kings service,
Pheons.
as is continued in the Custom House to this day? Sir John Harrison one of the
Farmers of his Majesty's Customs of London, bearing five Pheon heads on a
Cross, which they bare long before the separation to that Office, perhaps as
having won the Prize among the Games that were rewarded by the Prince: Aeneas
straight all those would exercise,
The nimble Shaft invites, and placed the Prize.


Some say Harbottles Coat is three Clubs, Clubs.
and denotes Valor: so the Club is SVI VINDEX; and When shame and well known
valor force revives,
And headlong everywhere he dares and drives.


blazon of arms The Victorious had a Sword and Helmet: Sable three Swords
Argent point in Pile Hitted Or.
by the Sword is understood military Faith, FLEXV PROBANTVR: and those in the
Shield of the Paulets do denote VIRTUES BELLI ET SAPIENTIA PACIS. Swords.
Helmets.
The Helmet is the Ensign of Counsel; hence that of Tully, Parvi sunt foris
arma nisi est consilium domi: the Helmet of Pluto being first invented, because
Caput tegitur quod occulti verticis Symbolum est. Sable a Helm^t Argent
Ensigned with a Garland Gramine.
Sometimes blazon of arms it stands fore-right, to denote command: so in the
Sovereigns Ensign sometimes side-long, to note Attention. So in Esquires and
Gentlemen's Helmets, it is Guard Visure, as a particular gesture of the eyes,
seeing they are the Index of the mind, there being no passion of the mind but
some particular gesture of the eyes may show it: albeit they may be altered by
the soul, when it is willing to conceal its passions. So the barred Helmet is
note of a great Lord or Privy Counselor, POST MVNERA BELLI, and was not
wanting in Achilles his Shield: All this he circled in the Shield, which
pouring round about
In all his rage the Ocean that it might never out.
This Shield thus done he forged for him such Currets as out-shin'd
The blaze of fire; a Helmet then (through which no steel could find
Forced passage) he composed whose hue a hundred colors took,
And in the Crest a plume of Gold that each breath stirred he struck.


Arms.
It Is said that the Lacedaemonians invented the Helmet, and Moses the Crown.
Mantles of Estate were first invented for use, as Tents by Lamech, TECTVM
MILITIBVS AMPLUM. Epeus invented the battering Ram. The use of the Shield was
to defend the Body, ETIAM POST FVNERA CUSTOS. Of the Gauntlet, TEGIT AC FERIT.
Scudmore bears three Stirrups to mount the War-horse, and Devic three
Chivaltraps to dismount the Horseman. Some Arms are offensive, some defensive,
all of them in the Achievement of a Knight, with his Sword, Helmet, Gauntlets,
Shield, and Crest, and Mantles, he becomes a man of Arms; neither is the
Tassels thereto appending to be slighted, seeing it represents either his own
military Girdle, or else his Horses Bridle, by which REGIT ET CORRIGIT.
Knightley bears a Lance as a man of Arms, IN FULCRUM PACIS. And Penyman three
broken Spears, VULNUS OPEMQUE GERIT. Crests are the only Ensigns, UT COGIT IN
HOSTEM. The Chimaera which Bellerophon conquered, was ens Rationis. Of the
people of Solimi under three Generals, Arius, which signified a Lion, Trosibis
the head of a Serpent, and Arsalus was a young Kid. And thus have we found out
how these Signs came to be called Arms; Jupiters stealing Europa in the form
of a Bull, because the same word signifies a Ship; the fetching of the Golden
Fleece was nothing but the robbing of the Treasure of the Kings of Colchis: and
the Syriack signifies both a Fleece and a Treasury; and the Bulls and Dragons
which keep it, were nothing else but the Walls and Brass Gates; the one Word
signifying both a Bull and a Wall, and the other Brass and a Dragon: The
Ensign of Foot, AUDENTES FORTUNA JVAT; and the Standard is so called, Ad rem
stabilem; every common Soldier is at Beat of Drum; which PERCUSSUM RESONAT:
and the Trumpet ANIMAT EXANIMES; the Great Artilerie SONITUS AB IGNE: And if
the Soldier lose his life in the Field, he has the Honor of a Roman.

Romans for Liberty their lives contemn.
-- each shook two Alpine Spears,
And for defense a mighty Target Bears.
The Shield of Pallas, and Helmet of Pluto are defensive Arms; and the
Fauchion of Mercury offensive, by which we conquer: And thus have I led you
through the Fields of Mars, where the Lanciers Burrs Arm the Wise man's Spear,
and the Spear heads are esteemed, since borne by Price, and now Venus gliding
through aetherial Spheres,
The expected present to Aeneas bears;
The fatal Sword he drawing, did Admire;
And Cask with direful Crests, ejecting Fire:
His bloody Corslet of a wondrous Mould
Pondrous he lifts, glistering with Brass and Gold, Aeneis lib. 8.

Like a Dark Cloud gilt with bright Phoebus Rays,
Which round about reflecting beams displayes:
Then his light Greves, which purest Gold did Gild
His Spear, and wonders Graven on his Shield,


And, what made me venture on such a Work as this, who am not able to gather the
Hyle, or dross of all the Elements, to such a Noble Art, may be wondered at,
considering I am feign to lay by my other employment, with the Cyclops, at the
command of Vulcan?

Cyclops lay by your several Taskes, he said,
Arms for a valiant Hero must be made.
Whereupon, understanding from the Captain of the Aeneas.
Britains, of A spacious Grove, near Ceres sacred Flood,
With Hills surrounded, and a shadie Wood:
The ancient Grecians, may we Fame believe,
Did to the rural God Sylvanus Give.


(And appointed him a Holy Day:) Whether I was overtaken with the Pleasantness
of those Fields of Parnassus, Tempe, and Helicon, or whether I was above my own
Sphere, I know not; but I was supposed to be besides my self; and talked as if
I had Ants at Hipocrene; and that Calliope was my Mother: though the Poets say,
They were all Virgins: and, I said so too; but they were Ravished by Homer and
Virgil: The first was the Herald, and the other Painted after his Copy; and
therefore (I thought) I might make use of my Faculties: Whereupon I sent these
Lines following to Calliope, taxing Her for being a Goddess to the Heralds,
and a Stepmother to Me; Ovid. Trist. lib. 2.
Inter tot populi, tot scripti millia nostri;
Quem mea Calliope laeserit, unus ero.


Craving thus for the free use of my Profession: Seeing Scipio Ammeratus was
allowed to Paint Genealogies in Parnassus, where I now Live, under the
Protection of Apollo.

Ad Calliopen.

Carpenters Geography Lib. 2. p. 269. Ad Matrem Academiam.
UNkindest Mother, has my former years
So much deserved your hate, or these my tears,
Thus to divorce me from my right of Birth,
To be a stranger to my native Earth?
Will you expose me on the common Stage,
To strive and struggle in an Iron Age?
Was better taught your Office than my fate,
To make me yours, yet most unfortunate.
And while I sat to hear Calliope sing,
My Winter suddenly o'retook my Spring:
Have I served out three Prentiships, yet find
My Trade inferior to the most humble Mind?
Or am out-stript by Unthrifts, which were sent
Free with Indentures, ere their years were spent?
Have I so played the Truant with my hours,
Or with base Riot stained your sacred Bowers?
Or as a Viper did I ever strive
To gnaw a passage through your Womb to Thrive?
That I am plucked from the Breast, to try
What I can do, when as the Duggs are dry.
Had I incountred, as I once did hope,
The God of Learning, in the Horoscope;
My Phoebus would auspicious looks incline
On my hard fate, and discontents to shine;
Now Lodged in a luckless House, rejects
My former Suites, and frowns with sad aspects:
Had I been born when that eternal hand
Wrapped the infant World in her first Swaddling Band;
Before that Heraldry was taught the way
To Rock the Cradle, in which Honor lay;
My Learning had been Husbandry, my Birth
Had owed no Tole, but to the Virgin Earth:
Nor had I courted almost thirty years
The Court of Honor with officious Tears;
To Live had been my Industry, no Tongue
Had told your Honors, suffered by my wrong:
The foul aspersions on my Calling thrown,
They might, in right, acknowledge for their own;
Only this difference, to Men wanting worth,
They Sell Preferments, and I Paint them forth;
Your Honor cannot be bribed, to Honor with a Kiss,
Their Guilded-Folly; it deserves the Hiss:
Accuse not my Just Anger; but the Cause
Nature may urge; but Fury scorns her Laws.
O Pardon, Mother, something checks my spleen!
And from my Pen takes off my angry teene:
Revolted Nature by the same degrees
Goes and returns; begs Pardon on her knees:
You are a Mirror; I Am by reflection taught
To faigne defects; You Guilty are of naught.
I, in my Calling, by your Indulgence Thrive;
Were they as just, as you are free to give,
We all might share a portion of that Store,
Which now the Sons deserve, the Slaves devour:
Whose Will is seldom measured by the Law,
But Power; whose greatness your Edicts can awe:
Slights thy Decrees? O would Imperial Jove
But once descend from his high Court above;
To see, the Innocent and Maiden-hands,
By his own Servants basely shut in Bands:
And, hearing my harsh Bondage would set free,
And their unkindeness hate, and pity me;
Then to your Bounties I will turn my sight,
From my dark confines to your Glorious Light.
Scarce had I shut up this tedious Discourse, spent for the most part upon such
Symbolical intimations which receive their efficacy from the fancy of the
Contriver; but surprised with a deep melancholy of what I had so rashly
written, I called my meditations to a strict account, to examine what motive
should make me run so far to meet the ambition of my Contrymen, or my own
affection, the remembrance of some grievances, seconded by mine imbred nature,
never taught to fawn on misprision, began to check my officious Pen as guilty
of too much weakness, in meddling with that which belonged to the Heralds, when
suddenly as in a vision there appeared to me Calliope, the Goddess of
Herauldry, who with a discontented Countenance, and harsh Language, seemed to
chide me in this manner.

Fond Son, who taught thy undeserved praise
To crown my Art thus with their thankless Bays, Carpenter Geog. l. 2. page
267^

What Legacies bequeathed that Soil to thee,
But fruitless hopes, and helpless poverty?
Which of these Worthies whom thou crown'st with Bays,
Will e're thy wants relieve, or fortunes raise?
How often have thou drawn out thy precious time
To tutor in their Arms their youthly prime,
Who like respectless and untutred Swains,
With loss and obloquy reward thy pains.
Such are the Darlings whom thou make to ride
In a triumphant Chair by Honors side.
Thus thou unwise giv'st immortality
To those whose base reproaches follow thee.
Even those thou know, thee they do accuse
To my disgrace and grief thy hapless Muse.
And vaunt'st thou still upon their Worships Names,
That owe to me their worth, to thee their shames?
Thy wants enforce thee still with me to stay,
When each Pedant or makes or finds his way
To play and stake it at that lawless game,
Selling my Honors for to buy their shame,
By griping Brokers, since the fatal time
That fair Astraea left thy thankless Clime.
Thus thy admired Mistress, Charity,
Set strangers in he lap, and shut out thee.
Have thou been honored by my sacred breath
Amongst rude Arcadians thus to beg a death?
Be ruled by me my poor, but yet loved Son,
Trust not their smiles whose wrongs have thee undone,
Although the least among my learned Sons,
Thy fortune told thee that I loved thee once.
Mount up thy mind, let not forced want conspire
To sell thy Scarlet to a worthless Squire;
Nor grace with Minivere or Ermine, he
That hates his Country in not loving thee:
Or if thy Nature with constraint descends
Below her own delights to practick ends,
What greater glory can thy ashes have,
Then thus preserved so near thy Mothers grave?
All thy endowments owed to my womb,
Return them back, I Will there erect thy Tomb,
And I will promise thy neglected bones
A firmer Monument then speechless stones.
And since my Art's restored to 'ts pristine hue,
Which former times admired, ours never knew;
I Will give thy milky Soul a Pen to write,
Though all the world be turned a Proselyte.
All this time as in a Fit of Frenzy I have spoken I scarce know what my
self, I fear too much, to, or of my Country and Art, and too little for the
present Purpose. Now as one suddenly awaked out of sleep, no otherwise then in
a dream, I remember the Occasion, we have all a Semel insanivimus; and as a
learned man of this University seems to maintain, No man has had the happiness
to be exempted from this imputation. And therefore I hope my Reader will pardon
me this once, if in such a general concourse and conspiracy of mad men I
sometimes show my self mad for company, having a License for it, concluding
with that Proverb, Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura insaniae. And if like
Phaeton I have provoked Jove, view but the Lightning before and the Thunder
after, and repeat but this Epitaph at my End; Hic fitus est Phaethon, currus
auriga paterni;
Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.


I Have read this Tract of Mr. Morgan's entitled Armilogia, etc. and have
corrected some mistakes therein, relating to particular Families. But as for
the Body thereof, being Hieroglyphical and Poetical Significations and
Derivations of all manner of Bearings in Armory; They are such, as in my
judgment would have better fitted the Romantic and Knight Errant Ages, then
this we live in, as being (to use the Phrase of a former King of Arms) pleasant
Vanities. However it may possibly please some of that old fancifull humor, for
whose delight and satisfaction I see no inconvenience to give leave for the
printing thereof with those Characters, if either of the Provincial King of
Arms shall agree with me for the publishing thereof.

EDW. WALKER Garter Principal King of Arms.
Heralds Office Feb. 19. 1664.
IN this Book are such and so many strange conceits and wild fancies, that I do
not know of what advantage the Printing of it can be to any man, that soberly
desires to be instructed in the true knowledge of those Marks and Ensigns of
Honor, which are called Arms, as to the use and progress of them from their
first rise and original; it giving no rational or historical Account thereof.
But to those who are affected with Romances, it may, perhaps, be pleasing
enough; and therefore, for their sakes I could be content it were Printed;
provided that thereby I be not understood to allow and approve of it, much less
to recommend it; in regard my discretion in so doing might, I fear, be called
in question.

WILL. DUGDALE Norroy.
Feb. 21. 1664.
Books of the AUTHORS already extant.
LOndon, King CHARLES his Augusta, or City Royal, of the Founders, Names, and
oldest Honors of that City, an Historical and Antiquarian Work in Verse with
Annotations in 4to. Printed An. 1648.

Horologiographia Optica, Dialling universal and particular, speculative and
practical, together with Topothesia, or a feigned Description of the Court of
Art in 4to. Printed An. 1652.

The Sphere of Gentry deduced from the Principals of Nature, an Historical and
Genealogical Work of Arms and Blazon, in four Books in Folio. Printed 1661.

Armilogia, sive Ars Chromocritica, or the Language of Arms, etc.

Books ready for the Press.
THe Genealogies of the Stocks and Families of the Noble Romans, Patricians,
and Plaebeians, gathered out of Richard Streinnius and augmented from the
Miscellanies of Peter Servius in 4to.

The Genealogies of all the Kings of England, since the time it was named
England (viz. from King Egbert the first Monarch thereof) until King CHARLES
the Second. 4to.

Patriarchae, or the Scripture Genealogies amplified, pointing out the Beginning
and Ends of the four Monarchies, and the Hebrew Months brought to ours,
whereby may be known upon what Day of the Month the remarkable Actions through
the Old Testament happened, etc. Folio.

Flavius Vigetius Renatus his Institutions of Military Affairs, in five Books,
Translated out of Latin, etc.

The Author does also advise, that he had and can still procure several Pieces
of John Norden his SPECULUM BRITANNIAE, viz. Kent Essex, Surrey, Sussex,
Hampshire, the Isles of Whight, Gersey, and Garnsey.

THE V-indicative Mood, SHOWING A REASON TRVE or FALSE; WHY THE AUTHOR PRINTED
THE LICENSE.
TRue, thou art Mad, false, 'twas for want of Wit
To write a Book, 'twas they that Licensed it,
Office offended at Boswells Herauldry, Anno 1597.
They did it right; It Is false; They did it wrong
That right to Heralds; always did belong.
Boswell did Write of Herauldry; and then
The Sir G. Dethick vide p. 41.
King of Arms was King of Englishmen and Pleasant Vanities on all He Writ:
Yet wronged the Author; 'cause he wanted Wit;
To Print a Book; with License from above
What was his Calling, yet had leave from Jove.
Brook's could not Brook Brittannia; Ask you Why?
Camden a Painters Son, Writ Herauldry;
Though I have h^ard it said; it may appear
Brittannia han't the Faults of Warwickshire.
Vincent does Rougerose prick; Rougecroix Cross him, Brooks Writ against
Camden, and Vincent against Brooks.

Both Print their Books, but both are full of sin
As Painters be; But if the King Exalt us
We Are then called Heralds; quasi Herus altus.
That is, High Masters that must License Thee
Without two Kings; thy Book could never be free,
If the old Greeks, like them, would not allow
Ought that was New, what shall be Ancient now?
Upon whose Works might we safely look,
To Read, and Con it as a Classick Book. Guiliam's Display spoiled between a
Printer and a Painter.

Painters, to be Revenged, have found a way
To right the Heralds, wronging the Display;
Joining with Printers, ere their Act of Doom
Could nip the Heralds Budds so in the Bloom.
Thou art not Wise but Just by this, I know,
To Print their Sense since they would have it so,
'Twas Wisely done, thou had a Just Intent;
Least thou should wrong an Act of Parliament.
But there is no Treason in thy Book, it is plain,
Thou needs no License, give them theirs again.
I hate such Kindness as offends, and his
That Draws my Picture Uglier than it is,
Though gayly Dressed: I value not a rush
The Gaudy Praises that must make Me Blush, English Horace Published by Mr. A.
B.

And Dread to have my Name bedaw'd on Paper
Fit but to light Tobacco-Pipes and Taper;
Or else to Wrap up Wares of Little price
In Chandlers, Shops, at best but Plumbs and Spice:
Adieu all Writing Books, if so be that
I Pine, when Hissed, or when I Am Humm'd grow fat.
A TABLE of the KINGS OF ENGLAND SUCCESSIVE: Of whose ARMS or BADGES, is
something Spoken in this BOOK.
EGbert 80 Edelwulf his Son 127. 183 Edelbald his Son 80 Edelbert his Brother
80 Edeldred his Brother 80 Alfred, youngest Son of Edelwulf 81, 183 Edward,
Senior, his Son 81 Athellon his Son 81 Edmund his Brother 81 Eldred his Brother
81, 182 Edwine his Brother 81 Edgar Pacificus, Son to King Edmond 81, 165
Edward the Martyr, Son to King Edgar 81, 165 Edeldred, Son to King Edgar 81
Edmond Ironside, Son to Edeldred 81, 165 Canutus the Dane 183 Harold Harefoot,
Base Son to K. Canutus 183 Canutus 2, Son to Canutus 183 St. Edward Confessor,
Son to K. Edeldred 8* Harald, Brother to Q. Godith, and son to Goodwin E. of
Kent 183 William the Conqueror 18 William Rufus his Son 183 Henry the First his
Brother 183 Stephen Sisters Son 183 Henry 2, Son of Geffery Plantagenet, and of
Maud the Emp. 183 Richard the First his Son 184 John his Brother 71 Henry the
Third his Son 189 Edward the First his Son 69, 85 Edward the Second his Son 85
Ed. 3 his Son 81, 125, 129, 144, 183 Richard the Second 184 Henry the 4, Son of
John a Gaunt 144, 184 Henry 5, his Son, 83 Henry the Sixth his Son 83 Edward,
Eldest Son to Rich. Duke of York, by the name of Edward the Fourth 197 Edward
the Fifth his Son 197 Richard the Third 144, 197 Henry the Seventh 125, 189
Henry the Eighth 144 Ed. his Son, the Sixth, bare the Red Dragon as his Father
189 Q. Mary his Sister 189 Q. Eliz. her Sister 189 James 125 Charles his Son,
the First 182 Charles the second 211
THE SECOND TABLE OF NAMES OF PERSONS and PLACES, Occasionally mentioned in
this BOOK.
A
ABbott 133 Abrahall 202 Abraham 212 Achilles shield 59 The Pattern Propounded
21 Acestes 59 Aceron 62 Agamemnon 182 Adventurers 45 Adams 194 Adam 209. 219
Alsaph, Bishops See 38 Alsack 184 Philip 184 St. Alban 74 Alston 148 Allington
230 Amazons 147 St. Andrew 74 Annubis 190 Anchises 229 Apollo 141. 210. 213
Apis 2^3 Apleton 126 Arundell 161 Argyraspides 6 Aquitain 183 Arcadians 40
Aquiliferi 158 Arch-Decon 70 Arius 232 Arragon 65, 67 Arsallus 232 Arbalaster
229 Argenton 229 Archer 229 Artilery com. 45 Ariadne 146 Atriades 50 Athenians
174 Austria 51 Aumarle 80 Earl 80 Aubrey 168 Avering 185 Augustus 146 Audley
38 Aulus Cornelius Cossus 62 Aeolus 141 Asculapius 142 Aediles Curules
B.
Barbarosa Frederick 180 Barrett 54 Baker 170 Barty 198. 228 Bacchus 142. 214.
219 Bellasis 37 Berecynthia 42 Berkinhead 124 Betty 228 Bellinus 182 Bellus 217
Bennet 227 Berkley 228 Beauford, Duke of Some. 50 Bethelamites 135 Bifield 106
Bide 46 Blunt 34, 48 Bloudworth 108 Blackborn 35 Blackstock 126 Blague 128
Boil 16 Bourchir 36 Bossuchio 59 Botetort 80 Bohun 82 Bohemia, King 174 Boyse
229 Brown 45, 159 Bridgman 104, 115 Bridge 124 Bridomarus 62 Bray 170 Bridger
174 Brute 182 Britain 201 Broughton 202 Brook 202 Bright 148 Burgundy, Duke, 76
Bulloigne Godfrey 77 Burnett 130 Butler 228
C.
CAniensis 62 Canaan 212 Cardinal 210 Cavendish 197 Casteill, King 36 Cambridg,
University 80 Carthaginians 197 Cambria 182 Cadmus 14 Castor and Pollux 37
Caleb 214 Ceres 142 Chrysorspides 6 Chaucer 82 Chalinor 96 Champion 119
Chichley 120 Chambrelan 121 Cham 214 Cyrus 147 Clerk 61, 68 Clarendon 168
Clare 185 Claxton 202 Clovile 210 C^rvinus 200 Columbus 63 Consuls 159 Courtney
107, 205 Coel, King 80 Colchester Town 82 Cornwall 158 Earl 205 Cook 160 Corbet
163 Cornwallis 164 Coney 200 Conesby 200 Cotton 224 Cominy 129 Cranfield 65
Crabb 174 Creythorn 185 Creswell 200 Cryoll 185 Cr^nos, a name of Saturn, 209
Crew 225 Culpepper 55 Curtos, Robert 183 Cyrus 147
D.
DAutrey, alias 16 D. Alta Ripa. 16 Day 154 Dakins 68 Delaware 52 Delahay 154
Dedalus 163 Delphinate 172 Dentatus 123 Deluna 145 Denmark 183 Dimon 136
Diomedes 50 Diana 142 Dochen 68 Drax 168 Drury 16 Drake 36 Drop 91 Diodumenus
163 Dymon 136 Dymock 199
E.
EDward, Black Prince 168 East- India Company 45 Edgar Pacificus 165 Edmond of
Lang. 125 Edmond Crowchback 125 Edmond Iron-Side 165 Edolph 127 Egg 174 Elbing
Company 45 Elphingston 192 Ellis 41 England 76, 125 Emperors Arms 157 Aolus
141 A sculapius 142 Eve 220 Evering 185 Air 128 Europa 193
F.
FAirfax 54 Fabius 118 Fitz 93 Fishmongers Com. 172 Fitz Williams 225 Fitz Roy
205 Flanders 111 Flower 127 Flora 142 Forster 54, 196 France 125 Fredrick 163
French Arms 225
G.
GAnymede 193 Gaunt John 50, 125 Gardner 130 Garrad 180 Gascoigne 173 Gaudy 201
Galba 149 Gloucester Bishops 38 Glaucus Armor 196 Godwin, Earl of Kent 183
Gourney 41 Gore 51, 84, 85 Gower 123 Grimes 16 Granado 36, 128 Granger 130
Griffith 221 Guilford 129
H.
HAmmon 198 Harding 124 Handcock 164 Hampson 133 Ham 212 Hamey 188, 215 Hay 203
Hastings 223 Harison 230 Harbotle 231 Hardres 185 Harald 183 Hamarsley 198
Hereford City 58 Hemini 59 Henault Earl 71 Hervey 119, 145 Hector 50 Helena
found the Cross 82 Herbert 180, 50 He^gest 186 Heigham 186 Hecate 142 Herris
202 Heylyn 186 Hercules his twelve labors. 165, 178, 190, 190, 189, 189, 197,
187, 165, 200, 190, 197 Herculani 157 Hide 228 Howard Duke of Norfolk 58 Hobert
67 Howard Catherine 68 Hortentius 121 Honywood 168 Horn 196 Hook 173 Houghton
185 Horsey 186 Horsus 186 Hulling 123 Hutton 145, 159 Huntley 196
I.
Jasper Earl of Pembrook 205 James 174 Jacob 213 Jaball 210 Janus 214, 181
Japhet 212 Jerusalem 78 India Company 45 Jocelin of Lovain 184 Joseph 213
Ireland 78 Isaac 212 Israel 217 Ivon 180, 80 Italus 129 Julius Caesar 160, 214
Jupiter 13, 141, 100, 212 Jupiter Hammon 198 Juno 100, 142 Juball 210
K.
Kelsey 200 Kirkby 185 Knightley 232 Kempe 128
L.
LAtimer 58 Lawrence 76 Lars Tolumnius 62 Lacy 104 Langley Edmond 125 Langham
195 Lamplew 229 Lacedaemonians 232 Lambert 198 Lesley 58 Lentulus 118 Lewis 119
Leland 127 Levines 130 Lluelling ap Griffith 184 Leyborn 185 Lynsey Earl, 198
Lilborn 36 Lions King, 36 Lincoln City 80 Lilly 118 Litleton 230 London City 80
Locrine 182 Lloyd 186 Lovet 190 Love 190 Lovell 200 Lock 210 Luna 141, 142 Lucy
147, 173 Lupus Hugh 129
M.
MAnduit 38 Mackworth 38 Manors 45 Masham 52 Marcellus 62 Mazarine Cardinal 56
Magdalen Col. 68 Mandevile 119 Macedon 190, 192 Marsh 186 Maleverer 192
Merchants Companies 193 Mars 117, 141 Manipulares 220 Marrow 222 Manus 208
Main 221 Maynard 221 Machiavils two Marks of Honor 113 Mead 119 Messala 200
Mecoenas 204 Medhope 185 Mesala Corvinus 20 Mercury 177 141, 142, 13, 214
Meires 214 Midas 199 Minerva on the Shields of the Trojans 25, 45, 142, 213
Military Company 45 Midhope 185 Minors 45 Minshall 148 Miteford 204 Mills 195
Mortimer 37, 41, 106 Moerger 60 Monk 121 Moorwood 121 Molin^ 129 Mordant 148
Moody 165 Morgan 180, 197 Morison 188 Moses 213 Mussard 103
N.
NAamah 212 Neptune on the Shields of the Greeks 25 Nevile 76 Neoptolemus 221
Neptune 42, 217 Nitingall 122 Nicholson 145 Nimbrod 217 Northumberland Earl
148, 184, 228, 271 Noah 214 Notarii militantes 75
O.
ORleance Lewis 127 Oteley 127 Ousley 165 Otho 149 Oxford by whom founded 124
Oxford Earl 165 Oxenden 196 Oxewick 197
P.
PAllas 187 Painell 80 Palmer 119 Parkhurst 188 Patraclus's Funeral Pile 64
Pawlet 231 Pan 141 Peterb^rough See 38 Pelham 50 Penny 102 Pear 118 Pennyman
232 Perry 133 Pentalpha 135 Peirson 149, 154 Persians 160 Perillus Bull 196
Pembrook Earl 205 Peter de Rupibus 173 Percie 184, 228 Phrygians 200 Philips
184 Pits 104 Piso 118 Pirton 133 Pickering 185 Plat 38 Player 93, 98
Plantaginet 121, 205 Pluto 141, 136, 215, 226 Porter 229 Polyphemus 221 Pollard
228, 173 Proud 202 Price 233 Propugnatores 135 Pyrides 221
Q.
QUarterman 221
R
RAtcliff 57 Rappach 59 Read 168 Rhaea 142 Richard King of the Romans 158, 184
Ridgway 169 Royal Society 46 Roso 118 Roberts 148 Roper 158 Royal Company 192
Roman Ensign 221 Roch 173 Romulus 62 Rokisley 185 Robinson 209 Rutland Earl, 45
Rushia Company 45 Rupibus 173
S.
SAndford 31 Samford 32 Sawyer 125 Saint-John 150 Sandwich Earl, 171 Salerna
Prince 196 Saunders 197 Sapcotes 199 Sabinus 129 Saturn 88, 141, 142 Sarah 212
Scythians 43 Scroop 57 Scotland 73, 182 Scipio Africanus 118 Scipio Assina 199
Seranus 219 Senatores majorum and minorum 67 Senatores 205 Seward 80 Senoke 131
Semour 169 Sewell 170 Septuans 213 Seranus 219 Seth 229 Sherburn 36 Sherington
67 Sherland 185 Shem 212 Siccius Dentatus 123 Sycks 121 Skeleton 122 Smith 111,
162 Smiths Company 209 Snow 34 Sol 139, 140, 141 Spelia opima 63 Spelman 67
Spence 102 Spring 126 Speed 161 Sprigurnells 82 Spain 85 St. Alsaph Bishop 38
St. Andrew 74 St. Alban 74 St. Clear 154 St. George 66 St. John 150, 156 St.
Maure 94 Sturton 33 Stapleton 45 Stokheimes 59 Stafford 70 Starkey 169 Still 90
Stone 136, 173 Sterling 145 Staple Company 85 Sumner 84 Summer 126 Swale 33
T.
TAlk 16 Tatershall 193 Templers Knights 85 Terwhits 167 Teuder 201, 222
Telemachus 171 Thornholme 130 Thunder 154 Thetis 142, 146 Therkeld 222 Thompson
145, 154 Tilesley 118 Toft 16 Torquatus 56 Trosibis 232 Trussell 38 Tremaine
231 Tribunus Aerarii 69 Turton 119 Tribunus plebis, and militum 72 Turks
Ensigns 148 Tucker 171 Turnus 34 Tubal-Cain 201 Twisto 108 Twisleton 201
V.
Vavasour 84 Vaughan 222 Vessey 80 Veare 148, 165 Vesta 209 Venus 157, 141, 142
Villiers 80 Vitelius 149 Vines 131 Virdomarus 62 Vinteners Company 131 Ulysses
172, 221 Ulaudislaus 180 Umphravile 82 Upsall 80 Urania 143 Vulcan 201
W.
VVAterhouse 34 VVarnetts 38 Waterton 40 Warren 41 Wake 106 Walmesley 108
Waltham 150 Wales 182 Wait 196 Wentworth 183 Weiler 60 Whaley 17^ Whittington
122 Wheatley 128 Winchester Bishop 38, 129 Wingham 169 Winter 126 Wingfield 169
Wildersteen 60 Williams 214 Wilkinson 171 Wiseman 233 Worcester Earl 50 Wolrich
169 Wood 200 Wriothesley 160, 228
Y.
YAtes 199 York 80 Young 127
Z.
ZOuch 106
THE THIRD TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS Spoken of in this BOOK; And of the
Things which are Analogized by apt Motto's declaring the nature thereof.
ANALOGY is when things have a similitude or likeness of Reason, which Euclid
calls proportion, and the Greeks (...): I have, for the accommodation of the
Sons of Honor, essayed to give some reason of the bearing, and such Coats as
are of one and the same ordinary, charge, or both, differing only in their
colors, may be said to have reason of equality; those again that are of the
same ordinary, and different charges, have a reason of inequality; which also
is of greater inequality when the ordinary shall differ by lines, or lesser
inequality when it shall differ by color only; for curvy-line-figures will
have reason with right-line-figures, and Lions will have reason with Wolves,
etc. according to their postures or kinds, or colors; nevertheless a one
color is preferred before another, and a straight line before a crooked, and a
Lion before a Wolf; and there will be a greater inequality between a Beast and
a Bird, between things of the like kind and things of the same kind mixed with
things of a different kind, or to have the same things differing from each
other in the same Coat by different colors. So that what is good Armory, is to
be understood in those Axioms mentioned in the beginning; and in the order of
Nature the living is to be preferred before the dead, the productive before
those that want generation; and in the living the sensitive before the
sensl^ss, as Beasts, etc. before Trees; and in things sensitive the reasonable
before the unreasonable, as Man before Beasts; and in things reasonable,
Immortals before Mortals, as Angels before Men: in which consideration Nobility
is agreeable to Religion, and Signs of Nobleness may be allowed in civil
consideration to distinguish the Noble from the Base; and the Reader may know
how good one Coat may be from another, if he duly consider what I have
delivered in the two first Chapters, albeit the good does neither dignifie the
bad, nor the bad the good. The Table follows.

A.
ACHILLES Shield the Pattern propounded, page 21. Of what color and metal,
8,23. How made, 24. How divided, 29. How charged, 30. Parts of the same Shield,
110, 127, 128. His Crest, 232. Blazoned by Homer, 22. AGAMEMNON's Armor, 182.
ALEXANDER's Knot, 38. ANIMALS hurtful born in Arms, viz. himera, 190, 232.
Cockatrice, 189. Dragon, 192. Hydra, 189. Scorpion, 191. Serpents, 192. Toad,
191. For other Animals, see letter I. ARMS, why called Insignia, 20. The only
means to preserve from oblivion; why called a Coat; Arms and Names reciprocal,
overcharged, sometimes honorable, 59. Arms by Conquest, 62, 41. Arms according
to men's inclinations, 94. Arms taken from their Lords, 185. Arms distinctions,
13. ARTS liberal, 207. Art helps Nature in a threefold manner, 226. ASTROIDES,
135. ACHIEVEMENT, 232, 62. AENEAS his Shield, and whole Achievement, 233.
AUGMENTATION, what, 47. AUGUSTUS, as much as Ample, 146.
B.
BATTOON, a spurious difference, and why, 59. BEARINGS is either metal or
colors, divided by lines, as in the second Chapter, or charged with
Ordinaries, as in the third Chapter, or charged with things natural or
artificial, as through the whole course of this Book, how the nature of the
Bearer is discerned by the Bearing, 135. BEASTS, Hair and Nails, 186. Ape, 21.
Ass, 199. Bear, 195. Beeves, 196. Bevar, Badger, 202, Boar, 200. Bull, 196.
Camel, 195. Cat, Cam-Leopardus, 194. Coney, 200. Deer, 188. Dog and its collar,
192, Dragon, ibid. Elephant and Ivory, ibid. Elephants snouts, 193. Ermine,
201. Fox, 194. Goat, 198. Gray, 202. Hare, 200. Heart, 188. Hedghog, 202. Horse,
186. Hyaena, 196. Lambs, 198. Leopard, 193. Leopards heads, 191, 192. Linx,
195. Lion, 178. Minotaur, 197. Oxen, 196. Panther, 193. Porcupine, 202. Rams,
198. Rhinoceros, 195. Sheep, 199. Sow, 200. Squirrel, ibid. Stag, 188. Tiger,
193. Tortois, ibid. Unicorn, 201. Urchins, 202. Wolf, 190. Wolves heads, ibid.
Skins of Beasts, 194, 198. Horns, 196. BENDS, 57. BEZANTS, 105. BILLITS, 74.
BIRDS and their parts; Cock, 166. Crane, Chough, 164. Crow, 163. Doves, 162.
Eagle, 157. Goose, 163. Griffin, 161. Harpy, 165. Ha^ks, 168. Heron, 164, 169.
Lapwing, 167. Martlets, 165. Nightingale, 166. Ostrich, 167. Owl, 168, 171.
Owsle, 165. Parrot, ibid. Partridg, 163. Peacock, 162. Pelican, 169. Phoenix,
162. Quail, Raven, 163. Redshank, 164. Sphinx, 165. Stork, 166, 169. Swallow,
161. Swan, 169. Terwhit, 167. Vulture, 166. Their Feathers, 168. Heads, ibid.
Legs, 170. Wings, 169. BLAZON, what, 13. Three sorts of Blazon, by colors, by
precious stones, and by Planets, ibid. Blazon for Princes, 143. BORDERS, in the
beginning of each Chapter. Bordered grounds among the Romans, 41. Border
g^bona^ed, 1. Border compony, 25. Border checkie, 49. Border guttie, 87. Border
entoyre, 32, 99. Border verdoy, 117. Border Enaluron, 157. Border Enurney, 177.
Border purflew, ibid. Border plain, 199. BRIDLES, 187. BRITAIN, known to the
Phoenicians in Homer's time, 63. So called from Scurvy Grass, 119. BUCKLES,
136. 50, 58. BUGLE Horns, 196.
C.
CANTONS, 46. CHAPLETS, 121. CHEVERON, 69. CHIEF, 42, 43, 113. CHIVALTRAPS,
232. CHROMATISM, the knowledge of the nature of things by colors. COAT, 21.
Plain Coat most ancient, 4, 18, 21, 25. COLORS; Color upon color false
Herauldry, 1, 17. The colors of Plants, 118, 119, 121. Of Flowers, 133. Of
Stones, 137. Of Planets, 149. Of Beasts, 185. Of Complexions, Seasons, Winds,
Ages, 185, 167. Colors confidered in a twofold notion, 3, 16. What, 13. Ten,
1. Black, foundation of matter, 5, 87. Its antiquity, 8. Its house and
exaltation, 88. Gules, 7. Azure, 8, 99. Azure proper for Seamen, 9. Purple,
ibid. Mourning for Kings, 10, 11. Colors produced from Metals, 18. Proper, the
worst color for Beasts, but five prime colors, 5. Different names from
Tincture, 12. Colors and proportion please the Fancy, 114. Colors mixed, 5,
8. Their Analogies shadowed, Pictures work on the vulgar, 144. Color with
Metals, three degrees of comparison, 17. COMETS, 37. COTTISES, 51, 58, 61.
COUPLE-CLOSES, 69. CRESSANTS, 143. CROSSES of several kinds, 78. Fell from
Heaven, 73. CROWNS, what they signify, 124. Crowning Emperors, 121. Crowning
of Poets, 122. Crown of Oak, 123, 131, 142. Of Ivy, 124. Crown mural, 42.
Olympic Crown, 122. Pa^^asado'd Crown, 66. CUBE, 22.
D.
DEGREES among Heavenly Bodies, Beasts, Birds, etc. 137. DELPH, 96. DIFFERENCES
for Distinctions of Houses, viz. Difference for the Grandchild, 5. Label for
the first Son. For the second Son, 146. For the third Son, 135. For the fourth
Son, 155. For the fifth Son, 171. For the sixth Son, 125. Differences of Noble
Persons by colors, 000. By Borders, 105. DISTINCTIONS of necessity, 13.
Distinctions among Creatures show the great Wisdom of God, 137. DOCTORS of
Divinity, 115. Doctors of Law their Dignity, 116. Doctors of Physic 215.
Doctors Ensigns, of Degrees, 216. DOVE-COTS, 199. DROPS signify the Spirits,
91. Drops of Water, 88. Drops of Gold, 92. Drops of Blood 93. Drops of Tears,
93. Drops of Oil, 94. Drops of Pitch, 90. Drops, how disposed, 95.
E.
ECLIPTIC, 58. EDUCATION sows the seeds of Honor, 137. EGYPTIANS three ways
of propagating Knowledge, 144. Wisdom of the Egyptians fourfold, 167. They
worshipped the Dog, 192. the Cat, 194, etc. ELEMENTS of Arms, number and
position, 99. Element, 20. The Hebrew letters called Elements, 14. Element of
Fire, 43. 92. 113. 140. 149. Lightning, 43. 55. Coals, 43. Element of Air, 34.
Clouds, 34. 44. 45. 91. 193. Snow, 113. Thunder, 35. 144. 155. Rainbow, 35.
Rain, 92. Comets, 155. Element of Water 29. 31. 37. 91. 109. Ocean, 33. Sea,
38. Rivers, 31. 92. Bourns, 36. Fountains, 33. Fish Ponds, 33. 36.
Water-budgets, 36. Tears, 95. Element of Earth, 25. 97. 106. 117. Rocks, 34.
Mountains, 46. Olympus, 97, Aetna, 97. Piles, 46. Peninsula's, ibid. Isthmus,
97. ENSIGNS of Sovereignty, 122. 227. Ensigns Military, 223. Quivers, Bows,
Arrows, Cross-Bows, 229. Arrow-heads, 230. Clubs, Swords, Helmets, 231. Shield,
Gauntlets, Lance, Spears, Tents, Galtraps, 232. Standard- Ensign, great
Artillery, 233. Drums, Trumpets, ibid. Spear-heads, ibid. Burrs, ibid. Bullets,
104. Ensigns Ecclesiastical; the Miter, the Crosier, the Bell, the Lamp, the
Incense-pot, the Cross, 229. The Altar, ibid. Ensigns Civil belonging to
Aedifices; Lime, an House, a Castle, a City, a Tower, a Column, a Porch, a
Temple; the Exchange; a Bridge, an Arch, a Pyramid, 209. ERMINE, 222. 194.
ESQUIRES Dignity, 156.
F.
FASCES, 56. FESSE, 49. FEUDS Regal, Feuda Militaria, and Feuda Scutiferorum,
230. FIELDS, what, 25. 88. 113. Fields equally divided have no predominancy,
47. Fields are checky, pally, barry, 41. Bendy, counter-changed, 42. 54.
Gerrony, 114. Field among the Egyptians, what, 11. The place of the Officers
in the Field of War, 61. The Field in Herauldry is Subjectum formarum, 113. and
is parted per Fesse, per Bend, per Pale, per Bend sinister, per Cross, per
Saltire, per Cheveron, per Pile, 118. Field with humane shapes called Campus
Anthromorphus, 225. FISHES, 172. Crabs, 174. Dolphins, 171. in the Shield of
Ulysses, 172. Dolphin among the Egyptians, ibid. Escolop-shells, 171. 173.
Eels, 173. Sea-Horses, 171. Mermen and maids, ibid. Lucies, 174. Roches, 173.
Whales, ibid. Fishes Heads and Tail, ibid. Fish Ponds, 33. FLANCHES and FLASKS,
66. 68. FOUNTAINS, 33. FRAUD justificable to an Enemy, 194. FRETS, 222. FUCILS,
135. FURRS, 222.
G.
GALTRAPS, 232. GARDEN, 133. GARLANDS, 127. GARMENTS, 223. Purple-Robe, 227.
Gown, 223. Cassocks, Coat, Mantles, 223. The Hat, the Cap, the Girdle, the
Sleeve, the Shoo, 223. 225. Garments of Linen, 223. Garments Ecclesiastical
and Civil; a Towel, ibid. GEMMS, 136. Gemms and Stones; Amber, Asbestes, 135.
Camphire, Crystal, Carbuncle, Coral, 136. Diamond, 135. Emrald, ibid. Flint,
136. Jewels, Jasper, ibid. Loadstone, ibid. Pearl, ibid. Ruby, Sapphire,
Thunderstone, Whetstone, ibid. GEMELS, 54. GENTILITY, what, 208. Gentility
without Herauldry, 214. GULPS, 112. GUNSTONS, 103. GUTTE, 95.
H.
HEAVEN, 44. Twelve Houses, 43. and Light, 44. HERALDS, their Office, 30.
HEURTS, 108. HIEROGLYPHICS, what, 15. 167. Unavoidably clogged with obscurity,
132. Hieroglyphick and Symbol, how differ, 151. Famous Hieroglyphick, 181.
Hieroglyphick of the Year, 191. Hieroglyphick of the Hawk and Dog, 139. HOMER
uttered nine Voices of Birds, 161. HUSBANDRY; Implements thereunto belonging;
the Plough, 213. 226. 127. the Flail, 213. the Harrow, 209. 226. the Yoke, 196.
213. 226. the Scithe, 213. the Wheel, the Bushel, ibid. the Fan, the Spade,
219. 226. Stables, Cottages, Dove-cots, 199. HUSWIFERY; Implements thereunto
belonging; the Reel, 224. the Purse, 227. Skain of Yarn, 224. Spindle, ibid.
Spinning-wheel, 218. Cotton, ibid. Fucils, 135. Lozenges, 134. 151. 152. 153.
Wool, 198.
I.
IBIS, 139. Letters taken from the Bird Ibis, 167. JERUSALEM's Arms, 78.
Jerusalem's Mark, 113. IN-ESCOUCHION, 47. INSECTS and Imperfect Animals;
Scarabee, 170. 203. Be, Silkworms, Caterpillar, Camelion, 203. Sna^l,
Grasshopper, Ant, Spider, Salamander, Frogs, Horsleeches, Wasps, Mice, Flies,
Glo-worms, Moths, Toads, 204. Mole, 201. INSTRUMENTS of Music, 210. The Harp,
the Organ, the Pipe, the Stop, the Clarendon, ibid. Instruments Mathematical,
204. The Level, the Plummet, the Globe, the Balance, 212. JUPITER, 99. Jus
Imaginum, 46.
K.
KNIGHTS, several sorts, 98. Knight Service, 230. To make a Knight, 138.
L.
LABEL, of three points for the first Son, of five points for the Grandchild,
5. LANCE, 60. LAW of Arms, 138. Law binds after the manner of the Stars, 145.
Law Military, 72. 110. LEGS across in Burial, 82. LETTERS of the Greeks
derived from the Egyptians, 15. Hebrew Letters, 16. Letters among the Military
Ensigns of the Romans, ibid. The Inventors of Letters, 14. Letters stand for
colors, ibid. Placed in the beginning of each Chapter according to the color
of the shield. Occult ways of sending Letters, 106. 111. Derived from parts of
Animals, 167. Billets are Letters, 74. LIGHT, 44. 90. 97. LINES straight most
honorable, 4. Lines the Boundaries of Arms, 89. Lines curved, viz. Crenelle,
42. Dauncette, 84. Flecked, 34. Ingrailed, 22. 43. Nebule, 45. Undy, 84. LIONS
Heads, 181. 190. Lions Paws, 185. Lions Hair and Nails, 186. LOZENGES, 40.
M.
MAN, how he is the Image of God, 144. Man, 219. His parts; viz. the Heart, the
Hand, the Fist, the Foot, 220. 221. 222. Man armed, 226. from head to foot,
ibid. MANTLES, 223. 224. 232. and Tents, 232. MARS, 117. 120. MASCLES, 136.
MERCURY, 177. Mercury Pinnatus, 168. The God of Merchants, 211. METALS
attributed to the Planets, 150. OR, Gold and Argent, Silver, 102. the prime
Metals, 4.6. Metal without color, Essence without Quality, 5. Argent the prime
Metal, but Or the Metal of improvement, 6. preferred before Silver through
error. Metals glue the form to the matter, 17. 25. Metals represent the minds
of men, 88. Iron, 103. Plates, 102. Penny, 100. Money, 103. Bezants, 105.
METEORS, 155. MILITARY Instruments, vide E. MINERALS, 135. Salt, 119. Sulphur,
ibid. MONSTERS tolerable in Herauldry, 160. MOTHERS Coat born on a Chief, 45.
on a Bend, 58, etc. MULLETS, 135. Examples by Mullets, how Coats may be varied,
151. 152. MUSIC, vide I. Musical proportion, 22.
N.
NOBILITY fourfold, 108. 212. 113. NUMBER Ten a perfect Number; so also Six,
17. 95. An odd Number in Musical proportion, 83.
O.
OR, a metal of improvement, 6. ORDINARIES, Cross the chief, Chief the next,
42, 43, 113. Diverse Ordinaries in one, 82. Ordinaries of Honor nine, viz. the
Fess, 49. the Bend dexter, Bend sinister, 59. the Pale, 62. 65. 38. Bars, 53.
55. Cheveron, 69. Saltire, 73. In-escouchion, 47. 144. Ordinaries derived from
the others, Barry, Bendy, Pally, etc. Ordinary, Charges, Flanches, 66. O
GRESSES, 103.
P.
PALADIUM, 144. PALE, 62. PALLETS, 38. PALMERS, who, 119. PARAHELII, 154.
PELLETS, 104. PHEONS, 54. PILES, 46. 34. 9^. PILGRIMS, who, 119. PLANETS, their
qualities, 140. 149. so called from Error, 155. Their number seven, viz. Saturn
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna; their colors, 141. PLATES, 67. 102.
POET lauriat, 122. POINT arises from Unity; Points, eight principal points in
an Escouchion, 22. Middle the Honor Point 19. POMACES. 111. POSTS wore
feathers in their Hats, 168. PRECEDENCE, 217. PURSE Ensign of the Chancellor,
227.
Q.
QUADRIPARTITE Division of Gentility, 208. 212. 213.
R.
RABIE Jochnides his conceit of the Tree of life, 81. REBATEMENTS or disgraces
in coats, for what causes, 206. REGALIA Crowns, 226. Scepters, 227. 128. Why
flowred, that of the Greeks, and of the Romans, 124. Rings, 136. 205. 227.
Mound, 227. ROUNDS, Forms and ROUNDELS, viz. Bezants, 105. Gulpes, 112.
Gunstons, Heurts, 103. 108. O Gresses, 103. Pellets, 104. Plates, 67. Pommaces,
111. Torteauxes, 106.
S.
SAL, 119. SALTIRE, 73. SATURN, 87. SCARF, 60. SEAL, 205. Great Seal, Privy
Seal, 206. SEASONS by Vegetables, 126. SMITH's Craft, 210. The Forge, Anvil,
Bellows, Hammer, Ax, Hinges, Nails, Locks, Keys, 210. Chains, 183. Millroinds,
213. SOL, 132. SPURS, 136. STANDARDS, what, 233. Standards of the Romans, 157.
191. 197. STARS, 113. Called Estoiles, 145. Emblems of Privy Counselors, 148.
Pole Star, 61. 148. Dog Star, 149. Stars, how they are said to bind and incline
to Virtue, 143. 145. 149. Stars represent Military and Civil persons; a number
of Stars make a Constellation, 148. 48 Constellations among the Egyptians, 26.
The Gards, 146. The Bears, ibid. Orion; the Cross; the Morning and Evening
star, 148. Star placed on the Cloaks of the Knights of the Garter, 149. STATUES
among the Romans, 219. STIRROPS, 232. STONES, Vide Gemms.
T.
TALISMANS, 144. TITLES taken from Heavenly Bodies, 146. TORTEAUXES, 106. Why
of a red color out of Virgil. TEN, a color, 1. TROJAN Horse, 187. TROPICKS,
58. TROY taken by night, 149.
V.
VEGETIVES: Aarons Rod, 132. Acorns, 122. 131. Almond-tree, 130. Apples, 105.
111. Apple Tree, 131. Aramanthus, 133. 121. Ash, 130. Balsam, 130. Basil, 132.
Bay, 130. Beans, 120. Bears-foot, 132. Blossoms, 129. Borage, 121, 132.
Branches, 118. Broom, 121. Capers, 132. Cassia, 118. Caterfoils, 121. Cedar,
129. 130. Chaplets, 121. Cinquefoils, ibid. Cipress, 130. Coleworts, 132. Corn,
127. 132. Cork-tree, 131. The Daffodil. Ears of Corn, 128. Elm, 130.
Flower-de-luce, 125. 133. Flowers, 128. 133. 121. Fennigreek, 13^. Fig Tree,
130. Flax, 133. Fruit, 131. Garbs, 127. 128. 129. Garden, 133. Garlands, 126.
Gesemine, 133. Gilliflower, 121. 133. Goad, 133. Grain, 132. Grapes, 131.
Herbs, 132. Heurtle-berries, 130. Holly, ibid. Holm, ibid. Housleek^ 133.
Hyacynth, ibid. Jerusalem Rose, 132. Indian-flower, 133. Ivy, 30. Laurel, 121.
Leaves, 26. 128. 121. Lilly, 125. Maidenhair, 132. Millet, 130. Mulberry, ibid.
Mushrom, 132. Myrrh, 130. Narcissus, 121. Nut-tree, 130. Oak, 122. 126. 129.
131. Oil, 95. Olive, 123. 132. Onions, 132. Orange, 130. Palm, 129. 131. Peach,
131. Pear Tree, ibid. Pine, 130. Piony, 134. Pomegranate, 129, 130. P^ppy, 134.
Quince, 130. Root, 136. Rose, white and red, 125. Roses, 124. 129. 133.
Saffron, 133. Sarvices, 131. Sciens, 132. Sedges, 121. Seed, 129. Sempervive,
121. Spanish-flower, 134. Stock, 132. Sun-flower, 133. Thistle, 125. 129. 132.
Thorn, 131. Trees, 130. Trefoil, 121. Trunk, 129. 130. 132. Tulip, 133.
Turnips, ibid. Turpentine, 130. Vervine, 123. Vine, 131. Vine planted by Noah,
211. Weeds, 128. Wheat, 132. Wheat sheaves, 127. 129. Willow, 131. Wine, ibid.
Wood, 132. Yew, 131. VENUS, 157. UNITY, matter and form; nothing without Unity,
48. VOIDERS, 68.
W.
WATER, the original matter, 167. Vide Elements. WHITE Staff Ensign of
Administration, 227. WISDOM of the Egyptians, 167. WOLF sacred among the
Egyptians, 191. WOMEN, how they take place according to marriage, 222. 224.
225. Moon Emblem of Women, 147. Women's work, See the letter H.
Y and Z
YORK and Lancaster, 123. ZODIAC, 57.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
REider, by reason of this late Visitation the Author was separated from the
Printer, and therefore prays thee to mend the most materials thus:

Page lin. 10 ^ pallets 15 purpuraeque 12 15 Minium 26 Pransinum 23 5 standi ^7
11 Squires 18 SUI. 40 15 Moon 31 Seating 50 5 Curule 63 15 Columnum 64 1^ dele
picea, and read it in the next line. Supremis 79 26 desertorum 91 2 INFUSA 7
CLARESCUNT 97 6 Volutati 102 3 CALCULUM 133 10 Goard 155 16 Martlet 157 22 omen
178 14 Nature 185 35 Synechdoche 214 ult. Omnis 216 1 Claus^s 223 20 virilit

Page 22. the marginal Blazon should be read on Page 19. Chap. 4. the running
Title mistaken. P. 177. in the margin read Purflew Ermine. 179. margin, at 3,
r. Passant, at 9, r. Queve.


