More last Words and Sayings of the True Protestant Elm-Board: or, a full
Answer to a late pretended Sober Vindication of the Dr. and the Board.
I Am something amazed that the Vindicator should call my harmless Discourse a
Profane Pasquil; for I would have him to know that he has little reason to
stigmatize so innocent a Paper with so odious an Epithet, unless it is because
F. Sh(...)s name is to it; but he that will call him a Patron of Wit and
Criticism, or magnify the Doctors Loyalty to his Prince, and Fidelity to his
Master, will call any thing a Profane Pasquil.

As for his second Paragraph, there are almost as many contradictions in it, as
there are in Oates's Narrative; for he says that the Board is yet living, and
at the same time that it was never born. Let the mercenary Inhabitants of
Kent-street Fib and Swear on, for one day truth and reason will rise up in
judgment against them. Besides, Mr. Vindicator, by my truly your love is a
million, for I can produce a company of good substantial Cripples and
Broom-men, that can prove the Board to be as dead as a Herting, or rather a
door-Nail; although it is confessed that the Ghost of the Board has been seen to
walk, and it is generally believed, that it has hid some Shavings thereabouts.
As for the nativity of the Board, that is undeniable, for Gadbury has cast it;
and whosoever says, that it was not a Dresser-Board in the Kitchen of Sh.
B(...)l, must have this suspicion, that Sh. B(...)l never had a Dresser-Board
nor a Kitchen: so that it is evident that the Board was born, and is now as
dead as Beddingfield the Jesuit, although Sir W. W. (so eminent for burning
Mother Lowse instead of the Virgin Mary) caught him plotting above ground after
he was buried.

In the third Paragraph of his Vindication, he says I term the Dr. a Reverend
Scot, for which I beg his pardon; for I will never do so any more: but he
proceeds and affirms positively, that the Dr. does never disturb the sick, but
rather makes them merry and jocose. Now certainly this is a very great
disturbance, to make men laugh and giggle, that should be thoughtful and
serious. Nor is his Vindication of Dr. T. O. less non-sensical and impertinent;
for he that will Testify through a Keyhole, will Swear through an Inch-board.
I Will be judged by the Dr. himself else.

But is it so ridiculous an action for the Dr. to kiss a Board? I am sure it
had been letter for him if he had married one. As for his sitting down upon him
without a Cushion, he does the same thing every night upon as hard a Board, at
the Nags-head-Club. As for the Gentleman that loves Custard, let me tell you he
deserves to have it thrown into his Face, for telling so impudent an untruth;
for Elk. Settle that loves Custard as well as himself, can testify, that the
rest of the last words and sayings of the Protestant Elm Board were these; for
he took the Dr. by the hand, and said, Draw near and comfort me, for I have
been a very sinful Board.

Dr. Here is a Book that I have written, The whole duty of Boards, read that,
for it will instruct and edify you.


Board. Ah Doctor, I am sorry that I must dye before the times turn.


Dr. Come, come, cheer up, you may live till to morrow, and I hope they will
turn before that time: However let this be your comfort, that you are going to
meet St. College.


Board. Whither I hope you will all follow me.


Dr. Farewell then, for I must go to the Nags-head-Club.


Board. Pray Dr. stay a little longer.


Dr. I cannot in truth, for delays are dangerous: ud's me, they will score me
up many bumpers.


The Board was something troubled that the Dr. should make such haste away, but
considering it was to carry on the good Old Cause, it was contented and
satisfied, and desired to be remembered kindly to Sir Thomas Creswel, Sh. Sh.
Pilk. and Tho. Fir. cum ^ultis aliis.

Now let the world judge whether or no I have imposed upon them, or wrested the
prose and meaning of the last words and sayings of the Protestant Elm-Board:
for I protest I am so much a hater of false History, that rather than I would
be thought one, would gladly suffer red hot Iron with the Board.

Printed for S. HADWEL. 1682.


