A Plain and Continued EXPOSITION Of the several Prophecies or Divine Uisions
OF THE Prophet Daniel, Which have or may concern the People of GOD, WHETHER JEW
or CHRISTIAN; Whereunto is annexed a Threefold APPENDAGE, Touching Three main
Points, the First, Relating to DANIEL, the other Two to the APOCALYPSE.

By HENRY MORE D. D.

Dan. 12. 10. Many shall be purified and made white and tried, but the wicked
shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
WHAT I present thee with, though The extent of the Authors Exposition of the
Prophecies of Daniel.
nor indeed was ever intended to be, an entire Commentary upon the whole Book
of Daniel, yet I hope it will prove what the Title promises, A plain as well as
continued Exposition upon the several Prophecies or Divine Visions of Daniel,
wherein the affairs of the Church of God whether Jewish or Christian are
prefigured or predicted, which indeed is as much as to say, upon all the
Prophecies or Divine Visions of Daniel. For those two Visions which I have
omitted, That touching the Tree, Chap. 4. to be hewn down by the decree of the
Watchers and the demand of the Holy Ones, and that other, Chap. 5. of the Hand
seen writing upon the wall, neither of those are the Visions of Daniel, but the
former the Dream of Nebuchadnezzar, the latter a Vision which Belshazzar saw,
namely, The shape of a man's hand writing on the wall. Nor were these
predictions of the State of the Church, but of the particular State of those
two Kings Nebuchadnezzar, and Belshazzar, his grandchild.

The change of Nebuchadnezzar by the decree of the Watchchers and Holy Ones
into the condition of an Ox, how to be understood.
for it is far less; but merely because they were not suitable to my scope. The
strangest thing in the former is that wonderful Metamorphosis supposed by some
in the body of Nebuchadnezzar, as if he were transformed into an Ox. But that
is a mere abuse both of the Text and of him. That by the just Judgment of God
he was struck with a ferine Melancholy is true. And as some in such a (...) or
delirancy, fancy themselves Wolves, others Dogs, other some, Cats, which
Distempers Physicians call (...) and (...), as you may see in Sennertus,
Institut. Medic. lib. 2. part. 3. sect. 1. so this ferine Melancholy or Madness
of Nebuchadnezzar, with which he was smitten and continued in for seven years,
may be termed a (...) or (...) and as Physicians report of those other
Distempers, that the parties that are affected with them will imitate the
actions, gestures and voices of those Animals, Wolf, Dog or Cat, so might
Nebuchadnezzar of an Ox or Bull, and in this wild salvage life of his he might
grow very rough and hairy, and his nails long as the claws of a bird are, he
never paring them. Which is all that is meant by that Text, Dan. 4. 33.
That his hairs were grown like Eagles Feathers (not broad as feathers are, but
so thick set and much grown that they covered his skin as close as the feathers
of an Eagle do hers) and his nails like birds claws, that is, long especially,
and something bending inward. And that this matter, this judgment upon
Nebuchadnezzar, was determined by the decree of the Watchers and by the word of
the Holy Ones, that is, of the Angelical Powers, this is no more than is more
fully intimated in those Prophecies of Daniel which I have expounded; that the
affairs of men and of Kingdoms especially are carried on by the activity and
ministry of Angels, according to that of Theognis, (...)
(...)
We mortals knowing naught, vain things surmise,
But all must go as the Holy Ones devise.


Of the Hand seen writing on the wall by Belshazzar, and of the Chaldeans,
Soothsayers, etc. being not able to read it.
the most puzling thing in that whole story is, that all the Chaldeans,
Soothsayers and Astrologers, all the wise men of King Belshazzar should prove
themselves such fools, as to be puzzled in the reading three or four words writ
in their own language, For the words are Chaldee. This I confess Interpreters
make a great pudder about, and endeavor to loose the knot various ways. Some
say, they could not read it because though the words were Chaldee, yet they
were writ in the old Hebrew, i.e. Samaritan Character. Others that the
Characters though they were Chaldee, yet were transposed. Others that only the
Initial letters were writ, and so they could make no words of them. And others
that they being writ without points, they did not know how to point them or
vowel them. And lastly there are others that conceive that God miraculously
blinded or rather dazzled their sight, and confounded their perception, that he
might reserve the credit of that exploit for Daniel. But it being such a night
of profane revelling and feasting, why might not the wise men partly out of
tipsiness, and partly out of consternation of mind, in sympathizing with their
perplexed Prince and his Court, be so maskard that they could not read the
handwriting on the Wall, it being writ also on purpose by the Angel Gabriel
(for the Jews make him the Scribe) so scribledly as I may so say, and brokenly,
that though a man of a pacate mind and quick understanding would easily read
it, yet men so much gone in drink, and drunk also with horror and
astonishment, would not be able to make any thing of it.

And yet there is a more simple and easy solution than all these. In Chap. 4.
verse. 9. Tell me, says Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel, the Visions of my dream that I
have seen and the Interpretation thereof. Where the particle [And] most
assuredly signifies as much as [that is to say.] For Daniel was not to tell the
dream but the Interpretation of it. So that the true and plain sense of that
part of that Verse is, Tell me the Visions of my dream that I have seen, that
is to say, the Interpretation thereof. In like manner Chap. 5. verse. 8. where
it is said, The wise men could not read the writing, the particle following
which is [] and which our English Translation renders [Nor] in ver^^^ of the
negation preceding (otherwise it naturally signifies [And]) may as well be
rendered [that is to say] as [Nor] And then the sense is plain and easy. The
Kings wise men could not read the writing, that is to say, they could not make
known to the King the Interpretation thereof, they could not read it so asto
interpret it to him. For though the handwriting was not mere Initial letters,
yet they were such single incoherent words without any syntax, that none could
tell what they meant but he that writ them, who happily assisted Daniel in (...)
the Riddle.

For the Handwriting in Chaldee was only The Interpretation of the said
Writing, by Daniel.
MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL, VPHARSIN. Which verbatim sounds no more than thus, He has
numbered, He has numbered, He has weighed, And the Persians. Which broken writing
without the guidance of God, or the good Angel Gabriel, he could hardly make
sense of, unless we may conceive that by reading the Prophets, and being
skilled in some principles of Prophetic Interpretation, he might of himself
spell out the meaning. As for the first part, MEAN, MEAN, He has numbered, He
has numbered, This, by reading of Jeremiah 25. 12. Chapter 7. 7. and Chapter 9. 10.
where is expressly set down the Number of the duration of the Kingdom of
Babylon, viz. seventy years, and till Nebuchadnezzars Sons Son, which time was
then near expiring; he might, I say, well interpret, [He has numbered, He has
numbered,] of the certain ^inishing of the Number of the duration of the
Kingdom of Babylon, to whose King the Handwriting is directed, and declare,
as he has in this Text, Chapter 5. 26. MEAN, God has numbered thy Kingdom and
finished it.

But now for the Interpretation of TEKEL, He has weighed, it is not improbable
but that in the reading of (...) there might be a Paronomastical Resonancy of
words in his mind, that would make out the whole sense thus, (...) Tekal veatte
Kal, He has weighed and thou art light. Which Daniel expresses more fully thus
to the King, Thou art weighed in the balance and art found wanting, that is,
found to want weight, and therefore rejected, as money illegitimate.

And the Prophetic Analyze of the last, VPHARSIN [ And the Persians] is
manifestly Paronomastical. Where he takes PEERS by itself, which signi^ies a
Persian, and in a Paronomastical allusion to the word (...) paras, which
signi^ies discindere or divellere or dividere, he makes out this full sense of
VPHARSIN, Thy Kingdom is divided, or rent from thee, and given to the Medes
and Persians. Which whenas he could not but know would be very bitter and
distasteful news to Belshazzar, and such as he would be more like to reward
with a wreath of hemp than a chain of Gold, I say although he attained to the
sense of the Handwriting on the wall, by a kind of art and skill, yet the full
assurance of the truth thereof, and his undaunted courage and fortitude of
spirit, (one great requisite in a Prophet, as Maimonides takes notice in his
Part. ^. Cap. 38.
More Nevochim) which imboldned him to declare the matter to the King, plainly
shows that his mind was actuated by a special assistance and divine impulse.
For according to all humane reasoning, besides the loss of his scarlet and
golden chain, which he did not stand upon, he would certainly incur the
greatest displeasure of the King imaginable, nor could escape without some such
sharp and wrathful rebuke, as that of Agamemnon to Calchas in Homer.

(...)
Thou messenger of mischief who to me
Did never yet tell ought that good might be.
In the mean time there are two main Observables Two things most to be noted in
the (...) shazzar, and Daniels Interpretation.
in this Vision of Belshazzar, the one against the incredulous of this age that
are so slow to believe any Apparitions. Whenas the Appearance of an Hand, while
it writ upon the wall, was most certainly a real Appearance to Belshazzar, and
not a mere fancy of his own, it having so violent an effect upon him, that it
loosened the ligaments of his loins, compages renum, as the Latin has it, so
that for very fear his urine came from him, as Grotius comments upon the place.
The Agony that the Apparition put him into, it seems was so great that it
weakened his (...), relaxated his retentive faculty, and wet his knees, as
elsewhere it is expressed in the Ezech. 7. 17. Chapter 21. 7.
Prophets, nay made both his knees knock one against another from the violence
of his trembling and fear. Besides, that it was no fancy, the Handwriting upon
the wall was an indubitable testimony, it being permanent and visible to all.

The other Observable concerns those high conceited Wits that think so goodly
and manly of themselves, as if it were below them to be moved by any
Prophetical Interpretation that is analyzed into Paronomastical Allusion.
Whenas Maimonides, in the above named Part. 2. Cap. 43.
Treatise, takes notice of that very way of understanding some passages in
Prophecies. And here, which is above all exception, Daniel himself that Prince
of Prophets expounds the Handwriting upon the wall according to this very
principle of Prophetic Interpretation, at least in the last part thereof. What
greater or more Authentic testimony for this way of interpreting can be
desired?

This little excursion, which I have made, Why the Author did not undertake
the whole Exposition of Daniel.
touching these two Visions that are not properly the visions of Daniel, but
the one of Nebuchadnezzar, the other of Belshazzar, his grandchild, will I hope
satisfy the Reader, if my preterition of them, in my Exposition of Daniels
Visions, may seem any Defect, and make some compensation for my omitting them,
I having thus cleared by the bye the most considerable things in them. But to
have undertaken the whole Book of Daniel, it would have taken more time, and
swelled the volume into a greater bulk and price than would be ordinarily
convenient, and delayed the publishing of it, and made it less effectual for
the main design, which is the most speedy and expedite succouring of the
Reformed Religion, which the Agents of Rome lay such strong battery against,
and by all means possible seek to undermine. Wherefore I conceived that my
Exposition would prove the more effectual for that end, the less it had of any
thing but what tended thereto. And yet I would not be so sparing and precise as
not to take in all the Prophecies of Daniel that concern the State of the
Church of God, whether Jewish or Christian; even all those entire Visions in
which these affairs are predicted, though also the affairs of the Infidel
Nations are involved in them, but in order to the affairs of the people of God.

Prophetical parts of Daniel so far as I have attempted, Why he undertook the
Prophetical parts.
I thought it not improper to undertake, forasmuch as in all likelihood it
might prove an easier Province to me, than to another man, and be more speedily
and more successfully administered by me; both because I have so thoroughly from
the beginning to the end considered the Apocalypse, which is a more full
Commentary upon those parts of the Visions of Daniel which fall (...) with the
times of the Visions of the Apocalypse (whence they will wonderfully illustrate
and confirm one another) and also because I had aforehand in other writings of
mine, viz. my Mystery of Godliness and Mystery of Iniquity, explained some
parts of the Prophecies of Daniel already, as that of the Seventy Weeks, and of
the King of Pride, and others. One good use of which my Performance, I hope,
will be, that when men see so palpable a correspondency betwixt the Apocalypse
and Daniel, they will be steared off from conceiving any such sense in any
passages of Daniel as may be inconsistent with the genuine meaning of the
Apocalypse. Which was one reason amongst the rest that invited me to this task.

But now for the Performance of the Task What the manner and nature of his
performance therein, And how grossly Calvin is mistaken in interpreting Daniel
in those parts of the Visions that fall in with the Apocalypse.
the manner and nature thereof, it is muchwhat like that of my Apocalypsis
Apocalypseos, an Exposition homogeneous and coherent, and as it were of one
thread, though I have been here and there ever and anon assisted by several
Interpreters, such as Cornelius a Lapide, Gaspar Sanctius, John Calvin, Hugo
Grotius and Joseph Mede, the two first of the Church of Rome and high Papists,
the third as high an Antipapist, the fourth a Cassandrian Protestant, and the
fifth a sound Christian, and the glory indeed of our English Church. Something
out of all these Authors, besides what is spun of mine own, makes one
continued Contexture and closely coherent Exposition of these six Visions or
Prophecies of Daniel, which I have undertaken to Interpret.

But as for those parts of any of the Visions which synchronize with the Times
of the Apostasy of the Church, or the duration of the Beast with ten Horns, as
I had least need of it (the understanding the Apocalypse being a sufficient key
for the opening those parts of the Visions) so I had least help from either
Cornelius a Lapide, Gaspar Sanctius, Grotius or Calvin himself, who is more out
in his Interpretation of those parts of the Visions touching the little Horn
rising amongst the ten Horns, and the King of Pride, than those two Jesuits who
with the ancient Fathers ingenuously confess, that Antichrist is prefigured in
those parts of the Visions, though they with the ancient Fathers rest in
ignorance who this Antichrist is. But Calvin not allowing so much as that they
are Predictions of Antichrist, but bounding the Vision in the seventh Chapter,
and also that in the eleventh, upon the first coming of Christ, and
interpreting things concerning the Pagan Roman Empire, his Expositions are so
childishly argute and whisling, so dilute, shallow and slubbering, so
preposterous, forced and confused, and so devoid of that strength and nervosity
he shows in other things where he is unprejudiced (nor is it prejudice I dare
say here, for he holds expressly and zealously that the Pope is Antichrist, but
mere defect of skill and judgment) that Calvin is not at all like Calvin in
this performance. And no wonder, he venturing to interpret those parts of the
Visions which are not to be unlocked without the key of the Apocalypse, which
he neglected to get the understanding of, or despaired ever to attain to the
understanding of it, by reason of the seeming obscurity thereof. And I wish
there were not so many in the Reformed Churches that in this point Calvinize
also, as there are.

But yet to give him his due he is much Grotius, That yet Grotius is far more
intolerable, and in what regard.
forasmuch as he expressly declares the fourth beast with the ten Horns to be
the Roman Empire, though he does not improve that light to the due advantage he
might. But Grotius on the other side, was so nasute on the behalf of the Church
of Rome, that foreseeing if the fourth Beast were the Roman Empire, it would
infallibly fall to the share of the Pope to be the little Horn with eyes and a
mouth speaking great things, that is to say, to be Antichrist, he to befriend
the Papacy denies, against the authority of all Antiquity, and against the
Roman Interpreters themselves, that the fourth Beast is the Roman Empire, but
that it is the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, having yet no better
Author for his opinion than Porphyrius a Pagan philosopher, and professed
enemy to Christians. But how foully he and Porphyrius are out, I have
abundantly demonstrated partly in my Exposition itself, and more fully in my
Confutation of Grotius, ^^^exed at the end of my Exposition.

Whythe Author has preferred (...) Epoch^ of the seventy Weeks before Joseph
Mede's.
there is only Mr. Mede that I have found to have a right sense of things in
those parts of the Visions I now speak of. But as for the Prophecy of the
Seventy Weeks, he missing of the right Epoch of the reckoning, and having
indeed taken two Epocha's, the one from the third or sixth of Darius Nothus for
the whole entire Seventy Weeks, the other from the seventh of Artaxerxes
Mnemon, for the Sixty two Weeks, not well knowing in the mean time what to do
with, or in what sense to understand the seven weeks antecedent to the sixty
two Weeks, and interpreting the odd week, or last week, of things appertaining
to the week in which Christ suffered, as well as to that in which the City was
taken by Titus and Temple demolished; I say, though he has shown good learning
and skill in the managing his Hypothesis, yet it looking so like a Labyrinth,
and seeming not so easy and natural a sense of things, I have declined this
otherwise excellent Interpreter, in this point, and have taken the Epoch of
Thomas Lydiat, that other singular ornament of our English Church, namely the
twentieth of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and in my Notes briefly opened his chief
arguments for that Epoch. And therefore this way being most simple, plain and
natural, I preferred it before what was more operose, intricate and
labyrinthical. And I believe Mr. Mede's main confidence in his own
Interpretation as to these Epocha's, was this, in that he followed the
footsteps of Joseph Scaliger in the main, (of whom through his innate modesty
he might have an overweening opinion,) and that he saw it was not charged with
those inconveniences which Funccius his Epoch was, which is the seventh of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, from which inconveniences this of Thomas Lydiat is free.

Why he so often names the writers he makes use of, contrary to the professed
purpose of Grotius who suppresses their Names.
as Laertius calls them, I have, I say, like a Philosopher of the Elective
Sect, addicting my self to no persons nor parties, chosen what is most sound
and unexceptionable in any, and so out of diverse writers with what I have
interwoven of my own made one uniform and strongly coherent contexture of
things, and such as, I hope, will bear the Test of the most accurate and freest
judgment. Nor have I concealed the names of those whom I have made use of,
doing right as I conceive thereby both to them and to the Truth. Which thing I
intimate, that no man's ears may be offended by my so frequent citing ever and
anon some or other of the above named Authors or whatever others come in by
the bye.

I must confess Hugo Grotius took another course in his Exposition of the
Evangelists, and did designedly suppress the names of those writers he made use
of in his Annotations, of which he renders this reason, Quod ea videam, says
he, factioso hoc seculo magis ad oblimandum quam ad defaecandum judicium
valere. Because, if Authors were named, it would in this factious Age, says
he, conduce more to the muddying or obscuring than to the clearing of the
judgment of the Reader; And so make him less capable of assenting to what
Grotius had set down for Truth. Which reason does not at all reach our case,
which I conceive to be quite contrary. Forasmuch as those parties I so often
quote, most of them above named, if not all, besides Mr. Mede, being of a
different persuasion from my self in other things of no small moment, as
certainly the two Jesuits are Cornelius a Lapide and Gaspar Sanctius, to say
nothing of Calvin and Grotius, it is the greater argument to the Reader that
those things are the plainer wherein both they and I agree and the more
assuredly true. And as for Mr. Mede he is such a (...), such a modest and
unexceptionable writer, and so usually successful in what he attempts, that no
man's judgment can be muddied or made less capable of receiving truth by its
being recommended to him by his suffrage. And thus much briefly touching the
manner of my Performance of this present task.

Performance itself, Of the usefulness of faithful Expositions of the Divine
Prophecies and the Requisi^eness of the reading the same.
I hope it will recommend itself to the Reader upon this twofold account,
namely of the Utility, if not necessity of perusing such discourses, and also
of the Pleasure thereof. He that gives his mind to the law of the most High,
and is occupied in the meditation thereof, will seek out the wisdom of all
the Ancient, and be occupied in Prophecies, says Chap. 39.
Siracides. He will (...), be very busy and diligent in searching out the true
meaning of the Holy Prophecies in Scripture. In which inquiry therefore a
plain, faithful and impartial Exposition, from an hand that has no design but
the discovering the Truth, must be very useful and helpful to as many as have
the fear of God before their eyes, and any regard to his law. And certainly
both particular persons and whole Nations miscarry many times from their
ignorance of, or non-attendance to the voices and predictions of the inspired
men of God, that they will not take notice of the works of Gods hand, and of
his dealings with the sons of men, but think all things are hurried on in a
blind carreer by chance, because they do not attend to what God has foretold
his Church by the mouth of his holy Prophets, nor will take the pains to
compare the predictions with the Events. But that woeful denunciation in the
Psalmist is against such, Psalm 28. 6. Because they regard not in their mind
the works of the Lord, no^ the operation of his hands, therefore he shall break
them down and not build them up.

So that we see a kind of Necessity incumbent upon us, to study the Prophecies
of the Holy Scripture, and to endeavor after the attainment of the right sense
of them, and more especially of Daniel and the Apocalypse* the Prophecies there
so assuredly reaching into our Times, and so (...) setting out the State of the
Christian Church, both of her Apostasy into a Pagan-like Idolatry, and of her
emerging out of it, And so faithfully also forewarning the true Church what
barbarous persecutions they should undergo under the tyranny of Antichrist
accordingly as it is come to pass, and is copiously recorded in the Histories
of Christendom to the eternal shame and ignominy of that Woman of Idolatry and
Blood, the Lady of the seven-hilled City of Rome.

The feigned and Hypocritical Modesty of such as pretend inability of studying
Daniel and the Apocalypse.
besides those of the profane rabble, that would willingly excuse themselves
from the duty of diligently studying these Prophecies of the Apocalypse and
Daniel, and that out of a demure, shall I call it, or hypocritical modesty, as
if these things were so profound and sacred, so abstruse and mysterious as that
they, poor humble souls! durst not presume to come near them, but were as
afraid of these two Prophets Daniel and St. John, as the Gadarens were of that
great Prophet our Blessed Savior, after he had dispossessed the two
Demoniacks, and brought them to their sober senses, but permitted the Devils
and the swine, fit companions, to run headlong together into the Sea. The
presence of the hoggs they could bear and of the Devils they could bear, but
the singular sanctity of our Saviors person was so unsuitable to their coarse
and unsanctified nature, that out of consciousness thereof they desired him
fairly to depart out of their coasts.

And it were worth the while for them that have so slight a conceit or great
abhorrence from conversing with John and Daniel, to search into the condition
of their own souls whether their unholy and insincere nature makes not the
converse with these two holy Prophets so irksome and burdensome to them. O ye
Hypocrites, says our Savior to the Pharisees, ye can discern the face of the
Sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the Times, and thence gather that
your expected Messiah or Christ is come by the predictions of the Prophets, and
by his life and miracles done by him, both the time of his coming and
characters of his person and actions being so lively described in the
Prophetic writings? And is not the like rebuke due to all the Pharisees of
Christendom that pretend they have convincing marks, signs or arguments to
conclude things far more hard and difficult, and yet cannot discern from the
plain presigurations in the Prophecies of John and Daniel (that set out so
punctually the coming of Antichrist both his time and place, the Pagan-like
Superstitions he would bring into the Church, and gross Idolatries, and
thereupon most bloody and barbarous persecutions) and yet, I say, cannot thence
discern the signs of the times, but as the Pharisees before them did oversee
the present true Christ, so they the present true Antichrist, and as the Jews a
Christ, so they forsooth expect an Antichrist to come.

John and Daniel. What is at the bottom of this Hypocritical modesty or
shieness.
It is over sublime, cry they, and over Divine for us, a thing of miracle and
inspiration. I grant the Prophecies themselves are so. And for that very reason
these men are so shie to have their judgments determined by them, they
harboring other crotchets in their carnal minds more suitable to the spirit of
this world and sentiments of the Flesh, and so seem to shuffle with God
Almighty and their own consciences, as Ahaz did of old, Isai. Chapter 7. to whom
when the Lord had spoken, saying, Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God, ask it
either in the depth, or in the height above, Ahaz presently returns this
cunning hypocritical answer, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.
What palpable Hypocrisy is this, as if it were tempting the Lord to do as he
commanded him? But he was tampering with the King of Assyria and his head was
full of worldly policies in which he had a greater trust than in the living
God, and therefore resolving to settle on these and not to be distracted by new
Appearances, he did what he could to wind himself off from any Divine or
supernatural Direction, as all true Prophecies are, that he might the more
fully follow the swing of his own carnal mind. And this is the usual case of
those that pretend such a shyness and modesty touching the understanding of
Daniel and the Apocalypse, they would not have their judgments so plainly and
irrevocably determined to the truth by Divine sentence, but be left free to
shuffle as occasion serves to maintain their worldly Interests.

Clear proofs that the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse are
intelligible, and what a touchstone they are to try a true Christian.
it is no fault of the Prophecies themselves, but that they are not duly
qualified that read them. For, as, that the Apocalypse is intelligible is
manifest from that passage in the beginning of it, Blessed is he that reads
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein, that is, observe them, which is impossible for them to do,
unless they understand them: So it is likewise declared touching the Prophecies
of Daniel, those parts especially that concern the Christian Church, that after
such a time, namely the expiration of one thousand two hundred and ninety
Prophetic days, Dan. Chapter 12. ver. 10.
which are so many years from the profanation of the Temple by Antiochus
Epiphanes, though none of the wicked shall understand them, yet that the wise,
namely those whose wisdom is according to Godliness, they shall understand
them. But otherwise those that have heaps of Arts and Learning, and Reading
(...), having a disorderly rabble of collections and notions in their heads as
Thersites is described in Homer) yet these things being not managed in order to
the discerning and maintaining of those grand truths that concern the Kingdom
of God and Christ, and the opposing of the Kingdom of Antichrist, I say in the
midst of this full light they fancy themselves in, they do become stark blind
as to any discovery of the true meaning of the Prophecies of Daniel. Wherefore
from the expiration of those one thousand two hundred and ninety days the
understanding of Daniels Prophecies, when the sense is fairly represented to
one, seems to be the touchstone to try a man's condition by, whether he be in
the rank of the wicked or the wise ones mentioned Dan. Chapter 12. 10. Which is no
small argument of the utility if not necessity of studying these Prophecies of
Daniel, and reading impartial Interpreters of them, the rightly understanding
of them being amongst other arguments, no obscure mark of our being sound,
sincere and intelligent Christians.

Which I would have those seriously to consider who (though they would take
themselves much injured if they were not numbered amongst the godly, yet) are so
boastfully big of their ignorance of the meaning of the Prophecies of Daniel
and the Apocalypse, that they cannot forbear the declaring of it in their
public writings, as if it were forsooth such a special perfection of nature or
Gift of the Holy Ghost, not to be able to understand those Prophecies. Whenas
the Holy Ghost himself does declare those blessed that understand them, and
that the wicked shall not understand them, but that the wise shall understand
them. Whence we may note a further ignorance in these men more than they are
aware of, or willing to acknowledge. They seem ignorant or insensible that they,
thus publicly and boastfully professing their ignorance in these Prophecies,
do but glory in their own shame, and basely and shamefully beg the applause and
approbation of the Wits of the age, and the worldly Wiselings who for coarse
carnal ends decry all pretense to the understanding of Prophecies. And thus out
of a fond and light ambitious desire of being entered into the list of the Wits
of the times, they really record themselves in the catalogue of the Scriptures
Fools. For if the Scripture tell us that the wicked shall not understand these
Prophecies, but that the wise shall understand them, certainly according to
Scripture, they that understand them not (to suppress the other more odious
part of the gloss) are plainly insinuated to be no better than Fools. This is
the Holy Scriptures express charge against them, not mine.

And thus much briefly to show how useful necessary the reading of any
impartial Exposition of these Visions of Daniel may be. The enravishing
pleasure in reading and rightly understanding the Visions of Daniel.
But now for the pleasure thereof, I profess that to my self it was
unspeakable. And indeed what man is there that has (...), that has a soul
sincerely in love with God his Creator and Christ his Redeemer, but he must be
enravished in contemplation of so clear footsteps of the Providence of God at
large in the world, and more especially of that tender care and inspection of
Christ our Lord (the Sovereign of all Souls that are to be saved) over his
Church whether Jewish or Christian: That in dear regard to his charge the
people of the Jews then carried captive to Babylon, and there remaining in
servitude under the Babylonian Monarch, he should condescend personally to
converse with his servant Daniel, first near the River Ulai under that
mysterious name of Palmoni, and afterward on the River Hiddekel or Tigris in
the Pontifical Habit of the High Priest of the Jews, which with other
circumstances shows plainly that it was Christ, of whom the High Priest with
his Pontifical habit was but a Type: Who I say without tears of joy in his eyes
can consider this solicitude of the Son of the most High God for the despicable
sons of men, who, yet further, though he did not personally appear to Daniel,
saving in those two Visions, yet by his appointment, and the ministry of his
holy Angels, as of Gabriel particularly, were the rest of the Visions, to say
nothing of the Handwriting upon the wall, communicated unto him?

Messiah bore in his breast the care not only of the present people of the
Jews, The vast comprehensiveness of Christ's care over his Church discovered in
them.
but had pourtraied in his mind the solicitous comprehension of the affairs of
the whole Church of God from that time even to the end of the world, over whom
his Father had ordained him universal Protector and Governor, and accordingly
he has described in these Divine Prophecies the state of his Church as well
Christian as of the Jews, and indeed mainly of the Christian, the largeness of
the Christian Church both for duration of time and amplitude of place being
exceedingly more considerable than that of the Jews. Whence even those Visions
that concern the Jews are so framed, that they also by way of Type lively set
out both the Apostasy of the Christian Church, and the Persecution of those
that bore witness against the Apostasy.

Which persecutions both Jewish and Christian Messiah faithfully forewarns his
true servants of, Why Christ did not prevent rather than predict the
persecution of his Saints.
not to avoid them but manfully to suffer them, his care and solicitude being
not so much for the gratifying of their bodies, as the safely bringing back
their Souls out of this Region of Mortality and Corruption, as a glorious spoil
snatched out of the hands of Satan and Antichrist to present to God his Father
in those higher Regions of Immortality and Bliss. And certainly so dear and
tender as well as so potent a Patron as the Messiah, would never have permitted
his best Clients to suffer such grievous things for his sake, had there not
been a certain reward in the other world for the Souls of them that so
suffered, and that been true which he told his Disciples after he was come in
the flesh, Joh. 14. In my fathers house there are many mansions, I go to
prepare a place for you: Whence these things add a mighty weight to our faith,
and assurance of the Immortality of the Soul, and of an unexpressible happiness
to be enjoyed after we have left this body. These considerations I think must
bring abundance of pleasure to them that have an heart to believe them.

The manner of Christ's working Miracles, and his communicating Prophecies
compared one with another.
that cannot but be taking with the judicious, That as the miracles of our
Savior Christ here upon earth were never done out of any vanity or ostentation
of his wonderworking faculty, but as the principle of goodness and needful
beneficency directed him, and limited him; so likewise the same Christ has
behaved himself in like manner in the communication of these Prophecies.
Wherein there is not the least show of affectation of foretelling future things
as future, but merely as they are in subserviency to the most certain
information of his Church, whether Jewish or Christian, concerning their own
state and condition, what it would be. This is more largely insisted upon, if
the Prophecies be rightly understood; but the Pagan Concerns more sparingly,
and in subordination only to the affairs of the Church, which is a thing
methinks very graceful and becoming the weightiness and authentickness of
these Prophecies. And this shall briefly serve to intimate what Pleasure the
pious soul may reap from the reading and rightly understanding these Divine
Visions of Daniel, as well as what other fruit or profit he may have thereby.
The more particular usefulness of which it was less needful for me to insist
upon here, they being muchwhat the same with those I have noted in my Preface
to my Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, to which the Reader may have recourse.

I shall only give an account of my adding The Threefold Appendage to this my
^xposition of the Visions of Daniel, The reason of the Author his adding the
first part of his threefold Appendage.
and then conclude. And the reason of my adding the first part thereof, viz.
The Confutation of Grotius his opinion, who makes the Kingdom of the Lagidae
and Seleucidae the fourth Kingdom in Daniel, is this: It being the constant
tradition of the Church, and opinion of the Primitive Fathers, besides other
Interpreters (it would make too great a rattle or noise to rehearse the names
of them, you may see them in Cornelius a Lapide and Ribera) that the times of
the ten-horned Beast and two-horned Beast Apoc. 13. and also of the Beast that
was, is not, and yet is, Apoc. 17. are the times of Antichrist; and Ribera
expressly says of this last, viz. the Beast that is said to ascend out of the
bottomless pit, that Antichrist ascends with him, and that the other Beast,
Chap. 13. with ten Horns is Antichrist, from the authority of the Fathers, and
the two-horned Beast his Armor-bearer or Squire of his body, though more
properly the two-horned Beast is to be called Antichrist, and the ten-horned
his Squire, (I wish he had had a better office and not been debased to so mean
and unbecoming a ministry by the Imposture of the two-horned Beast) I say it
being according to the common stream of Antiquity and Interpreters, that those
times of the ten-horned Beast are the times of Antichrist, and the same being
founded mainly upon that which is unexceptionably sound, viz. That the times of
these Apocalyptick Beasts, and of that in Daniel with ten Horns, (amongst which
appears that little Horn with eyes, which the ancient Tradition of the Church
and all the Primitive Fathers with one consent declare to be the formidable
Antichrist then to come) that those times, I say, do synchronize, or are the
very same times, and both necessarily conceived in the latter time of the Roman
Empire; Grotius discerning that unless Porphyrius his opinion may be admitted,
viz. That the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, not the Roman, is the
fourth Kingdom in Daniel, and having so much wit and perspicacity of Judgment
as to perceive that the Papistical notion and declaration touching Antichrist
is such a Romance, so incredible and ridiculous (you may have it pretty well at
large in Cornelius a Lapide upon 2 Thessalonians. 2.) that it is more fit for old wives
and children to listen to, than any one that can pretend to have the
understanding of a man, he (and as it seems to me partly out of the distaste he
had taken against the Reformed Church of Holland for their usage of him, and
partly to glaver and curry favor with the Pontifician party) that he might
make all sure in the behalf of the Pope and his Hierarchy, rejects the
Primitive Orthodox opinion of the Church who ever made the fourth Kingdom in
Daniel the Roman, and strikes in with Porphyrius a mere Pagan, who conceited
the fourth Kingdom to be that of the Lagidae and Seleucidae. By which device
Grotius forsooth would excuse the Pope from being the little Horn with eyes,
and consequently Antichrist, and cast it upon Antiochus Epiphanes, the little
Horn according to him not belonging to the times of the Roman Empire, but to
the times of the Kings of Syria and Egypt. Wherefore I thought it a business
of no small importance to show the shameful groundlesness of Grotius his
opinion, and to restore truth to her due possession and place.

The Popish fabulous notion of Antichrist, and how it drove Grotius to embrace
Porphyriu^ his opinion, touching the fourth Kingdom in Daniel in favor of the
Pope, and why he rejected the conceit of Mahomet's being Antichrist.
that Grotius being ashamed of that Romish or rather Romantic fable which that
Church entertains of Antichrist, as that he shall be born of a Jewish Female of
the ^ribe of Dan, and be begotten by an Incubus, or at least that he shall be
of the abovesaid (...) and make himself the Messiah of the Jews, shall do
strange miracles to deceive them, shall make mountains seem to remove out of
their place, shall raise himself or some other mortally wounded Prince from the
dead, shall bring fire from Heaven, and (like the story of Friar Bacons brazen
Head) his statue shall be made to speak; He shall fly in the air, the Devils in
the appearance of Angels doing homage to him; He shall rebuild the Temple at
Jerusalem, and there require to be honored as the sole God of the Universe;
and in the mean time Enoch and Elias appearing again in the Flesh, shall
Prophesy against him, whom he shall slay, and their dead bodies shall lie three
days and a half in the streets of that City, but then a voice from Heaven
calling to them to rise, they shall get upon their feet, and ascend into Heaven
in the sight of all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with other such like stuff
which would be but too tedious to rehearse: I say Grotius being ashamed of such
a childish story, occasioned first from the ignorance of the Prophetic style,
but entertained afterward by the Roman Clergy to save the credit of the Pope
from being suspected to be the Antichrist, it is worth our noting that he had
no way left to do them a more solid piece of service, or to offer them any
plausibler pretense, That the Pope may not be thought to be the little Horn
with eyes (which all Christian Antiquity with one voice declare to be the
Antichrist) than by espousing the opinion of Porphyry, that the fourth Kingdom
in Daniel is not the Roman, and therefore the little Horn not the Papacy nor
the Pope Antichrist. For Grotius was certainly a person of so much Wit and
Judgment as clearly to discern that that wooden conceit of Mahomet's being the
little Horn with eyes, and consequently the Antichrist, was altogether
impossible. That was such a blockish device, or rather such a stumbling block,
that so sober a man as he would never break his shins against it; it being a
thing absurd at the very first sight. For it is plain out of the Text that the
little Horn is an Horn growing up amongst the Horns of the fourth Kingdom,
which is the fourth Beast, and therefore it is an Horn of that Beast or
Kingdom, not of the Kingdom of the Saracens or Turks. Otherwise there would
have been mentioned another Beast to which this Horn should belong. But there
being no mention of another besides this fourth, which I say, is the Roman
Empire, nor does Grotius allow it to be the Mohammedan, it is necessary that
this little Horn be an Horn of the Roman Empire, not Mahomet nor any Horn of
the Mohammedan Kingdom. And therefore accordingly, Chapter 7. ver. 20. the other
ten Horns are called his fellows as belonging all to one and the same Polity
the Roman Empire, and as being all politically conjoined or consociated into
one Community as the words in the Original imply, which no Saracenical or
Turkish Horn is with the Roman Empire thus divided into ten Kingdoms. This
could not but lie obvious to the sight of so perspicacious a person as Grotius,
besides the unapplicableness of the description of the little Horn to the
Mohammedan Empire which it would be too long to insist upon.

I will only add one notable bar more against this conceit of Mahomet's being
the little Horn with eyes, viz. That what the Clay is to the Iron feet and ten
toes of the Image, Dan. Chapter 2. what the King of Pride is to the Roman Empire,
Dan. Chapter 11. what the two-horned Beast is to the tenhorned

horned Beast, Apoc. Chapter 13. what the Whore is to the Beast that was, is not,
and yet is, Apoc. Chapter 17. the same is the little Horn with eyes to the Beast
with ten Horns, Dan. Chapter 7. So that if the Horn with eyes be Mahomet or the
Turk; the Clay, the King of Pride, the two-horned Beast, and the Whore must be
the Turk also. This he that understands the Prophecies of Daniel and the
Apocalypse thoroughly is certainly assured of, and consequently as certain that
neither Mahomet nor any Turkish Polity is that little Horn with eyes, Dan. Chapter
7. But what was so very obvious you may be sure turned Grotius his stomach
sufficiently from so fond and frivolous a conceit. See my Synopsis Prophetica,
Book 2. Chapter 5. Consect. 9. where it is undeniably demonstrated, That the Whore
of Babylon or Antichrist sits not now at Constantinople, but that old Rome is
his Imperial Seat. Wherefore it is plain, That Grotius showed a great deal of
Judgment in not adventuring to let the Roman Empire be the fourth Beast, and so
to pretend that Mahomet is the little Horn or Antichrist, it being a thing so
absurd and impossible. And therefore to give a stop to this grand
inconvenience, that the Turk not proving the Antichrist or little Horn the Pope
would be surely he, he was forced to deny that the fourth Empire was the Roman,
thinking that less absurd, than that Idea of the Pontifician Antichrist or that
Mahomet should be he. Whence it plainly appears of what great moment it is to
be assured of this ancient Truth of the Church, that the fourth Kingdom in
Daniel is the Roman.

Which made me therefore though I have competently well confuted Grotius, or
made good that the fourth Kingdom is the Roman in my Exposition itself, yet
for more full persuasion and impression of so concerning a truth upon the mind
of the Reader, to add this first part of my Appendage, namely a particular
Confutation of that opinion of Grotius. Which being found so weak and
impossible as I have demonstrated, and this fable of the Romanists so foolish
and ridiculous as well as that of Mahomet's being Antichrist, or the little
Horn, even in Grotius his own judgment, and in any ones else that has any
sagacity or reason, this very Effort of his recoyles with the greater strength
against the Romanists, to prove that the Pope is Antichrist, he, methinks, thus
plainly insinuating, that if this conceit of his and Porphyrius his will not
hold, the Pope will be Antichrist and no mortal man knows how to help it.

The great importance of proving the fourth Kingdom in Daniel to be the Roman,
for making good the opinion of the ancient Fathers that the times of the little
Horn with eyes are the times of Antichrist etc. and consequently the Times of
Antichrist the Times of the Papacy.
Forasmuch as the fourth Kingdom in Daniel its being the Roman, is a necessary
foundation of the ancient Fathers interpreting the little Horn with eyes, Dan.
Chapter 7. the King of Pride, Chapter 11. the Man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. the ten-horned
Beast and the two-horned Beast, Apoc. Chapter 13. and the Beast arising out of the
bottomless pit, Chapter 17. of the times of Antichrist. And if this foundation
stand, as it is most sure, the Interpretation of the Fathers, so far in
general, as that those Prophecies concern the times of Antichrist, must stand
also. But now by undeniable demonstration in my Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, and
in my Synopsis Prophetica, I have proved that those times which the ancient
Fathers declare to be the times of Antichrist, are in reality the times of the
Papacy. Whence it necessarily follows, That the times of the Papacy, if we
stand to this verdict of the Fathers, are the times of Antichrist, and that it
is not a piece of angry or reproachful language but a just and sober charge
laid upon the Pope with his Hierarchy by the Reformed party, that he is that
very Antichrist which the ancient Christians, in the very Apostles time, so
much dreaded that he would come.

Which Rumor and Fear most certainly was raised from the Prophecies of Daniel,
and more especially from that of the King of Pride, which St. Paul calls the
man of sin, and from the little Horn with eyes. Which false Seer or
Pseudo-prophet, as also that King of Pride, is, by St. John according to the
vulgarly known name then in the Church, called Antichrist. Touching whom they
which he wrote to in his Epistles, being solicitous, he acknowledges indeed
that grand Antichrist to come that Daniel foretells of, but in the mean time
warns them of such Antichrists, false Seers or Pseudo-prophets as were more
near and under their noses as it were already, and gives them characters of
them to shun them, as being very wretched and mischievous Antichrists in their
time and place, as well as that other to come. So authentic a name is that
name of Antichrist for that Party and Polity that should prove the little Horn
with eyes, the King of Pride, or the two-horned Beast, etc.

How manifest it is out of the (...) that the Pope is the very (...).
and I have demonstrated them in my Synopsis Propherica and Apocalypsis
Apocalypseos to be so, it is evident, that the Papal Polity or Hierarchy is, as
I said, the very Antichrist properly so called, which the Ch^^ch in the times
of the Apostles was so solicitous about, they not knowing how near his coming
might be, nor having any distinct ^otion of him what an one he would prove when
he came, though they were assured out of the Prophecies of Daniel, that, when
he did come, he would prove horribly bad, as all the sincere Servants of Christ
have found him, his tyranny and salvage cruelty against them being unutterable,
as the monstrosity of his doctrines and gross enormities in practice a thing
beyond all conceit of any of the Apostolic Age, that one that professes
himself the successor of St. Peter, the Vicar of Christ, the Bridegroom or
Husband, if you will, of his Spouse the Church, and the Holy Father of
Christendom, nay such an one as is styled Holiness in the very abstract,
should be such a man of Idolatry and blood, a Destroyer and Murderer of the
most faithful and loyal Servants of Christ, whose Vicar notwithstanding he
pretends to be. But how well this name of Antichrist which St. John and the
Primitive Church has bestowed upon him does suit with him, that is, with the
Pope or Papal Hierarchy, I have so fully set out in my Idea of
Antichristianism, that I may well forbear to say. any thing more here; but
only remind the Reader, which is the thing in hand, to what good purpose this
first part of my Appendage is added, it making for the fuller confirmation,
that the fourth Kingdom is the Roman, which is the foundation of the ancient
Fathers Interpreting those Visions, which we know certainly to belong to the
Papacy, concerning the times of Antichrist, and that consequently according as
our Reformed Churches have ever declared, the Pope is he.

For that is but a childish and fo^d fools, That th^^ (...) Representation
Antichrist and false Notion of Idolatry, to shelter their Church from seeming
Idolatrous, and the Pope from appearing to be Antichrist, is indeed an
acknowledging the Pope to be Antichrist, and their Church guilty of Idolatry.
to interpose the above described Romish prefiguration of Antichrist, as if
Antichrist must not be said to come till a bastard of the Tribe of Dan sit in
the Temple of God at Jerusalem, and declare himself the only supreme God, and
that he himself alone is to be worshipped, etc. I say besides the ridiculous
fabulosity of Enoch and Elias their coming again in the Flesh, and their being
slain by this Antichrist, and their bodies lying dead three days and an half in
the streets of Jerusalem, and then raised to life and ascending into Heaven all
the people of the City gazing upon them, that very one thing of his declaring
himself to be the only true God that is to be worshipped, is a figment
impossible, the Devil himself would not have that impudence, nor any Devil
incarnate so little wit as to declare so, besides that it is perfectly
repugnant to the description of Antichrist in Daniel Chapter 11. where he is said
to worship the Mahuzzim together with a strange God. Nor is Antichrists
description 2 Thessalonians. 2. such as implies that he declares himself to be the
supreme God who-alone is to be worshipped. For he is not said (...), to show
himself that he is the true and only God, but only (...), that he behaves
himself as if he were a God rather than a man, an (...), as one of the Popes
boasted, that the people took the Successors of St. Peter to be, or Supremum
numen in terris as his glozing Canonists call him, and he abundantly exalts
himself above God, I trow, that takes upon him to dispense with his Laws and
enact things quite contrary to them.

But such pitiful shifts are they put to that wilfully maintain a wicked cause
for worldly Interest, that they must thus pervert the Idea's and notions of
things to delude the ignorant, and draw such an Image or representation of
Antichrist though never so salse and fabulous, so be it may but shelter the
Pope from appearing to be him; And to coin false notions of Idolatry such as
Rubenus Essendiensis has defined it, That it is the worship of Latria or truly
Divine worship given to an accursed Devil, and that directed in such a sense as
it is directed to God, whereby he would excuse the Church of Rome from
Idolatry. But we have insisted too long already on this first part of our
Appendage, we will only add this, That in making such gross shifts as these,
they do but betray their own guilt and insinuate to the sagacious, that unless
such a ridiculous and fabulous Image of Antichrist as they set forth be
admitted, the Pope must be Antichrist, and unless such a false and illogical
definition of Idolatry be allowed, the Church of Rome must be Idolatrous, that
is, in brief, they confess their own guilt, and acknowledge the Pope to be
Antichrist and his Church Idolatrous.

The second part of the Appendage, the usefulness thereof in settling the Table
of Synchronisms, and discovering the vain conceits of men about the ^ising of
the Witnesses.
besides that it is a confirmation of our Exposition of the Prophecy of the
Opened Book as the former part of the Appendage was of my Exposition of the
Visions in Daniel, and the third is of the Epistolar Prophecy in the
Apocalypse, it does also confirm Mr. Mede's Scheme of Synchronisms such as I
have exhibited it in my Epilogue to my Apocalypsis Apocalypseos with such
emendations and supplements as I have signified there. Which cannot but be a
gratification to men of a stable and judicious Spirit, and who are delighted
with a settled and orderly comprehension of things. But sundry being not aware
that the Vials, all of them follow the Rising of the Witnesses, and
consequently that the Witnesses are risen already in the late Blessed
Reformation, busy themselves in the inventing new Epocha's of the Medial or
Antemedial Synchronals to fit themselves for the foretelling (out of an itch of
Prophesying or prognosticating things future) when that will come, that is
already past, as I have demonstrated the Rising of the Witnesses to be, in this
second part of my Appendage. And they that have applied the late Blessed
Reformation to the second Vial, as Mr. Mede and after him Peganius has done, it
was from this error, that they took it for granted that most of the Vials
preceeded the Rising of the Witnesses. And such is the humor, fansifulness and
partiality of many, that they can hardly believe of themselves, that the
Witnesses are risen, till Kingdoms, Nations, and Principalities of their own
party rise into Political power, namely all Episcopal, all Presbyterian, all
Calvinists, all Arminians, all Socinians, and so of Anabaptists, Quakers and
Famulists. But they err knowing not the Scriptures or the true meaning of
them, nor rightly considering the Records of History, where they may find what
was the testimony of these Witnesses who are predicted to rise in the
Reformation, and to be warred against before by the Beast and cruelly
persecuted.

The main Testimony of the persecuted Witnesses what it was, and that there was
a Resurrection of these Witnesses in the Reformation.
they professing the Triunity of the Godhead and Divinity of Christ, and such
like Articles of the Christian belief, and living accordingly, whereby they
became idoneous, Witnesses; so their plain and simple testimony against the
Church of Rome was this, That the Pope was that Man of sin or Antichrist, and
their Church Idolatrous by reason of their adoration of the Host, invocation of
Saints and worshipping of Images, and their Religion otherwise also grossly
corrupt in seeking to propitiate God by their adhering to the multifarious vain
and wicked inventions of men, excogitated only for the gain of the Priest and
the keeping the people in blindness and ignorance. This was the tenor of the
Testimony of the Witnesses both in the Pergamenian and the Thyatirian Interval
of the Church, which they witnessed with great favouriness and assurance, in
virtue of the Spirit of life and holiness in them: And persons innumerable that
bore the same testimony and were of the same sentiments, instead of being still
mournful Witnesses in sackcloth, or lying dead in a Political sense in the
streets of the Mystical Prophet-murdering Jerusalem (the same with Babylon or
Egypt which signify the large jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome) at the
Reformation had a reviving into Political Power again, and ascended, in several
Kingdoms, to the highest Honors, Dignities and Employments in Church and
State. Which therefore as I have proved in this part of my Appendage must needs
be the Rising of the Witnesses, they being of the same mind and profession with
those that were so grievously persecuted and kept out of all power, nay burnt
at the stake, murdered and massacred God knows how many hundred thousands of
them.

And at this very day our own Church of England, partly in her Homilies, partly
in her Articles and Liturgy gives the same testimony of the Church of Rome,
even that she is that old painted harlot of Babylon with her cup of
fornication, that is, of Idolatry, and that the Pope is Antichrist, as I have
shown in my Synopsis Prophetica, Book 2. Chapter 21. Which, whenas our own Church,
which seems most moderate, does so plainly attest, we may be sure the rest of
the chiefest writers of the Reformation do not mince the matter at all. And if
there be any persons in the Reformation any where that at all recoyl from this
testimony, it is because the Spirit of life and holiness is decayed in them,
and the gross Spirit of this world has blinded their eyes and darkened their
understandings, and hardened their hearts against the truth, they preferring
worldly power, pomp and riches before the purity of Gods worship. Wherefore, I
say, this is one great usefulness of my demonstrating the Vials to follow the
Rising of the Witnesses, in that it is thence manifest, that the Vision of the
Rising of the Witnesses was fulfilled in the late Blessed Reformation, there
being thus no other Vision to predict it but this.

A sevenfold usefulness of proving the late Reformation (from the Vials
following the Rising of the Witnesses) to be the Rising of the same. The first
usefulness, viz. The discovery of the Popedom to be the Kingdom of Antichrist,
and Reformed Christendom the Kingdom of Christ.
For, first, that acclamation in Heaven upon the Rising of the Witnesses, That
the Kingdoms of the world were become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ, namely after so many Principalities, Provinces and Kingdoms had cast
off the Pope in the late Blessed Reformation, what does this imply but that
they were before in the hands of Antichrist, and that were the Pope has any
Dominion it is ipso facto Antichrists Kingdom, and on the contrary that all
the Reformed parts of Christendom are the Kingdom of Christ, and indeed the
fifth Monarchy begun. Which ought to stop the mouths and carrears of an
ignorant and Fanatical sort of men that cannot see wood for trees, and seek for
a fifth Monarchy in a fifth Monarchy, whenas so considerable a part of it is
erected before their eyes already. But as I noted above, such is the folly and
freakishness of ignorant and conceited men, that they would not willingly
acknowledge the Witnesses to be risen till those of the same crotchets with
themselves, (whole Kingdoms and Nations of them) have got into power.

But it is very true and extremely worth our nothing, that, as in the times of
the old Roman Paganism all those that professed Christ according to the tenor
of what we call the Apostles Creed, though in the mean time they had several
different conceits about things that appertained to the Christian Religion,
were notwithstanding looked upon as the Kingdom of Christ in opposition to the
Kingdom of the red Dragon, the Pagan persecutive Roman Empire; so all the
Reformed Churches, States and Kingdoms, though some Lutherans, others
Calvinists, some of one opinion, others of another, yet they keeping to the old
Orthodox Faith of the Triunity of the Godhead and Divinity of Christ,
acknowledged by the Church in the Symmetral times thereof, and renouncing the
Communion of the Roman Church for her gross Idolatries and wretched and
intolerable Superstitions and humane inventions, whereby she has so notoriously
adulterated the purity and simplicity of the Christian Faith and worship, all
these I say, are justly deemed the Kingdom of Christ, in opposition to the
Dominion of the Pope or Kingdom of Antichrist.

The second Usefulness against the Fifth-monarchy men.
that the late Blessed Reformation was the fulfilling of the Vision of the
Rising of the Witnesses, is the undeceiving of those they call the
Fifthmonarchy men, who would pretend to begin the fifth Monarchy, and upon that
account raise commotions and tumults, whenas it is so stupendiously and
surprisingly by the special providence of God, begun already.

And let a third usefulness be to reprove The third usefulness, against the
Contemners and Despisers of the Reformation, or unjust censurers of it.
that out of rashness and conceitedness or any other worse principle vilify and
contemn this great work of God the late happy Reformation, whether it be those
that think there is too much done already, they having an hankering again after
the Fleshpots of Egypt, the worldly bigness and downbearing Dominion of a
tyrannical Clergy over an affrighted and besotted Laity, who are made to
believe, or at least out of fear to profess any thing that makes for the
worldly Interest, the Gain or Revering of the Priest: (for who without
astonishment and affright can look upon such a Priest as professes himself, and
is believed to be a Creator of his Creator, and by a few words to be able to
change a piece of bread into the very person of Christ who is to be worshipped
with Latria as being God Blessed for ever?) or it be those that have private
phansies or freaks of their own, and think never enough is done till
Reformation come up to the measure of their conceit, nor will suffer the
Witnesses to rise or acknowledge them risen, till things ascend to the pitch of
that peculiar Idea which they have formed in their private imagination. Whenas
God be thanked things are in so good a frame for example in our English Church,
that nothing hinders but that a man may be a most perfect and accomplished
Christian holding Communion with her.

The fruits of the Spirit are Love, (...). 5. 22.
Joy, Peace, Long^suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.
Which of these fruits or privileges of the Spirit I beseech you may you not
enjoy (if it be not long of your self) holding Communion with the Church of
England? And as for the works of the Flesh, Galat. 5. 19.
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, are these any of them, any conditions of the
Communion of the English Church as some of them are of the Church of Rome, as
particularly that of Idolatry, to say nothing of Heresy, of Murder and Blood,
of which that Church stands so deeply guilty, which yet she justifies herself
in, and they in a manner subscribe to it, that join in Communion with her. But
as our Church engages none in the guilt of such detestable wickednesses, so it
apertly declares against all the rest of the vices of this black roll, and has
a pure and unexceptionable form of the worship of God, devoid of all Idolatry
and Superstition. Whence those people that so slight and vilify the Reformation
which Gods providence has brought to pass amongst us, their Ingratitude is
monstrous and horrid, and I pray God it may be never laid to their charge. They
will be reforming the Reformed Churches, in things indifferent; why do they not
reform themselves from their own vices and corruptions which are not
indifferent, they having so full and fair opportunity by the free enjoyment of
the Gospel, and no man requiring unlawful things of them, as they were required
in that deplorable condition under the Church of Rome?

The fourth usefulness, The Conciliation of due Reverence and Obedience to all
the Magistrates as well Spiritual as Temporal in Reformed Christendom.
All Magistrates supreme and subordinate in Reformed Christendom being in
truth the established Powers, whether spiritual or temporal, of the Kingdom of
Christ in opposition to the Kingdom of Antichrist, this ought to be a rousing
motive I trow, to all in the Reformed Churches to give due Reverence and Honor
to them as the appointed Ministers of the Kingdom of Christ, and be obedient
(in all things lawful) to the powers both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and make no
Schisms in the Church, much less behave themselves rudely and malapertly as the
custom of some has been, as if they forsooth were the only children of the
Kingdom, when nothing but fanatical pride or mistake, or the perfidious
suggestions of foreign Emissaries, or the envy of Satan has driven them to such
misdemeanors to slur and disgrace the Reformation as much as he can.

But it being thus apparent that the Reformed Magistrates are the Risen
Witnesses ruling in the Kingdom of Christ in opposition to the Kingdom of
Antichrist or Dominion of the Pope, whom the Reformed Princes have justly cast
off, as it appears out of the fulfilling of the Vision, not only those of the
Reformed Persuasion are to come in to the Church and leave their Schism, but
those also that yet continue Romanists, it is not only lawful for them (the
Dominion of the Pope being thus by Divine sentence abrogated and made null in
England and in the rest of the Reformed Countries) but their indispensable duty
to renounce their Communion with the Church of Rome, and communicate here with
our English Church, as elsewhere with other Reformed Churches, and so become
both good Christians and good Subjects at once. But for those of the Protestant
Persuasion to divide and subdivide (which is but to do that which all the
activity of the Emiss^ries of Antichrist is chiefly employed about) surely is a
strange fruit of the Spirit, which yet the most factious amongst them most of
all boast of. If it be not the Spirit of Pride and Hypocrisy, it is yet
certainly the Spirit of Giddiness, Imprudence, and Indiscretion.

Fifthly, The Impletion of this Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses in the
Reformation, The fifth usefulness, For the justifying the Reformation from all
imputation of injury or He^ resie in casting off the Pope.
justifies all the Reformed Princes in Christendom in their casting off the
Pope, from all show of injustice or Heresy which the Papal party would charge
them with, and demonstrates a Right in all the rest of the Princes of
Christendom to do the like, it being but the recovery by degrees of the
Kingdom of Christ out of the hands of Antichrist, and delivering themselves
and their people like so many good Moses's from that salvage Idolatrous and
impious Dominion and worse than Egyptian servitude of that mystical Pharaoh
the Pope of Rome, who has so notoriously and prodigiously defiled Christendom
with Idolatry and blood.

Daniel, The sixth usefulness, to show the ^wrod^ of either public or private
persons Revolts from the Reformed Religion to Popery.
John and Paul, are indeed the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and
that the supreme and subordinate Magistrates both temporal and spiritual set
over them, are set over them as the Vicegerents and Ministers of Christ, in
opposition to the Kingdom of Antichrist, the duty of all such is so to
discharge their offices as remembering they must one day give an account to
Christ how well they have defended or enlarged his Kingdom, or protected his
loyal subjects in it, nor given any advantages to those of the Kingdom of
Antichrist to incroach upon or get foot-hold against the faithful Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom.

But that any Magistrate spiritual or temporal should be so disloyal to Christ
as to betray any part of Christ's Kingdom into the hands of Antichrist, that is
a thing that none can think on without unspeakable astonishment and horror.
Certainly they must have a deep Melancholy and darksome jealous mind, that can
so much as fancy it possible to come into any ones breast so to do, that
remembers he is entrusted with such a charge from our Savior Jesus Christ, who
is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and has the keys of Hell and Death. Which
consideration touches also private persons in proportion as well as public
Magistrates, as many as leave the Reformed Communion to join themselves to the
Church of Rome. For how can they excuse themselves from treachery against the
Kingdom of Christ by thus listing themselves amongst the slaves of Antichrist?
But it is no pleasure to me to insist on so Tragical a subject.

Seventhly and lastly There is this use also The last usefulness, for the
freeing men's minds from the vain fear of the Witnesses being to be slain, and
as idle hopes when they are slain that they will rise within three years and an
half.
that the late Blessed Reformation is the fulfilling of the Prophecy of the
Rising of the Witnesses, in that it may free men from falsely conceived fears
and hopes of the Witnesses being to be slain and their bodies to lie three
years and an half dead, and then presently to rise again, and then that there
will ensue such glorious times as none can easily pre-conceive. Which is
founded upon as little ground or reason, as that conceit of 6 was of being the
year of the ruin of Rome, a thing which I always declared against as having no
ground on any Prophecy in Scripture. But that London was burnt that year all
know. And whether this conceit was not furthered by some in order thereto to
put a dodge upon the Protestants to weaken their Faith, and to make the
pretending to understand Prophecies in prejudice to the Popedom, ridiculous,
let those that understand the Intrigues of the burning of the City better than
I, declare their opinion.

In the mean time since all may rest satisfied that the Rising of the Witnesses
is past and consequently their being slain and lying dead three days and an
half in the street of the great City that is called Sodom and Egypt, let every
one discharge himself of that Panick fear, as if it were a thing yet to come,
and of that Romantic hope, if it were to be done, that they would rise again
within three years and an half, that so they forsooth may wisely step aside
under some convenient shelter till the fatal storm be blown over; but let all
that have any faith in or kindness for the Reformmed Religion with joint Effort
resist five rushing in of Popery by sincere repentance and hearty prayer to God
that it may never reenter this Nation again, nor any Nation else that has been
gained out of the hands of Antichrist; and let us bewail our unworthiness and
unthankfulness to God that we have not sufficiently esteemed nor valued this
wonderful work of his, that he has brought things to that pass he has in the
late Blessed Reformation, and be morigerous to the Magistrate as well Spiritual
as Civil in all things indifferent, and heartily love one another of whatever
different persuasion we may be, that has no Impiety nor Immorality in it, and
then God will love us all, and be our mighty Deliverer and Protector. Galat.
5. 15.
But if ye bite one another, says the Apostle, take heed ye be not consumed
one of another.

Reasons why he added the third part of his Appendage, as first from the
Sardian Church its being so plain a Representation of the Reformed Churches, as
Balthazar Willius and Ludovicus Crocius had noted before him.
in the giving my reasons why I added the third part of my appendage, viz. My
twenty Arguments for the proving the Vision of the seven Churches to be a
Prophecy of the State of the Church from the beginning thereof to the end of
the world. For I think it of very good use and moment that we be assured of
this truth for these two main reasons especially. First that it appearing so
plainly, That the Church of Sardis stands for the Reformed Churches, as they
are called, we may look our selves in that glass and see our spots and
blemishes therein, to amend them. For that we are signified by that Church even
they do acknowledge who otherwise differ something from me in the determining
the Seven Intervals of these Churches (but have declared, as I find, long
before me, that this Vision of the Seven Churches is a Prophecy of the State of
the Church to the end of the World) while they expressly deliver that the
Sardian Period as they call it, is the Period of the Reformed Churches
commencing from Luther and Melancthon's time, etc. Thus Balthazar Willius a
sober and learned German Doctor in his Commentary on the Prophet Zachary (and
indeed he is so well assured of the truth of the Vision of the Seven Churches
being a Prophecy of the Church from the beginning thereof to the end of the
world, that he makes it the Basis of a special part of his Commentary)
borrowing his first light from his Master Ludovicus Crocius, whom he calls
clarissimum suo seculo Theologiae Astrum, gives his suffrage touching the fifth
Period of the Church in these words. Quinta Periodus, says he, est Sardensis a
Reformatione coepta per Lutherum, Melancthonem, Zwinglium, aliosque veritatis
Doctores in hunc usque diem durans, in qua puritas doctrinae Apostolicae morte
operum, proh dolor! dedecoratur, and ii quibus lux Evangelii fulget
limpidissima, contentionibus, odiis ac discordia colliduntur, and somno
vitiorum ac luxuriae sepulti jacent. Which is a free perstriction of the
disorders observable in the Reformed Churches, how they hold the truth of God
in unrighteousness, and I wish it were not as true as free. But there be a few
names, God be thanked, even in this Sardis which have not defiled their
garments, of whom Christ foretells that they shall walk with him in white, for
they are worthy.

The s^ules of the Reformed Churches laid before them, with Comminations from
Christ in his Epistle to the Church in Sardis.
Where Christ tells the Sardian Church, that is, the Reformed Churches, that
they have a name that they live, because they have zeal and heat, which seems
to be a symptom of life, but it is not for the true indispensable Christian
life but for or against this opinion or that ceremony, whenas they are cold at
the heart to what is the only life of a Christian, Humility, Purity and
Charity. To which they are either dead or in a profound sopor. Whence Christ
says to them (...), Apoc. 3. 2.
as St. Paul in the behalf of Christ in another place, Ephesians. 5. 14.
(...) Awake out of this deep sleep or lethargy, and keep they self awake and
strengthen the things that are ready to dye, that is, Faith in God and Christ
and of a life to come. For it is horrid to consider how far Atheism, Unbelief,
and Epicurisme has spread itself even amongst the Reformed Churches themselves,
these monsters having grown upon us as our zeal has relaxated against the
Church of Rome. For to such all Religions are alike, if the worst be not the
most eligible, with them especially of the Clergy, it serving best for the
pride, power and profit of a corrupt Priesthood.

But Christ bids them remember how they have received and heard, from the
ancient Prophets and Apostles, and from the late Witnesses to the truth, as by
whom they were expressly informed that the Pope of Rome was the great
Antichrist, and his Church a Synagogue of Idolaters. That the Popedom is
Antichrists Kingdom, and consequently for one to forsake the Reformed Religion
and betake himself to the Church of Rome is little better in foro Divino than
rebellion and treachery against the Kingdom of Christ. Wherefore says Christ
to the Church in Sardis, Hold fast and be no revolters, but renew and resume
your ancient zeal for the Purity of Gods worship and the Power of Godliness,
your ancient Iealousy for the honor of God against Idols and Image Worship and
other kinds of Idolatry and Heathen-like Superstitions, your horror and
detestation of all Debauchery and Scandal of life, lest he whose eyes are more
pure than to behold Iniquity, loath you and turn off from you on a sudden, and
leave you to be a prey to your insulting enemies. So that here is Commination
of misery enough to the Reformed Churches unless they repent, without recourse
to the slaying of the Witnesses, the fulfilling of which Prophecy is already
past.

The second reason why he added the third part of his Appendage, viz. For the
Description sake of the Philadelphian Interval which is to succeed the Sardian.
namely the usefulness of the Epistle to the Sardian Church for the
representing the defects and corruptions of the Reformed Churches to their
view, that I had reason why I should be solicitous to make good that the Vision
of the Seven Churches is a Prophecy of the state of so many Intervals of the
Church from the beginning thereof to the end of the World. And the other main
reason is the description of the state of the succeeding Interval of the Church
in Christ's Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia.

Which glorious Character is exposed to the view of the Sardian Church as a
Pharos to mariners on a dangerous Sea in a dark night, that they may know
toward what to make to, and that the Reformed Churches may be assured that
Christ intends such a state of his Church upon earth, at the next turn, as
shall be without either spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it shall be
holy and without blemish. For for this very cause did he yield himself to the
death of the cross, as you may see, Ephesians. 5. 25. But of the Sardian Church it
is said expressly, that her works are not found perfect before God, Apoc. 3. 2.
And for this reason certainly, most especially are they not found perfect,
because they are not done in charity, according to that precept of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 16. 14. Let all your things be done in charity, which the Apostle
elsewhere calls the bond of perfectness, and is indeed perfectness itself,
without which, nothing is right nor perfect, nor can well hold together. This
is the thing that is especially wanting in the Reformed Churches, and is the
very Title and Inscription of the next Interval of the Church, which is the
Church of Philadelphia, The Church of Holy Love or Charity. For that Church
will count every son of Adam their brother, as the good Samaritan did every one
his neighbor.

Wherefore this condition of the Church that is next, is exhibited to our view
as an high golden tower with crystal windows on the Sea side, full of Lights by
night, and the burnis^ed gold and crystal glistering in the sun by day, to show
us whitherto we should stear our course, that we may conform all our outward
actions and inward motions as near as we can to this excellent principle of
Charity. The nature whereof St. Paul has so accurately described on purpose,
one would think, that we might be guided by the light thereof. And it is so
Divine and transcendent a principle, or deep and profound, that a man may give
all his goods to the poor and his body to be burnt, and yet either not have
reached it, or else overlooked it, and so be devoid of it, when a man would
think that so great a zeal and Liberality could not be without that Celestial
flame of Holy Love.

St. Paul's description of Charity with a brief explication thereof, and
consequently of the state of the Philadelphian Church.
if these be not sure Symptoms of it, what I beseech you are? The Apostle will
tell you. For whenas the former things may be done out of Self-Interest, the
Apostles description is of a pure and holy unself-interessed Love, that arises
out of the Ruins, Death, or Annihilation of the Old Man, in us, and is that
Rectitude of Spirit, of which our Savior Christ declares, Matt. 5. 6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
satisfied. As on the contrary they are in a sad condition, that never felt this
hunger and thirst in them, and are thereby convicted to be mere Strangers and
Aliens from the Life of God. But out of the Annihilation and Mortification of
our own impetuous selfish will or lust, which is our true purification from the
life of the Flesh, does this Divine or Vnself-interessed Love arise, the
effects whereof Paul describes thus:

Charity suffers long, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
that is to say, is slow to anger; and no wonder, Anger being properly a
passion raised out of a sense of injury done to ones self. Charity is kind, as
being the Image of that God who according to Saint John is love itself. Charity
envieth not, Forasmuch as the good of the Universe, and of every man in
particular is the very life and pleasure of the regenerate soul, whose real
Regeneration is into this Divine Love. Charity (...), does nothing scurvily,
rashly or tumultuarily, forasmuch as this Grace arises out of the allaying or
extinguishing all the Impetuosities of our own wills and lusts. Is not puffed
up, this Spirit of Charity being not an huffy blast of crude Enthusiasm, but
the permanent and solid life of God in us, into which our Souls are regenerated
by the operation of the Holy Ghost. Does not behave it self unseemly, no not to
her Equals, much less Superiors, least of all to the public Magistrates, as
being the ordinance of God, but gives honor to whom honor, and tribute to
whom tribute is due. For in the life of Charity all the quick Sentiments of
Justice and Decorum are eminently contained. Seeks not her own. And good
reason, she being not a Self-lover, or lover of her own Sect or Faction, but
that unself-interessed Love, whose glory and joy is in the good of all mankind,
and in reference thereto, is mainly sensible and solicitous of the common
Interest of the Kingdom of Christ, which so much concerns the salvation of
men, and for this reason alone, a sincere opposer of the Kingdom of
Antichrist. Is not easily provoked, to wrath and invective speeches or severe
designs, as commonly Factions are affected one party against the other.
Thinks no evil, makes no misconstructions or perverse collections from the
Opinions or Actions of men (that are capable of better Interpretation) out of
an ill will toward them. Rejoices not in iniquity, though carried on with
never so cunning Intrigues and never so good success in the behalf of any
Party. But rejoices in the truth, that is, In honest, true and plain dealing,
not the preference of a Party but the common Interest of the true Church of
Christ being the only allowable spring of her Joy. Charity ((...), for that I
look upon to be the more likely reading and not (...), because (...) which
bears the same sense comes so presently after) Loves all things, that is to
say, is a sincere lover and hearty imbracer of the whole Creation of God and a
rejoycer in his works. Believes all things, that is, All the Fundamentals, at
least, of the truly ancient and Apostolic Faith, in virtue of that
purification of the Soul whereby she has arrived to this transcendent state of
Divine Love. Hops all things, namely firmly expects all those great and
gracious promises of a Blessed Immortality after this life, and the Glories and
Enjoyments thereof, in which hope she is so fixed and steadfast, by reason of the
purity of the Soul, and presence of the Divine Spirit in her, that as it
follows (buoyed up by this full persuasion, and chiefly in assurance it is for
the glory of God and the good of his people) she, Endures all things, being
assured that God whom St. John calls Love, and with whom she is united by faith
and love, can carry her through a thousand persecutions and deaths, and yet
repose her safe at last in his own bosom.

Which is according to that courageous profession of the same blessed Apostle,
Romans 8. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or
Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? Nay in
all these things we are more than Conquerours in him that loved us. For I am
persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, (the fear of the one, or the love of
the other) nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to
separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ our Lord.

That the Sardian Church, the nearer she makes toward the Pattern of the
Philadelphian, the greater will be her safety, but that her slackness there may
hazard all.
glorious and salutiferous Idea or Character of the Philadelphian state of the
Church, which is immediately to succeed the Sardian, and in which alone the
Reformed Churches must hope to be in safe Harbor indeed. But in the mean time
the nearer we compose our selves to this great Pattern, in the greater safety
and better condition shall we be. If we will lay aside all our Dissentions and
Animosities, all our Factions and Schisms, and remember that for all the stir
and noise we make about Opinions and Ceremonies and Forms of Government, in the
esteem of our Lord Christ we are but dead bodies (for so he declares to the
Church in Sardis) being destitute of the life of Christ, which is the Spirit of
Love, whose fruits and effects I have above described out of St. Paul: If we
could but have so much zeal and ardour of mind to promote the Indispensables of
Christian Religion as every Sect has to promote such Forms or Opinions as
Christianity can well want, and yet be most effectual for the Salvation of
Souls, which is the end of our Religion, it would be a wholesome symptom or
sign of our Recovery. For this undoubtedly would bring along with it all
Decency and Order and Morigerousness to the Magistrate, whether Ecclesiastical
or Civil in things indifferent, and cement us together and consolidate us into
one inexpugnable Temple of Christ, able to bear off all the assaults of the
Emissaries of Antichrist; whereas now Divisions and Factions, Animosity and
Discord, amongst our selves, is like to make us a prey to the common Enemy.
These things are lively represented to us in those two Epistles, the one to the
Church of Sardis, the other to the Church of Philadelphia, which therefore made
me so solicitous to confirm to all the World that Truth, and here again
repeatedly to declare it, That the Vision of the Seven Churches is a Prophecy
of the State of the Church from the beginning thereof to the end of the world.

The third and last reason of his adding the third part of his Appendage.
That it makes much for the Gracefulness and Elegancy and Enravishing Artifice
of this Divine Volume of Prophecies, the Apocalypse, that the Vision of the
Seven Churches be acknowledged such a Prophecy as I have described, especially
if we consider how the order of the Intervals agree with the order of the
Synchronals of the Sealed and Opened Book-Prophecies, and particularly how the
Church of Sardis falls in with the Rising of the Witnesses, on which things it
is needless here to enlarge any further and not at all convenient, my Preface
having already swelled so exceeding much beyond my expectation.

Only I will remind the Reader that I am not alone in this my confidence of
the Vision of the Seven Churches being such a Prophecy, those two eminent
Theologers Ludovicus Crocius and Balthazar Willius (an Author that was very
lately sent me by a Reverend and Learned Friend) discovering the same truth
before me, and the latter so well assured of it that he makes it the ground of
his Exposition of a considerable part of the Prophecy of Zachary as I have
intimated above, and the more of us hitting upon and approving the same Notion,
unknown to one another, it ought to be the greater confirmation to others that
the Notion is natural, sound and true. Thus have I with all imaginable
sincerity and freeness given an account of this my Exposition of the Divine
Visions of Daniel and of my annexing the Threefold Appendage thereto.

The Author's Justification of his Zeal for the truth of the Reformed Religion
from the seasonableness thereof, left men dishonor God and the profession of
true Religion by their foul Apostasy.
immoderate, or extravagant: That it is not unseasonable I think is over
apparent, there being that strong Effort by the Popish Party to bring their
Religion again here into England; and therefore it is the duty of every one of
my Calling, as he finds himself tolerably appointed for it, to instruct the
people touching the Solidity of our Reformed Religion and of the Detestableness
of Popery, such as it may be made out to be either from Reason or the Divine
Oracles. For, for a Nation, Priest and People to turn in a moment from one
Religion to another, as contrary to one another as Light is to Darkness, and
Christ to Antichrist, surely must be the greatest slur that ever was put on the
Profession of true Religion since the world stood, and the greatest
gratification and Triumph, which that Triumvirate of pestilent Wits ever yet
have had, I mean the Atheist, Antichrist, and the Devil. And verily there being
that vast difference betwixt the Reformed Religion and Popery, this
consideration alone, one would think, should put an effectual stop to any ones
revolt, that is not an Infidel and believes nothing of a life to come, viz.
That if he does not stand his ground in this assault, nor be driven off by the
terror and affright of men, he cannot assure himself, but if the like
threatenings of death and cruelty were used to him to renounce all Christianity
whatsoever, that he might be an utter Apostate from Christ, pass over to
Turcism, nay Paganism, and at last be persuaded humbly to salute, not the
cloven toe, but the hairy backside of the black Goat in a Nocturnal conventicle
of Witches. The Consciousness of which baseness and impiety of spirit to him
that has any sense of Religion left in him, one would think, should be more
affrightful to him, than the menaces of the most cruel Tyrant, or the very
flames of Hell. Wherefore there being so strong an Effort and tugg to debauch a
Nation on this manner, how can it be unseasonable by all honest means to
endeavor to keep them sound, that God be not dishonored, nor Religion slurred
before the eyes of this Atheistical world, by so foul an Apostasy?

Nor is there any thing of Immoderateness Extravagancy in this my zeal That
there is no Immoderateness nor Extravagancy in his zeal for the Reformed
Religion.
for so good a cause. For I herein offend neither the Law of God nor man. And I
do but that duty I owe to my Prince, Church and Country, in defending the
established Religion of the Land against all Opposers or Underminers of it; and
being what I defend is true, I have the Apostles warrant if not command to be
zealous in it, Gal. 4. 18.
who tells us, It is good to be zealously affected always in a good matter. It
is not only asserted by our Church but it is irrefutably proved by able
writers of our Church, that the Church of Rome is Idolatrous. And the most
horrid murders they have committed upon innocent souls hundred thousands of
them, because they would not commit Idolatry with their Church, all Histories
ring thereof. Wherefore our Church in her Homilies does not stick to intimate
this bloody Idolatrous Church to be that Harlot in the Apocalypse upon the
Seven Hills, as also that the Pope of Rome is the Antichrist. And Bishop Jewel
in his Volume against Harding, appointed by authority to be in every Church,
expounds the Man of sin (2 Thessalonians. 2.) whom all the Ancients understood of
Antichrist, of the Bishop of Rome, making the Antichrist predicted there, to be
the Pope. And indeed what Protestant writer before Grotius, ever expounded that
Prophecy of any other than the Pope? But how absurd and ridiculous Grotius his
Interpretation is, I have abundantly shown in my Book 2. Chap. 19.
Synopsis Prophetica. Now what extravagance is it in me who further confirm
what our Church holds (to say nothing of other Churches) by a more perfect and
accurate account of the Prophecies of St. John and Daniel? Wherein I show all
those Prophecies that the Ancient Fathers interpreted of the times of
Antichrist himself, necessarily to belong to the Papal Hierarchy. And for
Antiochus Epiphanes whom they looked upon as a Type of Antichrist, I have
further showed how lively a Type he also is of the Pope. So fitly do things
agree and cohere all along, in every place.

And verily I am so well assured of the truth Daniel and St. John, With what
great sincerity and assurance the Author has writ his Expositions of Daniel
and the Apocalypse especially in those parts that concern the grand points
betwixt us and the Church of Rome.
those parts especially that appertain to the deciding of those grand
Controversies betwixt the Church of Rome and the Protestant Churches, viz.
whether that Church be Idolatrous, and the Pope Antichrist, that I dare in an
humble confidence spread them in the sight of Heaven before God and his Holy
Angels and the Blessed Spirits of the Saints departed, and particularly St.
John and Daniel, the two inspired Penmen of those Divine Visions, which the
special Providence of God has left to the comfort and direction of his Church,
and appeal unto them whether the Expositions be not true.

Not that I expect any miraculous voice from Heaven in attestation to the truth
of the said Expositions, but to signify thus to all the world with what
sincerity and assurance I have written them. Which I would have chiefly
understood of the abovesaid Controversies and of my Applications of things
past. But as for what is to come, that of the Poet may here take place, (...).
as he is the best Hariolus that guesses well, so he the best Interpreter of
Divine Prophecies that gives a rational account (whatever the Event may prove)
touching such passages of them as concern things yet future. Which I speak in
reference to my Expounding Dan. Chapter II. verse. 45. of the taking of Rome by the
Turk, which I heartily wish the Papal Hierarchy may prevent by a timely
repentance of their Idolatry and blood.

But the like fears and jealousies of holy men in former time touching the
Turks overrunning the West for their Idolatry, are expressed in our Churches
Homily upon that subject, to which I refer the Reader. But as for the truth of
my Expositions which reach the main points, whether the Church of Rome be not
that Babylon the great, the mother of Harlots with the golden cup in her hand
full of abominations and filthiness of Fornication, the woman on the Seven
Hills that is drunk with the blood of the Saints and the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus, and whether the Pope be not the Antichrist and the Papal Hierarchy
understood in all those Prophecies in John and Daniel which the Ancient Fathers
and Primitive Writers understood of Antichrist (whence it is manifest that the
Pope with his Hierarchy is he) these things I profess are as clear to me as any
point in all Theology and Philosophy, Geometry itself being not excepted.

Expositions (instead of endeavoring a solid confutation of them, A brief
Reply to the Contemners of his wellgrounded Confidence.
which they are conscious to themselves they can never perform, and therefore
have discreetly declined the taking notice of my Joynt-Exposition of the
seventeenth and thirteenth Chapters of the Apocalypse in my Synopsis
Prophetica, published at least fifteen years ago, which alone would make good
the conclusions aimed at, of the Antichristianity and Idolatry of the Church of
Rome) for those I say which answer this well grounded confidence of mine with
mocks and mowes, with distorted drollery and course buffoonry, I have no other
Reply to give to them, but that I heartily pity them, and that I humbly
conceive, if there were any remainders of a man's heart left in them, they would
pity themselves (could they but once consider what a few hairs breadths their
souls are elevated above those of Monkeys or Baboons) and would sadly sit down
on their breech with their arms or rather forelegs, if you will, across, and
sigh deeply to the Maker and Former of all things that he would vouchsafe to
transform them into the shape and state of men. And I in the mean time, it
being something doubtful how much the braying of their brutish nature may
prevail, shall desire all good people to pray for them.

But for those to whom is given a more sober What effect his Expositions are
like to have with the more sober minded Protestants, particularly in reference
to loyalty to their Prince and seemly behavior to other Magistrates.
I hope by perusing the Expositions which I have written upon the Prophet
Daniel and the Apocalypse, they will not stick to acknowledge with our own
Church and other Reformed Churches that the Popedom is the Kingdom of
Antichrist, and the Roman Church most foully and loathsomly besmeared with
Idolatry and blood, and that those that shut their eyes from seeing and their
mouths from professing so plain a truth, are but dough-baked Protestants and in
great peril if occasion offer itself, to be amassed and kned again into the old
sour lump of Popery, worse than the very Leaven of the Pharisees, which Christ
advised his Disciples to beware of. Moreover, That the Rising of the Witnesses
was fulfilled in the late Blessed Reformation, and that, as the Popedom is the
Kingdom of Antichrist, so Reformed Christendom the Kingdom of Christ, in
opposition thereunto, and a more visible emersion of the Fifth-Monarchy ever
distinct from the four Monarchies so much guilty of Idolatry and blood. And
that as the many Sects in the Primitive times, more in number and more heinous
in quality (as you may see in Epiphanius) than have appeared since the
Reformation, did not hinder but the Christian Church was then the real Kingdom
of Christ, no more do those Sects that appear in the Reformed Churches, but are
disallowed by them, hinder at all but they are the true Kingdom of Christ
also, and rightfully oppose the Kingdom of Antichrist, as the Primitive
Christians did the Kingdom of the Dragon. And that Reformed Christendom being
in truth the Kingdom of Christ, our inference therefrom is very sound, that we
ought from the very heart to give all Reverence and obedience in things
indifferent to the Magistrates thereof, a duty which is owing even to Pagan
Magistrates from Christians, much more, one would think, to Christian
Magistrates from those that pretend to be Christians themselves.

This is a Truth so firm and sure that I have placed it amongst my eight
Principles for the support and enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ in my
Divine Dialogues, Dialog. 5. Sect. 29.
in these express words. The fifth Document or Instruction should be to all the
Members of Christ's Kingdom, wherever their abode is, that they do not suffer
themselves to be stained with the least blemish or taint of Disloyalty to their
lawful Sovereign, upon any account whatsoever, but especially upon a Religious
one, there being no greater disinterest to the true Religion, than to appear to
be promoted or maintained by so gross an Immorality as Disloyalty, nor any
greater advantage than through Faith and Patience to bear all trials and
hardships, as the old Primitive Christians did, whose eyes being lift up
Heavenward, and their feet wholly in that path, by Providence stumbled on the
Imperial Crown, the Emperor at last becoming a professed Christian.

Furthermore, The Rising of the Witnesses Sardian Period commencing together,
How the Reformed Churches are bo^nd with all attentiveness to read Christ's
Epistle to the Church in Sardis. And of the sound and ^avoury Doctrine in the
Book of Homilies of the Church of England.
That they of the Reformed Churches are bound in the fear of God with all
attentiveness to read Christ's Epistle to the Church in Sardis, and especially
we of the Church of England, and to impress those weighty words on our minds,
Remember how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent; as of our
carnal and sensual lives, so of our wantonness and stipperiness in matters of
Doctrine, as those two great points attested by the Witnesses of Christ, That
the Popedom is the Kingdom of Antichrist, and the Papal Hierarchy the mother
of Spiritual fornication or Idolatry, That we are to remember what we have
heard and received and hold fast, and repent us of either our coldness in, or
Apostasy from the profession of so grand concerning Truths, as also of our
Schismaticalness and Rebelliousness; That we remember I say what we have
received, and may still read in that excellent Book of Homilies of our English
Church touching these main points of the Pope being Antichrist, the Papal
Church Idolatrous, and of that heinous wickedness of Rebellion against our
lawful Sovereign, and of mingling any Righteousnesses or Satisfactions and
Penances of humane invention, with our Justification and Remission of sins in
the blood of Christ.

The profession of the Risen Witnesses in the Book of Homilies is so sincere,
savoury and genuinely Christian in this point without the least leaning toward
Libertinism and Antinomianism, that I do not doubt but this profession of the
Reformed Churches is alluded to, Apoc. 15. in the placing those Harpers that
sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, upon the Sea of glass mingled with fire,
namely upon the shore of the Red Sea (for what reason so called it matters not)
in which Pharaoh and his Host was overthrown, as the Pope and his Pontifician
Clergy defeated by the Witnesses professing, That a true and living faith in
the blood of Christ (which the Title of the Red Sea is a Symbol of) for
remission of sins does alone justify us before God. Whereby they flung off a
load of trumperies and tedious impositions of humane invention, by which they
were kept in a worse than Egyptian servitude under the Pope and Pontifician
Clergy. And therefore the Reformed Churches are brought in, in the above cited
place of the Apocalypse (in imitation of the Israelites that had escaped the
thraldom of Pharaoh) singing a triumphal song on the shore, as it were, of the
mystical Red Sea, where the Roman Pharaoh and his tyrannical Hierarchy were
overthrown, and that wretched bondage, which those true Israelites had been
kept in for filthy lucre's sake and gain of the Church, cast off utterly and
quite escaped.

For, all that sweet alluring power and genuine comfort from the Gospel, and
wonderful efficacy to make men truly good, they hid from the eyes of the
people; and whenas the very specific nature and essence of the Christian
Religion is a sincere and vehement Love of our Saviors person and peaceful
repose of our Souls in his Passion and Merits, we in the mean time acting
sincerely (as our Homilies require) in this Covenant of grace, this high honor
and affection we bear to Christ, this repose and peace of mind we have in the
merits of his most precious blood and passion, those supplies, by his promised
Spirit, of illumination, comfort and direction, all this is so miserably and
perfidiously squandered away or sold, if you will, for the gain of the Church
by multiplying of false Patrons and the vain worshippings of Saints and their
images, by making men to depend on the Infallibility of the Pope and his
Priests, and by stifling all hopes of illumination and direction from the
blessed Spirit of Christ, that the members of that Church are made not only so
many slaves, bereft of their Christian liberty and enjoyment of the love of
Christ that procured it, but so many senseless stocks or stones, as to Divine
matters, and are taught to transfer all that recumbency that every true
Christian has on the person of our faithful High Priest, upon the persons of
these unskilful and, which is worse, unfaithful Tamperers with the Souls of men.

Whose Salvation consisting in a lively faith and sincere love, honor and
dependence on the person of our Blessed Savior, and doing the things that He
commands, these deceitful Emissaries of Rome, O Detestable Treachery! carry on
such a Religion or rather Superstition, as whose very nature is to abuse that
Religious inclination in humane Souls by making them swattle away their love
and zeal upon false objects, and to spend their obedience on the vain
inventions of men; by making them rely on the falsely supposed merits of Saints,
and to depend upon the person and Trumperies of an ignorant or deceitful
Priest, instead of having their sure repose in the richness of the mercy of God
through Christ Jesus our Lord. To whom if we be immediately united by faith and
love, and show our love by endeavoring sincerely, to our power, to keep His
commandments, this is the plain and compendious way to salvation. All other
Interposals of humane invention are but distractions and obstacles thereto, and
wicked elusions of the power and comfort of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. This
seems to be the sound and savoury sense of the Homilies of the Church of
England, and that in opposition to that Egyptian servitude and vile bondage
that Gods people were held in, under the Church of Rome. And certainly it must
have been a most loathsome slavery and a sight intolerable to as many as whose
eyes God had opened, to see the whole scope of the Gospel thus ^luded for
filthy lucre's sake by the wretched invent^^ns of men, besides the sordidness
and foulness of (...) intermingled therewith. Which made the s^ate of that
Church intolerable to as many as God had visited with his saving grace, and had
made to understand this mystery of Iniquity by the illumination of his holy
Spirit, insomuch that it was more tolerable to them to quit this world and life
itself, than to comply with such horrid Impieties.

How can we then, whom God long since has Several weighty Reasons, why no
Protestant should change his Religion upon the solicitation of the Emissaries
of Rome.
and have sung that Triumphal Song of Moses and the Lamb, return again into
Sodom and Egypt? How can we desert a Religion, to the Witnesses whereof God
has given so ample a witness in that blessed and Apostolic Reformation, in
raising them from the dead after three days and an half according to
prediction, and calling them up into the Political Heavens and setting them to
rule in high places? How can we return like a dog to his vomit? to a vomit cast
out and lying so long time cold and sour in the dirt and mire? a vomit cast out
as nauseous to all that is sound or sacred in the faculties of a man? Nauseous
to the outward senses and inward senses, Nauseous to common Reason, Nauseous to
the principles of Logic and all sound Philosophy; so nauseous to all these was
that figment of Transubstantiation forged for the gain and honor of the
Priesthood, but quite repugnant to all the abovesaid faculties of man, and
nauseous to all common honesty and modesty, to obtrude such an impossible
fiction upon deluded people, and to make them profess it whether they will or
no for fear of being cruelly and barbarously murdered, which must be exceeding
nauseous to all such as have but the least sense of Justice or humanity
remaining in them. How shall we again incorporate with that Church whom the
Spirit of God has so plainly as well as the Homilies of our Church of England
declared to be the Whore of Babylon? May we take the Members of Christ and make
them the members of an Harlot? How shall we forsake the Kingdom of Christ, and
make our selves subjects of the Popedom, which, out of St. John and the
Prophet Daniel, to say nothing of St. Paul, three sufficient Witnesses I trow
to put an end to this controversy, is most evident to be the Kingdom of
Antichrist. If treason and rebellion against an earthly Prince be so heinous a
crime, as most certainly it is, what a crime is rebellion and treason against
him who is assuredly King of Kings and Lord of Lords even the Lord Christ Jesus?

And lastly, How can we turn our backs of a Religion, unless we will wilfully
run into eternal perdition, that has all the assurance of truth against that of
the Church of Rome that the heart of man can wish or his curiosity require? Is
the vote of Primitive antiquity of any value? that stands for us, the Church
for the first four hundred years being the very platform of our Reformation.
Has Sense? common Reason? the Rudiments of Logic? the sound Principles of
Philosophy any weight with them? all these assuredly witness for us against the
impossible figments and fond forgeries of the Church of Rome. Has Morality and
indispensable Principles of common Honesty, (which the pretense of no Religion
ought in any wise to deface) Has the eternal law of God and Nature implanted in
our hearts any right to be appealed to? we right willingly appeal to it, how
innocent the Form of our Religion is as to this, and how foul and obnoxious
will be found the Principles of the Papacy. And finally has the attestation of
Scripture and blood of Martyrs, some hundred thousands of innocent and holy
Souls, burnt and massacred by these Antichristian Persecutors? have such
serious Testimonies any force with them? then have we even a cloud of Witnesses
in the behalf of the Truth of our Reformed Religion against the impious
corruptions of the Church of Rome.

The plain places of Scripture expressly condemn the worship of Images, the
praying in an unknown tongue, the communicating but in one kind, and the like.
And the Prophecies do not only declare the Church of Rome to be the Whore of
Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist, but those that professed the faith of the
Reformed Churches, to be the Witnesses, to be the Martyrs of Jesus, and the
Saints of the most High. Such a Seal is there set to the truth of the
profession of the Reformed Religion against the enormous corruptions of Popery,
even by the blood of infinite numbers of the serious and faithful servants of
our Lord Christ, that I may not say even by the blood of Christ himself. Who
gave himself, and shed his most precious blood on the cross, for his Church
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, as with the washing of water, by the
word of God: and the Pope keeps the word of God from the knowledge of the
people that they may wallow in the black mire of ignorance and the filth of
Idolatry, for the gain of Holy Church. Christ the true Bridegroom gave himself
for his Church that he might present it to himself a glorious Church most
illustriously shining forth in the fruits of the Spirit and the works of real
Righteousness declared in the Gospel: But the Pope blasphemously arrogating
that Title of Sponsus Ecclesiae, to himself, has debauched the Church, not
presenting it a glorious Church to Christ her true Husband, but in a whorish,
pompous dress contrary to the Christian man's very promise in Baptism (to
forsake the pomps and vanities of this wicked world) presents it to himself a
garis^, gorgeous, Idolatrous Church for the satisfaction of his own pride and
lust. And whenas Christ the true Husband gave himself for the Church that she
might have neither spot nor wrinkle nor any such thing, but be holy and without
blemish, the whole body of the Religion of the Roman Church so far forth as it
differs from the Joint Profession of the Reformed Churches, is nothing but an
overspread leprosy of grossly false Doctrines, and of foully Superstitious, and
Idolatrous Practices, besides being smeared over and over again with the blood
of the innocent, and carrying on a perpetual design and trade of eluding all
the force of true Religion and piety by a multitude of humane inventions, and
breaking off our comfortable recumbence and dependence upon the lovely person
of our Lord Jesus our faithful Savior and Redeemer, to depend upon the person
of some ignorant or deceitful Wight, that bewilders a deluded Soul with a world
of false devices and trumperies, giving her no solid rest after she has once
strayed from the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ, and fallen into the hands
of these deceivers, who are sealed and occrustated in the trade of their
impieties by a false and boastful pretense of their Churches Infallibility, and
under the color thereof declaring the true and faithful servants of Christ
Heretics, they thereby snatch all occasions to drink and swill and make
themselves drunk with the blood of the Saints of the most High.

From whence it is plain that the Roman Church is an estranged Synagogue, which
is no Spouse of Christ, but the Spouse of the Pope, as he boastfully pretends
to be her Husband. So contrary does this Successor of St. Peter to the example
of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 2.
who espoused the Church of Corinth as a chaste virgin not to himself but to
Christ, but the Pope the Church of Rome not to Christ but to himself, and not a
chaste virgin but all to be polluted with the filth of Idolatry which is
Spiritual fornication. But Reformed Christendom is the Spouse of Christ as
acknowledging no Husband but him, and depending immediately upon him by faith
in his blood alone and sincere obedience to his commands (and not to the vain
injunctions and inventions of men) for her justification and salvation. And for
such a Church his own chaste Spouse has Christ given himself, and poured forth
his most precious blood, and not for those that have espoused themselves to
another Husband. Which is also a sound Witness and may go for a most firm and
authentic Seal to the saving Truth of our Reformed Religion.

These things I have taken the boldness to speak with all freedom out of
sincere love and faithfulness to the Souls of men of what communion soever,
that those that are already deluded may be undeceived, and they that are yet of
our Communion may never so deeply sin against their own souls as to depart from
it, and so dislodging themselves out of the bosom of Christ run into the arms
of that man of sin and son of perdition the declared Antichrist according to
the testimony of the Holy Scriptures, and more especially of those Divine
Visions of the Prophet Daniel, which I have with so faithful care and diligence
expounded for men's fuller satisfaction and instruction, that they may return
into, or if they be there already, continue and persist in, the way of Truth
and of everlasting Salvation.

A Plain and Continued EXPOSITION Of the several Prophecies or Divine Uisions
OF THE Prophet Daniel.
VISION I.
The Vision of the Image of the Four Metals signifying the Four Empires,
Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek and Roman, seen first by Nebuchadnezzar, and
after revealed to Daniel, Dan. 2.

IN the second Year of his Reign (which is now about 2300 Years ago) did
Nebuchadnezzar being sollicitous concerning the Fate of his own Empire and what
would be afterward, his thoughts coming into his mind upon his Bed, as it is
said Ver. 29. fall into a Dream, which much affected him when he was in it, and
therefore was earnestly desirous to recall it into his mind again; but not
being able, he sent for his Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers, and Chaldeans,
to try if they could divine what this Dream was. For the thing was gone from
him, neither could he recover it into his mind. But if they could have declared
unto him what it was, he could then have very-well remembered he had dreamed it.
Which forgetfulness of Nebuchadnezzar in not retaining the Dream in his mind,
as well as the Impression of the Dream it self, is no small Argument of the
Providence of God over his Church and People, for whose sake these things
happened, viz. That Nebuchadnezzar should dream this Dream that concerned the
Church of God infinitely more than himself, and that he should forget it, to
the baffling of all his Magicians, Sorcerers and Chaldeans; and that Daniel a
Jewish Youth, and one of the people of God, should by Divine Revelation have
the honor of declaring the King's Dream unto him, so that the King could not
but acknowledge that this was the Dream. By which alone it was manifest that
the Spirit of the Holy God was in him.

And the Dream, it concerning the people of God, (more than Nebuchadnezzar
himself) whether Jews or Christians, there was this singular good effect
thereof, that they could not but be more certainly assured that it was a truly
Divine Dream, neither feigned by Nebuchadnezzar, nor by Daniel, but
communicated to both by God, either immediately, or by the ministry of his Holy
Angels. And that therefore Da^iel having this privilege of declaring
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, had also the same supernatural privilege of rightly
interpreting thereof. The Declaration and Interpretation whereof is as follows,
which we shall expound as briefly and as clearly as we may, where there is
need, beginning at the 31 Verse. For it will be admirable to observe how the
Pre^iguration of things in this Prophetical Dream reaches from Nebuchadnezzar's
time not to our days only but even to the pouring forth of the seventh Vial,
whereupon, all the Kingdoms of the World will become the Kingdom of the Lord
and of his Christ.

31. Thou O King, when thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy Bed, and thou
did fall into that Dream, saw, and behold a great Image, or great Statue
of a Colossean bigness, it comprehending in its extent no less than the
succession of Four Famous Empires. This great Image whose brightness was
excellent, it representing the Splendor and Glory of those Empires it did
prefigure, stood before thee. And the form thereof was terrible, setting out
thereby the great Fear and Awe these Empires, viz. the Supreme Powers therein
and their Ministers, cast the World into by their severity, violence and
cruelty. For which cause in another Vision they are resembled to wild Beasts
for their rage and bloudthirstiness, as the true Church of God has too often
found them.

32. This Image's head was of fine Gold. There being a Succession of Four
Empires here to be prefigured by Four kind of Metals, the order of dignity or
pretiosity in the Metals is made use of to set out the order of time, in the
succession of the Empires. And therefore because Gold is first in esteem
amongst Metals, therefore the Golden part of the Image the Head, both because
it is the Head, and of Gold, denotes the first Empire the Church of God, or
People of the Jews were concerned in, viz. The Babylonian under whom they were
then Captive. But as for the Ten Tribes they were carried away into perpetual
Captivity by Salmanasser King of Assyria long before, never to be heard of
again, at least during the time of these Four Empires here prefigured. But the
Jews properly so called were concerned first under the Babylonian Empire, then
under the Medo-Persian; decrees being given out first by Cyrus then Artaxerxes
in their behalf though Cambyses was unkind to them. And under the great Xerxes
by reason of his Queen Esther a Jew they had a signal deliverance from their
bloody Enemy Haman. And how they were concerned during the Greek Empire,
especially under Antiochus Epiphanes, and much more under the Roman, is so
notorious, that it is enough only to name it. Which reasons may suffice why no
more Kingdoms or Empires, and why these especially, Babylonian, Medo-Persian,
Greek, and Roman are comprised in this Image. The first whereof was signified
by the Image's Head of fine Gold, as Daniel himself will anon interpret. His
Breast and his Arms of Silver. The Arm is properly that part of the Body which
reaches from the Shoulder to the Wrist, and so excludes the hand, of which
there is here no mention though there be mention of feet adjoined to the Legs.
Which is not fortuitous but designed. For this Breast with its Arms of Silver
denotes the Medo-Persian Empire, which consisting of Two People, the Medes and
Persians, they are fitly represented by these Two Arms, but with no mention of
Hands of which the Ten Fingers would be the Natural parts, because there was no
division of the Medo-Persian Empire into Ten Kingdoms as there was of the
Roman. His Belly and his Thighs of Brass. By this Belly and the Two Thighs of
Brass is understood the Greek Empire, which was One in Alexander, but after his
death divided more notably and durably into the Two Kingdoms of the Lagidae and
Seleucidae. For at first there was a Quadripartition of his Empire, but that
not lasting so long, or all parts of it being not so famous, or the Jews not so
much concerned in them, this general Prefiguration of the succession of the
Four Empires, takes notice only of what is most remarkable, as those Two were.

33. His Legs of Iron. Here begins the Roman Empire; suppose upon Aemylius
Paulus the Roman Consul his vanquishing of Perseus the last King of Macedonia.
From which time the Roman Empire in the Prophetical account may rationally seem
to commence, the Greek or Macedonick Empire properly so called being then put
an end to, though other parts still remained. And here the Roman Empire may
very well be represented by the Two Legs, that State for many Hundred years
being most-what supported by the Supreme Power of their Two Consuls. And so
this Character may be alluded to by the Two Legs, to understand what People is
meant, though the succession of the Empire commence no higher than from the
vanquishing Perseus King of Macedonia by Aemylius the Consul. Which Consular
Power continued above an Hundred years after, and the Name much longer. So fit
an Emblem are these Two Legs of Iron, of the People of Rome and their Empire.
His Feet part of Iron, and part of Clay. Which Feet imply the Ten Toes which
are parts of the Feet, and therefore represent the Roman Empire divided into
Ten Kingdoms. Which Ten Kingdoms are also prefigured by the Ten Horns of the
Fourth Beast, Chap. 7. The division of which Roman Empire into Ten Kingdoms
happening since the Empire became Christian, we may better thence understand
what is meant by the Feet being partly of Iron, and partly of Clay, namely,
That in that time of the Roman Empire it was become partly Ecclesiastical and
partly Secular, by the Iron as before understanding the Secular Power, by the
Clay the Ecclesiastical. Which Clay, or Earth here in Daniel seems to be
alluded to Apoc. 12. 16. where the Earth is said to help the Woman, namely, an
Ecumenical Council, by opening its mouth and swallowing down the flood of
Contention (which the Arians especially had raised) by their condemning that
Heresy: as if a Clayie ground should cleave with a wide scissure and swallow
down a sudden Torrent, or Land-floud.

34. Thou saw till a Stone was cut out without han^^, that is, Besides this
Image and the Four distinct Metalline parts thereof, thou saw moreover a
Stone cut out without hands, no man with Axe or Gavelock dissevering it. Which
Stone is Christ and his true Church, himself being born in a supernatural way
by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, and his Church being raised and
propagated in a supernatural way by the assistance also of the Holy Spirit, by
real Miracles, by unfeigned Sanctity, and by invincible Patience and Suffering
for the Truth. Wherefore the true Christian Church, Head with the Members, this
is that Stone cut out without hand, which smote the Image upon his Feet, which
were of Iron and Clay, and brake them in pieces. This true Apostolic Church
which appeared with Christ and his Apostles, and so on in the pure Primitive
times, will at last strike the Image upon his Feet, namely, under the Seventh
Vial, or at that War of the Rider on the White Horse. Wherein the Beast and the
False Prophet (the remainder of the Iron and degenerate Clay) are cast into a
Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone, Apoc. 19. 21.

35. Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the Gold broken to
pieces together, and became like the Chaff of the Summer threshing-^^oor, and
the Wind carried them away that no place was found for them. This plainly
answers to the casting the Beast and the False Prophet into the Lake of Fire
burning with Brimstone. Both places signify the utter abolishing all the
Idolatrous Tyranny remaining in the Roman Empire at that time, whether in the
Secular or Ecclesiastical Powers. But that then the Clay, Brass, Silver, and
Gold are said to be broken to pieces together, that is only an embellishing of
the external Cortex of the Vision. The succession of these Four Empires being
exhibited at once, they are made also to fall to dust at once together. Besides
that the succeeding Empire most-what occupying the Possession and Territories
of the Antecedent, that which vanquisheth the last may in some sense be thought
to vanquish them all at a clap, or to possess what any of them had. Which will
be immediately made good in the next words. And the Stone that smote the Image
(...) a great ^ountain, and filled the whole Earth; that is, The true
Apostolic Church purged from all Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Tyrannical
Principles and Practices will overspread the whole World in a manner; the
Kingdoms of this world, as it is predicted in the Apo^alypse, becoming the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. This State of the Church may be termed
Regnum Montis, the Kingdom of the Mountain, (as Mr. Mede has well noted) as the
State before this may be called Regnum Lapidis, the Kingdom of the Stone.

36. This is the Dream, Which miraculously and by the mere inspiration of the
Spirit of the most High was communicated unto me, and which the King cannot
deny but to have been the Dream which he was so desirous to recover into his
mind. And we will tell the Interpretation thereof before the King. Which he may
be sure is true and Divinely inspired, it being impossible any man should know
the thoughts of another man, especially so strange and operose as these, unless
he were inspired. Whence my declaring the Dream ought to be looked upon as a
certain assurance of the truth of my Interpretation; which is this.

37. Thou, O King, art a King of Kings, that is, The greatest King on Earth.
For the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and
Glory. Thou have a Strong, Potent, and Glorious Kingdom, and it is the gift of
God unto thee, and therefore thou should remember to govern as his
Vicegerent.

38. And wheresoever the Children of men dwell, viz. the cultivated places of
his Kingdom, The Beasts of the Field, The desert places of Arabia and Africa,
says Grotins, And the Fowls of the Heaven, Invious and inaccessible Rocks,
where only the Fowls of Heaven can nest, Has he given into thy hand, and has
made thee Ruler over them all. All these diversities of the vast places of thy
Kingdom art thou Lord over. And God having given thee so large an Empire, so
prosperous and glorious, I declare unto thee, Thou art this Head of Gold. Which
is briefly and figuratively spoken by a Synecdoche or Metonymie, for, Thou art
the Head of this Golden Kingdom of Babylon, or, Thou art the Lord and Owner of
it. From whence we may be assured that the Head of Gold signifies the
Babylonian Kingdom, Nebuchadnezzar being then King of Babylon, and Cyaxares the
Made conjoined in a^^inity and confederacy with Nabopolassar the Father of
Nebuchadnezzar having subverted Nineve the Metropolis of the Assyrian Empire,
together with the Empire it self some Four years before, and near an Hundred
and twenty years after Salmanasser had taken Samaria, and carried the Ten
Tribes away captive.

39. And after thee shall arise another Kingdom inferior to thee. The first
Empire comprised in this Image being thus evidently the Babylonian, it does
naturally follow that the Second must be the Medo-Persian begun in Cyrus. Who
first having taken Babylon, and Belshazzar the last King being slain by the
Medes and Persians he brought along with him, though he delivered the Empire to
his Uncle Darius the Mede; yet he being aged, and dying within a year or two he
presently succeeded him, and became Monarch of the Medes as well as Persians,
himself also being a Medo-Persian by extraction, on the Mother's side a Mede,
and on the Father's side a Persian. Whence he was called (...), or a Mule, as
Grotius notes. But that the coalescency of these Two Nations into One Kingdom
or Empire, is signified by the Silver part of the Image which is the Breast
from which the Two Arms come, has been noted above.

The hardest scruple is, how this Medo Persian Empire should be said to be less
than that of Nebuchadnezzar's, the Babylonian, there being the accession of
Persia, and all the Acquists of Cyrus added thereto. Grotius his answer is,
Quia Cyrus and successores ejus Africam non tenuerunt. Gasper Sanctius, That
there was not that pacateness nor tranquillity in the Medo-Persian Empire that
there was in the Babylonian, or so continued prosperity and success. Calvin
makes one Empire inferior to another, (as the Metals are from Gold to Iron,)
in Morality, Temperance, Justice, Faithfulness, etc. according to that vulgar
opinion expressed in Horace, Carm. lib. 3. od. 6. Aetas parentum pejor avis
tulit
Nos nequiores mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Whence sprung that Poetical description of the World's degenerating according
to the Four Ages thereof, from Gold to Silver, from Silver to Brass, and from
Brass to Iron. Which in all likelihood was more particularly occasioned from
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream of this Image of those Four Metals, Antiquity not
understanding the true sense thereof.

But it is possible that forasmuch as it is read, And after thee shall arise
another Kingdom inferior to thee; that [to thee,] is here on purpose put for
[to thine,] that the first Head of this following Kingdom might be understood
to be more especially compared with him, in which there seems apparent odds.
For Cyrus the first Head of the Medo-Persian Monarchy or Empire reigned not
past Two or Three years in that enlarged Empire, and not passing Thirty in his
Kingdom of Persia, whenas Nebuchadnezzar in his Babylonian Empire reigned Three
and forty years most splendidly and prosperously, insomuch that the excess of
his prosperity cast him into that Septennial delirancy, out of which he was
recovered and gave praise to the God of Heaven. But Cyrus as he reigned but a
small time in the Medo-Persian Empire, so he was vanquished ingloriously by the
hand of a Woman, Tomyris, a Scythian Queen, who cut off his Head and cast it
into a Vessel of blood saying, Satia te, Cyre, sanguine, quem ^itisti. But
whether this way or that way please best to make the easiest sense of the Text,
it is unavoidably plain, that this second Monarchy is the Medo-Persian, nor
does any Interpreter doubt of it. And another third Kingdom of Brass. This
shows plainly, that the Golden, Silver, and Brass parts of the Image, signify
Three distinct Kingdoms. But now it is evident in History that as the
Medo-Persian Empire succeeded the Babylonian, so the Macedonick, or Grecian,
succeeded the Medo-Persian. For Alexander Macedo after he had vanquished Darius
Codomannus in his last Battle at Arbela, (Darius being slain some Six months
after by Bessus one of the Peers of his own Empire, and Babylon taken,)
translated the Monarchy from the Medes and Persians to the Greeks, about the
third year of the 112 Olympiad. And that the Greek Empire was not unfitly set
out by the Two Thighs of Brass, by reason of those Two most eminent parts of
it, into which after Alexander's death it was divided, and stood so divided for
a long time, namely, the Two Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, I have
noted above. And it may not be altogether impertinent to Note also what Justin
writes, Lib. 12. Eadie qua natus est Alexander duae Aquilae tota die praepetes
super culmen domu patris ejus sederunt, omen duplicis imperii Europae Asiaeque
praeferentes. Which shall bear rule over all the Earth. So it is said of him, I
Maccab. I. He made many Wars, and won many strong holds, and slew the Kings of
the Earth, and went through to the ends of the Earth. And so Justin, Lib. 12.
From the utmost Coasts of the Ocean were Embassies sent to him returning to
Babylon, both of the Carthaginians and other Cities of Africa, yea of Spain,
Sicily, France, Sardinia. And some also from Italy expected his return to
Babylo^ia; Adeo universum t^rrarum orbem nominis ejus terror invaserat, ut
cunctae gentes veluti destinato sibi Regi adularentur. Which is enough to show
how well this prediction suits with the event.

40. And the fourth Kingdom shall be as strong as Iron. That this fourth
Kingdom is the Roman is manifest from hence that it succeeds the Greek Empire;
which it may seem most properly first to seize upon, when Aemylius Paulus the
Roman Consul had vanquished Perseus the last King of Macedonia. But about an
Age after the Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, those Two eminent Parts
or Thighs rather of the Macedonick or Greek Empire, were subdued also by the
Romans. The last of the Seleucidae or Kings of Syria, Tigranes, ^ as vanquished
by Pompey, and Syria reduced into a Province; as also Egypt by Augustus when
he had vanquished Ant^nius the Husband of Cleopatra. Daughter of Ptolemaeus
Auletes, the last but one of the Lagidae, or Kings of Egypt. Whence it is
plain that the Roman succeeds the Greek Empire as the Greek the Medo Persian,
and that therefore this is the Fourth Kingdom prefigured by the Image of Four
several Metals. And the Genius of the Roman Empire, the former days of it
especially, suits well with this Metal, they being not only full of courage and
valor, but also hardy, rigid, severe, and indeed cruel. They that are any
thing versed in History will easily acknowledge this a fitting Character. To
which you may add what is intimated in the Text, namely, that as Iron can cut,
and form, and subdue all those Three first Metals, Gold, Silver and Brass, so
the Roman Empire could vanquish and subdue all those Regions wherein the
Babylonian, Medo-Persian, and Grecian Empire was spread. Which feat not being
done by the Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, it is impossible they
should be the Fourth Kingdom of Daniel. And besides this, we may be infallibly
sure that the Fourth Kingdom is the Roman, in that the Stone cut out without
hands happened, during the Roman Empire, (and it must happen in some of the
Four Kingdoms according to the Vision,) and not during the Kingdom of the
Lagidae and Seleucidae. Forasmuch as Iron breaks in pieces and subdueth all
things, and as Iron breaks all these, viz. all these Metals of Gold, Silver
and Brass, shall it, this Roman Kingdom or Empire, break in pieces and bruise,
the Countries and People which the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, and Grecian
Empires had ruled over.

41. And whereas thou saw the Feet and Coes. Here is mention made of Toes
with the Feet, which justifies our exposition above, Ver. 33. But now we are
come hither, we must remember we are come unto that period of the Roman Empire
when it was divided into Ten Kingdoms, which are intimated by the Ten Toes of
the Statue. Which Ten Toes answer to the Ten Horns of the Beast actually
crowned. Which is the time that the Two horned Beast rises out of the Earth: so
it is said, Apoc. 13. And why not out of a white Clayie clammy Earth, such as
Potters make use of, as well as out of any other Earth beside. And no man I
think while he considers that the Iron here signified men, a body Politic of
them, can stick to admit that this Clay does signify so likewise. But there
being so palpable a difference betwixt Iron and Clay, it is manifest that there
must be as great a difference betwixt these Two bodies Politic, the one
signified by the Iron, the other by the Clay; the former suppose the Secular
Power, the latter the Ecclesiastical; as it is said of the Papal Hierarchy,
which is the little Horn, Chap. 7. 24. that that Horn or King shall be diverse
from the rest, which diversification here betwixt the Secular and
Ecclesiastical Power, signified by the Iron and the Clay, need not be expressed
in words, the Symbols themselves being so apparently different. Part of ^otters
Clay, and part of Iron; that is, partly of such clammy white Clay as Potters
make use of, and partly of Iron; which implies that by that time the Empire was
divided into Ten Kingdoms, the Summa P^t^stas began to be neither in the
Secular Power absolutely, nor in the Hierarchical, but they were so mingled
together that it was not complete or full without both concurrent; the
Ecclesiastic Power getting such a hank upon the Secular, in ordine ad
Spiritualia, the effects whereof within no long time appeared with a witness.
The Kingdom ^^all be (...); that is, The Power will be divided or shared
betwixt the Papal or Sacerdotal Hierarchy, and the Secular Orders of Emperors
and Kings. For the Iron and Clay cannot stand for the division of the Empire
into Ten Kingdoms, for that the Ten Toes prefigure, but the sharing the Summa
Potestas betwixt the Secular Magistrate and Papal, or Sacerdotal Hierarchy. But
there shall be in it of the strength of the Iron, forasmuch as thou saw the
Iron mixed with the miry Clay: that is to say, The Swordmen or Secular Power
of the Ten Kings was so assured to the maintaining the Power and the Institutes
of the Papal Hierarchy (though never so foul or Idolatrous, so they made for
the Sacerdotal worldly Interest) that the Papal Empire, or the Empire framed
according to that pattern and scope, was as it were strengthened with Iron.
Which is that which is intimated Apoc. 17. 13. where the Ten Kings are said to
give their Strength and Power to the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
Which is the Empire refashioned again into a Pagan-like Idolatrous Form, for
the worldly advantage of the Papal Hierarchy. Thus was the Iron mixed with the
miry Clay, the Ten Kings cleaving so close to the interest of the Papal
Idolatrous Clergy.

42. And as the Toes of the Feet were part of Iron, and part of Clay, that is,
And as every one of those Ten Kingdoms consisted of Temporal power and
Ecclesiastical, the Papal Hierarchy being branched through all the Ten Kingdoms
till the Reformation: So the Kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken;
that is, The Roman Empire divided into these Ten Kingdoms shall be partly
strong, and partly brittle; the Papal Power weakening the absolute Power of
each Kingdom, and occasioning many breaches and jars in Christendom.

43. And whereas thou saw Iron m^xt with miry Clay, I shall tell thee the
reason of it by what means it came to pass in that measure it did; They shall
mingle themselves with the seed of men; so our English renders it, With the
seed of men. The Septuag^nt, (...). By this Interpreters usually understand *
alliance by Marriages, whereby one Kingdom may be more surely obliged to keep
peace and amity with another. But dominandi cupido cun^^is affectibus
flagrantior est, as the Historian observes. And if this may go for a good sense
as to the sodering of the Ten Kings one to another, the Iron to the Iron, yet
we are to consdier that the Text here speaks of the Iron being mixed with Clay,
and how they come to unite. They shall mingle one with another, faith he,
(...). It might as well be rendered, (...), in sementi hominum, that is, by
placing of men in Seminaries, where they shall be so brought up, informed and
instructed, suppose in Covents, Monasteries, and other such like places, that
they shall be made notable instruments, so to insinuate into the Secular
Powers, and also into the People as to engage their affections to his Holiness,
the great Ecclesiastic Sovereign, and to all the Rites, Institutes, and
Doctrines that are fittest to support that Papal Greatness. The Propagation and
Dissemination of such instruments as these, I conceive to be alluded to, as if
he should say, They shall mingle one with another, agree or unite together,
((...) or (...) for so (...) may signify,) by the sowing or planting of men in
the Seminaries abovesaid, fitting them for the foresaid purpose, the more
brisk, cunning, and gentile attacking Princes and great Men; and other Monks,
Priests, and Friars hanging fast on the people, and clarting upon them, and
keeping warm in them all the modes of Idolatry and Superstition, and all the
Principles and Practices that may be gainful to the Papal Hierarchy. Thus the
Clay sticks to the Iron as well as it can. But they shall not cleave (so very
firmly) one to another, even as Iron is not mixed with Clay. And what
Bickerings and Clashings there have been betwixt these Two Powers, the Secular
and Ecclesiastic in particular Kingdoms, the Chronicles of each Kingdom will
declare: As also what combats there have been betwixt the Pope and the
Emperors, both Greek and German, is notoriously known to all. I will only cite
one passage out of The Defense of the Right of Kings, written by King James of
blessed Memory. Let Histories be searched, says he, Let just accounts be
taken, and beside many Sieges laid to Cities, it will appear by true
computation, that Henry the Fourth, and Frederick the First fought above
Threescore Battles in defense of their own Right against the enemies of the
Empire, stirred up to Arms by the Popes of Rome. And indeed the dealings and
usurpations of that Hierarchy grew so intolerable that many Kingdoms at last
shook them off, and would admit the Papal Authority and Religion no longer.
Whereby was manifestly fulfilled which is here predicted by Daniel, That they
shall not cleave one to another, even as Iron is not mixed with Clay. It is an
unnatural and heterogeneal union, and therefore not durable and permanent. This
passage therefore in Daniel seems to answer to that in the Apocalypse, Chapter 17.
v. 16. And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast they shall hate the
Whore, and make her desolate and naked, etc. Which was performed in some
measure in the happy Reformation begun in Luther's days, and when there will be
a farther accomplishment of it, lies wholly in the pleasure of the Almighty.

44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom
which shall never be destroyed. After Daniel in his Interpretation has gone
through all the Empires comprised in that Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw from
head to foot, now he begins to explain the mystery of the Stone cut out without
hands; whereby is understood Christ, with his truly pure Apostolic Church.
Wherefore by [in the days of these Kings] must be understood in the days of the
Fourth, viz. in the time of the Roman Empire. For Christ was born, and his
Gospel divulged, and his Church first gathered in that time, as every body must
acknowledge. And the Seventy weeks plainly carry to that time also. But now
this pure Church of Christ being called the Kingdom which the God of Heaven
shall set up, we may observe from hence, how in our Savior Christ's preaching
and mentioning the Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom of God, that it had a
respect to this Prophecy: And the use of those Phrases with him does further
ratify our interpreting it thus, of the appearance of Christ with his true
Church. Which is rightly called the Kingdom of Heaven or of God, because the
raising of it was by the special miraculous power of the God of Heaven. And the
administration of this his true Church is by his Spirit from above in the
hearts of his true Believers. God does truly rule there by his Spirit, whence
it is rightly called the Kingdom of God. Which shall never be destroyed. The
Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it. The true and living Church which
the Spirit of Christ actuates, this shall never fail. And the Kingdom shall not
be left to other people. The Persians succeeded the Babylonians, the Greeks the
Persians, and the Romans the Greeks, but no Empire shall succeed, nor any
People the true Christian Church which is the Kingdom of God, which either as
Regnum Lapidis, or else as Regnum Montis will last to the end of the World. But
it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms; that is, When it has
become Regnum montis, it will have overspread, and will possess, and keep in
rule all the Countries that the Four great Monarchies, signified by the Statue,
had occupied. And the Three former Kingdoms being as it were incorporated into
the Fourth, or because the Four Kingdoms are in this Image exhibited at once,
the Kingdom of the Mountain, for the embellishing the cortex of the Vision, is
said to break in pieces and consume all the other Kingdoms together, striking
the Image on the Toes as I noted above. And it shall stand for ever. According
as it is said, Apoc. II. 16. The Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms
of the Lord, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

45. Forasmuch as thou saw that the Stone was cut out of the Mountain
without hands; that is, Forasmuch as the State of the true Church of Christ is
the absolute work of God, carried on by his special Providence not by humane
arts or policies, and that it was thus begun, and that he is with his Church to
the end of the World: And that it broke in pieces the Iron, the Brass, the
Clay, and the Silver, and the Gold. Forasmuch as thou saw the Stone cut out
of the Mountain without hands to do this: Which signifies the true Church of
Christ thus supernaturally begun, and as supernaturally emerging to this
glorious issue at last. For as the Stone was cut out without hands, so it will
be carried without hands to smite the Image on the Feet, namely, by the power
and conduct of the Spirit of Christ, who will then open a door of success that
no man shall be able to shut, as it is said to the Church of Philadelphia;
considering, I say, that Omnipotency it self is the Spring of this motion, and
that it does not depend on the humors and purposes of men, I can of a truth
declare unto the King that, The Great God has made known to the King what
shall come to pass hereafter, or after this, namely, after the demolition of
all these Four Empires, the Vision reaching to the end of the World, which that
expected glorious State of the true Church will precede, when the Kingdom of
the Stone cut out of the Mountain, that is, out of the Roman Empire, shall it
self become the Kingdom of the Mountain, and fill the whole Earth, that is,
when that State of the glorious and pure Church shall spread over all. And the
Dream is certain, and the Interpretation thereof sure; and more particularly
touching that excellent State of the Church concerning which it is said, Apoc.
21. 5. And he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things new.
And he says unto me Write, For these words are true and faithful. And he said
unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, The Dream
that he has interpreted is certain, especially the most concerning part
thereof, the Glory and Prosperity of the true Church of Christ, it being to be
achieved by the irresistible power of the Lord Jesus.

NOTES upon VISION I. Ver. 43.
* Alliance by Marriages whereby one Kingdom, etc.] That this is not the sense
of the place, viz. The Marriages of those of great rank in these Principalities
mutually with one another, thereby to bind these distinct Kingdoms in peace and
amity, besides the reasons alleged in my Exposition, this may be one also,
that the words which seem to import it are (...), where (...) is a very
improper word to signify that Noble, Princely, Royal sort of Men or Women, who
matching with one another of several Kingdoms, might tie those Kingdoms in the
bonds of unity and friendship. It would then have been said, (...), or (...),
or (...), they shall mingle themselves with the seed of Nobles, or Men of great
power and interest, or at least (...), with the seed of Men, in a common or
indifferent sense. But here it is (...), with the seed of mean, abject, weak,
despised Men, such at least in appearance, as Cornelius a Lapide very well
Comments upon those words, Dan. 7. 13. (...), id est, says he, alluding to the
Roots (...) and (...), quasi filius hominis miseri, aerumnosi, mox morituri,
obliviosi and oblivioni tradendi: haec enim omnia significat Enos, from the Two
Roots above named, the one whereof signifies to be sickly, the other to be
oblivio^s. Whence he makes Enos, which is the same with the Chaldee Ansa, to
denote a wretched, weakly, sickly, contemptible Wight, and at least seemingly
dull and oblivious, and whose Name is quickly to be drowned in oblivion. Which
certainly is a very unmeet Character for the Princes and Great ones of
Kingdoms: But may very well decipher those of the Papal Seminaries, Covents or
Monasteries, those Monks and Fries mob'd in their Cools and long Coats, and
making a show of great mortification and despicableness, as if they were
altogether dead to the world, and the vigor of nature were quite extinct in
them, they pretending to nothing but holiness and interest of Holy Church,
whether in these mob'd habits, or got into a more brisk dress to carry on
affairs in the behalf of the Papal Dominion, either in their own Country or
other Nations. The very propriety of the word (...), I say, intimates that this
mingling with the seed of Men does not signify matches of Great persons of
several Kingdoms, and that therefore it will naturally point to that sense I
have pitched upon in my Exposition. And how hugely applicable this is to
History, see that Excellent English Gentleman Sir Edwin Sandys his Speculum
Europae. Which shows what fast hold the Pope takes on the Secular party by the
activity and fedulity of the Monks and Friars, and other Emissaries, that are
sent out of their Seminaries for the purpose. For the Religion that is taught
in those Seminaries being framed more for the Power of the Pope, and worldly
interest of Holy Church, than for safe guidance to the Eternal salvation of
Souls; those that come out of these Seminaries to instruct the people do rea^ly
the work of the Papacy, that is, bind the Laick party to obedience to the Pope,
and so make the Iron stick to the Clay.

VISION II.
The Vision of the Four Beasts rising out of the Sea, whereby the Four
abovenamed Empires are prefigured, Dan. 7.

AS by the Statue consisting of Four Metals those Four Empires, the Babylo^ian,
Medo-Persian, Greek, and Roman, from their beginning to their ending were
represented; so they are here in the very same extent of time, notwithstanding
this Vision was seen toward the end of the first of these Empires, namely, the
Babylonian. Which manner of representing in Prophetical Type part of time past
in a Set of Visions, is made use of also in the Apocalypse, the greatest part
of the time of the first of the Six Visions in the First Six Seals being
expired when S. John saw them. And there is the same reason of the Set of
Visions of the seven Churches which begin, as that of the Seals, from the first
Epoch of Christianity, as does also the Vision of the measuring the Inner and
Outer Court, and the Woman clothed with the Sun with Twelve Stars upon her
head, etc. There was about Sixty years from the Epoch of S. John's Visions to
the time he saw them; and less from the beginning of the Babylonian Empire till
Daniel's seeing of this Vision of the Four Beasts. So that this is no obstacle,
but that the Babylonian Empire may be here represented, from its beginning,
though Daniel saw this Vision toward the end thereof.

But because that in a Set of Prophetical Visions, a little snip of time (in
comparison of what the whole Set of Visions takes in) may be set out by some
inconsiderable part of that Set of Visions, to take the liberty of interpreting
a whole Set of Visions (viz. all the Six Seals, nay Two whole Sets of Visions
succeeding one another, viz. all the Six Trumpets succeeding the Six Seals) of
things past when S. John saw those Visions, as Grotius does, is so wild and
extravagant, that it may well astonish any sober man, to see a person of so
considerable Parts and Learning to fall into such a delirancy. But what we here
adventure on is sober enough, viz. the supposing that the Babylonian Empire
even from its beginning is here represented by the First Beast, there being the
like liberty taken in the Apocalypse. And this being supposed, the Exposition
will run smoothly and unexceptionably.

1. In the first year of Belshazzar (the Son of EvilMerodac, who was the Son of
Nebuchadnezzar) King of Babylon, namely, the last King of Babylon who was slain
by the Medes and Persians, the City Babylon being taken by Cyrus in the
Eighteenth year of Belshazzar's Reign, according to Thomas Lydiat. Daniel had a
Dream and Uision of his head upon his bed. He had a Divine Vision communicated
to him in his sleep. For Prophetical Visions are communicated to the Prophets
either way, either sleeping or waking, and they are either way truly Divine.
Then he wrote the Dream, and told the sum of the matters; that is to say, He
declared the sum of the matters in writing.

2. Daniel Spoke and said, viz. he declared thus touching himself, I saw, says
he, in my Vision by night, and behold the four ^inds of the heaven strove upon
the great Sea. By the great-Sea in the Prophetic language is understood vast
multitudes of People that overspread the face of the Earth, as the Waters of
the Sea do. By the Winds is understood that invisible Principle of motion,
from whence comes that ^icissitude of mutations amongst the Nations of the
Earth, who are driven this way and that way according as the active part,
whatever it is, that answers here to the Winds, does move them: Whether they be
Angelical Powers which superintend the affairs of Nations, or whatever else.
And it is said in the Psalms, Who makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a
flaming Fire. On which Grotius learnedly and ingeniously glosses thus, Psalm.
104. 4. Sunt Angelorum alii Aerei, alii Ignei, and a little after, Esse Angelis
corpora sed subtilissima non Pythagorae tantum and Platonis Schola sensit, sed
and Iudaei veteres and veteres Christiani.

The activity therefore of the Aerial Genii or Angels may be understood by
these Winds, or the Commotions they bring in by Divine Providence in the
Production of new Empires, and demolition of the old. From the subtility of
their bodies, but it may be chiefly from their activity in the Innovations and
Commutations of the affairs of mankind, in pulling down and building up
Kingdoms and Empires, these Angelical orders are called (...), venti. And there
is a quadripartition of them, (Zach. 6.) a distribution of them into Four
Chariots with various colored Horses. Where to the Prophet asking, what are
these my Lord? it is answered, (...), Isti sunt quatuor venti Coeli, where
(...) is the very same word that is in Psalm. 104. 4. These are the Four Winds
of Heaven, The Quaternio of the Angelical Ministers of Divine Providence.
Something like that Apoc. 7. where there is mention of the Four Angels at the
Four Corners of the Earth, holding the Four Winds of the Earth that they should
not blow on the Earth, nor on the Sea. And that the great things in the
vicissitude of Kingdoms and Empires are done by the Angels, is an Hypothesis
that both Daniel and the Apocalypse plainly supposes, the latter indeed
inculcates to awaken this dull Sadducean Age.

This I don't doubt but is one sense of this passage in Daniel, but if any one
think it too sublime and remote from the vulgar capacity, he may substitute for
these Angelical Powers here denoted by the Winds, the ambitious and unquiet
minds of great Princes and Politicians, and their Officers, and those blusters
they make in the World by their impetuous activity to begin or increase their
Dominion, and to enlarge it into a more absolute Empire. But the more sober may
take in both Senses according to the Genius of the Prophetic style, that by
the same Symbol exhibits frequently more things than one at once.

But that these Winds are said to be Four, it may be partly in allusion to the
Four Quarters of the World, partly to the mystical meaning of the number Four,
in setting out the Angelical Kingdom or Ministry, and partly to the Four Beasts
that were to arise in succession one after another out of the Sea, by the
striving thereon, not all together, but one after another. For expressing the
thing so as if they all co^^^cted one with another at the same time, is but for
the embellishing the Cortex of the Vision, of which no more is to be taken in
than is agreeable to History and Reason.

But this in the mean time is very remarkable, that being the very Pri^ordia
here of them all is premised is necessarily follows that the Vis^ion reaches
the very beginning of each Empire, the Babylonian as well as the rest, or
because it reaches the very beginning of the first of these Empires, that that
Empire must be the Babylonian, as we shall see in the procedure.

3. And four great Beasts came up from the Sea. Which, as I said, shows that
the Vision reaches the very rise or first beginning of each of them. But here
we are again to Note that though all Four are here mentioned together, yet the
rising out of the Sea was one after another. But their coming thus out of the
Sea together strikes the fancy more strong, which is the peculiar scope of the
Cortex of the Prophecies both here and in the Apocalypse. Diversone from
another, viz. in shape and condition. But in the mean time they are all Beasts.
The Septuagint render it (...), wild Beasts. And Grotius upon the place, Ideo
Bestiae, says he, quia Idololatrica erant Imperia ut not at hic Jacchiades.
Their Idolatry indeed shows their brutishness, being accustomed to no higher a
dispensation of Religion than adoration of visible Objects, as the Elephant is
said to worship the Moon. But cruelty is another ingredient to make them (...),
wild Beasts: such salvage Cruelty, and gross and stupid Idolatry, being
exquisitely opposite to the Kingdom of the Son of Man, who came to erect the
Empire of Love and Charity, and of pure Religion, the worshipping the Father in
Spirit and in truth.

4. The First was like a Lion, a Beast of a fulvid or Golden color, as the
Poets describe him, and the head of all Beasts, which is the Babylonian Empire
signified also by the Golden head of the Image or Statue. The Prophet Jeremy
likewise describes Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon by this Animal, Chapter 4. 7. The
Lion is come up from his thicket, and the Destroyer of the Nations is on his
way. And had (...), which betoken the quickness of his dispatch in his
expeditions and conquests. And accordingly the same Prophet speaking of
Nebuchadnezzar his coming against the Jews, Chapter 4. 13. Behold, he shall come
up, says he, as Clouds, and his Chariot shall be as a Whirlwind, his Horses
are swifter than Eagles, Woe unto us for we are spoiled. And again, Chapter 40.
Behold, he shall fly as an Eagle, and shall spread his Wings over Moab. And
many other places there are concerning Nebuchadnezzar to the same purpose. I
beheld till the Wings thereof were plucked wherewith it was lifted up from the
Earth. For the Marginal [wherewith] in the English Bible is better than [and]
in the Text. And Grotius says, Verte [per quas efferebatur supra terram.] And
he adds thus Note further, Saepe enim Chaldaeis ut and Hebraeis Copula vim
habet Relativi. And besides the Copula ^ will signify [for] as well as [and]
and then the sense will be the same that Grotius drives at, and the Septuagint
ratify it by translating (...), which signifies, he was carried up on high,
not taken out of the way or destroyed, as some would have it.

Now the Babylonian Monarch his being thus carried up on high on his Wings, may
signify both the height of his prosperity and the haughtiness of his mind, his
ambition, as it is set out by the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 14. v. 14. where he
brings him in saying, I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be
like the most High. For this is to be understood of the King of Babylon, and
the whole succession is to be looked on as one King, as the Empire is looked
upon as one Beast. Now therefore [I beheld till the Wings thereof were pluckt]
is not to be understood as if this plucking of the Wings could not be but after
the time of this Vision of Daniel, because, as I proved above, the Vision
reaches from the beginning of the Babylonian Empire, the Scene whereof all
along Daniel here beheld. Where amongst other things he noted the plucking of
the Wings of this Lion, the Babylonian Monarch. Which happened most notoriously
in his being cast down from his loftily priding himself in his great
Magnificence, Chapter 4. 30. Is not this great Babylon that I have built, by the
might of my Power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Which was no sooner said
by him, but he heard a. voice from Heaven, O King Nebuchadnezzar to thee it is
spoken, The Kingdom is departed from thee, etc. And so he was driven out to eat
grass with the Beasts of the Field, till Seven times passed over him. And is
not this a clipping of his Wings indeed, who was soaring before above the
Clouds? Instead of being lifted up on high with his Wings from the Earth, he
was fain to graze on the ground with Oxen. And was made stand on the feet as a
man, and a man's heart was given to it. Now after that Septennial humiliation
of Nebuchadnezzar by being cast into so deep a melancholy and delirancy, as if
he were grown a very brute that goes on all Four, these words describe his
happy recovery out of that deep disease. For Physicians take notice of such a
melancholy as makes the party imagine himself to be, and to imitate the manners
and nature of this or that Beast, as you may see in Sennertus, and other
Writers. But here it seems he came to himself again by the good Providence of
God, and went constantly upon his Feet as other men do. And a man's heart was
given unto him, that is, his humane understanding was restored unto him. For
the Phrase of Scripture makes the heart the Seat of understanding. Instead
therefore of having the mind or heart of either a Brute or Luciferian Devil, he
had got a man's heart, and was taught Chapter 4. v. 37. to honor and extol the
King of Heaven, all whose works are Truth, and his ways Judgment, and who is
able to abase all those that walk in Pride. What can be more significant of
Nebuchadnezzar's Case than this? Which therefore is a most certain character
that the First Beast is the Babylonian Monarchy, and this passage is most
properly applied to him.

But withal I do not deny but it may be extended further to other Cases of the
Empire, or Monarchs of Babylon; accordingly as Grotius expounds the plucking of
the Wings of this Lion, Tardati cursus ejus Imperii, etc. The affairs of that
Empire were not carried on with that speed and success under Evil-Merodac and
his Viceroy, as it were, Naragalrazar, in whose days Cyrus rebelling against
Astyages (whom Nebuchadnezzar had set over the Kingdom of Media insomuch that
Media was under the Babylonian Empire in the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar, and
onward till this rebellion of Cyrus) Media by this means in Evil-Merodac's days
Son of Nebuchadnezzar was rent from the Babylonian Empire. And this, I think,
was a considerable clipping or plucking the Wings of the Lion, besides what
other particularities might be noted in History. And moreover Belshazzar, Chapter
5. (as Daniel reproves him for his not regarding that fearful punishment of
his Grandfather. For his pride had lifted him up also against the Lord of
Heaven, v. 23. and he had quaffed in the holy Vessels of God's Temple in that
impious Feast he made) Belshazzar, I say, was pretty well humbled by that
handwriting against him on the Wall, but immediately after was laid in the
dust of death. But in his Successor Darius the Mede (for I above noted that the
succession is accounted as one continued Monarch, as the Beast one continued
Empire, and what belongs to the Monarch or Empire is said of this First Beast)
the other part of the Prophecy is again fulfilled, That he was made to stand
upon his feet as a man, not to soar in the Air with Eagles Wings, and fancy
himself above him that dwells in the Clouds. And a man's heart was given to
him, namely, to Darius the Mede * the last Monarch of the Babylonian Empire.
(For all begin the Medo-Persian Empire from Cyrus.) And what a heart full of
humanity toward Daniel, nay indeed of Piety and Belief in Daniel's God, the
God of Israel, was given unto him, will plainly appear to any that reads the
Sixth Chapter of Daniel, ver. 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 26, 27. Thus fully well
assured may we be that this First Beast is the Babylonian Empire, and this
being given we shall easily be induced to believe that the Three following will
prove the Medo-Persian, Greek, and Roman, as they were in the Image of the Four
Metals, for the same reasons there above specified.

5. And behold another Beas^, a s^econd like to a Bear. This, according to the
succession of the Empires in History, which is the most faithful Interpreter
of Prophecies, must be the Med^-Persian Empire. So that there is less need to
take notice what Interpreters have observed of congruity, in the making a Bear
the Symbol of the Medo-Persian Monarchy: As that Persia is notorious for the
breeding the fiercer sort, as well as plenty of those Animals: That what is
most notorious in the Bear, that he can live on little or no meat for a long
time, is likewise significative of the great abstinence and hardhip of the
Persians, and what a mean diet they use to satisfy themselves with, as
Xenophon has taken notice in his (...), and the like. Upon which it is less
necessary to insist; there being further characters of this Empire in the Text
it self. And it raised up it self on one side, that is, It reared up it self to
fight against only one party of men, namely, the Gentiles, as if we should
conceive the World divided into Two parts, Jews or the People of God, and
Gentiles. The sense is, he meddled not with the Jews (but favored them, as is
notorious from the Decrees of Cyrus, and of others his Successors in the behalf
of the Jews,) but only with the Heathen party. It is also Grotius his gloss,
Iudaeae nihil nocuit, which Interpretation he confirms from the authority of S.
Ierom, who professes he follows the Jews therein, and the thing is abundantly
reasonable in itself. Whence it is a plain Characteristick of this Empire of
Cyrus and his Successors, that were kind to the Jews. According to that of
Isaiah, Chapter 44. 28. That says of Cyrus he is my Shepherd, and shall perform
all my pleasure; even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the
Temple, Thy Foundation shall be laid. And it had (...) ribs in the mouth of it,
between the teeth of it. These Three Ribs, says Grotius, are Persia, Media and
Chaldaea, which were Three notorious parts of the Medo-Persian Empire, (and
Ribs signify the Strength of a man according to Achmetes,) and others agree
with Grotius herein. But some by these Three Ribs would have understood Three
several Coasts of the World subdued by the Medo-Persian M^narchs, by Cyrus the
Eastern part, by Cambyses the Southern, viz. Egypt and Aethiopia, and by
Darius Hystaspis the Northern, namely, the Scythians. And they said unto it,
Arise, dedour much Flesh. Whether this may be Vox Divinitus emissa, an
Instigation from Heaven, or as he says in Virgil, -- Sua cuique Deus ^it dira
Cupido. the cruel and bloody Feats in the mean time of the Medo-Persian
Monarchs are here signified, whether they were stirred up as a scourge to the
wicked World, or their own ambition pricked them on to make a prey of so many
Countries, and to make a spoil of their riches, which by Flesh are understood
in the Onirocriticks. Which therefore seems to indicate the spoil of the more
civilized parts of the World which were grown rich and luxurious. In the mean
time, besides the order of reckoning, there are indications enough from the
Characters of this Empire it self, that it must be the Medo-Persian. But the
most substantial is, that it succeeds the Babylonian.

6. After this I beheld, and to another like a Leopard. Succession here again
is enough to assure us that this is the Greek Empire, because the Medo-Persian
was put an end to by Alexander, whose Victories with his Armies were so swift,
that in this regard a Leopard is a fit symbol of this Empire, that Animal,
besides the extraordinary velocity of it, jumping upon his prey, as Naturalists
observe. And there was a wonderful dispatch and celerity in Alexander's
Conquests, who in the space of Six years subdued not only all Asia, but a great
part of Europe and Africa. The variety of the Spots of that Animal, Grotius
will have to set out the diversity or uncertainty of the Genius of Alexander,
the First Founder of the Greek Empire, as being one strangely variegated with
notable Virtues and notable Vices, giving a specimen now of one, and then of
another in no small degree, and that of those very contrary. And that his body
had a sweet and pleasant smell, as the Leopard is reported to have, and very
grateful to other Animals, and that the Leopard as well as Alexander loves
Wine. These things also are noted by Interpreters, which makes the Leopard
still a more fit symbol of the Greek Empire. Some also think that the levity,
uncertainty, and fallaciousness of the Greek Nation is perstringed in the
diversity of Spots in the Leopard's Skin. But what follows in the Text will
sufficiently confirm to us that this Third Beast is the Greek Empire. Which had
upon the back of it Four Wings of a Fowl. These Wings in the general
signification of them assuredly denote the celerity of Alexander's Conquests,
as they are Wings; but as Four, they betoken the division of his Empire into
Four parts after his death, or into Four Kingdoms: as also what follows denotes
the Four several successions of Kings in those Kingdoms. The Beast had also
Four Heads. As the Roman Empire is represented by a Beast with Ten Horns,
because it was to be divided into Ten Kingdoms at last, so this Leopard is
represented with Four Heads, because after Alexander's Death, the Greek Empire
was to be divided into Four Kingdoms; Philippus Aridaeus the Brother of
Alexander, or rather Cassander, enjoying the Kingdom of Macedonia (for Aridaeus
Reigned not passing Seven months) Ptolemaeus Lagi Fill. the Kingdom of Aegupt
and Africa; Lysimachus the Kingdom of Thracia, and Antigonus the Kingdom of
Asia minor. Than which what can be desired for a more certain Character of the
Greek Empire, or a surer Argument that the Greek Empire did not expire with
Alexander's Death, but was continued in the successions of those Four Kingdoms
so long as they lasted, and till some other Empire may rationally be thought to
put an end to their compute, as when Aemylius Paulus the Roman Consul
vanquished Perseus, the last King of Macedonia? Which gave in a special manner
the denomination to the Greek or Macedonick Empire. And Dominion was given unto
it. Alexander's Conquests were so exceeding mavelous, and so extremely
overproportionate to the number of his Soldiers, and the space of time he
achieved them in, that a man may rationally think that [Dominion being given
to him,] may have a more peculiar meaning here than in other places. As if the
Empire he is said to acquire was * rather a mere gift of Divine Providence than
any Acquist by his own strength, policy, or vigilance. For what was his Thirty
thousand men, when he was to conflict, one while with an Hundred and fifty
thousand, anon with Four hundred thousand, and at last with near Ten hundred
thousand, Darius Codomannus bringing so many into the Field against him? And
when notice was given to him by his Captains, he was found in such a dead
sleep, that they could hardly awaken him, and yet he had scarce rubbed his eyes,
as Calvin expresses the dispatch of his Victory, (...) Darius fled, his Army
was routed, and Forty thousand of his men slain with the loss of less than
Three hundred of the Greeks, as Quintus Curtius relates. Calvin's Expression
here is indeed Hyperbolical, But for the main the Characteristicks of this
Third Empire are so remarkable and notorious, that he must be very bad sighted
that does not plainly perceive the said Empire to be the Greek or Macedonick.

7. After this I saw in the night Uisions. In this Divine or supernatural Dream
communicated to me from God. And behold a Fourth Beast, that is, A Fourth
Empire, and particularly the Roman. For what Empire should succeed the Greek or
Macedonick Empire but the Roman that vanquished it, as the Greek the Persian,
and the Persian the Babylonian? That this Fourth Beast or Fourth Empire is the
Roman Empire, I have so fully and evidently demonstrated against Grotius, in my
Synopsis Prophetica, Book 2. Chapter 13. that no rational man, I think, if he read
considerately what I have written, can ever for the future doubt thereof. And
how suitable the description is in the Vision all along, we shall now see.
Dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly, and it had great Iron teeth. As
this Fourth Kingdom is also represented in the Vision of the Image by the Iron
Legs thereof, to which you may also refer that it is said here to be strong
exceedingly. For so is that Metal. And the courage, cruelty, and exceeding
largeness of the Roman Empire must needs make it dreadful and terrible. Which
some conceive it to have been in so great a measure, as no one wild Beast could
be a sufficient Symbol to set off the terrible cruelty thereof. Amongst oth^^
Specimens of which that bloody and salvage Pe^^eution, First, of the Pagan
Roman Empire against the Primitive Christians, and then of the Pagano-Christian
against the Waldenses and Albigenses, and innumerable others, that professed
and stuck to the pure Christian Faith, is astonishing and ineffable, and
exceeding the Salvageness of any wild Beast whatsoever, that we may not want a
reason why this Fourth Beast is without Name. It devoured and brake in pieces,
and stamped the residue with the Fe^t of it; that is, The Romans subdued and
brought under many Kingdoms and Nations, devoured their Wealth, and
incorporated them into their Empire; and whom they could not so perfectly
subdue, yet they harassed their Countries, and by enriching some of their
Clients, by giving others Lands or Revenues to them, they trampled upon those
whom they could not so perfectly devour and digest into the body of their
Empire. Illa igitur astuta liberalitas, says Calvin, vocatur conculcatio, quod
Residuum, quia scilicet non poterant vorare and absumere suis dentibus, pedibus
suis calcarent. See Calvin upon the place. And it was diverse from all the
Beasts that went before it. Forasmuch as they being absolute Monarchies, this
Fourth Beast consisted of Two Consuls and a Senate, (Dictators also were
sometimes chosen,) and in after times of a Mingle-mangle of Popes and Emperors,
etc. And it had Ten Horns, answering to the Ten Toes of the Iron Legs of the
Image, that is to say, This Roman Empire was at last divided into Ten Kingdoms,
as the Greek Empire was into Four. That these Ten Horns belong to the Roman
Empire, Grotius himself is fain to acknowledge in his Commentary on the
Apocalypse. though with might and main he endeavors to distort and obscure the
sense of that Book to the utmost he can. But by Virtue of the Apocalyptick
Synchronisms, and the clear and undeniable sense of the Seventeenth Chapter of
that Book, these Ten Horns must be the Roman Empire divided into Ten Kingdoms
after the Empire became Christian, and was beginning to Pagano-Christianize and
grow Idolatrous again. This therefore is the time, and there the Ten Horns of
the Beast.

8. I considered the Horns. Which is said by Daniel to excite us to a close
consideration of these Horns to see what we can espy there. And behold there
came up among them another little Horn. And this more especially was the object
of Daniel's, and ought to be of our consideration, what this little Horn, that
is said to be another Horn, (among them indeed but distinct from them) may
mean. This little Horn therefore is an Additional to the Ten Horns here, as the
Two-horned Beast and the Whore are Additionals to the Ten-horned Beast, Apoc.
Chapter 13. and 7. Which most peculiarly is the Papal Polity or Hierarchy. Now let
us see how this suits with the Text. Before whom there were three of the First,
namely, of the First Kind, and First mentioned, viz. Secular, Horns pluck^ up
by the roots. Vatablus his Translation has it out of the Chaldee, Tria autem ex
cornibus prioribus evulsa sunt a facie ejus. Whereby is signified only the
removal from before his Face, they stood in his light it seems. Whereas they
would have or had fixed themselves so near him to his prejudice, he made shift
to get them pulled away. But this you must conceive could not be till the Pope
had ascended unto that rampancy of Power, that he would excommunicate
Emperors, and depose them if need were, or absolve their Subjects from
Allegiance and seize their Lands. In which time the Pope becoming the Monarch
as it were of the Roman Empire, the Emperors so called whether Greek or
German, may well take their places among the Ten Horns, especially the Secular
Empire of old Rome being dissolved, which gave the Name or Title to the Roman
Empire, as Macedonia did to the Macedonick Empire. This premised, what Mr. Mede
says on this Text is very agreeable, That the Three Horns pulled away from
before the little Horn is the power extending into Italy, of the Greek
Emperors, of the Lombards, and of the Franks continued in the Empire of
Germany. All these Three Powers or Horns he made shift to rid himself of, that
he might the more easily domineer in Italy without any Corrival, as is
sufficiently made out by History. And behold in this Horn were eyes like the
eyes of a man. This is another main observable in this little Horn, that it had
eyes, when none of the rest are said to have so. Which is a notorious
difference, and hugely significant of a Power that will pretend to lead all the
rest of the Horns, as being themselves destitute of sight. And the Papal
Hierarchy how cunning and quick-sighted a Polity it has been all Histories ring
of it, and how far they pretend and how active Assistants they are, even in
Civil Affairs.

But I conceive this does not exhaust all the meaning of these eyes in the
little Horn, and of the other Horns having none. Which may more peculiarly
represent the difference betwixt this Hierarchical Power in the Empire, and the
Secular of the Ten Kings, who in matters of Faith and Religion are to have no
eyes of their own, but to profess and believe as this Horn who pretends to have
the only eyes tells them, and to be led in a blind implicit Faith and
Profession of whatsoever this seeing Horn declares to be Articles of the
Christian Religion, and requisite to salvation. And this little Horn having
this hank upon them, you may be sure will require them to believe such things
as tend most for the greatness, power, and riches of the Papal Hierarchy. And
all the gross and intolerable corruptions of their Church, whether touching
Faith or Practice, are invented or upheld for this very end, and upon this very
advantage, that the little Horn is thought only to have the eyes in matters of
Faith and Religion, but the other Ten Horns to be stark blind.

But lastly, though this little Horn pretends to the only sight and
infallibility in matters of Religion, as if it were inspired so from God that
it cannot err; yet the very character which the Prophecy gives it, does
advertise us, that this is but a bold boast among the rest, and that these are
really but the eyes of a man, even of that man of Sin or Antichrist, that
exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped.

For that by this little Horn Antichrist is Characterized, is the common and
current Opinion of the Ancient Fathers, as the Romish Interpreters themselves
cannot but confess, though they were mistaken in the time of his coming. And a
Mouth speaking great things; that is, Uttering great boasts of his own Power
and Infallibility. For this Papal Hierarchy pretend him, as to Superiority, to
be above all Kings and Emperors, as to their miraculous Power, that they can
by certain words turn a piece of Bread into a man, with Flesh and Blood, and
all Essentials of humane nature, nay, into God after a manner, and infallibly
declare, it is no Idolatry to worship this thus transubstantiated Bread, though
it seem still Bread to all, and is believed still to be so by all, but by those
that see only by the eyes of this little Horn, and so trust his Eyes only, and
renounce in the mean time the use of their own Eyes and all their Senses, nay,
of Reason, and the plain Light of the Scripture. Their pretense also of
consecrating Images to the effectually keeping off Thunder and Lightning, and
incursion of the Enemies, and the like, may be reckoned amongst other their
Boasts. But this speaking great things may more especially respect the great
vaunts of the Papal authoritative Power, he being called by the Pontifician
Polity, Our Lord God, Optimum Maximum and Supremum Numen in Terris, The Supreme
Deity on Earth: It being declared by them, That his Tribunal and God's is all
one. That his Power is absolute. That what he does he does as God and not as
Man. That he is all and above all. That he has the disposing of Kingdoms, can
pull down one and set up another. That he can do all that God can do. That he
can change the Nature of things, make something of nothing, make Injustice
Justice, and Wrong Right. That all Laws are in his Breast. That he can dispense
with the Canons of the Apostles, and with the New Testament itself. That he is
the Cause of Causes. That it is Sacrilege to doubt of his Power. That he has
dominion over Angels, Purgatory and Hell. That he is the Monarch of the World,
and exceeds the Imperial Majesty as much as the Sun does the Moon. And, That he
is to be adored by all the Potentates of the Earth. This and more than this you
may see made good by Bishop Downham in his Treatise De Antichristo, for above
Fifty Pages together. And is not this a mouth speaking great things indeed? And
is not this part of the Prophecy also eximiously fulfilled, understanding by
the little Horn that Man of Sin or Antichrist, that thus exalts himself above
all that is called God or worshipped, whom the Lord shall consume with the
Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming? Which
thing is exhibited in the following part of the Vision.

9. I beheld till the Chrones were cast down. The word in the original might as
well be rendered, set down or erected, which is the most natural Sense and most
conherent with what follows, And the Ancient of Days did sit, * namely, God the
Father, who though he is not before the other Two Hypostases of the Blessed
Trinity in time, yet he is in order of nature. He sat in his Throne together
with the chiefest of the Angelical Orders in their Thrones or Seats, to make up
the solemnity of the Judgment. Whose ^arment was white as snow, and the hair of
his Head like the pure wool. Whiteness here by Interpreters is looked upon,
that of his Head as an Emblem of mature Counsel and Judgment with a sutableness
to his Title of the Ancient of Days, that of his Garment as a Symbol of pure
unspotted Righteousness and Impartiality in Judgment. And this appearance of
this first Hypostasis in general in White, may denote the proper Character of
his Nature. Which the Platonists call the (...), and the (...), which imply an
ineffable Simplicity and Benignity, and who would not have the world judged by
such a Judge? His Chrone was like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels like the
burning Fire. viz. Such was the splendor of his Throne and of the Wheels
thereof, bright, sparkling, and shining like Fire and Light. This is a
Description of the Divine Shechinah, not much unlike that in Ezekiel, Chapter 1.
and 10. This is a Chariot-like Throne as that a Throne-like Chariot; and as the
Wheels there as well as living Creatures are Angelical, so there are Angels
here innumerable in this great Session sitting with the Ancient of Days, or
assisting, while he sits in his Imperial Throne drawn with Wheels, Angelical
Wheels, by whose Ministry is the Revolution of all States and Kingdoms: Though
in the mean time there may be also an allusion in these Wheels to the Sellae
Curules, Chairs of State that ran upon Wheels, in use in the days of old.

10. A Fiery stream issued and came forth from before him. Flumen igneum
manabat ab ore ejus egrediens, so Grotius says it is, in Chaldaeo. A Fiery
stream issued out of his mouth. The brightness of this appearance, and the
mention of this Fiery stream coming out of his mouth, (like that blast of Fire
and flaming Breath, 2 Esdr. 13.) suits excellently well with that passage 2 Thessalonians. 2. Whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming. Which shall be by the clear
demonstration of the power of his Spirit so manifestly appearing in his true
Church, of whom Jesus Christ is and ever has been the living Head, the same
which is the Son of man which is anon exhibited in this Vision, namely, Christ,
together with his true and living Church. But in the mean time I leave to the
ingenious Readers consideration, whether that Fiery stream and Flaming breath
coming out of the mouth of the Ancient of Days, God the Father, may not
emblematize the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the third Hypostasis of the Holy
Trinity, as well as the Son of man plainly represents to us the Second. For who
can doubt but that it is a representation of Christ, the humane nature of the
Messiah united with the Eternal Logos, and according to his Divinity every
where existing in the Father, as well as according to his Humanity he is here
represented distinctly from him? Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and Ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him. This Judgment of the little Horn
is so magnificently set out as if it were the last Judgment of all, and I do
not doubt but that it alludes to it, and touches upon it in the following
words. The Judgment was set and the Books were opened. This sitting of the
Judgment corresponds with that Apoc. 20. 11, 12. Where there is a White Throne
and the Books are opened, and this is at the Final Judgment, and General
Resurrection, immediately preceding the Conflagration, which in another sense
this Fiery description here in Daniel suits very well with, and then the Fiery
stream out of the mouth of the Ancient of Days will presignifie that final
Sentence, Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting Fire.

But Ver. 4. of the same Chapter, Apoc. 20.
And I saw Thrones and they sat upon them, etc. This answers to the ninth Verse
of this seventh of Daniel, And I beheld till the Thrones were set. For these
Thrones are set to judge the little Horn, the same with the Whore or False
Prophet, which is said, together with the Beast, Apoc. 19. to be taken and cast
both alive into a Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone, which is to come to pass
under the Seventh Vial; which immediately preceeds the coming down of the New
Jerusalem, and the Reign of the Saints. Here is only the difference betwixt
these Two Sessions, that the Apocalyptick Session mentions only the Reign of
the Saints, this the instant dooming and executing the Doom of the little Horn
in order thereto, and the giving the Son of man the Kingdom. But being that
Corruption unius is Generatio alterius, and the things are so closely connected,
we may very well admit that these Two preceding Sessions or Sentences declared
therein, have a considerable correspondence one with another, that in the
Apocalypse manifestly belonging to this part of this Judgment here in Daniel,
that gives the Kingdom to the Son of man. So that so far the correspondence is
palpable.

11. I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the Horn
spoke; namely, Such blustering and boastfull words as were recited above upon
Ver. 8. to see what would become of this Horn that so magnified himself above
all. and had acted accordingly in deposing Kings and trampling upon the Necks
of Emperors, and murdering, massacring and burning God knows how many Hundred
thousands of innocent Christians for not submitting to his Tyranny and
Idolatry. I beheld even till the Beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and
given to the burning Flame. What then, is the Beast destroyed and the little
Horn escape punishment? This therefore is a very compendious and Elliptical
Form of Speech. But the Sense is fully made out by S. John Apoc. 19. 20. For it
is impossible but the little Horn must be concerned in that destruction of the
Beast, himself being the Two-horned Beast in the Apocalypse, Chap. 13. but in
Apoc. 19.
this Chapter styled the False Prophet for his false pretense to Infallibility.
And the Beast was taken, says he, and with him the False Prophet that wrought
Miracles before him, that is, who transubstantiated Bread into a Man, and
brought Fire from Heaven, and had power over Purgatory and Hell, thither to
strike innocent Souls by his fulminant Excommunications. These both were cast
alive into a Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone. And thus the Fourth Empire,
the Roman, as to its Idolatrous Tyranny, of which the Pope makes himself the
Head, as his Canonists and Theologers declare, is quite demolished under the
Seventh Vial.

12. As concerning the rest of the Beasts they had their Dominion taken away;
that is, And if any one shall be so curious as to enquire what became of the
rest of the Beasts, the other Three above mentioned, let that suffice that
their Dominion was taken away; and that, Yet their lives were prolonged for a
season and time; they had their certain periods allowed them too, by the Doom
of the Ancient of Days. This is enough as touching them, but the great business
of all is touching the Fourth Beast, the Roman Empire; forasmuch as the true
Church of Christ for so long a space of time is so much concerned therein, and
therefore that deserves more special observation and enlargment. The Affairs of
the Jews under the Three first Beasts are not considerable, in respect of these
of the Christians. And therefore the Three first Beasts in this Vision seem to
be brought in merely as a preamble to the Fourth; and the Fourth with the Three
first to be first described, as being of one suit, namely, Idolatrous. But then
there is a Fifth Kingdom which is Christ with his true Church commencing in the
Apostles times, and lasting till the end of the World. Of which in the
following Verse.

13. I saw in the night Uisions, in this Divine Dream as was abovesaid, And
behold, one like the Son of man. The Son of man is a Title which Christ so
inculcatedly assumes to himself, to whom the Kingdom does belong, that it is
impossible but he should have a regard to this very place, in the so
perpetually using that style touching himself. And therefore it being Christ,
it is plain that the second Hypostasis of the Holy Trinity is here exhibited in
this Divine Vision as well as the first and third, as I have noted, they all
Three are in the Vision of Ezekiel. This Title of Christ, the Son of man,
occurrs in innumerable places. I need name none. And yet there is one I will
not omit, Matthew. 26. 64. When the High Priest had adjured him to tell him if he
was Christ the Son of God, Jesus says unto him, Thou have said. Nevertheless I
say unto thee, (though thou have hit it already, yet I will give thee a further
confirmation thereof,) Hereafter shall you see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven; namely, as it were at
the head of the Roman Army, to take vengeance of the murtherous unbelieving
Jews, I say, the Roman Army, out of which People especially he was to raise to
himself his Kingdom, the Church. Which yet was but Regnum Lapidis, as I noted
in the foregoing Vision, but would be in time Regnum Montis. Came with the
Clouds of Heaven. To be carried with the Clouds of Heaven, denotes that a King
shall be master of his Enemies, and get glorious Victory, says Achmetes. And
the destruction of the Jews was the establishing of the Church of Christ, or
his Kingdom among the Gentiles, the Romans especially, whose Empire became at
last Christian. And came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near
before him, presented him as a Candidate for the designed Kingdom.

14. And there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all
People, and Nations, and Languages should serve him; that is, That some of all
People should serve him in the pure Apostolic way of Doctrine and Worship; and
indeed the whole Roman Empire in a manner did so for a while after
Constantine's time, till the Apostasy came in. Which small Interval of time in
this Vision is not taken notice of, as being inconsiderable. But in the mean
time it may be here seasonable to note, that this Right of the Kingdom being
given to the Son of man, answers to the first Vision of the Seals, the Vision
of the Heroes on the white Horse, with a bow in his hand, and who had a Crown
given unto him, Apoc. 6. 2. the right of the Imperial Crown. So that this part
of Daniel's Vision here commences with the Epoch of the Apocalypse, or the
beginning of Christianity. For there seems Four Sentences to have been
represented in this Judicial Session of the Ancient of Days, (besides that
touching the Three Beasts, Ver. 12.) one assigning the Kingdom in general to
the Son of man, the other, the Judgment of the little Horn; the third, the
giving of the more enlarged Kingdom to the Son of man upon the destruction of
the little Horn; and the fourth, the final Doom of all, at the day of Judgment
properly so called. But the first and the last there is only a slight
perstriction or brief intimation of them, but that of the little Horn is
insisted on, the abolishing of his power, and the giving the great enlargement
of the Kingdom, the Regnum Montis, to the Saints of the most High. His Dominion
is an everlasting Dominion which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed. The true Church which is the genuine Kingdom of
Christ, and of which he alone is the Head as being Universal, never yet from
the beginning thereof has failed, nor ever will fail to the end of the World.

15. I Daniel was grieved in my Spirit, in the midst of my body, and the
Uisions of my head, upon my Bed, troubled me; that is, I was very anxious to
know what the meaning of this Vision might be. And methought,

16. I came near to one of them that stood by; to one of the Assistant Angels
in this great Session, not to those that were placed on Thrones. And asked him
the truth of all this; that is, The plain meaning of this Prophetic Parable.
So he told me, and made me know the Interpretation of things; namely, as
follows; and first in general.

17. These great Beasts which are Four, are Four Kings (with their Kingdoms or
Empires, viz. the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek and Roman,) which shall arise
out of the Earth. And therefore be but Earthly Kingdoms, minding Earthly Things
here below.

18. But the Saints of the most High; of (...), of the most High God, or of
Christ; who is called in the Apocalypse, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
Shall take the Kingdom, of the Stone, Regnum Lapidis, from the first planting
of the Gospel, but Regnum Montis, the Kingdom of the Mountain, upon the
destruction of the little Horn. And possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever
and ever; that is, The true Church of Christ shall never fail till the end of
the World, as was intimated above. And thus far in general touching the Vision,
but he holds on.

19. Then I would know the truth, the true meaning, of the Fourth Beast which
was diverse from all others. And in what regard we have above declared, as also
why so Exceeding ^^^adfull, whose (...) were of Iron and his Nails of Brass,
which (...), brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his (...), that also
we have above explained.

20. And of the Ten Horns that were in his Head. And of the other especially
which came up. For the Interpretation is spent most in describing it, Ver. 24,
25. And before whom (...) fell, those three I above named. Even of that Horn
that had Eyes, and would admit no other Horn to have Eyes besides it self,
especially in Spirituals. And a Mouth that spoke (...) great things, both
against the Law of God, which this Horn the Papal Power pretends to have a
right to dispense with and act contrary to, and against the right of Kings and
Emperors, whom he pretends a Power of excommunicating and deposing, and
absolving their Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, if they submit not to
the Decrees of his infallible Mouth, which will be sure to pronounce nothing
that is not agreeable to the worldly Interest of Holy Church. For this Horn has
the eyes of a man merely, and directs all by the measure of humane Policy, let
him pretend never so much to inspired Infallibility. Whose look was more stout
than his (...); That is, that has a bold assured look, affecting the greatest
Grandeur imaginable, as pretending to be Lord of the whole World, in whose
presence his Fellow Horns did but sneak, as whose stirrup they are ^ain to
hold, even Emperors themselves as well as Kings and other Princes, when this
little Horn is to ride on Horseback, and to bear on their Shoulders his Chair
when he will be carried in State, to hold the Basin and Towel when he washes
his hands, and in public Assemblies to sit at his Feet, and if they will not
be dutiful enough, to be trod upon by his Feet, as Frederick Barbarossa was
served by Pope Alexander the Third, who treading upon his Neck in conspectu
populi, with a bigg look and loud voice, abused that of the Psalmist to his
barbarous insulting over the Emperor, Super aspidem and leonem ambulabis, etc.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, etc. These hints are enough to show
how fully this part of the Prophecy is accomplished [whose look was more stout
than his Fellows.]

21. I beheld, and the same Horn (namely, the little Horn) made war with the
Saints and prevailed against them; that is, The Papal Power by using the forces
of the Ten Horns or Secular Power makes war against the Saints, the true
Apostolic Church, that stand out and cannot admit the gross corruptions and
Idolatrous usages of the little Horn. This answers to that of the Apocalypse,
Chapter 13. v. 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them. It is spoken there of the Tenhorned Beast as the Executioner of
the War, but in Daniel of the little Horn, as the Instigator or Authorizer of
the War. But this in the mean time is no small indication, that the times of
the little Horn belong to the times of the Ten-horned Beast healed; which are
the times of the Apostasy of the Church.

22. Until the Ancient of Days came. viz. Till he proceeded to that part of the
Doom that pronounced Sentence against the little Horn. And Judgment was given
to the Saints of the most High; that is, The Sentence was pronounced on their
side, God so generally convincing the World of the truth of their cause. And
the time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom; namely, After the evidence
of the truth of their Cause was so well known to the World.

23. Thus he said, The Fourth Beast shall be the Fourth Kingdom upon Earth;
namely, the Roman State or Empire. Which shall be diverse from all Kingdoms, as
having a Political constitution different from them, as has been noted above.
The vulgar Latin, the Septuagint, and Vatablus, as also Gasper Sanctius read,
Which shall be greater than all Kingdoms, namely, than those Three before
named. Which therefore cannot be the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, as
Grotius would have it, if that reading obtain. And it has the start of the
other for Antiquity. And shall devour the whole Earth, and shall tread it down,
and break it in pieces. Which suits best of all with the sense of Vatablus, the
vulgar Latin, and the Septuagint. For the greatest Kingdom was the most able to
do this.

24. And the Ten Horns out of this Kingdom are the Ten Kings that shall arise.
The Roman Empire, Ver. 7. is described under one Interval of its period to have
Ten Horns, so that it is the same Ten-horned Beast that occurs in the
Apocalypse. And, Ver. 8. it is said that there came up among them another
little Horn, which naturally implies that it came up much about the same time
with them, though in what here follows it is said, And another shall arise
after them. Which is no contradiction to the former supposing in order he came
up last, so be it was not any considerable time after, or be understood of his
more sensible growth or palpable appearance; though the Hebrew word implies no
necessity of signifying any posteriority of time, but that he might spring up
with them and amongst them, but in such an occult manner, and so unawares, as
if he had stolen his growth behind them. For so the Septuagint render it, (...),
and the word in the Original will bear that sense very well, (...) and (...)
signifying order of place as well as of time, accordingly as the Septuagint
have translated it. But the time of the Ten-horned healed Beast being the time
of the Apostasy of the Church, and he being actually Ten-horned and healed at
the same time, (For the crowned Ten Horns which show their actual Reign, appear
only on the healed Beast's head, as I have noted in my Exposition of the
Apocalypse,) and the little Horn being said to arise among them or with them,
though the other Horns were not aware of him, as having no Eyes, though the
little Horn have the Eyes of a man, of a cunning perspicacious Politician; it
is manifest that the growth of the little Horn began with the Apostasy of the
Church, and so the little Horn may well be suspected of helping it on, being
most concerned in matters of Religion to manage them well or ill, as being that
Sacerdotal Polity or Hierarchy, as is intimated in what follows. And he shall
be diverse from the First, namely, from the other Ten Horns, they being Laick or
Civil, this Ecclesiastic or Spiritual, for such was the Papal Power. And,
under pretense of this Ecclesiastic Power, he shall subdue Three Kings. The
Three Kings which he is said to humble, subdue, or supplant, are, as I have
hinted above, those Three whose Dominions extended into Italy, as that of the
Greek Emperor Leo Isaurus, whom he excommunicated, and made his Subjects of
Italy revolt from their Allegiance because he was against Image-wor^hip. The
other supplanting or subduing is of the Longobards, whose Kingdom he caused, by
aid of the Franks, to be wholly ruined thereby, to get the Exarchate of
Ravenna, (which since the revolt from the Greeks the Longobards were seized on)
for a Patrimony to S. Peter. And the last of the Three which he humbled were
the Emperors of Germany, whom from the days of Henry the Fourth, he
excommunicated, deposed, and trampled under his Feet, and never suffered to
live in rest till he had made them quit their interest in election of Popes,
and Investitures of Bishops, and whatever remainder of Jurisdiction they had
in Italy. See Mr. Mede, Epist. 24. Thus did this Horn with Eyes, whose look was
more stout than his Fellows.

25. And he, namely, the little Horn, shall speak great (...) against the most
High. It is rightly translated, great words, because that Phrase touching the
little Horn has been used so often already, Ver. 8. 11. 20. Where either great
things or great words occur, and there cannot be a more fit and authentic
commentary on these passages than that in the Apocalypse, Chapter 13. v. 5, 6. And
there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; where
great things are expounded by blasphemies. And in the following Verse he shows
how these blasphemies are against God the most High, many examples whereof I
have given above upon Verse 8. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God
to blaspheme his Name, his authority and titles, and his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in Heaven. The Ten-horned Beast is said here to reproach them by
allowing, authorizing, and enforcing (against the decrees and authority of God,
which is also a blaspheming of his Name,) those blasphemous decrees of the Two
horned Beast, (which is the same with the little Horn, they being both the
Papal Polity or Hierarchy, the Ecclesiastic Authority not the Laick or
Secular,) for Imageworship, for Saint-worship, and worship of Angels, and for
Transubstantiation, which is a reproach to the Tabernacle of God, the body of
Christ; see the place in my Exposition of the Apocalypse. It is sufficient here
to note how well the deeds of the little Horn suit with those of the Ten-horned
Healed Beast, who is but the Abettor and Executioner of what the Two-horned
Beast would have. And therefore when it is said the little Horn here speaks
great words against the most High, it is all one as if it were said of the
Ten-horned Beast in the Apocalypse, nor is it any repugnancy to understand it
of them both. For this which is said of the Ten-horned Beast is to be looked
upon as the mere Echo of the Draconick voice of the Beast with Two Horns. So
agreeable in every point is Daniel with the Apocalypse. And shall (...) out the
Saints of the most High, By Imprisonments, Confiscation of Goods, by Burnings,
Croysades, and Massacres, upon which this little Horn will put the Ten Horns as
his occasions require, as is also noted Apoc. Chapter 13. v. 7. and in this Chapter
of Daniel, ver. 21. And think to change times and law^; To alter the Primitive
simplicity of the Christian Religion into a Constitution that best serves the
Interest of his Papal Kingdom, and the increasing the Revenues and the Power of
Holy Church, as they call it. All Superstitions never so Idolatrous, All
Doctrines never so monstrous, shall pass into a Law and Decree if they serve
this end. For the Papal Omnipotency has a power to make what Laws and
Institutes he pleases; all Edicts and Decrees lodge in the Cabinet of his own
Breast. Whence he may produce what he pleases, if you will believe his
Canonists. And they shall be given into his hand for a time, and times, and the
dividing of a time, or half a time. i.e. And they shall be established,
authorized, and enforced by the Secular Power of the Ten horn^d Beast, as was
observed above. To whom Apoc. 13. 5. power was given to continue Forty and two
months, which is just the same time with Daniel's Time and Times, and half a
Time, in the literal sense, each of the Sums amounting to Three years and a
half a piece, or 1260 days. But in the Prophetical style they signify so many
years. And that they are Prophetical ^^ys not vulgar, I have invincibly proved
in my (...) Prophetica, Book 2. Chapter 5. See also my Mystery of Godliness, Book
5. Chapter 15. Wherefore it is highly rational to conceive the times of the little
Horn to synchronize with all the middle Synchronals of the Ap^calypse: So that
we may know plainly where we are.

26. But the ^udgment shall sit, namely, To judge the little Horn or Papal
Hierarchy, which is the Two-horned Beast in the Apocalypse, or the Whore of
Babylon. To this alludes that saying of the Angel, Apoc. 17. And there came one
of the Seven Angels which had the Seven Vials and talked with me, saying unto
me, I will show unto thee the Judgment of the great Wh^re that sits upon
many waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication. And
part of this judgment is menaced against her in the Epistle to the Church in
Thyatira, Apoc. 2. 20. under the name of Iezebel, who calls her self a
Prophetess, but seduces Christ's Servants to commit Fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols. Which Prophetess so called by her self is the
Papal Hierarchy who boast themselves infallible, but judgment is menaced
against them, Ver. 22. Behold, I will cast her into a Bed, and them that commit
Adultery with her into great tribulation if they do not repent of their deeds.
Which Judgment fell upon her in the happy Reformation, when so many Kingdoms
and Countries deserted the Pope. And likewise in the Song of the risen
Witnesses, Chapter 15. v. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy
Name? for thou only art Holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before
thee. For thy Judgments are made manifest. And this is the former part of the
execution of the Sentence against the little Horn or great Whore. But the
Execution goes on in the Seven Vials. And they shall take away his Dominion to
consume and destroy it unto the end; that is, By that time all the Vials be
poured out upon the Two-horned Beast, the little Horn with Eyes, or the False
Prophet, his Dominion shall be quite destroyed and consumed, which is the
Second part of the Doom of the little Horn, and will be completed under the
seventh Vial, with which the Vision of that Divine Heroes on the white Horse
with a Sword coming out of his mouth does contemporize. Which Sword out of his
mouth answers to the fiery stream out of the mouth of the Ancient of Days, and
both to that of S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he says, that the Lord shall consume
the Man of Sin, by the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness
of his coming, as I have noted above. Now as the little Horn is doomed to
destruction (from whence the man of Sin is called the Son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) by this Divine Consistory, which is one part of their Act in this
Session; so that ample and everlasting Kingdom that succeeds the destruction of
the little Horn, is adjudged to the truly Apostolic, Catholic Church, of whom
Christ alone is Head. Which is the other part of the Act of this Session, and
which alone is taken notice of Apoc. 20. 4. the other part having been taken
notice of Chapter 17. and 18.

27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High. This
is that other part of the Sentence pronounced by that Divine Sanhedrim in the
behalf of the true Church that had been afflicted and oppressed so long under
the Tyranny of the little Horn. The true Church then consisting of Jew and
Gentile, will overspread all. This is to be accomplished under the second and
third Thunders. And I think no body can doubt but that the people of the Saints
of the most High are the truly Catholic and Apostolic Church, if he consider
the description of the New Jerusalem in the Apocalypse. And the most High is
Christ, who there is termed King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and the Messiah
will be acknowledged in those days to be such both by Jew and Gentile. This
answers to that of Apoc. 20. 4. And I saw Thrones and they sat upon them, and
Judgment was given unto them, and the result was, They that had not worshipped
the Beast, neither his Image, etc. they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years, acknowledging him the only universal Head of the Church. This
will be the truly Holy Catholic Church of Christ as they are here called the
people of the Saints of the most High. Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
not to end upon Earth till the last Thunder or Conflagration according to the
tenor of the Apocalypse. And all Dominions shall serve and obey him. All
Nations and Kingdoms shall willingly submit themselves to, and enjoy themselves
in this mightily extended and overspreading Kingdom of the Son of man which the
Ancient of Days had assigned to him. Which well may be called the Kingdom of
the Son of man in counterdistinction to those other Four Kingdoms that are set
out by ^ruel ravening Beasts, ^earing and trampling all under their Feet, and
forcing men to blind obedience with salvage violence, as was usual in the
Kingdom of Antichrist or little Horn with Eyes, that would let no body see but
himself. Whenas the true Church of Kingdom of the Son of man (as the Four
Beasts or rather Wights in the Apocalypse) are all full of Eyes within and
without. And certainly the Kingdom of the Son of man will be a Kingdom of
unaffected Prudence, defecate Reason and holy Love. For this is the true Man,
the rest in us is but common to us with the brutes. And therefore of such shall
consist the Kingdom of Christ the Son of man, (as he perpetually calls himself)
after the abolition of the Kingdom of Antichrist.

28. Hitherto is the end of the matter, namely, the matter the Angel
communicated to him by way of Interpretation of the Vision. As for me Daniel,
my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me. I was so
actuated by a supernatural power that my natural strength could scarce bear it,
which was discoverable in my very countenance grown lean and pale in undergoing
this Divine or Angelical Actuation or Impression. But I kept the matter in my
heart, that is, I committed it firmly and carefully to my memory, so that I
might be sure to transcribe it right, as being Ingens documentum Divinae
Providentiae Praescientiaeque, they are the very words of Grotius; A wonderful
instance of Divine Providence and Prescience to all Posterity. As certainly
this Vision and Interpretation is rightly understood, and I wish Grotius had so
understood it.

NOTES Upon VISION II. Ver. 4.
The last Monarch of the Babylonian Empire.] How rightly Darius Medus may be
deemed the last Monarch of the Babylonian Empire, See Thomas Lydiat in his
Emendatio Temporum, Anno Mundi 3469.

Ver. 6. Rather a mere gift of Divine Providence than any Acquist, etc.] Which
that in Josephus Antiq. Lib. 11. c. 8. seems to confirm. For notwithstanding
Iaddus the High Priest his disobedience to Alexander a little before, at which
he had conceived a displeasure against him, yet when Alexander came to
Jerusalem, and the High Priest and other Priests and Levites went out in their
Habits to meet him, and in this peaceable and splendid Pomp to receive him,
Alexander alone accosting Iaddus in his Pontifical habit and golden Crown with
the Name Iehova writ on it, bowed himself and saluted the High Priest very
friendly. Which was a wonder to the Bystanders, they expecting rather some
token of displeasure from him, than of that veneration and friendliness.
Wherefore Parmenio one of Alexander's Captains came privately to Alexander, and
asked him what was the matter with him that he, whom all others so much adored,
should condescend thus humbly to adore this Pontif of the Jews. To whom he
answered that he did not worship the Pontif, but that God whose Priest he was.
For I saw, says he, this his Priest in this habit in Dios of Macedonia (which
therefore must be his God himself, for he could not there appear) who while I
was deliberating with my self how I might subdue Asia, bid me be of good
courage, and without delay to Ship over my Army, for by his conduct I should
obtain the Empire of Persia. Which Vision of his in Dios of Macedonia, and the
meeting of Iaddus the High Priest in the very same habit that that Spectrum
appeared to him in, made him, as he himself professed to Parmenio, confident of
success. And Iaddus, which yet further might confirm his hopes, showed him the
Book of Daniel, I suppose that place in the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth,
where it is said, And a mighty King shall stand up that shall rule with great
Dominion and do according to his will, etc. Which the High Priest might well
interpret of Alexander his present expedition, and he, in virtue of his Vision
in Dios, of the God of Israel appearing there to him in the Pontifical habit
(as he did also to Daniel and S. John) firmly believe him. As we also from
these considerations may easily believe that Alexander's Conquests were rather
a mere gift of Divine Providence, than the fruit of his own Prowess or Policy.

Verse 9. Namely, God the Father, etc.] So we Christians call this first
Hypostasis of the Holy Trinity which the Cabbalists call Kether, and (from this
place questionless of Daniel) Attik Iomin, Antiquus Dierum. See the second
Cabbalistical Table in my Philosophical Volume Tom. 1.

VISION III.
The Vision of the Ram and He-goat, betokening the Kings of Media and Persia,
and the Kings of Graecia, Chap. 8.

THE Vision of the Image consisting of Four Metals and that of the Four Beasts,
both of them reached from the Babylonian Empire inclusively, to the glorious
Reign of Christ upon Earth in his true Apostolic Church in the blessed
Millennium. Now follows a Vision that insists more largely on some parts of the
time of the foregoing Visions, namely, those of the Medo-Persian but chiefly of
the Greek Empire; which is like the Method in the Apocalypse. Where first in a
more general and comprehensive way the state of the Christian Church from the
beginning thereof to the last Vial is set out in [Chap. 11.] and then again the
same period of time is run over in the Twelfth, Thirteenth and Fourteenth
Chapters. But afterward the Visions concern but parts of the same period which
are more fully insisted on. And so we shall find it here in Daniel, that the
rest of the Visions concern but parts of the times that are represented by the
Image of the Four Metals, and the Vision of the Four Beasts. And this of the
Ram and He-goat here in this Eighth Chapter concerns the times of the
Medo-Persian and Grecian Empire only, in manner as follows.

1. In the third year of the Reign of King Belshazzar King of Babylon, and
immediate Predecessor of Darius the Mede, A Uision appeared to me, even to me
Daniel; Non jam secundum quietem, says Grotius, sed (...), not in sleep but
when I was awake, and up and abroad. Else if it had been in his sleep on his
Bed he would have expressed so much in like manner as before. After that which
appeared to me at First, namely, in the beginning of the Reign of Belshazzar,
Chap. 7.

2. And I saw in a Uision, (and it came to pass that I was at Shushan in the
Palace which is in the Province of Elam.) He describes the place where he saw
this Vision as well as the time when. Now this Shushan is that Royal City of
the Persians, that is called S^sa in Historians and Geographers, a famous City
situated betwixt Persis and Babylonia, from whence the Country round about is
called Susiana. But there is mention of this Susa being in the Province of
Elam, that is, of Elymais, because Elam is the Name of the Persian people. Isa.
21. 2. Go up O Elam, besiege O Media; Ascend O Elam, i.e. Persa, and tu O Mede
invadite urbem, etc. says Cornelius a Lapide. The Vision therefore which so
much concerns the Persian Empire, Daniel saw upon the spot even in the Province
of Elam, which denotes the Persians. And I saw in a Uision and I was by the
River Ulas. Which is Vlaeus Fluvius with Historians and Geographers. That of
Pliny is for our purpose, Susianen ab Elymaide disterminat Amnis Ulaeus ortus
in Medis medioque spatio cuniculis conditus, ac rursus exortus per Mesobatenen
lapsus circuit arcem Susorum. It rises in Media, touches upon Susa, and at last
exonerates it self into the Sinus Persicus according to Ptolemy as well as
Bochartus.

3. Then I lift up mine eyes and saw, and behold there stood before the River,
that is, he saw externally with his Eyes when he had some charge there under
Belshazzar before that high honor of all which he bestowed upon him. A Ram
which had two Horns, by which as the Angel anon Interprets, is understood the
Medo-Persian Empire, and Kings thereof; Media and Persia being noted by the Two
Horns, as by the Two Horns of the Beast, Apoc. 13. the Two Patriarchates of
Rome and Constantinople are noted. But why the Persian King with his Kingdom
should be represented by a Ram, many reasons occur. For first a Ram is a strong
pugnacious Animal, and (...) and (...) in Chaldee as (...) in Hebrew signifies
to be strong, as it also signifies, the last I mean, a Ram. And such
Paronomastical allusions are not unusual with the Prophets, as I have observed
elsewhere. The strength therefore and pugnaciousness of the Ram, well represent
Cyrus and his Successors. But secondly, a Ram, according to Achmetes signifies
riches, which therefore intimates the vast treasures laid up in the Castle at
Susa and other places, in Cyrus and Darius Codomannus his time also; see
Grotius upon the place, of whom you may have a more particular account. And
lastly you may cast in that also, That for the kindness of the Kings of Persia
to the Jews, (especially in comparison of the Babylonian Monarchs and Greek)
they making several favorable decrees in their behalf, they with their Kingdom
is represented by the figure of this better sort of Animals, as Sheep are
conceived to be, whether Male or Female, and a Ram is of the Male-kind thereof.
Wherefore though they were as a Bear to other Nations, yet they were as a Ram
to the Jews, or rather as a Sheep. And the Two Horns were high, but one was
higher than the other. The Persians here are preferred before the Medes. And
the higher came up last. The Persian power, namely, did emerge into that
greatness after the Median.

4. I saw the Ram pushing Westward, and Northward, and Southward. He pusht
Westward, when Darius Hystaspis and Xerxes made war against Greece; Babylonia
also is Westward of Persia, which Cyrus took. He pusht Northward, when the
said Darius made war against the Scythians. And Southward, when Cambyses, and
others of their Kings invaded Egypt, Aethiopia and Libya. So that no Beast did
stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand, but
he did according to his will and became great. For the Persians took Babylon
with its whole Empire, Lydia also and Ionia, Asia minor and Egypt.

5. And as I was considering behold an He-goat. That the Greek Empire is
denoted by the He-goat we have the authority of the Angel for it, Ver. 21. And
why he should signify the Greek Empire, there be several reasons for it: As
first, it is a very apt allusion to the Ancient Name of the Macedonians. For a
company of Greeks under the conduct of Caranus taking the City of Aedessa,
Caranus called it afterward Aegea, from the Flock of Goats ((...) in Greek)
that led him in a misty mizling day unto the City, his omen lying in them,
according to the prediction of an Oracle, which bid him fix his Seat in
Macedonia where the Goats should lead him. And therefore urbem Aedessam ob
memoriam muneris Aegeas, populum Aegeatas vocavit, says Justin, Lib. 7. So
that the Macedonians (and Alexander was such) their being called Aegeatae,
which is as much as the Goat-people in English, may be one palpable reason why
the Macedonick Empire should be represented by a Goat. Secondly, Hircus rapaces
significat, as Grotius observes out of Achmetes. Thirdly, In that he is called
(...), Hircus caprarum, it denotes Alexander's youngness when he began his
enterprise of overrunning the Eastern Empire, he being not much past Twenty
years old. Fourthly, The clambring nature of the Goat that gets upon the
highest and steepest Rocks, sets out the bold aspiring mind of Alexander, to
say nothing of that * strange exploit of his, literally taken, in India, his
ascending with his Soldiers an high craggy Rock that Hercules himself was
deterred from enterprising. And lastly comparing the Greek Nation with the
Persian, as Pliny notes of Goats and Sheep, that the Goats are the wiser and
more ready-witted Animal; so the Greeks were more cunning and more clear-headed
than the Persians. To this purpose Interpreters comment on the Text. And how
much Philosophy flourished in Greece is well known, and that Aristotle was the
Master of Alexander, and how that they affected not only long Robes but long
Beards, which some wits among them have compared to that of a Goat, as you may
see in the Greek Anthology, Lib. 2. (...). Came from the We^^, Greece being
seated West of Persia. On the face of the whole Earth. Whereby is intimated the
largeness of his divagations in this his Expedition into the East, and the
over-spreading of his Victories. And touched not the ground, Which is an
indication of his swiftness and speed. The swiftness of Camilla in Virgil is
expressed thus, Aeneid. Lib. 7. Illa vel intactae segetis per summa volaret
Gramina, nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas.
And (...) which signifies an He-goat and is the word here used, is from (...)
which signifies to fly. So that this also may have some allusion to this
extraordinary speed in Alexander's Victories, who in the space of Six years
overran and vanquished the Persians, the Medes, the Babylonians and
Egyptians, and the neighboring Nations. And the Goat had a notable Horn
between his eyes. Where it is worth our taking notice of, that here is the Goat
and his Horn, which cannot be the same thing in nature, but one the part of the
other, and there is but one Goat, and therefore no more than one Empire can be
understood thereby which is the Greek, of which Alexander was the first Horn or
Sovereign. But it is placed betwixt the Eyes of the Goat, merely for the
embellishing the Cortex of the Vision, supposing an Animal have but one Horn,
that being the most seemly placing of it.

6. And he came to the Ram that had Two Horns which I had seen standing before
the River, that is, The Greek forces assaulted the Medo-Persian signified by
the Ram. And ran unto him in the fury of his power. Pliny observes that Goats
are of a more hot and fiery temper than Sheep. So well do the Symbols agree
with the things signified.

7. And I saw him come close to the Ram, and he was moved with choler against
him, with a fiery courage and animosity. And smote the Ram and brake his Two
Horns. The Two Kingdoms of Media and Persia. And there was no power in the Ram
to stand before him, neither in campis Adrastiis or at Granicus a River of
Phrygia, the first Battle that was fought betwixt Alexander and Darius his
Satrapae, nor at Issus in Cilicia where the second was fought, and where the
exceeding numerous Army of Darius was put to flight, from whence the City by
Alexander was after called Nicopolis. But he cast him down to the ground and
stamped upon him. For all Darius brought out a far more numerous Army against
him this last time than before, yet Alexander quite vanquished him and the
whole strength of his Kingdom at Arbela a City of Assyria. And there was none
that could deliver the Ram out of his hands. Nay the terror of Alexander was
such, that it caused Darius his own nearest friends to betray him. And so
Alexander was made Master of the whole Medo-Persian Empire.

8. Therefore the He-goat waxed very great; that is, The Kingdom of the Greeks
was exceedingly enlarged by this accession of the Medo-Persian Empire added
thereunto by Alexander the Great, deservedly so called for thus enlarging his
Empire. And when he was strong, as having all this power of the Medes and
Persians added to his own. The great Horn was broken. This Alexander the Great,
for all his greatness died, and that an immature and violent death, in the very
Flower of his Age, at about the Thirty second or Thirty third year thereof, and
that by Poison as Historians record. And, after this great Horn of the Goat was
broken, for it came up four notable ones. Not in comparison of the first great
one that was broken, but in comparison of the rest of Alexander's Captains
amongst whom the Empire was divided after his death. But in that there is not
the least mention or intimation of any more than one Goat, it is gross
delirancy for any one to imagine the Horns here mentioned to belong to any
other but to him. Whence it is as clear as Noonday that all the Horns here
mentioned signifying particular Sovereignties, there being in the mean time but
one Beast mentioned, which necessarily implies but one Empire, State, or
Kingdom, that all these particular Sovereignties must be the Sovereignties of
one and the same State or Empire which the Goat signified, which is the Greek
Empire. The Four notable Horns whereof here aimed at, I conceive, are *
Ptolemaeus the Son of Lagus, Sovereign of Egypt; Lysimachus of Thracia,
Antigonus of Asia, and Cassander (the Son of Antipater) Sovereign of Macedonia.
Toward the Four Winds of Heaven, that is, East, West, North, and South; Egypt
lying in the South, Thracia in the North, Macedonia in the West, and Asia in
the East, if we compare the situation of these Four Principalities one with
another.

9. And out of one of them came forth a little Horn which waxed exceeding
great. This cannot be understood restrainedly of the particular Person of
Antiochus Epiphanes, * but of the Kingdom of the Seleucidae commencing from
Seleucus Satrapa or Prefect of Babylon, who was none of the Four notable Horns,
but himself being less notable grew up by the favor of one especially of the
most notable ones, namely, King Ptolemy, to whom he made his address when
Antigonus would have turned him out of his Prefecture, as you may see in
Diodorus Siculus. But this little Horn, the Kingdom of the Seleucidae, which
rose from such small beginnings later than the rest, grew afterward very
great. First, Antigonus King of Asia being vanquished and slain, Seleucus and
Ptolemy divided the greatest part of the spoils betwixt them. And Seleucus
afterward, Demetrius Poliorcetes the Son of Antigonus being taken by him, he
got to himself the Empire of Syria and Asia. So exceeding great did this little
Horn grow in Seleucus his time, but nothing comparable to this in Antiochus
Epiphanes his. Toward the South, and toward the East. This little Horn so
called from its small beginnings (as the little Horn, Chap. 7. is) is to be
understood of the whole continuation of the Kingdom of the Seleucidae, or the
succession of the Kings of Syria or Assyria, as Helvicus styles them, and so
the Vision is to be applied to such parts of the succession as it fits with.
And therefore this part may point more particularly to Antiochus Epiphanes, who
toward the East overcame Artaxias King of Armenia, and had overrun Egypt also
in the South, but that at his Siege of Alexandria the Roman Legate Popilius
interceded in the name of the Senate, and circumscribed him so, that he durst
proceed no further but retroceded from his enterprise on Egypt, as you may see
in Justin. And toward the pleasant Land. The Hebrew word is (...) which
signifies what is beautiful, fair, and pleasant. All Interpreters understand
it of the Land of Judea, this being the character of that Land in Holy
Scripture, as Psalm. 38. The City of Jerusalem is said to be beautiful for
situation, and the joy of the whole Earth; and Ezec. 20. 6. the Land of Judea
is described as a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and as the glory of all
Lands. Not but that Judea belonged to the Kingdom of Syria or of the Seleucidae
before, but that there is here a peculiar occasion of mentioning it, because
Antiochus Epiphanes being disappointed of his purpose on Egypt and Alexandria,
made presently after, toward Judea to vent his choler upon them. Nor do I
deny, though the little Horn in its more general sense takes in the whole
succession of the Kings of Syria, but that yet it may more peculiarly aim at
Antiochus Epiphanes. * Which is the Genius of the Prophetic Style to give as
it were Two strokes at once, and under one figure to represent both the general
state of the thing, and also some more special part thereof alone. And here
that may luckily come in of Grotius, who understands the Horn out of which the
little Horn comes, to be Antiochus Magnus, the Father of Epiphanes, and
Epiphanes to be called little because he was modicae primum fortunae, privatus,
and Romae obses, of a mean fortune at first in a private condition, and an
hostage at Rome.

10. And it waxed great even to the Host of Heaven; that is, So far that it
fought against the People of God, the Israel of God, whose God is called the
Lord of Hosts, of which his own people are peculiarly a part, and may be said
to have kept garrison, as it were, in Jerusalem, the Temple being as it were
the main fortress thereof. And Grotius understands it peculiarly of the Levites
there watching. And it cast down some of the Host, that is, Antiochus perverted
some of the Priests and Levites, and of the Jews in general, to forsake the Law
and to observe the Customs of the Heathens, as you may see in the Books of
Maccabees at large. And of the Stars to the ground. Even some of those that
were or should have been great Lights to the people by reason of their
Learnedness in the Law, were perverted and precipitated into a compliance with
the Heathenish Rites and Customs. And stamped upon them, trod them into the
very dirt and mire at last of abominable prophanations.

11. Yea he magnified himself even to the Prince of the Host, that is, So as to
set himself above him, to dispose of the High Priesthood as he pleased,
accordingly as he was more largely bribed; as the case was in Jason and
Menelaus, and to put an end to the service of the Temple, and the daily
sacrifice as it follows. And by him the daily sacrifice was taken away. These
things Grotius would refer to the High Priest, but the more full and genuine
sense is, that Epiphanes magnified himself above God himself by thus taking
away that service that God had appointed for himself. And moreover he rose to
that impudence that he would bring in the Idol of Jupiter Olympius into the
Temple to take possession thereof, as if he intended to turn the true Owner out
of doors, who abominates Idols, and has strictly forbid his people the
worshipping of them; see Cornelius a Lapide on the place. And the place of his
Sanctuary was cast down, that is, was debased and cast down from that hight of
sanctity that belonged to it before, by vile Heathenish prophanations and
sacrificing Swines Flesh on the very Altar, as you may see in Josephus, Iudaic.
Antiquit. lib. 12. c. 7.

12. And an Host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of
transgression. There is no [him] in the Original, but the sense may run thus,
An Host shall be given, that is, granted or appointed by Antiochus (of whom in
the same place, Josephus writes, (...), to hinder the daily sacrifice, (...),
i.e. through his villainy and wickedness, his haughtiness swelling to so high a
pitch of impiety. To this sense Grotius glosses on the place, and it is
consentaneous to what follows in Josephus in the same Chapter. For presently
after, it is said, they built a Fort or Castle that could command the Temple,
to nose, as it were, the God of Israel, and deter both Priest and People from
their duties touching the daily sacrifice. For in that Castle did Antiochus
place (...), a Macedonick guard, for the purpose. And it cast down the truth to
the ground, that is, The true Religion or true worship of God contained then in
the Law of Moses. And as if this Chapter of Josephus were a comment on this
passage of Daniel, it follows in order after this, that, (...), the Holy Book
that contains the Law of Moses wherever it was found, it was presently
abolished, i.e. torn in pieces or burnt. And it practiced and prospered, that
is, These wicked doings of Antiochus succeeded and obtained for a time. That
the ancient Fathers make Antiochus Epiphanes a Type of Antichrist (whose time
is also set) is better known than that I need to note it. But in nothing is
Antichrist like his Type more than in trampling under foot the Sacred
Scripture, (as Antiochus caused to be burnt or torn in pieces the (...), the
Law of God contained in the Holy Bible,) that the People of God, without any
scruple, might be made subject to the vain inventions of men; in his cruel
persecuting of them that will not partake of his Idolatrous sacrifice of the
Mass, as the Jews were persecuted, tortured, and killed for not communicating
in their Feast of sacrificed Swines Flesh, as it is recorded touching Eleazar,
2 Maccab. 6. 18. And lastly, in endeavoring to Heathenize the People of God
again by many Idolatrous and Pagan-like Rites and Customs, as you may see
Antiochus did in the Books of Maccabees. But this only by the by, we go on.

13. Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that certain
Saint that spoke. Saint here is as much as Angel, as Chapter 4. 13. And behold a
Watcher and an Holy one, (...) as here (...). That Angels are called Holy ones
and Watchers is from the ethereal purity, exertedness, and activity of their
nature, as well as from their office and ministry, they being as it were the
vicarious eyes of God to watch over his people for their good, and to see that
righteous things be done among men. The most easy and genuine translation of
the Original I think is this, Then I heard an Angel speaking, and that same
speaking Angel said, (...), that is, (...), to a certain one who shall be
nameless, as if it were put for (...) in the sense I have expressed. But it
being a word occurring no where but here, and Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion,
and the Septuagint not venturing to interpret it, but leaving it as they found
it in the Original (...), Phelmoni, it raises a suspicion in me that there is
some greater mystery in it than some men are aware of, and therefore, I
conceive, with Calvin, it is a title of Christ, and that this Angel here called
Palmoni, is Christ himself, having this mystical name from (...) Pele,
wonderful, which is one of the Titles of him, Isa. 9. 13. and from Almoni,
which is from (...) obmutuit, and in Pihel, colligavit, which intimate the
ineffableness and unutterableness of the admirable union or colligation of the
Humane nature with the Divine, of the Soul of the Messiah with the eternal
Logos, as it is said also of him in the Apocalypse, That he has a Name written
that no man knows but himself. Which admirable and unspeakable condition of
Christ is set out by this word Palmoni. * Which is the sense that Calvin
himself seems to aim at upon the place. How long shall be the Uision concerning
the daily sacrifice, viz. Concerning the taking of it away, how long will that
condition last? And that transgression of desolation, viz. That wicked usage of
Antiochus against the People of God and their City and Sanctuary, which he will
so greatly oppress and make desolate, as it follows in the next words. To give
both the Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden under foot, to be insulted over,
despised and profaned. By the Host here in the first place may be understood
the Priests and Levites that kept watch and ward there in the Temple,
engarrison'd, as it were, in this great and glorious Castle of the God of
Israel. To say nothing of the Angelical Powers residing there, such as were
heard to say before the final destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, (...),
Let us go hence, but no small part also of this (...), this Host are the rest
of the People of Israel.

14. And he said unto me, Unto two thousand three hundred days, then shall the
Sanctuary be cleansed. The Hebrew has it (...), Evening-mornings, (...). Which
plainly shows that Prophetical days are not here meant but natural days. And it
being an unskilful conceit to think there was an affectation to predict the
time to a very day that this desolation or oppression from Antiochus should
continue upon God's People, it is plain the time is to be reduced into years.
And so by the answer may be signified there would be Six years or there-about,
which may comprehend the first coming of Antiochus into Judea when the
Priesthood was profaned, as also his second, his Interdicting the Iudaick
Rites, the placing the Idol in the Temple, and the whole time of the
Intermission of the daily sacrifice: so Grotius expressly upon the place. But
from the time of that gross profanation of the Temple when Antiochus his
Soldiers set an Heathenish Altar in the Sanctuary and sacrificed Swine's Flesh
on it, till Antiochus Eupator granted the Jews the free use of their Religion
and Temple, Thomas Lydiat reckons about Three years and a half. Which may give
a glance, being Prophetically understood, at the Time of the true Antichrist,
Chap. 7. as to the duration of the entireness of his Kingdom. Then shall the
Sanctuary be cleansed. At least by that time it shall be cleansed.

15. And it came to pass when I, even I Daniel, had seen the Uision and sought
for the meaning; he praying in his heart that he might understand it, Then
behold there stood before me as the appearance of a Man. An Angel externally
visible to him in humane Shape. For this is not a Dream, or Night-Vision, but a
Day-Vision, as I observed out of Grotius in the beginning.

16. And I heard a Man's voice between the banks of Ulai. The River Vlaeus that
runs by Susa, betwixt the Banks of this River he heard the voice of Palmoni, or
Christ: Who since he could walk on the Waters when he was in the Flesh, might
well appear betwixt the Banks of Vlai in the Air, or upon the Water, and there
speak in a Man's voice before he was incarnate. Which called and said, Gabriel,
make this man understand the Uision. The giving this command to Gabriel shows,
that this Palmoni is no (...) or (...), any ordinary Angel; but this and what
was abovesaid may well assure us that it was the Prince of Angels, yea Christ
himself, if we add what will occur in the Tenth Chapter.

17. So he came near where I stood, and when he came I was afraid. And might
have been more astonished if Palmoni himself had come so near him, when he
could not bear the presence of one of his Ministers. And fell on my face,
Through very astonishment my Spirits failed in me. But he said unto me,
Understand O Son of man, that is, be attentive and diligent to conceive what I
say. For at the time of the end shall be the Uision. Though it be long, even
about 400 years, till this of the little Horn be fulfilled in Antiochus
Epiphanes, yet at the end for a certain the Vision will be accomplished. To say
nothing how its Antitype at another Time of the End, even during the Time and
Times and half a Time, will have its completion too.

18. Now as he was speaking with me, namely, At the hearing of his voice, I was
as much stounded thereat as before at his sight, and so sinking down fell upon
my face, my Spirits retiring as in those that are in a deep sopor, as if they
were half dead. And therefore our English Translation is not so exact that
renders the following words (...), I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the
ground. Vatablus has it, Sopore correptus cecidi in faciem (...) in terram, and
Calvin, Sopitus corrui, etc. And the vulgar Latin, Collapsus sum pronus in
terram. Which therefore signifies a sounding fit that took him at the hearing
the voice of the Angel. Hence Daniel is concluded to have fallen twice to the
ground, the first time at the sight, the second at the voice of the Angel, says
Maldonat. Which naturally implies, that saving in these sounding fits Daniel
was perfectly awake, and that this Vision was (...), properly so called, a
Day-Vision not a Night-Vision or Divine Dream. But he touched me and set me
upright, The Hebrew is, He made me stand upon my standing, that is, By his
touch he enabled me to stand upon my Feet again; so great virtue was there in
it. And no wonder that the Ethereal and vivifical Body or vehicle of an Angel
which is (...) for the mavelous energy thereof, actuated also by so holy an
Inhabitant, should raise Daniel, fallen into a sound, unto life again, when holy
Souls even in their terrestrial Tenements have done such mavelous cures, and
by the application of their own bodies have raised them to life that have been
taken to be dead, as Elisha did in the Widow's Child, and Paul in Eutychus. And
here we see the Angel Gabriel (Christ appearing in humane shape by way of
prelude to his Incarnation) to have a preludious mission, as of an Apostle, to
preach to Daniel and to instruct him, and to do Miracles also as the Apostles
did. For this is a privilege of the Ministers of Christ's Kingdom, the Malcuth
of the God of Israel, which is the Tenth Sephirah with the Cabbalists, as
Geburah the Fifth, the Topic of the Powers belonging to that Kingdom, of which
doing Miracles is one. And Gabriel here, the Angel, his name signifies the
Power of God, or the Strength of God.

19. And he said, Behold I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of
the Indignation. For this prediction of the wrath of God in the time of
Antiochus against his People, and the raging tyranny of Antiochus over them, is
the main drift of this Vision, and here the Angel promises to tell what shall
come at the end thereof, which he does Ver. 25. That he shall be broken without
hand. For at the time appointed the end shall be. All times and affairs are in
the hands of God, and he can determine as he pleases, and at his appointed time
the Heat of those Persecutions and Oppressions of the Jews under Antiochus
shall have an end, they being not to last passing 2300 days as was declared
above by Palmoni, that Prince of Angels and Men, and of Israel especially.

20. The Ram which thou saw having Two Horns are the Kings of Media and
Persia, that is, The whole race of those Kings from Cyrus to Darius Codomannus,
as is to be understood from Ver. 4. where the Ram is said to push Westward and
Northward, and Southward, which was not performed by any one King but by the
succession. For that Typical Ram, says Gasper Sanctius, rusht out of Persis an
Oriental Quarter, and turning himself to the South assaulted Egypt, Aethiopia,
and Libya; to the North, Pontus, Scythia, and Cappadocia; and turning himself
to the West he made himself Master of the Babylonians, Assyrians, (I suppose he
means Syrians) and the Isles of the Mediterranean. These things were not
performed by one King but by the succession. And Grotius particularizes for the
main. For upon [towards the West] the Persians, says he, under Darius the Son
of Hystaspis and Xerxes made war upon Greece, [towards the North] the said
Darius made war against the Scythians, [toward the South] Cambyses invaded
Egypt and Aethiopia, as I noted above. So evident is it that the whole
succession is understood of the Kings of Media and Persia by the Ram together
with their Kingdom. Whence it is reasonable that by the Goat the whole
succession of the Kings of the Greek Empire should be understood in like manner.

21. And the rough Goat is the King of Grecia. Hic Rex pro regno ponitur
Hebraica locutione quae talia permiscet, says Grotius. And, I say, the rough
Goat is the Kings of Graecia together with their Kingdom or Empire, that is,
The whole succession of their Kings with their Kingdom or Empire. But now for
the rough Goat, as he is here called (...), that hirsute or long-haired Goat,
and consequently long-bearded, (which above was called (...), which
Interpreters make to be a young Goat, and refer it to the youngness of
Alexander when he undertook this expedition against Darius to win the Eastern
Monarchy,) I do not see but this long-bearded Goat as he is here described may
have reference to Alexander's Army, it consisting of old Soldiers, as Justin
describes them, the Leaders especially. Ordines quoque nemo nisi sexagenarius
duxit, ut si principia castrorum cerneres, Senatum te alicujus priscae
reipublicae videre diceres. None, says Justin, led the Files unless he was
Threescore years old, so that if you viewed the Forepart of the Army, you
would take them to be the Senate of some ancient Commonwealth. These
long-bearded Sexagenarii appeared in the Fore part of the Army as the Goat's
Beard goes before the rest of his Body. But at least the condition of
Alexander's Army consisting so much of old Soldiers may very well be prefigured
by this long-haired or long-bearded Goat. And the great Horn that is between
his Eyes is the first King. This first King is most manifestly Alexander the
Great, a thing that no man ever denied, and he is the first Horn of the Goat,
or first King of the Greek Empire. From whence it necessarily follows that
there must be other Horns and other Kings to succeed in this Body of the Goat
or Greek Empire. This is so plain that Grotius himself does allow it upon Ver.
8. that the Four Horns of the Leopard as he calls them, (he had better said
Heads) belong to the Greek Empire, that is, to the third Empire, and
consequently the Four Horns of the Goat. Thus much Grotius whether he will or
no, is forced to allow, though upon Chap. 2. he seems to endeavor to avoid it.

22. Now that being broken whereas Four stood up for it, Four Kingdoms shall
stand up out of the Nation, namely, out of the Greek Nation. These Four
Kingdoms into which Alexander's Empire was divided Grotius is forced to
confess, as to the first Kings of them or Heads of them, that they belong to
the Leopard or Goat, the third Monarchy. Now what a miserable and unnatural
divulsion is there that the Successors of Antigonus, suppose, of Ptolemaeus
Lagi, of Cassander and Lysimachus should be torn off as it were from their
Predecessors in their Four Kingdoms respective, to make a distinct Empire from
the Greek, which is as mad and extravagant as to cut off the Leopards and Goats
Heads with their Horns to make Two Goats and Two Leopards of them. And yet this
valiant exploit Grotius aims at, that he might excuse the Roman Empire from
being the Fourth Beast, and the Papal Power the little Horn amongst the other
Ten. What Egyptian darkness and blindness will Prejudice and Interest cast men
into, that can entertain such impossible conceits as these? Here is but one
Goat and one great Horn and Four lesser Horns, which lesser Horns imply so many
successions of the Four first Kings, be they longer or shorter. Which therefore
according to the Prophetic style and common sense can make no more than one
Greek Empire, first entire under one King, and then divided under Four, with
their Successors. But not in his power, that is, they were neither so valiant
as he in their own Persons, nor was their Kingdom so strong by reason of the
Wars among themselves, they squabling one with another about the prey.

23. And in the later time of their Kingdom when transgressions are come to the
full, that is, When the Sins of the Jews shall be very much increased. A King
of fierce countenance understanding dark Sentences shall stand up. This no man
doubts but is understood of Antiochus Epiphanes, but withal most of the
Ancient and Modern look upon Epiphanes as a lively Type or Image of Antichrist.
But in that it is said [in the later time of their Kingdom] in the singular
number, that fairly offers to us this truth, that in Prophetical account the
four Kingdoms named before are looked upon as one Kingdom though they be
divided into Four parts and have Four Kings, some of longer and some of shorter
succession. But in that it is said [in the later time of their Kingdom] viz. of
the Four Kings as they were at first, this does so manifestly tie the first
Four Kings to their succession even to Antiochus Epiphanes his times, as many
of them as reached so far; that it is a plain demonstration that the Kingdom of
the Four Horns does extend it self into the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, and
that therefore the third Monarchy which is the Greek reaches at least so far.
Whereby Grotius his fond conceit of making the Kingdom of the Lagidae and
Seleucidae the fourth Empire and the fourth Beast, is quite blown away. And it
is hence evident that the fourth Beast or Empire is the Roman.

Now that Epiphanes is said to be a King of a fierce countenance, the Hebrew
(...) may as well signify, vultu duro and obfirmato, of an hard, bold, and
shameless countenance. The vulgar Latin renders it, Rex impudens facie, and
Gasper Sanctius records one Specimen of his impudence out of S. Ierom,
Luxuriosus, says he, fuisse dicitur and in tantum dedecus, per stupra and
corruptelas, venisse Regiae dignitatis, ut Mimis quoque and Scortis public
jungeretur, and libidinem suam populo praesente, compleret. Which public
Fornication and Adultery of his whether it be a sign of greater shamelesness
than the spiritual Fornication, I mean, the Idolatry of Antichrist, his
Antitype, not only practiced by himself in public but also enjoined by him for
others so to practice, I leave the unprejudiced to consider, and whether
Antiochus his setting the Idol of Jupiter Olympius in the Temple, be a greater
piece of boldness than A^tichrist's setting himself in the Temple of God upon
the Holy Altar which is the throne of Christ or God, to receive public
adoration from men there, showing himself as if he were God, or above him, by
decreeing things contrary to the Laws of God, as if he were supremum Numen in
terris, as his Flatterers call him, for who can null or abrogate the Law of God
but that God that made it, or some God, if there be any, higher than he? What
Antiochus did to the Jews in commanding them point blank to transgress the Laws
of the God of Israel, and in making them conform to the Idolatrous Laws of the
Gentiles, (the Samaritans, those false Brethren, writing in the mean time to
Antiochus in this style, (...), to the glorious God King Antiochus,) the same
does Antichrist in his forcing the true Servants of the living God and
faithful Members of Christ, against the express Word of God, to worship Idols
of his own setting up, and so to pollute the Church with Gentilism, his
Flatterers in the mean time crying out, Dominus Deus noster Papa, and that all
is right that he commands and no man must disobey him, as I have noted above.
These are great examples of boldness in the Antitype as well as the Type, who
yet was never so bold as to avow that a piece of Bread (such certainly,
examined by the indubitable Test of Sense, Scripture, and Reason) was either a
Man or God, and miserably to kill men if they would not yield to this bold
obtrusion.

Now for the understanding dark Sentences as this passage in some sense
respects Antiochus Epiphanes, so it does Antichrist, and is, it may be, more
eminently fulfilled in the later than in the former. The Hebrew word is (...),
[Chidah] which most usually signifies a Parable or Riddle, but it signifies
also, at large, any hard question. Such as the Queen of Sheba is said to
propound to King Solomon, the word Chidah is there used 2 Chronicles. 9. where she
is said to commune with him of all that was in her heart, and that Solomon told
her all her questions, etc. Which two great persons surely spent not their time
in, Riddle me, Riddle me, what is this? as Children sometimes do, but the Queen
of Sheba put hard and weighty questions to him in points of State, Religion,
and Philosophy. And in the two former Antiochus might be pretty well versed,
and would not stick, when the question was put, whether the pure worship of the
God of Israel such as himself had appointed was to be kept, or the Rites of the
Gentiles and their Idolatry to be brought in amongst the Jews, to make all his
people of one Religion, and so the more to strengthen his Kingdom; he would not
stick, I say, to pronounce, having an equal share of boldness as of wit, that
the pure worship of the God of Israel must stoop to the Reason of State. And
whether Antichrist has not horribly defiled the Ancient pure Christian Religion
with gross Gentilism and Idolatry, to support the wealth and greatness of his
Antichristian Kingdom, let all indifferent men judge. These things are so plain
and open that they are unknown to none but those that wilfully shut their eyes.

But besides this, the Papal Hierarchy is a most notorious understander of hard
questions in matters of Religion especially, and of State so far forth as
Religion or Holy Church is therein concerned, as assuming to themselves the
privilege of Infallibility. So that the Pope, with his Hierarchy at least, is
the infallible oracle of Christendom to solve hard questions. Which makes me
conceive that this passage [and understanding dark Sentences and hard
Questions] was put in by the Spirit of Prophecy with a more peculiar respect to
Antichrist himself, than to Antiochus, his Type. And indeed that Church would
make every Sentence in Scripture a Riddle or dark Sentence that the Pope may
have the pretense of interpreting it, who will be sure never to interpret it
inconsistently to his own corrupt Interest.

24. And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power. The Power of
Antiochus over the Jews was caused by some mistaken or ill-minded Jews
themselves. And as for Antichrist or the Head of the healed Beast, or of the
Beast that was and is not, and yet is, it is plain Apoc. 17. 13. that the Ten
Kings give their power to him. Thus plainly is his power mighty but not by his
own power. And he shall destroy wonderfully. But whether Antiochus destroyed
more Jews or Antichrist more Christians let any one that reads History compute,
and tell which of them is the more wonderful destroyer. For not only the blood
of Saints and Prophets, but the blood of all the slain upon Earth is laid to
the charge of the Papal Hierarchy, Apoc. 18. 24. And shall prosper and
practice. Antiochus against the Jews, and Antichrist against the true
Christians, Apoc. 13. 7. And shall destroy the mighty and the holy people. The
mighty, the Hebrew word (...) Azumim, the Septuagint render it (...), Vatablus,
and the vulgar Latin Robustos. It signifies those that were strong in Faith,
and stout and courageous in professing the truth, whether in the times of
Antiochus or Antichrist. These may be those which the Apocalypse calls the
Prophets, and the holy people are those that are instructed by them which are
called Saints, Apoc. 18. 24. What a destroyer Antiochus was, and how much
greater a destroyer of these Antichrist has been, all History rings of it. What
Antiochus was to the sincere Jews, the same was Antichrist and much more to the
sincere Apostolic Christians.

25. And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand,
and he shall magnify himself in his heart, that is, Applaud himself as all
Politicians do (when things succeed) for his own great Policy that he has
brought things to pass as they are. This History testifies to be true as in
Antiochus so much more in Antichrist or the Papal Hierarchy, there never having
been a more cunning Polity in the world as all Historians and Politicians are
agreed. Which perspicacity of theirs in Politics is set out by the little Horn
with eyes (Chap. 7.) amongst the Ten Horns as I have noted above on that
Chapter. And by peace shall he destroy many. The Hebrew is (...), in peace, out
of time of war, he shall destroy many. Multos pacificos and innoxios occidet,
says a Lapide, and Grotius understands it of the Jews persecuted for their
Religion by Antiochus. But what is this to the bloody Massacres that Antichrist
has made upon the peaceable and innocent Protestants and to the burning God
knows how many beside with Fire and Faggot? The examples are more fresh than
that they need to be named. He shall also stand up against the Prince of
Princes, The Hebrew has it (...), where Grotius says, that (...), is attributed
to the Chiefs of all the Families of the Priesthood, Ezr. 8. 24. and Chapter 10. v.
5. Wherefore the chief Priests being called Princes, the High Priest must be
the Prince of Princes here meant. And let that be one sense, though Calvin says
it is nimis argutum and infirmum. But this sense of the Prophecy is fulfilled
in Antiochus his setting up and pulling down the High Priests at his own
pleasure, against the Law of God, as you may see in the Books of the Maccabees.

But is there nothing in Antichrist that answers this presumption in Antiochus
his standing up against the Prince of Princes? Surely yes. What think you of
the Emperor? Has not Antichrist stood up against him with a witness, and that
many a time as Historians record, and sometimes stood with his Foot upon his
neck singing Super aspidem and Leonem ambulabis, as I noted above? And other
sometime has humbled him so as to make him be content to receive the Imperial
Crown in the submissest manner imaginable, the Pope crowning him with his Feet,
and when the Crown was on, kicking it off again, as Spo^danus records of Pope
Celestine the third. But the full sense of the Prophecy in this passage I think
is not yet exhausted, but by the Prince of Princes is also understood the God
of Israel in reference to Antiochus whose Temple he profaned and robbed,
affected himself the Title of God, and was so saluted by the Samaritans, and at
last brought in the Abomination of Desolation the Statue of Jupiter Olympius,
in more full contempt of the God of Israel. This is Antiochus his standing up
against the Prince of Princes, as Gasper Sanctius comments upon the place, and
I think not without judgment.

But you will say, how is this fulfilled in Antichrist or the Pope? How has he
profaned God's Temple, or robbed it, or brought in the Idol of Jupiter
Olympius, etc. Answ. It is manifest that he has profaned Gods Temple, I mean,
the Church of Christ, by bringing in Heathenish customs and Idolatrous
practices into it, as is abundantly known; and as for robbery or sacrilege, the
most precious treasure the Church has he despoils them of, viz. the Word of
God, or the Law of God, of which the Psalmist says, they are more precious to
him than thousands of Gold and Silver. To say nothing of what are called (...)
in the Apocalypse Chapter 9. v. 21. and depriving the living Temple of God of their
livelihoods upon pretense of their Heresy, not permitting them to buy and fell
that receive not the mark of the Beast. And that the Popes have affected the
title of God has been also above noted, they accepting of it by not reproving
their Flatterers, as neither did Antiochus when they called him God. Qui non
vetat peccare cum possit, jubet.

And that nothing may be wanting to complete the Parallelism, he when he brings
himself into the Temple of God, and behaves himself as to absolute Power as if
he were God, as it is said in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, he being but a
man, what can this man be but an Idol, the fulminant Jupiter of Mount Coelius,
(for that Mountain is appropriate to the Pope of Rome upon account of the
Lateran there, his Palace) as that Idol Antiochus brought into the Temple of
the Jews, was Jupiter of Mount Olympus, by which the Poets understand Heaven,
Coelum, from whence Mount Coelius is so called, that the Names may have also
some little correspondency as well as the things. But if this seem too quaint
and operose, let the intelligent consider whether the bringing one Idol into
the Temple of the Jews, or the filling of the Christian Church with thousands
of Idols and requiring the people to worship them, which the Papal Hierarchy
does, be the greater affront to the Prince of Princes, to God and Christ, who
is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and has expressly commanded, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image, Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship
them. But he shall be broken without hand. Morbo divinitus immisso, says
Grotius, God inflicting a sore disease upon him. For, to be done without hand,
in Scripture phrase signifies to be done not by humane but by divine power, as
the Stone cut out without hands, Chapter 4. And Cornelius a Lapide upon this
passage [but he shall be broken without hand] Sic Antichristum Christus, says
he, occidet spiritu oris sui, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. For he had said before upon Ver.
23. That Antiochus in many things was the Type of Antichrist, following the
opinion of the Ancient Fathers therein, Irenaeus, Origin and others. And Gasper
Sanctius acknowledges that Antiochus was viva quaedam Imago Antichristi, a
lively image of Antichrist, and is so throughout to the very last stroke
according to that intimation of Cornelius.

And the very circumstances of Antiochus his death, as it is described, will
notably suit with the circumstances of the extinction of the Papal Hierarchy, 2
Maccab. 9. 9. The worms rose up out of the body of this wicked man (Antiochus)
and whilst he lived in sorrow and pain, his flesh fell away, and the
filthiness of his smell was noisome to all his Army. But thus he died,
percussus faetore and vermibus, as Cornelius phrases it upon the place. And as
Antiochus went out thus with a stink, so in all likelihood the exstinction of
the Papal Hierarchy will leave no good favor behind it, but end in wretched
contempt; according as it is predicted touching the King of Babylon, no doubt a
Type of the Pope or Papal Hierarchy, Isa. 14. 18. All the Kings of the Nations
even all of them lie in glory, every one of them in his House. But thou art
cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, -- as a carcass trodden under
foot. Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed
thy land and slain thy people, massacred, killed, consumed in Prison, and burnt
at the Stake many Hundred thousands of Apostolic Christians for not complying
with the worship of those Idols which this King of Babylon had set up, and also
filled all Christendom with blood upon other squables. Let that be for one
instance amongst the rest which I abovenamed, That those Two Emperors Henry
the Fourth, and Frederick the First, fought above Threescore Battles in defense
of their own Right against the enemies of the Empire stirred up to Arms by the
Popes of Rome. See my Exposition of that Prophecy of Isaiah in my Synopsis
Prophetica, Book 2. Chapter 17. But enough has been said to show how lively an
Image Antiochus Epiphanes was of Antichrist, viz. of the Pope or Papacy, and
how much the Church of God, as well Christians as Jews, are concerned in this
Vision.

26. And the Uision of the Evening and Morning which was told is true.
Explicatio visi, says Grotius, exponens numerum dierum 2300 nihil habet
obscuri. (...) Verum, says he, hic est clarum, apertum. Wherefore [is true]
here signifies, is not aenigmatical or symbolical, the 2300 days are not
symbols of so many years as elsewhere, which Calvin also observes, but are to
be taken in the literal sense as was above declared, though the other part of
the interpretation touching Antiochus Epipha^es may have also a further meaning
touching Antichrist. But it is here to be noted that the Angels giving notice
to Daniel that the Vision of the 2300 days is (...), is a plain truth, no
aenigma, but that the days signify days in a literal sense, does imply that
unless there be some such notice to the contrary, that they signify
aenigmatically and stand for years, as in Dan. 12. 11, 12. Wherefore shut up
the Uision, that is to say, Having exactly writ this Vision with the
explication lock it up safely, that the Original may be kept to compare with
the Event. So Grotius as well as Cornelius a Lapide, and Calvin. For it shall
be for many days, The time from the Prophecy to the Event will be a long time,
betwixt Three and Four hundred years. For from Belshazzar's Reign to Antiochus
Epiphanes is about 380 years.

27. And I Daniel fainted and was sick certain days, namely, By reason of my
converse with and consternation of mind from the hearing and seeing of those
Angelical Powers, so much removed above the condition of us Mortals, and also
out of sadness for the profanation of the Sanctuary, and great calamities of
my Nation which were foretold me. Afterward I rose up and did the King's
business, that is, After I had grown well again I went about the business the
King sent me for into Susiana where I was when I saw this Vision. And I was
astonished at the Uision, that is, I looked with an astonished or forlorn look
by reason of the Vision I had seen, that portended so much ill to my people.
But none understood it, (...). None understood what the matter was with me,
that I looked so sadly and ghastly on it. Quam diligentissime poteram
dissimulabam dolorem meum. To that sense Grotius interprets the place, and
before him Theodoret, Maldonat, and Gasper Sanctius.

NOTES Upon VISION III. Ver. 5.
That strange exploit of his literally taken, etc.] His climbing up with his
Soldiers a steep Rock as natural Goats are said to do. The Story is in Justin
lib. 12. cap. 7. Peragrata India cum ad Saxum mirae asperitatis and
altitudinis, in quod multi populi confugerant, pervenisset, cognoscit Herculem
ab expugnatione ejusdem Saxi terrae-motu prohibitum. Itaque cupidine Herculis
acta superare, cum summo labor ac periculo potitus Saxo omnes ejus loci gentes
in deditionem accipit.

Ver. 8. Ptolemaeus the Son of Lagus Sovereign of Egypt, etc.] The
Authentickness of this distribution to be applied to the Four Horns, that is,
the notable ones, as the Four chief Successors of Alexander, appears from
Diodorus Siculus, lib. 19. p. 727. Where, upon Cassander, Ptolemaeus, and
Lysimachus, their making peace with Antigonus, the Sum of the form of Agreement
was this. (...) that is to say, That Cassander should be chief Commander of
Europe till Alexander the Son of Roxana came to Age; and Zysimachus should be
Lord of Thracia, and Ptolemaeus of Egypt with the Cities conterminous in
Africa and Arabia. And Antigonus should be Prefect of all Asia. And the Greeks
live after their own Laws. And thus they continued but advanced in title. For
upon Demetrius his Naval victory over Ptolemy, and notice given thereof to his
Father Antigonus, Antigonus (...), puffed up at the greatness of the success,
put upon himself a royal Crown and took to himself the title of King. Which out
of emulation and to show himself not at all discouraged by that late defeat,
Ptolemy did also, and in imitation of him Lys^machus and Cassander. Which
things Justin also witnesses, lib. 15. cap. 2. And Seleucus a supernumerary to
the Four notable Horns, who did rise up after Ptolemy, (...), lately having
acquired the Satrapies of Syria superior to adjoyn to his former Prefecture,
crowned himself King also, Diodor. lib. 20. p. 761. But that the abovenamed
Four Horns still continued tight till Seleucus routed Antigonus and his Son and
so succeeded in their place, is plain from Diodorus. For there is mention how
Cassander, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolemaeus by common consent made war
against Antigonus, lib. 20. p. 787. his ambition threatening to swallow up all.
And whe^as some leave out Lysimachus out of the number of the Four first
notable Horns, it is without reason and against the testimony of this excellent
Historian Di^dorus Siculus, who reckons them together, and gives us to
understand that Seleucus came on afterward as a supernumerary, helped to this
his power (which afterward proved so considerable) by the favor of Ptolemy; as
part of the very Title of the Nineteenth Book of Diodorus gives us to
understand, which is, (...) i.e. How Seleucus receiving a small Army from
Ptolemy made himself Master of Babylon, and recovered his former Satrapy and
Prefecture again. And that Lysimachus may not be thought unworthy of the rank
of those Four notable Horns, consider what Justin says of him. Erat hic
Lysimachus illustri quidem Maoedoniae loco natus, sed virtutis experimentis
omni nobilitate clarior, quae tanta in illo fuit ut ^nimi magnitudi^e,
Philosophia ipsa viriumque gloria omnes per quos Oriens domitus est, vicerit.
So little (...) is there but that, according to Thomas Lydiat out of Diodorus,
he should be reckoned one of the Four notable Horns, after the breaking of that
first great one.

Ver. 9. But of the Kingdom of the Seleucid^e, etc.] The truth of what is said
here will be the more easily acknowledged from what we have produced upon the
foregoing Verse out of Diodorus and Justin. But I cannot here but take notice
of the well grounded confidence of Thomas Lydiat, who in his Emendatio
Temporum, Anno Mundi 3693. writes thus. Videtur vero nobis pace om^inum, ipsum
(...) Imperium hoc tempore Babylone institutum aliqua^to post caetera illa
quatuor Successorum Alexandri, ^uisse parvum illud Cornu juxta Danielem
Propheta^^ ab uno eorum exoriens: quandoquidem Sel^^cus (...) initium Ptolemaeo
accept^^ retulerit ac (...) s^pra ipsum evectus fit. The reasons are manifest
from the foregoing Note on the Eighth Verse. And of these Two main Kingdoms of
the Lagidae and Seleucidae he adds this observation, that the Epoch of the
Anni Seleucid^rum, is at this very day by the Arabians, Saracens, and
Maho^etans called Dhilcar^a^^^, from these Two Horns so remarkable in History
and the Prophecy of Daniel.

Which is the Genius of the Prophetic style to give as it were Two strokes at
once, etc.] viz. A more general stroke and a more particular, touch, and that
in the series of the same words. The former whereof for more expedite and
compendious expression you may call Geniconaea, the latter Idiconaea, which
signify the general and more particular meaning of such a part of the
Prophecy. As in this present Instanc^^ Geniconaea the whole succession of the
Kingdom of the Seleucidae may be understood, but by an Idiconaea such passages
as are understood of others in the succession at large, may be again
particularly applied to Antiochus Epiphanes, for whose sake chiefly the affairs
of the Seleucidae are predicted. And to give instances of these Figures in
other Propehcies, Apoc. 17. By a Geniconaea the whole succession of the Heads
of the Beast that was, is not, and yet is, (namely, of the Roman Empire become
Pagano-Christian) whether Emperors of Popes, are understood by the seventh
Head of that Beast, but by an Idiconaea the Popes particularly, as Antiochus
Epiphanes particularly in the succession of the Seleucidae.

So Apoc. 13. The Beast healed of its deadly wound, healed I say by the
diligence of the Two-horned Beast, and recovered again into a kind of Paganism,
by a Genico^aea may be understood of the whole Laick Roman Empire, so debauched
by the Sacerdotal Polity, but by an Idiconaea, the making of the Image of the
Beast may be referred particularly to the German Empire as the Object or Opus,
and to the Pope as the particular Artifex thereof. And lastly, in Daniel Chap.
11. ver. 36. the King that does according to his will and shall exalt himself,
etc. by a Geniconaea may be understood of the Roman Power, at least from the
first Epoch of Christianity to the expiration of the said Power, which will
expire with the Pope, but by an Idiconaea it is particularly understood of the
Papal Polity or Hierarchy. Which Four examples I hope are sufficient to
illustrate these Prophetical Figures, which are worth the notice of the
judicious and considerate, and will serve to reconcile serious Interpreters of
the Prophecies, some hitting upon the Idiconaea of the Prophecy, others upon
the Geniconaea. Which is no clashing one with another, if they understand
themselves. But that sense which the Geniconaea exhibits is necessary
sometimes, and demonstrably true by Virtue of the Synchronisms.

Ver. 14. Which is the sense that Calvin himself seems to aim at, etc.] And
Theodoret and Isidore are of the same opinion as they are cited by Gasper
Sanctius; Neque desunt, says he, qui Christum esse dicunt illum qui in flumine
apparuit, quique Gabrieli jussit ut Prophetae obscurm illud aenigma
manifestaret, quasi jam praeluderet ad sumendam postea humanam naturam, in qua
suas deinde inter homines delicias haberet, ita Theodoretus and Isidorus. So
Gasper Sanctius upon the place.

VISION IV.
The Vision or Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks communicated to Daniel by the
Angel Gabriel, Chap. 9.

1. IN the first year of Darius the Son of Ahasuerus, that is, the Son of
Cyaxares (King of Media) as the Greeks call him. And Ctesias in Diodorus
Siculus, Biblioth. Histor. lib. 2. p. 85. seems to call him (...), * which is
very near to Ass^baras, and consequently to Asuerus. Which Cyaxares the Mede
gave his daughter Nicrotis to Nebuchadnezzar the Son of Nabopolassar to Wife,
who therefore was the Sister of Darius the Mede as well as Mandane, who was the
Mother of Cyrus the Persian. Of the seed of the Medes. For he was Son to
Cyaxares King of Media, whom, being an Infant in a manner, his Father committed
to the tutelage of Nebuchadnezzar, his son in Law, when he died, together with
his Kingdom, over which Nebuchadnezzar set Astyages of near a kin to Nicrotis
his Wife, happily her Uncle: but upon Nebuchadnezzar's death Cyrus rebelled
against Astyages, by some intimation from his Uncle Darius, and overcame him,
after he had reigned some Thirty five years in the Kingdom of Media and Persia,
and Darius had been kept out of it the time. But Astyages being vanquished, the
Kingdom of Media was restored to Darius, and Cyrus had the Kingdom of Persia
for his pains. See Tho. Lydiat his Emendatio Temporum. Which was made King over
the Realm of the Chaldeans, succeeding immediately Belshazzar, after Cyrus
Nephew to Darius had taken Babylon, and Belshazzar was slain. Wherefore Darius
was invested in the Kingdom of Babylon, Cyrus his Nephew delivering it to him,
being then about Sixty two years of Age. And forasmuch as he lived from his
infancy in Nebuchadnezzar's Court, and Nicrotis Nebuchadnezzar's Wife was his
Sister, and was brought up as Nebuchadnezzar's Son, and so happily called out of
Courtship, the Babylonian Empire seems still to have been continued in his
Reign, and he fitly to be called the King of the Chaldeans, as Daniel the
Prophet here styles him.

And yet notwithstanding Daniel comparing the Babylonish Captivity and the
extirpation of Nebuchadnezzar's race by the Medes and Persians, and that, Cyrus
being Commander in the war, by name so predicted by the Prophet Isaiah, he
comparing these things, I say, with the commencement and duration of the Empire
of Nebuchadnezzar and his Sons, predefined by Jeremy the Prophet, and with the
time himself was first made captive, which was in the Fourth year of Iehojakim
King of Judah, and the first of Nebuchadnezzar when he was sent by his Father
Nabopolassar with Regal power against Egypt, it came then into his mind that
the expiration of the Seventy years Captivity of the Jews in Babylon was near
at hand, as it appears in the following Verse.

2. In the first year of his Reign I Daniel understood by the Books. For there
was in the hands of the Jews then the Books of Moses and the Prophets, that
they might know their transgression, punishment, and time of appointed mercy.
The number of the years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the
Prophet, Ier^m. 25. 11. 12. And this whole Land shall be a desolation and
astonishment; and it shall come to pass when Seventy years are accomplished I
will punish the King of Babylon, etc. And the whole race of his Sons was
exstinct in Belshazzar killed at the taking of Babylon by Cyrus. And Chapter 27.
ver. 7. And all Nations, says he, shall serve him, and his Son, and his Son's
Son until the very time of his land come. And there was but Three successions,
Nebuchadnezzar himself, Evil-Merodac his Son, and Belshazzar his Son's Son,
(according to the words of the Prophet) slain at Cyrus his taking of Babylon.
Of whom Isaiah foretold by name what a Friend he would be to the Jews, Isa. 44.
28. That says of Cyrus, He is my Shepherd, etc. That also of Jeremy, Chapter 29.
v. 10. is very express, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, That after Seventy years
be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you and perform my good word toward
you, in causing you to return to this place. Wherefore Daniel seeing so plainly
from these places of the Prophet sent to the Jews by God, That he would
accomplish Seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem, and then relaxate
their Captivity, and observing also that Cyrus had now appeared, and cut off
the race of Nebuchadnezzar, and reckoning from the time of his own Captivity
and the beginning of the Reign of the Kings of Babylon, he did rationally
conceive hopes that the day of their deliverance was now nigh at hand, and
accordingly he betook himself to his devotions to hasten it as follows.

3. And I set my Face unto the Lord God, viz. Toward the Temple at Jerusalem,
as he did, Chapter 6. v. 10. which is a demonstration it is no Idolatry to direct a
Man's devotions toward one certain place. To seek by Prayer and Supplication
with Fasting and Sackcloth and Ashes. Not lazily expecting, as if, because God
had once promised, he would be faithful and be sure to perform it, let us
behave our selves as we will, but preparing himself (for I look upon him as the
Representative here of all the people of the Jews) by earnest Prayer, hearty
Repentance, and sincere Humiliation, and fitting himself thus, to receive so
great a mercy and blessing. Which singular piety of Daniel, all those that wait
for the deliverance of God's people from the Captivity of the Mystical Babylon
should set themselves faithfully and conscientiously to imitate, and break off
their sins by Repentance, and make it their business that the Man of Sin may be
slain in themselves, and the Spirit of everlasting Righteousness and holy Love
be raised in them, and then will it come to pass, that even the external
Antichrist will be consumed by the breath of Christ's mouth, and by the
brightness of his appearing. Not by might, that is, not by an Army, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. This was the word of the Lord
to Zerubbabel, Zach. 4. 6. No force nor rebellion becomes the people of God in
their Captivity under the King of Babylon, as Jeremy also inculcates unto them.
But they are patiently to wait till some good Prince, like Cyrus, moved by the
good Spirit of God and their own good behavior do relaxate their Captivity; in
the mean time they are to be obedient to the Supreme Magistrate in all Secular
matters, but as for their Religion, to be as firm in it as Daniel and the Three
Children.

4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my Confession and said, O Lord,
the great and dreadful God. Which expressions show with what fear and
reverence we are to make our addresses to him, and that from our very heart and
inward sense, not in words and composed looks only. Keeping the Covenant and
mercy, that is, The merciful Promise in particular of redeeming thy People
from the Babylonian bondage. To them that love him, and to them that keep his
Commandments. i.e. If we were fitted for so great a blessing by unfeigned Love
and Obedience to him.

5. But, We have sinned and have committed iniquity -- The whole Prayer and
Confession following is plain of it self, and wants no interpretation, only we
may observe from the very form, We have sinned, etc. that Daniel here sustains
a public Person, and represents the whole Body of the Jews, as I noted before;
we will pass therefore to the Twentieth Verse.

20. And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin
of my people Israel. This passage also shows that Daniel in his Prayer
represented the whole Body of the people of the Jews. Which he did certainly
with the profoundest humility and the purest sincerity conceivable, as all such
addresses in such like circumstances are to be made. And presenting my
Supplications before the Lord my God, for the Holy Mountain of my God, that is,
For the restoring of the exercise of their Religion to the Jews, and the
rebuilding of the Temple.

21. Yea whiles I was speaking in Prayer, even the man Gabriel, viz. The Angel
Gabriel in humane shape. Behold the efficacy of humble, earnest, and sincere
Devotion, that by a kind of Divine Magic does attract unto the Supplicant, not
only the gracious illapses of the Holy Spirit within, but also the external and
visible converse of Angels. Whom I had seen in the Uision at the beginning,
namely, at Susa near the River Vlai or Vlaeus, Chapter 8. v. 16. Being caused to
fly swiftly. As if Angels were winged Creatures. But they are so described only
to signify the speed of their ministry. Touched me about the time of the
Evening oblation, that is, About the Ninth hour of the day, the time heretofore
while the Temple stood, allotted for Sacrifices, and now the Temple was down,
it was made choice of by the Jews for the time of Prayer, which is a more
Spiritual sacrifice.

22. And he informed me, and talked with me and said, O Daniel, I am now come
forth to give thee skill and understanding, namely, Touching his People,
Religion and Temple, for which he was concerned with so much zeal and
earnestness.

23. At the beginning of the Supplications the Commandment came forth. Thou
had no sooner set thy Face to seek God in behalf of thy People, thy Religion,
and the Holy Mountain, but it was given to me in charge to come unto thee. And
I am come to show thee, Not only how Cyr^s King of Persia will relaxate your
Captivity, but how the Messiah the true Shepherd of Israel will come to
relaxate his people from the Captivity of Sin and Satan. For thou art greatly
beloved. That is one sense of the Hebrew Text which verbatim is, Thou art a man
of desires, which may signify as well actively as passively, and denote the
earnestness of his Spirit in matters that concerned the glory of God, and the
welfare of his People. Which holy desire is, as I said, a certain Divine Magic
of the soul to attract the influences of the Spirit of God, and the ministry of
Angels. Therefore understand the matter and consider the Uision, viz. This
Prophecy here ensuing of the Seventy Weeks, which is expressly called a Vision
in such a general notion as Prophets are called Seers. It is Grotius his note
upon the Text; Nam ut Prophetae Videntes, ita omne Prophetiae genus, quocunque
modo ^omini innotescat, Visio dicitur. Which Vision of Daniel considered well,
it does more than abundantly answer the Scope of his Prayers, which concerned
only the relaxation of the Babylonish Captivity, for which they obtained a
Decree in the very first year of the Reign of Cyrus. But in the ensuing Vision,
as it is called, there is granted them the enjoyment of their Religion and Laws
for the space of about Five hundred years, and the promise of the coming of
their Messiah for greater purposes than were otherwise ever designed for the
People of God. This might Daniel collect by understanding the matter, and
considering the ensuing Vision, which is this:

24. Seventy Weeks. That Seventy Weeks of years are understood, and that it is
as much as if he should have said 490 years, all Interpreters are agreed, as
well Jew as Christian. But the very number of these Prophetic Weeks, which
consists of Ten Septenaries of Septenaries, or Ten Weeks of Weeks, seems not to
want its Mystery. For a Septenary of Septenaries, or Week of Weeks
Prophetically understood is 49 years, which is the Jewish Iubilee consisting of
Seven Sabbaths of years, so that every Forty ninth year was, as the Sept^agint
render it, their (...). It was the year of Iubilee wherein whose Lands were
gone from him were restored again to him; His Lands that were mortgaged as it
were before, were then released Gratis. Now these Seventy Weeks being Ten
Jubilees (for Ten times 49 is 490) and the number Ten a note of perfection, as
Alcazar observes, what are these Seventy Weeks of Daniel but the most perfect
(...), or the bringing in the most complete Jubilee conceivable, that is, our
being restored to our Heavenly Inheritance by the coming of the Messiah? For
this is the main upshot of them. Are determined. The Hebrew word is (...), that
is, cut out, as some would have it, implying that immediately after the
expiration of these, the Jews would into Captivity again. But that is a
curiosity more than needs, and not so conformable to the sense of the Prophecy.
So that in my apprehension the English translation has the odds of it. Upon thy
People and upon thy Holy City, that is to say, Near upon the expiration of the
Seventieth Week the People of the Jews shall be no longer the People of God,
nor the City Holy; their Religion naturally ceasing upon some act of theirs,
whereby a better according to the purpose of God shall be brought in. But from
the commencement of the Seventy Weeks till that time which is nigh 500 years,
they should be the People of God, and their City accounted Holy, which is a
fair space of time and ought to be welcome news to Daniel. To finish
transgression, that is, To consume Sin and make an end of it. For to that end
Christ came who baptizeth all true Believers with the Holy Ghost and with Fire;
or, who thoroughly purges his Floor, and burns the Chaff with fire
unquenchable, as John the Baptist witnesses of him: And he of himself, That he
came to pluck up every Plant that was not of his Father's planting. And such
sure is all manner of sin and unrighteousness. But the Hebrew (...), may
signify to complete transgression. And it seems as natural a sense in this
place. As if the Angel should say, Seventy Weeks shall the Scourge be taken
from thy People, wherein notwithstanding they will again follow their own evil
ways, and increase their sins to the very height, which they did the most
notoriously in killing their Messiah. And to make an end of Sins, Or to put an
end to the Iudaical Sin Offerings. For so will (...) signify, and (...) which
is as much as to Seal, denotes a putting an end to a thing by fulfilling and
completing it, as toward the latter end of this Verse to Seal up Vision and
Prophecy, the word (...) is used. And surely Christ crucified on the Cross for
the Sins of the World was the complement of all Sin Offerings. And to make
reconciliati^^ for Ini^uity, Or to expiate Iniquity, for so (...) signifies.
But the sense is much-what the same in both. And that Christ is that great
Expiation and Atonement for Sin all true Believers are agreed on. And to bring
in everlasting Righteousness. Such a Law or Religion as shall endure for ever,
and according to which if we live will be our Justification, not the works of
M^ses his Law nor those Offerings and Sacrifices. Iustitia ^^terna est
Evangelium, says Pintus, quod (...) justitiam. And I say it is that Evangelium
^^ternum mentioned Apoc. 14. So that no other Evangelium is to be expected
beyond this here mentioned in Dani^l. And to seal up the Uision and (...), that
is, To fulfill and accomplish the Prophecies, viz. Those great important
Prophecies concerning the Messiah. So the word to Seal is used, E^ek. 28. 12.
Thou seal^st up the Sum, which plainly there signifies to make full or
complete. And the word is (...) the same that is here, and immediately follows,
Full of wisdom and perfect in beauty. So that the vulgar Latin renders this
passage very rightly. Vt impleat^r Visio and Prophetia. And to anoint the most
Holy, viz. The most Holy Person that ever lived. For though (...) be the
feminine Gender and may seem to signify rather Sanctity in the abstract, or
Res Sancta, yet the Jews themselves understood it of a Person, Moses
Ger^ndensis of the very Messiah. And it is used of any thing consecrated to
God, whether Field, Man, or Cattle, Levit. 27. 28. Besides that (...) need not
be a Noun of the feminine Gender, but be the same that (...) Sanctus, as
appears from Levit. 21. 7. and Number. 6. 8. or the words there are to be read
(...), and therefore again confirm that (...) belongs to persons consecrated as
well as things. If it had been meant of the most Holy place of the Temple, it
had in all likelihood been (...), not (...). But if (...) might go for the most
Holy Place, Christ was also (...), (see Rev. 21. 22.) in the most eminent
manner imaginable. For in him dwelt the Godhead bodily.

25. Know therefore and understand that from the going forth of the Commandment
to restore and to build Jerusalem, viz. From the Decree or Command of
Artaxerxes Longimanus in the Twentieth year of his Reign, that Decree, namely,
that Nehemiah obtained of him, who made his complaint to him, how the place of
his Father's Sepulchers lay waste, that is, the City Jerusalem and the Gates
thereof were consumed with fire, according as Hanani had told him, Nehem. 1. 3.
That the Wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the Gates thereof burnt with
Fire. Wherefore Chap. 2. ver. 1. in the Twentieth year of Artaxerxes his Reign
he obtained a Decree for the restoring and rebuilding Jerusalem. For the other
Decrees granted by Cyrus, Darius Hystaspis, and by this Artaxerxes in the
Seventh year of his Reign, concerned only the Temple, not the City and the
Walls, as you may plainly discern by reading of Ezra. Whence it is manifest
that the Epoch of the Seventy Weeks must be taken from this Decree of the
Twentieth year of Artaxerxes. But Chronologers and Divines have been
discouraged therefrom, because they could not adjust the time from thence to
the Passion of Christ, it shooting many years beyond it, and so they were
content to take up with the seventh year of Artaxerxes, from which the Seventy
Weeks end in the Passion of Christ according to Funccius and others. But our
Countryman Thomas Lydiat, has adjusted the Chronology of Times so, that from
this Epoch of the Twentieth of Artaxerxes the Passion will fall in the middle
of the last Week, which is exquisitely according to the prediction of the
Prophecy, as we shall hear anon. Unto Messiah the Prince, that is, Unto the
manifestation of that Person that is so well known and so much expected by the
Jews under the name of their Messiah, the word never being used absolutely but
concerning him. To the initiation therefore of him into his Ministry, he being
first baptized by John, and so showing himself after in preaching the Gospel of
the Kingdom, and doing Miracles for the confirmation thereof in the sight of
all the people, To this manifestation of the Messiah, Shall be seven Weeks and
threescore and two Weeks, that is, Sixty nine Weeks, there being no mystery in
the pa^ting of these Numbers saving an Hebrew Idiom to be understood from
Ezekiel Chapter 45. v. 12. and Genesis 5. often in that Chapter, as also Chapter 8. v. 3.
as Grotius comments upon the place. In the last day of the Sixty ninth Week,
that is, in the Four hundred eighty third year from the Twentieth of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, did Jesus the Messiah manifest himself according to Thomas Lydiat's
Chronology, whom I conceive to have hit the nail on the head in this business.
The street shall be built again and the wall. This seems to be added on purpose
to give light to Interpreters that the Decree here mentioned from whence the
Weeks do commence, is the Decree granted in the Twentieth year of Artaxerxes,
because that was expressly for the City and the Wall, the other Three that
preceeded for the Temple. The sense is, That not only the Area of Jerusalem
shall again be replenished with Houses, but the Wall shall also be built again.
Even in troublesome times, As it appears out of Nehemiah, Chapter 4. For the
Builders were fain to have their Swords in readiness as well as their Trowels.

26. And after threescore and two Weeks shall Messiah be cut off, namely, After
the Sixty two Weeks which succeed immediately the Seven Weeks, that is to say,
after Sixty nine Weeks shall Messiah be cut off, viz. The abovenamed Messiah
the Prince. For that must needs be the natural meaning thereof; and, as I said
before, Messiah is never put thus absolutely but here; whence doubtlesly the
Jews gave him, whom they expected for their Redeemer, the name of Messiah. And
now for [cut off] if it were (...) in the Original it might signify
transfixus, or affixus, as Funccius would have it; but it is (...) which
signifies to cut off, not only from life, but as Mr. Mede says, from reigning
as a King. And in respect of the Jews he was cut off in both these senses. For
he was the Messiah their Prince whom his own people rejected and cut off from
life, and thereby from themselves that they should be no more his people, nor
he their King. But not for himself. The Hebrew is (...), and most easily and
naturally is translated, And they shall be none of his, viz. They that cut him
off or crucified him, the People of the Jews shall no longer be his People.
This sense generally Interpreters run upon, and it is most congruous and
coherent. The Messiah shall be cut off by the hands of the people of the Jews,
and that (...) none of his. And the people of the (...) shall come, i.e. But
the people designed (...) people of Messiah the Prince hereafter. For (...)
^ede interprets the place excellently well in (...), rendering (...), Populus
(...), understanding thereby the Romans, in (...) Empire Christ was chiefly to
have his Church (...) Kingdom. And it is most natural that as Messiah before
was the same with Messiah the Prince, so the Prince here should be the same
with the Messiah, the sense not only fitting exceeding well, but being more
closely knit and compact. Shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary. For this
heinous Parricidium of the Jews, namely, for their murdering of their Messiah
the Prince, shall the Romans destroy their City and their Sanctuary, which was
effected by Titus the Son of Vespasian. And the end thereof shall be with a
(...), that is, After the destruction of the City the Roman Army shall overflow
Judea. And to the end of the war desolations are determined. [(...)] Grotius
here interprets (...) [for] not [to] and renders it, Pro fine belli erit
definita desolatio. Deus hunc exitum bello isti praefinivit terrae vastitatem.
God has determined that issue of the War, the devastation of the Land.

27. And he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week. Mr. Mede renders
it, Nevertheless he shall. For indeed the conjunction (...) has the force in a
manner of any conjunction, and may be rendered according as the sense directs.
And the most genuine sense seems that which Mr. Mede has given. That though
Israel was cast off, yet a Remnant according to the election of Grace should be
won off to Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel of his Kingdom, which should
be done before and after his Passion, by himself and his Apostles. This is that
(...), or New Covenant, which adorns the very Title page of the New Testament.
And the Seventy turn it in this place, (...), He shall confirm the Covenant,
that is, The Covenant of the Gospel. See Funccius on the place. And that with
many, i.e. with several. For so the word signifies frequently, though it be
true also that many of the Jews were converted and entered the Covenant within
the space of this one Week, which is the Seventieth or last Week, some being
converted before Christ's Passion, others afterward. But the main Body of the
Jews remained obstinate, (...), and were none of his pleople. And in the mid^^
of the Week he shall cause the s^cr^fice and oblation to cease. This implies
the death of the M^ssiah as well as that in the foregoing Verse, [And after
Threescore and two Weeks the Messiah shall be cut off,] but the time there is
less definitive. So be it be but after the Threescore and second Week, or
rather the Sixty ninth and before the Seventieth expire, that part of the
Prophecy as to time would be fulfilled if there were no more accurate
determination intimated, as there seems to be here, and that he is to be cut
off in the midst of the last Week, suppose in the fourth year thereof. Whis is
the scope that Thomas Lydiat has aimed at, and, as I conceive, hit the mark.
Which makes me now less adhering to that laxe sense of [in the midst] which I
set down in my Mystery of Godliness, on this Verse. Wherefore about the fourth
year of the last Week of years shall the Messiah, by suffering on the Cross,
put an end to the Jewish sacrifices and oblations. For he that was prefigured
by them being come, and having been sacrificed and made an oblation, it is
plain those other ceased as to right and efficacy, that is, were abrogated or
abolished by the excellency of his Person, who offered up himself once
a-sacrifice and atonement for the sins of the whole world. The main drift
therefore of the Prophecy is more curiously to define the time, as of his
Manifestation, so likewise of the Death of the Messiah, which I question not
but may very well be hinted at here in this expression, [he shall cause the
sacrifice and oblation to cease,] and what was spoke more at large and more
undeterminately in the foregoing Verse, touching his being cut off, may here,
For time, be more punctually defined. And as at the mention of his death before
there was annexed that vengeance upon them that murdered him, so here where it
is repeated again, the same vengeance is repeated as follows. And for the
over-spreading of a^^minatio^s he shall make it desolate. The Hebrew is, (...),
which with Mr. Mede I would render thus, And commanding over a wing of
abominations he will be a destroyer, i.e. over an army of Idolatrous Gentiles,
namely, the Roman Army. And the coming of the Romans to destroy the City of
Jerusalem is in several places of the New Testament called * the coming of
Christ. So well fitted is the Interpretation to the nature of the thing. See
also Grotius upon Matthew. 24. 15. whose Interpretation though it differ
something from Mr. Mede's. yet in my opinion does confirm it very much, he
proving by several citations out of Authors that the Romans bore upon their
Standards the Images of their Gods, which in the Hebrew is (...). We shall only
instance in that one of many out of Tacitus, Fulgentibus Aquilis Signisque and
Simulacris Deum in modum Templi. So fitly is this wing of abominations
interpreted of an army of Idolaters. Even until the consummation and that
determined, Read out of the Hebrew, And until the consummation, i.e. the
finishing of this destruction, Shall be poured upon the desolate, Read out of
the Original. It shall continue upon the distressed, viz. (...) shall do so.
The Roman Army shall continue upon Jerusalem till they have brought it to utter
devastation. Or it shall be spread like water poured out upon the desolate, in
that sense that Inundation was interpreted in the foregoing Verse. For, as I
intimated before, this is but a repeated prediction of the same vengeance upon
the fame occasion, namely, upon the consideration of their murdering the
Messiah, which is implied in that expression, [He shall make the sacrifice and
oblation to cease,] himself then becoming a sacrifice for the sins of the whole
world, according to the eternal counsel of God.

The sense which we have given of this Prophecy is so coherent and of one
piece, though taken out of several Interpreters, that no sense can be applied
to any Writing more naturally. So that if Chronology will but favor the
Interpretation of this Prophecy, it is most certain that what we have given is
throughout the true meaning thereof. * And the Chronological part Thomas Lydiat
in my judgment has made out accurately well, of which I shall say something in
my Notes.

The goods news therefore that the Angel Gabriel imparts to Daniel in this
Prophecy is this, That they should return out of Captivity and that from the
going forth of a certain Decree to rebuild Jerusalem, even with the Wall
thereof, that from that time forward God had determined Seventy Weeks for them,
that he would give them his special Protection so long, and they should be his
People, and their City should be Holy, their oblations and sacrifices should
not be antiquated, nor their Law and Religion abrogated. But within that time a
new Law or Religion should begin, which should never have an end, which
therefore is called the everlasting Righteousness, and that the Iudaical
Sin Offerings should then cease, that is, should be no longer warrantable or
effectual. For the Messiah should by that time be come, whom they will slay,
and he shall by his death put an end to all other sacrifices, his blood being
sufficient to reconcile the whole world to God. But though the design of Divine
Providence herein was holy and good, yet the Jews crucifying him out of malice
and envy (enormous wickedness having blinded their eyes,) the People of the
Jews shall be cast out of God's favor, nor shall they be the People of the
Messiah, but a People that shall be the Messiah's, viz. the Romans, shall come
and destroy their City and Sanctuary with an utter destruction.

This is a short and easy account of the whole Prophecy, in which it plainly
appears, That the foretelling of the destruction of the City is but an Appendix
of the main Prophecy, and comes but in by the by, as an effect of that soul act
of the Jews in slaying their Prince: But that the circumscription of the
Prophetical Weeks is made by those main designs they were allotted to the Jews
for, that is, they should not expire till the everlasting Righteousness was
brought in, till the Prophecies were fulfilled, and the most Holy anointed,
that is, till the Messiah was manifested to the world, till he suffered, rose
again, ascended into Heaven, sent down the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and
set the Christian Religion on foot in the world. All which was done in the last
Week. After which the City was to be destroyed by the Romans, but there was no
need of precisely setting down the time when. It came to pass by Titus the Son
of Vespasian about Thirty years after the expiration of Daniel's Weeks.

NOTES Upon VISION IV. Ver. 1.
Which is very near to Assibaras and consequently to Assuerus, etc.] Which name
Assuerus, Gasper Sanctius looks upon as a common name of all the Kings of
Media, as Merodac of the Babylonian Kings, Seleucus and Antiochus of the Kings
of Syria, Ptolemaeus of Egypt, Caesar of the Roman Emperors, Arsaces of the
Parthian Kings, and Tigranes of the Armenian, because the first Founders or
Enlargers of those Kingdoms were called by those names; see Gasper Sanctius on
the place. But Diodorus seems to make this distinct succession by different
names, as (...) or (...) (the Son of (...), so thought because he succeeded
Astibaras, whenas according to Thomas Lydiat he might be the Uncle of Nicrotis)
which (...) the Greeks call' (...). Whence it is probable (...) standing there
for one single King, as well as the rest, that it was the proper name of that
single King as the rest are, and consequently that Assuerus is not a common
name of the Kings of Media, but a proper name to some one of them, or at least
was so at the first.

But if Grotius his Critical conceit be true, that out of (...), which is
Assuerus, the name Xerxes is framed, first by letting go the Two Gutturals ^
and (...), as he notes it to be very usual so to do, and leaving only (...),
and not sounding (...) with that softness as in Assuerus, (which when it is
sounded entire is as much as the Greek (...) or (...), as you may observe in
(...) Mosche, whence Vossius derives the Greek M (...), in Strabo, the name of
a Sidonian Atomick Philosopher there,) but rather transposing the single
Elements in the sounding that compound Letter (...), and setting the (...)
before the (...), so that it will be of the same fo^ce with the Greek (...),
(as the Doricks by transposition pronounce not (...), (which is as much as
(...),) but (...)) so that from this (...) will be made Xwerx, and the w for
more easy sound being cast out, Xerx, whence the Greek termination added it
will be Xerxes; this conceit I say of Grotius, if it be true (and I wish he had
brought more examples of (...) founding as (...) than that of (...)), (a
People, I suppose, he means in Arabia) from (...), where both the Guttural
(...) is lost, and (...) turned into (...)) I can easily allow that from that
(...), or Assuerus, or Xerxes, the Medo-Persian Kings afterward might be
called Assueri or Xerxes. And I will also add, that according to Grotius his
way of Criticizing, Cyaxares the Father of Darius may more easily be derived
from (...). For by casting away only the first Guttural (...) and retaining the
second, and by sounding the first (...) as (...) and the later as (...), it
will be (...) or (...), and then by detracting the (...) out of (...) into the
foregoing Syllable for more easy pronunciation, (...) or (...), that is,
Cyaxares, the real Father of this Darius, and only the supposed Father of
Astyages, from the mistake of the Heathen Historians. And we are the less to
wonder that (...) should have the same force that (...) has, sometimes, when as
Bochartus notes that (...) sometimes has so, as in (...) from whence Thrax is
derived as he would have it.

Wherefore Xerxes being the same with Assuerus, and Artaxerxes but Xerxes again
with a Prefix of Art, which is (...), a Persian word, as Bochartus notes, and
made by transposition of Letters from the Hebrew (...), and of the same
signification with it, viz. Illustris, Magnificus, (...), as Herodotus and
Hesychius render (...), Gasper Sanctius may have said well in the sense above
limited. And Artashasta may be but the same Xerxes or Assuerus under a
disguise, namely, of the abovementioned honorable Title prefixed, and
sounding the (...) more soft, and letting go the force of (...) or (...) in it,
and suffering the (...) to fall to the ground. As if it were first (...), with
an insignificant termination of (...), but that honorificent Title (...)
prefixed to it, the (...) let go, as needless, and (...) as harsh, the sound
also being as clear without it, it became (...), and as Assuerus was Xerxes
before, so this Artaxerxes, the great magnificent Xerxes, or King of Persia, as
Cambyses certainly thought himself when he had added Egypt to the Persian
Empire, and others so accounted him. And Herodotus in his sixth Book expressly
says, (...).

Wherefore we will thus far assent to Gasper Sanctius, that Assuerus or Xerxes
either openly or in disguise, either this name or Darius, (as usually the names
of the Kings of Syria were either Seleucus or Antiochus) were the Names or
Titles of the Kings of Persia after Cyrus. But Artaxerxes the more frequent of
the two, insomuch as Darius who was vanquished by Alexander, is, as Grotius has
noted, called Artaxerxes by Iacchiades, but the first that bore that name for
eminency seems to be Cambyses, Ezra 4. 6, 7. which might be paraphrased thus,
Ver. 6. For in the Reign of Ahasuerus, that is, in the Reign of Xerxes or the
Persian Monarch, in the beginning of his Empire, etc. Ver. 7. Namely, or, That
is to say, (for so will (...) signify) in the days of Artaxerxes, that (...),
that great Xerxes, viz. Cambyses, that immediately succeeded Cyrus, who enjoyed
the Persian Empire not passing Two or Three years, and therefore the days of
Cambyses may well be said to be in the beginning of the Persian Empire, wrote,
Bishlam, mithridath Tabeel, etc. This seemed to me to be an easy and natural
sense of this perplexing passage in Ezra, when I did not know any body of the
same mind with me. But looking after into Vatablus, I find his short note to
be, Tempore Artaxerxis, is est Assuerus. So that Assuerus is but a general
expression for a Xerxes or Monarch of Persia at large, but the person is
determinated in Artaxerxes, by whom Cambyses, as being so early in the
beginning of the Persian Empire, is naturally understood. And if this may
satisfy the Reader, my playing so long above in words, having also so grave an
example therein as Hugo Grotius himself, I hope will the better be excused from
being reputed Pedagogical Trifling. See Grotius upon Ezra 4. 6.

Ver. 27. Called the coming of Christ.] If any one doubt whether the Roman
Armies coming to destroy Jerusalem be one coming of Christ, let him read Dr.
Hammond upon Matthew. 24. 3. That citation out of John 21. 22. where Peter asking
Jesus and saying. Lord what shall this man do, speaking of the beloved Disciple
John, Jesus answered, If I will that he tarry till I come what is that to thee;
This citation, I say, is clear and unanswerable, and must needs be understood
of the coming of Christ to take vengeance of the Jews. For it is not sense to
understand it of so little a time as to the day of Pentecost, when he sent down
the Holy Ghost and was with them in that assistance, nor of so long a time as
his coming to the Final Judgment. And besides, there were several things so
peculiar in his chief Commander over the Army, as if he were picked out on
purpose or so qualified on purpose, that the Jews and Christians too might
easily believe that he was Jesus Christ his General, and that he by him and his
Army came to take vengeance on the Jews. As that he healed the Blind and the
Lame with Spittle and touch, That he was one of the most humble and mild men
then breathing, which is the very character of Christ, That he shut the Gate of
Ianus his Temple and erected a Temple of Peace, like a Lieutenant of that
Prince of Peace the Blessed Jesus, That after the taking Jerusalem and
vanquishing the Jews neither he nor his Son would be named Iudaicus, as other
Conquerours usually were styled from the Nation they conquered, but ascribed
the whole work to God. These and several other considerations which that
learned Author produces, are more than enough to make good the fitness of Mr.
Medes Interpretation, who understands (...) [a Destroyer] of Christ, who then
made good that Parable of the injured King, Matthew. 22. who in his wrath sent
forth his Armies and destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City.

And the Chronological part Thomas Lydiat in my judgment, etc.] A general
account of Thomas Lydiat his performance in this point I have given in my Latin
Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godliness, lib. 7. cap. 4. sect. 5. which I
will translate hither with some emendation. The sum of his Method is this.
Forasmuch as he makes the beginning of the Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus Six
years sooner than Funccius does (who places it in the Fourth year of the 78
Olympiad, but Lydiat in the Second year of the Olympiad 77,) it is plain that
Daniel's Seventy Weeks from the Thirteenth year of Artaxerxes (according to
Lydiat's Epoch) will have the same ending as before from Funccius his, viz. in
the Third year of the 202 Olympiad. So that if the Passion of Christ, as
Funccius would have it, fell out upon the expiration of the last year of the
last week according to his own Epoch, which Helvicus also intimates, namely,
that Christ suffered Anno quarto Olympiad. 202. We computing from Thomas
Lydiat's Epoch, viz. from the Twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, the
Passion will fall on the First year of his last week, which is immediately next
to the last of Funccius his, if the Passion fell out no later than they would
have it. Wherefore the rest of the Artifice of Lydiat's Method is spent in
proving the Passion of Christ to have fallen out about Three or Four years
later than vulgarly they reckon, viz. in the Twenty second year of Tiberius
(whenas others reckon it to have fallen out in the Nineteenth of his Reign) and
consequently to have happened in the midst of the last Week, according to
Daniel's Prophecy. This is that general account I give for the main, in the
abovesaid place of my Mystery of Godliness.

But here, for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I shall briefly intimate
the main reasons whereby Thomas Lydiat proves, First, That Artaxerxes
Longimanus began his Reign Six years sooner than others account; and Secondly,
That the Birth, Baptism, and Passion of Christ fell out several years later.

That Artaxerxes his Reign began Six years sooner than others reckon, he makes
out thus. Artaxerxes began his Reign about Six months before the Flight of
Themistocles into Asia, according to the testimony of Thucydides, the chief of
the Heathen Historians: For, Themistocles in his flight, according to him,
being tossed upon the Sea a day and night at anchor, that he might not be
driven into the Army of the Athenians then besieging the people of Naxos, whom
they subdued, as the same Thucydides writes, before that twofold famous Victory
against the Persians by Sea and Land in the same day on the Coast of Pamphilia,
and near the shores of Cyprus, under Cimon the Athenian General; Which Victory
they obtained, according to Diodorus his own testimony, on the Third year of
the 77. Olympiad, himself referring the flight of Themistocles to the former
year, viz. to the second of the 77. Olympiad: I say, it is plain from hence,
that the beginning of this Artaxerxes his Reign was Six years sooner than
Funccius, and others do place it, the Argument being founded upon the
unexceptionable Authority of Thucydides, of whom Plutarch in the life of
Themistocles writes thus. That Thucydides and Charon Lamplacenus record, that
Xerxes being dead, (...), that Themistocles had the communication with his Son,
viz. Artaxerxes. And Plutarch adds, that though others write that the said
conference was with his Father Xerxes, yet he prefers Thucydides his account as
being more agreeing with the Chronology of those times. And so Cornelius Nepos
prefers his Authority in this matter before all others, Quod aetate proxi^^s
erat qui illorum temporum Historiam reliquerunt, and ejusdem Civitatis fuit.
Who therefore could not but know the time of the Athenians subduing the Naxii,
and of their famous twofold Victory by Sea and Land over the Persians, under
Ci^^n their General. So well is this first point established. But see further
in Thomas Lydiat himself, A^^o Mundi 3534.

Now for the Birth, Baptism, and Passion of Christ, Daniel's Weeks reaching
from Lydiat's Epoch, which is the Twentieth of Artaxerxes, (which is Seven
years later than the Seventh in their Epoch, or the Thirteenth of his own)
reaching, I say, Seven years beyond Funccius his Expiration of them, so that
the year next after the last Week, with Funccius, is the first of the last with
Lydiat, it was requisite for Lydiat to set the Birth, Baptism and Passion of
our Savior several years later than others account them, that his Death may
fall out in the midst of the last Week.

Wherefore, whereas Funccius and Helvicus also placed the Birth of Christ in
the year when C. Lent. Getulicus and M. Messalinus were Consuls, and others
sooner as well as other-some later. Thomas Lydiat places his Birth in the
latest date of all, viz. in the year when L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius
Geminus were Consuls. Which is Four years later than that Date of Func^ius,
which is in the Third year of the 194 Olympiad, that in the Third of the 195.
The first ground of his Evidence is, That the Birth of our Savior happened in
that Ecumenical Tax appointed by Augustus, and mentioned Luke 2. and executed
by Cyrenius then Governor of Syria. Now we are to understand that Augustus in
his Reign appointed three universal Taxes of the Citizens and People of the
Roman Empire, which Suetonius intimates in his Life, Cap. 27. Ce^sum populi ter
egit, primum ac tertium cum collega, medium solus. The first was presently upon
the defeat and death of Antonius, cum collega M. Agrippa. The third a little
before his own death, cum Ti^erio Collega. The middle Tax was that which was
begun by his appointment in the year of P. Vinitius and P. Alfinius Varus, but
finished, Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus being Consuls, as Thomas Lydiat
makes good out of History. And that it is that middle Tax of Augustus that the
Evangelist Luke points at, is plain, in that the first and last are too far
removed to pretend to be the Tax at what time Christ was born. And besides, the
year before the beginning of this Tax, Caius Caesar and Aemylius Paulus being
Consuls, the Gates of Ianus Quirinius were the third time shut up by Augustus,
and it is a tradition of the ancient Fathers, that Christ was born in such a
time of Peace. Moreover in the beginning of the Consulship of Vinitius and
Alfinius was the twenty eighth of Augustus his obtaining that Title, together
with that supreme and Sacrosanct Tribunitial power, and Clemens Alexandrinus
expressly says, that Augustus his Tax and our Savior's Birth was in the Twenty
eighth year of Augustus his Reign. And lastly, Epiphanius farther to confirm
the other, says, our Savior was born in the twenty ninth year after the Jews
were perfectly joined with the Romans, and Iudaea fully reduced under Tribute,
so that they had paid Tribute to the Romans these nine and twenty years,
commencing after the fourth year of Herod his being constituted King by
Augustus; Forasmuch as so many entire years, says Thomas Lydiat, intervene from
the first Tax of Augustus; peracted, himself the sixth time and Agrippa the
second time being Consuls, to his second Tax instituted, Vinitius and Alfinius
being Consuls. To this purpose does Thomas Lydiat argue, to prove that our
Savior was born in the time of the second Tax of Augustus, which was begun
Vinitius and Alfinius, and ended Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus being
Consuls.

But not content with this, he further proves, that Christ was born in the very
middle year of this Tax, L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus being
Consuls, and P. Sulpitius Quirinius or Cyrenius being then Governor of Syria;
and that the first Tax that he meddled in, as the Greek, Luke 2. v. 2. will very
well bear it, expunging the Comma betwixt (...) and (...).

Now the year of these Consuls Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus is the 41
year of the Reign of Augustus to be computed from the Consulship of Pulcher and
Flaccus, (which is the Era Hispanica in Tomis Conciliorum, as Helvicus notes,)
but in this 41 year of Augustus was Christ born, according to the testimony of
Irenaeus and Tertullian and others, which is no mean argument in a matter of
this nature.

Again, P. Quirinius was sent Rectour or Tutour by Augustus to Caius Caesar
after he had gotten Armenia. For M. Lollius, the former Tutor of Caius being
dead a little before Tiberius his return out of Rhodes, which was when Vinitius
and Alfinius were Consuls; and Caius after his renewing his confederacy with
the Parthians, and gone again into Armenia, being in an heedless conference
treacherously wounded, and thereby disinabled as well in mind as body to attend
public affairs: from hence there can be no doubt, since Luke affirms this Tax
to be carried on Quirinius or Cyrenius being Governor of Syria or guiding the
affairs there, and that Caius was thus unhinged, (who indeed died within a year
after that disaster) there can be no doubt I say, but that Augustus by this
same P. Quirinius at this time, Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus being
Consuls, carried on the Tax, at what time Christ was born in Bethlehem, his
Parents coming up thither to be taxed. And that it is not for nothing called
the first Tax of Quirinius to distinguish it from that other, which he
afterward was employed in, when the Kingdom was taken from Archelaus.

Thirdly, Whereas Suslyga and Kepler make that Tax, under which Christ our Lord
was born, depending or interrupted, Suslyga for four years from the Consulate
of Censorinus and Asinius, and Kepler six whole years from the year after the
Consulate of Quirinius to the twelfth Consulate of Augustus with Sylla, as
reaching to Saturninus President of Syria, under whom Tertullian with all
confidence affirms the said Tax to be finished, I appeal says Thomas Lydiat, to
Kepler's Conscience and Ingenuity, whether my account, which reducing the Tax
within the space of three years divides it by years and half years betwixt
Quirinius and Sentius, allotting a year and an half to each, so that Quirinius
together with his prefecture of Syria began to carry it on in Iudaea in the
beginning of the Consulate of Alfinius and Vinitius, but Sentius succeeding him
and Caius, in the midst of the summer (the usual time of changing the
Presidents of Provinces) next following the Nativity of Christ, Servilius and
Lamia being Consuls, that Sentius, I say, finished it in the Consulship of
Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus his Son in all probability; I appeal, says
he, to Kepler whether this account be not far more rational and congruous, than
that of Suslyga, or his own.

Fourthly and lastly, for it were too prolix to take in all; It appears out of
Velleius, Suetonius and Dion, that Augustus adopted Tiberius and Agrippas
P^sthumus in the midst of the Consulate of Aelius Catus and Sentius Sat^rnin^s
the junior. But Eusebius in his Chronicon places the Nativity of Christ in the
year immediately preceding that adoption, which therefore is the year of Aelius
Lamia and Servilius Geminus Consuls. These reasons with others, which for
brevities sake I have omitted, being considered, and how stoutly and dexterously
T. L. has removed all blocks and rubbish which either Scaliger, Kepler or
Suslyga have cast in his way, it may convince any unprejudiced man that reads
him, that he is in the truth touching the time of the Nativity of our blessed
Savior.

Now for his Baptism, whereas they usually refer it to the fifteenth year of
Tiberius, he places it in the beginning of the nineteenth, which makes about
four years difference again. And indeed considering that John the Baptist began
but his Function (which was to prepare the way to the Messiah) on the fifteenth
of Tiberius, as it appears Luke 3. and that Province being of so great moment
and consequence, to wit, John his approving of himself so to all the People
that he might be an idoneous Witness to our Savior that was to come after him,
it was requisite that he should exercise his proper Ministry some competent
time before our Savior appeared upon the Stage. And who can say that the space
of about four years is more than competent, or superfluous?

But let us hear Thomas Lydiat's own Reasons. And the first is to that purpose
we have already intimated, only he adds, that John doing no Miracles and yet
having by the exemplarity of his Life and the Efficacy of his Doctrine drawn
the eyes of all so upon him and got such an authority with the Jews and esteem,
that they began to think with themselves that he might be the very Messiah, so
great an opinion could not be raised in them from one years experience, but
from many; and that it is rashly gathered from Christ's Baptism being named so
soon in the same Chapter, that it should be in the very first year of John's
Ministry, viz. in the fifteenth of Tiberius; things of far greater distance of
time being spoken of within less compass of lines and no intimation given of
the times distance, a thing frequent in Scripture. So that the time of Christ's
Baptism by John is to be defined from other considerations. And therefore

The second Reason is, That this nineteenth year of Tiberius exactly complies
with the age of Christ at the time of his Baptism, Luke Chapter 3. ver. 2. And
Jesus began to be about thirty years of age, etc. The Greek has it, (...)
(...), which is, And Jesus himself was about thirty years of age (namely the
age in which the Levites began their service Numb. Chapter 4.) beginning his
Function, which he was initiated into by this Baptism of John, the Holy Ghost
also then descending upon him. Now from the year of Aelius Lamia and Servilius
Geminus Consuls, to the nineteenth of Tiberius are thirty years, as you may see
in Chronologers. So plain an Argument is this for Christ's being Baptized in
the nineteenth year of Tiberius as Lydiat would have it.

Thirdly, From the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus to this time of the
manifestation of Christ in his Baptism and Ministry are precisely 483 years or
Sixty nine Weeks, according as it said in the very Prophecy. That from the
abovesaid Decree to Messiah the Prince, viz. to his manifestation should be
seven Weeks and threescore and two Weeks, that is, sixty nine Weeks. And thus
is there left one entire Week to confirm a^ covenant with many, first by his
own Preaching the first half of the Week, and after by his Apostles, after he
had sent down the Holy Ghost upon them. And let these three first reasons serve
for a taste, but there are more than thrice as many congruencies with historical
passages that, Lydiat notes in several succeeding years, that do notably
confirm this Hypothesis of his, touching our Savior's Baptism falling on the
nineteenth year of Tiberius, which I must omit, that the Notes upon this Vision
run not out too far.

Now the time of Christ's Baptism is settled, the time of his Suffering will be
determined with ease, and fall in right whether we will or no, taking but what
the generality of Expositors have concluded on, whom Funccius declares to have
been of opinion that Christ was between thirty three and thirty four years old,
when he suffered, whence of necessity his Death falls upon the fourth year of
the last Week, and about the middle of that year. And that he did not exceed
that age is further confirmed by Thomas Lydiat in his Canones Chronici, p. 93.
out of Theodoret, who expressly says, When our Lord for about three years and an
half had preached and had confirmed his Disciples by his Doctrine and Miracles,
he suffered. To all which you may add, that there being from Christ's Baptism
to his suffering but four Passovers, as is apparent out of S. John's Gospel,
(who writing to make a supply to the omissions of the other Evangelists, who
scarce take notice of any Passover but that wherein Christ suffered, would be
sure to omit none from the time of his Baptism to his Suffering) and Christ
being Baptized in the beginning of the eighth natural month, that is, of the
Jewish Marchesvan or Roman November, as Thomas ^ydiat notes out of Epiphanius,
Christ's Passion will necessarily run into the middle year of the last Week and
near upon into the middle of that year, there being nigh six months space
betwixt the beginning of Marchesvan and the middle of Abib or Nisan when the
Passover was kept. So handsomely do all things fall in and agree together.

And though I have been very brief in opening the grounds of Thomas Lydiat's
Chronological account of this Prophecy, yet I hope it is so plain, at least so
considerable, that it may excite the Reader to seek further satisfaction if he
need it from Thomas Lydiat himself, and admire with all true Christians the
stupendous providence of God who has left such clear and wonderful
testimonies thereof unto his Church in these Books of Daniel and the
Apocalypse, for our certain assurance who is the Christ and who is the
Antichrist. And those certain Revelations touching Antichrist are also as
effectual Corroboratives of our Faith in Christ, to as many as are unprejudi^ed
and set themselves seriously to understand them.

VISION V.
Which is the Vision of an Angel in human shape clothed in Linen with his Loins
girt with the fine gold of Uphaz, Chapter 10. and is a Prooeme or Introduction to
the Vision of the Scripture of Truth, which takes up the other two whole
Chapters in Daniel.

THat the same times are run over again as in the Apocalypse so in this Book of
Daniel, and things more fully explained in the repetition of the same times, I
have noted above. But what is most remarkable in this present introductory
Vision is this, That the vision of the Scripture of Truth which follows, and is
a description of Affairs from the times of the Persian Monarchy to the end of
the world, being of such great importance, (the Affairs of the Church not only
Jewish but Christian being so lively described therein) that which is most
remarkable I say is, that as in the Apocalypse to Visions of like great
comprehension and compass, so here to this Vision of so vast extent of time is
there pref^xt a very pompous introductory Vision: as there is before the
Prophecy of the Seals which reaches from the beginning of the Christian Church
to the end of the World, the representation of the throne of God prefixed and
of the Four Beasts and the Four and twenty Elders. Before the Prophecy of the
opened Bo^k, which reaches also from the beginning of the Church to the
Conflagration, there is a Vision of a mighty strong Angel clothed with a Cloud
and a Rainbow about his Head, his face as the Sun and his Feet as pillars of
Fire* etc. And lastly, before the Prophecy of the Seven Churches, which is of
the same extent with the forenamed Prophecies, there is seen in the midst of
the Seven Golden Candlesticks, One like unto the Son of Man clothed with a
garment down to the foot and girt about the paps with a golden girdle; His Head
and his Hair was white like Wool as white as Snow, and his Eyes were as a flame
of Fire, and his Feet like unto fine Brass, and his Voice as the sound of many
Waters. Which is a representation of Christ according to the sense of all
Interpreters on that place of the Apocalypse, and the thing is evident from the
Text it self.

But how like to this description of Christ, in the Apocalypse, this of the
Angel here appearing to Daniel is, I shall take notice in my exposition of the
Vision. I will only observe for the present, that there being so pompous an
Introduction to the Vision of the Scripture of Truth, which reaches from the
times of the Persian Empire to the end of the World, that there must be most
remarkable matters revealed therein, such as concern not only the Jews but the
Christian Church as well as them, or else the Gate will be too big for the City.

1. In the Third year of Cyrus King of Persia, * namely, in the Third year of
the Persian Monarchy begun upon the death of Darius the Mede, who immediately
succeeded Belshazzar, the Grandchild of Nebuchadnezzar. A thing was revealed
unto Daniel, (whose name was called Belteshazzar) There are Three names that
occurr in Daniel that sound like one another in the Hebrew, but are not the
same; The first is of the Grandchild of Nebuchadnezzar called Belshazzar, in
the Hebrew it is (...), which is compounded of (...), the Pronoun (...) and
(...), which signifies Thesaurum colligere, where Grotius interprets it, Belus
est cujus opes, q. d. In Beli potestate sunt opes and imperia.

The other two names in Hebrew belong both to Daniel, and have a distinction in
writing and signification, but they are writ alike in the English, viz.
Belteshazzar, and so other languages make no discrimination. But here in the
Hebrew the name that was given to Daniel by Ashpenaz the Prince of the Eunuchs,
is (...), which Iunius in Gregorius Gregorii his Lexicon sanctum interprets
Beli abdita thesaurizans, from (...) and (...), absconditum, (though with
something an hard Hypallage) and from the Pronoun (...) and (...) which is
thesaurizare. Which sounds as if they would make Daniel Arcanorum Beli
thesaurarium the Treasurer of the Secrets of Belus, understanding thereby the
God of the Babylonians; which, new name partly because (...) which is the same
with (...) is of a large and indifferent signification and may signify simply
Dominus, and partly because he could not help it, he bore as well as he could.

But here in this Vision there is a variation of the writing, and it is not
(...) but (...) the (...) being put before (...), whence Grotius would have it
to signify (as if it were compounded of these parts, of (...) and (...), which
Preposition and Noun put together will signify latenter, and (...) ignis, and
(...) hostis) Latenter ignis hosticus, And Daniel calls himself so, says he,
signifying that thereby what he had predicted did suddenly and unexpectedly
come to pass upon the Babylonians. But yet though he a little changed the
writing of his name, the sound being so near that which was given him by
Ahpenaz Master of the Eunuchs, he thought fit to record it here as well as his
own genuine name Daniel, which by long disuse in those parts was in a manner
buried in oblivion, and therefore he thought requisite to record this more
known name of his, that it might be more certain to those Nations, that this
was his Prophecy. To this sense Calvin writes upon the place.

But indulging to a little liberty and putting (...) for (...), then (...)
Belteshazzar may signify, Homo host is in abscondito, whereby Daniel cries
quits with them. For when they would have besmeared him with the name of their
Idol Bell, as if he were a professed Client of his, this little change of the
name declares himself to be inwardly a downright enemy to the Babylonish
Idolatry, though always a faithful subject to the Kings of Babylon, as all
good men are to their Princes be they of what Religion they will, though they
never close with the palpable erours and gross mispractices therein. And the
thing was true, that is to say, the matter that was communicated unto him was
not (...) Chidah, a prophetic Parable or Aenigm, (such as was communicated
hitherto unto him under the Types or Figures of an Image of various Metalls,
and of severally shaped Beasts, and therefore wanted an interpretation) but it
was (...), Emeth, a matter declared plainly and apertly without any such
Riddles or figurative Involutions. But the time appointed was long, that is,
this clear and plain Prophecy or Vision of the Scripture of Truth, without any
Aenigmatical shadows, (which begins at the next Chapter and reaches to the end
of Daniel) comprehends a long extent of time, even from the beginning of the
Persian Empire to the end of the World or Conflagration, as is expressed in the
Apocalypse. And he understood the thing and had understanding of the Uision,
that is, he understood the aforesaid Prophecy of the Scripture of truth, (for
Vision is here as much as Prophecy, as I noted above) it wanting no
Interpretation, as those Aenigmatical Prophecies did. This further confirms
that that passage [and the thing was true] is to be understood as I have
expounded it, viz. that the matter was plainly delivered without any
Aenigmatical Figure or Symbols of Beasts or Statues as in the former
Prophecies. Otherwise if [and the thing was true] should be understood in that
other sense as opposed to False, it would imply that the foregoing Visions were
not true, than which nothing can be more false or absurd.

2. In those days, i.e. On a certain time in that Third year of Cyrus King of
Persia after the adversaries of the Jews (notwithstanding the gracious Decree
of Cyrus) had so prevailed with Ca^byses his Son, his Father being busy in a
foreign War against the Scythians and others, as to hinder the building of the
Temple, as it is recorded in Ezra, Chapter 4. That they hired Counselors against
them to frustrate their purpose all the days of Cyrus King of Persia. I Daniel
was mourning three full Weeks. And the reason thereof I have already specified,
the Hebrew has it (...), Three Weeks of days, in counter-distinction to the
Seventy Weeks in the foregoing Prophecy, which signify Weeks of years, that
when in any Prophecy it self of Daniel, Years or Weeks or Days are mentioned,
and nothing intimated to the contrary, it may be presently taken for granted,
that it is to be understood of Prophetical Years, Weeks and Days. Which being
an observable Rule in Daniel, the putting days for years can bring no obscurity
on the Prophecy, whereby it may less deserve the name of (...), Emeth, a plain
Prophecy.

3. I ate no pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh nor Wine in my Mouth, neither
did I anoint my self at all, which implies at other times he did all these,
especially he being in that quality in the Kingdom that he was. But now in
these Three Weeks of Days he earnestly humbling himself before God in the
behalf of his Nation and Religion, he abstained from all these things, (which
otherwise it was lawful for him and accustomary to use) to recommend himself
the more to God, and make himself more fit for Prayer, Contemplation and
Devotion. Till three whole Weeks of Days were fulfilled. Though there be no
Prophetical Mystery in these days, they being simply taken for days not for
years, yet that he would determine himself to Three Septenaries, there may be
some Cabbalisticall Arcanum therein, though it may be more curious than
needful. They may signify a consummate subduing of the Flesh by abstinence, for
the fuller enjoyment of the Fruits of the Spirit or Divine influence of the
Holy Trinity according to that of Prudentius the Christian Poet. Parcis
victibus expeditu' venture
Infusum melius Deum receptat.


4. And in the Four and twentieth day of the First Month, as I was by the side
of the great River which is Hiddekel. The vulgar Latin from the Septuagint
calls it Tigris, And the Prophet here calls it the great River, because of the
breadth of it as it touches upon the Prefecture or Province Susiana, which
Daniel was set over, and where he was at the sight of this Vision. The head of
it is in Armenia major as Pliny says, and therefore having come so long a way
before it arrive at Susiana, and being increased by several Rivers running into
it, it may well become great. It runs on the West side of Vlai or Vlaeus which
passes through Susiana too, has its name as Pliny reports (Lib. 6. c. 27.) by
reason of the swiftness of its course, from an Arrow, Ita appellant Medi
Sagittam, as if Tigris were from the Chaldee (...) the Hemantik (...) being
prefixed, from whence it will be Tegiris, and after Tigris. And the Hebrew name
(...) Hiddekel is given it for the same cause, from (...) acuit, and (...)
levem ac velocem esse, which were a name as proper at least for an Arrow as for
the River Tigris. But this makes not much for the understanding of the Vision.
See Gregor. Gregorii n. 191.

5. Then I lift up mine Eyes and looked and behold a certain Man clothed in
linen. This is the very same Angel in humane shape that appeared unto Daniel
when he was near the River Vlai, which Calvin not without Reason concluded to
be Christ, called there Palmoni. And therefore it will be less rash to conclude
this angelical shape to be Christ here too, and consequently to be the same
Person in both places, which will be undoubtedly true, if it appear that this
Angel here is Christ, that brought the Israelites out of the Land of Egypt,
gave them a Law on Mount Sinai, settled them in the Land of Canaan, and bestirs
himself here in their behalf in their Captivity at Babylon. Now I think I have
proved evidently enough in my Exposition of the Apocalypse, or rather it is
plain at first sight, that the representation there of one like the Son of Man,
Chapter 1. amongst the golden Candlesticks, is the representation of Christ. And
therefore if that be the lively picture of this Angel described in Daniel, we
may well conclude that this Angel here in Daniel is Christ. To take notice that
here in Daniel he is said to be (...) a certain Man, but in the Apocalypse one
like to the Son of Man, as a Picture is to him of whom it is the portraiture,
is one of the least observations.

But it follows, Clothed in Linen, the Hebrew is (...), which in this place the
Septuagint render (...)* but Ezekiel. Chapter 9. v. 2. they render it (...). It is
remarkable what Grotius says upon this of Ezekiel, Idem habitus hic and in Dan.
10. 5. and 12. 6, 7. datur Angelo qui Pontifici maximo, that is, to Aaron the
type of Christ. But from hence it is plain that (...) is the same, that (...),
which are the very words in the Apocalypse Chapter 1. 13. Clothed with Linen. And
that therefore in both the Visions the Angel in humane shape was clothed with
the Pontifical Garment down to the Foot, or both clothed with Linen, which
signifies the same thing, namely such Linen or pure fine Silk as the High
Priest was clothed in. And as it is here said in Daniel, Whose Loins were ^irt
with fine Gold of Uphaz, so in the Apocalypse it is said, that he was girt
about the Paps with a golden Girdle; wherefore to be girt with a golden Girdle
is proper to them both, only in the one the place is mentioned from whence the
Gold comes, but in the Latin it is only Aurum obryzum, which signifies only
pure Gold, of which both their Girdles are supposed to be made. And Vphaz or
Ophaz signifies Aurum optimum as Gregorius Gregorii has noted, I suppose most
properly optatissimum, from (...) optare to desire and (...) Aurum, as if it
were (...) Aurum optatum, from whence by detrition of one of the (...) and the
(...) it is (...) Ophaz or Vphaz, for it is writ both ways. And Gregorius
Gregorii says, it is a place (as also Calvin) so called from the good or
choicest Gold there. Grotius conceives upon Ier. 10. 9. that Ophaz is the
Island Topazos which Pliny makes mention of which it may be might be so called
from (...) which is the same with (...). But these things as less material I
willingly pass by.

6. His Body also was like the Beryl. The Hebrew word is (...) which signifies
the Sea as well as Beryllus Thalassius ^ive Marinus. The Septuagint keep the
same word rendering it (...). Now the Sea signifying a multitude there is
mention of this Tharsis to signify the Party here described to be no private
Person but the Prince of a multitude, and that the People is represented
together with the Prince. Which same thing is notified also in that
representation in the Apocalypse though not by this Symbol of Tharsis or the
Beryl. And his Face as the appearance of Lightning. For this, in the
Apocalyptick representation is there put, His Head and his Hairs were white as
Wool as white as Snow, and the whiteness of Snow has a very dazzling brightness
in it like that of the Lightning, which is also a white splendor not red like
Fire, nor is the flashing motion of it necessarily implied but only the bright
color, so that the Snow and it may signify the same thing, a mature clearness
and serenity of mind. But now they agree again in the very words. Here it is
said, And his Eyes as lamps of fire, and there, And his Eyes were as a flame of
Fire: Here, And his Arms and his Feet like in color to polished Brass; there,
And his Feet like unto fine Brass as if they burned in a Furnance. And lastly
here it is said, And the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude; and
there likewise, And his Voice as the sound of many Waters; and Waters
unquestionably are a Prophetical Symbol of a multitude. Whence I say, Christ is
described in both places together with his Church, the Jewish in Daniel, and
the Christian in the Apocalypse. And the Prophetic Symbols signify much-what
the same things in them both. The greatest difference is, in that the mention
of the Beryl or Tharsis is left out, but it only signifying a multitude, the
multitude is expressly put in, in the close of the Apocalyptick description, to
supply its place. And Brass brightened by Rubbing or Polishing and Purified by
the Fire will signify the same things, the trial of Affliction and the being
bettered by it. But it is not necessary to insist over minutely on these
things; it is evident enough from what so easily offers it self, that this
Angel is that very Palmoni that appeared to Daniel, Chapter 8. 13. as they both
being the same Christ bestirring himself in the behalf of his Afflicted people
the Jews, and the latter having the same representation with that of him in the
Apocalypse, Chapter 1.

9. And I Daniel alone saw the Uision, for the men that were with me saw not
the Uision, At least they saw nothing but a Glorious light, as St. Paul's
fellow-travellers did, when Christ appeared unto him going to Damascus, and yet
they are said to see no body, because they saw not the distinct shape of the
appearance, as here Daniel and it is likely there Saul did. But that Daniel's
Companions saw something, is evident from what follows. But a a great quaking
fell upon them so that they fled to hide themse^ves. Which implies they saw
something whereby they were thus terrified, and that therefore this of Daniel's
was a real (...), or Day-Vision, and that he was in the place truly which he
mentions, namely by the great River, the River Hiddekel or Tigris in Susiana.

8. Therefore I was left alone and saw this great Uision. As being better
fitted for such Divine Communion by his Three Weeks preparation of Fasting and
Devotion. * But how an Angel can make himself seen of one and yet not of others
present, or whether the difference lie merely in the predisposedness of the
persons that are to see, is a subtle piece of Philosophy not requisite to
enter upon in this place. But well may this Vision be called great, it being
the sensible and distinct Presence of the Lord Christ. And there remained no
strength in me, Being overcome and stounded at the Presence of so Glorious a
Personage, as it follows. For my comeliness was turned in me into corruption,
and I retained no strength.

9. Yet heard I the voice of his words. Though he was half dead in this strange
consternation of mind, yet he heard the voice of this Illustious Angel that was
present with him. And when I heard the voice of his words, that is to say, But
at the hearing the Voice of his Words, Then was I in a deep sleep on my Face,
and my Face toward the ground. The like passage is there Chapter 8. 18. and
therefore the like interpretation is to be given, namely, that he was so
overcome and astonished at the Voice of this Angel as well as before at his
sight, that it made him fall down into a soporiferous swound with his face
toward the Earth, his spirits did so fail him or quite retire through fear.

Thus were the natural or carnal powers abolished in a manner and annihilated,
turned into a present Chaos and Death, before he could be raised up into a
capacity to receive supernatural Illuminations. And it is the Fate of those
that have a strong robustious carnal mind or wit, as they gladly would have it
called, to be as incapable of understanding these Prophecies of Daniel, or any
of the like nature, as he was before his humiliation and concidency of Spirit,
of receiving them. I cannot forbear to bring in here that description of the
Method of Divine Wisdom, Siracid. Chapter 4. 17. At the first she will walk with
him by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with
her discipline, until she may trust his Soul and try him by her Laws. Then will
she return the straight way unto him, and comfort him and show him her Secrets.
A figure whereof we have here in this Communication betwixt Palmoni and Daniel.

10. And behold an Hand touched me. When he was fallen thus to nothing in
himself through perfect humiliation and contrition, then an hand from without
touches him, supernatural power then is conveyed unto him, by due degrees,
not all at once, nor per saltum, such inordinate motion having no harmony in
it, nor soundness or safety, neither in things natural nor Divine. They go
from strength to strength, says the Psalmist, though their beginning be but
small as a mustard seed. But we must first learn to creep and then go,
according as we may observe in the following words. Which set me upon my ^nees
and upon the palms of my Hands. But this however was a good hopeful beginning,
it being in virtue not of our own strength but of that which is supernatural,
which will carry us out to the end if we be faithful.

11. And he said unto me, O Daniel a man greatly beloved. I have noted above
that the original has it, A man of desires, and so may signify a man of great
love toward God and his people, or a man greatly beloved of God and all good
men. Understand the words which I speak unto thee, and stand upright. Thus was
Daniel rouzed up and enabled to hear, understand and to take perfect notice of
what was to be delivered unto him for the information of Posterity. For unto
thee am I now sent, (...) The word is the same from whence Shilo the name of
the Messiah is derived. Whence his being sent hinders nothing but that he may
be Christ, who is said in several places to be sent in the Gospel. And when he
had spoken this word unto me I stood trembling, i.e. by the virtue of his
saying unto me stand upright, I stood upon my legs, but I trembled withal as
yet being not so thoroughly strengthened, or fearing what tidings this Angel
might bring unto me.

12. Then said he unto me, Fear not Daniel. This was to encourage him and abate
his trembling. For from the first day, namely of the three Weeks of Days, that
thou did set thine heart to understand and to chasten thy self before thy God
by fasting, mourning and Prayer, Thy words were heard, Thy petition was
granted. And I am come for thy words, that is, by reason of thy earnest and
zealous prayer I am come unto thee. Behold the admirable Efficacy of earnest
and sincere devotion that attracts to it, not only the Ministry of Angels, but
brings down into converse the Son of God himself.

13. But the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me One and twenty Days.
(...)
This is spoke by way of preventing an objection; for if his Petition was heard
the very first day of the Three Weeks of humiliation, Daniel might think
strange that he heard no news of it before now. But to solve that difficulty
the Angel tells him, that the Presidentiary Angel of the Kingdom of Persia with
whom he contested, detained him that time. And it is admirable to take notice
of the concurrence of Daniel's prayers and devotions, and the Activity of the
Invisible powers for that which he prayed for. At the very same time while he
prayed, they acted for the effecting the thing he prayed for. But lo Michael
one of the chief Princes came to help me. This bringing in of Michael one of
the chief Princes as assisting against the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia,
shows plainly that the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia is an Angel as well as
Michael, and therefore as Michael is the Presidentiary Angel of the Ie^wish
Nation, so must the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia be the Presidentiary Angel
of the said Kingdom of Persia. From whence it is plain that there are
Presidentiary Angels of all Kingdoms and Nations.

To which purpose the ancient Fathers allege that of Deuter. Chap. 32. 8.
according to the Septuagints translation, as Cornelius a Lapide takes notice.
When the most High divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when he separated
the Sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the People, (...), according to the
number of the Sons of God, not of the Children of Israel, they reading as it
sems, not (...) but (...), understanding by the Sons of God, the Angels. And
with this agrees excellently well what follows in the Latin translation, Pars
autem Domini Populus ejus, but the Lord's portion is the Jews, Jacob is the Lot
of his Inheritance. This runs far more coherently than any sense I can find
Expositors make of it, who read (...) for (...). Which Text therefore implies
that whereas other Nations have but Presidentiary Angels over them, the Lord
himself, i.e. Iehova Filius, Palmoni, is the Governor or King of Ieshurun or
Israel, and Michael the General of his Armies under him. But now for the
Presidentiary Angels of other Nations * whether they be good Angels, as the
general Authority of the Fathers seems to confirm, or bad, as Gasper Sanctius
industriously endeavors to demonstrate, is a point too nice to be insisted on
in so brief an Exposition, and therefore I will let it pass. And I remained
there with the Kings of Persia. For I was left alone (so (...) will signify) as
being the remainder of those that were with me, i.e. Michael and I were not
both there together for a good while, I having sent him elsewhere, but at last
he came again to assist or relieve me; whom leaving behind me in my place.

14. Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people, for
whom thou did so earnestly intercede in thy devotions, In the latter days.
For yet the Uision is for many days. As it is said verse 1. The thing was true,
but the time appointed was long: as if he should say, Thy great zeal and
earnestness is concerning the deliverance of the Jews out of this present
Captivity, and to know what their condition is like to be in reference to it.
But I am, for the good of my people, come to make thee understand what will
befall the Jews, or people of God at large, through the series of many ages,
even to the end of all; what they shall suffer under the Greek Empire, what
under the Roman, and what an happy restoring there will be of them toward the
end.

15. And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the
ground and became dumb, that is, I looked downwards toward the earth with all
reverence and modesty, not being able to bear the glorious presence of this
mighty Angel. And my astonishment from having beheld him was so great, and also
from hearing his voice, that I was not yet able to speak. For that Fear, and
the surprise of Admiration will stop the voice, is a thing vulgarly known, and
noted, both in Poets and Historians as an effect of those passions.

16. And behold one like the similitude of the sons of men, not in a
terrestrial body yet, though in humane shape. It is the same Angel, says A
Lapide, which he had seen, and which had talked with him all this time, and he
will allow him to be a Type of Christ, and Calvin mentions some that understand
this person in the similitude of the Sons of men, to be Christ. Touched my
lips, as he touched the Tongue of the deaf and dumb man, Mark 7. and crying
Ephphata loosed his tongue, that he could speak, as Daniel after the Angel had
touched his Lips, says, Then I opened my mouth and spoke and said unto him that
stood before me, O my Lord by the Uisions my sorrows are turned upon me, and I
have retained no strength. So overcoming was the glorious Presence of the
Messiah, before he came in the flesh. These consternations of mind in Daniel
thus often repeated, set off the inexpressible eminency of the person he
conversed with, and the huge weightiness of the matter that he was to conveigh
unto Daniel.

17. For how can the servant of this my Lord, The Hebrew may be rendered, How
can this Servant of my Lord! For (...) Zeh here may be referred to Servant, as
well as Lord, and then the sense is, How can so vile a servant, so wretched,
poor and despicable a creature as I am. For here Zeh signifies as Iste in
Latin, a diminishing indication. Ta^k with this my Lord, that is, with such an
one as this my Lord is. For here Zeh signifies eminency of Worth and
Excellency, or height of Glory and Majesty. Which expressions of Daniel put
Calvin to the trouble of making an excuse for him, and to show, that this does
nihil detrahere Dei Monarchiae. But understanding here by this Angel, that
Christ is meant by it, as I have proved he is meant thereby, this appellation
of him by the name (...) conjoined with so profound humiliation before him, can
bear with it no scruple or difficulty at all. For as for me, straightway there
remained no strength in me. So perfect an exinanition ought there to be of our
own carnal mind and powers for the fitting us to receive the supernatural power
from God, and those divine communications that flow from him. We ought to
become breathless and liveless as it were to our natural and carnal sentiments
and abilities, that we may be inspired from above, and receive the Influences
of the holy Spirit.

18. Then there came again and touched me, one like the appearance of a man,
that is, After Daniel was thus lost and confounded in himself, and found no
strength of his own carnal will and mind left (that we may pursue the Moral
Allegory also of this Vision) and after the free and hearty acknowledgment of
the same, then Christ in humane shape here, though not yet in humane flesh,
touched him again. And, says he, he strengthened me, namely by his touch. So
great virtue is there in the touch of the Divine body of Christ.

19. And said, O man, greatly beloved. What senses [greatly beloved] may bear,
I have more than once intimated. Fear not, but instead of trusting in thine own
wit and strength, trust in me. It is the sober boast of St. Paul, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me. But that is more Moral, the more
Literal sense is intimated in what follows, Peace be unto thee. Which friendly
salutation shows, that he came for the good of Daniel, and for the good of his
people the Jews, for whom he was so much concerned. Be strong, yea, be strong.
And this is the word of him, of whom that is true, Dixit and factum est. For he
is the Word by whose command all things were created. The repeating therefore
of the command is a note of his proportionating supplies according to the
sincere acknowledgment of our defects and desire of being supplied from him.
For it is upon Daniel that man of desires, that these communications are
bestowed. And when he had spoken to me, I was strengthened. And by this
strength perceived and acknowldged to come from without, not from our own
natural and carnal principles, was Daniel encouraged to think himself prepared
to hear the voice of Christ in things of greater concern, according as it
follows. And said, Let my Lord speak, for thou have strengthened me, that is,
Thou have enabled me to be a fit auditour of thy instructions and informations.

20. Then said he, viz. the Angel, know thou wherefore I come unto thee,
that is, thou can not easily imagine what things and of what mighty concern I
have to impart unto thee. And now will I return to fight with the Prince of
Persia, viz. I will return to dispute or contest (* for so Praeliari is taken
in Cicero) with the Presidentiary Angel of Persia, after I have imparted what I
have to communicate unto thee. And when I am gone forth, lo, the Prince of
Grecia shall come, viz. the Presidentiary Angel of Grecia, for he will also put
in for the Empire of the World, and to have the Jews under his command. And
this is the reason of the mentioning of the Prince of Grecia here.

21. But, now that I may enter upon what I came to thee for, I will show thee
what is noted in the Scripture of Truth, that is, I will declare in plain words
(without any Symbolical or Hieroglyphical figures, such as were used in the
former Prophecies) the Divine Counsel and Purpose, so distinctly and orderly as
if it were writ in a Book, which Writing therefore here is called Scripture,
and for its plainness and unsymbolicalness, as I may so speak, (...), the
Scripture of Truth. And I do not question but there is a certain correspondency
betwixt this Scripture of Truth, and that Book in the Apocalypse first Sealed
and then Opened. The Prophecy of which this Scripture of Truth contains, and
the times also before the Epoch of the Apocalypse, from the Persian Monarchy
to the said Epoch, which is fixed in Tiberius his Reign the Third of the Roman
Emperors. And there is none that holds with me in these things but Michael
your Prince, that is, there is none of the Presidentiary Angels of the Nations
that holds fast to me but your Prince, which is Michael the Presidentiary Angel
of the Jews, who is my General and therefore contains all the Powers or Forces
under him. So little occasion is there, that Interpreters should be puzzled or
move difficulties how one Angel only should be employed in carrying on and
assisting the affairs of Gods People.

But we may note here by the by, that as Michael here is made the Presidentiary
Angel of Gods people the Jews, so in the Apocalypse he is made the General to
fight the Battles of the Christians, the Christians succeeding into the place
of the Jews and being called or implied to be Jews or Israelites in several
places of the Apocalypse. And the sense of this passage suits well with the
interpretation of the former passages that make this Angel so Great and
Glorious, and the same with Palmoni, as it is here insinuated, that Michael is
the Generaliss^mo under him, but that he himself is the Lord of Hosts properly
so called and above this Generalissimo, that is, that he is Christ.

As is further confirmed out of the first Verse of the following Chapter which
ought to have been the last of this, which contains the Proemial Vision to the
great Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth: which first verse is this. Chap. 11.
^.
Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I stood to confirm and
strengthen him. Where [I] is repeated and an Emphasis put upon it, that that
act should be imputed not so much to the Minister Gabriel as to himself that
sent him, Chapter 9. 21. The man Gabriel whom I had seen in the Vision before, viz.
Chapter 8. 16. being caused to fly swiftly, touched me, etc. Now in the Vision
before, it is manifest that Palmoni commanded Gabriel, saying, Gabriel make
this man to understand the Vision. Therefore there is all the reason to think
that Gabriel by the same Palmoni was caused to fly swiftly, that is, was sent
speedily to touch Daniel about the time of the Evening Oblation, when he was at
his devotions in the first year of Darius the Mede. But in that it is said, he
stood to confirm and strengthen him, that is, to strengthen Michael, (as both
Grotius and other Expositours, as Calvin confesses, refer [Him] to Michael) by
Michael, accordingly as is perpetually to be observed in the Apocalypse, that
by Angels are understood the people over which they preside, is to be meant the
people of the Jews, who with Daniel were strengthened and comforted by that
Prophecy, Chapter 9. delivered by Gabriel sent by Palmoni unto him. Wherefore it is
most evident also from this last reason, that this Angel that delivers to
Daniel this Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, is the same with Palmoni whom
Calvin with judgment concludes to be Christ. Whence therefore the Angel, that
delivers this book of the fate of the Church of God and of Kingdoms in
reference thereto, which is the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, must also
be Christ.

Which agrees admirably with that in the Apocalypse, Chapter 5. That it was only
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that is, Christ that had the privilege of
opening the Seven-sealed Book, and of looking thereon. Which privilege of so
wonderful comprehensive Prophecy he obtained upon the account of his foreseen
obedience even to the death of the Cross, and his actual undergoing thereof at
the time appointed. And again, that this privilege may be solely reserved to
him, that Angel also Apoc. Chapter 10. in my Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, I have
plainly shown to be Christ, who delivers the Little book to John to swallow
down. Which happily amongst other reasons may be called little in that, comparing
the Epoch thereof with this of the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, (which
begins with the Reign of Cambyses, but that first in the Reign of Tiberius) it
will be found to take in less time than that by five or six hundred years. But
in this do they agree, both the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, and the
Prophecy of the Sealed Book and Opened Book, that these latter Prophecies run
through no other times than those of the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth,
though they run not through all of them, they beginning later by betwixt five
and six hundred years, but they both reach to the end of all things or general
Resurrection, and declare the same things of the same times, and are the
Prophecies of the same great Prophet even of Jesus Christ the Son of God, as I
have made manifest to the taking away of all Cavils and derogation to our
Blessed Savior, as if he put but in his sickle in messem alienam, into another
man's Harvest, and had told by his Angel sent by him, Apoc. Chapter 1. nothing but
what another, one Daniel, of old had told before him, saving that he was
something more particular, and more copious in declaring matters. Which though
it may be a pretty specious answer, and stand in stead, where there is no
better to be found, yet this I here intimate, so absolutely stoppingmens mouths
fromuttering any such derogatory stuff against the person of our Savior, I
think is worthy of all due consideration, viz. That it was as well Christ
himself that delivered this Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth to Daniel the
man greatly beloved, as it was Christ himself that sent his Angel to John,
whose name also signifies gracious or greatly beloved, to communicate to him
the Prophecies of the Sealed Book and the Opened Book and of the Seven Churches.

And that this might be understood by the careful and intelligent Reader of
this Proemial Vision, I conceive all those passages that set off the exceeding
Grandeur and Majesty of this Angel, and the repeated Consternations of mind and
humble deportments of Daniel toward him, are recorded, as the Literal scope
thereof. Which does not at all exclude those Moral Insinuations I hinted in the
Exposition of the Vision.

And thus much of this Vision Proemial to the Vision or Prophecy of the
Scripture of Truth, which Prooemium reaches to the very second verse of the
eleventh Chapter, as other Interpreters also have taken notice how ill the
division is made. The eleventh Chapter should have begun at [And now will I
show thee the Truth] and there will we begin our Exposition of the Prophecy of
the Scripture of Truth.

NOTES Upon VISION V. Ver. 1.
Namely in the third year of the Persian Monarchy, etc.] Gasper Sanctius here
moves a doubt how well this of the first verse of this Chapter [In the third
year of Cyrus King of Persia] agrees with verse. 21. of Chap. 1. And Daniel
continued even unto the first year of King Cyrus. Whence some Interpreters
collect, that Daniel either lived no longer, or at least prophesied no longer
than to the first year of the Persian Monarchy. But here Sanctius out of St.
Jerome answers to his own scruple, That Daniel is to be understood to have
continued in the Babylonian Court no longer than to the first year of Cyrus
King of Persia. But afterward though he returned not to Jerusalem with other
Captives, yet he was translated from Babylon to the Medes, where he obtained an
honorable prefecture. And this is the account which Saint Jerome with others
give of the place, which sufficiently takes away the seeming repugnancy.

Verse. 8. But how an Angel can make himself seen of one, etc.] Theodoret
according, to Gasper Sanctius, is of opinion, that those that saw not, were
struck with a kind of blindness which the Greeks call (...), as the Sodomites
were that could not find the door, and those also that were sent from the King
of Syria to apprehend Elisha. But Cornelius is point blank against this
opinion, and says expressly that the cause why Daniel alone saw the Angel, and
not his companions, was not that (...) wherewith the Angel might strike them,
as that Angel that stroke the Sodomites, Genesis 19. 11. But that Angels in
assumed bodies as well as the Blessed in their glorified bodies, have the
species vis^biles of their bodies in their own power, and can transmit them to
one, suppose Daniel, and divert them from another. Which opinion of A Lapide
were yet more plausible if he understood that Ang^ls need not assume bodies,
but have bodies, Ethereal bodies, of their own, whose rays therefore not
Mechanically (as in burning glasses which direct the beams of the Sun,
otherwise scarce sensible to the touch, so vigorously to one point, that they
will set on fire matter combustible) but vitally they may direct toward one,
party by the command of their will and fancy, and slip by the other. And
though the difference of some seeing and others not seeing at the same time the
apparition of an Angel, may proceed from the Angel himself that directs the
visibility of his body, the visible rays I mean thereof, to one party and not
to another; yet there may be a difference also in the parties themselves
present, whereby they may see some of them less distinctly, or not at all,
others clearly and distinctly. And this I conceive to proceed from the purity,
mildness and passivity of their Spirits. The Spirits of whose eyes are far less
thick, and less fiercely agitated than others, these are more capable of seeing
distinctly the subtle vehicles of Angels than others are. And therefore men of
a more fierce, strong, robustious temper, are more inept to see any such
Spectra, as it is observed of them. And as for madmen, whose Spirits are gross
and hugely agitated, I conceive they do not so much see Specter as raise them
in themselves, by the strength and fieriness of their Imagination. So that what
they see is more properly to be called a Phantasm than a Spectre.

Verse. 13. Whether they be good Angels, etc.] This controversy Gasper Sanctius
pursues pretty copiously, and of himself is very much inclining to conclude
against the authority of the ancient Fathers, that the Presidentiary Angels of
the Nations, of all but that of the Jews, were downright Devils. The two chief
arguments are, First, That the Devil is said to be the Prince of this world,
John 12. 31. Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. And St. Paul,
Ephesians. 6. 11. For we wrestle not, says he, against flesh and blood, that is
against Men only, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the
Rulers of the darkness of this world (of this world of darkness (an usual
Hypallage) this world comprised within the caliginous Air) against spiritual
wickednesses ((...), so it is to be read according to the Syriack version, cum
spiritibus malis, against wicked spirits) in high places, (...), the same
version has it, qui sunt sub coelo, viz. in the Air, for so (...) often
signifies out of the Hebrew. Which passage of Saint Paul suits excellently well
with this Hypothesis of Presidentiary Angels in Daniel. But whether all Angels
that are Presidents of the Nations besides such as belong to the Church of God
be downright Devils, is the controversy. And these two Scriptures are the first
argument for the Affirmative, That since the Devil is said to be the Prince of
this World in distinction to the Church of God, and that in bringing the world
into subjection to Christ, the Apostles fought against evil Spirits that had
the Rule of this dark World, that were the (...), the Chieftains, Presidents,
and Emperors of it, that it is hence apparent, that the Presidentiary Angels,
suppose, of Persia and Greece were Devils.

The second argument is from the contest of the Presidentiary Angels of Grecia
and Persia with Michael and Gabriel, and indeed with Palmoni himself, which is
the other argument which Sancti^s brings and pursues with that tightness in
answering all the evasions of the adverse party, that I must confess I do not
wonder that he is so much inclining to this opinion of his, That these
Presidentiary Angels of Greece and Persia were Cacodaemones, as he calls them,
downright Devils, rather than good Angels. Though it is hard on the other side
to conceive, that mere Quintessential Devils, such as consist only of envy,
pride and malice, and pursue evil for evils sake, should be Presidents over
Nations. Wherefore in respect of such Devils as these, we may with the Ancient
Fathers conclude them to be good Angels, but in respect of that more holy and
divine grace, such as Christ was anointed with in a measure far above his
fellows, but such as by his means all of his Kingdom properly so called, in
some measure partake of, and are expressly, and from the root of their life the
Sons of Light and Love, we may, I say, comparing those Presidentiary Angels of
Greece and Persia with these of Christ's Kingdom, conclude them not to be good
Angels but Devils.

If any one will adventure to say, That there is some such Analogy betwixt
Michael the Presidentiary Angel of Judea and the Presidentiary Angel of Greece
or Persia, as there is betwixt the most holy and most regenerate Christian King
or Emperor, and some other Emperor or King that is neither styled Christian
nor is regenerate, happily he may not be much out of the way. But I leave to
every one to think of such things as these, in such a way as will be with most
ease and satisfaction to himself, provided he shrink not from the belief of
that which is so manifest here on Daniel, viz. that there are Presidentiary
Angels over Nations and Countries.

Verse. 20. (For so praeliari is taken in Cicero)] Epist. 13. ad Attic. Lib. 1.
Quomodo ego minus quam soleam praeliatus sim, and within a line or two after,
Ego enim quamdiu Senatus Authoritas mihi defendenda fuit, sic acriter and
vehementer praeliatus sum, ut clamor concursusque maxima cum mea laud fierent.
And a little afterward persisting in the same Metaphor and bragging, quam
fortis esset (which also is a military expression) Dii Immortales, says he,
quas ego pugnas and quantas strages edidi! So easily is (...), which the
Seventy render (...), understood of dispute or arguing the case, whence the
Disputative or controversial Divines are also called Pole^icall.

VISION VI.
Which is the Vision or Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, which reaches from
the second verse of the eleventh Chapter to the end of Daniel.

2. AND now will I show thee the Truth, that is, Now will I declare unto thee
things to come in a plain intelligible way, touching the Kingdoms of Persia
and Grecia, and also the Roman Empire, not resembling the first to a Bear or
Ram, the second to a Leopard or Goat, and the third to a monstrous Beast with
Iron teeth, but delivering the matter without any Prophetic Aenigm or Parable,
you shall hear from me the bare Truth in easy and vulgar words. Behold there
shall stand up yet three Kings in Persia, viz. Cambyses, Smerdis and Darius
Hystaspis, which that particle [yet] seems to imply, as if it should hint to
us, that they are three beside Cyrus the then present King of Persia, so that
Cyrus is not to be taken into this reckoning. And the fourth shall be far
richer than they all. Which fourth is Xerxes, the same who is called Ahasuerus
(in the book of Esther) who married Esther the Jewish Virgin; and Herodotus
records the name of Xerxes his Queen to have been Amestris, which manifestly
has the sound of Esther in it, whatever the syllable Am prefixed may signify,
whether it be from (...) which signifies Sol, her beauty being such an
Inflammatory to love, or from (...) matter. For such in a wonderful manner was
she to her Countrymen the Jews, whose lives she saved from the malice of
Haman, which was no less to them than their mothers did for them that first
gave them their lives. But if we are to read as Joseph Scaliger would have it
(...) and that there is the like composition of the name of the Father of Aman,
viz. (...), this is not so consistent with our former conjectures: but what
(...) in the composition of those two names signifies, neither Scaliger nor any
one else I know, can tell us. However so be that Esther be but acknowledged to
sound in Amestris Xerxes his Queen, I am content.

Now for the riches of this Xerxes or Ahasuerus, all Histories ring of it, and
the Book of Esther will assure us thereof, which says he reigned from India
even to Aethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces. And Justin
Lib. 2. notes of the riches of Xerxes, that though his Army was so numerous
that they drunk up rivers, yet his riches were so great that the expense of so
vast an Army nor any other occasions could exhaust them. So hugely is it
verified of this fourth King, that he was far richer than they all, and that
therefore there is no doubt but that it is Xerxes.

Which yet is further confirmed from what follows, And by his strength through
his riches he shall stir up all against the Realm of Grecia. The expedition of
Xerxes against the Greeks is so vulgarly known and copiously set down in
Justin, Diodorus, Siculus and Herodotus, that to remind the Reader of it is
sufficient. And that he did stir up all against the Realm of Grecia, is I think
very plain if we consider the numerousness of his Army as it is described in
Herodotus Lib. 7. Cap. 186. where he reckons up no less than twenty six hundred
thousand and forty one thousand six hundred and ten (...), fighting men, to
which he adds (...), the Attendants of the Army, that were to minister to them,
and others that came along with them. All which put together, says he, made a
number at least as big as that of the fighting men. So that there was in all at
least two and fifty hundred thousand and eighty three thousand two hundred and
twenty. And this, says he, is the number (...), of the whole Army, which he
brought as far as to the Thermopylae. But for the number of the women to dress
their meat, and of Courtizans, and Eunuchs, of Wagon-horses, and other beasts
of burden, and of Indian Dogs, it was not to be told they were so many. Whence
says he, I less wonder that it is reported that some Rivers were drunk up by
them; which also Diodorus relates, and likewise the number of his Ships, that
they were about one thousand two hundred. So that Xerxes by this account may
well be said to have stirred up all against the Realm of Grecia. And he must
needs be rich that could set out such a Fleet and maintain such an Army, as I
noted above. Thus notably is this Prophecy of Daniel fulfilled concerning this
fourth King of Persia. Who came against the Realm of Grecia with an Army to
quite overflow them and swallow them up at once. Of which Xerxes confiding in
the numerousness of his Army, made himself sure in a manner, as we may
understand by that discourse betwixt him and Demaratus that had been King of
Sparta. See Herodot. Lib. 7. Cap. 101, 102, etc. For we have already produced
enough to show how fully the prediction is accomplished.

But why there are no more than four of the Persian Kings mentioned in this
Prophecy, and why four, I conceive the reason is because the scope of this
Prophecy is mainly to forewarn the People of God of the evils that would come
upon them, or what mutations there would be in which they were concerned,
whether Jews or Christians, and therefore the catalogue of the Kings of Persia
is so short, but yet brought down to Xerxes, who would have swallowed up all
Greece, as a fit transition to the expedition of Alexander against the
Persians, which intimates the reasonableness of the success which was given him
by Providence as follows.

3. And a mighty King shall stand up, namely Alexander the great, That shall
rule with great dominion and do according to his will, that is, All things
shall succeed according to his mind. And it is Curtius his character of him,
Lib. 10. Fatendum est tamen cum plurimum virtuti debuerit, plus debuisse
Fortunae, quam solus omnium mortalium in potestate habuit. He had the world in
a string, as our English Proverbial Phrase is. So fitly is this Prophecy
fulfilled in Alexander. But we will only take notice by the by, how like this
is, which is a Transition from the Persian Empire to the Grecian, how like it
is, I say, to that Transition from the Grecian to the Roman, Verse. 36. And a
King shall do according to his will. In both which the transition is so little
pompous and discriminative, that if the matter it self did not discover there
was a Transition from one Empire to another, the Form of Transition would
scarcely assure us of it. But being no man doubts but that here is a Transition
(though the form be so slender and obscure) from the Persian to the Grecian
Empire, so the slenderness and obscureness of the Form of the Transition (v.
36.) from the Greek Empire to the Roman, ought to be no prejudice to the
reality thereof.

4. And when he shall stand up his Kingdom shall be broken and shall be divided
toward the four winds of Heaven, namely, into four Kingdoms lying North, West,
East and South. Which are the Kingdoms of Thracia, Macedonia, Asia and Egypt,
which belonged to Lysimachus, Cassander, Antigonus and Ptolemaeus. See what has
been said above Chapter 8. And not to his posterity. For within sixteen years space
after Alexander's death, not only Aridaeus the brother of Alexander together
with his mother Olympias were put to death, but also Alexander the Son of
Alexander the Great and Roxana, and Hercules the other Son of Alexander by
Barsine was killed, and Cleopatra the sister of Alexander. So fully is this
passage accomplished [And not to his Posterity.] Nor according to his dominion
which he ruled. As not having that strenuity and greatness of parts, nor that
strength; his entire Empire being thus divided into four Kingdoms, which
therefore was a weakening to it, and made it subject to dissen^ons amongst
themselves, besides that there were several other Satrapies which other
commanders of Alexander were possessed of, distinct from those four Kingdoms,
which was a further weakening thereof; as it follows. For his Kingdom shall be
plucked up even for others besides those. The Hebrew word which our English
translation renders, shall be plucked up, is rendered by the Septuagint (...),
and by the Vulgar, lacerabitur, from the Septuagints (...). For (...) signifies
Quisquiliae: Whence is intimated into what a many little shreds this great
Empire would be discerped after his death, which is most fitly understood of
those lesser portions they had, who are related to here, besides those four,
namely Lysimachus, Cassander, Antigonus and Ptelomaeus. For Eumenes, Philotas,
Menander, Leonatus, Seleucus and others had their portions distinct from those
four, whereby the main body of Alexanders Kingdom possessed by them, was the more
weakened.

5. And the King of the South shall be strong, that is, Ptolemaeus the Son of
Lagus King of Egypt. He speaks only of the Kings of the South, and of the
North, that is, of the Kings of Egypt, and of Syria, because the affairs of
the Jews are most concerned in them. And this very first King of Egypt,
Ptolemaeus the Son of Lagus, he is taken notice of in Historians, for that
treacherous exploit of his, of the taking Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, under
pretense of Sacrificing. But he possessed himself of the City they not arming
themselves for resistance. For which Agatharchides Cnidius twitts them, as a
fond people that preferred their superstition before their liberty. He carried
many of the Jews at that time with him into Egypt. See Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12.
c. 1. And one of his Princes, that is, one of the Princes of Alexander, says
Grotius; but if it be referred not to Alexander, but to Ptolemy, it may happily
be one of those lesser Princes that he had a more special favor for: but
either way it is Seleucus Nicator, that is here meant, who got up first toward
this greatness by the favor and countenance of this Ptolemy, as I noted above.
And he shall be strong above him. Seleucus shall outdoe Ptolemy in exploits of
war. For having taken Demetrius the Son of Antigonus he added Asia to Syria, he
overcame Lysimachus King of Thracia, in batle, and Antigonus in Phrygia, as
Androcotus also in India, from which great exploits he purchased to himself the
name of Nicanor, or Nicator, as if we should say, Seleucus the Conqueror. And
have Dominion, That is plain from which has been said already. His Dominion
shall be a great Dominion. And so it appears to have been by History, as
Grotius has noted out of Appianus, according to whom his Dominion contained all
these Countries, Syria, Phrygia, Mesopotamia, Bactriana, Arabia, Sogdiana,
Arachosia and a great part of India, even beyond the River Indus. And Appianus
adds in general, that he was by far the most potent of all the successors of
Alexander, and that there were built by him near fifty Cities.

6. And in the end of years, that is, After a certain time, They shall ioyn
themselves together, that is, They shall be friends or confederates one with
another, viz. the King of the North, with the King of the South. Not that the
same Individual persons Ptolemaeus Lagi and Seleucus Nicanor shall do this, but
some of the succession of each of them. For the succession of the Kings of the
North and of the South, or of Syria and Egypt, are in the Prophetic style
spoke of, as of two single Kings continuing all that time of their Kingdoms.
Which is a thing so obvious and known, that it hinders not at all, but that
this Prophecy may be called the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, for all
that. For the Kings Daughter of the South shall come to the King of the North
to make an agreement. The Hebrew word is (...) which signifies Rectitudes, and
the Septuagint render it (...), Agreements. For the agreeing of things is to
set them right and straight. This Kings daughter therefore of the South is
Berenice the Daughter of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, Son and Successor to
Ptolemaeus Lagi. She it seems was sent to the King of the N^orth, viz. to
Antiochus Theos King of Syria and Asia and grandchild to Sele^cus N^icanor, to
beget peace and amity betwixt those two Kingdoms, with a vast dowry of gold and
silver, so that by this marriage betwixt Antiochus Theos and Berenice, these
two Kingdoms might be held together in a firm league: Otherwise the pro^^er
seems needless, Antiochus having already a wife, viz. Laodice, and two children
by her, Seleucus Callinicus and Antiochus. But accepting of Berenice for his
wife, and promising that he would not have Laodice for any other than a
concubine, this proved an ill business both to him and to Berenice at last. For
he receiving afterward Laodice into favor, and calling her ^ack to Court, she
made shift to poison her husband Antiochus, and get Berenice and her young
child she had by Antiochus to be slain, according as it follows predicted by
Daniel. But she shall not retain the power of the Arm, that is, She shall not
have that strong Interest at Court, nor remain in that authority she seemed to
have at first, the mind of her husband being afterward carried to his former
wife Laodice. Neither shall he stand, not Antiochus himself, For La^dice
suspicious how constant he might prove in his love to her, got him to be
poisoned. Nor his Arm, The Hebrew is (...) and may be translated, Nor his seed,
viz. that offspring which he had by Berenice, his little Son he had by her, who
was killed with her. But she shall be given up and they that brought her and he
that begat her. The truer reading is, and that son of hers, or, he whom she
brought forth. For that is the most obvious sense of (...). And he that
strengthened her in these times, that is, Those who were with her and took her
part as friends and comforters. But she and her little son and all her
Confidents would go to the pot. Even as it came to pass in the Daphneum at
Antioch, where she had shut her self up, and might have been safe through the
help of friends that heard thereof, but that she was betrayed, and so she and
her little son murdered by Seleucus Callinicus her son in law. So bad an end
had a matter ill begun. See Justin, lib. 27. c. 1.

7. But out of a branch of her roots. It seems to be an Hypallage, as Gasper
Sanctius also takes notice, for [But out of the roots of her branch] that is,
from the root or stock from whence she and her little son was, that is, from
Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, who was her father. Shall one stand up in his estate.
The Hebrew is (...) where there is plainly an Ellipsis of a praeposition,
suppose (...); super ba^in ejus, so Vatablus supplies it. He shall found his
quarrel upon the right that the young child had, if he had had strength and
been alive, to revenge his mothers death. This therefore is the brother of
Berenice, Ptolemaeus Euergetes. Which shall come with an Army and shall enter
into the fortress of the King of the North, that is, Shall fall into the
Territories or Frontiers of Seleucus Callinicus the King of Syria, who killed
Berenice and her little Son. And shall deal against them and prevail, that is,
He shall make war against them, and have them so much in his power, that he may
do what he will with them. He shall have very easy and mighty success.

8. And shall also carry captives into Egypt their Gods with their Princes and
with their precious vessels of silver and of gold. St. Ieromes comment upon
this place is full enough. Ptolemaeus, says he, prevailed so far that he took
Syria and Cilicia, and the upper parts beyond Euphrates, and almost all Asia,
and when he heard there was sedition moved at home in Egypt, he spoiling the
Kingdoms of Seleucus, brought away with him forty thousand Talents of silver,
and two thousand five hundred Images of their Gods, amongst which were those
that Cambyses when he took Egypt carried away with him into Persia. For which
feat of bringing back again their Images that were violently taken from them so
many years ago, the Egyptians being a very superstitious people, he obtained
the name of Euergetes amongst them, as if he had been so great a benefactour to
them in recovering their Images. Thus St. Jerome out of writers which he had
the use of, but since have perished. And he shall continue more years than the
King of the North. Ptolemaeus Euergetes his Reign was six years longer than the
Reign of Seleucus Callinicus the Son of Antiochus Theos by Leodice; his Reign
was almost by one third part longer than his. And the Kingdom of Syria was made
a Province by the Romans betwixt thirty and forty years before Egypt was, if
that may be also insinuated. But the former is more material, it implying that
Callinicus durst not bouge against Egypt all the days of his life, Ptolemaeus
Euergetes who got so full a victory over him (which would naturally daunt his
spirits) being still living.

9. So the King of the South, Ptolemaeus Euergets, shall come into his Kingdom
and shall return into his own land. Which intimates his power and success to
have been so great and with so little loss to his Army, and with that ease, as
if he had been Lord of Syria, and had free ingress and egress at his pleasure.

10. But his Sons shall be stirred up. Though that shameful overthrow he had
received, cowed the Spirit of Seleucus Callinicus, yet his two sons Seleucus
Ceraunus and Antiochus Magnus after his death, and indeed after the death of
Ptolemaeus Euergetes, which was a further encouragement to them, bestirred
themselves to recover what their father had lost, and to that end gathered a
great Army as it follows. And shall assemble a multitude of great Forces. See
Polyb. lib. 2. and lib. 5. And they were the more encouraged thereto,
Ptolemaeus Euergetes not only being dead, but a person little beloved, a
killer of his father, mother and brother, and therefore in derision called
Philopator, succeeding him. And he shall certainly come and overflow and pass
through. Though he began with the two sons, yet he changes the number plural
here into the singular, because Seleucus Ceraunus died in the beginning of the
enterprise, reigning scarce three years. Wherefore Antiochus Magnus is here
meant by him that shall certainly come and overflow, etc. For he did overflow
Judea and Coele Syria by the treachery of Theodotus Ptolemaeus Philopator his
Governor of that Province. Then shall, he return and be stirred up even to his
fortress. And after this no peace being concluded, he shall again renew the
war, and taking many Towns he shall at last come to Raphia an exceeding well
fortified Town in the confines of Egypt. See Polybius, lib. 5.

11. And the King of the South shall be moved with choler and shall come forth
and fight with him, even with the King of the North, viz. Philopator with
Antiochus Magnus. For though Philopator was but a sluggish voluptuous person,
and given to his ease and pleasure, yet when his proper Kingdom was in such
imminent danger, he was enraged, and thought it was time to bestir himself for
fear he should not only lose Syria but Egypt too. And he shall set forth a
great multitude. Seventy thousand Foot and five thousand Horse, and seventy
three Elephants. And a multitude shall be given into his hand, that is, He
shall take many prisoners of the Army of Antiochus Magnus. Which is the thing
that the Author of the third Book of Maccabees expressly sets down, and that the
success was from the passionate importunity of Arsinoe Philopators sister, who
ran up and down from one part of the Army to the other with her hair
disheveled and hanging about her shoulders, and by promises and earnest
intreatings driving the soldiery to fight with more than ordinary resolution
and courage, whereby they won the day, and took many Prisoners. Grotius out of
Polybius names four thousand, and the rest were killed or routed and put to
flight.

12. And when he has taken away the multitude, that is, When he has partly
taken captive, partly killed, and so taken them out of the way, and partly put
to flight and scattered the multitude of Antiochus his Army, and thereby
driven them away from his Territories. His heart shall be listed up, His heart
that was oppressed and depressed with fear and anxiety before, will be now more
lightsome and exalted, and give it self the swing to satisfy its own lusts, in
this security, by his unclean conversation with Agathoclea the singing wench
and Agathocles her brother, and will rudely and profanely at Judea not only
come into the Temple, but rush into the Holy of Holies against the advice and
persuasion of all either pious or prudent Bystanders. See the third Book of
Maccabees Chapter 1. And he shall cast down many ten thousands, but he shall not be
strengthened by it. The sense is (for of this latitude is the signification of
the particle ^) And though he shall cast down many thousands (for so (...) may
signify an indefinite great number, and not exactly Myriads, as all
Interpreters agree) Yet shall he not be strengthened by it. Though that great
Army of Antiochus Magnus was quite vanquished by him, yet Antiochus himself
escaping he will appear again in the field and undo all that has been done,
after he has espied an opportunity for his purpose. The Idleness, Luxury and
Sottishness of Philopator made this great advantage he had got against
Antiochus, to signify nothing.

13. For the King of the North shall return and shall set forth a multitude
greater than the former. He shall again gather an Army and that greater than
the former. And shall certainly come after certain years, that is, These things
were a brewing for a certain time while he observed the luxury and
dissoluteness of Philopator and his mindlesness of his affairs, which
encouraged him to meditate this other War against Egypt, made him sure to come,
and gave him hope of Success. With a great Army and much riches, With a great
Army and well appointed. Which Armies sometimes are not, by reason of the want
of money or whatever necessaries are requisite for the good appointment of an
Army. For the Hebrew word (...) signifies any Acquist from (...) acquisivit,
whence (...) a Post-horse or Mule has its name; wherefore by this word (...) I
conceive is meant all the plentiful supply of necessaries and fit
accommodations for an Army, such as Beasts of burden, Wagons, and
Draught-horses, with the things they carry, etc. Which the Latins call
Impedimenta, in English they are called the Carriage of the Army, Bag and
Baggage, with these the Army of Antiochus was stored, which the English
translation here renders, much Riches.

14. And in those times there shall many stand up against the King of the
South. For Philopator having appointed Agathocles his Catamite and brother to
Agathoclea the singing Wench, to be Prefect over Egypt, not only the Provinces
subject to Egypt rebelled, but Egypt it self was vexed with ^editions. And
Philopator being dead and Antiochus Magnus having made a firm league with
Philip of Macedonia, he was assisted by him upon condition of dividing the
spoils equally upon victory; and hence, says St. Jerome, is to be understood
the meaning of many standing up against the King of the South, that is, the
King of Egypt. Which attempt was made in Ptolemaeus Epiphanes his time, the
Son of Philopator, of not passing four or five years of age, and the stress of
affairs lay then upon that impure and dissolute Minister of State Agathocles.
But the wisest act that Philopator did before his death, was his recommending
his young Child to the tutelage and protection of the Senate of Rome, as you
may gather out of Justin Lib. 31. Also the Robbers of thy people shall exalt
themselves. The Hebrew word (...), which is here rendered Robbers, does signify
also at large Effractores or Breakers, and therefore the sense may be, Those of
thy people which are Breakers of the Law or of the Union of the Jewish Church
and Nation, some siding with the King of Egypt, others with the King of Syria,
they shall be puffed up, (namely those of the King of Aegypt's side, as he
carried many with him, viz. Ptolemaeus Lagi, as you heard above, so
considerable a party of Jews were there in Egypt, and they had their
correspondents also in Judea) they shall be puffed up in confidence of their
Arms and the fresh remembrance of the former victory. To establish the Uision,
that is, To fulfill or accomplish the sayings of the Prophets which denounce
all evil to them that despise the Law. So Grotius upon the place, according as
it follows, And they shall fall, To fulfill those comminations by the mouths of
the Prophet. Wshich were accomplished in the Victory of A^tiochus against
Scopas, Ptolemaeus Epiphanes his General, and them whom Antiochus overthrew at
the Springheads of the River Jordan; And when he had taken the Towns of Coele
Syria and Samaria that Scopas was possessed of, the Jews delivered up Jerusalem
to him of their own accord, and helped to beat Scopas his Garison-Souldiers out
of the Tower he there had left them in, as Josephus tells us, Lib. 12. c. 3.

And now though this may be part of the sense of these words [to establish the
Vision] and most accommodate to that very time; yet considering there was a
continuation of these Partizim in Egypt, even to Onias the junior his time,
and onward, I think there may be a glance also at a further completion of this
passage in Onias, who in the time of Ptolemaeus Philometor fled into Egypt,
and being favorably received there of Ptolemee obtained leave to build a
Temple in the Nomus or Canton of Heliopolis, and drew a great many of the Jews
to him, he pretending to fulfill the Vision of Isaias Chapter 19. verse. 19. There
shall be an Altar of the Lord in the midst of the Land of Egypt. Which Temple
after it had stood 250 years, was in the time of Vespasian rased to the very
ground. And though it stood so long, yet St. Jerome and other Interpreters
think this feat of Onias here pointed at. But I leave it to the Readers
judgment to consider it. Grotius his Interpretation touching the deserters of
the Law at that time may be the first Impletion of the Prophecy, but this may
be more particularly and eminently intended the fall of this Temple and the
Jews at once.

15. So the King of the North shall come. For the King of the North, Antiochus
Magnus, shall come, whereby these contemners of the Law shall smart for it. For
this Antiochus was a great friend to the Jews that stuck to Moses his Law, and
were no Prevaricatours, but did things according to his prescript, as you may
see in Josephus in the place abovenamed. And cast up a Mount. Against Sidon
(says St. Jerome who had the benefit of more Historians than are extant at
this day) where he shut up Scopas, Ptolemaeus Epiphanes his General, so close
and so long, that he forced him to yield. And take the most fenced Cities,
according as I have noted above out of Josephus. And the arms of the South
shall not withstand, viz. Europus, Menocles and Damaxenus, whom Ptolemy sent to
relieve Scopas when he was shut up, but in vain. Neither his chosen people,
namely those supplies that came with those three Commanders. Neither shall
there be any strength to withstand. All attempts will be in vain.

16. But he that comes against him, against the forces of Ptolemaeus
Epiphanes, Shall do according to his own will, Shall have complete success, And
none shall stand before him, And the Jews shall of their own accord deliver up
the city to him, viz. to Antiochus. And he shall stand in the glorious land,
viz. in Judea. The Septuagint do not venture to render the sense of (...) but
retain the word, as if we should say, And he shall stand in the land of Sabi.
Which I confess I suspect to be the name of the God of that Land, namely of the
God of Israel, who is called the Lord of Hosts. Of his entering Judea and
Jerusalem upon his vanquishing of Scopas I have hinted enough above. Which by
his hand shall be consumed. The vulgar Latin has it so likewise. But the
Interpretation suits not with History. For as I intimated above, Antiochus
Magnus was very kind to the Jews (as you may see at large in a letter of his
inserted by Josephus into his Antiquities, lib. 12. c. 3.) granted them many
Immunities, supplied their expenses for sacrifices and repairs of the Temple,
with other Testimonies of his favor to them. Wherefore the true Interpretation
of the place is, Which shall be perfected by his hand, that is, which shall
flourish under his Power. For the word in the Hebrew (...) signifies as well to
be perfected or consummated, as to be spoiled or consumed.

17. He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole
Kingdom. The more genuin^ sense I conceive is, and the Hebrew easily admits it,
viz. [He shall also set his face to get into the power of his, namely of
Ptolemaeus Epiphanes his, whole Kingdom] that is to say, He was not content
with the regaining only Coele Syria and Judea which were his Ancestors
before, but he has a design to make himself Master also of Egypt, there being
such a fair opportunity by reason of the youngness of Ptolemy, and the present
disorder of things there. And upright ones with him. And there are upright ones
with him. But the Hebrew word is (...) which I conceive may very well be the
same with (...) verse. 6. which signified Agreements. And so Gasper Sanctius
also expounds it. But if it be not to be understood as before of a Covenant or
Agreement but of men, then the sense will be, That Antiochus will bring along
with him honest, fair conditioned men, and such as had a good repute withal,
to help to carry on the match betwixt his daughter Cassandra and Ptolemaeus
Epiphanes. Thus shall he do, The Hebrew has it (...), And he shall do, that is,
It shall succeed. And he shall give him the Daughter of women, that is, He
shall give him his daughter Cassandra * the fairest of women, and Coele Syria,
Phaenice, Judea and Samaria for a dowry with her, Corrupting her, that is,
infusing such principles into her, if she would listen to him, as might make
her instrumental by treachery to her husband to get her father Antiochus the
Kingdom of Egypt. But she shall not stand on his side, or, She shall not
persist in such ways as her father would put her in. Neither be for him, She
will make good her duty to her husband, and be faithful to him and loyal as to
her husband and Prince, and not be seduced by her father. So that Antiochus his
Politics fell short of success in this design of marrying his daughter to
Ptolemaeus Epiphanes, though it was wisely enough done upon other regards, to
show himself by this match to be a friend to whom the Roman Senate was a
friend, and also to strengthen his Interest by this alliance against the Romans
if they proved his enemies. But the Text is plain enough already.

18. After this shall he turn his face unto the Isles. Which he thought he
might do with the better security having laid so firm a foundation of
friendship with the King of Egypt, that worser plot which he was conscious of,
being kept to himself, and Cassandra's piety to her father, though she was
loyal to her husband, permitting her to discover nothing. By the Isles are
understood any maritime Towns as well as Islands properly so called in the
Hebrew Idiom. And he is recorded to have set himself to take the Sea towns of
Thrace and Greece. And shall take many, even several Islands properly so
called, as Rhodus, Samos, Delos and Euboea. See Grotius on the place, but
especially Calvin, that tells the occasion of Antiochus his setting his face
toward the Isles, and how he came to be engaged in that war. But a Prince for
his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease, without his
own reproach he shall cause it to return upon him. This translation is
something obscure and confused, Grotius has rendered it out of the Hebrew into
Latin very truly and cleverly thus. Et cessare faciet Dux ipsius in se
contumelias, quinetiam contumelias illius in ipsum vertet, that is, A Commander
shall cause to cease his (that is Antiochus his) reproach against him, yea, and
moreover he shall return the reproach upon himself, viz. upon Antiochus. This
is the easy and natural sense of the Hebrew Text. And (...) is rightly turned
in this place especially, a Leader or Commander. And both Gasper Sanctius,
Calvin, Cornelius a Lapide, and Grotius interpret this of Lucius Scipio the
Roman Commander, who brought it to pass that Antiochus should not only no
longer despise and slight the offers of the Roman Senate, and infest their
confederates with war, which they took as a great affront, but that the
reproach at last should fall foully upon himself, he being wholly vanquished by
Lucius Scipio at Sipylus a Mountain in Asia Minor near the confines of Phrygia,
where fifty thousand of his men were slain and eleven thousand taken prisoners
as Justin writes, and Antiochus brought to hard and dishonorable terms of
peace, whereby he was bound to have nothing more to do with any part of Europe,
nay that the Romans should have Asia, and he rest content with the Kingdom of
Syria, that he should surrender all his ships and captives, and also defray the
expenses of the war. See Justin lib. 31. He gave hostages also for performance
of Covenant, namely his two Sons, Seleucus and Antiochus Epiphanes. Thus was
the reproach cast upon the Roman Power by Antiochus, returned with usury upon
himself at last.

19. Then shall he turn his face toward the fort of his own land, that is,
Toward the Frontiers of his own Kingdom. Upon this passage Cornelius briefly
thus, out of St. Jerome. Antiochus vanquished by the Romans, and commanded to
bound his Dominion within the Mountain Taurus, went thence to Apamia, Susa and
other of the more remote parts of his Kingdom, and then fighting with the
Elymites he and his whole Army was destroyed; according as it follows. And he
shall stumble and fall and not be found. Impinget and corruet. Where I^pingere
to* stumble, says Grotius, is as much as impruden^er se gerere, to act rashly
and imprudently. For in Justin, lib. 32. cap. 2. it is recorded that Antiochus
upon his robbing the Temple of Jupiter Didymaeus by night, the thing being made
known, concursu Incolarum cum omni militia interfectus est. Where Grotius
ingeniously conjectures that for Didymaeus should be read Elymaeus. Whence
Saint Ierome's and Iustin's account will fall into one.

20. Then shall stand up in his estate, Shall succeed in his place by right of
Inheritance Seleucus Philopator the elder son of Antiochus Magnus, A raiser of
Taxes. For his luxury put him upon the greater exigencies as Calvin observes,
and we may be sure he would not spare the people, who did not stick to rob the
Temple of the money there deposited for pious uses, who sent Heliodorus his
Treasurer thither for that purpose, 2 Maccab. 3. 10. In the glory of the
Kingdom, It is rather to be rendered upon the glory of the Kingdom, that is,
upon the riches thereof. For riches are the Political glory and decor of any
Kingdom or people, whenas Poverty makes them look sordidly and contemptibly.
But there is neither [In] nor [Upon] neither (...) nor (...) in the Hebrew, but
the Text runs thus, (...), which is verbatim, One that makes to pass up and
down afflicters or oppressers of the beauty or glory of the Kingdom by
exactions or Taxes, understanding by the decor or glory of the Kingdom, as
before, the riches thereof. Of which Taxes, besides his own luxury, the expense
of the war its being cast upon his father Antiochus by the Romans may be also
an occasion or pretense, etc. But within few days he shall be destroyed, Which
implies he shall reign nothing near so long as his father Antiochus, not
passing a third part of his time, the one reigning but 12, the other 37. years.
Neither in anger nor in battle. Neither by the sedition of the people nor by
war with foreign enemies, but by the Treachery of Heliodorus, who, as it is
thought, poisoned him, hoping and attempting to succeed him in his Kingdom, but
he was kept off by Eumenes and Attalus.

21. And in his estate, in his place, shall stand up a vile person, (...)
signifies a despised or contemned person; Who is here that Antiochus Epiphanes,
Son of Antiochus Magnus, and second brother to Seleucus Philopator. Who is here
represented as despicable, not for want of wit or parts, but for his actions
and manners. Which made the people when he would be called Epiphanes, which
signifies Illustrious, call him Epimanes, which denotes a mad man, as he was of
a cruel, turbulent spirit, and yet very servile, crouching and flattering where
it was for his own Interest. Besides he came unjustly to the Kingdom by
defeating his Nephew the Son of Seleucus Philopator. But Grotius his short
Character of him gathered out of Athenaeus is most conspicuously applicable to
the words of the Text. Dicitur hic Antiochus, says he, despectus, ob mores, ab
omni non tantum Principis dignitate, sed ab honesti viri gravitate alienos. To
whom they shall not give the honor of the Kingdom. There being no color for
it at all, by reason of his ill manners, and which is the main of all, the
right of Succession belonged to Demetrius the Son of his brother Seleucus. But
he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the Kingdom by flatteries, viz. by
plausible pretenses of administering the affairs of the Kingdom of Syria for the
good of his Nephew Demetrius the true heir to the crown, and by making a fair
show of clemency and of kindness he shall win the hearts of the people of Syria
to him.

The ancient Fathers some of them by this vile person will have Antichrist
alone to be understood, all of them, supposing it to be Antiochus Epiphanes,
will yet have him to be a lively Type of Antichrist. But in this Prophecy of
the Scripture of Truth, the downright Literal sense is the sense aimed at, and
the sense intended as to the persons and actions described in it. And therefore
this prediction concerning Antiochus Epiphanes is no more a prediction touching
Antichrist, than the History of the Jews a prediction of the State of the
Christians, and only in this large sense can I admit Antiochus Epiphanes to be
a Type of the Papal Hierarchy, or if you will of the Popes of Rome, who by
flattering and crouching at first to the Civil Sovereignty (consider the Letter
of Gregory the Great which he wrote to Phocas when he had slain his Sovereign
Mauricius the Emperor:) By giving to themselves all alluring titles of Servus
Servorum; of holy Father; of Sponsus Ecclesiae, etc. And by pretending the care
of all Christian people, and of the Emperors themselves whom they looked upon
always as pupils in Nonage, young weakly Wights, Wights scarce nine days old
and that cannot see (for the little Horn only must have eyes) from such fine
pretenses as these got they the Government not only of the people but of the
Emperors themselves whom they trampled upon, and made themselves in reality
the Emperors of Rome and of Christendom in a manner.

That there is a conspicuous correspondency here betwixt the Type and Antitype
I cannot deny, but the Literal and Historical meaning as I may so speak (for
Prophecy, especially such an one as this, is a kind of an Anticipatory History)
that is the main that is to be attended. We shall come to that part of the
Vision that speaks of Antichrist without a Type or (...) hereafter at verse. 36.
But till we come thither I find Grotius to be one of the most easy and coherent
Interpreters, in whose footsteps therefore I shall mostwhat insist, till he
turns out of the way, and then I shall shake hands with him and bid him adiue.

22. And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before him,
namely Heliodorus his forces who murdered Seleucus Demetrius his father,
prompted thereto perhaps by Antiochus, but doing the feat with a design for
himself, to get to himself the Kingdom of Syria, he having raised forces for
this end. But Antiochus Epiphanes with a specious pretense, as doing all in
behalf of his Nephew then at Rome, assisted with the forces of Eumenes and
Attalus, s^all quite overcome and rout this Army of Heli^dorus, and break in
pieces all his Faction as it follows. And shall be broken, namely, the
followers of Heli^dorus. Yea also the Prince of the Covenant, viz. Demetrius
the son of Seleucus Philopator, who may well be said to be the Prince of these
Consederate forces of his uncle Antiochus, Attalus and Eumenes, he being indeed
a Prince and heir to the Crown, and this war against Heliodorus seeming to be
managed in his behalf. But the good success turned to his mischief by reason of
the treachery of his uncle. And therefore he is said to be broken here as well
as the followers of Heliodorus.

23. And after the league made with him, that is, For after the friendship
professed by him to his Nephew Demetrius at Rome, with whom you may be sure he
kept Intelligence, He shall work deceitfully, This is the cause that Antiochus
his success against Heliodorus was the undoing of Demetrius as well as of him.
He shall work deceitfully, by getting his ^riends at Rome to detain Demetrius
there (though his father in kindness to Antiochus had sent him thither for an
hostage in his stead) that he might better pursue his own designs in the mean
time, as Grotius has noted on the place. And he shall come up and become strong
with a small people. His beginnings in Syria shall be small, says Grotius, but
he shall grow up by degrees (as the Popes of Rome did.)

24. He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the Province. By
degrees Antiochus will possess himself of the best places of Syria, as the
Roman Hierarchy of the fairest and fattest Seats in Europe. And he shall do
that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers fathers, he shall scatter
among them the prey and spoil and riches, that is, Antiochus Epiphanes shall be
a greater exacter of Tributes, and more profuse rewarder of his favorites and
adherents, his soldiers especially, than any of his ancestors. This lavish
liberality of his is taken notice of 1 Maccab. 3. 30. where he is said in
giving liberal gifts to have abounded above the Kings that were before him. And
the Papal Polity what tricks they have to get money, to say nothing of blood
and violence against pretended Heretics, and how able and lavish Rewarders
they are of their stickling clients, is obvious to consider. None of the
Emperors of Rome, the Popes Predecessors, comparable to him for that. Yea and
he shall forecast his device against the strong holds even for a time. After he
had taken the more easy and opime places, and encouraged his soldiers by
liberally dividing the spoil amongst them, he afterward will set his mind to
the taking of the more strongly fortified places, which will hold him longer
tack and take him some time, which happily is meant by [even for a time.] But of
the Hebrew it is better expressed thus [and that for a time.]

25. And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the King of the
South with a great Army, that is, Against the King of Egypt, Ptolemaeus
Philometor, because he pretended a right to Syria. And the King of the South
shall be stirred up to battle with a great and mighty Army, viz. Ptolemaeus
Philometor King of Egypt, whose two chief Commanders were Eulaius and Leneus.
But he shall not stand. He shall not be able to withstand him, but shall be put
to flight and discomfited. For they shall forecast devices against him. There
will be treacherous plots against Philometor and his Army.

26. Yea they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy him, that is,
Some of his Domestics, Ministers of State, and of great trust in his affairs,
and in the very management of this War, will be false to him and betray him,
and undo him, and spoil the success of the battle. And his Army shall
overflow, His Army shall be overflown or overrun, Opprimetur has the vulgar
Latin, Obruetur, Calvin, as if they read (...) not (...). But if our English
translation obtain, then [his] must be referred to Antiochus, not to Ptolemaeus
Philometor, accordingly as Vatablus also refers it. And many shall fall down
slain, By the hands of Antiochus his Army. This battle was fought betwixt Mount
Casius and Pelusium. So S. Jerome out of Suctorius, and so Grotius out of both.
And touching many falling down slain it is said expressly concerning this
battle, 1 Maccab. 1. 18. That Ptolemee was afraid of Antiochus and fled, and
many were wounded to death.

27. And both these Kings hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak
lies at one Table. They shall meet together at Memphis, Ptolemaeus Philometor,
and Antiochus Epiphanes, in outward show Friends but inwardly suspicious
Enemies and suspected one of another. But it shall not prosper. This palliated
friendship will again break out into open War. For yet the end shall be at the
time appointed. The Hebrew is (...), For it is yet till the end will be at the
time appointed, that is to say, there will be a space of time till another War
break out, but it will certainly break out at the time appointed. So that there
is an Ellipsis or omission of the thing which is to be understood from what
went before and only the time mentioned, an Intercessation of War is intimated
till the time appointed.

28. And he shall return into his Land with great Riches, that is, with great
Spoils, 1 Maccab. 1. 19. Thus they got the strong Cities in the Land of Egypt,
and they took the spoils thereof. And his heart shall be against the holy
Covenant. This is the first coming of Antiochus into Judea, says Grotius, which
the Writer of the first Book of Maccabees takes no notice of, it being so
inconsiderable in respect of the second. By the holy Covenant here is meant the
Law of Moses given by God, in which amongst other things, the right of
Succession in the High Priesthood is determined. And he shall do Exploits.
Exploits is not in the Hebrew. But the meaning is, He shall do according to his
own mind and will, particularly about the High Priesthood, Jason and Menelaus
by bribes and flatteries obtaining the High Priesthood of him, contrary to Law.
And return to his own Land, He shall return out of Judea into Syria.

29. At the time appointed he shall return, This is the appointed time
mentioned verse. 27. And come toward the South, that is, toward Egypt. But it
shall not-be as the formet or as the ^atter. The Hebrew has it (...), which the
Septuagint render thus, (...), which is, (...), or, (...). For the other seems
to be an Hebraism, a Feminine for a Neuter. And so the Latin has it, Non erit
priori simile novissimum, that is, This second expedition of Antiochus against
Egypt, will not be so prosperous as the former.

30. For the Ships of Chittim shall come against him, that is, The Ships of the
* Romans who were anciently called (...) Chittim according to Bochartus, or at
least the Ships of the Romans out of Macedonia who were anciently called
Chittim, as there are plausible arguments for it. And in general, says Josephus
Antiq. Lib. 1. c. 7. from Cethima, the ancient name of the Island Cyprus,
(...), All Islands and Maritime places are by the Hebrews called Chittim.
Whence it is no wonder that Alexander and Perseus the last King of Macedonia,
are said the one to come out of the Land of Chittim, the other to be King of
the Chittims. So that these Ships of Chittim may be so called, whether from the
Romans themseves, or because the Roman Navy came out of Macedonia after they
had vanquished Perseus, and made of that Kingdom a Province. For partly there,
and partly in other places the Romans had a great Navy ready for any exploit.
Therefore shall he be grieved and return. The cause of his desisting from his
enterprise of invading Egypt and of taking Alexandria, was Popilius a Roman
Legate sent by the Senate to command him to forbear, the King of Egypt having
put himself under their protection. Wherefore Popilius taking ship presently
upon this Commission sailed to Egypt, and imparted the commands of the Senate
to Antiochus. And this is all the Ships of Chittim that came to him then that I
know. And I must confess I doubt whether (...) here, which they render Ships,
signify Ships or no, and is not rather an Epithete of the Chittim or
Transmarine people, such as the Macedonians and Romans were to them of Syria,
and that the rather because if it signified the ships of Chittim it would not
have been (...) but (...) in regimine, as they call it, thus (...). But (...)
being not a Substantive in regimine but an Adjective, it is an Epithete of the
Chittim, or the more Northern and Transmarine people the Macedonians or Romans,
and signifies as much as the fierce, rude or rough Chittim.

And thus may it peculiarly. reflect upon Popilius his rough handling of
Antiochus, who at his arrival very complementally receiving him, and upon their
former familiarity at Rome offering to kiss him, was bluntly bid to forbear
those ceremonies; and the decree of the Senate being produced and given him,
and he making delays and pretending it fit to consult his friends, Popilius
presently drawing a large circle with his stick about Antiochus, bad him
forthwith consult his friends there upon the spot, nor pass out of the circle
till he had returned answer to the Senate whether he would have war or peace
with them; which rough carriage of Popilius so humbled him that he presently
answered he would obey the Senate. Which passage in Justin lib. 34. cap. 3.
suits mighty well with the very words in the Hebrew Text and Septuagints
Translation, the one saying (...), And he will be struck or broken, the other
(...), And he will be humbled, viz. by this rough carriage of Popilius, as
Justin also phrases it. Adeoque haec austeritas animum Regis fregit ut
pariturum se Senatui responderet. The English [he shall be grieved] is less
emphatical, and not so punctually answering to the niceties of History.

But certainly when Antiochus was thus struck, broken, and humbled, he was also
grieved, and returned from Egypt in this discontented mood. And will have
indignation against the holy Covenant. He will ease his grief and disburden
himself of his rage he had conceived against the Romans that were too strong
for him, upon the Jews, whom he could better master, and upon those especially
that would most faithfully adhere to the holy Covenant nor forsake the law of
Moses. So shall he do, he shall even return and have intelligence with them
that forsake the holy Covenant. He will be sure to take this wicked course to
ease his grief for his disappointed hopes of Egypt, and carry away what spoils
he can from Judea, the City and Temple, that he might not seem to return into
Syria empty; and for the better effecting his purpose he will practice with the
Deserters of the Holy Covenant Jason and Menelaus and those of that faction.

31. And arms shall stand on his part, Though not the whole stock, yet arms or
considerable branches of the stock, or people of the Jews. For so Gasper
Sanctius would have Brachia to signify, viz. the same that Rami, as if (...)
here were the seed (...), the seed of Abraham, the Jews; as if the sense were,
some of the seed of the Jews should stand on his part, such as Jason and
Menelaus and that faction. And Calvin expressly upon the place, Stabunt ab ipso
brachia, hoc est, non propriis opibus pugnabit sed fretus auxiliis ipsius
populi. Which is the same thing that is said of the little Horn or King
understanding dark sentences Chapter 8. 24. And his power shall be mighty, but not
by his own power, which I noted above to be a remarkable Note of Antichrist,
not sustained so properly by his own power as by the power of the ten Kings
Apoc. 17. And they shall pollute the Sanctuary of strength, They shall enter
into the Temple and take away the silver and the gold and the precious vessels
and the hidden treasures, 1 Maccab. 1. 23. But it is here called (...), the
Sanctuary of strength, Quia Templum erat munitum arcis in modum, says Grotius.
And (...) signifies a fortified place or a Castle, and we may add, such here as
in which the God of Israel with his heavenly Hosts and Priests and Levites, as
it were, kept Garrison, the God of Israel being (...) the God of Hosts, whence
the land of Israel was called the land of Sabi, as I noted above.

But this their entering and robbing the Temple thus foreseen and predicted as
well as permitted by the God of Israel for the trial of the faithful, is the
first degree of the profanation thereof as Grotius has also noted. And shall
take away the daily sacrifice, that is, King Antiochus shall send letters by
messengers unto Jerusalem and the Cities of Judah, that they should follow the
laws of the Gentiles, and forbid burnt-offerings and sacrifices and
drink offerings in the Temple, 1 Maccab. 1. 44. That they should not serve God
according to his own laws and prescripts, but according to Paganick Rites
prescribed by this Type of Antichrist. And this silencing the Law of God, and
setting up the dictates of men is the second degree of Profanation even
according to Grotius, and an inlet to the grossest profanation imaginable, and
therefore it orderly follows, And they shall place the Abomination that makes
desolate, The Hebrew word is, (...), and may signify either a stupifying Idol,
or an Idol that makes desolate, the Abomination of desolation, taking
Abomination for Idol as it so signifies.

And truly Idols in general in respect of them that worship them willingly and
superstitiously, may well be called stupifying, it making their worshippers
stupid, as very blocks as themselves whom they worship, as to all sense of the
true Religious worship indeed. They that make them are like unto them, and so
are all they that put their trust in them. And as for those that know the great
vanity and gross Impiety of them, they are astonished to see that mortal men
should ever so far degenerate as to fall down on their knees with their eyes
and hands lift up to stocks and stones. But that this should be in the Church
of God either Jew or Christian, whose hair would not stand on end at so horrid
and detestable a spectacle? But these Idols may be said to make desolate, the
Church of God, suppose, in that they will fright all good and conscientious men
from her communion, or cause them to be murdered or massacred, Myriads of them,
as it happened from the Church of Rome, for their not complying with her
Idolatries. Such Abominations of desolation are Idols.

But to come more particularly to the present Idol brought into the Temple at
Jerusalem, which is the third and last Profanation of the Temple, and which
drew along all disorder and uncleanness with it, it is 1 Macc. 1. 54. recorded
thus. Now the fifteenth day of the month Casleu in the hundred forty and fifth
year they set up the Abomination of desolation upon the Altar, and builded Idol
Altars throughout the Cities of Iudah^on every side. And when they had rent in
pieces the Books of the law which they found, they burnt them with fire, viz.
That the people might not be instructed thereby of the unlawfulness of
worshipping Idols. Which answers in analogy to the Popes forbidding the use of
the Bible to the Laity, because he has filled the Church of God with Images and
other trumperies, which the Bible declares against. This is the Abomination of
desolation in general, set up in the Temple of God, though they have yet given
it no name: but 2 Macc. 6. 2. this same Idol is Jupiter Olympius, as both
Calvin and Cornelius a Lapide, nay Grotius himself does acknowledge.

The thing being to be done therefore, that it may seem more passable and
plausible to the Jews and a less violation of the Law of Moses, there was sent
to them (...), 2 Macc. 6. 1.
an old man of Athens, a venerable Sophist I warrant you, to give them to
understand that this Image which they were so affrighted with, was but the
Image of (...), Jupiter Olympius, that is, of the God of Heaven, Olympus
signifying. Heaven with them, and Zeus that God which according to the notation
of his name is the living God, and gives life and motion to all things: and
that their very Law or Scripture calls their God the God of Heaven also, so
that they will worship, but the same God still, and thus the whole Kingdom of
Antiochus will be of one Catholic Religion, the Jews joining with the rest in
the same worship. Which will be much for the honor, safety and peace of
Antiochus his Kingdom. And as for the worshipping of the Image, would that
reverend Sophist say, that we directing our intention aright, the worship of
the Type passes to the Prototype, and that we do not give divine worship to the
Image, but such as it is capable of, nor to the rest of the Inferior Gods,
whose Altars might be set in other parts of Judea, but such is meant to them as
they are capable of, and no more.

At which grave Harangue of this old Greek, the Apostate party might find
themselves much edified, and it may be, others drawn in, but the sounder sort
it is likely would cry out, Isai. 8. 20.
To the Law and to the Testimony, and that those that spoke not according to
that word, there was no light in them. And certainly it is most safe to hold to
the plain and obvious sense of that Doctrine which is delivered by Inspiration.
And the like just and safe appeal there is of the reformed Churches to
Scripture given by Divine Revelation, in the plain and apert sense thereof,
against the Church of Rome. But by the Sophistry of that old Athenian, if they
will listen to his deceitful speeches, they may be seduced to worship not
only Jupiter Olympius, but Pluto also and all the Fiends of Hell with their
most deformed and affrightfull Images, such as the Indians Idols are, in
reference to that great and terrible God, as he is in judgment, as well as
infinitely sweet and alluring in mercy, under pretense of their being the
ministers of his wrath, and that we intend no higher worship to them than is
due. Wherefore the worship of God is the most safely bounded by his own
inspired word, not by the humor some or fraudulent and self-interessed
prescripts of men, or by their subtle and perverse Interpretations of Holy
Writ, which is abundantly plain in any thing of moment touching Divine worship.

But now for this Idol of Jupiter Olympius its proving an Abomination of
desolation, it was so in that it caused the Temple to be left desolate and
deserted of all good men, driving them into secret places wheresoever they
could fly for shelter, and it is said, 1 Macc. 4. 37. How the Sanctuary was
desolate and shrubbs grew in the Courts, as in a Forest or one of the
mountains.

32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant shall he corrupt with
flatteries. Eos qui sacerdotium, says Grotius, contra legem nundinati sunt,
blandimentis eo perducet, ut ad Idololatriam conniveant. Those that had
merchandized and given money for the High Priesthood contrary to the law, by
fair insinuations and flatteries, he would further persuade to comply with his
Idolatrous designs. Where we may observe, Earthly-mindedness, Covetousness and
Ambition in the Priesthood what an occasion it is of, and what a prop to
Idolatry and the corrupting the worship of God. But the people that do know
their God. Calvin well upon this place says, Cognitio autem hic non tantundem
valet ac frigida Imaginatio, sed accipitur pro fide quae radicem vivam egit in
cordibus. This knowledge, says he, of God is no frigid Imagination, but is
Faith that has a living root in the heart, which implies a purity there, from
whence all firm assurance of knowledge in Divine matters does arise. And that is
pitiful knowledge indeed that has not firm assurance. For how can we be said to
know what we are not assured of that it is true? It is vain Imagination and
conceit but not knowledge, such as a man will adventure any thing upon. And
hence it is that men crumple so in persecution, in that they do not know God
with any assurance, their hearts being not purified sufficiently for such a
kind of knowledge, and real sense of God, as it were, according to that saying
of our Savior, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, and act
always as in his sight and presence, which will give them invincible courage
and fortitude, whiles they are assured, that He looks on in whom they trust,
and for whom they suffer, and who will plenteously reward their fidelity to
him. Shall be strong and do exploits, that is, by the strength and power of
God, and by Faith in his assistance, they will not be forced through the
threats of mortal men, be they never so great and potent, to forsake the law of
God, or to relinquish their loyalty to him, who brings these persecutions on
his people, on purpose to try them. Wherefore if they prove faithless and
disloyal to him, the note of condemnation is branded upon their own
consciences, whereby it shall be either enraged with everlasting disquietness,
or hardened into eternal deadness and stupidity. Which is a sad thing and worth
our serious consideration.

But as for the fullfilling of this Prophecy touching the exploits they do
that truly know God, and are not mere sons of talk and Imagination, besides
both the Books of the Maccabees, Josephus also witnesses to it lib. 12. cap. 7.
where he says, though many of the Jews partly of their own accord, and partly
to avoid the punishment threatened by King Antiochus, to them that disobeyed his
command (which command was to disobey Moses and embrace Gentilism) they
submitted to what he decreed, (...), which are here the people that knew God,
they listened not to him, but had more regard to the Law of God, than to the
threats of King Antiochus, against those that Disobeyed his Decree, and
accordingly they endured murders and tortures, rather than they would forsake
the law of God. Which is a lively Type of the sufferings of Gods people under
Antichrist for adhering closely to the law and will of Christ, and avoiding
that Pagan-like worship of Idols, that Antichrist has introduced into the
Church of God.

33. And they that understand among the people shall instruct many. These that
understand among the people are those that before were said to know their God
from such a principle of life in their heart, and not in dry Imaginative
opinion. These therefore being assured of the truth, whether Priests or
Laymen, instructed many. For so Gasper Sanctius says, Hi vero non sunt Scribae
aut legis Doctores, etc. These were not the Scribes or Doctors of the Law, but
men that studied the Law for that purpose that they might keep it, such as
Mattathias and Judas Maccabaeus, who encouraged many to the observance of the
Law, with the peril of their lives, and made, that they willingly underwent
killing with the sword, burning, captivity, and a thousand such like
jeopardies, says he. And Cornelius a Lapide speaks much-what to the same sense,
interpreting those that understand among the people, though of the Priests
chiefly, yet also of the Laity. Which is therefore the more lively Type of
those that encouraged the people of God against the Idolatrous tyranny of
Antichrist, there being those that instructed them so, both of the Clergy and
Laity. So that the Ponti^^cian Party have no reason to lay such things in the
dish of the Reformed, these of their own Church here approving of it. For both
Gasper Sanctius and Cornelius a Lapide, were members of the Church of Rome. Yet
they shall fall, read rather, Though they shall fall, By the sword, and by the
flame, and by captivity, and by spoil many days. Though these things be in
their eyes, and they be in a manner certain to undergo them, to be either
killed by the sword, burnt at the stake, banished out of their country, or
despoiled of their goods, yet those that know their God, will not desist to
instruct those they have the opportunity to instruct touching their duty in
Religion, and adherence to the true worship of God, nor will others be
discouraged to follow their counsel, to keep a good conscience, nor be driven
to Gentilism by the terror of men, they knowing whom they serve, and being so
sure of their reward. Else it were as if there were no God upon Earth, and that
the Supreme Power of every Country were absolutely the God of that Country,
and that there were no difference of moral good or evil, nor any Religion truer
or more obligatory one than another, which is the very Quintessence of Atheism.
But this pious party of the Jews was otherwise persuaded, and stood to the
truth with the hazard of their lives, and all that they had, as is copiously
set down in the books of the Maccabees.

34. Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help.
Mattathias with his five sons (amongst whom was Judas who was called
Maccabaeus) he will open a way toward their liberty. See 1 Macc. 2. 1. and 2
Macc. 5. But many shall cleave to them with flatteries, The Hebrew word here
for (...) (...) which signifies Lubricitates, ^^ipperinesses, as well as
flatteries, so that the sense may be, That many shall join themselves to them
(...), not firmly and sincerely. There shall not be an immediate firm union
from one principle, which is the hearty love of God and unfeigned zeal for the
purity of his worship, but their adherence will be from By-respects of Ambition
or Covetousness, or the like, of each which we see an example in some of those
that sided with Judas Maccabaeus against Antiochus his forces. Of Ambition and
desire of Fame in Joseph and Azarias, who when they had heard of the valiant
acts which Judas and Jonathan had done, said, Let us also get us a name, etc. 1
Macc. 5. 55. But their success was accordingly, for they were routed by
Gorgias, and slain of them two thousand men, verse. 60.

But the example of Covetousness is that in those slain in the battle which
Judas fought with Gorgias the Governor of Idumaea, the men of Judas his side
that were slain were such as under whose coats were found things consecrated to
Idols of the Iamnites or Idumaeans, as Grotius would have it, which is
forbidden the Jews by the law. Here we see plainly that some of Judas his
company, who was himself so sincere a zealot for the true worship of God,
adhered to the Cause, part out of Ambition, part out of Covetousness, which
therefore was a more infirm or lubricous adhesion. And it were desirable that
those who oppose Antichrist as these did the Type of him, Antiochus Epiphanes,
held together in a more sincere principle, and then the opposing of him, I mean
in Polemical Theology (for I have nothing to do with other Polemicks or
Politics) would prove more successful.

It was Calvin's complaint in his time upon this Text, That in that little
number that had withdrawn themselves from the Idolatries of the Papacy, major
pars, says he, plena est perfidia and dolis, which is something an harsh
censure understanding it in the grosser way, as if they wittingly and
resolvedly were such. But so few are touched with the sincere and hearty love
of the pure worship of God, or oppose the Papacy upon this just and laudable
jealousy for His Honor and the Support of the Power of true Religion and right
knowledge of God, such as destroys the body of sin in us, that being encumbred
with these unknown Hypocri^es, or better assured that many things in Popery are
grossly false, than that the great articles of Religion, wherein we seem
generally agreed on all sides, are assuredly true, or that not so much the
purity of Gods worship as the splendor, power and worldly Interest of the
Priesthood is to be the measure of a prudent and well moderated Reformation; I
say men's minds and consciences being darkened with such prejudices, and they
seeking their own Interest, or following their own Humor, rather than
sincerely affecting that the power of true and pure Religion should prevail, it
is no wonder we have no better success in opposing the Papacy than Joseph and
Azarias, or those that had under their coats things consecrated to the Idols of
the Idumaeans, had in opposing Paganism. For it is two to one, but that he will
be vanquished by the Popes Champions, whoever enters the lists with them, who
has already, as the Proverb is, a Pope in his belly.

35. And some of them of understanding shall fall, that is, Some of them that
know their God in the sense above explained shall fall, the Septuagint turn it
(...). As in the former verse where the same Hebrew word is used, viz. (...),
the Septuagint render it by (...). As (...) and (...) signify to be in misery,
in several places in the New Testament. So that (...) has not a Moral sense but
Physical, as the following words do more fully assure us. To try them to purge
and to make them white. And therefore these troubles that seem so direful and
Tragical to mortal men, proceed from the love of God to his own, that he may
make them more pure and consequently better fitted for Communion with himself.
And this is that which St. Paul suggests, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light
affliction (and such is all that wicked men can inflict upon the true servants
of God, who will never suffer them to be tempted above what they can bear)
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: For the things which are seen are Temporal, but the
things that are not seen are Eternal. Even to the time of the end, that is, To
the time of their ending. For God had set his time wherein these afflictions of
his Church should end, as bounding all human affairs by his Power and
Providence, so that there may be a respiration to his people from these
extremities of affliction. And therefore there is put an end to this affliction
of his Church, because it was foreseen that another would begin, as it is
intimated to us by what follows according to the Hebrew (...), Because it is
yet for a time appointed. The vulgar Latin has it, Quia adhuc aliud tempus
erit, Because there will be yet another time, namely of persecution of the
Church of God, viz. under the Roman Empire, Pagan and Pagano-Christian:
Wherefore (...) is an Elliptical speech as was observed above v. 27. Which
verbatim is thus to be rendered, Because yet-again at the time appointed,
subaudi, There will be a persecution of my People or Church, viz. under the
Roman Empire, whose succession begins in the next verse, For hitherto is
described from verse. 21. the Reign and feats of Antiochus Epiphanes. But that
now the times of the Roman Empire succeed, both the mention of A Time and Times
and half a time, Chapter 12. 7. and those other numbers there verse. 11. that point
to them, and that vast gap that would be betwixt Antiochus his time and the
Resurrection of the dead mentioned v. 2. may sufficiently assure us. To which
you may add that the Passage here from the Greek Empire to the Roman in the
next verse, is as distinct and plain as from the Persian to the Greek verse. 3.
and the like great success and Prosperity expressed in both, in that of both
Kings it is said, And he shall do according to his will.

* Which therefore cannot be understood of Antiochus. Whence they that would
drag what follows of the Prophecy to that scope are fain to run back and apply
the same things that were predicted before, and so make the Prophecy to
tautologize. Besides, many things are most wretchedly distorted and very weakly
and faintly accommodated to the person of Antiochus. Which Calvin being
sensible of applies all to the Roman Empire from the times of the Roman Empire
after Antiochus his death, to the coming of Christ. In which besides that many
things are dilute or forced, he leaves a vast gap as well as those others, viz.
from the beginning of the Gospel to the Resurrection. Which makes the Prophecy
less worthy of that Pompous Preface to it, viz. the Prefatory vision Chapter 10. as
I noted above.

Wherefore there can be no doubt with them that consider the matter, but that
this Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth does not only here pass from the Greek
Empire to the Roman upon the death of Antiochus, and the vanquishing of Perseus
the last King of Macedonia by Aemylius Paulus, and turning his Kingdom into a
Roman Province, but that the Prophecy continuedly goes on, though in general
strokes, through the whole series of times of the Roman Empire to the end of
the world, or general Resurrection. And that as there has hitherto been
predictions (...), and Literally or Historically to be understood of the
affairs of the Persian and Greek Kingdom, and more particularly of those two
parts thereof the Kingdoms of Syria and Egypt, where the real gests of
Antiochus Epiphanes are foretold, and are but only as other Historical parts
of Scripture drawn to a Typical sense; so whatever follows touching the affairs
of the Roman Empire has a plain Historical meaning, and is so to be understood,
till its utter dissolution. So that there will be no room left for such a
Chimerical Antichrist as some of the Fathers have fancied, and others have been
either themselves such children, or would have others to be such, as to believe
them. Wherefore bidding adieu to Hugo Grotius, and laying aside all the
fancifull and Chimerical Crotchets of mistaken Antiquity, I shall clear the
sense of the remaining part of this Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, as
follows.

36. And the King shall do according to his will, and shall exalt himself and
magnify himself above every God. This may be understood of the Roman Empire at
large, and the words be rendered thus, Then shall a King do according to his
will, shall have all things go prosperously according to his desire, by King
understanding here as it is elsewhere in Daniel, a State or Kingdom, which is
here the Roman upon the expiration of the Greek Empire, Macedonia being
conquered by the Romans, of which Perseus was the last King contemporary to
Antiochus whom Daniel foretells to reign Chapter 8. in the latter time of the Greek
Kingdom. And therefore the Roman is very fitly here supposed to succeed it,
after Antiochus Epiphanes, the rest of his Successors being taken no notice
of, for the same reasons that all but one after Xerxes are past by in the
Persian Empire. And this Roman King or Kingdom is said to magnify himself
above every God, in that the Romans by sacred charms called out the Gods of
those Cities they conquered, and so as it were led them captive to Rome. See my
Synops. Prophet. Book 2. Chapter 10. And shall speak marvelous things, that is,
blasphemous, against the God of Gods, that is, The officers of this Roman Power
shall do so, namely against Christ Jesus himself, who was truly God as well as
man, and therefore the God of Gods; and yet was he in word and deed most
despightfully used by them and crucified. And how the God of of Gods, viz. the
God of Israel was despised by the Romans, a man may collect from that greatest
Wit of the Roman Empire, Marcus Cicero, and one of the best men of them, who
yet speaks but contemptibly of the Religion of the Jews as unworthy of the
greatness of the Roman name and Empire, and insults over their Nation as less
befriended by the Gods, because they were vanquished and subjected to the
Romans. If a person of his quality went so far in reproach to the God of
Israel, what would others of less sagacity and morality blurt out? See his
oration pro Flacco. And shall prosper till the Indignation be acc^mplished; for
that that is determined shall be done. And yet they shall prosper
notwithstanding this their villainy toward Christ, and bloody persecution of
his members wherein he was again reproached and blasphemed, till the determined
time of this rage ran out, and that the Empire became Christian, which was
certainly determined to be done, under the sixth Seal.

37. Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, that is, The Roman Empire
becoming Christian will cast off the Gods of their Ancestors, and cashier the
old Pagan Religion. Nor the desire of women, that is, Marriage will not be in
that high esteem then as it was with the Ancient Romans, as those Laws testify
which were called Iulia and Papia, which Constantine abrogated. This I say may
be one sense of the foregoing verse and of this part of this, and so take in
all the time of the Roman Empire from the beginning of the Gospel at least, to
the times of the Apostasy of the Church, or of the Empire become the Beast that
was and is not and yet is. By a Geniconoea, as I may so speak, this may be the
sense of the foregoing verse and this part of this. But by an Idiconoea, I
conceive, with the Ancients, that the chiefest sense is, that which concerns
that Antichrist which undoubtedly Paul aims at 2 Thessalonians. 2. And therefore
emboldened by his authority I shall paraphrase the foregoing verse and this
hitherto, thus.

Then shall a King, etc. i.e. After the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, that Type
of Antichrist, and notorious enemy of the people of God in the Greek Empire,
shall there arise a Rex Sacrorum, or Royal Pontifex if you will, who with his
formed body Politic or Ecclesiastical Power shall prove the very Antichrist
indeed, answering in the Roman Empire to that wicked Antiochus in the Greek,
and both of them placed in the latter times of each Empire. Which
Ecclesiastical Prince or Pontifex finding the stream of Affairs and good
fortune to carry him along, shall at last exalt himself above every God, i.e.
every Supreme Magistrate, the Emperor himself not excepted, nay shall speak
strange blasphemous words against the Sovereignty of God himself, as if he had
power to abrogate and dispense with the laws of God and Christ, and were
himself Supremum Numen in terris. Which impieties he will prosperously carry on
for such a time as Divine Providence shall permit, that is for a Time and Times
and half a Time, at the expiration of which his Kingdom shall begin to be
broken.

But notwithstanding all this wickedness he shall not be a pure Roman Pagan,
nor shall he regard the Gods of his Ancestors or Predecessors (that is, of
the Supreme Magistrates of Rome who Reigned there a long time before him) such
Deities, I say, as Neptune, Mars, Jupiter Capitolinus, and the like. But this
shall be notable in him, that he shall be outwardly a strict professor of a
single life, and it shall be against his Pontifical office to marry, and
likewise his Clergy shall be tied to the same laws, that he may thereby the
better promote the designs of his Rampant and Insatiable Ambition. Which spirit
of pride and worldliness shall grow so rank in him, that he shall in time cast
off the real sense of all Religion, as it follows in the Text. Nor regard any
God: for he shall magnify himself above all. And therefore he will subordinate
all Religion to his own worldly advantage and Interest. Whence it will be, that
he will amongst other things make no conscience of Idolatry, as it follows.

38. But in his estate shall he honor the God of forces. The Hebrew runs thus
(...). i.e. For together with God, or besides God (for so will (...) signify,
namely, together, as Dan. 11. 7. (...) Calvin renders, cum exercitu) he will
honor the Mahuzzim, that is, the Demons which St. Paul Prophesies of, whose
worship would be brought in, in the latter times, (that is in the Time and
Times and half a Time, which is the Reign of Antichrist, and in the fourth
Empire) by unconscionable liars, and men that are against marriage, and place
their R^^igion in abstaining from meats, that is, by Monks especially. This
Paul says 1 Timothy 4. That the Spirit has foretold (...) expressly, not obscurely
nor Aenigmatically, as being in this Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, that
is, in this plain and express Prophecy, and not at all obscure or Aenigmatical.
These Demons therefore of St. Paul and Daniel's Mahuzzim are the Souls of
departed Saints, which this Antichrist King of Rome, or Roman Hierarchy, will
worship together with God or Christ. (...), not, in his estate, but place,
namely in the places or Temples of God, or Christ, in Churches which have their
name from (...), our Lord Christ. Or (...) may signify as much as, upon his
bottom, or foundation, which is the very pretense of the Pontificians, that
they worship the Saints upon account of honoring Christ. And it is to be noted
also that Mahuzzim signifies as much as, Towers, Fortresses, Walls, Bulwarks,
Guards and Protectours, which are the very Titles the Idolatrous
Saint-worshippers give the Saints and their Relics reposed in their Churches.
Of so fit significancy is this name of Demons, viz. Mahuzzim which (...)
expresses them by, and the worshipping of whom St. Paul says, is so expressly
foretold would be. And where is it foretold, especially expressly, if not here?
And a God whom his Fathers knew not, Read according to the Hebrew, Even
together with a God which his Fathers, that is, his Ancestors the ancient
Romans, knew not, which God is Christ. Shall he honor them with gold and
silver and with precious stones and pleasant things. Which is abundantly
fulfilled in the rich offerings to, and clothings of the Images and Altars of
the Saints in the Romish Church, which are very costly and sumptuous.

39. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange God. This is very
obscure sense, The Hebrew runs thus, and is easy, (...). i.e. And he shall make
the Holds of the Mahuzzim jointly to the foreign God. As if we should say, the
Holds of the Mahuzzim with the foreign God, i.e. the Holds jointly made to them
both, or jointly appertaining to them both. Which are Churches and Monasteries
dedicated to Christ (for he is this foreign God, partly as being a Jew by birth
not a Gentile, much less a Roman, and partly as being really God-man, which is
such a strange and foreign Deity as the Romans, nor any Nation else were ever
acquainted with before) together with this or that Saint; and elegantly here
are these Churches and Monasteries called Holds, in reference to Mahuzzim,
which has a warlike sense in it, and signifies * military Protectours and
Champions, whose Houses therefore may well be called strong Holds. And the
Relics of the Saints lying there are accounted strong Castles and Towers of
defense, by the superstitious followers of Antichrist. Whom he shall acknowledge
and increase with glory, that is, Antichrist shall make an outward Profession
of Christ, and accumulate external shows and pomps in honor to him. And he
shall cause them, the Mahuzzim, to rule over many, and shall divide the land
for gain. And shall distribute the earth to them for a reward. So Vatablus out
of the Hebrew; And the Seventy have it (...), Every one has his portion as a
retribution or reward, namely of their sufferings, and of the good offices the
Mahuzzim, Demons or deceased Saints are supposed to do to them that worship
them, that is, This Antichristian Power though they profess Christ, yet they
will consecrate Temples and Altars to Saints together with him, and ascribe the
safety of Cities and Provinces to their Protection, and trust in them
accordingly, giving Religious worship unto them, and invoking them as their
(...) or (...) (for so Mahuzzim is often rendered by the Seventy) as their
Refuge and Protectours, in the time of trouble. Which is a lively Description
of the condition of the Papacy at this very day, and indeed of a long time
heretofore both of the Greek and Latin Church, of both which the Pope pretends
to be Supreme Patriarch. For which the Idolatrous Empire has been sorely
scourged by the Saraceus and Turks, namely for worshipping Mahuzzim, that is,
Demons or the Souls of deceased Saints, and in order to them Images of Gold,
and of Silver, and of Brass, and of Stone, etc. Apoc. 9. 20. The plagues of the
Locusts and the Euphratean Horsemen, that is, of the Saracens and Turks came
upon them for this. And so it follows answerably here upon the mention of these
Mahuzzim.

40. And at the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him, that
is, Within the compass of the Time and Times and half a Time, under the fifth
Trumpet, shall the Locusts or Saracens come against the Idolatrous Empire,
whose Original is from Arabia that lies South on the said Empire. And the King
of the North shall come against him like a whirlwind, that is, The Euphratean
Horsemen, which are the Turks and whose Original is Northern beyond the Caspian
Sea at a great distance opposite to Arabia, these under the sixth Trumpet,
which is the last part of the Time and Times and half a Time, these shall
invade the said Roman Empire by reason of that Idolatrous Antichristian Polity
therein, like a whirlwind or strong tempest from the North. With Chariots and
with Horsemen and with many Ships. With Carriages and a number of Horsemen as
they are described in the Apocalypse. And Ships are here mentioned
consentaneously to what follows. And he shall enter into the countries and
overflow and pass over, the Sea, out of Asia Minor into Europe, and at last
take Constantinople and utterly ruin the Eastern part of the Empire for their
Idolatries with the Mahuzzim, as has been above intimated.

41. He shall enter into the glorious Land, (...) (as Chapter 8. 9.) signifies the
land of Iudaea, according to the general strain of Interpreters, by reason of
the glory of the Temple and Divine Residence there. The King of the North the
Turk will be master of this land too, as he is known to be at this day. And
many countries shall be overthrown, but these shall escape out of his hand,
Edom and Moab and the chief of the children of Ammon, that is, says Mr. Mede,
the Inhabitants of Arabia Petraea, which were never yet Provincials of the
Turkish Empire. Yea with some of them he is fain to be at pension, for the
safer passage of his Caravans.

42. He shall stretch forth his hand also upon other Countries, and the land of
Egypt, namely, shall not escape, which thoug^ it held out long under the
Mamalukes, till the year 1517 (whenas Constantinople was taken in the year
1457) at last fell under the hands of the Turk.

43. But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver, and over
all the precious things of Egypt, and the Libyans, and the Ethiopians. The
Hebrew has it (...) and the Cushites (that is, the neighboring Nations whether
of Africa or Libya, as those of Algiers, etc. or of the Arabians in Scripture
called Cushim) Shall be at his steps, that is, At his devotion, so Mr. Mede.
And thus far the Prophecy seems clear, being applied to times past. But what
follows is to come, and therefore the sense more uncertain, and being so little
is likely to reach at times more distant. And we are already at the seventh
Trumpet, with which begin the seven Vials, and I suspect in this so contracted
a Prophecy, that aims only at main things, and such especially as concern the
Church of Christ, and here treats of the scourges upon Antichrist from the
Saracen and Turk, that there may be a leap to the sixth and seventh Vials, in
the latter whereof Antichrist or the bloody Idolatrous Papal Hierarchy is
utterly ruined, which is a thing so considerable, that it is unlikely to be
omitted in this Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth.

44. But tidings out of the East and out of the North shall trouble him, that
is, shall trouble the Turk Which tidings out of the East may very well
contemporize with the sixth Vial, which is poured out upon the River Euphrates,
whereby its waters are dried up, and a way to the Kings of the East prepared,
which shows some grand mutation of affairs and jeopardy that the Turkish Empire
in those Eastern parts will seem to be in, at that time: But the tidings out of
the North may be of a most formidable strength of Tartars invading the Turkish
Empire at the same time, it may be converted to the Christian Religion. And
Peganius, I remember, in his Exposition of the sixth Vial, interprets the Kings
of the East of the Tartars and Persians. But the Tartars are to be looked upon
as a people from the North rather than from the East, as this Prophecy of
Daniel expresses it. The Tartars their first driving the Turks on this side of
Euphrates, made them overflow so, that by degrees making themselves masters of
Asia Minor, they at last got into Europe, took New Rome or Constantinople, and
seized themselves of the Constantinopolitan Empire. And what this Driving of
them here mentioned will do, God alone certainly knows. But it seems the same
and rumor of this Incursion of the Tartars and Persians casts the Turk into
a great anxiety of mind, and an equal rage, as is intimated in what follows.
Therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make
away many, that is, any by whose destruction and overthrow he may think it
probable further to strengthen himself against those imminent dangers he is so
sensible of, or to compensate his losses.

45. And he shall plant the Tabernacles of his Palace betweeen the Seas in the
glorious Holy Mountain. This Interpreters ordinarily understand of his entering
into Iudaea, because of the word (...) here used, which they make a character
of the land of Iudaea, and will have the Mountain Mount Sion and Moria, where
the Temple stands, betwixt two Seas, the Mediterranean and Mare Mortuum, whenas
if you consult the Maps of Ptolemy and Adrichomius, Jerusalem lies manifestly
North of Mare Mortuum, and therefore it cannot well be said to lie betwixt the
Mediterraneum and it, it being nearer the North Pole than the most Northern
part of Mare Mortuum. But beside, this land of Iudaea the Turk had entered and
possessed before ver. 41. Therefore this seems some new Exploit and Acquist in
some other country betwixt two Seas, and where is to be found a glorious Holy
Mountain. Now for the Country betwixt two Seas, it is manifest that Italy is
such, being placed betwixt Mare Adriaticum and Mare Tyrrhenum, which are also
called Mare Superum and Mare Inferum. And then for (...), which is translated,
the glorious Holy Mountain, (...) is not necessarily a proper name of Iudaea,
but may be a Noun Appellative (though the Seventy, both here and also ver. 41.
do not change it in their translation, but call it (...), Sabi) which signifies
rem tumidam, plenam, turgidam, as A Lapide himself has noted, and the root from
whence it comes, viz. (...) signifies intumuit, to swell, or to be puffed up.
But it may also signify a solid greatness and gloriousness, as where it is used
of Iudaea in reference to the Temple, where the Glory of the true God resided,
and (...) itself in one place by the Seventy is translated, (...), God, as
(...), Ierem. Chapter 3.

But in the mean time, as we have found a Country distinct from Iudaea betwixt
two Seas, so that Country will afford a City, and hills famous ones belonging
to that City betwixt these two Seas, and these are the Hills and City of Rome.
Which being the Metropolis of Holy Church, or the Papal Hierarchy and the seat
of his Holiness so called, it is no wonder that (...), which signifies
Holiness, is here added.

And moreover though (...) were a proper note of Iudaea and the Temple there,
yet nothing hinders but figuratively it may be used to signify another place.
As it is said of the Prince of Tire, though but a Type of Antichrist, Ezekiel. chapter
28. That he was the anointed Cherub and set upon the holy Mountain of God, and
that he walked up and down in the midst of the Stones of fire; that is,
sparkling Stones in Aaron's Breastplate: If these things proper to Aaron the
High Priest and to the Temple of God, be applied to the Prince of Tire, who is
only a Type of Antichrist, why may not (...) which may seem to belong properly
to Iudaea and the Temple there, be applied to Antichrist himself, especially it
hitting so fitly as it does in virtue of other significations of the word
(...), it signifying as well a tumid excellency, as solid excellency; For so
you may render (...), either the Hill of a tumid pompousness of Holiness, the
Holiness of that Church consisting most-what in outward pomps and shows, or,
The Hill of the tumor and fastuosity of his Holiness the Pope, * or, the Hill
of Sabi Codesh, of the God who is called His Holiness, and indeed who exalts
himself above all that is called God or worshipped, as St. Paul speaks. And so
it will be (...) in good earnest, the Hill of a very tumid though not solid
Supremum Numen in terris.

This is Har Zebi, the Hill of him that puts himself in the place of God, as it
is said to the King of Tire his Type, who is said also to have swelled himself
into the conceit of being a God. Because thy heart is lifted up and thou say
I am a God, and sit, in Cathedra Dei, so the vulgar Latin has it, in the heart
of the Seas, that is, not at the North end nor South end, but in the midst
space of Italy included betwixt two seas Mare superum and Mare inferum. Behold
therefore I will bring strangers upon thee the terrible of the Nations, namely
the Turk, and verse. 9. Will thou yet say before him that slays thee I am God,
but thou shall be a man and no God in the hand of him that slays thee,
whether naturally, or, which is far more probable and desirable, Politically,
that is, despoils him there of his rule and Power. See my Synopsis Prophetica,
Book 2. chapter 16. where I explain these Visions of Ezekiel touching the King of
Tire; and consider but what I have writ, and I think you cannot doubt but that
the Pope of Rome, or the Roman Hierarchy, is concerned in those Visions, and
that he is to fall by the terrible of the Nations, and very probably by the
King of the North here in this Vision, viz. the Turk. But by this description
in Ezekiel, what a Zebi Antichrist is, that is, what a turgid and tumid thing,
as Cornelius a Lapide interprets the word, swollen and puffed up into a conceit
of being Supremum Numen in terris, is fitly set out.

But that his Power will be surmounted and that he will be brought down by the
King of the North the Turk, is intimated in the following words of this verse
(...). Our English translation renders it, Yet he shall come to his end and
none shall help him. Which I conceive is not so natural a sense, nor so
consentaneous to the drift of the Prophecy in hand, touching the Man of sin or
Antichrist. Wherefore the vulgar Latin and Vatablus render it better. To which
Gasper Sanctius also assents and Maldonat. Et veniet usque ad summitatem ejus
and nemo auxiliabitur illi. And he shall come to the top of it, viz. of the
Hill, (suppose Mount Coelius) and no man shall help it, that is, the Hill, and
rescue it out of his hand, so Maldonat and others. Which implies that the King
of the North will make himself perfect master of this Hill or Hills and City of
Rome, and that no man will hinder him * by rescuing the Hill, and consequently
the City and Seat of the Pope, out of his hand. But then will be fulfilled, at
least within this seventh Vial, that Prediction touching the King of Babylon or
Antichrist by Isaias, Chapter 14. which I had occasion to mention also above. All
the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in glory, every one in his own
house. But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, as a
carcass trodden under foot, because thou have destroyed thy land and slain thy
people; as it is said of the Whore of Babylon, which is the same Polity, that
in her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth. In this taking of Rome therefore by the Turk, and his
possessing of himself of Italy will the Western Empire be extinguished, as well
as the Eastern was by the taking of Constantinople, and that will come to pass
before the expiring of the seventh Vial, that is written Apoc. Chapter 19. And the
Beast was taken and with him the false Prophet, and were cast alive into the
lake of fire burning with brimstone.

But to the comfort of all good Christians, the King of the North or Turk *
shall be slain with the sword of him that sits on the White Horse, that is, he
shall be converted to Christianity in all likelihood, according to the
intimations of those Prophecies in the Apocalypse, which also place these
things under the pouring forth of the seventh Vial. Which taking of Rome under
this Vial makes it seem less probable, though not impossible, that the pouring
out of the fifth Vial upon the Seat of the Beast should be the taking of Rome
too, but some other calamity upon it, which is more easy to conceive, than
needful to utter. In the mean time I think it very rational to expound this
last verse, as I have, of the destruction of Antichrist at Rome, the Turk
having taken Iudaea and Jerusalem before, and the Tartar and Persian being far
off, nor any Holy Hill there betwixt two Seas to be found that I know of; and
it being also incredible, that this Prophecy describing so lively the
Idolatrous State of Antichrist, and the beginnings of his Punishment under the
fifth and sixth Trumpets, should not glance at his final destruction under the
seventh, that the Prophecy may seem, as it is not without an head, so not to be
without a foot. The Prophecies of the metalline Image, and the four Beasts,
that reach to the end of the Roman Empire as this does, speak of the
destruction of it in the last period thereof, namely of the feet and toes and
of the little Horn with eyes. Therefore there is all reason that this Prophecy
of the Scripture of Truth should do so too. Which it does not, unless this last
verse of this eleventh Chapter be understood of the destruction of the Papacy.
Which is a thing worth the considering.

NOTES Upon VISION VI. Ver. 17.
The Hebrew is (...), which taken verbatim, signifies no more than the daughter
of women, filia foeminarum, and therefore Vatablus adds, subaudi, formosarum.
But if (...) which is prefixed to (...) signifies Emphatically, it may signify
the daughter of excellent women, and therefore Vatablus calls her filiam
formosissimam vel nobilissimam. For it is not so perfectly reducible to the
form of (...) hircus caprarum, which Interpreters generally agree signifies
young ones of the kind, as there a young Goat; so that (...) should signify a
young delicate Damsel. Grotius is of opinion, that there is an Ellipsis in the
Phrase, and that (...) is put for (...) i.e. filia foemina foeminarum. But
these curiosities are but needless, all Interpreters agreeing in this, that by
(...) is understood some very commendable Female, with whom the King of Egypt
might be taken.

Verse. 30. Romans who were anciently called (...) Chittim according to
Bocartus,] namely in Phaleg lib. 3. cap. 5. Where though he produce probable
arguments why Chittim should signify the Macedonians, and amongst other that
out of Hesychius, (...), and that out of A. Gell. lib. 9. c. 3. Philippus
Amyntae filius terrae Macetiae Rex, etc. Yet he is more propending to the
opinion that Chittim signifies the Romans. But his first argument is from the
authority of Expositours, who where the word Chittim occurs expound it of the
Romans or Italians, as Numb. 24. 24. (...) a part Chittim, where St. Jerome,
the Jerusalem Targum, the Arabian Interpreter, Onkelos and Jonathan understand
by Chittim the Romans or Italians. So Ezech. Chapter 27. 6. (...) ex Insulis
Chittim, the Chaldee Interpreter and the Vulgar render it De Insulis Italiae.
And lastly, which Bochartus puts in the first place, namely this present
passage of Daniel's Prophecy Chapter 11. 30. Supervenient enim naves Chittim. Here
he makes no question but that these ships of Chittim are the ships of the
Romans, because the vulgar Latin has Romani for Chittim; which exposition, says
he, the Greek and Latin Fathers follow, and of the Hebrew Writers Josephus Ben
Gorion, Selomo Iarchi, R. Saadias Gaon, Aben Ezra, Josephus Iacchiades, which
is a competent plea of authority.

And for the more credibility of the matter he further adds, that in Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, there occurs the City (...) situated in Latium, one of the
great and populous Cities taken by Coriolanus. There is also Cetus flu. near
Cumae that petrifies plants according to Aristotle. He adds also that Eusebius,
Chronicon Alexandrinum, Cedrenus, Suidas affirm the Latins to have their
Original from the (...) or (...) the Chittim, nay that in the very word Chittim
is contained the name of the Latins, Latium being derived a latendo, to be hid,
and (...) signifying, occultus, absconditus. These are pretty Criticisms and
the fruit of laudable wit and reading; but whether we are to confide in this
more precise notion that makes Chittim signify the Romans properly and
adequately, or in that more large acception out of Josephus mentioned in my
Exposition, I leave to the Reader to use his own judgment in. But whether way
soever you take it, by Chittim the Romans will easily and naturally be
understood, from the genuine sense and coherence of the Prophecy.

Verse. 35. Which therefore cannot be understood of Antiochus.] Indeed Antiochus
Epiphanes is said some two years after he had profaned the Temple at Jerusalem
with Idolatry, to have made a third Expedition into Egypt, and upon Physcon
his account to have expelled Philometor his brother out of the whole Kingdom,
and to have entered a league and shared the Government of that Kingdom with
Physcon. But he had scarce settled these affairs, but the Romans again were on
his back out of Cilicia, and a sad rumor out of the East of the King of
Parthia his invading his Kingdom on that side, and that Iudaea also had
revolted came to his ear, and in the midst of his stickling to obviate these
difficulties and extricate himself out of the confusions he was in, within the
space of a year or thereabout he was cut off by an inglorious and lamentable
death. How well this suits with that phrase, A King shall do according to his
will, (which signifies the greatest prosperity that may be in the style of this
Prophecy) let any one judge.

Verse. 39. Military Protectours and Champions, etc.] Here, where Mahuzzim is
joined with Holds, it is requisite the Word should signify Persons, that is,
Protectours, Defenders, Guardians, Helpers, as (...) is very often rendered in
the Scripture, The Septuagint five times in the Psalms render (...) [Mahoz]
(...), and the vulgar Latin as often Protector. See Mr. Mede his Apostasy of
the latter times, chapter 16. part 1. There can be no doubt of the sense of
Mahuzzim in this personal signification. And in the other two places, where
Mahuzzim are named, though it were translated, (...), or (...), Walls, Towers,
Bulwarks and the like, yet the persons of the Saints or Demons are easily
understood thereby, forasmuch as the ancient Fathers gave those very names to
the Saints in reference to their relics disposed of in this or that Church or
Monastery. I will only add one citation of Mr. Mede's out of Theodoret, (who
calls the holy Martyrs, Guardians of Cities, Lieutenants of Places, Captains of
men, Princes and Champions, etc. which are plainly Military terms,) and so
leave the Reader to see the rest in that excellent Author in the abovesaid
place. But hence it is plain how wonderful easy and natural the Exposition of
this place of Daniel is.

Verse. 45. Or the Hill of Sabi Kodesh of the God who is called his holiness.]
That the Pope affects a kind of Divinity was the complaint of Frederick the
second, and how he is twice placed upon the holy Altar (which is the proper
Throne of the body of Christ) after his Election and at his Coronation you may
see in Laurentius Bank his Roma Triumphans, and what adorations are done unto
him. And in the Gloss of the Canon Law the Pope is called Dominus Deus noster,
Our Lord God, as Bishop Downham has noted in his De Antichristo, lib. 4. cap.
10. And there are many passages to that purpose in their Canonists and
Theologers who think fit to give all the names to the Pope that are given to
Christ to assert his Primacy over the Church, Powel, De Antichristo lib. 1. c.
15. these. 32. And therefore Sabi which no man can deny to be justly given to
Christ, may be given to the Pope. And (...) which the Septuagint render Ierem.
3. (...), God Omnipotent, suits excellently well with what the Canonists call
Omnipotentiam Pontificiam the Omnipotency of the Pope, In Papa omnem esse
potestatem supra omnes potestates tam Caeli quam terrae, which Bishop Downham
cites as the saying of an Archbishop of that Church in a public oration of
his in the Lateran, and there are several to that purpose as you may see them
cited by Bishop Downham and by Gabriel Powell in their Books De Antichristo. So
that the Pope is a Sabi Sabbath indeed, and take it in the most military sense,
he is, as one predicted of him, that Rex Superbiae cui paratur sacerdotum
exercitus, that King of Pride with his Army of Priests, of several ranks, and
as well ordered, as themselves will not stick to acknowledge, as an Army with
Banners. So little unfitness is there that the Pope should be called Sabi,
Scoptically, by the Prophet, he in the mean time in good earnest foretelling
how immensly he would extol himself and be extolled by his own.

But Kodesh is added that there may be no mistake, and that we may understand
that the same Sabi is not here meant that is meant verse. 41. (where the land of
Iudaea is called the land (...), of that true and eminent, of that solid (not
tumid) Sabi, even of the God of Israel himself. But here this Hill, the Hill
Coelius in all likelihood (where the Popes proper Imperial Palace is and Chair
of State, whose feet are as high as the top of the Emperors Chair and other
great Princes) is only called (...) the Hill of Sabi, not of that true and
eminent Sabi, the God of Israel) Kodesh, I say, is added, that no man may miss
of who is meant thereby, namely, his Holiness of Rome. For this is his known
Title, nothing more celebrated. And that it may be the Title of a man,
notwithstanding it is the feminine gender and in the abstract, Cornelius a
Lapide very well makes out upon Dan. 9. 24. where says he, Sanctitas
Sanctitatum, the most Holy, is to be understood of Christ not of the Temple,
and signifies no more than Sanctus Sanctorum or Sanctissimus, Sic Pontificem,
says he, vocamus Sua Sanctitas, that is, Sanctissimus Dominus; and Gasper
Sanctius on the same place speaks to the same purpose. What can be more easy or
plain? So manifest is it that no Grammatical or Critical violence is done to
the Text by thus expounding of it, but by the coherence of things and of the
Context, the place thus expounds itself.

By rescuing the Hill and consequently the City, etc.] I do not love to be
(...), a messenger of ill news, to any, but this is more tolerable and less
affrightfull, it being of a thing in all likelihood so far off. But whether
this be not the natural and easy sense of this passage in Daniel, I appeal to
any unprejudiced Reader. And it is no more than has been threatened to old Rome
(as well as it has happened to new Rome already, namely to Constantinople) by
men of their own Church, that their City would be destroyed by reason of the
wickedness of their Clergy. So St. Bridget, St. Catharine of Sienne, Abbot
Ioachim, and others, have denounced against them, and some, of their being
overrun by the very Turk.

But of all predictions of that kind, none seems more considerable than that
which Bartholomaeus Georgivitz, a zealous Pilgrim of the Roman Church, and one
who was a slave for some thirteen years in Turkey, delivers in his Epitome, De
moribus Turcarum, Cap. 3. as a Prophecy of the Turks themselves, to this sense.
That after their Emperor the Grand Senior has taken the red Apple, if at the
seventh year of his Reign the Christian sword does not advance, he shall rule
unto the twelfth, but after the twelfth year that he shall have won the red
Apple, the Christian sword shall appear and put the Turk to flight. Which is an
odd Prophecy amongst the Turks, and the more considerable in that it seems so
impartial as to declare against themselves. But what this Red Apple should be,
says Georgivitz, is a question amongst the learned of them, there being a
various reading in the Prophecy, either Kusul Almai which signifies a Red
Apple, or Vrum Papai, which may indigitate, says he, the Patriarchacy of
Constantinople, Vrum signifying the Greek, forasmuch as all Greece was once
under the Roman Empire, otherwise Vrum would more immediately signify Roman;
but taken in that other sense, Constantinople would be aimed at. But it is so
long since Constantinople was taken, that Vrum Papai will either signify the
seat of the Pope of Rome, or else must be excluded for a spurious reading,
understanding the Prophecy literally. And it may be it was a Comment crept into
the Text.

For as all are agreed that by the red Apple is meant some Imperial City, so
the Red Hats of the Cardinals and the Scarlet clothing of the Papal Hierarchy
might easily invite the Commentatour to interpret this Red Apple of the City of
Rome, and if any Jew was the Interpreter, as there are many amongst the Turks,
they understanding by Edom in the Scripture (which signifies Red) the City of
Rome or the Roman Power, it was hard for him to miss of that Interpretation.
And Cornelius a Lapide notes, that the Jews by the Idumaeans understand the
Romans, in his Commentary upon Isai. 21. 11. The Burden of Dumah (that is, of
Idumaea) in the Hebrew (...). Which is very nigh in writing to (...) as
Martinius in his Technologia observes out of St. Jerome, Sic, says he,
Hieronymus ait (...) literas parvo apice distingui, and cum interpretatur (...)
paululum literae apice commutato, pro (...) legi posse (...) and sonare Romam.
But there was no need of this nicety, the Interpretation of this Turkish
Prophecy is discovered enough already. I will only referr the Reader to Mr.
Mede, Book 5. Chapter 8. where, by many examples he shows, that the Jews by Edom
understand Rome, and how R. D. Kimchi turns (...) into (...).

But I think Interpreters are much mistaken when they interpret the seven and
twelve years not Symbolically but Arithmetically. For, if there be any thing in
the Prophecy, I suspect this to be the meaning thereof, That the Turk may take
the City of Rome (suppose within the space of the seventh Vial) being so*
hugely guilty of Idolatry and blood, if she prevent it not by timely
Repentance. And if the Christian sword advance not against him during the
Septenary, a Symbol of the reign of Idolatry, for such was the seventh Head,
yet upon the commencing of the Duodenary, which is the Symbol of the times of
the pure Apostolic Restitution, and of the new Jerusalem, Christianity shall
furmount Turcisme. Nor shall the Christians any where be any longer slaves unto
him. But I brought this Prophecy of the Turks taking* the City of Rome, set
down by that zealous Romanist Bartholomaeus Georgivitz, only to show that the
forewarning the Church of Rome of the danger, is no argument of the least ill
will toward them.

Shall be slain with the Sword of him that sits on the white Horse.] And this
is the Christian sword that in the beginning of the Duodenary, when the truly
pure and Apostolic Church shall appear, will put the Turk to flight, that is,
quite vanquish the Turkish Religion and Power and turn them all Christians. And
these are those times which Cardan in an Astrological Fit of Divination, more
than ordinarily assisted, it may be, as the Star-gazers of the East were by a
Supernatural Star, describes in his language briefly thus. Martem and Lunam
debellant Sol and Jupiter, Authoritate, Dignitate, Veritate. Ob hoc Christiani
erigite capita, qui potest capere capiat. The language is fantastical as being
Astrological, but the prediction insinuated by some better kind of Genius (as
the Turkish Prophet happily might be inspired by some secret Emissary from
Palmoni, who has a right to all Kingdoms though not possession yet of all) is
sober and true, as appears by the Holy Oracles of Scripture.

VISION VI. Continued.
From the times of the sixth and seventh Vial to the second Resurrection; as
also the Duration of the Entireness of the Kingdom of Antichrist defined; And
the time of his more palpable Discovery indigitated by two Numbers directing
thereto, Chap. 12.

1. AND at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands
for the Children of thy people. As it is said Chapter 10. 21. And there is none
that holds with me in these things but Michael your Prince. This passage
therefore denotes the time when the affairs of the Jews become very hopeful
and prosperous, which is about the sixth and the seventh Vials, to speak in the
language of the Apocalypse And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a Nation even to that same time. As it is said Apoc. 16.
18. under the seventh Vial, And there was a great Earthquake such as was not
since men were upon earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great. The comparing
which two places together plainly shows to what times they belong. And at that
time thy people shall be delivered. The Seventy have it (...), thy people shall
be saved, as also the vulgar Latin has it, Salvabitur populus tuus, namely,
from that bondage and abject condition they had lived in among the Nations, as
also from the rude and beggarly elements of Moses, and by their conversion to
Christianity, they will be made partakers of eternal salvation. Chery one that
shall be found written in the Book, Yea not the Jews only but every one as
well Gentiles as Jews that are found written in the Book of Life mentioned
Apoc. 20. 12. shall be saved. So that, as it is usual with the Prophets, there
is a running out from the Temporal deliverance of the Jews to the Spiritual
deliverance, and from their particular deliverance from the lake of fire or
second death to the General Salvation of all whose names are writ in the Book
of Life: As the sense is very coherent with what follows in the next verse
which contains though something involutely and contractedly both the first and
second Resurrection, according as the words are capable of a double Exposition.

2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake. Where
Many, in counterdistinction to All, does plainly intimate the first
Resurrection, which is not the General Resurrection, but the Resurrection of
the Martyrs only, such as did actually lose their lives for witnessing to the
Truth, or did without all reserve expose them for the same, as Daniel did who
was cast into the Lions den, and the three Children into the fiery furnace,
though they were miraculously delivered. Some to everlasting life, The Hebrew
has it (...), Those to everlasting life, viz. Those that awake out of the dust
of the earth, at this time, Those that are revivificated into their glorious
bodies at this first Resurrection, these awake to eternal life, and enjoy a
blessed immortality in their Heavenly bodies. This is the first Resurrection of
which it is said Apoc. 20. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection, on such the second death has ^o power. And some to shame and
everlasting contempt. In the Hebrew it is (...) which you may render, But those
others, another sort of people which the Prophecy points at (whose condition
begins at this first Resurrection or about the commencing of the Blessed
Millennium or New Ierusalem-state) these shall be in perpetual shame and
contempt all along the time of the Blessed Millennium or New Jerusalem, and
indeed even to the end of the world: For these are that wretched Crew, who are
the foul spirits or unclean birds that haunt the Ruins of Babylon, those Dogs,
Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers, Idolaters and Liars that are excluded the
Holy City. Which is a very shameful and contemptible condition indeed. And
according to this sense of the words of this verse, it is plain the first
Resurrection mentioned in the Apocalypse is pointed at.

But now if by Many we do not understand a certain number in counterdistinction
to All, but a vast multitude as there will be certainly at the general
Resurrection (and the Critical Interpreters of the Bible do not stick to affirm
that Many sometimes signifies All, so be they be but a great multitude) then
the Text will run naturally enough for the last and General Resurrection when
both good and bad shall arise. And those words, Some to everlasting life, and
some to shame and everlasting contempt, will be a fit distribution of those
Many or All that are then said to arise out of the dust of the Earth, the one
part of them being to be adjudged to a Blessed Immortality in glorified bodies,
the other to that shameful, squalid, forlorn and accursed condition of the
Apostate Spirits, those horrid Hell Hounds with whom they are to be sentenc^d
to everlasting fire, or the Lake of fire and brimstone which is the second
death.

3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, that
is, They that be docible and understand the ways of God and walk therein,
accordingly shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, as the bright azure
Sky. And they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever,
that is, They that are not only wise and holy themselves but are instrumental
in the promoting true wisdom and holiness in others, shall shine as the Stars,
shall have a greater and more peculiar and eminent glory than others. Which if
it respect the first sense of the foregoing verse, it denotes the splendor and
prosperity of the blessed Millennium, in what honor and repute the Citizens of
the new Jerusalem, especially the good Ministers, Pastors or Teachers, and
godly Magistrates in what high esteem and veneration they will live, in
counterdistinction to that wretched rabble that are excluded the holy City.

But if it respect the second sense, it intimates the different degrees of the
glorified bodies of the Saints in the Resurrection, which the Apostle sets off
by comparing one Star with another. For one Star differs from another Star in
glory. But Daniel by comparing the brightness of the Firmament with that more
vigorous luster in the stars themselves, makes a great difference betwixt that
share of glory and happiness which successful Teachers and Instructers of the
people in the ways of holiness, and faithful Magistrates shall have, and that
which shall fall to their lot whose activity has reached no farther than the
concern of their own Souls.

And thus we see this Prophecy of Daniel to reach to the very end of the World
the general Resurrection, when the good shall be rewarded with that
immarcescible Crown of eternal Glory, and the wicked sentenced to everlasting
Fire. What follows concerns the obscurity, and Intelligibleness of these
predictions in this last Vision and others that tend to the same scope, when
and by whom they are likely to be understood, and by whom not understood.

4. But thou O Daniel shut up the words and seal the Book even to the time of
the end. This command to Daniel to seal the Book is a kind of prediction that
the Book will not be unsealed as to the aforesaid Visions, till the Time of the
End, that is, till the last times or the time of the Roman Monarchy, for that
is the fourth and last Monarchy. But then in that time, Many shall run to and
fro, that is, be inquisitive and hunt after Truth. And knowledge shall be
increased, that is, They shall not altogether hunt in vain, but many shall find
the Truth and understand the coming of Christ by the help of the Prophecies of
this Book when he shall appear, as also in the latter part of these last Times
the coming likewise of Antichrist, Which is chiefly here aimed at, when
knowledge shall most of all abound, as it has very much this last age or two.

5. Then I Daniel looked and behold! there stood other two, Angels suppose in
the shape of men, The one on this side of the bank of the River, viz. of
Hiddekel or Tigris, chapter 10. 4. And the ^ther on that side of the bank of the
River. These two Angels signify two Presidentiary Angels of two Kingdoms or
Empires, and St. Jerome makes them the Presidentiary Angels of Greece and
Persia; Alcazar of Syria and Egypt. But this is out of Inadvertency to what
times this part of the Prophecy reaches, which is to the times (...) the Roman
Empire and Ma^^metan. Whence we may reasonably collect, that as there has been
mention made of the Presidentiary Angels of Persia and Grecia, chapter 10. and also
of Iudaea, so these two Angels are brought in as the Presidentiary Angels of
those Kingdoms or Empires that this part of the Prophecy reaches to, namely the
Presidentiary Angels of the Roman and Mohammedan Empire.

6. And one said to the man clothed in linen which was upon the waters of the
River, viz. to the man described chapter 10. 5. namely to Palmoni or Christ
himself. How long shall it be to the end of these wonders, that is, How long
shall these wonderful things that have been here foretold continue?

7. And I heard the man clothed in linen, viz. him that is described chapter 10. 5.
and whose description is somewhat like that of Christ Apoc. 1. V. 13, 14, etc.
and that in chapter 10. 1. Which was upon the waters of the River, but Apoc. 10. 2.
is said to set his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the earth. When
he held up his right hand and his left hand unto Heaven, As the Angel Apoc. 10.
5. is said to lift up his hand to Heaven, which is the posture of them that
swear. And swear by him that lives for ever, That it shall be for a Time and
Times and half a Time: namely, Those more mavelous things especially foretold
of that King of Pride chapter 11. v. 36, 37, 38. that they should continue so long,
about three Prophetical years and an half, or forty two Prophetical months, as
the Apocalypse expresses it, which is the time also of the little Horn with
eyes, Dan. 7. 25. who is the same with this King of Pride. And when he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, that is, After the
dispersion of the holy people the Jews shall be ended, which will be under the
first Thunder, about the sixth and seventh Vials. All these things shall be
finished. All these mavelous things even to the first and second Resurrection
when there shall be no more time upon Earth, according to the oath of that
Angel Apoc. 10. 6, 7. which answers to this. For it is about the same thing, as
the Persons are the same, and therefore the time the same. But the Oath of that
Apocalyptick Angel is. That there shall be no more time saving in the days of
the voice of the seventh Angel when he shall sound and the mystery of God be
finished, that is, Upon the expiration of the Time and Times and half a Time,
there shall be no more time on Earth or series of things there, save what are
contained within the seventh Trumpet or seven Thunders. Within the expiration
of that time and the Time and Times and half a Time, all these things, as the
Angel tells Daniel, shall be finished. So excellent a key is the Apocalypse to
this passage of Daniel.

8. And I heard but I understood not, namely where to pitch these Time and
Times and half a Time, or where the latter part of the Times of the End which
is the Time of the fourth Monarchy, is supposed to be. Then said I, O my Lord.
He speaks to the man clothed in linen upon the waters with this reverence and
respect as being the same Angel described chapter 10. which I there showed to be
Christ. What shall be the end of these things? The Hebrew has it (...), What
the latter part of those? whether Times, or things transacted in those Times?

9. And he said, Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed
till the time of the End. Which Time of the End here has a more restrict
signification, it being an answer to (...) What the latter part of those Times?
Which latter part the Apostle calls (...), the latter Times of these last. And
therefore is as much as if the Angel had said, The Vision touching these Time
and Times and half a Time is sealed up or concealed till the being of those
very Times, which are the Times of the End in the more strict sense. In which
Time of the End or Time and Times and half a Time, which is the Time of the
Apocalyptick Whore and Beast and the Little Horn with Eyes which wars against
the Saints, it is said here likewise, that

10. Many shall be purified and made white and tried, viz. In the furnace of
affliction and persecution under the Whore and the Beast or little Horn with
eyes or under the above described King of Pride the very Antichrist. But the
wicked shall do wickedly, that is, shall persist in their gross Idolatries and
sensual lewdnesses and all manner of wickednesses, of Pride and Avarice, and
persecution of the pure Apostolic Christians. And none of the wicked shall
understand, that is, None of the followers of Antichrist and immersed in the
foul Idolatries and gross Sensualities, or blinded with the deceitful
Hypocrisies of that Antichristian Synagogue, None of these, or others as
carnally or worldly minded as they, shall understand either these Visions of
Daniel or those of the Apocalypse which tend to the same scope. But the wise
shall understand, viz. Those that the fear of God has made so, which is the
beginning of all true Wisdom. These will prove competent Judges of the true
sense of these Prophecies: And will not be such fools as to expect light from
the ancient Fathers for the understanding of them, whenas it is expressly
declared that the^ are closed up and sealed till the latter Times. And then
those that are truly wise will understand them, as it is further intimated by
what follows that it will not be till then. And it is an hint and a
sufficiently certain though something obscure subindication, (...), what are
the latter Times of the last? or the Times of the Reign of Antichrist? This
intimation I say that follows is sufficient.

11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away and the
Abomination that malieth desolate set up, The same that is mentioned and in the
^ame words chapter 11. 31. in this very prophecy of the Scripture of Truth. There
shall be a Thousand two hundred and ninety Prophetical days, or eighty six
Roman Indictions, such as not only the Emperors but the Popes of Rome make
use of in their Decrees and are peculiar to the Roman State. In the latter part
of the last Times at the end of this number will that King of Pride above
described Chapter 11. v. 36, 37, etc. be revealed, namely, in the year of Christ
1120. * Then will this Antichrist by a public writing be exhibited or set out
to the world in his colors, that all may ^ee him that are not wilfully blind.

12. Blessed is he that waits and comes to the thousand three hundred and
five and thirty days, that is, years as before, or 89 Indictions. Blessed are
they that come to this Time, for they will have the opportunity of not only
knowing Antichrist but of suffering Martyrdom by opposing of him, and
witnessing against him in behalf of Christ and his true Church. This number
therefore thus augmented by three Indictions, viz. by forty five years, reaches
to the Time of the Waldenses and the beginning of their persecutions, viz. to
the year 1160. Which continued upon them so long and with that cruelty, that
many hundred thousands of them lost their lives in witnessing to the truth of
Christ against the Deceits, Impostures, Idolatries, and barbarous and
tyrannical Pride and cruelty of the Roman Antichrist: And so became Martyrs for
Christ, and purchased to themselves the privilege of Martyrs, which is the
privilege of having their share in the first Resurrection. Whence it is said,
Blessed is he that waits and comes to the Thousand three hundred and five
and thirty days. For Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection, on such the second death has no power, Apoc. 20. 6. These
numbers therefore served for the pointing out the Times of Antichrist to them
that should be born in those Times, though Daniel understood nothing by them;
and therefore the Angel says.

13. But go thou thy way till the end be. Which Translation is somewhat hard
and obscure, Vatablus his Interpretation seems more natural to me, who
interprets (...), not imperatively, but in a future ^ense, as is often in the
Hebrew. Tu autem vades ad ^inem tuum, But thou shall come to thine End, that
is, Thou ^halt dye, long before these things come to pass or be understood. And
thou shall rest, in an happy, peaceful and secure condition, as it is said,
The Souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment
touch them, Wisd. 3. 1. And stand in thy lot at the end of the days, that is,
At the Resurrection of the just, and because it is (...), in thy lot, it may
intimate some peculiar lot Proper to him, and such as he, that is, Martyrs: for
he was as good as actually Martyred, he exposing himself fully to the fury of
the Lions, rather than he would obey that wicked and impious Decree that his
enemies had got to entrap him with, from the mouth of Darius. His lot therefore
seems to be with those that partake of the first Resurrection, which happens
under the last Trumpet, as well as the last Resurrection does, and therefore
may well enough be said to be at the End of the days, that is, of Times,
namely, to be in the last share of them, under the seventh Trumpet, beyond
which the Angel swears there shall be no more Time upon Earth, Apoc. 10.

NOTES Upon VISION VI. Contin. Ver. II.
This Prophecy of the Time of the Revelation of Antichrist is so remarkable,
that it is worth our pains briefly here to consider the certainty thereof.
First then these Numbers 1290 days and 1335 days cannot be understood of days
so as to be applied, the former of them to the time from the pollution of the
Temple by Antiochus Epiphanes unto the Grant to the Jews, of living according
to their own laws, 2 Macc. 11. 27. the latter to the time from the same Epoch
to Antiochus his death, as Mr Mede has unanswerably demonstrated in his De
Numeris Danielis, against Broughton and Iunius. Whence it will necessarily
follow that these 1290 and 1335 days are indeed so many Prophetical days, that
is, years, as they are in this Book of Daniel naturally to signify, unless some
intimation be given to the contrary, as I have noted above in due place; and
that this obvious Prophetical signification of days suits very well with this
Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, and takes nothing from its clearness and
plainness, nay indeed there being here given no intimation to the contrary (as
there is in other places of Daniel where days do not signify Prophetical days)
it is no slight but rather demonstrative argument that they do signify
Prophetical days here, that is, that they are so many years.

Whence it will follow that if we can but light upon a fit Epoch to fix them
to, the Time of the strange wonders, or the time of the Time and Times and half
a Time (which the Ancients universally understood of the Reign of Antichrist)
will be discovered, and consequently that Antichrist is already come, according
to the very suffrage of the Fathers. And truly unless we will wilfully wink
against it, the Epoch to which these numbers are to be fixed is evidently
declared by the Angel, namely, the Time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken
away and the Abomination that makes desolate be set up, which is spoke of in
this very Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth, Chapter 11. 31. Where touching
Antiochus and his Ministers it is said, They shall take away the daily
Sacrifice, and shall place the Abomination that makes desolate. What can be
more assured, and more handsome, than that the Epoch of the Number that points
to the Times of Antichrist, should be fixed to the foulest Times of his Type,
Antiochus Epiphanes?

But it is further to be noted that this Epoch, this (...), the Transgression
that makes desolate, as it is called Dan. 8. 13. is of some latitude, above
six years space. The bounds of which space Grotius seems with judgment to
define thus, upon Dan. 8. 13. This Time, says he, of about six years begins
from the first coming of Antiochus into Iudaea when the Priesthood was
profaned, and it comprehends his second coming the forbidding of the Jewish
Rites, the placing of the Idol in the Temple and the whole Time of the
intermission of the daily Sacrifice. And upon Chapter 11. 28. This is the first
coming, says he, of Antiochus into Iudaea, when he disposed as he pleased of
the High Priesthood. Whence I think we may safely set those bounds of
Profanation or the Transgression that makes desolate, so as to place their
beginning in the 141. year of the Seleucidae, and their ending in the 148. For
in the former year Menelaus by large bribes and much flattery obtained the High
Priestood of Antiochus, and thrust out Jason. Quod erat proximum initium
miseriarum Iudaeae sub Antiocho Epiphane, says Thomas Lydiat. And in the latter
Antiochus Epiphanes died, and Antiochus Eupator his successor granted an (...)
to the Jews, ^ liberty of living acording to their own laws, viz. according to
the Holy Covenant or Law of Moses.

And therefore this Epoch being so large as comprehending the space of above
six years, it is the less likely that the ending pointed precisely to a year,
when this discovery of the times of Antichrist should be. But both the Numbers
consisting absolutely and completely of Quindenaries or Indictions, that this
was not only an intimation that the Numbers reached into the Times of the
Roman Empire since the beginning of their computation by Indictions, but that
we may also compute this distance of Time by Quindenaries or Indictions. As if
he should say, After 86 Quindenaries, or 89 Quindenaries, or before the 87th or
the 90th be expired, such things touching Antichrist will be clearly
understood, and it will be manifest and plain that those be the Times of
Antichrist, and that we are not then to expect an Antichrist to come, but may
be sure he is come already; And if it were but thus, it were sufficient.

But Mr. Mede taking the middle of the Time of the Transgression that makes
desolate, which is the year before Christ 167. the Time of the first Number
will expire, says he, A. D. 1123, the Time of the latter A. D. 1168. But
forasmuch as there is a latitude in the Epoch, we may begin the reckoning from
every year thereof, and therefore beginning at the first of the six, the first
Number will expire A. D. 1120. in which very year was there a Book published
which did plainly declare the Apostasy of the Church of Rome, and that the Pope
was Antichrist. And the very Date thereof is set in the Title page A. D. 1120.
as you may see in Paul Perrin's History of the Waldenses. This is very
accurate, though I confess I think it sufficient that this happened in the last
Quindenarie of the first Number. For neither were the 2300 Evening-mornings
intended to predict to a day, but to be collected into years, as these Numbers
into Indictions or Q^indenaries. This Book with this date of A. D. 1120. by
Paul Perrin is reckoned among the Books of the Waldenses, of whose holiness and
sincere Christianity I cannot but recite that Testimony which Mr. Mede has
noted out of Bern^ardus, who in the midst of his inveighing against t hem for
being enemies to the Pope, yet he could not but allow them this character. Whom
notwithstanding, says he, if you ask them concerning their faith, there is
nothing more Christian, if you consider their conversation, there is nothing
more irreprehensible, and they make good their words by their deeds. Who would
know more of these excellent Christians, let him read Paul Perrin.

And thus admirably is the Prophetic purpose of this first Number fulfilled in
the publishing of that Book of the Waldenses A. D. 1120. and within the last
Quindenarie of that Number. And it is remarkable how in that Age, yea less than
twenty years before the publishing of that Book, all the world was in
expectation of Antichrist's being revealed, insomuch that Pope Pas^hal himself,
when he intended for Gallia Cisalpina, stopped his journey at Florence, being
struck with the greatness of the rumor, which was understood of such an
Antichrist as the ancient Fathers fancied to themselves, and the Romanists
would seem to believe. Which circumstance was not without a Providence, that it
might be more remarkably impressed upon the capable, who it is that is indeed the
true Antichrist, to whom that Title so often used by the Fathers, does of right
belong.

But now for the other Number, the fulfilling of its* Prophetical Indication is
also admirable. For not precisely tying our selves to the year 1168. by taking
the middle of the six years of the Transgression that* makes desolate for our
Epoch; betwixt the year 1160. and 1170, and if another Quindenarie were added
to it, it would break no squares, provided that things happen within that
Quindenarie, upon this Revelation of Antichrist innumerable multitudes of men
were awakened as with a Trumpet into the ancient Apostolic Faith, whom they
called Waldenses and Albigenses and by other names, but they called themselves
Apostolici, who stood so s^outly to the Faith, that no persecutions which
presently ensued could change their minds or make them alter their Profession,
though about ten hundred thousand of them, and that in France alone, were put
to death, if Paulus Perrionius computes right in his History of them. And these
are that faithful Martyr Antipas who was slain in the lofty Pergamus, where
Satan's seat is, as Christ complains in his Epistle to the Church there. And
they having the privilege of Martyrs, who are faithful unto death, it is said
here in Daniel, Blessed is he that waits and comes to the 1335 days. But
this I have noted already in my Exposition.

I will only add one note more, what a childish thing it is or worse, to have
recourse to the ancient Fathers for a certain and distinct knowledge of these
Prophecies of Daniel (and there is the same reason for those of the Apocalypse)
whenas it is thus expressly signified in Daniel, that these mysteries touching
Antichrist would be sealed up till the time of the end, and particularly till
the expiration of the 1290 years from the Profanation of the Temple by
Antiochus, i.e. till about 1100 and odd years after Christ.

That the Times of Antichrist were prefigured and foretold by these and such
like Prophecies, so far the ancient Fathers were right, and so far their
Testimony stands for us; but when those Times would be, or who would prove that
Antichrist, that was left for the faithful to find out by the ass^stance of
Gods Spirit, when the Time of that Revelation by Gods appointment was come,
which was about the Time of the beginning of the Waldenses and Albigenses.

But to deny the People of God the assistance of his Spirit, to keep up the
credit of the Fathers and the Authority of the Church, as if we could be
assured of nothing unless they tell us it is so* is the very dregs of
Antichristianism, and the very Pit of slime and spawn out of which Antichrist
did arise, and though men do not so easily observe it, a bidding defiance to
our very Baptism, whereby we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. Which is not to make a mere dry profession of the Triunity of the
Godhead, but to remind us what a lively faith we ought to have in the Son, for
his ^ending the Spirit from his Father, according to promise, to sanctify us,
to strengthen us, and illuminate us, and to carry us on in the process of real
Regeneration, in which we shall attain to eyes as well as heart, hands and
feet, whereby we shall be certainly able to discern Christ from Antichrist, and
true Prophets from Impostours. And it is no small piece of Imposture in the
little Horn, that he will permit no other Horns to see besides himself, or with
no other eyes but his.

THE Threefold APPENDAGE To the Prophecies* or Divine Uisions of DANIEL.
The First. A Confutation of the opinion of Hugo Grotius, who makes the
Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae the fourth Kingdom in Daniel. The
Second. The Authors Apology for his placing the seven Vials within the
seventh Trumpet, after the Ri^ing of the Witnesses, contrary to the opinion of
Mr. M^de, as also for his making the three days and an half wherein the
witnesses lie dead, the same with Daniel's three Times and an half. The Third.
His twenty Arguments whereby he does prove that the seven Epistles to the seven
Churches are a Pr^phecy of the State of the Church cast into seven Inter^^ls
from the beginning thereof to the last Iudgme^^.
A Confutation of the Opinion of Hugo Grotius, who makes the Kingdom of the
Lagidae and Seleucidae the fourth Kingdom in Daniel, taken out of Synops.
Prophet. Book 2.
Chapter XIII.
1. THAT Prophecy also in Daniel of the Little Horn that is said to change
times and laws, is an express Prediction of that Antichristian Opposition which
is against the Regal Office of Christ. For that this Little Horn is the same
with the Two-horned Beast, or the Whore in the Apocalypse, I think no man will
scruple that considers that this Horn is part of the Roman Kingdom, which is
decyphered by Ten Horns, and that it belongs to that time when the Kingdom is
actually Ten-horned; which is not in Succession, but together; as the Ten^toes
of the Statue, which answer to these Ten Horns, do not ^ignify the Succession
of Ten Kings, but Ten Kings ranked in the same time, as the Toes of the feet of
the Image, which have not properly a precedence, but rather a co-ordination in
Site.

2. Now tha^ the Fourth Kingdom which is prefigured by the Iron^legs, feet and
ten toes of the Image, and by the Beast with iron Teeth and ten Horns, is not
that of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, as Grotius would have it, but the Kingdom
of the Romans, there are these weighty Reasons to convince us.

First, It is the universal sense of all Ecclesiastic. Writ^rs, That the
Fourth Beast is the Roman Empire; as both Cornelius a Lapide, and Gasper
Sanctius, both of them Jesuits, yet do roundly assert. The words of the latter
are these: Est ergo omnium sententia innominata haec atque horribilis Bellua,
Romanum Imperium; neque necesse est quenquam nomi^are, cum nemo non dicat.

3. Secondly, that it cannot be the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, as
Grotius would bear us in hand, (in which odd conceit of his he forsakes the
judgment of the whole Church of Christ, to follow Porphyrius his, who was a
sworn Enemy to the Christian Religion) appears from what is said Daniel 7. 23.
The Fourth Beast shall be the Fourth Kingdom upon Earth, (...) Qu^d majus erit
omnibus regni^, Which shall be greater than all Kingdoms; so the Vulgar Latin
and Vatablus. The Seventy also render it, (...). And it agrees best with what
follows, and shall devour the whole Earth, (which must be understood in such a
sense as Earth was before) and shall tread it down and break it in pieces.
Which it could not be said to do, unless it were so great a Kingdom as is here
intimated. Now it is manifest that the Kingdom of the Seleucidae and Lagidae *
was neither greater, more excellent, nor a more victorious Kingdom than any of
the three preceding, namely, the Babylonian, Persian and that of Alexander the
Great, from whose Kingdom they would make this of the Lagidae and Seleucidae
distinct. Wherefore their Kingdom cannot be this Fourth.

This Inference is so plain to Gasper Sanctius, that he does, though but
justly, yet very severely, chastise Porphyrius for this Error, which Grotius
has so unluckily taken up. For he breaks out into these words upon this Text,
Vide Porphyrii stuporem and oscitantiam, in cujus mentem venire potuit ^ut
existimaverit regnum eorum, qui Alexandro successere, omnium esse maximum,
quodque omnem terram sibi subjecerit conculcaveritque, cum reliquis regnis
long fuerit infirmius, and ab omnibus concisum out male vexatum. Nay, the very
Prophecy it self makes the Kingdom of the Successors of Alexander less than
his in power and greatness, Dan. 8. 22. where it is said that Four Kingdoms
shall stand up, but not in the power of Alexander: Which is, they shall be
in^eriour to him. Which questionless is meant of them jointly, it being a
needless intimation of them single.

4. Thirdly, The Kingdom of the Iron legs and toes and of the Ten horned Beast
with Iron teeth are one and the same Kingdom, according to Grotius his own
acknowledgment, which he makes that of the Seleucidoe and Lagidae. Now it is
said that, a Stone cut out of a Mountain without hands should break in pieces
these legs and toes, nay the whole Image o^ Iron, Brass, Silver and Gold, and
so succeed this Kingdom of the Seleucidae according to his sense o^ the Vision.
And Chapter 7. One like the Son of man in the Clouds of Heaven comes to receive a
Kingdom, namely, upon the destruction of Antiochus Epiphan^s, that little Horn
amongst the ten in this fourth Kingdom of Grotius his framing, of whom it is
said, at the 21 verse, I beheld and the same Horn made war with the Saints, and
prevailed against them, until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given
to the Saints of the most High. Which is the same with the Son of Man his
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, to receive the Kingdom of the Ancient of days,
verse. 13. And both agree with the Stone cut out without hands, to show it is
not the work of man, but of the Antie^^ of days, God himself; and that this is
indeed the very Kingdom of Christ, as Interpreters ever have expounded it.
Which is a perfect contradiction to Grotius his Dream, That the fourth Beast
with Iron Teeth and the Iron legs of the Image denote the Kingdom of the
Lagidoe and Seleucidae, and that Antiochus is this little Horn.

* For Antiochus Epiphanes was dead almost two hundred years before Christ so
much as preached the Doctrine of the Kingdom, or had any Disciples to follow
him; and yet it is said Dan. 2. 44. And in the days of these Kingdoms shall the
God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed. (From which
passage I doubt not but that phrase [The Kingdom of God,] as also from that
above [The Kingdom of Heaven] does so often occur in the Gospel, as also that
Title which Christ so often gives himself of the Son of man. And Grotius
himself upon Matthew 8. 20. acknowledges that (...) the Son of man mentioned
Dan. 7. 13. is to be understood of the Messiah) Wherefore it is impossible that
the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae should be the fourth Kingdom.

5. But here Grotius, contrary to his judgment when he wrote upon Matthew, has
found a device which is scarce to be uttered without horror and astonishment.
So that I am infinitely amazed, that a man otherwise so learned and laudable,
(as he speaks of Porphyrius) should be misled into so bad an adventure. The
Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, according to him, is Populus Romanus
nullum intra se habens Regem. When our Savior Christ intimated to the High
Priest, that he was that Son of man that should come in the Clouds of Heaven,
it seemed so high an Arrogation, that he rent his clothes and said he had
spoken Blasphemy. And truly I think that neither Jew nor Christian can well
acquit Grotius of that crime, who attributes that which is the peculiar
character of the Messiah to a Profane and Pagan people, and that forsooth
because they had no King, as if they were ever the better for that. But they
had Kings at first, and both in the Infancy of their Empire and afterward they
had a Supreme Power so great and Imperial, as may excuse them from the least
show of contempt. They had always over them a Sovereignty, so that they could
not be deemed the Son of man for any such private condition. For the Summa
Potestas is the Summa Potestas under what name or form soever, and of the same
real grandeur. Besides that, they were a most glorious and victorious people
before Antiochus his time. So that it is a very dilute and sapless conceit of
Grotius to apply the Phrase of the Son of man to them for any
inconsiderableness in them or obscurity: For they were not so in the times of
Antiochus.

6. Again, The Kingdom of the Son of man and the Stone cut out without hands
are all one, both in truth and according to Grotius his own concession. But
this Stone, is Christ and his Kingdom, as being Heavenly, (...), a thing
erected not by human power, but by the power and Spirit of God. That this is
the meaning of [without hands] is the general vote of Interpreters, S. Ierom,
Irenaeus, Justin, Epiphanius, S. Augustine, Theodoret, and several others.

Where think you does Grotius take shelter now? Why, This Figure which is so
appropriate to Christ, and mentioned of him so often in the New Testament, This
Stone must be cast away as if it were neither precious nor a Cornerstone, and
be bestowed again on a Pagan people the Romans. For so Grotius does not stick
to profess, Idem Lapis and Filius hominis; and he made the Son of man before
the people of Rome. But can a man believe that the Original or success of that
people was (...), a thing brought to pass by the special power and Spirit of
God, and not more humano, according to the usual course of the World, and that
not of the best kind, their beginnings being helped on by a rabble of Ruffians
and Robbers?

7. No, but that is not Grotius his gloss, you will ^ay. Let us therefore hear
what it is; Lapis abscissus de Monte sine ma^ibus, according to him, is
Exercitus populi qui suae esset spontis nullique Regi pareret, cuj^s populi
origo a Monte, nempe Palatino. In which there is nothing sound nor solid. For
was this Roman Army any thing more suae spontis in, that they had not a Kingly
Government at Rome? That supreme Power of Consuls and Senators was as
directive and coactive as if it had been Regal. So that the motion of this Army
was never the more spontaneous for this. Again, The Stone cut from the Mountain
without hands, implies that it was then spontaneously divided from the
Mountain, when it is said to be cut thence: But when the Romans first issued
from Mount Palatine, yea so soon as they were Populus Romanus, Regal Government
was amongst them, it being the first Government of this people, and therefore
they were not then Populus suae spontis, according to Grotius his own conceit,
so that he cannot bring both ends together. And lastly, To interpret Mountain
here in a litteral sense, is unskilfully done, and not according to the analogy
of the Prophetic Style, nor the very intimation of the present Text, which
says the little Stone became a great Mountain it self, and filled the whole
Earth. Wherefore this Mountain signifying not literally but politically, there
is no question but the other does so too, and that the Stone is in some sense
homogeneal to this rocky Mountain.

Whence the sense is plainly this: That out of the great Mountain, that is, the
Roman Empire, there should be a people raised, not by human power or policy,
but by the Spirit of God, and the preaching of the Gospel by Jesus Christ, and
his Apostles, which should be a peculiar people to him, and becom^ the Subjects
of his Kingdom; that is to say, That the Church of Christ should be cut out of
the Roman Empire without human help. This is a most easy and undistorted sense,
and against which there cannot be made the least exception.

8. Fourthly, which I have already intimated above, The Ten Horns of the Fourth
Beast with Iron Teeth, and the Ten Toes of the Iron Legs of the Statue, signify
the same thing. Wherefore it is plain, since the Ten Toes imply a Coexistence of
the Ten Horns, by reason of the coordination of their Site, that there must be
Ten Kings together in the Fourth Kingdom. But in the Kingdom of the
Seleucidae and Lagidae there were not Ten Kings together all at once. Therefore
that Kingdom is not the Fourth.

9. Fifthly, Antiochus Epiphanes, part of this Kingdom of the Lagidae and
Seleucidae, is said to ri^e up in the latter time of the Kingdom of the
successors of Alexander, Dan. 8. 22, 23. Wherefore this Kingdom of the
Lagidae and Seleucidae has expired near two thousand years ago. But the
Kingdom of the Fourth Beast reaches even to the day of Judgment. Dan. 7. 9,
10. And I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did
sit -- His Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burni^g fire. A
fiery stream issued and came forth from before him, thousand thousands
ministered unto him; and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; * the
Judgment was set, and the Books were opened, etc. That this is the description
of the day of Judgment is the general opinion of both Christians and Jews, and
answers exactly to the lake of Fire and the opening of the Books, Apoc. 20.
which Grotius himself does interpret of the last day. Whence we may safely
conclude that the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae is not the Fourth
Kingdom, as having ceased so long before that time, though we understood the
day of Judgment in the sense of the Rabbis (...) According to which the
meaning of [I beheld till the Thrones were set -- and the Books were opened] is
this, that the Prophet Daniel had a prospect even to the utmost end of that
great day. But he begins more particularly at the beginning of that day in the
eleventh verse. But this I have only noted by the by.

10. Sixthly and lastly, Alexander's Kingdom and that of his Successors is
all one Kingdom: But that of Alexander's is the third according to Grotius his
own concession. Now that that of his Successors (of which Line are the Lagidae
and Seleucidae) is one Kingdom with that of Alexander's, is evident out of
Daniel, Chapter 8. 21. The rough Goat is the King of Graecia, and the great Horn
that is bet^ixt his eyes, is the first King. Now that being broken whereas Four
stood up for it, Four Kingdoms shall stand up out of the Nation, but not in
his Power. This is one plain proof that the Kingdom of Alexander and his
Successors is all one Kingdom. For he calls Alexander the first King, which
necessarily implies that his Successors are the second, and that therefore
they all belong to one and the same Kingdom. Nay he says plainly, that these
Four Horns stand up for that great one, that is, in his stead. What is this but
to succeed in place of him, as the Heads of one and the same Empire? For no new
Beast is said to succeed this Beast, but the Horns the Horn. And then the
comparing of them and saying, But not in his power, farther intimates a
cognation and succession of one Line, and that he does no^ speak of the Heads
of two different Kingdoms.

Which appears farther from verse. 8. Therefore the Goat waxed very great, and
when he was strong, the great Horn was broken, and for it came up four notable
ones toward the four winds of Heaven. But where should these come up, but on
that Head that had lost this great Horn, which is compensated with four lesser
ones, * though in their kind notable? For it is very incongruous and
extravagant to fansy* them to come up in any other. And surely if they had
belonged to any other Beast, that Beast would not fail to have been named.
Wherefore they must either grow out of this Goat's Head, or no where, unless
out of the ground; which is ridiculous. And therefore it is plain, that
Alexanders Kingdom and that of his Successors is but one Kingdom. For that
Goat is but one and the same Goat under the Succession of this variety of Horns.

11. And yet there is still greater evidence of this truth from Chapter 7. 6. After
which I beheld and lo, another like a Leopard, which had upon the back of it
four Wings of a fowl, the beast had also four Heads, and Domini^n was given
unto it. That the four Heads of this Beast are the four Successors of
Alexander, * namely, Perdicca, Seleucus, Ptolemaeus, Meleager, Grotius himself
does frankly confess. The Wings therefore denote the four Kingdoms Alexander's
Empire was divided into, after his decease; which is still looked upon as one
Beast notwithstanding, as the Roman is with its division into ten Kingdoms,
noted by ten Horns, or into Oriental and Occidental, figured by the two Wings
of an Eagle.

Here Grotius, if he would speak out, would make Alexander the Beast, as he has
Domitian and others in the Apocalypse against all the Laws of Prophetic
Interpretation, nay indeed against all rhyme and reason. For he glosses thus,
Pardus vari^m Animal, ^ic Alexander moribus variis. But how grossly incongruous
it is, let any one consider. For then would Alexander be inferior to his four
chief Officers, and they would be the Head of him, which is a Political
Absurdity; nay the Head of him when he ceased to be, which is an Absurdity
Metaphysical. Wherefore Alexander is the first Head or great Horn of this
Beast, not the Body of it, that he may be superior to his four grand Officers;
and not be the Beast to bear these ^our Horns or Heads, when he had quite
ceased to be on this stage of things. For these were not Heads nor Horns,
before he was dead. Alexander therefore is the first of the Succession of the
Heads or Horns of this Beast, not the Beast it self.

But to come up closer to our business: I say, it is very manifest from these
^our Heads and four Wings that this Leopard is said to have, that the Third
Kingdom takes into it the four first Successors of Alexander. Nothing can be
more plain than this from the very Text. For the Leopard is described in the
third place, and immediately after him the Fourth Beast is mentioned, and
called the Fourth, v. 7. Wherefore this four-headed Leopard is plainly the
Third Beast. But now that the Succession of these four Heads even to Antiochus
Epiphanes is the Succession of one and the same Kingdom, is plain from Chapter 8.
22. Now that being broken, (namely the great Horn) whereas Four stood up for
it, Four Kingdoms shall stand up out of the Nation, but not in his power. And
in the latter time of their Kingdom (the Original has it, (...), which the
Seventy render (...), which is the very same with our English, and there is no
doubt of the Translation) a King of fierce countenance -- shall stand up. Which
Grotius and every one acknowledges to be Antiochus Epiphanes.

Whence it is evident that the whole Succession of Alexander's Captains from
the first four inclusively even to Antiochus his time, is one Succession and
one Kingdom. For he calls the times of Antiochus the last times of their
Kingdom.

Wherefore it is plain, seeing that the Kingdom of Alexander is one and the
same with the Kingdom of the four Captains (for that is the Third Kingdom)
and the Kingdom of the four Captains the same with their Succession even to
Antiochus his time; that the whole Succession from Alexander to Antiochus is
one Succession and one Kingdom. If this be not demonstratively true, there is
no demonstration in Mathematics* But if this be true, the Kingdom of the
Lagidae and Seleucidae are not the Fourth Kingdom, but the Kingdom of the
R^mans, according as all sober men have hitherto held.

12. Which we being so firmly assured of* we shall easily know where to seek
for this little Horn that is said to change times and laws. For where can we
find it but amongst those many Horns in the Roman Kingdom or Empire? not in
the Greek, to which Antiochus Epiphanes appertains. And we have already plainly
shown * that the Apocalyptick Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns is this
Roman Kingdom; and that this Beast once healed, or in such a condition, that
it may be said of him that he is the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is,
(which is when he is become Pagano Christian) is this Empire actually divided
into ten Kingdoms, and that together with this Division the Empire began to
relapse gradually into Idolatry by the Agency and Guidance of the Two-horned
Beast or the Whore, whom I have also showed to be Synchronal to the healed
Beast, or the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

13. But the Beast restored or healed, his duration is 42 months, which is 1260
days, or a Time and Times and half a Time. For the abode of the Woman in the
Wilderness is indifferently expressed by either of these latter; and the first
and the second are joined together in the Vision of the Outward Court and the
Two Witnesses. Wherefore 42 months and a Time and Times and half a Time, being
the same with 1260 days, they are the same one with another. But this little
Horn in Daniel we speak of, his Reign is also set out by a Time and Times and
half a Time: Therefore it is of the same duration with the Whore or Two-horned
Beast, which is Synchronal to the Beast restored, whose continuance is 42.
months.

Wherefore it is a strong suspicion that there is a Coincidence at least of
time, if not of affairs, or complication of natures (if not Identity of some)
betwixt this little Horn in Daniel and those three Synchronals, the restored
Beast, the Whore and the Two-horned Beast. For that expression Dan. 7. 24. And
another shall rise after them, does not at all hinder, since the Seventy
translate (...), behind them, * it signifying order of situation as well as of
time. And this being placed behind is the most convenient posture for such an
exploit as is attributed to this Horn, which is said to throw down or humble
three Kings: which is more by treachery and craft than open force.

14. Now from this equality of time it will also follow * that the duration of
this little Horn is 1260 years by the last Confectary of our joint Exposition.
Which again shows how impossible it is this Horn should be Antiochus Epiphanes.
To which you may add that it is said to be different from the rest of the
Horns, in the explication of them. * And the ten Horns out of this Kingdom
(that is, the Roman Kingdom, as has been demonstrated) are ten Kings that
shall arise; and another shall rise (...) behind them, and he shall be diverse
from the rest, and he shall subdue three Kings. Now I demand what one of the
ten Kings or Kingdoms is so different from all the rest, unless it be an
Ecclesiastical Kingdom.

Wherefore the Coincidence of time with the Pagano^Christian Empire, and the
long continuance, as also the difference of this Kingdom from the other ten,
is more than a strong suspicion that it is part of the succession of a Kingdom
Ecclesiastic, which is necessarily to run along with the Empire professing
Christianity. But if the question be whether this part of this Ecclesiastic
Kingdom be the uncorrupted Kingdom of Christ or the Reign of Antichrist, the
solution is not difficult. For that it is not the Kingdom of Christ, is plain,
in that Christ is said to come to burn and consume it. Whence it is manifest
that the Church has not been out in their Conjecture in deeming this little
Horn to be Antichrist; and therefore say I, the same with the two-horned Beast
and the Whore, who is plainly Isochronal, and I doubt not but Synchronal to
this little Horn, and is adjudged to be burnt in the Apocalypse, as this little
Horn is here in Daniel.

15. To speak briefly therefore, This little Horn is the Idolatrizing Clergy of
the Empire, but more chiefly and particularly that great and notorious part
thereof under the Bishop of Rome, who has been a more than ordinary stickler
for both the obtaining this degenerate Ecclesiastic Empire in the Roman
Empire, and in lapsing and keeping down the Empire in Superstition and
Idolatry; and therefore is rightly said to be an Horn growing out of this
Beast, the Symbol (Beast) it self according to Grotius his own Confession,
intimating Idolatry.

16. And if exquisite fitness of Application will assure us of the right sense
of a Prophecy, we cannot fail in this, examining every character of this little
Horn. For as it is little, so is the Original of the Popes mean and obscure,
and their Secular Principality small in comparison of those Princes they have
contested with. Again, As this Horn had the Eyes of a man, so it is well known
that for politic quicksightedness there has not been any Body of men
comparable to the Roman Hierarchy; insomuch that it is Proverbial to say, That
the Roman Religion is nothing else but a mere trick of Policy to increase and
keep up the honor, power, and wealth of the Pope and his Clergy. See Sir Edwyn
Sandys his Speculum Europae, and you shall find this part of the Prophecy
fulfilled to admiration, and that it is not for nothing that this little Horn
is said to have the Eyes of a man in it, which is said of no Horn in all the
Prophecies besides this. Thirdly, As this Horn is said to have a mouth speaking
great things, whether you mean thereby boasting of its own Sovereignty or
Blaspheming, it is well known that from this Horn are uttered such words as
imply the Pope greater than all Princes and Emperors, nay, that he is not
only said to be Infallible * but styled God, and declared worthy of Divine
Worship. Fourthly, For the humbling and subduing three Kings, which this Horn
is foretold to do, is it not long since performed by the Pope of Rome, in his
usage of Leo Isaurus, in his ruining the Kingdom of the Lombards to get to
himself the Exarchate of Ravenna, And in tormenting and disquieting Henry the
Fourth and his Successors with his Thunderclaps and mischievous Political
Plots, till he wrested from them all their Right and Jurisdiction in Italy?

17. Fifthly, and to come nearer to our purpose in hand; Whereas it is said
that he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the
Saints of the most High, and think to change Times and Laws; and they shall be
given into his hand for a Time and Times and half a Time: I say, This
Idolatrous Clergy has bid fair toward the fulfilling this Period of times
already; the Degeneracy of the Church beginning about four hundred years after
Christ, and (which is more considerable) they having received so notorious a
Check in the Decursion of this Half-Time, which is elsewhere called a Half-Day,
in which his swaggering is pretty well diminished and chastised. Sixthly, And
for his wearing out, and consuming the Saints of the most High, he has done it
even more bloudily and cruelly than the very Pagans on the Primitive
Christians; which is the most furious Opposition against the Regality of Christ
that can be imagined, thus to waste and destroy his true Subjects. Seventhly,
And for his speaking great words against the most High, that is, against the
Divine Sovereignty, is it not plainly done in the Pope's pretenses of having
power to dispense with or lay aside the Laws and Injunctions of Christ, of
which we have given several Instances in our Idea of Antichristianism, and such
as are notoriously well known to appertain to that Church? Besides that he is
Reus laesae Divinae Majestatis in appointing Religious worship to his canonized
Saints, which is an Honor due to God alone. Lastly, In that he is said to
change Times and Laws; what innumerable Institutes are there of the Pope's
injoyning, of which may be truly said what our Savior told the Scribes and
Pharisees, (...), From the beginning it was not so? And what is this therefore
but to change Times and Laws, and in many of them in a most perfect Opposition
to the Laws of God and Christ, as I have already noted in its place?

Whence we see plainly that this Antichristian Opposition against the Regal
Office of Christ, is very expressly foretold in this Vision of the little Horn^
which rose up with the ten Horns in the Roman Empire, and did fabricate
Imperium in Imperio, as some phrase it, and became a Two-horned Beast in the
Ten-horned Beast, erecting an Ecclesiastic Antichristian Empire within the
Civil, in opposition to the true Empire or Kingdom of Christ, and in
defeatment of his Power and Laws in the Church; nay, in opposition to those
Immutable Laws of the Eternal Logos that enlightens every man that comes into
the world.

NOTES Upon the Confutation, Sect. 2.
Was neither greater, more excellent, nor a more vi^torious Kingdom, etc. For
they both, viz. the Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Seleucidae put together were
yet but part of Alexander's Kingdom, And for their victories and spoils they
were of one against another, which was a farther weakening of this but part of
the Kingdom of Alexander, which still argues the less excellency of the said
part.

Sect. 4. For Antiochus Epiphanes was dead almost two hundred years before
Christ so much as, etc.] And yet Grotius would have Antiochus Epiphanes the
little Horn upon whose destruction notwithstanding the Ancient of days gives
the Kingdom to the Son of man, Dan. 2. 44. In the days of these Kingdoms, the
fourth and last of which is according to Grotius that of the. Lagidae and
Seleucidae, shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which is the Kingdom of
the Gospel of Christ, whenas the Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Seleucidae were
both of them utterly vanquished and abolished by the Romans before Christ was
born, and at least fifty years before the Gospel of the Kingdom was so much as
preached. So plainly impossible is it that the Kingdom of the Lagidae and
Seleucidae should be the fourth Kingdom.

Sect. 9. The Judgment was set and the Books were opened, etc.] This touches
both upon the final judgment of the little Horn, the only Horn with eyes or
seeing Horn, or if you will, the Seer, the ancient name of a Prophet (for in
old time the Prophets were called Seers) this touches I say both upon the
final judgment of this falsely pretended Seer or Pseudo-Prophet as he is called
in the Apocalypse, ^ Sam. 9. 9.
and on the general Judgment at the last day, when also in the Apocalypse the
Books are said to be opened. But the nearer of these two points, and it must
signify either one or both, are far enough removed from the times of the
Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae, whenas the fourth Kingdom necessarily
is understood, Dan. 7. 9, 10. to reach at least to the first point of that time
of Judgment. Whence it is impossible for the Kingdom of the Lagidae and
Seleucidae to be the fourth Kingdom. This is in short the undeniable force of
the argument.

Sect. 10. Though in their kind notable.] I have observed in my Exposition,
That the four notable Horns that came up are called notable in comparison of
several other Horns, viz. Commanders, that succeeded Alexander in several
lesser Principalities or Satrapies. But those notable ones who they are, we
shall have occasion to note in the next Section.

Sect. 11. Namely Perdicca, Seleucus, Ptolemaeus, Meleager, etc.] Quorum
Perdicca, says Grotius, Equitatui Macedonico, externo Seleucus, Meleager
Satellitio Regio, Ptolemaeus Peditatui praerant. Quatuor haec capita, says he,
succreverant loco unius. Where why he should say [succreverant] and not
[succreverunt] I know not, unless he would insinuate that they had grown upon
him so as to overrule him in his life time. Which yet is grossly false and
inconsistent with the magnanimity of Alexanders nature as well as with History.
It makes me suspect he would insinuate some such thing, because no Historian
reckons Meleager as one of those notable four Horns or Heads that succeeded the
great Horn after its fall, he living himself not many days after Alexander and
no notice being taken of his Succession. But those four notable Successors of
Alexander Historians take notice of as I have related in my Exposition. And
that these four Horns must be understood to arise after the fall of the first
great one, Alexander himself, is plain from the Text. But the four Heads and
the four Horns are all one according to Grotius his own acknowledgment, and the
four Heads are the Heads of the Leopard the third Beast or Greek Empire, and
what can possibly hinder then but that their Successors also, viz. the
Successors of Ptolemaeus Lagi and of Seleucus be Heads likewise of the Greek
Empire? But what a blinding thing is prejudice that Grotius could not see so
clear a consequence! But these things I have pursued sufficiently in my
Confutation it self.

Sect. 12. That the Apocalyptick Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns is this
Roman Kingdom, etc.] See Synops. Prophet. Book. 1. Chapter 11.

Sect. 13. It Signifying order of situation as well as of time, etc.] But if
the little Horn be supposed to rise after the other in order of time, it will
be good sense that way also, by an Idiconaea, which may restrain the sense of
that part of the Prophecy to the Papal Power when it emerged to that height
that the Pope might be more truly said to be the Head of the Beast that was and
is not and yet is, than the Emperor.

Sect. 14. That the duration of this little Horn is 1260 years by the last
Consectary of our Ioint-Exposition.] The Consectary is, That all Visions that
are Synchronal to that of the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, which is
said to continue forty two months, have necessarily the extent of 1260 years.
See Synops. Prophet. Book 2. Chapter 5.

Sect. 16. But styled God and declared worthy of Divine worship.] The Reader
for his fuller satisfaction in this point, let him consult Bishop Downham, De
Antichristo, Lib. 4. Cap. 10. Where he proves that in the Gloss of the Canon
Law the Pope is called Dominus Deus noster, and that there is no shuffling it
off by saying it was an Erratum of the Press (which is incredible that by
mistake they should intersert that word [Deus]) but that rather the omission of
it in whatsoever Impression it was left out, was an Erratum Typographicum. For
whereas most Editions had it, says he, and some few had left it out, the most
accurate Edition of all caused by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, who appointed
certain skillful men to revise the Gloss of the Canon Law, had [Dominus Deus
noster Papa] in it. And this Appellation of God and his receiving adoration
sitting on the Altar which is the proper Throne of the body of Christ, to say
nothing how it is also the place where they set their Images to be worshipped,
suits well together and are an Indication that a kind of Divine honor or
Religious worship, call it which you will, is given to the Pope. See Bishop
Downham in the place above cited. These few Notes are more than enough upon
this my Confutation of Grotius his Opinion, That the fourth Kingdom in Daniel
is the Kingdom of the Lagidae and Seleucidae.

The Authors Apology for his placing the seven Vials within the seventh
Trumpe^ after the Rising of the Witnesses, contrary to the Opinion of Mr. Mede,
etc.
I Am I confess abundantly convinced in my own Judgment that persons of
learning and parts and sobriety of life, that have piously applied themselves
to the understanding and interpreting the Holy Scripture, especially the
Prophetical parts thereof, and particularly of Daniel and the Apocalypse, have
a right, as to be read and duly considered by those that come after and put
themselves upon the same Province; so also not to be contradicted or deviated
from, but upon plain and palpable reason. Nor indeed do I think it safe for any
one or lawful, out of mere curiosity of knowing hard and obscure things, as
they may seem to many, to adventure upon such a Province, but simply either the
better to inform himself of his own duty, or to serve the Public, and having
this design with fear and reverence as in the sight of God to enter upon his
charge, and accordingly to quit himself therein.

Whenas yet notwithstanding such is the vanity and frailty of human nature that
upon mere Curiosity many times men rush upon such things, neither considering
the sacredness and difficulty of the matter, nor duly weighing what God has
imparted to others before them, but out of levity of mind, if they have
excogitated or hit upon any specious thing different from other Interpreters,
out of levity of mind, I say, and a self-favouring conceitedness they presently
fancy it as well more excellent and more true as different. Others out of a
fondness toward themselves presume they have a more peculiar gift that way,
and by strong prepossession of their private conceits deeply impressed upon
their melancholy Imagination render themselves incorrigible and incapable of
the most evident and most solid information from others. And others given up to
a Fanatic Spirit do not stick to presume themselves in an extraordinary manner
inspired, and upon that account heed not what others have writ before them, and
so comparing themselves only with themselves, prove themselves, as the Apostle
speaks, unwise. And lastly there are those who to serve an Interest have quite
left the rode of other Expositours (who had according to their measure of light
expounded things bona fide) and have most lamentably and shamefully perverted
and distorted the genuine meaning of both Daniel and the Apocalypse, the former
in the most concerning parts thereof, and the latter in a manner all over.

But I can appeal to God and my own conscience, that I have framed no
interpretations to serve any Interest but that of Truth, and the Church or
Kingdom of Christ. Nor have I out of any curiosity of prying into hard and
obscure things meddled with either the Apocalypse or Daniel, but merely for more
full satisfaction in the great Controversy betwixt us and the Papists, who
leave no stone unmoved to pervert Souls, and to bring them over to their
Idolatrous Church. Wherefore for my own more full satisfaction, and for the
service of the true Church of Christ, and for nothing else that I know of, have
I taken these pains to make a continued Exposition of all the Prophecies as
well of Daniel as the Apocalypse.

Wherein if I have deviated from the footsteps of others, amongst whom I
account Mr. Joseph Mede absolutely the chief (and than whom I conceive no
writer of that kind has deserved better of the Church of God) yet I can aver it
with all faithfulness that it is not out of a desire of seeming to have found
out something better than his, that I have dissented from him, but because I am
driven thereto by mere force of Reason. Otherwise having no design but
assisting the Truth, I hold it absolutely my duty not to deviate or vary from
such pious and able Interpreters where I find their interpretation sound; Truth
being thus the better recommended by the witness of two or many than if I stood
single by my self. And therefore I always covet if I can find them, to have
companions if they be companions in the Truth, otherwise (...) -- one man to me
is as much as three Myriads and three Myriads not so much as one man. But now
that it is mere Reason not any vain humor in me, such as I have specified
above, which makes me (contrary to the sense of Mr. Mede) place the Vials in
the seventh Trumpet after the Rising of the Witnesses, and interpret the three
Days and an half, wherein the Witnesses lie slain, of three Times and an half,
I hope I shall make clear by the Account following.

First then we are to take notice of the Method, or Genius if you will, of both
Daniel and the Apocalypse, that after two Prophecies suppose of the same extent
of time and of the same things which are of a more large and reaching compass,
there comes a Prophecy or Vision concerning only part of that larger compass
of time wherein some part only of the foregoing Vision is more copiously
enlarged upon. As for example, After the Vision of the Statue of four Metals
and that other of the four Beasts, both which Visions reach from the beginnnig
of the Babylonian Empire to the ending of the Roman, or speaking in the
Apocalyptick phrase to the end of the last Vial, there comes next the Vision of
the Ram and He-Goat which takes in only the time of the Persian and Greek
Empire, and enlarges on the affairs of the Greek Empire only, and especially
on the times of Antiochus Epiphanes. So likewise in the Apocalypse in the
Opened Book-Prophecies, after the two Visions or Prophecies of the same extent
of time, viz. from the beginning of the Church to the end of the seventh or
last Vial (the former of which two Prophecies is contained in the Eleventh
Chapter, the latter in the three following Chapters, namely, the twelfth,
thirteenth and fourteenth) there follows then the Vision of the seven Vials
which run over but part of that extent of time which each of the two foregoing
Prophecies do comprise.

Now as there are three conspicuous Joints of a more universal consideration in
the compages of the two abovesaid Prophecies in Daniel, namely, those in which
are held the Ending of the Babylonian Monarchy and Beginning of the Pesiran,
the Ending of the Persian and the Beginning of the Grecian, the Ending of the
Grecian and the Beginning of the Roman, so there are two manifest Joints
likewise and of a more universal consideration in the two abovesaid Prophecies
in the Apocalypse, (the one contained in the eleventh Chapter and the other in
the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth) namely, the time wherein, as in a
communis terminus, the end of the Symmetral Ages of the Church and the
beginning of the Asymmetral or of the Apostasy are held together, and the Time
wherein the Ending of the Entireness of the Apostasy and the Beginning of the
Restitution or first Emergency out of it, are held together. The former Joint
is the Time wherein the Ending of the Sixth Seal and Beginning of the First
Trumpet are held together, the latter Joint wherein the ending of the Sixth
Trumpet and the beginning of the seventh Trumpet are held together, where
according to the Vision Chapter 11. is the Rising of the Witnesses.

But now the question is, since we see in Daniel the Vision of the Ram and
He-Goat placed so as it begins with the first Joint of the two foregoing
Prophecies and ends with the third Joint, that is, begins with the Persian
Monarchy and ends with the Grecian, the question, I say, is where the Vision of
the Vials, that is, to what Joint of those two more comprehensive Visions [Ch.
11.] and [Ch. 12, 13, and 14.] the beginning of the said partial Vision is to
be affixed, whether to the first or to the second Joint, to the beginning of
the first Trumpet or to the beginning of the seventh immediately after the
Rising of the Witnesses, with those Acclamations in Heaven and Doxology of the
Elders, Chapter 11. 15, 16. Or which is the same Joint of Time to that joyful
Annunciation of the happy news of Babylons being fallen (whose Fall must needs be
the Rising of the Witnesses) told by the second Angel, Chapter 14. 8. the question
is, to which of these two more universal or notable Joints (for other Joints
betwixt Trumpet and Trumpet, they being so many, are more inconsiderable) the
beginning of this partial Vision of the Vials is to be affixed.

There is a temptation, I confess, to place the beginning of the Vials with the
beginning of the first Trumpet, because of some specious correspondence betwixt
the Vials and Trumpets of the same order or numeral denomination. For thus the
Evil of the first Trumpet as well as of the first Vial is cast upon the Earth.
As well under the second Vial as under the second Trumpet the Sea is turned
into Blood, and the living creatures therein dye. Under the third Trumpet and
under the third Vial the Rivers and Fountains are mischieved. The Su^ is
smitten under the fourth Trumpet, and the fourth Vial also is poured out on the
Sun. Under the fifth Trumpet out of a pit comes up a smoke as out of a furnace
that darkens the Sky: Under the fifth Vial the Kingdom of the Beast is full of
darkness. Under the sixth Trumpet the four Angels are loosed from the great
River Euphrates: Under the sixth Vial the waters of the great River Euphrates
are dried up.

1. These Congruities thus overly and in general represented make some show,
but look closer into them and they vanish, (as being intended only for part of
the Artifice of Concealment in the Apocalypse, or for an intimation that, as
the first six plagues concerned the Fate of the Empire, so these seven last,
the state of the Popedom especially, after the six first plagues were past,
they orderly mentioning the same things in both, or lastly to signify that the
State of the Empire under them was Egypt (whence Hail, Rivers turned into
Blood, and Locusts are mentioned) as well as the Popedom afterward was so,
which is also afflicted with Egyptian plagues under the Vials) I say, if we
look closer into them these pretended Synchronizing Congruities will signify no
more than thus, and so quite vanish.

For in the first Congruity to say nothing how that [upon the Earth] may have
no particular signification Chapter 16. 2. but signify so as [upon the Earth] in
the foregoing verse; the Hail cast upon the Earth under the first Trumpet is
plainly another thing from the noisome and grievous sore that fell upon men at
the pouring out of the first Vial. That Hail-storm and this rankerous Ulcer
most certainly signify quite different things as the Symbols are hugely
different. And I must confess I make no question in the world, but that Symbol
of a grievous rankerous Ulcer signifies the plague of an envious malicious
exulcerated mind, which is the plague of Intoxication or Dementation to them on
whom it falls and spoils all their counsels, they being given up to be actuated
by evil Angels and the fury of the Devil. This I conceive is a sad plague
indeed, and lively set out by the Symbol of a vexatious Ulcer. But what an
Hail-storm signifies in the Prophetic Style is so well known that I need say
nothing of it. Wherefore there is not only no Congruity betwixt the first
Trumpet and the first Vial to prove they must begin together, but the Visa and
the things signified by them being so quite different, it is a strong bar
against any such presumption.

The second Congruity indeed is more tolerable or passable, if all the rest
came to so near an agreement, but in that there is nothing peculiar under the
Second Vial that answers to the burning Mountain cast into the Sea under the
second Trumpet, the correspondence b^twixt this Vial and this Trumpet is
visibly lame and defectuous.

The third also is a Congruity far more passable than the first, but yet
besides the defectuousness in the third Vial that has nothing to answer to the
falling Lamp or Comet Lampadias under the third Trumpet; what the Fountains and
Rivers suffer under the third Trumpet, is a misery to men and bitterness to
them, what they suffer under the third Vial is a refreshment to men who praise
and justify God upon the account.

The fourth Congruity is wonderfully wretched and small. The Sun indeed is
smitten under the fourth Trumpet, as well as the fourth Vial said to be poured
upon him, but not the Sun alone under the fourth Trumpet, but the Moon also and
the Stars; but the Sun alone is mentioned in the fourth Vial. Besides, the Sun,
Moon and Stars lose their light and the Sun consequently his heat under the
fourth Trumpet; but the light and heat of the Sun is so invigorated under the
fourth Vial, that he scorches men so intolerably that they blaspheme again.

And the fifth Congruity is yet slighter. The fifth Vial is poured out upon the
Seat of the Beast whereby his Kingdom becomes full of darkness. Upon the
sounding of the fifth Trumpet, the Angel of the bottomless Pit, opens the pit
and a smoke comes out of it that darkens the Sun and Sky. In eleven large
verses wherein the Visum of the fifth Trumpet is described, there is no more
that Symbolizes with the fifth Vial than this, that is worth the speaking of.
For the gnawing their tongues for pain under the fifth Vial, is from their
impatiency of that dark inglorious condition they were cast into, not from the
sting of any Scorpions. And for the darkness arising from the Vial poured on
the Seat of the Beast, and that smoke and darkness out of the bottomless pit;
as the Seat of the Beast and bottomless Pit have no Analogy one to another, so
it is incredible that the darknesses themselves should not be quite different
things. So small grounds or rather none at all is there for this fifth
Congrui^y.

And as little for the sixth. For there is no correspondency betwixt the sixth
Vial and the sixth Trumpet, but that the great River Euphrates is mentioned in
them both. For the description of the sixth Vial is comprised within one verse
of Chapter 16. viz. ver. 12. But there is a large description of the sixth Trumpet
Ch.9. from v. 13. to v. 20. as there is also of the fifth Trumpet.

II. Which consideration of the descriptions of the six first Trumpets, their
being either as large or much larger than the descriptions of the first six
Vials, is a second argument against the placing of the beginning of the Vials
with the beginning of the Trumpets, as of a partial Vision whose beginning is
to be fixed at the first Joint of the foregoing Prophecies of larger extent, to
the end that part of the larger extended Prophecies might be more enlarged upon
and more copiously described, as it fares with the Vision of the Ram and
He-Goat in Daniel. Which partial Vision is annexed to those two more large
Visions for a fuller description of the affairs of the Greek Monarchy. And
therefore this Vision of the seven Vials the affixing the beginning of them to
the beginning of the first Trumpet not serving its due end, it is a sign it is
misplaced, and that the beginning thereof is to be placed in the second Joint
of those two larger Prophecies [the one comprised in the eleventh Chapter and
the other in the three following] and not in the first Joint. These therefore
are my two first Arguments against the placing of the first Vial with the first
Trumpet. The want of a continued Congruity betwixt the Trumpets and Vials all
along: And their uselesness for the fuller explaining the affairs of that part
of the more universal Visions that they are supposed to Synchronize with. But
that there is a part in those more universal Prophecies [Ch. 11.] and [Ch. 12.
and 13. and 14.] that the Partial Vision of the Vials will properly serve more
copiously to illustrate, I shall note hereafter. I am now only intent upon the
proving that the Vials and Trumpets do not commence together.

III. Of which I conceive this may be a third Argument, If we do but remember
and take notice of the second notable Joint in those two more universal
Prophecies (comprised, the one in the eleventh Chapter and the other in the
three following) and how in the former that second notable Joint is in the
con-termination of the sixth Trumpets ending and the beginning of the Seventh,
where the Rising of the Witnesses is, and those Acclamations in Heaven and
Doxology of the Elders; And the same Joint in the latter Prophecy at that
joyful Annunciation of the Angel, Babylon is fallen is fallen (which Fall, as I
said above, must needs be the Rising of the Witnesses:) The making thus the six
first Vials to Synchronize with the six first Trumpets, will leave the Seventh
Vial alone to posses the whole space of time and affairs from the abovesaid
second Joint to the end of those two Visions or Prophecies, whenas in Mr. Medes
own account, the seventh Vial Synchronizes with the Vision of the Wine Press;
so that in the fourteenth Chapter from verse. 9. to verse. 17. there is a Chasma
of time and affairs which the seventh Vial takenth not in, and so in like
manner in the eleventh Chapter, from the same Joint of the Prophecy, to the
seventh Vial signified in the last verse, there is such a Chasma leapt over by
the seventh Vial. Which is too hard and broken a business to have the seventh
Vial thus by an unnatural divulsion torn from the rest. But that the seventh
Vial ends both those Prophecies, there can be no question with the judicious.

IV. Fourthly, The plagues that the seven Vials pour forth are the plagues upon
some party and not the mere beating of the Air, and it is a frigid and dilute
thing not to conceive the last plagues to concern the same party on which the
first were inflicted, so that one party may be conceived to be afflicted by
them both. But the last (even the very first of them) fall upon the marked
slaves of the Beast as appears from Apoc. Chapter 16. verse. 2. And the first went
and poured out his Vial on the Earth, and there fell a noisome and grievous
sore upon the men that had the mark of the Beast, and upon them that worshipped
his Image. But these marked slaves of the Beast were not in being before the
first Trumpet, and not being before the first Trumpet could receive none of the
former plagues. Whence it is manifest that the first Vial cannot begin with the
first Trumpet.

V. Fifthly in brief thus: The very being of the Beast commences but with the
first Trumpet, but a plague or punishment supposes some time wherein the party
may have committed some grievous offenses before the plague or punishment is
inflicted. Wherefore the pouring out the seven Vials cannot commence with the
first Trumpet, Because then the Beast would be plagued before he has had any
time to commit any considerable offenses.

VI. Sixthly, The seven Vials are called the seven last plagues. Wherefore if
we place the first Vial so as to commence with the first Trumpet, I demand
where be the foregoing plagues in respect of which the seven Vials are to be
called the seven last plagues? For the first six Seals, there is no intimation
that they are so many plagues, but rather the contrary is intimated, that the
plagues and vengeance upon the Roman Empire was not to be poured out till the
sounding of the Trumpets, as Mr. Mede interprets that of Apoc. 6. 10. How long
O Lord Holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth? And whereas answer was given to them, that they should rest
yet for a little season, till their fellow servants also were killed, that
little season Mr. Mede with judgment interprets, till the sounding of the
Trumpets, then vengeance would be taken on the Saint-murdering Empire. But that
complaint of the Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar that no vengeance was
taken, it shows plainly that the five first Seals are not five plagues, and the
conversion of the Empire to Christianity under the sixth was no dilaceration of
it, as happened afterward, nor reputed by the Apocalypse as a plague. And it
would be a sorry business to name the seven plagues of the Vials, the seven
last plagues in respect of one solitary plague before it, which yet is no
Egyptian plague neither, but the very first plague of the Trumpets is
Egyptian viz. Hail, as the very first plague of the Vials is also Egyptian,
viz. Sores or Ulcers. Wherefore no number of plagues being taken notice of in
the Apocalypse before the six Trumpets which are unquestionably six plagues,
and there is a solemn premunition of the servants of God against them Chapter 7.
the plagues of the seven Vials is being the seven last plagues of Egypt cannot
commnece with the first Trumpet, which is but the first Egyptian plague of the
Mystical Egypt the Roman Empire.

VII. Wherefore seventhly, The seven last plagues of the Vials supposing a Set
or Number of plagues antecedent, and there being no other Set or Number of
plagues but those of the six Trumpets, it is manifest that that Set or Number
of plagues of the six Trumpets are the antecedent plagues to the seven last
plagues of the Vials, and that these seven plagues of the Vials follow them,
and therefore do not commence with the first Trumpet.

VIII. And now in the eighth place, Though all the six first Trumpets are in
the general plagues upon the Roman Empire, yet the Wo-Trumpets more especially
for their Pagano-Christian Idolatry and persecution as is expressly declared
Apoc. 9. 20. And therefore in respect of the fifth and sixth Trumpets
especially, though of all six in general, (they being plagues upon Egypt as I
noted above) would I have the plagues of the seven Vials called the seven last
plagues; and indeed where can the seven last plagues be more properly placed
than in the last Wo-Trumpet, or in the seventh or last Trumpet, it being a
continuation of plagues upon that party of men that did not repent them of the
works of their hands, of their worshipping of Demons and Idols of Gold and
Silver, and of murdering the servants of God upon a false pretense of their
Heresy, notwithstanding they were forewarned by the plagues of the two first
Wo-Trumpets, the Locusts and Euphratean Horsemen. But if the first of the seven
last plagues be to be placed in the seventh Trumpet, it cannot commence with
the first.

IX. Ninthly and lastly, Those plagues that follow a victory over the Beast and
over his Image and over his Mark and over the number of his name, which
certainly signifies the two-horned Beast, cannot commence with the first
Trumpet, because this two horned Beast could neither be fought with nor be
overcome, before the first Trumpet, he having no existence before that Trumpet.
But the seven last plagues of the Vials follow the abovesaid victory as appears
from Apoc. 15. and 16. where those that had got the victory over the Beast are
said to stand on the Sea of glass, having the Harps of God in their hands, and
to sing the Song of Moses the servant of God and of the Lamb, which is a plain
(...), a Song of Triumph, answering to that of the Israelites upon the
overthrow of Pharaoh in the red Sea. So that it is a Triumphal song upon an
actual victory. This is most punctual and plain, in Chap. 15. and it is said
immediately after this song, That the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony
in Heaven was opened, That the seven Angels having the seven Plagues came out
of it, and that unto them were given seven Golden Vials full of the Wrath of
God, and Chap. 16. 1. they are there commanded to pour them out. There is no
wriggling out of this plain evidence, that the plagues of the seven Vials all
of them follow the victory over the Beast. And therefore it is impossible they
should commence with the first Trumpet.

But it may be you will say, what is all this to the purpose as to Mr. Mede,
who does not make the Vials to commence with the first Trumpet, but rather with
the sixth? I grant he does so, and yet what I have wrote is much to the
purpose. Because if once a man be beaten off from placing the first Vial with
the first Trumpet, so as they may not commence from the first notable Joint of
the two Prophecies (comprised the one in the eleventh Chapter, the other in the
three following Chapters) the position of the first Vial being loosened from
this first notable Joint will naturally slide down and fix it self at the
second notable Joint of the Prophecies, namely, in the beginning of the seventh
Trumpet, where those Acclamations in Heaven upon the Rising of the Witnesses,
and Doxology of the Elders do occur.

But besides, the second, seventh, eighth and ninth arguments prove not only,
That the first Vial is not to commence with the first Trumpet, but that it is
to be placed after the Rising of the Witnesses in the seventh. For according to
our second argument the commencement of the Vials being placed at the second
notable Joint, they will then (in Analogy to that partial Vision in Daniel of
the Ram and He-Goat) more largely illustrate the affairs of those times they
are applied to, namely from the beginning of the seventh Trumpet to the end of
those two Prophecies, which conclude with the Vials, as no man doubts. For
there being but some few slight intimations of the affairs of the Vials, Chapter
11. from v. 18. to the end of the Chapter, as in that it is said The Nations
were angry, which belongs to the first Vial, and, And thy wrath is come and the
time of the dead, etc. which belongs to the third, as also, And there was seen
in his Temple the Ark of the Covenant, which refers to the sixth Vial, and, An
Earthquake and great Hail, which belongs to the seventh. These things which are
so sparingly hinted in this part of the Vision from the second Joint to the
end, are more fully insisted on in the Vision of the Vials, Chapter 16. through the
whole Chapter. As also instead of those Acclamations in Heaven upon the Rising
of the Witnesses and the Doxology of he Elders, there is a Triumphal song of
Moses and the Lamb in the fifteenth Chapter.

Which also makes amends for that more sparing Annunciation of the fall of
Babylon, Chapter 14. 8. where is the second Joint of the other Prophecy: after
which to verse. 13. the things of the fourth Vial are glanced at, and from verse.
13. to verse. 14. the things of the fifth Vial, and from verse. 14. to verse. 17.
the things of the sixth Vial; and from thence to the end of the Chapter the
things of the seventh. But that one partial Vision of the seven Vials contained
in the fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters makes a full illustration of that time
they are applied to namely from the joyful Annunciation of the Fall of Babylon
to the end of the Chapter: But is the most proper Supplement of all affixed to
the second Joint of the Vision in Chapter 11. From whence we may be sure that the
affixing this one partial Vision contained in the fifteenth and sixteenth
Chapters to the second Joint of those two more universal Visions, is sound and
right.

And now for the seventh argument, it has its force to prove not only that the
first Vial does not commence with the first Trumpet, but that it follows the
sixth, the whole set or Number of the last plagues of the Vials being so called
in respect of the whole Set or Number of the plagues of the Six Trumpets. This
I say is most natural and which ought to take place unless some necessary
reason withstand, which I question not but will never be found. And as for the
eighth argument it also does directly prove that the plagues of the Vials do
follow the sixth Trumpet, as is plain at first sight to him that peruses it.
And for the last it is an invincible evidence that all the Vials follow the
sixth Trumpet or the Rising of the Witnesses, and are placed in the seventh,
forasmuch as they follow a notable victory and triumph over the Beast. And
where can there be imagined any foregoing victory and triumph over the Beast
but that which is expressed in the Rising of the Winesses with which the Fall
of Babylon Chapter 14. 8. as well as the Fall of the City by an Earthquake, Chapter 11.
13. Synchronizes. But upon the Fall of this City and the Rising of the
Witnesses it is said, the Second Woe is past and the Third comes quickly, and
that the seventh Angel founded and there were great voices in Heaven, etc.
Wherefore the Vials following this victory (which is the Rising of the
Witnesses) and the Acclamations in Heaven and Doxology of the Elders which
answer to the Triumphal Song of Moses and the Lamb prefixed before the Vials,
Chapter 15. it is plain that the Vials follow the Rising of the Witnesses, and are
to be placed in the seventh Trumpet after the Doxology of the Elders as they
are placed Chapter 15. and 16. after the Triumphal Song of Moses the servant of God
and of the Lamb. Nothing I think can be more demonstrable.

And it is worth our noting here, How that the whole two Chapters, viz. Chapter 15.
and 16. though they be so divided are indeed but one Partial Vision
Synchronizing with the last part of those two more universal Visions, comprised
(the one in the eleventh Chapter, the other in the three following Chapters)
and beginning with the second main Joint of them, the Acclamations in Heaven
and Doxology of the Elders, or joyful Annunciation of the news of the Fall of
Babylon. So that that Doxology of the Elders, the joyful Annunciation, and the
Triumphal Song of Moses and the Lamb, fall in together, to which you may add
the commencement of the Church of Sardis, which also signifies a Song of Joy.
Which coincidency of things to my reason is very harmonious, the Sardian Church
being the state of the Church commencing with the Rising of the Witnesses,
which state is promised to the Church in Thyatira, the preceding interval
thereof.

To all which you may add; Whereas Mr. Mede cannot deny but that the
Vial-plagues are called the last Plagues in reference to the Trumpet-plagues,
and that the Trumpet-plagues are just Six as well as the Vial-plagues Seven, I
would appeal to Mr. Mede if St. John had had occasion to express himself
therein, whether he would not have called the Six Trumpet-plagues the Six first
Plagues, as well as he calls [ch. 15.] the Seven Vial-plagues the Seven last.
Whence it will necessarily follow that all the Seven last Plagues of the Vials
must follow all the Six first plagues of the Trumpets, whenas according as Mr.
Mede has placed the Vials, only one of the seven Vial-plagues namely the
seventh follows the six Trumpet-plagues, which is an apparent Repugnancy. Nay,
merely in that the Vial-plagues, all seven of them are said to be the last
Plagues, that, I say, does plainly imply that none of them are to be before the
ending of all the Trumpet-plagues, else they all seven (though they are said to
be so, viz. the seven last plagues) could not be the last, but five of them
according to Mr. Mede's placing of them would expire before the six
Trumpet-plagues, which is apparently absurd. For last of all in Succession
supposes the other all to have given place and to be gone, but by no means the
last themselves to expire before them. And these Vial-plagues all seven of them
are called (...) the very last seven Plagues, which they cannot be if any of
them expire before any of the six Trumpet-plagues.

These arguments are so considerable to me, that I make no doubt at all but
that the Vials are to be placed in the Seventh Trumpet after the Rising of the
Witnesses, and whether they satisfy others so as to make them of one mind with
my self or no, yet I hope they will not stick to acknowledge that I have not
rashly deviated from the Tract of Mr. Mede, and so not violated that Right,
which is due to so excellent an Interpreter.

But there is yet I confess another thing touching the Witnesses that Mr. Mede
and I do not agree in, which is the time of their lying dead, which the Vision
expresses by three days and an half. He will have it to signify three years and
an half, but I must confess I am fully assured in my own mind that those three
days and an half are the very same that three Times and an half. Nor is this a
new opinion of my own, but I met with it near forty years ago by chance at the
end of a Socinian Book in Quarto, but the Title of the Book I have forgot, and
the Socinians, every one knows, are rather dry Reasoners than phancifull
Writers. And after I met with it again in Clavis Apocalyptica ad Incudem
revocata, published A. D. 1652. and since that in that pious and learned
Author A. B. Peganius, his Genuine Explication of the Visions of the
Revelation, who though he most-what follows Mr. Mede in other things, yet he
leaves him in this. And that all people are not of the same mind herein with
Peganius and my self, the only objections that I know are First, That the
Witnesses are said to be slain at the ending or finishing of their mournful
Prophecy. Secondly, That if the three days and an half be the same with the
three Times and an half, which is the same with 1260 days or 42 months, which
are but various expressions of the three Times and an half, then the Witnesses
will be conceived to speak and prophecy while they lie dead, than which
nothing can be more absurd. This I confess would be an harsh repugnancy.

Wherefore to remove these Obstacles, the Reader must learn to distinguish
betwixt the Cortex and the Pith, betwixt the Rine and the Pulp of these
Parabolical or Symbolical Visions. In which if the parts of the Pith or Pulp
agree amongst themselves as well as those of the Rine or Cortex amongst
themselves, all then is sound, complete and harmonious. But those that make the
above named Objections seem to me to do as the Welch-man did, that bit the
Rine of the Orange into his mouth together with the Pulp, which made him
sputter and make hard faces. The Vision or Prophetical Parable it self is very
neat and coherent taking it in its Literal sense, which represents the two
Witnesses lying slain three days and an half after their 1260 days Prophesying
in Sackcloth. So that as their natural Death and Prophesying in Sackcloth are
inconsistent one with another, so they are disjoined one from another in the
Cortex of the Parable, and their death represented as an effect of their 1260
days Prophesying. But by this natural Death being signified their Political
Death, or Deprivation of all Power in Church or State (for their Resurrection
is into that Power) which Political Death is part of the Pulp or Pith of the
Parable, this is not only consistent with their mournful Prophecy but the
very cause thereof. So that the parts of the Pith or Pulp of the Prophecy
cohere one with another singularly well, and the contrivance of the Prophetic
Parable is of admirable elegancy and festivity.

For the matter to be represented being this, That for a certain time holy,
good and Apostolical persons sit for employment in Church or State, shall in
the Apostasy of the Church be for a time kept out of employment, namely, for
that time denoted by Daniel's Time and Times and half a Time, which is three
Prophetical years and an half, resolvible into 1260 Days, or 42 Months
Prophetical: Which being kept out of power and employment is a Political Death
to them, though they in the mean time in this low condition bear witness
against the corruptions of the said times; but it being also that at the end of
the said Times there will be such a change of things that they will come again
into power both in Church and State: First by an Henopaeia the succession of
these two sorts of men thus kept out of power are turned into two single
persons called two Witnesses. Then they are clothed in sackcloth as well as
made to Prophecy, to show their low condition in the World. Thirdly, it being
incredible that two single persons should each of them live 1260 years, they
are said by an Antichronismus to Prophecy only 1260 Days, namely, the days of
their deprivation of all power in Church or State, wherein they lay like dead
carcases as to any Political Power or Influence upon the World, though they
were yet in Being then, as being the woman in the Wilderness, as it is
expressed by another Symbol. But this dead condition of theirs representable by
an unburied carcass, that the (...) of the Cortex might be observed, is not to
expatiate unto 1260 days, much less to so many years, but by another
Antichrenismus though the same time is signified, is to be contracted into
three days and an half. For who could endure that two carcases should lie
stinking in the streets of the City suppose 1260 days or three years and an
half? Besides the incredibility of their being raised to life after so long a
time. And though these three days and an half be set at the end of the 1260
days, yet by a Lemmatosynechia, a figure usual in the Apocalypse, they are
easily understood to belong to the antecedent time and to Synchronize with it.
See my Synopsis Prophetica Book 1. Chapter 4. in Antichronismus. Therefore this is
the external Decorum observed in the outward Cortex of the Vision, that their
Political Death which is exactly Synchronal to the time of their mourning in
sackcloth, which is said to be 1260 days, is contracted into three days and an
half, signifying there Daniels three times and an half, as Day and Time
sometimes signify the same thing. This Parabolical Prophecy of the two
Witnesses thus understood, has a most enravishing festivity and elegancy in it,
and is one of the choicest examples of that Divine wit and Artifice of
Concealment, as well as Revealment, that occurr in the whole Apocalypse.

Nor does that expression ver. 7. (...), put a bar to the supposed
Lemmatosynechia, and hinder their Political Death from running back into the
same time with their mournful Witnessing. For (...) here is a word which the
Spirit of Prophecy has made choice of to serve as well the sense of the Pith of
the Parable, as of the Cortex thereof. But our English Translation has pitched
upon that sense which only comports with the Cortex of the Parable, while it
renders it, And when they shall have finished their Testimony, as if (...) were
Futurum exactum which it is not, and besides (...) signifies as well agere or
peragere, as finire. And so (...) will easily and naturally signify, While they
shall be performing or declaring their Testimony, the Beast shall make war
against them and kill them, that is the successive body of them, kill them all
successively in that Political sense, or keep them successively dead from the
first suppression of them, and kill some of this successive body according to a
natural death, even many Myriads of them as History can witness. So easily is
the difficulty of (...) removed. Where (...) has two senses, the one serving
the Pith the other the Cortex of the Parable, as Day has two senses verse. 9.
and relating to the Cortex signifies a natural day, but to the Pith it
signifies Time, in such a sense as Time is taken in Daniel, Chapter 7. verse. 25.

And now I hope I have made it abundantly plain that there is no Incongruity in
this Opinion of Peganius and mine, in making the three days and an half the
same with Daniel's Time and Times and half a Time, or 1260 days Prophetically
understood. Nothing hinders but this may be the sense. But now I shall produce
reasons to prove that it really is so.

As first, It being a Number consisting of three Integrums and an Half as
Daniels three Times and an half is, and the 42 Months and 1260 Days being but
the varying of the phrase for the Three Times and an Half, if a man have but
any competency of Apocalyptick Nasuteness or Sagacity in him, he will easily
smell out the high probability of these three days and an half being the same
with the three Times and an half in Daniel, and consequently the same with the
1260 Days of the mournful Prophecy of the Witnesses.

Secondly, There being no example in all the Apocalypse at least, and, I think,
no where else, of the affectation of predicting things to the curiosity of half
a year, it is plainly incredible that there should be any such affectation here.

Thirdly, If the condition of the Apostolic Church be ever brought to so sad a
condition again as is represented by the carcases of the two Witnesses lying
dead in the streets of the great City, it is incredible that they should
recover again within the space of three years and an half. The conceit looks
almost as Romantickly or fabulously, and out of the same ignorance of the
Apocalyptick Antichronisme, as that of the Romanists, who tell us what strange
feats Antichrist shall do in the same space of Time, namely, within the space
of three years and an half, when an age would scarce be sufficient to compass
such Achievements.

Fourthly, If we restrain the lying dead of the Witnesses to the three years
and an half at the end of their Prophesying, there is nothing in the Vision to
represent their Political Death (to which their Resurrection relates) before
that time, though they have been dead in that sense at least 1260 years
already. Which is exceeding absurd.

Fifthly, Being that the witnesses have lain slain in a Political sense, and
have been so often slain many hundred thousands of them in a Natural sense
before the end of their mournful witnessing, it is unconceivable what
persecution or oppression in these last three years and an half different from
what they had endured before, should ^efall them, or more worthy of taking
notice, that the former should be omitted, and these by the carcases lying
three days and an half in the street, be represented.

Sixthly and lastly, Whereas it is said, v. 7. And when they shall have
finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit
shall make war against them and shall overcome them and kill them, unless my
sense be admitted; Till the end of their Prophesying there is neither any war
nor any overcoming nor any killing of the Witnesses, which is point blank
against the Truth of History.

This which I have produced as it does fully satisfy my self, that the three
days and an half, are the same with Daniel's three Times and an half, so I hope
that other will also be satisfied, if not of the Truth of the thing, yet at
least that I have not rashly dissented from Mr. Mede therein.

We having thus solidly stated the sense of this Vision of the Death and
Resurrection of the Witnesses which was the true sense thereof many hundred
years ago, and ever will be, we may now the more seasonably enquire whether the
Prophecy be yet fulfilled or no. Which if it be not and the Witnesses be not
risen, it is evident from what we have proved above, (viz. That the Vials
follow the Rising of the Witnesses) that there is not yet one Vial poured out.
But there is no Protestant Interpreter that I know but will allow that some of
the Vials are already poured out. Wherefore unless they will shamefully recoil,
they must of necessity acknowledge that the Witnesses are already risen. But I
shall use but one Argument for all to prove that this Vision or Prophecy of the
Rising of the Witnesses is already fulfilled.

What a remarkable Providence, as touching the Church of God, and what a vast
change of affairs there was in the Papacy at the late Reformation, is
notorious, and what an innumerable company of people were delivered out of that
worse than Egyptian Bondage of the Pope; and multitudes who because of their
supposed Hereticalness lay dead, useless and unactive to all Political Power,
whether in Church or State, being excluded therefrom for their falsely suspected
Heresy, got into the most honorable employments at the Reformation both in
Church and State; Nay, that the highest honors were in the hands of the
Protestants in many entire Kingdoms and Principalities, which had been under
the Papacy before. What a mavelous, nay stupendous change this was, no man
can but be sensible of, and therefore that it must be, and that in no slight
manner, predicted in the Apocalypse.

Now it cannot be predicted in any of those Visions that in order of time
follow the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses as the Vials do, because this
notable and stupendous mutation of things has happened already, and as those
of the adverse party would have it, before the Rising of the Witnesses.
Wherefore I demand of them in what Vision, which is antecedent to the Vision of
the Rising of the Witnesses, is this so remarkable and mavelous a piece of
Providence predicted or prefigured? I am confident they cannot find any before
this of the Rising of the Witnesses. Wherefore it must be this Vision of the
Rising of the Witnesses which prefigured this stupendous piece of Providence
in the Reformation, or else none at all. Which were an absurdity intolerable
and utterly incredible. Wherefore it is even Mathe matically evident, that the
Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses is a Prophecy of the late Reformation,
and that it is fulfilled therein.

And this it would be, though it were less significative of that mavelous
passage of Providence than it is. But that it is most fitly and fully
significative thereof, as if made on purpose for it, my Exposition of it in my
Apocalypsis Apocalypseos and elsewhere, will I hope abundantly make good, which
is needless here to repeat, as also how naturally the Song of Moses the Servant
of God and of the Lamb follows the Rising of the Witnesses, which contains a
deliverance of the Servants of God from that worse than Egyptian Bondage of
that Mystical Pharaoh the Pope, and how the Sardian Interval of the Church
which signifies a Song of Joy, commences at the same time. Which things fall in
with that Congruity and Harmony, that he must be something more than ordinary
stupid that is not enravished therewith.

But in the mean time having observed, that neither the Messiah who is called
the Christ, when he was come, though predicted plainly enough by the
Prophecies, was taken notice of as such, by them that were concerned to take
notice of him, nor yet Antichrist (as fully nay more fully and repeatedly
predicted and prefigured) was taken notice of by them who were sufficiently
concerned so to do; I less wonder that the Prophecy of the Rising of the
Witnesses, so punctually predicted and manifestly fulfilled in the Reformation,
should be so little taken notice of as it is, but that several men, as the Jews
expect a Messiah to come, and the Romanists an Antichrist, so they a Rising of
the Witnesses to come, when the impletion of that Prophecy is so evidently
already past. Wherefore it was the duty of some or other to remind them of it.

The Authors twenty Arguments whereby he does prove that the seven Epistles to
the seven Churches are a Prophecy of the state of the Church cast into seven
Intervals from the beginning thereof to the last Judgment; out of his
Exposition of the seven Churches.
Chapter X.
1. AS in Natural Hypotheses, those are accounted truest that solve the
Phenomenon of Nature the most naturally and easily, and especially if such as
are no otherwise solvible than upon the proposed Hypothesis: so that meaning of
Scripture, I mean especially of any considerable portion thereof, ought to be
esteemed truest that can solve the most Difficulties that may be raised
concerning the same, or the Contexts precedent or subsequent / thereto; and if
all, still the more certain; and if unsolvible otherwise, there is still the
more assurance of undeniable Demonstration. Now how near this Mystical or
Prophetical Exposition of these Epistles approaches to the clearness of this
case, I will leave to the Reader to judge, after he has considered the
Solutions of the questions easily raised out of the Epistles themselves, or the
precedent Chapter, and not easily answered, nor at all satisfactorily, at least
most of them, but upon the Hypothesis we have gone.

2. As first, If a man enquire why the Spirit of Prophecy, after he has so
expressly given notice that this Book of the Apocalypse is to show unto his
servants things that are to come, Apoc. 1. 1, 3.
and called it plainly a Book of Prophecies, should start so unexpectedly from
the Title and intended Subject, as to write no less than seven Epistles to
certain Churches, that have nothing considerable of Prophecy in them, before he
deliver any Prophecies properly so called, but only Promises and Comminations;
and that he should do this * with as great Pomp and as high a Preamble as he
does when he begins so famous Prophecies as those of the seven Seals, and the
opened Book. But according to our Hypothesis the Answer is easy; viz. That
though these seven Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia have a Literal sense,
yet they are also a Parable or Prophecy, and of as high concern for both matter
and extent of Time (they reaching from the beginning of the Church to the end
of the world) as the Prophecy of the Seals and Opened Book; and that they are
ushered in with this great Pomp on purpose to give us notice thereof.

Secondly, A man would be prone to enquire why the Spirit dictates Letters unto
the Churches in Asia, and not rather to the Churches in Europe, Asia and
Africa. For certainly the Church had disspred it self into all these Quarters
of the world by that time. As if the Spirit of Truth were a respecter of
persons. For these are not the Letters of John, but of the Holy Ghost. But our
Answer is ready at hand, * That for the significancy of the word Asia to
comport also with the significancy of the names of the seven Churches, Asia
alone was pitched upon. But, according to the Prophetical sense, the true
Catholic Church is writ unto under such distinct conditions as she was to vary
into, unto the end of the world. So that there is no Partiality nor Acception
of Persons in this.

Thirdly, If a man demand touching the order or precedence of these Seven
Churches that are writ unto: What a plain and manifest account is there to him
that compares the Epistles in their Prophetical sense with the Intervals of the
Church Catholic lying in that order that these Churches are ranged? This is a
satisfactory reason, and worthy the Spirit that wrote these Epistles. But
whether they are ranged in this order, * because that a Letter-carrier going
from Patmos, his first journey will be to Ephesus, and then to Smyrna, and so
in order till he come to Laodicea; whether the holy Spirit of Prophecy regarded
that in the dictating of his Letters, (though Alcazar the Jesuit be for it) I
cannot but suspend my judgment, and that not without a smile. But of this
Ataxie more particularly anon.

3. Fourthly, If it be demanded why just Seven Churches in Asia are writ to,
neither more nor less, (especially that in Thyatira, according to the
acknowledgment of Epiphanius, being then not founded, but after the writing of
these Epistles,) it is hard to give a satisfactory answer in the Literal sense.
For to say this Book of the Apocalypse affects the number Seven, and that,
because it runs upon the number Seven altogether in the ensuing part of the
Book, which is Prophetical, it therefore, for Conformity sake, chooses this
number in writing to the Churches though Literally understood, seems but a
meagre, mean, and trifling account, a design unworthy the Holy Spirit that
dictated this Book. But the using this number Seven all over is rather an
intimation that the Book is Prophetical all over, and that these Epistles are
also a Prophecy, accordingly as we have explained them. And taking them so, the
Answer is plain and obvious, viz. The number Seven is here chosen out as
Symbolical, it being the note of Universality; whence the Pythagoreans, as I
elsewhere have noted, call it (...).

Wherefore Seven (and no more than Seven) Churches are writ unto, as standing
for the seven Intervals of the Church from the beginning to the end of all.

Fifthly, If it be demanded why these seven Churches rather than any others,
which in all likelihood may have the same Virtues and Vices that these are
commended and taxed for: The Reason of this is writ in the very Notation of
their Names, every Name being significative of the Condition of the Church
Catholic in that successive Intervall of time that this or that Church so
named stands for, and in such order as they are repeated.

Sixthly, If one require a Reason why Christ is described by holding the seven
Stars in his right hand in the Epistles to the Churches of Ephesus and Sardis,
why the same description in both, or why in either: In the Literal sense it
will be hard to find any peculiar Reason; but in the Prophetical sense already
declared, it is obvious. For the seven Stars signify all the Pastors, whether
in present existence, or succession And Ephesus is the begnning-state of the
Church; and therefore it is both very seasonable and methodical to represent
the First Founder, Sustainer and Continuer thereof, by this Emblem; Lo! I am
with you to the end of the World. And that this again is hinted at in the
Epistle to the Church of Sardis, is with evident Proportion and Analogy to the
Affairs of the Church there represented. For the Church of Sardis is as it were
the beginning again or the emerging of the true Church or Kingdom of Christ
out of the Power and Kingdom of Antichrist.

4. Seventhly, Why the Church of Ephesus, of all other Churches, should be
commended for their trying false Apostles. Why might not other Churches be
attacqued by them, and also discover them, as well as the Church of Ephesus?
The Solution of which Problem is easy in this Mystical sense of the Epistles, *
that places the Ephesine Interval within the Apostles times, but the rest on
this side of them.

Eighthly, If any one demand why it is said to the Church of Smyrna, more than
to any other Church, Be thou faithful unto death, Apoc. 2. 10, 11.
and I will give thee the Crown of life; and again, He that overcomes shall
not (...) hurt by the second death: In the Literal sense it will be very hard
to find any peculiar Reason why this might not as well be said to the Church in
Pergamus, where there was killing for Religion, it seems, by the mention of the
Martyr Antipas: I, but there was no obtaining the Crown of life there in any
peculiar sense; but the Crown of life, that is, the Imperial Crown was given to
the sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs under the Ten Persecutions: to whom
also according to the opinion of the Ancient Church the Promise of the first
Resurrection belonged. Which is here obliquely glanced at, (according to the
mode of the Apocalyptik style, that loves to hint things by Ellipses) in that
Promise, Apoc. 20. 6.
He that overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death, implying thereby,
that he shall be made partaker of the first Resurrection.

Ninthly, If any one will again object more particularly against the Ataxie of
the Churches, that they are ra^ged neither according to the merit, nor
congeneracy of their Conditions, pretending that it had been far better to have
joined the two irreprehensible together, Smyrna and Philadelphia, against whom
there is no complaint at all; and then Ephesus, Sardis and Laodicea, against
whom there is no complaint of eating things offered unto Idols; and afterward
Pergamus and Thyatira, in which Churches alone there is: If any one, I say,
contend that this method had been more exact; truly in the Literal sense it
will be hard to frame an handsome and satisfactory answer; especially if he
urge, that God is the Author of Method, as well as the God of Order. But in
this Mystical or Prophetical sense the Answer is solid and exquisite, and much
what the same that was given to the like difficulty more generally propounded
before, namely, That the Churches of Asia are named in that order the
Successive intervals of the Church Catholic were to proceed in, of which these
Asiatick Churches are but the Symbols or Hieroglyphics. And therefore those
two Intervals of time which take in the Reign of the Beast and the False
Prophet, viz. the Intervals of the Church of Pergamus and of Thyatira, must
come after Ephesus and Smyrna, because till the expiration of those two
Intervals Idolatry had not again reentred the Apostatizing Church. And the
three following intervals of Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea are the
Intervals of the true Church elapsed out of the hands of domineering Idolatry;
and therefore we hear no more in them of things sacrificed unto Idols, nor of
any Iezahel. And Philadelphia which is the most holy and the most glorious
Interval of the Church that is to appear on the face of the Earth, is not to be
named acco^ding to her Dignity, but according to her Succe^^ion in time, toward
the latter end of the World, as she is here ranged. But of this more than
enough, because we had touched of it in the general before.

5. Tenthly, Why is Christ in his Description before the Epistle to the Church
in Pergamus set out by a two edged Sword, Apoc. 2. 12.
coming, suppose, out of his mouth (according to the Ellipticalness of the
Apocalyptick style?) what reason in the Letter can be given of that? for
(especially if this Supplement be made) it cannot respect the slaying of
Antipas with the sword. What peculiar thing then in this Church of Pergamus is
there to require this Description? Truly nothing at all appears in the Letter,
but in the Prophetical sense it is very proper, The Waldenses and Albigenses in
this Interval assaulting the Church of Rome, or at least defending themselves
and their pure Faith, so signally by this Weapon, I mean by the sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God; though themselves died so many thousands of
them in the field by the sword for the Faith they thus defended.

And in the Eleventh place, The description of Christ before the Epistle to the
Church in Thyatira, And his Feet like fine Brass, Apoc. 2. 18.
(as if they burned in a Furnace) (for that Supplement is to be understood out
of his Description in the first Chapter, as before:) But now what peculiar
significancy has this description, or what congruity to any thing in the Church
of Thyatira Literally understood? surely none. But in the Prophetical sense it
is very expressive of those lower members of Christ's Body, his Church here on
Earth, of their invincible Zeal and Patience, and Sincerity of Affection, such
as did abide the most fiery Trials that could be put upon them, and made them
stand at the Stake amongst burning Faggots with the Flames about their ears,
and never flinch for it: As has been noted in the Interpretation of that
Epistle. This was the state of that Interval of the Church.

Twelfthly, In a Book that is so full of Aenigmatical Involutions, and
coverings upon coverings, where he calls the Churches Golden Candlesticks, and
the Bishops or Pastors, Stars and Angels, even then when he interprets, and
offers to be more plain; that the same Author should so openly and plainly
mention any one by name as he does the Martyr Antipas, if there were not some
farther Mystery in it, would be a great Difficulty, and hardly to be digested
by the more sagacious and curious. I must confess I have often wondered at this
naming Antipas by name, till I understood a further sense thereof, such as we
have rendered in the Exposition of that Epistle.

6. In the thirteenth place, One might well demand why Christ expresses a
greater disgust against the Church of Laodicea than that of Sardis. For though
the former is said to be lukewarm; yet the other making a great show of life,
is notwithstanding declared to be dead. That Christ should be more enraged
against Luke-warmness than Hypocrisy, and threaten it more deeply than the
other, I will spew thee out of my mouth, (which is quite to cast a thing away,
never to be resumed again,) must seem mavelous to the onsiderate Certainly,
if there were not some greater matter in it, the Spirit of Christ would not
speak so severely only to follow a Metaphor. But in the Prophetical sense the
solution is easy, that passage being predictive of the Extermination of the
Church from the face of the earth at the close of the world, as I have
expounded it.

In the fourteenth place, it may be demanded, why so affectedly and repeatedly
in every Epistle that Phrase is used, I know thy works, without any variation
or omission. Which seems a thing but of-small importance in the Literal sense
of these Epistles: but in the Prophetical it seems on purpose so repeated, to
intimate an Allusion in Asia to the Hebrew word * (as if (...) was intended on
purpose to answer to (...) * that Asia may also be significant as well as the
names of the Seven Churches: which they all being, it is a shrewd presumption
this repetition was for some such design as has been declared. Whereas the
Literal sense can give no account thereof.

Fifteenthly, Alcazar himself is much stumbled that the Spirit of God should be
thought to take notice of any one particular Woman in the Church of Thyatira,
and so call her by the name of Iezabel, as is ordinarily supposed. And indeed
these things are too little for the Majesty of this Writing of the Apocalypse.
But how can we help it in the Literal sense, if we will interpret with
constancy and coherency? But in the Prophetical sense there is no such
incongruity. The Object is worth the Spirits taking notice of in this kind;
this Iezabel being that painted Woman of Rome, intoxicating the Kings of the
Earth with the Cup of her Spiritual Fornications, as has been shown upon the
Text.

7. Sixteenthly, It seems very strange that that Promise of ruling over the
Nations, and receiving the Morning Star, (which doubtless are Political
Promises,) should be made to the Church in Thyatira, more than to that in
Pergamus, or Ephesus, and others. What Victories or Dominion did the Church in
Thyatira in Asia get over the Nations more than other Churches? This is an hard
knot in the Literal sense. But in the Prophetical it is loosened at the first
sight. For the Closure of the Interval of the Church of Thyatira brings in the
time wherein whole Nations revolted from the Pope and his Idolatrous Church,
and professed the Reformed Religion, and so in these parts got the Pontifician
party under them.

Seventeenthly, In the Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia there is mention
made of a mighty Temptation that is to come upon all the World, to try them
that dwell upon the Earth, touching which he says, Behold, I come quickly. Why
should this be said to the Church of Philadelphia more than to any other of the
Churches here specified? There are not the least footsteps of reason to be
found in the Literal sense. But in the Prophetical sense the thing is plain.
For the Interval of Philadelphia beginning in the last Vial, wherein that
mighty and terrible Earthquake is to happen, the great Temptation, what it is,
is plainly thence understood, and how in respect of this Philadelphian Church
it will come quickly, she commencing but in the very same Vial that this is to
happen under.

Eighteenthly, Why upon this Philadelphia, a private Asiatick Church, should
the name of the City of God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven
from God, (the very same that is expressed Apoc. 21.) be said to be written?
This Title were too big and turgent for any private Church, were it not a Type
or Symbol of some greater matter. But by the Prophetical interpretation this
difficulty is quite removed. For the Interval of the Philadelphian Church is
coincident with the times of the new Jerusalem, (mentioned at the end of the
Apocalypse,) and of the Millennial Empire of Christ upon Earth.

8. Nineteenthly, The Curious may be prone to enquire, why the Church of
Laodicea in those times should account her self so hugely and extraordinarily
rich, increased in goods, and to have no want of any thing. And truly why this
should be her estate rather than any of the Churches specified, from the
Literal ground we can fetch no reason. But admitting the Prophetical sense, and
that this is the last Interval of the Church of Christ, it will naturally so
come to pass: For this Laodicea will be left Heir to all the Riches of her
Sister Philadelphia, to Peace, Prosperity, Purity in Worship, abundance of
natural Knowledge, universal skill in the Interpretations of the Prophecies,
and whatever good thing there is belonging to the Church, saving the Life and
Spirit which Philadelphia carried along with her into the other World. How
easily then and naturally, or rather necessarily, does this Description of the
Church of Laodicea fall upon the last Interval?

And Lastly, It is a Question extremely obvious to demand, Why that phrase, *
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, which our Savior so often is found
to add at the end of his Parables to the People, should be used here so
repeatedly in every Epistle, they being no Parables, but Epistles sent to each
of those Seven Churches in Asia respectively: And then, why this Epiphonema is
sometimes the last close of the Epistle, sometimes not? To which Problem there
is no tolerable Solution in the Literal sense of these Epistles. But supposing
a Mystical or Prophetical sense, there was a necessity of affixing this
Epiphonema, to show there was a farther sense intended than that of the Letter:
and also, that sometimes this Epiphonema should come last of all, (as in the
four last Epistles,) that the Promise to the Conqueror, to him that overcomes,
might be more certainly understood to be of a proper Prophetical or Political
sense, not merely Theological, Moral or Spiritual; as has been abundantly
declared in the Exposition.

9. We might have drawn many more Questions and Solutions from the
consideration of the Letter, and of this Hypothesis we go upon, to show its
solidity and fitness, but that we hold it needless, having produced so many
already: which jointly considered, with the perpetual easiness and naturalness
of the whole Exposition of all the Epistles, * and the exact Correspondency of
the Names of the Churches to the Events of the successive Intervals of the true
Catholic Church which they represent, one would think they should not fail
fully to satisfy any unprejudiced Peruser of our Exposition of these Epistles,
touching the truth thereof. But I am abundantly taught by Experience, that both
the finding out, and receiving of Divine Truths found out by others, is a
special gift of God. And therefore to him alone be the Glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

NOTES Upon the Twenty Arguments. Sect. 2.
With as great Pomp, and as high a Preamble as he does, where he begins so
famous Prophecies as those of the Seven Seals, etc.] You may add to this of
the Seven Seals, and that of the Opened Book, the Prophecy of the Scripture of
Truth in Daniel. To which Prophecy the Vision, Chap. 10. verse. 5, 6, etc. is a
Preamble, as this Vision is to this Prophecy of the Seven Churches, and which
is yet more remarkable, the Person represented in the Vision, the same Person
in the like attire and other circumstances as here: And there set before the
most concerning Prophecy in all Daniel, which reaches from the Persian Monarchy
to the end of the World. Whence it is the more ^rigid and absurd not to make
these Epistles of the Seven Churches a Prophecy, as well as those three other
are, that reaches to the end of the World as they do.

That for the significancy of the word Asia to comport also with the
significancy of the Names of the Seven Churches, etc.] And there is one
significancy more in this Name Asia than I was aware of when I wrote my
Exposition of the Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches. For besides that
Allusion to (...) Fundamentum, and to (...) which signifies operari to work,
from whence [I know thy works] is so often repeated; there may be also a
further Allusion to the Cabbalistical (...), which signifies as they call it
Mundus Asiathicus, of which the Earth is the lowest Region. So that the
Churches in Asia will s^gnify according to this Cabbalistical Notion, the
Churches dispersed over the whole Earth.

Because a Letter-carrier going from Patmos, his first journey will be to
Ephesus, etc.] This is Alcazar his conceit, and yet as Liter^^ as it is, it
will not hold. For he must be an unskilful and indis^reet Letter-carrier that
setting out from Patmos to Ephesus will pass to Smyrna and to Pergamus, if he
intend, what he ought to do, the delivering most of his Letters in the
shortest time he may. For then, if we consult Ptolemies Mapps, in Asiae Tabula
1, he being to deliver the most of his Letters in the shortest time, is not to
go from Ephesus to Smyrna, and so to Pergamus, but from Ephesus to Laodicea,
from Laodicea to Philadelphia, from Philadelphia to Sardis, from Sardis to
Thyatira, and from Thyatira to Pergamus, and then from Pergamus to Smyrna; from
whence he may take shipping to Patmos again to give Saint John an account of
the delivery of his Letters. This is very evident out of Ptolemie's
Geographical Table, especially if we understand by Laodicea that Laodicea which
is situated betwixt the Rivers Meander and Lycus, which questionless Alcazar
understands: And that Laodicea is near to Philadelphia, and Philadelphia to
Sardis, and Sardis not far off from Thyatira.

But there is a Laodicea at a great distance from them all, that lies a good
deal East of the Mountain or Valley Aulocrene, from whence the River Meander
runs, which Ptolemy calls (...), Laodiceam combustam: which were it understood
would alter the account. And yet for ought I know it may be chiefly alluded to
in the Prophetical sense of the Epistles to these Churches, the Laodicean
Interval in a manner conterminating with the Conflagration of the World. So
that not only the Notation of the Name of Laodicea intimates that to be the
Interval of the Church that reaches till the last Judgment, but that Epithete
also of (...) or combusta that it is the Interval next to the Conflagration of
the Earth.

Sect. 4. That places the Ephesine Interval within the Apostles times, etc.]
For the Ephesine Interval terminates in the tenth year of Nero, as I have shown
in my Exposition. In which Interval all the Apostles were living, Saint John
long after. But another Character of this Interval is, that the Nicolaitan Sect
appeared not till presently after it. Whence they are commended that they hate
the deeds of the Nicolaitans; that is, such deeds as the Nicolaitans after were
found guilty of. And Spondanus places the Sect of the Nicolaitans some two or
three years after the tenth of Nero. The Church hitherto had kept free from
such wretched Debauchery as that.

Sect. 6. ( As if) (...) was intended on purpose to answer to (...))] Though
there be two other Paronomastical Allusions in the word Asia besides this, yet
I do not doubt but this is also intended, and the rather from the repeating so
perpetually (...), I know thy works, and it is the most useful and the most
accommodate to vulgar capacity. That Allusion to (...) or Mundus Asiathicus,
lies more deep, and is less intelligible to the vulgar.

Sect. 8. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, etc. namely what the
Spirit says unto the Churches. This Additional put to that excitation to
attention to what the Spirit says unto the Churches, shows that all these
seeming private Epistles to particular Churches, are indeed one Set or
Compages of Epistles which concern the succeeding Intervals of the Universal
Church, from the beginning to the end of the World. Whence the Epiphonema of
each Epistle to every Church is so framed as if it were directed to all the
Churches, that is, to every Interval thereof; The whole being a Representation
of the State of the Church Universal according to several Intervals from the
beginning to the end, which they are bound to take notice of and consider, and
compare together, for the better understanding of the whole.

Sect. 9. And the exact correspondency of the Names of the Churches to the
Events, etc.] And not only of the Names of the Churches, but of whatsoever
Names of Persons are mentioned in any of the Epistles to the Churches there is
a correspondency of these with the state or affairs of that Interval of the
Church wherever they occur. It may be that some strong Spirits, as they are
called, or high and hard lofty Wits will overlook these Paronomastical
Correspondencies or Allusions in words or names as Trifles. But the great Hugo
Grotius himself does not, that makes the Names of every one of the Seven
Churches to be significant. Nor does Peganius that incomparably learned as well
as singularly pious German, who knowing nothing of my Exposition of the Seven
Churches, nor I of his, gave about the same time muchwhat the same Prophetical
Exposition (with Allusions to the Words or Names) that I have done. Which shows
the obviousness and naturalness of this way of opening the Prophetical sense of
these Epistles, to them whose Judgments are free.

And though I knew none, when I set my self to the Prophetical Exposition of
the Seven Churches, that held it a Prophecy of the State of the Church
distinguished into so many Intervals from the beginning to the end, unless he
that put me upon it might surmise some such thing; yet after the publishing my
Exposition I met with one who was something a curious enquirer after
Expositours of the Prophecies of Scripture that named to me at least half a
dozen, that held the Seven Churches to be such a Prophecy, reaching from the
beginning of the Church to the end thereof; and I have had some such like
information since. But none of these that were of this Opinion had attempted to
make the thing out, as I was informed from the same hands. And very lately by
chance looking again into Mr. Mede, I find him also explicitly to declare his
opinion, that the Vision of the Seven Churches is a Prophecy touching the
Church Universal a princip^o ad finem, setting out the different states of the
Church in several Intervals in that order that the Seven Churches are ranged in
the Apocalypse, which I have noted in my Preface to the Exposition.

And he gives two reasons for it, The one that the Number Seven is a Number of
entire Revolution of Time; to which I would add expressly that, As the Seven
Seals reach from the beginning to the end of the entire Apocalyptick Period,
whose Epoch is the beginning of the Christian Church, and Exitus in the end of
the World, so does also the Vision of the Seven Churches, and that for that
reason they are likewise exhibited under the Number of Seven. His other reason
is, That if this Prophetic sense was not intended, the Spirit of Prophecy
would not have pitched upon these Seven Churches in Asia, but the Letters would
have been directed either to all the Churches, or the most famous, such as the
Church at Antioch, at Alexandria, and Rome, and many others; and such as no
doubt, says he, had need of instruction as well as those named in the
Apocalypse. These are his two Arguments which I have not missed in my twenty
though I never met with them before that, in Mr. Mede. And these two Arguments
were sufficient to persuade that Person of so excellent a wit and judgment, of
the truth of the thing in general. Into how deep a sopor therefore or lethargy
is their wit and judgment cast whom twenty Arguments of like nature will not
awake?

But now for a further assurance upon a more particular account: Which is
briefly this, I first considered the Integrum which was to be distributed into
these seven parts. Which is the true Apostolic Church not contaminated with
either Pagan or Pagano Christian Idolatry, though living in various
circumstances from the beginning to the end. Now there being a complaint of
eating things sacrificed unto Idols under the third and fourth Intervals, and
none in the two first and three last, made me conceive that those middle
Intervals both put together did comprehend no less space than the times of the
Apostasy of the Church, before whole Kingdoms and Nations had emerged out of
it, as it happened at the blessed reformation. This is the first fast hold I
seemed to have of things, viz. that the Pergamenian and Thyatirian Intervals
included the times of the Apostasy of the Church till the Time of Reformation
came. The Time antecedent to this was all that Time before the Apostasy, or at
least, which I look upon as the more probable, before the Roman Empire became
Christian by the Conversion of Constantine. Now this antecedent Time is
naturally divided into two parts. The Time before the beginning of the ten
persecutions which began in the tenth of Nero, and the Time from thence to
Constantine, when the Pagan Persecutions ceased. The former is the Ephesi^e
Interval, the latter the Smyrnean. The Persecutions are threatened in the
former, executed in the latter. So we see the order of these four Churches
placed according to the order of Time and known History.

And the Sardian Interval naturally follows where there is no complaint of
eating things offered unto Idols as in the two former the Pergamenian and
Thyatirian Intervals, which intimates that the true non-Idolatrizing Church had
now, whenas before she was but the Woman in the Wilderness, become, according
to Promise in the Thyatirian Interval a visible conspicuous Church and Polity
of her self got from under the Pagano-Christian Yoke, as well as the Primitive
Church before had got from under the Pagan. Not that this is the best
constitution of the Church that ever will be, though incomparably, or, if you
will, infinitely better than Popery, but that it is introductory to the Blessed
Millennial State, when the New Jerusalem descends upon Earth, according to the
Prophecies in the Opened Book. For now Prophecy shows the order of these latter
Intervals, not History, as being things to come.

And it is said expressly to the Church of Philadelphia, I will write upon thee
the name of the city of my God even of the New Jerusalem. etc. But now as in
the Visions of the Opened Book Prophecy after the thousand years Satan is let
loose, and Gog and Magog besieges the Holy City; so after this excellent
Philadelphian Interval succeeds the Laodicean, who by their laziness and their
luke-warmness will permit Gog and Magog to grow upon them; and as Fire from
Heaven puts an end to that Siege, so (...), Laodicea combusta puts a Period to
this Stage of the Earth together with the Church.

So that the account of the placing of the Seven Churches without any respect
to Paronomastical Allusions you see is steady and orderly and according to Time
and History for what is past, and according to the Prophecies in the other part
of the Apocalypse, for what is to come. Which ordering of them who can be so
stupid as not to acknowledge to be done by design? From whence again it will
follow that this Vision of the Seven Churches is a Prophecy (properly so
called) of the Condition of the Church from the beginning to the end.

And the same will be still more particularly and exquisitely proved by the
Paronomastical Allusions of the Names of these Churches and other Names that
occurr in the Epistles to the Churches. But as the former way of Proof I have
pursued but sparingly, so I must let this alone altogether, both because it
would take up too much space, whenas my Notes are swollen to too great a
bigness already, and because the Reader may peruse what I have copiously enough
writ in my Exposition it self. I will only here take notice that if the
Paronomastical Allusions all along from the beginning to the end suit
exquisitely to the order of Time and Things, as I am well assured they do; they
are also a notable confirmation or demonstration of the Vis^on of the Sev^^
Churches being a Prophecy, properly so called, of the state of the Church from
the beginning to the end; that it was as ce^^ainly intended a Prophecy by the
Spirit of God, as the skillful Structure of the Bodies of Animals are an
assured Argument of his Providence, or that Flower-work or Imagery in Carpets
or Clothes made of variously colored Feathers (which are things light and
slight enough one would think) are an argument of the Art of the Indians that
are said to make them. And for my part I look upon this Paronomastical way, let
others make as light and slight of it as they will, to be made use of on
purpose, because as it is, where seriously taken notice of, a sufficient key of
Revealment, so it is here as pleasant a pie^e of the Artifice of Concealment
from high and lofty Wits, that would be likely to stalk over such Allusions
with a disdainful gate, and overlook them; There being more ways than one
wherein that of the Apostle may be verified, That God has chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, and chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise.

THE END.
Errata sic corrige.
PAge 60. l. 8. For, is rightly, r. is, rightly. p. 96. (...). r. Genicon^^a,
ibid. r. Idicon^^a. p. 105. l. 11. r. (...). p. 114. l. 11. r. good. p. 116. l.
7. r. (...). p. 117. l. 15. r. retracting. ibid. r. ^. p. 119. l. 1. r.
Mithridath. p. 121. l. 5. r. 202: We. p. 122. l. 6. r. Pamphylia. p. 152. l.
32. r. from uttering. p. 176. l. 31. r. called, in. p. 228. l. 4. r. therein
accordingly. p. 257. l. 19. r. Ioint-Exposition.

Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
HEnrici Mori Cantabrigiensis Opera omnia, tum quae Latin, tum quae Anglice
scripta sunt, nunc vero Latinitate donata. Fol. 3 Voll.

-- Apocalypsis Apocalypseos; Or, The Revelation of Saint John Unveiled. Quarto.

-- His Tetractys Anti-Astrologica, A Confutation of Judiciary Astrology, in
Answer to John But^er, B. D. Quarto.

-- His Remarks on Judge Hales's Treatise of Fluid Bodies. Octavo.

-- Answers and Replies in Defense of his Antidote against Idolatry. Octavo*

T. Burneti Telluris Theoria Sacra: Orbis Nostri Originem and Mutationes
Generales, quas aut jam subiit, aut olim subiturus est, complectens. (Figuris
Aeneis.) Quarto. 1681.

Dr. Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica. Octavo.

-- Christian Loyalty. Octavo.

-- Vindication of Liturgies. Octavo.

Dr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, with a Defense and
Continuation. Octavo.

A Reply to a Pamphet called, The Mischief of Impositions: which pretends to
answer the Dean of St. Paul's Sermon concerning the Mischief of Separation.
Quarto. 1681.

N. Resbury's Sermon Preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Charter House
Scholars; On Monday, December 13. 1680. Quarto.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Alan Broderick, Knight. November 25. 1680.

Mr. Long's History of the Donatists. Octavo.

-- His Character of a Separatist. Octavo.

-- The Nonformists Plea for Peace impleaded, against Baxter. Octavo.

-- Against Hales of Schism, with Mr. Baxter's Arguments for Conformity. Octavo.

The Spirit of Enthusiasm Exorcised, in a Sermon before the University of
Oxford, on Act-Sunday, July the 11 th. 1680. By G. Hicks, D. D. Quarto.

The Spirit of Popery speaking out of the Mouths of Fa^atical Protestants.

Grov^i Responsio ad nuperum Libellum qui inscribitur Celeusma seu Clamor ad
Theologos Hierarchiae Anglicanoe, etc. Quarto.

Mr. Grove's Vindication of the Conforming Clergy. Quarto.

A Farewell to Popery, to Dr. Nichols, Vice Chancellor of Oxford, and Warden
of New College, from Walter Harris, M. D. lately Fellow of the same College.

A True and lively Representation of Popery, showing that Popery is only
new-modelled Paganism. Quarto.

The Reasons for Nonconformity Examined and Refuted. Quarto.

Mr. Lamb's Stop to the Course of Separation. Octavo.

Fresh Suit against Independency. Octavo.

Allen's Works. Octavo. 2 Vol.

R. Kidder' s Christian Sufferer supported Or, A Discourse of Christian
Fortitude. Octavo.


