THE Poor Man's DYAL. WITH AN INSTRUMENT To Set It. Made applicable to any place
in ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, IRELAND, etc.

BY Sir SAMVEL MORLAND Knight and Baronet. 1689.

(...) are to be Sold at all the Button-Sellers, Cutlers, and (...) about the
Town. And will be shortly published in several other (...) and Dimensions, for
the Good of the public, and for the (...) of the Manufacture of our Nation.

The Poor Man's Dyal, With an Instrument to Set it.
To Set the Dyal.
FIrst, Set the small Instrument upon any Level place, where the Sun comes two
or three hours before, and as many after Noon, and by the 4 Marks at the
bottom, make the 4 Points (A, B, C, D) and by those Marks make two Lines, (A,
C) and (B, D) crossing each other in the Point (O.) Then mark the Point (E)
where the shadow of the Pin terminates in the Forenoon. And having from the
Distance (O E) described a Circle, watch in the Afternoon, when the shadow of
the Pin cuts the Circle in the Point (F) for the Line (E F) is a true East and
West Line; And the Hours of (VI) and (VI) upon the Dyal, being placed upon the
said Line, the Dyal is truly set.

DIRECTIONS.
FOR London, or any place within 20 Miles, the Dyal must be placed exactly
Level; But for the following place, the North-side of the Dyal (where is the
Hour of (XII) must be elevated higher than the Opposite, or South Side, as is
hereafter expressed, which every Carpenter and Joiner knows how to perform.

IN ENGLAND.
BEDFORD, about 1 twentieth part of an Inch. Berwick, 1 tenth. Buckingham, 3
hundreths. Cambridge, 1 twentieth. Carlisle, 1 fourth, or a quarter. Chester, 1
tenth. Colchester, 1 twentieth. Darby, 1 tenth. Durham, 1 fourth. Gloucester, 3
hundreths. Hartford, 1 fiftieth. Hereford, 1 twentieth. Huntington, 1
sixteenth. Ipswich, 1 twentieth. Kendal, 3 sixteenths. Lancaster, 1 fifth.
Leicester, 1 sixteenth. Lincoln, 1 tenth. Northampton, 1 sixteenth. Norwich, 1
tenth. Oxford, 1 fiftieth. Stafford, 1 tenth. Shrewsbury, 1 tenth. Stanford, 1
tenth. Warwick, 1 sixteenth. Worcester, 1 sixteenth. York, 1 fifth.
WALES.
ANglesey, 1 eighth. Bermouth, 1 tenth. Brecnock, 1 twentieth. Cardigan, 1
sixteenth. Caermarthen, 1 twentieth. Carnarvan, 1 twentieth. Denbigh, 1 tenth.
Flint, 1 tenth. Landaff, 1 hundredth. Monmouth, 1 fiftieth. Montgomery, 1
twentieth. Pembroke, 1 fiftieth. Radnor, 1 twentieth. St. David, 3 hundreths.
The Isle of Man, 3 sixteenths.

SCOTLAND.
ABerdeen, 43 hundreths. Dunblain, 1 third. Dunkel, 3 eights. Edinburgh, 3
tenths. Glascow, 3 tenths. Kinsale, 45 hundreths. Orkney, 59 hundreths. St.
Andrews, 1 third. Skyrassin, 1 half. Sterlin, 3 tenths.
IRELAND.
ANtrim, 1 fifth. Arglas, 15 hundreths. Armagh, 17 hundreths. Caterbergh, 17
hundreths. Clare, 8 hundreths. Cork, 3 hundreths. Drogheda, 1 eighth. Dublin, 1
tenth. Dundalk, 1 eighth. Galloway, 1 tenth. Kenny, 7 hundreths. Kildare, 1
tenth. Kingstown, 1 eighth. Knockfergus, 1 fifth. Kinsale, 1 hundredth.
Limmerick, 7 hundreths. Queenstown, 1 tenth. Waterford, 1 twentieth. Wexford, 1
sixteenth. Youghall, 3 hundreths.
For the Places hereafter mentioned, the North-side of the Dyal must be lower
than the South Side, viz.

In ENGLAND.
BRistol, 1 hundredth. Canterbury, 1 tenth. Chichester, 1 sixteenth. Dorchester,
1 twentieth. Exeter, 1 sixteenth. Gilford, 1 fiftieth. Reading, 1 hundredth.
Salisbury, 3 hundreths. Truro, 7 hundreths.
The ISLANDS.
GVernsey, 1 eighth. Jersey, 1 eighth. Lindy, 1 hundredth. Portland, 7
hundreths. Wight, 1 twentieth.
If it be required to fix any Dyal in any place of England, Scotland, etc. not
mentioned in this Catalogue, it must be set according to the nearest of the
places that are mentioned, and it will serve without any sensible Error, and
much better than those ordinary Brass Dyals, which are usually made by ignorant
Apprentices and Journey-men: Or that Cobbled Pewter Dyal, which was lately made
by a Brazen-faced Founder, in Imitation of this Porr Man's Dyal, and deserves
at least, by way of Transposition, the Name of That Man's Poor Dyal; For though
he had the Wit to make a Circle of the same Diameter, and to set off all the
Divisions of the Hours, Halfs, and Quarters from the other; yet the Style is so
False and Defective in all its Parts, that it is not to be mended by one, who
knows nothing of a Dyal: Yet, notwithstanding, in one thing he is to be
commended, that he has made the Hour Lines so short, that the Shadow, of the
False Gnomon, will not so easily discover his Errors. Besides, he has carefully
filled up the Vacancies in the middle of he Dyal, with the Points of the
Compass, which are only proper for an Upright Style, and clogged the Tail of it
with five Leaden Bells, within a pair of Rams-horns, to ring aloud the praises
of his Sheeps-head, for attempting to Imitate or Counterfeit another Man's
Contrivance, without being able to perform it like an Artist: Forasmuch as any
person who has the least knowledge of those matters, will soon distinguish
between the true Original, (which was first Calculated, and afterward Exactly
Delineated by Sir Samuel Morland's own Hands, and the Molds of the Style, which
is the principal part of the Dyal, carefully Contrived and Corrected) and that
ignorant Founder's Counterfeit, and Ill-contrived Dyal, to which he has put a
Date of 1690, to let the World understand that it was none of his own
Contrivance, but that he did Counterfeit one that was made before, viz. in
1689. And of which the Style comes False out of the Mold, and by Cutting and
Scraping is made Ten Times worse.

If by Accident in sending about, or otherwise, any of these Dyals, or the
Styles of them being but Block Tin, shall happen to be Bent; Then with the help
of a Square, or for want of that, of a quarter of a Sheet of any Paper folded
up in a double fold, (which makes an exact Square) it may be bended back, and
set right again.

FINIS.

