Sacris ordinibus non- rite initiati, tenentur ad eos rite ineundos.
IN Thamisin Rhodanus turbatas devehit undas,
Et nostra insanis littora vastat aquis.
Lemani sese tentant attollere fluctus,
Et Lacus Oceano bella movere parat.
Dux facti auratis fulget Calvinus in armis,
Innumerisque ferox classibus alta premit.
Nescio quos vehit ille Senes, and nomina priscis
Non audita viris, and nova jura crepat.
Nos pia simplicitas, nos prima ac purior aetas,
Aeternique movent jussa tremenda Dei.
Non sacras patimur leges and vinc'la resolvi,
Non adeo faciles in nova damna sumus.
Quid populi furias, and murmura vana timemus?
Quid rabies? tetricae quid potuere minae?
Nos ritus prisci, and veterum reverentia Patrum,
Nos tenet antiquae Relligionis amor.
At vos, qui tumidae voluistis cedere genti,
Vos non-calcatum qui tenuistis iter,
Desinite, and nostras tandem redeatis ad aras,
Non juvat ulterius Gallica castra sequi.
Expetit amplexus Ecclesia nota priores,
Et pandit placidum Matter amica sinum:
Illa quidem natos, quos devius egerat error,
Inque suas aedes, and sua jura vocat.
Nam neque supremum fas est fraudasse Tonantem,
Devotumque Deo surripuisse Caput:
Nec leges violasse licet, quas cana vetustas
Jusserat a sera posteritate coli.
ERGO,
Qui modo nostra novus venisti in templa sacerdos,
Nec firmare potes, nec revocare gradum,
Mitratos apices, and quos tegit infula crines
Prostratus summa cum pietate petas;
Sic tua sacratus curabis ovilia Pastor,
Te ducente gregem, sic been semper eant.
Non datur Purgatorium Pon (...) aut Platonicum.
VEl merito. Nec enim levia aut ludio(...)
Fata Deus meritis, and stant sua praem(...)
Est Locus aeriis long semotus ab oris,
Quo se proponit manifesta in luce videndum
Ipse Deus, propiusque piis se mentibus infert:
Justitia haec immota colit loca, lancibus aequis
Expendens quae facta virum: queis vivere curae est
Haud coeli immemores, and tactos Numine vero
Ascribit coelo, quos ipso e font voluptas
Demulcet, liquidisque uberrima gaudia rivis.
At quos foedus amor mundi in peccata volentes
Egerit, excipient aeternis Tartara flammis,
Et tortor Satanas, tortus magis omnibus ipse:
Nec mora, nec requies: sedet, aeternumque sedebit
Poena illis, precibusque hoc jus revocabile nullis.
At Sancti clamore legunt decreta secundo
Justitiae, legesque pias mirantur, and ipso
Jura olim edocti, sanctoque oracula libro
Inter eos unus, long celsissimus, omnes
Eminet Origines, nec jam transcribit Olympo
Quicquid id est Erebi: jam nunc juvat esse modestum,
Spesque avidas revocare, and tantis parcere votis.
Non eadem Romae tamen and sententia coelo est;
Vertit Roma Acheronta, atque imo Tartara fundo,
Eximit inferno manes, atque inserit astris.
Et quisquam stupet, Astronomos ascribere coelo
Serpentesque, Ursosque, and factos astra Leones;
Cum foedi manes and adhuc tortoris olentes
Sulphura, and ignita late loca foeta Mephiti,
Quique ferunt maculas etiamnum in front recentes,
Lividaque hesterni retinent vestigia flagri,
Scilicet exiguo argento, and mox vindice Papa
Elapsi, loca pura colent, and dummodo Romae
Sic visum fuerit, nec digna Quiritibus illis?
Tantum Relligio? --
Tu quoque cede Deo, totumque in pectora Numen
Accipias, and prona Dei vestigia adores,
Infelix Ratio, mundoque haud aequa futuro,
Heu nimium coeca, and multo notissima lapsu.
Tune etiam mussas, ipsos te posse Nerones,
Sejanos, and quicquid habent jam Tartara diri
Eripere, and licet haud unum recreare valebat
Vel gutta Abramus, Tu, Tu tamen omnibus una
Aeternos praestare putas, te vindice, fastos?
Pone animos, nec fige Deo temeraria leges.
En! Viden' ut germana Fides tua temperat uni
Obsequiturque Deo, totumque ita subjicit orbem,
Fatorum Regina, volentibus imperat astris.
Illa tamen morietur, eris tu sola superstes.
Ah! Sapias tandem, and coelo te creed faventi;
Nam soli sapuisse Deo prudentia summa est.
Julii 7. 1663. In die Comitiorum, Respondente Mro. Morton S. T. B. and Coll.
D. Joan. Soc.

ICONISMUS 1.


A DESCRIPTION of The TUBA STENTORO-PHONICA In different Figures and
Dimensions; TOGETHER WITH A brief ACCOUNT of what Trials and Experiments have
been made of them, both at Sea and Land.
THe first Instrument of this kind (though the Invention had been long before
digested in my thoughts!) was by my directions made in Glass, in the Year 1670.
and is described in Ponism. 1. Fig. A. Icon. 1. Fig. A. Number. 1.
being about 2 Foot 8 Inches in length, the Diameter of the great end 11
Inches, and the Diameter of the little end 2.

In this Instrument I was heard speaking at a considerable distance, by several
Persons, and they likewise were heard by me, and found that it did very
considerably magnify (or rather multiply) the Voice. Whereupon I caused
another to be made in Brass, about 4 Foot in length, the Diameter of the
greater end 12 Inches, and of the less, 2 Inches; as in Fig. A. number. 2. Icon.
1. Fig. A. Number. 2.
is described. And for the better convenience of opening and shutting the mouth
without losing any part of the breath (the loss of a small part whereof
sensibly abates the lowdness of the voice) I caused the Mouthpiece (described
Fig. A. number. 3. Icon. 1. Fig. A. Number. 3.
) to be made somewhat after the manner of Bellows, that so by opening and
shutting, it might answer the motion of the mouth exactly, and yet be held so
close, that it might not lose any part of the breath in speaking.

Of this second Instrument, there were two trials made very succesfully in St.
James's Park; where, at one time, the Lord Angier standing by the Park wall
near Goring-House, heard me speaking (and that very distinctly) from the end of
the Mall near Old Spring-Garden: And at another time, His Majesty, His Royal
Highness, Prince Rupert, and diverse of the Nobility and Gentry, standing at the
end of the Mall near Old Spring-Garden, heard me speaking (word for word) from
the other end of the Mall, (though the wind were contrary;) which is 850 Yards,
or near of a measured English Mile.

Being much encouraged by these Trials, and by His Majesty's most gracious
approbation of the Invention, I resolved to make some further Experiments of
this Matter, and caused a third Instrument to be made ICONISMUS 1.
of Copper, in the form of an ordinary Trumpet, (as is described in Fig. B.
Icon. 1. Fig. B.
) the length 16 Foot 8 Inches, the Diameter of the great end 19 Inches, and of
the little end 2 Inches.

This Instrument I carried down below the Bridge (being accompanied with a
Gentleman or two of my acquaintance) as far as a place called Cuckolds-point,
and leaving it there in the hands of a Waterman, we Rowed down very near
Deptford; and there, notwithstanding the noise of Seamen and Carpenters in
diverse Ships both before and behind us, we heard very distinctly most words the
said Waterman spoke in it, whom we judged to be at least a Mile and an half
distant from us, and concluded that had the River been free from noise, we
might have heard and understood much further.

After that, I caused to be made a fourth Instrument of Copper (as is described
Fig. C. Icon. 1. Fig. C.
) about 21 Feet in length, the Diameter of the great end 2 Foot, and of the
little end 2; and of the same Figure and Shape with the former, only it was
more exactly wrought.

I gave likewise directions at the same time (for variety sake) for a fifth
Instrument of Copper, the length whereof was 5 Foot 6 Inches, the Diameter of
the great end 21 Inches, and of the little end 2 Inches, as in Fig. D. Icon. 1.
Fig. D. Icon. 1. Fig. E.
As likewise for two smaller Instruments, whose length was each 5 Foot 6
Inches, the Diameter of the great end 10 Inches 1/^, and of the little end 1
Inch.

The third and fourth of these Instruments were, at one Trial, heard from off
the River over against Faux-Hall, to the nearest part of Battersey over against
Chelsey: And at another, from Hide-Park-Gate to Chelsey-Colledge; either of
which distances was judged to be above a Mile and an half. And by what Trials I
have made of the two least of all, I conceive they may maintain a conference,
in a still calm evening, at the least three quarters of a measured Mile.

After this, by His Majesty's special Command, the three largest of these
Instruments were sent to Deal Castle, and there several Trials were made of
them by the Honorable Francis Digby Esquire Governor of that Castle; a particular
Relation whereof was given under his own hand to the Right Honorable the Lord
Arlington, His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State, in a Letter bearing Date
the 14 th of October, 1671. A Copy whereof His Lordship gave me leave here to
insert.

The Copy of a Letter written to the Lord Arlington, His Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State, by the Honorable Francis Digby Esquire Governor of Deal
Castle, bearing Date, October 14. 1671.
MY LORD,
SIr Samuel Morland having by the Kings Order sent hither three of his new
Speaking-Trumpets, I have found them, upon several Trials to answer, if not
exceed what could be expected from them; which I thought necessary to let your
Lordship know, as the best way of satisfying His Majesty concerning them. The
first Experiment I made, was between Waumer Castle and Deal Castle, with the
disadvantage of a side Wind and some noise of the Sea, and yet we heard very
distinctly from Castle to Castle, which are about a measured Mile asunder.
Since that I have tried the biggest of the three, which is turned Trumpet-wise,
and when the Wind blows from the Shore, we hear plainly off at Sea as far as
the Kings Ships usual ride, which is between two and three Miles. This we have
done several times, but particularly some days since, we heard from the Castle,
to Sir John Chichley's Ship, which lay in the best of the Road. So that without
question, they will be of great use in all occasions where it is necessary to
give Orders or Intelligence at a distance; but most of all at Sea, where we can
give and take the advantage of the Wind, as is best for hearing. We have found
likewise, that by laying one of these Instruments to the Ear, the Words are
heard more distinctly; and I am confident, there will be found several other
ways of improving them to greater perfection, since the improvement has been so
considerable at first. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient Servant, FR. DIGBY.


A SHORT DISCOURSE Touching the Nature of Sounds, and the manner how (as I
conceive) they are magnified, or rather multiplied by the Tuba Stentoro-Phonica.
I Shall not here engage my self in any tedious Philosophical Discourse
touching the Nature of Sounds, forasmuch as I believe it equally mysterious
with that of Light and Colors, and consequently too fine and too subtle a
thing for humane reason and understanding to comprehend.

True it is, as to the act of Vision, that by the help of curious Anatomists,
we may trace the Refracted Rays of visible Objects (more or fewer in number as
the Pupilla is dilated or contracted) through the several pellucid Tunicks and
Humors of the Eye, till we find their Pictures or Images (their postures only
inverted!) fairly lodged in the Tunica Retiformis. But how these Images or
Representations are afterward transmitted to the reasonable Soul? whether by
the mediation only of that incredible number of Capillamenta (or small Threads)
of which the Optic Nerve is composed? and if so, how the various percussions
of the extremities of those Capillaments in the Tunica Retina, are repeated by
the other extremities of the same Capillaments in the Brain? and how the Soul
by contemplating the one, can discern the other, with so great a variety of
Figures and Colors? Or whether that immortal Fire, in the act of Vision, makes
any use of the Animal Spirits (those nimble Mercurys of which it has such
plentiful Repositories in the Ventricles of the Brain) to conduct the Species
into its private Recesses there, as she does undoubtedly employ and send them
forth in greater and lesser numbers, to animate the Muscles, and so give
diversities of Motions to our bodily and living Engines? And lastly, what manner
of Creatures those little active Spirits are? and how they are commanded? and
how they obey? is best known to the God of Nature, whose wonderful Workmanship
we all are.

In like manner, as to the Nature of Sounds and Voices; I must confess, that
the circular Undulations of a Vessel of Water, by the percussion of any part of
its Superficies, and the reverberations of those Undulations when they meet
with opposition by the sides of such Vessels, makes it seem more than probable,
that the percussions of the Air by any Sound, spreads and dilates it self by a
spherical Undulation (greater, or less, according to the strength and virtue of
that percussion) till it meet with some opposition, and so echoes back again.
And there ICONISMUS 1.
is great reason to believe that Voices being first modulated and articulated
by the Glottis of the Larinx, and the several parts of the Mouth, make
spherical Undulations in the Air, till they meet with the Acoustick Organ,
whose excellent Fabric we may indeed with admiration contemplate, and give a
guess for what Uses each part was ordained, namely the (...), and (...), as
likewise the Tympanum, together with the Malleus, Incus, and Stapes: But what
manner of Images or Species such Percussions make; with such an infinity of
distinctions and varieties? and how they fly about like Atoms in the Air? and
are to be found in each point of the Medium? (and anon vanish into nothing?)
and by what stupendous agility they are conveyed to the Soul? and how that
does to receive so many millions of messages from without? and to dispatch and
send out as many more from within? and that in so short a space of time? the
more we torment our thoughts about it, the less we understand it, and are
forced to confess our Ignorance. (...).

All therefore that I shall adventure to say upon this Subject, is only to give
the Reader a short account of what Observations I have made, relating to this
Instrument; and where I attempt to give a reason, it shall be with all
submission to Men of greater Learning and better Understanding.

I. I do find that a small Tube (as for example, that of an ordinary Trumpet)
does not at all magnify the Sounds, or Words, or Syllables; but on the
contrary does much lessen and diminish it.

II. I do find it necessary, that the Diameter of the least end of one of these
Instruments must be equal to (if not greater then) the Diameter of the Orifice
of the Speakers Mouth; and that what it wants of that, so much the less does
the Instrument magnify (or multiply) the Voice. For Example: I made 2
Mouth-pieces for the Instrument in Icon. 1. Fig. D. number. 1, 2, 3. and 4, 5, 6.
Icon. 1. Fig. D. Number. 1, 2, 3. and 4, 5, 6.
the Diameter of the middle part (2) was an Inch, and of (5) about of an Inch,
but found that the one did not magnify, nor the other so much as the same
Instrument with a Mouth-piece like unto that in Icon. 1. Fig. A. number. 3. Icon.
1. Fig. A. Number. 3.
And indeed it seems reasonable, that the Mouth of Man being an Instrument that
Nature has already fitted for the work; to apply to it an Orifice less than its
own, is, in truth, to put a check to the motion of the Air and Breath, and
consequently to lessen the Sound of the Voice.

III. I find that the Instrument must be enlarged by degrees, and not too
suddenly. For Example: I made such a one as in Icon. 1. Fig. D. Icon. 1. Fig. D.
which did not magnify the Voice in any proportion, as did those in Fig. B, C,
or E. Fig. B, C, E.
which I cannot attribute to any thing, but its not being enlarged by degrees,
as the others are; as by comparing their respective dimensions will better
appear.

IV. That the least end, or rather the Mouth-piece of this Instrument, must be
so applied and fitted to the Speakers Mouth, that no Air or Breath be lost, and
yet that the Mouth have free liberty of opening and shutting, that so the
Articulation be entirely preserved.

ICONISMUS II.


V. I do find by diverse Experiments, that the Polyphonismus (that is to say,
the Focus, or Point where the Voice is most magnified or multiplied) is the
Center of its greater Orifice, as in Iconism. 2. Lit. B. Icon. 2. Lit. B.
And from that point, to the Center of the least Orifice (which is indeed the
whole length of the Axis) it is magnified less and less, in proportion, as the
Diameter is shortened.

VI. I find, that the turning and winding of this Instrument, either
Trumpet-wise, or in any other Circular Figure, does not at all prejudice it: On
the contrary, I do believe it rather strengthens and confirms the Voice.

VII. I humbly conceive (with submission to better judgments) that the Voice,
as it is transmitted through this Instrument (A B C D) from the Mouth A,
endeavors all the way, to spread and dilate it self by spherical Undulations;
but finding opposition on every side, makes a percussion in every point of each
imaginary Circle of the Tube, viz. V V, T T, S S, R R, Q Q, P P, O O, N N, M M,
L L, K K, C D, etc. and so reundulates back to the respective Centers of every
such imaginary Circle; That is to say, The Circle Q Q to its Center c; The
Circle P P to its Center b; The Circle O O to its Center a; The Circle N N to
its Center z; The Circle M M to its Center Y; The Circle C B to its Center B,
etc.

Again, it is to be supposed, that the Percussion in the Circle Q Q being
reundulated to the Center c, makes there a much stronger percussion than that
which was made in any single point or part of the Circle Q Q, forasmuch as it
may be presumed, that all the percussions that were made in the Circle Q Q are
now united in the Center c; and that this percussion in the Center c would
again spread and dilate it self by a spherical Undulation; but meeting with
opposition in every point of the Tube (suppose e e) an entire Cone of imaginary
Rays of Sound, of which c e and c e are two, are reverberated to some Center
(suppose it b) in the same manner as the Rays of the Sun are reverberated from
a polished Superficies of a parabolical Concave to its proper Focus; Of which
reverberation I had a fair Experiment, in a parabolical Concave of fine Pewter,
which I caused to be made in the Year 1670. by a very exact Workman, and found
that in the very same Focus, where the Rays of the Sun were so united, that in
a minute of time they set on Fire a Deal Board, was the Voice of a man speaking
near it, sensibly magnified. So that after the same manner an entire Cone of
Rays, of which b ps, b ps, are two, must be supposed to be reverberated to some
Center (suppose a; for in this Figure it was not possible to observe
Geometrically the Angles of Incidence and Reflection, without confounding the
other more significant Lines and Figures.) And so a Cone of Rays, of which W O+
and W O+ are two, are united in their Center or Focus, suppose B, etc. so that
there seems to be throughout this Instrument A B C D an united force as well of
Reverberations, as of Reundulations, which beget a a kind of Focus in every
point of the imaginary Axis A B: And therefore, as the Tube enlarges it self,
and the Circles both of Reundulation and Reverberation become greater, there
must needs be imagined ICONISMUS II.
a greater number of reundulating Circles, and reverberating Rays to meet in
each respective Center and Focus, whereby the same Voice is prodigiously
magnified and augmented.

Wherefore, if this Instrument A B C D were cut off in the points M M, it would
not magnify of what it does at the whole length, which I have sufficiently
experimented, and am entirely satisfied therein.

And as to the points of Reundulation and Reverberation, my opinion was very
much confirmed to me by a late Experiment I made with a Vessel of Quicksilver,
of the same Figure with this Iconismus H E G F I, in the midst whereof were
small thin Hoops, or pieces of wood bent and fixed in the same Figure as is C K
O V A V O K D, being closed at the end A, and open at the end C D. Into this
Vessel I put Quicksilver enough to cover the whole Figure, and consequently the
Figure A B C D. And then striking the Quicksilver smartly in A with the end of
a stick, it begot a numberless number of Curvilineal Undulating and
Reundulating Figures, not unlike to the Figures V V, T T, S S, R R, etc. from
the point A, to the point B, which were reverberated from the sides A N C, and
A N D, as they were driven along one by another.

This Experiment, together with another which I lately made, by carrying one
Ear along the Line E F and W G, with what exactness I possibly could, whilst a
Gentleman did me the favor to read some pages of a Book, with an even tone, in
each of the four Instruments B, C, D, and E, in Iconism. 1. separately and
distinctly: At which time I plainly found, that as my Ear advanced toward the
point B, the Voice was sensibly magnified; but as it was removed toward W, it
was somewhat abated; and as it was removed either toward C, D, or G, it was
abated two, three, four, five, six, and more degrees; made me conclude for
certain, that in every point of the imaginary Axis there is a Focus or
Polyphonismus, but that the principal and chiefest Focus where the greatest
Polyphonismus of all is, that is to say, the point where the Voice is most of
all magnified or multiplied; is B.

This Focus (or Polyphonismus) being now no longer imprisoned in the Tube,
dilates it self by spherical Undulations into the Medium (as in Icon. 2. may
more plainly appear) till such time as it meets with some opposition; as for
example, let us suppose it in the points H, E, G, F, I, from which points, and
innumerable others, it is reundulated, multiplied, and reverberated throughout
the Sphere of its activity: For by how much stronger the percussion is in B, so
much greater is the Sphere of Undulation and Reverberation, and consequently
the Voice is heard at a greater distance.

And that such Reundulations and Reverberations do exceedingly magnify or
multiply Sounds, I cannot but recommend to the Readers contemplation, a famous
Experiment made in the Year of Our Lord 1615. by one Bernardus Varenius (a
sober and learned Writer) as he himself relates it in his Geographia Generalis,
Lib. 1. Prop. 41. who, after he had with much pains and difficulty climbed up
to the top of Carpathus, a Mountain of Hungary, (whose perpendicular height he
judged to be a German Mile, and above all Winds and Motions of the Air) he
discharged a Pistol, which made at first no greater noise, than if he had snapt
a stick in sunder; till after some small space of time, being dilated, it waxed
greater and stronger, and filled the Woods and Dales beneath. But descending
through the annual Snows, toward the lower part of the Mountain, he discharged
a second time, and the noise was so horrible, that it exceeded the Report of
the greatest Cannon; insomuch that he feared lest the whole Mountain would have
fallen with him. This noise lasted about of an hour, till it had been
multiplied and reverberated from the most abstruse Caverns of the Mountain,
etc. as is better expressed in the Authors own words, Varen Geograph. Genesis l.
1. prop. 41.
Explosi in ea summitate sclopetum, quod non majorem sonitum primo prae se
tulit, quam si ligillum vel bacillum confregissem, post intervallum autem
temporis murmur prolixum invaluit, etc.

So that from this Experiment of Varenius, we are to conclude with him, That
the percussion of the Air made by the first discharging of his Pistol on the
utmost top and sharpest point of the Mountain, being dilated by a spherical
Undulation, and meeting with no Objects to reundulate it, was at the first
scarcely heard by him who discharged it; whereas the second Report, being
nearer to the Caverns and Woods beneath, were suddenly and prodigiously
multiplied and reverberated.

VIII. But in the last place, as to the demonstrative part of this Tuba
Stentoro-Phonica, together with the exact Figure and Dimensions of it, That is
to say, "What is that Right-lined, Curvilineal, or mixed
"Figure? And what are its exact Dimensions?
"And what the Sphere of its Activity? That
"best and most magnifies Humane Voice in
"Syllables, Words, and Sentences?
is a new Problem, which I humbly propose to the learned Philosophers, and
Critics of this our Age, as a thing that merits their Studies and
Contemplations, hoping that some one or other of them, either at his own, or
his Princes charge, may happily find a way how it may be clearly solved and
demonstrated, whereby the Invention may come to be of greater use and benefit
to Mankind, than from this first Adventure of mine could reasonably be expected.

-- Et erit mihi magnus Apollo. A Brief ACCOUNT of the Manifold USES OF THIS
TVBA STENTORO-PHONICA, OR LOUD-SPEAKING-TRUMPET, Both at SEA, and LAND.
I. At Sea.
I. IN a Storm, or in a dark night, when two Ships dare not come so near one to
the other as to be heard by any man's ordinary Voice; I conceive it may be of
great use, that by this Instrument they may with great facility speak and
discourse together at half a mile or a miles distance, or more, if occasion
require, especially if alternately they take the advantage of the Wind. And if
that be so strong, that but one of the Ships can have any opportunity of
speaking with the Wind, the other may answer by signs, though directly against
it.

II. In a Storm, it is of great use in a single Ship, that one man's Voice
giving Orders for governing and steering the Vessel, may be heard distinctly by
all the Mariners. Of which His Majesty, who perfectly understands all Maritine
Affairs, is so sensible, that He has already given order for some of these
Instruments of the smaller size (as judging them most useful) to be made and
put into several of His Royal Ships. And it is to be believed, that when the
use of them shall be more publicly known, few Ships (whether Men of War or
Merchantmen) will go to Sea without them.

III. In Calm weather, an Admiral may give Orders to his whole Fleet, though
they lay two or three miles about, without sending out Boats and Messengers
from Ship to Ship.

IV. In cases of great Expedition, Orders may be given from such Forts as the
Castle of Deal, etc. to any one or all the Ships riding in the Road. And if it
be a matter of secrecy, it may be spoken in Cipher, being before hand agreed on
between the Governor of such a Castle, and the Admiral or chief Commander
aboard those Ships.

II. At Land.
I. IN case a Town or City be Besieged, and so close girt about, that there can
be no message sent in; by this Instrument at one, two, or three miles distance,
they may be told that there is Relief coming, and what number, and when they
are to expect them, and how they are to behave themselves upon their approach;
and this by speaking in Cipher, as is before mentioned. And so on the contrary,
may the Besiegers make as good use of this Instrument to threaten and
discourage the Besieged, not only the Officers and Soldiers on the Walls and
Bulwarks, but all the People and Inhabitants, how great and spacious soever the
Town or City be.

II. A General may himself speak to his whole Army, though forty or fifty
thousand men or more, either to give Orders to his Commanders and Officers, or
to encourage and put life into his common Soldiers.

III. Whereas now a Herald at Arms making a Proclamation, though of never so
great concernment and importance, can scarcely be heard by above thirty or
forty Standers-by; by the help of this Instrument he may be heard very
distinctly by many thousands. And the Case is almost the same in such Courts of
Judicature as the King's Bench in Westminster Hall, etc. where many of His
Majesty's Subjects are punished for not hearing the Call of the Common Crier,
further, and beyond the sphere of activity of the said Cryer's speaking Organ.

IV. An Overseer of Works, of what kind soever, may by this give Orders to many
hundreds of Workmem, without once removing his station.

V. In case of great Fires, where usually all people are in a hurry, the
Officers and Commanders may by this Instrument so govern the Assistants, as to
prevent disorder and confusion, and consequently may save a Town or City from
perishing.

VI. In case a number of Thieves and Robbers attaque a House that is lonely,
and far from Neighbors, by such an Instrument as this, may all the Dwellers
round about, within the compass of a Mile or more, be immediately informed,
upon whose House such an attaque is made, the number of Thieves or Robbers, how
armed and equipped, what manner of persons, with the color and fashion of
their Habits, and by what way they have made their escape, with any such like
circumstances; whereby they would certainly know, with what strength to come
upon those House-breakers, where readily to find them, or which way to pursue
them. No particular whereof can be performed by either Drum, Trumpet, Bell, or
any other Engine or Instument, hitherto in use.

These and many more may be the Advantages of this New Instrument, as it is
already invented: And I do not doubt, but were the Dimensions of the Fig. C. in
Icon. 1. sufficiently enlarged, it might render a Voice audible at the least
eight or ten Miles, either at Sea or Land, with a favorable Wind. And what
further additions to, and improvements of this Invention may hereafter, by the
Art and Industry of Ingenious and Learned Men, be found out, Time and
Experience will better show. In the mean time, if the World shall kindly accept
these my first Endeavors, it will be an Encouragement to me hereafter to
produce others.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.

