THE Most blessed and truest NEWS FROM IRELAND, SHOWING, The fortunate
success of the Protestants, And Gods just vengance on the Rebels. WITH A List
of the Protestant Commanders, and the chief of the Rebels Commanders, and the
Towns that the Protestants have relieved.

With the humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Ministers, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of Lancaster,
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

With his Majesty's Answer thereunto.

London, Printed for T. W. and G. H. 1642.

A List of the Protestant Commanders, and the chief of the Rebels Commanders,
and the Towns that the Protestants ^ave releeved.
The Protestant Commanders
Lord Ormond. Lord Brabason. Earl of Baramore. Lord Lisly. Earl of Kildare.
S. George Wentworth Captain Armstrong Lord Pore. S. Thomas Lucas. Lord Thomond.
Sir Rich. Greenvile. Colonel Monk. Captain Scout. Lord Lambart. Lieut. Col.
Loftus, Sir John Sherlock. Serj. Major Wa^^^n. Serj. Major Paget. Serj. Ma.
Willoughby
The chief Rebels.
Earl of Care. L. Vis. Mountgarret L. Vis. Herne. Lord Dunsane. L. Bar. of
Dunbony. L. Bar. of Logmoe. Earl of Wickloe. Earl of Waxford. Ear. of
Catherlaugh Lord Muskre. Lord L^^^^^^. Lord D^lvin. Lord Arkin. Col. Fitz.
Gerard. Captain Demsey. Col. Hugh Birne.
Tow^^ re^^ved by the Protestants.
Athy. Killtrush. Drogheda. Cast. Tippar. Castle Catherlaugh. Cloughgrenan.
Wi^glee. Ballilenon. Cast. Rebon. Stradbally. Ballin^kill. Dent.
Knockardnegurrath. Burr^s. Knocknemease. O Duns. (...)int. Clogham. Kingsale.
Blessed News from Ireland.
SIR,
SInce many idle rumors are divulged among you, concerning the present
condition of Ireland, some of which are improbable, other are so doubtful,
that men have just cause of suspicion not to believe. My purpose is therefore
at this time intended perfectly to resolve you of the truest affairs, and most
real estate of all Ireland. The Lord Ormond, the Earl of Kildare, the Lord
Br^ha^^n, Cap. Armstrong, Quartermaster General of the Horse, and Sir George
Wentworths troop, under the command of Captain Herman, every one with their
several forces overcame the Castle Tippar, which the Rebel had possessed, taking
from thence great stone of Ammunition, who marching onwards with great courage
to Kiltullin, burned by the way many Villages of the Rebels; and from thence
marching to Athy, burnt the Castle and Town of Ki^^^sh, belonging to the
Rebellions Colonel Fitzgerald; from thence they took great store of provision,
which the rebels before had taken from the English. Then Sr. Patrick Wymes
bringing us a fresh supply of soldiers, consisting of 500. Foot, and 100.
Horse, the English Army marched to the Castle of Catherlagh, where the Lord
^^l^in, Earl of West-Meath, the Lord Mountggarrat, the Lord Lo^pon, resisted
them with strong forces, but our men had undaunted spirits, and feared them not
in the least respect, and we having the advantage of them, being on a hill,
gave them three vollies of shot, before they came within shot of us, and
continuing very eager with them, we took the L. Muskgroo prisoner, and slew
about nine score more, then they fled and yielded up the Castle. From thence we
marched to Cloughgrenan, a castle of great strength, and conquered that also;
but the Rebels perceiving their approach, fired the town; but Captain Harman
knowing that part of the Country very well, followed them, and slew a great
number of them, and relieved 5 hundred Protestants, exceedingly distressed
there. Then we marched on, and relieved Captain George Grehams Castle called,
Ballilenon; and by the help of the Lord Lievtenants, and Sir Thomas Lucas
troops, Castle Rebon and Pert were removed. Marching to Stradbally, we slew
many passing over the River Barron, where the Rebels are encamped; and marching
to his Majesty's fort of Mary-borough, by the help of the Lord Lislyes forces,
they relieved Ballynekill: Marching onwards, we killed threescore Rebels at
Knockardnegurrah, the other fled, and yielded up the town. The Lord
Lieutenant, the Earl of Baramore, the Lord Poor, Earl of Alentia, the Lord
Thomond, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Richard Grenvile, Captain Armestrong, and
Captaing Scout, with their several Troops and Forces, relieved Burros, the
Duke of Buckinghams Castle, and passing the River Noare, near unto Florence,
Fitz-Patrick, there was a stone Cause-way over a Bog, and passing thereby, we
killed many Rebels, and relieved three hundred English Prisoners. Then they
relieved Knocknemease, and in the morning Burr, and put four or five hundred
English therein, who had endured a long siege by the rebels. In their return
back they burnt the Country of O Duns, till they came to Castle-Ruffe, and by
the help of Colonel Monk, and Captain Treswel, the one commanding the Lord
Generals, and the other the Lord Lislyes Horse-Troops, slew four hundred at
the p^ssage of Portnehint, possessed by the rebels. S. Patricke relieved the
English in Ballynekill, who were in great distresses for want of victuals,
sending the eighty Barrels of Wheat and Beer belonging to Dempsey, a notorious
rebel: all whose villages they burnt, especially the Territory of Clanmaleero.
Four miles from Athy at the Bridge of Magainy, were about seven thousand Foot,
and two hundred Horse of the rebels, conducted (as the Prisoners taken told us)
by Viscount Mountgarrat, the Lord Viscount Ikerin, the Earl of Care, the Lord
Dunsane, the Lord Astry, the Lord Baron of Dunbony, the Baron of Loghmoe, and
most of the principal rebels, of the Counties of Wickloe, Wexford,
Catherlaugh, Kildare, Kilkenny, and Queens County, who drew up part of their
Forces to Pankardstown, near Grang Mellon. By the directions of the Lord
General, Corner Butler, and Cornet Magrah, were sent to discover the rebels,
and their Forces being understood to be so great, a Council of of War was
called, and it was debated what resolution was fittest to be taken. It was
concluded, that two thousand four hundred foot, and four hundred horse should
be raised against them, and put into this order of marching: First, Cornet
Pollard, with thirty Horse and forty Firelocks, as a Vantcurriers, and forlorn
hope. Then the baggage belonging to the horse. In the next place six Troops of
horse led by Sir Tho. Lucas, Comissary General for the Horse in two divisions.
Then followed the baggage of the foot Vieres. Next Captain Edmund Matthew, the
Lord Pillon, son to the Earl of Roscommon, the Lord Brabason, son to the
Earl of Mead, Sir Robert Farrer, Collonell John Barry, Sergeant Major John
Oagle, every one in the several ranks and orders. Then followed four
divisions of foot, each consisting of three hundred. The Artillery and
Ammunition followed. Then two Troops of horse by Sir Richard Greenvile, after
him Lieutenant Devalier. And the Lord Ormund marched in the reere. On the left
hand there lay of the rebels, the Lord Mountgarrat, Earl of Care, and Colonel
Hugh Birne: against them marched Sir John Sherlocke, Lieutenant Collonell of
the Lord Lambarts regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Lofins, Sergeant Major Warren,
Serjant Mayor Pageat, Seriant Mayor Willoughby and encountered very sharply
with them, and slew three hundred and seventy rebels, and the rest fled. They
have taken Waterford, Arkloo, Washford, and some other Towns, but we hope to
recover them very suddenly. And when more happy fortune, and convenient
success shall be given us, I will transport the truth thereof unto you. In the
mean time, I beseech you to accept the affectionate love of,

From Athy, May 14. 1642. Your most indulgent friend, John Barry.

The humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Ministers, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of Lancaster.
Showing to Your Sacred Majesty, Ireland; and finding your Majesty's late
resolution for that expedition, to threaten danger to your Royal Person, far
more worth then ten thousand of us.

We therefore your Majesty's most loyal Subjects out of our zeal to Gods true
Religion, your Majesty's honor and safety, and the peace and welfare of your
Dominions; and out of the deep sense and apprehension of our interest in the
same, do in all humility present and prostrate our selves, and supplication at
your Royal feet, beseeching your Majesty to return to your great Council
(there presentative body of your Kingdom) in whom this Nation has so far
consided, that they have entrusted them with their lives, liberties; and in
which multitude of Counselors there is health and steadfastness, and whereby
the Royal Throne may be established in Righteousness, and we with the rest of
your Faithful Subjects shall continually praise and pray for your prosperous
and happy Reign over us.

At the Court at, York the 10 of May, 1642.
His Majesty has expressly commanded me to give you this His Answer to your
Petition.
THat this Petion, as some others of this nature is grounded upon
misinformation, and being grieved and highly essended to see how his good
people have been and are abused by the false rumors and intelligences, which
have procured, causlesse fears and apprehensions, referres the Petitioners to
the Answers he has given to the Declaration presented to Him at Now market,
and to the Petition presented to Him the 26. of March last at York, wherein
His Majesty says, you will clearly perceive, that He is not gone, but driven
from his Parliament: His Majesty likewise, for your further information of His
proceedings and intentions, recommends to your view and consideration, His two
Messages, and Declaration concerning Hull, and His Message touching the Reasons
of His refusal to grant the Militia, all which, when they shall be fully
represented to the rest of your County, He doubts not, but that you will rest
very well satisfied of His consent and resolution for the maintaining of, and
governing His people by the Law of the Land, His unmovable resolution for the
maintenance and defense of the true Protestant Profession, and the suppression
of the barbarous Irish Rebellion, and His Majesty says, That he believes you
may then find reason to petition the Parliament to comply with his Majesty's
just desires, and gracious offers, which is the only way safely and speedily to
cure, the present distractions of this Kingdom, and with Gods blessing to put a
happy end to the Irish rebellion: for the effecting whereof, as his Majesty
has often said, he will neither spare pains, nor decline any hazard of his
Person or fortune.

Edward Nicholas.

FINIS.

