LUSUS SERIUS: OR, Serious Passe-time. A Philosophical Discourse concerning
the Superiority of Creatures under MAN.

Written By Michael Mayerus, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard, and Tho: Heath in Covent Garden, near the Piazza. 1654.

To the Honorable, CARRY DILLON Esquire. Son to ROBERT, late Earl of Roscommon.
SIR,
I Have neither by the Nobility of your Birth, your great and generous services
in Jreland under Immortal Jones (that admirable Prodigy and proof of English
valor) but by that greatness and goodness of Nature which shines in your
Conversation, been charmed into this Address; And I profess also to have eve^
since my first knowledge of you, to have placed you so much in my esteem, that
I now repen^ the boldness of so small an offer; and the rather* looking on you
as one that were pleased to take me into your friendship before I could imagine
you had reason to do it; and that I found in you all those Moral virtues
which the Schools so unnecessarily dispute about, I thought I could not put
this little Forraigner into better hands than yours, and teach it to tell
Posterity (for that is the Age of Books) that you have infinitely obliged a
person that adores nothing more than those Heroical Virtues which are
constellated in your Soul.

The Design of the Discourse (which I have libelled from a learned pen) shall
not be told you, saving in the general, that it is Philosophical and
virtuous; And as in Romances and Jnterludes, the chief art and virtue is to
conceal the Plot: So in hopes to betray you to a full perusal, I shall suffer
the Scene to open, and the Actors to enter, and therefore in an humorous desire
of entertaining you, will leave you in the embrace of your fair and noble Lady,
who may justly claim from me the same inclinations and devoir, as being both
hers and

( SIR) Your most Affectionate and most humble servant, J. de la Salle.

Lusus SERIUS: SERIOUS Passe-Time.
Wherein Hermes or Mercury is declared and established King of all Worldly
things, etc.

AFter it had been very hotly debated in the great Amphitheatre of this World,
to whom of all those, that presented themselves as Competitors the Pre-eminence
and Sovereignty were most due, and that by reason both of the number and
variety both of the persons and things, the whole matter found so many
several, or rather innumerable Opinions, that there appeared not more Judges
then differences of judgments; It was agreed by common consent, that out of
the whole populace of Worldly things there should be elected a Representative,
that is to say, from out the foure-footed, as being the largest, at the most
two, and for Birds, Fishes, Insects, creeping things, Vegetables and Mineralls
one a piece, these to be chosen by common consent, and to be sent to the next
Parliament, where before Man, as the wisest and fittest judge, out of these
eight a King should be chosen. For it was thought better and more agreeable
with reason, that a few of the Nobles, chosen out of every Tribe or Nation,
should be empowered by the consent of their whole people to elect one, then
that so great a Rabble (which is the beast of many heads and damme of cofusion)
should be again assembled, and it may be not only fall into different
debates, but dissent themselves into a Civil War. After great bandying in
Elections privately carried in every County of this lower World, a Parliament
of EIGHT was at last called, to wit, as it was set down in the Instrument, out
of the County of the first, that is the Fourefooted the CALFE and the SHEEP,
out of the second the GOOSE, of the third the OISTER, of the fourth the BE,
out of the fifth the SILK-WORME, out of the six^h, FLAX, out of the seventh
MERCURY. All these meet together, and, as it became so great Heroes that were
in emulation for sovereignty, made their address to Man, whom by common
consent they had agreed to be their Umpire. He was then very well apparelled,
his Doublet and Breeches were of the richest black Velvet, and very richly
covered with Gold lace; his Gown was of a fine Silk suitably trimmed; His cap
was of velvet too: bound about with a chain of Pearl, which were very fair
and of great value; his Band was very neat and of the purest Holland, and about
his neck he had a Golden chain of excellent workmanship; and to save me the
labor of telling you the rest, he wanted nothing, which a Man would require to
be splendid and magnificent, and to all this he had a mind pol^sh^d and
enriched, not only with sweeter literature, but an insight of the severer
Sciences, which indeed was very requisite in a Judge of so weighty a cause. To
him sitting at that time in the Air on a little tufted Hillock, which swelled
it self up in the midst of a flowery ground, the above said Representatives
made their address, and having chosen the CALFE for their Speaker* put in
their P^

The CALFE.
WE that are here assembled, most prudent Man, come hither with submission to
thy judgment, therefore we beseech thee take it not amiss, if we bring our
cause before thee at an unseasonable and busy time. Be pleased to hear the
case, and I will briefly open it. There is lately a great contest happened
among us the Inhabitants of the whole World, that is to say, the three degrees
of Animals, Vegetables and Mineralls, unto which of us next unto Man, our
Emperor, precedence is due: And therefore when the Parliament and People of
the World were divided in their judgments, and rent into such several
factions as could not be composed without a purge, they chose us from all the
rest, and having empowered us by their Instrument, have given us instructions
that we should appeal to you, as not only our Lord Protector, but rational
and fit for Government, and that we should fully remonstrate and report to your
Highness the whole state and case of the matter brought before you, that you
may at length from this Council here present, choose one, who by his worth and
service to Mankind you should think fit for to name your Viceroy. In which
honest and humble proposition we hope we shall not receive a denial, and that
after you have heard us all speak for our several Rights, we expect your
judgment, unto which we all humbly submit.

To this when MAN had consented, and in his countenance and behavior had shown
as much civility as he possibly could; Open severally unto me, says he, your
several cases, for you have taken me in a day, which I had designed for a
period and intervall of serious businesses, which notwithstanding I will bestow
upon you, if I can by hearing and stating of your differences be a means of
your peace, reconciliation or advantage. Speak then in the same order in which
you came hither, and first, you Calfe, when you have done I shall hear the
Sheep, then the Goose, then the Oyster, then the Be, the Silkworme, and Flax,
and then I shall call for Mercury, but one after another; with this Rule, that
you speak one after another, jarre not together, nor offer any disturbance or
interruption, and especially, that you forbear any smart touches or abuses:
which being a Law that I have at first made, I expect obedience unto till I
have heard the whole matter* This being assented unto* the judge prepared
himself for Audience, and the CALFE begun to speak thus.

May it please thy Highness, MAN, Lord high Steward of all things, we present
our selves here before thee, to know which of (...) thou will be pleased to
assume into a part of thy Sovereignty, not for the largeness of our stature,
or for handsomeness of shape, or agility of body, or readiness in motion, but
by such deserts and profits, as we shall be found most eminently to contribute
unto Mankind: which issue being once joined, I shall not doubt but that you
will be pleased to pass your judgment for the Family I here plead for above
all the rest. And the inducement which I shall offer to you shall be partly our
labors, by which while we are so usefully assistant, partly from those things
which even during life we contribute from our own bodies, partly from the
spoils which are gathered from our Carcasses. On which three heads as so many
settled arguments, I shall especial insist, nor shall I one way or other vary
from this method: THE LABORS, O Man! which we endure for you, are extremely
great, and to any of our Competitors here present impossible and intolerable.
For as to those that are absent I shall not much debate it, since the Election
of King is limited to those here present, all the absent, be what they will,
being in an incapacity. First of all then we are serviceable to Mankind in
tillage, which without us cannot at all or at the least so commodiously be
performed. I must confess that we are not otherwise much employed, unless it
be for drawing of the Plow and Cart, but these are services so necessary, that
they are infinitely more useful then any other. For if the fields were not
turned over and torn with Ploughs, painfully haled along upon our necks, it
were impossible to sow the seed with any hope of harvest, which not answering
expectation, I would know where man should have his subsistence. I believe,
Sir, you rational Creatures would not be very well content to return to your
diet of Acornes, or do you think you could be content for to live all your
hungry days on such poor Ordinaries as Apples, Nutts and Herbs? This I
believe you would hardly be persuaded to, and since you have found by
experience the necessity of bread, I necessarily infer the use of Oxen.
Suppose our species were lost, there is a stop upon all husbandry, and instead
of rich harvests of Corn, you shall have your fields pestered with weeds, and
withal you must consider, how these Northern Countries are supplied with
drink, marry Oats and Barley, and these come out of the Fields plough'd by us,
I shall say nothing to Pease, or other kind of fruits, which without stirring
or preparing of the Earth were not to be expected, as Wheat, Spelt, Oats,
Rice, Beans, Pease, Vetches, Lintels, and others of that kind. All these are
the fruits of Agriculture, and we next to man are the most effective in it.
Besides, I need not tell you how great is the use of Wagons, which yet we draw
in Italy (which if you will believe Timaeus and Varo, had its name from an OX,
for in the ancienter Greek IT ALOS signified an Ox) in respect at that time
both in number, shape, and greatness we excelled there above all other
Countries. And in many other places I cannot express how advantageous we are,
in drawing of loads from the Country to the City and back again. And yet all
these important services we perform merely out of duty to Mankind; services
I repeat it again such, as I challenge any Creature to perform the thirtieth
part of: So useful I am sure the old wise Egyptians found us, that they heaped
all possible honors upon an Ox, and gave him adorations proper to deities;
And the reason was that the life of Man could not but be unpleasant without his
assistance: The Ox APIS as sacred and privileged had Vul an's Temple for his
stall, where instead of an ordinary manger he had one of Gold, and of furniture
of straw, was provided for with fresh Tapestry, and when natural death had
taken him away, and ^e for addition of honor named Serapis, he was
magnificently buried, and covered with a most stately Tomb, being from the
time of his decease accounted a divinity of that Country. The Ox, say even
those men that professedly write of Husbandry, of all cattle is the most
considerable. He is companion and fellow labourer with man in all businesses in
the Country, and chief servant of the Goddess Ceres, for which reason it was
of old enacted, that no man should kill an Ox, and the wise Romans had us in
so much esteem, that it was banishment for any man to kill one of us, though
it were but to feed upon: and the reason is apparent; Bos comes (...), that is
to say, to eat, because Men eat from our labors, of which no further.

I shall now pass to those things which we yield during life for your use.
These are our Dung and our Milk. Our dung indeed may seem but a poor
business, yet it is the food of the Fields that feed you, it is their joy, their
recreation, without which they are barren and melancholy. From this had
Saturn (the great Grandsire as I may say of the Gods) his name of Stercurius,
as a title of honor for his useful invention of dunging the ground. That
Arch. Heroes Hercules was employed in carrying out Oxe-dung, and cleansing the
stable of Augeas Ph^bus^s own Son, which thing certainly had it not been of
very great moment might have been performed by other hands then those great and
noble ones of immortal Hercules the Son of Jupiter. Neither is it only that
our dung fattens the fields, but it serves Man for medicine, and for fuel for
fire instead of Wood or Coal: It is outwardly applied to a great many
Maladies, as to the Gout in the hands and in the Feet, and indeed to any Gout
whatsoever proceeding from a hot cause, and there is a Water distilled from it
in May, which is called the Water of all Flowers, which name is not given to
any other Medicine whatsoever, be it never so precious, in the shop of any
Apothecary. Not to tell you that Oxe-dung is most fortunately applied to the
resolving of all hard Tumors, and in Dropsies for drawing out of the
restagnant Water. I need not to add the benefits of it when taken into the
body, as in the Jaundies and Diseases of that kind, nor is it that you should
be offended with the smell, for it is sufferable enough, and in Gardens does
both refresh and nurse the sweetest and pleasantest herbs and flowers, whether
they be cherished there for their beauty, or their medicinal use. Then for
want of fuel, how much it furnishes the hearts of several people, and suffers
them not to eat their Victuals raw, let the people, who enjoy the use of it,
experimentally confess.

For Milk and all those several dainties it is varied into, I am at a stand,
in respect I cannot sufficiently declare the profits of it. What I beseech you
is more profitable to House keeping? What more agreeable to the life of Man?
What more pleasant and more healthful, not only to all in health, but to most
of the diseased? Of Cowes-milke you make Butter, Cheese, and Whey, three diverse
substances educ'd out of one matter, and they are of such excellent use of
Mankind, that that Table is indeed unfurnished which wants some of them. Nay
even in the Scripture it self, that Land which was described to be greatly
fruitful, was said to overflow rather with Milk then Honey; For Honey may be
found in Deserts, and places untilled, where plenty of Milk cannot be
expected. How many millions of men are there that live mostly of Cowes-milk?
How many that live altogether on Cheese? What a vast income from hence is this
to some Countries! And indeed from what I have said will appear, not only
bread, and Drink, but also, Butter, Cheese and all things made of Milk, are
the contributions of our species, the last immediately paid a Tax by us, the
former obtained by the Meditation of our pains: so that you, O Man, when you
come to cast up your accounts, will find all your conveniences and enjoyments
a debt to the Oxen, which that I may more clearly manifest, I shall instance
those things which we yield by our death, after we have wasted our Lives in
your service.

What vast emolument do we afford by our Flesh, our Entrayles, Fat, Bones,
Horns, Hides, Bladders, Hair, and other things which I think not worth the
mentioning? For our flesh, it is not only the daily relief of the needy, but
is the delicacy, and entertainment of the most sensual. Let those people
witness for me, that will acknowledge a piece of Beef to be the bravest food,
and eat as heartily for delight, as a hungry Man would do for necessity,
thinking no means better to quiet and silence a barking and a craving stomach.
Nor do our Guts make worse fare; how many sorts of puddings and other Dishes
are made out of them? As for our Tallow, it not only serves for the making up
of many excellent services and Pies, but as I may say shares Empire with the
Sun, since it affords candles and light in his absence; which how inestimably
it is to be valued I cannot say. For what benefits soever the Sun by his light
scatters in the day, are general and universal: now our Fat lighted, as it
does the same, so it does more particularly, not refusing the obscurest places
or Chambers where the Sun possibly has no access in the day, and entertaining
us in the night, when by the rules of nature he cannot be present with us. Our
Bones, Horns, Bladders, and Hair, want not likewise their profits: what a
many instruments are made of them, which I shall not attempt to express (being
willing to observe my time limited,) by reason of their variety and number.
Bottles and Galley-pots, are closed with Bladders to prevent the ingression of
Air, or the evaporation of the things enclosed. Nor is our Hair useless to
the working of mortar and many other occasions. Now for our Hides flead off
from our carcass and well tanned, in respect of the great advantage they
bring, I can so little pass them without mentioning, that I confidently
affirm they are one of the principallest utensills in Man's economy, nay so
principal, that were it out of no other reason, setting aside all that I have
hitherto alleged, I would safely presume the diadem we contest for should be
ours. Nor is it of one kind only, younger and elder are here serviceable, the
one is stripped of his Skin, the other of his Hide, from whence else would you
have your Boots, Shoes and Bellows swelling with a Timpany of wind? What would
you do for Trappings, and Harness for Horses, and for Leather, for other
innumerable occasions? I do not you will require demonstration* of the
necessity of Shoes, for there is none but a beggar of a vagabond that is able
to be without them. And for other things their use is so known and necessary,
that as a thing of knowledge I shall not otherwise mention. Now as for
Calves-skins, I shall quote unto you but these two considerable utilities, (for
the petty ones I shall pass.) In regard they are universally serviceable to
M^nkinde. The first is their use in War, by being made into Drums, without
which Discipline could not be observed; the other is the subserviency to Arts,
that is to say, that Books, Patents, Letters, or other Writings are made of
them, and they are the Preservers, and Treasurers of Arts and Sciences
faithfully conveying the memory of former times into the minds and instruction
of posterity. Now if all the World be governed by such Arts as owe their very
preservation and tradition to a Calves-skin, who sees not the empire of all
Worldly things given and devised unto us, as it were by last will and
testament, from all Antiquity? I shall only ask whether this may not be said
to be the common memory of Mankind, since it preserves things from age to age,
when themselves cease to have a being, since it hands unto us all things
necessary for knowledge, whether sacred or profane, old or new, since in this
womb, as in a Treasury, are preserved all Laws and Ordinances which are so
essentially useful to Kings and States, that without them the frame of
Government is immediately dissolved. This furnishes and directs the Clergy with
Hymns and Anthems in the Church; This is that which reares up all famous
Libraries, those invaluable Magazines of time. In a word, all the crafts and
subtilties of Statesmen, all the truth and fidelity of Records, all the
wholesome Prescriptions of Physic must be here necessarily deposited and
preserved, and those Books that are filled with them are called faithful
Counselors and dumb Teachers, for they cannot flatter men of Greatness,
although they be silent they teach; though they be lifelesse, yet they breath
and inspire Learning; and though they are mute, they speak all eloquence. And
this is all that I have to say concerning those my superiors that have sent me
hither, not doubting, my Lord Chancellor, that when you have fully considered
all that I have remonstrated unto you, you will, after hearing how little the
rest will bring to weaken my claim, vote me into that dignity, for which
before you I stand as Candidate.

The SHEEP.
THE SHEEP seeing the Eyes and expectations of both Judge and Assembly fixed
upon him; Now ( says he) it is my turn to speak, who am the meekest and
mildest Creature that ever nature made: and if this virtue may not put in for
the Crown, it is vainly attempted by peremptorinesse, and impudence. It Is not
without great reason that we call tyrants Wolves, and that with a general
consent, for they like so many savage beasts (which are the most hateful to us
that may be) exercise all the cruelty they can against those that are in any
subjection to them; Which if once granted, the contrary Doctrine must be the
more certain, viz. That a Sheep would prove the most merciful King, and such
as should be wished and obeyed by all. But if the greatest Deserts from
Mankind be that which must determine the case, and confer the Sovereignty,
as appears by what has been before alleged, there is no Creature whatsoever,
that while living is more liberal, nor when dead yields greater advantage to
Man, then the Sheep, to which two heads I shall confine my speech. The Sheep
supplies man's necessities with its Wool, Milk* and Dung. The Milk is such an
advantage that it harldy gives place to any other: We uncloath our selves to
apparel Man, which is a Charity the greatest can be done to Mankind. What
greater act of mercy can there be done, then for us to bestow what is truly
our own upon another? Then to cloth the naked? Then to lend defense against
the injuries and assaults of Summer and Winter? Our Wool is taken away from us
without any violence or resistance, nay we willingly permit it to be done:
which appears in that when we are shorn we do not so much as bleat against
the wills of our shearers. It is not therefore a prey taken from us, but a
present given by us, the Sheep Wool is not the spoil but the reward we owe
to Man, who disposes of it at his pleasure; Sometimes he caused it to be dyed
in several colors, sometimes he works it up several ways in its native
color and fashion. View a man from the Crown of his head to the sole of his
foot, and thou will find that whatever ornament he has about him consists of
our relics. Look but on his hat, that ancient badge of Liberty, thou shall
find it to be a circular texture of our Wool: Look on his Coat, cloak or
Clothes, nay put in his very Stockins, they will prove so many woolly-coverings
of his nakedness. The whole man is covered and furnished with our presents,
whence it should be inferred the greatest obligation he has to any is to us,
and consequently ought to pass his judgment for us: and as we have put him
into possession of all that was ours, so is it but just he should give his
verdict for us.

Is it possible he can be guilty of no returns of that affection which we
bear him? Or has he lost all memory of the benefits we heap upon him? We are
indeed a sort of Creatures neither injure nor entrench upon any other
whatsoever: Grass and the poorest shrubbs, are our nourishment, yet the
benefits we return to our Shepherds are not a few. I might here take occasion
to boast of our Milk, as being the fattest, the sweetest and most advantageous
man is acquainted with: far beyond that of diverse other Creatures; but my
modesty obliges me to contain my self: This boiled with a little salt in it,
thickens into an excellent and wholesome Sauce for diverse meats. The Cheese
that is made of it is extreme fat, and therefore becomes a great delicacy among
many Nations. For the Dung, there is no man so much as doubts but that it is
the welcomest to the ground of any, and that both Husbandmen and Shepherds
have well observed, and that is the reason that our folds are so often removed,
that by that means the whole Field may at length be sufficiently dunged. The
ground of the Penns wherein we are shut up, when it comes to be dug up,
confess the advantage of our imprisonment, for its sufficiently Levened with
Saltpeter, drained into it by the means of the Lie of our Urine, and by which
that terrible receipt, by which Gunpowder is made, cannot be performed, that
Powder, which being put in so Brass Gunns, with Iron-bullets once set on fire,
overthrowes the strongest Walls and Castles, and suffers not opposition.
Besides our Dung and the Salt lately mentioned drawn from it, is an excellent
medicine in several Diseases, as inwardly the Jaundies and the like
obstruction, outwardly in Scalds and Burnings, mingled with other things, it
makes an excellent Plaster, and thus much good we afford during our Life.

After death, behold our Lambs brought in their several seasons, as matter of
delight and rarity at the greatest Feasts, we our selves constantly making part
also of the furniture. Though I could wish men would rather follow the saying
of that noble Emperor, That a good Shepherd ought to sheare and not to flay
his Sheep, notwithstanding we are perpetually sacrificed to the palate of man,
and those, whom the Scab or diseases destroy not, are led to slaughter, and
made the employment of Butchers. Our patience and serenity, even when death is
before our eyes is singular, and exemplary: we make no resistance to the
Executioner, but voluntarily offer our throats to his knife. Our flesh and fat
help to make a share in the greatest Feasts, even where there is the most
abundance of other dainties. Our Skinns employ the Skinners, who make of them
not only many useful ornaments for Women, but many several distinctions of
Habits and Gowns for Men. Now if the Wool were pulled off them, as it serves
for innumerable uses, so the bare pelt would be serviceable in an equell
diversity, especially for Parchment, and Rolls for Records, in which benefit to
Mankind I am in all Justice a rival equal with the Calfe, nay I stick not to
affirm that for what praise he arrogates to himself is not only due to me,
but in a larger and more especial manner, for I afford no assistance to the
tumults of War as he does, since Drums, that are commonly made of his
Skin are not made of mine; but instead of that damnable subserviency to the
rage and fury of Man, my bowels make strings for musical Instruments, which
charm his mind with a purer pleasure then the noise of Alarmes. Consider but
the nature of Man, and see how it is fashioned and sympathiz'd to Harmony,
since nature it seems intended him not to be a Military Creature, since she
did not assign him any particular Arms to fight with, as she has done
Lions, whom she has made terrible by their teeth and claws, Wolves and
Bears formidable with the thunder of their tuskes; Horses provoked can revenge
with their heels, Bulls with their Horns, but Man came naked and disarmed
into the World, in which he bears a great likelinesse to us, and we to him.
But above all other things, he seems by a special pre-eminence of nature to
be particularly inclined to Music, which made divine Plato say, That he was
not harmonically composed, that was not delighted with Harmony. Now we give
such particular and eminent assistance unto Music, that we clearly outvie all
other Creatures. We afford strings to the Lute and other instruments, which
the finger of Man touches into so much harmony, and so entertaining with noble
delight several ways, in the Phrygian, Jonick, Dorick and Lyidian moods; and
according to the design of Art raise and and allay several passions. We shall
say nothing of the greater and thicker strings, which men so diversely abuse;
yet it is we that furnish them with strings too for Bows, and give sury and
force to their Arrows, which if singly without the assistance of other Weapons
determined the controversy between diverse nations, and have made lesser Nations
bring greater into obedience, merely through their want of skill and dexterity
in them. These are also mighty useful in the performing of sundry Handicrafts,
but I shall wave particulars, but one there is that I cannot omit, that one
parcel of our body, destroys the greatest Wolf of all Mankind, or to say
better his Whelps, least the World by increase of such Wolves might be
destroyed by them, which words, if you conceive to have too much of riddle in
them, I thus explain. What greater Wolf than the Turk, he strangles his
Brothers, and it may be his sons with a string made of our Guts: that he may
tyrannise alone. Now if these things have any consideration with you, I may
modestly say that I possess those virtues, which carry the greatest conformity
to man, as Meekness, Patience, Innocence of Life and Simplicity; and if you
look on my services to Mankind I know not who can compare with me, let them
be of what rank or species whatsoever.

The GOOSE.
THe SHEEP had scarce made a close of his harangue, but a good fat GOOSE stood
up and gaggl'd in this manner. We have with sufficient patience (most equal
Judge!) heard all that the Foure-footed Creatures can say for themselves, For
my part as I shall lay little to their charge, so I conceive it not my duty to
complement them with any excess of praise; They are such, who as they want not
due causes of comendation, so I believe may easily be brought to yield
pre-eminence to some more worthy, If you consider Kind in the Creation of a
King, none I am sure can be equal with us, much more preferred; ours is
sublime and aerie, nay, we affirm that not only the Air is part of our
dominion, but the Earth and Water, for in which of the three Elements we please
to live we are able to subsist, a privilege enjoyed by no other Animal, that
he should dwell and govern in three Elements, as three parts of the World.
But if these things be not thought considerable, and that it is only the
services and profits yielded to Man, that must cast the balance in this
dispute about Sovereignty, I shall no further press them, but urge only those
things that may seem more close and proper for the Question. For my course of
Life I have not much to say in it, since I may be rather thought to live for my
self than the use of others, yet nevertheless in some places I yearly suffer
my Wings to be plucked, and my quills to be rent from me for the service of
Men, withal I am employed in Laying and Hatching of Eggs, which are no
contemptible Viands. Some also make very good use of my dung in several
Diseases. But when my fatal time comes, about Michaelmas, or at other times,
then is it that Man reaps his greatest advantage by me: my flesh is put on the
Spit and roasted, so that I may be now said to enjoy a fourth Element, my Guts
and Gibblets well cooked with my own blood are boiled and baked, and so I
furnish the Luxury of Men with two excellent Dishes, which want not the esteem
due unto them; my softer feather^ serve to stuff beds, in which men may enjoy
their repose, so that being well sed with my flesh and entrails they may
softly sleep in my old clothes, and by this means, Man spends half of his
Life, which he commonly sleeps out among us, a privilege no Creature else can
lay claim to. What shall I say of these accidents when they are so known to
be advantagiously helpful to Mankind, since in them the species is
propagated, and preserved from discontinuance? My Quills and Feathers are
variously ordered and died and applied to several uses, some are fitted to
Arrows, who by ou^ means receive that assistance which nature has not
provided for them, nor art cannot acquire. These serve for War, the rest of
our Quills is most commodiously applied in writing, and consequently to the
government of the World. 'Twas we that in the Capitol long since gave the
alarm, and preserved it, and for that cause were accounted sacred and kept at
the public charge, being for watchfullnesse and diligence accounted better,
and certainer night sentinells than the Dogs themselves, so that we may
without raillery aver that we saved the City of Rome, which is a very high
commendation for us. But this much higher that by our Quills, we have
propagated all Arts and Sciences, we have preserved them and protected against
all injuries and violences of time? It Is in vain to prepare a Calfe or a
Sheep-skinne to write upon, unless our Quills be called to assistance, and be
made dance, turn, and play upon them. Their Skins suffer only and are the
patients, our Quills the Agents, they are but the subjects, we the efficient
causes, and of a much nobler nature; if the Goose and the Sheep join in league
together, the greatest Creatures are not able to resist, nay Man himself is
proved to be taught by a Goose, when he reads the writings of the wisest
Ancients. The Sheep without the Goose is of no value at all, that is to say,
no more than a blank parchment; but on the other side the Goose can join in
confederacy with the Calfe, or Flax excluding the Sheep, by which appears the
superiority of our power, and the prehemienc^ we hold above all the rest, and
methinks the controversy of our kind with the rest here present, might easily
be decided, since that formerly our Quills have obtained the prize from all
others, whether Eagles or other martial Birds whatsoever. In witness of which
victory, our Quills are worn in Caps, hence the Poet,

Penna beat coelo, penna volare facit,
The Pen gives Heaven, the Pen gives wings to fly.
Why should not we therefore carry away the Diadem, and the Title Royal from
those that are not for this to be compared with us? By us and by our quills the
Emperor commands Kings and Princes, as it was very truly said by one, That the
imperial Majesty ought not only to be adorned with Arms, but armed with
Laws, for Laws once Enacted are by our means propagated and made useful to
their Legislators. By our quills Kings, Princes and Dukes govern their
Dominions: suppose there never were, nor ever had been any books written, it
would follow there should be no Letters, no Laws, no Histories, no Physic,
nor any other Arts or Sciences put upon the file of memory, and so the life of
Man would nothing have differed from the life of bruites, mankind would have
been as unacquainted with himself and things, as Children shut up in a Cave
and there continued. Now all those that have gotten the reputation of wise,
learned and experienced Men, and have arrived at the Arts and Sciences, have
done it by the advantage of our quills. These are they that govern the World,
with their learning policy and science, which have been only propagated by
Penns, the use whereof whosoever know not are accounted of a contemptible
condition and disesteem'd. Pens often rescue the most despicable poverty into
vast wealth, Pens throw honor and luster on wealth it self, nay there is no
condition; which receives not ornament and advantage from them. Pens comprise
and establish all humane Literature; what anciently was with difficulty put
down with an Iron bodkin, is now more easily performed by Pens; what honor was
ever given to learning by the greatest Princes, is now due to Pens, and to
those to whom they are owing, Geese. Whence I infer that our esteem ought to be
such, that it should be far more considerable than to receive a denial in
this claim of Royalty. I will only add two advantages of quills more, though
they be not so much important; The first is in hunting, for the frighting of
Beasts by the sticking them up; the other in Musical instruments, besides their
use in* Arrows which we formerly mentioned. Let the Sheep brag the necessity of
his strings, my quills can no more be spared in the Sittarne and Virginalls:
Let him brag that his greater guts are useful for Bowstrings, without my
feathers I am sure no Arrow will fly. Let him and the Calfe prate of their
Parchments as so needful in writing, without my quills to write upon them,
they will signify nothing, not to mention even the smallest uses of our quills,
we shall omit to tell you how they help Anglers in fitting of their Hooks and
Files, and are employed in several mechanical works; Let this, which for the
time allotted us we have shortly but firmly and demonstratively argued,
suffice, since I cannot but believe, that they will justly evict the Royalty to
be granted me.

The OYSTER
THe OYSTER, who was in the fourth place as Burgess for the Fishes suffered
not another to assume the discourse, but hastily begun to plead in this manner;
If the Sovereignty over the Creature must be adjudged and conferred either upon
largeness of body, Strength, Industry, Sagacity or Docility, I believe my
pretension will be very weak, for I am little and without strength, nor can I
lay claim to any of the other indowments, yet withal I am of opinion that
none of these here present may justly hope that upon those grounds, the
election will be carried for them, since there are others in their several
kinds that far excel us in all those qualities, as well as they. But if
Nobility, Birth, Profit conferred on Man, great value and price prevail any
thing with your judgment, I see no competitor here present, whose interest I
think I shall have cause to fear,

For my Nobility I have this to affirm, that I am borne and bread in the
waters, the noblest element, and have been ever accounted Prince of all the
Aquatiles, which yet in variety and greatness far exceed the Terrestrialls,
the Waters are my Castle, and yet out of the waters (I vouch no worse authority
than Scripture it self) God in the beginning created all things, nor am I
confined to some little Brook, or narrow River: The vast Ocean, where ever it
spreads it self, the Indian, the Western Seas are but at the first our
Cradles, after that our dwelling house and Demesne. Now if it be borne in a
noble and a famous Country, adds no small Nobility to any person, I think I
may safely presume to claim precedence, in this point. But this you will say
may be as well claimed by the rest of my neighbors of the waters, and
therefore I shall not much press it, but direct my discourse to that which
most properly concerns me, that is my descent and manner of birth, far more
illustrious than any creature whatsoever. Chastity is a peculiar property and
endowment of our kind, as appears in that we do not propagate in the common
manner, but by a particular, to wit, by a secret and sweet distillation of the
influences of the Stars shed into us, from whence we conceive. It Is true
nature granted us not offensive, Arms, but she gave us* defensive, and these
of the best proof. Hence is that we are neither offensive to one another, and
are very well secured against the assaults of strangers. In those parts where
Heaven by reason of the neerness of the Sun operaes more purely and
efficaciously, as in the crooked windings of the Indian Sea, we there, by the
indulgence of its kinder heat, are impregnated with such seed as is indeed
invaluable* we get up to the top of the water, and opening the Gates of our
strong Castles, we ly gaping and yawning till we have sucked in so much of the
most precious morning dew, as, after being miraculously congealed within our
Testicles, and tinctured with the pellucid liquor of our bodies, becomes
albified into an incomparable luster, and make the noblest presents, that man
can rece^^^^ whether you look (...) for delight and (...) cause they are never
found but single, or that they only exceed in price and value. Now in
medicine, thus they are advantageous they are great strengtheners and
comforters of the heart, whose spirits and radical moisture they powerfully
restore and cherish, and your greatest Physicians are of opinion, that nothing
more sovereign, nothing more gentle, than confections of Manus Christi
prepared with pearl. They have also several kinds of Diamargaritons both hot
and cold, which they very successefully use in diverse Diseases, where the
patient needs reparation of strength. There want not also some of the curious
that prepare them into Milk, Oil, Liquour, Water, and Salt, and that to the
same end. But what shall I say, do not Margarites themselves and their Matrixes
exceedingly assist the wombes of Women, both in preventing sterility and
furtherance of conception? Besides all this, we have performed three other
notable services. First, (...) little being of ours, which nature (...) and so
strongly (...) the food of supporters, both in respect, that we are extremely
grateful to the palate, as also for that we do so greatly cherish and fill the
Spermatick Vessels of either Sex, and there is no doubt but Man will be so
grateful as to acknowledge this truth, which once granted, it will follow,
that we are powerful assistants in the Generation of Men, since possibly many
there are that owe their being, and procreation unto us, an obligation so high
and so noble, that I see not how it cannot be equaled by any. For so far as
the life of man is worthier, and of more concernement than all the utilities
that accrue unto us, even so is this utility given by us greater than life it
self. Nor are the Shells of Oysters of contemptible use, in adorning the hilts
and handles of several Instruments, which are too numerous to relate in this
place. Look into the Cabinets of the Magnifico's, look on their Tables and on
their Furniture, you will see them all furnished with our Shells, and
glittering only with our spoils. But I must be forced to say somewhat of
Margarites themselves, and I am afraid I shall rather be struck with the
deepest amazement and confusion, than be able to express their unspeakable
worth and preciosity. The proud Egyptian Cleopatra had among her other
treasures some Margarites, which were valued at the rate of 2000 Oxen, or as
many Acres of Land, nay it is thought they were richly worth a good large
Island. These exceeded Gold in value a thousand times, nay a hundred thousand,
nay more, if you would cast both into the scales and judge of the weight of
either. Hence was it that the whole Earth could produce nothing of greater
estimation, nothing of greater rarity or price, yet this Luxurious Woman,
destroyed one of them at one draught, when she designed to outvy Marke-Antony
the Roman General, in the cost and magnificency of a collation. Whence Pliny
said, Margarites have the principality, and are placed in the highest degree of
grace above all other earthly things. Now if that which is conceived and nursed
in us be that which dazles the World with the extremity of its value, why
should not we be thought equally noble, and assumed into that Royalty, which we
have so well deserved. It were inhumane and irrational for to confer the
highest advancements on any one's child or offspring, and in the mean time let
the miserable parents sordidly languish in poverty and contempt. Now if we had
not been, men had not had that which they so eagerly desire and passionately
covet. It Is we that prepare and present it to Man, whose acknowledgement we
desire and precedence accordingly* It Is we that cover even Queens themselves,
and the wives of the greatest Princes and Nobles, and make them flame and
sparkle like Stars in comparison of the other. It Is we that give ornament and
Majesty to Kings and their Grandees, and we conceive it but equitable, that
those, on whom we throw so much splendour and glory, should accordingly prefer
and honor us. This is but what Lex Talionis, and the justice of reciprocal
obligation does require It Is we that cast a greater luster on the very Crowns
of Princes, and make them flame and radiate like so many counterfeit
Divinities. It Is we that make Scepters brighter, and more splendid by the light
which we contribute. It Is we that make the royal Robes so stiff, and therefore
as we pay so high a tribute to the service of the Royal dignity, so we make
our just and legal claim to the same pre-eminence above all other, still
remaining as Tributaries to man, and this we hope will not be denied us,
unless those, whom we with so much care and diligence have always obliged, be
pleased either to forget, or not understand those great services we have
performed unto them, and instead of acknowledging of courtesies, incur the
censure of the highest ingratitude; having said thus much, he held his peace,
and retiring within his Shell, enclosed himself.

The BE.
AFter him stood up the BE, a Creature extremely little, and of the smallest
making, but one that with his noise and humming filled the Court with clamor
enough; besides he was very formidable with his Sting, in case of provocation
or affront. This magnanimous little one thundered it out thus. And I am also
here before thee Man, O judge, to lay a claim unto the Kingdom, which I
suppose you will easily admit me to, in regard nature has already decided the
controversy, and shaped and framed me as it were purposely for that end. For
what Creature acknowledges a King, but a Man and a Be? What Creature excells
us in political wisdom? None at all. Therefore as Man commands us, so we
command all other Creatures and things. Indeed our Kingdom is held of Man, Man
is Lord of the manor of the Universe, we are his freeholders, what we enjoy
we hold under him. He serves God, we him, all things us. There is nothing that
can destroy the Kingdom established among our selves, and we may easily
enlarge it to this, if Man would be pleased to invest it in us. No Creature
comes near us in Nobility of kind and splendour of birth; none has a motion
comparable with ours, none so offensively armed, as we with our stings, none so
grateful to their benefactors, none approaches us in our art of Music, none
that contributes so liberally to the uses of Man, nay to the Gods, nay to all
Estates and Degree^, as we shall easily manifest in our ensuing discourse.

For our Nobility and Generosity, none will doubt it, that knows our family
are not propagated by any nasty venereall ^oition, but by the peculiar
indulgence and warmth of Heaven. For at first we are a sort of little Worms,
lurking in the ^ombes, which our noble Ancestors had curiously built, but after
a little time we are strangely enobl'd, and become Bees. Hence is it that in
our very beginning we carry all the badges of honor about us, and are not made
honorable but are borne so. They only are properly said to be enobled that
are advanced to a better or higher condition by a greater King or Prince, from
whom they deserve it; but nature it self, who is the Queen of all things,
enobles us in the highest manner, that is to say, naturally and immediately
whilst we lie in our Honey^ombs, which are our swathing-bands. And this she
does by a kind of re-making us, calling us as it were into the higher house of
Animals. For a creeping Worm and a flying Fly differ very much both in kind
and shape, for the aerial* Creature is of quality far greater than the
reptile. And as our proportion is most chaste and innocent, so does our kind
retain a Virginal kind of pudicity, and modesty, a matter which adds no
small commendation to any Prince. What made Alexander the Great, and that
excellent Chieftaine Scipio so famous, so esteemed of old, so cried up by all
posterity, but their chastity? It Is not so much violence and force of Arms,
which commend Man, and become him, as this only virtue, by which even bruits
may obtain victory, but arrive at, or exercise chastity they cannot. Now if
you will but put a just estimate upon celerity, as requisite in a King, whom it
renders formidable and victorious, there is no Creature swifter than we, even
through the Air it self. Alexander, whom I just now mentioned, and Julius
C^sar used always incredible celerity, and by this means victoriously
overran the best part of the known World, which doubtless they had never
done, had they ever admitted doubts into council, or delays in execution.
Hence Alexander being asked by what means he subdued so many Kingdoms in so
short a time, answered (...), by delaying nothing. The other in a very short
space fought over all Pompey's parties in three parts of the World, never
failing of victory in respect his swiftness prevented all the Counsels and
Designs of the Enemy, even so we by their example very nimbly and quickly
strike our enemies with our little Javelins, but it is only when we are
provoked by an injury, our indulgent Mother nature having given us these
weapons for the rooting out drones, hornets and other mischievous insects. For
as the common proverb says very truly, He that puts up one injury proffers
himself to receive another Besides, A generous mind most easily awakes.

It Is true we are slow to anger, but if we be provoked, much more furious than
possibly could have been imagined such petit Animals could be.

Magna etenim est nobis in parvo corpore virtus.
We in small Bodies make great virtues shine.
It was said of Tyd^us a very little man, but of a vast and Gigantick spirit,
For virtue enclosed in a narrow room becomes stronger by compression, and
rushes out with a more vigorous violence upon its enemies. Notwithstanding all
this, though we be so powerful in arms, and enjoy so great a command, we do
not offer injury to any, no, we offer no affront or injustice to our professed
enemies* the sordid robbers of our Hives, those people who absolutely
desertlesse, do not only envy us the fruits of our own labors, but in
seeking them seek our lives also. Yet in the heat of our wrath and agitation,
with a little tinckling of Music we are presently pacified, as great Warriors
have been said to be charmed out of their warlike humor into softness and
retirement. We are therefore a Musical Creature, and in this not unlike to
Man. Let no Creature brag here, that his garbage is fit for Music and
instruments, we our selves are living and moving instruments, perpetually
cheering our selves, while we labor in our chymicall extractions, and upon the
hearing of any other noise easily appeased.

Hic Rhodus, hic salta: nam quae non fecimus ipsae,
Vix ea nostra voco. --
Here Is Rhodes! here Dance; what is by another done,
Belonging not to us we cannot own.
We during life sing, and not as mutes after death are inspired by others, as
the Sheep and Goose ridiculously glory; we send forth a sound which is very
pleasant, and all agreeable tunes are welcome to us, of which we our selves
are the fittest judges, none other. But as to the profits accrewing by us unto
Man, I shall speak a little, and were there nothing else, certainly we ought
not to be debarred this claim of Royalty. The benefits accrewing from our
little Nation are large and vast, and they especially consist in two things.
What have you sweeter, what pleasanter, what more healthful than Honey? Hence
an old man very fresh and lusty in his old Age being demanded by what means so
many happy and healthy years had attended him, he replied, it was by using
Honey within his Body and Oil without. Honey therefore is an ingred^ent
principally contributing both to length of Life and Preservation of sanity, it is
most delightful to children, acceptable to Women and salubrious to the aged.
Of this many Nations make drink as good as Wine, but much more convenient for
many maladies. This is made use of in colder Diseases, to which the Northern
Nations are subject to, with very happy effect they call it Hy^ dromel, or Mead
or Metheglin, etc. because it is made of Water and Honey, as they do oenomeli,
because it is made of Wine and Honey. From Honey and us the Mothers of it, that
invincible Hero, Sampson put a considerable riddle as we read in Scripture.
Of the making of Honey and the Government of Bees, Virgill and other excellent
Writers ^^ade it their business to write whole volumes, which with so much
curiosity and diligence they had not performed had they not seriously
considered our utility to Mankind. In medicine, Honey is of diverse great uses,
(besides the former drinks which we have mentioned) both in preserving and
assisting the virtues of simples, as in Roses and innumerable others, and
though to the Choleric and splenetick it is not so convenient by reason of
their incumbent distemper, yet to phlegmatic and melancholy men, it is an
excellent remedy joined with other things. So much shall suffice as to Honey,
whose excellencies to enumerate in particular, I might spend the whole day, but
I must confine my self. We are now to speak of our Wax, from which Man reapes
three extraordinary advantages. The first is that of Wax-candles, which are not
only exceedingly useful in Churches and sacred places, but also in private
Houses. In Churches it is apparent, in that we burn a perpetual Holocaust, as
it were unto the Almighty, prolonging our flame much more longer then any thing
else, which is accensible, which is known to the generality of Mankind, where
we have been in use, not only Christians but Heathens themselves, for the one
courts their Idols and Devils, the other their Saints and Confessors with wax
and ceremonies. It Is we that offer our first fruits to God, and our T^thes to
the Church: We are the principal Architects that design our wax in our
Escurials, in which all the wit of man has not been to understand or follow
us, nor the ingenuity of Artificers to counterfeit us. And in this
consideration we must needs appear to be not only subservient to Religion,
but very contributary to Man himself, in which double discharge of out duty,
we far outstrip all other. For private houses none will call it in question,
that has been in the Palaces and Hostel's of Kings and Princes, at whose
tables in the night we diligently watch, consuming our selves to be serviceable
to them, which istruly the character of a King, and therefore owing to us as
the authors of so great a benefit.

Secondly, it must be remembered, that in all medicines outwardly, applied to
the body of man, as in plasters, salves, and ointments; it is Wax that gives
its assistance and that to all affections of parts and diseases; besides, the
oils that are drawn from it, are of very great use. The last, but most
considerable, is, that the Ancients had waxen Tables, and Books enriched and
embellished with all kinds of Sciences, and at this day, as formerly men
preserve Seals, those faithful witnesses of all contracts impressed upon it,
to the great profit of all Co^mon-wealths. As for Books and Tables, all agree,
that are versed in Antiquity, how they were used, before searchfull and
restless mankind had found out other things to write upon: For then, in
tables covered with Wax, or else upon Linen, tempered with it, they engraved
and writ all their business with a sharp Puncheon, and so conveyed them away
by Courriers. Therefore Kings and Princes, and all others whatsoever, were
enforced to make use of our help for the communicating of Counsel, and our
spoils were their Ambassadors. And not so only, but volumes of Wax were the
great conservators of all Arts and Sciences, especially Laws; without which,
the life of man is miserable and belluine. Now it is apparent, how much the
impression of Wax, upon a Seal, has force and authority; nothing is firm and
constant in all compacts, unless Wax, as Umpire, close up the league; unless
Bees, with the ruin of part of their own dwelling-houses, gave them strength,
force and virtue: Therefore as all humane things are governed by Wax, so are
they preserved and confirmed, not by a waxen, but rather Adamantine Chain. For
it was truly said of the Poet,

Pan primus calamus cera conjungere plures Instituit.
Pan was the first taught many reeds to join with Wax, etc.
For all humane businesses, if we well mind it, are by this coagulated and
cemented together: for what any man has promised to another by his Seal
impressed in Wax, whether it be for service, or debt, or mean promise, it is
the ligament and the tie that Pan, that is to say, all business requires. Let
my Competitors, the Calfe, Sheep, and Goose, flourish out their deserts in this
kind, this is a business proper only to me. What are Letters without Seals?
Marry what Bells are without Clappers. What are Men without Faith? Shades and
Speeches, nay things civilly dead. Pray what are Calves or Sheep-skinnes made
with a great deal of do into Parchment, and scribled with Goose-quils, which
have made such a noise, to what end or purpose are they, unless we afford them
Wax for their Labels? None at all; nay if the Wax be but taken off, or broken,
or defaced, they are taken as invalid, and not writ It is Wax therefore that
gives them credit, and brings them into reputation, that they may be valid;
take it once off, and they are employed in the most sordid us^s. Therefore no
man is doubtful of recovering any thing that is past under another man's Seal,
since by this means, the writing which in it self is dead and unactive,
recovers life and strength. While we are speaking of seals, it must also be
remembered, how much other Images and Plasticks are concerned in it. In many
Churches, we observe many Images merely cast of Wax, as also in prophaner
places, where they had the Statues of themselves and Ancestors religiously
preserved in an orderly Series. Hence, even in Rome it self, they were called
fumosae cerae, that is, smokie wax-Images, and he was accounted of the most
ancient and noble Family that could produce most of them, and on the contrary
otherwise. Besides, there are often made Images to the life, colored after
several manners; which, since they are as various as individualls themselves,
I forbear to mention. From what I have said will be easily evin^ed, that the
royal preheminency is due to them for whom I plead, above all other, and no
doubt but you will think fit that we, who so justly administer justice to our
own nation, may also be thought the fittest to exercise government over
others. For in our Monarchy (I fear me I shall not have time enough to insist
at large) there is so much Majesty, Prudence, and harmony of Order, that even
Man himself may seem from us to have learned the Arts and Secrets of
Monarchical Government, rather than we from him, as many Writers have affirmed.
Our King is borne with marks so visible, both by his beauty, bigness, and
singular wisdom, yet without sting or passion, that we all yield an unanimous
obedience, and never acknowledge any but himself: It Is on him we labor, as
our Governor; it is for him doing justice, and disposing of affairs in his
Palace-royall in the midst of his Hive, that we attend; it is for him, when he
makes his Cavalcade, that we join together to make a triumph; nor do we ever
break the order in which we are marshalled, without his particular command; we
wait on him out, we bring him back. This and other things of this nature, some
speculative men have looked upon with so much admiration, that relinquishing
all other business, they have spent all their days in this employment,
manifestly inferring the ineffable wisdom of the divine disposer of all things
from this one demonstration. All which things, if you also, worthiest
Chancelour, be pleased to weigh in your maturest judgment, I question not but
you will award the Regality unto me, who by so many Endowments, Services, and
Obligations to Man, conceive all other, be they of what bu^k they will, are
much inferior; nor doubt I, that your judement will either be so biased, or
misinformed, as that I may ever have occasion to complain of your discretion
or equity.

The SILKWORM.
THe SILKWORM was for a long time desirous to speak, but the rule and order
of the Court enjoined him silence, but now strutting and swelling, and
impatient, of further delay, he broke out thus;

Though these my Competitours have had priority of speech, yet I doubt not of
obtaining so much, as the assignment of priority of reign, if I may but be
fairly heard, that is to say, if the praise of my nobility or birth, the
artifice and skill of my work, the vast and several profits which I liberally
bring unto Man, can confer upon me this high and royal dignity; in all
which, how gloriously and justly I triumph, I shall now show you. For the first,
though I shall not be very lavish, yet since others have insisted on it as an
especial Character of their eminency, and worth; I see not how I am in the
least beneath any of them: For who was ever able by the subtilest enquiry, to
search out my nature, which is admirable in so many changes? From a little seed
warmed by the heat of the Sun, or the breasts of Virgins, there are produced
certain little Worms, both living and active. These in the Springtime, being
laid open in the lesser leaves of Mulberry-trees, daily, like other worms,
increase and enlarge themselves every way, till at length they become very
great worms, and of diverse colors. This is our rise, this the manner of our
birth, which is therefore admirable, that an Insect with four wings sheds that
seed, and a little Worm is produced by it. There is a very great difference
between these two Animals, yet one is the Cause and Womb of the other; But that
is the excellent artifice which is woven out of the bowels of this Worm, while
it lies glutted and surcharged with the juice of the leaves of Mulberries: For
it begins to spin and wind up about it self certain silken threads, which no
imitation of man can possibly follow. These threads are reeled by man, and
gathered into diverse skaines, which are employed in severeall uses, the utilty
whereof, how great it is I cannot so well demonstrate, it is so vast and large.
The Raw-silk undied is pale and yellowish, but by dying is taught to lie an
infinity of colors. Hence are there threads wound up to a thousand uses, and
some woven into stuffs of different kinds* Hence see you so many different
Silks* differently made with great workmanship which employ the heads and
hands of most Artificers, who severally, as their Genius and design leads
them, disguise us into things suitable to the pleasure or profit of Man.
Consider, I pray you, only this, how many men, women, and children, earn their
bread by our service, that is to say, by unweaving what we weave to their
hands: Hence the Diers and their great families live merely by doing us
service, that they may change and vary the Fruits of our Labors into diverse
colors. Next to these, the Weavers have a share, who with our skaines once
died, make Stuffs, and Taffata's of different natures. Hence comes Velvet, and
indeed all other kind of Silks whatsoever. These come to be bought by the
Mercers, and make a great part of his stock, being afterward dispersed into
several Nations and Cities, for the use of Man: And these four sorts of
people are so populous and excessive in number, that there is no Prince, be* he
never so potent, be his Dominions never so wide, that dare vie with us to
number so many Subjects: yet these vast multitudes acknowledge us, and confess
they recieve their Bread and Sustenance from us. But besides these, those who
have their clothing from us, as being without number, cannot be reckoned; not
to say any thing of Emperors and Kings, nor of lesser Princes, though they
glitter in what they borrow from us, I will only instance in private persons.
Do but see how any inferior fellow, when ^e has once got upon his back a
piece of Stuff, which our kind had carefully provided for him, how he struts,
looks big, and domineeres: There is nothing that more usually changes the
minds of men, than clothes, which is a business owing unto us: Nay even some
adorned with our excrements, think themselves safe and concealed from those
vices which they carry in their bosoms. Have you not, I pray you, a good
opinion and esteem of him, that being followed by a long train of servants, is
wrapped up and covered with our Webbs? Although* consider him in his inward man
for his worth or honesty, he be the basest and w^^kedest creatur^ living. On
the other* side, do you not take him to be a vile and an object creature, who
appears only in bare and pittifll rags, although* it may be the cover of
never so honest, a great and candid soul? Thou thy self, O Man, very well
know, that even he that is arrived at the greatest pitch of Letters and
Science, is either not at all, or very little esteemed, if he be not well clad,
and appear in a garb suitable to his quality; and yet you will not find any
man, be he never so inconsiderable and low of spirit, if he be but gaily clad
in Silk, but he thinks he ought to be esteemed and take place before him: such
a prerogative have our Webbs, which if you will deny, I am ready to justify it
by a true story. Philip, D. of Burgundy, surnamed the Good, found one night in
Gaunt, a fellow very drunk, and fast asleep: This fellow he made some of his
followers take up and carry with him to the Palace, where they stripped him of
his nasty and dirty rags, and putting him on a fair holland shirt, laid him
in one of the Dukes beds; the next morning a company of Pages, who were very
handsome youths, and well clad, attend him till he awak^d, which when they
perceived, humbly* addressing* themselves* to him with the same speeches and
gestures, with the same courtship and submission that they used toward the Duke
himself; they asked him what clothes he would wear that day, and withal,
showed him several rich suits, that he might make his choice. The fellow at
the first was plunged in a million of doubts, whether this was a vision or no;
he could not be satisfied within himself about the place, or whether he was
the man they intended, or himself was changed from his former person into
another; but when he saw that persons of honor attended him with precise
obedience, and who with all respect, demanded of him, whether his Highness
would be pleased to rise and return to his wonted excercises; He began to be
really persuaded, that himself was the Duke they intended. Having therefore put
on one of the Dukes suits, and finding it fit for him, he was confirmed in his
belief, that he was the Master of so many Servants, and (wonder at that sudden
impression made upon his spirit) the most powerful Prince of the whole Region;
then with a great train following him* he is conducted to the Park adjoining to
the Palace, then to the Fish Ponds, then* to Breakfast, after that he spent his
time in visiting other places, discoursing about several matters, in which
whole occurrence the slave as to shape and habit, counterfeited the Duke well
enough; but his understanding and the rest of his deportment, spoke him (what
really he was) a Cobbler. At length he is solemnly called on to dinner, where
there bore him company the greatest Beauties of the Court, and men of the best
Quality; thence is he brought abroad to hunt, attended by all the Court,
furnished with the best Dogs, and mounted on the best Horses. At his return
supper staid for him, where he was entertained with variety of choicest dishes,
and while they about him very ceremoniously drunk his health in the strongest
Wine, he very naturally (as loving it with all his heart) became as drunk as
before, and fell into a sleep that approacht death as near as possible, then
D. Philip, (who all this while among the Courtiers, had attended the fellow in
a disguise, whilst the other sustained the person of a Prince) commanded him
to be clothed again in his former vestments, and to be carried to the place
from whence he was brought, and there left. This late Duke measured out the
night with a sound sleep, but when he awaked and found his lodging changed he
began to be very doubtful of his condition, enquiring of himself whether he
were he that he now seemed, or rather that Duke which he lately thought
himself: but when he could not otherwise persuade himself, there being
present so many circumstances, especially his torn and old clothes to convict
him, that he was a mean Cobbler, but more in regard there was nothing at all to
witness he had been a Duke, he returned home and related unto his wife the
adventure as a Dream he had had the last night, that he had been in the Dukes
Palace, how he had been treated, how he recreated himself with walking and
hunting, how he had fared, and (in short) All. From all which it is apparent,
that garments made of our silk, have a strange power of persuasion upon the
minds, not only of them that wear them, but also upon the beholders of the
quality and worth of the persons; For many when they see themselves laden with
the spoils of Silkworms, although they be men of the meanest rank, and of
souls not tinctured with the least generosity or literature, begin to persuade
themselves that they are really such as they are accounted (as the Cobbler did)
when they see every man humor, flatter, and fawn upon them: others when they
see a man shining in Silk, never at all consider him as a Silk-worme, or for a
Bird whose nest is only made of skeines of Silk, but mistake him for such an
one, as who being more powerful, we ought to obey, who being the more lovely we
ought to court, who being more learned, we ought to assent unto, and who being
superior, we ought to give place unto; you see what strange charms there are
in our Webbs; the Lodestone does not more powerfully allure the Needle, than
those attract the eyes of men to them, and bewitch them, Hence came these
Verses.

Hunc homines decorant quem vestimenta decorant,
In vili vest nemo tractatur honest;
Vir been vestitus pro vestibus esse peritus
Creditur a mill quamvis idiota sit ille;
Si careas vestte nec sis vestitur honest
Nullius es laudis quamvis sis omne quod audis.
Men honor him, to whom clothes honor give,
None in Course clothes does civil usage find:
Men, a well-cloathed man, well learned* believe,
Be he a sot and ignorantly blind.
If thou want cloachs, and if they be not neat,
They Will scorn thee, though thou know all they repeat.
Nam talis prima facie presumitur quis esse qualem vestes eum indicant, l. item
apud 15. sec. si quis virgins, F. de injur. and famos. Libel. A man at the
first sight is to be judged according to his babit. I confess indeed, some
Barbarous Nations know not the use of our Webbs, going naked, mangled and
tanned, not being able to put a right estimate upon them. But then we are to
consider, that as they know no shame, so they know no ornament; having no sober
and rectified judgment, whereby to put a value upon our work: we, in some
Forests of Asia, voluntarily adorn the Trees with our Webbs, few or none
there esteeming their price, which we perceiving, thought fit to remove, but
not unto the Negro's in Africa, a naked and unarmed people; but we choosed
rather to pitch our tents in Europe, which has treated us with so much
tenderness: But we cannot but express our piety and gratitude to so careful
a Foster-mother. Here are we fed with the lesser leaves of the Mulberrytree,
and we, by way of gratitude, for our nursing leave them our Silks: Some have
been said to have bred us in the breasts of Virgins, we in requital cover not
only their breasts, ^ut adorn and fashion their whole bodies by our labors, so
that they seem to be rather made and brought up by us, than we by them; they
indeed may give color to our skeins, but we add luster and splendor unto
them. There is one thing which I am very much astonished at, and whose cause
cannot find out* after my most curious research, from whence Man, cloath^d by
us, grows proud, when we our selves are neither proud, nor are at all adorned
by our Webbs: whence their spirits come to be so raised and blown up, while we
quietly labor in all humilty: our diet's homely, and of a single dish, nay all
our business is still one and the same: How comes it then that so ma^^
different passions should attend silken garments? Indeed I see no other reason,
but those several accidents and usages by which silk is varyed, by dying, by
weaving, by sewing. By dying, because the colors with which we are inbued, are
not only diverse, but of diverse properties; some are made of Vegetables, some
of Mineralls, nay indeed, some of animalls themselves, in all these, there is a
several variety which differently touches and works upon the heart. The Red
and Purple are belived to be very restorative unto it: so others also imprint
their little influences upon it, though it be not so easy to assign the
Reason* And it is very possible, that by weaving such an effect may likewise
happen: but especially by sewing, we see the figure and new shape of any new
matter, gives it a great deal of grace. Now by the shape of any thing, the
heart is easily won to esteem, or any other passion: Whatever is the cause, be
it in the matter, be it in the form, be it in the subject it self, that is to
say, the body, or the mind of Man; it is the same thing, since we by our
Threads contribute nothing to it, unless there be some hidden cause in it
which is too nice and subtle for my indagation. This I know, our diet is
Mulberry-leaves, and methinkes they should not nourish us with any pride: But
Man using our threads labored and spun out of the leaves of trees, not
forgetting his ancient nakedness in Paradise, which he would have covered with
Fig. leaves, seems to be proud now that he has found out so excellent a
remedy, as instead of them to be clothed with the leaves of Mulberry, lest he
might appear naked, or, according to his old barbarity, be glad of a
Sheep-skin. For my part I shall not much press it home unto him, that he uses
only the leaves of a Mulberry tree, transformed and altered in the maw of a
Worm; and thus only to hide his nakedness, to dis-esteeme the simplicity of
his first Fathers, or that it is but justice that he should be covered with the
excrements of Worms, who is after to become their nourishment: Man in this
being very prudent to consider, first what he was when he came into the world
naked, and what he shall be after death, either putrefactive, or putrefaction:
and if we well consider it, I may well infer, that we are noble, and of a
nature friendly to man, when we prevent his unhappiness by covering him with
our labors, and furnishing him with good instruction, rather than offensive to
him, in putting him in mind of his fragility by our own. What is more noble
and generous than Man? What more wise, more prudent? Yet he himself
acknowledges, that we are not unworthy to provide him fleeces, and furniture to
cover and adorn himself, whereby to heighten and manifest his reputation:
Therefore I know none who will deny us to be most noble creatures, since we
add nobility unto the noblest: It Is nothing that the Sheep be she English or
Spanish, or of any other Country, should bring his Wools in competition with
us, since we have had priority of esteem, by prescription of long time, and
keep at the present possession: it is fit therefore the Sheep do homage to the
Silkworm, and not the contrary: We, as fed with the leaves of tall trees,
whilst they, content with roots, and a little short grass, are penned up in
bare and barren pastures; there we seated in an higher fortune, derived by
nobler birth, and better nature, leave our rich fleeces to serve the
magnificence of Man; they are of an inferior condition to their wools unless
admirable skill, dying, workmanship make it somewhat, is only sought after and
used by the meanest persons. From what I have said there evidently results thus
much, What profit accrewes unto man by our Webs, and how great it is, that the
Royalty can with no right, but rather all the injustice of the world be denied
me. The merits of the CALF, SHEEP, GOOSE, are very great; The OYSTER, and the
BEES, are indeed very considerable, yet the SILKWORMS, are the most ample unto
man, especially him who richly clothed (...) our Webbs, is master of higher
and sharper reason, and for most part sits Chanc^^or in those weighty
differences of this nature.

FLAX.
HItherto the Annimalls of several Classes, sought praeheminence by declaring
their several worths. Liberty of Speech now devolved to the Vegetables, which
as they want sense and motion, are accounted of an inferior and meaner degree:
FLAX, therefore, though it seemed for this reason to be slighted by the others
began to speak in this manner, I believe none of this assembly, much less
yourself, most worthy Judge! will wonder why the orders which in this dispute
you commanded us to observe, did assign me this turn of speaking, because I
may seem the most inconsiderable among you: but since I am clearly of a far
other opinion, and it is known by experience, that the youngest and most
unworthy in all Counsels, are first demanded their Opinion, and afterward the
Ancients and Sages, I take it not ill at all, but rather render my thanks to
the L. President for being pleased to place me in the order wherein I stand,
you have heard Sir the animalls and so many of them all this while pleading for
themselves, and therefore I hope you will grant me who am chosen single to
represent the whole vast number of VEGET ABLES some little Time to remonstrate
our Rights.

But if any one may speak of the adva^tages rendered unto Man, no doubt the
praeheminence of Flax will oretop all the rest. And although it be not easily
acco^modated to that end, But requires abundance of Labor in the preparation,
yet once obtained, it is crowned with the greatest advantages, nay so great
that the life of Man would be much more sad and disadvantagious without it; and
therefore they have thought it no matter of shame to employ all their industry
in their several managements of it, in order to fit it to their own use, which
doubtless they had never done, had they not been allured by great hopes, and
confirmed by equal success; for all things which in themselves are handsome
and good, and least noxious, are scarce and rare, and seldom obtained by Man,
but after the greatest difficulties, and hardest labors, as is witnessed by
Hesod, That the Gods place Sweat before Glory, and the old Romans permitting
any man to set his foot into the temple of Honor, before they had past through
the chapel of Virtue. Nay, even in common things, before we can eat the Nut,
we must first crack it, and throw away the shells; So before man can use Flax
to the best advantage, it must be so prepared, that first the seeds must be
thrown into a ground excellently well manured, and when it is grown up so much
as to carry the shape of a plant, it must be often freed from some other more
unworthy weeds as may pester it. When it is ripe, then it is to be plucked up,
then the seeds are to be separated by drawing them through combs or rakes;
next, these being reserved, all the rest must be macerated in water, that it
may putrify for almost 12. days. Then it must be laid in some dry and windy
place, that it may be dried either by the Sun, Wind, or Air. After this
drying of it, it must further endure the heat of a Furnace, till it become
fragile and friable, then it must be broken and pounded, not all, but the
grosser part of it, for there will remain a rind, which cannot be broken, as
being of too ductile and easy a substance. Then must it be separated by wooden
Cleavers, as it were with Hatchets, or to say better, the hard substance made
more soft, and separated from the thinner parts. Then is it fit that it be
kem'd through with Iron-Hatchels, and next that, by finer than these, it be
purged from his thicker and shorter threads, that so at length it may be fit to
be spun: Then is it wound up into Hankes to be washed, both with Water and Lee,
and when once dried, is brought together into bundles, which by the means of
the Weaver are made Linen, which having tried both the Sun, and Rain, and
Water, is purged into a curious whiteness; and lastly, it coms to be
appropriated to the use of man, by cutting it, and stitching it together. The
profit of this Linen, which is so exceedingly various, is obtained through all
this labor; and I believe nothing in all the world needs so much preparation,
therefore it was very fit I should have mentioned it.

What the Silkeworme has said of her threads may be possibly true, but if they
were to be made serviceable by so many tedious ways, I cannot but imagine they
would be of rarer use; yet all this has so little affrighted mankind, that by
how much their pains are greater, they have been so much the more pleasant in
obtaining the use of Flax, of which I shall say little and briefly; The
profits of it are so many, both in the seed, threads, or Linen made of them,
nay of Linen it self after it has been decayed. In the Seed, either for it
self, or for the Oil drawn out of it: in it self, as in medicine, the seed
is applied for emolliency and maturation; the Oil extracted from it, is of so
piercing a tenuity, that it can only be preserved in Glasses or Bladders, not
in any Earthen Vessels, be they never so well prepared, for it sweats and
evaporates through them.

The use of this Oil extends it self to the tempering of Colors, and
several other things, besides what it is in Physic, but all these I pass by.
I proceed to threads, which are of various use both to tie and bind up any
thing, or to stitch up any thing, whether it be for use or ornament. Nay, there
are made from them several Stuffes, though they be not called Linen, such as
are Linsey-wolsyes, and Kersies, and Silks, and half Silks, which serve not
only for Clothes, but other uses of Men. But Linen above all the rest is the
most desired and prized. Man might want the others, or supply himself with
something in their stead, but if he wanted Linen (as unexperienced Antiquity
did before it knew how to use Flax) he would be obliged to a great deal of
troublesome and vexatious labor.

For to instance in the first place, Shirts and Wascoats, if he wanted them, we
should be forced to use only Woollen, from whence we should have a great
putrefaction arise from the Wool taken from the Beasts, by the warmth of the
skin into dirt and foetor, from whence we should have Worms plenty enough, or
the Lousie disease, which once creeping upon him, would either engage him to
change his Clothes often, or every day be troubled with the voydance of so much
nastinesse as we know by experience, for those that use Woollen next their
skin, are the most subject to this disease, a thing not known where they wear
good Linen, and that often changed.

Hence in former times, when the use of Linen was not so common, as it is in
this age, they were forced in Italy (where the warmer air did in Summer cause
their bodies to transpire more) every day to wash themselves, which occasioned
so many magnificent Baths to be built in Rome and other places, in which the
Emperors themselves often, and all people else washed themselves, and so spent
their time in Frictions and unctions, as though they had been borne for no
other end* Nay many there were, who, content to abuse this matter of necessity,
into an entertainment of pleasure, were so immoderate in it, that Galen the
Emperor is said to wash four or five times a day, which I would not have said
as if I understood not but that the old Romans knew what Linen was, but that I
would intimate that it was in greater esteem, and rarer use then it is at
present. Thus we read that Caesar covered the whole Roman Forum with Linen,
Virgil. l. 1. Georg.

Urit enim campum Lini seg^s --
For Hemp Seed burns the field.
Plautus in Mostel.
Linteum cape tuque exterge tibi manus.
Take the Towel and wipe your hands.
Therefore the Egyptian Priests in all Antiquity, used Linen Surplices,
witness even the Poets, Ovid 1. Metam.

Nunc Dea Linigera colitur celeberrima turba.
Yet men in Linen vestments still adore this famous Goddess.
And Invenal. Sat. 6.
Qui grege linigero circundatus and grege calvo
Plangentis populi currit derisor Annbis.
Followed by Linen Priests, and a bald train,
Anubis runs and laughs, poor men complain.
Ilius Apol^nius Thiganeus the Philosopher, is reported to have the same habit,
because this as is said, was accounted more pure and clean, than that which was
torn and fl^^d off other animals. Besides, by reason of the scarceness or
want of Linen, the Ancients used to anoint themselves with Oil, and
exercised themselves in public places, even to sweating, after which they
employed themselves in swimming near the Campus Marti^s and other places, which
as they did not only very much conduce to cleanliness, so did it very much
further all Martial exercises. Hither must we refer the Art of Wrestling, and
Leaping, and Dancing, which is only a motion of the Body, directed according
to Art, as also Frictions of the Limbs, so often repeated every day, of all
which physicians have thought them elves concerned to write, as of matters
belonging to Health: But of them which look thoroughly into the Matter, ^he
chief end of all the pains, and hardy exercise, was only the preservation of
cleanness of Body. But afterward custom and habit of these things, turned it
into another nature, and made it be believed as necessary for Health, which may
hence appear, that without Lotions and clearing the Body of its frequent
superfluities, they were so pestered, that they contracted the diseases I have
mentioned, and by this means the whole day was unprofitably spent in Bathings,
Frictions, Unctions, sweating exercises, Wrastlings, and Dauncings, especially
by those great ones that seemed to live for no other end but to please
themselves, when all others of a meaner rank, they were forced by the sweat of
their brows to earne their bread, seldom or never cleansing themselves by such
chargeable ways, were vexed with an hundred diseases, which may well make
appear, that the life of man is very miserable and uncomfortable without the
use of Linen, which we find to have been not only the experience of former
Ages, but the misery of some Nations at present, which I conceive I have
demonstrated enough to the ignorant themselves. For in purging of Linen, they
are of so different a Nature from the Body of Man, that filth is not so easily
contracted and putrified into Worms, whereas it is otherwise in Silk and
Cloth: The cleanliness of Man is therefore chiefly to be attributed to
Linen, to which that must be solely attributed, and is withal that which
defends him from those humors, which in it self it drys up. And consequently
we are to infer all that time, which men of all Ages and Qualities wast in
Bathings and idle care of their bodies, whilst their greater business, graver
Studies, Employments or Devotions, are neglected, is now merely owing to us, as
a benefit so mainly conducible to the commodious Conduct of life. But if
Princes were to Bathe four or five times a day, and so often to be rubbed or
exercised in so many manners, allowing them their times of eating, I should
ask of you when they should be at leisure to assist in the weightiest
Counsels for the welfare of their Subjects? When shall they hear the
Petitions and the cries of the oppressed poor? When shall they judge them? When
shall they relieve them? Not to speak of the lesser points of their duties. The
use of Linen therefore is absolutely as necessary as bread, nay, I say, more
profitable, the want of bread may be endured, Nay, recompensed with other
delicacies, but the want of Linen cannot possibly. In Tables and Beds they
yield the same cleanliness, as also in Towels, Shirts, and Hankerchiefs: and
thus much for their necessity.

But if we will consider the habit of women, and the pride they solely derive
from hence, we shall find that by several kinds of Linen, they appear not
only so acceptable and graceful, but they appear as ugly and contemptible
without it, but I rather choose to wave this Topic, in respect I am afraid I
am not able to enlarge it according to the merits of its cause. To all this we
shall add, (though very briefly) two other uses of Linen, whereof no
Antiquity has been ignorant, to wit, that all Navigation, which stretches as
far as the world it self, has been performed by Linen and Canvas sails.
Virg. 3. AEneid.

-- Certum est dare Lintea retro.
Let Us draw our Canvas back;
that is to say our Sails. Which gift how great it is, a small space of Time
suffers me not to declare; above all this, that books anciently were made of
Linen, as those of the Sybills which Livy mentions in his 4th. Book. So Pliny,
Lib. 13. Chap. 13. tells us, that all used to be written in Leaden and Linen
volumes. Nay, and in our age, we many times find somewhat either to be written
or painted, or printed upon the purest Holland. What we have for the present
said, for the use of Linen, while it is whole, though we have in a manner but
touched at it, and cursorily argued, may I think suffice: but when Linen has
been so often foul'd and applied to so many uses, and that so long, till it fall
in pieces, behold a new production. For the rags both of Linen and cloth, be
they never so much sullied, or torn, are gathered together to be carried to
the Paper-mill, where they make their choice and wash them, and then steep them
in water till they be in a manner putrified, then they beat them into a kind
of poultice, which being made very thin, and besprinkled with water, or laid
upon little nets of Wire, is made Paper, whether it be course and fit to wrap
Wares in, or Writing Paper, or Royal Paper; which being once dried, smoothed,
spread, and done with Allome water, brings innumerable helps to the
conversation of man. I beseech you now let Calves-skins* Sheepsskins, the waxen
table, which the Calfe, Shee^ and Be have passionately pleaded for desist any
farther competition, since that from Flax and Linen there arises a new thing,
that like the Phaenix out of her own ashes, shades and darkens all their
utilities, and renders them inconsiderable. I shall not quote to you the
several uses of Merchant-paper* fitted not only for the wrapping up of
things, but I shall say there is no man that can be ignorant, that Books and
Letters are written in Paper, and printed in such abundance, that the Skins of
any other Animals, nor wax would be able to supply so great a defect. By the
use of Paper, the world has enlarged the use of Learning, Arts, and Sciences,
and indeed all other excellencies. Now though we should grant that the Ancients
writ in plates of Mettalls or Wax, or in the barks of Trees, or in leaves of
the Paper of Nilus, or indeed upon the Skins of Creatures, yet scarce any man
could possibly atchieve the use of so many books, without the greatest toil,
irksomeness and cost; or carry them with him from place to place, although he
were a Man of a most plentiful estate. From whence we must necessarily
infer, that in that time men of lower Fortunes were withdrawn and deterred
from their Study, by those two great difficulties, the matter upon which they
should write, and the dearnesse of Books. To instance, Ge^metricians were then
forced to make their figures upon the Sand, that was therefore called the
wisest part of the Earth, as appears in Archimedes (who also while he was in
the Bath, drew Figures in Oil upon his own body) who whilst he was in
contemplation of some Diagramm's drawn in Sand, was slain at the taking of
Syracuse by the Soldiers of Marcellus. Others that were very poor, have made
use of several things, whereupon they might write the Lectures of their
Masters, as Cleanthes did the hoofes of Mules and diverse other things. But at
the present, we have such abundance of what may serve them in this kind, that
merely by the Courtesy of Flax, the poorest man may have enough wherewithal
to read, whereby to learn, and wherein he may dispose all things he has
either read, or has been taught.

And hence it comes, that so many Arts and Sciences have ascended into their
Meridian, not by the use of Parchment or Wax, but of Paper only. To Paper I
say you must ascribe it, you, whoever are embellished with pure literature or
sober Science, if your many and noble Books reach all Posterity, and oblige
unto your selves an eternal memory which will preserve both your names and
works. For I must tell you, the use of Paper has as much distinguished that of
Pelts and Wax, as the invention of Bread did that of Acornes. All Princes and
Noble men study only Paper, to which they trust their most dark Counsels,
never considering that they are made of the most durty rags of Linen. For as a
Potter once, came to be a King, and his golden Close-stool became an Idol to
the people, so the most shattered rags of Linen are made Paper, which Princes
are proud to guild and receive for addresses. The business of the greatest
Councillors of Kings, lies only in poring upon Papers, and by this means they
talk with dumb Teachers. What needs many words? Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities are governed by Papers, all businesses entrusted unto them, and
by that means preserved from Oblivion. The trust of the Chancery is to
preserve these, out of which Papers once being let fly like Doves out of the
Ark, they command, prohibit, perfect and enjoyne all that Law and Equity
requires. Papers therefore are the Messengers of Law, and Equity, which though
silent speak, and though innocent betray all deceits. In Papers the Physicians
make their prescriptions, and therefore we may well call them the Causewayes to
health. In Papers the Philosophers write their Theorems, and bring them home to
the eyes of their Scholars; so that we need not Sand or any other matter to
blot and scratch upon, and therefore may conclude Paper to be the wisest of any
thing. To Paper Lovers trust all their blandishments, and all their Courtships,
and how often do they receive the happiness of a Kiss, which it may be the
sender only lives in hope for?

By Paper, one friend whispers himself in the ear, and enjoyes his distant
Soul at distance. And indeed if Man first trusted his Body to Linen before
ever he knew that Paper was thought upon, now since it is found out, he finds
it the only fit messenger to which he thinks fit to trust his mind, and of
this must Flax only glory; this is one of the most faithful of Man's
lifeguard, to which as the most faithful Scout, he has entrusted and resigned
himself like some ancient Princes, or else some modern, to a German cohort.

Flax needs not the help of any, all of it; no garment can be stitched together
without Flax, or it^ daughter, Thread; but all Linen garments consist of
themselves by their own Threads and parts, without the help of any other.
Pray look upon printed books, of what consist they? marry Flax, and for the
Letters the greatest part of them is Oil of Linseed thickened, unto which I
add, some Paper burned till it be black, (as it well may be) or any other
smoke made of Linseed, you have an Ink fit to print any Book. Therefore a
whole printed book consists only of Flax. Nor can any other claim a share in
it, whether you will consider the Threads, or any thing else by which it is
bound.

Flax carries all things within it self, all that it has need of is its own
dowry; The Oil, which is extracted from its seed, is in the plant it self,
nay, it is in Linen and in Paper, which being fashioned into a pyramidall
shape, and the Base set upon a broad piece of plain Copper, there will appear
an Oil, not without singular admiration, that through so many washes and
vexations, it should be still steadfast to its old matter, to wit, Paper or
Flax.

Now to sum up all these together, and to collect them into the nicest
consideration, they are such and so great, as will not admit of any rival.
Therefore unto me, as the most profitable to Man, as without whom he could not
only live well, but must live very miserably, to me, without whom, neither
Arts nor Sciences, nor affairs of Man in any condition, could either be
delivered or received, I affirm this Diadem we now strive for, to be due above
all the rest. And this I believe none will deny me, but such sottish Beasts, as
never had the happiness to be acquainted with Letters, and therefore you, most
Learned Arbiter, end this strife, and give your verdict for me who have the
most right to it, nor envy me so great an honor, unless you have the mind to
incur the reputation of injustice, by giving Sentence otherwise than you
ought in equity.

MERCURY.
IT remained only, that he who was to speak last, MERCURY, should take his
turn, a thing which being gathered out of the Mines by the Industry of Man,
and accounted the meanest of all the rest, wanting Sense and Motion which the
Annimals possess, and the vegetative of Flax, none of the company feared to be
entertaind with a long Harangue, and therefore they desired him to dispatch
with all brevity, that the Judge might at length satisfy their Expectations,
by giving Sentence; But Mercury who very well knew their minds, did desire of
the Judge liberty to speak at large in this manner. Hitherto, most prudent
Judg^, you have most attentively and patiently listened, to the Remonstrances of
all the rest, and no doubt do perfectly remember how much strength and weight
there is in each of them, and therefore I humbly move that you will be pleased
to hear me, in all that I shall offer to bring before you. I shall not study
to gratify my Competitors by contracting or cutting off any thing that
conduces to my purpose, but rather shall be engaged in necessity copiously,
(with your permission) to discourse of all such things, as I may conceive
essential and material to insist upon, which when the Judge had granted, now
I shall very easily ( says Mercury* save the rest a Labor of ever (for the
future) disputing the prerogative either with me, or among themselves; For my
nobility of Birth I shall not say much, though I find some that have spoke
before have very much pleased themselves in this Topic, I shall content my
self to insist only upon the utility which I bring to Man, which is the rule
of speaking prescribed. But this is so immense and so rich, that like the
Prince of Rivers, the Nile (which discharges it self by a sevenfold stream
unto the Mediterranean Sea) spreads and divides it self into so many branches,
according to the number of Metallic forms, which merely draw their rise and
being from me. That I may therefore speak for my self, I shall first mention
these half Metalls produced by my means Secondly of Lead, thirdly, of Tin,
fourthly of Copper, fifthly of Iron, sixthly of Silver, seventhly of Gold* For
what concerns my self, I will justify I am in the greatest capacity to serve
Man. Not to lose time in representing unto you the vain and unprofitable
works of common Chemists, whilst they labor about me, being but rude and
volatile. I must confess all this toil is deplorable, and neither Laudable nor
Profitable, yet notwithstanding out of all this erroneous practice, there
results an Ingenuity of considerable advantages, four where of I shall chiefly
select, First, That I am employed in separation of Gold and Silver; Secondly,
For Guilding and Silvering; Thirdly, In other Mechanical Works, and lastly,
in Physic. Now by my means is that Gold brought into a body, which lies
scatteredly dispersed in the Mudd or sediment of Rivers or Pools, and there is
a Mass of People, that by this means hunt Gold, as one would say out of the
Waters, wherein their subtle and curious particles are strangely mixed, and
upon trial subside all below in the mauner of dregs. And by this means in
Hungary, Sclavonia, and other Nations, where Rivers steer their course from
mountains impregnate with Gold, as also in Germany and Silesia, they are
gathered into a body merely by the help of Mercury, that is to say, those small
Particles of Gold, which are washed and gnawed away from the main substance, by
the violence of the waters, and by their motion dispersed, are by this means
gathered, united and bodyed, which were impossible without Mercury. For he,
like an indulgent Mother of Gold, when ever she finds her Son gadding through
other Elements or Waters, carefully takes it into his lap, until he restore
it unto it self, and either direct it what to do, or what to declare, no
otherwise than Virgil. AEneid 1. feigns Venus to appear before her Son
AEneas wandering in the woods near Carthage, and bring him into the right way.

Gold being therefore gathered into a deductible substance, Mercury is
percolated through Leather, and made serviceable to the same end again. Now is
Gold melted in the Fire, and so reduced to its fresh continuity, that Gold so
collected and gathered together in so great quantities, is to be ascribed to
Mercury, that is to say, my self; otherwise it had perished or been neglected
or lost, and consequently never have been serviceable unto Man; and in this
point, I appeal only to Experience. Thus only profit surmounts all other
considerations, in the like manner the Silver that is gathered out of the Mines
of Peru, beaten and mingled with Quicksilver, returns it self in incredible
plenty, as may appear by the reports of those that have seen and managed it,
and indeed the increase is so great, that it infinitely exceeds any Treasure.
In the same manner Gold, though it be mouldred and brought into the most
insensible particles by any Mill or Engine, is by this means brought together
in case any remain, and this by the intercourse of Mercury, as the Reconciler
and Peacemaker. Any man may from hence think, that the defect of Mercury may
be supplied with a violent heat, which might cause liquefaction, but in this
they are deceived, for by reason of the Earthy and Clammy substance, in which
the purer Allomes are immixt and buried, it were impossible to make a right
separation with the single use of Fire.

Now for Guilding and Silvering, I my self, Mercury am the sole Agent, for
without me all endeavors of Artists are fruitless, and the reason is, the
likeness of my substance with that of Gold and Silver; And this is not the
least of my profits, that although Men by way of ostentation, may make use of
Silver, or other kind of Plate, yet they enforce me to serve either their use
or Magnificence: I am also employed in abundance of Mechanical operations,
some use me in Fishing, for the light and splendour I throw about me; some use
me for the fourbishing of Arms; some for the better moving and poizing of
Engines, which particularly to insist on, I think not necessary in this place:
But in Medicine I contribute such admirable advantage unto Man. When I am
pulverized either with Gold or any other Body (so it be not corrosive or
noxious) that I am the best Purgative Nature has given us. This dust, although
it be but meanly prepared, as it has the name and attribute of Aurelian is a
Panchymagogon [a General Medicine] which I cannot aver to purpose without a
particular discourse of all particular Physic; yet see here, most sage Judge,
to make good this point, I shall deliver some things that may very much conduce
to the service of your self and the rest of your Brethren, and my method shall
be this; First, I will tell you the virtue of this Aurelian powder, then of the
use and way of Administration, and lastly, I shall mention its admirable
operation and effects. For the first, as to its virtues it is highly Sovereign
for all these diseases and affections, which proceed from any humors, whether
antecedent or restaynant. With time, they are immunerable, I shall not bring
them hither upon a precise account, but only in general, that it roots out
and chases away all putrid Feavours, Gouts, Swellings and Obstructions of any
part, as also the great Pox, Palsies, lesser Apoplexyes, Hypocondriack,
Melancholy, palenesse and Jaundise in Women, the Jaundise, Chachexys, and
growing Dropsies, for drawing out and evacuating any humors descending unto,
and fermenting in the Bladder; which it does most powerfully, whether it be
Wind, Phlegm, Choler or Melancholy, as any matter Joyntly-Coagulated by them:
In the Gout, it is the surest remedy which may well suffice, since under that
name there are almost an hundred diseases comprised, though frequently lurking
under more Common or different shapes: In Fluxes, inflammations and the like
affection^, the dissolution of continuity, it may be very advantagiously used,
and upon experience has done a great deal of good, but never any hurt, but
rather (as in the maladies before mentioned) has ever afforded present relief
with Gods assistance. Secondly, For the Dose, it is one two or three grains, to
six or more, commonly three in children of three years old, two to them of
two, in other that are stronger four or six; for the increase of the Dose is
not dangerous, and the reason is, because it gently draws the Humors into the
Stomach, as the Magnet does Iron to it, works not violently at all; it is
taken most commonly in Fountain water, or some Hotwater, as spirit of Wine,
Cinnamon water, Aniseed water, Agnus Castus, spirits, or any other, especially
in diseases not extremely hot in themselves, as Burning Fevers, hot
distempers or inflammation of the Liver, in which cases it is better taken in
cold water, Carduus Benedictus, Endive or Rhenish Wine, or any other liquor, or
in Diet or Meals, in which it is m^st proper. Thus used, put one Dose into a
spoonful of liquor, and stirring it well up with your finger, drink it off
hastily, that so it may descend into the Stomach, if there stay any thing
either in the Spoon or the Throat, wash it so often with the same liquor, till
you have drunk it all, and are sure to have taken the full Dose: But this must
be done in the morning, keeping your self warm in Bed, neither sleeping,
eating, nor drinking upon it. But in case of necessity it may be taken out of
Bed, and business may be dispatched, some, as melancholy persons may stir
abroad (if the sky be clear) and persons in health. It is given without any
danger to all ages, as to children of two or three years old; nay to old Men,
in whom you must consider abundance of Humors, lest they be too much stirred,
but in children there needs not so much Caution: Thirdly, for the Operation it
is thus, if the Air be warm, or the Patient keep himself so, and drink warm
broths, if he have a full body the humors work well and Plentifully;
otherwise, if the Air be cold, and he keep not himself warm, nor make use of
an hot Vehicle, and his body be thin and extenuated, this Medicine will work
much less, or not at all: if any should suddenly sleep, drink, or eat upon it,
or casually take it in Pills, he would not want acquaintance of the effects of
it* violently, moderately, or not at all; it never does any harm, for it has
not the Nature of other violent Purgatives, to do mischief, in case it fail
of Operation: But commonly this is the effect of it, after you have taken it in
a fitting liquor, if the disease be Phlegm or any crude matter, this, though
it be thick, tough, and clammy, is drawn out of the Mesariack veins, and the
parts adjacent into the bottom of the Stomach, where the Medicine seats it
self, where if any considerable quantity be gathered, there arises a little
loathing, which if it increase, it causes a desire of vomiting, which provoking
and causing frequent spitting, throws out and egests all, but more easily by
putting the finger in the throat: and by this means the ventricle being eased
and evacuated, and freed from all that filthy matter that clogged it, which
being preserved in a Basin, till there be no further Spitting or Vomiting, you
will find that sometimes one, two or three pound of ugly matter, is gently
drawn out without much straining, and that with immediate ease, and relief of
the Patient: And when all trouble of Spuing or Spitting ceases, let him take
^^rme broth or meat. If the humor be (...) some Ginger in Wine or Beer, if the
disease be hot and proceeding from a bilious matter, the Operation will be
somewhat different; the like it is if Melancholy predominate. These humors for
the most part work upward, the rest conveigh away themselves both upwards and
downwards: Where, by the way, take these Cautions, that in Women or cachectick
old Men, or any infected with the Pox, that you only give it once, and in
warm drinks, as I said, and then stay till you see the effect of its working,
after this it may be given again, (unless the disease be overcome) lest the
Humor being plentiful should ascend to the upper parts, and the Patient
falling asleep might find some vexation in his Jaws, occasioned by such
putrid vapors, which yet with any abstergent Gargarisme, as of Wine, Bole
Almoniack, Honey, or Alum, boiled either with themselves, or with Betony, Mint*
Plantain, etc. are washed away and Educt; In Melancholy diseases it draws away
and cleanses all Humors like Pitch.

This one Medicine being so gentle, so harmless, yet so effectual, is
employed as the noblest Panchymagogon, both for the preservation of the
Healthy, and may also be made use of in the cure of most of the maladies which
I have mentioned, and in this particular you will acknowledge your self not to
be a little obliged to me, after you have made experience. Now although by
sublimation with several kind or Salts, I am changed into a poison, which
most properly is called Sublimate; or else by Abstraction, or re-infusion of
strong or separating waters, upon the same Mercury. I am transformed into a
ruddy substance, impregnant b^ the dregs of those dangerous waters, with a
fiery poisonous quality, which is commonly called Praecipitate, yet must not
this be attributed to any Pravity inhaerent in me, but the mixture of such
hurtful Salts, and the abuse of Mankind. For Mercury is of it self an
Antidote, not only against the Plague, but many other diseases, which is
apparent from hence, that where it is most commonly found and managed, the
Plague is most unknown, as in Istria: It is put also into plasters for
Ulcers, and the lousie disease, and that without any danger. Nay to some it is
given inwardly, mixed with conserve of Roses, as to children against the Worms;
from whence you may observe its harmless and Innocent Nature. But I hasten
unto other things, what I have said relates only to me in the state of my
Fluor and Crudity. But when Nature has once advanced me unto Semi-metalls, as
Bisomuthum, Antimony, Zinkium, I am extremely commodious unto Man, and what is
received from them, must be acknowledged also from me, as being their Crearix
and Mother.

The excellency of Tutia lies in curing the Eyes, in Cankerous Ulcers, and
making Laten of Copper; the rest mingled either with other things, or singly
prepared, produce an infinite variety of Medicinal preparations, and those of
as different forms and Colors, which since they are so innumerable, neither
ought nor can be reckoned here; and for this reason also, impossible to put an
estimate of the vast gains that Artists make by them: How Many Artificers,
Merchants, Chemists and Physicians have huge incomes hereby, is above all
account, and so I pass unto the second part of the progeny derived from me. To
wit, Lead, adding only this to what I have formerly said; that the use of
Antimony is so great, both in Physic and Chemistry, that it is scarcely to be
demonstrated in a great volume, and therefore since others have written whole
Tractates of the same subject, I shall rather acquiesce in them, than trouble
you with repetition, or hazard my eloquence upon so Noble a Theme; and besides
this, my time is very narrow. But Lead is of principal use in all Metallshops,
where Silver, Gold, Copper, and other mixtures, without the use of Lead could
not be purified or separated. For melted Lead puts on the nature of Mercury,
which gathers all fluxible matters unto it self, and among the rest Silver and
Gold, from whence it is after separated by the Coppell, and draws away the
other Metalls that are nearer a kin to it, as Copper and others, the Gold or
silver remaining untoucht upon the shell or Coppell of burnt Lead, is made
Lythargury, which is most fortunately used in Plasters and Ointments. Nay,
even Lead it self, either in powder, or the substance of a Leaden mortar
bruiz'd small, or else outwardly applied in plates, which are found to do a
great deal of good in many diseases: In plates it is applied to wrested
Sinews, swollen Lips, inflamed Reins, and the like, in the substance bruiz'd,
to Cancerous Ulcers, and all Fistulaes: Besides this, the uses of Lead are
diverse, Hence is coverings for Houses, Cisterns, Conduit-Pipes, and weights:
Among the rest, what effect Leaden Bullets have in War, is a thing so known,
that it needs not mentioning. But you will ask whether this be for advantage
or detriment? slight, or strength? I stick not to confess it to be an abuse,
but yet such an one, as men cannot well want, both for defense and convenience,
therefore that they are able to make War, and destroy their Enemies, is all my
gift, that is to say I my self changed into Lead. That several Medicines are
applied, both inwardly, and outwardly, to several diseases, otherwise
incurable; as the French Pox, Pthyryasis, vermiculation of Ulcers,
inflammations of the Eyes and Reins, Cankers, Fistula's, and innumerable
others, is merely the liberality of Mercury, and his children Tutie,
Lythargury, Lead, and none other: Neither is it a wonder that Mercury should be
both Soldier and Physician, since Apollo himself ownes both qualities, and
Pallas was ever equally addicted to Study and War; you know what the Poets
have told us, that the Caduceus of Mercury, was endowed with two several
Powers, that it could discharge the Souls of men out of their Bodies, and
again remand them; send them to Hell, and afterward release them; which is
most apparent in this, I sometimes heal the diseases of Men, and being
transformed by Arts into good Medicines, free from death: I am another times
poison and destruction unto him, as in the Wars or otherwise. But if any hurt
arise from me, it must be imputed to the preposterous endeavors and designs
of Men, which can turn the greatest Cordials into the most violent Poisons. I
come now to the third branch of my offspring, which is Tin, this appears in
more beauty and luster than Lead, and therefore is employed in more noble and
splendid uses, of this are all kind of Vessels, Dishes and Platters made,
which Man makes use of, either in his Diet, or Physic. Many Nations eat and
drink out of it, and they hold it in great estimation, as very harmless,
extremely bright and handsome. But of all kinds the English is clearly the
best, as coming nearest Silver, and therefore it is most prized, it changes or
infects nothing with its Sulphurous fume and contagion, but faithfully
preserves all that is shut up and trusted to it. Therefore as Lead covers the
outside of houses, so Tin adornes the insides and the Kitchen. Of the one are
greater Vessels or Instruments made, of the other the Lesser and Finer. So both
of them, though of a weak and ductile bulk and substance, serve and attend
the uses of Man, as much as possibly lies in them.

I shall say nothing of the profitable use of Tin in Medicine, and in the
colorings of Potters, which is very considerable. But to avoid prolixity, I
shall step unto the next Branch, to wit, Copper, a substance of hotter Nature,
and greater strength; of this there is much use in several instruments
necessary for Man, especially those that require Firmness, Capacity, and
withal, Beauty; such are all those Brasse-pots, that must endure the hardship
of the fire, Caldrons and Kettles, as big as Tonnes, which are used in the
boiling of many things, (as Cloth, Beer, and many others) of which it is
impossible to give an account: The Utensills of Housholdstuffe made either of
Copper or Laten are so many, that we shall pass them by, as being continually
in the eye, and generally known. Two things I must needs admire, and they are
instruments made of Copper, which much exceed and excel all the rest, and
these are Bells and Canons: By Bells we account the time of the day and night,
and whether you will reckon at the rate of 12. hours, or 24. every hour is
declared and proclaimed so well, that we need not the voice of Stent^r or any
other means to assemble the people, because the Bells do this, both by their
high ringing and sound, and by a noise that the nearest approaches to Thunder.

What profit arises from Clocks through the whole Christian world (for I speak
not of the Turkish Barbarity, which is afraid least their Tyranny might be
suppressed by the people gathered by this means) is indeed inestimable. We
need not now a Cynsophalon as they did in Egypt, to calculate either by her
pissing or shiting, to distribute the day and night into 12. equal spaces,
when by the noise of Bells all this is not only heard and computed, but it is
the same in night as in the day. It Is also needless that we should measure
time by an houre-glasse, or water-glasse, as the Romans did, because Bells give
a writ of ease and silence to all these Instruments, and they only tell us the
time of the day. Not to mention the crowing of Cocks, the measuring of
shadows, whilst the Sun is in the Meridian, and the like observations of Day
and Night, which it may be may serve, where Bells are not in use, otherwise not
at all* Besides, Bells call the people to Sermons, meetings, assemblies,
funerals, and what not. To Sermons, that every man by his devotion may
approach to God and come nearer him; to Meetings, that they may either commonly
join together, against an Enemy or wild Beasts, or Thieves, or Fire, or
Water, or whatever prejudices else they are like to receive, without the remedy
and assistance of common hands and common help. We declare Fire an Enemy by
Bells, as is believed, that Thunder is dispersed by the commotion of the Air
(caused by Bells.) The office assigned to Bells is expressed in great Letters
in a Sapphick verse, and that in one of the greatest in all Germany, and (for
ought I know) in the Christian world, as the inscription witnesses. For it
weighs two hundred seventy five hundred weight, that is, 27500. pound weight.
Laud Patronos cano Gloriosa,
Fulgur arcens and Doemones malignos,
Sacra Templis a populo sonanda,
Carmine pulso.
I ring my Founders praise with joy,
Preserve from Thunder, feinds annoy,
And by my noise tell people where
To Holy duties to repair.


Mercury therefore that in the founding of Bells, gives both sound and matter,
does all those duties, that is to say, calls people to their Devotions, and
Summons them to whatever else they are to perform, and therefore in this
point, may very well claim the greatest part of the prerogative. The things
that have been said before, may be accounted common and easily imitated and
supplied by others, but these that I now insist on, must be solely attributed
to Mercury.

No Man can of Wood, Stones or Glass make a Bell, unless for deaf men or
paralyticks, which either cannot hear it, or stir upon it. It Is Mercury, who
though he be mute, yet by the least impulse has a voice; It Is he who makes
others leap and gather together; It Is he that is the Sexton to the Church, and
Clerk to the Market, a faithful Scout, and Informer of all Dangers, that any
may incur or avoid them. It Is he that calls the hungry and the barking
stomach to its diet, that awakes the sleepy and the sloathfull to industry, and
gaining their bread. It Is he that commends dead men to burial, and declares
their last farewell to the world. But lest I may chime too long in this tune, I
shall pass to Artillery; And here what shall I say, or what shall I not say?
Shall I tell you of the profits accrewing to Mankind? Shall I suggest it as an
invention sent up from the Devil into the Earth, or found out by the
inquisition of Man? Whatsoever it is, if any evil happen upon it, it must not
be imputed to Mercury or the matter, but the way and invention or rather the
mis-use. For in all these Treasons to Man, Mercury, is not in the least
accessory, but still continues faithful to himself, to hurt no body and
profit all men. If it hurt, blame others, that either employ it to so dangerous
uses, or have brought it into such a form, or made use of such means as they
think may contribute to satisfy their own wills and Lusts. Hence come so
many Thunders and dreadful noises, and great breaches in Walls, made only by
Canon; for if Mercury or Metallic substance be founded in a long and a hollow
fashion, closed in the britch, and open in the bore, it then becomes an engine
of mischief, otherwise not. But let it be so, it is altogether innoxious
unless that cursed Gunpouder be employed in it, which being ramm'd in, and set
on fire, see how by the violence of Man, breaking out of it, it does the
highest mischief; yet not singly by it self, but by a Bullet made of Metal
or Stone, which may restrain the egression of the fire, and force it like
Thunder to break out and destroy all that is near it, and that to the greatest
damage and ruin.

If Metal therefore stay in its own first form, it is harmless, nay
suppose it be changed, it is the same; but if you bring the third and the
fourth, that is to say Powder and Bullet, and put fire to it, then indeed it
becomes mischievous; nay that all the harm is in powder only, may appear
from hence, that being laid in mines, sprung under Castles or Towns, and blown
up, it overthrowes all above it with incredible celerity, noise and violence.

This is the only thing which the Monk found out, which has dispatched away
10000. more lives, than all your other ancient Machines, whether Slings,
Catapults, Onager's, Rams, Bows, Darts or Arrows, which were but boyish
trifles in respect of the modern Artillery. What ever therefore has been
famously done against the Enemies of Christianity, is merely performed by these
Gunnes. 'Twas merely done by the hand and mouth of Mercury. It was I that took
into my mouth Iron and Leaden bullets, but I was heightened by Gunpowder, and
that in such a degree, as I have laid many Enemies flat before me; the blast of
my mouth is very pernicious, nay, it is Thunder. I break down Walls, Forts,
Castles, Towns, and all fortresses whatsoever. There are several sorts of
Guns made of me, some of Laton and Copper, some of Lead, some of Iron* some
whereof are great and busky, some of them middle sized, some little, some long,
some thick, some short, and some thin, and from hence, according to their
several forms, they have arrived at several names; as Cannons,
Mortar-pieces, Drakes, Muskets, etc. for they are too many to particularize.
All these are ayding to the death of Man, but by the design of Man, not the
will of Mercury, for it were better for me that things fitter for the health of
Man were brayed in morters, than that bullets of great weight should be shot
through me, to the destruction of Man. It were better for me that you made
Engines and Pumps to quench Fires in great Cities, (if they would but make them
of Metal) than on the contrary employ me to bring fire and destruction. But
because Man hurried by his passions, rushes upon mutual slaughters and
Massacres, I whether I will or no, am forced to do the office of a Hangman;
For them let them discharge their own consciences if they can, I as their
servant do but my duty.

My fifth child is, Iron, which as Chemists call it Mars, so it yields all
assistance to that God of War, that is by Swords, Fauchions, Tucks, Rapiers,
Hatchets, Muskets, etc. Iron though it may be accounted the basest of Mettalls,
does the greatest services to Mankind; Generals and Warriers use it not only
for to invade others, but oppressed men, and people enforced to a necessary
defense, make use of it themselves. The Robber will be armed, and the Travellor
must, that Iron may meet Iron, and one strength may repress or overcome the
other. This is that which Tyrants make use of against all disobedience and
noncompliance.

This is that which Kings and Princes employ against Enemies and Traitors, by
this the Judges punish the offenses of the bad, for the safety of the good. Of
Iron you make Bolts, Chains, and Shackles, and that for so many uses, that I
cannot count them. It Is Iron makes all Scales and Weights, and firmly and
strongly joins together, all Coaches, Ships and Houses. It Is Iron that makes
the greatest and strongest Instruments for the life Man, without which he could
not subsist any time. Of Iron is made Nails, Hammers, Axes, and Anviles, and
what not from the Instruments that are made of these instruments. Iron well
purified is Steel, which rightly managed, is such, that it cuts and severs the
hardest things, as Wood, Iron it self, Horns, Stones, and whatever. Of Iron
is made Saws, and the Locks of all Doors and Tre^suries, what you will not
trust to any body else, is entrusted to this only. This keeps away Thieves and
Filchers, this preserves things ready stolen and made a prey, nay, this is that
which makes Fetters for Thieves. By Iron chains the ways are rendered safe,
both against Force and Inundation. By Iron, Bridges, Towers, nay Pyramids, are
enabled to endure. What more necessary to a Man than a Knife? What fitter than
a Needle to sow his clothes together? What more convenient for Man, than Tongs,
Fire-shovels and Grates; yet all this Iron does, and Iron does it by the means
of Mercury. All these things therefore are made of coagulated Mercury, and by
it they are all strengthened. But withal there are made so many Medicines of
it, that it may be rationally called in question, whether it have more or more
royal uses in Physic or in Policy. Nothing doubtless is more advantageous,
than to give present relief to a sick body, and that to be taken inward, which
is a clear proof that it is of an inoffensive nature. For Iron several times
is taken in Electuaries, Conserves, Syrrups, Decoctions, and other ways of
prescript, and to that inwardly, not only without any danger, but a great
deal of benefit, though I must confess if it be ill prepared, and if the
managing of Man be ill, it gnaws, corrodes, and pierces through; but if it be
made a Medicine, it opens obstructions both of the Veins and Bowels, both by
its penetrative and attenuating faculty. Hence it often heales Cachexys and the
Green sickness, and restores them to their former Vigor, Color, and Beauty,
so that they said not amiss, who said that Mars was the most welbeloved of
Venus. But I am willing to wave any further speech of Iron, it is so much in
sight and use, that any man may from hence draw other things, and from what I
have said speak much more.

I come now to my fairer progeny, and it is my sixth child, to wit, Silver, a
Metal most precious and most valuable. What love, what admiration, what
esteem all people put upon it, is not worth my business, since it is a thing so
commonly known: With what labor, danger, care, it is drawn out of the
deepest recesses of the earth, nay in a manner the suburbs of Hell, they know
that have been upon the places, of which I shall not trouble you in saying
much, but this is the great Magnet of mankind, that more allures and entices
them and their understandings than the Loadstone does Iron. This is that
Proteus that turns himself into all shapes, and therefore is accounted the
price and measure of all the rest. This is that Cornu-copia, whence fruits of
all kinds all wealth plentifully proceeds. Money though it be dumb of of it
self, speaks for all, and makes the speechless talkative; Though it be
immovable in its own Nature, yet it gives motion to all things, animate or
inanimate, and though it be dead in it self, and a thing not enjoying life,
yet to Man ^ivilly dead among the living, I mean a ^oore man, it yields life,
and more than ^^at, joy, cheerfulness, credit, virtue, ^^putation, and all
other things which ^e account most desirable There is ^o more present Nepenthe
in the world ^an Silver, which of a sad Melancholy ^^an, engaged in To^es and
sorrows, makes ^im joyful and complacent, and puts him (...) to quiet. How men
may obtain such a recipe, how they toil themselves about it, how they
anxiously spend away their best days, nay their life, how they employ all
their estates and interest, is a business which the time allotted me will not
suffer me to make out, some sail to the East, some to the West Indies, nay to
our Antipodes with indefatigable industry they endeavor to find out new
Lands, new Islands, to furnish them with money or commodities that may bring
it. Some people have adventured so far, as to trust themselves under the
Northern pole, that being engaged in Ice, they could never have hope to
return to their own Country, or at best became a prey to Bears and other
wild Beasts. Some like swift Courriers have by their sails as with wings,
surrounded the world, that Jupiter cannot only be said to have sent Eagles out
of the Delphos, to fly about the World, and return to the same place, when
three Ships in stead of his Eagles in the latter times, and among men have done
the same performance, and to this end only, that they might know that famous
Silver River near the Straits of Magellan, and from thence bring great profits,
which how happily it has succeeds every man knows. Silver it is, I affirm
it, that is sought and gathered out of another world into this, and from this
the great Queen money raises, which gives not only Nobility and Birth, but
Power, Favor, Love, Wisdom and Learning to the World, whether it be by
ordinary Right or Attribution.

For the first, Kings, Princes, and other Magistrates reign lawfully by it,
not in order to Gain, but in governing their People. For attribution, it gives
many power who were unfit for it, it gives to Men, which the Law would not, it
makes men reverenced, that were more worthy of hatred, it gives Wisdom to
fools and Learning to the illiterate. It Is Mercury, who clothed in Silver, and
eminent in his witness, splendor, and other properties commands all this.
Grant me, there was never Mercury, and the consequence will be, there was
neither Silver nor Gold, nor any other Metal. Mercury is an Hermaphrodite, he
is Father and Mother to other Mettalls, though in making of imperfect Mettalls
he admits an extraneous Sulphur different from his own Nature. For what you
say of Mercury in perfect Mettalls, is nothing else but a maturer part of
Mercury, and better concocted, and it has nothing common with the common
sulphur, but the name. But I come to my seventh Son, which indeed is my first
borne, because it is every way more perfect than the other. Gold is of the
Masculine sex, Silver of the feminine. Now the right of primogeniture falls
ever upon the Males, the females by a Salick Law of nature being excluded. If
you look but on the brightness and the splendour of this my son Gold, you
will find nothing to be more gallant, nothing more amiable if you consider his
durability, and faithful tenacity, nothing so strong in fire, nothing less
yiedling, of its price nothing worthier or of greater value; if the weight,
color, expansion, tenuity of substance, in all these, you will easily grant
that he exceed all others. And if I should enlarge my self in his praises as
next unto man the epitome of the terrestrial world, none would be justly angry
with me, but I must also be angry with him, for wanting common sense. The
Beauty of Gold is such that will not undeservedly say it is an ectype of the
sun it self, which is the noblest and fairest of all creatures, and the most
profitable to Mankind. For without him we should live in continual darkness,
we should not discern common businesses and affairs, nor distinguish one man
from another. In like manner, unless Gold dissipated the clouds of humane
things by its own light, we should be absolutely confounded, and not able to
make distinction of any thing. Hence has the Altar of Gold so many unanimously
sacrificing to this Idol, as fair and precious. For what is fair, is lovely,
and on the contrary, as Theognis witnesss, for the Muses sung this Epitaphium
at the Marriage of Cadmus, (...)
(...)
What Is fair is lovely, what is not so's not fair.

Nay, Beauty is accounted a Kingdom without an Army, a conquest without
opposition, and a Monster without irregularity of nature, which since it is so
eminently seated in Gold, it presently possesses it self of Dominion over all
those that addict themselves, and sue to it. Therefore no man seems to contemn
it, but will value it at the highest rate; no man's humor can so much vilify
it, but he must be forced to obey it. For its fixednesse and enduring of the
fire and other qualities it may especially boast, like some invincible Hero or
Hercules Alexicacus. It valiantly sustaines all the buffets of Antaeus, all the
sleights of Achelous, let them turn themselves into Fire, Water, or any form
whatsoever. -- Unisiquidem nil deperit auro
Ignibus. --
Gold only looses nothing by the fire. As the Poet says. And therefore out of
excellent reason, Gold, which is in it self incorruptible, is on earth
accounted the Symbol, the mark and the shadow of that eternity, which we shall
enjoy above. For other bodies made of the four Elements are of a weak nature,
and corruptible; this is that hundred handed Giant, the Son of the Earth, who
as often as he touches his Mother, recovers his lost strength, and gathers new;
This is that invulnerable Cycnus, that yields neither to Hercules nor Mars,
armed by his own nature with a shield of proof. It Is Apollo the Archer, the
destroyer of Diseases, the Soldier, the Knight of the Golden-Fleece, the
Inventor of Physic, whom no Disease or Monster can resist, to whom nothing in
the Earth is like or equal, excepting only the Soul of Man: In Gold all
things are most temperate, nay, contraries of the highest degree, so that Heat
does not prevail over Cold, nor Drought over Moisture, but they are
reciprocally restrained, and temper one another, and conform themselves to an
anatick equality, which is the greatest temper imaginable. What is said of that
most temperate Region, which is beyond the tropic of Cancer, in the Western
part of the World, where there is neither Frost, Heats, Raines, immoderate
Droughts, nor any Disease to assault man, nor any infectious or venomous
Creatures, by which means the Inhabitants live to a great age, as though they
were seated in Paradise or the Elizian Fields, may be more truly said of the
Temperarure of Gold, which is impassible of any corruption or ill digestion. In
it a^ the Elements remain unchanged, firm, and lusty in their pristine vigor
and temper, and in which no rottenness or putrefaction can assault them.
Whether one or the other may exceed in power, is a business that never comes
into contest, none of them complains that he is undervalued. What they say of
a certain bone in the Thumb of Man (the Hebrews call it Luz) some stick not
to affirm that it can neither spoil nor be consumed, that it may remain as a
kind of seed for the Resurrection, and the ground and material of the future
superstructure; but if it be so, what affinity and hidden correspondence it
holds with Gold that is incorruptible, it may appear, since Albertus Magnus
has recorded that Gold has been found in Sculs of dead men, between their
Suitors and in their Teeth. Hence questionless men desire so much to finger
Gold, as a hint and document of their Resurrection, and the Eternity they shall
enjoy after this life, and therefore they look after it, not only with greedy
eyes, but possessed minds and utmost intentions, desirous, if it were but
digestible, to make it their food and repast, and by a pleasing artifice, to
guild their own Bowels, as it told of Arthemisia Queen of Caria, that she had
her self rather be the Sepulcher and the Mausoleum of her Mausolus, than he
should putrify any where but within her self. By this means the virtue of
Gold begets affection, and its beauty continues it, for it is most durable.

What virtue there is in Gold (besides its contempt of fire) is well enough
understood by Physicians, who give it to their Patients either in Leaf,
Filings or powder, with Electuaries, Conserves, or Syrups, as a singular
restorative of the heart, and in this they are not deceived, for it is dictated
by reason, and confirmed by experience. For why should there not in that little
Cittadell, which is so strongly fenced and fortified, that scarce any endeavor
of Man (unless very rare'y it meets success) can find entrance, contain
within it, all the Magnalities and Mysteries of Nature? We see that our
Creator has shrouded the Corn under Ears and Chafe, has given the Nut a
Shell, the Chestnut a thick and rugged one, and has fenced the Almond with a
kind of Stone, yet all these are most profitable for Man. He had in vain
therefore given Gold such a strength and guard, unless there had been a more
considerable thing contained in it, than in these Nuts, (...) fine things,
handsome and rare, pass ever at a great Rate. In Man, there is a most lively
and true Image of all things spiritual and corporeal, and Gold represents the
same of Man. Gold cheers and refreshes his heart, which as it receives a
general virtue, infused by the heart of the World, the Sun, so it very
gratefully repayes what is received from the celestial Sun to the heart of
Man, who is the lesser world. Hence comes the general consent of all Nations,
in Gold as the measure of all things measurable, and the rate of all things
marchantable, and these excellent qualities, all people, though they differ in
Tongues, very well understand, as though they read it in an open book, which
doubtless ought to give it precedence above any thing else. This golden Book
study all Chemists, Physicians, Politicians, all Men of Traffic and
Mechanics, but I must impeach the first, as knowing but the first Letter of
it, the second scarcely understand the next Letter, but few are able to dive
into the Mysteries of all five. Merchants and Usurers, that so much adore it
and abound with it, stay only as its surface, as boys do if they find any
thing rare, or of an odd color in Beans. And this they know themselves, they
know it is necessary for Traffic, Diet, or delight, but nothing else, and in
this very little differ from Beasts, which very well know the use of Hay, but
are absolutely ignorant what it is, or from whence it comes.

I shall add nothing of the weight and other accidents of Gold, because they
are in another place (...) copiously related; All these scattered things, which
I have rather gleaned up, than made a harvest of by a remonstrance fitting for
the subject, will easily give the prerogative unto Gold above all other things,
though they be most precious (since some of them are very dear in point of
scarceness, but not their medicinal faculty, since some of them are poison
taken into the body of Man, (as the Load stone it self) and will make the
others disclaim, and so assign and confirm the Kingdom of all worldly
things under the power of Man unto my self, who only gives Gold all the power
and operation it has.

There is another Benefit by which I Mercury have blessed Mankind in this last
age, and made it most happy, and it is so great, that Men had better want the
services of all that have spoke before me, than this one convenience, and this
is the Art of Printing, by Letters made of Metal, founded and shaped of Lead,
Tin, and Antimony. The profit is so great, that all Praises, and all Memory
comes short of it. Germany no less than old Egypt, the Mother and Nurse of
the refined'st Sciences, may rightly glory in the first invention of that, and
the communication to other parts, Hence Philippus Beroaldus in a certain
Hendecascillable,

O Germania muneris reportrix,
Quo nil utilius dedit vetustas,
Libros scribere qui doces prem^ndo.
The same Germany found out the terrible thunder of Guns and Gunpowder, which I
have spoke of before, she found them out, propagated them; to pass by
abundance of Mechannicall inventions which I shall mention no otherwise, which
may stop the mouths of those envious and unjust censurers, I will not say
Liars, that say these things are to be attributed only as to the matter, to us
Germans, but as to the form and perfection, would ascribe it to some other, I
know not what Nation. As though these pitiful triflers, could by their poor
suggestions render a thing undone, or make black white. These two contributions
which I have paid, both to Arts and Arms, are so great, that all others,
though they be prepared of Mettalls, must needs yield unto them. For the
former, take two instructed in it, they will in one day dispose of more
Letters, than two thousand others can write, which indeed is a matter worthy of
admiration and astonishment. There is no need therefore that the Goose should
brag of her quills, the Calfe of their hides or pelts, I have rendered all these
things contemptible by the invention of this on Artifice, and therefore as
inconsiderable leave them. For if I Metallic Mercury be in good Mattrices made
into Letters or Figures, I am able to peforme all that they brag of, provided
that Flax, with the Paper made of it, with Printing Ink, come as drudges to my
assistance. I am Mercury the Father of Metals, under me they are all in pay, by
my command they do their duty according to their stations and functions; some
of them adorn the Palaces of Kings and Princes, and there watch and keep guard,
some are commanded to other employments, as to Soldiery and Mechanical
works, as being things of the hottest and strongest nature; some I commanded
to serve in Kitchins, and in Apothecaries Shops; some there are whom I place as
Sentinels under Earth, and these attend the health and use of Man, all this is
merely from my indulgence, which yet I proportionably distribute. Gold my
eldest Son has my first care, next Silver, next Tin, then Copper, then
Lead, then Iron, according to their several endowments and ingenuities, I
favor or cherish them, according as they nearest comply with my own nature.
For the three last are clogged with much sulphurous matter, which they derive
not from me at all. The fourth, to wit, Tin has less, Silver less than
that, but Gold nothing at all. What Scyleurus, the King of Scythia, that had
eighty children begot upon several venters, left as his last direction unto
them, that they should keep peace among themselves, and that by a bundle of of
Arrows, which taken a together could not be broken, but might easily, taken
severally, the same is the case of six, Legitimate children of mine; besides
Semi-metalls, who are very strong in themselves if they assist one another, and
indeed very invincible, otherwise they are easily overcome, and this I would
not only say, but desire to press home.

Let Gold enjoy the pre-eminence, let him have his right of primogeniture and
maintain it, after him let Silver take place, and so the rest, but let Mars or
Iron be a servant to them all, he is of a stiff body and great strength. Let
not strong things oppress the weaker, and force them to obedience. But of them
all, you will find the noblest temperament, if you can make somewhat that is
not too hard, nor too soft, nor too hot, nor too cold, but moderate, and
e^c^^ning to warmth and moisture; in which temper, not only the life of Man
consists, but my Primogeniall Form and Spirit, which if any man can extract
out of such things as I plentifully reside in, but in Ambuscado, and either
join me with my other Sons, or reunite me to my self, the same right I now
claim will become his. Of all my children you will find none but is of my
humor, but it may be changed by a little breeding; for that hard substance [
Mars] is begotten by me in too hot, and too dry places, and in which sulphurous
fumes were very plentiful. Hence he is adust and swarthy, little resembling me
in his Countenance, but in his bowels, has as lively and natural Lineaments
of me, as any of the rest. Despise not therefore this Negro, because he is
black, and is very feculent, for if the other five should chance to be lost or
extinguished, the Kingdom would fall to him. Saturn is very like him in a
color, for he is Tawney and bluish, but he is of a soft nature and easily
guided, but of a very ill memory. He is conceived in clayish and dirty parts, I
mean in a womb stuffd with Fleagme and Melancholy; hence his spirit sends
forth a very ill savor, especially if it be warmed. No small share of this
Empire would fall to him, if his four other Brothers would assent, but they
have greater Interest, yet notwithstanding he is the Tryer and Searcher of them
all, because he approaches my nature nearest in softness, which is not so much
as mine, because he is tainted with abundance of sulphurous dregs.

The Birth of my third Son promises more, for he appears ruddy, and of a
stronger constitution, and full of blood, and is very able to endure all the
assaults of Summer weather, yet notwithstanding he brings from his womb an
adust Melancholy of a greenish red, and therefore is not fit to perform the
most duties. He is vexed commonly with the Scab like a Leaper, especially if any
violent fire externally annoy him, for it puts him into extreme thirst, and
inflames his Bowels. After these three, another must be my successor, who
though he be elder than two of them, yet they much exceed him in finenesse,
equality and temper. Jupiter is the most choice of all, of a most royal
ingenuity and complexion, which wants nothing but a redder face, and an ability
to endure the Sun. He may be heir to a great deal of wealth, if he made a
legal agreement with some of his Brothers, so that from them both, there may
arise an Hermaphroditick substance. This is he that may profit many, if he be
rightly understood, and the Father may be taken for the Son, and the Son for
the Father. In some cases his Father and his Son may do more than he himself,
yet such he is, as his Grandchild may command the Empire from his Grandfather,
though it be a wickedness to do it without the consent of the Father, if he
be then living. These four, according to their orders, must follow us, if ever
there were occasion to confer the Government upon others, From all which,
most just Judge, you will very well understand, as well in candor and equity,
as necessity of Judgment, by what right I lay claim to that Government, for
which we debate, and that, not only from my particular deserts, but my great
advantages to mankind, which if it will prevail me nothing, and you will give
your verdict for any other, from the meaner of my Posterity, will arise a
powerful revenger of my quarrel and injury. It shall accuse thee of a
Bribery, it shall bring a Bill of review for my right, and enforce
restoration. If the business be to be done either by Iron or Gold, I believe
we shall not want Parti^ans; if it be to be done by Cannon, or any warlike
Engines, whatever you deny us of right* we will enforce you to, and do not
think we can want followers. Consider you only unto whom you will give your
judgment and determination of this Realm, which all here so passionately
strive for, that at length you may make an end of a long suite, and satisfy
the impatient expectations of so many concerned in it, that so a firm peace
and quiet may be established in the Common wealth of the world. For my part, if
you will never suffer your self to be carried away from Truth and Justice, I
shall profess my self bound to do homage to you in all kinds of services,
and the most zealous of your honor of any other.

Thus ended Mercury, whose speech was attended by a deep and a long silence.
Then the Judge, who with the greatest attention and caution had heard them all,
began to speak thus --

The JUDGE.
HAving considered all things, and called them into the most strict and
impartial scrutiny of my Judgment, which you have severally said before me,
and put in plea, I do think there remains no farther question to whom I
should assign this royal Title. For indeed your deserts and services are so
great unto Man, that all of you deserve to be remembered unto Posterity with the
greatest Praise and longest Memory; yet as the several Planets have their
several Influences, yet one of them moves above another, so I conceive one of
you ought more especially to enjoy this Royal Crown. You Calfe, in the
beginning of this dispute told us, great and high services you did to mankind;
and you Sheep no less; you also Goose must be listed among these Heroes, for
you endeavor by all means to profit Man: You Oyster are Mistress of a great
many rarities, as praiseworthy as any of the rest; None will despise thee, Be,
though thou be small; as thou art a fruitful Mother of sweetness, so thou
carryest within thee a Dart which occasions much pain and trouble. And my
tender Silkeworme, who would not admire thee for thy deserts, that being so
little, payest so great a tribute to Mankind. And thou Flax, have filled the
world by thy benevolences, and may justly claim a praise that shall last to
all ages; But thou MERCURY, Thou art he, whom of all the rest I most admire,
whom I reverence, whom I pronounce the worthiest; Thy deserts, I say, are so
known, so necessary to Mankind, that I cannot, as convinced both by Necessity
and Reason, but appoint and establish thee King. Thy worth so much exceeds thy
Competitors, thy Pre-eminence, thy Honor, as the light of the Sun out-shines
the other Planets. Thou ballancest all the deserts of the other, all their
duties end and acquiess in Thee. Those gifts, which are severally dispersed
among them, are united and gathered in thee. Thou art the miracle, splendour and
light of the world. Thou art the glory, ornament, and supporter of the Earth.
Thou art Asyle, Anchor, and tie of the Universe. Next to the mind of Man, God
Created nothing more Noble, more Glorious, or more Profitable. What therefore
thy Virtue endowed thee with, what thy services have deserved see here, and
take thy recompense, the ROYAL CROWN that henceforth thou may be proclaimed
and declared, whether the other will or no, THE KING OF ALL WORLDLY THINGS
BEING UNDER THE COMMAND OF MAN, which said, he took out a Crown of Gold, which
he had hid under his Cloak, and causing Mercury to kneel, set it on his head.

And thus, though all the Assembly were mad with anger and envy, to see him
whom they accounted the meanest, declared their King and Lord; yet since the
Decree of the Judge could not be reversed, each returned to his own home,
every where proclaimeing Mercury their King. The Judge having dismissed the
Assembly, retired home. To God the giver of all good things be all glory for
ever.

Amen.
THE END.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in humane Learning, etc.
1. Historical Relations of the united Provinces of Flanders, written in
Italian by Cardinal Bentivoglio, and now rendered into English by the Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. Fol. 2. The History of the Wars of
Flanders, written in Italian by that learned and famous Cardinal Bentivoglio;
Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. The whole work
Illustrated with a Map of the 17. Provinces, and above 20 Figures of the chief
Personages mentioned in this History. Fol. 1654. 3. The History of the Wars of
the Emperor Justinian, with the Persians, Goths, and Vandalls, written in Greek
by Procopius of Caesarea in eight Books, translated into English by Sir Henry
Holcroft: Knight. Wherein the City of Rome was taken and retaken above eight
times, when it was the Seat of the Empire Fol. 4. De Bello Belgico, the
History of the Low Country Wars written in Latin by Famianus Strada, in
English by Sir Robert Sapylton, Illustrated with diverse Figures. Fol. 5. The
use of Passions, written by I. F. Senalt, and put into English by Henry Earl
of Monmouth 8o. 6. Judicious and Select Essaies and Observations, written by
the Renowned and learned Knight, Sir Walter Rawleigh, with his Apology for his
Voyage to Guiana. 7. The Complete Horseman and Expert Farrier in two books, by
Thomas De Gray Esquire, newly printed with additions. 8: Unheard of Curiosities
concerning the Talismanicall Sculpture of the Persians. The Horoscope of the
Patriarchs, and the judgment of the Stars, by James Gaffarel, Englished by
Edmond Chilmead, Chapter Chapter Oxon. 8o 9. The History of the Inquisition, composed
by the R. F. P. Servita, the compiler of the History of the Council of Trent,
in 4o. translated out of Italian. 10. Biathanatos, a Paradox of self-murder, by
Dr. Jo. Done, Dean of St. Paul's London. 4o. 11. The Gentleman's Exercise, or
the Art of limning, painting, and blazoning of Coats and Arms, etc. by Henry
Peacham Master of Arts. 4o. 12. M. Howels History of Lewis the thirteenth King
of France, with the life of his Cardinal de Richelieu. Fol. 13. Mr. Howels
Epistolae Hoelianae, Familiar letters Domestic and Foreign, in six Sections
partly Historical, Political Philosophical, the first Volume with additions.
8o. 14. Mr. Howels new volume of Familiar letters, partly Historical,
Political, Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions. 8o. 15. Mr.
Howels third Volume of Additionall letters of a fresher date, never before
published. 8o. 16. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the first
part in 12o. with many Additions. 17. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal
Forest, the second part, in 8o never printed before. 18. Mr. Howels Englands
Tears for the present wars. 19. Mr. Howels Pre-eminence and Pedigree of
Parliament, in 12o. 20. Mr Howels Instructions and Directions for Foreign
Travels, in 12o with diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey, and the Levant
parts. 21. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to his Majesty, in 4o.
22. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria and lachrymae, in 12o 23. Marquis Virgilio
Malvezzi's Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Ea^l of Monmouth, in 12o. 24.
Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's David persecuted, Englished by To. Ashley. Gent. in
12o. 25. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi, of the success and chief events of the
Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the revolt of the Catalonians from the
King of Spain. Englished by Rob. Gentilis Gent. in 12o. 26. Marquis Virgilio
Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades, and Coriolanus, Two
famous Roman Commanders Englished by Rob. Gentilis. 27. Policy Vnveiled, or
Maxims of State, done into English by the Translator of Gusman, in 4o. 28.
Gracious priveleges granted by the King of Spain to our English Merchants, in
4o. 29. Englands looking in and out by Sr. Ralph Maddison, Knight, 4o. 30.
Gratiae Ludentes, jests from the University by H ^ 31. The Antipathy between
the French and the Spanyard, an ingenious translation out of Spanish. 32. Mr.
Birds grounds of Grammar, in 8o 33. Mr. Bulwers Philocophus, or the Deaf and
Dumb man's friend, in 12o. 34. Mr. Bulwers Pathomyotomia, or a Dissection of the
significative Muscles of the Affections of the Mind, in 12o. 35. An Itinerary
containing a voyage made through Italy in the years 1646, 1647. illustrated
with diverse Figures of Antiquity, never before published, by John Raymond, Gent
in 12o
Books in Humanity lately Printed.
36. THe History of Life and Death, or the prolongation of Life, written by
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban in 12o 37. The Natural and
experimental History of Winds written in Latin by Francis Lord Verulam
Viscount St. Alban, translated into English by an admirer of the learned
Author. 12o. 38. The life of the most learned Father Paul Author of the History
of the Council of Trent, translated out of Italian by a person of quality. 8o.
39. Paradoxes, Problems, Characters, etc. by Dr. Done Dean of St. Paul's, to
which is added a book of Epigrams, written in Latin by the same Author,
translated by Jasper Main D* D. 12o. 40. Ignatius his Conclave, a Satyr written
by Dr. Done Dean of St. Paul's. 12o. 41. A Discovery of Subterraneal Treasure,
viz of all manner of Mines and Minerals, from the Gold, to the Coal, with plain
Directions and Rules for the finding of them in all Kingdoms, and Countries,
written by Gabriel Plat. 4o. 42. Richardi Gardener, ex AEde Christi Oxon.
specimen Oratorium. 8o. 43. The Sovereignty of the British Seas written by that
learned Knight Sir John Burroughes Keeper of the Records in the Tower. 12o 44.
Grammatica Burlesa, or a new English Grammar made plain and easy for Teacher
and Scholar, composed by Edward Burles Master of Arts. 45. Artificial
Arithmetic containing the Quintessence of the Golden Rule, the true valuation
of all Annuities, also to find the distance at one station; An Art never till
now published, Useful for Gunners, Seamen, and Surveyors, by Rob. Iager Gent.
8o. 46. Natural and Divine Contemplations of the Passions and Faculties of the
Soul of Man in three books, written by Nicolas Mosley Esquire. 8o.
Several Sermons, with other excellent Tracts in Divinity written by some most
eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
47 A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o. 48. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet
Meditations and Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot
Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24o. 49. Ten Sermons upon several
occasions, preached at St Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the right reverend
Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, in 4o. 50. Six
Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court before the Kings Majesty,
and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done, Dr. in
Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o. 51. Private Devotions in six
Letanies, with directions and Prayers for the days of the Week and Sacrament,
for the Hour of Death and the day of Judgment, and two daily prayers, one for
the morning, another for the evening, written by Doctor Henry Valentine. 24o.
52. A Key to the Key of Scripture, or an exposition with notes upon the Epistle
to the Romans, the three first chapters, by William Sclater, Dr. in Divinity
and Minister of the word of God at Pitmister in Somersetshire, in 4o. 53. Sarah
and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genesis opened in nineteen Sermons,
being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that learned,
Orthodox, and indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josias Shute. B. D.
and above 33 years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet, in Folio. 54.
Christ's Tears with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maden, B. D. Preacher of the
Word of God, late of Magdalen College in Camb. in 4o. 55. Three Sermons viz.
The benefit of contentation. By Mr. Henry Smith in 4o. The Affinity of the
faithful, By Mr. Henry Smith in 4o. The lost sheepfound. By Mr. Henry Smith in
4o.
56. Ten Sermons preached upon several Sundays, and Saints days, by Peter
Hausted Mr. in Arts, and Curate at Uppingham in Rutland, in 4o. 57. Eighteen
Sermons preached upon the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, wherein the greatest mysteries of Godliness are unfolded,
to the capacity of the Weakest Christian, by John Dawson Oxon. in 4o. 58. The
History of the Defenders of the Faith, discoursing the state of Religion in
England during the Reign of King Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth. by C. L. in 4o. 59. Christian Divinity, written by Edmund Reeve
Batchelour in Divinity, in 4o. 60. The Communion-Book Catechism expounded by
Edmund Reeve Batchelour in Divinity, in 4o. 61. The true and absolute Bishop,
wherein is showed how Christ is our only Shepherd and Bishop of ^u^ souls* by
Nicholas Darton, Master in Arts, in 4o. 62. description of the Newborn
Christian, or a lively pattern of the Saint militant, child of God, written by
Nicholas Hunt, Master in Arts, in 4o 63. Divine Meditations upon the 91. Psalm,
and on the History of Agag King of Amalek with (...) 65. Lazarus his Rest, a
Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious, learned, and Orthodox Divine,
Mr. Ephraim Udall, by Thomas Reeve, Batchelour in Divinity, in 4o. 66. The
Survey of Man, in a Sermon as it was delivered by Mr. John Bishop at his
Fathers funeral, 67. Enchiridion containing Institutions Divine and Moral,
written by Francis Quarles 24o.
Books in Divinity Lately Printed.
68. THE Psalms of David from the new Translation of the Bible, turned into
Meter, to be sung after the old tunes, used in the Churches by the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry King Bishop of Chichester. 12o. 69. Choice Psalms
in Music for three voices, and a thorough-Base composed by Mr. Henry and Mr.
William Laws, brothers and servants to his late Majesty; with diverse Elegies
set in Music by several friends upon the death of Mr. William Laws. 4o. 70.
Letters between the Lord George Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby Knight, concerning
Religion. 8o. 71. Essaies in Divinity by Dr. Donn D. of Saint Paul's, before he
entered into holy orders 12o. 72. Public Devotions, or a Collection of Prayers
used at sundry times by diverse Reverend and godly Divines, together with divine
implorations, and an introduction to prayer. 24o. 73. The Sinners Tears in
Meditations and Prayers by Thomas Fettiplace of Peterhouse. Camb. 12o. 74.
Quaestio Quodlibetica, or a discourse whether it be lawful to take use for
money by R. F. Knight. 75. Sions Prospect in its first view presented in a
summary of Divine Truths consenting with the faith professed by the Church of
England, confirmed from ^on, composed by Mr. Robert (...)
Choice Poems with excellent Translations by the most eminent wits of this Age.
76. EPigrammata Thomae Mori Angli. 16o.

76. Fragmenta Aurea, a Collection of all the incomparable Pieces written by
Sr. John Suckling Knight. 8o.

77. Poems, Songs, Sonnets, Elegies, and Letters by John Done, with Elegies on
the Authors death, to which is added diverse Copies under his own hand, never
before in print. 8o. 78. All Juvenalls 16. Satyrs translated by Sir Robert
Stapylton, wherein is contained a Survey of the manners and actions of Mankind,
with Annotations. 8o. 79. Musaeus on the loves of Hero and Leander, with
Leander's letter to Hero, and her answer, taken out of Ovid, with Annotations
by Sir Rob. Stapylton, in 12o. 80. Poems, etc. written by Mr. Edward Waller of
Beconsfield Esquire 8o. 81. Pastor Fido, the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly
translated out of the Original, by Mr. Rich. Fanshaw, Esquire 4o. 82. Poems, with a
discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o. 83.
Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with Annotations, by Thomas Stanly, Esquire
8o. 84. Coopers-Hill, a Poem written by Mr. John Denham Esquire the 2d Edition with
Additions. 4o. 85. Medea, a Tragedy written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca,
Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn Esquire with Annotations, 8o. 86. Seneca's answer
to Lucilius his Quaere, why good men suffer misfortunes, seeing there is a
Divine providence, translated into English verse by Mr Edward Sherburn Esquire 8o.
87. Madagascar with other Poems written by Sir William Davenant. 12o. 88. Poems
with a Masque by Thomas Carew Esquire Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to his late
Majesty, revived and enlarged with Additions. 8o. 89. Poems of Mr John Milton,
with a Masque presented at Ludlow Castle before the Earl of Bridgewater, then
president of Wales, 8o 90. Poems, etc. with a Masque called The Triumph of
Beauty, by James Shirley, Gent. 8o. 91. The Mistress, or several Copies of
love-verses, written by Mr. Abraham Cowley. 8o. 92. Stepps to the Temple,
sacred Poems with the delights of the Muses upon several occasions by Richard
Crashaw of Cambridge, 12o. 93. Divine Poems written by Francis Quarles 8o. 94.
Clarastella, with other occasional Poems, Elegies, Epigrams and Satyrs written
by R. Heath, Esquire 12o. 95. Poems written by Mr. William Shakspeare Gent. 8o. 96.
Arnalte and Lucenda, or the melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L.
Laurence. 4o. 97. The Odes of Gasimire, translated, by Mr. George Hills of
Newark. 12o. 98. Alarm to Poets by I. L. 4o. 99. Fragmenta Poetica or
Miscellanies of Poetical Musings, by Nich. Murford Gent. 12o. 100. Hymnus
Tabaci Authore Raphaele Thorio. 8o. 101. Hymnus Tabaci, a Poem in Honor of
Tobacco, Heroically composed by Raphael Thorius, made English by Peter Hausted
Mr. of Arts, Camb. 8o. 102. Olor Iscanus, a Collection of some select Poems,
and Translations, written by Mr. Henry Vaughan Silurist in 8o. 103. Argalus and
Parthenia written by Francis Quarles. 104. The Academy of Complements wherein
Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars and strangers may accommodate their Courtly
practice with gentile Ceremonies, complementall, amorous, high expressions and
forms of speaking, or writing of Letters, most in fashion, with Additions of
many witty Poems and Pos^es, Fancies and pleasant New songs. 12o*
Poems lately Printed.
105. Poems and Translations, the complete works of Thomas Stanley Esquire 8o.

105. Choice Poems with Comedies and Tragedies, by Mr. William Cartwright late
student of Christ Church in Oxford, and Proctor of the University. The A^res
and songs set by Mr. Henry Laws, servant to his late Majesty in his public
and private Music. 8o.

106. Herod^an of Alexandria, his Imperial History of twenty Roman Caesar's,
and Emperors of his time, first written in Greek, now converted into an
Heroic Poem by C. B. Stapleton. 4o. 107. the Card of Courtship or the Language
of love fitted to the humors of all degrees, sexes and Conditions. 2o.
Incomparable Comedies and Tragedies written by several Ingenious Authors.
108 COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont* and John Fletcher,
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Original Copies,
containing 34 plays, and a Masque, Fol. 109. The Elder Brother by Francis
Beaumont and John Fletcher. Gent. 110. The Scornful Lady by Francis Beaumont
and John Fletcher. Gent. 111. The Woman Hater by Francis Beaumont and John
Fletcher. Gent. 112. Th^erry and Theodoret 4o by Francis Beaumont and John
Fletcher. Gent. 113. Cupids Revenge by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher.
Gent. 114 Mounsieur Thomas by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher. Gent. 115.
The two Noble kinsmen by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher. Gent. 116. The
Country Captain and the Variety, two Comedies written by a person of Honor.
12o. 117. The Sophy, a Tragedy written by Mr. John Denham Esquire Fol. 118.
Brennoralt or the discontented Colonel, a Tragedy written by Sir John Suckling
Knight. 4o. 119. The deserving Favorite by Mr. ^odowick Carlel. 4o. 120.
Albovine King of Lombardy by Sir William Davenant. 121. The Just Italian. 4o.
by Sir William Davenant. 122. The Cruel Brother* 4o. by Sir William Davenant.
123. The Unfortunate Lovers by Sir William Davenant. 124. Love and Honor. 4.
by Sir William Davenant. 125. The Sophister by Dr. Z. 4o. 126. Revenge of Bussy
D. Ambois Georg Chapman. 127. Byrons Conspiracy. 4o. Georg Chapman. 128. Byrons
Tragedy. Georg Chapman. 129. Contention for Honor and riches I. Shirley. 130.
Triumph of Peace. 4o. I. Shirley. 131. The Duchess of Malfy by John Webster.
132. The Northern lass by Richard Brom. 133. The Cid, a Tragicomedy translated
out of French into English by Joseph Rutter Gent. 12o.
Plays lately Printed.
134. THe Wild-Goose-Chase a Comedy written by Fr. Beaumont and John Fletcher.
Fol. 135. The Widow, a Comedy by Ben. Johnson, John Fletcher, and Thomas
Midleton. 4o. 136. The Changling by T. Midleton and W. Rowley. 137. Six new
plays. 1. The Brothers. 2. The Sisters. 3. The Doubtful Heir. 4. The
Imposture. 5. The Cardinal. 6. The Court-Secret, by James Shirley Gent. 8o.
138. Five new plays. 1. A mad couple well matched. 2. The Novella. 3. The Court
Beggar. 4. The City Wit. 5. The Damo^selle by Richard Brom Gent. 8o. 139. The
Tragedy of Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, by George Chapman 4o. 140. Two
Tragedies, viz. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and Agrippina Empress of Rome, by
Thomas May Esquire* 12o.
New and excellent Romances.
141. CAssandra the Famed Romance, the whole work in five parts, written in
French, and now Elegantly rendered into English by a person of quality. Fol.
142. Ibrahim or the Illustrious Bassa, an excellent new Romance, the whole work
in four parts, written in French by Mounfieur de Scudery, and now Englished by
Henry Cogan Gent. Fol. 143. Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, an excellent new
Romance, written by that famous wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of
Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire Fol. 144. The Continuation of
Artamenes, o^ the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance* being the third and
fourth parts, written by that Famous wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery
Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire Fol. 145. The third
Volume of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance, being the
fifth and sixth parts, written by that famous wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery
Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire Fol. 1654. 146. The
fourth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that Excellent new Romance,
being the seventh and eighth parts, written by that famous Wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostredame and now Englished by F. G. Esquire Fol.
in the Press. 148. The History of Polexander a Romance, Englished by William
Brown Gent. Fol. 149. The History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated
by I. H. Esquire Fol. 150. Gassandra the famed Romance, the three first books
written in French, and Elegantly rendered into English by the Right Honorable
the Lord George Digby. 8o. 151. The History of Philoxipes and Policrite taken
out of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, made English by an honorable person. 8o
152. The History of Don Fenise, a new Romance written in Spanish by Francisco
de las Coveras, treating of the several effects of love and fortune, Englished
by a Person of Honor. 8o. 153. Aurora, Ismeni^, and the Prince, with Oronta the
Cyprian Virgin, translated by Thomas Stanly Esquire the 2d Edition corrected and
amended, 8o. 154 Cleopatra a new Romance, written in French by the famed Author
of Cassandra, and now Englished by a Gentleman of the Inner Temple. 8o. 155. La
Stratonica or the Unfortunate Queen, a new Romance written in Italian and
Englished by I. B. Gent. 4o. 156. Choice Novels, and Amorous Tales written by
the most refined wits of Italy, newly translated into English by a person of
quality. 8o. 157. Nissena, an Excellent new Romance, written Originally in
Italian, and now Englished by an Honorable person. 8o. 158. Dianea an excellent
new Romance written in Italian by Gio Francisco Loredano, a Noble Venetian in
four books, translated into Englsh by Sir Aston Cockaine. 8o.
Books newly printed this Term for me Humphrey Moseley
159. A German Diet o^ the Balance of Europe, wherein the Power and Weakness,
glory, and reproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages and
Defects Antiquity and Modernes of all the Kingdoms and states of Christendom
are Impartially poised by James Howel Esquire Fol. 160 Renatus des Cartes',
Excellent compendium of Music with necessary and judicious nimad versions
thereupon by a person of Honor, Illustrated with diverse figures. 4o. 161. The
Scarlet Gown, or the History of the lives of all the ^^esent Cardinals of Rome,
written in Italian, and translated into English by Henry Cogan. 162. discourse
of Constancy in two Books written in Latin by Iustus Lipsius, and now
faithfully rendered into English by R. G* sometimes of Chapter Chapter Oxon. containing
many comfortable consolations for all that are afflicted in Body or in mind.
12o. 163. Le Chemin Abrege or a compendious Method for the attaining of
Sciences in a short time, together with the Statutes of the Academy of
Cardinal Richelieu, Englished by R. G. Gent. 12o. 164. The Academy of
Eloquence containing a complete English Rethorick, with common places and forms
to speak and write fluently according to the present mode together with letters
amorous and moral, by Thomas Blunt. Gent. 12o. 165. The Secretary in fashion,
or a compendious and refined way of expression in all manner of letters, with
instructions how to write letters of all sorts, composed in French by P. Sr de
la Serre, and now Exactly Rendered into Englishee 8o* 166. Curia Politiae, or
the Apologies of several Princes justifying to the World their most eminent
actions by the strength of reason, and the most exact rules of Policy, written
in French by the accurate pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame,
and now faithfully rendered into English with the figures of many Emperors and
Kings. Fol. 167. (...), or observations on the present manners of the English,
briefly anatomizing the living by the dead, with an useful detection of the
Mountebanks of both sexes by Richard Whitlock M. D. late fellow of all Souls
College in Oxon. 8o. 168. Scholae Wintoniensis Phrases Latinae, the Latin
Phrases of Winchester School, corrected and much augmented with Poeticalls
added, and four Tracts: 1. Of words not to be used by elegant Latinists. 2: The
difference of words like one another in sound or signification. 3. Some words
governing a subjunctive mood not mentioned in Lilies Grammar. 4. Concerning
(...) and (...) for entering children upon making of Themes, by H. Robinson D.
D. sometimes schoolmaster of Winchester College, published for the common use
and benefit of Grammar schools. 169. Flores Solitudinis certain rare and
elegant pieces, viz. Two excellent discourses. 1. Of Temperance and patience.
2. Of life and death by I. E* Nierembergius. The World contemned by Eucherius
Bishop of Lions. And the life of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, collected in his
sickness and retirement, by Henry Vaughan Silurist. 12o 170. Atheismus
Vapulans, or a Treatise against Atheism rationally confuting the Atheists of
these times by William Towers, sometimes student of Christ Church in Oxford.
8o.
These Books I do purpose to print very speedily
171. DE Iuramenti Obligatione promissorij Praelectiones Septem. Of the
Obligation of Promissory Oaths, seven Lectures read in the Divinity Schools at
Oxford by Robert Saunderson D. D. and translated into English by his late
Majesty's special command. 8o. 172. Politic Maxims and observations written
by the most learned Hugo Grotius, translated for the case and benefit of the
English statesmen by H. C. S. T. B. 173. The perfect Horseman or the
experienced secrets of Mr. Markhams fifty years practice, showing how a man may
come to be a General Horseman by the knowledge of these seven Offices, viz.
The Breeder The Feeder The Ambler The Rider The Keeper The Buyer The Farrier.
Never printed before and now published with some Additions by Lancelot
Thetford Practitioner in the same Art. 40 years

174. Diverse Sermons on several Texts of scripture with a Catechism written by
William Gay Rector of Buckland, in 8o. 175. Divine Poems written by Tho.
Washborn. B. D. 176. Buxtorf's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar Englished by John
Davis Mr. of Arts. 177. Fasciculus Poematum and Epigrammatum Miscelan^orum
Authore Iohanne Done. D. D. 178* Poemata Graeca and Latina a Gulielmo
Cartwright e C. C. Oxon. 179. The Marrow of complements containing Amorous
Epistles, Complementall entertainments, Dialogues, songs, and sonnets,
presentations of gifts, instructions for Woers, with other pleasant passages
never before published by S. S. 180. Parthenopoeia, Or the History of the most
Renowned Kingdom of Naples, with the Dominion thereunto annexed, and the lives
of all their Kings.
The first part, By that famous Antiquary Scipio Mazzella, made English by Mr.
Sampson Lennard, Herald of Arms.

The second part Compiled by James Howell Esquire Who, besides some Supplements to
the first part, draws on the Thread of the Story to these present Times 1654.
Illustrated with the figures of the Kings, and the Arms of all the Provinces.


