PISKOPOS POSTOLIKOS, OR THE EPISCOPACY OF THE Church of England Justified to
be APOSTOLICAL, From the Authority of the Ancient Primitive Church: And from
the Confessions of the most Famous Divines of the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas. Being a Full Satisfaction in this Cause, as well for the Necessity, as
for the Just Right thereof, as consonant to the Word of God. By the Right
Reverend Father in God THOMAS MORTON Late Lord Bishop of Duresme. Before which
is Prefixed A PREFACE to the READER concerning this Subject: By Sir Henry
Yelverton Baronet.

Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the Old Paths,
where is the good way, and walk there^n; and ye shall find rest to your souls.
Jerem. 6.16. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum sed semper
retentum est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. St.
Augustine de Baptismo contra Donat. Can. 24. London, Printed for J. Collins in
Westminster Hall. 1670

To the Most Reverend Father in God GILBERT By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of All ENGLAND, and Metropolitan; and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
I Have often wondered how it comes to pass, that the Sacred Order of Bishops
should in this Island meet with so many unreasonable Adversaries; when in all
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, we are counted the only happy Nation,
who enjoy the Purity of Doctrine, with the Primitive Government. And I confess
my wonder is the more increased, when I consider that the Romanists look on our
Church as their most dangerous Enemy, because we have not only the External
Glory of a Church, but a continued Succession of Bishops (which some amongst
them are so ingenuous as not to deny) and yet these men amongst us, who so
vehemently cry down Popery, and so highly admire even the misfortunes of the
Reformed Church, do by a strange Antiperistasis, assist their Enemies, and
despise their Friends. It was a good Observation of that great man Archbishop
Land, That Caiaphas the High Priest, advised the crucifying of our Savior,
that the Romans might not take away their Name and Nation: and yet that Counsel
so Magisterially given, so deeply laid, and so wickedly contrived, brought on
them that sudden destruction they hoped to avoid. And have not we, My Lord,
found by sad Experience, the inference that Great Prelate made, fully true?
Since the Papists have not only had a great harvest amongst us, but all sort of
damnable Heresies have, like a flood, broke in upon us, and Atheism has so
prevailed, that if God, out of his Infinite Mercy put no stop to it, that
Prediction of our Savior will in our days be true, That Faith shall scarce be
found upon Earth!

But since the times are now come, (...). Ep ad Corinthios, Page 57.
which St. Clement more than 1600 years ago foretold, That there should be
contention about the name of Episcopacy. And since Reformation and Purity are
the Pretenses (though Interest or Sacrilege are the true Reasons) of
Separation amongst us: I have, in obedience to Your Graces commands, put out a
Book written some years since by the late Learned Bishop of Durham, that all
men may see, the great Lights of the Reformed Church beyond the Seas are so far
from approving the Practices of our Dissenters, that they commend and admire
our Episcopal Government; and therefore I cannot but hope, that either these
men will return again to the bosom of their forsaken Mother the Church, or
have so much Ingenuity to desist from deceiving ignorant People with the great
Authority of the Reformed Church.

And now, my Lord, I must humbly beg Your Pardon, that I prefix Your Great Name
before this Discourse: But since it is the work of a famous Bishop, and in
defense of that Order of which in our Church Your Grace is the worthy Primate,
I cannot but hope acceptance; and am very much pleased I have an occasion
offered me to let the World know how much I am

My LORD, Your most humble and very obedient Servant Hen. Yelverton.
From my house at Easton Manduit in Northamptonshire, March 26. 1669.
TO THE READER.
READER,
THere present thee with a Book written some years since by that great and
Reverend Bishop Tho. Morton, Lord Bishop of Duresme, in the defense of that
Order he bore, and for which he suffered so great indignities. And as it was
his Honor to suffer in so good a Cause, so it was his great Contentment and
satisfaction when he came to the end of his long race, that he kept a good
Conscience, though he lost all this world afforded him for it.

It would be very superfluous in this place to write an Encomium of this Great
Prelate, who is far beyond what I can do; and is already well performed by
that excellent person Dr. Berwick late Dean of St. Paul's, who was well
acquainted with him many years, and had the happiness once to be his Domestic
Chaplain: I only think fit to say this of him, that he was an Ancient Bishop,
and had all the qualifications fit for his Order, either to Adorn or Govern a
Church: but above all, he was eminent for his invincible Patience under so many
violent Persecutions, and almost necessities; always rejoicing in his Losses,
and protesting he thought himself richer with nothing and a good conscience,
than those were who had devoured his goodly Bishopric. And certainly he that
considers the excellency of this Prelate, with the rest of his Brethren, who
with him underwent the fiery Trial, will conclude as Tertullian does of the
first Persecution of the Christians, Apol. cap. 5.
Non nisi aliquod grande bonum a Nerone damnatum; Nothing but some great good
could be condemned by such men.

I must not omit, among the various Qualities of this great Man, to tell thee,
he was 44 years a Bishop, a thing so extraordinary, that since the first
Plantation of Christianity, and consequently of Bishops in this Island, T^^. 1.
ad Ana^^ 58.
which if we believe Baronius was the 58 of our Savior, but one exceeded him;
and he came not to these Dignities per Saltum, but passed through all other
inferior Charges before he arrived at the height. And one thing is
considerable in his Translation to Coventry and Lichfield, that King James was
pleased to do it at the particular motion of that great Prelate Bishop Andrews,
who never was known to move the King for the Preferment of any before.

How excellent he was in Controversies, his manifold Writings against the
Papists have given the World sufficient testimony; and in this he went so high,
that if he believed not the Pope to be Antichrist, he thought him very like
him. And yet there was never any who more approved of the ancient Customs of
the Catholic Church, than himself: And of this I shall give you this
particular instance. For that Ceremony of Bowing to the Lords Table at the
first entrance into the Church, he did not only commend by his Practice, but
publicly declared in a Letter he wrote to St. John's College, where he had
been Fellow, in behalf of a Kinsman of his, Mr. Low, for whom he desired a
Fellowship; that he was an adversary to his Kinsman, if he refused it: His
words are these: Quod si ve^o gestui illi flectend^ se versus Sacram Domini
mensam hic Juvenis adversetur, me multo seniorem habebit sibi utique
adversarium. Epistola ad Collegium Sti. Joh. Coll. Cantabrig.
But if this young man be averse to that posture of Bowing himself toward the
Lords Table, he shall have me much his Elder altogether his Enemy. And although
our Church in her Synod 1640 Can. 7.
Canons does but commend this, and leaves the practice of it perfectly
indifferent; yet nothing of this nature claims a greater Antiquity: For (...).
Stroma. lib. 7. p. 724 Edit. Paris.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, That by the Christians Prayers were made
toward the East. And Et inde suspicio, quod innotuerit nos ad Orientis
Regionem precati. Ap. cap. 6.
Tertullian says, That the Heathens suspected the Christians worshipped the
Sun, and that their suspicion arose, because Christians prayed toward the
East. And Cum ad Orationes stamus, ad O^ien^em convertimur unde Coe^um furgit;
non tanquam ibi sit Deus, and quasi caeteras mundi parres deseruerit qui ubique
praesens est non loco^um spatiis, sed Majestate potentiae; sed ut admoneatur
animus ad natur^m exc^llentiorem se convertere, i.e. ad Dominum. Lib. 2. de
Se^m. in Monte.
St. Augustine, who lived at the end of the 4th. Century, is very express in
this custom, and withal gives this reason of it: When (says he) we stand to
Prayer, we are turned to the East, whence the Sun arises, not as if that was
God's proper place, and that he has deserted the other parts of the World, who
is everywhere present, not by extension of places, but Majesty of power; but
that our mind might be admonished to convert it self to the more excellent
nature, that is, to the Lord. And in that discourse which goes under the name
of Justin Martyr, (though not so ancient as St. Justin, yet as old as
Theodoret, if we believe Critica Sacra lib. 2. cap. 5.
Rivet) we are told That (...). Quaestiones ad Orthod. 118.
this custom (speaking before of Praying toward the East) the Church received
from the holy Apostles: For the Church received the place where to Pray, from
whom they received the command to Pray. And a few lines before he tells us,
(...).
That ^o Pray to the East does not contradict either the Prophets or, Apostles:
As if he should argue, We have no command in the Scripture to the contrary,
this has been the custom and practice of the Church, of which we have no
beginning, therefore it is Apostolical. But, whether this custom be from the
Apostles or no, this we are sure on; Bodily adoration is that we owe to God,
Romans xii. 1. Psalm. xcv. 6.
and if that be his due and our duty, certainly the custom of the Church is of
more than sufficient authority to determine to what place that Act of Worship
is most decent to be directed unto.

I must not omit another Information I ha^^ of this good Bishop, before I come
to speak of this Work I now publish; and that is: He was in his younger days,
nay when he came to be a Bishop, earnest in those Controversies which commonly
go under Calvin's name; insomuch that when he was Bishop of Lichfield, he set
upon to Answer Arminius; and more particularly that Tract of his, Entitled
Examen Praedestinationis Perkinsianae: and after a months consideration, an^
making several Observations on tha^ Discourse, he laid it aside, saying these
words, If thou will not be Answered* lie thee there: And after that he gre^
very moderate, if he did not incline t^ the contrary opinion; though he did not
love to discourse of that Subject, or to hear Ministers in their Pulpits, to
meddle with that which is most proper for the Schools. Now though this
Controversy about the time of the Synod of Dort was by many good men looked on
under a severe character: yet now we find the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas
incline much to it. Deodati, when he was with Bishop Moantague at Eaton,
p^of^ssed he dissented from diverse conclusions of the Synod of Dort. Appeal.
cap. 7. page 71.
As in the French Church Amiraldus and Mr. Daillee (who has a particular tract
de Gratia Universali) do sufficiently assure us; and for the Dutch Churches the
Remonstrant party is so much increased in power, that they possess most of the
great places both in Church and State. But some men are strangely mistaken,
when they would father the Calvinian Doctrine on the Church of England in her
Articles, who has most wisely left it undetermined; knowing that both learned
and good men may differ in these Sublime Points, and that the Churches peace
ought not to he disturbed with such unnecessary determinations. It Is true, I
have read, Rushworth Historical Collections, p. 6^^. Apology for Bishops, cap.
3. page 16.
that in the Parliament of 1 Caroli, Mr. Pym moved in the House of Commons,
That Arminianisme might be condemned by a Vote of that House, as if the
Infallibility pretended to attend St. Peter's Chair at Rome was removed to the
Speaker's at Westminster. But yet I find not that grave Assembly did any thing
in it. As for those Articles composed at Lambeth by History of the Lambeth
Articles, printed in Latin, 1651. Bishop Mountague's Appeal, ca. 7. p. 71.
Necessaria Responsio, printed by the Remanstrants, 1618.
Archbishop Whitgift, and those Assistants he called to him, they were so far
from being received as a Doctrine of our Church, that if we believe a Heylyn
Historia Quinqu-Articularis, Par. 3. cap. 21.
very diligent Historian, Queen Elizabeth totally disliked them, and the manner
of making of them, and had like to have questioned the Archbishop about them.
And when, by Dr. John Reynolds at the Conference at Hampton Court, they were
desired to be inserted into the Articles of the Church of England, the motion
was rejected by King James, Conference at Hampton Court, p. 4^.
who told them, That the quietest determinations of such Questions were fit for
the University, and not to stuff our Articles with all Theological conclusions.
But this by the way.

I have before told you how great service this worthy Prelate did in his
Controversies against the Papists: This was not all the work that lay on his
shoulders: for he no sooner came to the Office of a Bishop, but he met with
another sort of Adversary, who began then to question the Authority of the
Church in her ordaining decent Ceremonies in her service. And when he found
that a private Conference with these sort of men did little prevail, he then
published his Defense of the Three Innocent Ceremonies; a discourse so solid,
that it must satisfy any person that is governed by reason, and not by fancy
and affection. But as these men began then to undermine the Outworks (as I may
so call them) of Episcopal Jurisdiction: so this great man lived to see the
whole Hierarchy by them destroyed, voted down, Root and Branch, and that as
Popish and Antichristian; to the amazement of all Mankind, the Wonder of the
Reformed Church, and the public Triumph of the Roman Conclave, And were it
not that those years so late past were perfectly a time of Paradoxes, what wise
man could imagine that they and their Order should be counted Popish, who were
the greatest opposers of it, who had writ so many unanswerable Volumns against
it; and who had by diverse of their Martyrdom in Queen Mary's days asserted the
Reformed Catholic Doctrine, against the Corruptions and Novelties of the Roman
Church.

This was the occasion which put this Learned Bishop to write this ensuing
Tract, which when he had first done, he communicated it to the Most Reverend
Father in God James Usher Lord Archbishop of Armagh; and it did so satisfy
that Learned Primate, that he put it forth with some Discourses of his own,
without our Bishops Name or Knowledge, though in the Codicel annexed to our
Bishops Will, it is owned by him for his. But afterward when the Covenant was
hotly pressed, and a compliance to foreign Reformed Churches pretended, our
Bishop renewed his former Discourse, made several additions to it; and where he
found it necessary, took occasion to answer both Salmasius and Blondel, and so
it swelled to the Volume it now is. This was by his Lordship committed to my
charge, either to publish, or not, as I thought fit. And truly I had once
determined still to have kept it by me, hoping that the wonderful Restoration
both of our King and Church would have made all Disourses of this Nature
unnecessary: but since it has pleased Almighty God to suffer these Troublers
of Israel still to continue amongst us their disturbances and separations, I
thought it a du^^ I owed to the Memory of this Blessed Bishop to publish this
Discourse; which I did not doubt, but might do God and his Church some service.
But before I would attempt so great a Work, I communicated both my Design and
Book to the Most Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
who was pleased not only to approve the Work, but command the speedy publishing
of it.

This immediately put me upon the Examination of the several Quotations I found
in it, having most of the Authors by me, fearing that either through the
mistake of his Lordships hand, which was not very easy to be read, or the
negligence of the Transcribers, some Errors might creep in the places cited;
and I dare assure the Reader, that for all the Works which I have by me, and I
want but few, they are exactly true.

The Method used in this Discourse is a way our Bishop had been very successful
against the Papists, and I hope may prove so against our Adversaries of another
kind; which is the Testimony of Reformed Divines in the Churches beyond the
Seas to our Episcopal Government, which they do not only commend, but admire
and wish for. Nay, diverse of them expound those very Texts of Scripture, which
are urged for Bishops, as we do; so that if our Dissenters will believe any
sort of men but themselves, they must be convinced with this kind of Argument.

It seems to me, I confess, extremely strange, that in these last and worst
times some men should so applaud themselves, and their own phansies, as to
condemn what went before them even in the most pure Primitive Church.

I find not in all my little reading any that set himself against that Sacred
Order till Aerius, Haeres. 57. St. August. ad Quodvult deum.
who lived about the middle of the fourth Century: And Epiphanius says, who
gives us the most ample Relation of him, this his Error arose out of Emulation
that Eustathius was preferred to a Bishopric before him who most of all
desired it. And truly I could wish secular Interest, such as, want of a
Bishopric, Applause with a Party, self-justification in former mistakes, and
an unwillingness to let the world know they were formerly deceived, did not
withold many amongst us from doing that, which, I doubt not, they are more
than sufficiently convinced they ought to do. And I do heartily wish, since
Conscience is the thing pretended, that they gave some assurance 'twas
Conscience and not Interest prevailed with them by their peaceable Passive
Obedience to our Laws, and not to fill our streets with their unreasonable
complaints against our Government and Governors, and still to seduce a sort of
empty people of great Faith and little Sense, who are in the right only because
they are sure they are in the right.

And although 1600 years possession is more than a sufficient lawful Title for
any to plead (A thing so unquestionable, that no man has yet produced any
sufficient Authority to the contrary.) Yet there are two learned Pens,
Salmasius and Blondel, who have attempted rather to show their Wits and
Reading, than their Reason in this Controvesie.

The first of these, when he undertook the task, wrote not under his own Name,
as if it was what he was commanded to write, (a thing frequent to the
Professors of Leyden) than what he himself either believed, or would persuade
others to do: And in all his Discourse, he is in that violent heat, that he
hardly gives Dionysius Petavius, that learned Jesuit, any other Name than,
Inepte and Fatue. He answers the Greek Fathers, who affirm that in the Apostles
time, a Bishop was superior to a Presbyter, Cap. 2. p. 82.
that it is a ly, and upon no other account, but because he expounds the
Apostles words after a different manner, than what Antiquity did. And in any
Controversy that concerns the Church, he continues this temper; For to the
Learned Doctor Hammond, who calmly defended the Churches Power of the Keys
against some of his Objections, De Subscribendis Testamentis adv. Heraldum. p.
19.
he gives no other Title but Nebulo in Anglia, showing neither respect to the
Learning, nor to the quality of the Doctor, who as he confessed, was Chaplain
to his late Majesty. And yet this great Magisterial man with the same
confidence as he denied the Divine Right of Episcopacy, so he does the
Authority of the 2d. Epistle of St. Peter, Walo Messalinus, Cap. pa. 58. p. 14.
affirming the first only for genuine: and truly I wonder not much at it, for
certainly he who shakes the Authority of the Tradition of the universal Church,
Cap. 5. p. 398.
takes away the only Argument to prove any Book to be Canonical, when any Sect
or Heresy shall question it. But I the more willingly pass this over, since in
his own Name in his Defensio Regia he seems to alter his Opinion.

For D. Blondel. He who shall look into his Discourse, will find it to be a
great Collection of Various Readings, and if Fame be true, collected at first
to be the Materials of a Discourse he intended for Episcopacy; But the
misfortune of our Church turned his weapon another way. But after all, Apol. p.
3.11. so Walo Messalinus. p. 7.
he only affirms, that Bishops and Presbyters were equal in degree, till the
136. of Christ; which, if you consider, is a very small time after the
Apostles. Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
For St. John died, Tome 5. Comment. in Danielem. p. 594. Edit. Froben.
as both Eusebius and St. Hierome tells us, in the 102. of Christ; so then,
according to him, their was but 34 years distance. But to me, truly, he proves
not that. For he who will consider the Epistle before his Book, will find all
he affirms, is, that in that short time, the Senior Presbyter in the College,
was their (...), their Praesident, and that, when he died, the next in Age
succeeded him. What then I pray does this make to his purpose? If he had given
us any Testimony that, though this Office fell to him by his Age, he
immediately entered upon it without any Consecration by the Imposition of
Episcopal hands, he had done something: but of this not one word. He only tells
us this course was altered over the whole world (velut Conspiratione facta) as
if done by a Conspiracy. And what was this Alteration? This he tells us out of
Hilary's Comments on St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians; which commonly goes
under the Name of St. Ambrose, and was as he confesses, an Author of the
middle of the fifth Century, Quia caperunt sequentes Presbyteri indigni
inveniri ad Primatus tenendos, immutata est ratio, prospiciente consilio, ut
non Ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum, multorum Sacerdotum judicio
constitutum.
and it was this. Because, says he, the following Presbyters began to be found
unworthy to govern, the reason of Succession was chang^^ (...) by the care of a
Council, that (...) ^rder of Succession, but De^e^^ (...) ^^ld create a Bishop,
thereunto elected by the judgment of many Priests. This Authority may be good
to prove, that the Church upon good reason altered the Method of succession,
but tends nothing to prove, that those who succeeded by Age were not Bishops.
But here, I would ask any impartial Reader, whether from this place, he has
color of Reason to imagine D. Blondells Proposition? Was it possible that all
the world could in a moment alter the Government established by the Apostles,
and that without the contradiction or repining of any in the Church to the
Contrary? Was it possible for a Council to do this, and no footsteps remain of
this decree? Nay, were all those Holy Martyrs the Apostles Successors, unto
whose mission God gave daily Testimony by the wonderful miracles they did,
seduced by a lying Spirit, to impose upon all Christians a Yoke, as some call,
Antichristian? Certainly he who will allow such an Extravagant Fancy has a
Faith to believe Impossibilities.

I might say a great deal more upon this subject, but that was to forestal the
ensuing Discourse, which will more abundantly satisfy any Intelligent Reader.

But our Episcopal Government has another sort of Enemies, than those we have
hitherto mentioned, which are diverse in the Church of Rome, who designing to
draw all divine Right to the Papal Chair, will allow nothing to Bishops but as
derived from that. And therefore if you will look into that excellent History
of the Council of Trent, when the Spanish Bishops pressed the determination of
the Divine Right of Episcopacy, Historia del concilio Trident. lib 7 p. 573.
the Italian Bishops opposed it, and were so cautions in it as if the whole
Papal Fabric was to fall by that assertion. Nay we are told that the Legates
had this in command from the College of Cardinals inviolably to observe, that
Episcopacy should not be determined of Divine right. And therefore he who looks
into the Canons of the Council of Trent, that treat of Episcopacy, shall find
them penned in such ambiguous Phrases, that all the Divinity allowed that Order
may be interpreted not to be so originally but derivatively as proceeding from
their great Divine Right the Papal Chair.

And upon this dispute the Infallible Pope, P. 586. p. 629.
in Letters sent to his Legates in that Council, tells them that the Opinion by
which the Institution of Bishops was said to be of divine Right was false and
erroneous, Historia del Concilio Tridentino. lib. 7. page 594. Edit. London
1619.
because the alone power of Order was from Christ. And Jacobus Lanez the
General of the Jesuits Order tells us, that Bishops are of divine Ordination
not Right: This in that Council. And in the Decretals collected by Gregory the
9th. we find this Decree. S^eros Ordines e^^cimus Diacona^um and Episcopatu^.
Hosc^. Solos Primitiva Ecc^legitur ha^^isse. l 5. Tit. 14. cap* 9.
We call Deacon-ship and Presbyter-ship sacred Orders. For those alone the
Primitive Church is read to have had. And it were very easy to find out
Testimonies in abundance to this purpose, were not these cited more than
enough; which I have collected out of the Council of Trent, which is the Rule
by which the Church of Rome is guided. And though it may be objected that
diverse Learned Papists are of another Opinion, Yet it is evident the Interest
of the Papacy runs that way: for certainly no interest could be carried on with
greater subtlety and dexterity than the Papal was in that Council: and this we
see was one thing principally to be taken care of. From this we may gather how
fond ^ thing it is in some zealous men among^^ us, who call the Order of
Bishops Popish and Antichristian; since the Papists as well as Presbyterians
conspir^ against this Order, and the Parity ^ Presbyters and Bishops is perfect
Popery.

But besides these two Adversaries which seem to be so diametrically opposite
in themselves, and yet both conspire against the Divine Right of Episcopacy (as
in many other points might were it proper, be made appear); W^ have a third
sort of a much later dat^ than the younger of these; and that is sort of
pleasant men, who tell us: The^ are for Church Government, but the^ believe
that neither Christ nor his Apostles left any at all, but with a dependence on
the Civil Magistrates will that whatever Government was established in the
Apostles time 'twas only settled for the present condition of the Church, and
not upon any lasting Reason; but that the Magistrate may, if (...) think fit,
institute a new Ecclesiastic^ Government. And this Opinion ha^ been so advanced
by a learned man, that he says the Magistrate is the only Judge of what
Religion his Subjects must be on, that he is the only infallible Judge of
Controversy and Scripture; and that he that is a Subject to the Great Turk,
and follows the Religion of Mahomet and dies for that Faith, is as much nay
more a Martyr than the Primitive Christians were in the first ten Persecutions.
And it is to me no wonder at all that this Opinion has after it many
Followers: For besides that this increases the Civil Magistrates Jurisdiction;
(Dominion is a thing all mankind contend for) and so cannot much offend the
best Supreme Governor, since it is an error of a good meaning to teach
Subjects obedience: Yet it carries along with it this advantage, that it
enables the Embracers of it to swim with every stream, and so finds them a
Religious Expedient to consult their secular interest and Advantage, let the
world turn upside down. But certainly this Opinion as it savours much of
Atheism, so it has in it little of Reason and nothing of Religion. For to
suppose that Christ Jesus, the Supreme Head of the Church, should take upon him
humane nature, and purchase to himself ^ Church with no less a price than the
blood of God; and that after this great work done he should take no further
car^ of her, but leave her to the direction of the changeable inclination of
every humane Fansy, to the Extravagancy of every ambitious humor: If this be
n^^ a fond and an unreasonable opinion, know not what may merit that name. But
this to me seems abundantly satisfactory, and to it I have not yet hear^ the
least color of an Answer. And tha^ is, since it does most evidently appea^^
from all Antiquity, the consent of a^ ancient writers, and the confession (...)
all that have searched into it, that the Apostles settled in all Churches one
an^ the same Government; (For thoug^ men dispute what Government was settled,
and every party fancy it is theirs, y^^ all agree, there was but one) how th^^
could one Ecclesiastical Order confor^ and agree with the Various Forms (...)
Temporal Policies? The World had the^ Monarchies, absolute, mixed,
Arist^cracies, Oligarchies Democracies, a^ they as different as we can imagine;
a^^ yet the Apostles, who were guided by an Infallible Spirit, settled
Episcopacy in them all: There was not in a Monarchy Episcopacy and in a
Republic Presbytery, but one and the same in both. And this is matter of Fact
and has greater Authority to attest it, than any humane story of that
Antiquity, which all mankind admits for Truth. And for to affirm, that, though
this be true this Government is alterable, if the Magistrate judge it not so
conducing to Piety as another he sets up: What is it but to say, that God did
not foresee what contingencies would fall out in succeeding Ages; and that the
Apostles did not know what would advance true Religion and Piety in succeeding
Ages, so well as Magistrates that follow, who are easily blinded and deceived,
when it conduces to their Temporal Interest? But if we must fansy nothing to
have a lasting Reason, but what we judge to have so; I doubt this Atheistical
Age will quickly lay aside all Institutions of Christ, by judging them (as some
openly do of all Religion) not to be of a lasting necessity.

Besides, he that shall affirm that nothing can be a Medium to bind the
Consciences of men as of Divine right unalterably, but what is founded on
Divine Testimony in some sense speaks true; but if this be included in the
assertion, that this must be obvious to every capacity, that is obliged to obey
this divine Right, it is false. For upon that account the Scripture it self
should not bind those, who have not understanding enough to know how they are
admitted as such. For to say the Scripture is the word of God, because my
Conscience, which in plain English is nothing but my Opinion, tells me so, is
no better an Argument than every Turc has for his Alcoran. But if there is a
necessity to prove the Scripture to be Divine, (viz. the Reception of these
books by the Catholic Church)* then he who has not sense nor Learning enough
to find out the truth of this, must either admit the Scripture of divine
Authority, when the reason why it is so is not obvious to his understanding, or
else all illiterate people are not obliged to believe the truth of its
Doctrine, and obey it. Now let us apply this to Church Government. If the same
Authority which tells us, these books are Canonical Scripture, tells us withal
that the very Apostles the Penmen of the New Testament did settle such a
Government, and if we find the following Age practiced it; allow it to be
dubious in Scripture, (which certainly it is not) yet is not there as
sufficient assurance, that that Government was settled by the Apostles, and so
in some sense of Divine Right, and so unalterable, as we have to admit for
Scripture the Revelation or any other book that ever was questioned? Now for to
affirm, that Antiquity is not a sufficient ground for our assent, unless we
have a full assurance that the succeeding Ages did not vary from what the
Apostles delivered, or that they could not mistake in the delivery: What is it
but to say we must have greater Authority for matter of Fact than what a fact
can have? and does not this Opinion destroy the Authority of Scripture totally?
For if the Churches delivery of such books as the writings of the Apostles be
not sufficient for a rational man to ground his assent, that these books were
their writings, and so Divine, unless we have assurance that she could not
mistake in the delivery of those books; we must either believe the Church
incapable of Error in the delivery of Scripture, or else we have no assurance
to ground our Assent. Now to believe a Church incapable of Error savours
little of Reason, and to believe her only incapable in the delivery of
Scripture savours much of Partiality. But if we must understand the Church (for
by Church here I mean the Governors of it) to be a wise, sober body of pious
and rational men, and so by consequence that they would receive no books, as
the writings of inspired men, but such of whose Authentickness they had
rational Grounds (as perhaps the very authentic Letters under the Apostles
own hands, which Tertullian mentions, or some other good Authority) And if this
be sufficient reason to gain our assent: De Praescrip. H^eret. ca. 36.
Why is not the same Reason as sufficient for the Apostolical Government, as
for the Apostolical writings? I confess it is beyond my reach.

But if the Apostolical practice be sufficiently attested, then to affirm, it is
not enough to bind continually, unless it be known to be God's mind it should
do so, is either to say the Apostles knew not the mind of God, or else would
not reveal it. For certainly we have much more reason to say, their practice
binds unalterably, than any one can have to say it does not. For we have much
more reason to demand of these men some mind of God, why we should change
Apostolical Practice; than they have of us, why we constantly practice what the
inspired Apostles did? Neither do I understand, how an Argument from
Apostolical practice must suppose a different State of things than what they
were when the Apostles established Governors over Churches. For why should not
we imagine the Apostles did constitute, what they practiced? And certainly he
must be as infallible as the Pope pretends too, that is sure any Exposition of
Scripture, that contradicts or concurs not with Apostolical practice, is true,
if there can be any rational Exposition of those Scriptures, which concurs with
that practice. And he who shall not believe there are such Expositions, and
though not infallible yet sober, and I dare say much surer than any to the
contrary, must condemn all the Ancient Fathers of the Church, as ignorant and
irrational men, and believe some new fancies of men of Yesterday and the
dotings of some idle Haereticks of greater Authority than those great lights of
the Catholic Church. And now to argue from some few practices in the Apostles
times, which were laid aside, such as the Holy kiss, etc. that therefore any
Constitution may; is just such an Argument, that if a circumstance, a Ceremony
may be changed, the whole Substance may too: unless a man will affirm, there is
no more need of a standing succession of Church Governors, than there is of
the most minute practice in those days.

But here I expect it should be said. What necessity is there of a Succession
of Ministers? A ministry is necessary, but to think that every Minister must as
some in derision say, draw his Pedigree from the Apostles, that is a narrow
principle and fit only for Bigots to believe, and such as are easily deceived
with the Great names of Antiquity and Catholic Tradition. I confess I was
sorry, when I considered this Opinion, to find that the French Ministers, when
they maintained their vocation to be lawful, (unto which Cardinal Perron made
his Reply) lay this down for their first Argument. Premierement, quand il n'y
auroit autre raison que ceste-cy a scauoir que nous avons la vraye et pure
doctrine en son entire, elle suffiroit pour prouver que nous auons aussi la
vraye vocation qui en depend. Card. Perron Replique aux Ministres page 5.
That if there was no other reason but this, that they had the true and pure
Doctrine entire, it will suffice to prove also that we have a true vocation on
which it depends. For he who without partiality considers this Position, will
find it is the Foundation of all Fanaticisme, and may be as well challenged by
the most absurdest of Haereticks as themselves. For though the difference here
may be, that these may have the doctrine entire, when other Haereticks have
not; yet since with the Adversaries they dispute with, that is the question; it
is no more an Argument to justify their Vocation, than for any Haereticks, who
believes he holds all Doctrine, true and entire for his. But in answer to this
sort of ingenious men of larger Souls and looser principles, I demand, What
Divine Demonstration have they, that a man may have a lawful call to the
Ministry, and not at all derive this power from those unto whom our Savior
first gave the power of constituting Successors? Certainly he, who goes about
to shake a Position that for more than 1500 years all Christians believed, had
need be as demonstrable in his proofs, as Principles in Mathematics are. Nay
he had need be infallible in his Expositions of Scripture, since he must give a
contrary sense to them, than all Catholic Writers have done before;
considering that if he be mistaken, he destroys the very Being of a Church, and
by depriving them of lawful Pastors, robbs Christians of Sacraments and all
other Spiritual Ordinances.

But if all Vocation to the Ministry must be either Extraordinary such as the
Apostles were, or Ordinary such as the Bishops their Successors were, it would
do well these generous men would show us by what Title they claim. If
extraordinary, certainly it is as necessary for them to prove their Mission by
miracles as it was for the Apostles, nay as it Was for our Savior: who
expressly tells us. Joh. 15.24.
If I had not done amongst them, those works which none other man did, they had
not had Sin. If ordinary, they would do well to show us, that this their call
to the Ministry was that ordinary way by which the Church enjoyed her Pastors.
For unless they can do that, they must believe, nay they must tell the World,
that those Good and Pious men, who succeeded the Apostles, and who for the
defense of the Doctrine of the Gospel resisted unto blood, did conspire to
cheat Christians of their Liberty, and the Soul of Man of those generous
principles, this liberal age is willing to allow her. And it is very frivolous
to say that the Successors of the Apostles, in those writings we have amongst
us, do differ in many things, and do maintain some things not altogether
consonant to truth. It Is true I acknowledge they are but men, and therefore
subject to frailties and errors as all mankind is: but this is so far from
weakening their Authority, that ^it strengthens it: That since they are men and
so subject to mistakes and differences amongst themselves, it was impossible
they should all agree in the Doctrine and practice of Episcopacy, unless they
were all convinced it was a principle not to be disputed against. And let not
some say that our Bishops now a days differ from the Apostolical Bishops: it is
possible they may in some external additions, which the Piety and Munificence
of Christian Princes have annexed unto that Order, believing they could not
honor those too much who were set apart to serve at the Altar of our Lord. Yet
I desire any man to show me whether the Catholic Church did not at all times
believe for 1500 years together, that a Bishop was absolutely necessary for
Ordination? And if Imposition of hands, which the Author to the Hebrews reckons
as one of the Principles, yea one stone of the Foundation of the Doctrine of
Christ, which (since the words are; the Doctrine of laying on of hands, and
Ordination is ever performed with it) may amongst others comprehend Ordination;
then he who shall destroy a lawful Ordination, pulls away one of the Foundation
Stones of the Christian Aedifice; and, if he does not destroy, certainly he
endangers the Building.

But why the Scripture should be thought deficient in Necessaries, If Episcopal
Government being necessary be not determined, I understand not; for if by not
determined by a Law be meant absolutely, it is begging the Question. For there
is no man but knows it is the Assertion of all who hold Episcopacy Apostolical,
that it is determined there. But if by determining by a Law, is meant, so
positive and clear a Determination as is Obvious to every Capacity, and can
admit of no Cavil, then it is a strange conclusion. For, I doubt, some great
Articles of our Faith are not so evidently revealed, and so positively
determined, but may admit of diverse c^vils; and those too not from unlearned
and irrational men, who allow the Scripture, as we do, to be sole Judge in such
Controversies. And if this be so, then either those great Truths are not
necessaria, or the Scripture is deficient in necessariis, both which are
strange Conclusions. And now to suppose, That Episcopal Government is a matter
of Christian Liberty, because it is not so clearly determined by a positive
Law, is to suppose that every thing, of which we have not positive and clear
Determination in Scripture as will admit of no Dispute, is of Christian
Liberty: and s^ we must bid adieu to some of the great Doctrines of our Faith,
because they ar^ not so clearly delivered.

Now by what is said, we may jud^ that that Argument is not cogent, which
affirms, That nothing can bind as ^ Law, but what is expressed in direc^ terms,
or deduced by evident consequence, as of an Universal bindin^ Nature. It Is
true, nothing can bind a^ a Divine Law, but what the Scripture teaches; but
it is not necessary this should be so evident, as to admit of no dispute. For
since whosoever affirms Episcopa^ Apostolical, fixes the Divine Right o^
Scripture: it is no more an Argument ^^ say it is not in Scripture, because it ^^
not so express, as to be without disput^^ than for an Anabaptist to say, there
^^ no Obligation from Scripture to Baptiz^ Children, because there is no place
produced to that purpose but we disput^^ against; nay it is no more than for an
Atheist to deny the Divinity of our Savior, because there is no place which
asserts it in Scripture, but the Socinians dispute against. But to expect that
this also must be express the binding Nature of the Law, it is far more
unreasonable. For if it be a Law, they who alter it ought to produce more
evident Authority that they may lawfully do it, than those who maintain an
Apostolical Constitution to be perpetual, to prove express Authority for the
continuance. For the Infallibility of the first Authors of it is enough to
teach it ought to continue, unless from as great an Authority the contrary be
proved.

And upon this account those other Arguments must be of as little force, which
affirm, That all standing Laws and Rules of Church Government are appliable to
several Forms, and that therefore the Scripture has determined no Government,
but left it arbitrarily. For, first this is begging the question: For, whoever
affirms this, must know that diverse Laws of Government, as particularly that of
Ordination has by the Catholic Church for more than fifteen Ages been
adjudged only to Bishops. And certainly it is more difficult to prove that these
Laws and Rules of Government are appliable to severa^ Governments, and of this
to give evident demonstration, against which (...) Objection can be made (For
such w^ are told is the proof in this case only necessary) than for us to
affirm those Law^ and Rules are only competible to Episcopacy; since from all
Antiquity, t^^ very lately, they were never applied (...) any other.

Besides, it is possible, that many principal Laws and Rules may agree with
diverse Governments, the Governmen^ being rather fitted to them than the to the
Government; and yet is not a^ Argument that one only Governmen^ is not
established. (I add the wor^ many principal instead of all; becau^^ I cannot
believe any ingenious pers^^ will now so lamentably beg the Question, or imagine
that every Rule necessar^ for Government and for new Eme^gences in it must be
expressed.) A^^ the reason of this is, because the end^* Government being the
good of the Soci^ty governed, every thing that is, or b^ pretends to be a
Government, must have some principal Laws and Rules common with the best
Government, and yet in as much as that Government wants the perfection of a
better, these Principles though they suit with that Government, yet do not
conduce so well to the end of Government, as when they are made use of in a
better. To illustrate this by an Instance. Diverse of the principal Laws of
England agree with the Laws of diverse Countries, now to affirm that Monarchy is
not established in England, because our Laws are or may be used to a Government
not Monarchical, is such a way of arguing as will hardly deceive a considering
man. And though this may be said as to Government in general, abstracting
Divinity from it: Yet if we find these Laws and Rules, that are given in
Scripture for Church Government, are more eminently conducible to the benefit
of the Church in Episcopacy than in any other; and if we have greater Authority
than we have of any Fact so ancient, that the Church ever understood and
practiced these Rules and Laws in Episcopal Government, can any rational man be
persuaded that Episcopacy is of Christian Liberty; because the Rules and Laws
of Episcopal Government may be forced and strained to the fond Inventions of an
Enthusiastic brain?

And now Reader I must beg thy pardon, I have been so long on this last
Argument. I hope the danger as well as the Novelty of the Opinion will be my
excuse. I proceed.

We have in the last place another sort of Adversaries that are Enemies to
Episcopacy; and the reason is, because they are friends to their Lands; and
unless they destroy their Order, they cannot divide the Spoil. And because this
is an Argument not fit to be openly urged, they pretend to annex them to the
Crown, and that (say they) will both enrich and strengthen the Monarchy. To
these two men I shall only lay down these Positions, and if I make them good,
this Argument will vanish as smoke. The first is, That these Lands in the
Churches hands conduce more to the Interest of the Crown, than if they were
annexed to the Crown. And the second is, that the Crown at present receives as
much in Revenue over and above what the Church men have, as it does from any
Lands not yet altered from the Crown, Quantity for Quantity.

For the first, I take that to conduce to the Interest of the Crown, which
obliges a great number of understanding able men to depend upon the Crown. Now
since all Ecclesiastical Preferments depend either immediately or mediately on
his Majesty's disposal, this must make all who that way seek for advancement to
deserve well of the Crown, that that they may obtain their desires. And this
does not only encourage those who are possessed of Ecclesiastical Dignities,
but does also persuade and incline Parochial Ministers to serve his Majesty,
that they may be considered and rewarded for it. Of this we have a notable
instance in our late ill Times, when, if I mistake not, as I think I do not,
there were 8000 forsook all for the Covenant. Of an 129 Parishes within the
Bills of Mortality of London, (I have the list now by me) an 115 was turned
out, besides all the Prebends of St. Paul's and Westminster. And the Great
dependence of the Clergy was so great an Eyesore in the beginning of our
unhappy Times, that the Principal Reason, why some seemed so zealous to Vote
Bishops out of the Lords House, was that they were a dead weight, and that
their Interest did so depend on the Court, that they always Voted as they
received Commands: which thing though in it self not true, yet certainly shows,
That their Interest is involved with the Crown and that he that will ruin the
Monarchy must begin with the Church.

Now let any man answer me, Has not this great Body of Cl^rgy a considerable
Interest in the Nation? Do we not find in many Parishes that the Minister
carries as great a sway as the Lord of the Manor? Is it then prudence to
alienate the Churches Land, to destroy this Body of Men who depend on the
Crown? What will be the consequence of this? This first will make every
Parochial Minister seek what either his Patron or Parish do desire. For he is
at his height, he can hope for no more. This will augment the number of
Freeholders, who are already increased to such a multitude, that their Lands
exceed both Crown Lands, Church Lands, Nobility and Gentry. And if that be
true, (which Mr. Harrington affirms, and is not improbable) that the Interest
of England is in her Lands; certainly all means ought to be used to continue
Lands in the hands of those whose Interest it is to support the Crown, rather
than suffer them to be divided amongst a giddy multitude, who judge of nothing
but as it conduces to their present profit. I shall not here enter into the
Religious Account of Church Lands, nor add what I have seen in some Papers of
Sir Henry Spelman's, that when the Abbeys were dissolved, there were but 28
Temporal Lords gave assent to it, and that in his time 22 of their Families
were expired: I shall not answer that which is in every Mouth, that the Church
had near a Moiety of the Nation, since it was not the Church, but their Tenants
had again nine parts of that ten, and in those times a Church Lease was counted
better than Capite Land, since the Tenancy was never altered but upon consent
or miscarriage, their Children were not subject to Wardships, their Revenues,
for all but stock, not liable to Subsidies, and their Lands maintained at the
charge of the Church from all vexatious Titles and Law Suits. But this is not
my work at present.

The second thing I am to prove, is, That the, Crown receives as much from the
Dignified Clergy's Lands, as it does for so much of its own. And this will
appear, if we consider that every Bishop at his Entrance in four years pays the
full reserved Rent of his Bishopric, after that a full Tenth yearly; and it is
not ordinary for any Bishop to continue in one and the same Bishopric above
seven year; so that if we call the First Fruits a Fine which comes in seven
year, and the yearly Tenths, it is a good certain Revenue to the Crown. Whereas
in the Crown Lands the reserved Rents are little, and much of that expended in
Collection: The Fines seldom come to any thing, and they, or the greatest part
of them, are commonly swallowed up by them who gather them. I know, at his
Majesty's Restoration the Clergies Fines were extraordinary: but though men
look on their Profit with an evil Eye, yet they are not willing to consider
their vast expense; the Repairing the almost Ruined Cathedrals, Episcopal
Houses, Redemption of Captives, Allowances to Purchasers, and particular
Contributions, besides those great Acts of Charity and Munificence, which
scarce any who have died but have left a good Example to their Followers.

But besides this, if we consider that the Priesthood under the Gospel is more
honorable than that under the Law, as being the Dispenser of a better
Covenant; and that it is Christ's own Command, that they who Preach the Gospel
should (...) should live of the reward the Gospel brings, that a Messenger of
such good News does merit; we will conclude, the Evangelical Clergy deserves at
least a proportionable Revenue, to that which God was pleased to command and
set apart for the Priests under the Law. And truly if we examine what that was,
we shall find our Churches Revenue comes not near it. Then certainly we have no
reason to repine at what they have, unless we are of the Opinion of some
amongst us, that to serve God is in it self not necessary; and so their needs
neither persons to be dedicated to serve at the Altar, nor maintenance for them.

How great the Revenue was, the Priests had under the Law, we may compute, if
we consider that they had the Tith of every thing in kind, Review History of
Tyths, cap. 2. page 456.
which as Mr. Seldom tells us was rather a Fifth than a Tenth; that they had a
great proportion out of every Sacrifice, that all Free Will Offerings were
theirs; so that to give to God and his Priests was one and the same thing: and
besides all this in that little Country, which I think exceeds not our four
Northern Counties, they had 48 Cities allotted them with their Suburbs, which
was to extend round about their Cities 2000 Cubits, which was something more at
the lowest reckoning than half a mile; so that allow the City a square and half
a mile over, there is a square of a mile and half, which makes 3 square miles,
and contains in it 1920 Acres; so that in that little Land they had 92160
Acres, which the soil being then so rich, by the multitude of Inhabitants, and
Gods special blessing, was a vast Revenue, and far exceeds what our Clergy ever
had. And therefore any sober judicious person may judge at the Intentions of
those men, who in their scurrilous and seditious Pamphlets make our Clergy,
like Bell, to devour the best of the Land. Omnia Comesta a Belo.
They are desirous to devour it themselves, and, that they may be fresh
Instruments to pull down more judgments upon this Nation, they desire to
involve us in New Sacriledges; as if this Nation had not been sufficiently
punished by sins of this kind, unless they fill up the measure by new Additions.

But this being not so properly the Subject in hand, I shall leave it at
present, and conclude this Preface, when I have added, what I have received
from good Authority concerning two great men amongst the Dissenters of the last
Age; that the World may see, that the Dissenters then were neither in Opinion
nor Temper like unto those, who now cause great Separations amongst us.

The first is of Mr. Tho. Cartwright, the Antesignanus of that Party in his
Age. Sir George Paul in the life of Archbishop Whitgift tells us, that the
Reason of his first discontent was, that in the Exercises that were done before
Queen Elizabeth at Cambridg, Dr. Thomas Preston got all the Applause and a
Pension from the Queen, when he, who was the better Scholar was not taken
notice of. This beg at in him Great Discontent and Anger first at the Queens
Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals, and afterward at all the Orders of the Church.
Fuller History of Camb. p. 139.
But though he continued long in this Temper, yet before his death he grew very
moderate. And when he came to die, which he did at Warwick at the Hospital, of
which Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester had made him Master, he did seriously
lament the unnecessary troubles he had caused in the Church, by the Schism he
had been the great Fomenter of; and wished he was to begin his life again, that
he might testify to the World, the dislike he had of his former ways. And in
this Opinion he died. The truth of which Story I have from the third hand: A
sober person present at his death told a friend of his a Gentleman of Warwick,
who assured a Clergyman of my Neighborhood of the Truth of it.

The second is Mr. John Dod, a man whose Name is known to all this Nation. What
thing he scrupled in the Ceremonies his nearest Relations could but guess. For
I am informed by one of them who lived above half a year in his house with him,
that in all that time, he never spoke one word of them to him. He advised a
Grandchild of his to go for Ordination to the Bishop of Lincoln, because he was
the Bishop, Students in Cambridg received Ordination from: And when he asked
his advise about Subscription, he answered, If you scruple nothing, why do you
question it? When one of his own Children seemed to doubt kneeling at the
Sacrament, and asked his advice, whether she should leave the Church, and get
some Minister to give her the Sacrament in the house, in the Posture she
inclined to take it in? the good old man man rejected the motion with some
eagerness, and bid her go to her Parish Church, and receive kneeling: When for
refusal of Subscription in the third year of King James he was deprived, he
refused to Preach; And when by Mr. Fox, I think I mistake not his Name, a
Minister in Teukesbury he was pressed to it by that Argument, that he was a
Minister not of Man, but of Jesus Christ. He replied, it is true, he was a
Minister of Jesus Christ but by Man, and not from Christ as the Apostles only
were; and therefore if by the Laws of Men he was prohibited Preaching, he ought
to obey: and never did Preach, till Mr. Knightly his Patron procured him a
License from Archbishop Abbot. Where by Ordinance of Parliament the Common
Prayer Book was laid aside, he never forsook the use of it, but read always as
much, as his very old Age would suffer him. When he was desired to Baptize a
Child after the Mode of those Times, without the Common Prayer Book, he
refused, but administered both Sacraments according to that Order, (the Cross
only excepted, which practice made some imagine 'twas the only thing he
scrupled). And when by Accident a great Commander in the Parliaments Army (who
formerly had been his Auditor) came with Forces that way, he asked Mr. Dod, why
he did not Pray and Preach up the Parliament. He Replied, He Preached Jesus
Christ, which was the work of a Minister. And after that asked that Commander,
Who he fought for? He answered, For the King and Parliament. The good old man
replied, But what if the King be in a fight, and you should kill him? The
Commander replied, He must take his fortune. Mr. Dod returned, It Is a strange
fighting for the King, to kill him; and this answer did so trouble and concern
this good man, that after this discourse ended, he mentioned it with great
horror to some of his Relations. A little before Naseby fight, King Charles of
blessed memory sent the late Earl of Lyndsey to Mr. Dod to know his Opinion of
the War. His Lordship found him ill, however he sat up and dictated his sense
of it. But the Earl was on a sudden, by reason of the Fight hurried away, that
whether the King had the paper or no, I cannot learn; but the Original, or a
Copy of it, was by some zealous men suppressed. And their lived near him a
Justice of Peace in those ill times, (who, though he pretended to much Piety,
had little honesty, as appeared at his death) that was thought the man who
suppressed it. And when by some of Mr. Dod's Relations he was asked about it,
he made this answer, That in his old Age he began to dote. I have done my
utmost to retrive it, and am not yet out of hopes to do it; which if I can
compass, the World shall see, this man was none of those who disliked the
Liturgy, despised our Ecclesiastical Government, none of those who gathered
Proselytes by broaching Opinions contrary to the Established Laws, none of
those who Preached in Corners, and so applaud themselves and their fancies,
that they fill our streets with their unreasonable Argumentations, none of
those who study to deceive, because either they have deceived or been deceived
themselves.

I have now done, I only desire the Reader to lay aside all interest and
partiality, and as an indifferent and unconcerned person, to read this
Discourse I here offer thee. And since all Truth is great, and will prevail, I
cannot but hope this truth will have a good success. If the constant practice
of the Primitive Church, if the Authority of all the great Reformers in the
Protestant Church, if the universal consent of Ancient holy Fathers, if the
concurrent Testimony of Modern Divines, if the confessions of so many great
Divines in our late ill times, the blood of Archbishop Laud, or the Martyrdom
of our late blessed Sovereign, have any Rhetorique at all, let these compel
thee to forsake these Separations, and to return to the bosom of that Church,
whose Orders are Apostolical, whose Ceremonies are Primitive, and whose Doctrine
is most Orthodox.

Hen. Yelverton.
From my house at Easton Manduit in Northamptonshire, this 12 of March 1668/^.
Episcopacy Asserted.
CAP. I.
SECT. I. That the Church of Geneva has both justified, and praised our
Episcopal Government in England, and prayed for the prosperous continuance
thereof.
FRom the Church of Geneva, we have that Pole-starr thereof Mr. Calvin himself
peremptorily asserting the Right of Episcopal Government, in what Church
soever, Calvin lib. de necessit. Reform. Eccles. p. 69. Talem si nobis
exhibeant Hierarchiam in qua sic emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non
recusent, etc. ut ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant, and ad ipsum
referantur, etc. Tum vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fateor, si qui crunt qui
non came reverenter, summaque obedientia observent.
That professes the truth of Doctrine, and denies dependence on the Roman
Antichrist. And the Case so standing, he denounces them Anathema and accursed
who shall not reverently obey such Episcopal Hierarchy: so Mr. Calvin: which is
the more remarkable, because the Tractate, wherein these words are, is written
professedly concerning the Reformation of Churches, and therefore so much more
appliable to the impugners of our English Church, none more professedly
maintaining the same Religion, and somewhat more Reformed than it was in the
days of Calvin. Yea, and even in her last Canons opposite to Papists and
Popery as ever. Again, his Approbation of our English Episcopal Government then
in being was expressed sufficiently in dignifying Archbishop Cranmer Calvin
Epist. ad Thom. Archiep. Cant. Te presertim (ornatissime Praesul) quo altiore
in specula seeds in hanc curam, ut facis, incumbere necesse est: Scio enim non
ita unius Angliae haberi abs te rationem, quin Universo Orbi consulas. p. 134.
Even for his Archi-episcopal care which he had (says he) not only of England,
but also of the whole World. Meaning, by endeavoring to his power to propagate
the truth of Christ's Gospel every where. In which sense of Public Universal
care, good Bishops were anciently called Bishops of the Catholic Church. Yea,
and in a more vehement and emphatical expression, he exhorts him (with others
the Governors of the Church, Id Epist. ad Cranm. inter Ep. p. 135. In qu^m rem
ita omn^s qui gube^nacula ist^e tenent commanibus studiis incumbere oporte^, ut
tamen praecipuae sint tuae p^rtes. Vides quid locus iste postular, vel magis
quid pro muneris quod tibi inj^nxit ratione abs te suo jure exig^t Deus.
To labor to discharge their Function, as that which is enjoined them of God,
who will exact of them a due account thereof. Our second witness (Mr. Beza)
testifies, Beza Resp ad Sar. de diverse. Minist. grad cap. 18. v. 3. Quod si
nunc Anglicanae Ecclesiae instauratae, suorum Episcoporum and Archiepiscoporum
autoritate s^ffultae perst^nt, quemadmodum hoc illi nostra memoria contigit, ut
ejus ordinis homines, non tantum insignes dei Martyrs sed etiam
praestantissimos Doctores and Pastores habuerit, fiuatur sane ista singulari
Dei beneficentia, quae utinam sit i^li perpetua.
That the Church of England, after the Reformation, was supported by the
Authority of Archbishops and Bishops, excellent Pastors of the Church; wishing
furthermore, blessing upon their Function, that it might be perpetual to this
Nation. And in another place Id ad G^i^dal. Ep. 12. and 23. Ut omnibus
Praesulibus ex animo obsequantur. Majori poena dign^ sunt qui autoritatem tuam
aspernabuntur.
Judging them worthy of punishment, that should not willingly obey their
Authority. So he. Next, both Mr. Beza and Sadeel jointly inveigh against those
B^z and Sadeel. cited by the Author of the Survey of the pretended holy
Discipline, and by Beza contra Saran. p. 126.
As impudent slanderers who should report them to have detracted any thing from
the dignity of Episcopacy in this Church.

What shall we say to that mirror of Learning Mr. Isaac Causabon? who having
taken due survey of our Episcopal Government in England, doubted not to publish
to the World, Cause. (regem alloquens) in p^aefat. ad Ex^rcit. Q^^ Ecclesiam
habes in ^uis regni^ pa^tim jam olim ita iustitatam par tim ma^nis tuis
laboribus ita infr^^^^tam ut a^ florentis Ecclesiae quondam fo^mam nulla hodie
propius accedat quam tua inter vel excessa vel defect^ peccantes mediam v^am
sequnta, qua moderatione hoc p^imum asseq^uta est Ecclesia Anglicana, ut illi
ipsi qui suam ei faelicitatem invident, saepe tamen ex aliarum comparat^one
illam cogantur laudare.
That no Church in the World does come nearer to the form of the Primitive
Church than it does; so far (says he) that they that envied her happiness, are
notwithstanding constrained to extol it: judging furthermore, That what either
belongs to the Doctrine of Salvation, or to the decency of a Church, is found
in her, as well as in any other Church, upon Earth. And in a Brotherly and
Christian close concludes saying, Praised and magnified be God therefore: Even
as he did at the sight of the Consecration of Bishops in Paul's Church, with
this pathetical ejaculation, Id ad Card Peron. Reg. (...) caine Cerro and
liquido ^ihi constat (...) notae (...) quae^antur, aut etiam decorum Ecclesiae,
nullam in orb te^ra^um (D^o ^n^ sit lau^) in^ventam, quae p^^pius ad fidem aut
sp^ciem antiquae Eccl^si^^ Cathol^cae ^ccedat. Id. Ephem. An 1610. ^rid. Cal^^d
Nov^^^. Test M^ricio frarte diem sac^um non male posni Dei be^^ficio, sum enim
invitatu^ ho^ie ut intere^sem sacris quae facta sunt ad consec^^nda E^^sco^^s
duos Scoto^, and A^chiepiscopo^^^ S^oti^, vidi illo^ ri^^s and impositionem
ma^^^m and p^^ces in ^am ^em. O Deus, quanta fil^t mih^ v^^^^t^^ ^ Tu (...)n
mine Jesus serva hanc Ecclesiam, and Catharis qui ista (...).
Good God (says he) how great was my joy? do thou Lord Jesus preserve this
Church, and restore such to their wits who do deride these things. So he.

After these Doctor Diodati, now a famous Preacher in Geneva, at his being in
England, did not a little joy to observe our Episcopal Government, who if he
had been an Adversary thereunto would not (as he did) have noted Dr. Diodati in
his Annotat. upon Revel. 2.1.
One of the seven Angels in the Revelations to have been the Bishop of Ephesus.
Lastly, Fredericus Spanhemius, Professor of Divinity in the same Church, may
well stand for another witness, who after his ample commendations (and that
worthily) of the late Primate of Ireland, manifestly extolleth Spanh. Epist.
Dedicat. Ut profitcar quanta Genevae nostrae sit nominis tui claritudo, etc.
Quamvis regna vestra praesulibus e^udit^ssimis and Theologis summis abundant
q^i omni Scriptionis accuratae genere judicium and acumen suum orbi Christiano
probant, etc. Docent id tam eximia vestratium scripta in hoc genere cuae in
linguis exoticis cum immortali vestrae ge^tis laud t^^ferun^ur, etc. Nec
desunt hedie ex Antissibus and Theologis vestris viri incomparabiles qui tata
faelicitate Polemica tractant, and Orthodoxam veritatem, a R^manensium
Theologo^um argumentationibus strenue assertum eunt, etc. Amplissimos Praesules
and Pastores sidos amp^examur, and pro omnium five in Ecclesia, five in
Republica ad Clavum sedentium prosperitate divinam bonitatem assidue fatigamus,
etc. Ecclesiarum vestrarum Praesulibus sua Autoritas.
The Bishops and Divines of our English Church for their accurate Writings in
defense of the Orthodox Religion, and their dexterity in confuting Romish
subtilties; after professes in the name of the Church of Geneva, Their
embracing our Pastors and Prelates with Christian affection, praying for the
prosperity of them that sit at the Helm of this Church, that their Prelatical
Authority may continue unto them. So they, and somewhat more pertinent to our
Question in hand, as now follows.

SECT. II. That the Church of Geneva disclaimed the Opinion of thinking, that
their Churches Government should be a pattern for other Churches.
THe Smectym. Vind, p. 182.
Smectymnians our Opposites, by instancing in that Church, may seem (in the
same book Dedicated to both Houses of Parliament) that the same Church of
Geneva (which we acknowledge to be essentially a member of the Church of
Christ) ought to be a Pattern of Ecclesiastical Government to all other
Protestant Churches. We have a contrary Certificate from Bez Resp. ad Sar. de
diverse. Minist. grad. c. 21. resp. 2. Sed and fidos Pastores cur non omni
reverentia prosequamur? n^dum ut, quod falsissime nobis aliqui objiciunt,
cuiquam uspiam Ecclesiae sequendum nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus,
imperitissimorum illorum similes qui nihil nisi quod ipsi agunt rectum putant.
Theodore Beza speaking of Bishops as the Celebrious mouth of that Church, We
(says he) do embrace all faithful Bishops with all reverence; neither do we
(as some falsely object against us) propose our Example to any other Church to
be followed. So he. Hitherto of the justification of our English Episcopacy, by
the judgment of our most Judicious Divines of the Church of Geneva. We are not
destitute of like Testimonies from other Protestant Churches.

SECT. III. That also other Protestant Divines of Reformed Churches have
observed the Worthiness of the Episcopal Government in England.
MR. Moulin (whose Name is Venerable among all Orthodox Divines) acknowledges
Moul. Epist. ad Episc. Winton. Quorum Martyrum habemus scripta, and meminimus
gesta, ac zelum, nulla ex part inferiorem zelo prae stantissimorum servorum
Dei, quos Germania aut Gallia tulit: hoc qui negat oportet ut sit vel im probe
vecors, vel gloriae Dei invidus, vel cerebrosa stoliditate stupens caliget in
clara luce.
That our English Bishops that suffered Martyrdom in the days of Queen Mary,
were for Zeal nothing inferior to the most excellent servants of God, which
Germany or France ever had; which none (says he) will deny if not blinded in
daylight. And least that worthy Divine should be thought to approve of such of
our English Bishops only as then suffered Martyrdom, we have furthermore his
indefinite large Testimony, Id. in These. de not^s Eccles. Episcopos Angliae
post conversionem ad fidem, and damn^tionem Papismi, afferimus fuisse fideles
Dei servos, nec deferere debere officium suum vel titulum Episcopi.
We affirm (says he, speaking as the mouth of the French Church) That the
Bishops of England, after the Reformation, were the faithful servants of God,
and ought not to desert their Office, or title of Bishop. Hierom. Zanch. Ep. ad
Reg. Eliz. Cogitet tua Majestas in hoc omnem tuam potentiam, and autoritatem
intendere, u^ imprim^s Epi^copos habeas vere pio^, and in sacris literis
exercitatos sicut Dei beneficio habes complurim^s eosque faveas, and augeas.
Hierome Zanchie (amongst excellent Divines in his time) exhorts Queen
Elizabeth with an Imprimis, and especially to extend her care and Authority to
have godly and learned Bishops, whereof ( by the blessing of God, says he) you
have very many, and to cherish them. And again, he congratulateth the Episcopal
Dignity of Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, Id Ep. ad Jewe^l. Sarisb. Episc. Verum
est (Doct^ssime praesul Jewelle) me nur quam ad te scriptisse and ut debebam,
istam ^ibi dignitatem ad quam tua te vir^us evexit gratulatum fuisse, etc.
Dominus te and reliquos omnes pios, and sanctos Episcopos Ecclesiae f^^ae
servet, and vestra opera promoveat Regnum suum. Hier. Zanch. suo and Colligar.
nom. An. 1577.
Praying to God for his prosperous success in his Function, and of all others
the Pious Bishops of England, and all this in the name of his Colleages, the
Pastors of the Church of Heidelburgh. Saran. adv. Bez. Epist. ad Lect. Saepe
miratus sum little sapientiam qi^ Anglicanae Ecclesiae restituerunt verum cultum
Dei, and ita se attemperarunt ut nusquam decessisse ab antiqua and prisca
Ecclesiae consuetudine reprehendi possint, quam si ^^^i suissent secuti minus
bello^um Civisium haberemus.
Sarania (a Belgic Doctor) though a great favourer of the Order of Episcopacy,
yet an earnest inveigher against the Roman Hierarchy, confesses Himself to
wonder often at the Wisdom of the Reformers of the Church of England, as no way
deviating from the ancient Church of Christ: And he concludes with this
Epiphonema saying, I hold it a part of her happiness that she has retained
with her the Order of Bishops. Mr. Moulin again (that he may be the Epilogue
who was the Prologue) concludes for the Church of England, saying, Mr. Moul.
Buckl. of Faith, p. 345.
That their agreement is such, that England has been a Refuge to our
persecuted Churches; and correspondently the excellent servants of God in our
Churches (says he) Peter Martyr, Calvin, Beza, and Zanchie, have often written
Letters full of respect, and amity to the Prelates of England. So he.

To these may be added the late dedicated Books to some of our Bishops of these
times, together with others referring their Controversies among themselves to
be decided by their judgment, if we thought that such instances could be of
easy digestion with some. Hitherto by way of Introduction in behalf of our
particular English Church. We are now to prosecute the justification of
Episcopacy in general, so far as to make good the Title of this Treatise
inscribed, A FULL SATISFACTION IN THIS CAUSE, as well for the Necessary use, as
also for the just Right thereof, as consonant to the Word of God. We begin to
consult with gray headed Antiquity for the manifestation hereof.

SECT. IV. That the Episcopal Government in the Church of Christ is for
Necessary Use the best, according to the judgment of Primitive Antiquity.
GEnerally the bestness of a thing (that we may so call it) is best discerned
by the Necessary Use, whereof Antiquity has testified by Hierome, Hier. in
Tit. 1. Antequam Diaboli instinctu studia in religione fierent, and diceretur
in populis, Ego Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego autem Cepha, ^ommuni Presbyterorum
Concilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur: postquam vero unusquisque eos quos
baptizaverat suos patabat esse, non Christi; in toto orb decrerum est, ut unus
de Presbyteris el^ctus superponeretur ^aeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura
pertinent, and Schismatum semi^a tollerentur.
That the original reason of constituting one over the rest of Presbyters, to
whom all the care of the Church should belong, was (says he) so decreed
through the whole World, that Schism might be removed. Which from the
continual experimental success thereof in the Church, he himself held to be
such, Id. advers. Lucis. Ecclesiae salus ex summi Sacerdotis dignitate
dependet, cui nisi exors quaedam potestas, and ab omnibus eminens detur, tot in
Ecclesia efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes*
As whereupon the safety of the Church did depend. Dandi (scilicet Baptismi)
jus habet summus Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus, dehinc Prae^byteri and Diaconi,
non tamen sine Episcopi Author^tate propter Ecclesiae honorem, quo salvo, salva
est pax. Tert. de Baptism. cap. 17.
Tertullian (yet himself no Bishop neither) will not have Presbyters and
Deacons to Baptize without Authority from the Bishop, for the honor of the
Church; which being observed, Peace (says he) will be preserved. Chrysostom Hom.
20. ad popul. Antioch. de reditu Flaviani Episc. (...).
Chrysostom illustrateth the Necessity of Episcopal Government, by resembling
the Bishop to the Head, in respect of the Body: to a Shepherd, in respect of
his Sheep: to a Master, in respect of his Scholars: and to a Captain, in
respect of his Soldiers: with whom Ambr. in 1 Cor. cap. 1.17. In Episcopo
omnium Ordinationum dignitas ^st, Caput est enim caetetorum membrerum.
Ambrose agrees in the first resemblance; calling likewise the Bishop, The
Head of the rest of the members. August. Unu^quisque in domo sua, si Caput est
domir, ^elut Episcopus es^.
Augustine compares the Bishop to the Father of the Family, as being Head of
the House. Nazian. Ep. 22. ad Basil. (...).
Nazianzen, Ambr. de diga. sa. cap. 6 Si oculus tuus simplex, id est, Si
Epis^^^us, qui ut ^amen prome^e^it praees^e in corpore, simplicitate, and
sancta ^nnocentia sit decoratus, omnis Ecc^esia ^ple^dore luminis radiatur.
Ambrose, Nicet. Com. in Gregor. Nazian Ora. 44. Neque vero absurdum fuerit
sanct^s Antistires oculorum loco positos esse affi^mare, utpote aliis
superiores, ac propterea nomen Episcopo^um conseqoutos: per eos enim plehem
Christus in se credentem invisi^.
Nicetas decipher him as the Eye in that Head, whose Office is to look to the
whole Body, whence they have their names, Episcopi or Bishops. Basil Epist. 67.
ad Eccl. Anc. (...), etc.
Basil (yet higher) compares the Church to the Body, and the Bishop to the
Soul; saying, That the Members of the Church by Episcopal Dignity, as by one
Soul, are reduced to Concord and Communion. Cy^r Epist. 55. N^que enim aliunde
Plaereses aborrae sunt, aut nata sunt Schismata quam inde, quod Sacerdoti Dei
non obtemperatur, nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex,
vice Christi cogitatur. Id. Epist. 65 Haec sunt enim iniria Haerericorum, and
ortus arque conatus. Schismaticorum, etc. Ut praepositum superbo tumore
contemnant. Id Epist. 69. Inde Hae^^ses and Schismata abortae sun, dum
Episc^pus superba quo^undam praesumptione ^^ntemnitur, etc.
Cyprian Bishop and Martyr, does more than once complain of the Contempt and
Disobedience of the inferior Clergy and People against their Bishops, as the
Original Spring of Heresies and Schisms.

We have done with the Fathers whom we have found generally asserting the
Necessary Use of Episcopal Government; and whom i^ the next place we shall find
seconded by the ingenious confession of Judicious Protestants of remo^^
Churches.

SECT. V. The Protestant Divines of remo^^ Churches have generally acknowledged
Episcopal Government, to for Necessary Use the best.
THe Protestant Witnesses which we shall here alleadg, are (...) two Classes,
the one Lutheram with whom we begin. Luther. Tom. 2. fol. 3^7 Plus illis tribuo
quam merentur, qui illos tam sancto and veteri nomine dignor. Id. ibid. fol.
320. Nemo contra statum Ecclesiasticum and veros Episcopes vel bonos Pasto^e^
dictum putet, qui^equi^ contra hos Tyrannes dicitur.
Luthe^ himself indeed will be found to i^ veigh against Bishops; yet not in
general against all, but such only (...) were Tyrannous and unworthy (as h^
says) of the holy name of Bishop* Otherwise not only he, but all the Churches
of the Lutherans have in the public Apolog. Confess. August. cap. de Number. and
usu Sacram. Act. 14. Nos saepe protestati sumus summa cum voluntate conservare
Politiam Ecclesiasticam, and gradus in Ecclesia facto; summa cum autoritate.
Ead. Confess. Aug. lib. 4. de unit. Eccles. Ut Schismata vitarentur, accessit
utilis Ordinario, ut ex multis Praesbyteris eligeretur Episcopus qui regeret
Ecclesiam, etc.
Augustine Confession (speaking of Bishops) testified that, They often
protested their earnest desire to preserve the Ecclesiastical Polity, and
Degrees then in being in the Church, even in their highest Authority; which
they acknowledge to be of great use for avoiding of Schisms in the Church. To
this purpose Melancthon, by the persuasion of Luther (as Camerar. in vita
Melancth. Hoc ille non intermittebat suadere non modo adstipulatore sed etiam
Autore ipso Luthero.
Camerarius writes in his life) as much for Episcopacy as any, burst out into
this pathetical Expression, Melancth. Hist. Confess. August. p. 305. Quanquam
ut ego quod sentio dicam, U^inam possim Administrationem, restituere
Episcoporum, video enim qualem simus habituti Ecclesiam dissoluta (...)
Ecclesiastica, video postea multo intolerabiliorem futura^ti Tyrannidem quam
antea fuit.
I speak my mind freely (says he) I would to God, yea, I would to God I were
able to restore the Government of Bishops; for I see what a Church we are like
to have, the Ecclesiastical Polity being dissolved; I foresee the Tyranny will
be more intolerable than ever it was before. So he, citing Melanct. cit. Bucer.
de discipl. Cler. Omnino necesse est ut Clerici suos habeant Curatores atque
Custodes instaurandos, ut Episcoporum ita and Archiepiscoporum aliorumque
omnium, qubuscunque nominibus censcantur, potestas, and animadversio caveat, ne
quis omnino in hoc Ordine sit (...).
Bucers like judgment of the Necessity of Episcop^^ Government: To the end that
refractory and dissolute persons may ^^ removed out of the Church. The
Illustrious Prince Hainault, one persecuted for Religion, and afterward
en^bled with the calling of Preacher of t^^ Gospel, professes in the name of
the Lutheran Churches, saying Greg. Princ. Hain. in praefat. de ordinat. Quam
libenter quantaque cordis laetitia Episcopos ipsot habere, revereri, morem
gerere, debitu^ jurisdictionem, and Ordinationem his favere, eaque sine ulla
accusatione frui vellemus? Id quod nos semper and Dom. Luther^^ piae memoriae
saepissime tam o^e quam scriptis, imo, and in Conci^^ publica in Cathedrali
Templo Marpurgii contestati promissimu^.
With what willingness and joy of heart wou^^ we reverence, obey, and yield
Bishop their Jurisdiction, and Ordination which thing we have always contest^
for, as did also Luther himself both i^ Words, Writing, and Preaching. So he*
We may add out of the Dani^^ Church that learned Hemingius confessing Heming.
Com. in Phil. 1.1. Et fateor utilissimum ad conserva^^ dam doctrinae
sinceritatem, and ad regendam disciplinam Ecclesi^ Unum aliquem in singulis
Diaecesibus five Provinciis praeficere, q^^ sit inspector rerum gerendorum in
Ecclesia, curetque ut omn^ j x a Pauli Consilium ordinate and decenter fiant.
Hunc five Episcopum Graeca voce, five inspectorem, five superintendentem voc^^
veris, perinde est.
The Episcopal Order to b^ most profitable, both for Governing the Church, and
for preservation of sound Doctrine.

The other Classis of Protestant Authors are at hand to deliver their own
Judgments; also Calvin in the first place delivers the Original Reason of
Episcopacy to be, (as he says) Calv. Instit. l. 4. c 4. v. 2. Praesbyteri ex
suo numero in singulis Civitatibus unum eligebant ^ui specialiter dabant
titulum Episcopi, ne ex aequalitate (ut fieri solet) di^sidia nascerentur.
Left by Equality (as it usually comes to pass) Schisms should arise in the
Church. So he. With such a Parenthesis as tells tales, namely, That
Dissension accompanies Parity: But that which is spoken in a far louder tone,
is this his Confession, Id. Com. in Phil. 11. Fateor quidem ut nunc sunt
hominum ingenia and mores, non posse state Ordinem inter verbi Ministros, quin
reliquis praesit unus.
I confess (says he) that as the manner of men is new a days, the Order of
Ministers cannot continue, except one be over the rest. So he. From whom we
expect much more hereafter: In the interim Beza grants Beza Resp. ad Saran.
de Minist grad c. 23. resp. 11. Dicamus ergo Primatum illum ordinis per Mutuae
successionis vices, ipsa tandem experientia compertum fuisse non saris virium
habuisse, nec ad ambitiosos Pastores ^ee ad auditores quidem vanos, alios vero
adulatorio spiritu praeditos compescendos, etc. Itaque quod singulorum secundum
successio^em commune fuit, visum fuit ad unum transfer, etc. Quod certe
reprehendi nec potest, nec debet, quum praesertim verustus hic mos in
Alexandr^na Ecclesia jam nd^, etc.
That because by Experience the Presbyterial Government was found insufficient
to keep under Ambitious Pastors, and vain and Fanatical Auditors; One was
constituted over the rest to govern them: which thing (says he) neither can,
nor ought to be reprehended. Especially seeing that in the Church of Alexandria
this Custom was observed, even from the days of Mat^ the Evangelist. And
again, Id. ibid. Resp. 13. Absit autem ut hunc Ordinem, ut temere aut superbe
invectum reprehendam, cujus potius magnum fuisse usum quamdiu boni and sancti
Episcopi Ecclesiis praefuerunt quis inficiari potest? fruantur igitur qui
volunt and possunt.
G^^ forbid that I should reprehend this Order as rashly or proudly brought
into the Church, whereof there was great us^ when good and holy Bishops
governed the Church. So he. Zanchie is of reverend esteem amongst our
Adversaries; yet he confesses, Zanch. Observat. in suam ipsius Confess. oper.
Tom. 8. Coll. 579. Quid certius ex Historiis ex Conciliis ex omnium
Patr^scriptis quam illos Ministorum Ordines de quibus diximus comm^^totius
Reipublicae Christianae consensu in Ecclesia constitutos and ^^ceptos fuisse.
Quis autem Ego sum qui, quod tora Ecclesia approb^^ improbem? Neque omnes Docti
viri nostri temporis improbari a^^ sunt: quippe qui norunt and licuisse haec
Ecclesiae, and ex pietate, and i^ optimos fines pro edificatione Electorum, ea
omnia fuisse pro^e^^ and ordinata.
The Episcopacy was ordained out of Piety to best ends for the Edification of
the Elect, and was so received by the consent of Christian Churches: Who th^^
am I, (says he) that I should disallo^ that which the whole Church of Christ
has approved?

To comprise much in a little, we have heard of the Protestation made in the
Augustane Confession, in the behalf of Episcopacy, and the Necessity of it; and
it is testified by Conrad. Vo^st. Apolog. pro Eccl. Orthodox. de Confess. Aug.
p. 285. In Colloquio Possianeno Augustanae Confessioni per omnia se subscribere
paratos ^sse testati sunt praeterquam Articulo Doctrinae Eucharistiae utpote
obscurius posito.
Conradus Vorstius, that the Protestant Divines, in Conference at Bosnack,
subscribed to it per omnia, except that dubious Article concerning the
Eucharist. Amongst whom he reckons Calvin, Beza, Zanchie, Viretus, and
Melancthon. We may not pass by Bogarmannus, Moderator in the Synod of Dort, who
has been rendered unto us by a credible person; That upon the mention of
Episcopacy by some of our English Divines, the want of which had, in all
probability, caused those dissentions in the Netherlands: He made this Answer
before them all, as the mouth of the rest, Bish. Hall Episcop of Divine Right,
Parag. 1.4. p. 16. Domine, non sumus adeo faelices.
Alas, but we are not so happy: which none that duly considers either the
Person that spoke it, or yet the Place where it was uttered, can conceive to be
a Complement; but rather a Conscionable acknowledgment of a clear Truth.

Neither is this the first or the last time that this Truth has been asserted
by Divines of remote Churches, though perhaps never so solemnly and publicly
as here: For before this Sarav. defens. Tract. e^e diverse. Minist grad. Epist.
dedicat. ad finem In patre fae^^^e^tatis hujus Regni (viz. Angliae) numerandum
fit, quod hunc Ordinem (viz. Episcopalem) retinuit, ut conservetur, etc.
Saravia has published his Judgment in Print, wherein he^ esteems it, A part
of the happiness of our English Church, that she has conserved in her the
Order of Bishops. And since that Synod, the learned Professor of Divinity in
Geneva, Videlius, speaking of good Bishops, and such as are instructed by the
Holy Ghost: Videl. Exerc. 1. in Ep. Ignat. ad Trall. c. 2. v. 4. Talibus
Episcopis and libenter paremus (...), h^e na a Spiritu Sancto docti (ut
Ignatius ad Ephesios loquitur) and parendum esse necessario dicimus.
To such (says he) as Ignatius speaks, We willingly obey, and say they are
Necessarily to be obeyed. Nothing now remains, but that one whom our
Opposites have proclaimed for their chiefest Advocate, Walo Masselinus alias,
Salmatius, may give the upshot in this very point, Walo Massel. de Episc. and
Presb. p. 413 Episcopus Ecclesiis regendis unicus praepositus estiqui and
Praesbyteris plur^bus ^^^us Ecclesiae praec^let ad Schismata tollenda, Bono
fine hoc fusse institutum nemo negat, cum optima ratio fuerat ita institu^ndi.
That (...) Bishop (says he) was set over Presbyters in the same Church, to
take away Schisms, none can deny to have been instituted to a good end, and
that with best Reasons. We need not repeat, how the Church of Geneva did not
dote so much upon their own Form of Church Government, as to think it worthy to
be an Example for other Churches to copy out. We are not ignorant of the
flourishing pretense which our Opposites make to others to be enamoured of
their Helen (the Presbyterial Government) as if it were most commonly used in
all Churches abroad, therefore have we been constrained to advertise as
follows.

SECT. VI. That the Episcopal Government is far more practiced among
Protestants of remote Churches, than is the Presbyterial.
THe words of Zanchie Zanch. Observe. in suam ipsius Confess. Oper. Tom. 8. Col.
583. Fuit mihi praeterea habenda ratio illarum etiam Ecclesiarum, quae licet
Evangelium complexae sinr, suos tamen and re and nomine Episcopos and
Archiepiscopos retinuerunt, quos ^mutatis bonis Graecis nominibus in male
Latina, vocant Superintendentes, and generales Superintendentes; sed etiam ubi
vetera illa Graeea bona, neque haec nova male Latina verba obtinent, ibi solent
esse aliquot primarii, penes quos fere tota est Autoritas; sed came de rebus
convenit, quid de nominibus altercamur?
are punctual, That Episcopi (that is, Bishops) and Superintendentes, are words
of the same sense and signification, and therefore where there is an agreement
in the thing, we ought not to make any alteration or strife about Words. And
for Practice (he says) That in some Reformed Churches, both the Name and
Function of Archbishops and Bishops, were retained; in others the Office was
retained, changing only the Title of Archbishops and Bishops, into
Superintendents, and general Superintendents: And where neither Name nor Office
did remain, as formerly, yet even there almost all Authority was managed by
some Chief Pastors. So he. Mr. Dureus (a Learned Divine) and in one sort
Apostolical, by his great Travail and endeavors for reconciling of Lutherans,
and other Protestant Churches, and also some others, published to to the World
a multitude of Protestant Churches governed by Prelates, under the name of
Bishops, far exceeding the number of the Presbyterial: which seemed a matter
so unquestionable to a Jesuit, that he presumed to affirm of all Protestant
Churches excepting Anabaptists, Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 9. q. 1. Reliqui
omnes Sectarii (praeter Anabaptistas Enthusiastas) admittunt tres saltem
Ministrorum gradus, nempe Episcoporum, qui habent Curam Ecclesae disciplinae,
and Presbyterorum quos vocant Ministros verbi, and Diaconorum qui Pastoribus
and Superintendentibus navan^ operam in dispensatione Sacramentorum and aliis
Officiis. Vide Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid. Sess. 23.
That they admitted three degrees of Ministers; to wit, Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons. That which we wish may be principally observed by these Premises,
is, That so many so eminently Learned and Judicious Divines, and among them
such as are thought to have practiced the Presbyterial Discipline, would not so
plainly and universally have acknowledged the Necessary Use of Episcopal
Prelacy, except (before all Presbyterial parity) they had judged it the Best:
but yet we are to soar higher, accounting that most truly the Best; which has
the Best Right.

CAP. II.
SECT. I. The second general part of this full satisfaction, is concerning the
Right of Episcopacy, which is to accord to the Word of God, which is the second
reserved Condition in the Common Covenant.
THere are but two principal ways to understand every Accordance to the Word
of God; One from Primitive Antiquity, especially that which bordereth
immediately upon the Apostolical Age; the Other by the light and evidence of
Scripture it self. And for our just enquiry into both, we shall take along with
us the Consent and acknowledgment of such Protestant Divines, to whom our
Opposites cannot justly impute partiality in the behalf of Bishops. Antiquity
speaks unto us both by its profession and practice; sometimes professing it
to be so far according to the Word of God, as it is Apostolical; sometimes in
an higher tone and accent, to attribute unto it a Divine Right. Touching the
Apostolical Right, our Opposites will not seem to be so far forlorn of Ancient
Patronage, but that they will object four Authors against this; which
Objections we are to remove in the first place, as rubs in our way, that our
Readers passage may become more even and easy unto him.

SECT. II. First, That no Ancient Father has been justly objected as
gainsaying the Apostolical Right of Episcopacy, no not Hierome.
THe Smectymnians have informed both the Honorable Houses of Parliament, that
Smect. vind. p. 13.
The best Charter pleaded for Episcopacy, is Ecclesiastical Constitution, and
the testimony of Hierome. Which is the main Fort which they and other out
Opposites rest upon, Hier. in Tit. 1. Episcopi noverintse magis consuetudine
Ecclesiae, quam dispositione Dominicae veritatis Presbyteris esse majores, and
in commui debere Ecclesiam regere.
The Original of Episcopal Prelacy (says he) is rather from the Custom of the
Church, than of the Lords disposing. Whence these Disputants conclude, that he
held it to be Smect. p. 77.
Merely Ecclesiastical; and the rather because this his Commentary is upon a
Text of Scripture. Two kind of Answers are appliable to this Objection; One in
respect of Hieromes person; the Other in regard of his manifold Confessions to
the contrary.

First, Hierome (by nature an angry man) had been not a little provoked by John
Bishop of Jerusalem, and thereupon (as a learned Doctor even of the
Presbyterian Church says) Scultet. observe in Tit. c. 8 Passus est bonus
Hieronimus humani quid quando ita scripsit, etc.
Did probably vent this sentence in an humane passion: Especially as another
says, Saravia desens. Tract. d^ diverse. Minist. grad. c. 23. ad Bezae Resp. 2.
Cum ipse Presbyter suit, indigne tulit suam Conditionem contemni.
Holding it an indignity to see his Order contemned. And that such passions
were sometimes incident to this Father, our next Section will further manifest.
But we are rather willing to rest upon the more manifest resolution of Hierome
himself.

Secondly, Therefore we come to the Construction of his words: which we cannot
unfold better, than according to the interpretation of the abovementioned
Scultetus, namely, Scultet. ubi. sup. Nisi forte Consuetudinem Ecclesiae pro
Consuetudine Apostolica, and Dominicae dispositionis veritatem pro instituto
Christi capiar.
That Hierome denying Episcopacy to be of Divine disposition; meant, that it
was not immediately ordained by Christ himself, in the time of his Residence
here upon earth. And by affirming it to be of the Custom of the Church of
Christ understood this in the days of the Apostles. And that this is the
proper and genuine interpretation of these words, we appeal from (if so it was)
passionate Hierome, to Hierome dispassionate; from whom we have manifold
acknowledgments of the Apostolical Right of Episcopacy, saying, Hierom. Ep. ad
Evag. Omnes Episcopi Successores sunt Apostolorum.

Id. Ep. ad. Marcell advers. Mont. Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent.

Id. Ep. ad Heliod. Episcopi stant loco Pauli, and gradum Petri. tenent.


That all Bishops are the Successors of the Apostles, and do now supply their
places. Id. ad Ripar. advers. Vigilant. Minor Sanctam Episcopum in cujus
parochia Presbyter esse dicitur, acquiescere furoci ejus, ac non virga
Apostolica, virgaque fe^^ea confringere vas inutile.
He also terms the Episcopal power of Excommunication, the Apostolical Rod; and
correspondently he calls Damasus (a Bishop) his Shepherd, and himself (a
Presbyter) his Sheep.

Thirdly, He resembles Id. Ep. 58. ad Evag. Ut sciamus Traditiones Apostolicas
sumptas de veteri testamento, quod Aaron and filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo
fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi Presbyteri and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia.
Bishops and Presbyters in the New Testament, to Aaron and his Sons in the Old,
calling it an Apostolical Tradition. And Lastly, He recounteth from Antiquity
Id. Catal. Script. Eccl. Jacobus qui appellatur frater domini, etc. Post
passionem Domini statim ab Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episc^pus Ordinatus. Ibid.
Marcus Ecclesiae Alexandrinae primus Episcopus ordinatus, Titus Cietae.
James, our Lords Brother, Bishop of Jerusalem, Mark Bishop of Alexandria,
Timothy of Ephesus, Titus of Crete; whom the Apostles left their Successors in
place of their Government. So St. Hierome in as full a distinction of Bishops
over Presbyters, as any Prelate can do at this day. Wherefore it will not (we
presume) fall into the imagination of any discreet Reader, to think, that so
many Apostolical Relations had unto Bishops by Hierome, must needs confirm unto
us his opinion of an Apostolical Institution, especially those last now
mentioned out of his Book of Ecclesiastical Writers, Erasm. Praesat. in ^und
lib. Etuditum opus and Hieronymo dignum.
which Erasmus calls, A learned work, and worthy of such an Author.

If we should yield unto our Opposites to choose them an Author out of all
Protestant Divines, whom they would make Umpire and Determinator between us and
them in this very Case, we are persuaded that Beza must be he, and him shall
not we refuse, who directly proves even out of Hierome Beza Resp. ad Saran. de
diverse. Min. grad. cap. 23. resp. 11. Verustus hic mos primum Presbyterum
eli^endi in Alexandrina Ecclesia, jam inde a Marco Evangelista, est observatus,
p. 367.
That the custom of ^of choosing one among the Presbyters, who should be over
the rest, was observed from the time of Mark the Evangelist. Nay, and further
the same Theodore Beza does quit the main Objection of Hieromes denying Prelacy
to have been of Divine disposition, saying roundly Id. ibid. c. 23. resp. 34.
Quod adversus Hieronymum obiicis ex Apocalypsi nempe quod aetate Johannis
Apostoli Asiae Ecclesiae habuerint septem Episcopos divina non humana
Ordinatione sibi praefectos, etc. Hoc inquam quorsum adversus Hieronymum and
(...) torques? Nec enim ille cum diceret Ecclesias imitio comm^^ Praesbyterorum
Concilio fuisse gubernatas, ira dissipuisse exi^^ mandus est, ut fomniaret
neminem ex Presbyteris illi Co^ praefuisse.
The Hierome is not to be thought to have dated so much as to dream that no^ of
the Presbyters was placed as Pre^^dent ^ver the rest, when he said that at the
first the Church was g^verned by the Common Council (...) Presbyters. This is
as much as an Prelatically minded man could either say, or wish to be said.

SECT. III. That Augustine objected against the Apostolical Right of Episcopacy
is directly for it.
AUgustine (a Father whose memory has been Venerable throughout the whole
Christian World) is objected to have written thus to Hierome, Aug. Ep. 19. ad
Hier. Quanquam secundum honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit,
Episcopatus Praesbyterio major sit, tamen in multis rebus Augustinus Hieronymo
minor est.
Although according to the titles of Honor usual in the Church, Episcopacy be
greater than Presbytery, yet is Augustine inferior to Hierome in many things.
Hence the Smectym. vind. page 87.
Smectymnians, If Augustine had known that the Majority of Bishops above
Presbyters had been of Divine or Apostolical institution, etc. he would have
said as much. So they. Which is much more than they themselves ought to have
said, for two Reasons.

First, Because St. Hierome (as they there confess) had taken distaste at
Augustine, and thereupon written two sharp Epistles to him, in both which he
does (but yet Ironically) extel^ him as a great man, because he was In
Pontificali culmine Constitutus. So they. Whereby they do in a manner proclaim
Hieromes peevishness, every Ironie proceeding from some Splenetical tumor; for
although Hierome was otherwise a Saint-like man, y^^ in respect of Moderation,
he was fam^ inferior to Augustine, who here by his mild answer (in the objected
Epistle) endeavored to allay the heat of Hieromes passion, with the cool
breath of Christian condescension, saying, Augustine is in many thing inferior
to Hierome.

Secondly, (to speak to the matter i^self) Because all that Augustine
a^tributeth to the Institution of the Church is only Honorum Vocabula^^ namely,
the appropriation of the word Bishop, as more significant (...) express the
Office Episcopal over Presbyters, the general use hereof may well be ascribed
to the Church though it had its Original from the Apostles times when the
Office was instituted; for even from thence this Father is found to derive the
Pedigree of Episcopacy, when he says, August. Epist 42 Radix Christianae
societaetis per seeds Apostolotum and Episcopo^um successiones, certa per orbem
propagatiene diffunditur.
That the root of Christian Society is diffused through the world by the
Apostolical Seats and Successions of Bishops. Which Successions are relative to
Episcopal Predecessors, and so upwards till we come to the Apostolical Seats
whence they had their foundation. Yet so as deducing Episcopacy from an higher
Original, namely, Id Qu. (...) and Nov. T^st. q. 97. Nem^ ig^^rat Episcopos
Salvatorem Ecclesiis institu^^se. Ipse enim priusquam in Coelo^ ascenderet,
imp^^ens manu; A^^stolis ordinav^^ cos Episcopos.
That none can be ignorant, that our Savior did institute Bishops, who before
his ascension into Heaven, laying his hands on the Apostles, ordained them to
that function. So he. So far was he from blemishing Episcopal Order, with an
opinion of its Ecclesiastical Ordination, that he acknowledges them to be the
institution of Christ. Now let us proceed to Nazianzen, who is the third
objected Father by our Opposites.

SECT. IV. Thirdly, Gregory Nazianzen a Primitive Father, who is verbally
objected against Episcopacy, does really contradict the Objectors.
THis Father is alleged by the Smect. vind. p. 88.
Smectymnians, not so much against the Apostolical Right, as the Necessary Use
of Episcopacy. Yet falling in the number of Objected Fathers, we have reserved
him for this place. The point Objected out of him is, that he being cast out of
his Bishopric, by the sinister practices of Maximus, wished Ex. Nazian. Orat.
28. (...).
That there were no principal Seat or Dignity in the Church, nor any Tyrannical
preeminence of place. But what of this? Thus spoke he (say they) of Episcopacy,
holding it a principal part of Wisdom in that age to shun it. So they. Whose
scope is to make the Reader believe, That Nazianzen had renounced Episcopacy as
a Degree, in his opinion, Unlawful, or at least Unnecessary in the Church. In
answer unto this, we have just cause to complain of the want of ingenuity of
the Objectors, both in translating the words of Nazianzen, and also for
concealing his own explanations. For,

First, The word [(...)] which signifies that very time and present occasion,
they translate, That Age; which word has usually in Authors the latitude of an
Hundred years.

Secondly, They conceal his precedent and subsequent words, the two Lamps and
lights of his meaning herein. For first, he having said, That Nazian. Orat. 28
(...).
(...), or Episcopal Dignity, was wont to be had in admiration amongst right
wise men; he added, But now (as it seems to me) it is a principal part of
Wisdom even to shun it. And he gave his reason for it, not to note it to be
Unlawful, or yet Unnecessary; but, Because (says he) whatsoever belongs to
me is hereby tossed and shaken. And not thus only, but most clearly (in the
same Oration) he expresses his full inclination to embrace Episcopacy, saying
to his Flock of Nazianzum, Id. ibid. (...).
I was driven from you by violence, but I return to you again most willingly,
the Spirit of God, like the Plummet in a Clock, moving me thereunto; or rather
driving (as it were) in the stream of a violent River running down from a steep
place. So he. Expressly manifesting his willingness to return to his Episcopal
Function, as moved thereunto by the Spirit of God, who will furthermore profess
the Divine Right of Episcopacy, when that point shall fall under out perusal.

In the interim we are to know, that words of Passion, though of the Saints of
God, must not be interpreted to be words of their Profession. For Gregory
Nazianzen was, at that time of his Complaint, driven out of his Bishopric, by
the malicious machinations of Maximus, whom he terms (...), meaning in a
simile, a most malicious man, but afterward was restored unto it (as has been
said) to his good contentment; even as Job in the extremity of his trial wished
himself unborn, but yet (after the blessings of God were redoubled upon him,
his comforts likewise were proportionable. It would be but a wild piece of
Sophistry in our Smectymnians to have argued from the words of Job's passion,
that therefore life it self was simply undesirable. There remains a fourth
Father to be examined, although last in place, yet first in order of time, but
therefore hitherto reserved, that his Testimony might be more lasting in our
Readers memories.

SECT. V. That Clemens, one of the most Ant^ent of Fathers objected, proves to
be a Counterwitness against the Objectors.
THe Smectymnians call upon us earnestly to hearken unto Clemens, Smect. vind.
p. 136.
telling us of a Prophecy Concerning a future contention which should happen
about the name of Bishop. Next, That there is no piece of Antiquity of greater
esteem then this Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians. Then, That this was
brought to light by a learned Gentleman Mr. Patrick Young. And lastly, for the
matter it self, That therein is a common and promiscuous use of the words
Presbyter and Bishop. So they. In answer whereunto we are first to speak to the
Prophecy: Secondly, The Author: Thirdly, The Publisher: and Fourthly, The
promiscuous use of the Names which are punctually to be unfolded.

The Prophecy was of a future Contention, about the names of Bishop and
Presbyter, which if we should ask the Smectymnians, When it befell in Christ's
Church after the days of Clemens? they would be loath to tell, lest they
should betray their Aerius, whom Antiquity renders unto us as one
Schismatically opposing Episcopal Function, because he himself could not get to
be a Bishop; so excellently is the choice of this Prophecy here made by these
Objectors.

The next point concerns Clemens the Author, of whom we esteem as highly as
our Opposites can: but from his not differencing of Appellations of Bishop and
Presbyter; to conclude that therefore the Offices were the same, is so ill
framed a Consequence, that both besides ancient Fathers, our later worthy
Protestant Divines, Mr. Beza, and Dr. Reynalds will disclaim it. In the mean
time we must have our matter tried by the most Reverend Father Clemens himself,
concerning whom we have a competent witness even from Geneva, Vedelius by name,
Divinity Professor in that University, testifying Vedel. Exercit. 8. in Ignat.
Epist. ad Marium. cap. 3. Constat Linum and Cletum ante Clementem obiisse,
quibus defunctis solus Clemens superstes, solus etiam nomen Episcopi retinuit,
cum quia inter Adj^tores Apostolorum solus ipse restabat, tum quia jam
invaluerat distinctio Episcopi and Presbyteri, ita ut nomen id caeteris Romanae
Ecclesiae Presbyteris, qui cum solo Clemente essen^ nomen id non fuerit
^r^bu^um.
That after the death of Linus and Cletus, Clement was left alone, and retained
the name of Bishop, both because he then survived all those who had been
Assistants of the Apostles, and also for that the distinction of Names of
Bishop and Presbyter was even then i^ force. So he. Which is as full a
Confutation of the Smectymnians, as if he had said to their faces, My Masters
you do but dream.

Our Third and Fourth answers must be unto Clemens his Book, and to the learned
(say they) no more, even exquisitely learned Publisher thereof, wherein Clement
immediately after the Prophecy abovementioned, adds concerning the Apostles
as follows: Clem. Ep. ad Corinth. p 57 (...).
They (says he) having a perfect foreknowledge, constituted the aforesaid
persons, and left (...): that is, a description of Officers and Ministers in
their course, that so after that they themselves should fall asleep, other
Godly men might succeed and exercise their Function. Which what it means, the
forenamed worthy and judicious Publisher of this Epistle of Clement, has
delivered in his Commentary thereupon, observing from Clement his word (...):
that is, Description: that it is no other then the Census in Tertullian, by
which it appears (says the worthy Publisher) to have been a Custom in the
Apostolical Churches to write a Roll (for this word he holds not unfit) of the
Order of Bishops in their Successions to bring them from their Originals (as
Tertullian speaks) Polycarpus was from John the Apostle in the Church of
Smyrna, and Clemens in the Church of Rome from Peter and others, (speaking
often of this Clement) whom the Apostles constituted Bishops, from whom others
might deduce their traductions and offsprings. So this singularly learned
Gentleman. Therefore by occasion of this Objection, Bishops have gained the
Patronage of Clemens, then whose writings (to use the Smectymnians, our
Opposites own Encomium) There is no piece of Antiquity of more esteem. May it
therefore please our Reader to observe with us, the unluckiness of our
Opposites, who have objected against Episcopacy no Testimony of any ancient
Father who has not in effect plainly discovered their ignorance, or else their
wilful boldness, as of men that in fighting do wound themselves with their own
Weapons. We are now to inquire into the Judgment of Antiquity, which is of two
Classes of Fathers, some more immediate unto the Apostles, and some more
remote. We begin with the latter.

SECT. VI. The justification of Episcopal Prelacy by the Universal practice of
the Church Christian, in times approaching toward Primitive Antiquity. First,
By condemning Aerius the only famous Adversary against Episcopal Prelacy in
those times.
Ep l. 3. Tom. 1. Quia Eustathius electus est in Episcopatum quem Aerius (...)
hinc Calumnias spargit Aerius, etc. (...).
(1) EPiphanius, and Aug. de Haeres. c. 53. De Aerio: doluisse fertur quod
Episcopus non potuit ordinari in Arrianorum haeresin lapsus, propria quoque
dogmata addidisse non nulla, etc. Dicebat etiam Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla
differentia debere discerni.
Augustine declare the Schismatical behavior of this Aerius, which was because
Eustathius was elected Bishop, and he himself received the repulse, therefore
he set abroach new Doctrines; and amongst others (as Augustine relates) That
there ought to be no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter. Which word [
Ought] is that which is derogatory to the Judgment of the two foresaid Fathers,
and of the then Church Catholic.

The two learned men Walo Massel. p. 329. Hieronymus autem non temere
recedendum ab usu post Apostolorum tempora in Ecclesia recepto putasser, cojus
introducendi gravissimam and maximam causam fuisse judicabat, Schismatum nempe
evitationem.
Walo and Blondellus, being (as it were) the late professed Advocates for
Presbyters, may give them satisfaction in this point by their confessions. The
one acknowledging Hierome to have taught that men should not adhere unto
Aerius, because of the use of Episcopal Govornment, for avoiding of Schism.
The other more generally, That Hierome and other Ancients were most against the
Sacrilegious, and Schismatical practice of Aerius. So he. Blondell. Apolog.
praefat. p. 59. Hieronymo aliisque veteribus iniqujores fuisse olim, vel nun c
esse quotquot cis Aerianismum, id est, Sacrilegum Schismatis molimen, a quo
alienissimi professi fuerunt, impingere non erubescunt.


Another learned Divine at this day censuring the Schism made in the Church
because of Episcopacy, to be Sacrilegious, as some other Protestants have done
by their approbation of Episcopacy; to whom may be joined (in a greater
speciality) two other lights of God's Church. Mr. Beza (in the first place)
plainly discovering the said Opinion of Aerius. Bez. Resp. ad Sarav. de diverse.
Minist. grad. apud Saran. p. 9. Siqui sunt (quod sane mihi non facile
persuaseris) qui om^em Episcopatus ordinem (ut ru scribis) rejiciunt, absit ut
quisquam sanae mentis, furoribus little assentiatur.
If there be any (says he) as I think there be none, who altogether reject
Episcopal Order, God forbid that any of sound brain should ever assent to their
furies. So he, professing furthermore, his acknowledged observance and
reverence to all Bishops Reformed. Accordingly Mr. Moulin roundly attesteth
himself Moulin. ad Episcop. Winton. Epist. 3. Aerium damnavi.
To have detested the Opinion of Aerius. So he. And so peradventure would our
Opposites have said, if they had not fallen into these days of contradiction,
who whether they look East, West, North, or South, to any Climate Christian,
cannot find in the Church Catholic, any other famous Presbyter, who, for the
space of Fifteen Hundred years, held an unlawfulness of Episcopal Government.
This is not all.

SECT. VII. That in the time of the foresaid Fathers the whole Church of Christ
held the Derogation from Episcopal Prelacy to be Sacrilegious.
WE call that the Judgment of the whole Church of Christ, which is the Decree
and Determination of a General and Unquestionable Council representing the
whole Church Christian; such was the Council of Calcedon, concluding by a
Canon, Council. Calced. Can. 29. (...). Smectym. Answ. to the Remon. p. 30.
That to depress a Bishop down to the degree of a Presbyter, it is Sacrilege.
So they. But what say our Antiprelatical Opposites? We may not conceal it. This
(say they) was but a Stirrup for Antichrist to mount into the Pontifical
Saddle. Wittily we see, but yet scurrilously withal: we do not desire to
contend with them, at this Weapon, but give our indifferent Reader to
understand, that this was a Council for Antiquity one of the four General
Councils, for number of Fathers above six hundred, for Universality of
Approbation Representative of all Christendom, for belief of the Doctrine
thereof in our Church Authorized by 1 Eliz. c. 10.
Act of Parliament, touching at least the Doctrine of Faith; and for Opposition
to Romish Popedom, decreeing on equality of Privileges of the Bishops of
Constantinople, Vide Bin. Annotat. in decret. Council.
and the Bishops of Rome, upon this especial ground, that the then Primacy of
the Romish Pope over others, was but an Humane Ordination: which was indeed to
pull both Stirrup and Saddle from under Antichrist; so that at that time he
could not mount up. Somewhat would be heard of the Ages succeeding after the
time aforesaid.

SECT. VIII. That the immediate Succession of Bishops from the days of the
Apostles, is liberally Confirmed unto us by Learned Protestant Divines, albeit
sufficiently Presbyterial.
IT was laid down as a Rule Infallible by Augustine in the days of Primitive
Antiquity: That August. de Bapt. con Do^. l. 4. c. 24. Quod Universa tenet
Ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum sed semper retentum est, non nisi
Authoritate Apostolica, traditum rectissime creditur. Id. Epist. 86. ad Cas.
and Ep. 118. ad Jan.
whatsoever the Universal Church held, and was not instituted by Councils, but
always retained, that was most rightly believed to proceed from no other than
Apostolical Authority. This P^^^e as it was often repeated, so was it never
contradicted by any Judicious Author; yea, it is plainly asserted, by as
Learned a Doctor as any their Presbyterian Church has afforded of later times.
Scultet observe. in Tit. c. 8. Aut igitur prox^mi Apostolorum Successores
acceptam ab Apostolis Gubernationis Ecclesiasticae formam suop^e arbitratu
im^utarunt, quod vero non est sin ^^^, aut Episcopale Ecclesiae Regimen a^
Apostolis ipsis est pro^ectum.

Id in Eund. loc. Nullum aliud tempas da^i potest in quo primum creati sunt
Episcopi quam Apostolicum, siquidem omne^ Apostolorum Successores primarii
fuerunt Episcopi, ut in ^ovissimis Ecclesiis Hieresolymitana, Antiochena,
Alexandrina, R^mana, apud Euseb^um.


If no instance (says Scultetus) can be given between the days of the
Apostles, and the times succeeding of a n^^ Episcopal Government, then must
Episcopacy be thought to have proceede^ from the Apostles. So he. Accordingly
Calvin in another case against them that deny the Baptism of Infants, says,
Calvin Tr. Theol. Eccles. Refo^m. p 322. Irenaeo and Origin: Negotium erat cum
improbis Nebulonibus, qui dum Predigiosos errores praeferrent in medium, eos
sibi Divinitus revelatos esse jactabant. Hujus mendacii facilis erat refutatio,
quod adhuc superstites erant multi qui familiares Apostolorum Disci^puli erant
qui^us rec^ns erat hujus Doctrinae m^moria, quam Apost^li tradiderunt.
That Irenaeus and Origin being t^ write against the Prodig^ous Errors of
Anabaptistical Revelations, refute^ them very easily from the testimonies of
those, who being then alive, had been Disciples of the Apostles, and had i^
memory what had been delivered b^ them. So he. Applying the same to his purpose
as we also do to ours.

SECT. IX. That there was an immediate Succession of Bishops from the Apostles
times, proved first, because no time can be assigned wherein it was not in use.
COncerning the immediate Succession of Bishops from the day^ of the Apostles,
it is confessedly acknowledged before by that worthy and Learned Scultetus. But
we shall not think we have fully satisfied the Reader until we show sufficient
proof, That the Episcopal degree was furthermore actually exercised, even in
the days of the Apostles. If therefore our Opposites be willing to consult with
Bucer, he will tell them, Bucer de Cura animarum and Offic. Postorali. Apud
Pat^es Hieronymo vetustiores, clara habemus, testimonia in praecipuis E^clessis
omnibus a tempore Apostolorum i^a observatum est, ut Presbyteris quidem omnibus
Officium Episcopale fuerit impositum; interim tamen semp^retiam a temporibus
Apostolorum, Unus e Presbytetis electus atque ordinatus est in Offi^i hujus
duc^m, and quasi Antistitem, qui caete^is omnibus praeibat, and curam animarum
Ministeriumque Episcopale praecipue and in summo gradu gessit atque
administravit. Ad eund^m modum nobis ordinatio quo Primitivae Ecclesia
Hieroso^ymitanae ostenditur, Etenim Lucas Jacobum describit ut Antistitem
totius Ecclesiae omniumque Presbyterorum, Act. 15. Talis quoque Ord nat^o in
aliis quoq^e Ecclesus perpetuo observata est quantum ex omnibus H^storiis
Ecclesiasti (...) colligere licet.
That the Fathers before Hierome did clearly affirm, That in the days of the
Apostles in all the chief Churches one was chosen and placed over the rest of
the Presbyters, to have and exercise a charge of Souls, and Episcopal Function
over them in chief, as James is described by Luke, Acts 15. to have been Bishop
of Jerusalem; and the like Ordinance was perpetually observed in other
Chu^ches. So he. And if we ask their most exact Searcher into Antiquity, Scult.
obs. in Tit. cap. 8. Nam qu^d ego de Jacobo di came non illo quidem Apostolo sed
servatoris nostri fratre matris Domini privigno? quem ab Apostolis
Hirosolymorum Episcopum fuisse Ordinatum testantur Clem^ns Alexandrinus,
Heg^sippus, etc apud Eusibium l. 2. c. 1. ^acobus quem Scr^ptura fr^trem Domini
nominat Hierosolymae Ecclesiae sed^m accepit.
Scultetus, he will testify no less concerning this James, Brother of our
Lord, for which he alleges not fewer or meaner Authors then (1.) Clemens
Alexandrinus, Eus. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 1. cap. 22. de Jac. Narrans ait
suscepit Ecclesiam Hierosolymi^a^am post Apostolos F^ater D^mini Jacobus
cogn^mento Justus. Sic Hi^^^^ymus de sc^ipt Eccles.
Eusebius, Chrysostomus Hom. 33. in Act. 15.1. (...) ubi loquitu^ de Jacobo
Chrysostom, Ambros in Galat. Ab Apostolis Hierosol^mis Constitutus est
Epi^copus.
Ambrose, Epipha^ lib 2. Tom. 2. Haeres. 66. (...).
Epiphanius, yea, and Hierome himself, besides the joint consent of the Fathers
in a Council. But that which makes all questionless is the personal Line of
Successors set down by Epiphanius Epiphan. ubi supra.
from James, in the same Sea of Jerusalem, by Simeon, Judas, Matthias, etc.
unto Hilarion, who was Bishop in Epiphanius his own time. (6.) August. c^^
Crescon^. 2 c. 27. l 3 c 37. Ecclesiam Hierosolymitanam primus Apostolus
Jacobus Episcopatu suo rexit
Hieron. Catalog Script. Eccles. Jacobus qui appellatur Frater Domini, etc.
post passionem Domini statim ab Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopus Ordinatus est
Synod S^^ta in Trallo Can 33. (...).


Alexandria was another Episcopal Seat, whereof Beza Bez. Resp. ad Sarav. de
diverse. Minist. grad cap. 23. Resp. 2. Audiamus Hieronymum, etc. Nam and
Alexandriae a Maco Evangelista ad Heracleam and Dyonisium Episcopos, Presbyteri
^n^m semper ex s^ ^^^ctum relsiore gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant,
qu^modo si exercitus im^eratorem faci^.
has taken especial notice (as also Calvin does, J^st. lib. 4. cap. 4. v. 2.)
from the testimony of Hierome, concerning Mark the Evangelist, That even from
his time there was one of the Presbyters by them elected, as an Army does their
General, who was placed in an higher degree, and was termed Bishop. This is
further confirmed unto us by Eutychius (an Author lately translated and
published by Mr. Seldom, the Ornament of our Nation for Exotic Learning) who
says expressly, Eu^^th. ^dit. a Seld. p. 29. Et credidit ab co tempore Anianus
in Christum, unde baptizavit cum Marcus, and consticuit e^m Patriarch^m
Alexandriae.
That Mark constituted Anianus Patriarch of Alexandria: And the said Learned
Publisher in his Commentaries thereupon has deduced the immediate Succession
of Bishops from Anianus, for almost 300. years, wherein according to exact
Chronology he has recounted eighteen Bishops; and tells us moreover, That
this Author Eutychius himself was Patriarch of Alexandria, albeit he lived not
till almost 1000, years after.

Antioch was a third, and therein Ignatius will stand for an example
irrefragable, of whom Antiquity has thus largely testified, namely Eusebius,
Eusebius lib. 3. c. 30. (...).
That he was after Peter the second Bishop of Antioch. Theodoret Athan. in lib.
de Synod. Arim. and Selen.(...).
That he received the Grace of Episcopacy by the right hand of Peter. And
before him accordingly Athanasius, Chrysostom. Encom. (...), etc.(...).
That after the Apostles he became Bishop of Antioch, and Martyr of Christ. We
conclude with the Encornium of Chrysostom, (g) Ignatius was familiarly
conversant with the Apostles, and enjoyed Spiritual Graces flowing from them,
and received his Dignity from the Racred Hands of the Blessed Apostles. So he.
Theod. Dial. 10 (...).


The like has been anciently witnessed concerning the Church of Rome, and
though the course of personal Succession therein (and especially about the
beginning) seem to be somewhat perplexed, yet is there nothing more sure in
Ecclesiastical History, than that there was an immediate personal Succession in
that Church from the Apostles times, and the doubtfulness of the course is
assoyled from Vedel. Exercit. 8. in Ep. Ignat. ad Mar. c. 3. sect. 6. Patres
illi qui Clem^ntem tertium vel quartum a Petro ponunt, vocem Episcopi in
primigenia significatione sumunt, etc. Qui autem Clementem immediate post
Petrum ponunt Episcopum, etc. Vocem Episcopi in posterior significatione
usurpant, atque ad tempus rejiciunt quo solus Clemens Episcopus fuit jam
defunctis Lino, and Cleto.
Vedelius, a most exquisite Professor at Geneva in that kind, who speaks unto
us in the Margent; and this Truth was so clear in ancient times, that Iren.
advers. Haeres l. 3. c. 3 Habemus ru^erare e^s qui ab Apostolis institurisunt.
Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and eorum Successores usque ad nos. Sed quoniam valde
longum est in hoc tali volumine omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare Successores. (...)
Huic Clementi succedit Ev^ristus, Evaristo Al^xander, etc. Sextus ab Apostolis
Constitutus est S^x^us, and Post Pius; post quem Anicetus. Cum aurem successit
Aniceto S^ter. (...). Eusebius sere verbatim. lib. 5. c. 6.
Irenaeus was able to recount those that had been instituted Bishops in the
Churches by the Apostles, and their Successors, even until his own time as one
that had his reckoning at his fingers ends, saying, But because it would be
very long in so small a Volumn to recount the Succession of all Churches, I
shall instance in the Church of Rome. Wherein he sets down an exact
Succession of twelve Bishops, the last whereof ( Elutherius by name) was then
alive when he wrote this Book. Blundell. Apolog. praef. p. 15. From Jerusalem
Succession of 15. And page 20. ibid. Electitiis. Presbyterorum Praepositis
Episcopatum tribuente usu Episcopum reliquos Collegas Presbyteros vocavit.
Mr. Blundel the French Divine, was not ignorant of the series and lines of
Succession of those whom he calls Praepositos, Episcopos, even of the same
times.

Those Ecclesiastical Testimonies being so manifold, so pertinent, so
perspicuous, and so freely confessed, we doubt not but that ingenuous Readers
will prefer Antiquity before Novelty, Universality before Paucity, Solemnity of
profession before Obscurity; and this fully testified Apostolical practical
Succession, before the refactoriness of any whomsoever: the rather, because
they, in the space of 400 years after the Apostles, have not had any famous and
absolute Patron of a Presbyterial parity in Ecclesiastical Government,
excepting that one Swallow Aerius, whom the Church Christian then rejected as a
man Schismatical, branding him with the note of Ambition, as the cause of his
Opposition to Episcopacy; even for that he standing in competition for a
Bishopric, did miss thereof, as has been showed. And now left the humor of
some in hearing of Popes of Rome to have been Bishops, should boggle and
startle at it, to make the Episcopal dignity no better than Popish, according
to that which is now held Popedom, we add (and it is but a footstep out of the
way) the next Section.

SECT. X. That the whole Church Christian did profess and practice the
Apostolical Right of Episcopacy.
IT cannot but be a matter of wonder to any man of judgment to see such an
averseness in our Opposites, as not only to object the Testimonies of these
Fathers, who have given their common acknowledgement of the lawfulness of
Episcopal Prelacy; but much more that they cannot discern, that they by
instancing in some few Fathers in contradiction to Episcopacy, do thereby grant
their assent for it in the rest: and that all the rest indeed do accord
thereunto, is as clear as a beam of the Sun, long before that time; whereof
their pretended Patron St. Hierome is a plentiful witness, who testifies of
the more Primitive times before him, telling our Opposites plainly and roundly,
Hieron. in Tit. cap. 1. In toto orb decretum est, unus de P^esbyteris electus
superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret.
That it was decreed through the whole Christian World, That one of the
Presbyters should be set over the rest; to whom the whole care of the Church
should appertain. So he.

Of many who gave their lives for the profession of the Faith of Christ, among
whom, as Captains of the innumerable Host of Martyrs of Christ, were many
Bishops in the days of Heathenish persecutions; of whom it is recorded by
Ciprian. Epist. 55. Quando Episcopus in locum defuncti substituitur, etc.
toties ad Leonem petitur.

Gregor. de cura past. p. 1. cap. 8. Tunc laudabile fuit Episcopatum quaerere,
quando per hunc quemque dub^um non erat ad supplicia graviora pervenire.


Antiquity, and confessed by one of our Opposites, Eusebius. lib 8. cap. 3. Ex quo
fere verbatim Brightmaanus in Apoc. 6.13. Non ita multo post accessit Edictum
de prehendendis praesidibus Ecclesiae, eisdemque c^gendis ut immola^ent Idolis.
Hic multi fortiter p^rseve^antes, ^u^lis Cruciatibus succub erunt.
That above all other Christians, enquiry was made for Bishops; Bishops were
rather apprehended than others; Bishops were afflicted with tortures; and, as
leaders to all others, constantly endured whatsoever was laid upon them. It had
been good therefore our Opposites had made conscience of their sayings, before
they had burst out into so contumelious detractions, and had followed the
example of the French Divine Mr. Moulin Mr. Moulin Epist. 7. ad. Episcop.
Winton. Non sum adeo duri otis, ut velim adversus illa ve^eris Ecclesiae
lumina, Ignatium, Polycarpum, etc. far s^ntentiam, ut adversus homines vitio
creatos, and usurpatores muneris illiciti, pl^s semper apud me potuit ve^eranda
illa primorum Saeculorum Antiquitas quam Novella cujuspiam Constitutio.
I am not so hard faced (says he) against the Lights of the Primitive Church,
Ignatius, Polycarp, etc. Bishops, as to think them Usurpers of an unlawful
Function; Reverend Antiquity shall prevail more with me, than any man's Novel
Institution. The like was that See above Sect.
Mr. Beza his Absit, saying, God forbid that I should reprehend that Order as
rashly introduced, etc. As also Zanchy his Quis Ego? Who am I that I should
reprehend that which the whole Church has approved to be for the best ends? So
he. Whereof there has been a full Section. And that the deduction of
Episcopacy cannot be called properly Popish, will be proved hereafter.

CAP. III. After these our Evidences from Primitive Antiquity, according to our
precedent Method, we are to contemplate of the Celestial Sphere, the Word of
God it self.
The Right of Episcopacy discussed by the Word of God.
IN this Discussion we are to use both our hands; the one of Defense in
Answering Objections, and (as it were) bearing off Assaults made against the
Apostolical Right of Episcopacy. The other is the Confirmation thereof by such
Arguments which may be held convincent.

SECT. I. Against the first Objection from the Identity of Names (as they call
it) of Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture.
OUr Opposites endeavor to persuade us that there ought to be No d^stinction
of Degree between Bishop and Presbyter; because of the Identity of denomination
in Scripture, which is (say they) of no small consequence. And this they offer
to prove from (as they say) The Supreme Wisdom of God, the imposer of Names,
who could not mistake the proper end of the imposition of Names. And for a
further inforcement, Smect. vind. p. 62.
they add, That the Texts brought to prove the Identity of Names, prove also as
intrinsically the Identity of Offices. So they. Which consequence was taught
them by their great Dictator, Wall. Mess. de Episcop. and Presbyt. p. 350.
Quaero quomodo hoc fieri potest ut Presbyteri in Sacra Scriptura Episcopi,
Episcopi Presbyteri vocati sint, qui nihilominus reipsa invicem differunt, quod
Episcopi nimirum majores essent P^esbyteris.
Walo Messalinus, Who would have it impossible that Bishops and Presbyters
should really differ in Function, seeing that their Titles are communicable in
Scripture. So he. One would think it had not been possible for any of judgment
to have concluded thus, who had but once observed the Texts of Scripture which
present themselves often unto any conversant therein; as the places in the New
Testament themselves: The Testimonies of Fathers, together with the consent of
some Protestant Divines will evidence unto us.

First Scriptures wherein we find Matthias, Peter, John and Paul, all by
excellency of Function Apostles, yet Ma^thias entitled to a Bishopric, Act.
1.20. Peter styling himself Copresbyter, 1 Pet. 5.1. John terming himself a
Presbyter twice, 2 John 1. and 3 John 1. And Paul descending a degree lower to
name himself thrice a Deacon, Col. 1.23, 25. and 2 Cor. 3.6. Yea reciprocally
those that were but Assistants of the Apostles, had the name of Apostles
attributed unto them. As Barnabas, Act. 14.14. Andronicus, and Junias, Romans
16.7. Titus and others, Graece, (...), 2 Cor. 8. In all which communicableness
of names of Bishop, Presbyter, Sympresbyter and Deacon attributed to the
Apostles themselves, and of the Title of Apostle given to some of inferior
rank, our Opposites (we dare say) will not presume to conclude any necessity
of Indistinction of Offices, either between the Disciples of the Apostles, and
the Apostles themselves; or between Presbyters and Deacons, and the same
Apostles. Therefore, to draw nearer to our mark, we add more particularly.

SECT. II. That the former Objection is rejected by the choycest and most
acceptable Divines, which our Opposites themselves can name.
WE (besides the current Testimonies of Fathers to be alleged in the
following Section) seek to satisfy our Opposites, by the Confession of three
such Protestant Divines, whose very Names (and that deservedly) are of great
Authority with them. 1. Calvin upon that very objected Text, Tit. 1.5. For this
cause left I thee at Creet, etc. Calv. Com. in Tit. 1.5. Discimus quidem ex hoc
loco non eam tunc fuisse aequalitatem in^er Ecclesiae Ministros, quin unus
aliquis Authoritate and Concilio praesset.
From hence we learn (says he) that there was not then any equality among the
Ministers of the Church, but that one was placed over the rest in Authority and
Counsel. 2. Beza (successor to Calvin) expressly confesses Bez. Resp. ad
Sarav. de diverse. Minist. grad. c. 25. Resp. 7. Habuit jam tum Presbyterium
unum aliquem primum (...) Presbyterum, ut Presbytererum sic etiam Episcoporum
manente communi Appellatione.
That the Presbyters even then (in the Apostles times) had a President over
them, while the Appellation of Bishop and Presbyter was communicable.
Accordingly hereunto is the judgment of Dr. Reynolds, telling us Dr. Reynolds
Consult. with Heart. ca^* 8. divis. 3.
That in the Apostles times the Presbyters did choose one amongst them to be
President, etc. Whom afterward (says he) in the Primitive Church the Fathers
called Bishops. So that in the judgment of these exquisite judicious Divines,
the Office or Function of a Bishop was distinct from that of Presbyters,
notwithstanding the Identical communicableness of Titles or Names.

SECT. III. The second Objection out of Scripture in that place Phil. 1.1. With
the Bishops and Deacons, etc. is repugnant to the general Expositions of
Ancient Fathers.
IT uses to be objected, That seeing (as the Fathers held) there should be no
more than one Bishop in any one City, How then comes it to pass, that the
Apostle mentions Bishops in the Plural, and immediately subjoyneth Deacons
without insinuation of Presbyters? Either we must suppose that there were no
Presbyters at all in that City; or else that by Bishops here, Presbyters are to
be understood. The Testimonies of Antiquity have untwined this thread long
since, telling us, That for as much as the words Bishop and Presbyter, were
then Communicable (notwithstanding the difference of their Degrees and
Functions) therefore by the word Bishops in this place are to be understood
Presbyters. So Chrysostom* Hom. 1. in Pbil. 1.1. (...). Et intra ibidem, (...).
Chrysostom, Oecum. in locum. (...).
Occumendus, Theophyl. in locum. (...).
Theophylact, ^heod. in locum. (...).
Theodoret. This last (for further illustration thereof) shows, That St. Paul
did in this Epistle attribute likewise this Title of Apostle to Epaphroditus,
though he was distinctly a Bishop.

Our Opposites we know are in all these Questions most addicted to Hierome: Who
notwithstanding, upon the same reason with the rest of the Fathers, infers
the same Conclusion, saying, Hieron. in Loc. Episcopos Presbyteros dicit, neque
enim plures praeter unum erant Episcopi qui singulis civitatibus praesiderent,
quippe cum nondum essent h^jusmodi nomina disparata: and etiam Ep. ad Evagrium.
85.
Here by Bishops we understand Presbyters, because there could not then have
been two Bishops in one City. But if Epaphroditus was Bishop of Philippi (as
Theodoret both here and elsewhere assures us he was) why (will some say) was
not this Epistle inscribed unto him, as well as to the Presbyters and Deacons?
Theophylact gives the answer Theophyl. ^n Phil. 1.1.
Because (says he) at this time the Philippians had sent Epaphroditus to carry
such things to the Apostle as he had need of; So he. Which Answer of his has
sufficient ground upon Phil. 2.25. and 4.18. To which we refer our Reader.

SECT. IV. The third Objection is against the appropriation of the word Bishop
unto one, which Appellation is shown to be most justifiable.
BOth Houses of Parliament have been advised concerning Presbyterial
Ordination, Smect. vind.
that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter have been communicable to Presbyters,
Therefore the appropriation of the word Bishop to one, has been (say they) by
corrupt Custom. Both which we take to have been so unadvisedly spoken
concerning Appropriation, as if they had meant to cross the judicious
Confessions of the three Worthies, Mr. Calvin, Mr. Beza, See above Sect. 3.
and Dr. Reynolds, who have expressly testified and delivered the contrary. But
yet our Opposites have given (as it were) defiance, not only to the manifold
and manifest Testimonies both of Antiquity, together with the most famous
Protestant Divines, who have already justified the distinction of Episcopac^ as
superior to Presbytery (here by them called a Corruption) as instituted for the
Best. But also against the Universal Church Christian, which held and continued
the same Appropriation for Fourteen Hundred years complete. This is not all,
for the time and reason of the same alteration will justify it to the full.
The time is thus acknowledged by the foresaid Reynolds ubi sup.
Dr. Reynolds, The Presbyters (says he) in the Apostles times chose one among
them to be President, etc. And this is he whom afterward in the Primitive
Church the Fathers called Bishop. So he. The reason is plain, for if the word
(...) (signifying a Superintendent, or President) was by the Fathers of the
Primitive Churches appropriated to him that had indeed the Presidentship over
Presbyters: How then should this be called a Corruption? and not rather a just
Congruity and Consideration: namely, that the Title Superintendent should be
g^ven to the Person and Function, which is indeed Superintendent.

Accordingly Vedelius (an exquisite searcher into Antiquities) has testified,
Vedel. Exercit. in Ep. Ignat. ad Philadel. c. 14. Nemini enim mirum videri
debet Ignatium ad discrimen Presbyteri and Episcopi alludere. Etenim jam
tempore Ignatii erat discrimen illud* Presbyterorum and Episcoporum ut ex
pluribus harum Epistolarum locis apparet.

Etenim discrimen illud valde matu^e ipsorum Apostolo^um t^mporibus in
Ecclesiam irreps^t, statim scilicet postquam dici caeptum est, Ego sum Pauli,
Ego Apollo, Ego C^phae, Test Hieron. Com. in Tit.


That this different Appropriation of the Word Bishop to one, was common in the
days of Ignatius, who was so ancient, us to be a Disciple of the Apostles
themselves; for (says he) this distinction of Bishop and Presbyter, was used
in the Church very early in the Apostles times presently after it began to be
said, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas. So he. With whom agrees the
learned Professor of Divinity in the University of Hiedelburgh, Scaltetus, who
from the words of Hierome, showing the occasion Scult^t Observe. in Tit. c. 8.
Unde (ex Hieronymo) sic colligo: Q^ando dici caeptum in populis, Ego sum Pauli,
Ego Apol^o, Ego Cephae, tum unus de Presbyteris electus praeposi^us est
caeteris; at viventibus Apostolis ita dici caeptum est in populis, de quo
praeter alias Pauli Epistolas prior ad Corinthios nos dubitare non sinit, etc.
Why one of the Presbyters was set over the rest as Bishop, was because of
Schism among the People, some saying they were of Paul, some of Apollos, some
of Cephas; From hence (says he) I collect, That Bishops were instituted in the
Apostles times; because that then it was said among the People, I am of Paul,
etc. As (says he) besides others of St. Paul' s Epistles, the former to the
Corinthians does undoubtedly assure us.

And that the end of this Institution was Ut Schismatum semina tollerentur; To
take away the seeds of Schism, are the express words of Hieron. Com. in Tit. 1.
Hierome; so that if either the seasons of the Primitive times be had in
consideration, or the wisdom of the Church Universal, or the reason now given
of attributing the word of Superiority to any superior degree of Dignity, one
would think they may very well persuade that this objection out of Hierome,
ought to have been put to silence before it had been published.

We are not ignorant how urgent many of our Opposites have been to prove from
Antiquity, That the Primitive Fathers sometimes gave the Title of Presbyters
unto Bishops, as did Vid Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 24.
Irenaeus to the Predecessors of Victor Bishop of Rome, and have concluded
thereupon an equality of Functions. This is a thrice wandering from the sense of
those Fathers, who were Predecessors to Victor.

First, By not considering that a Bishop by calling Bishops Presbyters, might
understand it either properly as Seniors unto him, because Predecessors before
him; or if in consideration of their inferior degree (by way of accommodation)
to the joint Functions of Bishops and Presbyters.

Secondly, By concealing from their Reader that although they have but a few
examples of the name Presbyter applied to Bishops; yet of calling Presbyters
expressly Bishops not one: Ambr. in Ep. ad Tim. 1. c. 3. Episcopus primus est;
ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, ^on omnis Presbyter Episcopus.
the reason is plain, by that which goes under the name of Ambrose, because
according to the proper signification of names, every Bishop is a Presbyter,
but not every Presbyter a Bishop.

Lastly, Those stand confuted by the universally confessed preeminence of
Victor, and other his Predecessors Bishops of Rome over Presbyters in those
Primitive times, as also of the Episcopacy, Iren. ubi sup*
and Superiority of Irenaeus over the Presbyters under him.

SECT. V. The last Objection, 3 John 9.
THat Objection which one has made, is usual with others, viz. Blondel. Apol.
Sect. 11. p. 13. Johannes vertit Diot^ephi vitio quod primatum inter fratres
affectaret (...). Ergo nulli tum fuerunt in Ecclesiastico Presbyterio gradu
superiores.
St. John reprehended Diotrephes for his (...) to desire a Superiority over his
Brethren Presbyters, therefore there was not any degree of Superiority over
them in those days. We say, that the consequent of this Argument is very
lavish and loose; because St. John does not except against (...), or degree of
Superiority, but against the Usurpation of Superior degree that was, and his
insolent abuse thereof, in contemning his Brethren, and peremptorily casting
them out of the Church; for it is incredible that any one Presbyter could
create and assume the degree of a Superintendent or Bishop that had no being at
all. Ergo, say we, The degree of Prelacy was in being before it could be
ambitiously affected.

CAP. IV. Our Propositions grounded upon the Word of God. Our first Evidence
out of the Epistles of St. Paul.
SECT. I. That the Presbyterial Order was always substitute to an higher
Government, as first to the Jurisdiction Apostolical.
HOw Commandatory the Apostolical Authority was, is best discernable by the
Apostles Mandates unto the Churches upon several occasions, as to the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3 6*
We command the Brethren. And again, 1 Thessalonians 4.11.
[ As we commanded you.] Next, by word of Censuring, 2 Thessalonians. 3.4.
[ If any obey not our Word, etc.] The same Apostle commanded the Act. 20.17.
and 26.
Ephesians to assemble themselves before him at Miletus. But most especially
was he occasioned to express his Jurisdiction Apostolical over the Corinthians,
regulating and silencing 1 Cor. 14.37.
Women in the Congregation, touching the ordering of Wives, 1 Cor. 11.34.
So ordain I (says he) in all Churches: and also concerning other matters,
(saying, The rest will I set in order when I come. Thus by his commanding, and
as effectually by his censuring in shaking of his Rod of Excommunication over
them, saying, 1 Cor. 4.21. and 2. Cor. 13.10.
Shall I come unto you with a Rod? Peter likewise did not conceal the
Apostolical Authority in general, over the dispersed Members of the Churches of
Pontus, Asia, Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia, when he put them in mind of
(as he says) 2 Pet 9.2.
The Commandments given by us the Apostles of our Savior.

We should have been larger in this proof, if we could think that any of our
Opposites were of a contrary judgment, or had not known that their own Author
Walo had by his ingenious confession given them a Supersedeas in this point,
Wall. Mess. de Episcop. and Presbyt. p. 245. Quamdiu vixere Apostoli, qui majore
authoritate Ecclesias gubernabant, facile potuerunt in Officio omnes conti^ere,
ne dissidia ex iis quas diximus causis orta, unitarem fraternitatis dividerent;
ut illud, ^ Corinthi ea de causa excitatum facile a Paulo compressum est*
For the Apostles (says he) as long as they lived, governed the Church with
great Authority, and could more easily continue them in their duties, lest that
any divisions might burst out upon the occasions aforesaid to the destruction
of unity in the Churches, such as was reprehended by St. Paul in the Church of
Corinth. So he. Wherefore to the confutation of Walo himself, I do necessarily
infer, That there being at all times the same, if not more possibilities of
Schisms and Rents in the Church, than could be in the Apostles times, there
cannot but be the like if not a greater necessity of a Superintendency over
Presbyterial parity, the rather if we duly consider our next Proposition.

SECT. II. That diverse of the Apostolical Disciples were even in their times
both in Dignity and Authority Superintendents over Presbyters.
HEre again our Opposites authentic Author Walo (after much discussion of this
point) is ready to teach them being enforced thereunto by Scripture Wall. Mess
de Episcopat, and Presbyt. p 247. Discipuli Apostolorum sub finem primi seculi
more and jure Apostolico orbem constituendarum Ecclesiarum gratia peragrabant,
and lustrabant, etc. Si quibus in locis adesse non poteraut, eorum locorum
Ecclesias pet Epistolas instruebant, and si quod in iis natum erat dissidium in
Clero aut in populo, objurgabant and increpabant, haud secus quam si propius
gre^ cu jusque effet. Id. p. 67. Isti veluti Super-Episcopi habebantur, quos
and Apostoli Apostolos nominabant.
That those who were (...) and Assistants unto them in founding the Churches,
ordaining of Ministers in every City, and watering the Church; which they had
instructed. These (he confesses) were so in Superiority above Presbyters, as
that the Apostles themselves did not forbear to term them Apostles, and so
predominant in Authority as, Although absent from the Churches, yet to instruct
them by their Epistles, and wheresoever any Schism arose, either in Clergy or
People, still to rebuke them, even as if they had been of their own Flock. Upon
these premises thus granted, we are sufficiently warranted to conclude, not
only that the Presbytery were continually under subjection both to the
Apostolical Government* but likewise to other eminent Disciples of the
Apostles. The same Author sticks not to give a List of such Prelates and
Superintendents, as Mark, Clement, Titus, Timothy, Epaphroditus, and (says he)
many others. This being so pregnant a truth, how is it that our Opposites
should pretend an Eccesiastical Presbyterial Government, no way Subordinate?
That which is objected by them is most vain and frivolous, whereunto we occur,
as now follows.

SECT. III. That the aforesaid Apostolical Disciples were as Bishops over the
Presbyters. Among whom were Timothy, and Titus by evidence from Scripture.
THE Texts of Scripture (for proof of their Superiority and Authority) are so
plain, that they need no Commentary. And our witnesses are so impartial, as not
to admit of any exception; For in the Text we read of an Apostolical Ordinance
to Timothy and Titus respectively, Tit. 1.5.
To set in order the things that were wanting. 1 Timothy 1.3.
To inhibit Heterodox Preachers. 1 Timothy 5.19.
To receive accusations against criminous Elders. Tit. 3.10.
To excommunicate Heretics. Tit. 1.5.
To Ordain Elders; yet so, 2 Timothy 5.22.
As to lay hands on no man suddenly. Each of these, and the like Apostolical
Injunctions do fully express an Episcopal Function, and Authority in both of
these respectively over Presbyters, and the whole Churches under them: And
though this has been stuck at by diverse of our Opposites, lest that hereby
Timothy and Titus might appear to be Bishops distinct from Presbyters; yet now
at last their chief and greatest Advocate for Presbyterial Government
confesses the Authority which these held and exercised over Presbyters; yet so
that Bishops (as he thinks) shall take no advantage thereby, if they who are
Pleaders, may also be admitted as our Judges. We proceed, citing the same
witness, Walo Messalinus, confessing, Wall. M^ss. de Episc. and Pre^byt. p 40.
Qui Apostoli vocabantur, duorum generum fuere, primi, and secundi. Primi a,
Christo missionem suam acceperunt immediate ap ipso missi; Secundi ab ipsis
Ap^stolis quasi Coadjutores and (...) fuere Apostolorum, qui Presbyteros
eosdemque Episcop^s instituebant; tales fuere Paulo, Timo^heus, Titus, Linus,
Clemens. Id. ibid. p 52. Q^i parem fere authoritatem ac potestat^m in
Ecclesias, and Episcopos a se constitutos h^bebant quam ipsimet Apostoli. ( p.
56) Tales quoque Ma^cus, Epaphroditus etc. p 63. Timotheus qu^m Ephesi
E^iscopum esse volunt, cum verus fuerit Superepiscop^s, and Aposto^us illius
Ecclesiae p. 68. ex 1 Timoth. 5 19. (...), etc. Q^o loco lique^ h^jusmod^
Episcopos Episcoporum d^rectores and judices fuisse. p. 229. Titum Cretae
Insulae praefecit Paulus, qui non singularis in aliqua illius Insu^^e Civit^t^
praefuit Epis^opus, sed gen^ratim totam illam Provinciam ad tempus (...) and
procurabat. Ille enim (...) erat Tal^s ser^e omne^ f^c^e Apostolorum adiotores,
and discipuli, juique primi eorum extitere successores. Non simplices certarum
Urbium audiebant Episcopi, sed curam agebant generalem Ecclesiarum, ut
Evangeli^ae, and Apostoli q^ibus (...) nom^^^bus nuncupari s^^^bant.
That Timothy and Titus had almost equal Authority with the Apostles of Christ,
by whom they were ordained to govern whole Churches as Directors and Judges: Of
which sort, besides Timothy and Titu^, he there sets down Mark, Clemens,
Epap^roditus, and all those who were Assistants and fellow Laborers with the
Apostles, whereof we have spoken already. Thus by the premises it sufficiently
appears, that there was a double Superintendency over Presbyters; yet we
enquire furthermore concerning Timothy and Titus, whether or no they were at
this time whereof we now speak) distinctly Bishops? In discussing whereof we
shall (according to our usual method) first remove their Objections which are
against their Episcopacy: that done, we shall make good the contrary by due
proofs.

SECT. IV. That Timothy and Titus were properly, and distinctly Bishops,
notwithstanding their Title of Evangelists, as is confessed by Protestant
Divines of remote Churches.
BUt here their Walo will needs interpose seeking by an Objection (as with a
Sponge) to wipe out all opinion of Episcopacy either in Timothy or Titus
because forsooth ^al Miss. de Episcop. and Presbyt. p. 67. Sciendum eo^ ha^i^s^
(...) Ecclesiarum gen^ralem, and extraordinariam and in commune hoc es^ '(...),
quam (...) Apostoli (...): qui autem Episcopi Presbyterorum etiam nomine dicti,
ab his per singulas Civitates ordinabantur, curam and solicitudinem illarum
Eccl^^^rum susscipiebant quibus erant ^ddicti, ibi ad finem us^, p^rman^bant.
Pl^no etiam jure Presby^eti Ecclesiam suam ^^gebint.
Called Evangelists, who had no peculiar Residence in any Church, but general
in all Churches; whereas they who are by the Apostle called Bishops, had a
singular charge of the Church wherein they were, and there were they to reside
and remain for the governing thereof. So he. And from him our home Opposites
chanting, and rechanting, and making it their undersong to say again, and
again, That Smect. vind. p. 114, 115, 117, 118, 120.
Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, so as not to be held that which we call
Bishop: and they name this Assertion, The hinge of the Controversy. But this
Objection (say we) has often been taken off the hinge, and laid flat on the
floor, by diverse solid and satisfactory Answers: We say not of Bishops or their
Chaplains, but of other Protestant Divines, even of Presbyterial Churches,
cited here in the Margent.

First, The Theological Professor of Hiedelberg answers, Scultet. Observat. in
Titum cap 8. Paulus, Timotheum Ephesi, Titum in Creta manner juher, non utique
ut Evangelistas, sed Ecclesiae Gubernatores; id quod Epistolae ad utrume;
Scriptae evincunt. In his enim non Ecclesiae colligendae, quod erat
Evangelistarum, sed collectae gubernandae, quod est Episcoporum, rationem illis
praesc^bir, suntque praetepra omnia ita conformata ut non speciatim ad
Timotheum, and Titum, fed generatim ad omnes Episcopos refe^^ntur, adcoque ad
temporatiam Evangelistatum potestatem minime quadrent.
That when these Epistles we^e written to Timothy and Titus, they were
exercised not as Evangelists in assisting the Apostles in the collecting of
Churches, but as Bishops in governing them, which had been collected, as (says
he) the general Praecepis given to them do prove, which could not refer to the
Temporary power of Evangelists, but to them and their Successors as Bishops.
From whence we conclude, what that learned Doctor does there declare, That the
name Evangelist did belong unto them in the large sense, as it signifies a
Preacher of the Gospel. Toloss. Index in S^cr. B^bl. vncab. Ti^us comes
perigrinati^num Pauli postea Cre^ensium Episcopus.
Tolossanus agrees in the same answer, namely, that Timothy, and Titus, who
had been Companions with Paul in his travails, was afterward made Bishop of
Crete. Dr. Gerard answers, by way of distinction, G^rard. in loc. Com. Tom.
6. de Minist. Ecclesiast. nu. 227. Evangeli^tae nomen accip^tur duplic^er;
pr^mo g^neral te^ p^o quovis Ecclesiae Doctore quia ad omnes pertinet (...)
secundo specialiter pro ce^to Doctorum gradu and ordine in primit^va Ecclesia;
priore modo sumitur, 2 Timothy 4.5 Quia jam Timotheus constitutus erat Ecclesiae
Ephesinae Episcopus, nec ulterius Paulum fuit Comitatus, etc. sicut eti^m
Lutherus reddidit -- Infra -- In illorum Evangelistarum nemero c^nsendi sunt
Timotheus quem Lyst^is assumpsit Apostolus Paulus, Act. 19.22. ac comitem
irineris sibi elegit. Postea eum una cum Erasto mifit in Macedoniam, Act.
19.2^. ad Corinthum, 1 Cor 4.17. ad Philippenses, Phil. 2.19. ad Thessal. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2 Tandum vero Ecclesiae Ephefinae praefecit Episcopum, 1 ad Tim. 1.3.
and 3.15. T^tus quem Paulus vocat suum, (...), 2 Cor. 8.23. Fum misit ad
Corin^hum, 2 Cor. 8.6. and 12.13. Assumpsit secum Hierosol^m^m, Gal. 2.1. misit
in Dalmatiam, 2 Timothy 4.10. tandem Cretensium Ecclesiarem constituit Episcopum,
Tit. 1.5.
That the word Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. is not there specially taken for a
particular degree in the Church, but generally as signifying a Preacher of the
Gospel, and so including that Order which Timothy now had being a Bishop of
Ephesus, for now he did no more accompany Paul So he, citing Luther also for
the like interpretation of that Text. And though he does acknowledge that both
Timothy and Titus had formerly been Evangelists, agreeable to the special and
proper signification of the word, and according has set down their several
travails from place to place; yet after those travails were ended (which was
before these Epistles were written) he concludes both of them to have been
Bishops, out of several Texts of Scripture, Timothy of Ephesus, and Titus of
Creet.

Zuingl. (...) five, de (...) ^ onc uper ^ ^ 4.7. fol. 45 (...) im Evangelistam
alium quam Episc^pum five pastorem di cor 5. poss^mu^, que^admodum ex P^a^li
verbis c^r^o, colligere (...) q^ibus, Timotheum ^^^um compellan^ ai^; At tu
vigila, and opus Evangelistae, etc 2 Timothy 4. Aique Timotheus tunc temporis cum
hae^^l^i P^elu^ scribebat, Epise pum agebat, un^e constat juxta Pauli
fostentiam, i sem esse Episcopi, and Evangelistae O^ficium.
(6) Zwinglius likewise is downright against the Objectors, proving by the
example of Timothy out of the 2 Timoth. 4.5. That the Office of Evangelist and
Bishop was h^re one, and the same. However our Opposites (it may be) will allow
to Bishops the same liberty of going out of their Dioces, which Calvin does to
Presbyters out of their Parishes, who are otherwise bound to be Resident in
their Charge: Concerning whom he says, Calv^inst. l. 4 c. 3. sect. 7. Et si
dum singulis Pastoribus suas assignamus Ecclesias, interim non negamus quin
alias Ecclesias adjuvare possit qui uni alligatus, etc. and infra. Non quod
veluti Glebae addictos ut Jurisconsulti d^cunt, id est Manciparus, and quasi
affixus Glebae pedem move^e n^qu^at, si ita ^u^lica utilitas postularet, modo
id ^ite and ordine siat.
That they are not strictly tied to their Glebe or Charge, but that they may be
helpful unto other Churches, upon necessary occasions. The same admirable
Divine will furthermore instruct us in the particular Instance which we have in
hand, who (although he held it uncertain, whether Timothy be here called an
Evangelist in the general notion of Preaching the Gospel, or for some peculiar
Function) yet does he grant, that an Evangelist is a middle degree between
Apostle and Pastor; and upon those words of St. Paul to Timothy, ( Do thy
diligence to come speedily unto me) he Commenteth, telling us, That St. Paul
called Timothy from the Church over which he was Governor for the space of
almost a whole year. This is a pregnant testimony to teach us, That Timothy had
both the Government over Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus, and also that it
was his peculiar Charge, whence (except upon great and weighty Cause) he was
not to depart: which is as much as we contend for.

Before we conclude this Point, we make bold to entreat our Opposites to
satisfy us in one particular, namely, seeing that (...). Act. 21 8. Act. 6.5.
Philip (being one of the seven Deacons) is found Preaching the Word in
Samaria, Act. 8.5. and yet afterward is called, Philip the Evangelist one of
the seven, viz. Deacons, Act. 21.8. Our Quaere hereupon is, Why Timothy and
Titus might not as well be called Evangelist for Preaching the Word of God,
being Bishops, as Philip was for the same cause named an Evangelist* being but
a Deacon? It may be our Opposites would wish to be satisfied by Reverend Zanchy
upon these points, whom yet they will find to be chief Opposite to themselves:
And albeit he will have the Apostles by their Vocation, to have been (as it
were) Itinerants for their time, Zanch oper. Tom. 7 part. 2. c. 9 de Eccles.
col. 101. Apostoli vocati erant ut nullas arctas ac firmas seeds haberent, sed
in totum terrarum orbem proficiserentur Ecclesiasque ubique crigerent, erectis
vero aliqu^m Pastorem (seu Episcopum) praeficerent Infra 106, 117: Primo tantum
erant Presbyteri (ut ait Hieronymus) Secundo additi sunt Episcopi, idque
tempore Apostolorum.
For the founding and erecting of Churches.Yet he grants, That Churches being
once erected, the same Apostles set a Pastor or Bishop over them. And what he
means hereby, he shows, when more distinctly he confesses, That at first
indeed Presbyters were ordained in the Churches, and after them Bishops (as
Hierome affirms) even in the Apostles times. So he. Where (by the judgment of
Zanchy) First, Bishops were ordained by the Apostles as a degree contradistinct
from Presbyters. Secondly, That the Bishops so ordained, although they had been
Evangelists, and fellow Laborers with the Apostles, yet when Churches were
once erected, some of them were placed Residentiaries in the said Churches. And
lastly, That although Presbyters had their Institution void of subjection to
Episcopal Authority at the first (as Deacons likewise had theirs) yet because
of the insufficiency of Presbyterial Government, the Episcopal was erected as
more perfect, even in the days of the Apostles. The next Obstruction is to be
removed.

SECT. V. That Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, notwithstanding that objected
Scripture Act. 20.
THere is one Objection (for we may not dissemble) which the Smect. vind. p.
121, 133, 134. Haeret ^ateri lethalis Arundo.
Smectymnians press thrice, as being inexpugnable; and thereupon call it
Lethalis Arundo, as that which must strike all opposition quite dead. In sum,
thus: Timothy was with Paul at the meeting of Miletum, Act. 20.4. Therefore
(say they) if Timothy had been Bishop of Ephesus, Paul would there and then
have given him a charge of feeding the Flock, and not the Elders. So they. As
though Timothy before this had not been sufficiently instructed in this duty,
both by his long and constant attendance on St. Paul, and also by his former
Epistle unto him, which was written and received before this time, as some have
probably conjectured; or as though Timothy should need a particular Admonition
to discharge that duty which was respectively common to him, with the rest of
the Bishops and Presbyters there assembled.

For though the Smect viad. p. 122.
Smectymnians tell us, It is a poor evasion to say, that they who were there
assembled, were not all of Ephesus, but were called also from other parts,
because (say they) these Elders were all of one Church made by good Bishops
over one Flock, and therefore may (with most probability) be affirmed to be the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus. Yet we must tell them, that Dr. Reynolds
Confer. with Heart, c 8. divis. 3.
Dr. Reynolds (whom they and we admire for his exquisite learning) speaking of
the same meeting at Milet^m, Act. 20.17. says (notwithstanding all these
objected circumstances) That though the Church of Ephesus had sundry Pastors
and Elders to guide it; yet amongst those sundry was there one Chief? etc. The
same whom afterward the Fathers in the Primitive Church called Bishop. So he.
But yet though he or all Protestants should fail us, there is a Father Iren.
advers. Hae es^. l. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus by name, who was so ancient as to be acquainted with the Apostles of
the Apostles themselves; and him we can produce, distinguishing the persons
here met at Miletum into Id. ibid. cap. 14 In Mileto Convocat^s Episcopi, and
Presbyteris qui e^ant ab Epheso and reliquis p^oximis Civitatibus.
Bishops and Presbyters, and affirming, That they came not only from Ephesus,
but also from other Cities, near adjoining to it. Which makes the Smectimnians
Arundo but a bruised Reed. Thus have we fully (as we hope) satisfied the
contrary Objections. We proceed now to our proof.

SECT. VI. That Timothy and Titus were both of them properly Bishops, by the
judgment of Antiquity.
THe greatest Opposite that we can name, even Wall. Mess. de Episc. and Presbyt.
p. 188. Nam ita etiam Titus a vete^ibus appellatu^, and a Paulo ordinatus
Episcopus Cretae Insulae traditur: and infra. p. 189. Ut Titus videretur esse
verus Cretae Episcopus ex eo numero ac genere qui hodie sic vocantur, ita
Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, Occumenius, a^ique Graecorum valgo interpretati
sunt, ne Theodoretum quidem excipio, etc.
Walo Messalinus (the very Atlas of Presbyterial Government) will spare us the
labor of citing the Greek Fathers or Scholiasts, for confirmation of this
point, who confesses, That most of their Commentaries upon Titus, record him
to have been Bishop of Crete: alleging by name, Chrysostom, Theophylact,
O^cumenius, Theodoret, and others, whose Testimonies we shall not need to
repeat; only we shall add (which may serve for a transition to Timothy) the
testimony of that ancient Ecclesiastical Historian Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c 4.
(...).
Eusebius (who speaking of S. Paul's fellow Laborers) reckons Timothy amongst
them, Whom (says he) History records to be the first Bishop of Ephesus;
(adding with the same breath) and so was Titus Bishop of Crete. Thus this
famous Author concerning the Episcopacy of Timothy also. To whom we may adjoyn
as concurring in the same Judgment, Epiphan. l 3. Tom 1. Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, Ch^sost. Hom 1. in Phil. 1.1. ( de Timotheo.)
Chysostomus, Theophyl in 1 Timothy 4.14. Id. in 2 Timothy cap. 1. verse. 6 and cap.
4. v 9.
Theophylact, Oecumen. in 1 Timothy 1.3. (...).
Oecumenius, Greg Mag. de Cur. past part 2. cap. 11. Praelatum greg^ ^ise pulum
(scil. Timo^heum) P^ulus a^monet dum venio attend lectioni, etc.
Gregory, Ambros. in 1 Timothy 1. Timotheus dignus judicatus futurus Episcopus,
etc. Id. in 1 Timothy 6 Magna vigilantiae and providentiae praecepta dat
(Apostolus) R^ct^^i Ecclesiae. In hujus enim pers^na totius populi salus
consistie. Non solicitus de Cura Timothei tam circumspectus erat. sed propter
Successores ejus. Ut Exemplo Timothei Ecclesiae ordinationem custodirent. etc
Ambrose, Primas^. in 2 Timothy 4.14. Prophetiae habebat gratiam vel Doctrinae cum
Ordinatione Episcopatus. Vide eund in 2 Timothy 2.6. and 4.5.
Primasius, yea, and Hieron. Catal. Script Eccl. Timotheus Ephesiorum Episcopus
Ordinatus a beato Pau^o. Id. ibid. Titus Episcopus Cretae.
Hierome himself, who has positively affirmed, That Timothy was Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of Crete.

But the Smect. vind. p. 13^.
Smectymnians hearing of a Cloud of Witnesses, averring Timothy and Titus to
have lived and and died Bishops, answer, That this Cloud will soon blow over;
and the greatest blast that they give, is, That the Fathers who were of this
judgment, borrowed their Testimonies from Eusebius. Assuredly this will seem
but a poor evasion to any judicious Reader, who shall but observe, that the
Testimonies of these Fathers are in their Commentaries and Collections out of
Texts themselves. But the best is, other Protestant Divines will appear to be
more ingenuous.

SECT. VII. That Protestant Divines, of very great esteem, have acknowledged
Timothy and Titus to have been properly Bishops.
WE begin with Luther, who amongst other Resolutions, sets down this for
one, Luther. oper. Tom 1. fol. 309. Resolut. Ejus super propositiones Lypsiae
disput. Conclus. 13. Probo quamlibet Civitatem habere debere Episcopum proprium
jure divino. Quod ex Paulo ad * Titum ostendo dicente. Hujus rei gratia reliqui
te Cretae, u^ q^ae desunt corrigas, and constituas Presbyteros per Civitates,
sicut ego disp^sui tibi. Hos autem Presbyteros suisse Episcopos testatur
Hieronymus, and textus s^quens ostendir dicens, oportet Episcopum
irreprehensibl^m esse, etc. Sed and beatus Augustinus in Epist. 29. ad Hieron.
Epi^copum descripturus rationem reddit, and dicit, erat enim C^vitas: quasi
diceret, non erat simplex Presbyter, sed Episcopus, de quo loquo^, quia erat
C^vitas cu^ praeerat.
That Episcopacy is of Divine Right: which he groundeth upon St. Paul's
appointing Titus to Ordain Elders in every City; which Elders (says he) were
Bishops, as Hierome, and the subsequent Texts do witness. Adding, That St.
Augustine in his Epistle to Hierome, was of the same judgment: upon this
ground, That it was a City whereof the Apostle there spoke, and therefore it
cannot (says he) be understood of mere Presbyters, but of Bishops, who are set
over Cities. Thus far Luther concerning the Episcopacy of Titus. And he is
seconded by a learned Doctor of the same Classis, Gerard. loc. Com Tom. 6. de
Minist. Eccl. Number. 225. Episcopi proprie fucre illi, quos certae Provinciae vel
Civitati Apostoli praefecerunt, ut Ecclesiarum and Presbyterorum Curam in illis
gererent, qualts Episcopi fuere Timotheus in Civitate Ephesi, Titus in Insula
Cretae, Crescens in Galatia Linus in u^be Roma, Dionysius, Athenis, etc.
Gerard by name, who does not only confess Titus to have been made Bishop of
Crete by the Apostles, but also Timothy of Ephesus, Crescens of Galatia, Linus
of Rome, Dionysius of Athens, etc. And Bez. in 1 Timothy 5.19. Notandum est hoc
loco Timotheum in Ephesino Presbyterio tunc fuisse (...), id est, Antistirem ut
vocat Justinus.
Beza himself confesses the same directly of Timothy, saying that he was (...)
in the Presbytery of Ephesus: That is (says he) Antistes, or Prelate, as
Justin Martyr uses the word. Mr. Moulin Moulin. Epist 3. ad Episcop. Winton.
Quomodocunque appellaveris Titum, Timotherm, and Marcum Episcopos, five
Evangelistas, constat eos habuisse successores Ep^scopos, haeredes ill^us
praeeminentiae.
joyneth both Timothy and Titus together, saying, That howsoever we term them
Bishops, or Evangelists, it is evident they had Bishops for their Successors,
who after them had the like preeminence in the Church.

We shall conclude this Section, with the determination of their Learned, and
Judicious Scult. observe. in Tit. c. 8. Exempla Episcoporum Apostolicorum quis
desiderat? Pleni sunt libri veterum de Timothei and Titi Episcopatu: quorum
uterque urut primum Evangelistam egerit, Evangelista tamen esse desiit,
postquam Timotheus Ephesinae, Titus Cretensi Ecclesiae fuit P^aefectus.
Scultetus, telling us, That though at first Timothy and Titus were
Evangelists; yet afterward Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of
Crete: Which thing (says he) the Writings of ancient Fathers do abundantly
confirm. So these famous Divines; besides those who have been See above.
formerly alleged by us in answer to the contrary Objections in three full
Sections. After this our first Evidence out of Scripture, there follows.

SECT. VIII. The second Evidence from Scripture, for proof of Episcopal
Prela^y, is out of Christ's Epistles, To the Angels of the seven Churches of
Asia, [To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus] write, etc. Cap. 2.1.
The state of the Question.
THe main Question is, Whether the word Angel in every Epistle, do signify
collectively, either The whole Church, or the whole Company or College of
Presbyters, or else singularly, an Individual person? Our Opposites are
distracted into the two former Opinions. We shall pursue them in Order,
confuting their first Exposition first, and then the other, that their mist
being dispelled, we may see more clearly to prove our own, which is, that the
word Angel of every Church is to be understood of a singular Person, having
preeminence over other Pastors in the same Church.

SECT. IX. That the first Exposition of our Opposites, by Angel, understanding
the whole Church, is flatly repugnant to the Context.
IN the Book of Revelation Cap. 2. Christ by his Angel (properly so called)
wrote unto the seven Churches of Asia, verse. 2. telling St. John mystically of
seven gold^n Candlesticks, verse. 13. signifying the seven Churches; and of
seven Stars, signifying the Angels of the seven Churches, verse. 20. After more
particularly and distinctly, Cap. 2. and 3. To the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, To the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. In which Epistles (to ease our
Opposites of a trouble) we confess, that although the Epistles be directed to
the Angel of each Church; yet the knowledge of them concerned also others,
because of the common Epiphonema in every one thus! [ He that hathan car to
hear, let him hear. But to the matter. The first Exposition of our Opposites is
set down by Wall. Mess. de Episcop. and Presbyt. p. 148. Si^ ergo hoc fixum, per
Angelos urbium nihil aliud voluisse Joh^nnem designari, quam ipsas Ecclesias.
Walo Messalinus a destinate Adversary to Episcopacy, as in other points, so in
this: For let it be held for a firm and fixed truth (says he) That by the
Angels of every City, St. John intended nothing else but the Churches
themselves. So he. But if we consult with the Context, Cap. 1.20. Where first,
the Angels are expressly called Stars, and the Churches are named Candlesticks;
we must therefore tell this great Clerk, that he must first turn Stars into
Candlesticks, before he can make Angels to signify the Churches.

Secondly, in the Text it self, Cap. 2.1. It is said, [ Write unto the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus] here again, if the word Angel must betoken the whole
Church and Congregation, then must this be the construction of the words, Write
to the Church of the Church of Ephesus. But we know that Christ, the author of
these speeches, was the Fountain of Divine Wisdom, and could not mean absurdly.
Enough of our Opposites first Exposition.

SECT. X. That the second Exposition is, in interpreting the word Angel, to
signify the Order of Presbyters in the Church. The state of which Question is
set down by our Opposites.
THis indeed is with our Opposites their common Exposition, Bright. Apoc. c.
2.1. Non uni Angelo mittuntur sed toti (ut ita dicam) Collegio Pastorum qui
omnes hac communi voce comprehenduntur.
The Epistles (says Mr. Brightman) are not sent to any one, but (that I may so
say) to the College of Pastors. So he. Who notwithstanding will be found to
contradict himself in the next Section. Yea, and after him out See hereafter.
Smectymnians; By Angel is not meant (say they) any singular person, but the
whole Company of Presbyters. So they. Idem post. v. 24. De Angelo Ecclesiae
Thya^irensis cum Colleg^tum tuatum Caetu
Wherefore we are to prove.

SECT. XI. That the Objections made for this Exposition, are confuted by their
own best approved Protestant Authors.
The Confutation of their first Reason.
OUr first Argument (say they) is drawn from the Epistle to Thyatira, Smect.
vind. p. 139.
Rev. 2.24. where after he had said to the Angel [I have something against
thee,] added in the plural [I say unto you] and the rest in Thyatira; Here is a
plain distinction (say they) between the Governors and Governed; which
apparently proves, that the Angel is collective. So they. Our first Answer must
be by a genuine Interpretation, (to wit) That after the word [ Thou] the
addition of the words [ you, and the rest] is a familiar figurative speech,
called Apostrophe, which is an aversion of speech from one thing or person to
another. As any Lord writing to his Chief Steward of matters concerning him,
and any Subordinate Officers, and whole Family, saying, I would have [ Thee] to
look to thy Charge, and that [ You] forbear to go to the Market, and the [
Rest] to apply their business at home. But we promised that their own dearest
Doctors, and Divines should be their Confuters.

First Beza upon the very words objected Bez. in Apoc. 2.1. Angelus (...) quem
opor^uit imprimis de his rebus admoneri, and per eum caeteros Collegas totamque
adeo Ecclesiam.
[Against thee] that is (says he) the President, [and unto you] that is his
Colleagues meaning the Presbyters [and to the rest] that is, ^o the whole
Flock. So he, in the exposition of this Text. Mr. Brightman Brightm. ubi supra
Sect. praeced. Datur au^em vobis and reliquis Thyatirensibus; id est, Tibi
Angele cum Collegarum tuarum Caetu, and reliquis ex Ecclesia. Ut Theodorus Beza
optime explanavit.
albeit the man who but even now interpreted the word [ Angel] not to signify
any particular person, but a whole multitude of Pastors or Presbyters
collectively; yet here being convinced by the light of the Text, he (as it
were) sups up his own breath, and of this objected Text Paraphraseth, saying,
[To thee] that is to the Angel, [And to you] meaning Pastors and Colleagues of
Thyatira, [and to the rest] that is to say, the People; as Theodore Beza has
excellently expounded it. So he. Such we see is the force of truth, in despite
of Opposition, to exact from him a Confutation of himself. Which form of speech
may be parallelled with the like example in the Chronicles, 2 Chronicles. 28.5.
where there is [Him] the King, and [ They] signifying the Kings Army, as well
as in this Text [ Thou] and [ They.]

SECT. XII. Their second Reason confuted by their own alleged Author.
OUr second Argument (say they) is drawn from the like phrase in this very Book
of the Revelation, Smect. vind. p. 142.
wherein it is usual to express a Company under one single person, as the Civil
State of Rome, a Beast with ten Horns, etc. Whence they conclude, that the word
Angel may be taken Collectively; and that is (say they) the likeliest
interpretation r Especially considering that Mr. Mede ( who was better skilled
in the meaning of the Revelation than the Remonstrant) said, That the word
Angel, is commonly, if not always, taken collectively. So they. Citing no
place out of Mr. Meade; but it may be it is that which they have alleged in
their first Smect. Answ. to the Remonstrant, p. 53. alleging his words out of
his Commentary, p. 265. vide etiam Smect. vind. p., 143.
Book, whereunto they often refer their Reader, where Mr. Meade teaches to
this purpose, Transl. Eng. in cap. 8. v. 6. vide etiam cap. 14. v. 6.
That God in his Providence works by the Ministry of Angels, the motions and
Revolutions of things amongst men, with their events, which are attributed to
one Angel, as Captain over the rest. So he. That is even as well as we could
wish, like as we find it here in the Texts. Wherein the Epistles, though
dedicated to the Churches, yet are inscribed to This and That Angel, each one
being over others. Thus it became our Opposites, when they thought to oppose
us, to be caught in their own snare; yea even in the same sentence where Mr.
Meade informs his Readers, Mr. Meade Clav. Apocalyp. p. 265. apud Smect.
Resp. p. 53. Denique (ut s^mel iterumque monuimus) quoniam Deus adhibet Angelos
providentiae suae in ^erum humanarum motibus and conversionibus sciendis,
gubernandisque administ^os, ideirco quae multorum manibus peraguntut Angelo
tamen tanquam Praesidi, and Duci scribitur.
That this other like speech ought to be understood, namely, by Angel, a
singular person, as we have admonished (says he) again and again. Which
Caution of his might have been sufficient (we should think) to have kept these
advers men from wandering, the rather seeing that this manner of speech is none
other, than which is most usual; as when a Defeat or Victory achieved in War
by the strength of the whole Host, is notwithstanding ascribed to the power of
one General.

Finally, Because they have extolled Mr. Meade his skill in the Book of
R^velation, as if he had oppugned the Apostolical Right of Episcopacy thereby;
we crave the Readers attention to this their own Author, Revel. 4.10. Mr. Meade
Clav. Apoc. c. 4.6.7.
declaring his own judgment of the [Four and twenty Elders that compassed the
Throne round about.] These (says he) resemble the Bishops and Prelates of the
Churches, etc. This any one may read in his Book lately Authorized to be
translated into English.

SECT. XIII. Their third Argument likewise confuted by their own Chiefest
Author.
Smect. vind. p. 143.
Our third Argument (say they) is drawn from the word [Angel] which is a common
name to all Ministers and Messengers, etc. And surely had Christ intended to
point out one individual person by the Angel, he would have used some
distinguishing name, to set him out by, as Rector, President, Superintendent.
So they. As if by their surely, they would assure us it is a Truth, if we shall
take their own word for it, contrary to the judgment of all the learned, who
have every where taught, that the word Angel (spoken in the better sense) has
always been used to express the dignity of their Office, and accordingly of
the Ministers of the Gospel, whenever it is applied unto them. In which case
they are sufficiently instructed by their own Mr. Brightman who taught them to
consider by these same Texts Brightm. A^^c. c. 1. v 20. Quanta igitur verorum
Pastorum dignitas, qui tum stellae sunt in dextra Christi fixae tum Angeli?
Quid retert, quibus probrosis nom^nibus impii eos ludane cum hoc loco talisunt
existimatione apud Deum?
How great the dignity is of the true Pastors of Christ, by whom (says he)
they are entitled both Stars and Angels, who therefore ought not to regard the
reproaches of the wicked, seeing they are in so high estimation with Christ
himself. So he. So flatly against those others, as if he had told them, that
they did from that Scripture, in a manner vilify the Pastors of the Church of
Christ, under the same name Angel, whereby the Spirit of God has dignified and
honored them. If our Opposites had spoken as they pretended, then they should
have given us but one Example of that kind, yet we for more easy illustration
hereof, shall add a parallel in the word Apostle, whereof Mr. Calvin has given
them this Observation, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c 3. Sect 3. Tametsi enim ex
ratione and etymo verbi, rite Apostoli possunt vocari omnes Ministri E^clesiae,
quia a Domino omnes mittuntur, ejusque sunt nunc^i, qu^a tam a magni referebat,
certum habere de eorum missione not^tia^, quia ^em nov^m and inau^itam
affertent duodecim illos, etc.
That although the word Apostles, in the propriety thereof, signify those that
are sent (namely Messengers) and may be applied to other Ministers of God as
sent by him; yet was it meet that his twelve Apostles should be so iustiled, as
they who should publish and promulgate the first knowledge of the Gospel of
Christ. So he. Even for the amplifying of the Dignity of the Twelve under the
Title of Apostles; whereas if the former objected reason may prevail, it might
be lawful not only to call every Minister of Christ, and Preacher of the Gospel
properly an Apostle; but also to term every Footboy sent on an errand, an Angel.

SECT. XIV. Their fourth Argument confuted by the same their own much applauded
Author.
Smect. vind. p. 146.
OUr Fourth Argument (say the same Opposites) stands thus: Cap. 1.20. Our
Savior says, That the seven Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven
Churches; but he does not say, that the seven Stars are the seven Angels of the
same Churches; but the Angels of the Churches, omitting not without a Mystery
the number of the Angels, lest we should understand by Angel, one Minister
alone, and not a company. So they. We are first to unriddle the Mystery, it is
indeed so mystical and obscure. Thus then, The number of Seven, which is used
in repeating the Churches is in the repetition of the word Angel omitted, and
therefore in the omission (forsooth) there must be a mystery.Yea, and also the
Mystery must be this, to wit, That the omitting of the repetition of Seven,
must signify, that the word Angel, is not to be taken singularly for any one
person, but collectively for many. This is their objection. We answer, That
this their Mystery, their great friend Mr. Brightman would have called a
Mistake, who interprets the omission thus, Brightm. in Apocal. 1.20. Stellas
autem inte^pretatur Angelos: seprem inquit Stellae Angeli sunt Ecclesiaarum (
i. e.) significant septem Angel^s, Consonant to this Mr. Perkins upon the
Revelation 1.20. These Seven Stars are said to be Seven Ministers.
The Stars of the Churches, they signify seven Angels. So he. As much as if he
had said, Although the word Seven were not added in the second place; yet it
could not but be understood by that known figure Ellipsis, which (according to
all Grammar learning in every language) is when a word omitted does follow
(...) of course, or (as we use to say) accordding to the understanding of every
intelligent Reader.

As for example, If any one of our Opposites had commanded his Servant saying,
Make ready for me two Horses, the White Horse and the Bay; where in repeating
the word Bay, is omitted the word Horse: Would it be an excuse in his Servant
for not making ready the Bay, to say, that the reason was that the word Horse
was Mystical? Now to the Mystery it self; which is (say they) That therefore by
the word Angel is not understood one Minister alone: Which in our scanning is
no more consequent, than in the former Example to conclude, from the omission
of the word Horse, that therefore the Bay was but a Mare.

SECT. XV. The fifth Objection (as a body in a Consumption) languisheth in it
self.
OUr last Argument (say they) is that although but one Angel be mentioned in
the forefront; Smect. vind. p. 146.
yet it is evident the Epistles themselves are dedicated to all the Angels and
Ministers in every Church, and to the Churches themselves; and if to the
Churches, much more to the Presbyters, as to any judicious Reader may appear.
So they, to prove that therefore the word Angel did signify a Multitude, and
no one individual person. We answer, That if we our selves had delivered the
like judgment, we might have doubted to have forfeited our own: even as it
would be to hear of Letters dedicated to a whole Corporation of some City, and
more especially inscribed to the Mayor of the City, of matters concerning
himself and the Body of the City; to conclude that therefore by Mayor in the
singular number, are meant the Aldermen, and whole Corporation in the plural.

SECT. XVI. Their last Argument stands confuted by their own selves.
THis Argument (say they) is taken from Christ's denunciation against the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus, to remove his Candlestick out of his place, Smect.
vind. ubisupra.
if he did not repent; where by Candlestick is meant the Church or
Congregation. But if there by Angel were signified one individual person, then
the Congregation and People should be punished for the offense of that one
Pastor. So they. Who would not have thus argued, if they had considered, that
by thus oppugning our Exposition, they had utterly undermined and overthrown
their own. As for example, their tenet has been, That by the word Angel, is
signified the Order and Coll^dge of Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus. Now
then, (to turn their own Engine upon themselves) if the Candlestick signifying
the Church of Ephesus should be removed out of his place, except those Pastors
should repent, then should the People, or Congregation be punished for the
faults of their Pastors. All the odds between these two consequences is only
this, viz. The punishing the people for the fault of the Pastor, so they
object, or for the faults of the Pastors. This is our Retortion. Whereas they
should rather have labored to solve the doubt by some commodious
interpretation, whether with Paraeus out of Scripture, thus, Paraus in Apoc. 2
5. Neque ratum neque a justitia alienum est pro^ter uni^s vel paucorum pecca a
aliquando totum Caetum male audite and puniri a deo. Ut docet Apostolus, 1 Cor.
5.6 and 11.30. cujus rei ratio est quia pl^rumque in vulg^s manant Ex^mp^a
Regentium Q^alis R^x tal^s G^ex, qualis Episcopus talis Ecclesia est; Ergo
probabile Ecclesiem nihil fu^sse in charitate m^liorem suo E^iscopo, proinde in
ipsum ut corruptionis authorem, and in Caerum corrup^um simul ditigitur
Comm^n^t^o.
That the People following the sins of their Ministers it stands with the
justice of God to punish both. Or else that which he holds to be no unfit
interpretation, by Id ubi supra. Quomodo conveniat propter Episcopi peccat^
^^tam Ecclesiam disciplinari? respondet revera Candelab^um hic n^n notare
Ecclesiam. sed Officium Episc^pale, seu dignitatem and lo^um eminentem in quo
Episcopus pro lucerna positus erat. etc. Q^^^ inte pretatio non quidem est
incommoda.
Candlestick here to understand the Episcopal Office, and Dignity. Or with
Ambros, Ut Ep^scopi puniantur dempta m^rcede; Quaere locum.
Ambrose, to mean, To remove the People from their Pastor, so as to pay him no
stipend. We have done with the weakness of our Opposites, which can serve for
nothing rather than to the betraying of their Cause: And now from the impugning
of the Arguments of our Adversaries Objections, we proceed to the demonstrating
of our own grounds.

SECT. XVII. Our Arguments to prove that the word Angel, in the aforesaid
Epistles of Christ, signifies an individual person, as a Prelate over
Presbyters.
AS the Opposites object against us, Sm^c. vind. p. 143. And also but now used
by our Opposites in their first object.
That in general the word Angel is commonly if not always (in the book of
Revelation) taken collectively, and not individually, and is therefore so to be
understood in this Text. They bring Mr. Meade for their Author, and for one
Instance allege Apoc. 9.14. That the word Angel, is put for Nations, whom
they are thought to govern. Whence they conclude, That therefore Angel here in
the singular number, is taken for the plural, to betoken a multitude of Angels.
We shall first give them a brief answer; and after retort upon them a
contradictory opposition. In answer thereunto, We say, that the word objected
is Angels in the plural number, whereas our question is wholly of the word
Angel in the singular number: And yet take the word Angels as it is, yet can it
have no other Extent, than when we use to say, that many Troops of Soldiers are
commanded by their several Captains; that is, every single Captain governs
his own Troop: And therefore now are they to be referred to their Author Mr.
Mr. Meade Engl. Transl. of of the Apocal. 9.14.
Meade and his common admonition concerning the acception of the word Angel, as
has bin alleged already, whereby if they had been directed, they had not so
far strayed out of the Road-way. Or else Apoc. Cap. 5.2. c. 11. v. 1. c. 8. v.
13. c. 14. v. 14, 15, 18. c. 18 v. 1. c. 10. v. 10. c. 22. v. 8. Again by
numbering the Angels by first, second, third, and after to the seventh to say
another Angel. cap. 8.7. By singular Adjuncts one having in his hand a little
Book, c. 10 v. 1. lifting up his hand, v 8. a loud voice, c. 14. v. 6, 8, 9 14.
and putting out his Vial. c. 16. v. 1, 2, 17. and took up a stone. c. 18 v. 21.
and having a Key in his hand, c. 20.
Mr. Brightman (their dearly beloved) might have instructed them in the places
of the Revelation without the Circle and compass of these, and the places in
the second Chapter, as the Marginals show; wherein the word Angel is taken as
individually as the word Man was, when the Prophet Nathan said unto David [Thou
art the Man.] Besides let any observe, Whenever there is any representation
of an Angel speaking to another, (which is very often) it can be but one Angel
that speaks at once, verily as it was seen in the Angel that said to John,
(...), I am thy fellow Servant, every singular word expressing a singular
person.

Some other Observations I had, but I choose rather to load the Margin with
them, than to be tedious in the Discourse it self.

SECT. XVIII. Arguments in special collected from the Texts.
FIrst, Cap. 2. v. 10. it is said to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Fear
[Thou] no^, the Devil shall cast some of [You] into prison, be [Thou] faithful
unto death. Some of [You] says the Text, where the word some cannot (in the
construction of our Opposites themselves) signify any more than a part of the
Presbyters, and not that all of them were to be cast in prison. Well then the
word [ Thou] if it be taken (as they pretend) Collectively for the whole
College of Presbyers, then the necessary inference would be, That the whole
College of Presbyters should be imprisoned. And what then? Then should a part
and some of all follow to be the whole. Even the sum of all.

Another Text we have had confessed already both by Mr. Beza and Mr. Brightman,
who grant of those words, Apoc. 2.20. concerning the Angel of Thyatira saying [
I know thy works] then v. 24. [ But unto you and the rest] that by [ Thou] was
meant the singular Angel, by [ you] his Colleagues the Presbyters and by [ the
Rest] the People and Congregation: Which we rather commend unto our Reader
because the very light of this Text has enforced it, even from a prime
Adversary to Episcopacy.

A third Argument we find in the first Epistle to the Angel of Ephesus, setting
forth the commendation of his Labors and Patience, his Hatred of the wicked,
his discerning Spirit in the trial of false Apostles; together with an heinous
fault in the loss of his first love. It were strange that so many different
virtues, together with this notable vice here spoken of, should concur in the
persons of all the Ministers in that great Metropolis of Ephesus; as it would
be if the figures and forms of their faces, in beautifulness and blemishes,
should be altogether alike. Thus much from the words of Christ himself. Yet
lest we may seem either novel inventers of our assertion, or else the only
consenters to them being invented, we are willing to be tried, first by the
judgment of Antiquity, and after by the Accordance of most Protestant Divines
concurring with us in our Conclusion.

SECT. XIX. The second kind of Arguments taken out of the Doctrinal Testimonies
of Antiquity.
ALthough it should not be expected, much less exacted of us to prove, that by
Angel in these places, is meant any singular person out of the Commentaries
upon the Apocalypse, seeing that Antiquity has been most sparing in meddling
with this so Mystical Scripture above others. Which notwithstanding the most
vulgarly learned (in the itch of their wills and high conceits) think to be
most familiar unto them: Yet we are not altogether destitute of Witnesses
herein in a competent number.

Anselm. in Apocal. 2.1. [Angelo Ephesinae Ecclesiae] Episcopo scribit de manu
ejus subditorum peccata requirit, etc. Id ibid. v. 8. Episcopus significatur
per Angelum.
(1) Anselm says, That our Savior Christ writes here to the Bishop from whose
hands he requires an account of the sins of all those that are committed to
his Charge. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 11.10. Angelos Episcopos dicit, sicut docetur in
Apocalypsi Johannis.
The ancient Author under the name of Ambrose expounding the place 1 Cor.
11.10.) tells us, That the Bishops are here called Angels, as it is also
taught in the Revelation of St. John. Aug. Ep. 162. Divina voce laudatur sub
Angeli nomine praepositus Ecclesiae.
Augustine (speaking of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus) says, That the
Governor of that Church is commended by the Word of God under the title of an
Angel. Greg mag. lib. 4. Ep. 38. ad Jo^an. Episc. Constant. Quid enim fratres
tui omnes universalis Ecclesiae Episcopi nisi Astra coeli sunt?
Gregory by Stars and Angels understands Bishops, and particularly the Bishop
of Laodicea. Ep^ph adversus Haeres. lib. 1. Tom. 2. Haeres 35. (...).
Epiphanius (writing against the Haeresie of the Nicolaitans) says, That it is
sufficiently confuted by St. John in the Apocalypse from the mouth of our Lord
in an Epistle written to one of the Churches, namely to the Bishop thereof
meaning the Bishop of the Church of Ephesus; And it could be no other than the
same Bishop of Ephesus whom Cyprian means, when citing the Text, Revel. 2.5.
[ Remember from whence thou art fallen, etc.] he says Cypr. Ep. 52. ad Anton
[Memento unde cecideris] Quod utique ei dicitur quem constant cecidisse, and
quem dominus hortatur ^ur^us ^xur^ere.
This is spoken to him, who (as is manifest) was then fallen, and whom the Lord
exhorts to rise again. We shall conclude this particular with Tertullian whose
words are consonant with these alleged Fathers. Where he says, Tertull. adv.
Marcion. l. 4. c. 5. Habemus and Johannis alumnas Ecclesias. Nam ersi
Apocalypsin ejus Marcion respuit, ordo tamen Episcoporum ad originem recensus
in Johannem stabit.
We have the Churches that were founded by John, for although Marcion does
reject this Apocalypse, yet the Order of Bishops reckoned up to their Original
will end in John their Founder. Where Tertullian spoke of Bishops by
succession, which were still singularly one by one.

SECT. XX. That Historical Evidence from Antiquity demonstrateth what Bishops
some of these Angels personally were by their proper names, and from them some
of their Successors.
THis we shall prove by way of Induction, for it being manifestly so in the
Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, and Sardis, and the contrary not appearing in any
others, it must follow that it was so in them also, there being the same reason
of these Angels, and of the rest. As for example, First, in the Church of
Ephesus whereof Polycrates wrote himself Bishop who was born within forty years
after St. John wrote these Epistles. He testifies, Polycrat. Ep. ad Victor.
apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 23. (...).
That seven of his kindred had been Bishops he himself being the eighth. Which
is yet more clearly manifested by a Declaration made by Leontius Bishop of
Magnesia in the general Council of Chalcedon. Council. Calced. Act. 11* (...).
That from Timothy even to that time, there had been seven and Twenty Bishops
successively in the Church of Ephesus. Certainly none can imagine but that even
shame it self would have restrained Leontius for making such a public
Declaration in the hearing of above six hundred Fathers, if the matter it self
had been liable to any contradiction. And that Timothy was indeed Bishop of
Ephesus we have it formerly proved, and is further confirmed by Scultetus (a
learned Doctor) out of Scultet. Obs. in Tit. c. 8. Quid quod de Timothei and
Titi Episcopatu, non solum Eusebius, Chrysostomus, Theodoretus, Ambrosius,
Hieronymus, Primasius, Theophylactus, sed etiam vetustissimi quique etc?
Eusebius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrose, Hierome, Epiphanius, Oecumenius,
Primasius, Theophylact, etc. But whether or not he was Bishop thereof when this
Epistle was written, is not so easy to determine, though the Affirmative be
intimated by Mr. Mr. Fox ubi supra.
Fox, and not denied by Paraeus in Apocal. 2.1. In medio igitur hoc esto si
fucrit Timotheus quod, etc.
Paraeus.

Our next (and as it were) authentical Instance, is in the Church of Smyrna,
where Polycarpus was Bishop in the days of the Apostles, and so continued
until he suffered Martyrdom in the days of Aurelius Antoninus; and therefore
must needs be the Angel unto whom the second Epistle of Christ is directed. Our
Witnesses deserve the hearing among the Fathers, First, (for we begin with the
least ancient) Hierome tells us Hieron. Catal. Script. Eccles. Polycarpus
Johannis Apostoli discipulus, ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus ordinatus, totius Asiae
princeps fuit, qui nonnullos Apostolorum qui Dom^num viderant, Magistros
habuerit, and viderit, postea vero regnante Marco Antonino quarta post Netonem
persecutione, Smyrnae igni traditus est.
That Polycarpus the Disciple of John the Apostle, was by him ordained Bishop
of Smyrna, and that he had to his Masters some of the Apostles that had seen
the Lord, and that in the Reign of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus he suffered
Martyrdom at Smyrna. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 30. (...).
Another records, That he was made Bishop of Smyrna by those that had seen
the Lord, So Eusebius. Tertull. de praese. c. 32. Smyrneorum Ecclesiae
Polycarpum a Johanne collocatum sicu^ R^manorum C^ementem a Petro.
A third before him, That by John was Polycarpus made Bishop of Smyrna, So
Tertullian. And before him a fourth testifies, as one who himself had seen
this Polycarpus, Irenaeus adv. Haeres l. 3. c. 3. (...) Habentur haecipsissima
verba in Eusebius. Hist Eccl. l. 4. c 13.
That after he had been instructed by the Apostles of Christ, with whom he had
been a conversant he was made by them Bishop of Smyrna, So Irenaeus. And about
the same time a fifth, who was nigh neighbor to Polycarpus, and thirty eight
years of age when he suffered Martyrdom witnesses, Polycrat. Ep ad Victor.
apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23. (...).
That he was Bishop of Smyrna, and Martyr, So Polycrates. We ascend yet higher
to a sixth, who wrote an Epistle to this very same Polycarpus wherein he styleth
him Ignat in quibusdam Ep. ad Smyraens. etc. (...).
Bishop of Smyrna, and in another Epistle saluteth him by the title of Bishop,
So Ignatius. And both these Epistles and Sayings are allowed by Vedel. Exercit.
in praedict. Epist. c. 5.
Vedelius Professor in Geneva, and a strict Searcher and Purger of Corruptions
crept into the Epistles of Ignatius.

Our third and last Instance is in the Church of Sardis, whereof Melito was
Bishop either at the time when this Epistle was written (as says Paraeus)
Paraeus in Apoc. 3 v. 1. Veteres quidam hunc Sardium Episcopum volunt fuisse
Melitonem, etc.

Ibid. Tamdiu nempe ab Apocalypsi revelara usque ad tempora Antonii Pii, non
est verismile Melit^nem Sardibus praefuisse, licet de Polycarpo quod tar^diu
praesuerit Smyrnensibus non est improbabile.


Some of the Ancients will have it, or very shortly after; for it is confessed
by him, That this Melito was Bishop of Sardis, while Polycarpus was Bishop of
Smyrna; whom we have proved to be the Angel written unto Revel. 2.8. And both
Marlor. in Apoc 3 v. 1. In^er hujus Ecclesiae Episcopos praeclarus habetur
Melito, vir admodum eruditus ja^^ao; pius.
Marlorat, and Sebast. Meir in Apoc. 3.1. Eisdem omnino verbis cum Marlor^to.
Sebastian Meir (two Eminent Protestant Divines) acknowledged, That he was a
very Learned Man, Pious, and Bishop of Sardis: besides, That he died before
Polycrates wrote the Epistles concerning Easter. So they. Whereunto they are
sufficiently warranted by the said Epistle of Polycrat. Epist ad Victo^. apud
Eusebius. lib 5 cap. 25. (...).
Polycrates, which makes mention of the death of this Melito; whereunto we may
add the Testimony of Eusebius, calling him Bishop of Sardis.

Thus have we made good our three Instances, for proof of our Induction, and
may by the Law of Logic either require of our Opposites to show the contrary
in some of the rest, or to yield us our Conclusion. As for their Successors, it
cannot but be very pertinent to know (for corroboration sake) the Subscription
of some Fathers in the General Council of Nice Council. Nicen. in Subscript.
apud ^inn. Tom. 1. p. 349.
lineally descended from the Angels of six of those Churches in the Apocalypse,
viz. Menophanes, or Menophant Bishop of Ephesus, Eutychius Bishop of Smyrna,
Artemid^rus Bishop of Sardis, Soron Bishop of Thyatira, Ethymasius Bishop of
Philadelphia, Nunechius Bishop of Laodicea. And that one of seven should be
absent upon some occasion, it can be no matter of exception; else would not
these Protestant Divines have been satisfied with the same Evidences, to wit,
(see the Margent) Marlor. in Apoc. 2.8. M^j^s Ecclesiae Polycarpus Episcopus
fuisse creditur.
Marlorat, Areti^s in Apol. 2.8. Ad hujus Ecclesiae Angelum, i. e. Ministrum
praesens subscribitur Epistola forte Polycarpum.
Aretius, Parae. in Apoc. 2.8. Ad hujus Episcopum dirigitur secunda Epistola,
quia Epheso vitinior, Polycarpum hunc fuisse Sancti Johannis Discipulum
probabile est. Testatur Irenaeus, quod and Eusebius refert in ea quae est
Smyrnis Ecclesia Polycarpum constitutum fuisse Episcopum. Constat autem
Apostolos omnes praeter beatum Johannem ante Domitianum vita decessisse. Ergo
sub Domitiano ante Apocalypsin revelatam, Polycarpum fuisse Smyrnae Episcopum
probabile est. Omnia enim Epistolae Polycarpo convenient.
Paraeus, Gasp. Sibell. p. 185. Patres autores sunt Polycarpum caetui Smyrnensi
praesuisse, neque improbati haec Sententia potest, Nam testimonium Smyrnensium
Angelo a Christo datum fidei, vitae, and Martyrio Polycarpi respondet.
Gaspar Sibellius, Quals. Hom. 9. in Apoc. 2.8. Constat Polycarpum hunc
Angeli^^^ fuisse, etc.
Gualter, and Bulling. Concion. in Apoc. 2. Testantur historiae Angelum illum
five Pastorem Smyrnensis Ecclesiae Polycarpum fuisse factum ab ipsis Apostolis,
ab ipso inquam Johanne Episcopum, ac vixisse in Ministerio hujus Ecclesiae.
Annis 86. totidem enim ipse enumerat coram Praeside Herod dum postuletur ad
Supplicium, Anno Dom 170. etc. Paraeus in Apoc. 2.1. Neque Christus nomina
expressit, ut ne tam personis quam ordini haec Scripta existimarentur.
Bullinger, respectively, all confessing Polycarp to have been Bishop of
Smyrna; most of them also, that he was the very same to whom the Epistle was
then dedicated [ To the Angel of the Church of Smyrna] and three of them
witnessing as much for Melito Bishop of Sardis.

SECT. XXI. A Torrent of Protestant Divines of the Reformed Churches consenting
to the same Exposition, of an Individual Person having Prelacy over Presbyters,
under the Name of Angels.
HEre likewise the Church of Geneva allows us two Witnesses; thus, Beza in
Apoc. 2.1. Angelus (...), qu^m oportet admoneri, and per cum Collegas, totamque
adco Ecclesiam.
By Angel is meant the President, and so in special was to be admonished, and
his Colleagues and whole Church by him. So Beza. The other paraphrasing thus;
Deodat. Anut. in locum.
[To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus] That is to the Pastor, or Bishop,
under whose Person ought to be understood the whole Church. So Deodate, the now
Pastor in the new Church of Geneva. True, the whole Church is concerned, as far
as the matter did appertein unto them; yet so as to receive it from the Angel,
as one Person ( quasi per se una) according as Beza has even now shown, and as
the Testimonies following will confirm. Gualt. in Apoc. 2.8. Angelo, i. e.
Episcopo Smyrnensi, atque adeo toti Ecclesiae: constat ex Histor is Polycarpum
fuisse hunc Episcop^m.
[ To the Angel of Smyrna] that is, To the Bishop, which was Polycarpus, as
History evidenceth. So Gualter. Gaspar. Sibell. p. 185. De uno singulari Angelo
quae Sententia mihi magi^ arrider.
To the Angel; that is, to one singular Angel, as I rather think. So Gaspar
Sibellius. Piscat. Anal. in Apoc 2. Epistolae mittuntur ad Episcopum Ecclesiae
Ephesinae, ad Episcopum Ecclesiae Pergamensis, etc.
Letters are sent to the Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, to the Bishop of the
Church of Smyrna, to the Bishop of the Church of Pergamus, etc. So Piscator.
Bulling. in Apoc. 2.7. Nomina ur ergo Pasto^, non exclu^untur Oviculae, interim
vero Angelo inscribitur, ut admontantur Pastores in ipsis esse permultum situm
qualis sit Ecclesia.
The Pastor is therefore named, but the People are not excluded; The Epistle is
therefore to the Angel, that Pastors might be admonished, and in them the whole
Church. So Bullinger. Ma^lorat. in Apocal 2.1. Q^amvis quaedum tam in Clero
qu^m in Populo corrigenda essent, non tamen Populum, sed Clerum agg^editur, nec
qu^mlibet de Cle^o nominatim, sed principem Cleri utique Episcopum.
Although some things were to be corrected as well in Clergy as Laity, yet the
Chief of the Clergy is named, as the Bishop. So Marlorate. Paraeus in Apoc.
2.1. Ange^o Ephesinae Ecclesiae, sic vocat Pastorem ejus. E^dem appellatione
Christus aliarum Ecclesiarum dignatur Episcopos.
To the Angel of Ephesus, thus he calls the Pastor of the Church. So Paraeus.
Aret. in Apoc. 2 13 Ad Pergamensem M^nistram, per quem ad totam Ecclesiam
deferenda fuit.
Angel, that is; Minister by whom the whole Church was to be informed. So
Aretius. Zanch. de Persever. Sanct. Tom. 7. p. 131. [Angelo Ephesinae Ecclesiae
scribt] sed ad totam Ecclesiam pertinet haec Epistola: and infra, novi, probo
opera bona tua, non tantum Episcopi, sed totius Ecclesiae Ephesinae.
To the Angel; yet not to him only, but to the whole Church. So Zanchie. Pet.
Mart. Com. in 1 Cor. ^1. Johannes jubetur scribere ad Angelos Ecclesiarum, qui
erant illarum Episcopi.
He was commanded to write to the Angels of the Churches; that is, unto the
Bishops, So Peter Martyr. Scultet. O^serv. in Tit. ^. Angelos enim ^^prem
doct^ssimi quique Interpretes septem Ecclesi^rum Episcopos interpretantu^,
neque ve^o aliter psiuont nisi vim textui facere velint.
Yea all the most learned Interpreters, by Angels, understand Bishops; nor can
they do otherwise, without violence to the Text. So Scultetus. One more, but
such a one that stands as a second Proctor for equality of Degree of
Presbytery with Episcopacy. Blund. P^aesat. ad Ecclesiarum Rectores, p. 6.
Ecclesiarum Asiaticarum Angelos ab iisdem seu t^tius C^eri Capitibus, etc.
Mr. Blundell in his Book published but the last day, naming the Angels of the
several Churches of Asia, he calls them, The Heads of the whole Clergy of the
same Churches. We add,

SECT. XXII. The second of our English Protestant Divines, in the opinion of
our Opposites, as competent Witnesses as any.
ONe deserving the first place is Doctor Reynolds; Dr. Reyn. Conf. with Heart,
c. 8. divis. 3.
Although the Church of Ephesus (says he) had sundry Pastors and Elders to
guide it, yet among these sundry was there one Chief, whom our Savior calls
the Angel of the Church. Even as Mr. Brightman of the Angel of Thyatira,
B^ightm. in Apoc. 2.24. i.e. Tibi Angele cum Collegarum tuorum Cae^u, and
reliquisex Ecclesia qui perstitistis in s^na Doctrina, ut optime explicat
Theodorus Beza.
To the Angel, together with his Colleagues, as (says he) Theodore Beza has
excellently expounded it. And how adverse this Author was to Episcopacy, who
knows not? Mr. Cartwright, he who in his time justled with Bishops, says,
Mr. Cartwright upon the Revelat.
That the Letters written to the Church, were therefore directed to the Angel,
because he is the meetest Man by Offi^e, by whom the Church may understand the
Tenor of the Letters. Mr. Fox also concludes for us, Fox in Apoc. 2. Cujusmodi
hos Angelos tum fuiss^ non dubitamus, qui primis illis temporibus Praefecturam
gerebant Ecclesiarum, ut Polycarpus, Timotheus, etc.
These Angels (says he) were such as did govern the Church in those Primitive
times, as Polycarpus, Timothy, etc. All these Authors, because in the Degree of
Presbyters for Ingenuity so impartial, for Learning so judicious, for Consent
so unanimous, for Multitude so numerous, by direct and clear Testimonies,
avouching the truth of this Episcopal Prelacy from the Divine Epistles of
Christ Jesus; which we think ought to persuade all Religious Consciences of the
infallibility thereof.

SECT. XXIII. Of two notable Subterfuges of our Opposites, What they are.
THey finding themselves sinking for want of Support by Judicious Protestant
Divines, are glad to catch at Reed, Rush, or very Shadows; as for Example,
these two: 1. To deny these Apostolical Prelates their due Jurisdiction, Smec.
vind. p. ^^9.
as if it were no more than a Moderator has in the Schools. The other is to
abridge them of their just time of Continuance, as no better than a Weekly
Office, if yet so much at one time. It were good we heard themselves speak.
Smec. ibid.
Although (say they) these Angels had a Prelacy over others, yet it was not of
Jurisdiction, but only of Order, as of a Moderator in the Assembly, or Speaker
in the House of Commons, which is only during Parliament; and thus we take our
leave. Courteously done; but will you not stay for an Answer, which is from one
of your own Friends? First, to the former Paradox Dr. Bastwick (whom the
Classis of our Opposites do much respect) rejects the Collective sense of the
Word Angel, saying, Bastwick in his Book of Independency.
That in each of these Churches there was a College of their constituted
Church; and therefore for Order sake, the Light of Nature teaches there must
have been a President, who by way of excellency, and to distinguish him from
others, is called an Angel, (...) the Inscription of the Epistle of the
Revelation declares, saying, [ Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.] Than
which, what can be more contradictory to your former flat denial and force in
oppugning Prelacy, even (as he says) against the Light of Nature?
Nevertheless, he leans to the same slender Reed with you, to allow no more
Jurisdiction to the Prelate, or President, than (to use his own words) To a
Speaker in the House of Commons, and to a Proloqunter in an Assembly. We reply,

SECT. XXIV. Against the Opposites Exception to Episcopal Jurisdiction from
Scripture.
AMong them that are adverse unto Episcopacy, is he that pareth Episcopacy to
the quick, as if the difference between a Bishop and Presbyter were not Blundel
Apol. p. 13. Nominale tantum fuisse discrimen inter Presbyterum and Episcopum,
reale nullum.
Real, but Nominal, and in Name only, as a Moderator in the Assembly, or
Speaker in the House of Commons. This derogation has been sufficiently
confuted by St. Paul's Epistles, in the Examples of Timothy and Titus in taking
Accusations, imposing Injunctions, and the like, as has been amply
acknowledged. Wherewithal we are to adjoin the aforesaid Epistles of Christ by
St. John, unto the Seven Churches of Asia. Wherein yet we need not to bestir
our selves much, but may be contented with the Testimonies of our Opposites
choice Advocate, and against Bishops as vehement an Adversary as could be. Yet
he in his Brightm. in Apoc. 2.2. [Et quod non possis far malos.] Sic erat
docendi Cura, disciplinae ratio non minus integra fuit. Quae primum universe
proponitur, qualit erat in omnes malos; deinde speciatim, qualis in ipsum
Clerum, ut ita dicam in proximis verbis: exploraveris eos qui se dicunt
Apostolos, etc. Generalis disciplina minime toleravit homines quovis m^do
fl^gitiose viventes, sed pro ratione sui criminis vel redarguebat clam, vel
coram p^uribus, si privara monitio nihil prodesset: tum demum etiam
interdicebat sacris, ver. 14, 15. [Sed habes eos qui renent Doctrinam Baalami
and Nicolaitarum] peccatum autem erat Pergamensis Angeli, quod nimis
indulgenter permittebat homines licenter ex hujus Pseudoprophetae faecibus
haurire. Officium erat instituisse docendo, monendo, redarguendo, corripicado,
etc. v. 20. [Angelo Thyatirensi] reprehensio est quod permittebatur mulier
Jesabel, offuciis suis imponere servis Dei. Datur ergo crimini, vel
negligentia, v^l pusillus animus, vel utrumque quo fi^bat, ut non agerer cum
improbis pro meritis, sed sinebantur secure in flagitiis indormiscere.
Commentaries upon the Verses concerning the foresaid Bishops, instiled Angels
in the two first Chapters of the Apocalypse, from Point to Point shows
notwithstanding, how those Bishops in these Churches were reprehended by
Christ, for not executing Spiritual Discipline upon certain as well Clergy as
People. A second, for too much Indulgence to the Wicked. A third, for suffering
the Woman Jezabel, and such as had been seduced by her, and not handling her
according to her Deserts. Dr. Fulke in Apoc. 2.14.
Doctor Fulke says as much in effect. A fourth, For forbearing to use
Discipline against a Balaamatical Seducer. Mr. Mr. Perkins in Apoc. 14.20.
Perkins likewise fetches his ground of Excommunication from the foresaid
Texts, concerning the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, whom he was inclined to
think was a Prelate over Presbyters, as Marlor. ubi supra.
Marlorate also but even now told us, That the same Angel was therefore
reprehended by Christ, because, being President there, he did not put in
practice his Authority of Correction, which he had over Clergy and People.

Let us now proceed to a Rule of Proportion, to try how our Opposites
Comparison can stand between an Apocalyptical Prelate, and either Speaker in
Parliament, or Proloquutor in an Assembly, or as any other for Time or Place,
together with some other circumstances allotted by Ordinance of Parliament. But
tell us, have any of these Authority to take an Accusation of any Criminal
Offense, which happily may be committed, or of controlling any one Vote, be it
never so exorbitant; much less any Corrective Power of any one Member of the
House? Nor does this differ from the Confession of Mr. Calvin, first, in his
Collection out of the Epistle of St. Paul to Titus, viz. Calvin in Tit. 1.5.
Discimus ex hoc loco non fuisse tunc aequalitatem inter Ecclesiae Ministros,
quin unus reliquis praeesset autoritate, and Consilio.
That at that time one was set over the rest of Presbyters to govern them, both
in Authority, and Counsel in Authority. Why? Idem in Phil. 1.1. Fateor quidem
ut nun^ sunt hominem mores and ingenia non posse o^dinem servati inter
Ministros Ecclesiae quin reliquis praeesset unus.
I confess (says he) as the Conditions of Men are now a days, no Order can be
kept amongst Ministers, except one be over the rest. And how often have they
acknowledged the Prelacy of one over the rest of the Clergy to be a Presidency?
And so their thrice Learned Advocate will resolve them, saying, Blundel. Apol.
Quis ^ Praesidentium^ sine Autoritate?
They dream not of any Presidency void of Authority, seeing that every Child
knows, that there cannot be any Presidency without Authority.

SECT. XXV. That Episcopal Government exercised in the Primitive Church was
Authoritative.
WE dare and do protest, That hereby we plead not for an irregular Prelacy. No,
for according to the State of the Church (even at this time) Bishops themselves
are under Canons, and are as liable to Censures as others, if they shall
transgress. Besides, the Obedience enjoined upon Presbyters has ever been
constituted by their own Consents, either express or implicit, and accordingly
ratified by Parliaments. But we are to inquire into the Judgment of Antiquity,
that we may the better continue in their Footsteps.

The most Ancient Father Ignat. Eo. ad Trallens. (...).

Allegat hic Ignatium ad Hebr. 13.17. etc. Haec and plura hujusmodi occurrunt
apud Vedelium, Exercit. 1. in Epist. ad Trall. cap. 2.


Ignatius, in those Epistles which are allowed for genuine, by the most exact
and industrious Authors, Vedelius, Scultetus, and Rivetus, is most frequent in
this Argument for submission of Presbyters to their Bishops, giving them always
a Negative Voice, and allowing nothing to be done without them. As did also
Clemens Epist. 3. Omnibus Presbyteris and reliquis Clericis cavendum est, ut
nihil absque Episcopi permissione agant.
Clemens, both of them being Disciples of the Apostles; Cyprian. Epist. 27. ad
Laps. Inde per temporum and successionum vices E^i^coporum O^dinatio and
Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis
actus Ecclesiae per Episcopos gubernetur.
Cyprian (not long after a Martyr of Christ) professed to do nothing without
the Consent of his Clergy, yet held it necessary for the Church that all Acts
should be managed by Bishops. Tertull. de Bapt. cap. 17. Dandi ( viz Baptismum)
jus habet summus Sicerdo^, qui est Episcopu^, hi^c Presbyteri and Diaconi, non
tamen sine Episcopi autoritate.
Tertullian (though himself a Presbyter) denied that Presbyters (we speak of
the Exercise) had the right so much as of Baptizing, without the Consent of the
Bishop. Orig. Hom. 7. in Hierom. Plus a me exigitur quam a Diacono, p^us a
Diacono, quam a Laico. Qui autem totius Ecclesiae aicem obtinet, pro omni
Ecclesia reddat rationem.
Origin (a Presbyter likewise) thinks, That his Account to God will be less
than if he had been a Bishop; because (says he) the Bishop possessing the
chief place in the Church, is accomptable to God for the whole Church. Ambros.
Offic. l. 2. c. 24. Si quis non obediat Episcopo, extollere atque exaltare sese
defiderans, obumbrare merita Episcopi simulata affectatione doctrinae aut
humilitatis, aut misericordiae, is a vero deviut superbit.
Ambrose notes such a Man (be he Presbyter or Lay) to be a strayer from the
Truth, who does not obey his Bishop. We pass by Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and
other eminent Fathers, to Hierome, Hierom. advers. Lucifer. Ecclesiae salus ex
summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui nisi exors quaedam potestas, and ab
omnibus eminens detur, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes.
whose Patronage our Opposites pretend to have, yet in this Particular he is as
much against them as any. The Safety of the Church (says he) does depend upon
the Dignity of the Bishop; so that unless an extraordinary and eminent Power be
given unto him, there will be as many Schisms in the Church as Ministers. And
again, (which we wish the Presbyterial Advocates duly to mark) he says not
only that Id. Ibid. Sed scito non legem esse ci ( viz. Episcopo) qui est Lex
Presbyteri.
Bishops are a Law unto themselves, but unto Presbyters also. Hitherto of the
Jurisdiction it self: The next Point concerns the Continuance of it in the
Person of the Bishop.

SECT. XXVI. That the personal continuance of Episcopacy was during life,
against the most novel Figments to the contrary.
FIrst, The Angels or Supreme Ministers in the Revelation, to whom the Epistles
according to the Scriptures were written, seeing that they were always
chargeable to inform the Presbyters with the Contents, therefore they must be
supposed to be in Office before they could discharge any such Function. Because
Timothy, Titus, and all the other Apostles continued their functions until
their bodily dissolution.

Secondly, In the narrative parts of every of the said Epistles Christ gives
every of the Prelates to know [ That he knew their works] and that he had them
in estimation according to their works, namely, works done long before,
insomuch that he charge one [ To do his former works] c. 2. v. 3. and
commends another because [ His last works were better than his former.] c. 3.
v. 19. Noting as well the works of his Function, as of his Conversation, and
therefore was far from the conceit of a Deambulatory, Hebdomatical (or
peradventure Bez. adv. Sarau. de diverse. Min. grad. c. 23. Respons. 8. Sed
Hebdomaticam hanc (...) suisse probabile est.
Ephemeral) Office, either of the foresaid Speaker, Proloquutor, or Moderato,
Who by reason of their not continuance in their Office, could not be capable of
their Charge, either of doing their former work, nor commended for his better
after work in his said Office.

Thirdly, Besides some were questioned for not executing their Offices against
the Heretical Nicolaitans, and Idolatrous Balaamites, and Jesabel, as well out
of the Convocation of Presbyters, as with their consent when they were met:
Which proves that in the interim between Convents, and not Convents, the
Prelates office was permanent. Whereas the Deambulatory Actors use to have
their Quietus est, and to forgo their Employments for want of Continuance more
or less.

Fourthly, If we look forwards to the time to come, Christ is found threatening
the Prelates that were obnoxious. One [ to be removed, if he did not repent] c.
2. v. 3. And denouncing against another, [ To come against him, if he should
not repent and do his former works,] c. 2. v. 14. But uses this to be the
process of Deambulatory Officers, if they have offended grievously in one
Parliament, and Convocation, to elect them again upon an expected Repentance?

Lastly, to one of these Prelates Christ made a royal Promise, saying [ Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.] c. 2. v. 9. Wherein
is as well implied Faithfulness in his Function, as Constancy in his Christian
profession, especially this being written unto him, even as he was President
over others. Which is a Faithfulness which the Spirit of God frequently
mentions commending it in Tychicus, Ephesians. 2.21. and in Timothy, 2 Cor. 4. v.
1.2. Now let us pro^eed to show you the Novelty.

SECT. XXVII. That the Novelty of this Opinion of a Deambulatory Prelacy
evinceth the Falsity thereof.
HIstory has delivered unto us the Successions of all the four Celebrious
Churches, Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome, as also from the Asian
Churches in the Revelation. An Instance in one will give light to all the rest.
As for example, The Church of Alexandria, wherein succeeded next to Mark the
Evangelist, See M. S^lden in his Eutych.
Anianus, An. Christ. 51. Sedit An. 22. After him Abilius, An. 77. Sedit An.
13. Then Cerdon Sedit An. 10. and Justus An. 12. Finally, there is not any
Monuments more directly manifesting the continuance of the Succession of
Emperors and Kings in their Royal Thrones, than there has been for the
Residence of Bishops successively in their Episcopal Seats and Functions, even
to their dying day. Sure we are therefore that Antiquity would have exploded
that conceit which Tertullian abhorred to think, Tertull. Praescript. c. 41.
Al^us hodie e^it Episcopus, alius ^ras.
That one should be a Bishop to day, and none to morrow. The general Council of
Calcedon also judging Calc. See above.
the Depression of a Bishop down to the degree of a Presbyter to be no better
than Sacriledg.

SECT. XXVIII. That the Foundation of the Deambulatory Opinion was altogether
groundless.
A Belgic Doctor noted this Opinion as void Sarau de div Min^grad. c. 23 ad
Bez resp. 8. Sine ulla authoritate verbi Dei, aut patrum testimonio, aut
Historiae Ecclesiasticae exempl^, Hebdom^ticam hanc praesidentiam ^^^sse
probabile jadicat
Of any warrant from the word of God or example of Ecclesiastical History, or
yet probable reason, Whereof a Zealot for the Presbyterians has confessed
namely, Blun. praef. ad Eccl. rect. p. 6. Deduci successiones caeperunt cum
en^m post beatam (...) c^jusque in Domino dormitionem ad secundum primatus
dev^n^ rit, e^que de ^o tuo ad te^^ium, sibi singuli ex ordine successisse
dicti sunt.
That the Succession of one after another in the primitive times was after the
Predecessor had slept in the Lord. The result of all these premises
discovering the senseless Novelty of this Opinion, shows that it serves for
nothing better, than the betraying of a lost Cause.

CHAP. V. Our last Consideration is, whether this Apostolical Right of
Episcopacy in some sense be called Divine?
ALthough the proof of the Right thereof to be according to the Word of God, be
demonstration enough of a Divine Right; Yet will it not be amiss to know how
far either the Judgment of Antiquity, or the Consent of learned Protestant
Divines have extended their Suffrages for acknowledgment thereof. But yet first
we are to satisfy our Opposites Objections in censuring this to be properly
Popish.

SECT. I. That the Doctrine of the Divine Right of Episcopacy is repugnant unto
Popedom and Papal Usurpation.
NOthing has been more common in the mouths of many adversly affected, than
first hearing of the Divine Right of Episcopacy (not without some horror of
mind) to impute Popery unto it, but yet not without ignorance of the Popes
Usurpation herein, which is here discovered (in the Margin) by the earned
Professor of Divinity in Geneva grappling with the greatest Champion of the
Pope, even that Romish Goliath, Bellarmine who in his defense of Papal Right,
says, Bellarm. l 4. de Pont c. 25. Quemadmodum Apostoli primi erant sub
Christo, sic Episcopi primi sub Pontificae Romano.
That the Pope of Rome is immediately from Christ, and all other Bishops from
him, pretending this to be patronized by Antiquity, citing that most ancient
Father Ignatius for his Opinion; but he was confuted by our judicious Author
Vedelius even out of the express words of Ignatius himself, teaching, Vedelius
Exerc. 1. in Ign. Epist. ad Trall. c. 4. Putidum hoc nimis est, etenim Episcopi
non sunt primi sub Pontifice, sed sub Christo, nisi Bellarmino Ignatius
mentitur, qui Episcopum nullam in Ecclesia habere potestatem supra se dicit
hac. ipsa Epistola ad Trall. (...)
That as Presbyters are immediately subject to Bishops, so are likewise Bishops
to Christ. So does he also from Tertullian, Id. ibid. c. 3. Saltem addam
Bellarminum cum dicit Papam aliter succedere Petro quam alii Apostolis
Tertulliano contradicere, qui eandem caeterorum Apostolorum and Petri
successionem verbis exp^essi^ statuit. Sic enim de Praese. cap. 32. Evolvant
ordinem Episcoporum, etc. Sic Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum a Johanne
collocatum refert, sicut Romanorum Clementem a Pet^o ordinatum edit, ubi duo
Observe. Primo, omnes Cathedras Catholicas habere debere Successionem
Apostolorum. Secundo, Eandem esse Successi^nem Romanae and Smyrnensis
Ecclesiae. Verba sunt expressa cum dicit sicut, etc.
who recounteth the like Succession in the Church of Smyrna, where the first
Bishop was ordained by the Apostle St. John; which he does from St. Peter, in
the Church of Rome. But sooner may the Roman Pope unbishop himself, than
presume to justify from Antiquity, that other Bishops, in respect of their
first Original, are immediately derived from him, as by the manifold
testimonies of the Ancients alleged expressly already, has appeared, and will
furthermore become more undeniable when Antiquity it self shall be heard to
speak by and by; in the interim we may behold the Spanish Divines standing for
the Divine Right of Episcopacy as being from Christ himself; and therefore
denied to be present in the Council of D Blund' Apol. praef. p. 62. Histor. de
Council. Trident. l. 7. p. 775. and 589. Sept. An. 1562, 1589, and 1596.
Hispanis se deinceps Concilio non interfuturos minirantibus, nisi Episcopatum
de jure divino esse defineretur. Itali die sequente libello porrecto ne quando
defineretur petierunt: ipse Pontifex, literis ad Legatos datis, opinionem qua
Episcoporum Institutio de jure divino esse absolut^ dicitur, quoniam lola
ordims potestas a Christo sit, falsam and erroneam censuit; nec Julii sequentis
decima quinta (qua decrotum ex Papae sententia cond^tum promulgatum est)
repertus est quisquam qui contra hiscere auderet.
Trent except it should be so decided. The Italian Bishops contrarily withstood
this in the behalf of the Pope, that it might be known to be derived not
immediately from Christ, but mediately by the Pope himself; Can any doubt what
the Pope would determine in this Case? He in his letters prohibited that
Episcopacy should be held to be absolutely from Divine Right. This being the
Case, who can justly attribute Popery to them, who in defending a Divine Right,
yet renounce and abhor the derivation thereof which is from the Pope?

SECT. II. The Judgment of Antiquity concerning the Divine Right.
WE begin with the most ancient Ignatius, and for the vindication of the credit
of this our Foreman, It is testified by Vedelius Apol. pro Ignat. c 1. Nemo
quod sciam negat Ignatium fuisse sanctissimum virum Ecclesiae Antiochenae
Episcopum, and qui Christi veritati saevissimo mortis genere testimonium
praebuit- p^ulo supra -- sanctus Ignat^us Antiochenus Episcopus, ipsorum dum
vivebat Apostolorum discipulus. Id. ib. c. 3. -- Dico igitur non omnes illas
duodecim Epistolas genuinas fuisse, sed septem ad Trallens^s, Philadelphenses,
Magnesios, Smyrnenses, Polycarpum, Ephesios, and Romanos. Patet hoc primum in
eo quod veteres in scripta Ignatii, opera data and ex professo recensa non nisi
septem enumerant genuinas. Eusebius l. 3. c 30. Sal^em has commemorat non plures,
nec pauciores, Hieron. Catal. Script. Eccl. and ejus Interpres, Sophronius, and
Ruffinus. Id. ib c. 4. Scultetus in M^dulla Patrum, and post cum Rivetus ex
duodecim illis Epistolis septem genuinas esse ostenderunt.
Vedelius (the Genevan Professor) concerning Ignatius his Epistles (alleging
withal the like testimonies of Scultetus and Rivetus) That seven of them are
properly his, and so genuine herein as that they take no exceptions in this
Case. Which he furthermore proves out of Eusebius, Ruffinus, and Hierome: and
we shall not wander out of these seven. And though all these be full of
Sentences abundantly asserting the Divine Right of Episcopacy, yet we shall
content our selves with these few wherein he exhorts Ignatius in Epistol. ad
Trallens. (...). Et paulo post, (...). vide Scultet. Observat. in Titum ubi
haec citantur. Id. Epist. ad Smyrnens. (...).
The Presbyters to obey the Bishops as the Vicars of Christ; And he tells
both Presbyters and People, That he that contemns his Bishop is Atheistical
and Profane, and does set at naught (...) (that is) the Ordinance of Christ,
and the like, as is more fully testified in the Margin.

Cyprian. Epist ad Laps. ep. 27. Dominus noster cujus praecepta metuere and
observare debemus Episcopi honorem and Ecclesiae suae rationem disponens in
Evangelio, etc. Infra -- Ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis
Actus Ecclesiae per ^osdem Praepositos gubernetur. -- Id. Epistol. 65. ad
Rogat. Quod si nos aliquid facere contra Deum debemus qui Episcopos facit, etc.
-- Id. Epist. 55. ad Cornel. Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimis and divina potestas.
Cyprian is our next Witness, who tells us, That the constituting of Bishops
over the Church with Authority to govern all Acts therein, is done by Divine
Law, So he. With many other expressions to the same effect, for which again I
refer you to the Margin. We pass to Origin (our next Witness) who says of the
public Governors of the Churches of Christ, Origin. Tract. 31. in Matthew. c.
24. In magno fastigio qui praesunt Ecclesiis Christi, propterea quod constituit
eos Dominus super familiam suam. -- Id. Tract. 1. in Matthew. 16. Qui Episcoporum
locum vendicant, utuntur eo dicto sicut Perius, E^ Claves Regni Coeloium a
Servatore acceperunt, docentque ea quae ab ipsis ligata fuer^nt, hoc est,
condemnata, eadem and in coelis ligata -- dicend^m eos recto loqui, etc.
That they are in a very eminent place, because the Lord has set them over his
Family. And again (which we alleadg as making against Romish Popedom) That
Bishops have as much interest in that saying of our Savior [ Whatsoever thou
bindest on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven etc.] as St Peter himself. Gregory
Bishop of Nazianzum tells his Flock of that City, Gregor. Naz. Orat. 17.
(...).
That the Law of Christ had made them subject to his Episcopal Power and
Jurisdiction. Athan. Ep. ad Dr^cont. (...).
Athanasius, That whosoever he be that contemns the Function of a Bishop
contemns Christ who ordained that Office. Epiph de Haer. l. 3. Tom. 1. Haer.
75 (...).
Epiphanius writing against that grand Antiepiscopal Presbyter Aerius told him,
That the Superiority of Bishops above Presbyters was founded in the word of
God. Ambrosia 1 Cor. 11 16. Episcopus personam habet Christi quasi e^go ante
J^dicem, sic ante Episcopum, qui Vicarius Domini est, propterea reatus originem
subjecta (scilicet mulier) debet videre.
An Author (under the name of Ambrose) speaking distinctly of Bishops, says,
That they held the person of Christ, and therefore our behavior before them
ought to be as before the Vicars of the Lord. And again, That the Bishop is
ordained by the Lord the light of the Church. Another under the name of Aug
Quaest vet and nov. Test. vide supra. Id. de verbo Dom. sermon. 24. Si solis
Apostolis dixit [Qui vos spernit me spernit] spernite nos, nam vocavit nos, and
in eorum locum constituit nor, videre ne spernatis nos, ne ad illum perveniat
injuria quam nobis seceritis.
Augustine (as has been said) judged it a matter that none could be ignorant
of, That Bishops were instituted by Christ, who instituted Bishops when he
ordained the Apostles, whose Successors the Bishops are. Hier. Ep. ad Marcell.
adv. Montan. Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent. -- Idem Ep. ad Helvid.
Episcopi stant loco Pauli, and gradum Petri tenent.
Hierome thus far agrees with him, to wit, That Bishops in the Catholic
Church supply the place of the Apostles. And what else meant that, which has
been before alleged out of the Canon of six hundred Fathers in the general
Council of Conc. Calced. Can. 29. (...).
Calcedon, which judges, The Depression of a Bishop down to the degree of a
Presbyter to be in it self Sacriledg? But do any Protestant Divines of remote
Churches consent to any Divine Right?

SECT. III. That two eminent Protestant Divines grant this Supposition, which
is the ground of the said Truth.
THis grant and concession is freely yielded unto us by Beza, who (speaking of
Episcopacy) says Bez. resp. ad Sarau. de div. Min. grad. c. 23. resp. 10.
Certe si ab ipsis Apostolis profecta esset haec mutatio, non vererer illam (ur
caerera^ Apostolicas Ordinationes) Divinae in solidum dispositioni tribuere.
If it did proceed from the Apostles, then certainly I should not doubt to
attribute it wholly (as all other Apostolical Ordinances) to divine
disposition. Another (who is also a professed Advocate for the Presbyterians)
grants as freely as the former, Wall. M^ss. de Episc. and Presb. p 422. Si ab
Apostolis est, juris utique est divini.
That if Episcopacy be from the Apostles, then doubtless it is of Divine Right.
But that Episcopacy had its Apostolical institution, has been sufficiently
ratified unto us through this whole Discourse, both from Testimonies of
Antiquity, from general Consent of Protestants of Reformed Churches, and above
all, from the clear Evidence of the Scriptures themselves, the Repetition
whereof would be superfluous, the rather, because these our foresaid Opposites
will ease us of that labor: for Mr. Beza himself confesses, Bez. ih. Resp.
11. Reprehendi non debet vetus mos in Alexandrina Ecclesia, jam inde a Marco
Evangelista observatus, ubi visum est quod singulorum suit ad unum transfer.
That it is a Custom not to be reprehended, of setting one of the Presbyters
over the rest, which was used (says he) from Mark the Evangelist in the Church
of Alexandria. So he. Now then whether we say with Hierome, Hier. de script.
Eccles. Marcus erat Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus Episcopus. Id. in Prooem. in
Matthew.
That this Episcopacy was in Mark because the first Bishop, or in Anianus who
was constituted by Mark, as Eutychus relates; or with Beza that it was from
Mark as a thing irreprehensible; It must needs be judged to be from the
Ordinance of the Apostles, and consequently Divine. We have yet somewhat more.

SECT. IV. That Episcopal Prelacy has been directly acknowledged by
Protestants of remote Churches to be of Divine Right.
Luther. Tom. 1. sol 309. Reso^ejus super Proposit. Lyps. disp. concl. 13.
Probo quamlibet Civitatem habere debere proprium Episcopum jure D^vino, etc.
(1) LUther proves this directly and Categorically saying, That every City ought
to have its proper Bishop by Divine Right; grounding his Argument upon Titus
2.5. Who was commanded to ordain Elders in every City; which Elders (says he)
were Bishops as Hierome witnesses, and the subsequent Text does manifest. Yea
and St. Augustine describing a Bishop concurreth with them saying, It was a
City, as if he should have said, it was not a mere Presbyter, but a Bishop
which is here spoken of, because Bishops were over Cities. Thus far Luther; his
Tractate being a Resolution, his Sentence the Conclusion, and his words plainly
distinguishing Bishop from mere Presbyter, and alleging from Scripture, a
divine Right of Episcopal Function, as clearly, as either our Opposites can
dislike or we desire.

Accordingly Bucerus de vi and usu Minist. prout ^^atu^ a Sarait. ^ract. ^t. de
diverse. Minist. grad. cap. 16. ad Bez. Respuns. 7. itaqu ni ordines
Ministr^^rum in Ecclesiis perpetui, and a Spiritu Sancto Istarim initio
constituti sunt Ep^scoporum, Presbyterorum and Diacenorum.
Bucer a man of great Learning and Piety) says, That these three Orders of
Ministers in the Church, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons were for institution
from the Holy Ghost, and for Continuance perpetual, even from the Beginning.
The learned Professor in the Palatinate Scultetus Observat. in Titum, cap. 8.
Regimen Episcopale este Divinum moveor asseverate efficacibus Rationibus and
Exemplis Mustribus and autoritatibus praelaeris.
Scultetus, has Professedly and Positively concluded Episcopacy to be of
Divine Right, by (as he says) efficacious Reasons, clear Examples, and
excellent Authorities. And he has been as good as his word, as in diverse
foregoing Sections has been made manifest; upon which Subject likewise a most
learned Sarau. Tractat. de diverse. Minist. grad. per tatum.
Belgic Doctor wrote a whole book, urging therein very many Arguments, both
from Scripture and Antiquity, and assoiling the Objections to the contrary.

Aegidius Hunnius (Divinity Professor in the University of Marpurg) speaking of
Episcopacy in the Apostles times, says, Hunnius in Epistol. ad Titum. apud
Sarau. cap. 16. Respons. 7. Paulus Titum Generalem Superintendentem Creticarum
Ecclesiarum ordinat, etc. and infra, Deus requirit ut inter ipsos Ministros sit
ordo and gradus, etc. and infra, Qui Ordo and Gradus non recens introductus
est, sed inde ab Apostolorum temporibus in Ecclesia receptus fuit.
That Paul did ordain Titus General Superintendent (that is Archbishop) of all
the Cretian Churches; and thereupon concludes, That the Order and Degree of
Episcopacy is a thing not lately invented, but received in the Church even from
the very times of the Apostles. Wherein he is seconded by Hemingius in Tit.
1.5. Est aurem observandum hoc primum quod Patlus non vult Anarchiam in
Ecclesia, sed quo omnia fiant Ordine and Decenter; vult aliquem vita and
doctrina conspic. un praeesse Ministris ordinandis, and recte disponendis
omnibus in Ecclesia, qui caveat ne quid Haeresium oriatur.
Hemingius (a very Learned Divine) whose Observation upon Titus 1. v. 5. is
That to the end that Anarchy might be avoided, and all things done Decently and
in Order, the Apostle would have some one to ordain Ministers, to dispose all
things in the Church, and to take care lest Haeresie should arise.

The worthily renowned Doctor Gerard speaks no less than the former; proving
Gerard Loc. Com. Tom. 6. de Minist. Eccles cap. 5. Sect. alt. Number. 205.
Retinemus in nostris Ecclesiis, and retinendum esse censemus, O^dinem inter
Minist^os, ut alii sint Episcopiali P^esbyteri, alii Diaconi. Primo, Deus ipse
donorum varierat; and differentia Ordinem facit inter Ministros, etc. Secundo,
Exemplum Apostolicae and P^^mitivae Ecclesiae est (...), sed in ea fuere
distincti Ministiorum Ordines, and quidem Divinitus constituti, etc. Id. Number.
206. Diversiras illa graduum dependet quidem a Iure Divino, cum ratione generis
quatenus necessaria est ad (...) and tranquillitatem Ecclesiae; tum ratione
donorum, varietate and diversitate declarat velle se ut distincti inter
Ministros gradus constituantur.
Episcopacy (as distinct from Presbytery) to be of Divine Right not only in
respect of the Original as proceeding from the diversity of Gifts, but also in
regard of the End, The avoiding of Dissension and Schism in the Church. Yea,
and even the Church of Geneva it self will afford us a Testimony or two from
the pen of the Mirror of Learning Mr. Isaac Causabon who tells us, That three
Orders of Ministers in the Church, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are founded
upon the Testimony of plain Scriptures. And again, That Bishops are the
Vicegerents of the Apostles; Thus these learned Protestants. Nothing now
remains but that ( nam finis coronat opus) we have as the Seal of this Truth
the Approbation of Christ himself. Causabon. Exercit. 14. An. 32. number. 5.
Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi aperris Scripturae testimoniis sunt fundati. Id.
ibid. Apostolorum hodie Vicarii sunt, etsi non pari potestate c^m Apostolis
omnes Episcopi.


SECT. V. That Episcopal Prelacy had the Approbation of Christ himself after
his Ascension into Heaven.
NEver did nor could any deny, but that every of the Angels of the seven
Churches of Asia had the Approbation of Christ himself after his Ascension into
Heaven, that Book wherein they are mentioned being called the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, as the Author, delivered by an Angel to John, as unto Christ's
Scribe, commanding him to write the seven Epistles, and to direct them to the
Angels of the seven Churches, See Revel 2.5. etc.
two of which Angels Christ commend^th in the same Epistles for the good
discharge of their Function. And is not Commendation Testimonial enough, and an
Argument of his Approbation? The other five Bishops (being more or less
Delinquents) are reprehended for Neglect of their Cure. And is not Reproof of
the Neglect of Duty in the Officers, a Justification, and Approbation of their
Offices?

Finally, as those which are faithful in their Offices are continued, so they
that were obnoxious are threatened, To be removed except they did repent. So
that here is no Displacing of any for a first Offense, nor yet an Eradicating
the whole Order, for the particular Abuses of some; For he that calls for
Repentance and Amendment of Life in the Ministers intends a further execution
of their Ministration, and Discharge of their Function in these Angels, which
was a Prelatical Superintendency or Episcopacy, as has been testified not only
by Protestant Divines of the Reformed Churches fourteen in number; but also so
generally that Doctor Scultetus (Divinity Professor of Heidelburgh) concerning
this Approbation of Christ, says, Angelos s^ptem Ecclesiarum doct^ssim^ quique
^nterpieces ^nterpretantur i^^tem Ecclesiarum Episcop^s ^neque vero al^ter
possunt, nisi textui vitu facere veiint. Scultet. in Ep. ad ^itum c 8.
That all the most learned Interpreters have by Angels understood Bishops, nor
can they do otherwise without violence to the Text. So he.

All Glory be to God through Jesus Christ, the Bishop of our Souls, the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, Amen

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. SECT. I. That the Church of Geneva has both justified, and praised
our Episcopal Government in England, and prayed for the prosperous continuance
thereof Page 1 SECT. II. That the Church of Geneva disclaimed the Opinion of
thinking that their Churches Government should be a Pattern for other Churches
p. 6. SECT. III. That also other Protestant Divines of Reformed Churches have
observed the Worthiness of the Episcopal Government in England p. 7. SECT. IV.
That the Episcopal Government in the Church of Christ is for Necessary Use the
best according to the judgment of Primitive Antiquity p. 11 SECT. V. The
Protestant Divines of remote Churches have generally acknowledged Episcopal
Government, to be for Necessary Use the best p. 14 SECT. VI. That the Episcopal
Government is far more practiced among Protestants of Remote Churches, than is
the Presbyterial p. 22
CHAP. II. SECT. I. The second General Part of this full Satisfaction is
concerning the Right of Episcopacy, which is to accord to the Word of God,
which is the second reserved Condition in the Common Covenant. p. 24 SECT II.
First, That no Ancient Father has been justly objected as gainsaying the
Apostolical Right of Episcopacy, no not Hierome. p. 26 SECT. III. That
Augustine objected against the Apostolical Right of Episcopacy is directly for
it. p. 31 SECT. IV. Thirdly, Gregory Nazianzen a Primitive Father, who is
verbally objected against Episcopacy, does really contradict the Objectors. p.
34 SECT. V. That Clemens, one of the most Ancient of Fathers objected, proves
to be a Counterwitness against the Objectors p. 37 SECT. VI. The justification
of Episcopal Prelacy by the Universal Practice of the Church Christian, in
times approaching toward Primitive Antiquity. First, By condemning Aerius the
only famous Adversary against Episcopal Prelacy in those times p. 42 SECT. VII.
That in the time of the foresaid Fathers the whole Church of Christ held the
Derogation from Episcopal Prelacy to be Sacrilegious p. 45 SECT. VIII. That the
immediate Succession of Bishops from the days of the Apostles, is liberally
confirmed unto us by Learned Protestant Divines, albeit sufficiently
Presbyterial p. 47 SECT. IX. That there was an immediate Succession of Bishops
from the Apostles times, proved first, because no time can be assigned wherein
it was not in use. p. 48 SECT. X. That the whole Church Christian did profess
and practice the Apostolical Right of Episcopacy p. 55
CHAP. III. After these our Evidences from Primitive Antiquity, according to
our precedent Method, we are to contemplate of the Celestial Sphere, the Word
of God it self p. 59 The Right of Episcopacy discussed by the Word of God. ib.

SECT. I. Against the first Objection from the Identity of Names (as they call
it) of Bishops and Presbyters in Scripture p. 60 SECT. II. That the former
Objection is rejected by the choicest and most acceptable Divines, which our
Opposites themselves can name p. 62 SECT. III. The second Objection out of
Scripture in that place. Phil. 1.1. With the Bishops and Deacons, etc. is
repugnant to the general Expositions of Ancient Fathers p. 64 SECT. IV. The
third Objection is against the Appropriation of the word Bishop unto one, which
Appellation is shown to be most justifiable. p. 67 SECT. V. The last Objection,
3 John, 9. p. 72
CHAP. IV. Our Prepositions grounded upon the Word of God. Our first Evidence
out of the Epistles of St. Paul p. 73 SECT. I. That the Presbyterial Order was
always substitute to an higher Government, as first to the Jurisdiction
Apostolical ib. SECT. II. That diverse of the Apostolical Disciples were even in
their times both in Dignity and Authority Superintendents over Presbyters p. 76
SECT. III. That the aforesaid Apostolical Disciples were as Bishops over the
Presbyters. Among whom were Timothy, and Titus by Evidence from Scripture p. 78
SECT. IV. That Timothy and Titus were properly, and distinctly Bishops,
notwithstanding their Title of Evangelists, as is confessed by Protestant
Divines of remote Churches p. 81 SECT. V. That Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus,
notwithstanding that objected Scripture, Act. 20 p. 88 SECT. VI. That Timothy
and Titus were both of them properly Bishops, by the judgment of Antiquity p.
91 SECT. VII. That Protestant Divines of very great esteem have acknowledged
Timothy and Titus to have been properly Bishops p. 94 SECT. VIII. The Second
Evidence from Scripture, for proof of Episcopal Prelacy, is out of Christ's
Epistles, To the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, [To the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus] write, etc. Chap. 2.1. p. 97 SECT. IX. That the first
Exposition of our Opposites, by Angel understanding the whole Church, is flatly
repugnant to the Context. p. 98 SECT. X. That the second Exposition is, in
interpreting the word Angel, to signify the Order of Presbyters in the Church.
The state of which Question is set down by our Opposites p. 100 SECT. XI. That
the Objections, made for this Exposition, are confuted by their own best
approved Protestant Authors p. 101 SECT. XII. Their second Reason confuted by
their own alleged Author p. 103 SECT. XIII. Their third Argument likewise
confuted by their own Chiefest Author. p. 106 SECT. IVX. Their fourth Argument
confuted by the same their own much applauded Author p. 108 SECT. XV. The fifth
Objection (as a body in a Consumption) languisheth in it self p. 111 SECT. XVI.
Their last Argument stands confuted by their own selves p. 112 SECT. XVII.
Our Arguments to prove that the word Angel, in the aforesaid Epistles of
Christ, signifies an individual person, as a Prelate over Presbyters p. 114
SECT. XVIII. Arguments in special collected from the Texts p. 116 SECT. XIX.
The second kind of Arguments, taken out of the Doctrinal Testimonies of
Antiquity p. 119 SECT. XX. That Historical Evidence from Antiquity
demonstrateth what Bishops some of these Angels personally were by their proper
names, and from them some of their Successors p. 121 SECT. XXI. A Torrent of
Protestant Divines of the Reformed Churches consenting to the same Exposition,
of an Individual Person having Prelacy over Presbyters, under the name of
Angels p. 128 SECT. XXII. The second of our English Protestant Divines, in the
Opinion of our Opposites, as competent Witnesses as any p. 131 SECT. XXIII. Of
two notable Subterfuges of our Opposites, What they are. p. 132 SECT. XXIV.
Against the Opposites Exception to Episcopal Jurisdiction from Scripture p. 134
SECT. XXV. That Episcopal Government exercised in the Primitive Church was
Authoritative 138 SECT. XXVI. That the personal continuance of Episcopacy was
during life, against the most novel Figments to the contrary p. 141 SECT.
XXVII. That the Novelty of this Opinion of a Deambulatory Prelacy evinceth the
Falsity thereof. p. 144 SECT. XXVIII. That the Foundation of the Deambulatory
Opinion was altogether groundless p. 145
CHAP. V. Our last Consideration is, Whether this Apostolical Right of
Episcopacy may in some sense be called Divine? p. 146 SECT. I. That the
Doctrine of the Divine Right of Episcopacy is repugnant unto Popedom and Papal
Usurpation p. 147 SECT. II. The Judgment of Antiquity concerning the Divine
Right p. 150 SECT. III. That unto eminent Protestant Divines grant this
Supposition, which is the ground of the said Truth. p. 154 SECT. IV. That
Episcopal Prelacy has been directly acknowledged by Protestants of remote
Churches to be of Divine Right. p 156 SECT. V. That Episcopal Prelacy had the
Approbation of Christ himself after his Ascension into Heaven p. 160

FINIS.

