Aug. 7: 1670. A most useful SERMON Preached in London, By a most worthy and
faithful Minister and Servant of Jesus Christ's, most learnedly pressed from
Amos 8.11.

Behold the day comes, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of
the Lord, and they shall wander from Sea to Sea From which Text of Scripture,
he learnedly shows the dreadful and deplorable condition of that Kingdom which
a famine of the word of the Lord seizes upon; and further shows, That they are
the greatest Felons who would rob us of the word of God, and that there is more
justice in Hell then is here upon Earth, for in Hell they do not punnish the
Innocent.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

Amos 8.11. Behold the day comes, says the Lord God, that I will send a
Famine in the land, not a famine of Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of
hearing the Word of the Lord; And they shall wander from Sea to Sea.


A Sad Text, and Sad Times too well agree; In the beginning of this Chapter
there is a Vision, in the first verse, The Lord has showed me, and behold a
Basket of summer fruits, it was a Type or Emblem to signify the suddainness
of Isreal's misery; you know summer fruit does soon perish, winter fruit may be
preserved long, but summer fruit does soon fade; so the glory of Israel (like
to summer fruit) it shall soon fade away; there is the Vision.

2. In this Chapter there is a Prophecy in the 32 d verse; The Songs of the
Temple, shall be turned into howling, a sad Prophecy, God grant it may not be
our Portion; songs of the Temple to become howling, where God formerly was
served in a pure manner, where there was sweet singing and melody unto the
Lord, now there would be mournful Songs, that joy of the Temple it shall be
quite ceased; A sad Prophecy!

3. In this Chapter is set down the cause why the Lord did write such bitter
things against Israel his own People, the cause was very apparent; it was their
sin, sin drew Plagues at the heels of it, Israel grew now weary of God in the 5
th verse of the Chapter, When will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell corn,
they had rather a great deal be trading in their shops, then worshipping in Gods
house; when will the New Moon be gone, when people grow weary of Ordinances,
then God grows weary of a People. And

4. There are set down the punishments for those sins of Israel in the 9 th
verse of this Chapter, I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon day. Beloved
this is not meant the natural Ecline of the Sun, but the meaning is, God would
now darken Isreal's outward glory and splendour; The Sun in Scripture is a
Metaphor for joy; now the going down of the Sun at noon, it is to express great
afflictions coming upon this People: when they thought all things should be
well, every thing should be well, flourishing peace and prosperity, kissing
each other, why now there should be a sudden change, God would Eclipse their
outward Comforts; says he, the Sun shall go down at Noon day, and this was not
all, there is a greater punishment yet behind, and that is, in the Text I have
read. God threatens for their sins, that there should be a Famine in the Land,
not a Famine of Bread, nor a Thirst for Water, but of hearing the Word of the
Lord, (as if God should say) it was a mercy if only a Famine upon your Bodies,
that may pine your Bodies, Oh, but it is a worse, a Spiritual Famine; a Famine
of hearing the Word of the Lord. In which Text, you have these four parts.

1. Here is a note of admiration in these words, Behold it seems to be a
wonder, that Israel, God's People in Covenant, to whom the Oracles of God were
committed, that these should want the word of the Lord: Oh what a wonder that
such a full breast should be drawn dry! that they that had such plenty of
Ordinances, should now be cut short, and forced to cry out, We see not our
signs, there is no more any Prophet among us, that is the first. Behold there is
admiration.

2. Here is the judgment threatened in the Text, a soul Famine.

3. The extention and universality of this Famine, why says God, it shall be a
Famine in the Land, not in a House or Parish, but there shall be this soul
Famine, it shall be universal in the Land.

4. Who it is that gives the Famine a Commission, and that is God; I will send
a Famine, not of Bread, or Water, but of hearing of the Word of the Lord.

The words thus opened into these several parts, they yield us these four
Propositions or Doctrines.

1. It does show, That the word of God is to the soul as food to the body, for
strengthening and refreshing of it, and that is implied in Job 23.12. I esteemed
the words of thy mouth, as my necessary food, they are my food that my soul
feeds upon.

2. The second Doctrine is this, When the word of God is despised or opposed,
it is just with the Lord to take it away from a People.

3. The third Doctrine is this, The taking away of the word, is the beginning
of a Spiritual famine, and

4. That a famine of the word, is far worse then a famine of Bread. A famine I
will send, says God, not of Bread, nor of Thirst for Water, but which is
worse, the hearing of the word of the Lord. The famine of the word is worse
then a famine of bread; next to damning of a soul, what can be worse then
starving of it; bodily famine is very sad, much more spiritual famine. I shall
speak a little of bodily famine, that will set off the other the more.

Famine is that withdrawing of an necessary recruit of Nature, Famine is the
withholding of that Oil which should be poured into the Lamp of Man's Life;
Famine and Death is such as you see a picture, they both bring the Body into an
Anatomy: See a description of a famine in Jer. 14.3. Their Nobles have sent
their little ones to the water, they came to the pit and found no water, they
were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads. It is a very unusual
sight to see Noble Men's Children Tanckard-bearers; the Nobles sent their
Children, but found no water, Famine of the Body is worse than the Sword is,
and that in these three respects.

1. The Sword cuts off suddenly, it makes a quick dispatch, now Famine makes
you dye a lingering death, Lam. 4.9. Those pine away, stricken through for want
of the fruit of the field; they pine away. Famine will neither let a man live,
nor yet suffer him to dye. He that is in famine, may say as St. Paul, In death
often, how many deaths does he dye, before he dies.

2. Famine is universal, it reaches more then the Sword, the Sword skips over
many; they may be hid from the edge of the Sword, as we read of Obadiah, he hid
a Thousand Prophets in a Cave, and so escaped the edge of the Sword, now a
Famine reaches all.

3. Famine makes a man cruel to himself, and it is like a Wolf in his breast,
it makes a man feed upon himself; he eats the flesh of his own arms; it makes a
Person unnatural, Lam. 4.10. Thus the famine of the Body is worse than the
Sword, and now Beloved, a Famine of the Word is worse than a Famine of Bread,
in these two respects.

1. A Famine of Bread is only a pineing and starving of the body, Oh, but the
other is starving of the soul; by how much more precious the soul is then the
body, so much the sadder the famine of the soul must needs be; the soul is the
most spiritual and reserved part of man; it is like spirits of wine; the soul is
a divine spark that flees upwards toward God. Now if the soul be more noble
than the body, then the famine of the soul must needs be more deadly and
pernicious than that of the Body, etc.

2. The Famine of the body is but temporal, but for a time, and it will quickly
have an end, sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Ezekiel. 35. Oh, but the Famine
of the soul is eternal. The worm will be ever gnawing the man; the man will be
ever dying, but never dead; he will never taste of one drop of the water of
life, it is an eternal famine, he shall not have one drop of water to cool his
tongue, and thus you see the Famine of the word is far more grievous than the
Famine of bread: Now the sadness of the souls famine, will further appear in
these three or four particulars; And I beseech you observe.

1. To have the Famine of the Word of God, it is a dreadful Judgment, because
now the very means of Salvation is taken away: The very Bridge is plucked up,
that should lead us over to Heaven. Prove. 29.18. Where there is no Vision the
people perish. The Hebrew word for perish, has two significations, either it
signifies to be made naked, they. strip off their Ornaments and glory, or else
the word perish, signifies to reject, God rejects such a people, when he takes
awy the Vision from them, Where there is no Vision the people perish. But now
here is a Question may be asked,

Quest. You will say unto me, but may we not be saved without the Word Preached?

Ans. I will not dispute what God can do, in an extraordinary way, when people
are debarred from Ordinances by sickness, or the like, or captivity, the Lord
has promised to be a little Sanctuary unto them. Ezekiel. 11.16. As the people of
Israel in the Wilderness, when they could not have the ordinary means of
tilling, plowing, and sowing; in this case God gave them bread from Heaven,
John 6.31 Let me assure you, ordinarily God does not distill the Golden Oil of
Salvation, but through the pipes of Ordinances, and therefore you shall observe
in Scripture, that Ministers of the Gospel, are called Ministers of the Spirit,
2 Cor. 3.8. because the spirit of God ordinarily makes use of the Word, to work
grace, and therefore it is called the Ministry of the spirit, why this makes the
Famine of the Word so dismal, because now, the very means of salvation is taken
away from a people, they lie in their blood.

2. I beseech you observe, A Famine of the Word it is very sad wherever it
comes, because now the Lord turns away his face from a people or a nation.
Ordinances are the face of God, they are his smiles, face, in the Gospel, it is
called the face of Christ, 2 Cor 4.6. Now beloved, when a spiritual Famine
comes, God turns away his face from us. The Child had rather have his Fathers
frowns upon him, than that he should turn away his face, to be so incensed
against him that he will not look upon his Child; and this is sad, to have God
turn away his face from a people; better have a frowning face from God, than
noe face. The Lord may have love under a wrinckled brow, as the sun may be
under a Clowd; but for God to turn away his face from us, is a sign he intends
to disinherit us, as David prayed, Lord hide not thy face from me in Anger,
Psalm. 120.2. It is sad when God hides his face for a time, but worse when he
quite turns away his face, that he will not look upon a people, Oh this makes a
soul-famine very sad and dreadful.

3. The Famine of the Word must needs be very sad and dismal, because if the
Word be gone, God has now done speaking to us, he has no more to say. Pray
observe, It is called in the Text a famine of hearing, of hearing of the Word,
we shall hear no more from God; God has something to say to a people as long
as his Ordinances are amongst them; he speaks to them by his Ministers, they
are his mouth, they deliver his Council. Now as it is a sad judgment for God
to have done smiting a people, Ezekiel. 1.5. why should you be smitten any more,
and so for God to leave speaking to a people, this is a rebellious people, it
is to no purpose to use any more words, I will speak no more to them, it is
better for God to speak as if he were angry, than not to speak at all: the
prisoner cries to his Judge for mercy, mercy, and the Judge will not speak a
word noe way, but he must dye; if God has done speaking to us in Word, we
shall hear him speaking in another Language, in his Wrath, In Psalm. 2.5. then
shall he speak to them in his Wrath, and fiery Language. If a man will not
speak to another, it is a sign either that he slights him, or he does not think
him worth speaking to, or it is sign he intends some evil against him. It was
sad with Saul when the Lord had done speaking to him, 1 Samuel 28.6. the Lord
answered him neither by rain, nor his Prophets, God had done speaking to him, a
sign some evil was intended to him, the next be heard speak, it was the Devil,
and the news which he brought was sad, to morrow thou shall be with me, 1 Samuel
28.19. beloved if God has once done speaking to a people, why then he has
done hea^ing to when he shuts his mouth he always stops his ears, though you
pray unto him he will not hear; they cried to me and I would not hear; when the
Lord will not speak no more to a people, when he shuts his mouth, he presently
stops his ears: Now is not a spiritual famine sad? God has now done speaking
to a people.

4. The people and the dispensers of the Gospel, they are promised by the Lord
as great blessings to a place, why then to be deprived of such blessings, and
have a famine of the Word it must needs be a heavy and a dismal Judgment. Now
to speak more distinctly to these,

1. Consider what a great blessing the Gospel is, and

2. The dispensers of it, and then you will easily conclude what a Judgment it
is to be deprived of them.

As for the Gospel, it is a blessing which Crowns a people, the very Engine
which God uses to convert a Soul. It is called in Scripture the word of life,
because it enfuses life into the people, it is a two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
with one edge it strikes sin dead, with the other edge it strikes the soul
alive. besides consider the great blessing of this people in these three
particulars, and you will see what it is to be deprived, of it.

1. The Gospel of Christ, it is the beauty, the riches, it is the strength of a
Kingdom, the most sparkling Jewel in their Crown, the beauty of God shines in
the Gospel, Brethren, the Gospel is the glass in which we see, the
unsearchable riches of Gods love to a sinner. The Gospel preached gives us the
presence of Christ, and Christ's presence is the spiritual beauty of a Nation;
now if there be a famine of the Word, then the glory is departed. England
without the Gospel will be like unto a house, when the rich furniture and
hangings are pulled down, the house is naked and deformed; so if the preaching
of the Word be Eclipsed, then the glory of a Kingdom is Entombed, and all
places of honor lie in the dust.

2. The preaching of the Gospel is the riches of a Kingdom, it increases a
Kingdoms treasure and revenue; there are many temporal blessings that come
along with the word, it has been observed that those places have been most
fruitful and have been most enriched where the Gospel has been planted,
trading in those parts has been most quick; it is observable that same place
of King Jehosaphat, that when he had taken care for a preaching Ministry, and
sent his Princes and his Nobles to encourage his Ministers; Oh how rich did his
kingdom grow, they brought him presents of silver, and he waxed exceeding
rich, 2 Chronicles 17.11. The Gospel it is like the Ark which carries a blessing
with it where ever it went, Hag. 2.18. says God, Consider from this day, even
from the day that the Lords Temple was laid, from this day will I bless you:
Isreal's mercies did bear date from the Temple building; so that the Gospel is
the riches of a Kingdom.

Mark what I say to you this day, the ready way to beggar a Kingdom is to take
away the Gospel: I beseech you remember a Famine of Gods word will soon bring a
Famine of Bread upon a Land.

3. The Gospel preached is the defense of a Kingdom, it is a Kingdoms safely
and defense, it is the Fort-Royal of a Land, it is the very lock where on
Englands strength lies; what was the strength of Israel, God was there, there
was his word, and there was his ordinances, that was the Rock where Isreal's
strength did lie, not brazen Walls but silver Trumpet are the best defense of
our Land. It is said of the Levites or Ministers, that when they came and
preached at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. The Text says, thry strengthened the
Kingdom. It is remarkable in Scripture, they as take away the preaching of the
Gospel, are like those that pull down the Bancks to let in the main Sea, they
open a sluice to let in the wrath of God upon a Kingdom; thus you see the Gospel
is a singular blessing, and therefore to have a famine of the word, to have the
Gospel go, it must needs be a great curse to a Land.

Again, as the Gospel is a great blessing so the Dispensers, the Ministers of
the word, they are promised as great blessings to a Land; and therefore to have
them removed, and a Soul famine, it is a heavy judgment: God promises his
Ministers as blessings to a Nation; Jer. 3.15. I will give you Pastors after
mine own heart, that shall feed you with knowledge, and that they are great
blessings, appears by the title the Scripture gives to them.

1. They are called the Dispensers and Stewards of Gods word, they are called
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. We as Ambassadors of God, beseech you in Christ's
stead to be reconciled, we come to woe you in Christ's name, and clear up your
souls to Christ, we come to make up the happy match between Christ and you, we
bring the Kings picture along with us, we set before your eyes the Lord Jesus
in his most Orient Colors, we show him to you in the beauty of his Person, the
glory of his Offices, the sweetness of his love; why now, if on a sudden God
calls home his Ambassadors, it is a sign he intends the match shall be broken
off.

2. They are called Dispensers and Stewards of the word of God, they are called
stars in Gods hand, Rev. 1.20. They are stars.

First, For their light, how glorious is the Gospel when it is bespangled and
set thick with those stars.

Secondly, they are stars not only for light but for use, they are like the
star that guided the wise man to Jesus Christ, if those spiritual stars be
removed, how shall the soul know how to steer its course, they will be like
Mariners that are benighted upon Shelves and Rocks, Oh, how many where these
stars are wanting, shall to hell in the Dark.

3. They are called Dispensers and Stewards of Gods holy Oracles. They are
called Physicians, Jer. 8.22. Is there no Balm in Gilead, is there no Physician
there! the soul of man is subject to more Diseases then the Body, as one
Christian is troubled with the Stone of the heart, another with a dead Palsy;
and benumedness of Conscience, now it is the work of Gods Ministers to find out
these Diseases, and to apply proper remedy. Beloved how sad is it, to have your
Physician taken away that should heal you, to have a poor soul lie all in
Agony, in a burning Feavour of Conscience, and now to speak words in due
season, or drop in Christ, is there no Balm in Gilead?

4. God calls his Ministers his Waterers, 1 Cor. 3.6. Apollo's was a Waterer,
now you know if you have a plant set in a good soil, if it be not watered, it
yields no fruit. This City of London has had many Apolloes in it, it has had
much watering, you have been watered with the Laborers of your Ministers, and
perhaps watered with their Tears too; Oh, but for your sins, God may command,
that there shall be no more showers, no more watering; If the Lord should
transplant his Apolloes, and see there is more need of watering and planting in
foreign parts, how would this work of Grace go backward in us, how would your
good affections wither, and be as the ground that is parched and dried for want
of showers; Thus Beloved, you see what a great blessing it is to have the
Gospel Dispensers among you, and therefore you may imagine what a spiritual
famine is, and to have these blessings removed; well may England weep her eyes
out, when these are gone that should bring the Vision to her.

Now my Beloved, if a famine of Gods word be so deplorable and dreadful as it
is to have the Bread of life taken away from us, as you may read Amos 8.11. It
is called there, A famine of the word of the Lord, and in Sam. 1.4. it is
called there, The glory departed, and in Matthew. 26.47. The Kingdom of Heaven
taken away, The Salvation of God sent away, Acts 28. and can there be any thing
worse befall a people, than a soul famine, and an Eclipse of their spiritual
glory, the shuting up of the Kingdom of heaven, the carrying away of the
Salvation of God, what worse thing can come upon a people? It is a great wonder
there should be no deeper a sense of this most dreadful of evils, than is
mostly found among Men. Men little understand what they do, who either in a way
of Merit, or Instrumentally procure and bring on these Plagues, and few
understand or are sensible what they herein suffer; to be an instrument in this
hellish work, it is an Office for a Devil; and the suffering of such a Plague to
them as understand it, is an hell above ground; this Darkness is the very same
for kind, with the darkness of Hell, as the light of the Gospel is the same in
kind with the everlasting light, as glory under age; so is this thick
darkness, in specei and in simile, the darkness of the pit, Oh what a hell of
wickedness does this world then become, the Devil is then in his Region, is
let loose and rules the world at pleasure, deceives, devours, destroys souls
without Contradiction, takes them Captive at his will, carries them down by
wholesale to destruction. These dark, and dismal seasons are the Devils Marker,
where he may vent his hellish Wares, his Snares and Temptations, his Deceipts
and Delusions, and every abominable thing by wholesale; there is nothing so
false, so vile and abominable, but he can put it off at pleasure, Adultery,
Drunkenness, Witchcraft, Sodomy, Buggery, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Atheism, any
thing that Satan has to offer he will find Customers enough to receive, and
the truth is, the Devil may spare his pains; Men then need not a Devil to damn
them, they shall do it fast enough of their own Accords.

Oh, it were happy if the Saints were so busy in improving their light, to
haste them Heavenward, as sinners do their larknesse, to hurry them to Hell.

Oh, the sad truths that the world affords of this dreadful truth; look into
all the dark Corners of the Earth, especially there where there has been
light, and see if you find not all this proved to your hand. Can he then be
accounted a Christian whose heart does not tremble at the thoughts and the
fears of such a sore judgment, he is both dark and dead indeed, to whom such a
Mist is not as the first born of death, or the King of Terrors.

Christians, If ever this should be your Case, make not light of it, and take
heed, how sad soever it may seem in its first approach, that no track of time
do wear off the sense of it; I have now done, and come to improve this
Proposition, and proceed to the Application.

Use 1. Now my friends, If a famine of the word be so dreadful (as you have
heard) next to damning of souls, I know not what worse then starving of a soul,
if it be so dismal, then what are we to think of those that endeavor by their
Counsel and by their Interest, what in them lies, to be instrumental to bring a
famine of the word upon Gods People. For my part I account those, and always
shall do, the greatest Felons in the Land, who would rob us of the word of God;
these are the Devils Agents, they are his Factors; let me assure you they will
be found fighters against God; They are like the Philistians that stops the
Wells (those that would stop the Wells of the Water of Life) Oh, how would this
inhaunce their sin! What to be instrumental to starve souls? I will say but
this, the Ministers of Jesus Christ they are to warn people of their Sins, they
are to tell them if there be any danger, any wrath of God hanging over a Land,
they are Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.6.2. If Watchmen see the Sword come and blow not
the Trumpet, and the People be not warned; their blood I will require at the
Watch-mens hands. Now Brethren I appeal to you; We Watchmen must warn the
people. Oh how will they be able to answer to God at the great day, that shall
take Ministers off from his Spiritual Watch, that shall hinder him from warning
the People; Surely the blood of souls must needs lie at those men's doors; that
is the First.

Use 2. It is of Exhortation, if a Gospel Famine be so dreadful as you have
heard, as good almost be in hell; why then let me exhort you this day to some
duty.

1. Let us labor with all laboriousness to prevent the removal of the Gospel
from us, as we would endeavor to remove the Sword, the Fire, the Plague, so
let us labor to prevent the removal of the Gospel from us: Oh a Gospel famine
is the most dismal! and the more let my words prevail with you, because there
is so much fear (if God prevent not) of the Gospel departing from us. I might
show you that there is a soul famine in many parts of this Land already, and
there are many sad signs, the Lord is about to bring this spiritual famine upon
this Land. I shall show you the sad simptoms of the Gospel going from England,
there are (4. gray hairs) 4. sad signs of the Gospel departing, which the
Lord prevent.

1. First of all that great contempt which is thrown upon the Gospel and
professors of it; do we think that God is tied to England more than to another
Nation? do we think the Lord will continue his mercy to a people that despise
his mercy? is he bound to do that? is nor the Gospel of our Lord Jesus this
day slighted and persecuted? the Gergesens, they were more mannerly, they
beseeched Christ to depart out of their Coasts Matt. 8.3. But we have many
among us, they do not beseech Christ, they would drive him out by force, though
nothing but honey dropps from the Lips of the Gospel, it brings salvation to a
people, yet how is it opposed at this day? pray observe, I confess the Gospel
of Christ, it is not suited to men's carnal interest or appetite, the Gospel
does not tell them of Fields and Vineyeards it has to bestow upon them, the
Gospel of Christ does not prophecy of Wine and strong Drink, then the Drunkard
would gladly receive the Gospel; but it is a holy Gospel, it bears down men's
lusts, it proclaims peace to them upon no other terms, but their proclaiming
War against Sin, and therefore the Gospel is hated and contemned, and
surely this contempt of Christ and his Gospel, it is a sad forerunner of the
removal of the Gospel: Mark what I say, a despised Gospel will soon be a
departing Gospel; will any man stay long in a place where he is not welcome? If
God sees that he and his Gospel are not welcome, he will soon take his leave
and be gone from them Hos. 2.12. Woe, Woe to them when I depart from them.
Well, that is the first sad simptom of the Gospel departing.

Secondly, Another sign of the gospel going, it is the general barrenness of
people under the preaching of the gospel; indeed it is to be hoped that some
are fruitful, but the barren branches are more than the fruitful; Lea did
comfort her self for her fruitfulness that now her husband would love her, Genesis
29.34. She was fruitful, therefore her Husband would love her. May not we on
the contrary fear God will not love us because we are unfruitful? it is a sad
sign, when in the Weekly bill we see more every Week die than are born; Oh is
it not so in a spiritual sense? we hear of many people that die Apostates, but
how few are born to God. We hear of many barren Fig Trees that Christ cursed,
but where are the fruitful Vines? if once that gospel; and people which was as
the garden of God, shall become barren, it is a sign the Lord will bestow no
more cost, but will pull up the hedge, and lay his Vineyard waste; that is the
second Symptom.

Thirdly. Another sad sign of the gospel going from us, which the Lord prevent,
it is the animossities and bitter divisions of Gods own people; the Devil
danceth at discords, it is a sad sight not only to see Christ's Coat rent, but
to see his Body rent, his mistical Body. I have often seen, and it is usual,
the Woolf to worrie the Lamb, but it is unnatural to see one Lamb worrying
another: Christians, they should be ready to dye one for another, and they can
hardly live one by another: Those that write concerning the Be, observes, when
the Bees strive and mutanie together, it is a sign that the master Be is
about to leave the Hive; and when Gods people strive by discords and
contentions, Oh it is a sign God is goi^ from the Nation, he is about; to leave
^ive. If that servants cannot agree, they will fall out, why the Master will
take away the light from them, I wish it be not so here. My beloved, do not we
all hope for one heaven? Oh why should there not be one heart among us? how
unsationable are contentions among Gods people, now when the Popish adversary
is so near to us, he is at the door. It is a very bad time for Mariners to
divide and fall out when the Enemy is boreing a hole a^ the bottom of the
ship; is it not so now? surely it is a sad sign of the gospel going from us,
the Lord will not let his gospel dwell in such a house as is all on fire.

Fourthly, Another sad sign of the Gospel going from us and a Spiritual
Famine, i^ is this; When the People of God lose their first love, and decline
in their affections toward Jesus Christ, Rev. 2.4. I have somewhat against
thee, because thou have left thy first love; when Christians have a Chillness
and a Deadness grow upon them, they have not the love to the word of God as
they had, they have not that brokenness of heart for sin, they have not that
zeal for truth, they have not that simpathize for the misery of Sion, they are
now in a declining state, they have left their first love, and this is a fatal
sign of Gods departing from the Nation; Lost thy first love, it will not be
amiss to enquire whence this loss of our first love ariseeth; this Spiritual
Consumption (as I may so call it,) whence does this loss of our love arise, I
conceive it arises from these four Causes.

First, Perhaps there is some sin secretly indulged, some sin that your heart
sets brooding upon, now sin is pernicious to grace; it is like the blow at
the Root of the Tree, that causes the Tree to wither; as if a man takes but a
small quantity of poison, why this will hurt his virals, it will waste his
spirit, look upon David, he had been taking of poison, he was tampering with
sin and he found a decay in his holiness, he was like one in an Apoplexsie, he
had not that lively acting of Grace as formerly he had, he lost his first love.

Secondly, The loss of our first love, it may arise from the neglecting of the
Ordinances, the means of Grace; you know abstinasie from food will quickly make
the body Consumptive, it will soon bring a Consumption; so when People either
through Pride or through Melancholy leave off Praying, leave off Sacraments;
they have abstinasie from their Spiritual food, no wonder if they find a
declining in their affections; Gods Ordinances they are the fuel for our
Graces, if you take away the fuel, no wonder you begin to abate and you loose
your first love.

Thirdly, The loss of our first love arises, and I pray observe it, it rises
from a formal use of holy things; though perhaps we do keep up duty, yet God
knows we do not keep up fervency in duty, Romans 12.11. Fervent in spirit serving
the Lord. Oh, when once Christians grow into dull formality, pray as if they
prayed not, their hearts is not in the duty, they do not put sire to the
insence, they grow Drowsy in Prayer, you know the wise Virgins they slumbered,
Matthew. 25. Thus by degrees you lose your first love, though you be not quite
dead in sin, yet you are dead in duty.

Fourthly, The loss of your first love, arises from a spiritual sloth,
Christians do not exercise themselves to godliness, and then there follows a
decay in godliness; why, you know your experience tells you there is nothing in
the world sooner brings a man's body into a Consumption than want of exercise,
because the ill humors are not purged away, and natural heat exercised, want
of exercise kills. My brethren, he that will not use grace, he will be sure to
loose grace; Christians they do not exercise their faith, they do not busy
themselves about heaven, they do not trade their Tallent for Gods glory as they
should; they live in houses together, but they do no good together, they do not
exercise their grace, and hence they fall into decay of grace before they are
aware and loose their first love, and what follows, this loss of your first
love sadly prefages the loss of the gospel of Christ, for this very sin in the
second of the Revelations and the 4 th v. for sin they had their golden
Candiestick removed from them, in the second of the Revelations and the first
verse. Therefore you see brethren what need there is to labor to prevent the
spiritual Famine, and a loss of the gospel, because there is such a fear of the
gospel departing from your; you have seen it evidently proved before your eyes.

But here is a question; now you will say unto me, we cannot deny but there is
a fear of the removal of the gospel, and of a famine of the Word; but how shall
we do to prevent this soul Famine? now to this I answer, do these three or four
things to prevent the gospel going away.

First, Take heed of those sins which will surely bring a Famine of Gods Word,
there are some sins which we must endeavor to prevent, that will bring a
famine of the word, there are several of these sins set down in this Chapter,
Amos 8. Pray observe them. I will mention some of them.

The first sin the Prophet does set down, is Oppression, Amos 8.11. Hear
this, Oh you that swallow up the needy. Those Jews they were like the Fishes of
the Sea, the greater devour the lesser; For this sin of Oppression God
threatens a Famine of the Word, and is not this sin to be found among us.
Oppression, I appeal to any one that has his Reason left. Does not one Man now
become a Woolfe to another, does not he tear from him the Golden Fleece; I dare
be bold to say there is more Justice to be found in Hell then among men upon
Earth; for in Hell no Innocent Person is oppressed, that is one sin.

Secondly, Another sin the Prophet sets down, that is the cause of this
Spiritual Famine; it was weariness of Gods Ordinances, Amos the 5 th and 8 th
Verse. When will your New Moons be gone that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath
that we may set forth Wheat, Verse 6. For this sin I will bring a Famine of
the Word; are you weary of me, They were more for Trading then they were for
worshipping; The Lord has fed us of this City with the finest of the Wheat, the
Bread of life, he has given us the very Cream of his Ordinances, but when we
have been fed to the full, have not we begun to surfeit, have we not said, when
will the Sabbath be gone, what a weariness is it? Truly when we have lost our
Stomach, it is most just with God to take away our Food; If a Man's Commodities
bares a better price in one place then in another, he will remove his Marker;
the Gospel is grown a cheap Commodity, it bears but a lo price; now Men are
weary of it: and may not we fear God will remove his Market, he will transplant
his Word into Foreign parts: Surely if we begin to say what a weariness is it
if our mercies be our burdens, God can soon ease us of this burden; this is a
sin brings a Famine of the Word, when we are weary of the Ordinances; and
has not this sin caused a Famine of the Word already in many parts of this
Land. There is none knows how to speak to their Spiritual Case, that can feed
them with the Bread of life, that can divide the Word aright, in many parts of
the Land it is so, they have Husks given to them instead of Food, and Music
instead of Manna.

Thirdly, Another sin that brings a soul Famine, is this cozening in men's
Dealings, Verse 5. Making the Ephar small, the Ephar it was the Kings Measure,
Verse 7. In selling they made the Ephar small, the meaning is, they gave but
scanty Measure; they made the Ephar small; and says God, you sell the refuge
of the Wheat, that is mear Cheating, they pick out of the best Grain for
themselves, and the Husks and Refuge they sell to the poor; here is mear
Cheating, says God, I will bring a Famine of the Word upon you for this; let
none hold in their hands false Balances: I would there did not.

Fourthly, Another sin that brings a Famine in this Chapter, is Idolatry,
Verse 4. They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God Oh Dan
lives, here was plain Idolatry; but let us understand this sin of Samaria,
what was that? that was the Calf that was set up at Bethel near to Samaria, and
to swear to this Calf, here was plain Idolatry; for this God threatened a Famine
of the Word, and are we free from this sin, I would we were: is there no Idol
worship among us, are there not some so impotent, as to say in Print, It will
never be well with us till we are reconciled to the Mother Church of Rome:
Idolatry it inrageth God, it breaks the Marriage Knot, it makes God give a Bill
of Disvorce to a People; Idolatry it does so provoke the Lord, that he takes
away the visible Tokens of his presence from a Nation, 2 King. 17.12.18. they
served Idols, What follows, Verse 18. Therefore the Lord was very angry with
Israel, removed them quite out of his sight, he unpeopled them, he unchurched
them, he removed them out of his sight. I say this to you, when once you see
dark shaddows of Popery stretched out, then fear the Sun of the Gospel is
going down.

Fifthly, Another sin that brings a Gospel Famine, it is opposition to
Reformation, when God calls to a Land to return to him by Repentance, Turn ye,
turn ye, why will you die? but they will go on in sin when God cries to them
by his Judgments to break of sin, but they will not hear the voice of Gods
Rodd, Jer. 5. verse 3. they refuse to receive Correction; when once it is thus
with a people, God will pack up and be gone from them, 7. Jer. 13.14. ver.
Therefore will I do to this House which is called b my Name, as I did to
Shilo; why what did God do to Shilo? when he left the tokens of his wrath there
at Shilo, the Priest was slain, the Arc taken Prisoner, all the signs of Gods
presence were removed, and we never read that the Arc retuned to Shilo any
more. Oh dreadful! has not the Lord blown the Trumpet in our ears? has not be
called to us to repent, but we hate to be reformed, we turn a deaf ear to God;
let England, let London, take heed it be not with it, as once with Shilo that
God does not make the Vision cease, and bring a Famine of the word in these our
days, Levit. 26. verse 23. pray observe, 24.30. says God, verse 23. I will
punish you yet seven times more, for your sins I will make you lie waste, and
I will bring your Sanctuary into desolation, that is the first thing: if you
would prevent a Gospel Famine, I beseech you beloved take heed of those sins
which you have seen have brought a Famine of Gods Word upon a Land.

Secondly, If you would prevent a Famine of the Gospel, let us besiege the
Throne of Grace by earnest prayer; Oh pray to God, you that can pray, pray,
that the Lord would not depart from you, that he would not make the Vision
cease, that he would not turn the Songs of our Temple into Howleing, Oh lay
hold upon Christ by importunity you read of those in the Gospel, when Christ
made as if he was going away, the Text says, they did constrain his to stay
with them, Luke 24. Verse 29. Is not the Lord upon the Thrashal of his Temple,
as if he was ready to take his wings and fly from us? Oh let us by humble
prayer lie at his Feet, and if it be possible, constrain him yet to stay with
England; stay Lord, rather any Judgment than this! rather lay a stroke upon
my body or Estate, but do not bring a Famine of the Word of God; and if we
would prevail with the Lord, use Arguments in prayer when we come to God for
the poor Gospel of England: Lord have thou never a Remnant left among us, a
People that love thee, and fears thee, that hangs about thee, that will not let
thee go? Oh destroy not the cluster, is not there a blessing in it? Oh will thou be gone from us, art not thou our Father, will the Father take away Bread
from his Children? Lord, will not the Enemy insult to see thee leaving thy
Temple, where thou have put thy Name? will thou make the hearts of thy people
sad, and will thou rejoice thine Enemies? Oh Lord, have thou not given Bond,
and is there better. Security? have thou not promised under thy Hand and Seal
thou will give us Pastors after thine own heart to feed us with Knowledge?
Lord, thou will never Forfeit thy Bond. It is true, we are an unworthy Nation,
not worthy to be Beloved; Oh but can not thou make us fit for Mercy? can
not thou give us Repentance as well as Deliverance? Nay Lord, let us farther
press thee, is not thy Honor concerned in all this? we are called by thy Name,
leave us not; thus should we use Arguments and follow God by prayer, and surely
the Lord will not depart from us. Prayer, it makes a sweet sound in Gods Ear,
and he will not go away, where he hears this Music, Again,

Thirdly, Would we prevent a Gospel Famine (which we have cause to fear) let us
this day turn to God and break off our sins by righteousness, Jer. 7. Verse
3. Amend your ways and your doings, it is a vain thing to pray unless you
reform, amend your ways and your doings: What should God continue his Gospel
for to an impenitent sinful Land, that are resolved they will sin; who
will lay out cost upon ground that brings forth nothing but Briars? who will
power Rose Water upon a Dunghill? Would we prevent a Gospel Famine, let us
break up the Follow ground of our hearts by Repentance. I will say but this,
if we Reform not, we can expect to see no good days more, God will un-People
us, he will un-Church us ere he has done; Oh better loose the Sun in the
Firmament, than that the Gospel Sun should be Eclipsed in our Horison: who
would desire to live when the Ark of God is gone? what good Christian can
forbear weeping at the Funeral of the Gospel? that is the first exhortation;
let us labor to prevent the coming of Gods Famine upon us, as we would prevent
Fire, and Plague, so labor to prevent this Soul Famine.

Seccond Use, of Exhortation is this, if a Famine of the Word be so sad as you
have heard, let us do what we can to keep God still amongst us and his Gospel.
You will say how shall we keep the Gospel, it is a blessed design to keep the
Gospel? I will name three or four things, and I have done.

First, Entertain the Gospel into your houses, that is one way to keep it;
Obadiah he entertained the Ark, and his house was blessed for the Ark sake; if
you cannot have the Gospel in poblick, as you use to have with purity and
freedom, get it into your houses; I am sure of this, you can never put your
houses to better use, then to entertain Christ and his Gospel; I beseech you
let it not be said, that the Gospel is put to seek its lodging; does not this
Gospel bring Salvation? Oh how glad should you be to have Salvation come to
your House.

Secondly, Would you keep the Gospel among you? Improve it the best way, I know
still to enjoy the Gospel, is to improve it, lay up a stock of knowledge, let
the word of Christ dwell richly in you, coll. 3. Verse 16. Receive the Word not
only into your heads, but into your hearts, get good by the word Preached,
while the Manna falls gather Manna, the best way to enjoye the Gospel is to
improve it, God will not take away the Breast, so long as Faith draws the breast.
And then,

Thirdly, Prise the Gospel and that is the way to keep it, the Ordinances of
God are the most signal blessings, they are better then Gold and Silver, they
are the food of your souls, they strengthen faith, they increase joy; these are
the Conduits that holds the Water of Life, that soul that before was dry like
Aarons Rod being planted near these waters of the Ordinances, have flourished,
have brought forth Buds and Almonds, and therefore prise the Ordinances.
Beloved here we converse with the Lord Jesus Christ, if ever we enjoy Christ
upon earth, it is here; if ever we see his face, it is through this Lattice,
Gods Ordinances are like the place of the Mercy Seat, where the Lord did speak
from heaven to his People; oh then prise these Gospel blessings, and that is
the way yet to keep them among you.

And lastly, If you would keep the Gospel with you, adorn the Gospel, you that
are here present, you do all profess the Gospel, that is not enough, unless
you adorn the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel; but when do we adorn the Gospel? I answer, when we live according to
the rule of the Gospel in sobriety and sanctity, Oh that is to adorn it: when
we walk according to the rule of it in sobriety and sanctity, we adorn the
Gospel; when we walk as the Members of Christ, and as those that are acted by
his Spirit, we adorn the Gospel; when we shine forth in a kind of Angelical
brightness, and live so holy as if we had seen the Lord, this is to adorn the
Gospel, and this is the best way I know to have the Gospel intailed upon us,
and upon our posterity after us.


