THE Most Strange AND WONDERFUL PREDICTIONS OF Cleombrotus AN HEATHEN JEW,
PROPHESIED In the Year One thousand Two hundred Seventy and two; upon the
Reigns of Twenty Nine Kings of ENGLAND, from EDWARD the First to CHARLES the
Fifth, One thousand Seven hundred Ninety nine.

Found in the College of WITTENBVRGH in GERMANY.

LONDON. Printed for Langley Curtis, in Goat-Court on Ludgate Hill. MDCLXXIX.

The most Strange and Wonderful Predictions of CLEOMBROTVS, etc.
WHen Sixteen hundred year is come,
And Twenty five, the I is done;
The Letter C shall take the Crown,
And Reign Nine years in great Renown;
But then beware of Lebon Rex,
Lest that the P the Lion vex;
For then sad Fates and Destiny
By Wars, throughout his Reign shall be;
Then, with a Blow, the Times will turn,
And Thousands for one Man shall Mourn;
The C shall stoop unto the C,
But, pray the first, it be not He.
But before this day come, there will reign a mighty War; Many Towns will be
brought low, stately Cedars will bow their Heads, and mighty Castles stoop to
Cottages. Then will England be surfeited with the Blood of Innocents, and
remain a while without King, Lords, or Commons; then will Churches be made
Stables, and Palaces become Prisons. The People at that time shall stand
amazed, thus bewailing:

O Happy certainly are they
That never did live to see this day:
Our Wealth is all unto Confusion brought,
By those who have not left us worth a Groat.
Our stately Livings to the Ground are come,
But dare not speak, we must be dumb.
Once had we Justice, and a Glorious King,
Now Thousand Tyrants in the room of him,
Which, like to Tigers, did his Life betray,
Since we, like Sheep, must unto Wolves obey.
We know not where to go, nor where to fly,
But, like poor Job, sit down in Misery.
Great Changes at that time will happen; and the Death of some Great Man will
then hasten: But when you remember the Fall of Charran Cross, and see a new one
built in Paul's Church, then will Captivity be led captive, and Redemption out
of Bondage will draw near: at which time the Sea will say unto the Land, I have
brought home the Treasure of many years Voyage: And the Land shall then answer,
It is so Rich and precious, I am not worthy to receive it. Which Time
described, is in the year One Thousand Six hundred and Sixty.

In the Sixteen hundred and Sixty year
Strange Wonders unto England shall appear;
Providence by Connection joyneth Close
The Exiled Thistle to the Southern Rose.
For Neptune of the Ocean home shall bring
A second C, but what a Precious thing
Will this same Letter be, and high will stand,
Lord of the Eleventh House, by Sea and Land.
Describe but Mars and Venus to command.
He Will come in May, or else the first of June.
Pray that the Seas may calm and quiet be,
Twice missed he Dangers, now again at Sea,
Yet will be quiet from Troubles, Neptune Roar,
And when He is arrived on the Shore,
Observe this Prophecy, 'twill make appear,
His Reign consists, One Five and Fifty year;
But yet before the Eighty first, you will see
A mighty Monarch in the World He Will be,
Some great and hughy War may then ensue;
If that by chance the Eagle proves not true,
The Lion Rampant may in Fury grow,
Though it is suspected whether he will or no;
For if the Eagle he should fly too fast,
It Is thought his Tallons will be clipped at last.
For then in his Description you will find,
All Europe will be subject to One Mind.
Which is the Letter C predicted true,
That will some Great and Neighboring Prince subdue.
And then, before the Lion proves kind,
He Will have an Heir according to his Mind,
Sprung from an House that is of a pretty Name,
An Ostridge sounds something near the same.
Then Spain in Fame shall last,
France by Chance may fall,
Germany will stand fast,
But England all in all.
Now mark, that toward the year one thousand six hundred sixty two, will great
Contest be in England about Religion, at which time, will then Reign, twenty
eight Scots of several Opinions, in which time will many Sparks of Dissentions,
but of small Continuance, like the Snuff of a Candle, quickly waste out and
soon extinguish; for then will the Crows Head and the Magpies Breast, be a
stumbling Block to erroneous Errors, more Disputants will be in arguing, than
Parish Pastors in reconcileing; many at that time will be confuted and range
abroad, like seemed mad men, but after a while will be soon quieted, so that by
the year, one thousand six hundred sixty five, will all become one peculiar
Government, and then it will be as hard to hear the Name of a Soldier in open
Hostility, as to see a white Raven on the top of a Pinnacle, a white Harvest
will follow, and Peace and Plenty will continue, few Murders will be
committed, no Treasons will be thought of; but in the year, one thousand six
hundred sixty nine, or there abouts, will a Ship sail up the River Thames, and
a Merchant will ask the Mariner, what News he brings, the Mariner shall
answer, that Austria is removed to England, and the Gates of Rome does seem to
tremble; that year will some great Foreign Prince have a Fall, but England
shall reign Dominical and provide a great Voyage for Sea, but beware a Swallow
do not sit in the Stern of the Admiral, for if it do, it will endanger the
Fleet, for that Bout. And in the year one thousand six hundred and eighty,
great Tournaments will be exercised, tilting and Lances will be in high
Request, and that year will a Talbot jump to a Duke of Norfolk, but it will be
better for him, to absent that day, than repent of his Title all the year
after; for if his Horse throw him in the Morning, let him abstain his Honor
that day, otherwise he will take a Fall at Court, and pitch his Head at Berkley
Castle. For the Eagle and the Leapard shall spurn him in the dark, for the Moon
at that time, will be eclipsed, but if his Horse does not stumble, as he
mounteth, let him proceed, for then he shall discover, by the Light of the
Moon, the Craftiness of the Eagle in all her Darkness,

The sixteen hundred eighty year will bring,
Great days of Honor, by a mighty King;
For Nobles in the Month of July they,
Shall try great Actions on the twentieth day.
By which you will find in this same Prophecy,
A Talbot shall the Duke of Norfolk be.
An Eagle then at this begins to spurn,
Till she have made the Talbot 's Title turn.
Unhappy then will be the twentieth day,
Unhappy Talbot, this Prediction say,
If that his Horse does stumble when he mount,
This is a perfect and a true Account.
In his Behalf the Moon will lose her Light,
And he arrested at the Court for Spite.
For Treason and Contentions they have bred,
He shall at Barkley -Castle lose his Head:
But if he miss that twentieth day before,
He Will live a Duke for thirty years and more.
The second Prophecy of Aldura Manasach, on the Year one thousand seven
hundred.
THis will be a year of great Change and Alteration throughout the whole Realm,
but no Wars heard or thought of; and a glorious Flower of long Continuance that
year shall fall; his Color for the Letter C will lay down in his Dormitory,
and a fresh Rose will arise from the same Root; observe a little before and you
shall see an Eagle alight upon the Tower of Canterbury, and two white Doves
shall come and oppose him, but after a small Repose, the Eagle will return to
the Wood and the two Doves, retire to the Top of the Church, and after a short
space, they shall take their Flight toward some great City; then shall a man
in a long Gown say, this is a great and notable Sign, what means it? then
shall a Man of a strange Nation answer, shaking his Head and say, some Mighty
Monarch is desperate ill; But if he passes the ninth day, and the nineteenth
day, and twenty ninth, It will be added to his Reign fifteen years. It is
observed this Prediction comes near of that Prophecy, on the year one thousand
six hundred sixty.

The third Prophecy on the year one thousand seven hundred.
TImes when the second Letter C
Begins to reign will prosperous be,
Whose great Abilities have been foretold,
And Pattern to the universal World.
All Malice, Envy, Hate, Discord and Spite,
For length of days (will vanish from his Sight)
He will exceed all Reigns of Kings before,
He Will Reign till Forty seven, if not more.
And, if in Forty Eight he miss a drift,
He Will Reign out Fifty, nay, till Fifty fifth.
With Pious, Virtuous, and a Godly Fame,
Both Peace and Plenty then shall end his Reign.
A Prophecy upon CHARLES the Third, and two Kings after him, by Cleomlrotus the
Jew.
WHen that the third of this same Letter C. do Reign,
Then will be cheap all kind of Grain.
The space of twenty two years 'twill consist,
Which this Prediction here does manifest.
No Wars nor Rumors in his Reign shall be.
Except in thirty or in thirty three,
And then some Foreign Prince will with him jar,
Which in the thirty fourth proves a War;
In June do it but mark, in July after,
'Twixt Di^p and Calis is a Mighty Slaughter,
The first will dye, the third will have Renown,
And win two Standards and a Crown;
Which ends the Grudge, long time had been before,
But after this will never be Battle more.
The F. shall subject be unto the E.
And sail subjective unto them at Sea.
To Charles the third will Nations intercess,
He Will live in Peace, and dye in Quietness.
But then beware O Germany,
For the Letter I will Emperor be.
The Second Letter of this Name, will be a mighty Warrior abroad in other
Nations, Great Conquests will be gotten, but in the last Battle he will intend
to fight in the Eastern part of the World, let him beware the Moon he do not
change, for if he do, the day will be lost in the Afternoon, and a great Prince
of the Blood will be slain; but in the Afternoon he shall recover most part by
the Assistance of a Monk. Three Kings will be in the Field that day, but the
Victory will go to the West, and suddenly after will a Northern Prince send an
Embassage to this great Conqueror; but let him beware he gives not Audience,
for if he do, the Letter I will be in danger of Stab; and if he escape that, he
will be delivered from a great many more that year following. But in the Month
of December, let him sit up late, and have trusty Friends to be Esquires of his
Body, for under the Mat of his Bedchamber, will a horrid destructive Bear be
lodged, yet it will be discovered by the Scent of a Talbot, whereby the Moon
will be greatly ecclipsed, and endanger the Loss of his Light. After this the
Letter I will return home, and carry the house of Austria upon his back; great
Lands will be subjective, and never after will Wars or Rebellion be heard of in
his Days. In Canterbury he will end his Reign in Quiet, but before this will
the Prince of the Blood be born in Cornwall, and the fourth of the Name, which
begins with the Letter C. but then shall London be removed to Canterbury, and
remain the space of sixteen years; at which time will England be troubled, by
two Roman Senators, for then shall two Ships sail up the River of Thames, and a
Merchant on the Bridge shall ask them, what Merchandise they have; and the
other shall answer, two white Ravens and a Black Swan; the Merchant on the
Bridge shall ask, what they will have in Exchange for them; they will answer,
the Cathedral of Paul's, and the Relics thereunto belonging; then the Merchant
will say, the Merchandise is but Counterfeits, and Paul's is too heavy for the
Strength of Rome to remove, at which, the Tower will seem to thunder, and
Dover-Castle, to give an Echo. That when Charles the Fourth, should take the
Royal Diadem, London will be removed to Canterbury for sixteen years, in which
latter time, England will be troubled with two Roman Senators: that is, the
Pope shall send to the Bishops of England, and endeavor to seduce them, for to
acknowledge the Supremacy of Rome; the Merchants on the the Bridge, signifies
the Bishops disputing upon the Grounds of Religion. The two white Ravens are
the Pope's Indulgences, and the Black Swan his tyrannical Penance; had he but
obtained his Errand, the saying of the Bishops, Their Merchandise were but
Counterfeits, was the Invalidity of their Proffers, and that Paul's was too
heavy for Rome to carry away, signifies, they will keep up the
Church Government of England, and renounce his Idolatry. After this,
Church Government shall never be attempted neither by Pope nor Sectarian any
more. Now the Thundering of the Tower, and the Echo of Dover-Castle is the
Roaring of some great Guns in Scorn to the Pope's Supremacy.

The Description of CHARLES the Fourth.
WHen Charles the Fourth Reigns England's King,
Some great Repulse to Rome that Year will bring.
The true Religion he will maintain as far,
As Charles the Second his Progenitor;
Or Charles the third of everlasting Fame,
Or James his Father, second of that Name,
Who was Victorious both by Land and Sea,
But Charles his Reign, no Wars in it shall be.
Both Peace and Plenty all his days shall spring,
That Is One and Twenty years He Will be a King.
So long Continuance he shall rule and sway,
Then like a Rose he will depart away.
With Grief of thousands, he will end his Reign,
Then Seventh Edward will come in again.
From James the Second, know it certainly,
These Kings will rule Imperial Majesty.
Till Charles the fifth, both King and Emperor then,
Shall keep his Court in Germany again.
Observe that near the year, one thousand seven hundred ninety nine, there will
a Prince of the Blood, be born in Canterbury, and at two years of Age, the
Imperial Crown will be put on his Head, and he shall remain under the Tuition
of a Monk three years, but York shall have the Pre-eminence.

When that the Month of July does begin,
In Canterbury will be born a King.
Edward the seventh, he is called by Name.
But in the Lineage of the former Name,
Till that the time of sixteen years does come,
A Monk will be his Tutor all along.
But near the eighteenth, Cleombrotus say,
The Seventh Edward will depart away.
And then will York rule Lord Protector he,
Till Charles the fifth comes to Maturity;
Which when the Royal Diadem shall take,
And make the Crowns of other Princes shake;
But when that twenty years is gone and past,
To his Native Country, he comes Home at last,
And leave his Crown, and to the Grave does go,
He Will die in Love, both Peace and Plenty too.
FINIS.

