THE PREACHERS Tripartite, IN THREE BOOKS.

THE FIRST To raise DEVOTION in Divine Meditations upon PSALM XXV.

THE SECOND To Administer COMFORT by Conference with the Soul, in particular
Cases of Conscience.

THE THIRD To establish TRUTH and PEACE, in several Sermons Against the present
Heresies and Schisms.

By R. Mossom, Preacher of Gods Word, late at St. Peter's Pauls-wharf, London,
Quondam e Col. S. P. C.

S. Aug. Hom. 28. in Ezekiel. 3.19. Si me non audieritis, and tamen ego non
tacuero, liberabo animam meam; sed nolo salvus esse sine vobis. LONDON: Printed
by Thomas Newcomb, and are to be sold in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of
the Bible on Ludgate Hill, and in Fleet Street. 1657.

To the Right Honorable, KATHERINE Countess of PEMBROKE, etc. Together with her
truly Noble Sister, THE LADY MARY SOANDES; As dear in affection, as near in
blood; The Ornament of their Sex and Name.

AND To the true Exemplars of Piety, Honor, and Faithfulness; whether of
Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, or Citizens; Late Auditors and Communicants, at the
preaching of the Word, and ministration of the Eucharist, At S. PETER'S.

Robert Mossom Dedicates the ensuing MEDITATIONS: which, conceived in the
Closet, have had their Birth from the Pulpit; and being now grown up to the
Press, they take heart to travel the World under so just a Patronage and
Protection.

AND The same holy Spirit of Truth, which accompanied them to the ear and the
heart of each reverent Auditor; bless them also to the eye and the soul of
every ingenuous Reader: For a sustaining with grace in the present Warfare; and
a crowning with glory in the future Triumph of Christ's holy Church. Amen.

TO THE Ingenuous Readers.
BEcause just Promises are due Debts; I acknowledge my self a Debtor to the
Church, by promise under mine hand, for the Second Part of my Sions Prospect;
which (if they who importune me by their desires, assist me with their prayers)
I doubt not by Gods blessing to perfect; notwithstanding the encumbrances to
retard, and difficulties to discourage. Indeed, did not my Ministerial service
(unexpected when I past my word) engage what time of the Night I might spare
from my necessary rest, and my School-employment take up what time of the Day I
could spare from my Family-charge; I had not run into so great arrears, in
being so long behind-hand with so just a debt. Yet now, with that honest,
though necessitated person in the Parable, I plead a Patientiam habete, Have
patience with me, and I will pay you all; and till I can pay the Principal,
accept the Interest: These Treatises and Sermons, a part of my Five years
Service; which by a good hand of Providence (amidst all the variety of Secular
changes) I did continue in a plenary discharge of all Ministerial duties,
according to the legally established, viz. Ab Ann 1650. ad Ann. 1652.
and ever piously to be esteemed Order of the Churches Liturgy. And when I was
forced from any longer Ministry at S. Peter's, I may say with confidence, a
Congregation was dissolved, which for reverence, charity and devotion, was not
outvied, if paralleled, by any in the World.

For their sakes especially, that they may the better call to mind what they
have heard, and so the more fully practice what they have been taught; I here
publish to the eye, those Instructions I once delivered to the ear; And what
many of mine Auditory have importuned me for in a Transcript, I here present
them with advantage by an Impression, viz. Those Divine Meditations, which once
warmed their hearts with a devout fervor, when Communicants in the monthly
ministration of the blessed Eucharist. Also, those Choice Cordials, which
refresht their Souls with a chearing vigor, when Combatants in the Christian
warfare of their Spiritual Conflicts. Lastly, See our Contests with Heresy and
Schism; in zeal, not so much to confute the Adversary, as to confirm the
Orthodox; confirm them, even in Truth and Holiness. In which Contests, it is
not the Bays, but the Olive, not victory, but peace, even the peace of
Jerusalem, which is the aim and end of my Preaching; and God, who is the
Searcher of hearts, will bear witness to the sincerity of this profession.

I know well, what I publish in Print, will find a Critical Comment, and
censorious Paraphrase from some; but, if I may benefit the souls of Gods
suffering Saints, I am not careful to stop the mouth, or smooth the brow of a
clamorous, or supercilious censure. I will not fear it worse, nor expect it
better in the whole Volume, then in a large Vineyard, that there be tam uvae
quam labruscae; some clusters of sound and sweet grapes, which have their full
blood, and true spiritual vigor; though withal, some of lighter digestion not
so happy in their soil or sun, and therefore not ripened to so divine a
maturity and sweetness. Neither am I ignorant or unexperienced, how much less
the mind is affected with reading, then with hearing; even by how much a
Preacher, in the particular gift of utterance, is the more master of his
tongue, then pen; and so can speak much more piercingly to the eye, as an
Orator, then as a Scribe. But, what my Pulpit-conceptions do lose by the Press,
as to their affecting heat; I hope they will have repaired them by their
informing light, the Judgment being more thoroughly convinced by a frequent
perusal, then a single delivery.

Whatsoever then you meet with of a devout vigor and solid nourishment, receive
it as from the Storehouse of Heaven, and only ministered by my hand; it is
wholly God's, and yours. But whatsoever is flat or crude, weak and indigested;
that is all mine own, it is like my self, and I shall not refuse, though blush,
to father it. Accept the former, and excuse the latter: And as in that, I shall
further your Piety; so in this, do you express your Charity, the charity of a
fair construction; considering my busy and distracting charge of a
School-Tuition, in which I am still engaged (and I bless God I am so;) as well
to get subsistence, as employ my talent. This troublesome Task may well plead a
favorable interpretation. Which yet is not all the kindness I crave; your
Prayers I sue for, viz. That God will make me farther serviceable to his Church
and you, whose I am in the strictest bond of love, and heartiest zeal of
devotion,

From my House near Blackfriars, over agrinst the Old-Wardrobe, Pridie Nonar.
Febr. 1657. Robert Mossom.



. 1. WEll might David be called the sweet Singer of Israel, ^ Sam. 23.1. Non
minus vivendi genere, quam canendi juavitate immorta^em Deo sui fudisse
Cantilenam, dicit S Ambr. lib. de offic. c. 22.
whose Heart was more divinely musical then his Harp, and the harmony of whose
devout Soul did outvie that of his whole life, what was it but a continued
Antheme? His several failings, through the indulgent mercy of his God, being
made as so many stops of time, to add more grace and sweetness to the music.

. 2. This his Book of Psalms, it is aptly called the Epitome of the whole
Bible, and the Anatomy of the Spiritual man; yea, we may rightly entitle it,
the Register of sacred History, the Ephemeris of Prophecies, the Library of
Divine Doctrine, the Storehouse of Spiritual Comforts, and the Treasury of
holy Devotion; And that Devotion either Penitentiary, Invocatory, or
Eucharistical: Penitenitary, in deep contrition, humble confession, and
passionate lamentation; Invocatory, in fervent supplication, earnest
deprecation, and pious intercession; Eucharistical, in gratulatory
thanksgivings, laudatory oblations, and triumphal songs.

David totus est in deprecanda venta peccatorum and cujusdam sensim quod magnum
and multum dicit v. 11 hoc de illo cum Bethsabe commisso Kimhi intelligit. Sim.
de Muis in loc.
. 3. Here amidst so large a store, choice is made of a Penetential Psalm
(though none of the seven commonly called the Penetentials) fitted in its
devotion to the sacred solemnity of the blessed Eucharist; and could we attain
David's frame of spirit when he composed this Psalm of Penitence, O how well,
how well would it become this holy Sacrament!

. 4. If any inquire a reason why choice is made of this present Psalm for the
constant celebrations of the Lords Supper; know, I have observed a secret vigor
of devotion to diffuse it self into the David's Psalms to draw heat from his
flame, and administer heavenly matter for so holy an exercise; and upon this
reason (O ye humble suppliants) I thought it an apt and profitable service, to
give at once a pattern whereby to frame your private devotions in your Closet,
and an help to compose your souls to an higher pitch of devotion in the public
solemnities of the holy Eucharist.

. 5. Besides, the mystery and benefits of this blessed Sacrament, they are so
many and so various, that no one single verse, or small portion of Scripture,
may be a Text large enough for so copious a subject; wherefore, that many souls
might receive something of instruction and devotion, see here I have chosen an
whole Psalm, which divided into parts, like those loaves in the Gospel broken
into pieces, it will so increase in the explication, Mark. 6.41.
as those did in their distribution; that whereas this Psalm, like one of those
loaves, may seem in the whole, one person, yet shall it, by a blessing of
grace, like as that, by a miracle of power, be in its divided parts, sufficient
for many fifties.

. 6. That this Psalm is of more then ordinary excellency and worth, as penned
by a more then ordinary diligence and zeal, appears by the Alphabetical order
of the Hebrew Letter, Ad musicam an ad memoriam pertineat incertum est, Ral
b^ni nihil certi statuunt.
beginning each verse; The Psalm it self, is a mixture of various, yet devout
affections, for that here the Psalmist moved with the sense of his sin, and the
violence remission of the former, and protection from the latter, and at last
salvation, in respect of both, even to himself and the Church of God; this he
does supported by faith and hope, of which hope and faith he gives a sure
testimony, in the commemoration he makes of Gods abundant mercy, and faithful
promises; And in the profession he declares of his sincere confidence in those
promises, and his firm expectation of that mercy.

. 7. The Analysis of the Psalm.

The whole Psalm consists of Four parts.

1. The Preface, verse. 1. Unto thee, O Lord do I lift up my soul. 2. The Prayer
O my God I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed, etc. 2. Petition, verse. 4. to
v. 8. Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths etc.
3. The Meditation Good and upright is the Lord, etc. 2. Consolatory, verse. 12.
to v. 6. What man is he that fears the Lord, etc.
4. The Conclusion Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, etc. 2.
Intercession, verse. 22. Redeem Israel O God, out of all his troubles.

David's Psalm, with the enlargement of David's spirit, whilst I shall pass
through the several parts in an explicatory application of the particular words
and phrases, let me revive and raise your sincere devotion, as the Prophet did
the Shunamites child; 2 King* 4.35.
as the Prophet laid his mouth to the child's mouth, his hands to the child's
hands; so let me lay David's mouth to your mouth, his hands to your hands; that
is, I me^n, make his prayers your prayers, his meditations your meditations;
David, we shall find a like acceptance with God; whose ear is still open to our
prayers, whilst our hearts are laid open in his presence, the Throne of grace
being the only refuge of an humble penitence.

Verse. 1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
. 1. BUt, O my Soul! have thou not been lift up against the Lord in thy sinful
rebellion? how then can thou lift up thy self unto him in a sincere devotion?
True, I have been long dead in sin, long buried in the grave of customary
iniquity: heard the voice of the Son of God, Joh. 5 25.
in his Word, in his Sacraments; this a quickening, a reviving voice: And
therefore unto him that calls me, unto him that quickens me, unto my God,
unto my Jesus, even unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

. 2. And though heretofore, in the state of darkness, sin and death, though
then I have lift up my soul against thee in pride and profaneness, the highway
to hell; yet now let me lift up my soul lift me up to thee.

. 3. Oh, how does Sin and Satan, the flesh and the world, even the whole
Powers of darkness, how do they with violence pursue after me? Psalm. 55.6.
Oh give me then the wings of a Dove, that I may flee away Haste, haste, O my
Soul, for thy escape; hie thee to the holes of the rock, to the wounds of thy
Jesus; and for this shelter and succor, for this protection and safety, Oh see,
unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul: Unto thee in the fullness of thy
merits, unto thee in the riches of thy grace; unto thee in the embraces of thy
love, and comforts of thy Spirit; unto thee, that thy thorns may be my crown,
thy blood my balsom, thy curse my blessing, thy death my life, Coloss. 3.3.
thy cross my triumph. Thus is my life hid with Christ in God; unto thee, O
Lord, do I lift up my soul.

. 4. I lift up my soul unto thee at thy Table, who have been thy self lift up
for me on thy Cross; thou have been lift up for me in a propitiatory sacrifice,
and therefore I here offer my self to thee in a gratulatory oblation; Is^.
53.10.
thou made thy soul an offering for sin, and here I make my soul an offering
of thankfulness: In this Eucharist then accept my (...), mine oblation of
praise and thanksgiving, I lift up my soul unto thee.

. 5. Unto thee, O Lord, thy flesh, thy blood; not unto the outward elements,
the bread, the wine; unto thee and thy fullness, as the inward grace, not unto
thee and their use, as the outward sign: My soul dwells not on those earthly
symbols; but by them, as by a ladder, it ascends and lifts up it self unto thy
heavenly riches: And thus whilst my body feeds on consecrated food, oh let my
soul be filled with thy consecrating fullness; whilst my body tastes their
wholesome sweetness, let my soul be satisfied with thy saving goodness. And to
this end it is, that unto thee, O Lord, I lift up my soul.

. 6. Unto thee, O Lord! Oh make good thy name of Lord unto me; as Lord rebuke
Satan, and restrain all earthly and carnal affections, that they do not once
dare to whisper a temptation to my soul, thou openest thine hand, Psalm. 145.16.
and satisfiest the desire of every living thing; Oh open now thine hand, thy
bosom, thy bounty, thy love, and satisfy the desires of my longing soul, which
I here lift up unto thee.



. 8. Oh how does this blessed Sacrament add wings to devout souls, and wrap
them up with S. Paul, unto the third heaven, 2 Cor. 1^.2.
in an ecstasy of contemplation and love! And what, shall my soul now lie Saul
amongst the stuff, 1 Samuel 10.22.
clogged and deprest with worldly thoughts; with earthly and carnal affections?
No, it may not, it must not; Christ is risen, Col. 3.1.
and therefore sursum corda, my heart, my spirit, that shall rise too, and seek
those things which are above; even unto thee, O Lord, my Jesus, do I lift up my
soul.

. 9. My soul; but how shall I call it mine, seeing it is thine, thine by
purchase, thine, having bought it with thy blood? yea, is it not I lift up my
soul unto thee.

. 10. I lift up! Oh the load of my sins! the burden of my flesh! so heavy, that
I cannot of my self lift up my head, how shall I then lift up my soul?
Wherefore, O my Savior, do thou add thy strength to my weakness, thy supporting
grace to my fainting spirit, and then I will run after thee; and lift up not
only my hands, but my heart, not only my eyes but my soul unto thee.

. 11. My soul; For it is not indeed the eye, or the tongue, or the hand, or the
knee, but the soul, which makes the acceptable service in prayer and praises
unto God; the devotion of the soul, that is the a living sacrifice at Christ's
table, Romans 12.1.
my best part shall be my first oblation, and therefore in the very preparation
and entrance of this sacred solemnity, See, O see, unto thee O Lord do I lift
up my soul.

Verse 2, 3. O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed,
. 1. O My God I trust in thee, etc. My prayer O Lord is founded upon faith, my
faith upon thy promises, so that because thou art my God, therefore I trust in
thee, yea because I trust My God, otherwise, O Christ thou were not my Jesus,
but O my Jesus, who savest me by thy blood, Gal. 3 1.
in this thy Sacrament thou art set forth crucified, and I behold thy wounds,
from whence, by the hand of faith, I pluck forth these comfortable words of
life, My Lord and my God.

Joh. 20 28.
. 2. My God; mine, for thou have partook of my humane nature, 2 Pet. 1 4.
and thou have made me to partake of thy divine nature; thou have taken upon
thee my flesh, and thou have communicated unto thou art my God, and I trust in
thee.

. 3. I trust in thee to make good my right, to the Covenant of Grace, to make
good my claim to the heavenly inheritance, yea, even to make good my communion
with thee in all thy fullness; a my God. And for this so great a blessing of thy
love, for this so great a benefit of thy grace it is, that I trust in thee; not
in my self, not in mine own righteousness, who am not worthy thou should
come under my roof, Luk 7.6.
or that I should crawl-under thy table; not worthy to gather the crumbs, not to
pick up the scraps, much less to partake of the riches, the fullness of thy
bounty, thy love.

. 4. It is not that I trust in mine own faith, but in thy faithfulness; not in
mine own repentance, but in thy pardon; not in mine own preparation, but in
thine acceptance; in thee, and in thy merits, in thy mercies do I trust, Let me
not then be ashamed, let me not be I trust in thee, by this Sacrament to be
filled with good things, Oh let me not then be ashamed of my trust, in being
sent empty away! I trust in thee, as the rock of my salvation; even a firm
rock, Oh let me not be ashamed of my trust, as if I had leaned upon a deceitful
reed, or rested upon a broken staff! as if I had followed mine own devices, and
not attended thine Ordinance.

. 5. Thou my God have promised, that whosoever trusts in shall not be
confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6.
Be it then unto me according to thy Word; and seeing thou O God may as soon
not be, as be unfaithful, make my trust as firm, as thy promise is sure, and so
shall I not be confounded; not confounded, as if I had taken a wrong course to
be saved, when I run to thee for salvation; or as if I had done foolishly in
seeking thy grace, by trusting to thy promise; and attending thy Sacraments,
for the obtaining thy blessing; Let me not thus be ashamed.

Neither let mine enemies triumph' over me, my homebred Enemies, my lusts, my
passions, when I return from thine Ordinance, let them not thus triumph over
me, saying, Vain man, what have thou gotten by all thy fastings and prayers?
what have thou profited by all thy siftings and winnowings, thy confessions and
humiliations? what have thou benefitted by all thy vows, thy resolutions and
renewed resignations? we are not yet abandoned, we are not yet cast out; we
still live, and are as mighty in power, yea, as many O let not mine Enemies, my
lusts, my passions, thus triumph over me; rather let thy cross be to me, what
thou have made it to thy self, a Triumphant Chariot; by the efficacy of thy
death, 2 Cor: 10.5.^
mortifying all my corrupt affections, and bringing into captivity every
imagination that exalts it self against the power of thy grace.

. 7. Yea, not only I, but many others also with me, here wait at thine
Ordinance, in obedience to thy command, and confidence of thy blessing; let
not, Oh let not me, nor them who thus wait on thee, have so ill success, and
fruitless labor, as if we came to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles; knock at the wrong door for mercy. We come, and at thy call we come,
Matthew. 11.28.
as heavy laden to obtain rest, as spiritually sick to recover health, as
secretly mournful to receive comfort; we come, and at thine invitation we come,
as thirsty to be refreshed, as hungring to be satisfied, as poor to be
enriched. We come, and at thy Command we come, as weak to be strengthened, as
fainting to be revived, as wavering to be established. For this, for this it is
we come to thine ordinance, we wait at thy table: Oh let none that thus come
unto thee, that thus wait upon thee, let none of them be ashamed; let none
frustrate of their hope, return from thy Sacrament, as empty, and as dry, as
sorrowful, and as fainting, as poor and as weak, as when they

. 8. Rather let them be ashamed which transgress without cause; even they, who
not prizing thy love, despise thine ordinance, and causelessly absent themselves
from thy table; as if a morsel of bread and a sup of wine were all the bounty
and blessing of thy Sacrament. Yea, let them be ashamed who carelessly presume,
or causelessly despair at thy table: They who carelessly presume, as if all
Sinners were welcome, though never so unprepared; or causelessly despair, as if
no

This the Explicatory Application of what David has put up in prayer by way of
Deprecation, saying, O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed, let not
mine enemies triumph over me: yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed; let
them be ashamed which transgress without cause.

Verse. 4, 5. Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy
. 1. OBserve how the devout Communicant thus bespeaks his Egypt, but am not yet
in Canaan: I am still in the wilderness; and whilst my face is toward
Jerusalem, the heavenly habitation of thy Saints, this is the object of my
hope, this is the subject of my prayer, that thou will show me thy ways, teach
me thy paths, and lead me in thy truth.

. 2. There are the ways of men, and the ways of God; the paths of sin, Psalm.
23 3.
and the paths of righteousness: There are thy ways, and there are my ways;
thine the ways of truth, mine the ways of error; thine which are good in
thine eyes, and mine which are good in mine eyes; thine which lead to heaven,
mine which lead to hell: Wherefore show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy
paths, lest I mistake mine own ways for thine; yea, lead me in thy truth and
teach me, lest I turn out of thy ways into mine own: show me thy ways, by the
ministry of thy word; teach me thy paths, in the guidance of thy Spirit; lead
me in thy truth, by the assistance of thy grace.

. 3. Oh how have I been blinded in my Judgment, not discerning the light of thy
truth, through the thick mist of mine own wilfulness and pride! But now thou
have convinced me of my wanderings, show me thy ways; now Lord especially show
me thy ways, now so many and so diverse, yea, so cross and contrary are the
ways of men and of the world, though all pretending the paths of God, and
leading to the heavenly Jerusalem of peace and life. Psalm. 139.1, 2, 23.
Thou Lord who searchest the heart and tryest the reins, who understandest our
thoughts afar off; thou, even thou know the secret trouble of my
Closet-thoughts, the private anguish of my souls distractions; in that, viewing
the ways of men and of the world, I see thy holy Name signal judgments of thy
displeasure, men plead signal testimonies of thine acceptance, even in what thy
soul hates, thy Word condemns, and thy wrath pursues.

. 4. Whilst I see Covenants and Engagements entered with a seeming zeal, but
broken with open perjurie; whilst I see Sacrilege possess, yea demolish thy
Temples, and yet Hypocrisy pretend a propagating thy Gospel; whilst I see
injustice in the seat of Judgment, lead into the chambers of death: But thy
ways, Prove. 6 27.
O Lord, are ways of truth, and lead in the paths of life; wherefore show me
thy ways, and teach me thy paths. Psalm. 16.11.


. 5. Do thou show me, and do thou teach me. While others take upon them to show
me thy ways, they teach me to throw off the sacred Order thou have establishe
in thy Church, as wicked and antichristian; public Worship, as Popery and
Superstition; yea, they teach me Heresy, and pretend it is thy Word; they
teach me Blasphemy, and pretend it is saving Doctrine; they teach me Schism,
and pretend it is the Communion of Saints; they teach me to profane thine
Ordinances, Joh. 4 24.
and pretend it is to worship thee in Spirit. Wherefore do thou, thou Lord,
show me; do thou teach me; as show me thy ways in thy Word, so teach me thy
paths by thy Spirit; yea, lead me in thy truth and teach me; make me to saving
truth.

. 6. But O my Jesus, behold me here, another poor Bartimaeus; so blind, that to
show me thy ways, thou must not only point them out, but also give me eyes to
see. Yea, I here present my self at thy Table, as another impotent Cripple in
the Temple; Act 3.2^
so that to lead ^e in thy truth, thou must not only go before me, but give me
feet also to run after thee. And that thou my Jesus (who art the same yesterday
today and for ever) wilt now by a miraculous power of thy grace and truth, Heb.
13 8.
even cure my spiritual lameness, and ignorant blindness, this is the ground of
my hopes, thy Promises; this is my encouragement^ thy Sacrament; in which
Sacrament and Promises thou art exhibited unto my soul, as the God of my
salvation. In thy word thou have given the promise, and in thy Sacrament that
way of everlasting life, and so faithful art thou who have promised that safer
it is for my soul to be as low as Hell with a promise, Heb. 10.23.
then to be as high as Heaven without it, though as low as hell, yet would hope
bear me up, and though as high as heaven yet would presumption throw me down.

Jer. 17.5. 1 King. 13.4.
. 7. Thou, O God, who art my trust, art my salvation, my trust is not in the
arm of flesh, that, like Jeroboams hand does suddenly my trust is not in humane
power, or policy, that, I see by daily experiments, Jon. 4 7.
proves like Jonas Gourd, when the Sun beats hottest, when trouble and dis^^ess
is the the greatest, then does it vanish and come to nothing, what then is my
trust? Truly Lord my trust is even in thee, Psa. 146.5, 6.
who have made heaven and earth; whose Wisdom will find out the way, and Power
effect the means of my salvation, notwithstanding all the present difficulties,
and seeming impossibilities of deliverance.

. 8. Yea, thou O Lord, my joy, my Jesus, thou art the God of my salvation; Oh
transcendent love! Oh rich mercy! Oh incomprehensible goodness! the God of my
salvation! Blessed Savior, had the efficacy of thy merits extended no further
to the race of mankind, then mine own self; yet would thou glory and make me
rejoice in being the God of my salvation. And Oh firm salvation! which is
founded upon the Grace, Wisdom, Power and Faithfulness of my God! in all which
attributes my God, my Jesus communicates salvation of my God: and giving me a
communion with the God of my salvation, in this holy Sacrament.

. 9. O how willingly could my soul dwell upon this Mount, and build Tabernacles
for this contemplation of my Saviors love? how do I behold him through faith,
communicating himself unto me in all his fullness? Which fullness is in his
Church, and in his chosen, as the soul is in the body, and in the members;
whole in salvation unto all, yet does he communicate himself unto my soul, in
that fullness of his merits, and grace, as if I were saved alone. And Oh that my
soul could imitate my Savior! Oh that my heart might return like love! in
giving my self, my whole self unto my Jesus, even in that fervor of affection
and ravishment of spirit, as if I alone were wholly to possess him, joying in
him, and enjoyed by h m, as the one and only God of my salvation.

. 10. Seeing then, thou art the God of my salvation, on thee do I wait all the
day; so that, If I find not present comfort in thy blessed Sacrament, yet on
thee will I wait; the husbandman does not sow his seed and reap his crop in a
day, wherefore if thou art pleased to defer thy salvation, for the trial of my
faith, and love; on thee will I wait, in a constant use of those sacred means
thou have ordained, and the continued practice of those holy duties thou have
enjoined; and though this be all my days; Oh let not my faith faint, seeing I
cannot wait too long for the grace I so much desire, and which am assured I
shall at last obtain, Matthew ^24 23.
seeing he who indures to the end shall be saved.

. 11. On thee do I wait; on thee, whose hand of bounty, whose bo om of love,
yea, whose bowels of mercy are not only opened on thee do I wait, wait to hear
the secret voice of thy Spirit speaking peace unto my conscience, wait to feel
the reviving v^gor of thy grace, quickening mine obedience; wait to see the
subduing power of thy holy Spirit quelling my rebellious sin; wait to feel the
chearing virtue of thy heavenly comforts, refreshing my fainting soul; for all
these thy blessings, O thou God of my salvation, on thee do I wait all the day.
All the day; being never so satisfied with thy goodness, as not more eagerly
let me wait, even all my life, all the day.

Verse 6, 7. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses,
for they have been ever of old; Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
transgressions, according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness sake,
O Lord.
1. O My God* thy former mercies are pledges to me of thy future grace.
Wherefore, remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses,
which have been ever of old, Psalm. 90.2.
exhibited by thy Spirit in this Sacrament; Are not thy mercies O Lord, like
thy self, from everlasting to everlasting? thy mercies they have been ever of
old, and sure the streams cannot fail, where the fountain is inexhaustible, and
such is thy good goodness.

. 2. But how is it then that my soul dwells in darkness, if thou be light? how
is that I remain disconsolate and miserable, if thou Lord art so gracious and
merciful? thou love to be importuned in prayer, Isa. 43.26.
and thereby, as it were, minded of thy mercy, not that that thou art forgetful
of thy love, but that thou would have us sensible of our wants. Wherefore,
least thou should do as my sins Thy tender mercies, for it is no ordinary
medicine that will cure my soar, no mean mercy that will save my soul; the
sadness of my affl ctions requires the tenderness of thy compassions, wherefore
Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies.

Psalm. 42.7.
. 3. Mercies; O how does one deep call upon another? the depth of my multiplied
miseries, calls, loudly calls upon the depth of thy that mercy, whereby thou
do pardon my sin and help mine infirmities; that mercy, whereby thou do
sanctify me by thy Grace, and comfort me by thy Spirit; that mercy, whereby
thou do quicken me with life, and preserve me from death; that mercy, whereby
thou do deliver me from Hell, and possess me of Heaven. Remember, O Lord, all
those thy mercies, thy tender mercies, which as they have been of old unto thy
Saints, so now seal them unto thy servant, in this blessed Sacrament.

. 4. And as thou seals me thy tender mercies, so convey unto me thy loving
kindnesses, even those enligthning gifts, those beautifiing graces, those
refreshing comforts, those divine manifestations of thy presence, those secret
aspirings of the soul, those devout raptures of the Spirit, those divine
meltings of the heart; that peace of conscience, that joy in the holy Ghost,
all these thy loving kindnesses, let me in some proportion of measure taste, if
not in some measure

. 5. Thy Saints of old, how have they come from this thy Table satisfied with
good things? and like Giants refreshed with wine, Psalm. 65.4.
furnished to every good work, and strong to resist the temptations of Satan?
having been made partakers of thy precious blood, which thou shedest for them;
how have they been animated in the profession of faith, to shed their dearest
blood for thee? Yea, remember I am the more eager in my desires, will thou be
the further off in thy fullness?

. 6. This indeed my sins have deserved; but thy mercies they are tender, and
will not deal with me according to my deserts; wherefore remember then thy old
mercies, not my old sins, thy tender compassions not my present transgrssions;
call not to mind the sins of my youth, to visit them upon the years of my riper
age; wean me from my youthful sins, and give me not over by a just remember
thou me in this according to thy mercy, for thy goodness sake, O Lord.

. 7. According to thy mercy, not mine, for I have forsaken those mercies thou
made mine own, in being cruel to my self by my sin; Jon. 2 8. Psalm. 59.10, 17
through distrust of thy promise, upon presumptions in thy mercy; yea let it
be, for thy goodness sake not mine, for in me, Rom 7.18.
that is in my flesh dwells no manner of thing that is good; let thy goodness
then be the motive, thy mercy the rule of all that grace, and of all those
blessings, thou vouchsafest unto my soul.

Verse: 8, 9, 10. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners
in the way. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his
way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
Covenant and
. 1. GOod and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way;
The true knowledge then, O God, of thy will is the gracious manifestation of
thy goodness, Good is the Lord in the graciousness of his promises, upright is
the Lord in the truth of his performances; and this grace and truth which is
the habitation of is the refuge of the sinner, the sanctuary of the penitent;
whom he teaches in the way, even the way of truth, the way of holiness, the
way of life.

. 2. The Lord is good; And where Oh my soul can thou better taste the goodness
of the Lord, then in this blessed Eucharist, Psalm. 34 8.
the sacred feast of the Lords goodness? and as his goodness does invite thee,
so let his uprightness encourage thee; for that, faithful is he who has p
omised, faithful to give according to his promise, healing for thy wounds,
strengthening for thy weakness, comfort for thy sorrow, yea, give that which is
the compendium of all spiritual good things, Rom 5.1, 2
Peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost.

3. Why art thou so heavy O my soul? and why art thou so cast down within me?
Psalm. 42.11.
Is it because thou have broken the Covenant of thy God, even the Covenant of
reconciliation sealed thee by the Sacrament, and that thus, by thy sin, thou
art become at enmity the Lord who is good, be as gracious to his Enemies, as
he requires us to be to ours? It is his own Law, If thou meet thine enemies Ox
or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again; Exodus 23
4.
Now God meets us sinners, Romans 5, 8, 10.
and all sinners, as such are his Enemies; he meets us straying-like the beast
without understanding; and what? will he not bring us again unto himself, the
sole proprietarie by that first right of Creation, and that more firm right of
Redemption.

4. Our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus blessed for ever, he comes to seek those
that are lost, to raise those that are fallen; yea, read his Commission, Luke
4.18. he comes to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to
preach deliverance to the captives, to recover sight to the blind, and to set
at liberty them that are bruised, Joh. 6.27.
to this, to all this is he sealed of the Father, and that he will do it he
seals unto us in the Sacrament; so that as sure as the Lord is good and
upright, merciful and faithful, so sure it is he will teach even sinners in the
way.

. 5. The way, (...), By an excellency above all the ways of men and of the
world, in respect of the Author that prescribes it, Isa. 40.3.
it is the way of the Lord; in respect of the hand that points it out, it is
the way of truth; 2 Pet. 2 2.
in respect of the passengers which read it, it is the way of the just; Psalm. 1
6.
and in respect of the end to which it brings us, it is the way of life; Psa.
16.11
but as to the proper nature and essential being Romans 16 26.
this, the way; it is the obedience of faith; the obedience of faith, that
Gospel-path, in which we have Christ for our leader, the Saints for our
fellow-travellers; Psa. 119.105.
and the Word of God for a light unto our feet, and the blessed Sacrament our
best Viaticum, the choicest provision for our spiritual journey, in this our
earthly pilgrimage to the heavenly Canaan.

. 6. Be it so then, that when now my soul would raise it self on the wing of
prayer, and approach the Throne of Grace in this blessed God even teaches
sinners in the way, so they be humble, penitent sinners; and from hence know I,
that the Lord teaches sinners, even from hence, that he is good and upright,
Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way.

. 7. Further yet, The meek he will guide in judgment, and the meek will he
teach his way; the humble and meek God will enlighten and instruct, to a right
discerning the ways of his providence. and the mysteries of his truth; he will
not suffer them to be lead away with the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17.
but amidst the many secular the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him; Ephesians. 1.17, ^8.
and thus the eye of their understanding being enlightened, whatsoever is the
condition of their temporal being, they know what is the hope of their
spiritual calling, even the glorious riches of an heavenly inheritance.

. 8. Thus then does God give grace to the humble, to the humble not so properly
said to the humbled; for humbled we may be, when pressed down under the weight of
punishment; but humble we cannot Psalm. 38 4.
My sins are gone over my head, and are become a sore burden too heavy for me
to bear; too heavy not only in their punishment and wrath, but even in their
pollution and guilt: If so, yet, though humbled, be not dejected, O my soul,
but rather comfort, O comfort thy self in this holy Sacrament of thy Jesus,
through faith in the to the meek and lowly in heart. Matthew. 11.29.


. 9. To such, to such it is, Christ here calls, with a venite ad me, Come unto
me; And all those who thus come unto Christ, even unto find rest unto their
souls, Matthew. 11.29.
to whom belongs the promise here, that he will guide them in judgment, and
learn them his ways, whereby they became (...), taught of God; he will so judge
them, as to guide them in judgment; so correct them, as that their corrections
shall draw them to him, not drive them from him, their (...) shall be (...),
their corrections shall be their instructions, they shall teach them his ways.

teach sinners, they must be such as are humbled for their sin, and in their
humiliation become meek and lowly in heart; and well might the Apostle say of a
meek spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4.
that it is in the sight, that is in the judgment and approbation of God, of
great price, of much value; when here the whole work of sanctification is
comprised in the one grace of meekness; and no wonder then, if so few know the
ways of God, when so many are enraged with passion, filled with envy, swollen
with malice; to be far from meekness is to be far from God, far from holiness,
far from truth; for it is the meek that he will guide in judgment; it is the
meek that he will teach his ways.

. 11. But further yet, All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such
as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. It is the mournful complaint of the
devout soul, saying, Since I came last to this Table of the Lord, and entered
anew into covenant wi h my God, oh! how have I broken my sacred vows, by my
sinful relapses? all his paths are mercy and truth; mercy goes before his face
to prepare a way, to make plain a path for the access of languishing souls to
his Throne of Grace; yea this

Romans 3.3.
. 12. Where then there is faith and repentance; it is not our failing, that
shall make Gods truth to fail; not our defects which shall make his promises of
none effect; no, though justice, exact justice, does require a perfection of
our obedience, yet mercy, indulgent mercy will vouchsafe acceptance through
Christ; through Christ, in whom mercy and truth are met together, Psalm. 85 10.
on purpose that righteousness and peace may kiss each other; even in him our
blessed Mediator, in him do meet all the paths of God, in which he brings
salvation to his Church; and those paths are now become beaten roads, right
viae Regiae, the King of Heavens highways, in which we have our passage from
sin and death, to righteousness and life; from guilt and misery, to holiness
and glory; and these paths of our God, what are they but his Mercy and Truth in
Christ Jesus?

. 13. But O my soul, that the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, it is to
them that keep his Covenant and his testimonies; seeing then thou have broken
his Covenant, and transgrest his Testimonies, how can thou expect the
acceptance of mercy, and the blessings of truth? True, I have sinned, and
through my sin, mine obedience is become imperfect; but what, is not the
Covenant of my God a Covenant of Grace; Jam. 2.13,
where mercy rejoices, yea triumphs against judgment? yea, is not the
Covenant of my God, that Covenant Abraham, confirmed by Christ, and sealed by
this holy Sacrament, a part of which Covenant is the remission of sins? if so,
then shall faith and repentance be accepted through Christ, and all my
imperfections made up with the righteousness of his most perfect obedience.

. 14. Indeed, were our obedience perfect, what need should we have of Christ,
to justify and save us? though Truth and Justice then may blame, and condemn
our failings, in the keeping of Gods testimonies; yet grace and mercy go
before, to vail all with the robe of Christ's righteousness, to a pardoning our
infirmities, Psalm, 89.14.
an accepting our persons, and a rewarding our services* though we cannot then
keep the Covenant and Testimonies of our God in an Angelical purity, yet may we
do it in an Evangelical sincerity; though not in a Phil. 3.12, 13, 14
and blessed is that soul which shall witness the saving comfort of this sacred
doctrine, that all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep,
even thus keep his Covenant and his Testimonies.

Verse: 11. For thy name sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is great.
. 1. THe very best of Gods Saints do not so perfectly keep the Covenant and
Testimonies of their God, but that in thoughts of his Covenant, they may well
have a sense of their sin; in the meditation of his Testimonies, they may well
have an apprehension David here upon this emphatical ejaculation of fervent
prayer, For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is great.

. 2. Thou Lord, not only art good and gracious, but thou will also be so
acknowledged, so declared; yea, as such worshipped and adored, that thy name
then be not dishonored, let me though a sinner be accepted; pardon mine
iniquity, that it be not said, thou ever rejectedst a poor penitent, and
thereby lose the glory of thy name, whose name is A merciful clemency is a
royal virtue, Exodus 34.5, 6.
and honorable in every Sovereign Majesty; thou then, O Lord, Psalm. 24 5, 8.
who art the King of Glory make this thy holy Sacrament to be the broad Seal to
my pardon; and this, for thy names sake, even for thy mercy sake, by which thou
art as well known, as any man can be by his own name.

. 3. I plead not, Lord, my merits, who am less then the least of thy mercies,
and as I look not upon my merit, so nor do thou God of mercy, be unto me what
thou art called; make good the glory of thine own name in being merciful unto
my sin; of which, I cannot say as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? no, it
is great, Gen, 19.20.
for that it is against thee so great a God and so good to me; Great, for that
my place, my office, my calling is great; the Sun, the higher it is, the less
it seems but my sins, the higher I am, the greater they are, even in thine, and
others eyes.

. 4. Great, for that my knowledge of thee and thy ways is great, I knew thy
will, and yet did it not; my conscience checked me, and yet I obeyed not; thy
Spirit moved me, and yet I yielded not; Mine iniquity is great for that I have
greatly multiplied and increased it, so that it is become great in quality and
in quantity; great in weight and in number; very heinous, very numerous; yea
the number of my unknown and hidden from me. Psalm. 19.12.


. 5. Yet further, mine iniquity is great, for that mine apprehension of it is
so great, that I know more ill by my self then by any other; each man best
feels his own burden, and the burden of my sins is such as is too heavy for me
to bear: Lastly, mine iniquity is great, for that, it is such a debt, as I am
no way able in the least part to make satisfaction; And even a little debt is
great, to him who has nothing great mercy from me, who hide not my great sins
from thee; and the greater is the guilt of my sin, the greater shall be the
glory of thy mercy to pardon it; let it be the glory of thy mercy then to pass
by mine offenses, so shall the greatness of my sins make the glory of thy
mercies more conspicuous, for that where sin has abounded, there grace does
much more abound. Romans 5.20.


. 6. And thus, though I went against mine own knowledge in believe and repent
thou will forgive; and now, 1 Cor. 10.12.
as my sins teach them that stand to take heed least they fall, so let thy
pardon of my sins, teach them that are fallen, upon their repentance, not to
doubt of thy mercy and forgiveness; which mercy and forgiveness do thou seal
unto my soul, and to each humble penitent, through Jesus Christ, in a return of
peace unto our consciences by this blessed Sacrament.

. 7. In the close, observe the strange, yet strong argument of faith and
repentance; Pardon mine iniquity for it is great, what! does the humble
penitent pray and plead for pardon, from the heinousness of the offense, and
the multitude of the sins? yea, and an enforcing plea it is too, when uttered
from a broken heart and contrite spirit; for that then, even then, is God most
affected with mercy, when he sees man most afflicted with misery. This cry then
of the humble penitent unto God, pardon my iniquity for it is great, is David
here does: For thy name sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is great.

Verse. 12, 13: What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall
inherit the earth.
truth and righteousness; yet who is it, that fears drowning? who is it that in
sense of sin, and remorse of soul, fears, humbly and contritely fears, the just
wrath and vengeance of God? Many there are in deed, who plead for Reformation,
and pretend the fear of the Lord, but what do they but cast out Devils by
Beelzebub? cast out prodigality, by covetousness; superstition, by
profaneness; Popery Psalmist speaks, whilst the vilest of men are exalted;
exalted to Moses Chair, and Aarons Altar, needs must it follow, that the wicked
walk on every side, Psalm. 12.8.
ambulant in circuitu (as the vulgar Translation reads it) they walk about in a
circle; pursuing their worldly interest, they tread a large circumference of
sins, of which Hell it self is the Center.

. 2. See their character from the pen of an Apostle, Romans 3.13. Their throat is
an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of
Asps is under their lips. And what is the true orginal, as well as the high
aggravation of all this wickedness? what but that verse. 18. There is no fear of
God before their eyes. So that, in wonder at the rarity of a person, truly
religious, we may well say, Quis ille vir? What man is he that fears the
Lord? But it is not only the rarity, but more especially the excellency of the
truly religious that David here in devout meditations so much

. 3. He had said verse. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto
such as keep his covenant and his testimonies, and now reflecting upon himself
he seems to make this the meaning of his here registered meditation; Oh how does
my conscience accuse me, and my sin testify against me, that mine iniquity is
great, so that though all the ways of God be mercy and truth, Verse. 10.
yet seeing it is to them that keep his covenant and his testimonies. I cannot
find God always before his face, to over-aw his soul from trangressing his
commands, Psalm. 4 4.
thereby enjoying him in his love, and the light of his countenance, thereby
preserving entire his claim to the promises of grace and life, his hope of
glory and blessedness; Oh the excellency and greatness! Oh the beauty and
loveliness! Oh the bliss and happiness of such a soul of such a Saint! O quis
ille vir; what a man is he, he who thus fears the Lord?

. 4. Whilst others fear those who kill the body, the truly religious fears him
who can kill both body and soul, Mat. 10.28.
and kill not only as wicked oppressors per modum potentiae, by way of power,
but as a righteous Judge per modum justitiae, by way of justice. Many there are
obstinately wicked, who yet fear when they have offended, struck with the
horror of their guilt; but it is the devoutly from the earth, earthly; the
latter is always from heaven, heavenly; the former does arise oft-times from
the love of our selves, the latter only from the love of God.

Cant 5.5.
. 5. Fear is the Spouses myrrh; which, when it is lest we offend, like the
myrrh flowing of its own inclination, it is much the What man is he that thus
fears the Lord? Fears for what? why, not so much for his judgments as his
mercies: To fear him for his judgments, that is servile; to fear Judgments of
wrath are upon us, Isa. 26.9. Psalm. 90.11.
who is it that will not fear? It was of old, Thereafter as a man fears, so
is thy displeasure: But now the tables are turned, and it is the direct
contrary; Thereafter as is thy displeasure, so is man's fear.

. 6. Gods judgments and man's fear (unless it be with those desperately wicked,
who are even fearless of Gods judgments) they keep pace? If he severely inflict
his wrath, then a seemingly devout Psalm. 130.4.
There is mercy with thee, O Lord, therefore shall thou be feared. Indeed, to
the Godly, all the ways of God are mercy; so that we cannot tread the path of
holiness, but we must set foot in the way of mercy, especially when we come to
Gods house, and approach the Lords table; there, there the Lord receives us
into Covenant, confirming to us his grace; both the grace of Justification in
the remission grace of Sanctification by the spirit of holiness; yea, here he
communicates the fullness of his benefits, the riches of his blessings, the
sweetness of his love; here he strengthens us in spiritual life, and gives us
the pledge of eternal glory: And who is it that will not fear, lest by
unworthiness he deprive himself of all this mercy? or by unthankfulness sin
against all this love?

. 7. What man is he then that fears the Lord? that fears to be absent from
this holy Table, this blessed Sacrament, yet fears to come unprepared to it?
That man shall be as blessed in his coming, as he is rare to find. Blessed
shall he be, 1. in the sacred knowledge of Christ's will; Him shall he teach in
the way that he shall choose. 2. Blessed shall he be in the quiet peace of a
good conscience; his soul shall dwell at ease. 3. Blessed he shall be in the
his seed shall inherit the earth.

. 8. (1.) Blessed in the knowledge of Christ's will; him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose. He that fears the Lord, let him in this Sacrament
commit his way unto the Lord, Psalm. 37.5.
as for the blessings of his Providence, so for the instruction of his Spirit,
and the guidance of his hand; that so the way which he shall walk, may not be
so much of his own, as of Gods choice; and not so much of his teach him in the
way; not only direct him to find it in the knowledge of his Word, but also
enable him to walk in it, in a conformity to his will; sanctifying him
throughout, the understanding to discern, the will to embrace, the affections
to pursue, the whole man to act what is holy, and just, and good.

. 9. And thus we know then, which is the right way (amidst the many now
Cross-paths of Heresy and Schism) we know, which right way of truth and
holiness, not that which we devise, but which God does choose: for it is God
alone who must prescribe the rule, by which we are to square our lives; the
form, by which we are to order his Worship. And therefore the Church from the
beginning has still worshipped God according to Divine revelation, not humane
discretion, acknowledging as one true God, so one true manner of Worship, of
which God himself is the Author; the Author in his Word, his Word of truth, the
glass of his Divinity; he that fears the Lord shall be taught in the way that
he shall choose, to the making him blessed in the saving knowledge of his sacred
will.

. 10. (2.) Blessed in the quiet peace of a good conscience, His soul shall
dwell at ease, His soul: happily he may, with S. Paul, Gal. 6.17.
bear in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus, in his sufferings for his name;
his person imprisoned, his estate seized, his name defamed, Sweet peace! the
peculiar blessing of the truly sanctified, yea, the special benefit of this
blessed Sacrament, which as it seals the Covenant of grace, so of peace, in a
perfect reconciliation with God by Christ.

. 11. In this peace of conscience, sure we are, to find ease of soul; yea,
pernoctabit anima, the soul shall dwell, or lodge all night in rest, all the
night of the Churches distress, the dark and doleful night of heresies and
schisms, of oppression and violence; the soul that is at peace with God, being
instructed in his truth, and sanctified with his grace, shall have its light in
darkness, its easeful rest of spiritual comforts, amidst the tumultuous changes
of temporal troubles. Yea, pernoctabit in bono; when with others, either their

. 12. And it is not worldly calamity that shall so dismay his soul, as to
fright him, from the profession of a true faith; no, the holy fear of God shall
destroy all such sinful fears of men, even as Moses's Serpent devoured all
those Serpents of the Magicians; efficit timor Dei, ut caetera non possint
timeri, the fear of God has this good in rest, so in goodness; as in peace, so
in patience; till this moment of time be swallowed up in the fullness of
eternity, and he change his earthly dwelling, for an heavenly Mansion; and his
spiritual peace, for an everlasting blessedness. And when he that fears the
Lord shall be translated to that eternal bliss, of which spiritual peace is the
earnest, and the blessed Sacrament the pledge; that God whom he feared, shall
take care his seed shall inherit the earth, which is the third blessedness, the
present comfort of an hopeful progeny.

. 13. His seed; so near and dear are children, especially good children, to
their parents, that they are their very seed, as if themselves were but as
chaff or straw without them; and to them as well as unto the Parents, belong
the promises; for so says God to Abraham, Act. 2.39. Genesis 17.7.
I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after thee; true Canaan being a type
of Heaven, the temporal promises under the Law, were the typical figures of
those spiritual blessings given us in promise under the Gospel. So that, though
the generation of the righteous shall be blessed, Psalm. 112.2.
yet may a righteous generation lose the inheritance of their fathers; their
just possessions, by unjust violence; and this without breach of this promise,
of those who fear the Lord shall inherit the earth.

. 14. For that, to inherit the earth, as spoken of Canaan in the type, does
represent us the Evangelical promise of inheriting Heaven, as the thing
typified; of which heavenly inheritance they cannot be deprived, by an earthly
violence, who are the righteous seed of him who fears the Lord: Thus have we
seen the blessedness of him that fears the Lord, blessed in the saving
knowledge of Christ's sacred will; in the quiet peace of a good conscience; and
in the present comfort of a hopeful progeny; all which is implied when David
here says, What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose, his soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit
the earth.

what man is he that fears the Lord? that fears lest he offend, and fears
till he obtain pardon of his offenses? And therefore now, that mercy comes down
from heaven in this blessed Sacrament, and rests upon this Ordinance as a
sacred Mercy-seat; he does not, with Adam in the garden, withdraw and hide
himself in a distrustful fear; but as Aaron in the Temple, Genesis 3.6.
he draws near in an awful reverence with the incense of prayer, Exodus 30.6, 7.
to be received to mercy, and obtain atonement for his sin.

Blessed shall this man be, blessed in his employments abroad, and in his
retirements at home, in himself and in his issue; blessed in his employments
abroad; for that, whereas the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man
that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10.23.
when he is in a strait, and knows not what to choose, the Lord shall guide him
in his choice, and put upon him a good course; so that whatsoever he takes in
hand it shall prosper: Prosper, psalm. 1.3.
if not to his temporal advantage, yet to his spiritual benefit; in respect of
which spiritual Romans 8.28. (...), all things work together for good, for good,
to them that love, and to them that fear God.

. 17, And as thus blessed in his employments abroad, so secondly, in his
retirements at home; when his soul drawn abroad by worldly affairs, and public
employments, shall retire home into his own breast, in his reflective
self-examining meditations, how does it then dwell at ease, within his own
doors? no Shrew there to bate blessed, not only in himself, but also in his
Issue, in his Children, those pledges of love, and hopes of his family, whom
with diligent care he instructs to the possession of the best intail, the fear
of the Lord; not so much solicitous, that as his children, they may possess his
temporal estate; as that being Gods children, they may be joint possessors with
him of the heavenly inheritance; of which Canaan was the type, so are the
promises of the Gospel the conveyances, the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the
seal; and the Spirit of Grace, the sure earnest and pledge.

Verse. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant.
. 1. HEre we have David's Argument to prove Gods blessing upon them that fear
him, and he makes use of a twofold medium; The first, from the operations of
his grace. The second from the manifestations of his love. 1. The operations of
his grace, ^he secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. 2. The
manifestations He will show them his Covenant. 1. Medium, David's Argument drawn
from the operations of Gods grace, the secret of the Lord, etc. the secret,
even that St. Peter calls (...), the hidden man of the heart; The new man
regenerate by the spirit of grace. Which new birth is set forth unto us in
Scripture, by the womb and dew of the morning; the birth of the regenerate,
Psalm. 110.3.
like that of the morning dew, it is heavenly and secret; the vapor exhaled by
the Sun, is of an earthly substance: grace, are converted into a spiritual
frame and heavenly temper.

. 2. Further, the birth of the dew is secret and undiscerned; when it is fallen
we see what it is, but know not how it is made; thus the new man, we discern
when it is formed, but cannot discover the point of time, or manner of action,
when and how it is wrought. Psalm. 139.14.
We are fearfully and wonderfully made; the womb is not so secret a Workhouse
of nature, for the generation of the body; as the heart is of grace, for the
regeneration of the soul.

. 3. The effectual vocation whereby we are called unto Christ it is vocatione
alta (So St. Aug.) by a secret and deep call, which speaks to the heart of the
most desperate sinner, in that Is. 30.21. there says God, of the Christian
Convert, Thou shall hear a voice not only to denote unto us Gods indulgent
mercy, that when we fl^e, and even turn our backs upon him, he then calls unto
us to turn unto him; but a voice behind thee, to show that the call of the
Spirit is secret and undiscerned. Joh. 3.8.
Thus the voluntary breathings and free accesses of the Spirit unto the soul,
in the operations of grace, as they are actively powerful, so are they
indisernably secret; which secret operations of grace, that they infallibly and
inseparably accompany the fear of the Lord, will appear by a short view of
those Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity; the very vital parts of
the new man.

. 4. Observe we then, how the Ancients compare our Christian hope to the Shop
and Storehouse of blood, the Liver; and therefore Clemens of Alexandria, calls
hope very aptly, (...) the blood of faith, which carries the very life of
Religion in it; so that as hope wastes, so faith decaies, and religion it self
faints. Now if Faith be the Heart, and Hope the Liver of the new man, then is
Fear metaphorically the Lungs: which with a gentle breath, of awfulness and
reverence, fans and cools them both keeping Faith and Hope in an healthful
temper; which otherwise would soon have their heats and heights, to the
indangering the eternal welfare of the whole too sad experience tells us, how
many by denying the Saints can sin, and so excluding fear, have been by Satan
cast down headlong, from the high top of presumption, into the lowest pit of
despair.

. 5. Yea, how many puffed up with the fancied conceit of their fellowship with
Christ, forget that he is their Lord? 1 John 1.3.
and so casting off their awful fear, become so far transported with the
Gospels privileges, that they lay themselves open to Satan's temptations,
Rabbinical note may be well worth our Christian observation upon Genesis 31.42.
where Jacob calls the Lord the God of Abraham then deceased, but the fear of
Isaac, then surviving; to show, that whilst we live we ought to fear, and
though we stand, lest we fall; for the way to be secure of mercy, is to beware
of security, and to confirm our hope of possessing, do we still nourish our
fear of losing Heaven; for certain it is, an holy fear firm hope, which holy
fear, as well as hope of future blessedness, is a good means to be blessed.

. 6. And as thus the fear of the Lord is accompanied with Faith and Hope, so
also with Love. True it is, St. John he tells us, perfect love, (...), casts
out fear, for as ejicit, 1 John 4.18.
casts it out of doors; but it is that fear which disturbs, not that which
preserves the quiet of the house, the peace of the soul; that which does
extinguish, not that which does inflame our charity; that which is a servile,
not an avenging Judge, this servile fear, love quiet casts out of doors; but
not to sin because we fear offending God, as a gracious Father; this filial
fear, it is so far from being cast out, that it is loves dearest inmate, the
one mutually sustaining the other; so that we may well pray, as the Church has
well taught us, Collect second Sund af. Trin.
Lord make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name.

. 7. However then the external profession of the truly religious, may be
imitated by that artificial sanctity of the formal hypocrite; yet who is it,
that can draw out the lineaments of life, sense, and motion? Who can
counterfeit the internal forms and active principles of grace? secrets, not
visible to the eye, but sensible to the soul; from whence we draw an infallible
argument of Gods blessing, to say with David, The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

. 8. The second Medium, the manifestations of his love; He will show them his
Covenant; 1 Cor. 2.14.
the natural man knows not the things of the Spirit of God; and no wonder,
for he is blind, at least (...), 2 Pet. 1.9.
as St. Peter speaks non procul videns, one sand-blind, that cannot see a far
off the good things of Gods Covenant and grace they are deep, and in their
depth have too much of misterious darkness; they are high, and in their height,
have too much of glorious brightness, for the purblind eye of the earthly soul,
and carnal man, O the refreshings of divine love to the truly penitent! when
God by his word discovers their sin, then by his spirit he withal manifests his
grace, he shows them his Covenant, even life and salvation by Jesus Christ. And
by this we may know, whether the discovery of sin be a temptation or an
humiliation, whether it be from Satan to tempt to despair, or from God to
humble in repentance.

. 9. The spirit of grace and truth lays open sin in the soul as a the spirit
of error and wickedness lays open sin, as the mischeivous murderer does the
wound, in the open air, and the soul drawn away from Christ, and his promises;
on purpose to torment, and kill, not to cure and save. The promises,
privileges, and blessings then of Gods Covenant, they are not known in their
saving truth, but by who fear the Lord: for that (...), so the Sept. to them
the Lord will declare and make known his Covenant, even his Covenant of Crace,
in which are concentred all the promises of the Gospel; and this Covenant he
will show to them that fear him, especially in that which is the firm
foundation of their comforts, as to the immutability of his love, and the
stability of his promise.

. 10. First, The immutability of his love; the grace and love Romans 4.5. Romans
5.10. Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 3.24.
no, he justifies us when ungodly, he reconciles us when enemies, he quickens
us when dead; and therefore must it be that we are freely justified, and so
eternally saved by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.
Now if when enemies by wicked works, Col. 1.21.
we were reconciled by the death of Christ; if when dead in sins, we were were
quickened by the Spirit of grace; how much more being quickened, being
reconciled, shall our infirmities be pardoned, our falls repaired, our persons
accepted, and our services rewarded? If when we were enemies, Gods grace did
prevent us to make us his children, how much more being Gods children, shall
the same grace preserve us from becoming his

. 11. The love of God in his Covenant of grace, Jer. 31.3.
it is an everlasting love; which everlasting love, sure, cannot end in an
eternal hate. So that though we are unworthy, yet does he continue gracious;
though we deserve his wrath, yet will he bestow his love; his love unchangeable
like himself, for God is love; and as Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not,
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

Jer. 32.40. God tells us, he will make an everlasting Covenant with his
people: And how is ^t everlasting? why, says God, I will not turn away from
them to do them good. But though God be immutable in his grace, unchangeable in
his love, and so, constant in his promise, yet what if his people through
humane frailty fall from him, and so make void the Covenant of the Almighty? To
this God himself gives answer, v. 40. for the comfort of all the faithful; I
will put my fear into Thus does God give the promise, and strengthens man to
the condition of his Covenant: so that they who are begotten to a lively hope
by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.5.
are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation. And thus our holiness
depends upon Gods promise, not Gods promise upon our holiness. Deus facit ut
nos faciamus quae praecepit, nos non facimus ut ille faciat quae promisit; (so
S. Aug.) God makes us to do what he has commanded, we do not make obedience of
faith from his grace too, even the grace of his Spirit sanctifying.

. 13. So that all our comfort of soul and peace of conscience is firmly fixed
upon this sure Basis, this firm foundation, the immutability of Gods love, and
the stability of his promise. For so, Heb. 6.17. God willing more abundantly to
show unto the heirs of promise (and in that his love) he confirmed it by an
oath: And wherefore? Was it to make his obligation more firm? No, but to make
our consolation more full: For so, v. 18. it was, that by two immutable things,
in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation.
Gods covenant is not made the more firm or sure by oath then by promise; for
that his truth, as his nature, it is without variableness or shadow of turning:
Jam. 1.17.
And it is not any thing that can add to its immutability; for as to infinity
in respect of extension, so to immutability in respect of firmness, there can
be no accession of parts, nor addition of degrees.

. 14. Wherefore, as man's oath adds not to the truth of his word, so nor Gods
oath to the certainty of his promise: So that, merely to show unto the
faithful, Heb. 6.17.
the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, he confirmed it by an
oath; which was for the greater He will show them his covenant. Who is it now
that fears the Lord, and in that fear approaches a communion with Christ in
his ordinance, his holy Sacrament? that God may now acquaint him with his
Covenant, in the manifestations of his love, let him first see to this, that he
be acquainted with his secret

. 15. And here, that we rest not on moral principles, or on a formal sanctity,
do we examine the operations of grace in a real holiness, such as mere morality
cannot reach, nor formal hypocrisy counterfeit.

See we then what is the secret of the Lord with them that fear him, in the
operations of grace: 1. In respect of their contritions and humiliations: 2. In
respect of their hungrings and thirstings after

. 16. (1.) Their contritions and humiliations; in which their sight and sense
of sin is not only in respect of the general corruption of their nature, but
also the particular and more enormous transgressions of their life; yea, they
view sin, not so much in its horror Psalm. 14.3. Col. 1 21. Ephesians. 2 12. Isa. 59.2.
as in its pollution of filth; not so much as exposing to wrath and hell, as
setting at enmity with God, and estranging the soul from Christ. And thus does
Christ's grace work upon their hearts, with the Laws threatenings tempered with
the Gospels promises; thereby bruising and breaking them in contritions of
soul, mollifying and melting them in languishings of spirit: Oh this the secret
of the Lord, these the operations of grace in Contritions and Humiliations!

. 17. (2.) In hungrings and thirstings after righteousness, which arise in the
soul from faith in the promises of Christ; those of Justification by his Blood,
and those of Sanctification by his Spirit: yea, that knowledge of God and of
Christ which they had formerly, being speculative, now becomes practical; and
they find those Scriptures true in experience and trial, which before they
viewed only in fancy and notion. Psalm. 27.4.
So that nothing appears more beautiful to their sou^s, then the worship and
service of their God; nothing more joyous then communion with Christ, and
fellowship with his Saints. And therefore do they breath forth their longings
after righteousness, with holy David; Oh that our ways were made so direct,
Psalm. 119 5.
that we might keep thy statutes! And as they have no comfort in their souls,
till God speaks peace unto their consciences; so nor have they perfect holiness
in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7.1.


. 18. (3.) Holy purposes and godly resolutions; which resolutions of their
souls are conformable to the admonition of the Apostle, Act. 11.23. even with
purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord. And whereas the purposes of the
Hypocrite, they are ab extra, from without, from Gods judgments, or man's
persuasions; their holy ab infra, from within, from the sense of Gods mercy and
Christ's love, which does so powerfully aff^ct their souls, that they are with
David at a Juravi, I have sworn, Ps. 119.166.
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. They make it
their solemn vow and sincere resolution to observe the Law of their God, and
the precepts of their Redeemer. And according to the sincerity of their holy
resolutions, so do they order the integrity of their holy obedience, even in an
universal and impartial respect to all Gods commandments; not allowing, not
approving, yea, Ps. 119.6.
not excusing or indulging themselves in the commission of the least evil, of
which their conscience is convinced, that it is a sin against their just and
holy God, their good and gracious Father.

. 19. (4.) Earnest prayers, and fervent supplications. How many, oh how many
are the deep sighs, how many the mournful groans, how many the secret wishes,
how many the pantings and longings which they feel in their souls, as so many
ebullitions of grace, wing in prayer, to present and enlarge themselves in
supplications before the Throne of grace? In which supplications they are not
more earnest and importunate for justification, then they are for
sanctification; for remission of sins, then for newness of life: yea, they sue
with as much fervency and importunity for holiness, as for happiness; for
grace, as for glory.

Their humble assurance of Gods love, and acceptance through Christ. And for
this know, that the Spirit of supplication which gives them words to put up
their prayer unto God through Christ, the same Spirit does often bring back
word unto their souls, that their prayer so put up is accepted; whereby with
David they taste and see, that is, Ps. 34 8.
experimentally find and feel that the Lord is God; receiving even whilst they
are praying, an answer of their prayers returned into their bosom, by a secret
contentation of soul, wrought by a sweet illapse of the Spirit. And thus their
souls become even transported with a divine joy and heavenly delight; the
spiritual communion they obtain with God through Christ in humble prayer, being
an earnest of that eternal communion they expect with God and with Christ in
the heavenly presence. Joh 17.24.
Of which eternal communion, and heavenly presence, this blessed Eucharist is
the Sacramental seals and pledge, confirming unto us the truth and comfort of
this doctrine, the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant.

Verse. 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out
of the net.
. 1. HIs guards are strong, his fence is sure, whose salvation is Christ; which
salvation is communicated to us in the promises of grace, exhibited in the
ministry of the Word, and more plentifully conveyed, yea more effectually
confirmed in the ministration of the Sacraments. Now, to spoil us of the
treasure, to rob us of the comfort of this salvation, is Satan's grand design in
his temptations unto sin, and his suggestions of distrust; for by these he
communion with Christ is preserved from Satan's snare: And if through infirmity
the soul flag and fall to the earth, and so become entangled in carnal and
worldly affections; yet keeping the eye fixed upon Christ, looking to him in his
Ordinances, to rece ve the quickening power of his grace; though corrupt
affections may entangle, Romans 8 2. Romans 6.14.
life and liberty, a Spirit of Grace and holiness, delivering from the power of
Satan and from the dominion of sin.

. 2. And this, this is David's practice and experience, registered here by the
Holy Ghost, for our pattern and comfort; when to the meditation of Gods
promise, and the manifestations of his love, he joins this profession of faith,
saying, Mine eyes are ever toward the etc. In which profession of David's faith
we have two particulars, 1. Its firm affiance. 2. Its comfortable assurance. 1.
Its firm affiance, Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord. 2. Its comfortable
assurance, For he shall pluck my feet out of the net.

. 3. First, The firm affiance of David's faith, Mine eyes are ever toward the
Lord. Mine eyes, so general and sovereign an influence has faith into the
actual exercise of the divine graces, that it does supply the office of the
choycest members, in the spiritual man; therefore is Faith the legs that
support, the hand that receives, the arms that embrace, the palate that
tastes, the eye that beholds, yea, it is the heart of the inward man, the seat
of spiritual life; for so says just shall live by faith; and again, I live,
Romans 1 17. Gal. 2.20.
yet not I, but Christ that lives in me, and the life that I now live, I live
by the faith of the Son of God. And very apt is this metaphor of faith, that it
is the eye of the soul, whereby it discerns those things which are invisible,
invisible to the eye of sense, and the eye of reason, 2 Cor 4.18.
yet made evident and visible by an enlightening power of the Spirit to the eye
of faith; and therefore is faith called (...), Heb. 11.1.
a sacred evidence and divine demonstration of the truth of those things, which
neither sense nor reason can apprehend.

. 4. Many indeed there are eminent in Caldean learning, and not necessitating,
influence of the Stars and Constellations, yet how far short is all this of
that Philo calls fides oculata, an illuminated Faith, the eye of the sanctified
soul? whereby it pierces within the vail, Heb. 6 19.
looks into the holy of holies, the most sacred and secret mysteries of grace
and glory. This is that Eagles eye, which can receive the Rays of the Sun of
ever toward the Lord, in the sweetness of his love, and the riches of his
fullness; By this piercing eye of faith it is, that Abraham through a bleeding
sword, and a sacrificed son, does see a posterity numerous as the stars in
heaven; by this piercing eye of faith it is, that Israel through a red Sea, and
a barren Wilderness, does see a land of promise, a Canaan of rest; By this
piercing eye of faith it is, that David through a despised Crown, and a broken
Scepter, does see a glorious Throne and famous Government; Jerusalem, a type of
the Church, through a night of distress, and a grave of capcaptivity, does see
a resurrection of peace, and a full Noon of glory,

. 5. An enlightened faith is not discouraged with difficulties, (...). Nazian.
in Cyp.
nor dampt with dangers, knowing well, that God oftentimes so orders the
administrations of his Providence, as that he works his own ends, even by
contrary means: So that man is at a stand to determine, whether is greater, the
wonder or the mercy of his Churches deliverance, good mediums, but no full
objects, we must look through them, as through a glass, by which we behold God
and Christ, as the full and final object, whereon to fix the the eye of faith,
and wherewith to terminate the sight of the soul.

. 6. Yea, the blessings of providence, and the graces of the spirit they are
but the streams; the Lord, the Lord, he is the fountain; so that when all
outward hopes fail, and all inward comforts faint; when there is a perfect
vacuum in the creatures, a seeming emptiness in the Ordinances, even then the
poor soul and afflicted Saint* does find rest and comfort in the Lord. Psalm.
116.7.
In him faith sees an Almighty power, and an omniscient wisdom; an infinite
grace, and an all-sufficient merit; yea, an all-compassionating mercy. So that
were there indeed Lords fullness.

. 7. Who art thou then, O thou afflicted soul, who in thy spiritual desertions
walk in darkness clouded with sorrows? Oh in thy greatest dejections lift up
thine eyes unto the Lord, Psalm. 123.1.
that when the rising Sun appears thou may see his refreshing light; and
however now by reason of thy present anguish, thou can not serve God Wait
upon the Lord, having thy eye of faith still toward him; Psalm. 27.14.
and so shall comforts be redoubled, in a life recovered; and thy difficulties
of obtaining, shall the more sweeten thy delights of enjoying, even of enjoying
God and Christ in the refreshing comforts of the Spirit, conveyed and confirmed
in his blessed Sacrament. In which blessed Sacrament eyes be still toward the
Lord, in his merits, in his grace, in his benefits, in his love; let him have
thy fixed heart, and thine intent eye, yea, let him have thy whole man, for to
this end it is that he here gives thee his whole self.

. 8. And Oh the sweet converses of the devout soul when the divine presence of
Christ shall fill its Tabernacle, possess the heart, and so the eye of faith
become fixed upon the Lord, in devout contemplations of his grace and love! So
fixed, that with holy David, When we awake we are still with him; yea, We set
the Lord always before our face, Psalm. 139 18. Psalm. 16.8,
he the continual object of our eye, as being the only object of our love, of
our joy, of our delight. Indeed, where should be our hearts, but where is our
joy? where our eye, but where our love? and whilst our eyes are on the Lord,
the Lords eyes will be on us, so that lifting up our eyes to him above, we
shall not fear the snares of our feet beneath; but in all our affairs of life,
in all our conditions of being, in all the public calamities of the Church,
eyes being ever toward the Lord, he shall pluck our feet out of the net.

. 9. Secondly, The comfortable assurance of David's faith, he shall pluck my
feet out of the Net; that is, he shall deliver me from the sinful temptations
of Satan, the world and the flesh, which are as a net to entangle and ensnare
the soul. First, such is Satan's malice to the sanctified soul, that not being
able by his temptations to deprive of grace, he will not cease his suggestions
to rob of comfort; so that as Hercules in his cradle, so the faithful in his
infancy of the new man, he does encounter the winding serpent, whom he
overcomes by the blood of the Lamb, through faith in the Lord Jesus.

. 10. And when Satan thus repulst and beat off, departs from for a while; yea,
(...), for a season, even till a fitter opportunity to return; Luke 4.13.
so that again and again does Satan encounter the humble penitent, renewing his
terrors to destroy his comforts, and if possible, to overthrow his faith: Oh
how does he by subtle insinuations, make the soul to argue against it self, in
many needless scruples, and groundless doubtings, intermixed with distrustful
fears! But such is the wisdom and mercy of his God, that Satan's Wiles they are
repelled by Christ's truth, divine love, by the Spirit, obtained in fervent
prayer.

. 11. And as thus we have seen something of the combat the faithful have with
Satan, so see, Secondly, something of the encounter he has with the world; in
which there is a secret antipathy against the spiritual man, as it is observed
by our Savior when he tells his if they were of the world, the world would
love them, Joh. 15.19.
even as the Mother loves her own Children but because he had called them out
of the world, therefore did the world hate them. Thus then, the faithful man,
in the world, and from the world, he meets with hatred, yea, that hatred
sharpened with contempt, derision, and slanders; ay, men's malice does increase
with his goodness, their fury with his piety; so that he meets with loss of
liberty, spoil of goods; yea the threatenings, if not execution

. 12. Sometimes again, the world turns her violence into allurements* her
threathings and fury, into fawnings and flattery; she presents profit, proffers
pleasure, tenders honor, and all to allure and deceive; and the faithful man's
danger, is greater from the plausible fairness of the worlds allurements, then
from the apparent fierce^ess of her threatenings. But such is the power of
divine grace, that plucks his feet out of the net, 1 John 5.4.
making him by faith to overcome the world; a sincere faith in the apprehension
of Gods love, and the assurance of Christ's Kingdom, will powerfully, yea,
victoriously repulse the world, in all her incounters of feat, or of favor.

. 13. As we have seen something of the spiritual conflict which the faithful
man has with Satan and the World; So thirdly, see now something of that he has
with the Flesh; which though it be an enemy less violent, yet is it more
dangerous; whose insinuations being secret, they are the more hurtful, because
the less discernable; in this conflict with the flesh, the sanctified person,
he feels the bent of nature struggling against the dictates of the Spirit;
corrupt dispositions, against gracious inclinations; carnal lusts, against
spiritual desires; earthly affections, against heavenly motions; thus he feels
the spirit lusting against the flesh, Gal. 5 17.
and the flesh lusting against the spirit; in which domestic War he receives
many secret blows, and some Paul, Oh wretched man that I am! Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? This body of death, in which the
inward man is divided against the outward man, the old man against the new man,
that is, the same man against himself.

. 14. And yet, O happy soul which is truly sensible of this spiritual war! it
shall assuredly rest in an eternal peace. These several Combats then and
conflicts, which the faithful have against Satan, the World, and the Flesh,
though they often discourage, yet do Christ's Spirit, give strength to their
fainting souls those many assaults of their spiritual enemies, would assuredly
beat them back, from their holy course; but being by the same spirit
strengthened, by which they are sanctified, notwithstanding all the oppositions
of the World, or the Flesh, they go forwards in holiness; And no^withstanding
Satan they resolve, and will endeavor to live godly in Christ Jesus; being
ready in firm affiance and a comfortable assurance, to subscribe this
profession of David's faith. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, for he shall
pluck my feet out of the net.

. 15. But now, how may we best fortify our souls against the sinful
temptations of the World and Satan? Answer, By mortifying the corrupt
affections of the flesh; For that, most certain it is, Satan lusts; and by
their treachery does surprise the Citadel of the heart. Satan may tempt, but
he cannot force the will; So that it is not his tempting but our consenting,
which brings guilt upon the soul; Jam. 1.14.
properly then indeed every man is tempted, when he is drawn away with his own
lust, and enticed. Satan he subtly proportions his sinful temptations to our
corrupt dispositions, and therefore where he sees the heart set upon
covetousness, he tempts Balaam with the wages of iniquity, 2 Pet. 2.15.
to curse Israel; he Judas with horrid treason to betray his Master, Luke 22.2,
3.
he tempts Annanias, Act. 5.3, 4.
with cursed sacrilege, to alineate to his own use, what he had dedicated to
Gods service; Thus also when he sees the heart set upon ambition, Numb. 16.1.
he tempts Corah with desperate rebellion; he tempts Absolon with unnatural
treason; 2 Samuel 15.10.
he tempts Arrius with blasphemous Heresy; he tempts Julian with horrid
Apostasy.

. 16. But now, on the contrary, as an Arrow shot against a Rock may be broken,
but cannot enter; thus temptation to the soul* it shall be repelled, where no
lust is within to give admittance. Wherefore, though Satan tempt our Savior,
yet are the darts of his temptations shot in vain: He finds nothing in him;
Joh. 14.30.
nothing in Christ of carnal or earthly affection, whereon his temptation might
fasten it self. In us then, it is the treacherous correspondencie of the flesh
fortify the soul against their sinful temptations, the surest means is, to
mortify the flesh in its corrupt affections. Romans 8.13.


. 17. Now when the solemnity of the holy Eucharist is celebrated, Job 1.6.
it is a day when the sons of God come to present themselves before the Lord,
and we may be sure Satan will also come among them, not only to accuse every
unworthy Receiver, but even to tempt the worthiest that receives; tempt him
with wandering and

Wherefore it will be a second Case seasonably proposed, How we may best attend
this sacred solemnity, that we be not entangled in Satan's net? Answer, By
having our eyes ever toward the Lord, our souls fixed and intent upon Christ in
the sufferings of his Passion, the power of his Resurrection, the glory of his
Ascension, and the benefit of his Intercession. And this, with the enlargements
of contrition,

. 18. This a fit exercise for the whole solemnity of Administering; but
especially in the very act of receiving, when the Minister comes toward thee,
( O thou devoted soul!) with the Sacramental pledges of Christ's body and blood,
raise thy self in this, or the like ejaculation of fervent prayer: O my Jesus,
thou boundless mercy and glorious purity, by thy Spirit pierce into every
faculty of my soul, cleanse out every corner of my heart, and so sanctify and
enlarge me, that I may This done, when the sacred bread is administered to thee
with a Take, eat, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ; then in thy silent
meditations, by a commemoration of faith, behold Christ in the garden, Luke
22.44.
and see him in his anguish of soul and agony of blood pressed under the weight
of man's sin and Gods wrath. This being over, behold him betrayed by Judas,
apprehended by the Jews, and dragged away to the Highpriests palace, where,
Mat. 26 67.
in thy commemorations of Pilate's Judgment-hall, where being falsely accused,
see him unjustly condemned, and after he is scourged with whips, Mat. 27.2.11.
crowned with thorns, and sceptred with a reed, mocked and despightfully used;
behold him in thy meditations, bearing his cross till he faints under it.

. 19. At last coming to Mount Calvary, see his limbs stretched and violently
distorted, his hands and feet dug and bored, and at length his precious body
nailed to his Cross; where fix thy meditations of faith in an exercise of
contrition and love; that as S. Paul thou may become crucified with Christ;
Gal. 2.20.
and with good Ignatius in a Pathos of devotion cry out, (...); Oh my love, and
therein my life, my joy, my Jesus, he is crucified! And in this melting ecstasy
of contrition and love, continue till the Cup be presented thee, with a Drink
this, the blood of our Lord Lord Jesus Christ; Savior hanging upon his Cross,
seeing thou can not conceive his (...), his unknown sufferings, as the Greek
Church calls them; seeing thou can not conceive the Sea of sorrows which
overwhelmed his soul, see, oh see those Rivers of blood which overflowed his
body; And life flowing out with the blood, see him seal a Consummatum to his
Passion and our Redemption, with a giving up the ghost.

. 20. And here say within thy self, Who is it (in a challenge to the Law, and
Sin, and Satan) who is it that condemns, seeing it is Christ that dyed? Romans
8.34.
my Surety, my Savior, who thus offers up himself a sacrifice for my sins? And
therefore presenting thy self in the presence of thy God and his holy Angels,
raise thy soul in this apprehension of faith; That whatsoever is the guilt of
Sin, the accusation taken away, cancelled, and abolished by the merit of
Christ's passion. And therefore in thy meditation of holy faith, send forth this
ejaculation of fervent prayer: Look down, oh look down, heavenly Father, from
thy celestial sanctuary, and behold the sacred Host, the death, the passion of
my crucified Savior; whose blood of sprinkling speaks better things then that
of Abel's, even things of grace and mercy, of pardon and peace.

Ephesians. 4 8. Col. 2.15.
. 21. And here from the Passion of thy Savior, proceed in thy Ressurection,
and behold him leading Captivity captive, triumphing gloriously over sin and
Satan, death and hell. From his Resurrection follow him to his Ascension, and
raised by faith, Heb. 7.25.
behold him at the right hand of the Father in glory, where He ever lives to
make intercession for us. And therefore presenting thy self before the Throne
of grace, power out thy soul in prayer, in the mediation of Christ Jesus, that
God would make good to thee the institution of this holy Sacrament, as the seal
of his a communion with the Lord Jesus in all his benefits; that so, the pardon
of thy sins being sealed, a supply of grace exhibited, and the earnest of glory
confirmed, thy whole man may be further sanctified, and eternally blessed. And
now let the close of all be lauds and praises, even Halleluiah, salvation be
unto our God, and unto the Lamb for ever. Rev. 7.10.


Verse. 16, 17. Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and
afflicted: The troubles of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my
distresses.
Infinite Good, as he has his being from himself, so has he his contentment
in himself: He has his Paradise in his own bosom, his perfect bliss in the
eternity of his own fullness. And O the immensity of Gods love unto man! in
ordaining him no other felicity then himself enjoys, giving himself to be man's
end, man's happiness! This then is the comfortable rest of man's soul, Communion
with God in Christ; which yet in this life is neither full nor fixed, the godly
man's comforts being always sweet, yet often frequent interruption, Psalm. 30.7.
though not a total dissolution.

. 2. So that, did we lay our ears to the devout man's closet, how might we hear
the Turtle-moans of his sobbing sorrows, the deep sighs of his broken heart? Oh
how are his prayers bedewed with tears, which drop from the bleeding wounds of
his anguisht soul! His sad complaint, how is it often that of mournful Sion;
Isa. 49.14.
The Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me? Every word has its Lord,
rich in his goodness, dear in his love; the Lord, infinite in his power,
glorious in his majesty, faithful in his truth; even the Lord my God, my God by
covenant and communion, the stay and strength of my soul, the desire and
delight of my heart, the life of my joy, and the joy of my life, He has
forsaken me.

. 3. Yea, he has not only cast me out of his arms, but also out of his heart;
he has not only taken away his hand, but has also hid He has forgotten me.
Now this state of spiritual desertion, though excluding comforts, yet is it
consisting with grace. And therefore the devout Saint of God, notwithstanding
his languishments of sorrow, does not lie down in distrust, but raised by
faith, he powers forth his complaint unto God in prayer. Thus holy David; Turn
thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted: the
troubles of my heart are enlarged, oh bring thou me out of my distresses.

Case rightly stated in a mournful complaint, and the Cure fitly applied in a
fervent prayer. The Case rightly stated in a mournful complaint, (1.) In its
spiritual dereliction, I am desolate. (2.) Its secret anguish, I am afflicted.
(3.) Its high aggravation, The troubles of my heart are enlarged. In the Cure
fitly applied in fervent prayer, (1.) To the Spiritual dereliction is applied
the manifestation of Divine love, Turn thee unto me. (2.) To the secret anguish
is applied a sovereign balm, Have mercy upon me. (3.) To the high aggravation
is applied a full deliverance; Oh bring thou me out of my distresses! Thus turn
thee unto me, and have mercy, upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted, etc.

. 5. (1.) The case of a deserted soul rightly stated, in its spiritual
dereliction, I am desolate. The devout soul in its near approaches unto God
through Christ, Psalm. 34.8.
oftentimes tastes and sees much of heavenly plants carried out of their native
soil and proper climate, they keep not their sweetness in a continued strength;
God oft-times withdrawing himself from his dearest Saints, in the comforting
influence of his grace and love. The cheering vigor then of Grace in its
triumphant power over sin, and the satisfying peace of conscience in the clear
testimony of the Spirit, they are not always the portion of the truly
sanctified. Grace and Peace, indeed, they Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2.
but not inseparable companions: Grace may be without Peace, though Peace
cannot be without Grace. The soul then is often desolate and forsaken of God,
in the refreshing influence of peace and comfort, when yet he is most
intimately present with the soul, in the quickening power of life and grace.

. 6. Now the spiritual dereliction we here speak of, it is none other then a
stop of that gracious effusion of Gods love, a shutting Christ's fullness upon
the soul. A truth this so well known by sad experience to Gods Saints, that who
is he that has drunk of the waters of life, that has not tasted those waters
of Marah? that has not tasted at least some drops of that full cup of Christ,
when in bitter anguish of soul he cried out upon the Cross, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This then of Gods withdrawing
himself in the comforts of his Spirit, it is a temptation common to men, 1 Cor.
10.13.
the best of men, even to men of the divinest tempers and devoutest souls.

. 7. Yet these spiritual derelictions of the godly, though they are real, they
are not total, not final; for that, God is faithful in his promise, whose
promise is full and emphatical, Heb. 13.5. (...); I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. Est. in loc.
Est negationis conduplicatio, ut sit vehementior The promise is doubled in the
expression, that our faith might be confirmed in its assurance. Yea, here are
five Negatives, (...); which is as if God had said, I will not, no, I will not,
no, most assuredly I will not, for ever leave thee, for ever forsake thee; his
compassions may be restrained, but cannot be extinguished.

. 8. Know then, in the spiritual desertions of comfort, Gods love is not
interrupted in him, but the acts of his love intermitted to us; he withdraws
himself indeed in his love, but it is not amor benevolentiae but amor
beneficentiae; (as the School speaks) his love of benevolence wherewith he
loves us in Christ, this love like himself it is unchangeable; but now the
actings of this love, which is the love of beneficence, that is often suspended
in its benevolence and beneficence may aptly be illustrated by lux and lumen,
the inherent and the radiant light of the Sun; Gods love of benevolence like
the Suns inherent light it varies not; but his love of beneficence, like the
Suns radiant light, it is often clouded, yet not totally eclipsed; And when
Gods love is clouded, his face hid, then is the soul desolate; which
dereliction brings not only a sudden fit of heaviness, but very often, a
continued estate of discomforts, David in his desertion; I am desolate and
afflicted.

. 9. (2) The secret anguish, I am afflicted; Indeed what soul can be desolate
and not be afflicted? Psalm. 30.6. Thou Lord did hide thy face, and I was
troubled: Certainly, his absence cannot but be lamented with greatest grief,
whose presence the soul prize^h above all earthly joy; when the evidence of
salvation is obscured, the light of Gods countenance darkened, the comforts of
the Spirit detained, promises taste not so sweet, the Ordinances prove not so
lively, yea, the clouds which hang over the soul they gather blackness, doubts
arise, fears overflow, terrors increase, troubles enlarge, and the soul
becomes languishingly afflicted, even with all variety of disquietments.

. 10. Oh how does the experience of former happiness sharpen the sense of
present misery! Every evil after the experience of the opposite good, becomes
the greater evil; (...) Theoph. Epist. 37.
when the soul then calls to communion with God through Christ; and withal,
now sees its communion cut off, and the comforts vanished, the spring stopped
and the streams ceast, O how great must needs be the bitterness of her grief!
miserum est fuisse felicem, we commonly say, it is a miserable thing to have
been happy; it is the souls trouble, that she is without Christ; but it is the
increase of her trouble, the sharpning of her affliction, that him whose
presence was once so sweet, that it makes his absence to be most bitter.

. 11. Many indeed there are, well enough as to present sorrow without Christ,
because they never enjoyed him; but what soul ever enjoyed Christ, that can
enjoy it self and want him? without Christ, that soul may see her wounds, but
cannot see her cure; she may see her danger, but cannot see her refuge; and
when God shall conceal his love and reveal our guilt, hide his face and
discover our sin, what can be more grievous and afflicting? So that well might
David join his spiritual dereliction, and his secret anguish, saying, I am
desolate and afflicted.

. 12. (3) The high aggravation, the troubles of my heart are enlarged; the
heart of man is the greatest Tyrant, the cruellest persecutor to himself; he
needs none other fury who has that of an accusing spirit; this, this alone
will be Accuser and Witness, Law and Judge, Executioner accusing conscience!
this, this alone does make a hell upon earth; distracting, direful, and
accusing thoughts, are worse then chains, then stripes, then death; needs must
that man's troubles be enlarged, his anguish increased, when his soul, left to
its own darkness and unbelief, with Saul, it falls upon its own sword, becomes
its own executioner. Witness those dreadful complaints of a deserted soul and
wounded conscience in Prove. 18.14.
Psalm. For, a wounded spirit, says Solomon, Who can bear? And a wounded
spirit who can declare? its troubles, its distresses, they are as
unexpressible, as they are insupportable; especially when the soul is in
desertion.

13. When the humble Penitent, apprehending the vastness of eternity, both as
to heavens joys, and hells misery, has labored under the pressing weight of
sins guilt, and the laws curse; And when in this Agony, the soul has thrown it
self upon God in Christ, pardon and love; after all this, for him to be in so
great darkness, as to doubt whether Christ will own him, whether God will
regard him what can this darkness be but the very valley and shadow of death?
Psalm. 13 4.
O how does a man in desertion, through distrust, fight against himself? if we
go about to bind up his wounds, he rends them wider; give supplying oil, and
healing balm, and he will make it a very corrosive to his bleeding soul; he
will fetch misery out of mercy, and hell out afflicted soul we tell him of Gods
fatherly compassion and mercy, his riches of grace and love, O how does he thus
reason against himself? this, this the accent of my misery, to die in the midst
of life, to perish in the midst of salvation.

. 14. Surely, God is a Father, and were I his child his bowels would not be
restrained; he is infinitely gracious, and were I at all in his heart, in his
love, he that receives millions, would not reject me. merciful, Romans 10.20.
that he is found of them that seek him not, and sure if his displeasure were
not irreconcilable, I that so carefully seek him, should at last find him; God
is goodness it self, and sure my evil must needs be great, that goodness cast
me off; nothing then can heal me, but that which has wounded me; I have lost
the presence of my God, I have lost the embraces of my Jesus, and nothing but
that presence, and those embraces can bring comfort to my soul; but whilst I am
desolate I shall be afflicted, and the troubles of mine heart will be enlarged.
This the Case rightly stated in a mournful complaint; I am desolate and
aflicted, the troubles of my heart are enlarged.

. 15. (2.) The Cure fitly applied; and (1.) To the spiritual dereliction, the
manifestation of Divine love, Turn thou unto me. In desertions of comfort, God
does not cease to be present, but to By hiding his face, Venit cum
manifestatur, and cum ^ccultatur abscedit. S. Aug. ep. 3.
God departs; and by manifesting his favor, he returns. And therefore says
David, Turn thee unto me. The freest fountain yields the fullest stream, and
the best good the greatest comfort. And the best good is God, who being the
Object as well as the Author of our comfort, the measure of our joy must needs
be according to the degree of our enjoyment. In heaven we enjoy him fully, and
therefore a fullness of joy; but on earth having an imperfect possession, Psalm.
16.11.
we have but an imperfect consolation. So that it is when God turns his face to
us, that we can say with David, Return unto thy rest, O my soul. He alone who
gives life, can give comfort; Psalm. 116.7.
He alone who gives grace, can give peace: The Spirit of sanctification, is the
Spirit of consolation.

. 16. Indeed, that which can satisfy the soul, must be the bounty of a
sovereign goodness; such as is pardon of sin, deliverance from Prince of peace,
and greater then the Conscience? When the soul like Hagar languisheth, Genesis
21.19.
it is the Spirit of grace and truth that can open the eye, enlighten the
understanding, and discover the ^rue well of life, and waters of comfort.
Darkness of mind is the womb of doubts, and the shop of fears; but the Light of
the Spirit brings comfort of soul in a discovery of Gods love in Christ, which
discovery being Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4 2.
which gives day to the inward man, and his continued beams bring the soul its
renewed joys. Wherefore then let the deserted soul present its self in all its
languishings, and thus bespeak God and Christ in this blessed Sacrament: O my
God! my soul seeks what

. 17. (2.) To the secret anguish, is applied a sovereign balm: Have mercy upon
me! Such are the wounds of an afflicted soul, as no balm can cure but that of a
compassionating mercy; Misericordia ^elia^uata, mercy which melts to supple and
to heal. Though then the deserted soul, has the same promises, the same
Mediator, the same God, which it had before its desertion, yet it does not find
comfort, till it have the same mercy. And therefore does St. Paul happily join
the Father of mercies and the God of all consolations: 2 Cor. 1.3.
For that indeed, God were not the God of consolation, were he not the Father
of mercies; all remission of sins, all power of grace, all manifestations of
love, yea, the earnest of glory, are all the offspring of mercy, brought forth
of her womb, brought up in her lap, yea, nourished with the milk of her
breasts, and cherished with the warmth of her bosom.

. 18. Who art thou now that languishest in desertions? Know, the door of mercy
is not shut, because thou should not enter, but because thou should knock;
if thou would obtain mercy then, it must be by prayer, and that through Faith
in the promise; Faith, I say in the promise, for how know we Gods good will,
but by his fathers mercies melts at the Sons mediation, Heb. 2.17. Bern. de
grad. hum.
go unto God by Christ, by Christ as a merciful and faithful High Priest, a
merciful High Priest, compassi^ cum impossibilitate perdurat, though Christ be
now gloriously imp^ssible, yet is he still graciously compassionate; yea, he is
one that proportions his pity to our misery, Heb. 5.2. (...).
his compassion to our affliction; such compassion as is a Sovereign balm to
cure the secret anguish of a deserted David, when he cries unto God in prayer,
Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted, the
troubles of my heart are enlarged, etc.

. 19. (3) To the high aggravation is applied a full deliverance, O bring thou
me out of my distresses. Now the soul begins to recover her former taste of
heavenly sweetness; now she begins to feel the warmth of those sweet embraces,
from the everlasting arms of her dearest Jesus; And therefore does she pursue
this begun recovery, deliverance from all her distresses, of doubts, and fears,
and terros; which deliverance from those distresses, is by the sacred testimony
of Christ's spirit, evidencing the sincerity and truth of grace, and thereby a
personal interest in the promises of life and love.

Joh. 14.26.
. 20. To make it appear how the Spirit is the Comforter, and by his testimony
to the soul free's it, from its distress; observe this gradation. 1. The Gospel
proposes salvation through Christ in the free promise; and now press this
grape, examine this truth, and the wine of comfort is no more but this, that
salvation may be mine, if I believe. But then, 2. A further progress is made by
faith, in casting the soul upon Christ for salvation according to this promise,
and in this, the foundation of comfort is laid firm, the root is fixed, yet the
fruit is not grown; this is sufficient to life and salvation in the end, but is
not effectual yet to peace and consolation in the way; wherefore to all this,
that salvation through Christ is offered in the promise, and that the promise
of Christ for salvation is received through faith; to all this, must be added
this testimony of the Spirit, that, that faith is sincere, and so, that
salvation sure: And this testimony it is, that confirms the souls peace, and
gives enlargement to its sweetest comforts.

. 21. Thus Faith in the habit it is medium incognitum (say communion with
Christ. When the Sun of righteousness then appears with healing in his wings,
Mal. 4, 2.
the clouds of fears are scattered, the storms of terrors cease, the night of
unbelief does vanish; yea, Psalm. 24.8.
when Christ the King of glory sets up his Throne in the heart, and rules with
the golden Scepter of his grace, then do proud lusts stoop, then do the powers
of darkness case and the cure of a deserted soul, the case rightly stated, and
the cure fitly applied; the case rightly stated, I am desolate and afflicted,
the troubles of mine heart are enlarged; the cure fitly applied. Turn thee unto
me, have mercy upon me, O bring thou me out of my distresses.

. 22. Who art thou now that looks upon what is said of spiritual desertion as
strange doctrine? Let me tell thee thou have had acquaintance with God, if thou
know not yet, what it is to lose him, to lose him in the comforts of his
Spirit; thou have room, I question not, for profit, for pleasure, for sin, for
Satan, but no room for God, for Christ; and so not having enjoyed the comforts
of the divine presence, thou know not the discomfort of his absence; O what
is it that we see daily? some men lose their Estates, and they grieve heavily;
some men lose their Friends, and they go mournfully; some men lose their
Health, and live sadly; God, their Savior, their souls, and yet neither
grieve, nor mourn, nor are heavy for it! Oh ye who are guilty of this self and
soul-murder, did the day break upon your souls, 2 Pet. 1.19.
the Spirit of truth enlighten and awaken your consciences, Oh how would
amazement seize you, and the terrors of death fall upon you!

. 23. But who is it, that having Sions sorrow in his heart, and her tears in
his eyes, comes unto me with her complaint in his mouth, Oh, my God has
forsaken me, Isa. 49.14*
he has withdrawn himself in the comforts of his Spirit from me, so that I am
desolate and afflicted, the troubles of my heart are enlarged? For thy comfort
and direction, (1.^ Know, Comfort is not of the necessary being, but of the
happy well-being of the Saints; it is rather a partial reward, then a
particular grace; an earnest of glorification, rather then a part of
sanctification. It is the light, not the heat of the Sun that makes the day;
and it is the grace, not the comfort of the Spirit, that makes a Saint. (2.)
For thy direction, (1.) Be zealous to find out the Achan, to discover the
cursed thing (if any there be) which has caused or occasioned this desertion;
and having found it, be humbled in repentance; for commonly, Spiritual comforts
take their first rise from Penitential sorrow.

. 24. (2.) After humiliation, enquire of God in the means of Venite ad me, his
Come unto me, Mat. 11.28.
extending it self to the hungry, that they come and be satisfied; to the
thirsty, that they come and be refreshed; to the weary, that they come and be
eased; to the weak, that they come and be strengthened; to the sick, that they
come and be healed; to the fainting, that they come and be revived; to them
that are fallen, that they come and be restored; yea, to all that have faith
and repentance, treasury of heaven, here the fountain of life, here the
storehouse of comforts are all set wide open: Here, O ye afflicted souls, here
you are at the right door, knock, and knock hard, be not answered without
admittance; God loves an holy importunity; and know, the Lord is here, Christ
is here, life is here, salvation is here, here dwells everlasting mercy, here
dwells eternal peace: Oh look in, look in, with all reverence and faith, into
these sacred mysteries of grace and love; and see, see there Paradise, and
rivers of joy feeding them: Oh how the Angels sing, whilst devout souls exult,
at this blessed Feast of the Lord of life, and Prince of peace!

. 25. (3.) To preserve the comforts of the Spirit, when received of God in
Christ, be faithful in the exercise of grace. For God imprints his love upon
the heart in the characters of grace; which the more large, the better read:
yea, Grace is Gods seal; and the more visible the stamp, the more evident the
assurance; the more evident ways of holiness are as beds of spices, Cant. 4.16.
the more we walk in them, the more they requite the soul with their sweet
delight and spiritual refreshments. Thus must man's obedience be conformable to
his devotion, his conversation to his supplication; not doing that which may
drive God from him in justice, whilst he would have God turn to him in mercy;
Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, etc.

Verse. 18. Look upon mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins.
. 1. AFfliction is the proper object of compassion, misery the proper object of
mercy: And therefore we read how Pilate, willing to release Jesus, he brings
him forth, having his back furrowed with the whips, his head harrowed with the
thorns, and his derisive purple stained, yea, drencht with blood; and presents
him thus ghastly a spectacle to the Jews, with an Ecce homo, Joh. 19.5.
behold the man; supposing so sad a sight would have moved malice to mercy, and
envy it self to compassion. Now, what Pilate did to the Jews with Christ,
Christ in a fit resemblance and apt allusion does with the Penitent to his
Father; he brings him forth in the Court of Conscience, heart wounded with
sorrow, his spirit broken in contrition, and his soul fainting in languishments
of repentance, and presents him so sad a spectacle to the Father with an Ecce
homo, Behold the man.

. 2. Behold the man, once so lofty in his pride, now so lowly in his penitence;
once so hardened in his rebellion, now so humbled in his contrition; once so
obstinate a sinner, now so pitiful a penitent. And oh! whilst this man of
sorrows mourns in affliction, how does the Father of mercies melt in
compassion? When the wounded sinner is presented by the wounded Son, and the
Penitents tears cry aloud with the Mediators blood, how must the Fathers
compassion needs melt into sins remission? Of which sacred truth, and heavenly
comfort, was David well assured; when in this his Psalm of penitence he makes
this prayer of faith, Vide afflictionem, Look upon mine affliction and my pain,
and forgive all my sins.

. 3. Observe we in these words two particulars. 1. The proper Look upon my
affliction and my pain. 2. The firm ground of the Souls peace, it is sins
forgiveness; Forgive me all my sins.

. 4. (1.) The proper object of Divine mercy: Look upon mine affliction and my
pain. This affliction and pain is either that of the penitent Sinner, or that
of the devout Saint. That of the penitent Sinner, who having withdrawn himself
from the world, and retired Isa. 38.
how does he with Hezekiah even Recogitare annos in amaritudine animae,
Overturn the Annals of his life in the bitterness of his soul? And after a
strict survey, having faithfully observed the sins which he has committed, and
the several circumstances by which they are aggravated, he then sums them up
into a Catalogue, which is no sooner in his eye, but sorrow is in his heart,
endeavoring to blot out those letters of guilt with his tears of repentance,
through faith in the blood of Christ.

. 5. And whilst he sets his sins in order before him, Oh how does a secret
affrightment chill his blood, and make his heart to tremble, in the
apprehension of their loathsome filth and dreadful curse! yea, he beholding
himself under the heavy sentence of the laws condemnation, Oh how, how, is he
wholly encompassed with terror and amazement! When he looks within him, Oh the
terrors of an accusing and a killing guilt! When he looks without him, Oh the
horror of a deserved death, and a tormenting Hell! When he looks above him, Oh
the dread, the dread of an offended Majesty, and an avenging Judge! Oh whither,
whither then shall this poor penitent fly for succor? Where, oh where shall
his affrighted and afflicted soul seek for shelter? Where, but at the cross of
his Redeemer?

. 6. And when Christ, so full of pity, so full of love, when he humble
suppliant, and sincere penitent, in the lowest depth of his humiliations,
pouring out his complaint at the foot of his cross; when he hears his mournful
sighs, his painful groans, the earnest messengers of his afflicted soul, it is
then as possible for Christ, to forget the passions of sorrow which he
suffered, as not to compassionate this poor penitent sinner for whom he
suffered; he who stopped not his ears at the Jews blasphemies, will certainly
not stop his ear at the penitents complaints; he that turned not away his face
from suppliants tears; though the Devil has bereaved the sinner of his purity,
yet can he not deprive his Savior of his pity; Christ does not, Christ cannot
so remember the sins that man has committed, that he forget the soul which
himself has purchased; his eye, and nothing indeed else can do it, but his eye
of mercy, that looks through the guilt of sin, to behold the sorrow of the
sinner; and that affliction moves his compassion; so that the penitents prayer
is David's petition, Look upon mine affliction and my pain, etc.

(...) Chrysostom. de poen. hom. 5.
. 7. Thus then, sin brings forth sorrow, and the Daughter devours the Mother,
sorrow does destroy sin; as the worm has its original from the wood, and the
wood its decay from the worm; but this sorrow here of affliction and pain in
the penitent sinner, that it does become destructive of sin, is not from any
proper virtue in its self, but from that power it receives from the love of
God, and faith in (1.) From the love of God; A servile fear, and a mercenary
hope, a servile fear in the dread of hell, and a mercenary hope in the desire
of Heaven, are the common motives to repentance, which yet are then only to be
approved as good and holy, when they exclude not the love of God and of Christ.
For as St. Paul, in 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor,
and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, (...). I am
nothing. So again, though we dissolve our eyes into tears, and break our hearts
with mourning, and have not charity, all will be as nothing, nothing available
to eternal life.

. 8. The will (we say) simply embracing good, is good; yet if it so embrace the
less, as to reject the greater good, the will becomes inordinate; not that the
less is accepted, but that the better is repulst; pain of soul, that we may
avoid the pains of Hell, and obtain the bliss of Heaven, is certainly good in
it self, yet if excluding and repulsing the sincere love of God and of Christ,
it becomes an inordinate act, and its self so far from true repentance, that it
is a sin to be repented of: Observe, the love of God and of Christ is the
perfection of all the graces, Col. 3.14.
and is therefore called (...), The bond of perfectness.

. 9. Now observe then further, the beginning, the progress, and fear that is
servile, and hope that is mercinary, are good in the beginning of Christian
discipline, and evangelical holiness; But then they must have their progress to
that end which gives perfection, even the grace and exercise of love; wherefore
know we, that repentance and affliction of mind which does exclude the love of
God, is infernal, that of the damned in Hell, That repentance and affliction of
mind, which does not express, is legal, from the spirit of bondage; but that
repentance and affliction of mind, Romans 8.15.
which does not only express, but also arise from the love of God, that is
truly Evangelical, from the Spirit of adoption; which alone can give salvation,
by virtue of the promise, he that repents and believes shall be saved.

. 10. This the second particular, that the sorrow of affliction and pain in the
penitent, becomes destructive of sin, through the power Levit. 10.3.
God he will be sanctified in all them that come nigh unto him; And therefore
he being a consuming fire in the fury of his vengeance; Heb. 12.29.
when we humble our selves before him, though with the deepest of afflictions,
unless it be by faith in Jesus Christ, as the Mediator, God will be a just
Judge to condemn, rather then a merciful Father to forgive; for it is not our
tears without Christ's blood, not our sorrows without his sufferings, not our
affliction without his passion, that can quench the Gods wrath, satisfy the
severity of Gods Justice, and move the tenderness of his mercy. When therefore
acted by love, and strengthened by faith, we pour out our complaints unto our
God, in a sincere repentance, our affliction and pain shall become the proper
object of his divine mercy and grace; so that we may pray with confidence as
holy David, Look upon mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins.

. 11. (2) The affliction and pain, which is that of the devout Saint,
especially, either in the meditations of Christ's sufferings, or in the exercise
of fervent prayer, or in the sense of their own infirmities. (1) In the
meditation of Christ's sufferings; here I shall show you a mystery, a mystery of
godliness known only to the devout Saint; that the meditation of Christ's
sufferings, it afflicts by compassion, and delights by complacence, and so is a
(...), a bitter sweet; to see the sorrows of death seize the soul of life, yea,
the soul of him, devout Saint loves better then life; how, Oh how must this
needs be bitter! But now, to see the fire of love drink up this sea of sorrows,
and all in tenderness of endeared affection to his beloved Spouse, the penitent
soul; Oh how, how must this needs be sweet! How can the devout Saint meditate
upon his crucified Savior, but with unspeakable anguish, and yet with
incomparable delight; Beholding amidst the excess of his love, the pangs of his
sorrows?

. 12. Whilst the devout soul then meditates upon Christ's passion, Soliloquy is
a part of her devotion; O my crucified Jesus, how grievous is his sorrow, how
gracious is his love! he loves his torments, and takes pleasure in his
sufferings; he dies with joy, that he may dye with grief for me; O love
ecstatical! Wherefore as I cannot but grieve in his grief, so I cannot but joy
in his love; that is mine anguish, this my ravishment; so that as I sorrow with
him as my beloved, so I glory in him as my Savior. Thus Benjamin, a child of
grief and love, in an amorous compassion, and a dolorous complacence of the
soul with Christ, which amidst its joy and delights, says as David, Look upon
my affliction and my pain.

. 13. (2) In the exercise of fervent prayer, whose voice is louder from the
heart, then from the mouth; louder from the eye, then from the tongue; sighs
and tears are the best Rhetoric of the devout man's Romans 8.26.
but in sighs and groans which cannot be expressed. O then, then are we most
fervent in prayer, when our troubled souls become big with desires, which
cannot be uttered; and therefore the tongue being unable to declare them in
words, they force their passage at the eyes in a flood of tears. Thus, thus
pray we for the Church of Christ, for the chosen of God, that in a sympathy of
their David, Behold mine affliction and my pain.

. 14. (3) In the sense of their many infirmities. The Saints of God exercised
with ecstatical devotions, in the holy excess of divine love, Gal. 2.20.
as St. Paul, They live, yet not they, but Christ that lives in them, Col. 3.3.
and their life is hid with Christ in God, even as the stars without losing
their light, they shine not in the presence of the Sun, but the Sun shines in
them, and their light is hid in the light of the Sun: thus the Soul, without
losing its life, it lives not, being ecstatically swallowed up in Christ; but
Christ, he lives in the soul, and the souls life is hid in the life of Christ.
But now, after the soul is descended from the Mount Tabor of her divine
ecstasies, how does she find herself in the Valley of Tears, by reason of her
humane infirmities? hope deferred makes the heart faint, Prove. 13 12.
so desires not satisfied make the soul languish. Thus the Psalmist; Psalm 42.1.
As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee O
God; my soul is athirst for God, for thee the living God, etc.

. 15. Oh when the devout soul would fain take wing, and fly away to her sweet
repose in the bosom of her beloved; oh the secret servile miseries of this
mortal life, yea the impure motions of corrupt affections! So that the devout
Saint cries out with the blessed Apostle, Wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of sin and of death! There is certainly no
pleasure like that of pleasing God; no joy like that of enjoying Christ: And
now for such a person as has placed his liberty in Gods service, his life in
Gods love, his comfort in Gods favor; for such a person to be so spiritual
anguish, the laboring throes of his souls perplexities? in which he cries out,
Vide afflictionem, Behold my affliction and my pain.

. 16. (2.) The firm ground of the souls peace, Sins forgiven us; Forgive all my
sins. Romans 5.1. there says the Apostle, Being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. blessed fruit, it is this; an humble
assurance of Gods love in Christ, in the free and full pardon of our sins. We
may observe, that till Christ had reconciled the Father by his sufferings and
death, and had given an assurance thereof unto his Church by his Resurrection,
the Holy Ghost the Comforter did not come down upon the Apostles; so now, Joh.
7.39.
till we be reconciled unto God by Christ in the remission of our sins,
Comforter the Holy Ghost does not fill our souls with his divine consolations;
He does not refresh our spirits with his heavenly dew and sacred influence,
Peace of Conscience.

. 17. Therefore, Isa. 57.21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked;
their worm of conscience is still gnawing in the midst of outward jollities,
fretting their souls with inward tortures: So that the wicked flee when no man
pursues; Pro. 28.1.
no man pursues without, yet there is that pursues within, even the stinging
guilt of an evil conscience: So that seeing he every where carries with him his
tormentor, no wonder this, if he can no way fly to escape his torment;
impossible it is he should fly from his misery, since he cannot fly from
himself; his guilty conscience, that makes his wound incurable, his plague
unavoidable. But now, when God speaks comfort unto his people, Hos. 2.14.
it is ad Cor, Comfort to the heart; making the good banqueting house, Cant.
2.4.
laid up in store for his Spouse, the humble and penitent soul. Let not then
the heart that is drowned in worldly pleasure, think to partake of those
heavenly delights: Let not the soul which is in the gall of bitterness, think
to participate of this divine sweetness, this hidden Manna, as our Savior
calls it, Rev. 2.17. hidden to the world, and the men of the world; for that
the blessedness of comfort which is in this sweet peace of conscience, no man
knows but he that tastes.

. 18. The better to represent by some measure of proportion, what the comforts
of the soul are in the peace of Conscience, after its languishing under the
terror of sin; let those men give a shadow of it, who from the safe and quiet
port, do behold the waves and billows of that raging sea, in which they
themselves were even now overwhelmed, and by a miracle of providence are
happily escaped; or let those women in some sort declare it, who after their
bitter and laboring pangs, have enjoyed the quiet ease of a bed of rest; for
such is the Peace of Conscience to the mournful Penitent, after the terrors of
sin and his horrors of soul, as is the safe Port to the shipwrackt Mariner
after the raging tempest, or as the easeful bed to the laboring woman, after
her painful travel.

. 19. These may give us the shadow; but as for the substance, such is the
excellency of that (as S. Paul tells us) it passes all understanding; Phil.
4.7.
so that we can never rightly conceive it by description blessed comfort of
that man's soul, who in the peace of his conscience can see himself delivered
from the chains of sin, the bondage of Satan, the powers of darkness, and the
flames of hell; who, in the peace of his conscience, can see himself made
partaker of the merits of Christ's death, and the benefits of his intercession;
can see himself admitted into a covenant of grace with the Lord of life and
King of glory, received only Son? Which of us can conceive, that has not felt,
what is the comfort of those thoughts, of those meditations, in that sweet
peace of conscience which the faithful have, being reconciled unto God through
Christ, in the remission of their sins?

. 20. Let us now join together the penitent sinner, and the devout Saint, in
this one exhortation, that they approach the Table of the Lord with a secret
affliction of soul, and that, being raised by faith and enlarged by prayer. (1)
A secret affliction of soul, in this consideration, that their sins have been
the cause of Christ's sufferings. Luke 23.21.
The Jews cried out of Christ, crucify him, crucify him, such was the
greatness of their malice, that if possible, they would have had him once with
their hands, and we, even we crucifying him again by our sins? Who art thou
then that comes to Christ without floods of tears, when he comes to thee in
streams of blood? Who art thou who can worthily meditate on his wounded body,
without a wounded soul? or view his pierced side, without a pierced heart? in
which our Savior gives us our true devotion, bespeaking us as well as the
daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but for weep not for me or my
sufferings, Luke 23.28.
in a fruitless compassion; but weep for your selves and your sins in an hearty
contrition.

. 21. Thus affected with contrition, (2) Let our hearts be raised by faith,
that so whatsoever is our affliction and pain, we may find an healing virtue in
the blood of Christ, which is this Sacramental administration, is none other
then Gileads balm to cure, Hermons dew to refresh, and Aarons ointment to
revive all wounded, distressed, and drooping enlarged in prayer; and such
prayer, as by the paths of its devotion, may speak the anguish of our
affliction; as in the sense of our grosser enormities, so of our humane
infirmities; that so, for every sinful distemper in us, we may receive an
healing virtue from Christ; and in our prayers for our selves, forget we not
the afflictions of the Church, the calamities of the Nation; and seeing our God
pursues us with his judgments, send we forth legationem in the language of St.
Ambrose, send we forth an Embassage of tears, to sue for peace; And doubt we
not but received into the Court of Heaven, they shall have their access to the
throne of grace, and obtain a gracious audience; if not for a public
deliverance, yet for our particular salvation; having our remission of sins,
and our peace of conscience confirmed unto our souls, by his blessed Sacrament,
as the seal of grace and the pledge of glory; to which glory, he preserve us by
his mercy, who has purchased it by Amen.

Verse. 19. and part of the 20. Consider mine enemies for they are many, and
they hate me with a cruel hatred; O keep my soul and deliver me.
. 1. WHat confidence and comfort can there be in pardon of sin, when there is
not a conscience and care to prevent indeed, sin forgiven becomes stingless,
toothless sin, the venom and guilt removed; but after humiliation, sin
reacted, becomes the most deeply wounding, the most closely gnawing sin, more
wounding then the Serpent, more gnawing then the worm. Wherefore holy David
here, having made it his complaint unto God in prayer (verse. 18.) Look upon my
affliction and pain, and forgive all my sins; knowing the number and force,
eying the multitude and rage of his spiritual enemies, his sinful lusts; he
joins to Consider mine enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with a
cruel hatred, O keep my soul and deliver me.

. 2. To give the sense of our present interpretation, together with the sum of
our intended discourse, take it in this paraphrase upon the words: Consider
mine enemies; and thine enemies, O God, are mine; thy greatest enemy is sin,
and my greatest enemies then must be my lusts; Oh consider those mine enemies,
for they are many, they hate, and fight against thy good spirit in me; and to
hate that, is to hate me, and the good of my soul; yea, their hate is cruel, it
is a tyrannous hatred; though I never willingly suffer them to rule over me,
yet too too often they overruled me: Romans 6.12.
Though I never let them command me as a King, yet they often compel me as a
Tyrant. Now Lord, whereas many in the days of trial, and of trouble, beseech
thee to keep their bodies, their estates; keep my soul; the salvation of it is
dearest, of more price then all the world; Matthew. 16.26.
my good name, my health, my life, my friends, my estate, all may be lost, and
I safe; But oh, my soul is my self; to cast away it, is to cast away me; to
keep it, is to deliver me, O then keep my soul and deliver me.

. 3. Observe in the words two general parts; the Subject, and David's prayer;
The Subject with its description, and the method in its gradation. (1) The
Subject, with its description, David's enemies described, from the greatness of
their number, they are many; and the violence of their hate, it is cruel; for
they are many, and they hate me with a cruel hatred. (2.) The Method, in its
gradation; which gradation has its three steps, Consider mine enemies, Keep my
soul, and Deliver me.

. 4. (1.) The Subject, with its description, David's enemies described from the
greatness of their number, they are many; consider mine enemies, for they are
many. No man may resolve his sins into any other original, then his own lusts;
as for Satan, though it be he that tempts, it is we that act; and therefore when
we commit any wickedness, and sin against God, though it be by Satan's
instigation, our tongues may not smite him, but our hearts must smite our
selves, David's did, in 2 Samuel 24.10. We may not accuse the tempter, but our
selves, who let in the temptation; Non diabolus voluntatem delinquendi imponit,
sed materiam voluntati subministrat. Tert. exhort. cast. c. 2.
for that the Devil cannot impose upon the will a force and necessity, but
propose to the will an object and opportunity of sinning. It is by confederacy
with the Traitor in our bosom, by conspiracy with our Rebel-lusts, that Satan
does seize the Citadel of our hearts, and surprise the strongest Fort and tower
of our wills.

. 5: Again, as for the World, her temptations and allurements, The causes of
corruption and guilt are not in our allurements, Causas corruptelarum non in
illecebris, sed in cordibus habemus. Salv. l. de gubern. 6.
but in our lusts; not in the world, but in our hearts. And therefore, We
overcome the enemies that are without us, by subduing the enemies that are
within us, even our lusts, by whose treachery and violence Satan and the world
bear sway in our hearts, Eos qui foris nobis oppugnant, intus vincimus,
vincendo concupiscentias per quas nobis dominatur. Aug. tom. 3. l. de agone
Christ. c. 2.
and send forth their imperial edicts, and command the soul. A man's enemies
then are those of his own house, his own heart, even his own lusts: And of
these we may David, in the greatness of their number, they are many; many
streams from one fountain, many branches from one root, many lustful Affections
from one original Concupiscence.

. 6. Which concupiscence is in the Scripture called, (...). the sin that
dwells in us; The sin (...), Romans 7.17.
in an eminency of evil, as having in it the seed of all sins. And therefore
the Author of the Book De duplici martyrio, (attributed to S. Cypr.) plus est
tollere peccatum quam peccata; it is a matter of greater difficulty to mortify
this one sin, then to subdue all other sins. We may say of original
concupiscence, strengthened and heightened by customary transgressions, its name
is Legeon, for it is many: Hydra-like, it is a body with many heads; and when
we cut off one head, one enormous impiety, there presently sprouts up another
of like monstrous nature, like venomous guilt. From the womb then it is of
original sin, and Trojan horse, there does issue forth an whole Army of unclean
lusts, to surround the soul in all its faculties, and the body too in all its
members.

. 7. As for the faculties of the soul view we the Understanding, and how do we
see it surrounded with fleshly wisdom, carnal reasonings, humane inventions,
curious enquiries, vain imaginations earthly contrivances? View we the
Conscience, and how do we see it surrounded with erroneous principles,
misguided zeal, false accusations, and as false excuses, groundless fears, and
a fearless stupidity? The like might be said of the Memory, and of the Will, of
the Heart, and of the affections. But pass we from the Faculties of the Soul to
the Members of the Body; and in them we see the Eyes surrounded with envy,
covetousness, and adultery; the Tongue with deceit, revilings, blasphemies, and
corrupt communications; the Ears with slanders, Heresies, and false doctrines;
the Hands and Feet with theft, murder,

. 8. Yea, from the particular members of the Body, pass we to the several
conditions of life; And in them, see, how diverse lusts not only attend, but
pursue us; if young, intemperance; if aged, covetousness; if rich, vain
confidence; if poor, murmurings; if ignorant, blind zeal; if learned,
vainglory; if honorable, pride; if mean, envy: Lastly, from our several
conditions pass we to our best Employments; and we find, how, even in holy
duties, as in Tamar's Genesis 38.29.
Zarah first thrusts out the hand, but Pharez crowds him by, and first gets
forth the body; thus in holy duties how often is it, that the Spirit begins the
work, but the Flesh crowds forth into the action? See it in Prayer, when the
soul quickened in devotion, and raised by faith, does take wing and fly aloft,
in some gracious inlargements; even then, how do worldly and carnal thoughts
intrude themselves into the Closet of the heart; and by their earthly weight,
pull down the soul from its heavenly height? or else, how do some heavenly
flame, the enlarged devotion of the pious soul? Again, in the attending of the
worship of God, and the ministry of his Word; when the soul becomes affected
with the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 29.2.
and begins to relish the sweetness of the Gospels promises, yea, to be
enlarged in spiritual desires, after a nearer communion with God and Christ in
his Ordinances; even then, how do fleshly lusts oppose their carnal reasonings,
framing arguments of disswasion

. 9. Yea, in the solemn ministration of the blessed Eucharist, when the
longings of the the soul are enlarged, its fervor of devotion heightened, its
very joy in communion with Christ increased, even then, how do worldly and
carnal suggestions, or else nice and needless scruples, or dark and cloudy
imaginations, how do they too too often damp our faith, dead our devotions,
perplex our thoughts; and sacred service, and most blessed Ordinance? And now,
if the least atome of sin do spot the soul, and the smallest transgressions
qualify for death, and hell; what shall we do, whilst we behold an infinite
swarm of corrupt desires, an whole Army of lustful affections surrounding us,
in all the faculties of the soul and members of the body, in our several
conditions, and even in our best employments? what shall we do, but fly to the
Lord for succor? even to the Lord of hosts, the Captain of our salvation,
Christ Jesus blessed for ever: Heb. 2.10.
and cry we unto him as David here does, Consider mine enemies for they are
many, and they hate me with a cruel hatred, O keep my soul, and deliver me.

. 10. (2.) The violence of their hate, they hate me with a cruel From that,
Romans 6.12. we observe that Sin has the power of a King, even to reign over
them who cast off Kingly power; and from Romans 7.23. we observe, Sin has the
force of a Law, to command them who bear down all Law by force; they whom no
Law of God or man can bind, the Law of Sin holds fast; the most licentious and
lawless, are to their lusts the greatest captives and slaves. This for the
power; but see further the violence and rage of Lust: when once it steps into
the royal chariot of sovereign command, how Jehu-like drive furiously, 2 King.
9 20.
though it be upon the very precipice of death and hell? The wickedness of the
ungodly, the Prophet calls a breaking forth; Eruperunt instar diluvii, Hos.
4.2. So the Chalde and Vatable.
They have broken forth as a flood. So violent are the water-floods of
ungodliness, as no bounds of Law or Equity, civil or divine, can keep them in;
thereby men become (...), such as no bounds of Oaths or Covenants can restrain;
but what is most sacred, Romans 1.31.
by the rage of men's lusts is violated.

Hab. 2.6. Woe to him that loadeth himself with thick clay! The covetous man may
heap up enough to load, but never lay up enough to fill; he may load his house,
yea his pursuits of lusts are more violent and fierce in their conquest then in
their assault, in their after-desires then in their first motions.

. 12. When ever yet did Ambition or Covetousness, or the like bottomless and
boundless lusts find a center to rest in, any Hercules Ne plus ultra to confine
them? Elijah's Cloud no bigger then a hand at first, yet after a while it
spreads and covers the whole face of the heavens: And why? it rises from the
sea, 1 King. 18 44.
and is driven with the wind. Thus our lusts at first of lesser size, spread
themselves after a while to a larger extent, to a covering the whole heaven, a
clouding all righteousness: And why? they arise from a sea of concupiscence,
and are driven with the wind of Satan's temptations. But further yet, in the
very Saints of God, when lust breaks forth, there is in it this fierce and
intemperate rage. See it in those two remarkable Examples, so eminent for
sanctity and sin, Jonah and Peter; Jonah a Prophet, and Peter an Apostle.

. 13. Jonah, though an holy Prophet, so eminent in grace and office, yet when a
lustful passion breaks loose, a greater tempest and rage then that of the Sea
swells his breast; so that in pursuit of his own vain glory, lest he should be
accounted a false Prophet, he is exceeding angry. And see the contumacious
impudence of Lust: Gods argument and expostulation is answered, yea, outfac'd
with a daring reply of an -- I do well to be angry, Jon. 4.9.
even unto death. Aga^n, S. Peter, so eminent in the profession of Christ the
Messiah, and so confident in the opinion of his own faithfulness, yet how does
the breath of a woman shake this rock? that against the very evidences of his
own heart and bosom, the consciousness of his own promise he denies his Master;
and when now the lust of self-love and fear had stepped into the throne of the
heart, and snatched the scepter, see its tyranny and rage; the denial swells
into an oath, and that oath multiplies into execrations, Mat. 26.74.
so that he does (...), even renounce Christ with direful imprecations upon
himself, (according to the ^xposition of the learned Diodate.)

. 14. Thus Lust, like a River when stopped in its current, it swells and fomes,
and if it force a passage, its violence and rage is the greater. habitual
malice of sin is great in the heart of the wicked, which are under its dominion
and power; but its actual malice is greater far in the souls of the sanctified,
who have dispossessed it of its throne, and broken its scepter; for that the
malice of lust is excited by the opposition of grace, and so like the Enemy in
the battle, it is more violent and fierce: In which battle and spiritual confl
ct, if lust prevail, so cruel is its hate, that no opposition can put stop to
its fury, but the Spirit of Christ. And therefore in all our contests with sin,
David here presents us with a pattern for our practice, even to fly unto our
God with th s complaint and prayer in our mouths; Consider mine enemies, for
they are many, and they hate me with a cruel hatred; O keep my soul and deliver
me.

. 15. Second General; the Method in its gradation, the first step or ascent;
Consider mine enemies. Consider how they are furnished with policy and power,
with number and mal^ce, with provisions principalities and powers, Ephesians. 6.12.
and spiritual wickednesses, even the gates of hell can contribute to supply;
Ps. 22.6.
and what shall I, weak I, a worm and no man, what shall I do against so great
a force? how shall I conquer or withstand so huge an host, who am not able to
master, not to mortify the smallest lust! Oh consider, Lord, in this cause, in
this combat, thy glory is engaged; and in my weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9.
in mine insufficiency thy strength is perfected; Thou art the Captain of my
salvation, and the service I am upon is thine: wherefore so consider the
multitude and violence of mine enemies, that through the succor and supplies of
thy grace, I faint not and perish.

. 16. But know, as we would have God to consider our enemies, so God would have
us to consider his Saints, that as they were men so that we be men of like
patience with them; Jam 5.17.
and as of like humble patience, so of like faithful practice: See we that
Cloud of witnesses, the Church of the firstborn, Heb 12 1.
those Saints of Christ, with palms in their hands, as tokens of victory: Rev.
7 9.
And consider we aright, that as we have the same combat, so if we faint not,
we shall have the same conquest, yea and the same crown; only then we must
fight with the same weapons, faith, love, meekness, patience, hope, and the
like; yea, with the same importunity of supplications, blessed Eucharist. And
when thus we consider Gods Saints to imitate them, God will consider our
enemies to subdue them.

. 17. But (2.) O keep my soul; my soul so precious, as no price save that of
the blood of the Son of God could make its purchase. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Wherefore, Lord, amidst the worlds changes and thy Churches trials, howsoever
thou disposest of my body or of my goods, of my liberty or of my life, O keep
my soul; for that in holding faith and a good conscience, though I lose all
things else, I have enough, if I save my soul; and in deserting faith and a
good conscience, if I lose my soul, I have nothing, though I save all things
else. But further, O keep my soul; yet not so properly mine, as in a more
peculiar right of propriety thine; thine, O blessed Jesu, by right of donation
from thy Father, who has made thee Lord and Christ, and has given me to thee,
Act 2.36. Ephesians. 1.22.
as thou art Head over all things unto thy Church. Thine by right of Ransom,
yea, (...), a Ransom in kind, 2 Timothy 2.6.
even thine own soul and body, to redeem unto thy self the souls and bodies of
the faithful.

. 18. Further, thine by right of conquest, in which thou have made us free from
the law of sin and of death; having for our sake, Rom 8.2.
and in our name, spoiled principalities and powers, Col. 2.1^.
triumphing over them. Further yet, thine by right of Covenant, in which thou
have be our God, and we to be thy people. Lastly, Heb. 8.10.
thine by right of Communion; for that, all we are, and all we have, are from
thy fullness; our life, our love, our joy, our holiness, our happiness, all is
in thee and from thee. Thus I am thine, my body thine, my soul thine, thine in
the nearest relation, in the strictest union, and in the dearest affection.
True it is, all is thine; the Devils are thine, thy vassals; the wicked are
thine, thy prisoners; the Angels are thine, thy subjects; the Creatures are
thine, thy servants: But only the sanctified are thine, thy brethren, thy
members; yea, the faithful are thy treasure, thy jewels, thy jewels of ornament
and delight. Thus, oh thus keep my soul, as one of thy jewels, a part of thy
treasure.

. 19. (3.) Deliver me. The propriety Christ has in us, is a strong engagement
of his care over us, as it is with his children in general, 1 Timothy 3.15. Cant.
4.8.
so with each of his chosen in particular: Though Christ's own house, he will
raise and repair it; though it be black, yet seeing it is his own Spouse, he
will pity and cherish it; Isa 5.4.
though it bring forth wild grapes, yet being his own Vine, he will fence and
prune it; though it wander from his truth, 1 Pet. 5.2.
yet because it is his own Flock, he will watch and gather it. This then is the
argument of faith, which the devout soul makes unto Christ: Because I am thy
purchase, O do thou Lord preserve me; because I am of thy household, do thou
provide Ps. 119.94.
because I am one of thine whom thou ownest, O keep my soul and deliver me.
Deliver me not only from the conquest, but also from the conflict of sin: For
that, Conflictus licet non fit damnabilis, quia non perficit iniquitatem,
miserabilis tamen quia non habet pacem: Aug. de nupt. and concupisc. l. 2. c. 2.
Though our conflict with our lusts is not damnable, because the act of sin is
not perfected; yet is it miserable, because the peace of the soul is disturbed.

. 20. This very conflict with sin it was, which put S. Paul to Romans 17.24.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! Which
complaint he answers with this profession, I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; for that the grace of Christ does weaken the strength, the blood of
Christ does pardon the guilt, and the glory of Christ shall annihilate the
being of sin. In renascentibus remittitur, S. Aug. contra Jul. l. 6. c. 16.
in proficientibus minuitur, and in resurgentibus tollitur: Sin in
justification through Christ is remitted, in sanctification by Christ is
weakened, and in glorification with Christ shall Consider mine enemies, for
they are many, and they hate me with a cruel hatred; O keep my soul and deliver
me.

. 21. Thus being in conflict then with our lusts, how may we best order our
lives as to the safety and peace of our souls? I answer Paul's example for our
imitation, 2 Cor. 12.9.
when he proportions the vehemency of his devotion to the violence of his
temptation; and by how much the Messenger of Satan does the more furiously
reiterate his buffetings, by so much the Apostle of the Gentiles does the more
zealously renew his prayers; and at length he receives this comfortable answer
to his sorrowful complaint, My grace is sufficient for thee; sufficient to
pardon thy guilt, sufficient to cure thy wound, sufficient to strengthen thy
weakness, sufficient to perfect thy deliverance.

. 22. (2.) Entertain we no parley, no treaty with our lusts, have Qui
deliberant desciverunt; so Tacit. We betray our selves to sin, whenever we
treat with our lusts; conference with them, is the way to be ensnared by them.
We must fly sin as a serpent; not let in the head, lest it draw in its body;
not yield to the first motion, lest we be engaged in its full commission.

Law of the Spirit and life in our hearts; Romans 8.2.
and by how much the Law of Sin will be stirring in our thoughts, by so much
the more let this royal law of Christ's spirit and life bear sway in our souls.
And to that end, especially now in the solemnity of the blessed Eucharist,
renew we our purposes, our vows, our covenants; renew we our self-denial, our
total resignation, thereby to obtain a further quickening in grace, a further
strengthening of the inward man; Joh. 1.16.
and all by a nearer communion with Christ in his fullness. Thus this He will
keep our souls and deliver us.

Verse. 20. part, and v. 21.

Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee.


. 1. THE Creatures were made subject to change by the law of their creation;
which mutability has been much improved sin of man; whose guilt, as Lord of
the creatures, has redounded to the misery and mortality of all his retinue;
yea, the womb of sin has added, as one iniquity, so one mortality to another,
making the best of earthly beings to be momentany and vanishing: That alone
which gives fixedness and permanencie, is trusts in God. However then the Stars
may sometimes be eclipsed, yet have they a fixed and permanent subsistencie in
their own heavenly Orbs: whereas Comets which rise with a greater train, and
stream of light, at last vanish into ashes, and are seen no more. Thus the
Saints of God, however clouded or eclipsed as to a worldly splendour, yet have
they a fixed estate of peace and rest in their own heavenly souls: whereas the
wicked, which flourish in a greater pomp of outward glory, are at last covered
with shame, and buried in everlasting ignominy.

. 2. To give a particular instance of this truth, see it in the ambitious and
the humble Saint: The ambitious man, when he has outclimb'd the modest designs
of his first wishes, he then mounts his aim higher, and ventures to break down
every hedge of Property and Right which stops his way, and force many a gap
through Law and Conscience to shorten his passage: But when now he has
obtained the height of his hearts desire, the Imperial crown of all his hope,
how does he find his promised fruition seized with an unexpected ruin? (...)
2.18, 19
his person, name, and family, as stained with blood, humble Saint, which has
made God his stay, his trust; whatsoever are his temporal changes, (...). 10.
his soul is fixed upon an eternal rest, his integrity and uprightness shall
preserve him, that so, neither shame nor confusion overtake him. For however he
lose an earthly, yet does he hold fast an heavenly crown; however disgrace
amongst men may be his affliction, yet a Diadem of glory in the hand of God and
of Christ, and in the sight of Angels and of Saints, shall be his reward, put
their trust in the Lord, Lam. 3.26.
and wait for his salvation. And therefore is David right in his prayer, when
he makes supplication unto his God, saying, Let me not be ashamed, for I put my
trust in thee, etc.

. 3. As if the Psalmist had said; O my God! that I profess, is thy truth; that
I maintain, is thy cause; and my trust is in thee, that by the wisdom and power
of thy providence, the cause I maintain thou will defend, and the truth I
profess thou will justify; so shall Ps 39.8.
or the reproach of sinners make me ashamed, but that still with faith and
confidence I will hold fast mine integrity and uprightness, in a sincere aim at
thy glory and thy Churches good. And oh let this integrity of my heart, Ps.
119.116.
and uprightness of my cause preserve me; which is that I expect by hope, and
wait for with patience: And oh let not my patience be disappointed of its hope,
seeing I wait on thee; on thee, whose wisdom can find out the way, and whose
power can effect the means of my salvation, notwithstanding let me not be
ashamed, for I put my trust in thee, etc.

. 4. Or, to give the paraphrase of the words according to the subject matter of
our ensuing discourse, holding conformity with the order of our former method,
and the solemnity of the blessed Eucharist. O my God and Savior! I put my
trust in thee, I build my salvation upon the sure rock of thy saving merits,
let me not be ashamed, as if I had builded it on the sandy foundation of mine
own works: I cannot plead for my self a perfection of holiness; Isa. 38.3.
but this I can plead through thy grace, an integrity and uprightness; my faith
and repentance, though they are not full and perfect, yet are they sound and
sincere: Let then mine integrity and uprightness beg by prayer, what it cannot
challenge as debt, the preservation of I wait for in the longings of hope, and
the expectations of patience: And I thus wait on thee, who as thou find me
vessels, so also power in oil; as thou make me capable of salvation by
integrity and uprightness, so make me to be saved in thy goodness and love.
Thus let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee; let integrity and
uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee.

. 5. In the words we observe a twofold Petition of prayer, set on Argument of
faith. The former Petition is this; Let me not be ashamed: The Argument of
faith, For I put my trust in thee. The latter Petition, Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me: The Argument of faith, For I wait on thee.

. 6. The former Petition; Let me not be ashamed. Sin is the mother of shame;
for that our first parents in their primitive state of integrity, when they had
none other clothing save that of Innocence, they were no less void of shame
then sin: For see Genesis 2. v. ult. The Chaldee paraphrase is very expressive and
emphatical, They knew not what shame was. Shame (says the Philosopher) it is
(...), the fear of ignominy or disgrace; which could not possibly befall man,
so noble and sovereign a creature, whilst he preserved entire the glorious
image and likeness of his Maker: for within, his soul was arrayed with that
(...), that splendent robe of perfect righteousness; S. Chrysostom. hom. 17. in
Genesis
without, his body was decked with an admirable beauty and exact

. 7. Yer, as for the shame of the Cross which Christ did despise, Heb. 12 2.
Gal 6.14. Co^ 1 11. Ph^^. 3.10.
S. Paul makes it his glory, and we must bear it with patience, yea with
joyfulness, having fellowship with Christ in his sufferings. But, that shame
which is the consequent of guilt, the effect of sin, when the conscience checks
the soul for deserting the faith of Christ, for David here prays, Let me not be
ashamed.

. 8. (2.) The Argument; For I put my trust in thee. A wicked man deprived of
worldly comforts, is wholly at a loss and amazed in himself, as a naked man in
a storm, or an unarmed man in the battle, he has no shelter, no defense; but
the godly man, when spoiled of all earthly succors, finds then a shelter to
fly to, a defense to trust in, a God to rely on; when all temporal supplies
fail, and all humane help is gone, then does the religious heart see a fullness
and allsufficiencie in its God. 2 Cor 3.5. and 9.8.
To put our trust in God, is an act and exercise of faith, whereby we take our
souls off from all carnal and worldly props, and devolve them upon God through
Christ, to obtain present support and future salvation. And we thus devolve our
souls upon God through Christ, in his Word of promise, and in his Works of
providence. our faith, then God reveals his will, nor draw our line of hope
beyond his rule of promise.

2 Cor. 1.20:
. 9. Now the sure foundation of all the promises, is the love of God in Christ:
So that, in their nature, they are free and gracious, in their virtue,
quickening and purifying; in their value, rich and promissory, but also
federal: He has made his word, a word of promise; his promise, the promise of
a covenant; his covenant, a covenant confirmed by oath; that oath and covenant
sealed with blood, even the blood of the Lamb, yea of the Son of God; and that
word, promise, covenant, oath, blood, and all, we have confirmed, yea sealed
over again in the blessed Sacrament. And David, we may with the greater
confidence of faith put our trust in him? (2) His works of providence; Jer.
23.24.
in which he is powerfully present by an immediate and intimate operation, at
all times, and in all places, with all things.

. 10. For that, God does not do with the World, as the Workman with a Watch;
that is, when by the divine art of his all-powerful hand he has finished each
wheel, and fitted each part, then to wind it up by a Law of Nature, and set it
by him, to observe how the time Gods providence is not a bare and naked view,
but an actual and efficacious administration; so that rather he does with the
World, as David with his Harp, when artificially made and accurately strung, he
tunes the Creatures as so many strings unto an unisone consent of divine
harmony, by an obediential power to his holy will. And then, by his hand of
providence, he strikes each string in its due place, whereby it has a
particular Note in the universal Melody of the Worlds Hallelujah. Ps. 103.22.


. 11. Now, our trust in God, as to his works of providence, is an act of faith,
eyeing that infinite power and wisdom, whereby he preserves and governs all
things, in order to his glorious mercy and justice. And hence it is, that no
extremity of danger or of distress can nonplus the Saints faith in establishing
their trust, because they know nothing can pose Gods wisdom, Jer. 32.17 27.
or puzzle his power, to accomplish their deliverance; for that either by an
absolute power he can create succors out of nothing, or by a wonderful wisdom
of his providence he can bring light out of darkness, Isa. 45.5.7.
comforts out of discomforts, life out of death, salvation out of destruction.
As in the Red sea, he can make the swelling waves a fencing wall, Exodus 14.22.
and the swallowing Deep a Champian plain: In the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.25.
Jon. 2.10.
he can make the consuming flames a refreshing heat; and in the raging a
devouring Whale a safe Port. This, this the wisdom and power of his providence,
Isa. 28.29.
who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working.

. 12. Now that God does work oftentimes without means, and oftentimes against
means, it is to teach us to trust in him, even when we see no means; for that,
hereby as God declares his sovereignty, so does he exercise our dependence, and
encourage our faith; encourage (I say) our faith, this being the chief Basis of
all our comfort, Romans 8.28.
so that all things work together for good to them that fear him; all things,
all gifts and graces, all blessings and benefits, yea, all crosses and
calamities, all afflictions and persecutions; and to go further, all their
infirmities and failings, Satan and his instruments, all are awed and ordered,
all are overswayed and overruled by the wisdom and power of Gods providence, to
further his intendment of grace and love unto his Saints.

his heart fixed trusting in the Lord, trusting in him, Ps. 112.7.
in his word of promise, and in his works of providence. Wherefore now, O God,
let the mercy and truth of thy promise, let the wisdom and power of thy
providence attract the force, and quicken the vigor temporal safety, nothing in
my self for eternal salvation I may then see all things in thee and thy Christ
for both: And thus shall my faith be the more pure and firm, and thy glory the
more perfect and full.

. 14. Wherefore, make we God the object of our trust, Isa. 12.2. and 26 4.
Exodus 34.6, 7.
God the great Jehovah who has his being from himself, and himself gives being
unto all things: He, a God gracious and merciful, just and holy, eternally,
infinitely, and immutably such. God alone then is the fit object of our trust;
earthly objects have no proportion with the heavenly soul: As soon may the
chest be filled with grace, as the heart be satisfied with wealth; and as soon
may we fat the belly with ^ir, as fill the soul with honor. Indeed we may not
trust in the Creature, which is none otherwise good, then in not being trusted
in. Nothing (we say) can act beyond its sphere; what then can outward comforts
of the world do, to solace spiritual griefs of the soul?

. 15. Yea, look we inward to the gifts of Nature, and those streams (we find)
can ascend no higher then their Springhead; and as for the gifts of Grace,
take the whole New creature, yet it is but a creature, and therefore no fit
object of our trust. God alone then, who is the Author of our life, is fit to
be the object of our trust, as O my God, Isa. 44 2. Isa. 26.13. Psalm 48.14.
Deuteronomy. 32.30.31 Isa. 63.16.
in thee do I trust; in thee, as a Creator to sustain me, as a Lord to govern
me, as a Guide to direct me, as a Rock to defend me, as a Father to succor me:
All which relations thou have taken upon thee in a merciful regard to my
weakness and wants, that thou might the more manifestly declare thy goodness
and love; which goodness and love, now seal unto my soul, by a Communion with
thee in the Lord

. 16. But how may we best strengthen our trust in God, that we faint not in
these days of trial? Ans. We strengthen our trust by renewing our resignation;
and when can we more seasonably renew our resignation, Gal. 3 1. 1 Cor. 11.26.
Ephesians. 2.18.
then at our receiving the blessed Sacrament? in which we have exhibited the
fullness of Christ's merits, as the propitiatory sacrifice and atonement for our
souls, by whom we have access unto the Father, to receive a blessing of pardon
and of peace, of life reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto him, Romans
12.1.
casting our selves upon him in the mercy and truth of his promise, in the
wisdom and power of his providence.

. 17. And upon this total resignation, he seals us this assurance, holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist; there to renew his resignation, Jer. 23.6.
and strengthen his trust; for that, here we have set forth Christ our
righteousness, and that name imprinted on him which was proclaimed before
Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord God, Ps. 9.10.
This that name of God, whereof David speaks, saying, They, Lord, that know thy
name, will trust in thee. Yea, this is that Solomon speaks of, Pr. 18.10.
when he says, The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs
into it, and is safe; safe from the guilt of Sin, from the rage of Satan, and
from the fear of Hell.

. 18. Wherefore for the instruction and comfort of the dejected, we will spell
every letter of this Name, we will view every turret in this Tower; The Lord,
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, etc. Here then, art thou frighted (O thou languishing soul!) art
thou frighted at the the Lord, the Lord Jehovah, the mighty God, the Lord of
hosts, he will defend thee, he will deliver thee. True, (says the dejected
Penitent) I question not his power, but his will: Why hear then, he is the Lord
merciful; as the Lord, to assure thee he is able, so merciful, to give thee as
full an assurance that he is willing. Ah! but I am so wretched and so
worth-less a creature, that I have nothing to move his mercy. Why merciful, so
he is gracious; his riches of mercy are free, not expecting merit to move, but
faith to receive.

. 19. Ah! but God has been often rejected by me, how shall I then be accepted
of him? Why, know, his name will still answer thy moans; as he is gracious to
receive freely, so he is long-suffering to wait patiently, even that he may be
gracious. Ah! Jer. 30.18.
but my sins are numerous and heinous, great in number and in weight: Why, but
long-suffering in patience to bear, is also abundant in goodness to pardon. Ay!
but I have been false unto God, often, very often returning, and yet as often
revolting: I have broken my resolutions, my vows, my covenants, and how then
shall I hope for pardon? Why, though thou have been unfaithful unto God, yet
will God be faithful unto thee; as he is abundant in goodness to forgive thy
sin, so is he abundant also in truth to make good his promise, his promise of
grace and salvation to the believing Penitent.

Name, and see it written too upon his Saints, A God forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin; sins of all sorts and sizes, of all kinds and degrees,
the most heinous, and the most numerous. Ay, but this is mercy vouchsafed but
few! Yes, it is mercy vouchsafed to thousands, and a mercy not exhausted, but
still renewed; He has a whole He keeps mercy for thousands.

. 21. And here th^s treasury is open; in this blessed Sacrament, come and
receive of this mercy of thy God, this pardoning, this healing, this
comforting, this saving mercy of thy God, dispensed by the bountiful hand of
thy Jesus, who with that mercy gives his merits, his benefits, his spirit, his
whole fullness, his whole self. Joh. 1.16.
Wherefore rouse up thy soul to receive the bounty of thy God, and of thy
Savior; with an humble, a thankful, and a devout heart. And amongst other
parts of thy devotion, remember David's petition, Let me not be ashamed, for I
put my trust in thee.

Verse 21. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me
. 1. SIn and shame, guilt and punishment, they are inseparable in their
conjunction, unless a timely repentance sue out a divorce, and the blood of
Christ make the separation. In the prosecution of sin, nothing more hardens in
impenitence, then the prosperous success of impiety; And in the execution of
punishment, nothing They think God altogether such an one as themselves; one
that approves of their sin, Psalm. 50.21.
in prospering their designs, and hereby they become hardened in their impiety,
not willing to take the bitter pil of penitence and godly sorrow, whilst they
are chewing the sweet morsel of profit Zech. 12.2.
how does the Churches portion prove a cup of poison, making them to vomit up
not only the meat they have swallowed, but their own bowels also, even bring
ruin upon themselves and their posterities?

. 2. And now, Oh what shame and confusion shall be upon the soul! when this
guilt flies in the face, and men find by sad experience, Obad. 4.
Edom they have made their nest among the stars, Ezekiel. 28.14
and become in the language of the Prophet, speaking of Tire, tanquam Cherub
extentus and protegens, as a Cherub spreading their wing and enlarging their
power and protection, over People and Nations; yet having Tyres guilt, they
meet with Tyres doom, their great glory does consume to ashes, and their
ruine's sealed with a non eris in perpetuum, Verse. 19.
Thou shall not be any more for ever. Wherefore when we behold Riches heaped up
by oppression, and sacrilege; Jacob, Genesis 49 6. Psalm. 141.4.
My soul come not thou into their secret; And with David, Let me not eat of
their dainties, lest partaking of their sin and guilt, we partake with them in
their shame and punishment. Yea, as the best guard of the soul, against the
suggestions of Satan, and seductions of men, make we David's prayer our
petition, invocating God in all fervor of devotion, as the Psalmist here does,
Let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee; Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee.

3. This the second part of David's petition, Let integrity and uprightness
preserve me; Integrity of heart, like Elisha's salt, it purges the spring, and
purifieth the streams; it seasons our duties, spring up to everlasting life.
Joh. 4.14.
Take we a view of this uprightness and integrity, as to its subject, its end,
and its object. 1. The subject, the inward man; without which, all outward
performances they are Pharisaical obedience; for God is a Spirit, Joh 4.23.
and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. And thus
the I delight in the law of God after the inward man. Romans 7.22.
In religious services then, the integrity is that of the heart, so that in
what the heart does not act, God does not accept; Isa. 29 13, 14.
the performance of the outward duty, without the concurrence of the inward
man, being as a body without a soul; and meet formal professors, though they
wear Christ's livery, yet do they serve themselves.

. 4. (2.) The end, the principal and ultimate is Gods glory; to which there are
many subordinate and subservient, as the good of the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31.
A sincere aim at which sacred end does lay the soul level and eaven in its
desires, which otherwise would warp and bend, according to the sway of some
base lusts and vile affections. But notwithstanding this pure Heb. 11.26.
seeing Moses has a respect to the recompense of reward; Heb. 12.2.
and our Savior himself had an eye to the joy that was set before him: It will
be no hypo^ritical affection, but a devout encouragement, to quicken our pace
in the way of holiness, from this Scripture-motive, our own salvation and
happiness; I call it a Scripture-motive, then which nothing is more frequently
urged in sacred Scripture.

. 5. And indeed, whether Gods glory, or Man's happiness be considered, attain
happiness, but fully to enjoy God? Psalm. 36.6. Psalm. 17.16. Psalm. 16.11.
and what is it fully to enjoy God, but to attain happiness? So then, Gods
glory is man's felicity, and man's felicity is Gods glory; true it is, some pious
souls, and learned pens have made it a note of integrity, to love God, though
the^e were no heaven: But, besides the nicety of the Metaphysical abstraction,
if rightly considered, it implies a contradiction; 1 John 4 8.
for seeing God is love, what is there in heaven, which is not contained in the
love of God? And whereas hereby they think to clear pure love from the stain of
being mercenary, it is but a needless attempt; for that, omnis amor mercedis
non est mercinarius, Ps. 16.5. Lam. 3.24. Genesis 17.1.
all love of reward is not mercenary love; God who is our portion, is our
reward; and if so, to love our reward, is to love God.

. 6. (3) The object, whatsoever God commands; which is to be done, ut mandavit,
and quia mandavit, according to his will, and because of his sovereignty. To do
what, but not as God commands, is disobedience; 1 Samuel 15.19.
as with Saul in the case of Amalek. Again, to do as God commands, but not
because he commands, is hypocrisy; as with Jehu in the case of Baal; Jehu, 2
King. 10.30, 31.
he is zealous in reforming, yet credenda, as well as the agenda, the doctrines
of faith, as well as the duties of obedience. For it is easy to observe, how
the Apostles in their several Epistles are as zealous in their reproofs, and as
hot in their zeal against evil doctrines, as against evil lives; against false
Teachers, as against lewd Livers: yea, and accordingly in their exhortations
and instructions, they join the necessity of a true faith

. 7. To practice holiness, and profess heresy; and to profess truth, but
practice profaneness, are both opposite to David's integrity and uprightness;
for sincere faith can no more dispense with any doctrines revealed, then holy
life with any precepts declared in Gods word. Yea, Gal. 5.19.20. 2 Pet. 2 1.
ask the Apostles, and they will tell us, Heresies as well as Prophanenesses,
they are works of the flesh, they are damnable, yea, bring swift damnation;
False teachers, as well as lewd livers, they deny Jud. 4.
and are prepared of old to destruction. Wherefore a holding fast the true
faith, and a keeping firm a good conscience, is that Integrity and uprightness
which shall preserve us; preserve us, by fixing us upon God in Christ, as the
Rock of our salvation.

. 8. A Rock this is so deep, that no floods can undermine it; so high, that no
waves can overtop; so strong, that no storms can shatter it: when the Soul is
set upon this Rock, it views the swelling neither height nor depth, neither the
height of wicked violence, nor the depth of worldly troubles, shall separate it
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8.29.
Whereas then, amidst the worlds changes, and worldlings violences, the upright
man seems likeliest to be lost, yet shall his Integrity preserve him: For that,
this Maxim of sure truth, Piety is the best Policy, shall confound all
Machiavels Principles in the end: Ps. 94 14.15.
So f^^m is that sacred word of promise, The Lord will not cast off his people,
neither will he forsake his inheritance; but Judgment shall return into
Righteousness, and all the upright in heart shall follow it.

. 9. (2) The Argument of faith, wherewith David backs his For I wait on thee.
As preservation is a continued creation, so is waiting a continued trusting;
for, what Trust believes by faith, it waits for by hope; and thus is Trust a
Compound of both. When we trust in God, we look to the Word of promise, and in
that, 1 John 2.25.
to the authority of him that speaks the word; and this is the act of faith.
Again, we look to the object of the promise, and in that to the goodness of the
object; and this is the act of hope. Yea further, when we trust in God, we rely
upon his promise, as from him who is Heb. 6 12 15.
as from him who is the chief Good; and this is hope. Now that God oftentimes
suspends the blessings we desire, it is to try the trust we profess; and if our
trust be upright, it will be constant; the reliance of faith, and the
expectance of hope make our trust perfect; so that the same grace which casts
our souls upon God to trust in him, will sustain our souls to wait till we
enjoy him. Ps. 27.13, 14.


10. The truth of faith, the sincerity of our trust, and the integrity trust,
our faith, our hope, it will then appear, and our shame will accompany our sin,
the deserting a good cause by reason of great calamities, will manifest to the
world our hearts were not upright, 1 Ioh. 2 19.
however our professions seemed zealous. Hereby shall it appear then that we
truly trust God, when we firmly rest in him: Disquiet of mind

. 11. If with integrity we trust God, we shall in piety and prudence commit our
way to him; Ps. 37 5.
we shall wait patiently the success of our faith, and the effects of his
providence. Thus when the three Children had committed themselves to God, Dan.
3 16.
they are not careful to answer Nebuchadnezar; they know their duty, and let
God work his will. Indeed it is grace in act, more then in habit, in function
quicken, strengthen, support, and save. And therefore the waiting Saint has a
waking soul, his graces are not dormant, slugg'd with security, presumption, or
sloth; no, but still exercised in the duties of holy devotion, and a sincere
obedience, in an active vigor of life and strength.

. 12. As in nature, so in grace, motion is the preservat^ve of purity, and the
incentive of heat; even life it self, is the more lively by action. God (say
the Schools) is a pure act, and every creature has the greater excellency of
being, by how much it has the greater perfection of working; Rev. 7.15. Rev.
4.8.
the heavenly bodies have their rest in motion, and the heavenly Saints their
blessedness in operation; the more holy the soul is, the more heavenly; and the
more heavenly, the more active. It is then in the exercise of grace and duties
of obedience, we wait for the accomplishment of Gods promise his promise of
deliverance in time of trouble; upon which promise, David founds his prayer,
Psalm. 50.15.
and fixes his faith, when he thus bespeaks God, saying, Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee.

. 13. Oh what is the best temper of soul then? what the best exercise of grace?
what the best duties of devotion, when in public calamities, or private
distresses, we wait for the salv tion of What the best temper of soul? Answ.
When composed to a holy frame of divine patience; this resolution we have from
our Savior, when he gives the admonition to his chosen, amidst the afflictions
of his Church, that, in their patience they possess their souls; Luke 21.19.
which words, compared with the cont^x^, admit this Paraphrase; As if our
Savior had said, though such shall be the persecution of my Church, that men
rob you of your goods, by oppression; rob you of your liberty, by imprisonment;
rob you of your lives, But in your patience possess your souls, (...), possess
them, so as to preserve them, preserve them as your best of treasure, even in
the profession of faith, and a good conscience, which is still accompanied with
peace and rest in the inward man. So that the heart of the upright, like the
center of the earth, amidst all the storms, tempests* and commot ons Psalm.
112.7.
it remains unmovable from its stedfastness, it is still fixed, trusting in
the Lord.

. 14. (2.) What the best exercise of grace? Answ. The exercise of humility, of
faith, and of hope. First humility, t^is that dispels all secret murmurings, at
the public order of Gods providence; prompting the soul to an acknowledgment
of his Justice, and an advancement of his Mercy; an acknowledgment of his
Justice, thus Daniel, Dan. 9.7, 8.
O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion Judah, and to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are
far off, through all the Countries whither thou have driven them, because of
their trespass, that they have trespassed against thee. O Lord, to us belongs
confusion of f ce, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, because we
have sinned against thee. Yea, humility prompteth the soul, in the midst of
Gods judgments, to an advancement of his mercy. Thus the Psalmist, Psalm. 1^3.10.
He has not dealt with us according to our sins, neither has he rewarded us
according to our iniquities; and it is the humble acknowledgment of Gods
Church, in her lamentations of sorrow, saying, Lam. 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed.

. 15. (2.) Faith, the Apostle calls faith, (...), as the substance, Heb. 11 1.
so the subsistence of things hoped for; the subsistence, making that glory
and blessedness, that salvation and deliverance, to have a present subsistence
with us, which we look upon through hope, as in their future existence to us.
Wherefore then is it that the conscientious confesso^s of Christ's truth, so
calmly, so patiently, yea so cheerfully suffer the disgrace of the world, and
the violence of the wicked? is it not because they see by faith, that, to
suffer for righteousness, truly makes them, what Turtullian elegantly styles
them, Coelestis gloriae candidatos, Candidates of the celestial glory? having
received the earnest of the spirit, the seal of their redemption, 2 Cor. 1.22.
Ephesians. 4.30. Rom 8.23.
the first fruits of glory, they see by faith, that whilst men load them with
injuries, they heap up their rewards; whilst they spoil their earthly goods,
they increase their heavenly treasure; yea, each scornful reproach, they see by
faith, it does but add a flower to their garland; each violent act, a jewel to
their Crown; 2 Cor 4 17.
all their light affliction which is but for a moment, they see by faith how it
works for

. 16. (3.) Hope; such as that of David's, which he commends unto the Church upon
his own experience of good success, Psalm. 130.7.
Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plentious redempteon. Wherefore when the Church mourns and the gates of Zion
languish, this the hope, which strengthens the patience, and comforts the souls
of Gods Saints; that he will either vouchsafe them a temporal deliverance, or
crown their sufferings with Romans ^.5.
(...), non confundit (so the vulg.) it brings no shame of face, no confusion
of soul; it fears no deficiency on Gods part, and preserves from Apostasy on
man's part; and so becomes a right, what the Apostle styles it, the Anchor of
the soul, He^ 6 ^
both sure and steadfast.

. 17. (3.) What the best duties of devotion? Answ. Solemn humiliation, fervent
prayer, and a worthy receiving the blessed Eucharist. solemn humiliation;
solemn for time, for measure, and the manner of performance; for time, some day
in the week, or at least in the month, set apart and dedicated to this
service; For measure, not the dropping of a tear, the breathing of a sigh, and
so away; Psalm. 51.1^.
no, we must offer unto God, the Sacrifice of a broken heart, and a contrite
spirit; the sorrows of our contrition must be like that of one mourning for the
dead, a funeral sorrow, the deepest of mournings; yea, Zech. 12.10.
like that of one mourning for her only Son, the saddest of Funerals. Indeed
the Church, by our sins is laid in the depth of calamities; fit it is, that we
for our sin, lie down in the deepest of humiliations: For manner of
performance; confessing the guilt of sin, bewailing the bitterness of distress,
deprecating Gods wrath, and imploring his mercy.

. 18. To affect our souls with the greater relentings of contrition, and
meltings of compassion, see, oh see we, how this Church Lam. 1.1.
sits as a disconsolate widow, mourning in her distress! her hair disheveled,
her beauty defaced, her garments rent, her body wounded, her blood flowing, her
spirits fainting; yea see, see a flood of tears overtakes her streams of blood,
her sorrow accompanies her pain, and her mourning her affliction. And yet how
do too too many (who boast themselves her Sons) Oh! how do they by their oaths,
their drunkenness, their whoredoms, and other their abominable pollutions, how
do they even drag this their Mother, by that Churches deep affliction, and wait
upon God for her gracious restoration; let them thus wait, even in this sacred
duty of holy devotion, Solemn humiliation.

Iam. 5.13.
. 19. (2.) Fervent prayer; this is St. James's Catholicon, his If any man among
you be afflicted let let him pray? the Original is very emphatical, (...),
where the word (...) taken in the large sense, as here most proper, we may thus
paraphrase the words of the Apostle. Does any among you suffer any evil of
body or of mind? as the readiest means of his redress and succor, let him
pray; and in our prayers do we prescribe to our selves some solemn service of
devotion, more peculiarly appropriate to this sacred blessing, Nehem. 1. Dan. 9.
the Churches restoration Nehemiah, thus did Daniel, and ( Psalm. 137.) the
faithful are so zealous for Jerusalem (the type of the Church) that they seal
the resolution of earnest prayer, with this (...), this dreadful imprecation,
Psalm. 137.6.
that if they remember her not, their tongues may cleave to the roof of their
mouths; intimating this zealous w^sh, that they may never have tongues to pray
for themselves, if they forget to pray for Jerusalem.

. 20. (3.) The blessed Eucharist; here we have an unmovable God our portion,
Christ our fullness, an object larger then the heavens. Oh that our faith were
now suitable to its object! the firmness of our trust, to the fullness of our
God, our Jesus! had the widow of Sarepta prepared more vessels, she had
received more oil; 1 King. 17.14
and that we receive less, in the supplies of grace, and the bounties of love,
from God and Christ; it is because we are straightened in our faith, not God or
Christ straightened in his bounty; we less capable to receive, not he less willing
or able to give; the Widows vessels were all filled, and here each humble soul
shall be replenished, according to the measure of their capacity, not the
riches of Christ's fullness; who, as the Sea can fill the vessels, though never
so large; and therefore where the measure is but little, there the vessels are
but small. Enlarge we then the thirsting desires of our soul, fountain of
Christ's fullness, here set open in this Ordinance, Psalm. 36.8, 9.
may satisfy and fill them; here behold the promises of life sealed, here feel
the riches of grace communicated, here see the earnest of salvation and glory
confirmed: yea, here shall the soul find David's double petition of prayer
accepted, and his twofold argument of faith approved; O let me not be ashamed,
for I put my trust in thee; Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I
wait on thee.

Verse. ult. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
. 1. AS there is no greater incentive of divine wrath then sin, so David
himself gives us his profession, from his experience saying, Psalm. 66 18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me; Quantum a
praeceptis, tantum ab auribus Dei long sum. (So Tertul.) Look how far our
lives are from Gods precepts, to obey them; so far are Gods ears from our to
hearken to them. The person then must be accepted before the petition; and so a
sincere penitent, is the best suppliant; for that, our Lord Jesus Christ being
the Priest that offers, Heb. 4.14.15.16.
and the Altar that sanctifies all our services, there can be no acceptance,
without his mediation; and sure I am, he will not be our Advocate, unless he be
our Lord, he will not be our Priest, unless he be our King; he will not present
God our prayers, unless we present him our persons; and whom faith and
repentance consecrates through the spirit,

. 2. Very aptly then does David, in his penitence, as put up supplications for
himself, so make intercession for the Church; the guilt of his transgressions,
he knew well, did add to the heap of the Churches afflictions; and therefore
when he bewails his sin with penitent tears, he remembers her trouble in a
compassionate sorrow: And that he might make the Church some amends; whereas
his guilt did help to the heighten^ng her distress, his prayers shall
contribute to the hastening her deliverance; and for this reason, does he close
this penitential Psalm with this pathetical petition, Deliver Israel, O God,
out of all his troubles. Which words are David's intercession for Gods Church:
And in them we have, first, the subject matter of his intercession, Isreal's
deliverance; deliver Israel; which deliv rance is set forth in its Author, and
its extent; its Author, God; and its extent, out of all trouble; Redeem, or
deliver Israel, O God out

. 3. (1.) The subject matter, Isreal's deliverance, deliver Israel. God in a
gracious vouchsafement of love, will have h^s Saints to be his Remembrancers,
Isa. 62.6, 7.
by the importunity of their prayers, minding him of his promises; Not giving
him rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem, even his Church, a
praise in the earth. And therefore hear the Prophets zealous devotion, well
worthy our devoutest imitation; For Zions sake will I not hold my peace, Isa.
62.1.
and for Jerusalems sake I will even made visible and glorious, in the sight of
m^n and of Angels.

. 4. But what, in the Churches, (...), in her fixed season, and determined
method of deliverance, is not the decree past, Dan. 8.19. Hab. 2.3. Psalm.
102.13.
and the time set: And so, as that we cannot hasten the time, nor alter the
decree by our prayers? and if so, to what purpose is it to importune God for
the Churches deliverance? I answer, True it Gods will being immutable in its
determinations, his providence must needs be infallible in its administrations;
yet neither the deliberations of councels, the industry of endeavors, nor the
importunity of prayers are taken away, or made void; but rather confirmed and
made good, by the infallibility of God providence, in the determinations of his
will. For that, God determining the end, does also order the means, means
proportionable and agreeable to that end: which makes much for the
strengthening our faith, quickening Gods will, when we observe the means as
appointed in Gods word.

. 5. So that, to establish the means, and deny the providence of God
determining the end, is a part of Atheism; to establish the providence of God
determining the end, and despise the means, is great profaneness; but to use
the means, so, as withal to trust and attend Gods providence for obtaning the
end, Hab. 2.3.
this, this is the way of truth, work of righteousness; knowing this, that
prayers, and councels, and endeavors, they are appointed of God, not whereby we
should alter his Will, but perform it; not whereby we should change his Decree,
but fulfill it; and in what we, as yet, obtain not our desires, we testify our
obedience. Wherefore, God having past the Decree and given the promise of his
Churches deliverance; through his will be unchangeable, and his Decrees
immutable, Heb. 6.17, 18.
yet are not our prayers fruitless, our supplications needless; for that the
Decrees of Gods counsel, and the Prayers of Gods chosen, they are subordinate;
and we say, Subordinata non inter se pugnant, Things subordinate in their
being, oppose not each other in their working. The w^mb of all Gods blessings
to his Church, it is his gracious Decree; and the Midwife to bring them forth,
is the Prayer of the faithful.

Dan. 9. and thus, Psalm. 102. Yea, God having given the Promise, it is an
implied Condition, that we ask by Prayer; thereby testifying that his Promises
are of free grace, not of due debt; of mercy in him, not of merit in us: Yea,
as we subscribe to the acknowledgment of his mercy and goodness in giving the
Promise, so we submit to the dispose wisdom and power in ordering the
performance. And thus, whatsoever blessing it is, of life, of grace, or of
glory, of supply, of support, or of deliverance, upon our selves in particular,
or upon the Church in general, whatsoever blessing (I say) it is which we
receive from Gods hand, it must be on our knees, as an effect of his Promise,
so a fruit of our Prayer.

. 7. Thus, God having promised to build the ruined places, Ezekiel. 36.36.37.
and to plant the desolate, he tells the house of Israel, that for this he will
And again, hear the promise God makes unto Israel by the Prophet Jeremy: Thus
says the Lord, After seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit
you, Jer. 29.10, 11.
and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place:
For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of
peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. But how shall this
gracious Promise be brought to full performance? Why, it is by fervent prayer;
for so says God, v. 12.13, 14.
Then shall ye call This then emboldens the confidence, and enlarges the
comfort of our prayers, that what we ask, is according to Gods 2 Cor. 2 20.
most sure and firm.

. 8. And thus, whether we look upon the purposes of Gods will or the promises
of Gods word; this is a requisite condition and means of their execution and
performance, even our prayers. Wherefore though the Decree be past, and the
time be set for the Churches deliverance; yet not to alter, to execute that
decree; not to shotten, but to accomplish that time, we must be instant in our
prayers; and then most instant in our prayers, when most earnest in our
penitence; interceding for the Church, as David here does, when he closes his
devotion with the fervor of this Petition, Deliver Israel, O God, out of all
his troubles.

. 9. (2) The Author of Isreal's deliverance, God; Deliver As we acknowledge none
other Mediator of intercession, but Christ; none other Master of our requests,
but the Spirit; so, none other Author of salvation, but God, who alone is all
sufficient to save. Jer. 3.23.
Thus the Prophet; Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and
from the multitude of mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of
Israel. Where, by hills and multitude of mountains, is meant in an Allegory,
the strongest defense and surest protection; which shall certainly betray us to
ruin,

. 10. (1) Salvation temporal. O the inconstancy of Popular esteems, various as
the wind! To day, Hosanna; to morrow Crucifige. O the folly of Carnal wisdom!
whilst the subtilest Achitophelt clash in their counsels, Luke 19 38. and 25.21:
and become puzzel'd with intricacies hampered in different worldly force! The
strongest Armies having Reubens sat and character unstable as the water; Genesis
49.4.
they have their tide and ebb, they sometimes flow to an inundation, and then
again sink away to nothing. And O the vanity of the vastest Treasures! more
matter of prey to the mighty, then means of help to the miserable; they betray
to ruin, rather then protect from danger. As all men, so all creatures in
themselves are liars; Ps. 116.11.
Liars either through impotencie, or through imposture; salvation temporal.

. 11. And (2) much more insufficient are they for salvation eternal. Sure we
are, he who cannot span his own length, shall never be able to grasp the
heavens: He who cannot with Sampson bear away the Gates of Gaza, Judge. 16.3.
shall never be able with Atlas to support the Universe. If the Creatures (I
mean) be all insufficient to work that Ps 49 7, 8.
It is not then the wealth of worldlings, nor the merits of Saints, no, nor the
power of Angels, that can save a sinner. Wherefore when we make the deliverance
the Church the subject of our prayers, it must be to him who is styled, The God
that hears prayers, Ps. 44 4.
and who alone can command deliverances for his Church.

. 12. But here, some may say; Alas, I have often prayed for the deliverance of
the Church; but God either hears not, or he answers not: yea, he rather
contradicts by his providence, what I importune by prayer; involving his Church
in greater distress, rather then delivering it out of all its troubles. But to
this I answer; The stay of our faith, and so the ground or our prayer, is the
word of Gods promise; which word of promise is most certain, though the means
of performance secendary causes, and view his wisdom infinite in contriving,
and his power omnipotent in effecting the execution of his will, and
performance of his word.

. 13. The unbelief of the Churches restoration, and the Bodies a not knowing
the Scriptures and power of God. Mat. 22.29.
And therefore we observe how aptly God speaks concerning Isreal's deliverance
from Babylons Captivity: Israel had said, that by reason of their desperate
estate, their bones were, dried, their hope lost, and they cut off for their
parts: But now, Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 27.11.
Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of
your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel, v. 12, 13.
and then Ye shall know it; how? why, in the experience of mine omnipotent
power.

. 14. Wherefore, what St. Augustine speaks concerning the resurrection of the
body, we may apply to the restoration of the Church: Considera Authorem, and
toll Dubitationem; Consider the Author, to whom nothing is impossible and this
will take away all doubting of what seems incredible. Consider the Author, it
is the Lord Jehovah, He is the Original of all being; who not only does work,
but also can command; and not only does command, but also can create
deliverance for his people; yea, he can bring light and salvation out of
darkness and desolation; no estate so miserable, and no misery to desperate,
which can either pose his wisdom, or puzzle his power, to effect a deliverance;
but as his counsel is unsearchable, Deuteronomy. 33.27. 2 Cor. 12.9.
so his strength is everlasting, and this strength is made perfect in weakness.
Wherefore when we pray, if God does not answer, it is not because he does not
hear, but that we should farther ^mportune: Ostium coeli propterea clausum, ut
tu fortius pulses; The gate of heaven is shut, not that entrance is denied, but
that thou should knock the harder; even with more faith and more servor, more
patience and more importunity; praying again and again, Deliver Israel, O God,
out of all his troubles.

. 15. (3) The extent of Isreal's deliverance, out of all trouble; Deliver
Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. Many there are whose seared consciences
have made them obdurate hearts; they are become (...), men void of all
relenting affections, wholly insensible of the Churches sufferings: So they can
raise themselves upon her ruins, and enrich themselves with her spoils, they
care not to see her lie in the dust, yea, wallow in her blood, torn with
Schism, and defiled with profanenesses. But most certain it is, the Good Heart
can never be without trouble, whilst the Church continues in her distress,
still preferring Jerusalems peace before its chief joy.

Ps. 137.6.
. 16. Yea, our sad experience (we know) will subscribe the acknowledgment of
this truth, that the present waters of the Churches affliction, like the former
oil of her sacred unction, it has run down from the crown of the head to the
skirts of the garments, Ps. 133.2.
from the highest Prince to the lowest Peasant. And now then, let Compassion be
the mother of devotion, and by how much our sense of her sorrows is the more
deep, by so much let the fervor of our prayers be the more zealous, that God
would deliver her out of all her Exodus 4.22. Exodus 19.5, 6.
But what? deliver Israel out of all his troubles! Israel, Gods is he in
trouble, and in many troubles too? Yes, it is so: Let not then any place plead
privilege, nor any person, no, not the most Sacred on earth any prerogative,
to exempt or acquit them from the chastising scourge of the most high God.

Genesis 6.12.
. 17. All flesh (says God) have corrupted themselves before me: And if all
flesh be corrupted, all flesh must suffer the Chyrurgions ad sanandum, or ad
excindendum, either for the curing, or for the cutting off. Even he who was the
Son of God, taking upon him the flesh of man, though he was without sin, yet
was he not without suffering. Wonder not then, that Gods firstborn Israel,
whilst the onely-begotten of the Father, Christ Jesus, suffers affliction: for,
Non decet sub spinoso capite corpus esse delicatum; It is not comely that the
head being crowned with pricking thorns, the body be clothed with delicate
purple. The Spouse must share in her Husbands fellowship with Christ in his
sufferings: And it is his promise, Phil 3.10. 2 Timothy 2.12.
if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; in which triumphant
estate alone it is, that the Church shall have her full freedom from all
miseries, her full deliverance out of all troubles.

. 18. Here, to represent the Troubles of our Israel, and then to mind us of the
fit season and service, to pray for Isreal's deliverance, even the celebration
of the blessed Eucharist. 1. To represent us Paul, (in 2 Timothy 3.) that he seems
not only to have aimed at our times, but also to have pointed at our Land: For,
what was his sure prophecy, has been our sad experience; and it is but
changing the tense, to make his Prophetical prediction an historical narration,
even that (as v. 2.) Men are become lovers of their own selves; from which
unclean fountain of self love, do issue those filthy streams, of all the
following imp^eties, which give so fit a character of our Apostate times; in
which men are become through self-love, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful unholy. All which evils, they are set down
by the Apostle, and are plainly to be discerned by us, to be the adulterate
b^ood and bastard brats of Heresy and Schism.

Tragical Scene of tumults and wars, of rapines and spoils, of treachery and
violence! See a Nation sick and fainting, a Church ruined and in the dust, a
People in fatuated and divided! Oh see Justice despised, and Truth rejected!
yea, see the Ministry, ordinances, and worship of God violated and invaded,
Priests being made of the lowest of the people, and who will, 1 King 13.33
putting himself into the Sacred function; the least fitted being best
accepted, and most approved; Men, women, and boys step from the shop, Church
were another Capitol -- or our days those of Jereboam, to worship Calves.

. 20. Indeed Zeal and the Spirit is pretended; yet we know well enough it is
the Clusters of grapes which invite the Foxes into the vin^yard; the Revenues
of the Church, that draws Faction into the Ministry. And by these intruders,
see, oh see how the greatest testimonies and the dearest pledges of his love,
his blessed Sacraments, they are either quite removed, or impiously prosan'd.
Yea, see weak men, and silly women suffer their precious souls to be vainly
seduced; and through fond pretenses of piety, yea some in open professions of
blasphemy, make shipwreck of their faith. 1 Timothy 1.19.
O God! in what a maze of perplexities and labyrinth of miseries are we
involved! such as no hand save that of thine extraordinary providence can lead
us out.

stand as a thick cloud betwixt us and our God, that our prayer, Lam 3.44.
cannot pass through! And thus our continuing in sin is the prolonging of his
Judgments; and whilst we thus lie wallowing in our lusts, restless in our
malice, and helpless in our misery, God, he hides his face in anger, end our
enemies look on with scorn; God, he goes on in his wrath farther to afflict us,
and our Enemies continue in their hatred still to deride and mock us: Lam. 2.16.
This (say they) this is the day we now Gods vengeance has overtaken them, and
his fury seizd upon them. In the thoughts of these sad troubles and deep
distresses, quis temperet a lachrymis? who can refrain from tears of mourning?
who can refrain his sorrows of compassion? And who is it that feelingly
compassionates the troubles of our Israel, that will not servently implore its
deliverance? And when, when more seasonably help the Church with our prayers,
then now when her Prayers are violently wrested from the Church?

. 22. But more especially (2) to mind us of the fit season, and service to pray
for Isreal's deliverance, even the celebration of the blessed Eucharist. Seeing
so great wrath is come upon us from the Almighty, do we this day lay hold on
the horns of the Altar; do we in the celebration of this blessed Sacrament,
deeply sigh and contritely mourn for all the abominations that are committed in
the Land; that so, Ezekiel. 9.4.
with those Penitentiaries in Ezekiel, we may receive our mark, even that blood
of Christ upon out souls, that so the destroying Look down, oh look down,
heavenly Father, from the height of Heaven, thy celestial Sanctuary, and behold
the sacred Host, the blood of our Jesus, speaking better things then that of
Abel, Heb. 12.24.
even things of grace and of mercy, of pardon and of peace, of reconciliation
and of restoration: And seeing in him thy justice is satisfied, let thy wrath

. 23. And here, let the outward distractions of our Israel, mind us of the
inward distempers of our hearts; the great profanations in the Church, prompt
us to a strict purifying of our Consciences; yea, our longing desires after
better days, quicken our holy endeavors after better lives: So shall we find
by an happy experience, God In the Powderplot, 1605.
he will not sleep now we know our danger, and pray for our deliverance. No, as
for the Enemies of Sion, evil shall fall upon them, and sudden desolation; Isa.
47.11.
and nescient ortum ejus, they shall not know from whence it arises. But as
for the Israel of God, he shall deliver them as a bird out of the Fowlers net,
Ps. 124 6, 7.
and as a prey out of the Lions teeth: at once making it the praise of our
faith, then to believe, when our trust seems to be against hope; Romans 4.18.
and the glory of his power, then to Isreal's troubles, we shall have our
portion in the joy of Isreal's deliverance; Is. 35.10.
if not whilst the Church is militant on earth, yet most assuredly then when
triumphant in heaven, of which this blessed Sacrament is the seal and pledge,
confirming the Royal grant of this humble Petition to every faithful soul, that
prays with David; Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

Halleluiah!
THE Preacher's Tripartite.

BOOK II.

To administer COMFORT BY CONFERENCE with the SOUL IN ITS Spiritual Conflicts.

Reduced to particular CASES of CONSCIENCE, Viz. 1. The importunate Crowd of
Vain Thoughts. 2. The frightful Suggestions of Foul Thoughts. 3. Some late
Relapses into Sin. 4. Daily Conflicts with Sin. 5. A Distrust of the Graces
sincerity, in general; of Faith and of Repentance, in particular. 6. The sense
of Barrenness in holy Duties. 7. The misapprehension of Gods withdrawing the
Comforts of his gracious presence. 8. The misinterpretation of the Order of
Gods Providence, as to the Tribulations of the Godly, and as to the Prosperity
of the Wicked. 9. The long Continuance of Temptations and Afflictions.


By ROBERT MOSSOM.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Newcomb. 1657.

TO THE Right Honorable Lady, FRANCES, Marchioness of HERTFORD, etc.
MADAM,
I Acknowledge it mine ambition, that I seek your Honor's Patronage; but dare
adventure upon this guilt, in confidence of a Favorable Pardon, as well as an
Honorable Protection, to your Suppliant. I know no vice in Morals unpardonable,
like that of Ingratitude; and therefore to avoid the sin and censure of this
Apostasy, I declare it (Madam) your Reward of Goodness, exceeding the Merit of
a former Present, which has obliged the duty of this Dedication: What are the
charitable supplies of your Eleemosynary bounties (notwithstanding, Modesty is
at once the Vail and Ornament of your Virtues) there is a Trumpet of Honorable
Fame that proclaims it; That I have my self received, an encouragement of my
Studies by your Nobleness, I willingly embrace this opportunity, thankfully to
acknowledge and record. Besides (Madam) it were improper, to entitle the SOUL'S
CONFERENCE, to any other, then an experienced Piety; whose Spiritual Conflicts
sustained, can give testimony to the Comforts administered; which not Greatness
but Goodness, can best approve and Patronize.

Here then (Madam) to your Goodness, as great in Honor; and to your Honor, as
great in Goodness; is humbly presented this Freewill-offering, the Work and the
Author; and no Votary can do more, then make his whole Possession one Oblation,
as ambitious to bear the name and attribute of being

NOBLE MADAM Your Honors Faithfully Devoted Servant R. MOSSOM.


THE INTRODUCTION.
design of Satan, in a malicious envy to Man, if he cannot spoil us of our
Crown, Lam. 3.17, 18.
then to rob us of our Comfort: If he cannot deprive us of Grace, then to
bereave us of our Peace. Which thing he does not only attempt, but often
attain, by raising in our hearts an infernal fog of diffidence and distrust,
Ps. 77.8, 9. Ps. 88.5, 6.
begetting such doubts and fears, and affrighting terrors, as do make the Soul
(against all the light of counsel and of comfort in the Word) conclude against
it self, to have lost all interest in Gods love, Job 38.2.
and Christ's merits, Lam 5.22. Isa. 49.14.
all Communion with the Spirit of grace and of life; pleading with much
vehemency of passion and impatience, that its former hopes have been but
deceitful presumptions, and its exercises of holiness hypocritical delusions.
-- Oh the thick darkness which this mist and fog of Satan's suggestions casts
upon the inward man! How does it become the very shop of fears, the womb of
terrors, Ps. 23 4.
yea the valley and shadow of death; the cheering light of the Sun of
Righteousness, being thereby eclipsed from the Soul!

Now, there is no greater advantage unto Satan in his temptations, then the
ignorance and error of the mind, when the Understanding is darkened or
deceived; darkened through want of knowledge, or deceived with a false light.
For Satan, he works still contrary unto God, and yet in imitation of him too:
And therefore as God in his Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
he first enlightens and illuminates; so Satan in his temptations unto sin, to
destroy grace, he first darkens and deceives: 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 4.18. Luke 22.64.
He does with the Soul, as the Jews did with Christ, first blindfold it, and
then buffet it; his first aim still is to abuse the Judgment; for he knows
well, he must first make blind, before he can lead into the ditch; Mat. 15.14.
he must first deceive, before he can destroy.

Wherefore in our Spiritual Conflicts, they are the carnal reasonings
suggestions of Satan's malice, which rend the deepest wounds, and fret the
forest galls of Conscience even to a griping anguish, and an amazing horror;
persuading, too too often persuading us, that Gods hiding his face is a casting
off the soul, Lam. 3.7, 8. Ps. 77.8, 9.
his withdrawing his presence a rejecting our prayer, and his temporary
displeasure the earnest of an eternal vengeance: whereby our perplexed souls
become so full of troubles, that our life draws nigh unto the grave, we are
as those that go down into the Ps. 88.15, 16.
and whilst we suffer these bitter terrors, we are distracted.

Now, seeing the womb of all this Impatience is that of Diffidence, and the
mother of this Diffidence is that of Ignorance, ignorance in the mysteries of
grace, Ps 73.21, 22.
and promises of life, in the ways of God, and the works of his providence;
seeing it is so, to whom shall we apply our selves in our Spiritual conflicts
to receive Spiritual counsel, but to the Priests of the Lord, Mal. 2.7. 2 Cor.
5.20.
the Ministers of the Word, as the Messengers of God, and Ambassadors of
Christ? whose lips are not only preserve knowledge, but also to dispense peace.
Many there are, 2 Chr. 16.12.
alas too too many, who in their distemper of soul, are like unto Asa in his
disease of body; as he sought unto the Physician, and not to God, so they seek
unto the World, and not to Christ; they betake themselves to sports and
pastimes, to merry company and frollick entertainments: And thus in stead of
salving the wound, they rend it wider; Cant. 5.7.
in stead of pacifying their Conscience, they either stupifie or enrage it.

Again, others there are, who under the pressure of temptations, being
indisposed to holy duties, their hearts heavy, their minds perplexed, their
thoughts wandering, their spirits wounded, they then in a froward discontent and
sad dejection cease their Religious performances; by this means yielding that
advantage Satan seeks, whose main drift and aim is, Job 15.4.
to discourage from holy exercises, that the power of Grace being weakened,
Jam. 4 7.
the force of his temptations may the more easily prevail. And among all the
duties of Holiness, none is more eagerly opposed by Satan then that of Prayer;
Luke 18.1.
therefore does he make it the masterpiece of his subtilty and malice, in all
our afflictions of soul to damp our devotion of heart; knowing well, that there
is no readier way to quench his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16.18.
then by our sorrowful sighs and mournful tears powered forth unto God and
Christ in

In Spiritual Conflicts then, the soul through ignorance and error, like a man
in the dark, fights against it self, emb^ttering its sorrows, and widening its
wounds by impatience and distrust; Is^. 50.10.
and the succor which Gods word does afford, it either does not discern, or
cannot employ. And seeing it is thus, of how great a concernment is it, that
they who languish in dejections, and labor under the weight of Spiritual
troubles, do betake themselves to some holy Confessor, some is committed the
word of reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5 19.
that consulting him in their grief, he may be an Helper of their joy, and
knowing their secret trouble, 2 Cor. 1.24.
he may administer them saving comfort.

And seeing our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the chief Shepherd of the Flock,
has set his Ministers in excubiis, Heb. 13 17.
to stand upon their Watch for the good of Souls, strange it is that so many
should conceal their distress, and thereby languish in their distrust; hide
their disease, Ipse sibi denegat curam qui suam medico non publicat causam. ^.
Ang. ep. 188.
Knowing that of S. Augustine to be an experienced truth in ghostly as well as
bodily distempers, that He denies to himself the cure, who declares not to his
Physician the cause of his disease.

Saving work of Grace in the Heart; whereby many dear Children of God, through
the violence of Satan's temptations, are not able to read their own Evidences
without help, discover their own right in the Promises, and title to the
Heavenly inheritance, without Council and advice. Even for this reason, know (O
ye blessed Souls!) who have given up your names unto Communion of Saints, ought
to preserve as a duty of your obedience, 1 John 1.3 7.
the fellowship of B eth^en; which is, not only in the midst of temporal
distress^s to conve se cheerfully one with another as Friends, but also in the
midst of spiritual afflictions to confe^ g aciously one with another as
Christians; whereby it shall appear, Ps 45.2. E h. 4 29. ^sa 61.3. Rev 22 2.
that the very leaves of a Tree of Righteousness, the very words of a
sanctified person, they have a Curing, and a Comforting virtue in them.

Yea, such is the Sympathy of Grace, as is shadowed out to us in that of
Nature; L. Verulam's Not. Hist.
the Harmony of devout Souls being like that of musical Instruments, the string
that is struck in one Lute aff^cting with a trembling concent the string of
that which is neighboring to it: And thus do the devout affections of one pious
soul strike impressions upon the heart of another. Luk 24 32.
And indeed those communications are most kindly and cordial, which are from
the experience of our own of those comforts wherewith we our selves have been
comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4.
And because Precedents in all Courts are of much use and benefit for the
deciding particular Cases, therefore observe here the more usual Conflicts set
forth in the Souls complaints; and these reduced to several Heads, as so many
Cases in the Court of Conscience; the resolving and determining whereof may
happily, by a blessing of Gods Spirit and grace, administer comfort and
in^^ruction to the afflicted, such as the Experience of

The several Heads are these. 1. The importunate Crowd of vain Thoughts. 2. The
frightful Suggestions of foul Thoughts. 3. Some late Relapses into Sin. 4.
Daily Conflicts with Sin. 5. A Distrust of the Graces sincerity, in general; of
Faith, and of Repentance in particular. 6. The sense of Barrenness in holy
duties. 7. The misapprehension of Gods withdrawing the Comforts of his Order of
Gods Providence, as to the Tribulations of the Godly, and as to the Prosperity
of the Wicked. 9. The long Continuance of Temptations and Afflictions. These
the several Heads of those Spiritual Conflicts, to which are appropriated the
Words of Complaint, the Grounds of Comfort, and the Rules of Direction. Only
before we enter this Field, observe these three Maxims by way of Premonition.
1. That the best of Gods Saints are still exercised 2. That these Temptations
are permitted and ordered of God. 3. That they are so ordered of God, as to
make for the good of his Chosen.

(1) The best of Gods Saints are still exercised with Temptations. Indeed, what
is the estate of Gods Church on earth, but an estate militant? Ephesians. 6.12.
The Faithful still exercised in a spiritual warfare against the Powers of
Darkness, and wiles of Satan; and who shall think himself secure from Satan's
temptations, Mat. 4.1, etc.
whilst the Son of God being clothed eminent in grace, by so much is Satan the
more violent against him in his fury. It is a large Encomium which the Apostle
gives his Thessalonians; 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5.
Such as were elected of God, having received the Gospel of Christ not in word
only, but also in power and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; such as
were Followers of Christ and his Apostles, in much afflictions, with joy in the
Holy Ghost, so that they became ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and
in Achaia: yet is the Apostle careful, notwithstanding this ground of
confidence, to send to know their faith; And why? left by some means the
Tempter had tempted them. The Tempter, chapter 3.5.
that is, Satan's proper title in an eminency of malice and envy; the chief and
principal world and the flesh as his baits to deceive, as his instruments to
act. Whatsoever then our temptations are, S. Paul will tell us, there has no
temptation overtaken us, but what is common to men, even the best of men, 1
Cor. 10.13.
and holiest of Saints.

(2) As the best of Gods Saints are still exercised with temptations, so are
those temptations permitted and ordered of God. Job. 1.12. and 2.6.
This we see in that Conflict of holy Job's, wherein, Satan upon earnest
solicitation, Jobs estate, but not over his person; and when upon temptation
he prevails not, God gives him a further power over Jobs person, but not his
life. So that neither could Satan have touched Job in his goods, or in his
body, had not God permitted it: which God did permit, and order too, for the
manifestation of Jobs integrity, and the advancement of his own glory. Again,
it is our Saviors premonition to S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
saying, Simon, Simon, behold, Luke 22.31.
Satan has desired to have Thus the Devil, he aims at the fairest, makes his
hottest encounters against the eminentest Saints; Fortissimos quosque Diabolus
eligere solet, quibus oppugnet. Eu him.
seeing he could not shake the rock and foundation of the Church, Christ Jesus,
he will try what he can do against the strongest pillars thereof, the Apostles.

But see, Satan, though rage he may, yet assault he cannot till God permit.
Therefore says our Savior, Satan has desired to have you, he has made a
challenge to encounter with you: But challenge he Be sober, 1 Pet. 5.8.
be vigilant (says S. Peter) because your adversary the Devil as a roaring
Lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour. Satan is a roaring Lion, full of
rage and fury; yet is this Lion kept in a grate, held in a chain; he cannot go
further then God permits, being still awed and ordered by the hand of his
power, and will of his providence. And therefore says the Apostle, that he
goes about seeking whom he may devour, not whom he will: Such is his malice,
(...).
Lead us not into temptation.

(3) Temptations are so ordered of God, as to make for the good of his chosen.
And therefore our Savior calls Satan's tempting the Apostles, a sifting them as
wheat; in that, as the wheat is the more pure for being sifted, so the Apostles
the more holy for being tempted: Not that this Satan did intend, but that thus
God did order. And as it was thus with Christ's Apostles, so is it still with
all Gods chosen; 1 Cor. 10.13. (...). Theoph.
God is faithful, who will not suffer those that are his to be tempted above
what they are able: He proportions their burden according to their strength, or
else gives strength proportionable good man will laden his beast with a greater
burden then he is able to bear? and shall a good man be thought more merciful
to his beast, then our good God is to his children? Far be it, to conceit so
high a blasphemy against so gracious a Majesty.

But further, God permi^ting his chosen to be tempted, he not only gives
strength to bear the burden, but also makes a way to escape Romans 16.20.
treading Satan under their feet. Yea, to give the proper Emphasis of the
Apostles expression; He shall with the temptation make a way to come off, (...).
not by flight or treaty, but with victory and triumph. So that, though
Temptations for a while cloud the Sun of righteousness, yet when dispelled by
his arising upon the soul with healings in his wings, Mal. 4.2.
then the light of Christ's Spirit and grace appears more comfortable and
glorious; and thereby the assurance of divine love, which under temptations was
dampt and conquest and victory obtained through Christ, it is the more
graciously renewed and powerfully confirmed. The three Maxims then of
Premonition, which we behold evident in their truth, we must keep fixed in our
mind; and this will conduce much to the composing our souls, when their Words
of Complaint are answered with Grounds of Comfort, and Rules of Direction.

CHAP. I. The Souls Conflict, from the importunate Crowd of Vain Thoughts.
secret Thoughts are commonly the immediate issue of our inward Principles,
vile affections still begetting vain imaginations, and holy desires
administering matter for divine thoughts. Wherefore, when our Lord Jesus Christ
sets up his Throne in the Heart, he there governs by the golden Scepter of his
Grace; which Grace it is that casts down every high imagination, and brings
into captivity every vain thought to the obedience of Christ: 2 Cor. 10 5.
(...).
which vain thoughts, however they may seem small sins, yet their strength of
Egyptian caterpillars, it is in their number; Ps. 10 5.34, 35.
whereby they prevail oftentimes to eat up every green thing in the land, every
good motion in the heart. And this importunate crowd of vain Thoughts, is not
the least of Satan's temptations; in which he is right Beelzebub, the God of
Flies; Mat. 12.24.
for as busy Flies were to the Altars sacrifices, so are vain thoughts to our
holy services; their continual buzzing disturbs the Mind, and distracts its
devotion.

Cogitationum tumultus, this tumult and crowd of vain Thoughts, was once S.
Bernards trouble, of which he complains, Bern. de inter. Them.
that introeunt and exeunt, they pass and repass, come in and go out, and will
not be controlled; Amovere volo, nec valeo, I would fain (says he) remove
them, but cannot; either as sly Thieves they creep in undiscerned, or as bold
Guests they force admittance, though they find no welcome. Now because nothing
is more dreadful to the godly man then sin, (...) (so says S. Chrysostom)
secret closet of the Heart, can only appear unto God. And in this his
affliction, hear we his Complaint.

The Words of Complaint.
holy duties become a weariness to my soul? They cool the heat, they damp the
vigor, they dead the comfort of all my devotions: Even when I pray God to
forgive my sins, I then sin whilst I am praying for forgiveness; yea, whether
it be in the Church, or in the Closet, so frequently and so violently do these
vain Thoughts withdraw mine heart from Gods service, that I cannot have
confidence he hears my suit, because I know by experience I do not hear my
self; and therefore, sure, needs must God be far off from my prayer, whilst my
Heart is so far out of his presence, hurried away with a crowd of vain
Imaginations. The Grounds of Comfort.
1. These vain Thoughts (O thou afflicted soul!) being indeed thy burden, they
shall not be thy ruin; and though they do take from the sweetness, yet they
shall not take from the sincerity of thy devotions: Yea, 2 King. 10.16.31. Ps.
26.2, 3.
hereby thy sincerity is approved; for that some external interest of temporal
relations may make us guard our words, our actions; but it must be some
internal Principle of holy fear, which makes us to watch our thoughts, our
desires. If then thy devotions Ps. 119 115.
is no disquet to the mind; but it is an argument we set a value and esteem
upon the work in hand, when we are loath to be disturbed in the doing.

Ps. 7.9. and 139.2. Jer. 11.20.
2. It is no little glory which we give to God, in the acknowledgment of his
omnipresence and omniscience, that we own him present in the Closet of our
Hearts, and privy to the first risings of our most inward thoughts. And as it
is the excellency of Gods law, that it Heb. 4.12. Luke 2.35.
so it is the riches of Gods mercy, that it goes beyond the number of our
thoughts, to remit and pardon them. Were it not indeed for the multitude of
Gods compassions, Ps. 51.1. Genesis 6.5.
dangerous, yea desperate were our condition in the multitude of our sinful
imaginations. Which Imaginations being in number infinite, are not to he
forgiven but by those Mercies which are infinite and numberless. Ps. 145 8, 9.
This, oh this is the sure foundation of firm comfort to the soul, the tender
mercies of its

3. It is much the experience of Gods children, even the devoutest Saints; that
their thoughts of God and of Christ, of heaven and of holiness, are very
unsteady and fleeting. Like the sight of a Star through an Optic glass, when
held by a Palsey-hand, such is our view of Divine objects; we are long in
finding them, and soon lose them; our thoughts wavering, through our minds
weakness. Besides, when we are most intent, and our eye fixed, then is Satan
ready to strike us Ps 57.7. Ps. 31.21, 22.
and by some suggestion to shake us from our steadiness, and disturb our
devotions. Indeed, as Satan, so the World and the Flesh, they are most
importunate suitors; and let our communication with God and with Christ in
fervent Prayer, or any other holy service, be never so earnest and secret, yet
will they thrust in upon the soul for reception and audience. Yea, though we
observe our Lords command, and watch unto prayer, Mar. 13.33.
yet in our strictest Watch how do these enemies slip by our Guards? If we stop
and turn back some vain Thoughts, yet even then whilst we are busied in that
watchful care, how are we surprised with some other as vain imaginations,
notwithstanding all our care and watchfulness? Think not then (O distressed
soul) think not, 1 Cor. 10 13
in the common condition of Gods children, that thou art cast out of Gods favor.

thou have the gracious mediation of an alsufficient Savior to supply thy
defects, and procure an acceptance of thy sincere, though imperfect Devotions.
In thy Saviors mediation, Heb. 2.17. Joh. 6.27. Luke 4.18. Romans 8.34. Heb. 7
25.
behold him a merciful and a faithful High Priest, sealed of the Father, and
anointed by the Spirit to this very office, that being entered the Holy of
Holies, and set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, he should ever
live to make intercession for us; so that he, he it is, who compassionately
touched with a feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4 15.
incense of his merits, offered up before the Mercy-seat, Rev. 8.3.
the Throne of Grace. And indeed, our fervor being that of faith, not of
vision, we may not expect the fire of our sacrifice to burn so clear, as to
have no smoke upon the Altar; no, Judge. 13.20.
it is purely Angelical to ascend in a flame to heaven. Whilst we are here,
Pilgrims and Sojourners, dwelling in the earthly Tabernacles of our bodies, 2
Cor. 5 1.
vain blessed mediation of our holy Jesus, which makes the enlarged Suppliant
to be accepted. Let this then quiet thy soul amidst all the distractions of thy
disturbing thoughts; thou have the mediation of Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5.
to make the secret desires of thine heart accepted of thy God.

As thou have the gracious Mediation of an alsufficient Savior to supply thy
defects, so have thou the strengthening power of his holy Spirit to help thine
infirmities, Romans 8.26. 2 Cor. 12.9.
which strength is made perfect in weakness: And when thou art emptied, it
shall fill thee; when thou art stumbled, it shall raise thee; when thou art
lost in thy self, it shall by a secret evidence of divine love discover thee to
be found in Christ, who treading Satan under thy feet, Romans 16.20. Romans 8.37.
Phil. 3.10.
shall make thee more then conqueror, by fellowship with him in his death and
in his victory. vain thoughts, and earthly distractions; yet after long
conflict have obtained a joyful conquest, Ezekiel 7.16. Isa. 40 31.
and their mourning as Doves has been changed into mounting up as Eagles, in
sweet enlargements, yea ravishments of spirit, by the grace of supplication,
and in their raised communions wiah God through Christ, in the sacred duties of
his holy Worship. Know then (O thou afflicted soul!) know assuredly, that
bearing thy Cross with patience, waiting upon God in hope, and relying upon
Christ by faith; thy vain thoughts, resisted with diligence, and bewailed with
sorrow, shall neither deprive thee of Gods blessing, nor declare thee void of
his grace.

The Rules of Direction.
1. In the duties of Gods worship, affect thy soul with a raised apprehension
of Gods sacred presence, and an awful fear of his divine Majesty; so mighty in
power, so excellent in purity, his perfections infinite, his presence glorious.
For this, this is the main reason why the elect Angels and blessed Saints are
so fixed in their thoughts, so intent in their service, Rev. 7.15.
not liable to any the least wanderings, even because their thoughts, their
hearts, their whole selves are concentred in an heavenly contemplation of the
majesty, purity, and holiness Mat. 18 10. Rev 4 8.
Ay, and amongst men, who is it that will play with a feather, whilst he is
speaking with a King? This know then assuredly, by how much the soul does
receive the deeper impressions of an awful reverence, Heb. 12.28.
by so much it shall find the less prevailings of worldly distractions.

2. Keep thy faith fixed upon Christ's mediation, especially in the close of thy
devotions; Rev. 8.3.
beholding his incense when thou offers thy sacrifice; and though distractions
have drawn thee from thy self, yet Jesus: But remember, when vain Thoughts have
taken off thy minds attention in Gods service, then to breath forth some secret
sighs, and send them up to God as the winged messengers of thy Souls desires,
which shall certainly have their audience and acceptance at the Throne of
Grace, when their access is from the hand of Christ. Ephesians. 2.18.
It may be, God suffers thy Thoughts to be loose, that thy faith may be fixed.
Wherefore, by how much Satan is the more busy to distract thy thoughts, by so
holy duties; especially, closing still with an eye of faith, Heb. 7.25.
fixed upon Christ in his intercession. And when Satan sees his suggestions help
to increase the flame, not put out the fire of thy devout zeal, he will then in
policy withdraw the temptation, which in malice he has continued, to withdraw
thee from thy God, thy Jesus, and thy devotion.

3. Get an increase of saving knowledge, as a sure means of sanctified
thoughts. The mysteries of Grace, and sacred truths of the Gospel, Mat 12.35.
Luke 6 45.
they enrich the mind, and become a good treasure, which laid up in the heart,
does still furnish the soul with sacred matter for divine meditation. The Mind
is a Mint continually going, and whatsoever metal is cast in, receives its
stamp, is formed and fashioned into thoughts of good or evil, Mat 15.19.
according to the matter which is administered. Hereby then we give weight and
worth to our thoughts, by fixing them upon heavenly objects; which heavenly
objects are presented to the mind, according to the knowledge of God and of
Christ laid up in the Heart; which when we are awake, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Pro. 6.22.
is said to talk with us. For there are (...) in a Soliloquy of Thoughts, as
well as (...) in a Conference of the Tongue: yea, by those David; When thou
said, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
Ps. 27.8.
As the best communion is that of the Spirit, so the best communication is that
of the Thoughts, which are spiritual.

4. Mortify vile affections and inordinate passions, as availing much to the
restraining evil thoughts and vain imaginations. For, as wet wood when stirred,
so are our passions when moved, Mat. 9.4. Luke 11.17. Jer. 4.14.
they send forth an whole crowd of thoughts, which rise like thick vapors and
David, he sees, and then lusts; and Job, that he might not lust, 2 Samuel 11.2.3.
Job 31.1.
he would not see. And here (O man) whilst thou guardest thy senses, and
restrainest thine affections as to external objects; beware, oh beware of
acting over that sin in inward speculation, which thou have formerly committed
in outward action. This speculative wickedness spiritual incest, most hateful
to God and destructive to the soul. Know, Satan is often tempting with this
bait; even thoughts of pleasure, of profit, or the like, 1 John 2.16.
he makes the Thief thrust in at the window, or slipping by the door; and when
Master of the house is still and at rest, thinking all safe, Mat. 12.34.
this opens to those without, and lets in that number and crowd of thoughts,
which bind the spiritual man, and spoil his goods; even rob the soul of its
precious treasure, its divinest comforts.

5. As suppress and mortify vile and carnal, so stir up and cherish holy and
spiritual affections. For, the clearer is the fire, the less will be the smoke;
and the more divine is our love, the more devout will be our thoughts. Thus it
was with David; Ps. 119.97.
Oh how do I love Upon this it follows, It is my meditation all the day. From
this power of love then, do thou exercise thy self to collect divine
observations from providential dispensations, and extract holy thoughts from
secular occurrences. As the Philosophers stone turns all metals into gold, so
does the sanctifying grace of Love convert every occasion into devotion;
raising pious meditations in the Closet of the Heart, from those many objects
presented to the eye in the throng of the World. Thus David contemplating the
sweet order and various acts of divine providence, he makes this thedevout
Epiphonema to every Series: Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, Ps. 107.8.15.
and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men! Yea, as the Sun
exhales sweet dews from the brackish Ocean, so does the devout Soul gracious
meditations from the Worlds tumults and distractions. Now, these thoughts of
thankfulness and praise, raised by some strong affection of delight Atoms are
in the open air, and the greatest Crowd of vain Thoughts is in empty minds.

6. Beware of that great subtlety of Satan's casting in good thoughts, on
purpose by that bait to draw us from our present duties. Thoughts unseasonably
offered, though never so seemingly holy, are not to be entertained. Like
Soldiers out of rank, though never so valiant; Meteors in the air, though never
so radiant; like one out of his way, though never so swift; such are thoughts
not suitable and seasonable to the duty in hand, though never so pious and good;
they are disorderly, wandering, and destructive, destructive of comfort, if not
of grace. Gal. 3.1.
For, Satan's subtilty takes advantage at our folly: We think, because the
thoughts are good, therefore we must not repel them: But when they are entered
to divert the Heart from the present service, then are vain and vile thoughts
too let loose upon the To instance; Suppose something we have read in a Book,
or heard of a Sermon, or received by Conference, suppose this come into the
mind when busied by prayer; 2 Cor. 11.14.
it being some good motion, how does it find a ready acceptance? Whereas it is
indeed, like a person of best repute sent before, to bespeak admission and
procure reception for worse company after. Wherefore, in prayer, or any other
holy service, what thoughts are not praying thoughts, helps to devotion,
motions from Gods Spirit, but snares from the Evil Spirit: And know them by
this, that when we have ended our prayers, and are ready then to bid them
welcome, they are not to be found; they are withdrawn, when it is a fit time to
give them entertainment. By this it appears, Satan had a design to take off
from duty, rather then the Holy Spirit purpose and intention to affect the
Mind. 2 Cor. 2 11.


7. Put thy self in order, as a sure means to regulate thy thoughts in their
inordinacie. Ps. 139.18.
(1) With David, when thou awakest, be still with God; let thy first flight be
to heaven, thy soul fixed upon God in his attributes, his promises, and his
graces: This will season thee for the day, Ps 34 8.
and happily make thy heart taste of the Lords goodness; yea, like something
solid upon the stomach, which keeps out windiness, such are early thoughts of
holiness to the heart, to keep out vanity. Besides there is a secret
disposition in men, like that sordid superstition in the Egyptians, who did
worship that for their God all day, which they first see eye on in the morning:
Thus is it with the Idols of men's Hearts, commonly that they most dote on, if
not adore, which they first entertain into their minds in their
Morning-meditations. Wherefore there is no surer rule of godliness, Ps. 57.8.
Ps. 108.1, 2. Genesis 5.22. Mark 13.37. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 1 Pet. 4.7.
then to begin (2.) As careful to begin with God, so be watchful to walk with
him; and if we keep this Watch strict upon our ways, wanderers will not be so
busy; vagrant thoughts will not be so ready to meet, or to follow us, much
less to haunt ou^ houses, or keep their rendevouz in our hearts, if we strictly
examine them, and their Pass, and finding them idle and unprofitable, we give
them their correction and send them packing; this will weary and wear them away
in time. But if thou be remiss and careless, pleasing thy self for the day with
vain curiosities, or encumbring thy mind with perplexing cares, Isa. 32 9, 10,
11. Isa. 47.8.
no wonder if thy thoughts become loose and licentious, when thou appliest thy
self to thy wonted devotions. Indeed, if we would not have the birds to flutter
about our sacrifices, Genesis 15.11.
we must be careful of this, that we do not disturb their nests: And thus, if
we would not have vain thoughts to crowd in upon our hearts and distract our
holy services, we must be sure not to engage our selves too actively in worldly
affairs, or too busily in prying curiosities. For, it is no wonder, if prayers.
An heart overcharged with cares or curiosities, Luke 21.34.
is as unfit for devotion, as when stufft with surfeiting and drunkenness. 3.
Whatsoever is the duty of thy calling, do it with diligence: For they who
become (...), will be (...); 1 Timothy 5.13.
men being idle in what they ought to do, become busily intent upon what ought
not to be done. Surely, the main end of Gods employing men in Vocations, is to
Gods holy worship. Indeed, our natures are too weak, to b^held always intent
upon holy duties; and therefore Gods woship has its necessary intermissions,
in which intermissions the works of our callings are ordained, for the keeping
our minds innocent in their thoughts, and renewed in their vigor for his more
holy service. Here then (O thou afflicted soul!) who complainest Grounds of
Comfort, and Rules of Direction: God give thee his Spirit of Grace and Truth,
to order thy practice, and administer thee Consolation, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen!
CHAP. II. The Souls Conflict, from the frightful Suggestions of Foul Thoughts.
GReat is the activity of the Soul discovered by the Thoughts, Earth to Heaven,
Ps. 139.17, 18. Phil. 3.20.
and back again from Heaven to Earth. Which excellency of Man in the activity
of the Mind, was given of God for this end, that he might turn away from sin,
at the first appearance of evil: But now, oh how has the guilt of sin laid
fetters upon this freedom of the mind, and made it servile unto Satan, if not
to act his suggestions, yet to suffer his buffetings! 2 Cor. 12.7.
So that those very thoughts of sin which the soul abhors, Ps. 19 4.
through fear of guilt: knowing well, that as Devout meditations are
acceptable, so Foul imaginations must needs be abominable; abominable to that
God, Hab. 1.13.
who is of most pure eyes, and such as cannot behold iniquity.

Besides, whereas our Thoughts present the Idols which our hearts worship, and
that the Israelites bowing the knee to Baalim and Ashtaroth were not more truly
Idolaters, Judge. 2.13. Col. 3.5.
then the Covetous, the Ambitious, Voluptuous, who bow the heart to Riches, to
Honors, to Pleasures, and the like. Therefore the afflicted soul dreads the
guilt of the vilest Idolatry, even lest by its blasphemous thoughts it fall
down to Satan, Mat. 4.9.
and worship him. Oh! how does the sad experience of many pious souls witness a
dreadful horror in their sudden and frequent thoughts of Infidelity, Atheism,
and Blasphemy; calling into question the Truth of Gods Word, the Order of his
Providence, and the very Being of his Deity? yea, such thoughts, as for their
many souls languish in dejection, ashamed to declare their grief. These the
Cogitationes onerosae, in the language of S. Bernard, the burdensome thoughts
which load the soul with an unsupportable weight of mournful distress, and
press it down with an inconceivable anguish of spiritual dejections. In which
Dejections and Distress, hear and compassionate the Souls Complaint.

The Words of Complaint.
Oh! oh the Dunghill of mine unclean Heart, which sends forth such filthy
vapors! Needs must my soul be a very Sink of sin, whilst there arises from
thence such a noisome stench of corrupt Thoughts. Sure, if ever I had been
washed with the least drop of my Saviors blood, or purified with the least
spark of his Spirit and grace, so great a filth, and so foul a corruption could
never cleave unto my soul. But oh! woe is me; I see I am so far from being the
Temple of the Lord, that I am become the very Den of the Devil; the flames of
Hell already flash in my face, and the amazing terrors of cursed Blasphemies
torture my soul, and wound my Conscience even unto death; yea, I could rather
choose to die ten thousand deaths, then undergo the fears and frights, and
bitter pangs of my amazing thoughts and dreadful imaginations. Ah what, what
shall I do with these Egyptian frogs, my foul Suggestions, which are still
croaking? In every place, and in every action, in the Church and in the Closet,
in my meditations and in my prayers, still they crawl in and dead my heart,
yea, their noisome stink makes me loath my self and all my services. Oh, I
faint, I die, I perish! whilst ashamed to speak what I abhor to think, I must
needs despair of The Grounds of Comfort.
1. The horrid Blasphemies which affright thy soul, though they are thy
thoughts, yet are they Satan's suggestions; and not having thy consent of will,
they bring no guilt upon the conscience. Jam. 1.44, 15.
Non nocet sensus, ubi non est consensus, is the resolution of S. Bernard,
Ancient and Modern Divines, that where the Will yields no consent, there the
soul may suffer a temptation, but act no sin. Yea, 2 Cor. 12.7.
Quod resistentem fatigat, vincentem coronat, says the same Father; The
importunity and frepuencie of the suggestions which weary the soul resisting,
shall bring the greater crown of glory in its overcoming. True it is, He that
is born of God keeps himself, 1 John 5 18.
and that wicked one touches him not: But how, touches him not? Is it meant
of wicked touches him not, tachi qualitativo, we say, and that aright; not so
touch, as to make like himself, in an impress of sin and guilt upon the soul.
Now then, that it is no sin to be tempted, is more then evident from this one
argument, That otherwise our Lord and Savior himself, Heb. 4.15.
who was tempted, had also finn'd. Wherefore this is sin, to admit the
temptation wish allowance or delight,

2. That these foul and frightful suggestions have not thy consent Desst. 7.26.
Romans 22.9.
and so is far from a consenting of the will. As when the stomach loathes any
meat, though it be forceably cast into the belly, yet can it not be said to be
received with rppetite: So when the Will abhorrs any suggestion, though
forcibly cast into the mind, yet can it not be said to be received with
Consent. And know, we are less able to keep the Mind free from Satan's
suggesting thoughts we abhor, then we are to keep the stomach free from
another forcing meats we loath. Thy thoughts then (O distressed soul!) being
injected, not inbred thoughts; cast in from some suggestion without, not raised
up from some corruption within, they are only brats laid at thy door, not
children of thine own begetting; they are Satan's buffetings, in which the soul
is merely passive, a sufferer, not a doer: 2 Cor. 12.7.
And therefore as much need of patience, as of penitence; of fortitude to
resist, as of contrition to bewail.

Sure, it is the corruption of my heart from whence these foul thoughts are
raised; and so, though the Devil in his malice be the Father, yet my corrupt
flesh in its filthiness is the mother. Jer. 4.14.
Answ. True, if we find the mother hug and kiss the child, the Heart (I mean)
embrace and indulge the thought, then indeed, though the foul suggestion be
only an egg laid in our nest, yet because we brood it with our own warmth, it
becomes the issue of our own corruption, and lays a black stain and guilt upon
the soul. tender children affect the womb, so do corrupt thoughts the heart
that bears them. Know (O thou afflicted soul!) if thy foul thoughts be of thine
own begetting, or begotten of thee, thou shall find a secret disposition of
liking and of loving to them, and an inward softness will be ready to foster
and to cherish them: Ps. 119.113.
But if they are the objects of thy hate, which startle and affright thy soul,
and thou find a secret antipathy against them, and an inward abhorring of
them, then they are certainly altogether from and so, I have our Saviors
warrant to assert, and thou his word to believe, that they defile not the man.

Mat. 15.18, 19.
But what is it that thy troubled soul still objects? Thou say, Never any of
Gods children were in this condition; and sure, it is some strange corruption
discerned by Satan, which makes him thus tempt; and it is some heavy
displeasure conceived by God, which makes him thus permit the temptation. Answ.
Thus to be afflicted is no new thing, 2 Cor. 2.11.
and that with Gods Saints: even I (the least of those Flock of Christ) can
witness to thee, that in the service of my Ministry, amongst other afflicted
Consciences, I have met with more then two or three, even very many, who had
been thus buffeted by Satan, and with such violence of fury for length of time,
even for some years, that they have pined away, and languished in their
Convulsion-fits of secret tortures, brought down to the very gates of death,
yea of hell too; concealing their temptations, because ashamed to utter them.
And these have been persons of no mean piety; Satan's assaults to have been most
violent, when their devotions had been most enflamed. Yea, their first conflict
with these foul temptations, was some time after their thorow-conversions; when
having given up their names unto Christ, they had been exercised in solemn
humiliations, and graciously enlarged, yea ravished with the sweet delights of
holiness, in their communions with God and with Christ, in prayer and in
praises. Good souls, thus brought to Mount Tabor they thought of building
Tabernacles; but alas, Mat 17.4.
they were presently made to come down, and bearing their Cross, Luke ^.23
follow Christ to Mount Calvary, yea to the grave, and to hell; that the glory
of their victory and triumph might be the greater. And blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3.
who in the power of his Spirit and grace, was pleased to make these very
Grounds of Comfort, and Rules of Direction, to become effectual to their
restoring.

3. It appears then, that these faedae tentationes (as Casuists call them)
these foul and filthy temptations, even of Infidelity, Blasphemy, Atheism, and
the like, they are Satan's scare-crows, when his baits fail; when he cannot
allure and win the soul by carnal pleasures and worldly delights, then he seeks
to fright and deter it from duties of holiness, by secret horrors, and dreadful
suggestions. Which Job 30.15. Ps. 88.16.
they bring more of terror then of guilt to the soul; being so contrary to the
light of Nature, and the dictate of Reason, not raised by man, but cast in by
Satan: And being thus cast in, they have their passage through, not their
dwelling in the heart; they make their entrance as bold Intruders, but find not
entertainment as welcome Guests. Wherefore, as many good Thoughts, which only
come into the mind by sudden motion, and like sparks die as soon as brought
forth, as those do not argue a regenerate estate; so many evil Thoughts which
thrust into the heart by a sudden irruption, and are opposed as soon as
discerned, they do not prove a state unregenerate.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Rightly inform thy judgment, by making it a part of thy spiritual
understanding to discern aright between the temptation, Phil. 19.10. Heb. 5.14.
and the Which evil of temptation lies in the consent of the Will; which Satan
may persuade, but cannot enforce. So that, if the temptation be consented to,
it brings guilt upon the soul; but if repulst, it returns upon Satan.

2. Strictly examine thy Conscience, for the discovery of what transgressions
may have occasioned these temptations. For, sometimes they are the punishment
of sin, though themselves not a sin to be punished; they are a just affliction,
when they are not a condemning ^inah gad abroad, her chastity suffers a Rape,
Genesis 34.1.
as the punishment of her curiosity; and to wander in our thoughts from God, is
oftentimes punished with meeting a Bugbear in our way, Thoughts of Blasphemy,
or the like, to fright us back, and drive us nearer to him. Yea, when we become
disobedient to Gods will, not laid low in our humble submissions, he suffers
Satan to buffet us, even against our wills, sore vexed with his foul
suggestions; and thus our grieving his Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30.
is by a Lex tali^nis justly chastised with a grieving ours. Again observe,
that when we have had our Eagles flight, soaring aloft in spiritual
ravishments, and then been pufft up with spiritual pride; 2 Cor. 12 7. Luke
10.10.
God, as once to chastise this sin, and subdue this lust, he justly suffers
Satan, who for his pride fell from heaven like lightening, 2 Cor. 12.8.
to buffet and afflict the soul with these affrighting terrors, which like
lightening amaze with horror, though they do not wound with guilt. Further yet;
as thou examinest thy self to examine what sins have been caused or occasioned
by them; as what deadness of heart, what impatiencie of spirit, what neglect of
Gods service, what weariness in holy duties, what froward discontent, what
repining distrust, and the like.

3. Now, having rightly informed thy Judgment as to the quality and nature of
these temptations, and strictly examined thy Conscience as to the cause or
occasion of them; the best way to free thy is this. (1) Do thou prostrate thy
self in Gods presence, and in a deep humiliation of soul with fasting and
prayer, Mat. 17 21.
do thou supplicate the Throne of Grace, to obtain the mercy of thy God through
the merits of thy Savior, for the free and full pardon of whatsoever sin has
occasioned these temptations, or has been it self caused by them. (2) When
thou have made this humble supplication, with all earnest contrition, then cite
Satan before the Divine Tribunal; where, in the presence of thy God, and
disclaiming and renouncing all allowance, or willing admittance of them;
returning them upon Satan as the effects of his malice and fury, if hereafter
they return upon thy soul in their affrights and terrors. 3. Close thy solemn
service with this sincere devotion; earnestly beseeching God to rebuke Satan
and restrain his rage; Zech 3.1.
and to vouchsafe thy languishing soul his quickening, sustaining, and
restoring Grace; and together total resignation of thy self into the hands of
thy Jesus, Heb. 13.20. Isa. 40.11. 1 Pet. 5.8.
the great Shepherd of the Flock, that he may keep thee as a tender Lamb, safe
from the paw and teeth of the roaring Lion. And here; that I may not only point
thee thy way, but also lead thee by the hand, see a Pattern for thy practice, a
prescribed form, which thou may either use or imitate, use in its own words
and order of expression, or imitate in the like matter and method of devotion.

O most glorious and most gracious Lord God! who art the Searcher of Hearts,
the Lover of Souls, and the Preserver of Men. Before thee (holy Lord) before
thee so sacred a Majesty, I here present my self a polluted, oh do thou make me
a penitent sinner. Polluted I am, and loathsome in the filth of mine own
corruptions; and oh how much more vile and abominable am I, through the guilt
of that sin which is come upon my soul through Satan's suggestions! Suggestions
so horrid and dreadful, that I abhor to set them in mine own sight, much more
to declare them in thy presence. -- I confess, O holy Lord, and glorious God! I
confess with shame and confusion of face, that mine own sin has betrayed me to
Satan's buffetings, and his suggestions have increased the guilt and horror of
my sin. Oh my pride and presumption! provoked thy wrath, and given advantage
unto Satan against my soul! -- And oh the murmurings and rep nings! oh the
diffidence and distrust! oh the neglect of thy worship, and profaning thy
glory! oh the deadness and hardness of heart! oh the many and great evils of
pollution and guilt, caused and occasioned by my foul thoughts, all further
provoking thy divine afflicted spirit! -- Woe is me wretched sinner! whither,
oh whither shall I fly for succor? unless thou Lord wilt pity, my poor soul
must needs perish; and oh! oh my God! perish from thy presence, thy gracious,
thy glorious presence, for ever.

Wherefore see, O thou great and glorious, O thou just and righteous Judge! Oh
see, I here prostrate my self at the Bar of thy Justice, and lay my mouth in
the dust, no^ Satan does accuse me, my Conscience witness against me, and thy
Law condemn me; who, oh who shall plead for me? -- Oh! wilt not thou blessed
Jesus, my Surety, my Savior? wilt not thou undertake my Cause, who art mine
Advocate? Wilt not thou procure my Pardon, who art my Mediator? Wilt not thou
make mine Atonement, who art the High Priest of my salvation? -- O blessed
Jesus, be now my able to save unto the utmost all that come unto God by thee,
oh save me lost creature, undone soul; without thy merit and thy mediation,
lost and undone eternally: Oh save me unto the utmost of what my Conscience can
accuse, or Satan's malice aggravate.

And now; O holy Lord God! whilst thou beholdest thy wounded Son, pity, oh
pity me wretched sinner: See him accused by men, to free me from the
accusations of Satan; see him unjustly condemned, Lord, his pierced side, as
the Fountain opened, and his streams of blood flowing forth unto his Church, to
wash in from sin and from uncleanness: Oh, here bathe my polluted soul, wash,
and wash me thoroughly, that not the least filth of mine own corruptions, or
Satan's suggestions, may now cleave unto me, or her^after appear in Judgment
against me. -- Behold, in Jesus Christ my Surety, my debt is paid, thy justice
satisfied: Oh blot out then the handwriting of Ordinances that is against me,
The sentence of death in the curse of the Law upon sin.
discharge Satan, and in the presence of thine holy Angels pass sentence of
Absolution upon me, in the free and full pardon of all my sins.

And oh! of a dreadful Judge, be thou now, Lord a gracious and reconciled
Father; behold me justified through the blood of thy Son, and the righteousness
of my Jesus; and as thou make merit of Christ's passion to my justification,
so make me partaker also of the power of his resurrection, even to obtain
victory and to triumph over sin and Satan, and all those powers of darkness
which shall rise up to rob me of the riches of thy grace, and to deprive me of
my right and title to the inheritance of thy Saints in light.

Now, holy Lord and gracious God! as Satan has accused me, so let me cite him
before thy sacred Tribunal. And here ever lives to make intercession for me;
even thus, Lord, I here declare in thy presence, and in the presence of thy
holy Angels, that I utterly renounce all communion with Satan in his sinful
suggestions; and therefore do humbly implore thy gracious goodness, that
whenever Satan shall renew his suggestions, they may be returned upon himself
in his malice, not fasten upon my do thou Lord Jesus rebuke him, and keep me by
thine almighty power through faith to salvation; making thy strength to appear
in my weakness, thy grace and mercy in mine unworthiness. -- And as thou art
pleased, O Lord God, to quench all the fiery darts of Satan, so stir up thy
graces in me, and inflame my soul with an enlarged fervor of holy devotion. So
sanctify me throughout with thy Spirit, that my desires may humble resignation
in thy presence, that so I may be safe under the shadow of thy wing, and
preserved unblameable unto the day of the Lord Jesus.

O Lord God! Into thy hands I commit my body, soul and O my God, gracious and
merciful, accept me in thy Beloved, even Jesus Christ, in whom alone thou art
well pleased; and for his sake let me not go from before thee without a
blessing; a blessing of pardon and of peace, a blessing of thy Spirit and of
thy grace, a blessing of thy favor and of thy love in the Lord Jesus. Thus,
Lord, say of me, Thou have blessed me, and that I shall be blessed for ever.
Amen, Amen.

Here rising up, and making thine humble adoration before the Throne ot Glory,
say, Halleluiah! Salvation be unto our God and to the Lamb for ever, Amen.
Halleluiah!

4. After all this, if thy foul thoughts shall yet continue or renew let them
pass like lightening, and so though they suddenly startle, yet let them not
long discontent thy soul; for this slighting is the best resisting; and thou
shall sooner be quit of them by a pious neglect, then by an eager opposition.
Like angry Bees, such are foul and blasphemous thoughts; Isa. 30.15. Ps. 118.12.
they are better avoided in passing by, then in beating off. -- This Direction
is well attested by the experience of a Minister of Christ (with whom I have
had intimate acquaintance) who being devoutly employed holy Eucharist, Satan,
to disturb his devotion, and thereby disquiet his soul, assaults him with the
sudden suggestion of foul thoughts: He, startled with their appearance in so
sacred an action, began a contest of holy indignation; which contest heightened
their rage, and the more entangled his soul. In this secret trouble, he
observes how busy the Flies were (in that hot season) about the Cup which he
was administering, and that he in prudence as well as piety was regardless of
their buzzing, and kept himself intent upon holy service. This became presently
his instruction, from thence raising this sudden Meditation. -- Sure, Satan
envies the sweet comforts of my soul in communion with my Jesus, and therefore
sends these busy Thoughts to suck up their sweetness; which if I strive to
beat off, they do but the more disturb my soul: I will therefore do with Satan's
suggestions, as with the Flies, pass them by in a silent contempt, not think to
drive them away by a forcible opposition. And he thus resolved, they soon
vanished; keeping

5. And lastly (O thou afflicted soul!) do with thy God, when assaulted with
frightful thoughts, as children do with their parents, when they behold any
frightful thing, even cling closer, and hold faster to him. And doubt not, when
Satan sees that what he intends to drive thee from thy God, draws thee nearer
to him, he will soon cease the violence of his temptations: And when the Devil
has left thee, Mat. 4.11. Isa. 63.9. Mal 3.1.
Angels Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, he shall revive and glad thy soul
with the quickening graces and chearing comforts of his Spirit.

CHAP. III. The Souls Conflict from some late Relapses into Sin.
AS Physicians make a sovereign Antidote of the Vipers flesh, to destroy its
poison; Heb. 2.17, 18. Heb. 4.15, 16.
so does Christ a saving Medicine of Satan's temptations to defeat his malice:
Christ being tempted even to sanctify our temptations, and to be himself at
once our refuge, and our pattern; that as we are guarded by his power, so we
may be instructed by his example. Mat. 4.4.7.10. Ephesians. 6.17. Jam. 4.7.
And what is the instruction, but that of spiritual wisdom and holy resolution,
in opposing the Word resisting till he fly from us? And when Satan is beat
back in his temptations, oh! how do the comforts of Christ's Spirit return upon
our souls, to quicken, strengthen, and establish them?

Whenever then we hear the mournful complaints of languishing souls upon
Relapses into sin, Job 13.24. Job 14.17. Ps. 43 2.
that God accounts them his enemies, seals up their transgressions, and casts
them off: They are the passionate Expressions of a distrustful impatience;
Satan by his Luke 5.31. 1 John 1.7.
that thereby the soul becomes wholly fixed upon the disease, eying neither the
Physician not his remedy, neither Christ nor his blood: Yea, the soul becomes
so overburdened with its debt, that it views neither the Surety, Heb. 7.22.
Joh. 1.16. Luke 24.47. Joh 3.16.34
nor his sufficiency; neither Jesus, nor his fullness; both which are presented
to the Penitent in the Promises. In this distress of soul, hear the Words of
Complaint; yea,

The Words of Complaint.
Oh, woe is me! how is the Crown fallen from my head! How is all my joy and
comfort fled from my soul! How are Wretched man! how have I forsaken my first
love, cast off my former zeal, and by my sinful Apostacy quenched, yea grieved
the Spirit of my God? So that, whereas before I did delight in his servi^e, I
now shame and fear to come into his presence: whereas before, his Spirit did
enlarge my heart with comforts, now my sin does fill my soul with horrors. Oh,
what shall I do! I have abused the mercy of my God, despised his love, profaned
his holiness, and offended his Majesty: And what hope of pardon from an abused
mercy? What hope of favor from a despised love? What hope of Communion with a
profaned Holiness? What hope of acceptance with an offended Majesty* These the
Words of Complaint. And now to set open a safe Harbor for the humble and vain
shelter for the profane and presumptuous: Observe

The Grounds of Comfort.
1. The immutability of Gods love. The grace and love of God as the Agent, is
not founded upon any motives or reasons in man Object; as if merit or worth in
man did either beget or continue favor or love in God. No, He justifies us when
ungodly; Romans 4.5. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.6. Romans 3.24.
He reconciles us when enemies; He quickens us when dead: And therefore needs
must it be, that we are freely justified, and so eternally saved by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Now, if when enemies by wicked
works, we were reconciled by the death of Christ; if when dead in trespasses
and sins, we were quickened by the Spirit of Grace; how much more being
reconciled, being quickened, everlasting love, Jer. 31 3.
a love that will not end in hatred; This is that God himself tells us by the
Prophet, I am the Lord, I change not; Mal. 3.6.
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

2. The stability of Gods Covenant. God tells us, he will make an everlasting
Covenant with his people: And how is it everlasting? Jer. 32 40.
Why, says God, I will not turn from them to do them good. This Covenant of
Grace declared by the Prophets, and confirmed by Christ, was long before made
to Abraham. Genesis 22.16.
The sum of which Covenant the Apostle gives us, Heb. 6. where he tells us,
that when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater,
Heb. 6.13, 14.
he swear by himself, saying, Surely, blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thee. Surely; the Greek is (...), which Erasmus and
the Vulgar render nisi, unless; Unless blessing I shall bless thee, and
multiplying I shall multiply thee. And so indeed it is right the usual manner
and form of an execratory Oath among the Hebrews; the sense which is depending
upon this expression, being implied by the Figure Aposiopesis: So that (...),
Nisi benedicens benedixero tibi; as if the Lord had said, Unless blessing I
shall bless thee, and multiplying I shall multiply thee, let me not be
accounted God; that is, let me not be accounted faithful and true. And thus,
because God could swear by no greater, He swear by himself.

Now, this being the form of Gods Covenant by way of an oath, what is the
substance and matter of it? Why, this; Blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thee. Which gemination of words, is to signify a
cumulation of Gods blessings: And thus our former Translation may be a good
Gloss, which reads these I will abundantly bless thee, and multiply thee
marvellously. Which promise was made good to Isaac and the Jews in temporal
blessings and an earthly inheritance, the Types and Figures of Christ and the
faithful, to whom this promise is made good in spiritual graces and an heavenly
kingdom. And therefore this Covenant made unto Abraham, Ps. 105 10:
is called an everlasting Covenant; which it could not be, if not extended to
the times of the Gospel in respect of those spiritual graces and heavenly
blessings bestowed upon Christ, God willing more abundantly to show unto the
heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, Heb. 6.17.
confirmed it by an oath. And wherefore this? Was it to make his obligation
more firm? No, but to make our consolation the more sure, v. 18.
it was, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong consolation. By two immutable things, his promise and
his oath, in which it was impossible for God to lie; to lie, that is, to revoke
or

Now we must know, Gods covenant is not made the more firm or sure by oath then
by promise; for, Gods truth, as his nature, is without any variableness or
shadow of change; Jam. 1.17.
and it is not any thing that can possibly add to its immutability: As to
infinity in respect of extension, so unto immutability in respect of firmness,
there can be no accession of parts, or addition of degrees. Wherefore, as man's
oath adds not to the truth of his word, so nor Gods oath to the certainty of
his promise; and therefore merely to show unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel, he confirmed it by an oath. Which was, for the
greater testimony of his grace, in the stronger assurance of our faith, being
fixed upon the firm stability of his Covenant.

1 John 2.1.
3. The merit of Christ's passion, and benefit of his intercession; both which we
are directed to by S. John. My little children, these He is the propitiation
for our sins in the merit of his passion; and he is our Advocate with the
Father, in the office of his intercession. In the merit of Christ's passion it
is, that he became our ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6.
and so we saved by his death; and in the benefit of Christ's intercession it
is, Romans 5 10.
that we are said to be saved by his life, for that he lives to make
intercession for us. So that, as the end and purpose of Christ's passion was our
redemption; so the very end and purpose of Christ's intercession is our
salvation: And thus is Christ become our (...), our Great High Priest, Heb.
4.14. Heb. 2 17. Heb. 3.1.
whose proper and peculiar office it is to make atonement for his people; and
therefore Christ can no more reject a penitent sinner,

Wherefore see S. Paul's confident challenge that he makes: Romans 8 34.
Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. Who is it that condemns, since it is Christ that died for us, redeeming
us with the price of his blood? Oh what filth will not this Fountain cleanse?
what wound will not this Balm cure? what guilt will not this merit expiate? But
further yet; who but rather who is risen again; having by his almighty power
led captivity captive, and triumphed over Satan, the Law, Ephesians. 4 8. Heb. 8 1.
Ps. 110.1.
and Sin; even death, the grave, and hell; and is set down at Gods right hand,
until he make all his enemies his footstool. Yet is not this all: Who is it
that condemns? since it is Christ who not only died, rose again, and is set
down at the right hand of God, but who also makes intercession for us. This the
Complement of all: Heb 7 25.
our Saviors saving us unto the uttermost, even in that he lives to make
intercession for us. Hereby it is, that he is able to save us to the uttermost;
whether it be in perpetuum in plenum (as Erasmus;) whether it be for perpetuity
of time, or fullness of measure, Christ is able to save unto the uttermost all
those that come unto God by him.

Let thy Conscience then (O dejected Penitent!) object the hainousness of thy
sins, and raise them to the greatest height, by all aggravating circumstances;
as being committed against the dictate of reason, and the light of knowledge;
as being reiterated again and again after solemn resolutions, and the gracious
enlightenings of the Heb 2.17.
but also willing to save those who come unto God by him, Rev. 12.10.
even unto the utmost of what their Consciences can accuse, or Satan's malice
aggravate.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Raise thy faith; and this by a frequent meditation upon the promises of
grace and life: By which meditation the soul shall the better suck out the
sweetness, and digest the nourishment of Gods mercy and truth. And because
Pattern prevails above Precept, take this Instance for thy imitation: Suppose
thou fixest thine eye and thoughts upon that blessed truth and comfortable Text
of S. Paul's; 1 Timothy 1.15.
and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of which I am chief. Upon this let thy soul dwell a while by serious
meditation, and in these or the like expostulating thoughts let thy faith
gather strength and renew its vigor. How! Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners! What, was this the very end and purpose of Christ's coming in the
flesh, and suffering on the Cross, that he might bring men, sinful men to
salvation? O divine Cordial to an afflicted soul! penitent Sinner! I am
convinced the words are gracious, but how shall I be assured the saying is
true? Why, it is the Word of God, and shall I then distrust its truth? Vain
heart, be not so deceitful; it is a faithful saying, this, a saying as firm as
God is holy, as true as Truth it self. But what right have I, I so vile a
Wretch, to so divine a Truth? Why, my right lies in Gods mercy, which here
extends to all: That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, it is a
saying worthy of all men to be received; Of all all I am included, my
particular is involved in this general; Ps. 78.41. Isa. 59.1.
for who shall limit the Holy one of Israel? Ay, but will God have respect to
so heinous a sinner? Have not my grievous sins made me unworthy of so gracious
mercy? Jam. 2, 13.
Yes, unworthy, but not incapable: It is the glory of Gods mercy to forgive
sins; the greater then my sins, the greater his glory in their forgiveness.
Though then I be the chief of sinners, I will rely upon my God in my Jesus for
his chief of mercies, and so resolve to apply the truth this is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, of which I am chief.

Thus in thy greatest dejections, endeavor to raise thy faith by meditation on
the Promises; to the greatness of thy sins opposing the riches of Gods mercy;
to the horror of thy guilt, the fullness of Christ's merits, both unmeasurably
infinite and gracious. And as the skill of a Physician is the more eminent in
curing a dangerous sickness, Romans 5.20.
goodness of Gods mercy more glorious in pardoning, and the power of his grace
more evident in healing hamous sins. Bonitas invicta non vincitur, and infinita
misericordia non finitur; Gods invincible goodness is not by sin conquered, nor
his boundless mercy by guilt limited: And therefore may he alone despair of
pardon, who can be more wicked then God is gracious. And as for the merit of
Christ, it is a superabundant merit: Though the purity of all the Heavenly Host
is not able to wipe off the stain, nor their death sufficient to expiate the
guilt of the least transgression, Joh. 1 29. 1 John 1.7. and 2.2.
yet is the least drop of the blood of the Son of God an expiatory sacrifice
for the whole World; how much more then shall these his streams of blood be
sufficient in their fullness of merit for the most heinous sins of a relapsed
Saint? There may be then some disease of opprobriu^ medicoru^, past the
Physicians skill to cure; but no wound, no distemper of soul can pose or puzzle
the mercy of God, or merits of Christ to heal. We cannot then dishonor Christ
more, then to distrust his grace and love, to undervalue his merits and blood,
Joh. 15.13. Romans 5.8.
especially he having given so great a testimony of his love by his death, and
made so firm a Conveyance of the merits of his death in his promises; yea, and
vouchsafed so sure a seal of those promises, and of that merit in his
Sacraments. Be it so then (O thou dejected be it so, that thy troubled
Conscience does rage as the sea with uncessant accusations; be it so, that sin
and hell besiege thee round with the bitter terrors of everlasting death, and
that now the waves and surges of temptations swell and overflow thee; yet shall
thou not faint, not sink, not perish, 1 Pet. 1.5.
whilst the Son of God supports thee through faith in his merits; a faith fixed
upon the promises of grace and life; in which promises thou may behold thy
sins, thy heinous sins, thy mountain-sins, swallowed up in the Sea of his
blood; yea, thou may behold thy guilt, thy horrid guilt long since cancelled
on Golgotha, Col. 2.14.
and expiated by the death of thy Redeemer.

2. Renew thy Repentance; and this in a deep contrition of heart, and sincere
humiliation of soul. There being no flying from God, but by flying to him; no
flying from his wrath, but by flying to his mercy; for which we have the
comfort and encouragement of a gracious Advocate, of a perfect Mediator, 1 John
2 1. 1 Timothy 2.5.
Christ Jesus blessed for revolting Judah, Joel 2.12.
and which he requires of all backsliding children; even that they turn unto
him with all their heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning: Sighs and tears,
they are the Penitents best oratory; for so says David, Ps. 6.8.
The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. Know then (O thou afflicted
soul!) though thy relapses into sin may hide Gods countenance, yet upon
repentance renewed, they shall not banish thee from his presence; though Gods
Saints; the grace and mercy which God has vouchsafed to them in Christ, not
being only for their own salvation, but also for others instruction. For this
cause (says the Apostle) I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting. For a pattern, (...), as a complete Image,
in whom men might view as most lively drawn forth, the exceeding abundant grace
of Christ, in receiving to mercy so cruel a Persecutor of his Church, and so
horrid a Blasphemer of his Truth; that so, humble Penitents being more invited
with the riches of Christ's mercy and merits, then might believe on Christ, the
Savior of the World, unto everlasting life.

Indeed, we soonest convince by argumen s drawn from our own experience. Ps. 27
13, 14. Ps. 34.11.
Thus we make it an ordinary Medium and Method of persuasion to one in
sickness, saving, Make use of such a Physician; for when I was taken with the
like desperate disease, he administered to me safe Physic, and by Gods blessing
has wrought upon me an Luke 22 32.
Thus, S. Paul converted, David repenting, Peter restored, and others of Gods
holy, and now blessed Ones; they seem to comfort and raise the dejected Sinner
and relapsed Saint with arguments drawn from their own experience: Why (vain
man) do thou delay to seek cure for thy wounds, healing for thy sickness?
Take a Physician upon our recommendation, of whose grace and goodness, of whose
ability and skill, we our selves have had so long and so large an experience;
and let not the distemper of thy disease filthiness has been as great as
thine, yet the blood of Christ has cleansed us; our wounds as deep as thine,
yet his balm has cured us; our souls as fainting as thine, yet his grace has
revived us: Do thou then exercise faith and repentance according to our
example, and thou shall partake of grace and salvation according to our
experience.

3. Observe the most sovereign and sacred Restorative left us by What can be a
more divine Cordial to the fainting soul? what more sovereign remedy to a
wounded Conscience, then the Covenant of Grace firmly sealed, the merits of
Christ's death really exhibited, and the earnest of the heavenly inheritance
visibly conveyed? The whole sum of that Tremendum Mysterium, that dreadful
mystery (as the Ancients call it) the blessed Eucharist, it is this, the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ; 1 Cor. 10.16.
in which Communion our Lord Jesus Christ powers Treasury of all Goodness, the
Fullness of all Graces, Joh. 1.16.
the Fountain of all Blessedness. Wherefore then (O thou afflicted soul) having
raised thy faith, and renewed thy repentance, attend the sacred solemnity of
the blessed Eucharist; thereby to have thy pardon sealed, thy weakness
strengthened, thy Corruptions subdued, thy Peace of Conscience restored, thy
Joy of the Spirit enlarged, and thine assurance of Gods love confirmed.

The Objections answered
Here several Objections are made by the distrustful and doubting souls. 1.
Obj. Against the immutability of Gods love, and stability That sure, God is not
bound to perform the Promise, when man neglects to fulfill the Condition; and
therefore though God do not forsake us, yet we leaving him, he may justly cast
us off and reject us. Ans. True: yet know concerning the faithful whom God has
received into his Covenant of grace, communicate that grace whereby he is ready
to support and sustain them, that they shall not totally and finally fall away
from him: Jer. 32.40. Heb. 8.10.12.
And hereby fear God puts into their hearts, does restore them; and that love
he bears unto their persons, does accept them. Wherefore as the house and
ground stands firm, though to distempered brains they seem to totter; so the
grace and covenant of God stands unmovable, though to distrustful hearts they
seem to waver. Lippientibus singularis lucerna numerosa est (says Tertullian;)
A fit allusion here: As to a weak eye, the candle which is single seems to have
a Covenant of God which bears a single truth, seems to carry a double sense. So
that, notwithstanding all the doubtful Quaere's of a troubled heart and
distrustful mind, this remains as the surest and safest comfort of Gods
children, that He who is their Father, is unchangeable in his love, and
constant in his promise.

2. Obj. Against the merit of Christ's passion, and the benefit of his Some
languishing and dejected soul may be so far from Christ's passion, with the
virtue of his intercession, are so far from administering him comfort, that
through despair they increase his sorrow, and horror of soul. Objecting that of
the Apostle, when he says, Heb. 10.26.
If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin; and if so, what will avail us
Christ's passion and intercession? Answ. To explain the true meaning of this
Scripture is to repel the force of this objection. Wherefore know, the sin of
Apostacy, forsaking Christ, and falling away to Judaisme; a sin frequently
committed in those times and sharply reproved in this Epistle. And that this is
meant of the sin of Apostacy, the very Greek word does hint it somewhat to us;
which is (...), a word which denotes a defect on and falling away; and that
being (as the Apostle expresses it) after the receiving the truth, it can be
rightly interpreted of none other sin but that of Apostacy. And indeed, the
Apostle here speaks after the manner of the Hebrews, with whom Apostacy was
called sin, (...). As a fall ng away to Idolatry then with the Hebrews, so
falling away to Judaism, with the Apostle, is peculiarly called sin, as indeed
the sin most hateful and abominable. And to them that v. 29.
there remains no more sacrifice for their atonement; for that they have
counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and have done despite to
the Spirit of grace. Yet more pla^n: They who denied their Christian
profession, and fell off to Judaism, could have no more Sacrifice for sin;
because Christ being denied, none other Messiah was to he expected; and as for
the Sacrifices of the Law, they were now no more available to take away sin,
they being ended and fulfilled in Christ. So then, there is to wilful
Apostates, but there is still a sacrifice for sin to humble Penitents: The
merit of Christ's passion shall nothing avail him that renounces his
Christianity; but it shall much avail, yea effectually save him who bewails his
iniquity.

Against the renewing of Repentance. And this Objection is raised from that of
the Apostle, Heb. 6.4, etc.
where he says, that it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
and have tasted the From hence the relapsed Saint, in his deep distress of
Conscience, frames this objection: Seeing I have been once enlightened, and
have tasted the heavenly gift, and have been partaker of the Holy Ghost, and
have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come; and now
having fallen away from my God by my multiplied iniquities, it is impossible
that I should be renewed again unto repentance. Answ. humane infirmity, but of
the Professors of Christ falling away through the sin of wilful Apostacy. Of
which sin many in the primitive times became guilty, either through fear, or
through covetousness; renouncing the faith of Christ, and returning again to
Judaism or Heathenish idolatry; and of such it is that the Apostle here speaks,
when he tells us, that they crucify to v. 6.
and put him to an open shame. For, they that fell away to Judaism, did as much
dishonor, injure, and abuse Christ, as if with the Jews they had actually spit
upon him, buffeted him, and crucified him: And for such, to renew them again to
repentance, it is impossible; Impossible, non physice, sed moraliter, (as the
School speaks) Impossible, according to the ordinary course of the Church,
according to the common and usual way of salvation: otherwise, our Savior
tells us in the like case, With men this is impossible, but with God all things
are possible. True it is, Mat. 19 26.
Novatus and his followers, from this Heb. 6.4. and that Heb. 10.26. did deny
repentance, and admission into the Church, not only to those who fell away from
the faith, but also who fell into any scandalous sin; but for this were they
justly condemned by the Church of for Heresy. So that this place of the
Apostle is to be interpreted as meant of such professors of Christ, who fall
away from the faith by wilful Apostacy, as did Judas and Julian; Not of such
servants of God who fall into sin through some prevailing temptation, as did
David and Peter.

4. Obj. Against a partaking of the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist. receive
unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
is to increase faintly: I repent, but it is but weakly: And what, shall I then
so vile a sinner attend so dreadful a solemnity? Answ. O thou dejected, yet
penitent soul! blessed Ordinance; but attend unto our Saviors call* and come
at his gracious invitation. Hearken and hear; Come unto me, Mat. 11.28.
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Even because
weary, come and be refreshed; even because burdened, come and be eased; because
weak, come and be strengthened; because poor, come and be enriched; because
sick, come and be healed; because wounded, come and be cured; because sad, come
and be comforted; because dull, come and be quickened; because relapsed, come
and wedding garment, Mat. 22.12. Genesis 27.15.
the pure robe of Christ's righteousness put on by faith; and thus clothed with
the sweet smelling raiment of our elder Brother, thou shall obtain a multiplied
blessing from our heavenly Father, even a blessing of righteousness and of
peace, a blessing of mercy and of love, of grace and of strength, of comfort
and of joy; R^m. 86.
the testimony of the Spirit setting on the seal of the Sacrament for the
recovering and continuing, the renewing and confirming, the assurance of (O
thou afflicted soul!) that thou fix upon the immutability of Gods love, and the
stability of his Covenant, together with the merit of Christ's passion, and the
benefit of his intercession; these the sure Grounds of Comfort. Again, do thou
raise thy faith, renew thy repentance and apply thy self to a wor^hy partaking
of the blessed Eucharist; these the faithful Rules of Direction. All which the
God of mercy and compassion bless unto thy soul, and make effectual to thy
salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.

CHAP. IV. The Souls Conflict from the daily Assaults
WHich Conflict that it is truly spiritual and sincere, will appear by these
signs. Romans 7.21, 22, 24.
1. The sanctified person acts against the power, whilst he groans under the
weight of his sin; Ps. 51, 2.7.10.
He hates its pollution, as well as dreads its guilt; He abhors its filth, as
well as fears its punishment. 2. The Saint of God in his spiritual conflict, he
is both earnest to discover his corruptions, and zealous to subdue them: 1 Cor.
9.27.
whereas the Natural man seeks out his corruptions, as the Coward does his
enemy, unwilling to find him, and afraid to fight him. 3. Whereas the Natural
man, like a Neuter in a State, is offended with the tumult and uprore that
disquiets him; the Spiritual man, like a loyal Subject, is incensed against the
Rebel-Lusts that raise this tumult, Ps. 18.23.
and cause this disquiet. 4. His heart does as suddenly startle at the motions
of sin, as the Lamb does at light and darkness, Christ and Belial, 2 Cor.
6.14.15.
heaven and hell. Lastly, above all the evils sin brings upon the soul, this,
that it deprives of communion with God, is the most afflicting. Ps. 61.11, 12.
In which affliction, these are the words of Complaint.

The Words of Complaint.
Oh! how, how can mine heart be right with God; which so often revolts from
him? How can mine heart be sound, which is continually sore? When with sighs
and groans in humiliation, I have confessed and bewailed my sin, presently upon
temptation I commit and repeat it. Thus my wounds daily bleed afresh, and
thereby my spirit faints, and my hope fails: I shall one day perish by the hand
of sin, as David complained he should do by the hand Saul; for that daily my
strength decays, my grace diminishes, my comforts fade, mine Evidences for
Heaven ar blotted, my seals defaced; my life is become my trouble, and death it
is my terror; I fear to die, and yet have no joy to live; Wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin and of death! The Grounds of
Comfort.
1. The holy dispensation of the all-wise God; according to which it is, that
neither the merit of Christ's blood, nor the sanctification of Christ's Spirit,
does yet so far prevail, as to root out the being of Damnatum est peccatum, sed
non extinctum; Christ has condemned sin in the flesh, condemned, but not
extinguished. (...), Rom 8 3. Cajet. in loc.
he has condemned: The word is metaphorical; for that, Condemnation implies a
depr vation of all preceding privileges and power. Thus our Lord Jesus Christ
he has dealt with sin; he has so disanull'd it in the faithful, that it has
no more place to appear in judgment, Col. 2.14.
no more guilt to bind over unto death; Romans 8.1.
there being no condemnation

2. Our nature is pure and perfect in Christ, in which he h th satisfied the
justice of our God, Joh. 2.29.
as being the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world; even the sin of
nature as well as of our lives, our original as well as our actual sin. Col. 1
19. Joh. 1.16.
And seeing it has pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, He
will communicate to us of his fullness, till he has wholly destroyed the
Serpents seed, 1 John 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.16.
till he has made us pure even as he is pure, not only subduing the dominion
grace, but also destroying the life and being of sin by glory.

3. No man is sensible of sickness, but who has life; and therefore sense of
sin is a sure symptom of the life of grace. So that (O thou afflicted soul!)
in thy conflict with sin, thy very grief is a ground of comfort; this being a
sure testimony of true Sanctification, Gal. 5.16, 17 18.
that thou can not endure the close workings of thy secret corruption, but
art still sollicitous to cast out the enemy, to establish the

4. It is a free and willing subjection to the commands of sin, Romans 6.12, 14.
which declares the soul to be under the power and dominion of sin; but by our
opposing and resisting, our lamenting and bewailing our sin, we manifest
plainly, sin does rebel, but does not reign; prevails as a Tyrant, but rules
not as a King. And where Grace has the Throne of the heart, and sways the
Scepter, the^e Christ rules by his 1 Pet. 1.5.
we shall be kept by the power of God through faith to salvation. For what,
has our Lord Jesus Christ begun, and shall he not perfect the work of grace?
Has he made the purchase, Phil. 1.6.
and shall he not make us to possess the inheritance of glory?

Lastly, Seeing thou cleavest unto the Lord with purpose of heart, though thou
servest him not in per^ection of holiness; these infirmities and failings which
are thy burden, they shall not be thy bane. If the ravished Virgin cry out,
Deuteronomy. 22.27.
she is in the censure of the Law guiltless; by her cry having proved her rape.
And thus, a sure testimony it is, Sin has committed a rape upon our souls and
ravished our hearts, when we cry out in our trouble unto the Lord: And sure,
God who commanded indulgence unto the ravished Virgin, will vouchsafe

The Rules of Direction.
1. Be constant in thy Conflict, in the sense of thine own wants looking unto
the Lord Jesus Christ in his fullness; and in the weakness of thine own
strength, Phil 4 13. Joh. 15.5.
relying upon the almightiness of Christ's power. Be not disheartened by some
losses, not discouraged by some fasting and prayer renew thy strength, and then
by diligence and Zeal renew the combat: Thus shall thou gain by thy losses, get
ground by thy falls, increase thy graces by thine infirmities.

Phil. 1 9, 10.
2. Preserve the judgment of thy mind clear, and the frame of thine heart
tender; that so the Understanding may discover to thee what is evil by its
light, and the Heart restrain thee from it by its tenderness. Restrain, by some
secret checks of Conscience upon the first Psalm. 19.13. Ephesians. 4.30.
that so they get not head by any rebellious wickedness, to grieve Gods Spirit,
and to disquiet, yea, wound thine own. Let it be thy pious policy to fight
thine Enemy when he is at the weakest: Thus, set upon Sin in its first motions,
quell it in its first risings; for indeed, that which increases our guilt, and
destroys our peace, is our willing entertainment of sinful motions, our ready
cherishing corrupt desires.

Prove. 4.23.
3. Keep up an holy jealousy over thine own heart; for it is not in Jer. 17.9.
And such is the Hearts deceitfulness, that those corruptions lurk in it, which
we think have no affinity with our nature, but are most contrary to our frame
and disposition: As who could have imagined Moses's his meekness could have
become guilty of murmuring? Ps. 106.32, 33. Psalm. 51.14. Matthew. 26.24.
or David's tenderness guilty of murder? or Peter's zeal of denying his Master?
Wherefore in this holy jealousy over thy Sheep thou slip into the mire through
weakness, yet thou shall not with the Swine wallow in it with delight.

4. Be humbled in the sense of that body of sin, carnal concupiscence, Jam.
1.14.15. Romans 7.23.
the polluted fountain from whence issues all our filthy streams of sinful
thoughts, words and actions. It may be, God suffers Satan to shake the vessel,
that the dregs may appear; to pursue us with his temptations, that we may the
better discover our corruptions, and so discern the true womb of all our
misery, that which breeds and fosters all our disquiet. Whilst then we bewail
the guilt and pollution actual transgression, with David, Ps. 51.5.
pass we from the branches to the root, let the stream lead us to the Spring,
that of Original corruption, which defiles the whole man, and maintains an
irreconcilable war with the sanctifying grace of Gods Spirit. Rom 8 7, 8. Gal.
5 17.
Though we are ingrafted into Christ, yet will God have us mindful of our old
stock, that we may the better glorify him in the power of his grace which
sanctifies and saves us. And indeed, unless we bewail sin in the affection as
well as in the action, unless we be humbled Repentance cannot be found, nor our
Peace settled. Our Repentance not sound, which must be a thorow-hatred of the
whole body of sin; our Peace not settled, Romans 8.1.14.
which must be not only from mercy pardoning, but also from grace subduing sin.

Lastly, Increase the importunity of thy prayers, as thou see sin increase in
the impurity of its pollutions. And to strengthen thy prayer, fix thy faith
upon the promises; those of the Gospel of Christ, blot out our transgressions,
and remember them no more; Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.12. Luke 11 13. Zech 13.1.
That he will put his fear into our hearts, and that he will give his holy
Spirit to them that ask it. Especially look up unto Christ as the fountain set
open to Judah and Jerusalem, even to all penitent sinners, to wash in for sin
and for uncleanness. And if thus (O thou afflicted soul!) if thus thou make
good the combat by prayer and penitence, our Lord Jesus Christ the Captain of
our salvation, Heb 2.10. Mat. 12 20.
will make good the Conquest through Judgment unto Victory, victory over Sin
and Satan, and all the Powers of darkness. Thus, Blessed Jesus, save the Soul
which thou have purchased; sustain by thy grace, whom thou have redeemed by thy
blood!

Amen. Amen.
CHAP. V. The Souls Conflict, from a Distrust of its Graces sincerity in
general, and of Faith and Repentance in particular.
THe most gracious testimony of Gods love, is from the immediate testifying to
the inward man the eternal favor of his God. This estate, it is gracious and
blessed, but it is not constant and continued; yea, it is oftentimes, even to
the best of Saints, very much discontinued; witness David's Usque quo? How
long, Lord, how long will thou hide Ps. 89 46. Ps. 6 3.
for ever? And again; My soul is sore vexed, but thou O Lord how long!

Now, in the night of Temptation, when we have lost the sight of the Sun, it is
no small comfort that we have the light of the Stars: when we see not the
immediate rays from the manifestation of Gods divine presence, a sweet comfort
it is that we see him by reflection in the light and vigor of his spiritual
graces; which confirm to us this comfortable assurance, that he will yet rise
again upon our souls. Act. 27.20.
how many even of the holiest Saints, as S. Paul in his tempest, so they in
their temptation, they see neither the light of the sun nor of the stars,
neither the comfort of Gods presence, nor of his graces: Ps. 88.6 15, 16
And such a state of darkness as this, must needs bring fear, horror, and
amazement to the soul. And in this distress, hear the affl^cted Sa^nt thus
complain.

The Words of Complaint.
Oh! how do I feel the struglings, and alas, they are but the struglings, of
good d sires! My soul conceives and travelleth in pa^n with holy purposes; but
alas! she wants strength to bring forth into actual performances. Whereas
looking upon the true Saints and servants of God, I see faith has life in
them, and they life by it; but clouds of unbelief darken my soul, and the bonds
of death take hold of me. I see them as Temples of the Lord, they receiving
Eagle-like with faith and fervor mount aloft, through diffidence and deadness
of heart creeps in the dust. Oh! my corruptions, they are increased, and my
contritions diminished; my temptations they are stronger, and my graces they
are weaker: Ah! what said I? weaker; I would to God I could say upon assurance,
that I had any grace at all, pure and sincere; For, woe is me! such is my
darkness of mind, deadness of spirit, and hardness of heart, that I cannot but
with much horror of soul and trouble of conscience, call in question the
sincerity of all grace, especially the sincerity of my Faith and of my
Repentance; whether (1.) The Grounds of Comfort, as to the distrust of Graces
sincerity in general.
1. It is not more the policy and design of Satan to persuade the Hypocrite
that his life is gracious, his grace sincere, Luk 18.9.11. Job 4.6. and 8.6 and
15.5
and his heart upright, then it is to persuade the true Saint that his heart is
corrupt, his grace counterfeit, and his life hypocritical: The former he does
to harden in presumption, the latter to sink in despair. Know then for thy
comfort, there is no such deliquium animae, that there are not some reliquiae
gratiae; there is no such faintness of soul, that there are not some remains of
life. As a Spring, when stopped at one place, it breaks out at another; so Grace,
if not discovering itself in some particular acts, it shows it self in some
other proper operations. Yea, God in wisdom suffers some one grace in its acts
to be the more dampt and deaded, that some other may be the more quickened and
enlarged: As how often is it, that God suffers our faith to be weakened, that
our fear may be awakened; Ps. 55.5.6. Ps. 42.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor 12.7. Stimulus in
carne.
He abates the fervor of enlarged devotions, to quicken our zeal of hungring
desires; and oft-times suffers the assaults of some sensual lust, to pull down
or prevent the haughtiness of spiritual pride. So that our growth in grace is
then Ephesians. 4 16. Col. 2.19.
but still an effectual working of his Spirit and grace in each part of the New
man.

2. When God and Christ have the greatest measure, the highest degree of thy
will, love and desire; though thine heart is not so enlarged, thy spirit not so
cheerful, thy duties not so pleasant, yet are thy graces saving and sincere:
Saving and sincere, making God in sure sign God is thine end, that thou art so
disquieted in his seeming absence from thy soul: For, what we most highly
prize, Ps 7^ 25.25. Ps. 2^.1 Ps. 143 7.
we are most careful to keep, most joyous to possess, most grieved to lose, and
most troubled to want.

3. There is less danger, and more hope of a languishing, afflicted, and
mournful, then of a raised, ravished, and transported Soul: Humility and holy
fear shall preserve the former, whilst pride and presumption destroys the
latter. For whilst proud conceits, fanatic dreams, and false joys fill the
sails, how many, how very many do run themselves upon the rocks, even the rocks
of presumption and spiritual pride? Rev. 3 17. ^am. 4.6.
whereas God gives grace unto the humble.

4. When the soul by mortification struggles with the motions, by prayer
contests with the suggestions, and by vows contends with the oppositions of
soul do prove an increase of grace; which increase, if it be not in that growth
which is upward in the sprouting of the branches, yet is it in that which is
downward in the spreading of the root; Col. 2.7. Mat. 11.29. Mat. 5.3. Romans
5.1, 2.
and by how much grace is the more firmly rooted in humility and poverty of
spirit, by so much shall it the more abundantly flourish in peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Go not about to judge of thy Spiritual estate in an unseasonable time, or
by uncertain signs. (1.) Not in an unseasonable time, as is that of temptation,
when the Mind is clouded, the Conscience afflicted, and the Spirit wounded; Ps.
^7.10.
what were this but to take a Prospect in a Mist, or to view a Country in a
Storm? (2.) Not by uncertain signs. Many signs beget much perplexities:
Confident I am, Signs of Grace, which some give, (as if they would make up with
number, what is wanting in weight;) the soul that questions but one often shall
be more dejected and afflicted with that one, then raised and comforted with
all the other nine. True it is, Formae nos latent, the essential forms are hid
from us, is true in natural, much more in spiritual things; and Demonstrations
are still a posteriori, discovering the cause by the effect. Wherefore we must
observe, that the effects we set up as signs, be such as are most proper and
immediate to the cause; and then I am sure they cannot be many; and those that
are, Isa. 57.18, 19.
they will be full, convincing the Judgment, and comforting the tender
Conscience. Thus we discover the fire by its heat, the sun by its light:
whereas to discover the sun by its heat, or the fire by its light, may prove
erroneous; though we know light is in the sign, of joy and delight in holy
duties, is by an effect more remote from the cause, and the cause may really be
without this effect: For, how many gracious hearts and sanctified souls (even
such as we are now conversing with) do languish in trouble, and are oppressed
with grief? So that, if joy and delight in holy duties must be the evidence of
their saving graces, Psalm. ^7. and Psalm. 88.
there is no remedy but they must lie down in sorrow; and it is not any present
ministration shall afford them comfort, till Gods mercy make good the sign,
which man's imprudence has prescribed. Know then, one proper sign rightly
apprehended and truly applied, is a Rule of trial which concludes in it all
that can

Wherefore, 2. Lay hold on the Promise in its sweetness of divine truth, so
suitable to the condition of thine afflicted estate. Hear thy Saviors words.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, Matthew. 5 3. verse. 4. verse. 6.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And again, Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted. Yea, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, Lay up these Promises in thine heart as thy sure delight, prize
them as thy treasure, feed on them as thy Manna, given of God to refresh thy
soul in the Wilderness of this afflicting world: Build thou thy peace upon this
pillar, suck the sweet comforts of the Spirit from these breasts of
consolation. Isa. 66.12.
Apply these healing medicines to thy wounded Conscience by a discursive
meditation; awaken thy heart, and incite thy will to close with God and with
Christ in the mercy and truth of the promise, saying in David's Why art thou
cast down, O my soul, Psalm. 42.11.
and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him who is the health of my countenance, and my God. Or, as the devout
Psalmist again; Return unto thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116 7.
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Thus, as chasing the benumbed
limbs with hot oils, will recover their former warmth and life; so plying the
sadded heart with quickening thoughts, will restore its former peace and
comfort. And when thou feel a secret heat of divine keep the fire burning,
ply it with zealous affections; those zealous affections raised in devout
meditations, those devout meditations fixed upon the promises, those promises
founded upon Christ as Mediator, and upon God in him, as Fountain of all grace
and love.

3. Keep an open passage betwixt God and thy soul; hold fast an humble converse
and heavenly communion with him, Ephesians. 1.3.
as in the public Ministry of his Word and Sacraments, so in the private
duties of thy Closet devotions: And if thy duties of devotion in prayer and
praises be not perfunctory and formal, thou shall find by sweet and gracious
experience, that they are the food and nourishment of thy soul. And therefore
as the body, when it wants its meals, so the soul, Psalm 36 8. Psalm. 63.5.
when it omits its prayers, shall feel an hungring and griping in it self; and
a good argument it is, those devotions afford some solid sustenance, when the
soul upon the want of them does feel a sensible emptiness. Wherefore,
whatsoever are thy affairs or engagements in the World, cherish thy desires and
longings after God and Christ in thy soul; and when thou have not the
opportunity of retirement and privacie for thy devotions, retreat thy thoughts
into the secret Closet of thy Heart, and let thy Mind (so swift of wing, as
moves further in a moment then the Sun in a day,) let thy Mind send forth its
winged Messengers, some heavenly Desires, which taking a sudden flight to the
Throne of grace, Genesis 8.11.
shall like Noah's Dove return thee an secret ejaculati^ns, as by some coals
from the Altar, keep alive thy fervor of holy devotion, and zeal of ardent love
unto thy God, and unto thy Jesus.

(2.) The Grounds of Comfort, as to a distrust of the sincerity of Faith in
particular.
1. Thy not being assured thou do believe, is from the pressing weight of
temptation, not the total want of faith. As it was with S. Peter, Mat. 14.31.
so is it with the faithful: whilst the waters are smooth, Peter walks with
confidence; but when the winds begin to be boisterous, and the sea rough, he
then sinks with fear, and in this his fear he cries out, Lord save me! upon
which Christ stretches forth his hand and holds him up, saying, Why did thou
doubt, O thou of little Thus is it with the Godly, whilst they have a Calm
within, the cheerful light of Gods countenance shining forth upon their souls,
then they go on willingly and freely in the ways of holiness, rejoicing in his
love: Ps. 30.7.
But when God hides his face, then they are troubled; when a tempest of
temptation arises in their souls, then they fear and doubt, sink and cry: And
oh the tender mercies of their compassionating Jesus! He is nigh unto them when
they call Ps ^45.18.
He rebukes Satan, stills the tempest, revives the soul, and returns in the
sweet embraces of his love. This know then (O thou afflicted soul!) thou may
have true faith in a firmness of adherence, even when thou have it not in a
cleerness of evidence; and so may truly believe, when through the violence of
temptation thou can not for the present evidence to thy self that thou have
faith.

2. However thy doubts and fears may dull and damp, yet shall they not dead and
destroy thy faith. It was a large testimony of the Apostles Peter, as the mouth
of the rest, did to confidently answer our Savior with a -- Lord, Mat. 6.68,
69.
whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life; and we believe, and
are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. Yet in the hour
of trouble and of trial, see how fear damps their faith; in that, when Christ
was apprehended, Mar. 14.50.
they all forsook him and fled: yet behold, their faith recovers its strength,
and they who fled from the face of a small Band in the Garden, Act. 5.27.41.
Act. 2 36.
dare afterward stand in the face of an whole ^ouncil in Jerusalem; yea, and
preach him Lord and Christ, whom they denied their Lord and Master. And now, if
the strong Pillars of the Church be shaken, what shall the weak Reeds do? If
the glorious Lights of the World suffer an Eclipse, Mat. 5.14.
what shall the smoking Flax do? Why, here is our comfort; our Lord and Savior
does assure us, that a bruised reed he will not break, Mat. 12.20.
and smoking flax Wherefore (O distressed soul!) though thou art as weak in
faith as a reed, yea as a bruised reed, yet thou shall not be broken; though
there be no more fire of grace in thee, then that of smoking flax, yet shall
thou not be quenched: Be thy measure of grace never so small, the least good
desire, holy purpose, or sincere endeavor, though hid under a multitude of
infirmities, yet will Christ in his tenderness of love so cherish it with the
breathings of his Spirit, till he send forth judgment unto victory; that is,
till by a Romans 8.37.
yea become more then conqueror through him that loved thee. How many then are
like Mary, of whom we read, that whilst she wept and sought for Jesus, though
he stood by her, and talked with her, yet is it said, Joh. 20 14.
she knew not that it was Jesus. Thus many poor souls and sincere believers, in
a trial of temptation, they are weeping and mourning after Christ, yea refuse
to be comfo ted, because they cannot find him lodging in their hearts whom
their soul seeks. But after some languishings of sorrow, and distractions of
fear, Christ discovers hlmself to the soul, as he did unto Mary; and then, oh
how is their joy redoubled in their faith revived!

3. There can be no true sense of the want of faith, without some measure of
true faith; as no man can be sensible of sickness, who has Mat. 5.6.
which hungring desire cannot be in the soul from Satan or the flesh, but is
most assuredly a work of the Spirit and grace. Wherefore, when that poor man in
the Gospel, a weakling in faith, cries out, Lord, I believe, help mine
unbelief! Man. 9.24.
from a principle and seed of faith, opening and dilating it self for increase,
he desires and cries out for more faith; so that he could not Lord help mine
unbelief, if he had not already believed. And further, because a willing mind
in desires after godliness, 2 Cor. 8.12.
is a real conversion unto God; therefore is it rightly said, that an Heart
truly desirous to repent and believe, is indeed a repenting and believing
heart. As a woman then that feels the stirrings of the child, though but
weakly, yet has good hope she is conceived; so (O thou afflicted soul!) when
thou feel'st the secret pantings of faith, in sincere desires after Christ,
which are the breathings of the Spirit, have a good hope thou art regenerated;
and as the mother waits for an assurance of her quickening in the child's
stronger motions, so do thou wait for an assurance of thy regenerating in
Faiths stronger enlargements. The strongest Believer, 2 Pet. 1.1.
and the weakest of the Faithful have all obtained like precious faith; like
precious in quality of nature, though not in degree of perfection. Wherefore in
thy doubts and fears, let thy fears diminish thy doubts: For know, Satan does
Phil. 1.6.
He who has begun a good work in thee, will perfect the same unto the day of
the Lord Jesus. He who recovered the Apostles from their fall, shall restore
thee from thy dejections, healing thy broken heart, Ps. 147.3.
and binding up thy wounds, dispelling thy cloud of temptations with the light
of his countenance, yea sealing thee with his holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians.
1.13, 14
and giving thee the sure earnest of the

The Rules of Direction.
1. Clear thy judgment from that too common error, which asserts Faith of
assurance that our sins are pardoned, to be the only justifying and saving
faith. For, this error consented to in the judgment, has Joh. 3.16. Romans 3.25.
Luke 24.47.
Thou read in Scripture, God promises to all remission of sins through
faith in the blood of Christ. Now, thou first assentest to this as a certain
and sacred truth, acknowledging it the free promise and wise dispensation of
the all gracious and holy God. Jam. 2.19.
This thou may do, and yet not be justified: But when further to this assent
of Faith thou do add the act of Reliance, even a casting thy self, and
resting thy soul upon the love and mercy of thy God for the remission of sins,
according to the truth of his promise, Act. 5.31.
this accompanied with repentance, can never be without justification. But now
after this, upon some gracious experiences it is, of Gods love in Christ in the
sweet communions and comforts of his Spirit, that thou come to find a third
act of holy Faith, even this humble assurance, that God, according to his word
of promise, Ephesians. 1 13. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
has graciously pardoned thy sin, and accepted thee in thy Jesus.

Observe then, many millions of Gods Saints there may be, yea doubtless are
justified through faith, who yet have not an assurance that their sins are
pardoned: I say, yet have not; for that, an assurance of Gods love accepting
them in Christ, is not the real essence, but rather the sweet effect, not the
proper being, Romans 5.1.
but rather the happy consequent of a justifying faith; which is seldom
vouchsafed of God even to his dearest children, but upon frequent experiences
of spiritual firm root, as a sound faith, Col. ^.7. Gal. 5.22.
it shall in due time bring forth its sweet fruits of righteousness, peace,
joy, etc.

2. Understand aright how to discern that thou have faith; which Peter, that
there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby they may be
saved, Act. 4.12.
but the name of the Lord Jesus: And therefore relying upon him in his mercy
and in his merits, in his passion and in his intercession, thou seeks and sues
for life and salvation in and by him alone. Thus Faith is like the Light, which
discovers not only other things, but it self too: wherefore as by the light
thou do discern the object, and by the eye withal 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 4.12.
by the understanding may apprehend that faith whereby thou art saved.

But here thou will object, reflect act or inward experience certainly discern
we have faith: For that, how many do we know daily deceived? and what more
common amongst men, then to think, yea, to be confident they have faith, when
they have it not? and amongst the most profanely wicked, who will not I
believe? To this I answer; Shall we therefore conclude the Godly man is
deceived, because the Hypocrite is? sleeping man indeed oftentimes dreams he is
awake; and what, shall we therefore have the waking man distrust himself and
fear he is asleep? who would not condemn this conceit of folly?

Wherefore, as the waking man does discern he is awake; so may the Believer
discern he does believe; and this by an experimental passion of Melancholy. And
thus, if any Believer shall strongly persuade himself he does not believe; we
may not say, it is because he has no faith, but because he has an
overpowering Temptation of Satan. As therefore in the former, we use Physical
remedies to cure the passion; so in the latter, we must use Spiritual helps to
overcome the temptation.

3. Endeavor to prove the sincerity, and strengthen the weakness of thy faith,
by devoutly meditating upon the mysteries of Godliness,

(1.) Devoutly meditating upon the mysteries of Godliness, the large series of
which mysteries linkt together in the long chain of man's redemption and
salvation; Romans 8 33.
oh how will it at once raise the mind with wonder, and fill the soul with
comfort? and this, in beholding how in every link, in every mystery, Mercy and
truth do meet together, Ps. 85.10.
righteousness and peace do kiss each other. O thou afflicted soul! how will it
strengthen thy faith, and thereby confirm sealed by the Father to the office of
Mediation, Joh. 6.27. 1 Timothy 2.5. Luke 4.18. 1 Timothy 3.16.
and anointed by the Spirit to the work of Redemption; which Redemption he has
perfected by his Passion, declared sufficient by his Resurrection, and applies
as effectual unto his Church in his Intercession. So that S. Paul makes it his
confident challenge to all in heaven, in earth, and hell; saying, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Romans 8.33, 34. Magnificentissima
conclusio. Bez. in loc.
it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died,
yea rather that is risen again, (2.) Humbly applying the Promises of life. In
this exercise of faith (O distressed soul!) thou shall experimentally find and
feel how aptly the Graces of the Spirit are resembled by fire; for that, as
fire by burning, Mat. 3.11:
so grace by exercising, it further enlarges and spreads it self. Thus Charity
is increased by loving, Patience by bearing, Mercy by compassionating, and
Faith it self by believing. The best exercise of Faith then is in application
of the Promises; and in Christ Jesus unto the faithful. 2 Cor. 1, 20.


(3.) The Grounds of Comfort, as to a distrust of the sincerity of Repentance.
1. A man may be truly sanctified, and so through the power of grace in the
work of the Spirit, a sincere Penitent, notwithstanding the relics of sin to
hinder his progress in holiness. This we have made good by the example of S.
Paul; who, in an high accent of sorrow, and a full confession of guilt,
complains of a body of sin, a law in his members, and a being brought into
captivity to that law of sin; Romans 7.23, 24.
which sin, though it rules not as a King, it has no willing and ready
obedience, yet it sometimes bears sway as a Rebel, and prevails upon the soul;
so that, with the Apostle, the good which he would, v 15, 19.
that he does not, and the evil which he would not, that he does. And this S.
Paul speaks of himself, not as personating the unregenerate estate, Augustine
has determined: For observe, S Aug lib. retr. v. 18. v. 22. v. 25.
to will says the Apostle) is present with me; and what, is it not the Spirit
of grace that thus sanctifies the will? Again, I delight in the law of God
after the inward man; this the voice, and the practice too sure, of a man
regenerate. Again, With my mind I my self serve the law of God: Here the
Apostle is certainly either a Saint, or an Hypocrite. Wherefore then, from the
example presented, it is evident, a man may be truly

2. The more stirring motions and prevailing power of corruptions, is not
always from the greater impiety, but oftentimes from the fitter opportunity to
sin. Know then (O thou afflicted soul!) though opportunity does not beget, yet
it is worth thy enquiry; whether it does not help to bring forth thy sins of
infirmity. It may be thou art more angry and passionate then formerly; but is
it because thou have less meekness, or more provocation? It may be thou find
unclean affections more defiling then formerly; but is it because thou have less
chastity, or more temptation? It may be thou feel'st more grudgings of
impatience and distrust then formerly; but is it because thou have less faith,
or more affliction? Mat. 26.35. compar d with v. 56. 2 King. 8.12, 13
No man knows what corruptions are in him, till he be tempted; and that,
occasion and opportunity by an unhappy midwifery bring them forth. Besides,
Active employments, yea, Deuteronomy. 32 15. Jer. 48 11.
and an afflicted condition in the world, silence and still many corruptions,
which, when we are at ease, then they appear and show themselves; not that lust
has then more more life, but more advantage; not more strength, but fitter
opportunity.

Thy sight of sin, is from more light of Grace; Rom 7 7.8 9. Ephesians 4.^8. 1 Co^. 6
11. Rev. 3.17.18.
and thy sense of sin, from more life of the Spirit. Oh how many lustings and
sinful corruptions are there, which the soul (till exercised in the ways of
holiness) takes no notice or knowledge of? So that, thy corruptions increased
in their number (at which thou art so much dismayed) do not necessarily argue
that thou have formerly less iniquity, but rather that thou art now able to
make a more clear and full discovery of thine iniquity; which discovery of sin
is a good argument to pro^e the growth of grace. For as the dust and atoms in
the air are not discerned, till the Suns beams present them to the eye; so the
lusts and corrupt affections of the heart, they are not seen, till the Beams of
divine light do make their discovery to the soul.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Apprehend aright, what is the proper sign of a sincere Repentance; even the
hatred and detestation of sin, accompanied with a striving and contending
against sin; which contention is to be continued, weakening sin in its power,
till we mortify it in its motions. It is not then the not committing of sin,
which is in it self the proper sign of a sincere repentance: For what were
this, but to send us to Wilderness or the Cloister for the only Penitents? yea,
and not find them there neither; seeing the sad experiences of the Godly do
sufficiently witness, that sins of infirmity, and of daily incursion, (as
Tertullian calls them) they do too too often surprise the best of Saints,
Peccata quotidianae incursionis, Tert. 1 John 1.8. Ps. 18.23. Heb. 12.1.
and that in the best of duties. Yea, there is in most, if not in all, some
particular sin of nature, which by special appropriation we may, with David,
call our iniquity; and with S. Paul, (...), the sin which does so easily beset
us: Ay! not only facile, undique; it besets us not only easily, but also on
every part, in every place, in every employment; yea, it does not more easily,
then closely beset us; with which sin some of the most eminent of Gods Saints
have had a continued contest, even to the end of their lives. Here then (O thou
afflicted soul!) know, this shall speak the sincerity of thy repentance, Romans 6
12.14 and 7.24, 25.
if from an hatred of sin, and a striving against sin, thou find'st it weakened
in its power, though not quite rooted out in its being; thou retaining an
irreconcilable enmity against sin, in judgment unto victory, Mat. 12.20.
either by a spiritual mortification, or a temporal dissolution.

2. Distrusting the sincerity of thy Repentance, apply thy self to those duties
which do assuredly evidence our Repentance to be sincere; even confession of
sin, contrition of heart, accompanied with fasting and prayer, and confirmed by
an amendment of life. Which amendment Phil. 3 2. Ps. 84.7. 2 Pet. 3.8. Obj.
affectu and conatu, in desire and endeavor tend toward perfection. Here thou will say, Ay! Contrition of heart, that were a good testimony indeed to assure
the sincerity of my repentance: Could I lie down in sorrow, and with floods of
tears bewail my transgressions, I should be much satisfied in this gracious
evidence of being a sincere Penitent. But alas, I find my sin is increased, but
not my sorrow; I would fain weep, but cannot: I have the Prophets wish indeed,
Oh that my head were waters, Jer 9.1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears! But oh mine hard heart! it will not relent,
it will not melt in sorrows of contrition. Answ. Strike the Rock with Moses
rod, Exodus 17.5, 6.
the Curse of the Law upon thy guilt of sin; happily this will make the waters
gush out: if not, wound thy heart with Christ's spear, Gods Spirit to work upon
thy spirit, and the Searcher of hearts to fashion and frame thy heart, to
become a Sacrifice of penitence, made acceptable through the blood of Jesus.
Ps. 51.17.
And now, if after all this thy dryness continues, know, it does arise either
from the natural constitution of thy bodily temper, or some clouded mind. If it
be the former, (as with many it is) know; thou may break thine heart in
sorrows of contrition, and yet not melt thy sorrows into tears of compunction.
If the latter, no doubt in time the cloud will dissolve into a shower; and by
how much the waters are the more kept in, by so much the more will the streams
flow forth when the floodgates are open. In the mean time take notice, that
the Close-Mourners we count deepest in the sorrow, though least to be seen:
Indeed, to be grieved because sincerest of contrition. Again, observe; It is
not our tears, but Christ's blood which expiates the guilt, 1 John 1.7.
and cleanses the filth of our iniquities: And therefore, what is wanting in
tears, make thou up with sighs; what is wanting in sensible contrition, make up
with an irreconcilable indignation, and that devout indignation heightened to
an holy revenge, in mortifying thy lusts; 2 Cor. 7.11.
which holy revenge the Apostle gives us as the full height of a sincere

CHAP. VI. The Souls Conflict from the sense of Barrenness in holy Duties.
Ps. 119.32. Cant 1.4. Joh 3.8.
THe actual assistance of Gods Spirit is more powerfully, more The Spirit
blows where and when it lists; as where and in what place, so when and at
what time, yea how and in what manner it lists The same sanctified soul is
sometimes enlarged, and sometimes straightened; sometimes raised and sometimes
dejected; sometimes lively and active, Joh. 5 35. Mat. 12.20.
sometimes heavy and flat; sometimes as a burning lamp, and sometimes as
smoking flax. As fire, though it be of an active nature, yet in green and wet
wood it will need continual blowing: its stirring up. 2 Timothy 1.6.
So that to habitual grace infused, there must be inciting grace to awaken, and
assisting grace to enable; otherwise the heart and soul of the devoutest Saint
will be heavy and dull, drowsy and dead, Cant. 5 2.
unapt and unable for holy duties and spiritual enlargements.

The womb then of all holy duties, is Grace inherent; but the Midwife to bring
them forth, yea the Nurse to bring them up, is Cloud of divine presence fills
the Tabernacle of the heart, Number. 40.34, 35 Cant. 2.4, 5, 6. (...). Chrysostom. hom.
3. de incomp. Dei not.
then the soul has its sweet converses with God, the soul becomes exercised
with heavenly contemplations; yet this lasts not always, sometimes the Cloud is
taken up; the divine power and presence is withheld; and then the Eagles wings
are flagg'd, the souls devotion is clogged with the weight of earthly and
carnal affections. And in this damp of Devotion, hear the words of Complaint.

The Words of Complaint.
Oh the deadness of mine heart, and the dryness of my devotion! Whereas Gods
worship should be my delight, and an heavenly communion mine happy contentment;
ah when I come unto God, it is with unwillingness, and when I stay, it is with
wearisomness. My Contritions of Repentance should melt in tears; but alas, mine
eyes are dry, and mine heart hard: My Prayers should have their fervor of
devotion, in an humble confidence of faith, and sweet enlargement of love; but
alas, my spirits are chilled, mine heart is straightened, mine whole man
distempered and discomposed: My Services are neither so frequent in their act,
nor so vigorous in their activity; What I do, is from a compulsory judgment of
conscience as a task, rather then from an impulse of love as a delight;
Obedience a legal debt, not a free will offering; a necessitated service awed
with fear, not an Eucharistical sacrifice moved with love. Yea, I am not what I
was; in stead of improving my Talent of Grace, I have forsaken my first love; I
am not at all ready and cheerful, willing and constant in holy duties as
formerly, so that, I fear, I have received the grace of God in vain. Time was,
when, with David, I made Gods Word my portion and heritage; gold and silver not
so precious, liberty and life not so dear: holy services were so sweet to my
soul, that I counted my very work wages. But oh! now my delightful Paradise is
turned into a barren Wilderness; holy duties and religious performances, they
are as the ways of thorns and briars, even wearisom and unpleasant paths; and
oh! how can I then believe God accepts my person in Christ, when I feel no
quickenings of his Spirit in an holy life?
1. It is the wise dispensation of our gracious God, sometimes to suffer our
devotion to decay, and our corruptions to prevail, on purpose to advance the
dignity, and discover the necessity of his grace; Joh. 15.5.
that so knowing our dependence, we may become the more sincere goodliest
fabric of an holy life, Phil. 4.13. Jud. 24, 25.
if God withdraw the props and pillars of his supporting and strengthening
grace, how will it soon shake, and sink, and fall to ruin? If David then be
continually with God, it is because God holds him by his right hand. Ps. 73.23.
As it was grace which wrought effectually to our conversion and regeneration,
so it is grace that works still in the like efficacy, to David's prayer unto
God, saying, Hold up my goings in thy paths, Ps. 17.5. 1 Pet. 1.5,
that my footsteps slip not. And that we are kept, it is by the power of God
through faith to salvation: So that, as fuel to the fire, as food to the body,
as showers to the corn, such is Grace to devotion and an holy life, without
which it faints, it dies, it withers away.

2. That there is a less active vigor in our holy life and religious
conversation, may proceed from weakness of nature, not of grace. The soul
follows much the temperature of the body; if that be sickly and weak, the soul
cannot act its gracious operations with that vigor and zeal, as when healthful
and strong: A decay of spirits in the body, will certainly make an abatement of
vigor in the soul; the unaptness of the Instrument takes much from the art and
excellency of the Workman; and the body, that is the souls instrument whereby

Rev. 2.4.
3. Whereas many complain as thou do, that they are fallen from their first
love, because not so affected with the enlargements of devotion, and therein
not so quickened with the life of grace as at their first conversion, when they
first gave up their names unto Christ; they may happily find (if rightly
examined) those enlargements and delights novelty, as the piety of their
estate: Their love, and in that their delights, more sensible, but not more
solid; more passionate, but not more sincere: right like the love and delight
of first Espousals; Jer. 2.2. Cant. 3 11.
whereas we question not but that a long married Couple are as dear in their
love, though not so frequent in their embraces. Yea, it may be an excess of
love, which begets this affliction of soul; for true love is so enlarged in
dispositions and resolutions of doing more service to God and Christ, small
love thought little to be much, and now great love thinks much to be but little.

To close then. Whereas it is ordinary with God to deal with the penitent
Convert, as the Father did with his prodigal Son, even entertain him with
feasting and mirth, receive him with much of Luke 15.23.
And this he does, the better to encourage him in the way of holiness, yea and
to fortify him against the days of trial and temptation, which shall after
come upon him; in which days of temptation and trial, he may not think, but
that, though his former joys and delights do cease, yet the sincerity, and
strength too of grace may continue, yea and be increased.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Breathe forth thy complaints unto Christ in prayer; for, the life thou have
is from the quickening power of his grace; and therefore he who died that thou
might live, will preserve the life which he has given: But then thou must
beg it by prayer. And at once to quicken thy prayer, and strengthen thy faith,
hear his promise, and own his love: Mat. 5 6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. What parent is it, who hearing his child hungry and fainting, cry out
for bread, Luke 11.11.13.
that can restrain his bowels from pity, or his hand from relief? And far more
compassionate is thy Savior, far more tender is his love; He is indeed love it
self; 1 John 4.16
He the fountain, as of life, so of love: The love thou bear to him,
proceeds from him; and certainly he would not make thee to love David, Make
good, O Lord, thy word unto thy servant, Ps. 119 4^.
upon which thou have caused me to hope. Yea, let me bespeak thee, as the
Prophet does Zion, Let tears run down like a river; Lam 2 18.
not in the impatience of distrust, but the importunity of devotion: In this,
Ne taceat pupilla let not the apple of thine eye keep silence; Ps. 6.8.
every tear every sigh has a voice to implore mercy, and to importune grace.
Yea, seeing thou can not follow Agnum immaculatum, sine macula; the spotless
Lamb, without thy spots of sin; Joh. 1.29.
thy daily tears shall obtain the blood of the Lamb to cleanse thy guilt: And
doubt not but in due time, thy heart thus melted, like wax when softened, or
metals dissolv d, shall become pliable and yielding to some new impressions of
grace, and gracious formings of the Spirit, to an enlarging thy

2. Consult the judgment of some faithful Minister, as thy spiritual Guide, for
the better ordering thy duties of devotion. For as there are some, who careless
of offending God, rob him of his due, through unseasonable recreations
unnecessary employments, or needless ease; willing to admit any excuse to stop
the mouth of conscience, in the^r neglect of their daily devotions: So again
others there are, who very tender of offending God, become much disquieted in
conscience Co^ 2.18.23.
whom Superstition has made prodigal of Devotion; such Devotion as Fancy, not
Faith, Humane opinion, not Divine institution has prescribed and warranted;
and therefore do such persons entangle Mal. ^ ^. Heb. 13.17.


3. Beware of a misguided Zeal; it being that whereby Satan through his
subtlety has prevailed upon the consciences of many religious dispositions, to
involve them in a maze of perplexities. By this misguided Zeal, Satan prompts
many to a tyring and a wearying themselves with duties, secretly persuading
them that all time is lost which is not religiously employed; and thereby, how
have many wasted their estates, impaired their health, neglected their
callings, and even ruined their families, carried away with this misguided zeal
of being still religiously employed? But what, Can a man be too religious? alms
to his undoing, yet never be undone with charity; he may fast to his famishing,
yet never hurt his soul with devotion. But what, is it not a Paradox (think
you) that Satan should prompt men to be religious? that the Devil should spur a
man on to fastings, to watchings, to Sermons, etc.? Yes; know, even in the
zealous and unadvised prosecution and performance of these holy duties, 2 Cor.
11.14
there may be much of Satan transformed into an and especially when those
duties of piety are inconsistent with the duties of charity or of justice. To
instance in some particulars: When watchings and fastings destroy the body,
though rightly ordered, they are holy duties; yet thus disordered, as they are
not profitable to the soul, so nor are they acceptable to God, who says, Mat.
12.7.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. As then to be immoderately indulgent to
nature, is sluggish and profane; so to be immoderately oppressing nature, is
merciless and cruel. Again, to He who provideth not for his own family, 1 Timothy
5.8.
is worse then an Infidel. One instance more: It is a temptation of Satan, and
a snare to the soul, for a servant to rob his master of that time he justly
owes his service, and in a blind zeal to bestow it a Lamb that is stolen, to
offer what is not our own; a thing God is so far from accepting, that he hates
it. We must not then cause the duties of the First Table to make a breach upon
the duties of the Second; our duty to God must not thwart or suppress our duty
to our neighbor. Though Communion with God be the Souls delight, and so
Closet-devotions the sweetest services; yet as a part of self-denial, we must
with Moses quit the Mount, when God has work for us in the Mar. 7.11.
And therefore the Jewish Corban is no Christian plea: Piety and Charity may,
yea must consist together, like the two wings of the Eagle; Isa. 40 31.
with both together, not one alone, we take our flight to heaven.

4. Let thy Piety be regulated by Prudence, and Discretion become Tutress to
Devotion. What is the reason we see so many Monsters in Religion? Is it not
because Zeal brings forth, before Knowledge has formed the conception? Ps.
112.5.
A good man (says David) will order his affairs, much more his duties of
holiness with discretion. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Phil 19.10. Col. 1.9, 10.
And S. Paul is very careful in the behalf of his Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, etc. that God would give them knowledge, and judgment, and wisdom,
and a spiritual understanding; and all to this end, that they might walk worthy
of the Lord unto all well-pleasing; so body, to the quality of condition, to
the opportunity of time, to the benefit of means, and the like. Knowing this,
that where much is given, much shall be required. And again, Luk ^2 48. 2 Cor.
8 1^.
God accepts according to that a man has, not according to that he has not.
They whose birth, breeding, and estates have freed them Isa. 55.1. Rev. 3.18.
they are to traffic for Heaven, and so hold a more frequent commerce with
the Angels. Further, a respect is to be had to extraordinary occasions, that we
do something all of us according to our ability in an extraordinary service,
whether it be under private afflictions, or public calamities; particular
disquiets, or general distresses. At such times, Act. 12.5. Esth. 4.16.
Prayer without ceasing, then fastings and watchings, and what other holy
duties may be most suitable to the occasion, and consistent with our condition,
will be all seasonable and requisite in their performance. Further yet; it will
be a part of our Christian prudence to observe, that excess in the outward
duties of Religion is the right hand error; less danger there is in pinching,
then in pampering the flesh; less danger and damage in overworking, then in too
much indulging the outward man: For where one man sails his course of piety
with too lukewarmness. Rev. 3.16.


In the Close; Beware of attributing to duties, what is proper to Christ. A
chief reason doubtless, (though little notice be taken of it) a chief reason it
is of dryness and barrenness in holy performances, that we have an overprising
opinion, an overvaluing esteem of them. For, the softning and melting, the
raising and enlarging, the comforting and reviving the heart, Ps. 11^.32. Isa.
57 18. 2 Cor. 1.3. Ps. 34 15.
these are all the works of Christ and his Spirit; not to be attained by labor
and toil, but by humility David; The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and his ears are open unto their cry. First, Gods eyes are upon their persons,
and then his ears are open unto their prayers: It is not the duty we perform,
but the promise Christ gives, or rather Christ in the Promise, which brings
rest to the soul. And he vouchsafe thee (O thou afflicted soul!) a gracious
portion of this spiritual rest, as a pledge and earnest of that full
inheritance, even rest eternal. Amen.

CHAP. VII. The Souls Conflict, from the misapprehension of Gods withdrawing
the Comforts of his gracious presence.
SUch is the deceitfulness of man's heart, and the subtlety of Satan's
suggestions, that many there are who forsake God, yet think they have him; and
many that have him, yet think themselves forsaken of him. Many are so
enlightened, that they come near to the Kingdom of Heaven, which yet are cast
down to Hell: Again, many there are so dejected, as to come nigh to Hell, which
yet are received to Heaven. The discomforts of the faithful Isa. 49 14 Isa.
14.12, 13.
but the enlightenings of the wicked through their pride, make for their
greater condemnation. Such is the (...), the exceeding craft and cunning of
Satan, Ephesians. 6.11.
in his (...) his arts and methods of temptations, (made the more expert by
many thousand years experience;) such (I say) is Satan's art and cunning, that
he suits his suggestions to our affections, and tempers his temptations to our
dispositions. And therefore the va n Enthusiast who prides himself in his
fancied converses with God, afflicted Saint, from whom God has hid his face,
and withdrawn the comforts of his gracious presence, him Satan presses down in
his dejections. He heightens the Enthusiast in his presumption, by feeding his
fancy with renewed delusions of false joys, and the imagined ravishments of
Gods love: Again, he depresseth the afflicted Saint in his dejection, by
filling his heart with renewed jealousies of false fears, and imagined terrors
of Gods

Thus, there is none more near or dear unto man then himself; yet none more a
stranger, more an enemy: For, what man is he that can fadom the depth, Jer 17 9.
and so know the deceitfulness of his own heart? Again, what man is he that
does not cause the wounds, and destroy the comforts of his own soul? by
diffidence and impatience throwing off the healing balm, and casting away the
reviving cordials of grace and mercy. Ps. 143 9.
So that, well might S. Bernard cry out, in a devout gloss upon Libera me
Domine ab inimico meo, id est, a me ipso: Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemy,
that is, from my self. See this true in the afflicted Saint, dejected in soul,
distressed in conscience, deep in desertions; Oh! how does his soul become
cruel to it self, refusing to be comforted? With him, Mourning observes no
method; but his full sorrow poures out its Complaints, as a bottle does its
liquor, in sudden and disordered eruptions rather th^n effusions. Thus then
complains the languishing Soul.

The Words of Complaint.
Oh! what a misery is it to have been happy! The thoughts of those comforts I
once felt, sharpen the sense of those sorrows I now Mount Nebo of Divine
Contemplation, I could by the Perspective of Faith take a view of the Heavenly
Canaan, in the riches, pleasure, and glory of it: But now my belly cleaves
unto the dust, I lie down in the valley and shadow of death, clouds of darkness
cover me, and the light of all heavenly comforts is hid from mine eyes. Those
holy duties, Ordinances, and Promises which have been as honey, sweet to my
soul, at once feeding and delighting mine inward man, they are all become
bitterness Sun of Righteousness, those refreshing, those ravishing delights in
communion with God through Christ? Alas! O my soul, those blessed delights were
but pleasant dreams; and now thy fancied Paradise is become a real Wilderness.
And oh! how do I wander and weary my self in a maze of perplexities! the bitter
waters of Marah flowing in upon my soul, and the fiery Serpents of hellish
fears stinging my O sweet and joyful presence! O sad and dreadful absence of my
Jesus! and oh the filthy lusts of my foul heart, which have made him quit his
lodging and be gone; and with him all peace, all comfort, all joy, all life, He
is gone; and (I fear) never, oh! this, this the deep wound, more deadly then
death it self; He is gone, and (I fear) never to return more. In his favor is
life; and therefore when he hides Job, My soul is weary of my life; and yet,
though my life be full of torment, death is full of terror, lest! be
everlastingly shut out from Gods presence: Oh Eternity! Eternity! how does this
gulf swallow up my soul! how does this weight more heavy then a mountain press
down my drooping heart, and crush my fainting spirits! yet whilst there is
life, there is hope; though my God, my Jesus be gone from me, yet will I mourn
after him, if happily I may find him whom my soul loves. O return, return, my
joy, my Jesus! For till thou do return, I shall lie down in sorrow; without
thee my soul refuses to be comforted. The Grounds of Comfort.
1. As thy distress is not without a promise, thy misery without a Redeemer, so
nor is thy state and condition without many presidents; even a cloud of
witnesses, whose sad experience will give full testimony to this certain truth;
Ps. 55.5.
That God oftentimes not only withholds the comforts of his good Spirit, but
also afflicts with the terror of our own hearts; That oftentimes he hides the
grace of the Gospel, Ps 88.14 15.16
revealing guilt, and concealing mercy: yea, oftentimes he rebukes the heart
with secret checks of conscience, and convictions of Spirit; so that in the sad
apprehension of sin and guilt, death and hell, the soul languisheth with
frights and fears, with horror and amazements. Yet further, he oftentimes
renews the charge of former sins in the Court of Conscience, making a man to
possess the iniquities of his youth, Job 13.26.
and by his Spirit writing such bitter things against him, that the soul is
struck with the deep shutting the gate of mercy and peace, Ps. 77.7, 8, 9.
his refusing to be entreated, or to hearken to any terms of reconciliation; so
that no holy duties or sacred ordinances, for a time, either administer
comfort, or discover love. That this is the sad experience of the most eminent
Saints, the Book of Job, and Psalms of David will sufficiently testify: And
yet withal, this testimony too they give of God, and of Christ, that he
lifts up those that are cast down, Ps. 37 24, and 42.11. and 147.7, 8. and
148.3.
he heals the broken in heart and binds

2. This the condition of our present estate, to be freed from the discomforts
of afflictions, as from the power of sin, but in part. Our graces are
imperfect, and therefore needs must our peace: Our life's a pilgrimage, 1 Pet.
2.11. 2 Cor. 10.4.
a warfare; and so, hardship, travel, danger, distress, day that has no night,
no cloud; the joy that has no mourning, no grief; the crown that has no
cross, no care, is reserved for heaven, not found on earth; peculiar it is to
the state of blessedness and eternity. So that, I cannot but question the
uprightness of that man's heart, who never questioned the goodness of his
estate; I cannot but doubt that man's assurance, who never doubted; and fear
those comforts, which were never discomforted. There is certainly a woe to that
peace, which Satan does not sometimes disquiet. True it is, God could send
forth his Saints, as the Sun in its course, to attract the eyes of all
Beholders, and make them in their splendour of graces Solomon in his luster of
glory: But this God has not thought so agreeable to his wisdom, in his
dispensations to his Church and chosen; 1 Cor. 1.^3.14. etc.
he will rather have the Saints excellency clothed with humane frailty, and
their inward worth veiled with outward contempt. Yea, their life is so hid with
Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
that themselves oftentimes feel not the quickenings, discover not the actings
of their own graces, for that a cloud of secret trouble darkens the light of
all their comforts. Doubtless, had Adam continued in his primitive integrity,
by faith and reason, but also by sense and external manifestation: But now, he
conveys spiritual things in a spiritual manner; We walk by faith, and not by
sight. As is the manifestation of the Divine presence, 2 Cor. 5 7 1 Cor. 13 9.
such is our participation of Divine comforts, all in part and imperfect.

3. Though thy comforts are fled from thee, yet the God of thy comforts abides
with thee; though thou want Christ in that blessed best communion of grace and
life. Spiritual joy, though a sweet flower of Paradise, yet a fading flower;
though a spiritual, yet a temporal blessing; a separable adjunct of grace, and
so not of the necessary being, but of the happy well-being of a Christian; a
partial reward, rather then a particular virtue. Let this then be a firm ground
of solid comfort; That though thy light of Joy be extinguished, yet thy seeds of
Grace are preserved; thy heart has its holy affections, though Ps 23 3 4. Isa
2^.8.
even when now he withdraws himself from thy soul in the light and comforts of
his countenance? And if so, what thou do possess, is far more precious then
what thou have lost; Communion w th Christ in the sanctifying influence, is
more excellent then communion with him in the comforting light of his Spirit.
Besides, having the fountain, thou will not Ps 7 120 21.
This is David's confidence: Thou Lord which have showed me great and sore
troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths
of the earth; thou shall increase my g eatness, and comfort ^e on every side.
Hear Gods profession and promise; Isa. 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones. And how revive them? why, by healing them with his grace,
leading them with his councels, and restoring comforts to them. See then the
mercy is thine, the promise is thine; only thou must know and acknowledge, the
time of dispensing, the season of performing is Gods, who orders all things, in
number,

4. Those rebukes of the Spirit which so much torture thy conscience, and that
hiding his face which so much sads thy heart, is all from a fatherly tenderness
of care and love, not from an avenging severity of justice and wrath. God deals
with the soul, as David with Absalom; 2 Samuel 14.24.
Notwithstanding Absalom has David's heart, yet must he not see his face: Thus
when God rebukes the soul for sin, though his love be great, yet his face shall
not appear gracious; And this for Wilful disobedience is that cursed bramble,
Judge. 9.15.
from whence (as in Jotham's parable) there does come forth the fire of divine
displeasure to parch and wither the tallest wanton with Gods ordinances, and he
therefore uncloaths them of their quickening virtue and refreshing vigor,
because we approach them without awful reverence, and an holy fear. Or (3.) It
may be the Heart begins to harden, and exalt it self; and therefore God
withdraws his favor, and secretly rebukes the soul with terrors, to bring the
offender upon his knees, and lay him low in humiliations, melting him like wax,
thereby fitted as more pliable O the streams of spiritual comforts, Jam. 4.6.
which water the fruitful valleys of humble souls, whilst the lofty mountains
of spiritual pride are parched with thirst! Or (4.) It maybe, God withdraws
himself in his gracious presence from the soul, to sweeten, enlarge, and
establish its fuller comforts: The toil and troubles of a barren Wilderness,
make more sweet the milk and honey of a fruitful Canaan. As Nature has its
times and seasons, so has Grace; the Winter-frosts prepare Spiritual
afflictions make for the Spirits further consolations; Heb. 12 11.
and to be exercised with inward distresses, helps to the increase of grace,
and a further strengthening of the inward man.

It is indeed the method of Gods dealing with a soul, first to humble it by a
spirit of bondage, Romans 8 15.
then to raise it by a spirit of adoption. Again, he withdraws himself in his
spiritual comforts wherewith he cherisht our faith and love, that he may try
their strength, and prove their sincerity, further rooting the soul in humility
and godly fear; and after this, Grace having taken deep root in the heart, it
brings forth the more abundant fruit of peace and comfort to the soul. Yea,
hereby God not only tries our love to him, but the more endears his to us; in
that when we seemed in our selves to be wholly lost, and quite cast off, he
then appeared in the Mount, in our greatest extremity, for succor and
salvation; turning the signs of his wrath into testimonies of his love, and
changing our dismal estate of doubts and fears, and mournings, into a glad
condition of holy confidence, enlarged hope, and refreshing comforts. Oh how
must this needs win the heart to a greater enlargement of love, when it feels
it self restored to so great an enlargement of delight? yea, so clear an
evidence Mal. 3.2.3. 2 Timothy 2 21. 1 Pet. 2.9.
and purified us to himself a peculiar treasure, even vessels of honor. Lastly,
To this end also God hides his face, and withholds the light of his
countenance, even to quicken our longing desires after Christ, and to convince
the soul of its immediate dependence upon him: For, by how much we are the more
dejected, distressed, and restless in our selves, by so much shall we be the
more eager in our longings after, and the more zealous in our enjoyments of the
Lord Jesus, who alone can bring peace, and comfort, and rest to the inward man.
brightest stars in the firmament of heaven, the holiest Saints in the Church of
Christ, derive their light, as of grace, so of peace, as of life, so of comfort
from Christ the Sun of righteousness; Mal. 4 2.
and therefore that they may know and own their dependence upon him, he
oftentimes shuts in his light, and then the soul presently finds it self in a
dismal and darksom deep of mournful distress: And oh what a shop of fears is
this gulf of darkness! what sad apprehensions amaze devout Saint, as they
redeemed from Babylons Captivity, becomes as one that dreams; Ps. 126 1.
he is strangely enwrapt with spiritual rejoycings, so that he makes his boast
of the Lord, and his praise is continually in his mouth; his thankfulness is
redoubled with his joys, Ps. 34.1, 2.
and his duties enlarged with his delights.

5. Though God is least in appearance, yet is he most in power; though he is
not chearing and refreshing with his favor, yet is he making spiritual
temptations his chief preparations, when he designs any of his Saints to
eminent actings, or glorious sufferings. David's Worthies are best acquainted
with the experiences of War; the skilful Pilate knows well what it is to be in
winds and storms; the choice Vessel is the oftener cast into the fire for its
refining; and certain it is, the eminentest Saints in Christ Church have been
well tutored in his School of temptations. Hear Elihu, Job 33.22.
speaking of a man, whose soul draws near to the grave, and his life to the
destroyers; v. 23.
He tells us, that Messenger, that Interpreter, who can show unto him his
uprightness, raising him in his dejections, 2 Cor. 12.7.
he is as rare as excellent, one of a thousand. That S. Paul was so strongly
tempted, so fiercely buffeted, it was not so much to his personal, as to his
ministerial advantage, that he might the better have the tongue of the learned,
learned by experience in himself, how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary. Isa. 50.4.
And see what Cordials comforts others, 2 Cor. 1.4.
it is by the same comfort wherewith he himself was comforted of God. And as
thus spiritual temptations are Gods chief preparations, when he designs any of
his Saints to eminent actings; so (secondly) when he designs them to glorious
sufferings: For, he who has been exercised in spiritual afflictions, knows
well how insufficient and vain the best things of the world are to administer
true solace to the soul; and therefore he will not be so loath Worlds fury,
which has once wrestled with Gods displeasure. Thus, how often is it, that God
prepares man to become some excellent structure, even when he seems to be
turning him into a ruinous heap? As men intending to repair, seem to demolish
the building; they take away some beams, but it is to put in stronger; they
stop up some lights, but it is to make larger. Thus is it with the faithful,
who Gods building; 1 Cor. 3 9.
He removes their props of sense, to fix the pillars of faith; He darkens the
light of their spiritual joys, but it is to enlarge their fuller comforts.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Search, what root of bitterness it is that has taken away the taste of all
heavenly sweetness; what guilt of sin, that has deprived Enter the Court of
thy Conscience, where God has set up his tribunal, and hear what charge is
there laid against thee: Is it not some stubbornness of spirit, some unrepented
disobedience, which God chastises with those rebukes of conscience and terrors
of soul? For commonly God deals with his backsliding Saints, as a King with his
rebellious Subjects; when neither the proffers of grace, nor the promises of
pardon, when neither the edicts of command, nor the threatenings of wrath, when
Job 6.4.
as Job complains, The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
This is certain, upon all known experience, that disobedience and impenitence,
they are the bitter springs of much spiritual distress: And truly, God need not
go far for a rod to chastise our disobedience; if he withdraw his comforting
Spirit, we shall soon find and feel our own will become an afflicting Spirit;
our own dreadful thoughts will be our sorest scourges.

2. Is it not some spiritual lethargy of remisness and sloth, that has seized
thine inward man? If so, no wonder if the Physician of thy soul prescribe thee
so sharp a medicine, administer thee so strong Holy performances, whether in
the Closet or in the Church, they are not only debts we pay to Gods justice,
but also oblations we owe to Gods mercy; Ps. ^1 18, 19.
and therefore either wholly to omit them, or slightly to slubber them over, is
not only unfaithfulness, but also unthankfulness, both the majesty and the
mercy of God being despised; and where his majesty and mercy is despised, no
wonder if his favor and presence be withheld.

to serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Heb 12.23. Heb. ^.16.
God likes well that we come with boldness to the throne of grace; yet a
boldness of humble confidence, not of a careless irreverence: The awe of
Majesty is much preserved by avoiding too much familiarity; and therefore some
Monarchs have withdrawn themselves from vulgar eyes, to keep up the more sacred
esteem and to walk in the fear of the Lord, Act. 9 31. Phil. 2.12.
and comfort of the Holy Ghost; yea, work out their salvation with fear and
trembling. This is indeed a sure Maxim, that he who bears his

4. Is it not thy heart playing false with thy God, leaning in its affections
too much to the world? For that, then God usually comes with bitterness to wean
the soul, when we are upon making the world our Home, which should be our Inn;
when we are upon taking our rest in these earthly things, then God brings on an
evil day of temptation J^m 4.4.
and enter an adulterous league with the World, then comes God with his Bill of
Divorce, that she may know what is the vanity and folly, the guilt and curse of
her falling off to such wretched, beggarly, and worthless lovers; for that, in
a day of terrors, the soul will know that there is none but Christ, none but
he, that can bring comfort, peace, and safety. Thus then, search whether it be
not some stubbornness and disobedience, some lethargy of sloth, some
wantonness, irreverence, or spiritual pride, some love of the world. Search
whether they are not these, or some other enormous iniquities which have
separated betwixt thee and thy God, Isa. 59.2.
whether they are not these or some such heinous sins which have hid his face
from thee; and if so, no wonder if he who does the works of the Devil, find an
Hell in his Conscience. And to still

2. Confess and bewail thy sin in the deepest of humiliations. The reason
indeed oftentimes why God puts the soul to the rack, it is because it will not
confess; it is so loath to leave, that it is unwilling to acknowledge its sin.
But as there is no full discovery of sin without examination, Prove. 28.13.
so nor is there any full pardon of sin without confession. Wherefore set thy
sins in order before thee; and if thy Conscience Job 40.4.
Thus it was with Job; he confesses unto God, saying, I am vile, what shall I
answer? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. And humbly submitting to the justice
of Gods plea, Job 42.36.
and the reproof of his conviction, in the sense of his impatience and pride,
he abhors himself, and repents in dust and ashes. And after, God gives
testimony of his love, in accepting a Throne of Grace, soliciting earnestly
with strong cries the mercies of thy God through the merits of thy Savior, for
the pardon of thy sin, the peace of thy soul, and the comforts of his Spirit:
which pardon obtained, peace restored, comforts recovered, are all
strengthened, confirmed and sealed by servent prayer, holy duties are the oil
which keeps the lamp burning; the sacred means ordained of God and Christ, for
the quickening of our graces, and the enlarging of our comforts.

The Objections answered.
Obj. 1. These Rules I have according to my best endeavors observed, my wound,
ah my deep wound, is not healed! mine anguish, my secret anguish is not abated:
Oh! sure my hope is perished from the Lord! He has cut me off! Oh that I had
never been born, or that I had never lived to behold my wretchedness! Answ. Do
what, thou say, thou have already done; still endeavor, that thy spiritual
comforts may take their rise from thy penitential sorrows; enquire still after
God in Christ in the means of grace, press near to him in his ordinances, let
no discouragements beat thee back. Joh 6.^7.
Hear the promise of thy Jesus; He that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out. O the stay of faith, and staff of the soul! O divine word of grace! O
gracious promise of love! He receives us into his bosom, when we cast our
selves into his arms; He will sustain and hold fast, in no wise cast off and
forsake. Heb. 13.5.
Wherefore (O thou afflicted soul!) though thou art forsaken of comfort, yet do
not lie down in despair, nor sleep in sloth; but let faith hold up thy hope,
and hope keep up thine obedience; and do not rest quiet, till finding thy God
in Christ, thou obtain a quiet rest. And how shall thou find God in Christ, but
in the application of the Gospels promises, and in the exercise of holy duties?

Obj. 2. What tell you me of holy duties: As Absalom said of David, so I say of
Christ; What are all these to me, if I cannot see the Kings face? What are the
Ordinances and the Promises? 2 Samuel 14.32.
what are holy duties and religious performances? These have no sweetness, but
when I can taste Christ in them; they have no beauty, but when I can behold
Christ in them: by his presence all my troubles would soon be dispersed; and by
his absence, all comforts they are embitter'd. Answ. Christ is present with
thee in all his ordinances, obeying his voice, Isa. 50.10.
though they walk in darkness and have no light. It is no great matter to see
the Child express much love, when pleased with the Fathers smiles, and cheered
with his embraces; but if when the Father seems with frowns to put the Child
from him, and it then cling close to him, it is a sure argument of dutiful
affection. Thus, when the mind is raised, the heart enlarged, the soul ravished
with the sweet delights of holiness, and the though he kill us, to trust in
him; though he chide us, Joh 13.15.
to call upon him; and though he seem to reject us, yet faithfully to serve and
obey him. But besides (O thou afflicted soul!) in the holy Christ, and Christ
in all his fullness. Mat. 26.27, 28.
For hear how our Savior in the ministration of this sacred ordinance, he
says of the bread broken, Eat, this is my body; and of the wine poured out,
Drink, this is my blood; whereby we are to believe in a firm assent of faith,
that our blessed Lord and Savior has appointed and ordained this holy
Sacrament to be a most effectual means to convey, and most sure seal to confirm
the actual efficacy and merit of his body crucified, and his blood shed. So
that, the bread and wine do not only sacramentally represent, but also really
exhibit to each faithful, though languishing soul, whole Christ with all his
benefits; then which what can be more effectual to the repairing thy peace of
conscience, and the renewing thy comforts of the Spirit?

Obj. 3. I know not how nor what to do: For, besides my trouble of conscience
and terror of soul, I find such a stupifying dullness, and amazed deadness upon
my spirits, that I cannot apply my self to any holy duties with a fixed, Answ.
Apply thy self to some faithful Minister, or some other experienced Saint of
God. For, seeing the Mind under spiritual afflictions, is as a bone out of
joint, Gal. 6 1.
who is it that shall (...) joint it again, but (...) the spiritual man, he who
is acquainted with the motions, methods, and actings of the Spirit. Yea, seeing
the afflicting of the soul is a breaking of the bones; so with David, Make me
to hear of Ps. 51.8.
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. We stand in need to be
careful to make use of some skilful in Soul-chyrurgerie, who may so help, so
heal the wound, set right the bones, that no splinters be left to fret the
Patient, no scruple to vex the Conscience. Yea, sure I am, there is not so much
danger to the body in the ill setting of a bone, as there is to the soul in the
unsound resolving of Conscience.

But further. Let the faithful Minister, or other experienced that shall have
to do with his clouded and dull, as well as afflicted and troubled soul; let
him see well to it, whether Melancholy has not penned up the soul in its
darksom cell, whose adust humors are aptly called Balneum Diaboli, the Devils
Bath. Melancholy distempers beget afflicting thoughts, and afflicting thoughts
beget melancholy distempers; and thus is the poor soul whirled about in a
circle and maze of disquiets and distractions: which disquiets and distractions
are the more increased by Satan's malice and subtlety; Act 4.36.
Now here, an Hippocrates is as proper as a Barnabas, a Physician as a
Minister, for that, say what we can it will be with the soul in a melancholy
body, as with a candle in a dark lantern, its light still dim and dismal, and
oh! what terrors of strange imaginations, and strong passions does this
distemper work in the whole man! Wherefore, seeing it is no Natural cause that
can calm the soul, nor any Spiritual that shall cure the body, they must be
joined together; the Physician for the body, and the Minister for the soul, and
Gods blessing for both. Which blessing he vouchsafe through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
CHAP. VIII. The Souls Conflict, from the misinterpretation of the order of
Gods Providence in the Tribulations of the Godly, and the Prosperity of the
Wicked
TEmporal afflictions, when sanctified by grace, they become the spiritual
physic of the soul; which though administered by the no less tender, then
skilful hand of Providence, how do we, vain and foolish Patients, how do we
embitter our condition, by chewing the pills we should swallow? We mingle our
passions with our crosses, and through impatience struggle with our burden we
bear, by casting one part upon God, as to support and deliverance, Ps 55.22. 1
Pet. 5.6, 7.
and taking the other part upon our selves, as to duty and obedience; the
weight of our present Cross would be the less, and of our future Crown the
greater. But now, amidst the many troubles of anxious thoughts, and various
temptations, nothing more afflicts, yea endangers the soul, then the murmuring
discontents of an envious impatience, Job, who so bitterly complains of the
arrows of God, Job 6.4. chapter 21.6, 7, etc.
was deeply wounded with this dart of Satan, this murmuring impatience of
afflicted souls; in an envious discontent, grieved that iniquity prospers in
their enemies, wh^lst innocence suffers in themselves. But that we may calm
this bosom-tempest, and still this secret murmur, we will give answer to the
Souls

The Words of Complaint.
Oh the deep infidelity of my false heart! and diffident impatiencie of my
troubled soul! wounding my Conscience, and grieving my Spirit with a secret
muttering, yea sometimes an open complaint against God in the order of his
providence! Whilst I behold the prosperity of the wicked, and the tribulations
of the godly; Babylon sit as a Queen, and Jerusalem lie in the dust: yea,
whilst I see Religion suppressed with Violence, Truth blasphemed by Heresy, and
Piety smothered with Contempt; and on the contrary, I see Profaneness exalted,
Sacrilege magnified, and Injustice prosper. Upon these thoughts, oh! how does
Satan suggest to my troubled mind and discontented soul, no less then
blasphemy, either against Gods omniscience, or against his justice! Against his
omniscience, denying that all-seeing eye of his providence, as if the world
were governed blindfold; and ready I am to say with those the Psalmist speaks
of, Ps. 73.11.
Does God know? and is there knowledge in the most High? If this cloud be
dispelled, this temptation repulst, Satan he renews his assault and my
affliction, by blasphemous thoughts against Gods justice; as if he regarded not
the sufferings of the good, notwithstanding their innocence, he continuing his
blessings upon the evil, Mal. 3.14.
So that I am ready to say with those profane persons and distrustful souls, It
is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we keep his ordinances? Oh!
these, these thoughts of Atheism and infidelity, of envy and impatience, I find
by sinful and sad experience, they are a smoky vapor ascending from the
infernal pit, which clouds the judgment of my mind, damps the comfort of my
soul, choaks the life of grace, and even drives away the Spirit of my God. (1.)
The Grounds of Comfort, as to the Tribulattons of the Godly.
Job 5.6.
1. The order of Gods providence: Affliction comes not forth of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground; it is not a thing that happens
by chance, but is ordered by providence. Which providence special providence of
his it is, that as he afflicts in mercy and truth, so he saves in wisdom and
power. (1.) He afflicts in mercy and truth. God it is that afflicts: Men that
injure or oppress, Isa. 10.5.
are but his Instruments to chastise, by his providence ordering their rage,
for the trial of the faithful; their malice, for the correction of his
children. Thus, Deliver my soul, (says David) deliver my soul from the wicked
which is thy sword, Ps. 17.13, 14.
from the men which are thy hand, O Lord. The wicked who persecute, are Gods
sword with which he wounds, his hand with which he strikes. Job 2.7. chapter 19.2.
Thus Job, when Satan himself had smote him, yet we hear his complaint; Have
pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my friends! for the hand of the Lord has
touched me. Thus, God it is that afflicts, and that in mercy: God, we say, he
has paternum animum, as well as maternum affectum; his love is fatherly for
care, as well as motherly for tenderness. As a David's acknowledgment unto God,
saying, I know, Ps. 119.73.
O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have
afflicted me. Wherefore it is well said, that all the troubles and distresses
which befall the faithful, though amarae sagittae, yet ex dulci manu Dei;
though bitter arrows, yet from the sweet hand of God; whose special providence
over his children is such, that he afflicts them even in mercy and in truth.
(2.) He saves them too in wisdom and in power; his wisdom ordering the means,
and his power effecting the work of their salvation, notwithstanding all
difficulties and seeming impossibilities of their deliverance; all secondary
Heathens feigned to be fastened at Jupiters Chair, and we Christians believe to
be held in Gods hand, Isa. 41.10.
in him is the sole ordering and disposing of them. And therefore, Fear thou
not (says God to the true Israel) fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not
dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea,
I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Gods patronage and
protection is not like that of men; of which Salvian complained Hac lege
defendunt miseros, Salv. de gub. Dei, l. 3.
ut miseriores faciant defendendo: Upon this account they defend the miserable,
that they may make them the more miserable by defending them; like the thorny
bush, to which when in the storm the poor sheep runs for shelter, it loses its
fleece. It is not thus with God; Ps. 84.11.
He is Sol and Scutum, a Sun and Shield; as a Sun to enlighten in the midst of
darkness, so a Shield to defend in the midst of dangers. Yea, such is Gods
wisdom and power in his special providence over the The Lord shall judge his
people, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
when he sees that their power is gone. And wherefore this, but that they may
have the greater joy, and he the greater glory in their deliverance?

2. The truth of Gods promise. Amongst many promises, fix we upon that by the
Prophet, Mal. 3.17, 18.
where God at once answers the complaint of a profane diffidence, and
strengthens the comforts of a weak faith. The complaint is, That it was in vain
to serve God, seeing the proud become happy, the wicked exalted, v. 14, 15.
and they that tempt God are delivered. Well, says God, the day comes, that
shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly shall be as
stubble. And that we may discern between the righteous and the wicked, between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not; this is the promise
concerning the godly, They shall be mine (says the Lord of Hosts) in that day
when I make up my jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son
that serves him. In this gracious Climax, a sacred gradation of goodness and
love. The Judgment of wrath threatened by God, is compared unto a devouring
fire, in whose destroying flames God gives the promise to preserve his Saints.
And at once to raise their confidence, and enlarge their comfort, he declares
the grounds of property and preciousness, the relation of sons and service,
which do engage his Almighty self for their safe protection and sure
deliverance. Observe then, in the raging fury of a devouring fire, who is it
that first does not think of saving his own goods? And amongst his own goods,
what is of most worth and value, his treasure; and of his treasure, what is
most choice and precious, his jewels? Yet who does not more highly prise, and
will not more eagerly save his child in the cradle, then his jewel in the
cabinet? And amongst children, the treasure of our bowels, and so the chief in
our affections, amongst those, if any child be a jewel, more precious and dear
then another, sure it must be that, his own goods; for so says God, they shall
be mine: And to this property is added preciousness, they are his choice goods,
his treasure; his chief treasure, his jewels: They shall be mine (says the
Lord) in that day when I make up my jewels: Jewels here cut and squared by
affliction, then polished and made up into a royal diadem. Yea, because I will
spare them as a man spares his son. But may not undutifulness harden the
heart, and shut up the bowels of the most tender parent? Yes sure: But then, a
dutiful obedience must certainly the more abundantly melt the heart and enlarge
the bowels in compassion and love. And so is it here with God; he will the son
that serves him.

3. The example of Christ. The two Disciples which went to Emmaus, Luke 24.
do make our Saviors ignominious death an argument to doubt and question; v.
26.
but he, the sure argument to prove and confirm that he was the Messiah, who
came to redeem Israel: For (says he) ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and to enter into his Yea, in respect of the analogy and
correspondencie betwixt the head and members, Christ and his Church, this was a
comely and beautiful order of Gods decree; Heb. 2.10.
for that, It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation
perfect through suffering. Wherefore as our redemption was not perfected, so
nor shall our salvation be consummated, without suffering of afflictions: For
that, Romans 8.29.
Whom God did foreknow in his Election of grace, he did conformed here in
sufferings and holiness, and conformed hereafter in glory and happiness. Heb.
12 1, 2.
Good then is the exhortation of S. Paul, That we run with patience the race
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith,
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. And the Apostle
will have us thus seriously to consider Christ, lest we be weary and faint in
our minds. v. 3.
For as ( Prosper observes) Malus miles est qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur; He
is a cowardly Soldier that follows his General with mourning into the battle:
He is a faint-hearted Christian, that follows Christ with heaviness in his
afflictions. The Apostles were right indeed, Act. 5.41.
when they departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were counted And thus
S. Paul; Col 1 24.
I rejoice (says he) in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is
the Church, whereof I am made a Minister. The Apostle rejoiceth in his
afflictions; and what is the ground of his joy, but his conformity with Christ?
for that, his afflictions he calls the afflictions of Christ, by virtue of that
mystical union, and tender sympathy arising from that union, which is betwixt
Christ and the Church, as is that of the

Now the Apostle calls his sufferings (...), Lyr. in loc.
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ; we must know (as Lyranus
well) that the sufferings of Christ are twofold. 1. Those afflictions which he
suffered in corpore proprio, in his natural body, these he did complete and
perfect by himself. 2. Those afflictions which he still suffers in corpore
mystico, in his body mystical, and these are fulfilled and consummated in his
members. Wherefore says the Apostle, that he fills in his flesh, not in
Christ's body. No room then for Romish indulgences; for that S. Paul suffered
for the Churches sake, yet not by way of satisfaction, but of edification, the
better to confirm the Church in the faith of Christ. And therefore when he says
that he suffered for the Church, he subjoins, of which I am made a Minister,
not of which I am made a Mediator. Wherefore now, thou that complainest of thy
afflictions, and persecutions, and troubles, tell me, do thou think to be
Christ's Zebedee to aspire to Christ's throne, Mar. 10.37.
unless we drink of Christ's cup. Wherefore let all the children of God look

4. The pattern of Gods Saints. Christ, Joh 6.33.
as he promises his Disciples peace in him, so he foretells them of
tribulations in the world; which we find fulfilled, when the Apostle tells us
that they were become in their sufferings (...), a Theater unto the woald, and
to Angels, and to men. The sufferings of the Apostles became a wonder to the
very Angels. Sen. l. de provid.
Optimi milites ad durissima mittuntur; The stoutest Soldiers are put upon the
hottest service, and so the holiest Saints upon the sharpest sufferings. And
therefore S. Paul, he would have no man moved from the stedfastness of his
faith, Act. 14 22.
by the greatness, of his troubles; for that, we are thereunto appointed of God:
Ad hoc destinati, it is the ordinance and appointment of God, that through much
tribulation we should enter into the kingdom of God. 2 Timothy 3.12
And therefore S. Paul is positive and plain; All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions; persecutions either from a reviling
tongue, or an oppressing hand, either from the world without, or the flesh
within, and from Satan in both. Wherefore, whom the Lord loves he chasteneth,
Heb 12.6.
and scourges every son whom We say, Unicum habuit Deus filium sine flagitio;
sinc flagello, nullum: God, he has only one Son without transgression, but no
one Son without affliction. Wherefore, so far ought afflictions to be from
damping, that they should be arguments of confirming our assurance of Gods
love; v. 8.
for that, if we be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are
we bastards, and not sons; formal Hypocrites, but not true Children of God.

5. The spiritual benefit of afflictions. It is said, Schola crucis Affliction
gives instruction, either for the mortifying some sin, or the quickening of
some grace: And therefore God, as an indulgent Father, Heb. 12.10.
he chastens his children for their profit, that they may be partakers of his
holiness. Afflictions to a faithful heart, are as the waters to Noah's Ark, to
raise it higher toward Heaven. Hear David, Ps. 11.4.
The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lords throne is in heaven, his eyes
behold, his eyelids try the children of men. Why his eyelids, and not his
eyes? Quia oculos claudendo, etc. (says the Expositor) and fidem probat and
amorem, he tries the sincerity of our faith, and truth of our love. Wherefore,
though no affliction for the present is joyous, but grievous, yet let not the
children of God have such a sense of the suffering, that they be de^ected with
sorrow; for that, afterward it brings forth the peaceable fruit of
righteousness. Heb. 12.11.
So that the sweet peace of a good Conscience, shall outvie the bitter grief of
an affl cted Condition; the miseries of this life weaning the soul from

2 Cor. 4.17.
6. The eternal reward of suffering patiently. Our light affliction which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Observe the Apostles Antithesis: For affliction, here is glory; for light
affliction, a weight of glory; and for momentany, eternal. And now, if we take
in the Apostles (...), then have we an excellency of glory, beyond all
hyperboles. Therefore well might the Apostle say, that the sufferings of this
life, Romans 8 18.
they are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in
us. Observe; (...), says the Apostle, I reckon: And indeed, none could reckon
so well as he; for that, we find he suffered more of present affl^ctions, 2
Cor. 11. 2 Cor. 12.
and he saw more of the sufferings of this life, they are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

A thousand years sufferings for Christ, with a thousand years service in his
Church, cannot merit one days being in Gods Courts, one Mat. 5.11, 12.
Blessed are ye, says our Lord and Savior, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely or my sake;
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. In heaven is
life, and that eternal; a Crown, Rom 6.23. 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 Pet. 1.4.
and that of glory; an inheritance, and that of a kingdom. Tell me then, O man,
cloud of witnesses, Heb 11. and Heb. 1.1.
those many Worthies of whom the world was not worthy; this was that, I say,
Heb. 11.26. Hug. Cardin. in loc.
and persevere with constancy, even the respect they had to the recompense of
reward. Consideratio praemii minuit vim flagelli; the consideration of the
eternal reward, weakened the force of the temporal trouble.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Betake thy self to a sincere repentance; in a strict examination Elibu say
right, Job 36.7, 8, 9, 10.
that though God withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, yet does he suffer
them to be holden in cords of affliction, that he may show them their
transgressions; and so, opening their ear to discipline, they may return from
their iniquity. Requisite then it is, that the children of God in their
afflictions take up the resolution of the faithful, Lam. 3.40.
to search and try their ways, to find out not only those sins which have
procured, but which have deserved the afflictions of Gods hand: And this is no
ways done, but by str ct examination of Conscience, that key which unlocks the
Closet of our hearts, where all our Books of Accounts David's prayer be a part
of our devotion; Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my
thoughts, Ps. 139 23.
and see if there be yet any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting.

(2.) A solemn ^umiliation of soul. Sin is the sting, as of death, so of
suffering: And therefore the feeling of our suffering, is to lead us to the
sense of our sin; and so our correction is for our humiliation. Isa. 26 11 Isa.
42 25. Mic. 6.9.
and we not instructed; if Gods hand be l fted up, and we not see it; yea, if
the fire burn, and we not feel; if the rod speak, and we not hear; but, as we
have been wanton in mercies, we be sensl^ss too in judgments; needs must our
ruin be as desperate, as our hearts are stupid. Whereas, he makes an happy
advantage to his soul, who gains repentance by his trouble; for he shall then
get salvation by his repentance.

(3.) A true reformation of life. The poison taken out of the Viper, Ps 119 71.
not to destroy, but to instruct, not to plague, but to heal. Thus says David;
It is good for me that I have been afflicted; v. 67.
and what is the reason? In that, before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now
have I kept thy word. What wise Patient the^ will not more prise the
healthfulness, then loath the bitterness of that potion which is prescribed him
by an able and careful Physician? And Isa. 48.10.
rightly to consider, that God casts into the furnace of affliction, non ut
frangatur, sed ut coquatur, (as S. Augustine) not that the vessel may be
destroyed, but renewed; made what S. Paul was, Act. 9.15. 2 Timothy 2.21.
a vessel of election, or as S. Paul speaks, a vessel of honor, meet for the
Masters use. Seeing this then is one main end Genesis 35.1, etc.
) in this, even the reformation of life. Thus it was with good Jacob, when he
was afflicted with the cruelty of his sons, and the fear of the Canaanites, he
then remembers his vow and fulfils it, he then orders his household and reforms
it; then the strange gods are put away, and in zeal to Gods worship he goes to
build him an Altar at Bethel. Doubtless, he loses the benefit of affl^ctions,
that is not bettered by them; for that, like Jonathan's arrows, they are not
intended to the godly to wound, 1 Samuel 20.20.
but to warn; not to kill, but to admonish.

Outward afflictions become like the cloudy pillar, they have a dark side to
the Egyptians, that is, wrath and vengeance to the obstinate; but a light side
to the Israelites, that is, correction and instruction To illustrate this:
Suppose two men have their hands formal punishments; for that, though they be
occasioned by sin, yet are they not inflicted by way of revenge, which is the
true nature of punishment properly so called. Indeed, God cannot be rightly
said Jer. 31.34.
And therefore God so forgives iniquity, that he remembers it no more: But
sure, remember it he does, if after forgiveness he yet punish it.

Whereas then, 2 Samuel 12.14.
notwithstanding God had told David by the Prophet, that he had put away his
sin; yet he both threatens, and afterward executes wrath against him by reason
of his sin. And whereas, Numb. 14.23.
notwithstanding God had told Moses, that he had pardoned the yet he tells him,
that none of them that murmured should enter Canaan: In both these we may not
think, that there was any punishment by way of satisfaction unto God, but
chastisement by way of admonition both to themselves and others: For, where
there is remission, there is perfect reconciliation; and where there is perfect
reconciliation, there must needs be full satisfaction. So that, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus; and if no
condemnation, then no punishment: For what is punishment, but the Augustine
then gives us a short and full resolution, that vere Christus communicando
nobiscum sine culpa poenam, and culpam solvit and poenam; Christ by
communicating with us of punishment without sin, has taken away both sin and
punishment. The afflictions then of the faithful, they proceed from God as a
provident Father, not as an avenging Judge; and are not for satisfying of his
justice, but the reforming of their lives. To close: What is it that most
retards our pace, tyres our spirits, and dulls our vigor in the way to life and
glory, but the Corruption in our hearts, and the Cross on our shoulders? By so
much then shall we the better bear our Cross, by how much we the more subdue
our Corruption. To instance: Root out Vainglory, and o how much is taken away
from the weight of ^nfamy? Root out Pride, and o how much is taken away from
the weight of Poverty? Root out Wrath, and o how much is taken

2. To the exercise of a sincere repentance, join the invocation of fervent
prayer. Ps. 86.7.
See David's resolution; In the day of my trouble I will call upon the Lord. And
according to his resolution, see his practice: Ps. 116.3, 4.
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold upon me; I
found trouble and sorrow; then called I upon the And for our encouragement to
this duty, we have the comfort of Gods promise: Ps. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. O the divine power of fervent prayer, which by an holy importunity
does even vincere invincibilem, overcome him who is invincible. Exodus 32.10.
Let me alone, (says God to Moses) let me alone! Domine, quis tenet te? (says
the Father) Lord, who holds thee? Why, the instance and importunity of Moses
prayer. Let not then David is good instruction as well as true devotion, a
maxim of faith as well as a petition of prayer; Ps. 60.11.
Help Lord, for vain is the help When our affliction then is sharpest, let our
devotion be hottest; and the more fervent is our prayer, the more near shall be
our help.

The tears of the afflicted, when poured forth in fervent prayer, cannot so
f^ll to the ground, but that their cry does ascend unto heaven, and prevail
with God for a blessing: So that, he shall either overshadow them with his
wing, or support them with his hand; either protect them by his power, or
sustain them with his grace; Ps. 4 1. Ps. 32.7.
A greater blessedness was that of David's, when enlarged in his distress, then,
when encompassed with songs of deliverance. Hear me when I call, O God of my
righteousness; thou have enlarged me, when I was in distress. Upon this says
S. Chrysostom excellently, Chrysostom. in loc.
(...): He says not, thou have kept trouble quite from me, or thou have quite
rid me out of trouble; but that which is (...), a wonder and paradox to the
world; In the midst of my distress, (...), thou have placed my soul in rest.
Let it be thy prayer then (O distressed

3. To the invocation of fervent prayer, join an humble submission unto Gods
will. For that, God oftentimes deals with his children by way of exchange and
commutation: denying them wealth, he gives contentment; denying peace, he gives
patience; denying an end of troubles, he gives strength to undergo them. Such
is Gods wisdom, 1 Pet: 5 6, 7.
Wherefore S. Peter's admonition is savingly good; Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, casting all your care
upon him, for he cares for you. Casting all your care upon him! what, may not
Benjamin then have his sack, and Christ his bag? may not the Master provide for
his family, and the Father for his children? Yes sure. When the Apostle then
will have us to cast all our care upon God, he does not exclude any prudential
providence, but all sinful diffidence; Eli, in our greatest dangers and deepest
necessities, say, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18. 1 Macch. 3.60.
let him do what seems him good. Or as Judas Macchabaeus, in the midst of the
calamities of his Nation; As the will of God is in heaven, so let him do.
Indeed, a greater proof of grace there cannot be then this, in the midst of
afflictions humbly to submit unto the will of God: For David's -- Tacui Domine,
quia tu fecisti; Ps. 29.10.
I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because it was thou Lord that did it.

To an humble submission unto Gods will, join a patient expectation of his
help. Hear the Psalmists advice sound and saving; Ps. 37.6, 7.
Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him, and he shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light, and thy just dealing as the noonday. Gods children
must have a patient expectation of Gods help; for without him all is but
vanity; all policy and strength, all wisdom and wealth, without God, they are
but like Jonahs gourd, Jon 4 7, 8.
when the sun beats hottest, when trouble and affliction is the greatest, then
do they vanish and come to nothing. 1 King. 13.4.
The arm of flesh, like Jeroboams hand, shall suddenly wither; Deuteronomy. 33.27.
but the arms of the Almighty are everlasting, stretched out to all eternity for
the defense of his chosen. Water then of the River may be more ready, but that
of the Fountain is the more pure: We may look upon man's help as nearest at
hand, but it is Gods succor which brings safety in the end. Wherefore the
patient expectation of Gods people must be for Gods help; being assured, The
Lord will not cast off his people, Ps. 94.14, 15.
neither will he for sake his inheritance; Know, afflictions they have their
set time, and deliverance its appointed season. Thus Isreal's bondage in Egypt,
the Jews Captivity in Babylon, both were determined; and our Savior when laid
hold on to be carried away to his passion, he tells the Jews, Luke 22 53.
that was their hour and power of darkness. And as thus afflictions have their
appointed time, so has deliverance its appointed season. Ps. 102.13.
So the Psalmist; Thou O Lord shall arise, and Ps. 110.3.
And again, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Which is
spoken prophetically of Christ, who notwithstanding his enemies hour and power
of darkness, yet has he his prefixed and determined time for victory and
conquest.

Every thing is beautiful in its season: The husbandman will not expect his
harvest in the Spring, nor mow down his Corn in the blade; but does wait the
appointed time of the year, for the precious Jam. 5.7.
as is S. James's Simile. Thus, be it so, that the people of God oppressed with
misery, seem to be laid dead in their graves, yet are they but as seed cast in
the furrows; Light is then sown for the righteous; Ps. 97.11.
and they must wait till harvest, the set time of their restoration and
deliverance. Yea, shall we not allow that in God, we approve in men? Does
humane authority constitute the appointed seasons of Civil Judicature; so that
the greatest injuries and most violent oppressions must wait their legal
process, and men Isa. 34 8.
shall not God then much rather appoint his day or year, his time and season of
recompenses, for the controversies of Sion? We must therefore wait, not
prescribe the time of being heard in our suit, and eased of our trouble; Ps.
102.13.
seeing God has his day of visitation, a set time wherein he will have mercy
upon Sion. To close then; if afflictions have their set time, and deliverance
its appointed season; seeing our Savior has told us, Act. 1.7.
That times and seasons are in Gods hand;

5: To the patient expectatoin of Gods help, join a firm resolution of enduring
unto the end: And when the expectation of help does fail, this resolution to
endure, will hold good; knowing the premonition, and promise too of our
Savior, who having premonisht us that in these latter days Brother should
betray brother to death, and the father the son, and the children should rise
up against their parents and cause them to be put to death, M^^. ^3.12, 13.
and that the faithful should be hated of all men for his name sake; our
Savior presently subjoins to this premonition, this promise, He that shall
endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. Finis coronat opus; the evening
crowns the day. Constancy it is that gives the garland to all virtuous
actions: A That neither death, nor life, nor Angels, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate thee from
What though afflictions be great, yet is this life but short; and the more we
do sow, the more we shall reap; the more we here sow in tears, Ps 126.5.
the more we shall hereafter reap in joy; for that, the more excellent is our
grace of patience, the more abundant shall be our reward of glory.

A patient suffering of afflictions, it is the right way-mark in our passage
and pilgrimage to heaven: And who will not the better pass the dirt and mire,
that knows his way is right? Yea, Gal. 2.14.
he that will Paul's phrase, (...), walk with a right foot, it must be in this
strait path: He that will walk with a right foot according to the truth of the
Gospel, it must be in this strait path of suffering afflictions, the way of
Gods chosen hedged with thorns. Wherefore, Hos. 2.6. Jam. 5.8. Rev. 22.12.
be patient, and stablish your hearts, (O ye afflicted souls!) for the coming
of the Lord draws nigh^ yea, Behold, says Christ, behold I come quickly, and
my reward is with me. Now then, Mat 24.42.46.
as our Savior bids, watch and pray, for blessed is that servant whom his Lord
when So again, Be patient and endure; for blessed is that servant whom his Lord
when he comes shall find so suffering; as doing of his will, so suffering for
his name. Imitate we David, who neither murmurs against God, nor inveighs
against his enemies, nor cries out of his troubles; Ps. 42.11.
but chides and complains of himself to himself; Why art thou so troubled, O my
soul! and why art thou so disquieted within me? I can bear all sorrows but
thine, all afflictions but thine; O be not thou cast down, and I shall stand
firm;

(2.) The Grounds of Comfort, as to the Prosperity of the Wicked.
1. Wicked men are in a certain instability, notwithstanding their present
prosperity. For, that dignity, pomp, and peace cannot stand firm, which is
founded upon sin, though never so successful. True it is, David's advice then be
as acceptable, as it is seasonable; Fret not thy self because of evil doers,
Ps. 37.1.
neither be thou envious against v. 2.
And the reason is good; for, they shall be cut down like the grass, and wither
as the green herb. Sometimes the wicked, like the green herb, they wither in
their spring, they fall in their rise, they perish in the beginnings of their
mischievous designs; but if they do come to a full growth, they grow but to
harvest, the fit season of their cutting off. See another Simile very
emphatical: The w cked shall perish, v. 20.
and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs, they shall consume,
into smoke shall they consume away. as the smoke, when it is at its highest
ascent, so the wicked, when at their highest advancement, they then suddenly
vanish and come to nothing.

The wicked of the world, though never so high and mighty, they shall be written
in the earth; Jer. 17 13. Luke 10.20. Ps. 17.14.
opposite directly to that of the godly, whose names are written in heaven. The
men of this world, they have their portion in this life; but as for the
Citizens of heaven, their inheritance is eternal. As the godly then are made
blessed in an heavenly happiness, so sometimes the wicked in an earthly. But,
as the men of the world are said to have their names written in the earth for
their temporal felicity, so also for their certain instability, yea their
sudden destruction. For, how suddenly are their names wiped out by the hand of
Providence, who are Prove. 10 7
quasi per lusum, as it were in a sport, we write it in the dust, or upon the
ground. Thus the godly shall be had in everlasting remembrance, but the memory
of the wicked shall rot: The former are written in heaven, the latter in the
earth. The godly, though temporally miserable, yet shall they be eternally
happy; the wicked, though temporally happy, yet shall they be eternally
miserable.

Away then with all envious repinings or murmuring impatience at the
flourishing prosperity of the wicked. What! do thou wonder that so just a God
should suffer so horrid injustice to go unpun^shed? Magna (yea maxima) ira est,
Hier. ep. 33 and in Ps. 140.
quando peccantibus non irascitur Deus; God is most severe, when being provoked
by sin, he withholds from punishing; and is then most angry, when he least
discovers his wrath; leaving men to their own wills, and so to work Tertullian
say, Tert. de pat. c. 11.
O servum illum beatum cujus emendationi Dominus instat, cui dignatur irasci! O
blessed is that servant with whom the Lord will vouchsafe to be angry, that he
may amend him!

2. The Churches assured preservation, notwithstanding her present persecution:
Which assurance is founded upon Gods promise, once (and that once for all, Ps.
89 35, 36.
yea for ever) once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not fail David;
but his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. His
seed, that is, Christ, and Christ in his Saints, begotten of God through the
Spirit, they shall endure for ever. And however the He shall arise, and the
enemies of the Lord shall be scattered; Ps. 68.1.
like clouds before the sun, they shall suddenly vanish, and utterly be
dispel'd. And as we have heard the promise of God unto Christ, so hear we the
promise of Christ unto his Church, That the gates of hell shall not prevail
against her. The gates; For the understanding of this, Mat. 16.18.
it is gates of hell is meant in a Figure, all the power and policy of hell;
all which (says Christ of his Church) they shall not prevail against it.
(...), non superabunt eam, so Beza, they shall not overcome her; yea, they
shall be overcome by her; for so the word, as Scultetus observes, it is verbum
bellicum, a warlike word, which signifies the combat and contest of enemies,
till one party be subdued and overthrown. The power and policy then of Satan
and hell, they may valere, but they cannot praevalere; they may vertere, but
they cannot subvertere; they may shake the Church, but being founded upon the
rock Christ Jesus, they cannot throw her down; they cannot do with the Church,
as with her

2. The Churches assurance of preservation, founded upon her own 2 Cor. 1.10.
The Church frames her argument of faith with S. Paul; God has delivered me,
and does deliver me, and I trust also he will deliver me. And therefore if we
be not (...), as Nazianzen speaks, Naz. stilit. 1. Ps. 77.5.
mancipia praesentium, captived in our judgment to things present; but do with
David, consider the days of old, and the years of ancient times; the Church
presents us with a view of that her so glorious a deliverance from under the
bondage of Egypt, and from under the captivity of Babylon; and these so
eminent, before Roman tyranny, and after from under the Arian fury, and of
later years from under the Anabaptists frenzy. These the deliverances of the
Church Ecumenical: But, which is more full to our present and particular
comfort, the Church presents us with her deliverances here at home, which have
been national; as, that from the Danish inundation of Idolatry, that from the
Romish infatuation of Marian deluge of blood, and flames of violent
persecution. Thus God having delivered this his Church from the conspiracies
and violence of foreign and homebred enemies, from the fire and sword, the wit
and malice of cruel persecutors: From these experiments of deliverance, she
raises her faith to an humble assurance, that he will in the end of all
deliver her from the compendium of all, the present rage of Heresy, and
furious zeal of Schism.

3. The pleadings of Gods providence, thereby justifying the cause of his
Church, and discovering the wickedness of her enemies. Thus it was of old:
Corah and his company, moved with malice and envy, conspire against Moses and
Aaron, Number. 16.1, etc.
thereby striking at the root of Magistracy and Ministry. But see the event
clear contrary to their design and expectation: God so orders the matter, in
the pleadings and disposings of his providence, that thereby Moses becomes more
honorable, and Aaron more eminent; both the Kingly and Priestly office more
illustrious in the eyes of the People. And if we pass from the sacred Scripture
to Ecclesiastical History, we find, that whilst the cruel Persecutors of the
Primitive Saints thought to have drowned Christianity in a sea of blood, yet
then was sanguis martyrum semen ecclesiae, the blood of the Martyrs the seed of
the Church: which Moses bush, Exodus 3 2. Number 17 8.
it consumed not; but like Aarons rod, after her night of distress, she became
more fresh and flourishing, more eminent for the purity of her faith and
holiness.

Christ's conquest over his enemies, is not only military, by a potent and
prevailing force, but especially it is judiciary, by just and righteous
pleadings; Jer. 2 9. Mic. 6 9.
and therefore he first strikes with the rod of his mouth to Turkish argument,
and so not fit to overthrow or stagger a Christians faith;) how does God retort
the argument, by giving such signal and remarkable passages of his Providence,
that they seem very near giving up to a reprobate sense, who after the voice of
Gods word, shall stop their ear to the voice of his providence;

Look we upon the present estate of the Church of England; and how do we find
it too unhappily like that of the Church of Judah? For that, we may say of our
several Factions and Schisms, what they say of the children of Ammon, Moab, and
Mount Seir; 2 Chro. 20.10.
we may truly say of them, that the Church not invading and subduing, not
quelling Egypt, even when by a religious Reformation we forsook the Romish
superstition; Behold how they reward us! even to cast us out of our
possessions; v. 11.
not only the possession of our own temporal estates, but even of Gods holy
worship. Now in the depth of this calamity, in which we seem to be forsaken of
God, herein does God own his people, that he lays upon their adversaries the
curse of the Midianites, Ammonites, and Edomites, v. 23.
even one to defeat and destroy another. True it is, Gods power is invincible,
Ps. 44 4.
his wisdom unsearchable, and his judgment unavoidable; so that he can command
deliverance for Jacob; or if that will not do it, he can create help for his
people. Yet such is the wonder of his providence, that he orders seeming
casualties, particular, unexpected, and unthought of emergencies, to bring
forward his peoples deliverance: Of which we have ample testimony, in the
history of Ioseph's advancement by Pharaoh, and Esther's by Ahasuerus; Israel
in the cradle, and the other to restore him from the grave. Things independent
in their relation, unsubordinate in their being, God oftentimes makes them
concur in the order of his providence for his Church's restoration; that the
World may know, it is the counsel of his will, and the work of his hand, acted
to this end, even the greater glorification of his own name, and the clearer
justification of his peoples cause. Let the providence of God frame the
Argument of Divine conviction in mood or figure he please, sure I am, God will
so order the Premises, that the Conclusion shall be his own glory, and his
Church's good: which two are never more eminent, then when in the pleadings of
his providence God justifies the cause of his Church, and discovers the
wickedness of her adversaries.

The Rules of Direction.
Ps. 73.17.
1. With David, enter the Sanctuary of God. Interiora veritatis penetralia; so
S. Ambrose: Search the more secret mysteries of Gods truth. So shall thou find,
the ground of thine impatience is thine ignorance, v. 22.
that thou art velut jumentum, as a beast before the Lord: As a beast, thou
look upon the affairs of this life in their outward appearance, with the eye
of sense; thou do not so well view them in their secret providence, by the
eye of faith: For that, thus viewing the ungodly in their prosperity, we
understand their (...), we become spectators of their last Scene, and thereby
see their sad Catastrophe; How, being set in slippery places, v. 18, 19.
God casts them down to destruction, and they are brought to desolation as in a
moment. Tolluntur in altum, etc. they are lifted up to the greater height, that
they may be crushed in their greater fall; and by how much their precipice is
the more steep, by so much is their ruin the more desperate. Yea, which is
most dreadful, be the wicked never so lofty and high, yet is there but a
trap-door betwixt worm and the fire, Mar. 9.44.
the guilt and the punishment. It may be, for the present, presumption and
pride have made them secure in their sin, and they see no danger, they feel no
misery; but when they come to be awakened from their security, oh the weight of
that millstone, that mountain that lies upon their backs! oh the piercings of
that sharp sword, that poisoned arrow, which sticks in their hearts! oh what
are the stings, the flames, the furies of a guilty Conscience! how do their
knees tremble, their lips quiver, their tongues falter, their throats roar,
their hearts languish, and their whole man become filled with horror and
amazement! Who art thou then that find'st prosperity of the wicked? Let this
still thy murmurings, and quell thine impatience, that entering the Sanctuary of
the Lord, thou understandest their latter end.

2. Mortify sin by a sincere repentance. This, this shall weaken the force,
quell the pride, and blast the prosperity of the Churches enemies; for that, as
S. Hierom of old, Nostris vitiis Barbari facti sunt fortes, etc. The sins of
the Christians did strengthen the Barbarians: And even now, without all doubt,
the sins of the Orthodox Elisha, 2 King 2 21.
at the springhead; the best curing a wound, is, with the skilful Chyrurgion,
at its festered root: The best heali^g of a Nations miseries, is by removing
the cause, in mortifying the sin, and so seeking reconciliation with God by
repentance. Thus Moses, when he stands in the gap to divert Gods wrath, and
recover his love, Number. 14.19.
he does it by confessing the sin, and bewailing its gu^lt: And so when David
seeks 2 Samuel 24.
he does it by an atonement on the Altar. God indeed still directs his arrows
of wrath against the mark of sin; and therefore if sin be in us, no wonder if
wrath be upon us: For, where indeed should the arrow stick, but where the mark
is fastened? If then we will divert the arrow, we must remove the mark; if we
will turn away wrath, we must take away sin. Sin it is which corrupts our best
of duties, and taints our best of blessings. Corrupts our best of duties; like
leaven, it turns a solemn Passover covering himself as with a thick cloud, Lam.
3.^4.
through which they cannot pass to the Throne of grace. Yea, our sin it is,
that taints our best of blessings, blessings temporal; turning our sweetness of
earthly comforts, into the bitterest of earthly curses: even honor, wealth,
wit, learning, plenty, peace, which should make us more serviceable unto God,
how does sin make them even tributary unto Satan, in the advancement of his
kingdom? Wherefore, in the calamities of our silly Heart, to mourn, and bleed,
and faint, and yet take no care for what would happily be our cure, the
plucking out the fatal dart that sticks in our side, the removing the sinful
guilt that cleaves unto our souls: which gu lt is none other way to be removed,
but by a sincere repentance.

Which repentance is sincere when free and full. (1.) When free; not so much
extorted by the rack, or compelled by horror, as being the willing purpose of a
relenting heart. Oh how is it with some! They are won with the Gospels
sweetness, and Mercy's allurements: Others, they are driven with the Laws
curse, and Judgments terrors. The former is like water from a Spring, it flows
with freeness; the latter like water from a Still, which is forced with fire.
And when men repent as Pharaoh in Egypt, Exodus 9.27. 34, 35. Ps. 78.34, 35, 36,
etc
or as Israel in the Wilderness, only on the rack of judgment and wrath; it is
much to be suspected, when once the scourge is taken off, the judgment
respited, they then will metal is it that will not melt in the furnace? and
what heart so hard, which in the furnace of divine wrath will not melt in
mournful penitence? But hereby is their insincerity and hypocrisy discovered,
that when taken out of the fire, they return to their former obduracie. Thus
formal and hypocritical persons, they melt in the heat, and harden in the cold;
Clem. Alex. Strom. l 2.
they thaw in the sun, and freeze in the shade. These repentings Clemens of
Alexandria aptly calls (...); when men Repentance then be sincere, it is free,
the willing and resolved purpose of a relenting heart. (2.) Full; as extended
to all sin whatsoever. Even the smallest sin in its degree, is deadly in its
nature: Of Vipers, the least is poisonous; and to coin pence, is a treasonable
act, as well as to coin pounds: Every degree of sin, as one leak in the Keel,
one breach in the bank unrepair'd, is enough to sink the ship, and drown the
Country; so one sin allowed of, is enough to destroy the man; and one sin
generally unrepented of, is enough to ruin a Kingdom.

Indeed, who can think to obtain his Princes favor, whilst he harbors a Rebel
against him in his house? Who can think to partake of the merit of Christ's
blood, whilst he hugs the murderer of gracious deliverance, we must serve him
to the utmost of a faithful repentance; crucifying sin, as he was crucified for
sin, not in some members, Romans 6.6. Col. 2.11.
but in the whole body; not reserving any lust,

3. Let not the calamities of the Church deter thee, or the prosperity of her
enemies seduce thee from the stedfastness of thy faith, the integrity of her
cause, and the innocence of thy sufferings. Innocence is the surest guard:
Goliath fenced with brass, is not so safe, as a naked man armed with innocence;
and whilst we hold fast our innocence, in all our tribulation, God sets us
forth not as Malefactors to suffer, but as Champions to conquer, and after
conquest follows a crown. The way of the Lord is our surest path, and safest
walk; in this the Lord will be our stay and strength, and his Angels He shall
give his Angels charge over us, Ps. 91 11.
to keep us in all our ways. Observe, it is in viis, non in praecipitiis, in
our lawful actions, not our unlawful presumptions: we have no promise of
support or protection, unless we retain our innocence and uprightness. Being
beaten then with the storms, and distressed with the tempest of Gods judgments,
take we heed how we offer to land at any shore of carnal interest, or worldly
policy: This is dangerous to the soul, lest it shipwreck its faith and its
self. Rather, as is best prudence as Main, though pursued with the storm. God
will at last rebuke the wind and the sea; and so still the tempest, and save
the ship; cease his judgments, and deliver his Church. To wind our selves out
of worldly troubles, by entangling our selves in sinful courses, is such a
folly, or madness rather, as is like his, who thinks to heal his wound by an
envenomed plaster, or cure his disease with a poisoned potion; or indeed, to
quench the flame by pouring in oil.

self-love: From hence, not only come many men's Apostacies, but also most men's
complaints, yea all men's impatiencies. How many in a self love are grieved for
public calamities, out of a respect to their private interest? Whereas the
upright heart is grieved for the contempt of Gods ordinances and truth, the
profanation of his Sanctuary Ps. 78, 34.37. P^. 147.9
how many with the Israelites, when God smites them, then they seek him, but
their heart is not right with him. They call upon God, as the Ravens, because
hunger-bitten; or as the gaping Earth, because parcht with heat. Their devotion
is from an impulse of nature, weary of pain, and seeking for ease; not from a
principle of grace, grieved for sin, and suing for holiness. Such men, could
they enjoy their corn and their wine, their peace and their plenty, their full
trade and their full stock, their

4. By how much God does the more increase his temporal blessings upon the
wicked, by so much the more do thou implore his spiritual graces upon his
Church, and her temporal deliverance out of troubles. And thus, the greater
conformity thy prayers have unto Gods will, the easier access shall they find
to his ear, and the readier acceptance at his hand. What can give peace, if God
withhold grace? what can bring succor, if he refuse favor? All wealth, honor,
pleasure, Scepters, Crowns, the whole World with its fullness (or rather its
vanity and peace of God dwell in us, Phil. 4.7.
(...), it shall keep our hearts; yea, praesidio custodiet, (so Beza) it shall
keep them as with a Guard. So that, amidst all outward distractions and
distresses, all temporal troubles and trials, Gods wing of providence shall be
our shield of protection; the comforts of his promises the encouragements of
our faith; and the secret of his presence, the safety of our souls. Indeed,
Gods grace is the

Rev. 12.9. 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 20.2.
The Scriptures represent Satan unto us in a threefold resemblance, Serpent, a
Lion, and a Dragon; a Serpent for the wiliness of his subtlety, a Lion for the
mightiness of his strength, and a Dragon for the fierceness of his malice. Now,
what is the Churches safest guard to repel, and her surest weapon to overthrow
this malice, might and subtlety of Satan? what, but the importunity of fervent
prayer? See it in David, Asa, and Esther. By prayer David befools the counsel
of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15.31. 2 Chro. 14.11.
and therein defeats his, and Satan's subtlety. Again, by prayer Asa vanquisheth
the Ethiopian host, consisting of Esth. 4.16.
and therein he quells theirs and Satan's might. Lastly, by prayer Esther
disappoints the design of Haman, and therein overthrows his and Satan's malice.
And no wonder if prayer do overthrow the greatest malice, might, and subtlety
of Satan and the world, seeing it does fetch in the infinite grace, power, and
wisdom of God and of Christ. Yea, prayer does besiege heaven, and takes it by
force, Exodus 32.10.
and puts God himself to a Dimitte me, Let me alone: yea, such is the
prevailing importunity of fervent prayer, as breaks I will deliver you no more,
Judge. 10.13, 14, 15.
says God to Israel; yet, which shows what stock they came of, right
Israelites indeed, they wrestle with God, and conquer him, before they conquer
their enemies; they first overcome God by the importunity of prayer, and then
through God they overcome the Ammonites by force of arms. When God goes on in a
resolved wrath, and purposed desolation, he stops the mouth of prayer, lest
that should stay him from striking. Thus he bespeaks the Prophet Jeremy; Pray
not for this people, Jer. 7.16.
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for
I will not hear thee. But now on the contrary, when the Church is in distress,
the hearts of the faithful raised in devotion is a sure sign of Gods arising to
judgment; his peoples approaching near unto him in prayer, Ps. 102. and Dan. 9
is the forerunner Luke 18 4.7.
if the petition of an importunate Widow could prevail with an unjust Judge,
much more shall the prayers, and sighs, and tears of a widowed Church prevail
with the most holy God.

5. To fervent Prayer join faithful obedience. ^am. 3 41. S. Hier. in loc.
Thus the Church of old; Let us lift up our hearts (say they) with our hands to
the Lord in the heavens. Upon which S. Hierom gives this gloss; Cor cum He
lifts up his heart with his hands, who strengthens his prayers with his works.
The zeal of obedience quickens the fervor of our prayers; and the fervor of our
prayers, quickens the zeal of our obedience. Which obedience, if it be sincere,
it will be universal, in an impartial respect unto all Gods commandments; not
allowing the commission of any one sin, nor quitting the obligation of any one
duty, desirous to please God in all things: And where there is a breach of this
obedience, Col. 1.10. Phil. 3 9.
Christ by faith, for a supply of his righteousness. Without this sincerity of
obedience, no man is upright in his conversion; and so not in a fit capacity of
temporal deliverance, or eternal salvation. O consider this, all ye that in the
bargain of salvation, and traffic of heaven, stand upon your abatements with
Christ; the abatement of such a darling lust, such a temporal ininterest, such
a worldly gain, such an hard duty, or such an irksom task. Thus the flesh
barters with the spirit, and the Sybils Prophesies; the longer you stand off in
dispute of the price, the dearer every day will be its purchase; it will cost
the more difficult task of repentance, the more large expense of tears, the
more deep moans of sorrow, the more bitter cries of prayer, the more sharp
combats of spiritual conflicts, the more painful throws of the new birth, and
the more strict watchfulness of an after-obedience. Vain men, ye certainly know
not how to value the price of a soul, nor the worth of a Savior, who would
gain life and salvation upon so easy conditions.

Ah! this, this is the great sin of the Land, unfruitfulness under the means of
grace. Like Rebekah's womb, Genesis 25.21, 22, 23.
we have been a barren Nation; and therefore God in just wrath has brought
upon us pain in our own bowels, the struggling contests of profane Esaus, and
supplanting Jacobs, in the very womb of the Church and Nation. Wherefore, all
ye who own your selves sons and daughters of the Church, be faithful unto God
and your souls in the duties of a sincere obedience; knowing this, that the
sins of professed enemies are not so much provoking God to temporal judgments,
as the sins of his people; in that they are committed against the testimonies
of greater love, and exposing Gods truth, name, and worship to greater
contempt. Amos 3.2.
Thus says God to Israel by his Prophet: You only have It is worth our
observation, that if we consult the sacred Scriptures, the Annals of the
Church, and the Histories of Nations, we find, that God bears longer with the
sinful provocations of a strange Nation, then with those of his chosen people.
The sins of the Amorites are not so soon full, as the sins of Israel; nor, at
this day, is the measure of the Turkish iniquity so soon filled up, as that of
the Grecian Churches. And the reason is, those fruits Amos 8.2. Jer. 1.11.
which are therefore called by the Prophet, the first ripe fruits; and the
judgment on Gods people is resembled by the rod of an Almond-tree, Ezekiel. 9.6: 1
Pet. 4.17.
which first puts forth its branches: And thus, Judgment first begins at the
Sanctuary, the house of God. Indeed, where the sun shines hottest, there the
fruits ripen fastest, and fall soonest. Unfruitfulness then under the means of
grace, exposes to further

CHAP. IX. The Souls Conflict, from the long continuance of its afflictions and
temptations.
2 Cor. 12 9.
that Gods strength does so gloriously appear in man's weakness, as to sustain
him against all the malicious oppositions of Satan, all the treacherous
beguilements of the Flesh, and all the various temptations of the World, it is
the astonishment, this, of the Angels; and that, for which Christ shall one day
be so much admired in his Saints. See, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
see the spiritual estate of a man truly sanctified, whilst he is in his
earthly pilgrimage law of sin, Romans 7.23. Mat. 16.24. Ephesians. 6.12.
and on his shoulder the Cross of Christ; he walks in a narrow path, pusht at
by many potent enemies, the powers of darkness, to throw him down; to which end
they add subtlety to their malice, policy to their power, they spread a net
for his feet. So that, how is it possible, without a miracle of grace and of
mercy, of life and of love, of power and of peace, how is it possible weak and
fainting man should tread so strait a path as the way of righteousness, and
break through

This is that beaten path, which the Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets, the
Apostles, Martyrs and Saints have trod before us: And if any man shall conceit
some other way to heaven, then this of difficulties and dangers, of afflictions
and temptations; Secr. schol. hist. eccl.
we may say to him, as Constantine did to Acesius, Erige scalam and ascend
solus, Raise thy self a ladder and climb up alone; never any went that way thou
dream'st of before thee, neither shall any go it after (vain man) if thou lose
thy self, when thou take an unknown path, and leavest the beaten road, even
that which is right via regia, the Kings highway, that way which the King of
heaven, Christ the Prince of glory, Heb 2 10 Luke 2^.26. and 9.22, 23.
both by precept and by pattern, by doctrine and example has chalkt out to us.
If then we be of the Israel of God, having escaped out of the Egypt of an
unregenerate state, we must expect our Red sea of persecutions, our fiery
Serpents of temptations, and our long Wilderness of afflictions Canaan, the
inheritance of promise and of rest.

And now that we be not discouraged with the difficulties of our passage, look
we into the Word of life, and Gospel of our salvation; and there see, besides
the reward of glory to crown our constancy, see the hand that sustains, the
might that strengthens us to overcome, even the power and grace of Christ. See
the refreshings which keep our souls from fainting, and add to our constancy
cheerfulness, even the councels and comforts of the Spirit. And these we shall
administer to the distressed soul, which in its long and continued Conflict
makes this sad and languishing complaint.

The Words of Complaint.
How long, oh how long have I waited for the returns of my laid me in the
darkness, but also shut me up, that I cannot come forth. Mine afflictions
compass me daily, yea all the day; they come about me like waters, and threaten
the swallowing up of my soul: And oh! what is my help, my hope, but my God? But
alas, he refuses to child of darkness; for that, sure, if the Sun of
righteousness healing in his wings, so would he bring comfort in his light,
refreshings by his Spirit, and deliverance by his power. The Grounds of Comfort.
1. The firm assurance Christ gives of his indulgent care over his Thus he
comforted Sion of old: When the Prophet in much Pathos of joy, Isa. 49.13.
calls upon the inanimate creatures to make up the Jubilee: Sing, O heaven, and
be joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, O mountains! for God has
comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. Yet it is Sion's
deep complaint in the depth of her calamity; v. 14.
The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. But see, see the
love of God to his afflicted Church, exceeds that of the tender mother to her
sucking Naz orat 31.
(...); no bowels more tender then those of a mother; yet more tender far are
those of our heavenly Father. For so says God, in a pathetical expostulation of
faithfulness and love; v. 15.
Can a mother forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? yea, she may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

Think not then (O thou afflicted soul!) when God hides his face, that he
forgets thee; or when he withdraws a while, he then forsakes thee: For, how
have we seen the careful and tender Mother wave the Child in her loving arms,
and pleased with its embraces, threaten its fall, that so fear might make it
cling unto her bosom with the more sportful eagerness? Thus, even thus it is
with the humble Saint and his gracious Savior: Videtur deserere, quia non vult
deseri; That he will put his fear into the hearts of his chosen, that they
shall not depart from him. Yea, Jer. 32.4^.
see the indeleble characters of Christ's love, and the infallible testimony of
his care. Says Christ to his Spouse, his Church, and in her to every faithful
soul, Behold, I have engraven thee in the palms of my hands. Engraven! how?
why, s^. ^9 16.
not with the carving tools, but the piercing nails; and not upon the skin, but
quite have I engraven thee in the palms of my hands: Humanitus dictum (says
Jun us) it is spoken after the manner of men; Jun. in loc.
but it is indeed an emphatical expression outvying the highest Courtship of
the most amorous Lover to his beloved: He, it may be, will have her Picture
hang in his bosom, that so (forsooth) she may be near his heart: But Christ, he
has his Spouse engraven

Wherefore, that the Saints and chosen of God are often and long afflicted, is
not through want of love to pity, or of care to regard, or of power to
relieve: No sure; for what Father or Mother is not compassionately affected,
affectionately moved with the sufferings and sorrows of their dear children?
What tender Husband, or what indeared Friend will not engage himself for the
comfort, succor, David frames the Argument, Ps 94 9.
He that made the ear, shall not he hear? He that formed the eye, shall not he
see? and he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? So say I; He who
implants love and compassion in his creatures, shall not he be much more loving
and compassionate to his Saints? He who imprints those tender affections in
fathers, husbands, friends, shall not he be more tenderly compassionate to his
Church and chosen? Yes Exodus 3.7. Jer 31.20. Ps. 65.2. Ps. 56.8. Mal. 3.16.
he has an eye of Providence to see their distress, bowels of pity to
compassionate their trouble, ears of mercy to hear their prayers, bottles of
love to hold their tears, a book of remembrance to register their complaints:
yea, Satan and the World shall know, he has Judgments of righteousness to
plead their cause, Vials of wrath to avenge their blood, an arm of power to
deliver their persons, and a crown of glory to reward their constancy.

Be it so then (O afflicted soul!) that thou lie under heavy pressures,
length of time adding to their weight of misery; yet, that neither the burden
nor continuance of thy trouble may bear down thy patience, or break off thy
constancy, here is a Center of rest for thy soul, a ground of comfort to
establish thy faith; even the firm assurance Christ gives us in his Word, of
his indulgent care over his Church and chosen.

2. Our Lord Jesus Christ, in his indulgent care over his Church makes thine
afflictions the longer, that thine humiliations may be the deeper; and by how
much thou art the more firmly rooted in humility, by so much shall thou be the
more fully established in grace. 2 Cor. 12.
Thus S. Paul, he is no sooner stepped out of heaven, but he is presently set
upon by h^ll; he has no sooner done conversing with the Angels, v. 7.
but he is presently buffeted by Satan; and his temptation is still continued,
v. 8.
notwithstanding his supplications are so often renewed: And wherefore was it,
but that he might be the more fully Paul so holy, so humble, yet is he in
danger of spiritual pride, of being exalted above measure, even puffed up in
conceit, above what he was lift up in exstasie: Wherefore it must be a strong
buffeting, and of long continuance, to beat down this pride, and quell this
haughtiness. Thus, it would be a matter of much support to the faithful in
their affliction, to

This, this is to master our passions, in making our temporal troubles become
serviceable to our spiritual advantage. This the practice and profession of the
faithful in the Prophets hymn; Isa. 26.8.
In the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee. In the
dispensing of which judgments, it is Gods method, to put in the sickle when the
harvest is ripe, Joel 3.13. Isa. 63.6. Genesis 15.16. Jer. 51.13.
to tread out the grapes when the wine press is full; to cut off a people, when
the measure of their iniquity is made up. Thus the end of Babylons peace, and
the measure of her sin meet together. And, It is time, Lord, (says David) to
put to thy hand, for men have made void thy law. Ps. 119.126.
Such is the rage of the wicked in their impiety, and such the impudence of
their sin, that they seek to raze the very Ordinances of God, and cancel the
very Records of Heaven, in casting out the name and worship, the fear and
service of the Lord out of his Church. And when it is thus with men, then is it
time for God to put to his hand in the fury and vengeance of his wrath; then is
the (...), the fixed and set time, Ps. 102.13.
which his wisdom and justice has preordain'd and constituted; in which,
notwithstanding the low expectations and small preparations, notwithstanding
the seeming wound and strike through his, and the Churches enemies. Ps. 110.5.
Ps. 16 8. Ps. 100.5.
And therefore is he said to be at her right hand, emphatically declaring his
readiness of presence and of power, for her protection and deliverance.

Now, in this way and method of his judgments it is, that the faithful wait for
him; whilst worldly men and carnal minds murmr and complain, quarrel and
repine, grudge and blaspheme. They wait, purify and refine: Isa. 1.25. Mal.
3.2, 3. Isa. 27.9.
And therefore shall there not be one degree of heat more in the fire, nor one
moments continuance more in the furnace, then the metals refining requires; not
one dram or minute more of affliction, then the Church's purifying calls for.
And for this reason, the faithful in all humility submit unto Gods will;
thereby making it appear, that the desire that he may be glorified, rather then
that they may be delivered; preferring suffering before sin, affliction before
transgression, a continuing in distress, before an engaging in what is wicked
and rebellious.

3. When God answers not prayer by enlargements of comfort, Isa. 50.10.
he then does it by strength of support; composing the soul to the purest, and
perfectest act of obedience upon earth, even to rely upon God in his promises
by faith, when there is no sensible testimony of his love. Job 19.20, 21.25,
etc. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10
is a secret martyrdom of the soul, advancing Gods glory in its deep
affliction, and preferring the truth and faithfulness of Gods promise above all
Satan's suggestions, or its own fears. Be it so then (O thou afflicted soul!) be
it so, that God does delay, yet does he not deny the returns of his love, in
the refreshings of his Spirit; but he is therefore the longer absent, that thou
may be the more eagerly longing, and thereby the better prepared to receive
his blessings of love and Sol, nisi cum deficit, spectatorem non habet, (says
Seneca;) Men most look after the Sun, when his light is eclypsed; and so do our
souls after Christ, when his favor is clouded, his face hid. Thus, how often
is it, that God does put grace in the soul, when yet he does not publish it in
the conscience? And so it is with the faithful as with Moses; Exodus 34.29.
Moses his face shines to the Jews, when yet he knew not of its luster himself.
Thus many times the faithful have their graces eminent in others observation,
when yet they discern them not in their own apprehension; God giving supporting
strength, when he withholds enlarging comforts.

The Rules of Direction.
1. Keep faith and a good conscience. For, as a ship tossed with contrary
winds, such is the mind distracted with contrary opinions, still restless and
uncertain: Whereas, if the judgment be clear, the purposes will be resolute,
D^^. 3.17, 18.
and where the purposes are resolute, there the soul is at rest. Ps. 112.7.
If then we would not change, in these times of Changes, then fix we upon him
who is unchangeable: For, as Quicksilver, Jam. 1.6.
till a spirit of constancy in the faith from God does fix and fasten it. Men
unsettled in faith, will be unquiet in their thoughts; and therefore keep faith,
Act. 24.16.
but with a good conscience too; that of S. Paul, (...), a Conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men. For, where the Conscience is not pure, it
cannot be pacified: It is as proper for sin to raise doubts and fears, as for
rotten flesh to breed worms, Jon. 1 11 12.
or a corrupt sink to send forth noisome Jonah is in the ship; nor the troubles
of conscience ceased, whilst guilt is in the soul. Beware then above all
things, that thou yield not to sins commission, to avoid the trouble of Satan's
temptation: For, what were this but to sink the ship, to avoid the storm; or to
yield the Fort, because of hard duty?

Jam. 4 7.
2. Resist Satan; and let thy resistance be armed with fortitude, fortified with
constancy, and constant in obedience. To strengthen Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 7, 8.
see the Crown to him that overcomes, see the reward of life, blessedness, and
glory to him who is faithful unto death. That Satan is restless, let that make
thee watchful; that he is malicious, let that make thee resolute; and as he
renews his assaults with rage and Romans 8.37.
and by a communion with him in his victory and triumph, make thee more then
conqueror through him that loved thee. Thus art thou fortified in thy
Constancy.

But, thou must be also constant in thine obedience; knowing this, that we
stand obliged to the performance of holy duties, though God should never
vouchsafe us the enlargements of divine comforts. The gracious manifestations
of Gods love, they are the privilege of some devout souls, not the propriety
of every sincere heart; Isa 50.10.
they are Gods bounty, not man's right; and therefore to be disposed of in a
free act of goodness as to the gift and measure, and in a fit Ps. 27 14. Joh.
5.2, etc. Mal. 3.1.
and in those holy duties wait upon God for his enlargements of comfort: Lie
still (O thou distressed soul!) lie still at the Pool of Bethesda, attend God
in his Ordinances; the Angel of the Covenant will descend, yea he is descended,
the waters are troubled: And know then it is his method, first to trouble, and
then to cure; first to afflict, and then to comfort; on purpose to make us
prize the grace whereby we are comforted and cured, and resist we Satan, having
that resistance armed with fortitude, fortified with constancy, and constant
in obedience.

3. Stay thy self upon some promise of thy God: And if thou search the sacred
treasury of the holy Scriptures, there is no Affliction which thou may not
suit with a Promise; which Promise do thou convert into prayer, and press God
in an humble importunity for David's practice be thy pattern, and his success
thine encouragement. We hear him complain, how he is weary with his groaning,
and his soul even fainting in him with long waiting for his God: My soul is
sore vexed; Ps. 6.3.6.
but thou, O Lord, how long! O divine Aposiopesis! At once he breathes, and
stops that breath; he complains, and checks that complaint; his desires are
hot, which yet he gently cools with the awfulness of the voice of his weeping,
and graciously grants his supplication. v. 8, 9.
Such is Gods wisdom and goodness, that he does but delay to grant, till it be
a fit time to give: Nazarat. 2. adv. Euuo^.
So that with him, (...), (as Nazianzen speaks) it is a mercy to hold back his
mercies, and a favor to defer his loving kindness; for that,

Wherefore, O thou languishing and distressed soul! who stayest thy self upon
the promises of thy God, made unto thee in Christ; as thou convert'st it into
prayer, so wait for its performance with patience. Yea, as the Prophet speaks
of its vision, Though it tarry, wait for it, Hab. 2.3. S. Aug. med. 41.
for it will surely come. Veniet Redemptor tuus, quia bonus est; nec tardabit,
quia pius est: Thy Redeemer will come, for he is gracious; and he will not stay
his coming too long, for he is holy; holy in his faithfulness and truth, making
good his word, his promise, upon which he has caused thee to hope. Though for
the present then, Ps. 119.49.
such is the violence, and continuance of thy luctam luctnosam, a sorrowful
combat; yet be constant in thy prayer and patience, and through faith in the
promise, thou shall have laetam victoriam, a joyful conquest.

Objections answered.
Obj. 1. Alas, the promises we have in Scripture they are general; whereas the
promise to Israel of deliverance from Egypt and from Babylon, the promise to
David of establishing his throne and kingdom, and other the promises to the
Saints and servants of God in Scripture, they were given them in particular:
And thus, if I particular promise of deliverance out of my particular distress,
I could then quiet my soul in a patient waiting for the salvation of my God;
being assured, that if the Laws of Medes and Persians, Dan. 6.8.
much more the Word of the most High God, it alters not; but as the Lord is
gracious in his promise, so will he be faithful in the performance.

Answ. General promises have their particular application, and so become as the
object of faith, so the support of the soul in each particular condition.
Indeed, it has been the privilege of some more devout souls, and more divine
tempers, by an experienced Latimer, Bishop in the beginning of Reformation,
that he had frequent in his prayers, and firm in his confidence, these three
things: Queen Elizabeth's obtaining the Crown; His sealing the Truth with his
blood; and the third (which he used to express with greatest (...) of devotion,
and vehemencey of zeal,) was this, The Gospel restored England. All which God
has fulfilled.

But what said I; all fulfilled? No sure: Upon perusing this passage of
History, I was affected in my thoughts, observing the duplication of the good
Fathers prayer, that it was for the Gospels restoring once again, and once
again in England. I hope the Spirit of prayer and of prophecy here went
together; and as the Gospel has been already once again restored unto our
fathers, so it shall be once again restored unto us and unto our children; as
it has been once restored from Romish Superstition, so it shall be once again
restored from Heretical, Schismatical, and Sacrilegious Profanation. And this,
oh this, do we further with our prayers, our tears, our deepest humiliations!
I call to mind the Historical tradition concerning S. Augustine; That his
Monica frequently applying herself to S. Ambrose, that famous Bishop, with
bitter mournings for her son, then a blasphemous Maniche, and of a dissolute
life, though after an Orthodox Father, and of a religious conversation: S.
Ambrose observing her continual lamentations, dismissed her with these words of
comfort and confidence; that, Tot lachrymarum filius, etc. The son of so many
tears should not perish. Oh! did the Sons of this Church for their Mother, as
Monica the Mother did for her Son, Isa. 62 6, 7. Luke 18: 7.
importune God with prayers and tears, day and night, giving him no rest; I
could with confidence make particular application of Christ's general promise,
and tell them in the words of S. Ambrose, a little changed, -- Tot lachrymarum
Matter, The Mother of so many tears, the Church of so many prayers, shall not be
ruined; The gates of hell, even the policy of men and devils shall not prevail
against her. But oh! I fear, I fear, our prayers have been so long out of the
Church, that most men leave the Church out of their prayers.

divine privilege of Gods devoutest Saints, to have a secret persuasion and
impulse of the Spirit, for the asking by prayer, and believing through faith,
particular blessings, as if given in particular promises: yet, that which is
the pattern of our practice, is an application of the general promises to our
particular conditions, with an humble submission unto God in the order of his
providence, to dispose of our distress and of our deliverance, as shall long
date of time to the performance of his promise, yet let not our hearts faint,
nor faith fail, seeing there is certainly no void and empty space, no vacuum in
his providence; but the interval is that of preparing the seed to harvest, the
fitting his people for deliverance; and as the sharper Winter makes the Spring
more fruitful, the harvest more plentiful; so the sharper affliction makes our
graces more pure, our deliverance more glorious.

Obj. 2. I have long expected, and could with patience have

Answ. If God increase thy burden, continue thou instant in prayer, and he will
doubtless either increase thy strength, or else hasten thy deliverance. That of
S. Paul stands firm: God is faithful, who will not suffer those that are his to
be tempted above what they are able. 2 Cor. 10.13. Theoph. in loc.
(...), (as Theophylact) God proportions our burden to our strength, or else
gives strength propor ionable to our burden; so that the force of Satan's
temptations shall not exceed the power of Gods grace. Wherefore,

Further, take this admonition; That thou cherish an expectation of distresses
happening, and withal make good a preparation against the happening of
distresses; for nothing more discomposeth the frame of soul, or disturbeth the
peace of mind, then when our Quae alii diu patiendo, sapiens diu cogitando,
levia facit: Those things which others make light by patience, in
long-suffering, the wise man makes light by patience, in long foreseeing. Good
it is then in afflictions, still to expect the worst: And thus, what ill
befalls us, will be the lighter; and what good happens to us, it will be the
sweeter. Expect we the worst, not in a distracting fear, but in a wary
prudence; not

Thus (O thou afflicted soul!) it remains firm, as a sure Rule Direction, That
whatsoever is the weight or continuance of thy trouble, thou stay thy self upon
the Promise, waiting by prayer and patience for the salvation of thy God.

O Blessed JESUS! the Lord of life, Prince of glory, and Captain of our
salvation! who have vanquished Satan and all the powers of darkness: Spiritual
Conflicts; Guide them with thy councels, sustain them with thy grace, refresh
them with thy comforts, preserve them in thy love, and crown them with thy
glory. Amen, Amen. Halleluiah!
THE Preacher's Tripartite.

BOOK III.

TO Establish TRVTH and PEACE, IN SEVERAL SERMONS Against the present Heresies
and Schisms; ESPECIALLY As to The Gospels Ministry. Infants Baptism. The
Mystery of the Trinity. The Divinity of the Holy Ghost. The Authority and
Interpretation of the Scriptures. The Judgment and Communion of the Church, and
The Worship of Gods Sanctuary.


By ROBERT MOSSOM.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Newcomb. 1657.

To the most Noble LADY, MARY Dutchess-Dowager of RICHMOND and LENOX, Her
Grace: And to the Illustrious, ESME Duke of RICHMOND and LENOX, Earl of MARCH,
etc. His Grace.
Most Noble and Illustrious!
ACcept the Devotion of an humble Votary, who truly honors the Name you bear
and beautify; presuming it will be no Soloecism to join in one Dedication of
Honor, whom God and Nature have conjoined in so near a Relation of Blood.
Besides, it is here an innocent Policy, (though in Religion no right Piety) by
offering a Supplication to the Mother, to make more acceptable to the Son; and
by making an oblation to the Son, to become the better accepted of the Mother:
For thus, I have a Patronage secured by a Mediation, which will not be denied.
And indeed, it is auspicious this, that confuting Schism, I have an United
Patronage for my protection. But, that the Inscription of Your Names may appear
neither insolency nor insinuation; be pleased to know, the main design of this
Dedication is, to be a Monument of Gratitude to the happy memory and excellent
merit of that Illustrious Personage, JAMES Duke of Richmond and Lenox, etc. the
deceased Husband and Father: In whom Virtue gave Honor its perfect tincture: He
was truly FAITHFUL and RELIGIOUS; A Title which does eternize his Name and
Person. Now, that from him my former Labors received approbation, and my self
encouragement, I cannot acknowledge on a fitter Scene, nor perpetuate in a
firmer Record, then this of a Public Dedication.

Thus (Madam) you see what tribute of Thankfulness I owe to your deceased Lord:
And to whom shall I pay the debt, but either to the Executrix, or the Heir? the
Heir to his Fathers virtues and goodness, as well as Honors and Estate. And
here I cannot but congratulate that enlarged comfort your Grace has, in
beholding the fair hopes of this tender Youth, so green and flourishing; his
Heroic disposition shows of what Stock he comes; A Generous Plant, which
watered by a skilful hand, and cherished with an Heavenly influence, will
doubtless grow up to be a lofty Cedar in our Libanus, whose leaves will shade,
and boughs will shelter; being as spreading, as tall; as good, as great; as
virtuous, as honorable. And thus, whilst after-Ages blush at the Prodigies of
this, they, reading your Name (My Lord) upon record, shall adore the
Providence, which has preserved, in You, a Nursery of Heroic worth; which,
maugre all the malice and mischief of degenerate Times, shall flourish to
Posterity; and bless Afterdayes with that, we deplore as lost in ours, Piety,
Prudence, and Honor, the truest Patriots of a Nations happiness, and the
Churches peace. ESME, the Name (as it is anciently observed) of the most
eminently successful Lords of this Illustrious Family.
May your Person (My Lord) be as prosperous, as your Name's auspicious: A Name
that speaks Nobility of the best stock, Ancient Descent; and of the fairest
impression too, Virtue and Valor. I will not presume to instruct your tender
Age, knowing well in what Artists hands you are for the Jewels polishing: Only,
what is presented may happily contribute to the right informing of your Noble
Youth, that no False Light of our Days Impostures may seduce you to become a
Proselyte of Heresy and Schism; but as a true Disciple of the Holy Jesus, you
may be firm in the faith, religious in your life, blessed in your death, and
glorious to Eternity.

Now, as I have begun, so I shall close my Dedication, with an happy Union; not
declaring only mine own thoughtt, but even Fame's report; That you are (Madam)
an happy Mother, in so good a Son; and that you are (My Lord) an happy Son, in
so good a Mother. And see the Cedar's shade! I joy my self as happy too, in so
good a Patronage: For, in all humility I devote my self,

Most Noble and Illustrious, YOUR GRACES, Unfeigned Votary and Servant, R.
MOSSOM.

THE FIRST SERMON 1 COR. 11.19. There must be also Heresies among you, that
they
THE INTRODUCTION.
The Introduction.
that we can say of our English Church, what Lyrinensis does of Origen's
Family, Illustrata Martyrio, etc. Vincent. Ly^in. cont. Novat. c 23.
That it is made Illustrious by Martyrdom, as with a Royal Crown; and
beautified with the magnificent furniture of all kind of Learning, whether it
be that of diverse Pentecost Effusion of Gifts and Graces. But oh! how does our
sad experience tell us, That with the bu lding up of Sion, Satan and his agents
have begun to destroy and pull down what was built? The holy zeal of Martyrs
and Saints has been undermined with the Hypocritical zeal of Heresy and
Schisms: Heresy endeavoring to pervert the Catholic Doctrine, and Schism to
subvert the Apostolic Discipline of our Church, and so at once to raze the
Foundation, and at least break down the walls of this Spiritual building: A
Fabric of so rare and divine a structure as did attract the eye of all
Nations. The Romanist looking on with envy, the Protestant with love; all with
wonder.

But oh the guilt, the provoking guilt of ingratitude and profaneness! Psalm.
^02.13, 14.
Our Sion is laid in the dust. And now as in the broken Walls of a Palace,
Adders and venomous Serpents; so in the public ruptures of our Church,
factions, and poisonous opinions, do daily breed and multiply. Yea in a sinful
fecundity of Error, one Heretical opinion has given birth unto another, till
this whole City, yea, this whole Nation, once incorruptae veritatis Sacrarium,
the very Temple of chaste Truth, Lyrin. Cont. Haeres. c. 31.
is now become in the words of Vincentius, Turpium the unclean Stews of
adulterate Errors. Oh how is the Beauty of our Religion reformed, wholly
defaced with the many Forms of Religion, even to a making the greater number
wholly irreligious? It is an hard, yet a just censure, That men either turn
Scepticks, and question all things; or Atheists, and believe nothing: (...).
Epiph. lib. Haeres.
Like those in Epiphanius, neither Christians, Jews nor Gentiles; but whilst
they will be something of all, they become nothing at all.

But (Beloved) in this general defection, however persons Schismatical,
Heretical, and Atheistical, however they forsake the Church as the Capernaits
did Christ, Joh. 6.67.
who followed him for the loaves; yet hear the Church be speaking you, as
Christ did his Apostles, Nunquid and vos -- Will ye also go away? Oh methinks I
hear, and I hear with joy, the secret whisper of your secret thoughts,
returning the Church St. Peter's answer of a (...), To whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of eternal life. O this, this is your day Paul spoke to the
Church of Corinth, it was spoken also to the Church of England, (...). There
must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved, may be made
manifest among you.

Division.
Observe in the words two general parts, A Premonition, and a Premunition; a
Fore-warning, and a Fore-arming: The Premonition and Fore-warning in the former
words, There must be also Heresies The Premunition and Fore-arming in the
latter words, That they which are approved, may be made manifest among you.

In the first general part, the Premunition, observe four particulars, the evil
foretold; in its quality of nature; its quantity of guilt; its certainty of
event; and its propinquity of danger. First, Its quality of nature, Heresies:
Secondly, Its quantity of guilt, (...), also or even Heresies: Thirdly, The
certainty of event, (...) there must be also Heresies: Fourthly, The
propinquity of danger, (...) among you. There must be also Heresies among you.

In the second general part, the Premunition, observe two particulars, a
Fore-arming them with Constancy, and with Comfort* That they be approved.
Secondly, Comfort in their Trial; knowing this to be the end of God's
permitting Heresies in the Church, That they who are approved may be made
manifest. Thus, There must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.


THe first general part, the Premonition, Explic.
and therein of the first particular, The evil foretold, in its quality of
nature, Heresies. There must be also Heresies. We will consider the name, and
then the nature. 1. The name (...), it is derived (say the best Etymologists)
(...), from choosing; as being that opinion or sect which a man chooses to
himself: At first a word of an indifferent signification, till by use in St.
Paul's Epistles, and Ecclesiastical Writers, materiale and the formale of
Heresy together, I conceive, we may thus define it, to be a Pertinacious error
of judgment in the Fundamental Doctrines of Faith. Upon which definition we
will give you our several Observations.

As first observe, not every Error of Judgment in Doctrines of Every man to
abound in his own sense; with this proviso, That we violate not the Analogy of
Faith, Romans 12.6.
and use our liberty without breach of Charity; for as there was no noise of
Axes or Hammers in the building of the Temple; so, nor should there be any jars
from the difference of Judgment and Opinions in the Edifying of the Church.
True it is, no Instrument was ever so perfectly in tune, Artists hand would
mend something; and so, no judgment was ever so perspicaciously knowing, but
that some fancy or opinion could find matter of dissent. Look we back upon the
Primitive times themselves, and how do we find Chrysostom and Epiphanius,
Basil and Damasus, Jerome and Austine, Victor and Irenaeus, and others, though
learned and holy men, Famous in their Generations; yet in matters of some
consequence, though of less moment, differing in their opinions, and so
necessarily some of them erroneous; yet did not their dissension of judgments
(in which they were excellent Paterns of Hum^lity and Charity) yet d^d not (I
say) their dissension of judgments break forth into disunion of hearts; but in
all things they held fast the bond of love, as Disciples of Christ, and sons of
the Church.

evertendo, or concutiendo; in direct terms, basis and foundation of our
Christian Religion. But here is the great quaere, What Doctrines of Faith are
fundamental, in which to err with pertinacy, is Heretical? Here, not to
determine the cause, but to give you my judgment. For I find the ablest
judgments declining the cause, as too weak to determine it. 1 Cor. 3.11.
To give you (I say) my judgment, observe St. Paul. Other foundation (says the
Apostle) can no man lay, then that is laid, which But how then is Jesus Christ
objective, the foundation of our Faith? Why in his one Person, his diverse
Natures, his different Estates, his several Offices, and his inestimable
Benefits. According to all which (me thinks) our Church gives us the best
Commentary upon the Apostles Text, in that Analogy of Faith, set forth in the
Apostles Creed, the Decalogue, the Lords Prayer, and the Doctrine of the
Sacraments; of the Sacraments, as to their Essentials.

Murder, Adultery, Theft, and the like, though they be sins of an heinous
nature, yet are they not of an Heretical guilt; to act those sins forbidden by
Gods Word is Profaneness; but to deny those acts to be sins, and Gods Word to
have forbidden them, that is Heresy. So then dogmatically to deny any Article
of our Creed, any Command of the Decalogue, any Petition of the Lords Prayer,
any Heretical.

Augustine was wont to say, Errare possum Haereticus esse nolo; I may err, but
I will not be an Heretic, not be pertinacious in Error, wilfully opposing the
light and evidence of Divine Truth. And it is Bellarmin's Apology which he
makes for Durand, Bellarm de Euchar. l. 3. c. 13.
That though his opinion in some things was Heretical, yet was he not himself
an Heretic, Quia paratus fuit Ecclesiae Judicio acquiescere, Because he was
ready to acquiesce in the Churches judgment. Indeed, Humility and Charity
preserves from Heresy, as being formally pertinacious, though not as
materially erroneous. We see it in St. Cyprian, in the case of Rebaptization;
to whom the Church of Christ has given a general approbation of his Person and
Gifts; yet an Universal condemnation of his Opinion and Error.

And it is Vincentius his observation, Authors ejusdem opinionis Cathelici,
consectato^es vero haeretici judicantur, ^hsolvuntur Magistri condemnantur
discipali. Vincent. Lyrin. Adv. Haeres. l. 11. Correcturus erat sententiam
suam, tanto excel lenitor quanto humilior. Aug de Bapt. l. 2. c. 4.
That oftentimes the Authors of the same opinion are judged Catholic, but
their followers Heretical; the Masters absolved, the Disciples condemned; and
he gives the instance in St. Cyprian, and the Donatists: In him, Humility and
Charity made his Error pardonable; in them, Pride and Pertinacy Augustine
undertakes to be his compurgator, That he would have corrected his judgment and
rectified his opinion being by so much, the more excellent, by how much he was
the more humble.

To this instance of St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, add we an other of St.
Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers: Who is it that does not read his name in the Album
or Church Roll of Holy and Orthodox Hilar. in l. 10. de Trin.
That Christ had Corpus quidem ad paciendum, sed non naturam ad dolendum, a
Body indeed to suffer, but not a nature to grieve. And again, his stripes and
buffettings, Afferre quidem ei impetum passionis, non tamen dolorem passionis
infer. Sic and in Psalm. 53. and in Psalm. 138.
his thorns and nails, they did bring upon him the force of violence, but not
the anguish of pain in his Passion. Though in this, his opinion he was
Heretical, yet not being admonished, not being convinced, Peter the Minorite,
who at first affirmed it in a predicant zeal to move the Auditors tears, but
after maintained it in a pertinacious obstinacy to a disturbing the Churches
peace. Guido Carme lit. l. de Haeres. Anno 1311.
For this (I say) he was justly censured and condemned by the Council of
Vienna, for an Heretic.

Augustine is positive and plain, Aug. ep. 162. ad init.
That they who defend their opinion, though false with no pertinacious
animosity, but seek the truth in a wary tenderness, and cautelous solicitude,
Corrigi parati cum invenerint, being ready to amend their Error when they find
the truth: As for such, Nequaquam sunt inter Haereticos deputandi, They are by
no means to be reckoned in the number of Heretics.

But now then in the close: Seeing Pertinacy formally constitutes hold fast his
Tenet; Aristot. Ethic. l. 1. c. 3.
keep still to his opinion, and rather disturb the Churches peace, then
acknowledge his own error; such a person is in the judgment of St. Paul to be
rejected; Tit. 3.10, 11.
that is, Excommunicated and cast out of the Church, as a man subverted, and
(...) condemned of himself; as sinning against the Light and Evidence of his
own Conscience.

Thus we have laid open unto you the several particulars of Heresies
definition, as a pertinacious Error of Judgment, in the Fundamental Doctrines
of Faith: And in this you have the Explication of the first particular, The
evil foretold, as to its quality of nature. Heresies. There must be also
Heresies.



Answ. 1. Pride and pertinacy of spirit; 2. Impurity and profaneness of life; 3.
Envy at some, and admiration of others; 4. A familiarity with Heretics, and
indifferency in Religion; 5. An itching curiosity and affectation of Novelties.
Lastly, Covetous desires and ambitious designs.

1. Pride and pertinacy of spirit. Pride, Lucifers sin and fall, and the
Scholars are of the same temper with their Master; all Heretics of the same
resolution with Satan, Isa. 14.13.
ascendam in altum; They Bern. ep. 190.
As St. Bernard of Abailardus; so experience tells us of all Heretics, they
are at their Omnes sic, ego autem non sic. Though the Ancients and the Orthodox
think and say thus, I think and say otherwise; they of that mind, but I not of
their mind: This the right genius and proper strain of Heresies. Such a
Scelerata praesumptio, Vincent. Lirin. c. 42.
such a daring and high-towering presumption Lirinensis tells us Nestorius; who
boasted himself, the first and only man who understood Scripture; such a pride
is common to all Heretics, especially those of the Anabaptists race; all
Gnostics for their pretensions of knowledge in Divine Mysteries.

1 Timothy 6.3, 4
But as St. Paul gives us the resolution, If any man consent not to the Doctrine
which is according unto Godliness, (...) he is puffed up with an airy conceit of
knowing much, yet is empty and vain, knowing nothing: It is the Heretics aim
to be all Masters in Israel, all, Preachers all, every one a Simon Magus, a
(...), Some great one. And this Pride it is that begets Pertinacy; Pertinacy,
that bar upon the Window of the Soul, to keep out the light of truth. Sicut
constantia non sinit hominem depravari, sic pertinacia non sinit corrigi. Aug.
ep. 110. Quando animositatem illam viceris qua teneris, veritatem tenere
poteris qua vinceris. Aug. l. 6. c. ult.
As Constancy in the truth will not suffer a man to be depraved with Error, so
Pertinacy in error will not suffer a man to be corrected by the truth. And
therefore St. Austin writing against Julian the Pelagian, he thus bespeaks him,
When thou have overcome come that pertinacy with which thou art held, then thou
shall hold that Oh how loath are men, who have professed errors, to come to their
retractations! Though in this of retracting error, they have learned St.
Augustine for their pattern. They shame to recant errors, yet shame not to
oppose the truth. Oh the Pertinacy of a proud spirit!

2. Impurity and profaneness of life. It is the excellent observation of
Gregory in his Morals, Vt per hoc quo^ quidam nequiter vivunt, and illud
pe^^ant quod salubriter credunt. Greg. Moral. l. 25. c. 10. 1 Timothy 1 19. Romans
1.28. Aug. de Not. and great. c. 67.
that it oftentimes comes to pass by a dispensation of just Judgment, That some
men by their corrupt lives which they lead, do lose that sound truth which they
profess; and so putting away a good Conscience, make shipwreck concerning the
Faith. Dissolute men are very often given up to a reprobate mind. And thus it
becomes an equal dispensation of Gods Justice, that, Qui sciens recte non
facit, amittit scire quod rectum sit. He that does not Rom 1.21.
That those who know God in the way of truth, yet glorify him not as God, 2
These. 2.12.
in the way of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.8.
God justly gives them up to a blindness of mind to bel^eve a lie; and so, for
their being reprobate in their life, they become reprobate concerning the Faith.

Know then, O man, to be taken off from open profaneness, and Shepherd of
Israel, rescue thee out of the paw of the Lion, by the power of his grace.

3. Envy at some, and admiration of others. Above all the sinful affections,
Envy and Malice do most blind the judgment of the mind, and cloud the light
of Truth; from hence is that spirit of contradiction, so common with Heretics,
Tertul. Adv. Valent. c. 4.
Valentinus aims at a Bishopric; and missing of his aim, he is so full of envy
and malice, that Arrius in envy and malice to Alexander, Theodor. l. 4. Haeret.
fab. init. Aug. de Haeres. c. 69.
Bishop of Alexandria; and Donatus in envy and malice to Cecilian, Bishop of
Carthage; they broach their Heresies, and become ringleaders of their Sects; to
the great dishonor of Christ's sacred Truth, and the general disturbance of the
Churches Peace.

And now what Envy and Malice does in some, by an antipathy of hate, the like
does the esteem and admiration of others by a sympathy of love; Vert. de
Praescript. c 3.
when men do Ex personis probare fidem, non ex fide personas, approve of the
Faith from men's persons, not of men's persons from the Faith. Thus Nestorius out
of a reverent and too affectionate esteem he had of his friend Anastasius;
Socra^: l 7 c. 32,
from him he sucked his error, and heightens it to an Heresy, denying the
Blessed Virgin, the Mother of Christ, to be (...) the Mother of God. And thus
Cyprian having Tertullian in so great admiration, as to a Da Magistrum calling
to his Amanuensis, he used to say of Tertullians Works, Vid. Tert. de Bapt c
15. and de pudicit. c. 19. Matthew. 23.10.
Give me my Master. From him Cyprian received the first principles of his error
of Rebaptization, in his asserting the nullity of Heretics Baptism.

Our Savior will have us to acknowledge no Master but Christ; none to an
(...), ipse dixit, none whose will we may make our Law, Col. 2.3.
his word our Rule; none thus our Master but Christ, In whom are hid the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He, he is our Sacred audite eum hear ye him,
Matthew 17.5. Joh. 1 14.
him, who is full of grace and truth, who can neither deceive with error, nor
seduce unto sin; but will so instruct our minds and sanctify our hearts, as
to order our lives, and save our souls.

4. A familiarity with Heretics, and a careless indifferency in men's selves.
The plague is not more catching, pitch is not more defiling, then Heresy;
which still is active and busy in gaining Proselytes, corrupt minds and
destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6 5.
St. Paul's gives Timothy the admonition of an abscede, From such turn away,
withdraw thy self, shun the congregations of Heresy, as thou would do an
house infected with the plague; that being more dangerous to the Soul, then
this to the body; corrupt doctrine is more destructive to the spiritual health,
then corrupt air is to the corporal. Who is there of you that have friends
perverted by Heresies? Are they not still urging Matthew. 7.15.
If so, remember our Saviors admonition, Beware of false Prophets; lend them
not too much your ear, not at all your bosom; yield them not too much your
company, by no means your intimate familiarity; give them civil converse and
communication, but be not persuaded to their Churches fellowship and communion.

Whilst Heretics are zealous to pervert, and men are careless to preserve
their Souls, no wonder if so many be seduced to their destruction: Isid. l. 3.
ep. 191.
Such a (...), as Isidore calls it, such a laziness and sloth of spirit is upon
many, that they care not to trouble themselves with examining what is truth;
but as men indifferent in matters of Religion, every easy persuasion of a
friend, is sufficient conviction of judgment, to sway their Conscience, and
conform their practice, to what is most Heretical and irreligious.

But (Beloved) as for you, of whom I hope better things, let me admonish you,
not to part with that precious treasure, your souls; and that more precious
then your souls, the Truth and Faith of our Lord Jesus: Part not with them, at
least, not upon such easy terms; but upon any solicitations to Popery, to
Schism, to Heresy, call to your assistance and advice, some able and faithful
Confessor, some reverend Father, or learned Minister of the Church; and if the
person

5. An itching curiosity and affectation of novelties. This is that which has
made so many Seekers, that they are become a Sect. Seek and ye shall find,
says our Savior. Seek, is the precept; Matthew 7.7.
ye shall find is the promise. But no wonder if men find what is not intended
in the promise, wise unto Sobriety, Romans 12.3.
is a temper for all those who will be sincere in the Faith. But he who still
is affected with novelties, no wonder if he be soon infected with Heresies; and
they that have the itch of

6. Covetous desires and ambitious designs; All Heresy and Schism we find
still cherished with the warm zeal of a full purse. Had not the Church of Rome
those strong attractives of Cardinal Dignities, Papal Indulgences,
Ecclesiastical Immunities, and Spiritual Benefices, I believe, she would find
few Patrons of her cause, and gain few Proselytes to her profession: The Foxes
would not trouble the Vineyard, were it not for the Grapes, neither would
Heresy and Schism so much Church, were it not for her Revenues. That poorer
Fry and meaner Sect of Quakers, would not, as they do, 2 Timothy 3 6.
Creep into houses, and boast themselves in so poor a Triumph, as a leading
captive silly women, were it not as some men's ruined estates can tell them,
That there-out they suck no small advantage.

And I refer it to the Consciences of most Ministers, whether the sequestered
Living was not the strongest Argument to convince their Judgments, to a
deserting as well as a dissenting, from what they had Invader of the Churches
possessions, whether this be not the great weight which keeps down his wishes
of the Churches restoring, even the thoughts of vomiting up the morsels he has
so greedily swallowed, giving up the possessions he has so covetously seized?
When covetous and ambitious minds, see profit and preferment soonest obtained
by Faction; what Schism, what Heresy, yea, what Perjury will they not allow,
embrace, and follow? Primianus and Maximianus heads of two Donatist factions,
St. Augustine tells them, That, were it not for Faction, Primianus would be
Postremianus, and Maximianus, Minimianus: The like we may say, of the greatest
Patriarchs of Heresies and Schisms, That, were it not for Faction, kept up by
covetousness and ambition, they would soon become as low in esteem, as in
merit; as mean in degree, as in desert.

To close then, from the Premises we may infer, That Heresy is Domitius used
to say, Nil nasci potuit nisi detestabile and infausium. Suet.
That of him and Agrippina nothing could be begotten, but what was ominous and
odious, hateful and monstrous; and such was Nero. The like may be said as to
this cursed Brood, That, of the Devil, and the Flesh, nothing can be begotten,
but what is horrid and heinous, Carnal and Diabolical; and such is Heresy.
Joh. 8 44.
Satan he is the Father of lies, and therefore as Ignatius Ignat. ep. 1. ad
Trall.
(...), Heretical opinions they must needs be Satan's offspring, the Devils
inventions. And as Heresies are from Satan, as the Father of lies, so begot of
the Flesh as the mother of corruption; Gal. 5.20.
and therefore the works of the flesh are manifest, says the Apostle, amongst
which are reckoned up, with adultery and murders, Seditions and Heresies. Some
carnal affection, either of pride and pertinacy of spirit, or of impurity and
profaneness of life, or of envy and malice, or of slothfulness and
indifferency, its father the Devil. And thus we have done with our proposed
task, To show you by what means Satan draw's men to the sin, and involves them
in the guilt of Heresies. Now give me leave to close with a few words of
Application.

Applic.
Be we sincere in our obedience, as a chief means of being sound in For, this
is our Calling, to walk worthy of the Lord (...) in all well pleasing. Col.
1.10.
Of which general notion, the Greek Scholiast gives us this equal distribution;
(...), in words, in works, and in opinions, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in 1 Timothy
or Doctrines of Faith: And therefore with St. Chrysostom, True Faith is
compared unto a sound Ship, without which we cannot pass the Sea of this
troublesome World, to the safe Harbor of Heavens Pelagius, such was Donatus;
yea, such were many of the Arrians, of the Macedonians, even to an high repute
amongst the Orthodox themselves, as St. Basil and Nazianzen, both will
witness.) Suppose we then (I say) a man to be Chaste, Temperate, Hospitable,
Just in his Dealings, Zealous in his Devotions; but withal, that he is an
Heretic; and then hear what St. Augustine will tell us, August. tom. 7. de
Bapt. l. 4. c. 18.
Nulli utique dubium est, propter hoc solum quod Haereticus est, regnum Dei non
possessurum. There is no doubt at all, but for this alone, That he is an
Heretic, he shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And this of St. Augustine
does well accord with that of St. Paul, 2 These. 2.13, 14. Where he gives us to
understand, That if we hope to obtain Jesus Christ, it must be through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. And, O thou blessed
Spirit of Grace, so sanctify us through the Truth, that we be not led away
into the errors of the wicked; but amidst the many Heresy, which are amongst
us, let it be manifest, that we are approved. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON 1 COR. 11.19. There must be also Heresies among you,
that they which are approved, may be made manifest
THE INTRODUCTION.

The Introduction.
WHen I see the greatest Lights of Learning, have Aquinas, Doctor Angelicus;
Bonaventure, Doctor Seraphicus; Scotus, Doctor Subtilis; and Alexander Hales,
Doctor Irrefragabilis; but enter we the Congregation, and there instead of
Angelical Aquine, Seraphical Bonaventure, Subtle Scotus, and Irrefragable
Hales. Instead of these, we meet (what I blush to tell you) the Illuminated
Cobbler, the Sublime Coachman, the Profound Skinner, the Inspired Waterman, and
the like. And now finding so much Error in the Prophets Schools, shall we seek
for truth in the Separate Congregations? No sure, their many new lights, what
are they, but so many anciently exploded Heresies? Those very Errors which lay
urned and buried with their Founders, are raked up by the hand of a proud
ignorance, and their dust thrown in the eyes of the vulgar to a blinding them
with folly, that they cannot see the truth. Whilst then we view the learned
Schools, or the illuminated Congregations, with those in Melancthons time, Quos
fugiamus habemus, sed quos sequamur non intelligimus. We have whom we may fly,
but understand not, whom we may follow.

Seeing therefore with the travailing woman the Churches emblem, driven into
the Wilderness, Revel. 12.1, 2, 6.
what shall be our guide that we loose not our way? where shall we find our
Cynosure, our Polestar, to direct us in our passage, that we miss not of life
and salvation by Jesus Christ? Why see, see I point you to our Book of
Articles, that Summary of Faith, that Star of Truth, borrowing its Sacred Light
from the Sun of Righteousness, in the Gospel of our Jesus. This, this
Commentary of our Creed, it has Pillar of saving truth; what St. Paul
foretold, is now come to pass, and this Scripture is this day fulfilled in your
ears, (...). There must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved

2. The quantity of guilt, (...) even, or also Heresies. Explic.
Whereby the Apostle does denote unto us, the more heinous guilt of Heresy,
being above that of Schism; for so, relating to the former verse, whereas the
Apostle had heard that there were Schisms among them, he receives the report
with a (...). I partly believe it. Verse. 18.
And as a Reason of this, his facility and easiness of belief, he adds this
Premonition, For there must be also Heresies among you. As if Gal. 5.12. it is
added (...), and by way of an Auxesis, intimating the aggravation of Heresy
from its comparison with Schism.

Now how horrid a sin Schism is, may appear from the judgment Cyprian founded
upon the Testimony of St. Paul, Cypr. de Uni^a^ Eccles. n^m. 12.
Macula ista nec sauguine abluitur, gravis haec culpa nec passione purgatur. It
is a stain upon the Soul not washed of with our blood; a guilt upon the
Conscience not expiated by Martyrdom: And this Cyprians Assertion is founded
upon St. Paul's Doctrine, in 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Schism, as violating the Bond of
Charity, destroys the Churches Unity; but Heresy (beside the breach of the
Churches Unity) as violating the Foundation of Faith, destroys the Churches
Being; the very Essential Form of the Church, consists in Union; the Bond of
which Union, is Faith; which Faith, Heresy destroys; both in the Object, and
in the Act; both as to Doctrine, and as to Grace.

Matthew. 18.17.
Observe our Savior, He that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee Velut
Ethnicus, as an Heathen; that is, Let him be excommunicate, Tertullian, Tertul.
de Pulic. c. 19.
Apud nos Ethnico par and super Ethnicum haereticus habetur. With us the
Heretic is accounted not only as, but even worse then the Heathen. And if we
ask Epiphanius the reason, his answer is ready, Epiphan. in Anchorat. n. 9.
and resolute, (...), A perverse faith is worse then Infideiity, and so the
Heretic is worse then the Heathen. Both indeed have their Infidelity, only
with this difference; the Heathens infidelity is Negative, and the Heretics is
Positive. Commission exceed in guilt, sins of Omission; so the Heretics
infidelity which is Positive, exceeds in guilt, the Infidelity of the Heathen
which is Negative: Besides open enmity is not so hateful as secret treachery;
nor a professed adversary so odious, as a perjured friend.

If we consult the writings of the sacred Scriptures, and of the ancient
Fathers, we find an holy zeal pursuing Heresy, with the blackest characters
of guilt, and heaviest sentence of doom; ask St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
Heresies they are pernicious, destructive, damnable; Tit. 1.11. Ezekiel. 22.25.
they subvert whole houses, they devour souls, they seize the heart, and life
of Religion; corrupting the mind and stupifying the Conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2. 2 Timothy 3.8. Revel. 8.11.
to a making blind, hardened, seard, reprobate. This the wormwood which makes
bitter the waters of the Sanctuary; this the leaven that sowres the whole lump,
Matthew. 16.11.
the whole Doctrine of the Gospel; Matthew. 13.38.
this the tares which choke the good Wheat in Christ's field; this the canker
that so deeply eats, 2 Timothy 2.17.
the gangreen that so dangerously Rev. 9.1.
this the smoke of the furnace, and of the infernal pit; that darkens the Sun,
and infects the Air; that clouds the Truth, and corrupts the Word of Grace.
These the black characters of Heresy in the writings of the sacred Scriptures;
and the like we find in the writings of the ancient Fathers. Cyril. in Joan.
l. 1. c. 4.
Cyril he calls Heretics (...), and (...), the Devils journeymen in the works
of destruction, Nazian. Orat. 42.
and gins of death: Nazianzen he calls them (...), Satan's engines for Ignat. ad
Trall.
They are, says Ignatius (...), not followers of Christ, but hucksters of
Christianity; they cry up their opinions, as Mountebanks their Salves, and
promising strange Empyrical cures, they cheat simple souls with their
adulterate wares.

The Ancients, to show their hate of Heresy, compare it to those diseases
which are most deadly, and those Beasts which are most dangerous. They call it,
that contagious Plague, which killing one infects an hundred; that Hectic
Fever in the Churches Body, which is at first facilis curatu, but diffici is
cognitu, easy to be cured, but hard to be discovered; afterward becomes
facilis cognitu, but difficilis curatu, easy to be discovered, but hard to be
cured. Further, The Ancients call Heresy, that Scorpions sting which invenoms,
Hyaena which deceives and devours; this subtle and cruel Beast (as it is
repor^ed) will imitate the voice of a man, and oftentimes calling at the
Shepherds Cottages, does seize and devour them: Such a thing is Heresy,
counterfeiting the voice of Christ, as the Hyaena does the voice of a man, it
deceives and destroys Souls; yea, its malice and rage, is especially against
the Pastors of the Church, as the Shepherds of the Flock, on purpose the more
easily to scatter and spoil, to raven and devour the

I might enlarge in setting before you the bitter fruits of this cursed stock
of Heresy; even, Sedition, Murder, Sacrilege, Oppression, and the like; to
witness which, I might bring you the sad experiences of Christ's Church, under
the Arrian, Nestorian, and Macedonian factions; yea, and under the rage of the
Anabaptists frenzies; and above all, under the unparralel'd fury (if these days
have not out-vied them) of Papal persecutions. The Orthodox in their

Thus did the Orthodox in their prosecutions of Heretics; but how much
different were the Heretics in their persecutions of the Orthodox? Non ex
dialecticorum locis, sed ex carnificum officinis argumenta solvebant. The
Prison, the Dungeon, the Stake the Socrat. l. 2 c. 22 and 30 and S^z^ ^ en. l.
4. c. 2. and 20.
and by which they convinced; thus Socrates of the Macedonians. And such the
confutation from the Spanish Inquisition, and the Marian Persecution, Notantur
articuli and parantur fasciculi (says Erasmus) The Articles are read, and the
Faggots are ready; and yet certainly to bring to the Stake, and cut off with
present death, was a mercy to this cruelty, of pineing the whole Family with
want; and exposing persons to the hardships and sufferings, the names to the
ignominy and disgraces, but also the souls, the precious souls o^ their
Brethren to the snares and temptations of beggary and necessities. It is a
mercy indeed to give life, but it is a cruel mercy, unless that life be
suffered to have its livelihood.

To close: Amongst the Heathen, Ingratus and superbus, un^hankful and proud,
were thought a compendium of all reproachful language; Ingratum si dixeris
omnia dixeris, If thou call un hankful, thou speak all evil, says
Seneca; and to set forth Tarquinius in the deepest die of basest ignominy, the
Romans named him Tarquinius Superbus, Tarquin the Proud.

Now as for ingratitude, what greater then that of the Heretic, who Viper-like
eats out the Bowels of his Mother that gave him birth? And as for the pride of
the Heretic, it is that of Lucifer, truly Diabolical, a preferring the spirit
of error, before the Spirit of Truth, as in Pertinacy of Will, so in Pride of
Judgment. And those Chain of Heresy, he can easily lead (if it suit with his
further ends) into any other enormous impiety; though never so bloody and
cruel, never so filthy and carnal.

Thus we have given you the Exposition of the second particular, The quantity
of the guilt, (...), even, or also Heresies.

3. The certainty of its event, (...), There must be also Heresies: Must, not
in an Oportet of right and duty, but of fact and necessity; not of right and
duty as to obedience, but of fact and Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Sermon. 21. in
loc. Luke 9.22.
The words are a Prophecy, not a Precept; a Prediction, not an Exhortation; the
Oportet is like that of our Saviors, The Son of Man must suffer many things,
and be rejected of the Elders. An Oportet equivalent to a necesse est; a
necessity not absolute and fatal, but upon supposition and conditional; even
Posita causa ponitur affectus, the cause being granted, the effect does follow;
this being supposed, That Satan is malicious against the Church and truth There
must be also Heresies.

How often was there an Oportet in the New Testament, for a fulfilling the
prophecies of the Old? Now as concerning these last days, How many are the
prophecies which foretold false Prophets? how many are the prophecies from
Christ and his Apostles? Many Matthew. 24.11.
and shall deceive many; so our Savior foretells us. And this began betimes to
be fulfilled, for not many years after, 1 John 4.1.
St. John witnesses, Many false Prophets are gone out into the world; the
whole world is the false Prophets diocese. And now as for the latter days,
which though it take in the whole Chronical account from our Saviors
Ascension, yet more especially does it point to our times, upon whom the end of
the world is come: As to these then our latter days, the Spirit speaks
expressly, That some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils; so St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.1. Yea, we may observe,
the very Apostles are put to weed whilst they plant; the Church of Corinth,
and of Ephesus, even in St. Paul's time have those that deny the resurrection, 1
Cor. 15.12. and 2 Timothy 2.18. Galat. 5.2, 4, 7.
and overthrew the faith of some. The Church of Galatia has those that Judaism
with Christianism, the Ceremonial Rites with the Evangelical Mysteries. The
Church of Coloss has those, that patch Philosophical Notions to Gospel Truths,
Col. 2.18.
and the Worship of Angels to the Worship of God. The Church of Pergamus has
those that assert the doctrine of Balaam and the Nicholaitans. Revel. 2.14.15.
The Church of Thyatira has those that teach it lawful to commit fornication,
Revel. 2.20.
and eat things sacrificed to Idols.

Augustines time, which was about the fourth Century; August. l de Haeres. c.
88.
no less then Eighty eight Sects of Heresies were sprung up in the Church, each
divided one from another, and all from the truth. How many Heresies there are
amongst us, passes my skill to reckon, as much as it does your judgments to
ghess. Since we may say of London, what was once said of Africa, Semper aliquid
apportat novi, it always is bringing forth some^hing new; as that Country,
some new Monster, so this City, some new Africa: And as before we could pass
through that Country, there would be some new monster; so (confident I am)
before we could well pass through those Sects, there would be some new opinion;
some new opinion which we had not met with, some mungrel Heresy

Oh how do the Anabaptists, by a corrupt mixture of opinions (as those African
Beasts by an unnatural mixture of Seeds) how do they engender with the
Novatians, and beget a mishapt brood called Separatists? Again, how do they
engender with the Apostolici, and beget another as deformed a brood called
Levellers? They engender with Donatus, and are called Brownists; they engender
with Montanus, and are called Enthusiasts; they engender with Cerinthus, and
Millenarians; they engender with Priscilianus, and are called Familists; and
upon other profane and heretical mixtures, are engendered the Antinomians, the
Adamites, the Libertines, with many, very many other, too numerous to be
numbered, and too horrid to be mentioned. And to all these, extends our Apostles
Oportet in the Text; There must be even these Heresies amongst us: Man's
consenting through Wickedness, and Gods permitting in Justice.

1. The Devils tempting in malice. He is that implacable enemy of Christ's
Church and Truth, who seeks all opportunities, and pursues all occasions of her
mischief and ruin; sometimes infesting her with bloody persecutions, sometimes
seducing with corrupt doctrines, always disquieting with hellish temptations. 2
Chro. 18.21.
This that lying spirit in the mouth of all false Prophets; Matthew. 13 28.
this that (...), that the enemy Lords field; Revel. 12.9.
this that old Serpent which seduceth the Nations. And therefore our Savior
calls the Congregations of Heretics, Revel. 2.9.
the Synagogues of Satan.

2. Man's consenting through wickedness. It is with too too many as with Judas
and Ananias, Satan has filled their hearts; even with Treachery and Treason
against Christ and his Church; with Hypocrisy and Hate against his Holiness
and Truth: So that what Aretine, that foul mouthed Italian, may be too truly
said of the Heretics in our times, Quicquid Diabolus audet cogitare hi audent
proloqui; What the Devil dares suggest to the Thoughts, these dare utter with
their Tongues: Satan is not more ready to suggest, then some men to broach,
that doctrine which is blasphemous. Hieron. Apol. Adv. Ruff. l. 2.
For this St. Jerome called Arrius, Daemonium meridianum, The Noonday Devil;
so high was the impudence of his Blasphemies.

3. Gods permitting in Justice. What Heresies are amongst us, Miro and
ineffabili modo, by an admirable and ineffable manner, Non fit prater ejus
voluntatem, quod fit contra ejus voluntatem; that is not done beside his will,
in the disposings of his providence, which is done against his will in the
precepts August. En. chir. c. 100.
so St. Augustine. And that God permits men to fall, or rather run into
Heresies, we say it is in Justice; even according to that rule of equity given
by St. Paul, 2 These. 2.11, 12. where the Apostle tells us, That because men
receive not the love of the truth that they may be saved: They are given up to
strong delusions to believe a lie, whereby they are damned. Thus then upon
Satan's tempting in malice, Man's consenting through wickedness, Gods permiting
in Justice: Upon this is founded the force of the Apostles Oportet, There must
be also Heresies.

Applic. Socrat. Hist. l 4 c 27. August. de Here Is. c. 72.
To reprove and convince those Licentious men of folly and profaneness, in whom
Themistius the Philosopher, and Rhetorius the Heretic, are revived; though not
by a transmigration of Souls, yet by a transmission of their opinions;
imagining, yea asserting, that by diversity of Judgments, and variety of
Opinions, God does gloriam suam illustrare, illustrate his own glory; and so a
man may be saved of any Faith, of any Religion. But, sure I am he who believes
a man, may be saved of any Religion, is not himself of the true Religion; and
that of Leo is most infallibly true, Nisi una sit, Leo in Nativ. Dom. Sermon. 4.
fides non est; Faith is not at all, if it be not one: And so that must needs
be contrary to the truth of Faith, which is contrary to the unity of Faith;
especially, if that of St. Paul stand firm, Ephesians 4.5.
as There so but one Spirit; and as but one Lord, so but one Faith. Indeed God
is truth, and reason then tells us, there can be but one Truth, as there is but
one God.

And further, from hence it appears, That to assert Toleration of Heresies from
the Word of God, is it self most Heretical, and intolerable: We read of Julian
alone, that gave Toleration of all Sects, and he was an Apostate; whose aim and
end, was not a regard to tender Consciences, but the destruction of Christ's
Church. If Paul given in charge unto Timothy, saying, A man that is an
Heretic, reject. Yea, Tit. 3.10.
in vain did the Fathers implore the Royal Aid of the Imperial Scepter, and
make supplication to Kings, as Nursing-fathers of the Churches peace. St.
Jerome speaking of Arrius of Alexandria, he tells us, Hieron. in Gal. 5.9.
Una scintilla fuit, was but as one spark, sed quia non statim suppressa est,
because he had at first some indulgent toleration, and not a speedy
suppression: Therefore this small spark was kindled to a great fire, Et totum
orbem ejus flamma depopulata est, And the flame of his heretical fury, laid
waste the whole Christian world. Herein then is the Zeal of the Ancients,
worthy our imitation; to endeavor, a niping the Bud, a cutting off the
Branches, and a plucking up the Roots of Heresies.

Now let us inquire,

Answer. First, To be sincere in Obedience: Secondly,

1. To be sincere in Obedience. 1 Timothy 3 9.
He that will hold the Mystery of the Faith, it must be in a pure Conscience.
To keep the Conscience clear in an exercise of Holiness, is a sure means to
keep the judgment sound in doctrines of Faith; and this accords with our
Saviors rule of experience, If any man will do Gods will, he shall know of the
doctrine, Joh. 7.17.
whether it be of God or of man. It was a quick and a quaint answer Pole is
said to have given a Priest; In vi^a Poli Card n.
the Priest asked him, How he might best understand the former part of St.
Paul's Epistle to the Romans, being dogmatical and deep? the Cardinal answered,
By practicing the latter part, which is parenetical and plain. Indeed (...)
((...), Synes. ep 136.
) so Synesius, An upright life is the entrance of Divine Knowledge; or as
Solomon, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Practical Duties,
(...). Naz. Orat 29. Psalm. 119.100.
are the surest steps to Theoretical Notions. That David becomes wiser then his
teachers, and attains more knowledge then the Ancients; it is in the keeping
Gods Commandments.

2. Humble in Mind. Corporal and Spiritual things are differently discovered;
Corporal things the higher they are seated, the higher we must look; whereas in
Spiritual things, the loftier are the Mysteries, Bern. Sermon. 62. in Cant.
the lower must be our minds. Superbo oculo non videtur veritas, submisso
patet; Truth will not discover her self in her naked Benard.

3. Fervent in Prayer. The Spirit of Truth is the Spirit of Holiness, and the
Spirit of Holiness is the Spirit of Prayer. So that to be fervent in Prayer,
must needs be a sure means to be sincere in Holiness, and sound in the Truth.
Heresy is a Spiritual infatuation upon the Soul, against which, no
preservative is more effectual then that Wisdom which is from above, Jam. 3.17.
Jam. 1.5.
pure, and peaceable: And, if any man August. Conf. l. 11. c. 2.
let him ask it of God, says St. James. Wherefore when we read Gods Word, let
St. Augustines Prayer be our devotion, Domine Jesu sint castae deliciae meae,
Scripturae tuae: Lord Jesu let thy sacred Scriptures be my chaste delights; Non
fallar in eis, non fal^am ex eis; Let me not be deceived my self in them, nor
deceive others by them.

4. Rooted in the Faith. As for Heresies, they have their strength from our
weakness, Tert. de Prae. script. c. 2.
Nihil valent si in been valentem fidem incurrant Spiritus vertiginis, That
spirit of giddiness ( Isa. 19.14.) who are carried about with every wind of
doctrine; and in their variety of opinions, Non errorem exuunt sed mutant, They
put off their old Errors, as they do their old Clothes, to put on new. What are
those persons then, thus fickle and inconstant in their opinions? Ephesians. 4.14.
Why St. Paul tells us, They are children, that is, Weaklings in the Faith.
Thus being sincere in Obedience,

Wherefore, when false Prophets arise, and Heresies infest the Church, curb ye
the murmurings of Discontent, quell ye the repinings of Impatience; be ye not
offended at Gods providence, nor discouraged in your Piety: Our Blessed Lord
and his Holy Apostles 1 Pet. 4 12.
the Fiery trial of Heresy and Persecution. This is that we ought in our
greatest posperity, to expect with fear; and therefore do we in our greatest
adversity endure it w th patience, Holding Faith and a good Conscience, till
the victory of Truth (which is great and will prevail) crown our sufferings. To
this end, make we it a chief part of our Prayer unto Christ, as the woman of
Tekoah unto David, 2 Samuel 14 4.
save O King. Save O Jesu! Thou King of Glory, Head of thy Church; save us O
thou that art the Way, the Truth, and the Life; John 14.6.
Show us the Way, for thou art our Prophet; Lead us in the Truth, for thou art
our Priest; and Crown us with Life, for thou art our King. And see, see a fit
season for this your Devotion; your preparatory Eucharist; in which your
preparatory supplications to that sacred Ordinance, remember that part of our
Churches Letany, and Dev^tion, From all Sedition and Privy Conspiracy, from all
false Doctrine and Heresy; Good Lord deliver us. Amen. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON 1 COR. 11.19. There must be also Heresies among you;
that they which are approved, may be made manifest
THE INTRODUCTION.

Introduction.
IT is Satan's subtlety to instruct his Agents, Son of God, Mark 3.11, 12.
our Savior does forbid and silence him. If we inquire the reason why Satan is
silenced, Venerable Bede answers our enquiry, Bed. in loc.
with a Ne dum aliquis audit vera praedicantem, sequatur errantem, Basil. ep.
69.
and meeting places of Heretics (unworthy the name of Churches) (...), as the
Schools of ungodliness. Indeed who art thou, that go to hear one that speaks
B asphemy, think thou thine ear shall be innocent, and his tongue guilty? If
he that speaks, lends his tongue, do not thou that hears, lend thine ear
unto the Devil?

But thou will say, Thou can not think them Heretical in their Opinions, who
are holy in their lives, and therefore won by their example, thou attendst unto
their Doctrine. Yet be not dece^ved for Hypocrisy still leads in Heresy by
the hand; Macedonius, Donatus, and others, though Arch-hereticks, yet as strict
for life, as reprobate concerning the faith. It is no new thing, 2 Timothy 3 8.
for the Devil to appear in Samuels shape and mantle, 1 Samuel 28 14
for Heresy to rise up in the show and dress of truth. Let not then the
Preaching some truth, and the pretending much holiness, be baits to draw thee
i^to Heresies: For that, our Apostle here forewarns his Corinthians eminent in
gifts and graces; he forewarns them with much emphasis of Premonition, There
must be also Heresies (...) among you, that

4. The propinquity of its danger, (...) among you, Explic. Hierom^^ Jer 22.
there must be also Heresies among you; Omnis Haereticus Nascitur in Ecclesia*
Every Heretic is begotten and brought forth in the Church, as a Viperous Brood
eating through the Womb that bare it. He who never professed the Faith of Christ
is an Infidel; whether Jew, Turk, or Pagan. He who renounceth Christ, and the
Faith he has prof^st, is an Apostate; such was Judas, Simon Magus, and Julian.
He who Heretic; such was Sabellius, Apollinaris, Arrius, Nestorius,
Macedonius, Pelagius, and others. Now these three, the Apostate, Heretic, and
Infidel, have this d^fference of degrees, in their greatness and guilt of sin.
The Apostate he is guilty of greatest transgression, as violating the most of
Obligation: The Heretic he is next in guilt of sin, as being next in breach of
Faith; and both are so much worse then the Infidel, by how non-subm^ssion, or
refusal of Allegiance.

The Jew, Turk, and Pagan have the more sin, as to the extension of their
Infidelity, because guilty of more error; but the Heretic sins mo^e, as to the
intension of the guilt, because more opposite to the Law of Faith. And of those
that fall away, they sin so much the more ha^nously, by how much they have been
instructed the more fully. Heresies then, which are ad languorem and interitum
fidei productae, Tert. de Prae. script. c. 2.
Paul had planted. Apollo watered, and God given the increase. 1 Cor. 3.6.
No Purity of faith then, may privilege any Church from the poison of
Heresies, since that of Corinth is infested. Corinth so famous for the gifts of
Tongues, of Prophecy, of Knowledge, of Eloquence; yea, so eminent for the
graces of Faith, of Charity, of Patience, of Hope, and in all, for Zeal.

How comes the Wolf then into this fold, so strongly guarded? How comes this
Church of Corinth to be infected and infested with Heresies? Why, especially
because Heresies still appear in the shape of truth, and the show of holiness:
The Wolf covers himself up so close in the Sheeps clothing, Optat. cont.
Parmen. l. 2.
Ut prius ovis mordentem sentiat quam praesentiat venientem, that the innocent
Sheep feels him biting, before false Prophet to be an Heretic. Manes himself,
so profanely blasphemous, yet hides his blasphemy under this vail; An Apostle
of Jesus Christ; and intitles his Heretical Paradoxes, with an Haec sunt
salubria verba de perenni ac vivo font; These are the wholesome and saving
words, from the eternal and living Fountain of Truth, (so St. Augustine.) If
Simon Magus attract the eye and ear, yea, the judgment and affection Acts 8.10.
The great power of God. If Montanus seduce with his Fanatic dreams, it is by
the plausible insinuation, of being the Comforter, (...). Athan. Orat. 2. cont.
A ian. Quest. Answ. Matthew. 7.16.
promised by Christ, and sent from Heaven. Yea Arrius the Arch-heretick as full
of cruelty and blood, as of Heresy and Blasphemy; yet in his Thaleia, he
asserts the doctrine he delivers, to be according to the Faith of Gods Elect,
and of those holy Men who have received the Holy Ghost, and were taught of God.

But if such be the close subtilty and fair show; if such the plausible
pretenses, and yet desperate deceit of Heretics, how are they discovered? how
are they known? Answer. Our Savior himself resolves us, By their fruits ye
shall know them. Not only meant of their fruits of manners, but chiefly of
their fruits of Doctrine; the evil consequences of what they teach, as well as
the evil actions which they practice. Haeresis docta est mentiri non lingua
tantum sed and vita. Bern. Sermon. 65. in Cant.
For that, oftentimes Heresy is taught not only to lie in words, but also in
works; not only with the tongue, For every Heretic (as formally such) not
only violates the Faith, but also makes breach of Charity; and where there is
not Faith working by Love, let the show of Piety be more then Angelical, yet is
it Hypocritical; and how ever gracious in the eye of men, yet is it odious in
the sight of

Socrat. l. 2. c. 14. (...). Basil. ep. 82.
We read of Arrius, that as he was himself (...) subtle in disputes; so were his
followers grave in their sanctity; yea, for the reverence had to their feigned
sobriety, temperance, and holiness, offices of dignity and trust were committed
to their charge: Yea, as for the Macedonians, blasphemous in their Heresy, yet
Nazianzen gives this testimony of them, N^zian. ^ 2^.44.
(...); Though we admire their lives, yet we approve not their doctrine. Here
you see, the blasphemous Macedonians, and the no less blasphemous Arrians,
advanced to offices of dignity for the esteem of their Piety; and though horrid
Heretics, yet they live (as to Formal Religion) to the wonder and admiration
of the Orthodox. Yea (Beloved) I have my self wondered to see many open
profaneness, and to set off the credit of Heresy with a form of Holiness.

Besides, Luxury, Drunkenness, Whoredom, the too too common sins of profane
persons, otherwise Orthodox in the faith; they Formal in Holiness, they are
sins right Diabolical: And it is our Saviors resolution, Matthew. 21.23.
That Publicans and Harlots enter the Kingdom of God; that is, are wrought upon
to Conversion, before Pharisaical Hypocrites, and Formal Heretics. Wherefore,
when according to our Saviors rule, Matthew. 7.15, 16.
we judge of false Prophets by their fruits; we must not only examine the
fruits of manners, because their Hypocrisy may for a time deceive us; but
divine Charity, the dissolution of holy Unity, or the breach of public Peace;
again, whether that they teach us, tend to the profaning Gods worship, the
depressing his grace, and the diminishing his glory. Are these the fruits of
their doctrine, to destroy Magistracy in the State, and Government in the
Church? To bring neglect of Gods worship, and contempt of his Ordinances; to
promote Licentiousness, countenance Disorders, and hasten on Confusion?
plausible pretenses of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus: The Throne of Christ, the
Liberty of the Gospel, the Discoveries of Grace, the Breathings of the Spirit,
the Outgoings of the Lord, and the like: Notwithstanding all these plausible
pretenses, yet by their fruits we know them; know them to be Ministers of
Satan, taking upon them to be Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.15.
and though with the Prince of darkness they are transformed into Angels of
Light, yet their cloven foot discovers them; their Peter, and St. Jude, in
their several Epistles.

We will close then with St. Augustines observation, That the Devil seeing his
Temples forsaken, and his Oracles silenced, he subtlely devises to make a new
supply to his Kingdom, by having his Ministers still in and about the Church;
Qui sub vocabulo Christiano Doctrinae resisterent Christianae; who under a
Christian name should resist the Christian Doctrine; and under the show of
sanctity, seduce into the way of Heresy. No wonder then, if St. Paul to put
his Corinthians upon their stricter guard, does give them the emphatical
Premonition of a (...), There must be also Heresies among you.

Ephesians. 4 14.
even to a (...) an art and method of deceiving: Seeing it is thus, How may we
know the deceitful workings of Heresy? by what means and in what manner, does
it instill its poison, Answer, (1) By pretending and perverting the sacred
Scriptures. The Spirit of delusion still brings Scripture in the front of his
temptation, not to instruct but to deceive: And as it was with the Master, so
is it with the Scholars; the Heretics mouths are full of Scripture, Matthew.
22.29.
yet we may truly say of Sadduces, They err not knowing the Scripture. They
have the Words indeed, but not the Sense; the Letter, but not the Spirit;
however they boast themselves, with confidence of both.

Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
But as Irenaeus gives us the apt Simile, comparing Heretics to the maker of
Molten Images; who taking the Golden Statue and Image of a King, and
transforming it into the shape and Image of a Wolf; he may by a fallacy affirm,
This is the Kings Image. Now Word of God. True, this Heretical doctrine is said
to be the Word of God right, as that Image of the Wolf is said to be the Royal
Statue and Image of the King; materially, but not formally so. There is the
same Matter, but not the same Form; the same Word, but not the same Sense. And
the true Believer whilst he acknowledges the metal, he discerns the shape;
the metal,

2. A vain gingling and juggling of words: I cannot call it a wily Sophistry,
but a witless Vanity; yet like the cantings of the Gypsies, it takes the
ignorant. An instance and example of this, Epiphanius gives us in the Arians;
who, denying Christ to be the eternal Son of God, Epiphan. Haeres. 69.
they say of him, That he is (...), Nazianzen is very apt, (...), In these
follies to cure their Brains, is to confute their Arguments; Hellebore is the
best Syllogism, Anticyrae the fittest Schools. This of the Arians, a Creature,
but not as one of the Creatures; begotten, but not as one of the begotten; A
^han. cont. Arian. r^n. 1. orat. 3.
Athanasius answers with a (...), and (...), as if a man should speak without
speaking, and understand without understanding. 2 Timothy 2.16.
This right that (...), that vain babbling which Timothy must avoid, as being
proper for them, Whose words increase unto more ungodliness; whereas that Faith
and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, form of sound words, 2 Timothy 2.13.
its proper phrase to express plain truth.

Yea, besides their (...) words of vain babbling, it is ordinary with the
Heretics of late, as once with the Valentinians and Gnostics of old, they
have their (...) their words of new coining; such as neither themselves, nor
their followers ever understood: Yet these, simple Souls, because they
understand not, they admire; and

3. A busy Tongue and Pen; always prating and printing. As they swell big with
self-conceit, so Emperick and Mountebank like, they are still professing their
art and prescribing Receipts; yea, the very Women (as Tertullian speaks of old)
how malepert, how confident, Tere. de Prae script. c. 41.
and daring, even to teach, to dispute, and that with the ablest Divines, as
some of them have sent their challenge? Nazian. Orat. 51.
And as the Tongues of Heretics are still babbling, so are their Pens still
scribbling, as Nazianzen Apollinarists, (...), They take a pride and glory in
the multitude of Books; though as the penning was but waste time; so the
printing proves but waste Paper.

4. A disesteem of all men's judgments and opinions, but their own. This that
Egregium Sophisma, Lyrin. c. 16.
that notable Sophism Vincentius speaks of in Nestorius, Aug. de Utilit. cred.
c. 1. Plus in refellendis aliis diserti and copi^s^, quam in suis probandis
firmi and ^erti manebant.
and St. Augustine observes the like in the Maniches, They were more eloquent
and large in confuting other men's doctrines, then constant and firm in proving
their own opinions. Chimera's, raise scandalous imputations which they cast
upon their Brethren, and then inveigh against them; Right like children with
their Cherristones, who build Castles on purpose to throw at them, and then
pride themselves in overthrowing them. O how do many raise Objections, and
fancy Errors, which never were imagined, muchless asserted, and then confute
them with zeal, that they may seem unto the ignorant, great Champions of

5. Their Proteus-like changing themselves into many shapes; (...). Naz. Orat.
51.
sometimes smooth and pleasing, sometimes harsh and rugged; that, to speak
their sweetness of love; this, their heat of zeal. If they be to gain a
Proselyte, habent artificium, they have an artifice, Tert. Adv. Valen. c. 1.
as Tertullian observes of the Valentinians, Quo prius persuadeant quam
edoceant; Whereby they persuade the Affection before they convince the
Judgment; whereas truth, Docendo persuadet, non suadendo docet, It persuades by
conviction, not convinces by persuasion. The Heretics art is insinuation, not
instruction; and therefore their business is to work more upon the Affection,
then upon the Understanding. But observe, To pervert their credulous Auditors,
and seduce their easy Proselytes, Ad ruinas solummodo humiles and blandi and
submissi agunt; caeterum nec suis praesidihus reverentiam noverunt Tert. de
Praescript. c. 42. Tert. de Praescript. c 42.
they are as gentle as Lambs, humble and meek; but bring them to their Pastors,
the Fathers of the Church; yea, to the Politic and Ecclesiastic Governors,
and then the Ye Moses and Aaron take too much upon you.

6. Their making Subversion, not Conversion, their work. Pulling down, not
building up; which is a work easiest and soonest done. It is a general rule
Tertullian observes in all Heretics, in their service of Ministry, they have
an aim, Non Ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros subvertendi; Not to convert those
who are out of the Church, but to subvert those that are in the Church: And
thus the proper work Good and old to be pulled down. And this the work of
Heresy, so long since observed by Tertullian, and now experienced in our
selves.

7. Lastly, By making women their agents to propagate their errors. Satan knows
well by his first temptation, how facile, and yet how prevalent that Sex is;
the weakest to be won, and yet the strongest to win; Heresy still prevails
soonest with them, and most by them; so that, in all propagating of errors, the
multiplying Proselytes has been still by women. Hieron. Tom. 2. epist. ad
Crefiphont. Optar. contr. Parmen. l. 6.
And therefore had Simon Magus his Helena, Apelles his Philumene, and Nicholas
of Antioch, Choros duxit foemineos, he became leader of the Feminine Troops.
Montanus had Prisca and Maximilla, the Donatists their She-preachers. Though we
read in all the Gospel but of one woman that taught in the Congregation, and in
the same line we read the effect of her teaching, even a Seducing the servants
of God to commit fornication; so it is recorded of that Jezabel, Rev. 2.20. And
thus, Heretics, by a pretending the sacred Scriptures; by a vain gingling and
juggling of words, by their busy Tongue and Pen, by their disesteem of all men's
judgments but their own; by their Proteus like changing Ancient Fathers; and I
think, you are sensible, how too well they agree with the sad experience of our
present Church. To whom St. Paul directed his Premonition, as well as to
Corinth, in his (...). There must be also Heresies among you, etc.

Here let us make Application. 1. By way of Complaint. Applic.
That such is the power and prevalency of Heretical Impostures, that our
Sacraments are not esteemed sacred, nor our Worship of God holy; but in
contempt of both; our Churches are without people, the people Et sine Christo
deinde Christiani; Bern. ep. 24.
and from hence it is that we are become Christians without Christ, having the
name, but wanting the truth of Christianity amongst us. It was Gods complaint
of old, and may be now unhappily renewed, That from the Prophets of Jerusalem,
Jer 23.15.
(and so from the Prophets of this great City) Profaneness and Hypocrisy are
gone forth into all the Land: But V. 21.
They are such as Preach without Mission or Commission, He sends them not, and
yet they run; he speaks not to them, and yet they prophecy. And as we see who
are the Prophets, so, see what is their prophecy; V. 23.
They prophecy lies (says God) in my name; that is, they Preach Heresy and
Error, under the specious pretenses of Gods Word and Truth. Thus St. Paul's
Premonition given the Corinthians, has extended unto us, and we subscribe to
his sure prediction by our own sad experince; when he says, There must be also
Heresies among you.

Romanist, who objects to the Protestants, what the Heathens of old objected to
the Christians. Ye Christians, Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
said the Heathens; and so, ye Protestants say the Romanists; ye disagree
amongst your selves, and divide into so many and different Sects, that it is
hard to find a Christian among Christians, a Protestant among Protestants;
each Sect condemns the other. And amidst those divisions, which are so many,
where shall we find truth, which Adversaries, though we cannot but bewail the
misery of our Brethren; know, if rightly considered, so far is any Church from
being Heretical, because there Heresies spring up against the truth; that it is
therefore Orthodox, because even then the truth is maintained against England.

But we further return upon our Adversaries, That the Church of Rome is not
therefore the true Church, because they suffer not amongst them, the Heresies
that are amongst us; for they have their Errors, and those Heretical too; only
they maintain and defend, what they should acknowledge and reform, at least
oppose and disclaim. The Jesuit indeed, he thinks he has set a sufficient
guard upon St. Paul's Oportet: And whereas the Apostle says to every Church what
he says to that of Corinth, There must be also Heresies among you: The Jesuit
says, There shall be no Heresy in Rome, and the Popes pretended infallibility
shall be their protection. But what! Do not we know that those very Churches
which were as so many Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. and 2.
and had Christ walking in the midst of them; do not we know, that those very
Churches had then their an holy Seed, a remnant of Orthodox Ministers to preach
and profess against them.

Indeed, where grow the Tares, but in the Lords field? where spring up
Heresies, but in the Church? It is not then, that the Church of Rome has no
Heresies, but wants truth to discover, and faithfulness to exterminate them.
Would they begin to weed their field, Corinth was, they must subscribe to St.
Paul's Oportet, as our Church does. That there must be also Heresies, and that
(...) among you.

3. By way of Comfort. And blessed be God, that as he foretells us of Heresies
for our Caution, so he prescribes us remedies for our comfort: And amongst
those remedies, what more sovereign then the truth of his Word, well digested
by Prayer and Meditation? This is a sure preservative; for though all Heresies
plead Scripture, yet I like not that opinion and prescription of taking away
the Scriptures from the people, least they become Heretical: This is a remedy,
like that of famishing the children, because the Dogs eat their Bees, because
the Spider sucks out poison; or taking away the pasture from the Sheep, because
the Wolves devour many of the flock. This prescription we leave to those of the
Roman Church, as suitable to their Roman, not to our Christian Faith. Tert. de
Resur. Carn. c. 47.
For our parts, we are no Lucifugae Scripturarum, as Tertullian speaks of some;
we shun not the light of Scripture, but are willing to bring our Gold to the
Touchstone, our Line to the Rule, our Doctrines of Faith, to the Word of God.

We know well, those Gyant-Heresies of Sabellius, Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches,
Apollinaris, and others; we know well, those Gyant-Heresies were over^hrown by
the holy Fathers, in the General and Provincial Councils, with stones from
David's sling, (...) (so Athanasius) with Arguments drawn from the sacred
Scriptures. Athan. cont. Arian. Orat. 2.
We like not then, to forbid all Coin, because much is counterfeit; nor quite
to take away the Scriptures, because much is perverted. Indeed, the Patrons of
Heresies are not always, nor for the most part, of the Plebeian rank, but
rather of the Ministerial Order; they are not such, as have not enough of
knowledge, but such as have too much of perverseness. True, the Heresies of the
Anabaptists (I think) are all the peoples Brats, Errors of their bringing
forth, and nursing up; they are the Births of a Proud ignorance. Church, I
would have all her Sons and Daughters so experienced (by the help of a faithful
Guide) in the Doctrine of the Scriptures, that they might be able in their
Conference with Heretics, Matthew. 4.6, 7.
to imitate our Savior in his combat with Satan; to repel the Error of
Scripture misinterpreted; by the Truth of Scripture rightly understood, and
aptly applied. For sure, to this end, that we should be prepared, did the
Apostle here premonish, saying, There must be also Heresies among

4. Exhortation. To join to our profession of Faith, an holiness of life; for
the Mysteries of Grace, are Mysteries of Godliness; 1 Timothy 3.16.
they have their holiness, as well as their truth: And what think thou then,
O man, that thou can be a fit Judge of the Truth, when thou art not
acquainted with the holiness of Gospel Mysteries? No sure, for to instance in
some particulars: Art thou fit to determine what concerns the dispute of
Free Will, Romans 6.20.
who art thy self a Servant unto a slave unto thy lusts? Art thou fit to decide
what is the use and efficacy of Grace, Jude 4.
who thy self do turn the Grace of God into wantonness? Art thou fit to state
the nature and necessity of good Works, who art thy self to every good work
reprobate? Tit. 1.16.
Art thou fit to prove the Divinity of Christ, who thy self feel nothing of
the power of his Divine Spirit? Art thou fit to judge what is Truth, in
doctrine and purity of Faith, who do stain and dishonor the Truth, by thy
conversation and impurity of life? Whosoever of you then (Beloved) Heresies
among you; do you join to your profession of Faith, an holiness of life; and
then, though there must be Heresies among you; yet shall you be of the number
of those who are approved and made manifest among you.

THE FOURTH SERMON UPON 1 COR. 11.19. There must be also Heresies among you,
that they which are approved, may be made manifest
THE INTRODUCTION.

Introduction.
THe Church of Christ is the House and Temple of yea, the Pillar and ground of
sacred Truth; 1 Timothy 3.15.
even as the Edicts of Kings are fastened unto Pillars, so the Word of Truth,
the Gospel of Christ is committed to the Church; to be held forth to the veiw,
and proposed to the faith of all. 1 John 4.6.
Wherefore St. John, he gives this infallible note of true Doctrine, that it
holds fast a conformity to, and a communion with the Church of Christ. Hereby,
(says the Apostle) hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error;
the spirit of error that seeks a separation from, and the Spirit of truth, that
holds a communion with the holy men of God, in the several parts of the World,
and the several ages of the Church; both as to the practice of Holiness, and
Doctrines of Faith.

To establish us then against those Impostures which withdrawing us from the
Church, Seduce us into Heresy; To establish us (I say) against those
impostures, observe we the Apostles seasonable admonition, That we be not soon
shaken in mind, (...). 2 These. ^.2.
not removed from our judgment and faith in the Scriptures, to which we have
been directed, in which we have been instructed, by the Church of Christ; not
thus removed by Spirit or Word, however pretended to be Apostolical 2 Cor.
11.14.
for that Satan the Prince of Darkness is oftentimes transformed, (in the
Hypocritical pretenses of truth and holiness) into an Angel of light. But (O
Beloved) that which heightens the sin, and shall heighten the condemnation of
our days Apostates, is this, That they join themselves to those works, and
workers of darkness, which have not so much as the appearance and show of
light. For that, now Judah s impudence, They declare their sin as Sodom, they
hide it not. Isa. 3.9.
And though Heresy and Schism, with their so inseparable concomitants,
Sacrilege and Profaneness, though they have put of their mask of truth and
holiness, yet are not men affrighted with their ugliness; but as if the Hellish
deformity were some heavenly beauty, they are woed and won, to an embracing
those Doctrines, and a pursuing those practices, which even startle and amaze
the souls and minds of the truly religious. Rev. 12.4.
But blessed be God, the Dragons Tail is not so long as to sweep away all Stars
of Heaven; amidst the thickest of Heresies and Schisms, God does, and will
preserve himself a remnant, John 4 24.
to worship him in spirit and in truth; a remnant approved in the faith, and
manifest by their works. For so says our Apostle, There must be also Heresies
among you, but by the wisdom of Gods providence ordered to this end, That they
which are approved, may be made manifest among you.

2. General part, the Premunition; Explic.
and therein of the first particular, the Apostles fore-arming them with
constancy in the Faith, that Mercy and Justice they are the two Pillars of Gods
Throne of Majesty, whereon he sits as King in the Supremacy of his will to
govern by the wisdom and power of his providence, all things in Heaven and in
Earth. So that of all humane actions, God he is no bare spectator, but an
All-powerful and an All-wise disposer; what is good, he working it by his
grace, rewards it with his bounty; and what is evil, he permitting it with
patience, he revengeth it by his justice; but whether good or evil, as he sways
all by his power, so he sacred ends, his peoples spiritual advantage, and his
own eternal glory. Wherefore, that Heresies, permitted of God, do spring up and
spread themselves in the Church, Chrysostom. in Act. Apost. Hom 33 Aug E^chirid.
c. 61 and de Cor. and Great. c. 10
(...), in the language of St Chrysostom, it comes to pass by Providential
dispensation. The wisdom of God having determined it more suitable to the glory
of his providence, ex malis hona elicere, quam nulla esse permittere, (as St.
Augustine) more suitable to the glory of his providence, to bring good out of
evil, then not to suffer evil at all to be. And therefore the Schools, in their
Tracts of Gods providence, tell us aright; That if God did not suffer some
evil, we should want much good, Aquin. 1. q. 21. art. 2.
Non enim esset vita Leonis, si non esset occisio animalium, If there were no
slaughter of Beasts, there would be no life of the Lion; and so, were there no
persecution of Tyrants, there would be no patience of Martyrs; were there no
opposition of Heresy, there would be no honor or reward in the approbation of
the truth.

Now as Persecution does exercise the Patience, so does Heresy try the Faith
of Gods chosen; and to this end, does God order this, That Faith having its
tentation and trial, Vt fides habendo tentationem haberet etiam and
probationem. Tert. de Praescript. Aug Sermon. 98. de temp.
may have its approbation and reward. Yea, as St. Augustine speaks, God suffers
the Catholic Faith, to be impugned and opposed, by Heretical Doctrine; Ut
fides nostra non otio Torpescat, sed multis exercitationibus Elimetur, That our
Faith may not grow sluggish and rusty with ease, but become more quickened and
polished by exercise. And hereby indeed are exercised, edifying gifts of
knowledge, of prophecy, of tongues, etc. Their sanctifying graces of humility,
meekness, charity etc. All which, as they are opposed, so are they exercised;
and as they are exercised, so are they improved, by the subtleties,
hypocrisies, and pertinacies of the Heretical As for the Doctrine of Faith,
Chrysostom. in Act. Apost. hom. 33.
(...), as Trees shaken with the winds more firmly fix their Roots in the
Earth, so the doctrines of Faith discussed by the oppositions of Brass
Inscriptions appear the better by foul feet, not from the dirt but from the
rubbing: Thus the doctrines of Faith become the more dilucide and clear, not
from the Error but from the examinations of Heresy. For whilst the subtlety
and pertinacy of Heretics do stir up the wisdom and industry of the Orthodox,
Theological Verities and Aug. de Civi^. Dei. l. 16. c. ^.
Et considerantur diligentius and intelliguntur clarius, They are more strictly
examined, and more clearly understood.

And therefore does St. Augustine (the Hammerer of Heretics, whose Pen was of
all the Fathers, the most employed against Heresies and Schisms,) even he,
professes himself to be of the number of those Qui proficiendo scribunt and
scribendo proficiunt; Aug. ep. 7. ad Marcel.
who in improving their knowledge, do write to communicate it; and by writing
to communicate it, do improve their knowledge. O how Blessed Trinity, and
Personal Unity, and of the Catholic Church, if the Sabellians, Photinians,
Arians, Eunomians, Nestorians, Eutycheans, Donatists, Novations, and the like;
if these and others ejusdem farinae of the same Leaven; if they had not rose
up, by their oppositions of Heresy and Schism, to stir up the Study, Prayer,
Zeal, and Argumentations of the Holy, Learned, and Orthodox Fathers?

Yea, let us look home a while; and upon an easy observation we may find,
That this benefit and advantage our Church has gained by the eager contentions
of spightful Tongues and perverse Minds; That her holy Form of Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, has been more fully discussed, and more
clearly vindicated, Churches unity and peace, and restore her purity and
splendour, (as that he will do it in his due time (you helping forward by your
Prayers) I nothing doubt, and I would not you should distrust) If God, I say,
shall please to repair the Churches unity and peace, and restore her purity and
splendour; those stale calumnies, and unjust cavils, of Bishops being
Antichristian, our Liturgy the Mass, our Litany Conjuring, our Doctrine Popish,
our Ceremonies Superstitious, our Temples Idolatrous, our Ministers Baal 's
Priests; these, and the like clamors of Error and Ignorance, of Malice and
Madness; These (I say) If God pleases to repair and restore our Church, they
will become then as odious and hateful, as they are now acceptable and useful
with the vulgar; then as much hist down, as now cried up; then as vain and
insufferable, as now unjust and unreasonable.

But if for the sins of the people, God shall unchurch the Nation; Rev. 2 5.
he shall remove the Candlestick, and deprive us of his Ordinances: Such is the
full conviction of Errors, to a confirming all sober minds in the Faith, that,
I doubt not to say, There are many which hear me this day, would rather choose
to die and fall with truth, then live and flourish with Heresy. This the first
particular of our first general part; the Apostles fore-arming his Corinthians
with constancy in the Faith, that they be approved.

That being approved they shall be made manifest. Manifest on Earth, and
manifest in Heaven. 1. Manifest on Earth. The furious Zeal, and violent
Persecution of Heresy, is the Furnace, Mal. 3.3, 4.
wherein God oftentimes purifies the faith and faithful, separating the dross
from the Gold; it is that strong wind which shakes down the rotten boughs and
corrupt fruit severing it from the strong and sound; it is that overflowing
flood, which overturns the sandy foundation, whilst the rocks stand firm; or
lastly, Matthew. 7.25.
it is fan, which severs the chaff from the Corn; men of light fancies, Matthew.
3.12.
and loose affections, from those of solid judgments and established hearts.
How is it with many men's hearts, as with musical instruments? They are in good
tune and temper, whilst the pleasant and fair season of peace and prosperity
lasts: But as upon change of weather, the strings do either slack or break; so,
upon change of times, do their resolutions, either yield or faint.

But oh (Beloved) an heart established, a spirit resolved, a mind steadfast! Oh
how is it the honor and ornament of our Christian Faith? By this it is, That
the Confessors Graces like Lebanons Spices, have the sweeter smell in being
bruised; and in their trial of Faith, they become, as more acceptable
Sacrifices of Obedience, offered unto God; so more choice examples of Holiness,
manifest and set forth in the Church. Had it not been then for the Heresies,
Schisms, and Apostacies of the former ages, those ancient Fathers, Irenaeus,
Athanasius, Hilary, Nazianzen, Basil, Chrysostom, Hierome, Augustine, and
others: They had not been Stars of so great a magnitude in the Firmament of
Christ's Church.

And indeed, were it not for the Heresies, Schisms and Apostacies of these
latter days; our Church would not have so much to glory, of her Cranmer,
Tindal, Whitaker, Whitgift, Bancroft, Bilson, Andrews, Hooker, and others, Men
famous in their Generations; yea, our Jewel would not have had his luster, nor
our Laud his praise; Learned Worthies, yea of Royal Patriots, would not be so
large, so venerable and so glorious. These and all other Strenui propugnatores
fidei, stout Champions of the Churches faith, They are by a blessing of God
made manifest; and observe, made manifest not only in the Orthodoxes love, but
also in the Heretics hate; it is with them as with St. Augustine whose
industry and piety, in quelling and extinguishing the Pelagian Heresy, Hieron.
ep. 80.
St. Hierome thus congratulates, telling him, That his name Quod signum majoris
gloriae est, omnes Haeretici detestantur, and which was a signal of greater
glory, all the Heretical did hate him.

However then black-mouthed malice does spit calumny upon the whitest
innocence, yet, that encomium St. Paul gives the ancient Heroes, Heb. 11.39.
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Martyrs of old; the same we may justly give our
Protestant Worthies of late, That by Faith they a name that shall outlive all
Heresy and Schism; a name precious and honorable in the memory of the
faithful. Thus they who in their oppositions of Heresy, become constant in the
Faith; they are made manifest on Earth.

But further. 2. Manifest also in Heaven: For this then observe, The Church on
Earth is Militant, and therefore, the Church in right order is said to be
terrible as an army with banners: Cant. 6.4.
Though in disorder, an army with banners becomes terrible to the Church. The 1
Cor. 15.32.
and St. Paul's fighting with Beasts at Ephesus, was not a combat more
honorable and glorious, then that of contending for the Faith, Jude 3.
against the rage of Heresies. This, this is that (...), Certamen illud
praeclarum (as Beza renders it) that good, 2 Timothy 4.7.
that honorable fight of Faith, which has for its reward a Crown of life; Rev.
2.10.
or if a Crown of life be the reward of Faith to all the blessed; yet then the
stout Champions of the Faith, shall have some special Jewels in their Crown,
some particular glory in that blessed life; and so being manifest on Earth,
they are manifest also in Heaven; being manifest in the Church Militant for
their eminent Grace, they shall be manifest also in the Church Triumphant, by
some excellent glory: According to that of the Prophet, Dan. 12 3.
They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they

To close then, in days of persecution, St. Paul tells us, That the suffering
Saints of Christ's Church, 1 Cor. 4.9.
they are made a Spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men, (...),
says the Apostle, We are brought forth into the World, as upon a stage to play
a prize in the view of Heaven and Earth. So that, being approved, we cannot but
be manifest; yea, performing our parts well, the Angels themselves shall give a
pla^dite at our exit, they shall with triumph Heb. 2.10.
where Christ the Captain of our Salvation, as Arbiter of the Combat, shall
bestow a Crown of Glory as the reward of Victory. 1 Cor 9 25.


In days then of trial and trouble from the persecutions of Heresy,

Answ. In the exercise of these Christian Duties;

1. Fervent Prayer. That God would be pleased in mercy to open the eyes, and
incline the hearts of the Seducers, and of the seduced. (O Beloved) you know
not the virtue and efficacy of Prayer, for the Conversion of Souls; Prayer may
do it when Preaching fails, when the religious and tender mother Monica applied
her self to St. Ambrose with this humble suit; That he would by his learned
Conference reclaim her son Augustine from his Error, seduced into Maniches:
Though she urged her suit with sighs, and that Pathetical Oratory of flowing
tears; yet the pious and prudent Father waves her request, and returns her this
answer, Thy sons heat of youth, and pride of sp rit, does render him incapable
of my Conviction to his Conversion; but thou continuing thy Prayers, earnestly
soliciting the Throne of Grace, Aug. Confess. l. 3. c. 12.
Ille legendo reperiet quis ille sit error, and quanta impietas, He shall find
by reading, in how great an Error and Impiety he is involved; For that, Tot the
son of so many tears shall not perish. And that this was seasonable and saving
advise, the manner and method of St. Augustines Conversion, evidently declares.

Let this then be a part of their Prayer, who are approved in the Faith, That
God would open the eyes, and incline the hearts of the Seducers, and the
seduced; or if their Seduction be a Judgment of Reprobation, and irreversible
by Prayer; let this be our supplication, That God will defend and deliver his
Church from the Policies and Practices, 2 These. 3 2.
the Pertinacy and Persecution of such unreasonable men, as the Apostle calls
them. And in our Prayers, let not our hearts fail, nor our faith faint; for
notwithstanding the thick mists and threatening storms, yet God will be seen in
the Mount, a present help in our pressing troubles, and a saving deliverance in
our deepest distresses. With Jehoshaphat, when we know not what to do, then Let
our eyes be toward the Lord; 2 Chronicles. 20.6.
and if our eyes be toward God

2. To our fervent Prayer, we must join a sincere Obedience. I doubt not, but
that we have many of us, poured forth many Prayers, breathed forth many sighs.
But what is the reason they have not returned as Noah's Dove, Genesis 8.11.
With an Olive branch of peace, a gracious answer of mercy? Is it not because
we have sought our selves more then our God? Our ease and rest, more then his
truth and righteousness? Psalm. 65.2.
a God that hears Prayers; this is a title in which he glories, a glory of
which he boasts: So that our narrow hearts stop his flowing streams; and we
become straightened in our selves, not in our God: His Mercies are free and full,
our Prayers empty and vain; and why are our Prayers empty and vain, but because
our lives are sinful and vile? God is not unwilling to give, but we incapable
to receive; he not backward to bestow, but we unfit to enjoy; we seek
Consolation, but not in the way of Sanctification; we desire Peace and rest,
but pursue it not in the way of Truth and Holiness.

Renewed hearts and reformed lives, O how well, how well (Beloved) do they suit
the old Faith, and ancient Truth? That truth in which we profess to be
constant, and that Faith in which we desire to be approved? But oh, when our
sins outcry our Prayers, and our Conversations confute our Supplications; no
wonder if an Orthodox Church languish: And a few Suppliants at the Throne of
Grace, have Lamentations, Lam. 3.41.
By lifting up our hearts with our hands unto God in the Heavens. Hieron. in
loc.
Now, Cor cum manibus levat, qui orationem operibus roborat; he lifts up h^s
heart with his hands, who strengthens his Prayers with his works; his hearty
Devotion with his sincere Obedience.

3. Devout Meditation. This in the sacred Scriptures, the Pandects of Divine
Law, from whence we argue; the Panoply and Magazin from whence we arm our
Tongues and Pens, against all that is Heretical: Only our Meditation here must
be accompanied with Humility; 1 Cor. 8.1.
that Knowledge puff not up with Pride: And therefore, herein especially do we
exercise our Humility, in not being over-confident of our own knowledge; for
alas, when the best know most, how far are they from knowing half of what is
contained in the Mysteries of the Grace and Gospel of Christ? For that, Hierom
in Ephesians. 3.
Singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, puncta, in divinis scripturis plena sunt
sensibus; (so St. Hierom) every word, every syllable, every letter, every
title, Chrysostom Proaem. C^m. in Ep. ad Romans Dam Scripturae bonae intelliguntur non
been and quod in eis non been intelligitur etiam temere and audacter asseritur.
Aug. Tract 18. in Joan. Id. Aug.
in the sacred Scriptures, is full of mystery and divine meaning. Now from
hence are all Heresies, even (...), from Chrysostom; and St. Augustine more
fully, hereby men become Heretical, when they have not a right understanding of
the sacred Scriptures; and what they rightly understand not, through ignorance,
they rashly assert with boldness; Wherefore when we meditate upon the sacred
Scriptures, meeting with some more secret and amazing mysteries; let our
humility teach us, that there, Melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria
scientia; Better is a modest and faithful ignorance, then a rash and confident

4. Strict watchfulness. Knowing this, that Heretics by their subtle
pretenses, and hypocritical shows, do inescare animas, Jer. 5.26. Ezekiel. 13 13.
catch souls as the fowler does Birds; the fowler he straws some good Corn to
entice, but withal sets a snare to entangle: Thus the Heretic he will teach
some truth to allure, but withal much error to deceive. Wherefore, when St.
Paul forewarns the Church of Ephesus, Act 20.29.
That grievous wolves not sparing the flock, should enter in among them. He
gives Attendite vobis ipsis and toti gregi, Take heed to your selves, and to
all the flock, vobis ipsis, to your selves, in the first place, for there lies
the chief spite and malice of Heresy and Schism; it is against the Pastors of
the Church, the Shepherds of the flock; the flock they aim at for the fleece,
and those they strive to seduce by flattery; but the Shepherds they aim at in
malice, and those they strive to fright with fear, or throw out with violence.

Heart of man is deceitful above all things: Jer. 17 9.
So that, we can never be confident enough of our sincerity, never assured
enough of our constancy; do we therefore keep a strict watch over our hearts,
least Heresy by pretenses deceive us, by flattery allure us, by fears affright
us, by distresses discourage us, from owning, ptofessing, and maintaining the
Faith and truth of Jesus Christ; and that we may be thus watchful over our
selves, keep we a waking eye fixed upon our reward with God; knowing this, that
if our reward God is our reward, Genesis 15.1.
his promises must be our comfort, his grace our strength, his love our joy,
and his heavenly presence our eternal happiness.

5. And lastly, Holy Zeal. Zeal in profession of the Faith, declaring our high
value and esteems of the truth: Thus Margaret de Valois, Queen of Navarre was
wont to say, That she received it as a greater act of favor from God, that she
was Orthodox and Reformed in the Truth, then that she was Wife, Sister, and
Aunt to Kings; and Scultetus he tells us of Henry Duke of Saxony, Scultet.
Exercit. Evangel. l. 2. c. 5.
that when he received this message from Duke George, his elder Brother, That
either he must renounce his Interest in the Protestant Faith, or loose his
right of succession to the inheritance of Misnia; he returned this answer,
Pluris se aestimare Jesum quam omnem Misniam; That he esteemed more of Jesus,
then of all Misnia.

Thus in Zeal to the Faith of Christ, resolve we, yea, profess we, rather to be
with Truth in a dungeon, then with Heresy in a Palace; with Truth in bonds,
then with Heresy in robes; with Truth on the Gibbet, then with Heresy on the
Throne. Yea, not only Zeal in professing, but also Zeal in pleading for the
Truth: Observe we St. Judes (...), Jude 3.
Earnestly to contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints;
yet contend not in Passion, but with Prudence, to justify not to disgrace the
Truth; and in our Zeal Athanasius and the Ancients refused to receive (...)
Letters pacificatory from the Arians, so do we refuse all Church Fellowship and
communion with those, who by their doctrines of Heresy, overthrow the
Foundation of Christianity. Thus we have resolved, how we are approved, and how
made manifest. There must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest among you.

Applic.
Let us recount with gratitude, and extol with praise, the Divine light out of
darkness, good out of evil; ordering the poison of the Serpent, to be an
Antidote unto his Church. The mist of Error, for a clearing of the Truth; the
malice of the Heretic, for the honor of the Orthodox.

Thus, as we of the same Letters differently transposed, do make far different
words: So God of the same causes, differently ordered, he makes as far
different effects. The Blasphemy of Ebion and Cerinthus, John's Breast,
occasioning by their Heretical doctrine, his Seraphical Gospel, which has
worthily styled him (...) St. John the Divine. Had it not been for the
irritating impudence and importunity of Heresy and Schism, how many eminent
lights had either hid their Candle under a Bushel, Mark 4.21.
or under a Bed; either covered their gifts with a vail of modesty, or of sloth?

Thus by the manifold grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Quod inimicus
Machinatur in perniciem, Aug. ep. 105. ad Sixth. Presb.
Deus convertit in adjutorium; so St. Augustine, What the enemy devises and
designeth for ruin and destruction, God orders and turns to succor and
salvation. According to that his promise, Romans 8.28.
All things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are
called according to his purpose. From whence was it, that such an holy vigor of
divine learning, and devout Holiness, did inflame the Breasts, and instruct the
Pens of Athanasius, Basil, and Augustine, was it not raised from an holy Zeal
against those blasphemous Heresies and Heretical blasphemies of Arius,
Eunomius, and Pelagius? And now as long as Piety and Learning do live, the
memory of those holy and learned Fathers shall not die; though this profane
and illiterate age would seem to give them their deaths wound.

comfort your selves (Beloved) in the midst of Heresies rage, it cannot pluck
up the Root, though it break off some Branches of the Church; it cannot throw
down the solid Stock, though shake off some rotten fruit: Though the number of
true Professors be the less, yet the worth is greater; And let them have more
of our esteems of love, who have more of the stamp of truth; approved and
manifested, as firm and settled in the Faith. Tert de P aescript ^. 3.
Avolent quantum volant, paleae levis fidei. Let the flitting chaff of a light
Faith, Eo purior massa frumenti in horreo domini reponetur, (so Tertullian) The
more pure heap of Corn is laid up in the Lords Barn. Goshen's light was the
more illustrious for Egypts darkness; and the Worlds Apostasy sets a luster
upon the Churches Constancy.

Wherefore (Beloved) that ye be not carried about with every wind of doctrine,
yea that you be not removed from your stedfastness, but may be preserved sound
in the unity of the Faith, take the To hold fast to the Apostles, Prophets, Ephesians
4.
and Evangelists, yea, the Pastors and Teachers wh ch Christ has ordained in
his Church; hold fast to them and to their doctrine; keep firm to that
profession of Faith, which the Orthodox Clergy have preached in their Sermons,
and still preach in their sufferings; such as never yet renounced or
contradicted their subscriptions. The sum of our Churches Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, contained in the Liturgy, in the Thirty nine
Articles, the Book of Homilies, Ordination. These every Minister did subscribe
to; even those Ministers did set to their hands in subscription to justify
them; who after lift up their hands in Covenant to destroy them: But God grant
them Repentance, and us Perseverance; them Repentance of their Revolt, and us
Perseverance in the Faith; that at the last day, the Church may say to us, what
Christ said to his Apostles; Lu^. ^.28.
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations; and then shall
Christ in the view of the whole World, reward our Patience, and That we are
approved. Thus have we done with the several particulars of the Explication,
and of the Application; what remains but your practice?

Halleluiah.
THE FIRST SERMON UPON Matthew. 28. V. 19. and part of the 20. Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations, Baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching
Introduction.
IF we, who serve in the Sanctuary do (as men entrusted in greatest Affairs and
Employments should do) often view our Commission Savior as his Ministers; 1
Cor. 4.1. Matthew. 10.24. 2 Cor. 5.20.
from our Lord as his Stewards; from our Master as his Servants; yea from our
King as his Ambassadors: This frequent view will animate our Ministry with a
zealous vigor, encouraged in our Service, by the authority and presence of our
Lord and Master. See the Preface to my Text, and we find our Savior
victoriously risen from the Grave, and before the things concerning the
Kingdom: Acts 1.3.
The Kingdom, of which he is Sovereign, All power being given unto him in
Heaven and in Earth; which power he has promised shall never fail his Church.
For so says Christ unto his Apostles, and all their Successors, in the close
and compline of the Text, Behold I am with you unto the end of the World.

I am with you, in the work of your Ministry; with you, to prosper your labors
and protect your persons: To prosper your labors, making Disciples not to your
selves, but to me. You I have deputed to the Office of Preaching my Word, and
administering my Sacraments; and therefore they who own me their Master, shall
acknowledge I am with you, Matthew. 10.40.
as to prosper your labors, so to protect your persons; I will plead your
right, vindicate yo r authority, punish your contempt, and avenge your injury.
If any slight and despise the office of your ministry, if any question or
doubt the efficacy of mine Ordinances, my Word, my Sacraments, see my power,
behold my presence, maugre all the malice and rage of men and devils, of earth
and hell, the ministry of my Gospel and Grace shall stand; let this then be
your encouragement and comfort, All power is given unto me in Heaven, and in
Earth; and lo, I am with you unto the end of the World: And therefore, (...),
Go ye, teach all Nations, etc.

The words they are the very basis and foundation of the Gospels Ministry to us
Gentiles. Observe in them three parts; a Mission, Division.
a

First, The Mission, delivered in an usual Grecism of the Participle for the
Verb, (...), Go ye.

Secondly, The Commission, not barely, no nor properly, teach, but more fully
(...) make Disciples: Discipulas facite omnes gentes (as Beza) Disciple ye all
Nations.

Thirdly, The particular instructions for the exercising this Commission,
(...), Baptising and Teaching; admitting In the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and the Doctrine is prescribed as to the extent of
its object, to be, All things whatsoever Christ has commanded; the end of wh
ch Doctrine is obedience, even to observe and do. Thus, Go ye, disciple all
Nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost;

1. The Mission, Go ye. The three Offices of Christ as Mediator, Explic.
his Prophetic, Priestly, and Regal Office, These he now exercises in his
Church on Earth; in the outward Ministry by her Pastors, and in the inward
Ministra^ion by his Spirit. In the outward Ministry of the Church her Pastors
do expound the Word of God, Preach the Gospel of Truth, unfold the Mysteries of
Grace; which is that part of their Ministry, committed to them of Christ, in
the execution of his Prophetical Office. Again, they offer up the Sacrifices of
Prayers and Thanksgivings, Baptize and bless in the Name of Christ, and
celebrate the Sacramental solemnity of the holy Eucharist; which is that part
of their Ministry committed to them of Christ in the execution of his Priestly
Office. Further yet, they bind the unbelieving and loose the Believer; they
excommunicate the Regal Office. Now no part nor portion of this Ministry may
any man take upon him, Heb. 5.4.
but being called as was Aaron, that is, called even with an inward and outward
call; as thus, A man has been brought up in the Schools of the Prophets; or
else where devoted himself to the study of Divinity, whereby he is become in a
competent measure fitted for the service of 1 Pet. 5.2.
when now he finds St. Peter's (...), a willingness of spirit, and readiness
of mind to employ his gifts; this is the inward call of God: But further to
testify and declare this, there must be the outward call of the Church; Christ
receiving him into the Office of the Ministry, by the regular Ordination of his
Substitutes, who alone in this representing his person, can give us our Mission
of a (...), Go ye.

But alas, the disorder and confusion of Sacrilege and Schism! They go before
they are sent, Jer. 14.14. and 23.21.
they will run, before they are bid go: But stop we them here in their haste,
and question we their Commission; Dear Brethren, ye that are so hasty to be
Preachers, tell us by what hand are you sent? You will say by the Spirits
Mission. I ask then, What is the outward Testimony and Warrant? You answer, You
look not further then the inward call. Strange, that men dare Timothy and
Titus; yea, of Paul and Barnabas, who though inwardly called, yea,
extraordinarily, immediately; yet they had their outward Testimony, their
Ecclesiastical Warrant, Acts 13.2, 3.
their Apostolical Mission, and this, by imposition of hands.

But further, Some others there are who will not go but as sent, and sent by
Ordination too; but tell us, Dear Brethren, by what hands are you ordained, by
what authority are you sent? The former

First, That our Lord Jesus Christ did constitute a Ministry to be perpetuated
in the Church.

Secondly, That there is no admission into this Ministry, but by imposition of
hands in Ordination.

Thirdly, That this admission into the Ministry by imposition of hands in
Ordination, was Viz For the space of above 500 years after Christ.
never in the power of any mere Presbyter.

And these being proved, it will easily appear from what hand to receive
Ordination, our lawful Mission into the Ministry, our (...), Go ye.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ did constitute a Ministry to be perpetuated in the
Church. Our Lord and Savior, as it was prophesied of him, so it was performed
by him, the Government was upon his shoulder. Isa. 9.6.
He the founder of Ecclesiastical polity, the constitutor of Order and
Government in his Church, as being our Apostle sent from God, our Prophet, our
great High Priest, the Shepherd and Bishop of our Head and King of his Church,
whose Ministerial Government shall continue, 1 Cor. 15.24.
till he come to give up the Kingdom unto his Father, and God be all in all.
Now as the Father sent Christ, Joh. 20.21.
so Christ has sent his Apostles, and sent them to be a standing Ministry, by
a communicated power, not seated in the people, but in the Pastors of the
Church, who are to continue unto the end of the World, even to the fullness of
Christ and his Church; as in the close of my Text, and in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
is most plain and evident. If a Gospel Ministry was not established successive
in the Apostles themselves ordain, and leave in charge to those Apostolick-men
which came after them, that they should ordain? For so St. Paul left in charge
with Titus for Creet, and Timothy for Ephesus; yea, to what purpose has the
Spirit dictated, St. Paul penned, and the Church preserved the particular
instructions, who are to be admitted to Ordination; if none were to be
ordained? How frivolous and useless were the Apostles Deacons and Bishops
qualifications, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. Rev. 2.1.
if they were to receive no Ordination? And sure the Angels of those Churches
were approved in their Ministry by Christ, who held them as Stars in his right
hand. And that of the Psalmist, Psalm 45.16. St. Hierom. in loc.
Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy children, St. Hierome applies to the
Apostolical prefecture and presidency in Bishops, Quia, Apostolis a mundo
recessis, habes pro illis Episcopos filios: Because, the Apostles as Fathers
being dead, the Church has her Bishops, as Sons surviving in their stead.

No admission into this Ministry, but, by imposition of hands in Ordination. We
read of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.23.
that they ordained Elders in every Church: And for this purpose, Tit. 1.5.
St. Paul left Titus in Creet, that he should ordain Elders in every City. And
that this Ordination had its outward ceremony of Imposition of hands, nothing
is more plain from Apostolical practice in Scripture, and the continued custom
of Christ's Church. But, because men little regard the Churches custom, we will
wave that, to insist upon the Apostolical practice. Act. 6.6.
Thus, those seven persons, commonly called the seven Deacons, they are
ordained to their intended Ministration by the Apostles; And how? Why, by
Prayer and Imposition of hands.

Acts 13.3.
Again, Paul and Barnabas are separated to the work of the Ministry; and how?
with Fasting and Prayer, and laying on of hands: Again, Timothy is received
into the Ministry; and though it be (...) prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.14
yet is it (...) with the laying on of hands.



1 Cor. 1.17.
for, this St. Paul's prefers before

I ask the question then, Is Public Teaching a proper office of the Paul's
testimony is plain and full, when he tells us of public offices given by
Christ unto the Church; Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
amongst which are Pastors and Teachers, and these, For the perfecting of the
Saints; for the work of the Ministry; for the edifying of the Body of Christ.
Now, if public Teaching be a proper office, may any enter it without
Admission? To do this, were an absurdity against the very light of nature, and
Law of Nations;

the persecution raised about Stephen, Acts 8.4. and 11.19.
they are said To go about preaching the Word.

To this I give a twofold answer, Holy Ghost, Chap. 3 31.
and so their call, as well as their work, was extraordinary; and this
witnessed by their gift of healing, intimated in Chap. 11. 21. where it is
said, The hand of the Lord was with them, to which some Copies Diodate) for to
heal them. Or (2) observe, What is here said of these scattered Brethren,
extends not to public Teaching in the Church, which public Teaching is
peculiarly Ministerial; but, to publish, declare, divulge the Gospel where
Christ was not yet known, no Church yet gathered, no Disciples yet made: And
this we deny not, to be lawful to any man, yea, we acknowledge it a duty, where
God so gives the opportunity. To declare the Gospel then to unbelievers, is
common to all as Christians, but to Go ye, disciple all Nations, Baptising
them, etc.

Again, one Objection more there is which appears big, 1 Cor. 14.31.
viz. The Apostle seems to tell the whole Corinthian Congregation, That they
may all prophecy one by one.

I answer, True indeed, all may prophecy; Verse. 6.
as he instanceth in himself, that he speaks in the Church; as, by knowledge,
so by prophesying: Knowledge, that is doctrine obtained by premeditation;
Prophesying here is doctrine delivered by sudden inspiration, as appears Verse.
30. Prophesying was of old, Preaching moved by divine rapture; now, Preaching
is prophesying, attained by diligent study. Even by attending unto reading, and
to meditation, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.
as St. Paul exhorts Timothy.

These Prophets St. Paul speaks of, were a peculiar office in the Church, so
reckoned with Apostles and Evangelists; Ephesians 4.11.
and of those there were many at Corinth, as we find many at Antioch; Acts
13.2.
and these (...) too, Ministering unto the Lord. Now, to these Prophets says
the Apostle, to preserve order in the Church, Ye may all prophecy one by one.

And thus is the Giant slain, the great Argument and Objection

3. To admit into the Ministry, By Imposition of hands in Ordination, was never
in the power of any mere Presbyter. Our Lord and Savior did constitute Twelve
Apostles, Matthew. 10.1, 2. Luke 10 1.
in degree and office above the Seventy Disci^les. Which holy Apostles, that
they were to have their Successors, is evident from the promise here of Christ.
Behold, I am with you, unto the end of the World: Which promise extends to the
whole Ministry of the Church, the Apostles having all authority Ecclesiastical,
and every office Ministerial, virtually and eminently in themselves. Most
certain and plain it is, our Saviors promise could not be meant of the
Apostles persons, it must be then interpreted of their Function: And of their
Function, not in its extraordinary privileges, but its ordinary Ministrations;
not in its extraordinary Privileges, as, that their Mission was immediate from

Successors then there must be to the Apostles, invested with the Authority and
Office of the foregoing Ministrations: Now, our inquiry then is, who these
Successors are? And for this, we find in Scripture, Acts 12.17. and 15.13. and
21.28. 1 Timothy 1.3. and 3.15. 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 1.5. Rev. 2. and 3.
James, Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy of Ephesus, Titus of Creet; yea, the seven
Angels, Presidents, and Bishops of the Revelations. Besides these, we find in
the undoubted History of the Church, Mark, Bishop of Alexandria, Epaphroditus
of Philippi, Archippus of Coloss, Clemens of Rome, Ignatius of Antioch, these
and others too, in the Apostles times, and ordained by the Apostles hands, were
the received Successors in the ordinary Ministry of the Apostleship. And that
this was so, Theodor. in Phil. 2^25. (...) --
is evident from that which is given us by Theodoret, (...); Those very persons

But now, Time, the great mint and master of words (least community of names
should beget a confusion in things) Time (I say) did appropriate the name of
Apostle to the immediate Apostles of Christ, and the name of Bishop to their
Successors; whose particular Presbyters, though of never so eminent abilities,
and high esteems) is upon undeniable record in the Churches Histories. And
though I might heap up the unquestionable testimonies of the Ancients, yet that
one full witness and quaint expression of Tertullian, may be here sufficient:
Who, writing within one hundred years after St. John; and so, the Succession of
Ministry, not very long settled in the Church after the Apostles; he tells us,
Tert. de Praescript. c. 32.
speaking of some Metropolitan Churches, Exhibent quos ab Apostolis in
Episcopatum constitutos, Apostolici seminis traduces habent. They exhibit and
produce those persons constituted by the Apostles to be Bishops, who, by virtue
of an Apostolical Seed, do transmit a Succession of Ministry in the Church.

Episcopacy becomes, what Epiphanius elegantly styles it, Epiph Haeres. 75.
cont. Aerium.
(...), That order which is Generative of Fathers; Presbyters may beget Sons by
Baptism, but not Fathers by Ordination and Consecration: This is the Bishops
peculiar, as Successor to the Apostles, in that full Ministry which is
perpetuated in the Church. That the Seventy Disciples had not this full
Ministry, nor Presbyters, the Successors to those Disciples, who have power to
Preach, to Baptize, and Consecrate the Eucharist; that they have

Consult we then. (1) The Sacred Scriptures. And the first Ordination we meet
with, is that of those Seven, Acts 6.
commonly called Deacons; and here we find no hands, but those of the
Apostles. Presbyters; Acts 14.23.
and this we find to be by the hands of Barnabas and Paul: Which two when
separated to the work of the Ministry, if we may call it an Ordination, it is
by the hands of Simeon, Lucius, and Manaen, Apostolick-men. Acts 13.1, 2, 3.
Prophets ministering to the Lord; who (as Church History tells us) were Bishops
of Syria. The last Ordination we meet with in Scripture, actually executed, it
is that of Timothy, 1 Timothy 4 14.
which though by Presbytery, yet is not that Presbytery without an Apostle;
even the laying on of the hands of St. Paul. 1 Timothy 1.6.
From Scripture practice, pass we on to Scripture precept; and for this,
consult we the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, in which we have the exact
platform of the Churches Ministry, as communicated and perpetuated from the
Apostles. Behold we then the Church of Ephesus, and the Churches of Creet, in
them we find many Presbyters; and above those Presbyters in dignity and
office, Timothy and Titus; Timothy and Titus were in dignity and office above
those Presbyters, appears plainly by that power they had of enacting
Ecclesiastical Laws, of passing Church censures, and of ordaining by imposition
of hands; in which, is the work and the office, proper and peculiar to Timothy
and Titus, above those Presbyters which were in their Churches. And observe
those instructions given by St. Paul to Timothy and Titus, in their particular
persons, have been and yet are continued in the Church, as sacred Rules to
regulate for ever the Function and Office of an Episcopal presidency; 1 Timothy
5.22. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.19. Tit. 3.10.
which Function and Office extends it self, not only to the ordaining of
Presbyters, but also to the exercising a Disciplinary power, and an
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over them; as appears by many plain Texts, given by
the Apostle.

But (2) from the Scriptures Authority, pass we on to take a short view of the
Churches History. Which History, from the most sacred John who tells us of so
many Antichrists, 1 John 2.18.
should not tell us of Episcopacy being Antichristian, if he had had the Spirit
of our present times to have believed it such; which, ^rer. l. 3. c 3.
sure we are, he did not believe, for that, Irenaeus assures us, (...) in his
younger years, he saw Polycarpe, Bishop of Smyrna, whom he knew to be so
constituted by the Apostles; and Tertullian, Tert. de P aescript. c. 32.
is express that St. John himself was one. After Tertullian, consult we St.
Basil, and he calls Episcopacy, (...), the Apostolical prefecture and
presidency; August. Ep. 44.
yea, St. Augustine he informs us, That Radix Christianae societatis, per seeds
Apostolorum, and successiones Episcoporum, certa per orbem propagatione
diffunditur; the Root of Christian communion has branched and spread it self,
in a certain propagation throughout the world, by the Apostolical Seats, and
Episcopal Successions; Aerius pertinaciously asserting the contrary, was by St.
Augustine, yea, by the Catholic Church (says Epiphanius) condemned of Heresy.

Further, they are known examples which we have of Musaeus and Eutychianus, two
Grecian Presbyters; who having ordained without the Bishop, and themselves not
being Bishops, their Ordination is declared by the Council of Sardis (about
eleven years after Constantine the Great) to be null, Council. Sard. can. 19.
and those they had ordained are reduced to the state and condition of Laics,
(...), as such who had dissembled and forged their Ordination. Again, we read
of Ischyras, ordained by Colluthus, (...) one, who strongly, yet vainly,
fancied himself a Bishop, being Ischyras, the Synod of Alexandria reduces him
to Lay-communion, and determines concerning Colluthus, that (...) whatsoever
Ordinations he had made, they should be all void and invalid.

To close then, we have made good unto you by infallible proofs, that
imposition of hands in Ordination, so plain and evident in the planting, is
requisite and necessary in the propagating the Church of Christ, as being
productive of issue and succession in the Ministry; which Ministry shall
continue in the Church, whilst the Church continues in the world. And now,
seeing that only Apostles and Apostolick-men did ordain; and that no mere
Presbyters in all the Scriptures are expressed, nor in all Church History
allowed, we see, by what Ordination we receive our Saviors Mission here, of a
(...). Go ye, Disciple all Nations, Baptising them, etc.

But, before we pass this point, it will be some further confirmation, and much
more illustration of the truth, that we give you some plea of Divine Reason, to
make good the equity of our present assertion. Know then, in the Apostles
times, and Infant-state of the Church, Parishes were not divided, nor
Congregations with their particular Ministers fixed and settled; but in one City
there were many Presbyters;

A Prudential Experience does tell us, it is with Christ's Church as with David's
Harp; in all, a parity of office is as far from peace, as the unison of strings
is from harmony; subordination in some, and superiority in others, is as
requisite to Ecclesiastical as Civil Polity, without which, Schism becomes as
fatal to the Church, as Rebellion Hierome; unless the Episcopal pre-eminence of
Authority and Office be preserved, Hieron. Dialog. Adv. Luciferian.
Tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes. There will be as many
Schisms in the Church, as there are Presbyters; especially if every Presbyter
has power of Ordination intrinsecal to his Office, by the Divine Right of
Apostolical Institution: For, what then would be the use of Ordination, but
chiefly to propagate Schism?

cannot be taken from them; this would be a strange disorder and confusion.
Wherefore (Beloved) in what we have asserted, the Apostolic Constitution, and
the Churches practice, does engage our consent of judgment, and conformity of
obedience, upon a double tie, of Reason and of Religion: So that if we be
either prudent men or pious Christians, we must submit to the truth of this
assertition, That by imposition of hands to ordain into the Ministry, is not in
the power, nor belongs to the office of any mere Presbyter.

Acts 20.17, 28. Phil. 1.1.
But what, do we not find that frequently in sacred Scripture, Presbyters are
called Bishops? and are they not therefore one in office, being one in name?
and not to be differenced in the Church, not being distinguished in the
Scripture? To this so specious an Argument, we answer our adversaries, That, as
we are not so ignorant, as from the name to prove the office of Bishop, so nor
should they be so erroneous, as from the community of name to prove the
identity of office in Bishop and Presbyter. We find in the Acts and Epistles
(those Acts and Epistles, the same persons sometimes called (...) Ministers,
sometimes (...) Presbyters, sometimes (...) Bishops; so that, by the
signification of name, it is clear, we have not the distinction of office: 1
Pet. 5.1. 2 John 1.
And therefore, Presbyter being spoken of the Apostles, as well as Bishop of
Presbyters. As from hence, That the Apostles were

It is easy to observe, how words, common at the first, became appropriate in
their use, and so, in some process of time, even within one Century of years
after Christ, the distinction of office became commonly known by distinction of
name; Bishop being appropriate

We close then, with this sure inference from the premises, That this late
Schism in our Church of mere Presbyters ordaining to the Ministry, as it has
not any clear Text of Scripture to warrant it, nor any allowed practice of the
Church to approve it, so nor has it any argument of Reason to abet it; as
being contrary to that Mission, constituted by our Savior in his (...). Go ye,

Applic. 1 Cor. 9.16.
1. You see (Beloved) what is our Mission, Christ has bid us go, and a
necessity is laid upon us, Woe unto us if we preach not the Gospel. But then,
much more, woe unto them who stop our mouths, that we cannot preach, or that
bind our feet that we cannot go. Let such dread Jeroboams judgment, their arm
withering, 1 King. 13.4.
their power shrinking and wasting with a curse. God did bear long with Judah,
but when they came to this, That they mocked the Messengers of God, 2 Chronicles
36.16, 17, etc.
despised his words, and misused his Prophets; then, there was no remedy, his
mercy had borne so long, that his justice could bear no longer, but wrath does
arise against his people, to captivity, and to beautiful our feet, make
pleasant our paths. Sure, there is no greater joy (and blessed, even thrice
blessed be God, I can call it much my joy) there is no greater joy in the
service of our Ministry, then to preach the Gospel, to a willing and reverent
Auditory. But oh! (Beloved, and my dearly beloved in the Lord) this, this is
too too much the disparagement of your profession, and the discouragement of my
Ministry, that your holiness of life and righteousness in the world, answers
not 2 Cor. 3.3.
that I might say of you what St. Paul says of his Corinthians, Ye are the
Epistle of Christ ministered by us, known and read of all men. The Epistle of
Christ, such in whom he has imprinted the truth and holiness of his Gospel,
which has been preached unto you. This, this would very much seal the
lawfulness of my Ministry, even Go ye, disciple all Nations, etc.

2. As I have showed you the manner, so let me mind you of the end of our
Mission and Ministry, even the good of your Souls; and the chiefest good too,
that of Life and Salvation. The office of the Magistrate intends the
establishment of Peace; the art of the Physician, the health of the Body; the
profession of the Lawyer, the security of the Estate; but the calling of the
Minister, the salvation Paul admonishes Timothy, saying, 1 Timothy 4 16.
Take heed unto thy self, and unto the doctrine; for in so doing, thou shall
save thy self, and them that hear thee. He then that loves his Soul, will prize
the Ministry; and bless God, in making him a partaker of the peculiar
privilege of his v^sible Church, the public Ministration of his Word and
Sacraments: Which gracious priv^ledge of his visible Church, Oh! how near are
we to the loosing of it? Oh help, help to prevent it by your Prayers, and that
which speaks louder then your Prayers, the works of an holy Obedience. And O
how may God justly take away in wrath, what men cast off in contempt, the
office of his Ministry? Which sacred Office, however slighted by men, yet is it
honored of God; however esteemed of the world, as a mean employment (for what
more contemptible a disdain, 1 Timothy 3.2.
then, thou Priest?) yet is it styled by the Apostle an excellent work. And see
some part of its excellency; The Minister in Orator unto God; and in public
Preaching, he is Gods mouth, as his Ambassador unto the people; and thus, what
honor on earth greater then this, to have (...) (as Nazianzen speaks. Naz.
Apolog.
) a Presidentship of Souls, and a kind of Mediatorship betwixt God and Men?
Behold we the Minister at the Altar, and I will not say, what Prince on his
Throne? but, what Seraphim in Heaven, is employed in a service of more dignity
and honor then this, to offer Commemorative Sacrifice of his Sons Body and
Blood?

I might enlarge, were it not that I stand before those I know, or at least, am
willing to believe, not defective in this duty, the honorable and reverential
esteems of the Gospels Ministry, in its several orders and degrees, owned by
Gods holy Church, though despised by men and the wicked world. Only this, from
the dignity of the Ministration and Office, is aggravated the guilt of their
usurpation Ambassador, Cicer. in Ver.
Non modo inter seciorum jura, sed etiam inter hostium tela incolume versetur;
it is of that reverence and regard, that it may not be violated; not only
among the rights of confederates, but even the weapons of enemies: And what,
are the Ambassadors of earthly Princes sacred, and inviolable by the Law of
Nations; and shall the Ambassadors of the King of Heaven be silenced, Numb 16.
rejected, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, opening their mouths in mutiny against
Moses and Aaron, the earth opens her mouth in revenge, and they sink down quick
into the pit. Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.
King of Judah, invading the Priests office, he is sequestered from his regal
Function, being smitten with a Leprosy, and so separated from his people. And
what? was God more jealous for the Legal, then he is for the Evangelical
Ministration? did he punish Kings invading the office of the Priest, and will
he acquit the people blindness of mind, and a reprobate sense, which seems to
be the judgment of this Nation, it is the most dreadful vengeance that can
befall a people; of which vengeance there can be no surer symptom, then this
horrid sin, even through Schism, Heresy, Violence, Profaneness, and
Sacrilege, to invade the Function, corrupt the Doctrine, abuse the Persons,
debase the honor, and spoil the maintenance of that Ministry which Christ has
constituted; and constituted here in his Mission and Commission, of a (...), Go
ye, Disciple all Nations, Baptising

THE SECOND SERMON Matthew. 28. V. 19. and part of the 20. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, Baptising
Introduction.
WHilst I behold the Word and Ministry of Christ to to be amongst men, as the
Ark and Testament Philistines, scornfully abused as in the Temple of Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.2.
rather then religiously reverenced as in the Church of God; The sacred
Scriptures, the Evidences of our salvation, not so much read in Devotion, as
wrested by Faction; Malice or Pride being the venomous Spider which converts
the wholesome sweetness of saving Truth, into the deadly poison of destructive
Heresy. And as for the Sacramental of Gods holy Covenant, whilst I behold them
either plucked off by the violent, or defaced by the foul hand of Schism and
Profaneness; so that a question it is, Whether the profane neglecting, or the
unworthy receiving, or the disorderly administering the blessed Sacraments bring
greater guilt upon the Nation. And no wonder then if our dearest blood has
been spilt in so large a profuseness, seeing we have spilt Christ's precious
blood in so open a profaneness. Oh! how, how have men come to receive the bread
and wine of the blessed 1 Cor. 11.29.
but have not discerned Christ's body and blood, through their profane and
unworthy participation? And now, how many, oh! too too many, how do they go to
receive Christ's body and blood, and alas discern not that it is mere bread and
wine, through an unlawful and Schismatical administration? Of these two so
horrid evils, I cannot suddenly say, which is the greater guilt.

And as for the Sacrament of Baptism, whilst I behold Parents cruel to their
tender Infants, Joh. 3.5.
denying them entrance into Christ's kingdom, and keeping from them the seal of
the Covenant of grace, out of which Covenant there is no salvation: In which
see the just judgment of the righteous God, that they who in a blind zeal have
been so cruel to their mother the Church to eat out her bowels by Schism, they
are given up to such a blindness of mind, that they become Go ye, disciple all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, etc.

Having given you the Explication of the first particular, Explicat.
The Mission, Go ye; We proceed to the second particular, The Commission:
teach; but more fully, (...), make Disciples; (...), Disciple all Nations. But
why disciple, rather then teach? I answer, for a two fold reason; the propriety
of the word, and the congruity of the sense. (1.) The propriety of the word,
which neither in profane Authors, nor in the sacred Scriptures, any where
signifies to teach, but either to admit another, or to give up ones self to be
taught. To confirm this from the language of the Scripture, we observe, radix
(...), which all Lexicons render disco, to learn: I say, besides this, we
observe, that the word here (...), ill translated to teach, is aptly expounded,
and that according to the use of the Hebrews, by a (...) to make Disciples:
Joh. 4 1.
which exposi ion is further confirmed by that of S. Matthew, where it is said
(according to the Greek) of Joseph of Arimathea, Mat. 27.57.
(...); which, if (...) did signify to teach, must be absurdly rendered, He
himself taught Jesus. But signifying (as we interpret a giving up to be taught,
therefore it is properly rendered, as our English reads it, Himself was Jesus's
disciple.

2. The Congruity of the sense. It appears a Tautology, unbeseeming us to put
upon the fundamental law of our Savior in his constitution of the Gospels
Ministry to us Gentiles; it appears (I say) a Tautology, to read, Go teach,
baptizing and teaching. Yea further, we observe, if our Savior had intended
the latter teaching, either (...), or (...), either by way of explication or of
amplification to the former, he would have said (...); but saying, (...)
properly signifying teaching, we are hereby taught, (...) must be properly
rendered discipling: And then the sense runs clear, when the word is read true,
Go, make disciples, baptizing and teaching them; which teaching extends it self
to

Thus then (Beloved) it appears by this little, how requisite it is that Humane
learning be handmaid to Divine knowledge; for that no Translation can be the
authentic Word of God, any further then it perfectly agrees with the Original.
How unfit then are they to interpret Scripture, who cannot tell you which is
Scripture? as sure I am, no man can tell you upon his own knowledge, but he who
is Original tongues. In opening then the Apostles Commission, we read it,
Disciple ye all Nations; and propose these two particulars for our Explication.
1. What it is to disciple. 2. Who they are, that are to be discipled.

1. What it is to disciple. That discipling is more then teaching, appears by
this, that many were taught which were not Disciples of Christ; and many are
Disciples of Christ, which yet are not taught. Many were taught, which were not
Disciples of Christ; such were Pharisees: Again, many are Disciples of Christ,
which yet are not taught; such are now the Infants of believing parents, who
are initiated by baptism to be educated in Christ's school by teaching. To
disciple, does not exclude teaching, but signifies an initiating to be taught,
an admitting to be Scholars: yet because no man will give up himself to a
Master he knows not, Christ must first be preached to the Nations, before the
Nations can be made Disciples unto Christ: And thus Camer. in loc.
and the nature of the Churches communion. For as it is observed well by the
Learned, our Savior's (...) is answerable to the Jews (...); his making
Disciples, to their making Proselytes, which still admits the children with the
parents into the communion of the Church. And it is the Critics observation,
Dr. Hammond, multis nominibus mihi honorandus.
that when our Savior says, Suffer little children to come unto me, his (...)
is equivalent to the Jews (...); whereby Christ receives little children as his
Proselytes, that is, his Disciples.

Actual discipling, then, does not consist in teaching, but in receiving in to
be taught, those that have learnt already to be further taught, and those that
have not learnt (through defect, not default) to be taught so soon as they can
learn. Which latter is the condition of Infants dedicated unto Christ; who,
though they are not in a capacity to learn as to the outward Ministry, yet this
does not exclude them from being (...), taught of God. Sure, Joh. 6.45.
those men who oppose Infants disciplining and baptism, will not confine the
teaching of the Spirit to the Ministry of the Word. But however Christ's
disciples they are, as admitted into his family and school, made partakers of
his Churches communion and prayers, received under his protection and guard.
Thus then the Apostles execute their Commission; they go out among the Nations,
preach the Gospel, and upon their preaching the Gentiles believe, upon their
believing the parents and children are received to Baptism, thereby initiated
as Scholars of Christ's School, listed as Soldiers of his Army, enrolled

So that, in sum, to make disciples, is to admit into Church Communion: which
Church Communion, before the Jews peculiar, is now become the Gentiles
privilege; who whilst they were without Christ, they were Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12, 13.
and strangers from the Covenants of promise; but being made nigh by the blood
of Jesus, Jew and Gentile are made one, one Church of diruto septo, the wall of
partition being broken down, even the Law of commandments in the Ceremonial
ordinances being abolished, the Gentiles are received into communion with the
Jews, Ephesians. 3.6.
being made (...) fellow-heirs of the same eternal inheritance, heaven; yea
(...) fellow members of the same mystical body, the Church; lastly, (...),
fellow-partakers of the same gracious promise; that made to Abraham, Gal. 3.8.
when the Gospel was preached unto that in his seed should all the nations of
earth be blessed. Thus we have done with the first particular, what it is to
disciple; it is to receive into the communion of the Church.

2. Who they are that are to be discipled, who they are that are to be received
into the Churches communion; even of all Nations as many as believe, and the
believing Parents bringing in with them their Infant-children. Of believing
parents we have no doubt; of the Infant-children is all the question:
Wherefore, how come they Quaere, I will first prove, that Infants of believing
parents, they have a right and interest in the communion of the Church.
Secondly, give you the reason of that interest and right. First, prove that
Infants of believing parents have a right and interest in the communion of the
Church, from three Arguments. 1. Because the Jews infants were members of the
visible Church, therefore are the Christians. 2. Because our Savior testifies,
that to them belongs the kingdom of God. Mar. 10.14. 1 Cor. 7.14.
3. Because S. Paul affirms them to be holy.

1. Arg. Because the Jews infants were members of the visible Church; therefore
are the Christians. That infants were accounted members of Christ's visible
Church under the Law, and before the Law; if not from Adam, as it is probable,
yet from Abraham, as it is infallible: Ger. 17.11, 12.
Circumcision, the then initiating seal of Church Communion, Church Communion
is not changed in its nature and essence, by the access of the Gentiles: For,
some of the natural branches being broken off, Romans 11.17.
we of the wild Olive are ingraffed in, and made to partake with them of the
root and fatness of the good Olive Tree. As with the Jews, they and their
children are broken off; so with the Gentiles, they and their children are
graffed in: yea, with the natural branches, the ingraffed Gentiles partake of
the root and fatness of the Olive, that is, they partake with the Jews of the
promises and privileges of the Church; of which privileges this is a chief
one, That the infants of believing parents are members of the visible Church.

If it were not so the Jews children, which were in Church Communion before
their parents became Christians, they should lose the privilege they before
enjoyed, and become so far from being bettered in their estate by their parents
believing in Christ come in the flesh, that their estate is made very much
worse: And if this be so, that children lose the benefit and blessing under the
Gospel which they enjoyed under the Law, show us what guilt in infants
forfeited it, or what act of Christ repealed it. Sure we are, Mar. 10.14.
Suffer little children to come unto me, we shall hereafter prove, confirms
them members of the Christian.

To enlarge a little further. When Jews and Gentiles are united, we find in
Scripture, Ephesians. 2.14.
it is by taking down the partition wall, not taking away the Churches
communion: If there were any change in this, sure we are, it were for the
better, not for the worse, even such as might advance the grace and riches of
the Gospel; so that I thus plainly and fully argue the cause. When the Jews
were converted to the faith of Christ, did their children which were before
Church Members, then cease to be of the Churches communion? If so, I ask what
cast them out? If the repealing of that privilege, give testimony of that
repeal; if the forfeiting that blessing, give witness of that forfeiture. On
the contrary, did the Infant-children of the believing Jews retain, and shall
not then the Infant-children Apostles pens and tongues had been never so silent.
Yea doubtless, had this so dearly prized, this so long enjoyed privilege been
either prohibited or omitted, so great a change of so great a concernment would
have

2. Arg. Our Saviors testifying that to little children belongs the kingdom of
God. And his testimony we have from S. Mark s Gospel, Mar. 10.14.
where we find some zealously devoted, bringing young children unto Jesus,
(...), sucking children: Sure we are, they were (...), (as Suidas speaks of
some) children borne in arms; for adferebant, non adducebant; Apud Scap. in
Lex. graec.
they brought them in their arms, not led them in their hands; and Christ
receives them, as they brought them, (...), He embraced them in his arms: So
that it is apparent beyond all contradiction, they were little children, very
babes or infants. v. 16.
And these they bring to Christ as a great Prophet sent of God, or the Messiah
in whom they believed; and to this end they bring them, that he might bless
them. But the Apostles, for what reason we know not, they forbid whose
imprudent, or sinful act moves our Savior's just displeasure, yea, (...), He
was much displeased saying, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not. Where the negative command, is the stronger enforcement of the
affirmative precept. Of both which, if we enquire the reason, our Savior
answers, Of such is the kingdom of God; that is, they have a right and interest
in the communion of the Church, and the Covenant of grace.

David sings, Ps. 103.19.
The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all?
This the providence of God, in his government of the world: Infants are
Subjects of this Kingdom, Gods providence being over them in the womb, as
fearfully and wonderfully made; and from the womb, Ps. 139.14.
as being fearfully and wonderfully too preserved, considering the dangers of
their education, as well as the wonders of their conception. Yea, in the
example of the Israelites, Numb. 14.31, 32
we see how tender and careful they are of their children, lest they should
become a prey: but God, he punishes the rebellious parents, and preserves the
innocent children. Your little ones (says God) which ye said should be a prey,
them I will bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised. But
the Kingdom of Power is not that our Savior intends, when he says of Infants,
that of such is the kingdom of God; but it is the Kingdom Mat. 18.10. Heb. 1.14.
in testimony whereof God has assigned them tutelar Angels; which holy Angels
the Apostle tells us are ministering Spirits for the good of those God ordains
heirs of salvation. Of Infants then is the Kingdom of Grace, in the promises of
Gods covenant, the privileges of Christ's Church, even whatsoever their tender
age is capable of, in the communion of Saints.

of them, but of such as them; of such in innocence, not of such in Answ. If
it had been thus intended by Christ, as it is interpreted by the Anabaptist,
then what had Christ to be displeased with his Disciples for, seeing they could
not divine that Christ had a mind to read a lecture of admonition from the
Emblematical resemblance of those children? But our Savior's being displeased,
argues something in the Apostles which was faulty, either of ignorance or of
heedlesness, infants belongs the kingdom of God. But further, the Argument is
clear; if to such as Infants, much more to Infants. Our Savior is so far from
excluding them, that he primarily intends them: For so is our common saying in
English, suitable to the Scripture Phrase in Greek, Nehem. 6.11.
when Nehemian thus speaks, Should such a man as I fly? Now does Nehemiah
speak this of himself, or of some other? Sure, of himself. And the like, the
very like is that of Christ; of such, even of infants themselves, as of such is
the kingdom of God.

Yea, observe how our Savior frames his speech to the best advantage of
Infants. Had he said (...), of these, or of them, he might have been
interpreted to have spoken of the then present individuals; but in his (...),
of such as them, he intends, and expressly declares his intentions to concern
all the whole species of Infants, in as many as are presented unto him by the
hand Mar. 10.16.
so he sends them away with a blessing: But what blessing does he bestow? Why,
no ordinary blessing, we are sure, for he gives it with imposition of hands;
and it seems to be no single blessing, for he lays on both his hands; no
temporal or earthly blessing alone, but some spiritual and heavenly blessing in
chief: To them, he says, belongs the kingdom of God; and therefore, sure, to
them he gave the blessing of the kingdom. Thus we have seen Christ's singular
affection to infants; and seeing he embraces them in his arms, we may not, we
dare not but receive them into the Church: We cannot, sure, deny them
Church Communion, to whom belongs the Kingdom of God; for that, being Subjects
of Christ's Kingdom, we are sure they are Members Go ye, disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, etc.

3. Arg. From S. Paul's assertion, who tells us expressly, 1 Cor. 7.14.
that the children of believing parents, yea if one only of the parents be a
believer, they are holy. Holy, how? Is it by an inherent quality of Else were
your children unclean, but now are they holy; if his meaning should be
interpreted to be this, Else were your children Bastards, but now they are
legitimate; the Apostle thus interpreted should be made to speak what is most
false, for that the children of wedlock are no more bastards with the Pagans
then Anabaptist would evade the Apostle; and therefore no such holiness is here
intended. But what holiness is it then, that the Apostle speaks of? Why, it is
an holiness of Church Fellowship and communion, in a right to the promises and
privileges of the Gospel. And this external holiness it is, which is
transmitted from the parent to the child, like that of political freedom
transmitted from the father to the son. Thus as a holy nation, an holy seed, so
are the infants of believers said to be holy children, as dedicate and separate
unto God; the proper notion of a relative holiness, so often spoken of
throughout the Scriptures.

But the Anabaptist objects further, unbelieving husband is sanctified to the
wife; for it is an improper phrase (says the learned Critic upon the place)
and by no instance to be made good. They who will interpret (...) to the wife,
as if it were without (...), they do but (...), endeavor to serve and support
their own prejudice and opinion. Thus then we are taught by the Learned to
interpret the Apostle, clearly to avoid all the Anabaptists subtleties, with
which we find him to puzzle some of his eminent opposers. In that the Apostle
says then, (...), The unbelieving husband has been sanctified by the wife; and
again, (...), The unbelieving wife has been sanctified by the husband; the
word (...) being in the Praeter-tense, has been sanctified, the Apostle speaks
of what v. 16.
What know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? or what know
thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? your children are holy, which
otherwise were unclean. Act. 10.14.
And that this is so, S. Peter's Vision will resolve us; where by unclean, is
meant, not fit to be received into the communion of the Church; and so by holy,
opposite to unclean, must be

So that, from these three Arguments, 1. That Infants of believing parents were
members of the visible Church under the Jews, and that this privilege is not
repealed. 2. That our Lord and Savior has testified, that to such Infants
belongs the kingdom of God. 3. That S. Paul has asserted it of all such
Infants, that they are holy. From these three arguments, the surest and
soundest we can fix upon to plead the Infants cause against the Anabaptists;
from these, I say, Go, disciple all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,

2 Having proved, that Infants of believing parents, as Disciples of Christ,
have a right and interest in the communion of the Church, I shall now give you
the ground and reason of that interest and right; which ground and reason is
this, most sure and firm, Their being parties in the same Covenant of grace
with their parents, upon which Covenant of Grace, is founded the Communion of
the Church; and therefore, they who are parties in that Covenant, must needs be
partakers of this Communion. And that children are parties in Covenant with
their Parents, is most plain from the express words of the Covenant first made
with Abraham, Genesis 17 7.
I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in
their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to
thy Seed after thee; and that this, thy Seed after thee, does relate to the
Abraham; is not only evident from the Seal of the Covenant-Circumcision, Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11.
but also from that renewing of the Covenant to Israel, where are present
before the Lord, to enter into his Covenant, not only the men of Israel, but
also their wives and their little ones. Now, this same Covenant which God made
with Abraham, Jere. 31.31.
and established with Israel, we find renewed by the Prophet, which is
therefore called New Covenant; and as renewed by the Prophet, so published and
declared by the Apostle. Indeed, God had told Abraham, Heb. 8.10.
that he did establish with him an Everlasting Covenant; and such as is the
Covenant, such must be the Communion, both Everlasting; and therefore Infants
admitted in the Jewish Church, must not be excluded the Christian.

And further, That children of believing Parents do retain their interest in
the Covenant of Grace, is confirmed by the doctrine of St. Peter, in that his
powerful Sermon, where he tells the Jews, Acts 2.38, 39.
The promise is to them, and to their children; as if the Apostle had said, Now
God has remembered his Covenant unto Abraham, and performed it; he has sent
that blessed Seed, the promised Messiah; in whom, all Nations of the Earth are
blessed: Deprive not then your selves of the Blessing of Grace and Life,
through obstinacy and unbelief; for according to the tenor of the Covenant, so
runs the promise of the Gospel, To you and to your children. And that,
Gentiles; and what is spoken to those then present, does extend to all that
shall come after, is fully implied, if not plainly expressed, in that the Apostle
adds, And to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call: Which clause, As many as the Lord our God shall call, no ways excludes
Infants, they being called in their Parents. And observe, the Apostles argument
is purposely framed, in a regard to that benefit, which their children should
receive, under the Gospels

But the Adversaries urge, None but Believers ever had, Covenant of Grace.

I answer. True; right who is a believer, that brings in the infant by virtue
of the promise. Herein then is the ground of error, that men imagine we affirm,
the child's right to the blessing of the promise, is in himself as a child;
whereas it is in the believing parent, who conveys the right in this relation
to the infant, that it is his child; his, to whom God has obliged himself by
the promise of his covenant, that he will be his God, and the God of his seed.
Indeed it is worth our observing, that in the right manner of entering covenant
with God, no parent he will be our God; and on our part, the condition runs
from us and our children, that we will be his people: That as by virtue of the
promise, God makes it his act of grace, that the seed of the godly be blessed;
so by virtue of the condition, the godly make it their duty of obedience, that
their children be given up

Thus, apparent it is, that our infant-children have an interest in the
covenant of grace; for that the tenor of the covenant, in promise and
condition, so takes in the children with the parents, that the parents cannot
covenant either excluding, or not including their children. This then remains
as a firm ground and sure reason of infants being parties in the communion of
the Church, that they are parties in the covenant of grace. And thus we have
done with Disciple all nations. Where we have showed you, what it is to
disciple; and who they are that are to be discipled. What it is to disciple,
even to receive into Church communion; and, Who they are that are to be
discipled and received into the communion of the Church, ev^n all Nations, as
many as believe, and the believing parents bringing in with them their
infant-children. We proceed to Application.

Applic.
1. Do we here sharply reprove, and seriously admonish those who deny Infants
Church communion, whereby (as much as in them lies) they do separate them from
Christ, and as it were pluck them out of his arms, offering them greater injury
then to dash them against the stones: Know ye not, vain men, that either
Infants are Christ's disciples and servants, or the Devils pupils and slaves?
That they are Christ's disciples and servants, you loudly deny: That they are
the Devils pupils and slaves, you are loath to declare: Can 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
No sure; for, what communion has light and darkness, Christ and Belial?
Certainly, to deny Infants Church Communion, is to deprive us of all sound hope
of their salvation: For where can we find a sacred promise, and therefore how
can we have any found hope of any being saved, that are not of the Church? the
Church, the treasury of Christ's promises and blessings, to which God is said to
add such as shall be saved; Act. 2 47.
not saved without the Church, but in being added to the Church: so that
without her communion we know no salvation. On how do the Anabaptists, in
cutting off Infants from the Church, how do they like those which in their heat
cut off a tribe from Israel? Judge. 20, and 21.
And though with Benjamin this be the youngest tribe, yet it is not the least,
the Infant age making up a chief part of the body of Christ. For this, Oh that
our Brethren would, with Israel, sit down and weep; yet at length repenting of
their indiscreet and blind, if not malicious and proud zeal; drenching
themselves with a baptism of tears, for denying the Church the baptism of
Infants.

2. Comfort we those parents, whose children God shall please to pass ab utero
ad uterum, from the womb to the grave; yea, that shall make their grave in the
womb, the place of conception, the Lord Jesus Christ owns your Infants as
parties in the Covenant of grace, and thereby partakers of his fullness in a
communion with his Church: And though they have not the seal, they have the
promise; yea, though not the outward sign as to the visible ministration, yet
the inward grace as to the invisible dispensation: Though they have not actual
baptism, yet they have intentional, in voto parentum and Ecclesiae, Ephesians. 1.22,
23.
in that desire and devotion of their parents and the Mat. 18.3.
And thus did he take upon himself every age, that he might sanctify every age
unto himself: Even he, when an Infant, was Head of the Church, that Infants
might be members of that Church whereof He is

3. See we to our duty as Disciples of Christ; and this by imitating our
pattern, even little children; without which, our Savior is express, we cannot
enter the kingdom of heaven; Except ye be converted and become as little
children. How is this? why, by self-denial, in being harmless without malice,
innocent without guile, humble without haughtiness, contented without
murmurings. Yea, in this imitate we our pattern, as children submitting Ps.
131.3.
in the mysteries of his grace, and the truth of his promises: Submit we our
wills and affections unto him, in the precepts of his Word, and the
dispensations of his Providence. Yea further, as Infants and tender Babes,
ordered by the Nurses hand in the day, and by the same hand got to bed at
night, do neither question nor quarrel at the time or place, or manner of their
disposal, but quietly fall asleep in the Nurses lap: Ps. 131 3.
Thus, O that we could with David, we an our affections from the world, that we
might become as Children resigning up our selves to our heavenly Father,
submitting with all contentedness of humility and faith to the order of his
wisdom and providence, whether for day or for night, for life or for death! And
when we go to bed and hasten to the grave, O that we could fall asleep in
Christ's lap, depart this life in his arms, in his love! as being of the number
of his Disciples, by virtue of his Commission Go ye, Disciple all Nations, etc.

THE THIRD Matthew. 28. V. 19. and part of the 20.
THough they are not the dictates of men, Introduction.
nor the Word of God, and of Christ, into which we make the ultimate resolution
of our Faith; yet sure I am, in Controversies of Religion, we have most reason,
next Christ, to trust his Spouse, his Church Universal, and next her, or rather
with her, our Mother, this Church National. Whose judgment and practice is most
Orthodox and Religious, Infants Baptism. And to justify the judgment and
practice of our Church (into whose communion we have been baptized, when
Infants) I shall keep me to the matter and method I have begun; in giving you
the evidence of divine Reason, the authority of sacred Scripture, and the
consent of the Universal Church Remembering that sure rule of St. Austines, Aug.
de Trin. l 4 c. 6.
Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturam nemo Christianus, contra
Ecclesiam nemo No man, that is a sober man, will oppose reasons evidence; no
man that is a Christian, will reject the Scriptures authority; and no man, that
is a peaceable man, will despise the Churches judgment. And therefore from this
confidence and encouragement, that I stand here before Christians of sober and
peaceable minds, I shall go on to speak for them, who cannot speak for
themselves, our tender Infants; pleading their right to Baptism, from the words
of my Text, in which our Savior gives Commission and Instructions to his
Apostles, saying, Go ye, disciple all Nations, Baptising them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

Explic.
3. The particular Instructions given by our Savior to his Apostles, for the
exercising their Commission, viz. (...), Baptising and Teaching. 1. Baptising,
which Baptism is instituted, as to the form of its administration, to be in the
Name of Wherefore we have here two things especially to insist upon. 1. The
Institution. 2. The Administration of Baptism; both applied unto Infants.

1. Baptisms Institution In the Explication whereof, we shall consider the
original and use of Baptism, together with its benefits and effects. Know then,
to make Disciples by Baptism, was ordinary among the Jews, and nothing more
commonly known in Scripture, then the Baptism of John: And as the Baptism of
John denotes John, must signify the Disciples which submitted to his doctrine
and authority in his Baptism. Now, as John made Disciples, so Christ sends his
Apostles and his Ministers to make Disciples too; and what, by teaching? no,
but by baptising, though not without teaching; so John, and so the Jews made
Disciples. So that, as before the Flood, there was a Rainbow in the Clouds,
which after, by a divine appointment, becomes the sign and seal of a promise:
Genesis 9.12, 13, etc.
Thus Baptism was before Christ ordinary, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is Christ's Institution.

To be thus baptized then, is to be discipled; and therefore did the Ancients
call Baptism, sometimes Sacramentum initiationis, the Sacrament of our
initiation and admittance into Christ's School; sometimes Ecclesiae janua, the
door whereby we enter the Communion Investitura Christianismi, the badge and
livery of Christ's service; sometimes (...), the Key of Christ's Kingdom; Mark
10.14.
for so says our Savior, to little children belongs the Kingdom of God; and
how then do they enter this Kingdom, John 3.5.
but, in being born again of Water, and of the Spirit; that is, by Baptism? so
says our Savior expressly, Joh. 3.5. Now, if we enquire into the original use
of Baptism, we find it as a Ceremony (though not as a Sacrament) of greatest
antiquity in the Genesis 7.
deriving its original from Noah's flood, when the sinful world was purged with
the Water of a deluge: But, because without shedding of blood there is no
remission, Heb. 9.22.
therefore God separating a people peculiar to himself, he constitutes them a
Sacrament of initiation, and that Sacrament is Circumcision; to signify, that
his Covenant of Grace and Peace was established in the blood of the Mediator.

Now, in the Church of the Jews, whilst Circumcision was the Covenanting Seal,
Baptism was the purifying Ceremony, yea, the Females of the Jews (not being
capable of Circumcision) were initiated by Baptism; and the Proselyte Parents
with their children, were adopted into the Family of the Church, admitted into
holy Communion with the Jews, by Baptism as well as by Circumcision. And that
Baptism was in our Saviors time a known Ceremony of Talmud, and other
Traditions, so by the sacred Scriptures, especially in that quaere which our
Savior proposes to the chief Priests and Elders concerning John; Matthew 21.25.
Whether his Baptism was from Heaven, or of Men? Had there not been Baptisms
from men, known among the Jews, either the question had been vain, or the
answer easy. Besides, the Jews wondered not at the use of Baptism, but why John
baptized, he denying himself to be Christ, John 1.25.
Elias, or that Prophet.

Now, the way being prepared by John, in his Ministry closing the Law, and
ushering in the Gospel, our Savior changes some of the Jewish Ceremonies into
Gospel Sacraments; That Ecclesiastical Rite of the Postcaenium; when, in the
close of the Passover, the Master of the House did distribute Bread and Wine
unto his Family; this, Christ, by an holy Institution, converts into the
blessed Sacrament of his last Supper. Likewise, that Ceremony of initiating
Proselytes, he converts into an holy Sacrament of initiating Disciples, even by
Baptism. For so it is said of Jesus, that, John 4.1.
He made and baptized more Disciples then John; he made and baptized, spoken
(...) and (...), by way of Emphasis and Explication, he made, and made them by
Baptism; even by solemn institution and admission into his School, John 3.2.
as a great Doctor and Teacher come from God; so esteemed of by his followers,
thus admitted and instituted to be his Disciples.

Moses; so must it be the practice of the Church, to baptize Parents and their
Infants, when discipled unto Christ: For that, Baptism being commonly known,
and discipling by Baptism too; when our Savior gives in Commission, Disciple
all Nations, Baptising them; his command is to be observed according to the
common usage and known practice of discipling and baptising, even as to the
persons in general; he not expressing,

To close then; If some Prince should give out his Royal Grant to make a City
free; would any be so imprudent, as to think the Royal Grant did not intend the
children as well as the Parents? And because the children are not expressed,
would any be so vain, Justin. Instit. l. 1. Acts 22.28.
as to say they are excluded? Seeing it is the known manner of conferring
liberty, to give it to the Parents and their children. And the like is to be
said of the liberty of the Gospel by discipling, Joh 8 36. Gal. 5.1.
which consists in the promises and privileges contained in the sacred Charter
and Royal Patent of the Covenant of Grace, which is sealed by Baptism.

Having then given you the grounds of Infants Baptism, so plain and permanent,
so reasonable and inviolable; even, that interest they have in the Covenant of
Grace, that right they have in the Communion of the Church, and that hold they
have in the Institution of Christ: To all this, Let me now add the practice of
the Apostles, to conformity of the Universal Church, and I know not what more
can be required.

1. As for the Apostles practice, we can have no surer testimony, then St.
Paul's Argument, 1 Cor. 7.14.
Therefore are your children holy: Holy, in a known and common account of the
Church, which could be none other then that of Church Communion admitted
thereunto by Baptism. For observe, This of the children being holy, the Apostle
makes a convincing argument, That the unbelieving Parent is sanctified
Wherefore, this of the childrens holiness, must be a known holiness, otherwise,
the Apostles argument were no argument. And whereby was the childrens holiness
known, but in order to Church Communion? Into which Communion there is no known
entrance and visible admission, but by Baptism.

2. Pass we from the Scriptures, and consult we the very next ages after the
Apostles, Orig. l. 5. ad Romans c. 6. and in Luc. Hom. 8.
For the usage of the Church: And here Origin witnesses, That Traditionem ab
Apostolis suscepit, etiam parvulis the Church received a Tradition from the
Apostles, to give Baptism, even to children. About the next age after Origin
(for later he could not be) the Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
(attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite) he pleads for Infants Baptism; (...).
Dionys. Eccles. Hier. c. 7.
as being of those things which the divine Ministers (the Apostles) from the
beginning had delivered down to the Church. I might give you the testimony of
those first Fathers and Doctors, both of the Greek and Latin Churches,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Nazianzen, and others; but we will insist awhile upon two
Testimonies most full and convincing, the one of St. Cyprian, the other of St.
Augustine.

Cypr. Epist. ad Fid. Presbyt.
That of St. Cyprian we have in his Epistle to Fidus, the Presbyter, who
propounds the Question, Whether Infants might be baptized before the Eighth
day, urging the Instance and Analogy of Circumcision; Cyprian gives his own
judgment, and that of a Council of Sixty six Bishops, for the resolution;
resolving, That Baptism be Cyprian lived within few years more then a hundred
of St. John; so that he and a Council of Sixty six Bishops, could not be
ignorant of what was the Apostolical practice, as to Infants Baptism; seeing
some of their Fathers, and many of their Grandfathers, in all probability, yea,
without all doubt, did live in the Apostles times, and were baptized by some
Apostolical hands.

Now as for the testimony of St. Augustine, it is of the more credit and
esteem, being spoken against his professed Adversaries the Pelagians, who wanted
neither wit, nor will, to have retorted the Error, if he had not delivered the
truth, when he says of them, Aug. de pecc^t. mer. and rem. l. 1.
Parvulos Baptizandos esse concedunt, qui contra authoritatem Universae They
grant children ought to be baptized, because they cannot go against the
Authority of the Universal Church, without all doubt delivered by Christ and
his Apostles. The Non-Baptism of Infants had been a strong argument for
Pelagianism, as their Baptism was an invincible argument against it; so that,
either to defend themselves, or offend the Orthodox, certainly the Pelagians
would have denied Infants Baptism, had they not well known Christ, and the
Ministry of his holy Apostles.

I might yet further enlarge, and give you infinite Testimonies for Infants
Baptism, as to the constant practice of the Universal Church, for above these
One thousand six hundred years; that of the Prophet being perfectly fulfilled,
Isa. 49.22.
That God having lift up his hand to the Gentiles, and set up a standard to the
people; they have brought unto the Church her sons in their arms; she having
few Members Savior was so far from excluding Infants, that he chiefly intended
them in the commission and instructions he gives his Apostles, and in them all
the Ministers of his Church, saying, (...); Go ye, disciple all Nations,
baptising them, etc.

Having given you the original and use of Baptism, we proceed to the benefits
and effects thereof, all applicatory to Infants: Know Sacraments are no empty
and bare signs to signify; but they are sacred and moral Instruments to
convey, real and effectual Seals to confirm, yea, gracious and Evangelical
pledges to assure. For so we are catechized by the Church, if we have not
forgot our Church-Catechism; in which we have this most clear, most full
definition of a Sacrament; That it is an outward visible sign, of an inward
invisible grace; which grace is given, and which sign is ordained; ordained by
Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive that ponere obicem, put a bar and
hinderance (as the School speaks from St. Augustine) as of Infants we are
assured they do not: In their Baptism then, as the Water gives the outward
sign, so the Spirit gives the inward grace; and when the Minister pronounces,
saying, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, then is the power and virtue of the Blessed Trinity, present to
justify and to sanctify, to cleanse and renew the inward man, as sure as the
Sacramental Water is present to sprinkle and to wash, to cleanse and to purify
the outward man.

And now, that the Sacraments are thus effectual, is not by any natural
causality, or physical operation in themselves; but by virtue of the gracious
promise and voluntary institution of Christ, whose Spirit still accompanies his
Word, to the quickening, sanctifying, and Tert. de Bapt. c. 8.
Very aptly then does Tertullian call the waters, Pristinam sedem Spiritus
Sancti, the ancient Seat of the Holy Ghost; by whose quickening power they
become prolifical, both in nature and in grace. For that, the renovation of the
Church was typified in the Creation of the World; as in the Creation, The
Spirit moved upon the waters, Genesis 1.2.
and by a quickening power did produce the living Creatures; so now in the
renovation, the Spirit moves upon the waters still; in that, by a quickening
power of the Tit. 3.5. (...).
we are renewed by Baptism, that Laver of Regeneration, to become an holy and
heavenly Offspring, alive unto God in Christ Jesus.

St. Cyril of Jerusalem calls Baptism (...), The Antitype of Christ's
sufferings; the Water indeed, that represents the Image of Death, receiving the
Body (as Baptism is sometimes, and in some places administered) into its Bosom,
as into a Sepulcher, Romans 6.4.
whereby we are said to be buried with Christ; but raised we are risen with
Christ, renewed again to life by the quickening power of the Spirit, in the
efficacy and operation of his grace. Romans 6.3.
So that, as we are Baptized into Christ's death, so are we baptized (...), so
Theodoret, into a participation of the Lords Resurrection. Very fitly then is
the Font of holy Baptism compared (by Leo) to the Womb of the Blessed Virgin,
in which the Holy Ghost is powerfully present for our Spiritual Conception, 1
Pet. 1.3.
In begetting us For, as of Christ risen, Acts 13.33.
so of the Infant Baptized, does God seem to say, This day have I begotten thee.

And to them who are thus begotten again, hear St. Chrysostom reckon up the
several Divine Benefits and Blessings, Quasi tot Baptismatis largitates and
honores, As so many acts of grace and titles of honor, accompanying their
Baptism: They are become not only Citizens, but also Saints; and not only
Saints, but also sons; and Christ; Romans 8.17.
and not only brethren of Christ, but also coheirs with Christ; and not only
coheirs of his Kingdom, but also members of his body; and not only members of
his body, but also temples of his presence; and not only temples of his
presence, but also organs of his Spirit: Et hac de causa etiam Infantes
Baptizamus, And for this cause also we Baptize Infants, that they may be
sanctified, that they may be justified, and that they may be adopted; Chrysostom.
Tom. 5. Hom. ad Neophyt. recited by Aug. l. 1. cont. Julian. c. 6. Cassand. de
Bapt. Infant.
so St. Chrysostom, as he is recited by St. Augustine.

Justification and Adoption being relactive acts, the admitting them in
Infants, is no difficulty; but concerning Sanctification, as a real work, by
infusion of inherent holiness, whether we shall allow Cassander (from the
Ancients) he makes the Baptismal Regeneration of Infants, to consist in the
remission of original sin, (which is Justification) and in the acceptance to
eternal life (which is Adoption.) But now, what the Sacramental Sanctification
which accompanies this Justification and Adoption is, St. Augustine resolves,
Difficile est dicere, Aug. con^. Donat. l. 4. c. 23. Episc. Satisb. Epist. ad
D. Ward.
It is hard to say; yea, he that shall undertake the cause, as to quit it of
all difficulties, Ego me Auditorem libentissime profiterer (says our English
Augustine) I would most willingly profess my self an Auditor, and

Even they who deny Grace inherent, habits infused, do yet acknowledge the
presence and habitation of the Holy Ghost; now, sure we are, the Holy Ghost
dwells not, but in an holy Temple; yet how far the baptized Infant is
sanctified to be this Temple, and wherein expressly that Sanctification does
consist, Explicet qui intelligit, ego fateor me non intelligere (says that
Learned Author, Episc, Satisb. ibid.
and

That Children are capable of real Sanctification, we must needs grant,
believing them liable to original Pollution: For that, doubtless, the grace of
the second Adam, is as effectual to make holy, as the sin of the first Adam is
to make corrupt. Besides, we say, original Righteousness should have been
inherent in children, transmitted from their Parents by natural propagation, if
Adam had stood; and Adam, and we in him, are fain.

To close then, of this we may be assured, Baptized Infants have their
effectual manner, and real measure of Sanctification by the Holy Ghost, because
pro condition parvulorum, according to the condition of their tender age, they
are stated in a present ordination to eternal life; for that, Without holiness
no man shall see God. Heb. 12.14.


original and use, the benefits and effects of Baptism; I shall seasonably
resolve you these three Quares.

1. What the Judgment of the Church is, as to the state of those Infants which
die baptized?

2. As to the state of those children which die before Baptism, being children
of the Orthodox?

3. As to the state of those children which die before Baptism, being children
of the Anabaptists?



I answer. Though there is some dispute among the Ancient Fathers, a hot
contest in the after Schoolmen, and a more moderate debate in Modern Divines;
as to the nature and manner of Infants Regeneration, the nature of its being,
and the manner of its causation; England, In the Rubric before the Catechism.
she is most clear and full. Only observe in those children that live, what by
Divine Ordination was sufficient to Christ; without which, they cannot then be
saved.



I answer. Herein the Judgment of the Church is not so generally one; St.
Augustine, and some in his time, and since most of the Roman Church resolve,
That such Infants so dying, they are not saved; they have paena damni, though
not paena sensus; they have a punishment of loss, though not of sense; they
enjoy not Gods blissful presence, and yet are not cast into hellish flames;
they have a Limbus Infantum for them, but it is of their own fancying, not of
Gods providing. The truth is, the Scripture has not clearly Ut qui aliena
culpa cecidit, aliena fide refurgat, That he who fell by another fault, might
rise again by another Faith. And as in the Catechumens of old, those who were
designed to Baptism, if any of them died unbaptized, their intention of mind,
and desire of will, was in the judgment of the Church interpretative, as the
actual Performance. And thus we determine in the case of Infants, who have
votum parentum and Ecclesiae, the desire of their Parents, and of the Church,
God accepts the will for the deed.

Thirdly, What the Judgment of the Church is, as to the state Anabaptists?

I answer. We can plead no excuse for the Parents, I will be thy God, and the
God of thy Seed, Genesis 17.9, 10.
says the Lord unto Abraham; and therefore, Thou shall keep my Covenant, thou,
and thy seed after thee, in their Generations; every man-child among you shall
be circumcised. And the like obligation our Savior makes as to Baptism, when
he says, Except a man be born of Water, John 3.5.
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

If then there be no Salvation without the Covenant of Grace, removed his
Candlestick. And sure, Rev. 2.5.
if the Parents contempt of Gods Ordinances, has deprived whole Nations of the
comfort of the Gospels Ministry; it is justly to be feared, though not
positively Go ye, disciple all Nations, baptising them, etc.

Applic.
We have here (Beloved) to answer the Anabaptists grand Quaere; Where have ye
any Gospel precept for Infants Baptism? And withal, to establish your Judgments
and Faith against all their oppositions and clamors. Wherefore, we thus prove
Gospel Precept; in that, Christ gives in Commission; Disciple all Nations,
baptising them. Now Infants are a part of the Nations, capable of discipling,
and no where excepted from Baptism; therefore, needs must Baptism extend unto
Infants. Again, it is our Saviors express precept, Mark 10.14.
Suffer little children to come unto me; but children have no way of coming to
Christ (in which we can suffer or hinder them) but by Baptism, and therefore
Baptism is ordained for children. Now back those precepts of Christ, with the
practice of the Apostles and the Universal Church, together with the Grounds
and Reasons of that practice and those precepts, even childrens discipleship
and Church Communion, founded upon their interest in

2. We will answer the Objections of the Adversaries who press us with these
Arguments, That Infants have not Faith; that they are not capable of teaching,
and not liable to precept. These the chief Objections, to which we return our
particular Replies.

They have not Faith: And our Savior is express, He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved; Mark 16.16.
thereby intimating, That he alone is to be baptized, who does believe.

He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; our Savior adds, But he
that believes not, shall be damned. Where a not having Faith, excludes Infants
from being saved, as much as from being baptized: So that if we count them
capable of Salvation, we must count them ^^pable of Baptism; if capable of
credit in alter^ qui peccavit in altero, he believes in another, Acts 2.39.
who sinned in another. And children baptized are propter fidem Sacramenti, yet
propter Sacramentum fidei; though not because of the Faith of the Sacrament,
yet because of the Sacrament of Faith; so St. Augustine very frequently.
Besides, Infants they are indeed non-believers, but not unbelievers: Now it is
infidelity Positive, not Negative, which excludes from Baptism; that infidelity
which opposes or denies the Faith, not a mere carentia fidei want of Faith in
a subject not capable of believing. Faith then, and Repentance Author of Faith,
Heb. 12.2.
and needed not any Repentance; but Repentance and Faith, they are necessary as
to some persons to be baptized, even in whom there are false principles of an
adulterate Religion, and erroneous persuasions; together with actual enormities
of a sinful life: These, these must be put off, by a sincere Repentance and
actual Faith, as being contrary and a direct obex and hinderance to the effects
and state of Baptism. Faith and Repentance then, they are not essentially, but
accidentally necessary to Baptism; not absolutely requisite, and to all (as not
to Infants) but conditionally and to some, as to the adult, Acts 2.38. Acts
8.37.
to whom all those particulars are to be Peter to the Jews, that of Philip to
the Eunuch, and the rest.

To close then, Baptism coming in place of Circumcision, as the initiating Seal
of Gods Covenant, Col. 2.11, 12.
there must needs be this Analogy in the administration; That as Abraham first
believed, and then was circumcised, and Isaac he first circumcised, and after
believed; so in the conversion of the Gentiles, and discipling of the Nations,
the Parents first believe, and then are baptized, but their children first are

Secondly, They are not capable of teaching, and our Saviors Go, teach and
baptize.

I answer. We have already blunted the edge of this weapon; Go, disciple all
Nations; which discipling refers not to teaching before, but after; a receiving
and admitting into Christ's School to be taught. And thus the Argument is
retorted, seeing it is our Saviors express precept, to disciple all Nations by
Baptism; and that all men in all ages, account children one part of the
Nations; they being capable of discipling in its proper notion, either they
must be plainly excepted, or necessarily implied.

Thirdly, They are not liable to Precept; not having the use of

I answer. The Precept obliges the Parents, Medicine is prescribed as the
only cure of the sick Patient, though the sick know not the Medicine, and so
is not obliged to the prescription; yet the friends of the sick are bound to
prepare what is prescribed, otherwise they make breach of charity and duty, and
if the sick die through their neglect then before, as to Circumcision; yet is
the obligation as great to Parents, and the benefit as great to Infants, now,
and under the Gospel, as before, and under the Law.

To close then; Notwithstanding all the Objections of the Adversary, Mark 10.15.
seeing men must receive the Kingdom of Heaven as little children, it is most
infallible, little children do receive the Kingdom of Heaven, as well as men.
Again, seeing Infants are capable of the blessings, it is an injury to Gods
goodness, as well as their Souls,

And whereas the Anabaptists urge us to instance in any Infant baptized in the
Scripture, we urge them to show in all Scripture, or in any other History;
where or when any Infant of believing Parents was past by, and not baptized
till years of discretion? let all Records be searched, and the account of times
examined, from that period John Baptist begun his Ministry, to that John the
Evangelist Go, disciple all Nations,

3. Whereas woeful experience, especially that of the German miseries, gave
occasion to this Proverbial Speech, That the Anabaptists Waters turn to Blood;
how much sad truth we can witness to this unhappy Proverb, I had rather bewail
then dispute, deplore then declare. And Oh! that we were (Beloved) so deeply,
so devoutly affected with our sins and sufferings, both as to Church and State,
as to turn our late Baptism of Blood, into a Baptism of Waters, even Siloam,
Gods wrath (I mean) by our penitence, and his indignation by our contrition.

4. Be we exhorted to testify our holy Communion, by an holy Conversation; our
Communion with Christ's Church, which we entered by Baptism: Remember we then
that innocence, meekness, peace, patience, purity, and the like, which are the
silver feathers of the sacred Dove, Matthew. 3.17. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
that holy Spirit, which descended upon Christ, the Head, and still rests upon
those who hold Communion with the Church, his Body.

These, these our virtutes Baptismales, the Baptismal virtues of our new Birth,
let them be the continued practice of our whole life; choose we to lose the
Humidum radicale, the radical moisture of our natural constitution, rather then
that of our Baptismal Regeneration; part we with our lives, rather then with
Faith and a good Conscience; for that, hereby it is we hold fast our Communion
with Christ, and our Communion with his Church, sealed us by his Sacrament, the
Sacrament of our initiation, and new birth; concerning which, our Savior gives
in Commission and Instruction to his Apostles, Go ye, Disciple all Nations,
Baptising them,

THE FOURTH SERMON Matthew. 28. V. 19. and part of the 20.
Introduction.
WHen Faith is so much corrupted, and Souls are so many subverted, who can be
silent and be faithful? I observe, as the receiving of Baptism is the entrance
into all the privileges and blessings of the Covenant and of the Church, so
the renouncing of Baptism is the open door to the greatest enormities and
impieties of this day's Apostates. In uno Caesare multi Marii; Holland-Lady was
of children, whose numerous brood is said to equal the days in the year.

It is easy to observe, how men first turn Anabaptists, despising the Ministry
of the Gospel; then they become Antinomians, rejecting the rule of the Law;
then Enthusiasts, making their fanatic revelations to outvie Gods word; then
Libertines, casting off all Ranters, destroying the very being of humane
society; yea, by their disorders and confusions, their blasphemies and
execrations, making a very hell upon earth. O God! who knows whither that man
goes to his confusion, who is once gone out of the Church by separation!
especially if it be that of Anabaptism.

It is the known observation of the Exorcists; Sancta ecclesia uniformiter agit
ut exertismis spiritus immundus abigatur. Aug. de eccle. dogmat. c. 31.
That whom Satan possesses, he first tempts them to renounce their Baptism, in
which they renounced him; and till this be done, he cannot have power to
possess them. Now, that too many miserable wretches are possessed with an Evil
spirit, is too unhappily apparent by their quakings and trances, by their
rantings and ravings, their impudence and filthiness, their diabolical
blasphemies and hellish execrations: Aquam ingressi renunciasse nos Diabolo and
Angelis ejus ore nostro co^testamur. Tert. de spect. c. 4.
renounced the Devil in their Baptism, in renouncing their Baptism, they have
too too much given way to the Devil, and God by a just judgment given them up
to his delusions. But, O God! thou who art more gracious, then man is impious;
2 Thessalonians ^.9.10, 11, 12.
O do thou yet restrain Satan, and preserve their souls in the day of the Lord
Jesus.

It being then too endless a task to encounter each Sect and Heresy Antidote
and Preservative in the general; and it is this; even in discharge of duty to
God, the Church, and your souls, to fortify your judgments, and strengthen
your faith, in what concerns the nature and manner, the duty and benefit of
Infants Baptism: hereby to keep open the door of the Church for entrance into
her communion; and yet shut it too against those, who otherwise, running out by
Anabaptism, would find themselves departed from Go ye, disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, etc.

Having given you the former branch of our Saviors instruction to his
Apostles, the Institution of Baptism; we proceed to the latter, Explicat.
the manner and form of Baptisms administration, viz. in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And here we shall consider the
administration of Baptism in a twofold respect. 1. In what is necessary as to
the essence of the Sacrament; and, 2. In what is requisite as to the solemnity
of the Church. (1.) In what is necessary as to the essence of the Sacrament;
and this is the application of the Water, and of the Word. The application of
the Water, whether it be by immersion, or aspersion, or effusion: The
application that the immersion or dipping, the aspersion or sprinkling, the
effusion or pouring out be, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.

In the administration then of Baptism, the first thing necessary as to the
essence of the Sacrament, is the application of the Water, and this in an
outward washing; whether that washing be by a dipping in, or a sprinkling on,
or a pouring out of the water: All which forms of washing expressed in the one
word (...), we have in S. Mark; where we read concerning the Pharisees and
others of the Jews, Mar. 7.4.
that when they come from the market, they eat not, (...), unless they be
baptized, that is, except they wash, as our English re^ds it. Yea, from the
tradition of the Elders they are said to hold (...), the Baptisms (so the
Original) the washings (so our English) the washings of cups and of pots,
brazen vessels, and of tables, or of beds. From which baptisms or washings it
is most certain propriety of the word, to prove a necessity of dipping or
plunging in the water, seeing that baptism does equally signify a washing by
sprinkling, or pouring out the water.

And as there is no strength of argument from the propriety of the word, so nor
from the signification of the ceremony: For that, the sprinkling and pouring
out of the water is aptly significative of the sprinkling of Christ blood, and
the pouring out of his Spirit; Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 1.2.
the laver of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; yea, the sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus. And as it is in the Gospel, Ezekiel 36.25. Joel 2.28.
so it was in the Prophecy: There says God unto his people, I will sprinkle
clean water upon you; and, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh.

Ans. Baptism may signify the death of Christ, without exposing the person
baptized to the danger of death; yea, it may signify Christ's burial too,
without sending the baptized to his grave; as in colder Countries, we certainly
know, dipping and plunging in the waters do; for so the experience of some more
ignorantly zealous, then religiously wise, has lately assured us. Even in
sprinkling and pouring out of the water (then) upon the Child which is under
it, there is signification merits of his passion, Romans 6.3.4.
and power of his resurrection.

But further yet; as it is not from the propriety of the word, nor from the
signification of the ceremony, so nor (thirdly) is it from the prescript of
Christ, that any strength of argument can be drawn, to and therefore the
ceremony of his Sacrament must not be made such, as may hazard the life of the
person celebrating that Sacrament and ceremony. Besides, Baptism is prescribed
to all Nations; and sure, its manner of ministration being common to all, must
be possible to all: Which yet it cannot be, if (as some Anabaptists would have
it) to dip and plunge in water be essential to Baptism; for that, some
Countries have not water enough to drink, and not

But lastly, as the Anabaptists have in this no strength of argument, from the
propriety of the word, the signification of the ceremony, the prescript of
Christ, so nor from any plain pattern or sure example in the Scriptures. For,
the Baptisms we read of to have been in Rivers, were (as is most probable)
after this manner: The person baptizing, and the person baptized put off their
sandals, and John's baptism, is (to me) plainly intimated, Act. 1.5.
when our Savior gives in promise to his Apostles, That whereas John baptized
with water, they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Now, how were the
Apostles baptized with the Holy Ghost, but by pouring out of the Spirit? and so
how did John baptize with John when he baptized all the Region round about,
Mat. 3.5. Act. 2 41.
and Peter three thousand in one day, they did preserve all good rules of
modesty, in so sacred a service of their Ministry; they were not at all guilty
of the impudence of some, who baptize naked, or the immodesty of others who
baptize in a slight covering of their nakedness; neither sure did they plunge
them in the rivers with their clothes on; this had been a soaking, rather then
a washing. If then S. John and S. Peter

And as for the Eunuch, being on a journey, Act. 8, 27, 28.
he was sure very unfit for such a washing: And that he is said to go down with
Philip into the water, it does not signify the depth of the river, but the
descent of the hill; for the Country being mountainous, the rivers, or rather
Joh. 3.23.
not deep enough for a plunging (as the Anabaptists manner now is) over head
and ears; even Aenon it self where John baptized, it is (say Geographers) a
small brook shallow in depth, and narrow in breadth, fordable with the leg, and
passable at two or three steps; yet it is said, there was much water there, in
respect of that dry country where little water is. But besides all this, that
of the Jailor's being baptized in the night, and in his house; yea, Act. 16.33.
that which Ecclesiastical history tells us of some secretly baptized in
prisons; Ep. 76. ad ^iagn.
and S. Cyprian reporting of one that brought a pitcher of water, and was
baptized by S. Laurence, as he went to martyrdom: These and the like instances
sufficiently evidence what was the practice of the Primitive Church; such, as
does not prove either plunging in the water, or washing in a river, to be
essential or necessary to Baptism.

To close then: Know we that moral conveyances require no large (by virtue of
Christ's institution) signify and seal, convey and confirm me a right and
interest in all the promises of the Gospel, all the merits of Christ's blood,
all the graces of the Spirit, all the bliss of Heaven. It is otherwise in
spiritual Laver, then it is in the corporal Bath: In this latter, not to wash
every part, is to be unclean in some part; but in that former, to wash any
whit, is to be clean all over; so that, the sprinkling or pouring out of a few
drops, are as effectual to our spiritual washing, as the dipping or plunging in
an whole river. It is then the use and application of the element, which refers
to the substance and essence of the Sacrament: A washing there must be with
water, whether that washing be by immersion, or aspersion, or effusion: And to
the application of Water, join we the application of the Word; and then have we
Baptism complete as to its form of administration, that of our Saviors
prescription; Go ye, disciple all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

2. From the application of the Water, pass we to the application of the Word.
Therein observe S. Augustine's Maxim; Accedat verbum ad Elementum, and fit
Sacramentum; Let the Word be added to the Element, and it becomes a Sacrament,
even the word of institution, Go, baptize; the promise is, Mar. 16.16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. All which our Church orderly
recites in her form of ministration, thereby testifying her obedience to
Christ's precept, and begging the performance of his promise, when she baptizeth
according to his word In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Here we have a Trinity of sacred Persons, in the unity of the
Divine Essence; and in this faith runs not only the form of our Baptism, but
also the form of our Creed; the form of our Doxology, and the form of our
Benediction. Bas. ep. 78. and cont. Eunom. l. 2.
And that it was of old so received in the Church, we have the full testimony
of S. Basil; (...) (...); yea, add we too, (...): We ought to be baptized as
Christ has instituted, to believe as we are baptized, to give glory as we do
believe, and to bless as we give glory. Our form of Baptism, it is in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: our form of Creed, it is, I believe in God
the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only Son; and again, I believe in the
Doxology, it is, Glory to be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost: and lastly, our form of Benediction wherewith we dismiss the
Congregation, it is, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God
the Father, 2 Cor. 13.14.
and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Thus you see, the faith
of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, is the very lifeblood of our
Christianity, it runs through the veins of all our Doctrine and Worship.

Christians, that thus we baptize, thus we believe, thus we worship, thus we
bless; how great is that Apostacy, even from Christianity it self, which will
deny our Baptism, destroy our Creed, abolish our Worship, and (if possible)
deprive us of our Blessing? To close this, (Beloved) Let us, as by the
profession of a true faith, so by the exercise of an holy life, O let us so
regain and keep firm the love of God the Father, that by the grace of Jesus
Christ our Lord, we may so Act. 2.3.
that our fiery trial shall be but as the Apostles fiery tongues, not to
consume and destroy, but to fortify and prepare us, even to a more firm
founding and more glorious building up the Church, in the unity of divine
Faith, and the uniformity of holy Worship.

Further, in the manner and form of Baptisms administration, we observe, that
the Holy Ghost is the third Person in the sacred Trinity, and very God; upon
which it will be very seasonable to enlarge our Ero similis Altissimo, I will
be like to the most High; and failing in that proud attempt of advancing the
creature to equal the Creator, he has ever since made it his malicious design,
to depress the honor of the Creator to the condition of a creature; witness the
horrid Idolatries among the Heathens, and the blasphemous Heresies amongst Romans
1.23.
Changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like unto
corruptible man, and to birds, and to four-footed beasts, and to creeping
things. The blasphemous Heresies amongst Christians: Heresies denying the
thrice blessed and glorious Trinity, especially the eternal Godhead and the
incommunicable subsistence of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And amongst the
many (...), fighters against the Holy Ghost, (since the Pentecost tongues
silenced the Heathen Oracles, and the preaching of the Gospel banished their
idolatrous worship) amongst the many fighters (I say) against the Holy Ghost,
the militant Church of Christ has been chiefly assaulted and infested by the
Arians, Macedonians, and Photinians of old time, and by the Socinians and
Anabaptists of later years: Yea, even at this day, there are too too many
amongst our selves, who pretend most to the Spirit, yet are most blasphemous
against the Spirit, heretically denying the Divine nature and eternal Godhead
of the Holy Holy Ghosts Divinity, (a zeal enkindled by that Spirit which
descended in fiery tongues upon the Apostles) give me leave to explain and
confirm to you these two particulars. First, That the Holy Ghost is the third
Person in the sacred Trinity, proceeding from the Father and the Son. Secondly,
That this third Person thus proceeding is very God.

1. The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the sacred Trinity, proceeding And
what we here speak in so ineffable a mystery, let it be salva reverentia; with
due reverence to the Divine Majesty. The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the
Trinity, Mat. 10.20. Joh. 15.26.
and we prove it thus: The Holy Ghost is called in Scripture, the Spirit of the
Father, not as sent by the Father, but proceeding from the Father; his mission
is temporary, and his procession is eternal. And it is worth our observation,
that the Holy Ghost here Joh. 1.14.
by an immanent act so proceeding from him, as being of the same essence with
him: And as the Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of the Father, Gal. 4.6. Joh.
16.15.
so also of the Son: And seeing Christ says, All that the Father has are
mine; what the Holy Ghost receives by procession from the Father, the same he
receives also from the Son, and that by one immanent act of eternal spiration
from them both; which act of spiration was signified by our Savior, when he
breathed upon the Apostles, Joh. 20.22.
thereby giving them the Holy Ghost.

Now that the Holy Ghost thus proceeding from the Father and the Son, is a
distinct person from the Son and the Father, is most firmly proved from that of
S. John, where we have expressly the Comforter, Joh. 15.26.
the Spirit of truth, sent by the Son from the Father. And lest any should
think the Spirit the same in person, as he is in essence with the Father, our
Savior answers the (...) in the Neuter, with an (...) in the Masculine, to
denote (say the Ancients) the distinct person of the Holy Ghost. An Heterosis
like unto In textu legitur (...) ipsum; in margin (...) ipsa; and verbum (...)
conteret est masculinun.
Disciple all nations, (...), in the Neuter; yet is it (...), in the Masculine.
The like very aptly observe in the Septuagint upon Genesis 3.15. A dispute it is
whether to read ipse, ipsa, or ipsum; he, she, or it, shall bruise thy head:
The Septuagint resolves the doubt, that it is not meant of mankind in general,
as the Rabbis would have it, and so read ipsum, it; nor yet of the blessed
Virgin in particular, as the Romanist contends for it, and so read ipsa, she;
but of Christ himself, and that is ipse, he: For so the Septuagint reads it
with an Haeterosis; I will put enmity, (...), between thy seed, and between her
seed; where the Antecedent is in the Neuter, but the Relative they give us in
the Masculine, (...), not she, nor it, but he, pointing unto Christ, He shall
bruise Many, very many the like observations I might give you, very frequent in
sacred Writ: but I instance in these, as to second the Father's Note upon that
of S. John, so to hint unto you, how necessary to the interpreting, and so to
the understanding of sacred Scripture, humane literature is; however cried down
and declaimed against by the Illiterate, and the Enthusiasts.

2. The Holy Ghost, the third Person in the sacred Trinity, is very God. Of
this we have several proofs in sacred Scripture, giving him

First, The Names of God. Whereas it is said, the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.^2. Isa. 63.14.
even Jehovah led Israel in the wilderness; the Prophet, he tells us, this
Jehovah was the Spirit of the Lord, even the Holy Ghost. Again, that in the
Acts is plain and full: Why has Satan filled thine heart (says S. Peter to
Ananias) to lie unto the Holy Ghost? Act 5.3, 4.
and in so doing, thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. Again, we are said
to Temples of God; and how? Why, in that the Spirit of God, even the Holy
Ghost, who is God, dwells in us. One proof more, 1 Cor. 3.16.
where it is said, The diversities of gifts, the differences of
administrations, and the diversities of operations are all from the Holy
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
who is called God and Lord, working all in all, v. 11.
yea even dividing to every man severally as he will; (...), not as a Minister
of God, according to another command; but as the Author, who is himself God,
according to his own will. As then Christ proves his communicates life; Joh.
5.21.
so from hence we prove the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, that he distributes his
gifts, (...) even as he will.

Secondly, The Attributes of God: As that he is eternal; Heb 9.14. 1 Cor. 2.10.
Mar. 12.28. Is 139.7.
that he is omniscient; that he is omnipotent; and that he is omnipresent. And
much of force there is in this argument of the Holy Ghost's omnipresence; an
argument not so easily evaded by the sophistical disputes of the Heretic. The
Holy Ghost in all the Saints of Christ's one Body, Ephesians. 4.4.
so but one Spirit. One and the same Holy Ghost then, at one and the same time,
sanctifies by his gracious presence and operation, the Saints of God in heaven
and in earth: And how is this possible, but to a person infinite and
omnipresent?

Thirdly, The Works of God. As, to him is attributed the Creation of the World,
the giving of Life, the distribution of Grace, the governing the Church, and
the Resurrection of the Dead: yea, by him was Christ conceived in the womb,
anointed to his Ministry, and raised from the grave. Heb. 7.7.
And upon S. Paul's argument, which holds to be without all contradiction; The
less is blessed of the greater; upon this argument must the humanity of Christ,
as Mediator, be less in dignity then the Holy Ghost: which could not be, if the
Holy Ghost were not God; for that, by virtue of the hypostatical union, Col.
1.15.
as man, is the the firstborn of every creature.

Fourthly, The Worship of God. Adored he is in that Trisagion of the Churches
Anthem; Rev. 4.8.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, Romans 9.1.
and is, and is to come. Attested he is, as (...), the Discerner of the heart,
and the Searcher of the Conscience. Yea, invocated he is in the form of
Blessing, for his spiritual communion; and invocated he is in the form of
Baptism, 2 Cor. 13.14.
for his power of regeneration. And here review we the form of Baptism: We are
baptized into the name; Bez. in loc.
that is, invocato nomine (says Beza) by invocating the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. But this is too little, for so full an
Emphasis. To be baptized then into the name, what is it, but by Baptism to be
obliged to the faith, worship, and obedience of God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost? For that, Baptism being the seal of the Covenant of grace, the Regius
Character, the Royal stamp of this seal, is the name of the sacred Trinity, (so
S. Augustine.) Wherefore as God in the

Here, if I should ask those who now have raked up the long since buried
Heresy of Macedonius, what is their fear of affirming the Holy Ghost God? Is
it to assert many Gods? how vain is this fear! how false were that assertion!
For in the mystery of the Trinity, the distinction of the Persons does not
multiply the Nature of the Unity of the Nature nullify the Persons: For the
Father is God, begetting the Son; the Son is the same God, begotten of the
Father; and the Holy Ghost is the same God, proceeding from the Father and the
Son. So that, each Person is (...), the manner of subsistence, whereby the
Godhead is distinguished; not a part of the Godhead, whereby the essence is
divided.

And as to the procession of the Holy Ghost; though true it is, Constantinople,
called by the Emperor Theodosius, did suppress the then spreading Heresy of
Macedonius, adding to the Nicene Creed, what concerns more fully the Faith of
the Holy Ghost, that he is the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the
Father, etc. Though after this, there arose a great controversy betwixt the
Greek and Latin Church, concerning the Holy Ghost's procession; the Grecians
affirming it, from the Father by the Son; the Latins, from the Father and the
Son. After a long time, the controversy was composed in the Florentine Synod,
by the prudence, piety, and learning of good Bessarion; the Crecians being
satisfied by the Latins, that the Filioque, and the Son, added to the Nicene
Creed, was taken Athanasius, as more fully expressed, to declare the procession
of the Holy Ghost.

But, to return to the Administration of Baptism, which is very aptly called by
the Ancients, Sacramentum Fidei, the Sacrament of Faith, as admitting into the
household of the faithful; and being the Sacrament of Faith, it is administered
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as being the
sum of our Faith. To confess the faith of the Trinity, the Ancient Church did
use their trina immersio, a threefold immersion: And again, to confess the
Unity, they had but one immersion. Greg. l. 1 ep 41.
And therefore Gregory writes to Leander the Bishop, that it was no matter of
reproof, whether Baptism was administered with once, or with thrice dipping or
sprinkling; quoniam and in tribus immersionibus Personarum trinitas, and in una
potest Divinitatis singularitas designari: In three immersions the Trinity of
Persons, and in one immersion the Unity of Essence may be confessed and declared.
Yea, when we say, I baptize thee in in the name, not in the names; we profess
the power, majesty, and authority of all the three Persons to be coequal, and
so in essence and unity coeternal.

In those places where the Church uses three immersions or aspersions, (as at
this day in many Countries the Church does;) there the first dipping or
sprinkling is with a nominating the Father; the second, the Son; the third, the
Holy Ghost; and so, though B^nav. l 4. disp 3.
as Bonaventure well observes, Non est completum Sacramentum, quousque
terminatum sit verbum; The Sacrament in its administration is not perfected,
till the word of Institution be ended. And now, where Baptism is thus rightly
administered as to the application of the Word and Water, there it is certainly
valid and good, though administered by an Heretic. Even an Heretical Church,
like a

But how are we assured, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Act. 2 38. and 8.16. and 19.5.
seeing the Scripture so often speaks of their baptizing in the name of the
Lord Jesus?

I answer: To baptize in the name, is to baptize according to the institution,
with the invocation, and in the confession of the Lord Jesus. And so, that the
Apostles (notwithstanding they are said to baptize in the name of Jesus) did
baptize expressly in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; besides the precept of Christ's institution, which they could not
violate, and besides the witness of universal Tradition, which we may not
reject, hear one Scripture Proof which none can evince; which proof is taken
from Acts, Act. 19.2.3, etc.
concerning the Ephesian Disciples of John, who tell S. Paul, that they had not
so much as heard whether there were any Holy Ghost: Which seeming strange to
the Apostle, he asks with wonder, Unto what then were ye baptized? intimating,
that Christian baptism did certainly admit them into the faith of the Holy
Ghost, being administered in his name; and he, supposing they had been baptized
with the Baptism of Christ, did not question their believing, but their
receiving the Holy Ghost: And therefore, having John's Baptism, as differently
administered from that of Christ's; he gives them Confirmation after Baptism,
and by his imposition of hands, they then receive what they were taught to
believe, and in Baptism to profess, even the Holy Ghost. This, that genuine and
clear interpretation of that Text, consenting with the Judgment of the Ancient
Fathers; which will bear up against all that forced and wrested sense, which is
urged by Modern Opponents. And so, hereby we make good Scripture-practice, as
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

2. Having done with the Administration of Baptism, in what is necessary as to
the essence of the Sacrament; we proceed to the second particular; What is
requisite as to the Solemnity of the Church, viz. Especially, that the Infant
baptized make its abrenunciation of sin and Satan, and its profession of the
faith of Christ, by the mouth Augustine, speaking of Infants Baptism;
Accommodat illis matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum cor ut
credant, aliorum linguam ut fateantur: The Church as an indulgent Mother
accommodates them with another feet, that they may come; with another heart,
that they may believe; with another tongue, that they may confess. And this
the Church does upon a sure persuasion, that it is agreeable to the grace and
goodness of the Almighty, ut qui aliena culpa cecidit, aliena fide resurgat; Et
ad verba aliena sanetur, Aug. sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. c. 11.
qui ad factum alienum vulnaretur; and he might be healed by another
profession, who was wounded by another sin; (so S. Augustine) intending the
sin of Adam.

As for the original of Sureties in Baptism, the Learned deduce it from
Apostolical tradition; sure we are, very near the Apostles times we read
plainly this custom settled in the Church; and the same piety and prudence which
first instituted this ceremony, does still persuade its continuance. For, as
formerly to preserve from Heathenism, so now to preserve from Heresy, it is
the pious and prudent care of the Church to engage the promise of Sureties,
with the duty of Parents, to secure their Childrens instruction and education
in the Faith. Enquir ng into the original of Suretiship in the behalf of Jews:
The Rulers of the Consistory taking the care and charge of the young
Proselytes; and the House of Judgment, that is, the Congregation, entering
promise to instruct them in the knowledge of what they had undertaken.

And passing from the Jewish Synagogue to the Christian Church, we find
Higinius the eighth Bishop of Rome, whose seat was in the time of Antoninus
Pius, Eus^b. hist. eccles.
(so Eusebius) about an hundred and forty Higinius (I say) we find to have
first enacted this pious and prud ntial order of Godfathers and Godmothers. But
however this Bishop may be said to have regulated, yet sure (methinks) he
cannot be said to have first introduced this custom: which, whether it be of
Apostolical tradition, or Ecclesiastical constitution, we may well esteem it,
as Peter Martyr styles it, utile institutum, a profitable ordination; Pet.
Mart. loc. com.
and as profitable, so just and reasonable too: For, the abrenunciation Minors
and Pupils undertaken by their Guardians. So that, the Questions, Do thou
forsake? and, Do thou believe? are Interrogatories pro more fori, according
to the manner of Civil Courts, known and allowed by the prudent, derided and
despised only by the ignorant.

Lomb. l. 4. did 6 c. 1.
but require a profession of repentance and faith in their names, ut
obligentur, non ut instruantur, (so the Schools) for their obligation, not
their instruction; to bind them to act and perform in their persons, what their
Sureties do promise and vow in their names. Which Promise and Vow made in their
names, Children catechized take upon themselves, when confirmed by the Bishop.
Which Confirmation, if stripped of the rags of Romish superstition, and

That Confirmation is of Apostolical institution, is not only the general
opinion of the Ancients, but also of modern Divines, even Calvin, Beza,
Piscator, Chemnitius, and others; all which subscribe to S. Hierom, who calls
Confirmation, Apostolicam observationem, an Apostolical observation. And though
Calvin disallows this of S. Hierom in his Institutions, yet he consents to it
in his Commentaries, Calv Com in Heb. 6.2.
(saying upon Heb. 6.2.) Hic unus locus testatur, hujus Ceremoniae originem
affluxisse ab Apostolis; This one place does abundantly testify the original
of this Ceremony to have flowed from the Apostles. Read we here the Apostles
Catechism, a Summary of the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; and see
how he numbers Repentance and Faith; Baptism and Laying on of hands; the
Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Judgment. So that we easily discern what
Laying on of hands the Apostle means, even that which succeeds Baptism, that of
Confirmation. In Baptism regeneramur ad vitam, we are regenerated to life; by
Imposition of hands, confirmamur ad pugnam, we are fortified to battle, even to
combat against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil; having given up our names
unto Christ, Act. 8.17. and 19.6.
and listed our selves under his banner. Observe, given the Holy Ghost, does
rather magnify, then nullify this ordinance; the miraculous gifts being signs
and testimonies of the saving graces of the Spirit. Besides, all that were
baptized, were confirmed; but certainly, all that were confirmed, did not work
miracles. This then of Confirmation, which was of so high account and common
practice with the Apostles, I see not why it should be otherwise amongst us.
Sure I am, Tert. de praescr. cap. 36.
we can say of our Mother the Church of England, what Tertullian Asian,
African, and Roman Church; Aqua signat, Spiritu sancto vestit, Eucharistia
pascit, Martyrio exhortatur; she signs us to Christ in Baptism, invests us with
the Spirit in Confirmation, feeds us with the Manna of the Eucharist, and
animates us to the crown of Martyrdom; and adversus hanc institutionem neminem
recipit, against this form of institution she receives none to be her children.

Before we close, I will here declare unto you that great obligation Supremacy
and Allegiance, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Mat. 28.28.
for ever to acknowledge Christ, submit unto him, and serve him, as our great
Adonai, our supreme Lord, the Head of and King of heaven and earth; renouncing,
yea resisting all Foreign jursdiction of Satan and of hell, yea all rebellious
usurpations of sin and of the flesh. And therefore, if reflecting upon our own
bosoms, we find Satan has invaded the soul, and sin usurped the throne of the
heart, it will be no plea to excuse our rebellion and revolt, that renouncing
our oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance unto Christ, we have submitted to the
sway of present Powers, even our corrupt lusts and Satan's suggestions: No, our
guilt is no less th^n that of Perjury and Apostasy, accompanied too with the
vilest Sacrilege, (which seldom go asunder.) For, by entering covenant (which
we all do in Baptism, more fully ratified in Confirmation) with Christ as the
Lord of life, and Prince of peace, we consecrate our whole selves unto him in
his sacred worship and service: And therefore,

To close, observe: Baptism does imprint an indelible character upon the
baptized, as Soldiers listed in Christ's Army, Subjects sworn to his Crown;
from whence it is, that those wicked ones are then called the Children of the
kingdom, Mat. 18.22.
when cast out into utter darkness. And therefore, to the Apostate, Baptism is
not to be renewed, Fide perdita, Sacramentum fidei non amittit; having lost the
Faith, he loses not the Sacrament of Faith. Manet ad noxam criminis, non ad
vinculum foederis; it remains, not as to any benefit of the covenant, but the
aggravation of his guilt: Ad cumulum supplicii, non ad meritum praemii; it
remains not as to hope of mercy and reward, but as to the heap of wrath and
punishment; (so S. Augustine.) Wherefore, the Bond of Baptism, Aug. de nupt.
coucup. l. 1. c. 10.
we have aptly illustrated by the Oath of Allegiance, whereby a Nation
Institution, so the Administration of Baptism; and this Administration, both in
what is necessary as to the Essence of the Sacrament, and in what is more
especially requisite as to the Solemnity of the Commission and Instruction
which he gave his Apostles, saying, Go ye, disciple all nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

1. Receive ye (Beloved) this seasonable Admonition; Applicat. 1 Cor. 11.2.
That every faithful Soul here present, is as a pure Virgin espoused unto
Christ. And therefore if false Prophets shall endeavor to seduce this Soul,
and attempt to ravish this Virgin, by adulterate opinions, spiritual
fornication, and without sincere repentance she shall die and perish in her
sin. And as for the present Heresy which so horribly infests the Church, that
of Anabaptism, let me give it you in charge, as you will answer it at the last
day, Heb. 13.17.
when I must give up an account of my Ministry; let me give it you in charge,
that if any of you here present shall be sollicitated to desert the Church, and
separate your selves by Anabaptism, that inlet to all Blasphemies and Heresies;
that then you call in to your aid some faithful Pastor of the Church, and I
here present my self for your assistance; Romans 14.15.
and therefore let not any plausible pleas or fair pretenses deceive you, to a
destroying that soul for which Christ died.

2. Accept you this necessary Exhortation; To bring your tender Infants, your
dear Babes unto Christ. Dedicate them to him in Baptism, Ephesians. 2, 3.
thereby to secure their safety and your comfort: For, being by nature children
of disobedience and of wrath, what greater need then to be given up unto him
the Author of life and grace? His all sufficiency will answer their necessity;
though not in their apprehending him, yet in his comprehending them. Are not
your children your greatest wealth? then fittest sure to be returned unto God
that (Beloved) has the Church dedicated your children unto God, and do you
tutour them for the Devil? Are they in a state of salvation whilst Infants, and
do you, oh do you bring them into a state of damnation when adult? Your selves
being Precedents of evil, you infect their tender years with your exemplary
impieties, which they suck in by imitation. There is certainly Childhood; how
is it then, that you not only prompt them to be evil by your example, but also
encourage them by your approbation? whilst their obscenities, lyings, and other
evil speeches and actions, you do risu and osculis excipere, Quintil. Instit.
entertain them with laughter and delight, with kisses and embraces: By which
means it is, that many (otherwise ingenuous children) vitia miseri discunt,
priusquam vitia esse sciant; they (poor wretches) learn vices, before they know
them to be

But know, this Nursery of young Plants must be weeded and watered, Isa. 61.3.
if we expect they should become Trees of righteousness: If we will have our
children Christ's disciples, we must betimes instruct them in the first
principles of faith; make them to know what they were by nature, and what they
are by grace; that love unto God and unto Christ may be stamped upon their
souls, before malice creep into their hearts. Let them, whilst innocent, learn
to be religious; Episcopal hands for Confirmation; and after that take care for
their further education in divine knowledge, as well as humane literature; that
they may be received into the full communion of the Church, in being admitted
to the consummating Ordinance of Christ, the blessed Eucharist. And thus, you
performing the duties of Religion to your children, they shall become dutiful
in their obedience unto you, unto the Church, and unto God. And hereby you
parents shall be blessed in your children, and your children blessed in their
parents, and all blessed in him who is the Fountain of all blessings, Christ
Jesus, blessed for ever.

3. Be mindful of this serious Caution; To beware of apostatizing from Christ,
to whom we gave up our selves by vow and covenant (O man) who have now the vows
of God upon thee? that sacred and solemn vow of Baptism? Know, in that thou
did give up thy self unto God and Christ, Ps. 56.12.
with an abrenuncio to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh: And therefore now,
after this Baptismal abrenunciation of sin and Satan, this Federal consecration
unto God and Christ, to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, to walk in the course
of the world, and to do the works of the Devil; oh! how, how shall it lie as an
heavy aggravation of guilt upon thy soul, Augustine brings in the Devil
pleading against the Apostate Christian, which breaks the vow and covenant of
his baptism. Thus says Satan to the Lord Christ, against the Apostate
Christian: AEquissime Judex, judica quod aquum est: Most just Judge, judge what
is right; judge him to be mine, who refused to be thine, even Ut quid invasit
pannos meos? What had he to do to wear my livery? What had he to do with
gluttony, drunkenness, pride, malice, envy, heresy, sacrilege, and the rest
of mine infernal ware? Haec omnia mea post renunciationem invasit; All this my
merchandise he has traded for, even after he had renounced all commerce with
me. Meus esse voluit, mea concupivit; It was his own will to be my servant, his
own lust to be my vassal. Judge therefore righteous judgment; quoniam quem tu
non because he, whom thou had redeemed to be thine by so great a price of
blood, has revolted from thee to be mine, in so great a guilt of Apostacy.
Consider, oh consider how this plea of Satan shall be thy confusion of face,
and horror of soul.

Be convinced then, O man, whosoever thou art that quittest the covenant of thy
God; be convinced, that by thy Apostacy thou do enter covenant with the
Devil; in quitting the service of Christ The covenant of Satan, a covenant of
sin and death, of bondage and corruption, of damnation and hell; The covenant
of Christ, a covenant of righteousness and life, of liberty and glory, of
holiness and of happiness; all which Christ the Mediator has purchased by his
sufferings, proclaimed in his Gospel, and sealed by his Sacrament. Wherefore
then, O man, let this, this one consideration more sink deep into thy heart;
Even what shame and confusion shall cover thy face, what dread and horror shall
seize thy soul, when at the last day Satan shall thus plead against thee before
Christ's tribunal, saying; As for this wicked person, and wilful Apostate, I
never created him, nor redeemed him, and that himself well knew; I never
suffered buffetings or scourgings for his sake; I was never crucified or slain
for his sin; I never promised heaven and the fellowship of the blessed O
Christ, he has obeyed me, and has contemned thee; and this after he had
covenanted to be thine, even covenanted in the sight of those Angels which now
stand in thy presence, and can give testimony to this truth.

Who art thou, upon whose guilty soul this Satan's plea takes firm impression?
Remember, O remember thy vow in Baptism, when thou did oblige thy self by
covenant, to be the faithful soldier and servant of Jesus Christ: And
remembering this, fight no longer Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness; but betake
thy self by faith and repentance to the Captain of thy salvation, Heb. 2.10.
Christ Jesus; and so in the sincere profession of truth and holiness, thou
shall recover the favor of thy God, and renew thy communion with Christ, a
communion of grace and life, conveyed and sealed thee in thy Baptism:
Concerning which our Lord and Savior gave in commission and instruction to his
Apostles, and in them to all the Ministers of his Gospel; Go ye, disciple all
nations, baptizing them

THE FIFTH Matthew. 28. V. 19. and part of the 20.
GOD, as he is Alpha, so is he Omega too; Introduction.
as he is Rev. 1.11.
endued with Understanding and Will; who as they issue from God the product of
his power, so do they return to God, the complement of their happiness. And
therefore, whilst the Soul of Man, winged with desires, hovers over the surface
of this Worlds changes, like Noah's Dove, Genesis 8.9.
it finds no footing, way which leads to his rest? what the path of truth
which conducts us safe to the Lord of Life? whilst we all stand under one
starry roof as Men, as Christians; our desires tend to the same Heaven, yet we
seek not to ascend by the same Ladder; we all aim at the same Goal, yet run not
all in the same race.

In this we agree, That God is our rest, that happiness is our end; truth is
the way, and Christ is the Truth: John 14.6.
Yet when we come to the profession of the Truth, and Faith of Christ, how do
we presently part hands? and dividing our selves into several Sects, we choose
to our selves several paths, and all pretend the right way. Now, what is the
reason of all our distraction and division, but this? That, what God has
joined, men put asunder; even the Authority of the Scriptures, and the Doctrine
of the Church: Both which are established by Christ, in the Commission and
Instruction he here gives his Apostles, Go ye, disciple all Nations -- teaching
them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you.

Having done with the former part of our Saviors Instruction, the (...), our
admitting into the School and Church of Christ by Baptism; we proceed to the
latter part, the (...), our tutoring and training up by Doctrine, which
doctrine is prescribed as to the extent of its object, to be (...) all things
whatsoever

Here then, as the subject matter of our ensuing discourse, we will insist upon
these two particulars.

First, The object of our Faith, the Word of God, in which we have, Whatsoever
has been commanded of Christ to be taught.

Secondly, The means of communicating this object and preaching this Word, the
Ministry of the Church, by which we are taught, whatsoever Christ has
commanded.

Explic.
1. The object of our Faith, the Word of God, in which we have Whatsoever has
been commanded of Christ to be taught. That there is a natural Theology we
willingly acknowledge, but that there can possibly be any natural Christianity,
we utterly deny; and therefore, that (...), Romans 1.20.
that, which may be known of God in the visible things of the world, it is not
his infinite grace and love as a Redeemer, but hi^ eternal power and Godhead,
as a Creator. True it is then that a natural knowledge will serve us to
understand the Creatures Dialect, Psalm. 29 2.
how to worship this Deity, in a beauty of Holiness, and so enjoy him in a
communion of love, must needs be the dictate of a supernatural Revelation,
especially and eminently called the Word of God. Which Word of God, the word of
life and grace, has been delivered to the Church, by the mouth of Moses and
the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles; registered and recorded in the several
Books of the sacred Scriptures, both of the Old Testament and of the New.

The Books of the Old Testament we receive transmitted to us from the Jews, by
an especial providence and divine appointment made faithful Registers and
Bibliothists to the Christian Church, for unto them were committed the Oracles
of God. Romans 3.2.
But now, under the New Testament, Heb. 1.1, 2.
God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, (...), in different measures
of light, and diverse manners of revelation, spoke in times past to the Fathers,
by the Prophets; has in these last days (in which the Church shall receive God
has spoken unto us by his Son; who being the only begotten in the Bosom of
the Father; John 1.18.
that is, most intimately one with him, not in a mere conjunction of love, but
in a near union of Nature, and communion of Attributes; he has declared, yea,
(...), he has by divine Revelation expounded the Mysteries of the Godhead, in
his Communications of Grace unto his Church.

The Service, then, of God in the Old Testament, Heb 9.1.
that of the first Tabernacle and worldly Sanctuary ((...), the Sanctuary
earthly and material) this did stand in meats and drinks, Verse. 10.
and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances, imposed (...) laid as a burden
Jews, till the times of the New Testament, the time of Reformation, the coming
of the Messiah; who should reform the Ecclesiastical state, by abolishing what
was earthly and carnal, and by establishing what is heavenly and spiritual. So
that, now, Joh. 4.24.
now, God being a Spirit, they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
in Truth; in Spirit, that is in opposition to the carnal Ordinances; and in
Truth, that is in opposition to the typical Sacrifices; or, in Spirit, for the
purity; and in Truth, for the sincerity of his Worship;

Having then showed you where it is, that we have the Word of God, even in the
Books of sacred Scriptures. I shall proceed to describe this Word unto you, in
its inherent Attributes, and its transient operations.

1. In its inherent Attributes, especially its full sufficiency, and its self
authority. 1. Its full sufficiency. The holy Scriptures they are the heavenly
storehouse, from whence the Church of Christ is furnished with all spiritual
provision of heavenly Doctrine, whether it be treasury, in which are laid up
for the Church her inestimable riches of divine Promises, and spiritual
Blessings. Profitable they are; First, 2 Timothy 3.16.
(...) for Doctrine and Instruction; secondly, (...) for Argument and
Conviction; thirdly, (...) for Correction and Reformation. For Doctrine and
Instruction, in what concerns God and Christ, Creation and Redemption, Sin and
Grace, Death and Life, Argument and Conviction, in discovering and refuting
Errors, in discerning and confirming Truth. For Correction and Reformation, in
what concerns mind and manners, the inward and the outward man, in thoughts,
in words, and in works. And of these three, does consist the Apostles perfect
(...) his Form of Institution in Righteousness: That, the Man of God, even the
Preacher of the Gospel, may be perfect, yea, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works, especially that of his Ministry. And Acts 20.27.
whose office it is to declare unto them the whole Council of God.

2. Its sacred Authority; this especially for the proving, deciding and
determining all Controversies in Doctrines of Faith: And therefore, to the Law
and to the Testimony, is the challenge of the Prophet, Isa. 8.20:
from the command of God; and they, Who speak not according to this Word, have
no Light, of truth and righteousness, in them. From this full sufficiency and
self authority it is, That the Word of God is the Canon and Rule of Faith: The
Canon (I say) and Rule; for, seeing we are commanded to prove the doctrines, 1
John 4.1.
whether they be of truth; and try the Spirits, whether they are of God; and
seeing it is (...), prove by trial, as the Goldsmith does his Gold by the
Touchstone, or the Carpenter his work by the Rule; if thus prove and try, some
Touchstone and Rule there must be of trial and Gal. 1.8.
and what is this, but the Word of God? For, If any man, or an Angel from
Heaven, preach any other Gospel, then that which we (the Apostles of the Lord)
have preached, let him be accursed; is that dreadful Anathema pronounced by St.
Paul.

And thus the holy Scriptures being the Rule of Faith, as a Rule has its just
measure inherent in its self, not depending upon the hand of the Artificer; so
the Scriptures have their infallible truth in themselves, not depending upon
the judgment of the Church: Yet, John Baptist, points us unto Christ, in the
infallible truth of his Word. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Thus, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, we come to hear
it, because the Church does so teach us; but we believe it, because the
Scriptures so teach the Church: And this is right the Apostles determination
against Papist and Sectary both, Romans 10.17.
That, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the We are to hear the Church,
but the Word of God is the object of our Faith, and this the Church proposes
to be believed; to be believed upon this ground of Faith, Dominus dixit, the
Lord has said, or Christus mandavit, Christ has commanded it. This for the
inherent attributes of Gods Word, full sufficiency, and self authority.

2. Its transient operations; viz. By a divine light, and sacred power. 1. Its
divine Light; the Word like the Sun, it carries with discovers the hidden
things of darkness, the Souls guilt, the hearts deceitfulness, Satan's
subtleties, sins enormities. As light, it distinguishes betwixt good and evil,
truth and falsehood, faith and heresy. Yea, as a light it guides and directs
the whole man; Psalm. 119.105.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths; a lamp unto my
feet, for the instructing my mind and ordering my affections; and a lanthorn
to my paths, for the Its sacred power; either governing what is under its
command, or subduing what is against its dominion. First, Governing what is
under its command. Jam. 2.8.
Therefore a Law, (...), a Royal, a sovereign, a supreme Law, regulating the
affections, restraining the lusts, conforming each faculty of the Soul to its
self. Secondly, Subduing what is against its dominion. Discomfiting Satan in
his assaults, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
overthrowing sin in its strong holds, breaking down the Bulwarks of the flesh,
and leading into captivity the corruptions of nature.

Such, such the light and power of the Word through the Spirit, as convinces
man of sin in himself, humbling him in repentance, and withal discovering
righteousness in Christ by Faith; by Faith to first particular, chiefly
considerable in our Saviors instruction, the object of our Faith, the Word of
God, in which we have whatsoever has been commanded of Christ to be taught.

Ministry of the Church, by which we are taught whatsoever Christ has
commanded: And therefore, says our Savior expressly to his Disciples; and in
them, Luke 10.16.
to the whole Ministry of his Church; he that hears you, hears me. And by
this St. John gives us to know the Spirit of Truth, from the Spirit of Error, 1
John 4.6.
even by a conformity to the doctrine of Christ's Church; He who is of God,
hears us: In which Church, Christ has given some Apostles, Prophets, some
Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11, 14.
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry; and all to this end, to preserve the unity of the Faith. Where
observe, to a confutation of the Popes infallibility on the one hand, and the
factious Enthusiasm on the other; the Apostle does not say (as doubtless he
would, had he been of the Jesuits belief) that for the preserving of the one
Faith, Christ had given one Head, and so with some Apostles had ordained St.
Peter the chief Apostle, and with Pastors had ordained one Universal Pastor, to
whom all Doctors and Teachers, yea, all Nations and Languages should repair,
for the resolutions of Faith, and ultimate determinations of the Truth. Again,
the Apostle does not say (as doubtless he would, had he been of the factious
humor) that, for the work of the Ministry, and perfecting the Saints, he had
ordained as some Pastors and Doctors, so distinct from them, some gifted
Tradesmen, some illuminated Mechanics.

sophisticate, by any of your companies, that then the judgment of some puny
Journeymen, should be preferred? The like case is in the Controversies of the
Church; and what will you have more regard to your wares, then to your Faith,
to your commodities, then to your Salvations, and allow that in the Church
which you will not admit of in your shop?

I urge this the rather, because, though we may say of our Church, what
Lyrinensis does of Origens family, Vincent. Ly^. cont. Donat. c. 23.
that it is illustrata mantyrio, Iraeneus tells us of the Heretics of old,
Iren. l. 3 c. 1.
That they took upon them to be Emendatores Apostolorum, Reformers of the
Apostles; so since that, the Romanists have took upon them to be Emendatores
Patrum, Reformers of the Fathers, (witness their Index Expurgatorius, yea, we
have them rose up amongst us, who will be Emendatores such as reform our
Reformers; calling into question that Gold which the whole Company of
Goldsmiths have tried by the Touchstone: Those Doctrines our Church has
examined and determined according to Gods Word, and given Testimony too, to
those Truths, sealing them with their blood.

Wherefore, seeing in the public ruptures of our Church, Heresies and Schisms,
as in the broken Walls of a Palace, Adders and 1 John 4.1.
Believe not every Spirit, Non omni, quia omni, Believe not every Spirit,
because it will be every thing; any thing, but what it ought to be; Ephesians. 4.4.
believe that Spirit which is but one, but one Spirit, as but one Truth: One
truth delivered us by the faithful Pastors of the Church, as by one mouth;
whereas the factious and heretical, they are divided in their spirits, Tert. de
praescript. c. 42.
and their opinions; so that, Schisma est unitas ipsis (as Tertullian tells us)
their unity is that of Schism, Word and Truth of God, in which, we are taught,
whatsoever Christ has commanded.

In the farther prosecution of the two parts of our Saviors Instruction,
establishing to us the Authority of the Scriptures, and the Doctrine of his
Church; we will resolve you three seasonable questions, and clear unto you two
vulgar Errors. (1.) Resolve you three seasonable questions, which are these.

1. What is the Authority of the Church, compared with the Scriptures?

2. How do we come to believe, that the Scriptures are the Word of God?

3. In doubtful cases, how may we best interpret the Scriptures?

First, What is the Authority of the Church compared with the

I answer. England keeps the middle path betwixt two extremes, both by ways of
Error; she gives due honor to the Catholic Church, but chief honor to the
sacred Scriptures; whereas the Romanist exalting the Churches dignity, debaseth
the Scriptures Authority; and the Sectary, advancing the Scriptures Paul, Ephesians.
2.20. Quippe, illud, (...) -- tam de doctrina quam de persona intelligendum.
Ambros. de Fid. l. 1. c. 4.
That the Church has its Foundation fixed upon the Scriptures; and from thence
we infer infallibly, the Scriptures cannot have their Authority derived from
the Church: And therefore St. Ambrose makes his challenge to the Emperor
Gratian, Nolo argumento credas, sancte Imperator, and nostrae disputationi.
Scripturas interrogemus, in terrogemus Apostolos, interrogemus Prophetas,
interrogemus Christum, I desire not (O sacred Emperor) that thou should
believe our Argument and Dispute; let us ask the question of the Apostles, of
the Prophets, of Christ? What shall I say more? Let us ask the Father, whose
honor they say (being Arians) they contend for. And we hearken, with consent of
judgment, to that known resolution of Faith, given by St. Augustine, Audi, non
dicit Donatus, hear, Aug. ep. 48.
it is not said, Thus says Donatus, thus says Rogatus, or thus says
Vincentius, or thus says Hilarious, or thus says Austine; no, but Thus says
the Lord.

It is the Authority then of the Scripture, which gives firmness of truth to
the Doctrines of the Church. Yet again, we acknowledge what St. Paul affirms, 1 Timothy 3.15.
That the Church is (...) the pillar, and stay of truth; in that, as the Edicts
of Kings are fastened unto Pillars, so the Word of Truth, the Gospel of Christ
is committed unto the Church, to be held forth in its genuine sense, and proper
Sion, the City of the living God, the Church of Jesus Christ. And thus the
Church does not give Authority to the Scriptures, yet declares the Authority of
the Scriptures; she does not impose a sense, but expounds it. So that, the
Church is the Heavenly Orb, in which the glorious

Secondly, How do we come to believe, that the Scriptures are the

In answer to this, observe; Answ: Ep^. 3.10. (...).
The Mysteries of the Gospel contain such a manifold wisdom, as is the Angels
astonishment; so that, needs must they be the Council of Gods Bosom, not the
invention of man's brain: However then, the Grammatical sense and Logical
connection of words and phrases, be discerned by the common light of Humane
Reason; yet, that of our Saviors (...), conviction of the Spirit; John 16.8. 1
Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 4.2.
and St. Paul's (...) and (...), demonstration and manifestation of the Spirit,
is a work transcending the skill, a wonder surpassing the discovery of natural
men; here, Omnis Platonicorum caligavit subtilit as, Cypr. de Sp. Sancto.
All the subtlety of Plato's School is put to silence. A Deo, then, discendum
quod de Deo intelligendum Hilary speaks) we must learn from God, what we may
understand of God; even as we discover the Body of the Sun by the light of its
own beams; yea, God it is who prepares the eye of the practical judgment, and
proportions the palate of the rectified will, to discern the evidence, and
relish the sweetness of supernatural Truths; and he does it in this order.

The Church by a Ministerial Manuduction, and Ecclesiastical sacred Scriptures
are the Word of God. But, to them who are without, the Infidel and Heathen; the
Church has her arma praelusoria, her preparatory Arguments of Right Reason, to
fit the mind for a candid reception and diligent examination of the
Scriptures: And upon this, the Spirit

Wherefore, besides the Ministry and Manuduction of the Church, there must be
an illuminating power of the Spirit; yea, a power rectifying and raising the
mind to a capacity of supernatural light, otherwise the Mysteries of Grace to
the Natural man, will be as the varieties of colors to the blind; the

In doubtful cases, how may we best interpret the sacred Scriptures?

I answer. That Interpretation of Scripture is best, which holds conformity to
the Analogy of Faith, and consent with the judgment of the Church; two sure
rules of Scripture interpretation, approved and observed by the ablest
Expositors of Gods Word.

1. Which holds conformity to the Analogy of Faith. Rom 12 6. (...).
Which Analogy of Faith, is none other thing, then that summary and fit
proportion which is in the general principles of Christianity, and chief
mysteries of Grace, plainly set down in the sacred Scriptures: A sum whereof we
have in our public Confessions of Faith, the Decalogue, the Lords Prayer, and
the Doctrine of the Sacraments; seeing then it is the Scripture phrase, to be
built up in our holy Faith: As that stone, Jud. 20.
Architect; so, that interpretation of Scripture which holds not Analogy with
the received Doctrines of Faith, it must be either amended, or cast away by the
Religious. And, in doing this, the Faithful of Christ's Church, they shall
according to St. Paul's precept, (...), Phil. 3 16.
walk orderly by one and the same rule, and so preserve the unity and peace of
the Church, in being of one and the same mind.

Consent with the Judgment of the Church. For that, no Scripture is of private
interpretation, (...), 2 Pet. 1.20.
to be interpreted by a man's own wit, fancy, or reason, but by the enlightening
power of the Spirit of Truth; for as the Scriptures came not by the proper
will, Verse. 21.
so nor are they to be interpreted by the private judgment of men; but the same
Spirit who is the Author, must also be the Interpreter. And where may we with
more confidence rest assured, that this holy Spirit is, then where Christ did
expressly promise he should with his Church? Matthew. 28.20. John 16.13.
And especially with the Pastors of his Church, to whom our Lord gives the
promise, that, His Spirit should lead them into all truth.

But here it may be demanded, what I call the Judgment of the Church? I answer,
The ancient, perpetual, and universal consent of holy Doctrine, received at all
times, in all places, and of all the faithful: But especially do we fix upon
that judgment of the Church, in the ancient, perpetual, and universal consent
of holy Doctrine, collected Eminent Saints for holiness of life, excellency of
learning, purity of doctrine, and constancy of martyrdom: And he that will
think to go to Heaven in any other path, then what these blessed Saints have
trod before him; I say to him as Constantine to Acesius, Erige scalam, and
ascend solus, Raise thy self (O man) a Ladder, and climb

Now, this ancient, perpetual, and universal consent of holy Doctrine,
collected out of the most consonant Writings of the Primitive Fathers, and the
sacred Decrees of the first Councils; This is that we may call, in the language
of St. Ambrose, Liber Sacerdotalis, Ambr. de fid. ad Great. l. 3. c. 7.
That Sacerdotal Book, signatus a confessoribus, and multorum Martyrio
consecratus, signed by the confessions of the most eminent Saints, and
consecrated by the blood of the holiest Martyrs. As then the Authority of the
sacred Scriptures gives us the sure rule of Faith, so the judgment of the
Universal Church gives us the right line of interpretation; according to which
two, it is well worthy our observation, the Church of England did exactly draw
the platform of her Reformation. And this is evident in her Doctrine and
Practice; (1) In her Doctrine; Art. 20.
amongst many other instances, see it in her Book of Articles, expressly
acknowledging the Church to be the witness, and Canons, as expressly denying any
doctrine necessary to be religiously held and believed, which the Catholic
Fathers, and old Bishops of the Primitive Church have not collected out of the
Scriptures. And (2) that her practice is suitable to her Doctrine, appears by
her owning the four General Councils; the Apostles, Nicen, and Athanasian
Creeds: And in all her disputes against the now silent adversary, otherwise too
busily employed, the Jesuit; justifying her reformed estate, as conformed to

And here, give me leave to observe unto you, how the Presbytery laid the way
to their own, and our Churches ruin; even, by setting up private
interpretation of Scripture, in opposition to the received judgment of the
Universal Church. For, do not the Brownists, the Anabaptists, under the name
and notion of Independents, presently beat them with their own weapon? The
Presbyterian abolisheth the Public Liturgy, and takes away Regular Ordination;
Presbyterian, follows close the Independent, and treading in his steps, at last
over-teacheth him in his design, and carries away his Helena from him; he pulls
down the Classes, and the Synod, as humane inventions, and remains of
Antichrist, denying, That by the Scripture, any Presbyters or persons
whatsoever, ought Christ, which are by Scripture-rule Independent in their
Government, to any Secular or Ecclesiastical power whatsoever. And for this,
they urge their Scripture Texts, with much heat of contention against the
Presbytery; pleading this their common ground, of interpretering Scripture by
the Spirit, whose inspirations and revelations they pretend to, above what the
Presbytery dare own or acknowledge.

As then, in joining the Authority of the Scripture with the judgment
Reformation; so is it Satan's subtlety, and the Jesuits design, both acting by
the Enthusiast, That in dividing the judgment of the Church from the authority
of the Scriptures, may be our ruin. To the prevention whereof, what God has
joined together, let no man put asunder; The Word of God, and the Ministry of
the Church; for so faith Christ, in Instruction to his Apostles, Go ye,
disciple all Nations, (...), Baptising and teaching; Teaching, whatsoever I
have command^d you.

2 Having resolved you the three seasonable Questions, we proceed to clear unto
you two Vulgar Errors, no less dangerous then epidemical, as mischievous in
their consequents, as spreading in their infections.



Secondly, That every man may be an Interpreter of sacred Scripture.

Which two make up that (...), that grand and primary falsehood, which laid the
ground for all that division and disobedience, which has of late broken forth
into violence and blood, both in Church and State.

That the sacred Scriptures are the only rule of all men's actions. 1. Vulgar
Error.
An opinion, however made plausible, yet is it indeed pernicious. To state the
case right; That the Sacred Scriptures are our perfect rule of direction, as to
the knowledge of supernatural Truths, in the objects of divine Faith; and the
exercise of supernatural Graces, in the duties of Evangelical obedience, we
willingly acknowledge; and therefore reject all humane Traditions urged by the
Romanist, as supplements to the Doctrine of Faith, and Codicils to the
Testament of Civil or Natural, especially as extended, by the Brethren of the
Separation, to indifferent actions, (whereas indeed this opinion makes no
actions to be indifferent, all being commanded by the Word of God.) This we can
by no means admit of, it being an opinion which makes an in^et to all Schism
and Sedition. For (Beloved) upon diligent search and judicious observation, you
may find, That in the Controversies of this last age, since the Reformation,
Theorem of all their Pulpit discourse, the very Corner stone of all their
Babel-argumentation; That simply, whatsoever we do, and are not thereto
commanded and directed by the Word of God, it is sin.

As if, when God gave his Scriptures, he then made null the Law of Nature, and
of Right Reason; which Law of Nature and Right Non differet, Scriptura an
ratione consistat, Tert. de cor. Mi^. c. 4.
(so Tertullian) it will not matter much, whether our warrant be from Scripture
or from Reason, both being the Word of God, only with this difference, That
Humane Reason is subordinate to Divine Revelation. Besides, if the Scriptures
are the only rule of all our actions, then where there is no Scripture, there
should be no rule; and where no rule, no Law. But to the Gentiles, having no
Law written in Tables, there is a Law written in their hearts, Romans 2.15.
and according unto this Law, their Consciences do either accuse or excuse
them. And thus, If the Gentiles have a Law, then have they a rule of their
actions, and that to excuse too; and so, not every thing which is done without
direction of the Scriptures, is therefore sin; nor yet the written Word, the
only rule of what is Natural and Civil.

To say as some do, to mitigate the rigidness and harshness of this opinion, to
say, That the Scriptures are the rule of all men's actions, in those general
maxims dispersedly and occasionally set down, of doing unto others, Matthew. 7.12.
as we would they should do unto us; and, of doing all things decently, 1 Cor.
14.40. Romans 15.2. Phil. 4.8.
orderly, and to edification, and the like; especially of doing whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report, etc. Scripture Revelation: But, in that, holy Scripture points
us expressly to those maxims in general; it withal directs us implicitly to the
use of Nature and Reason in all ordinary affairs in particular.

To convince you more fully of the great danger, see the evil consequents of
this Erroneous opinion; which are especially these three.

First, An unavoidable guilt of Superstition. For that, this opinion takes away
the indifferency of things and actions, making all necessary as commanded, or
else to be sinful: So that, it is well observed, the Romanist and Separatist,
as they go upon contrary grounds, yet both false; so they run into quite
contrary errors, yet both superstitious. Romanists; who, cutting short the
Scriptures perfection, impose Humane tradition, with an opinion of absolute
necessity, and divine authority. The Error and Superstition Negative on the
other hand, that is the Separatists; who, extending too long, or rather laying
too low, the Scriptures perfection, they condemn Natural and Civil Actions,
with a censure of being sinful, which yet the Word of God condemns not.

And thus, to take away what is indifferent in its self, by commanding it as
absolutely necessary; or forbidding it, as absolutely unlawful, is
Superstitious: By commanding it as necessary, when Gods Word requires it not;
and by forbidding it as unlawful, when Gods Word condemns it not.

Secondly, A vexatious perplexity of Conscience. Oh how is a conscientious man
entangled in a snare of perplexities, surrounded with a maze of distractions!
Who cannot in his ordinary affairs of life, be quieted in his Conscience, in
the resolution of things lawful and expedient, without Scripture proofs to
determine it. The rule of Reason, That is readily applied by a man of ordinary
prudence; but the rule of Scripture, is not to be applied to every action, by
the ablest Textuary in the World; he stands in need to carry a Scripture the
only rule of all his actions; and yet not avoid perplexity of Conscience
neither.

Thirdly, A seditious contempt of Humane Laws, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.
This opinion is that which will break the bonds of all subjection, and temporal
obedience, both of children to Parents, of servants to Masters, and of subjects
to Sovereigns; who will by influence of this Error, question when they should
obey, and call into

As for these kind of men, who will not obey Magistrates (forsooth) but in a
Gospel-way, upon a Scripture proof for every Law, I call the whole World to
witness, whether ever yet, they proved themselves good subjects; and sure we
are, according to that maxim of ancient and known experience, Qui nescit
servire, nescit imperare, He that knows not how to serve, knows not how to
govern;

Thus, having discovered to you the dangerous falsehood, and evil consequents of
this Vulgar Error, That the sacred Scriptures are the only rule of all our
actions; give me leave to answer the Objections urged by the Brethren of the
Separation, the first broachers, and the continued abettors of this Error.
Their main Arguments and Objections are drawn from that of the Apostle,
Whatsoever ye do, 1 Cor. 10.21.
do all And again, that, Whatsoever is not of Faith, Romans 14.23.
is sin.

The first Argument is framed thus, We must do all to Gods glory; but

Answer. All this is true, and yet the Error remains, which is this, Scripture
alone is this Law; whereas, God in his several Laws, distinct in nature and
degree; but in subordination, the lower to the higher, and all to him, the
supreme Lawgiver. So that, to measure all men's actions by one kind of Law,
were to confound that sacred Order of divine Providence, in which his
Government of the World is so eminently glorious. Some actions are within the
bounds of nature, as we are Creatures, for these we have a Law natural; some
are within the limits of Reason, as we are men, and for these we have a Law
rational. Some within the verge of Secular community, as we are Subjects, for
these we have a Law politic; some within the sphere of Faith, as we are
Christians, and for these we have a Law divine. Lastly, some within the orb of
External communion, as we are visible Members of the Church, and for these we
have a Law Ecclesiastical.

And such is the sweet order of these several Laws, in the constitution Law,
Mr. Ho^ker, Eccles. Polit.
she is sacred, her seat is the Throne of God, her voice the Harmony of the
World, all things in Heaven, and in Earth do her homage; the very least, as
feeling her care, and the greatest, as not exempted from her power; Angels and
men, and the whole number of the Universe, though in different manner; yet in
uniform consent,

Argument is framed thus, Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; Romans 14.23.
but where there is no Word, there can be no Faith; and therefore whatsoever
action has not warrant from the written Word of God commanding it, it must
needs be sinful.

Answer. This Argument however it may seem to set forth the Paul means by
Faith, we see plainly from the context, is neither fides quae creditur, nor
fides qua credimus; neither the object, nor the act; neither the doctrine, nor
the belief of Supernatural Revelation: Which Revelation we acknowledge perfect,
in order to eternal life, in the sacred Scriptures. But, by Faith, most evident
it is, the Apostle means an inward persuasion of mind, believing, That what we
do, may lawfully be

In things then ordinary, and quotidianae incursionis, of daily incursion; and
debitae subjectionis, of due subjection. Our warrant is sufficient as to
Conscience, if we know no Law of Scripture to contradict it, though we know
none in particular to confirm it: So that, it is the inverted order of right
Argumentation, to say, this or that we may not do, because Gods Word does not
command it; whereas we should rather say, this or that we may do, because Gods
Word does not forbid it. For observe, What things are indifferent in their own
nature, as being neither directly expressed in the Word, nor necessarily
deduced from it; nor any way opposite to the Word, or inconsistent with it,
those things we acknowledge left to the prudence of Governors, for the
preservation of order and unity in the Church; which things indifferent in
their nature, do (by the command of lawful Authority) become necessary in their
firm ground, upon this sure basis are fixed those Ecclesiastical Laws and
Ceremonies of our Church, which have been so loudly decryed, and so hotly
pursued.

2. 2. Vulgar Error.
That every private person (who pretends to the Spirit) may be a fit
Interpreter of sacred Scripture: From this evil principle it is, that, as
Hilary complained of, of old; Annuas atque menstuas fides habemus, Every year,
every month produces some new Doctrine of Faith. This is somewhat modest and
fair, to our Factions and Frenzies, Non modo annuas aut menstruas, sed vel
diurnas fides, Not only yearly, or monthly, but even daily new Doctrines of
Faith; and all from the pretended new Revelations, and new discoveries of the
Spirit. Yea, from the influence of this Vulgar Error it is, That the meanest
Artisans, become the chief Preachers; the Day-laborer in the Brick, a Master
builder of the Temple; from hence it is, That Sacrilege is expunged the
Decalogue; the Lords Prayer, and the Creed banished the Church; and all
disorder and

That you may know then, we heartily desire to preserve your common right, and
special blessing, of reading the sacred Scriptures, against the Papists; as
well as prevent the particular abuse, and fatal mischief of corrupting the holy
Word by the Factious. Observe, We acknowledge, that the holy Scriptures, in
Truths absolutely necessary to Salvation, they are plain and easy; but, 2 Pet.
3.16.
in Mysteries excellently profitable for edification, they are in many places,
dubious Judgment of Discretion, to apply what is easy and plain; but not a
Power of Interpretation, to expound what is difficult and dubious. Certainly,
John 5.39. 2 Pet 3.18.
every man is bound to search the Scriptures, that he may know, and improve
that knowledge too of Gods will. Yea, bound he is to apply what he reads, and
reading understands, for the ordering his conversation in Truth and Holiness,
in Faith and obedience.

Scripture by his private Spirit. Wherefore, for the true Interpretation of
Scripture, observe, We admit the Judgment of the Church as a Trusty Guide, and
the Opinion of the Learned as a Rational Argument; but we approve the Scripture
it self as an Infallible Rule; clearing those Texts which are dark and
doubtful, by those places which are more plain and evident; being still careful
to keep close to the Analogy of Faith, consisting in those principles of
Christianity, which are clearly set forth in Scripture, and generally received
of the Church.

What think you now then (Beloved) he who is not acquainted with the Judgment
of the Church, and so wants his Trusty Guide; he who is not acquainted with the
Opinions of the Learned, and so Scripture, and so wants his Infallible Rule; is
such a person, however he may pretend to the Spirit, is such a person, think
you, fit to be an Interpreter of the Word? Wherefore, to interpret Scriptures
by the Spirit, not being qualified, as to the use of means, for right
Interpretation, it is certainly, most certainly, plain Enthusiasm, Spirit of
Error, being so opposite, in act and operation, to the order and method of the
Spirit of Truth.

Enthusiast, to prove his interpeting Scripture by the Spirit to be lawful and
right, he urges that of St. Paul, as his Herculean Argument, 1 Cor. 2.14.
That the Spiritual man (...) intelligit ac discernit (as Beza renders it) he
understands and discerns: Judicat Vulgar Latin and our English) he judges, and
that, all things, in matters of Faith and of Manners, of Doctrine and of
Conversation. So that, what needs more to interpret Scripture, then to have the
Spirit? the case seems clear, if St. Paul may decide the Question.

The spiritual man judges all things; says also, 1 Cor. 14.32.
The Spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets; where, by Prophets
are especially intended the Interpreters of the Scriptures, Enthusiast himself
will readily acknowledge. Now then observe, If the Spiritual man will interpret
Scripture by the Spirit, he must remember, That his spirit must be subject to
the Prophets, submit unto the Judgment of the Church, in those holy
Interpreters which have gone before him, or which are now surviving with him:
Otherwise, he is not spiritual, but carnal, carnally puffed up with the pride of
his own spirit, which he blasphemously calls the Motion of Gods Spirit. Thus
then to interpret Scripture by the Spirit, according Paul's direction taking the
Church for our Guide, holy Expositors for our Instruction, there can be no just
quarrel at our Interpretation: For that, we keep to the right Rule, and Line;
to the Polar Star, and the skilful Pilot, the happy Union of what the Text has
joined; the Word of God, and the Ministry of the Church; for so is the
Instruction of our Savior, in his Commission to his Apostles, Go ye, disciple
all Nations -- Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you.

1. By virtue of our Ministerial charge, we do here, Applic.
in foro Conscientiae, in the Court of Conscience, arraign and condemn the
Heresies and Schisms of our present times, of that so horrid (though so common)
sin of Scripture-Sacriledge; men surreptitiously stealing away the true
meaning, or profanely corrupting the proper Delphick Oracle (...), the sacred
Scriptures, I mean, to speak that sense, which the Spirit of Error has
imposed, not the Spirit of Truth revealed. Church-Sacriledge and
Scripture-Sacriledge, they commonly go together; they who will profane the
House of God, will not stick to corrupt the Word of Christ; and they who will
not spare to defile his Worship, will not care to pervert his Truth. Wherefore,
(...). Naz o^at 36. Rev. 22.18, 19.
as for the Sacrilegious invaders of the Holy Scriptures, whether they be John,
saying, I testify unto everyman that hears the words of the Prophecy of this
Book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this Book: And if any man shall take away from the
words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which are written
in this Book. O Man's Testament (how much more, when it is The Testament of God)
being confirmed (...) being by Legal Authority ratified, and declared
Authentic, No man disannulleth, Gal. 3.15.
or adds thereto: No man disannulleth or adds, that is, No man ought to
disannul or add, under peril of heinous impiety, and John seals up only the
Book of Revelations; but that, guided by the Spirit of Truth, he seals up the
whole Books of the New Testament, with that dreadful Commination, against all
Violators of the sacred Scriptures: And this, whether it be in the Letter, or
the Sense of Christ's holy Word; for, that of Tertullian is most firmly true,
Tert. de Praescript. c. 17.
Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum and corruptor stilus; To
impose an adulterate sense, is as much injury to the Word of Truth, as to
violate Valentinus, and so the Heresies of our times, do as much damage to the
Scriptures verity, in misinterpreting the Sense, though they spare the Letter;
as Marcion did, by mangling the sentences, and chopping off the words. Hear
then and tremble, O ye seduced Souls! who through some carnal prejudice, and
temporal interest, involve your selves in this so horrid sin of
Scripture-Sacriledge; for that, perverting the sense or corrupting the Letter
of Christ's holy Word of Truth, 2 Pet. 3.16.
ye do it to your own destruction.

2. Observe (Beloved) these two sure Rules of Instruction and Exhortation. 1.
Keep close to the Doctrine of the Scriptures. 2. Hold fast to the Judgment of
the Church. Keep close to the doctrine of the Scriptures, that will keep you
from the seductions of the Romanist: Hold fast to the Judgment of the Church,
that will preserve you from the Errors of the Separatist. For so has God
England, to be betwixt the eager opposition of two enraged Enemies, the Church
of Rome, and the Brethren of the Separation; against whom, she thus makes good
the combat, from the Authority of the sacred Scriptures, and the Judgment of
the Primitive Church. Urging the Authority of the Scriptures, the Romanist
flies at the point of that weapon, and would soon be beat out of the field,
were it not some return he makes by pretending the Church. Separatist staggers
at that blow, and would soon fall to the ground, were it not some hold he
catches, by wresting the Scriptures.

To close then, That ye may continue firm and sound in the Faith, be careful
that in the Epidemical distempers of the times, ye change not the diet of your
Souls, least what you think to make your food, prove your poison. Feed on your
Mothers Milk, keep to that sum Liturgy, in the Thirty nine Articles, the Books
of Homilies and Ordination; all consenting with the Word of God, and Truth of
Christ. Withal, see that, to the confession of a true Faith, Aquin.
ye join the confession of an holy life: Confitetur qui nulla part diffitetur,
He confesses truly, who confesses thoroughly. Confess we with the mouth, and
with the hand, in our words, and in our works, This is the best Harmony of
Confessions. And thus, Matthew. 10.32.
Confess we Christ before men, and he will confess us before Own we him in this
Truth, and he will own us in his Glory; hear we his Word, and do we his Will;
so shall we receive his Reward, and this in an eternal Rest unto our Souls.
Thus have we done with the Explication, and the Application, of what concerns
the Mission and Commission, together with the several Instructions given by our
Savior to his Apostles, in his (...), Go ye, Disciple all Nations, Baptising
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching
them

Halleluiah.
THE FIRST Coloss. 1. v. 18, 19. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church;
Introduct.
and there sat down on the right hand of God, Rom 8.34. Heb. 7.25.
he ever lives to make intercession for us. From which exaltation and
intercession, the Apostle draws his (...), Christ being able to save unto the
utmost all that come unto God by him. Able to save unto the utmost; for that,
in his intercession, is applied Resurrection that gives testimony to the
sufficiency of price, laid down in his Passion; his Ascension, that gives
testimony to the sufficiency of power, which he exercised in his Resurrection;
his sitting at Gods right hand, that gives testimony to the sufficiency of
favor, whereby he is exalted in his Ascension; and lastly, the Intercession of
Christ, that is applicatory of all these, for the full and final redemption of
his chosen.

In his Intercession, he pleads the merit of his Passion, as the full
Resurrection, as his clear acquittance; he pleads the benefit of his Ascension,
as giving actual possession; Ephesians. 1.6, Mat. 17.5. Heb. 1.2.
and pleads the virtue of his Session at the right hand of the Father, as
thereby declared to be (...), the beloved Son of God, and lawful Heir of
Heaven. Yea, our holy Jesus and blessed Mediator being sat down at the right
hand of God, he is not only by a gracious decree appointed, by an holy unction
consecrated; but also by a glorious investiture from the Father, he is
established in the Act. 2.36. Romans 14.9. Mat. 28.18.
and actual administration of that sovereign authority, whereby he is
constituted and declared to be Lord and Christ, Judge of quick and dead, King
of heaven and earth; and (as S. Paul here gives us the description) Head of the
body, the Church; the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, etc.

Connection.
Before we give you the Division of the words, we must give you their
Dependence; to which we are directed by the Copulative and, And he is the Head
of the body, the Church: which Copulative does Prosopographia, a personal
character of Christ, both from his intrinsecal relation to the Father, and from
his extrinsecal relation to the creature; and that to the creature, either as
made and formed, or as redeemed and repaired. 1. v. 15.
According to his intrinsecal relation to the Father; so Christ is the image of
the invisible God, the natural and essential image by eternal generation. And
if we may draw the Sun with a pencil, if illustrate this mystery by a
similitude, take this as our aptest illustration: That, as a man beholding
himself in a Looking-glass, does produce an image in nothing different from
himself, in lineaments of body, or proportion of parts; so, God the Father
beholding himself in the glass of his Divinity, with the eye of his
understanding, does beget his Son, Heb. 1.3.
the express image of his person; no ways different

But indeed, as for the manner of Christ's eternal generation, in which he is
the essential image of the invisible God, Naz. orat.
with Nazianzen I say, (...), it is hidden in a cloud; and therefore (...), let
it be reverenced with silence: We may, we must make it in humility, an article
of our Creed; not think it in curiosity, an object of our knowledge. From the
Apostles description (then) of Christ in his intrinsecal relation to the
Father, pass we to the second part, his description of Christ in his
extrinsecal relation to the Creator, and to the creature. 1. As made and
formed; in which relation he is called the firstborn of every creature. v 15.
At which the Arian readily catches, to prove Christ Deus factus, made God:
but Chrysostom and the Ancients repel his argument, and confute his blasphemy,
from the propriety and emphasis of the Apostles expression, (...), not the
first made, or the first created, but the first begotten, or the firstborn;
and therefore primogenitus, non primo-creatus, ut and genitus pro natura, Ambr.
de fid. ^. 1. c. 4.
and primus pro aeternitate credatur: Christ is therefore said to be the first
begotten, not the first created; that his being begotten, may make us believe
the essence of his nature, and first begotten, the eternity

If with the Modern Expositors, especially of the Protestant Church we
interpret the Apostle as speaking of Christ's humane nature; then by firstborn
is meant Lord and Sovereign, according to the law and right of Primogeniture.
Thus in the Prophecy of David concerning Solomon, as a Type of Christ; I will
make him my firstborn. Ps. 89.27.
higher then the Kings of the earth. But if with the Ancient Writers,
especially of the Grecian Church, we interpret the Apostle as speaking the
firstborn of every creature, is meant, that Christ was begotten before any
thing created; so primogenitus, the first begotten, as that he is also
unigenitus, the only begotten: And needs must he be before the creatures, v. 16.
by whom all things were created, even all things that are in heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions, or
principalities or powers; even the whole heavenly host and celestial
hierarchy; all things were created by him, and for him; by in his omnipotent
power, and for him, in his incomprehensible glory: He the efficient, and the
final cause of all the Creatures.

And he, by whom are all things, must needs be before all things; v. 17.
before, and dignitate and tempore, in order of dignity and of time. And the
same Efficient which creates, conserves: The whole world, as at first it had
none other hand to frame it, so nor now has it any other pillar to support it,
then the power of Christ's word as he is by him all things consist: Even as
water whilst contained in the vessel, it has a consistencie in it self; which
when the vessel is broken, it presently flows out, and wastes away in its own
fluidity. Thus the creatures, whilst encompassed by Christ's conserving power,
they consist in their being; but that power withdrawn, they faint and perish in
their own mortality. Or, as the Air, when the Sun withdraws his enlightening
beams, then cease to have any light: Thus the creatures, should Christ
withdraw his sustaining power, they would cease to have any being.

This sustaining power of Gods providence, the Schools call manutenentia Dei,
which is thus illustrated. As a man holding a Globe in his hand, if he withdraw
his hand, the Globe presently falls to the ground: Thus Christ sustaining the
whole Fabric of the Universe with the supporting power of his providence,
should he withdraw Lucifer and Adam, what were they (when abused, and they left
to themselves) what were they, but as Gerson's expression is, Gerson apud Ep.
Sar. in Col. 1.17.
pondera plura ad ruinam, more weight to press them down to their greater
ruin? Now our Apostle having given us the description of Christ in his
extrinsecal relation to the creatures as made and formed, he proceeds in the
words of my Text to give the further description of him in that his extrinsecal
relation to the creatures, as redeemed and repaired. Which relation he brings
in with this Copulative, and; And he is the head of the body the Church, who is
the beginning, the first born from the dead, etc.

Division.
From the dependence we proceed to the division. Observe, a single description
raised from a twofold relation, and argued from a threefold reason. 1. The
single description, it is of Christ in the the Head of the body, the Church. 2.
The twofold relation, from whence this description is raised; that of Creator,
and that of Redeemer: That of Creator, in which he is the Beginning of all
things; and that of Redeemer, in which he is the firstborn from the dead. 3.
The threefold reason, from whence this description of Christ is argued: One
drawn from the final moving cause, that in all things he might have the
preeminence; A second drawn from the efficient ordmaining cause, the good will
And the third is drawn from the formal constituting cause, the perfection of
all fullness dwelling in Christ. Thus Christ, he is the head of the body the
Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things
he might have the preeminence; for it pleased the Father, that in him should
all fullness dwell.

Explicat.
1. The description of Christ in the dignity and office of Mediator, that he is
the head of the body, the Church. In this observe three

1. How Christ is said to be the Head of the Church, viz. In th^se four
particulars. 1. The fullness of his perfection. 2. The excellency of his glory.
3. The lively operations of his Spirit. 4. The real communication of his
benefits.

1. The fullness of his perfection. S. Paul writing of the mysteries of Grace,
Ephesians. 1.10.
tells us of God gathering together in one all things in Christ. The Original
expresses it by an (...), which Hierom renders by a recapitulari, as a
metaphor taken from the manner of Orators, whose usual art it is to sum up the
chief parts of the whole Oration, in a short, yet full Epilogue. Thus has God
made Christ, as Head of the Church, to be a recapitulation or compendium of all
the excellencies in the creatures: So that, whatsoever was eminent in the
Patriarks, Kings, or Prophets, whatsoever was glorious in the creation of the
World, or promulgation of the Law; whatsoever glory was in Moses's Sanctuary,
Solomon's Temple, or the Jewish Sacrifices; whatsoever grace is in his Saints,
or excellency in the Angels; All that, and what more can possibly be expressed
or conceived, it is an higher degree of perfection, and in a greater measure of
fullness, comprised and contained in him, who is the Fountain of all, Christ
Jesus, the Head of the Church.

This, this our Apostle makes the very formal constituting cause of Christ's
office and dignity, as Mediator and Head of the Church, in him all fullness
dwells; even the fullness of grace, of wisdom, of power, and of the Divinity it
self: According to that of the Apostle to his Colossians, Col. 2.9.
In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; (...), non (...); no
temporary sojourning, but a perpetual habitation. In him dwells the fullness of
the Godhead, (...), bodily; not in shadows and figures, but in substance and
truth; not merely by a vertual operation, but even in a personal union. God, he
dwells in Heaven by his glorious presence, in Col. 2.3.
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, of righteousness and truth, of peace
and of joy, of holiness and of happiness. Yea, as in the Head is the source of
all the Senses, so in Christ the fullness of all the Graces. And for his fullness
of perfection.

2. The excellency of his glory. The Head is most noble and excellent in the
body natural, and so is Christ in the body mystical: Joh. 1.21.
He is that (...), that, the Prophet, (...), by an excellency above all the
Prophets. So that, Joh. 1.18.
though no man has seen God at any time; yet, the only begotten in the bosom
of the Father, this (...), this the Prophet, he has revealed him: He is that
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; Heb 5.6. Heb. 4.14.
that High Priest, that (...), that great High Priest, who by his own blood
has passed into the Heavens, and ever lives to make intercession for us. 1
Pet. 5 4. Joh. 10.11.
He is that (...), that chief Shepherd; that (...), that one and only Shepherd,
who lays down his life for his sheep, and delivers his Lambs from the mouth of
the Lion. He it is, whose name is Wonderful, Isa. 9.6. 1 Timothy 6.15.
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. He is
that, the blessed and only Potentate, the blessed, even blessedness it self,
Gal. 3.8.16.
in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed.

The highest excellency of Christ's glory is set forth unto us, by his sitting
at the right hand of the Father; where the right hand, (...) and (...),
metaphorically, and after the manner of men, Ps. 44.3. Ps. 110.1. Ps 16.11.
is transferred to God: which signifies, in the language of the sacred
Scriptures, sometimes might and power, ad dextram Patris, at the right hand;
that is, next indeed, yet inferior to the Father according to his manhood. Ps.
45.9.
And thus, in that Allegorical Hymn, and Spiritual Epithalamium, it is said,
Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir;

To close then:

viz. Upon Ascension-day.
This is what the Church commemorates; the highest degree of Christ's exaltation,
in might, majesty, and happiness; that He is set down at the right hand of God.
And thus having finished the work of man's redemption, after his many
humiliations in the body, he is exalted in the same body; and whereas his
Divinity Ephesians. 4.8.
it shines forth gloriously in his exaltation; when ascending up on high, he
leads Captivity captive; and entering the heavenly Jerusalem, he is invested and
adored, crowned and worshipped, as King of Angels and Saints, Head of the body
the Church.

This the second particular; Christ the Head of the Church; as for the fullness
of his perfection, so for the excellency of his glory.

3. The lively Operations of his Spirit. As the head gives sense and motion to
the body; so does Christ, a quickening and actuating vigor to his Church: Act.
17.28.
By him we live, move, and have our being; Mal 4.2. Joh. 1.9.
as in life natural, so in life spiritual, whether it be that of Grace, or that
of Glory. He is the Sun of Righteousness, that true light which lights every
one that comes into the World: He is the overflowing and ever flowing
Fountain, of whose fullness do we all receive grace for grace: Joh. 1.16.
From him we have the grace of Justification, by his blood; the grace of
Sanctification, by his Spirit: He it is that ingrafts faith in us, and
strengthens it; that kindles Charity in us, and inflames it; that raises Hope
in us, and confirms it. Such the influence of life and grace from Christ, as by
a secret and ineffable operation of the Spirit, enlightens the understanding,
Cant. 1.4. Phil. 2.12, 13.
and we embrace; He persuades, and we desire; He strengthens, and not we, 1
Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God that is with us. Grace sways so powerfully, as if the
Will had no freedom in the action: And yet the Will acts so freely, as if Grace
had not sway in the election.

We see daily, how humane wisdom orders the use of natural motions to the
producing artificial effects. Thus the Artists skill does order the Plummets
weight, by its natural motion of descending, willing Subjects of Christ's
K^ngdom, Members conformable to him their Head, Ps. 110 3.
quickened and actuated by his Spirit and grace. This our third Particular,
that Christ is the Head of the Church; as, for the fullness of his perfection,
for the excellency of his glory, so likewise for the lively operations of his
Spirit.

4. The real Communication of his Benefits. Col. 3.11.
Christ is said to be all, and in all: As in all the faithful, by the lively
operations of his Spirit; so all to the faithful, in the real communications of
his benefits. He is all to the faithful; all Truth to their Illumination; all
Righteousness to their Justification; all Holiness to their Sanctification; all
Comfort to their Consolation; all Glory to their Exaltation; and all Fullness to
their Perfection.

The actions of the Head, they are all for the good and profit of the body: The
eye sees not for it self, but for the body; the ear hears not for it self, but
for the body. Thus, our Lord Jesus Christ he communicates his benefits to the
Church; the redemption which he has wrought, the heavenly inheritance which he
has purchased, he bestows upon his Church. His incarnation, passion,
resurrection and ascension, were, and are all for the benefit and use of the
faithful, as members of his body the Church. 2 Cor. 8.9.
He was humbled, that they John 14.2.
He rose from the grave, that death might have no power over them; He ascended
into the heavens, to provide mansions for them in the heavens; He is sat down
at the right hand of his Father, that at the last he might make them to sit
with him on his throne. Rev. 3.21.
Thus is our Lord Jesus Christ the everlasting Fountain of life, the
overflowing Spring of grace, all whose streams do run into the bosom of How
Christ is said to be the Head of the Church; and it is chiefly in these four
respects: For the fullness of his Perfection; the excellency of his Glory; the
lively operations of his Spirit, and the real communication of his benefits.



1. What is the surest testimony of a communion with Christ in his fullness as
our Head?

Answ. A conformity unto Christ in his holiness as his members. Christ, as he
is the original of spiritual life, so is he the pattern of Evangelical
holiness. He the Original, from which the being of the baptized with the Holy
Ghost as with fire. Matthew. 3.11.
Now (...), so says the Philosopher; and in this, Grace imitates Nature; in
that, from the Altar of the Heart, where the fire of the Spirit is first
kindled, a vital heat diffuseth it self, to a quickening the whole spiritual
man, in each faculty and power of the soul, and in each part and member of the
body. Thus is Christ the Original of Life: Discipline of his Gospel, in works
of love, of humility, meekness, patience, etc.

Therefore S. Paul gives the exhortation; Phil. 2.5.
Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. The same mind,
that is, the same sincerity and truth of judgment and profession, the same
integrity and sweetness of heart and affections, the same innocence and
tenderness of love and compassions. And thus S. Peter exhorts; As he who has
called you is holy, 2 Pet. 1.15
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. In all manner of conversati^^,
both as to an active, and a passive obedience: An active obedience, in doing
his will; and a passive obedience, in suffering for his name; doing his will
with all integrity and faithfulness, and suffering for his name with all
constancy and meekness. And when the Apostle says, Be ye holy, as he who has
called you is holy; the Apostle's as, does not require our obedience
mathematically equal, but evangelically like: For that, holy unction of the
Spirit, poured forth upon Christ, Luke 4.18. Psalm. 133.2.
runs down from him the Head, to the skirts of his clothing, to the meanest of
the faithful: Which oil of grace, as it heals our wounds, so it cleanses our
natures, and consecrates our persons; thereby evidencing in a conformity to
Christ in holiness, that we have a communion with him in his fullness.

2. How may we best confirm this our communion with him?

Answ. We confirm our communion with Christ, its object, Christ, in the price
he gives for satisfaction to Gods justice, the purchase he makes

Those Officers are in highest honor, who are nearest to the Kings person; and
thus is Faith a chief grace in dignity, as being nearest in place to the person
of Christ. And as thus Faith has its excellency from its object, so from its
act; Romans 3.25. and 5.1.
whose peculiar office it is to Ephesians. 3.17.
who is therefore said to dwell in our hearts by faith. Wherefore, if we would
confirm our communion, we must strengthen our faith; and how is this, but by a
frequent exercise of fervent prayer, a devout meditation upon the Gospels
promises, and a worthy partaking the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, yea,
all the duties of an holy obedience? Thus, even thus we confirm our communion
with Christ in his fullness, as our Head.

Applicat.
1. By way of Expostulation, the more forcibly to woe and win the soul to
Christ. Were it so, O man, that thou did now possess all secular
contentments, in the greatest confluence of this Worlds fullness; whether it be
for riches, honor, pleasures, or whatsoever worldly men and carnal minds count
most precious; yet how far are O man, that thou may be united to him, and
obtain a communion with him; hear what is the command of thy God, 1 John 3.23.
it is even this, that thou believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ: yea,
hear Christ himself in the Ministry of his Word, lovingly inviting thee with a
Come unto me: Yet further, he has made the Ministry of his Word to be an
embassage of peace, in which he not only lovingly invites, but more 2 Cor. 5.20.
(so says the Apostle;) As though God did entreat you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God.

And if now, O man, neither the command of thy God will awe thee, nor the
invitation of Christ move thee, nor yet his entreaties prevail upon thee; hear
at last his pathetical expostulation by his Prophet, Ezekiel. 18.30, 31, 32.
if not to thy conversion, yet to thy conviction: O house of Israel, repent,
and turn your selves from all your transgressions; so In the meditation of
which words, suppose you heard (Beloved) this expostulary Dialogue betwixt
Christ and the Sinner.

Thus says Christ: See, see, O man, I who am thy Judge,

The Sinner answers; I die, because the Law, the Minister of death, condemns me
for my sin. Ay, but I who have satisfied the Law, promise thee absolution upon
repentance; therefore why will thou die? I die, because I have made a league
with hell, and a covenant with death; and my soul is so fast in fetters and in
prison, that I cannot come forth. Ay, but I have vanquished and triumphed over
death and hell, and offer thee power to break that covenant and dissolve that
league, and so return and live; and therefore yet why will thou die? I die,
because I carry about with me a body of sin, a law in my members, which
presses me forwards into all impieties. Ay, but I bring thee a regenerating I
die, because I was of old ordained of God to this condemnation, reprobated in
his eternal decree. Ay but, O foolish and perverse soul! I give thee my word,
my oath, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked: And therefore search
not my Decrees which are secret, but see the truth of my Gospel revealed, which
tells thee, that I came into the world to save sinners: And therefore whilst I
stretch forth mine arms,

O man, be thou drawn from thy self unto Christ, by a gracious resignation of a
holy faith: Cast off, O cast off the solicitations of thy dearest and closest
corruptions, the strongest temptations of the World and the Flesh; and yield, O
yield up thy will unto Christ's scepter, captivate thy lusts to his power,
dedicate thy soul to his Worship, and submit thy whole man to his sway and
government: So shall his Spirit of Union be unto thee a Spirit of Unction; 1 John 2.27.
as of Union to incorporate thee

2. Administer we Comfort to the Faithful, amidst their private troubles of
Soul, and amidst the public calamities of the Church.

1. Amidst their private troubles of Soul: That, Isa. 50.10.
howsoever they walk in darkness, Mal. 4 2.
clouded with some distress of conscience, yet shall Christ the Sun of
righteousness arise upon their souls with healing in his wings; and in a
communion of his fullness, their souls shall be calmed with a serenity of peace,
crowned with the joy of faith, refreshed with the preapprehensions of Gods
glorious presence; and this as the clusters of the heavenly Canaan, Rom 8.23.
as the earnest of their future inheritance, as the pledge of their eternal
redemption.

In all the faintings and languishings then of soul, this is the sustaining
comfort of the faithful, that they have Christ near at hand to succor and save
them; Ephesians. 3.8.
with him they have a sacred communion in his unsearchable riches of grace and
love; riches unsearchable, not as if they could not be found, but because they
cannot be fathomed, an inexhaustible treasure: Of which as Christ is the
Depositary, so is he the Dispenser; Jam. 15 6.
giving liberally to them that ask by prayer, and pray in faith.

2. Amidst the public calamities of the Church; of which calamities, that of
spiritual captivity is the greatest. Thus, when Jeroboam had usurped the
Throne, this was Isreal's captivity in their own land, 1 King. 12.26, 27, etc.
that they must worship the Calves; lest, going up to Jerusalem, worshipping
God according to his Word, should mind them too much of their revolt, and so
bring them back in their allegiance to the house of David. Yea, the slavery of
Soul was that made Babylons captivity more grievous to the Jews, then that of
Egypt. In Egypt Dan. 3.15.
though their Persons were in bondage: In Babylon they must either fall down
and worship the Image, or be cast into the fiery furnace. Now, in this, or any
other public calamities of the Church, behold the comfort of the faithful:
That sure they are, by virtue of the Churches communion with Christ as the
Head, in his wisdom and power, grace and mercy; by how much her distress is the
more grievous and mournful, by so much her deliverance shall be the more
glorious and joyous. Thus, when the Ps. 126.1.
(says the Church in her Song of praise) then were we like unto them that
dream. The deliverance was so sudden, and so strange, that it seemed to be not
a vision of the day, but a dream of the night: The manner and method of Gods
providence so wonderful, that, as if none could imagine it being awake, they
are rhetorically said to dream it being in a sleep. And as this deliverance of
the Church was wonderful and strange, so glorious and joyous; glorious to the
astonishment of her enemies, v. 2.
these acknowledging with praise, those confessing with envy, the Lord has
done great things for them.

3. Do we hereby declare we have communion with Christ, by denying our selves;
by denying our own strength of reason, seeing he is our wisdom; denying our own
merit of works, seeing he is our righteousness; denying our own lustful
affections, seeing he is our Sanctification; and denying our whole selves,
seeing he is our Redemption. life is hid with Christ in God; Col. 3 3.
live as such, who profess a fellowship with the faithful, and expect society
with the Angels; as such, who are fellow-citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
and of the household of God; yea, live we as such who wait for the glorious
appearing of the Son of God, and to be received into the heavenly Jerusalem,
that City of Holiness, Rev. 21.27.
into which no unclean thing shall enter.

Lastly, do we with enlarged desires and ravished affections, even with all the
holy vigor of inflamed hearts, recount the great love, and extol the due
praises of our God, and of our Jesus, and of the good Spirit of grace, for all
the great work of our eternal salvation, effectually applied in our Spiritual
communion with He is the Head of the body the Church, the beginning, the
firstborn from the dead, etc.

THE SECOND SERMON Coloss. 1. v. 18, 19. He is the Head of the Body, the
Church; who
Introduction. Acts 1.10.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ he is ascended; and whilst we in devotion, as his
Apostles in admiration, do gaze after him, see the solemnity of his triumph.
Sin and Satan, Death and Hell, his Ephesians. 4.8.
those he leads captive in his Ascension. It was indeed the manner of the
Nations, most frequently and most solemnly practiced by the Romans, to take the
spoil of the enemy in the field, and after victory, to ride in triumph through
the City. Heb. 2.10.
And thus the Apostle speaks of Christ, the Captain of our Salvation; having
spoiled principalities and powers, Col. 2.15.
he made a show of them openly, leading them about in public triumph; and then
it was, that Christ did spoil Satan and the Infernal spirits, of all their
principality and power; when he disarmed them of their weapons, and brake in
pieces their ensigns, even the strength of sin, the curse of the Law, and the
sting of death; of these he spoiled them in the open field of his Passion,
where the battle was fought; he not giving up the ghost, till he had cancelled
the handwriting of Ordinances, Verse. 14.
and nailed it to his

And Christ, having thus vanquished and spoiled his enemies in campo victoriae
in the field of Victory, his Passion; he after Triumphs in his Cross, as in
sella Regia or curru Triumphali, his Chair of State or Triumphal Chariot, in
his Ascension. And being Triumphantly ascended, see him royally entertained
into the heavenly places; see a Celestial Chore of holy Angels, leading the
host of Heaven to the Gates of Sion; Where they welcome their Lord, and our
Jesus, into the heavenly Jerusalem; with that, or the like divine Anthem: Lift
up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, Psalm. 24.7, 8, etc.
ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in: Who is the King of
Glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. Lift up your
heads, O ye gates, even lift them up, ye everlasting Who is the King of Glory?
The Lord of Hosts, Jesus the Son of God, he is the King of Glory.

Now, the King of Glory, Christ Jesus blessed for ever, he being entered; behold
the Father entertaining him, with a plenary grant of his Petition, in that
consecratory Prayer before his Passion: John 17.45
Father (says he) I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do: And now, O Father, glorify me with In full answer
to this Petition, says the Father unto Christ, when entered into glory; Sit thou
on my right hand, Psalm 110.1.
until I make thine enemies thy footstool. And our Lord and Savior being thus
exalted, All the Angels of God, all the Host of Heaven, they pay him homage,
they acknowledge him their King; they fall down and worship him, Heb. 1.6.
worship him, as the Head of the Body, the Church; who is the beginning, the
firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have

Having done with the first branch of Divine Mysteries, How Christ is said to
be the Head of the Church; we proceed to the second, What the Church is, of
which Christ is said to be the Head; And for the Explication of this, we shall
speak of the Church in these three particulars, its larger acception, its
nearer relation, and its different adjuncts.

Its larger acception, as the Church of the Elect. 2. Its nearer relation, as
the Church of the Redeemed. 3. Its different adjuncts, as visible and
invisible.
1. What the Church is, of which Christ is said to be the Head; Explic.
in its larger acception, as the Church of the Elect. In this extended sense,
the Church compriseth the heavenly orders of the Angelical Hierarchy, who being
of the Elect of God, 1 Timothy 5.21. Col. 2.10.
are also of the Church of The Head of all principality and power. The Elect
Angels receiving their confirmation, as the Elect. Saints their Redemption, by
Jesus the Mediator.

True it is, as concerning the Angels, that Christ he assumed not their nature
in his Conception, and so neither did he sustain their person in his Passion;
He took not on him, the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but the seed of Abraham, (...), He took not hold on Angels, a Metaphor
signifying an eager following after, and laying hold on one running away, to
bring him back; or a catching him that is fallen, to recover him from the pit.
This Christ did do for men, this, this he did not do for Angels; but as those
which fell, sinned without a tempter, Ambr. Ser. 8. in Psalm. 119.
so they perish in their sin without a Savior. But as for the Elect Angels,
St. Ambrose tells us, that they needed Christ, to preserve them from falling
into sin, as men did need him, to free them from sin, into which they were
fallen; and in this, St. Bernard joins issue with St. Ambrose, Bern. Tract. de
dilig. D.
affirming, Qui hominibus subvenit He that succored men in such a necessity,
saved the Angels from the like necessity. Aug. Enchir. c 62.
To all this, add we that of St. Augustine, Quod in Angelis lapsum, ex
hominibus redditum; the number of those Angels which are fallen, shall be made up
by those men whom Christ has redeemed; all which expressions and opinions are
several descants and glosses upon the Apostles words in his (...) telling us,
Ephesians. 1.10.
Of all things gathered together in one, even in Christ, the Head of all

Angels and Men, were indeed created happy, in that natural blessedness of
Spiritual contemplation, but not in that supernatural bliss of the beatifical
Vision. Which beatifical Vision, being the last end of the rational and
intellectual Creature, could not be attained by any ordinary work of nature,
but by some extraordinary act of grace; for to be, and to be blessed, is one
and the same in none but Matthew. 18.10.
of whom our Savior has said (...), They This benefit, then, the Angels have
by Christ, that they are confirmed in their full and perfect union with God.
Heb 1.6.
Wherefore, Let all the Angels of God worship him, yea, and join we too with
the Angels in that worship, as having communion with them in the same Head,
even Jesus the Mediator; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, etc.

2. What the Church is, of which Christ is said to be head; in its as the
Church of the redeemed, and redeemed not only in the infinite sufficiency, but
also in the actual efficacy of his merit, yea, and effectual sanctification of
his grace. For, observe, Christ he is according to the promise, Genesis 3.15.
the Seed of the woman; not in a common and carnal generation, but in a proper
and spiritual conception, conceived by the Holy Ghost. And therefore Christ is
not properly the Head of all mankind, but of that part which is regenerated,
by the same Spirit, by which he was conceived. So that, 1 Cor 1.2. Romans 8, 30.
it is effectual calling, which constitutes the Church of Christ in actual
being, as to its internal and essential form. Which Church is diversely defined
and described by diverse men, according to the difference of their faiths or
fancies. To omit then the needless, and avoid the curious; we may thus define
the Church of Christ to be, The whole And this, in the Language of the sacred
Scriptures, this is Christ's Spouse, this the Kings Daughter, this the Mount
Sion, this the Heavenly Jerusalem, this the Mother of us all, Virgo virtute,
matter prole (so St. Ambrose) a Virgin indeed for purity, a Mother for
fruitfulness; this the Kingdom of Heaven, this the Body of Christ, this the
Church Universal, the Church Catholic, which is invisible, the object of
Faith, and not I believe the holy Catholic Church.

Which holy Catholic Church, ^ Tim ^.15. Cant. 6.8.
as by S. Paul it is said to be Columna Veritatis, the Pillar of Truth; so by
Solomon, Columna Unitatis, the Dove of Unity. Indeed, the Church can be but
one, because Christ her Head is but one; who is the same yesterday, to day,
Heb. 1^.8.
and for ever. The same (1.) Objective, in his Word; yesterday shadowed in the
Law, to day showed in the Gospel; the New Testament objective in his Word, so
is he the same subjective in his Attributes; his Wisdom, Goodness, Power, yea,
dignity and authority; one and the same Shepherd of his Flock, one and the same
King of his people, one and the same Head of his Church. (3.) The same
effective, in the gifts and graces of the light of the Gentiles, Luke 2.32.
as before the glory of his people Israel; as yesterday to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, so to day he is to as many as believe on him, Jesus a Savior. And if
thus but one Head, then necessarily but one Body; if but one Christ, then but
one Church.

But one Church, however it receives its diverse names of distinction, according
to its different degrees of communion, as being either militant or triumphant:
The Church militant in tempore peregrinationis, in the time of her sojourning
here in fear; and the Church triumphant in aeternitate mansionis, Aug. Enchi^.
c 56.
in the eternity of her dwelling with Christ in glory, (so S. Augustine.)
Militant is that part of the Church which is on earth, still fighting in a
continued warfare against the flesh, the world, and the devil: Triumphant is
that part of the Church which now rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13.
who by the power of Christ have vanquished the powers of darkness; and
therefore with victorious palms in their hands, clothed with the robes of
glory, they stand continually before the throne of God, Rev. 7.9, 15.
and serve him in his temple. Both these, the Militant and Triumphant, make up
one Church Catholic; Aug. ibid.
one now in vinculo charitatis, in the bond of charity; and shall be for ever
one in consortio aeternitatis, in the fellowship of eternity.

But further, this Catholic Church with which we have communion Columba
Unitatis, the Dove of Unity, so Columba Puritatis too, the Dove of Purity; she
is the holy Catholic Church. Though on Earth, indeed, she be encompassed with
many infirmities, Psalm. 45.13.
overshadowed with many afflictions; yet is she the Kings daughter, all
glorious within; endued she is with Christ's holy Spirit, adorned she is with
his holy Graces, clothed she is with his perfect Righteousness. Holy the Church
is, (1) In Christ her Head, who is perfectly holy, even holiness it self. (2)
Holy she is in her Triumphant Ephesians. 5.27.
which is made complete in Holiness, sine ruga aut macula, without either
wrincle or spot; without either wrincle of imperfection, or spot of
uncleanness. (3) Holy she is in her Militant part also; holy by sanctification
partially, and by imputation of Christ's Righteousness perfectly; so sanctified
she is, not as to be free from all abiding of sin, Romans 6.12.
that is for the estate of glory; but so, as to be free from the reigning of
sin, that is for the state of grace. Our holiness in this life, it is but
inchoative, and in part, in fieri, not in facto; our perfection

Thus, you have seen what is the Church of Christ in its larger acception, and
in its nearer relation: In its larger acception, as the Church of the Elect,
the Elect Angels, and Elect Saints; in its nearer relation, as the Church of
the redeemed; redeemed in an effectual communication of Christ's fullness, as he
is the Head: The

3. What the Church is, of which Christ is said to be the Head; in its
different adjuncts, as visible and invisible. The Church Catholic, or
Universal (not being generice, but integraliter Universale; the Universal
Church, as we say, the Universal World) as it is aptly distinguished according
to its different states into the Church Militant and Triumphant, so is it
distinguished no less aptly, according to its diverse adjuncts, into the Church
visible and invisible: Which Genu^ into its Species, nor of the whole into its
parts; as if either one Church, or one part of the Church were visible, and
another invisible; but a distinction of adjuncts to the same subject. This
being observed, we may the better answer and retort the Arguments of the Romish
adversary, in the great contest concerning the visibility of the Church.

To be invisible, is an affection of the Catholic Church, in respect of its
internal and essential form: To be visible, is an affection of the same
Catholic Church, according to its form external and accidental. The internal
and essential form of the Church, consists in union with Christ, through the
Spirit, the object of Faith, and not of Sense; in which regard, the Church must
needs be invisible. But now, the external and accidental form of the Church, is
the Ministry

The Church then, as it is visible, may be thus defined; to be, The whole
company of men and women professing the Faith of Christ, in the sincere
preaching of the Word, and right administration of the (And this is the
definition of the Church, according to its external and accidental form; that
definition before given being according to its form Internal and Essential;)
and by this we may understand, how men are said to be of the Church, and to be
in Christ, either by outward profession, or by inward sanctification, that, an
external, this, an internal communion; by the outward profession of an external
communion only, so the Formal Hypocrite; by the inward sanctification of an
internal, as well as the outward profession Truly Regenerate.

Many there are then, who bear the name of Christians, ay, and of Catholics
too, who yet are in Christ, John 15.2, 6
but as withered branches in the Vine; yea, they are in the Church, as Wens in
the Body; not in a vital and internal communion, but in a formal and external
profession. Thus, speaking of the Authors of Heresy, and Heads of Faction,
which separated themselves from the communion of the Church. They went out from
us (says the Apostle) but they were not of us; 1 John 2.19
for as to the external and accidental form of the Church, as it is the visible
company of Professors; but they were not of us, as to the internal and
essential form of the Church, as it is the invisible Body of Christ.

Very fitly then, is the visible Church compared in Scripture unto a field, in
which there grows up together, Wheat and Tares; Matthew. 13.29, 30. Matthew 3.12.
Matthew. 13 47.
to a on which there lies together, Corn and Chaff; to a draw not, in which are
contained good Fish and bad; for that, in the Church, as it is visible, there
are Hypocrites mixed with true Believers, the wicked with the godly: And
therefore, the Apostle compares the visible Church to a great house, 2 Timothy
2.20.
where there are not only Vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of Wood, and
of Earth; yea, Some to honor, and some to dishonor. Thus in the visible Church,
there are not only strong Believers, but also weak Christians; not only those
who are more eminent in the gifts and graces of the Spirit, but also, those who
are weaklings, and of less spiritual abilities then others: Yea further, as
there are some to honor, that is, some who through the Election of Grace, shall
at last inherit eternal glory; so, some to dishonor, Romans 2.5.
that is, some who through their impenitence and hardness of heart, treasure up
to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and shall be plunged in eternal
misery. And thus ye have seen in its several What the Church is, of which
Christ is said to be the Head.

3. How the Church, of which Christ is the Head, is said to be a Body, viz.
Especially from the communion of the faithful as Members; Ephesians. 4.4.
a communion so near, that they are all said to have but one Spirit; Acts 4.32.
yea, one heart, and one soul; and all this from the efficacy of love, Col.
3.14.
that bond of perfectness, and knot of unity. A Sacramental representation of
this Mystical Communion, 1 Cor 10.17.
is given us in the holy We being many, are one Bread, and one Body; for we are
all partakers of that one Bread: That Bread, which exhibites to us the flesh of
Christ, our quickening and enlivening Food. Food not which we convert by any
carnal digestion, into the nature of our body; but, which converts us by a
spiritual operation, into the nature of Christ's Body; making us to be heavenly
and spiritual, as he is spiritual and heavenly. We change not it, but it
changes us; for so is the powerful operation of spiritual

By virtue of this communion of the Faithful, the Church is said to be Corpus
compactum and connexum, Ephesians. 4.16.
a Body fitly joined together and compacted, no rents of Schism, but every
member has its proper place, Verse. 13.
and its peculiar connection in the whole; and this, Till we all meet in the
unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of this does intimate the
near and full communion of Christ's Church, all the Faithful being as one
political person in Christ; Gal. 3.28.
according to that, There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor
free, there is neither male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus; and it
is not (...) but (...), not one Body, but one Person. Now, to grow up to a
perfect man, according to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
is the perfect man.

To close then, such is the communion of the Faithful, one with another as
Members, and all in Christ as their Head, that he who by Schism separates from
the Church (though never so seeming a Saint) he cuts himself off from Christ;
and in the prosecution of this separation, though he should zealously give up
his life unto death, his goods unto the spoil, his body unto the fire; 1 Cor.
13.2, 3.
yet all this would not be fidei corona, Cypr. de Unit. Eccles. n. 12.
but paena perfidia (as St. Cyprian speaks) His Body in a communion of the
faithful as Members.

Here it will be a seasonable service, to resolve you these four Questions.

1. Whether the Church of Christ on Earth, may totally fall away?

2. What is meant by that common saying, That, out of the Church there is no
Salvation?



4. Seeing we are to hold communion with the Church, how may we know which is a
true Church, with which we may hold communion?

First, Whether the Church of Christ on Earth, may totally fall We see in the
World such a general defection from truth and holiness, that some may happily
propose this Question, as well worthy Polutheism, a worshipping many gods, has
ever been an argument for Atheism, a not worshipping any God: And in these our
days, whilst men see so many Religions, they (not knowing which to choose) think
it best, to be of no Religion; and whilst they behold the eager opposition of
Churches, all professing Christ, they are ready to question, whether indeed
Christ has now any Church. But to stop the mouths of Atheists, and confirm the
Faith of true Christians, I shall resolve unto you this Quare, Whether the
Church of Christ on Earth, may totally fall away?

To which I answer.

And this stability of Christ's Church is founded upon the immutability of Gods
Covenant; his promise cannot fail, and therefore his Church cannot perish. In
all her variety of states and conditions Non mutat voluntatem, sed vult
mutationem, (so the Schools from the Master of the Sentences, and he from St.
Augustine.) When God alters his work, he changes not his will, but wills those
changes; so, as to establish his promises: Amongst which promises to his
Church, Matthew 16.18.
observe that, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. And again, Lo,
I am with you, says our Savior; what only for a short time? Matthew. 28.20.
No, it is for a long date, always; even unto the end of Indeed, to suppose the
Church to fall totally from grace, were to separate Christ from being Head, and
to divide him from the Body; Ephesians. 1.23.
and so make him who is the fullness of perfection, to be himself imperfect.

Of particular visible Churches indeed, we say, That they have, and may fall
away; so did the Church of Israel in the time of Elijah, so has the Church of
Ephesus, of Antioch, of Jerusalem, and many other particular Churches, they
have fallen away; yet the Universal Arianism, when (as St. Hierom tells, us)
Ingemuit totus orbis, and se Arianum esse miratus est: The whole World groaned,
and wondered to see it self become Arian, yet then there was an Athanasius to
be Arianorum Malleus, the Hammer, and Hammerer of the Arians; yea, there were
stout Professors of the Truth, in the several Propugnatores fidei, the Churches
Champions for the Faiths defense. Rev. 13.5.
Yea see, when the whole World wonders after the Beast, even the Princes of the
Earth dread his power, court his friendship, adore his greatness; yet even
then, God has a remnant left, A remnant which worship him in Spirit, and in
Truth.

But further yet, I observe, The old Adversaries of the Protestant Faith, the
Papists, they take advantage of our present distractions; viz. Necessary it is
to be of some Church, for it is a truth received on all hands, That out of the
Church there is no Salvation; and now as for the Church of England (say they)
where is it? or, what is it? That has ceased to be, but the Church of Rome,
that continues in her ancient glory: So that, unless now you will be Roman
Catholics, you can be of no Church; and if you be of no Church, you can expect
no Salvation.

Wherefore to discover the subtlety, and overthrow the strength of Second
Quaere, What is meant by this ancient truth, and common saying, That out of the
Church, there is no Salvation?

Answer. It is meant of the Church Universal, not of this, or that, or any
other particular Church. There is no particular Church on Earth, but may under
a cloud of persecution cease to be any longer visible, in respect of the
outward Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; and yet continue to be of the
Church Universal, the Body of Christ in the inward sanctification of the Spirit
and Grace. So that, when we say, Out of the Church there is no Salvation, it is
not spoken of the Church of Rome, any more then of the France, or of the Church
of England, or of any other particular and National Church on Earth: But it is
spoken of that Una Sancta and Catholica Ecclesia, That one holy and Catholic
Church, the Body of Christ; for that out of it indeed there is no Salvation.

And therefore do the Ancients make Noah's Ark, Genesis 6.16, 17, 18.
a Type of the Church; for that, as all within the Ark, so all within this
Church are saved; and as all without the Ark, so all without the Church are Per
portam Ecclesiae intramus in portam Paradisi (so St. Augustine) through the
door of the Church, we enter the Gate of Paradise; and as the same St.
Augustine observes well, He that has not the Church for his Mother, cannot
have God for his Father; and he that has not God for his Father, cannot have
Christ for his Savior, and without Christ there is no Salvation. For, as that
which is not of the Body, does not receive life Natural from the Head; so he
that is not of the Church, does not receive life Spiritual from

We proceed then to the resolution of our Third Quaere,

That a Church does not then cease to be, Kings Daughter, Psalm 45 13.
though clothed in Rags, though covered with contempt, yet all glorious
within. Tell me, is not the Church then most truly eminent, when most eminently
suffering for the Truth? Innocence is more illustrious upon a Dunghill, then
injustice on the Throne; Fa th and Truth more honorable in a Dungeon, then
Schism and Superstit on in the Temple; wherefore, the^e Christ has his Church,
where Truth Romanist, say, Where is your Church? in contempt and scorn; whilst
we can point him to those who give Testimony to the Faith, by their innocence
and sufferings.

To close with the Fourth Quaere. Seeing we are to hold Communion

Answer. By these inseparable and infallible Notes, a sincere Preaching of the
Word, a right Administration of the Sacraments, and a firm Profession of the
Faith: All which, by how much they are the more or the less perfect, by so much
is the Church the more or the less pure.

And now blessed be God, even for ever blessed be his holy Name, that he is
pleased to vouchsafe us here, the visible face of a Church, amidst the Churches
so many blind-foldings and buffetings, in this hour, Luke 22.53.
and power of darkness. But because I know many of you come from far, having
your habitations where are no Churches, no Churches as to the right
Administration of the Word and Sacraments; therefore, let me mind you of what
St. Paul admonishes you, Heb. 10.25.
Not to forsake the assembling your selves together, but to meet in a private
participation and communion of the Ordinances, where you cannot have them in
public. And in so doing, fear not the guilt or reproach of a Conventicle; for
be assured, That Conventicle, where Religious persons meet in private
Administrations of Public Forms, but where Faction meets in the Administration
of Private Forms, opposite to Public Order.

John 20.19.
The Apostles we find in a Private Meeting, With the doors shut for fear of the
Jews; yea, the Primitive Saints had their Crypta, their secret places for
Private Worship, for fear of their Persecutors. It is not then so much the
place of worship, as the form of service, Conventicle; even, when that service
is opposite to the established order of the Church, whether the place be private
or public. Be it so then, that we are reduced to the persecuted condition of
the Primitive Saints, when their salutations run to Aquila and Priscilla, Romans
16.19.
and the Church in their House. Be it so, that we are forced to celebrate the
Eucharist, as our Savior did institute it, Mark 14.15.
in some inward or upper Room. Be it so, that whilst Heresy declaims in the
Pulpit, Truth be driven to the Desk; yet know, Matthew. 18 20.
who has said, That where two or three are thus met together, in his Name, he
will be in the midst of them.

Thus we have done with the Explication of the first general part, The
description of Christ; in the Dignity and Office of Mediator, As the Head of
the Body, the Church. I should proceed to the Twofold Relation, from which this
Description is raised, that of Creator, As the beginning of all things; and
that of Redeemer, As the firstborn from the dead. And having opened unto you
the Twofold Relation, from whence the Description is raised, I should proceed
to the Threefold Reason, whereby it is argued: First, From the final moving
cause, That in all things he might have the pre-eminence. Secondly, The
efficient ordaining cause, the good will and pleasure of the Father. And
thirdly, The formal constituting cause, the fullness of perfection dwelling in
Christ. These particulars, seeing I cannot enlarge upon in Explication, give me
leave lightly to open by way of Paraphrase, that so I may proceed to
Application.

Know then, Christ is the Head of the Body, the Church, as he is the beginning,
the firstborn from the dead; that is, the Author of nature, grace, and glory;
the Fountain, as of life natural, so of life spiritual, and life eternal; not
only the Creator and Preserver of the living, but also the Raiser and Restorer
of the dead. The first that rose to an immortal and incorruptible life, and the
Author as well as the Exemplar of all that shall rise to the like life,
incorruptible and immortal. And wherefore this, but that, In all things he
might have the pre-eminence, Tam in (...), quam in (...), Primas tenet, He has
the pre-eminence.

But by what ordaining Power and Authority, does he obtain and possess this
Dignity? Why, it is (...) the good will and pleasure of the Father; who, to
this very end, that Christ might be all fullness: All fullness of wisdom, grace,
power, and of the Divinity it self; and this fullness, is not that of the
Vessel, but of the Fountain, it dwells in him: So that, though of his fullness
do we all receive, John 1.16.
yet is not his grace to be exhausted; he imparts his grace, as the Sun his
light, without diminution of his fullness; which fullness he has as Head of the
Body, the Church, etc.

Applic.
as in the Body there is a diversity of Members, and in the Members a diversity
of Functions; Romans 12.4. 1 Cor. 12.12, etc.
yet in those diverse Functions and different Members, there is a mutual
communion, and a perfect concord; the less honorable not invading the office of
the more noble, nor the more noble contemning the use of the less honorable. So
ought it to be in the Church, where every one of the Faithful, as a member,
has his office, his gift, his function from Christ; not so much in a regard to
himself, destruction. Thus is it in the Church of Christ, if the Mechanic
shall invade the office of the Minister, the Subject usurp the office of the
Sovereign: Psalm. 77.23. Epis. Winton.
If, instead of the people led like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron;
wicked men shall invert the order, and make Moses and Aaron to be led like
sheep by the hand of the people: Sure this Schism in the Body Mystical (to say
no worse) like that in the Body Natural, it must needs be dangerous and
destructive to the whole; even destructive to the people, as well as to Moses
and Aaron, to Magistracy and Ministry, even the State Civil and Ecclesiastical.

2. Whatsoever is others Schism, see we to our own sincerity, that we be true
Members of Christ's Body; which Body of Christ admits of no withered hands, no
wooden legs, no profane persons, no formal Hypocrites; but such as are truly
justified through the Blood of Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit of Grace.
Quid facit in demo fidei perfidum pectus (so St. Cyprian) What has an Apostate
The general assembly, Heb. 12.23.
and Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven. If we are
Members of Christ's Body, where is our conformity to him in holiness? where are
the vital operations of his Spirit? where the quickening power of his Grace?
Wherefore

Now, if by these symptoms of Spiritual life from Christ, as the Head; we can
evidence to our selves that we are living Members of Paul's direction, Ephesians 4.15.
even, In growing up into him in all things, who is the Head, even Christ: This
is that the Apostle calls aright, an increasing with the increase of God: Col.
2.19.
with the increase of God, that is, with all divine and spiritual growth, in
true Faith, fervent Love, firm Hope, and sincere Holiness, even in all saving
Graces; which is therefore

3. From the so near union of the Members with the Head, of the Faithful with
Christ; does flow forth most divine comfort to the languishing Soul, in the
midst of inward temptations, and outward afflictions.

First, In the midst of inward temptations: When we rightly apprehend the
wisdom and goodness of our God, the love and mercy of our Jesus, in this
Mystery of the Head, being made conformable to the Members, Christ in all
things like unto his Brethren; that, Heb. 2.17, 18.
he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining unto
God; and so, Was himself tempted, that he might be able to succor them that are
tempted.

Heb. 4.15.
As is touched with a feeling of our infirmities. Touched not only per
apprehensionem, but also per experientiam; not only by his divine knowledge as
God, but also by his humane experience as man; for that, as it follows, He was
in all points tempted as we are, yet without Now, from Christ's being touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, it is the Apostles inference, Verse. 16.
That we therefore come boldly (even in an humble confidence) unto the throne
of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of
need; for that, thus doing, Christ shall speak to the Soul, what he once spoke
to St. Paul, in his spiritual conflict: My grace is sufficient for thee; 2 Cor.
12.9.
and thereby, My strength shall be made perfect in thy weakness.

Secondly, In the midst of outward afflictions: By virtue of that I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; Matthew. 25.35, 36.
I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and
ye came unto me. Oh the inconceiveable love of Christ! And Oh the divine
comfort of the Soul! in this communion between Christ and the Faithful: As the
Faithful communicate with vice versa; Our Lord Jesus Christ, though in himself
never so rich, yet in the Faithful he still suffers poverty; though in himself
never so glorious, yet in his Saints he still suffers ignominy; though in
himself never so highly exalted, yet in his Members he still suffers contempt.

Now, who rightly apprehends, and considers, that Christ himself, not only
has suffered for him as his surety, but also still suffers in him as his Head?
who is it that rightly considers this, but will, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb.
12.1.
Run with patience the race that is set before him, looking unto Jesus the
Author and Finisher of his Faith? For that, if we suffer with Christ, Romans 8.17.
we shall also be glorified together with him. With him, Who is the Head of the
Body, the Church; the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence:

Halleluiah,
PSALM. 27.4.
NOthing is more dismal then darkness; so that, Introduct.
Sun behind the Cloud, behold Gods face through the Worlds frowns, and in his
favor find light and life, when the outward man discerns nothing David, he
quells his fears and triumphs by faith, saying, The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, v. 1.
of whom shall I be afraid? But where has David this courage, from whence this
confidence? Why see, he takes Sanctuary, he flies to the horns of the Altar, he
seeks shelter under the Cherubims wings; Gods presence is his protection, Gods
house his fort and tower, yea his comfort and delight; by way of excellency it
is his Unum, his one thing: One

See David here right according to his own Emblem, Ps. 42.1.
even as the Heart panting after the waterbrooks: As the Heart, so he wounded
and pursued; wounded with distress, and pursued with danger, he pants after the
waterbrooks, eagerly longs after the refreshing comforts of Gods Sanctuary.

Division.
In the Division of the words, observe two general parts: David's Petition; with
its Divine Reason. 1. David's Petition; One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life. 2. The divine reason of David's Petition; To behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to enquire, etc.

In the first General observe two Particulars; the Object, and the Acts. The
Object; 1. Emphatically asserted to be unum, one thing. 2. That one thing
expressly described to be this, That I may dwell This the Object. Secondly, the
Acts; they are two: The one speaks the inward affection, that of desire; the
other speaks his eager prosecution of what he desired, in seeking after it: One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life.

This is David's Petition, to which he is moved by a twofold beholding the
beauty of the Lord. 2. That of Devotion, relating to the Oracle and the Altar,
the Incense and the Sacrifice; to which answers our Preaching, and Prayer, with
the Administration of the Sacraments: And this David calls, a visiting, or an
enquiring into Gods temple.

Thus the wounded Heart pants, thus David's troubled soul longs, One thing have I
desired of the Lord, etc.

Explic.
First General, David's Petition; and therein the Object, emphatically asserted
to be unum, one thing. In the beginning of the Psalm David keeps an Audit of
his Souls accounts, reckoning up the large incomes and lasting treasures of
Gods bounty, grace and mercy; the sum whereof is this: The Lord is my light and
my life, my strength and my salvation. And now, where shall David design his
presence, but where is his light? where shall he desire his person, but where
one thing, to dwell in the house of the Lord, etc.

There are quos interpellat ad desiderandum finis ipse desiderandi, says
Tertullian well: Tert. de paen. Isa. 57.20.
There are those, whom the end of one desire provokes to another; fluctuating
souls, whose motion is that of a troubled Sea in continual waves; and no wonder
if the Needle flit up and down the Compass, whilst it is not fixed upon his
Pole: So, no wonder if the mind of man wanders in multiplicity of desires,
whilst it is not fixed upon David's unum, his one thing, the enjoyment of his God.
1 Pet. 2.11.
We are here strangers and pilgrims; The soul then pursuing sensual delights,
may happily find some Inn for a nights lodging, but no house to make its home,
no object to make its center. Our right habitation can there only be, where is
our true contentation; our repose, where is our rest; and that is God; and this
by communion with him in Christ: which communion with him in Christ, we have in
his ordinances; and Christ's ordinances are in Gods house. Gods house then is
that one thing above all things, which most conduces to the good of souls, yea
and welfare of States: For, no Nation ever Sanctuary, who shall secure the
City? Ezec^. 9 ^ 6. Ps 75.3 Gen 32.26.
The Prayers of the Church are the prosperity of a People, whose united force
is beyond that of men and Angels; it prevails with God, Ephesians. 2.3.
it overcomes the Almighty, not letting him go without a blessing.

But from whence is the Churches unity? why from Loves union: From which union
of love it is, that the faithful become (...); fellow members of the same
mystical fellow heirs of the same eternal Kingdom, fellow-citizens of the same
heavenly Jerusalem. Yea, such is the communion of love, as not only makes many
one, but also one many: hereby, (...), (so S. Chrysostom) love not only
combines ten thousand into one, but also multiplies one into ten thousand: For,
look how many lovers a man has, so manifold he is; he has so many eyes to see
for him, so many ears to hear for him, so many feet to go for him, so many
hands to work for him, so many tongues to speak for him, communion of love
become each man's in particular, which are all theirs in the general. And this
is the incomparable benefit of the Churches Liturgy generally received, that
each one has ten times ten thousand together imploring at the Throne of grace,
for that blessing he singly sues for.

Oh the sweet delight of those Closet contemplations! when we could take a view
of all the Congregations in England, at one time Lords day, in one place of the
Lords house, in one posture of bended knees, and of lift up hands, and eyes,
and hearts, breathing one Prayer, and closing one Amen! Oh how lovely were this
in the sight of Angels, how acceptable in the presence of God, thus at once in
an united force to wrestle with him for a blessing, Genesis 32.14,
as did Jacob! And as such the Prayers, such also the Praises of the Church,
the Militant being Echo to the Triumphant; Holy, holy, Isa 6.3 and so in the
Te Deum
to Holy Lord God of Hosts, that Song of the Cherubims in heaven, and of

Oh! had we this sacred Unity, how soon would vanish our hateful Divisions! O
that all men's Ambitions and Covetousness were concentred in the Unity of
David's desire, to enjoy God in his Sanctuary, to dwell in his house, and
devote themselves to his holy worship! This the first particular of David's
Petition, as to the Object, emphatically asserted to be unum, one thing.

2. We proceed to this one thing, as it is expressly described: A dwelling in
the house of the Lord. Of all the creatures, God still has some whom he
calls his; as separate by a particular dedication and sanctification to
himself. Thus of men's persons, some are his elect and chosen; Luke 18.7. Ezekiel.
44 24 Psalm. 105.15. Mal. 3.8. John 2.16. 2 Samuel 7.5.
of times and seasons, some are his Sabbaths and feasts; of servants and
attendants, some are his Prophets and Ministers; of goods and chattels, some
are his Tithes and Oblations: And thus of places and habitations, some are his
Temples, some are his in which Houses and Temples, places dedicated to Gods
worship and service, he vouchsafes to dwell; not as thereby confining his
presence, but therein declaring it.

For most true it is, God has no bounds of himself, but himself; his essence
is infinite for immensity and omnipresence, as well as for majesty and
omnipotence; He has heaven for his Throne, and earth for his footstool; Isai.
66.1.
and therefore is not contained in Temples made with hands. Seeing God then is
not enclosed within walls, nor Philo Judaeus gives the short, yet full
resolution; God is present every where, as containing all things, not contained
himself? And so though in the immensity of his Omnipresence, his being is in
all places, yet in the manifestation of his gracious presence, his dwelling is
more especially in his Temple; and

And thus has God his house on earth, as well as his house in heaven; which
two have so good a correspondency in a communion of things, Psalm. 102.19.
that they have their analogy in a communication of Names; And therefore as we
find in Scripture, heaven is called Gods sanctuary, so Gods Sanctuary may be
called Heaven. And thus however men despise the house of Gods worship, yet is
it the place where his honor dwells; Psalm. 26.8.
yea, as his house above is coeleste solum, earth in heaven; so his house
below, it is terrestre coelum, heaven on earth.

But now, to attribute holiness to places, and call our Churches, Gods houses,
is not this superstitious and Jewish? No sure, we are otherwise taught by our
Savior; who says expressly of his Fathers house, Mark 11.17.
that it shall be called the house of prayer, (...) to all Nations; it shall be
called, that is, palam erit and habebitur, it shall so every where be, and be
accounted; as Beza himself gives the gloss. And observe, We find not our
Savior using any severities, so much, as in zeal for Gods house; that being
profaned, he takes oxen, and those men more beasts then they, the
money changers, out of the Temple; and justifies his Zeal by a Scriptum est, it
is written: My house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a
den of thieves. Now, that part of the Temple where our Savior did this was
not, Atrium populi, the Peoples court, that wherein the Jews worshipped, but
that Atrium gentium, the Gentiles court, wherein those (...), Acts 17.4.17.
those Grecians, and other devout persons spoken of in the Acts, Acts 8.27.
were admitted and worshipped. For, we may not think, the Jews, who were so
zealous for their Temples holiness, we may not think, they would suffer the
Oxen to tread, where themselves set foot so charily; neither would they suffer
shops and stalls, and trade and Mark 11.16.
(as appears by the peoples carrying vessels through it,) which none was, but
that of the Gentiles, as being void of legal sanctity, and without the first
bounds of the Temple; yet this being a place of public prayer, our Savior
will have it esteemed as Gods house, whereby he establishes the relative
holiness of our Christian Churches.

his Fathers house, and thereby establishes the holiness of Christian
Oratories to all Nations. Wherefore if we be Christians, we must approve of the
public places of

And now, upon this our Saviors ground, have all our Christian Churches been
erected; and as erected, so consecrated: Thus, when Christianity gained first
acceptance, with the Imperial authority, that famous Church at Jerusalem was
consecrated by Eusebius, and that at Alexandria by Athanasius. And we may
observe, it was the

But why will our Savior have his Fathers house called the house of prayer,
why not as well the house of sacrifice, and of the Sacraments;

I answer, Because without prayer all the rest are nothing, house of the Lord,
and we shall proceed further to show you, how David dwells there and discover
to you the length of his lease, even for term of life; so says the Psalmist,
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life.

1. How David is said to dwell in the house of the Lord. The dwelling David
here speaks of, is not such, as if he would have the palace of the King to be
in the Temple of the Lord; or as another Samuel, himself continually to attend
the Priest; no, his dwelling is not meant of a proper and continued habitation
there, but of a frequent and constant repair thither; even in the mornings, and
in the evenings, on the Sabbaths, and on the Feasts days, then to attend the
public solemnities of Gods worship and service; Psalm. 84.4.
And O blessed are they, Lord, that thus dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee. David's desire and resolution answers that of God himself; who
says of Zion, This shall be my rest for ever, Psalm. 132.15.
here will I dwell, for I have desired it. The Lord delights himself in
Communion with his Saints, and well may his Saints then delight themselves in
Communion with their God; God dwells with the faithful as in his Temple, O let
the faithful then still joy to dwell with God in his Sanctuary.

2. See the length of David's lease, for term of life; that I may all the days
of my life. So much is man's nature in love with liberty and change, that not
having variety of objects, and freedom of enjoyments, a Palace becomes a
Prison, and the sweetest dainties a loathed bitterness. But O the perfect
freedom of Gods service, and ravishing sweetness of his Sanctuary! which never
begets loathing or dislike to the devout soul; but the more enjoyed, still the
more desired. So that Gods house, is not David's desire for change, but for
constancy; not for all the days of his life.

All the days. The godly man's Calendar is from the Son of righteousness, he
numbers his times by his aspect and influence; and and therefore he thinks it
no day with his soul, but when Christ's face does shine; and accounts no happy
hours, but what are spent in his service. So that should the Sun have run his
round, and David Titus the Emperor upon a less occasion after did, O amici,
diem perdidi! O my friends, I have lost a day! and as with David, so with every
good Christian, that day is lost as to an happy account, which makes not an
account of Gods holy worship.

But further, David renews his Lease, and resolves to have it for perpetuity,
or rather makes Gods house his inheritance: I will dwell (says he) in the
house of the Lord for ever. Psalm. 23.6.
David is not willing

Thus we have done with the object of David's petition: 1. As emphatically
asserted to be unum, one thing. 2. As that one thing is expressly described to
be this, a dwelling in the house of the Lord all the days of his life.

From the Object we proceed to the Acts, which are two: The former speaks
David's inward affection, that of desire; the latter speaks the eager
prosecution of what he desired, in seeking after it; One thing have I desired
of the Lord, that will I seek after, etc.

Act which speaks David's inward affection, that of desire. One thing have I
desired. Desires are the Echoes of our loves; what we most ardently affect, we
most eagerly covet: If our love then be spiritual and fixed on God, our desires
will keep the tincture of our loves, and become holy and spiritual too. And
there are no enjoyments so full, nor contentments so great, that desires are
not excited; for what is desire, but the hearts flame? which does not by
emission spend the stock, but by reflection quicken the vigor of our loves:
Testimonium gustatae gratiae est esuries, says S. Bernard; grace desired, is a
sure testimony of grace received, and to hunger after Christ, Ps. 34.8.
is a good argument of having tasted with David how good the Lord is.

Thus it is with Gods Saints on earth; but see the same with the very Seraphims
in heaven, who clap their wings, that is, Isa. 6.2.
agitate their loves, and actuate their joys by their desires; yea, no heart
is so Ps. 145.16.
and God alone it is, that can satisfy the desire of every living thing.

And therefore is David right in his Unum petii, One thing have I desired of
the Lord. For indeed, seeing the fruition of God is the last end of the souls
creation, so infinite an object as God, supposes an infinite desire in man.
And though David confines his desires to one Object, yet can he not contain
them in one Act; for like Number they are infinite, none so great, but is still
capable of addition; so that Naz. in Na^al.
as Nazianzen elegantly calls him, (...), a Sea of Being, which has neither
bottom, nor shore; a fullness as inexhaustible, as it is unsearchable.

All that splendour which attracts the desires of the most lofty Heroes; all
those miseries which suspend the admiration of the most learned Sages; all that
beauty which inflames the hear^s of the most passionate Lovers; yea, take all
the whole Wardrobe and Magazine Isa 40 15.
what are they all but stilla situlae, as a drop of the Bucket, compared with
the vast Ocean of Gods fullness?

What art thou then but ungrateful unto God, and unfaithful unto thine own
soul? What art thou but a Rebel to his Sovereign Majesty, and a traitor to
thine own repose and glory; whosoever thou art, that seeks for any other
felicity then that of God? who has h s paradise in his own bosom, and offers
to make thee blessed in his embraces.

O that thou would now collect thy scattered thoughts, (vain man) and reduce
thy wandering desires into this period and center of Unity, Communion with God
in Christ! fixing thy delights in the beauty of his holiness, the worship of
his Sanctuary, and the joy of his presence: Thus does David in his Unum petii,
One thing have I desired. Thus we have done with the former Act, David's inward
affection, that of desire.

2. The latter, which speaks his eager prosecution of what he desired, in
seeking after it. One thing have I desired, and that will I seek after. In
earthly pleasures, desires faint upon enjoyment; but in spiritual, once
enjoyed, they are the more desired; and as the more hotly desired, so the more
eagerly pursued. In carnal delights we say, Vilescit adeptum quod accendit
desideratum; That which we hotly pursue for the attaining, when sped, we as qui
satietati occurrit satietatem incurrit, A man is satiated with that which he
took as a remedy against satiety. Thus how many are eagerly mad upon their
carnal pleasures, till they feel their sting, and then they hate them? but it
is far otherwise with our spiritual delights, we have no such appetite to them,
as when we have tasted them; and are never glutted with their sweetness, but
the more inflamed in our desires by their enjoyments.

True it is, divine raptures, and spiritual ravishments, they are our heavenly
refreshings, given not for food, but for cordials; and therefore are not so
frequent, Bern. in Cant. ult.
nor so continued, which begot S. Bernards complaint, heu hora rara, and mora
parva! O how few (sweet Jesus!) are thy heavenly visits, and how short their
stay! given they are either to comfort after affliction, or strengthen against
temptation: 1 Kings 19.8.
Yea, like Elijahs repast, they are to sustain the soul for many days. Ye then
that do not know the pleasures of Gods

And indeed, we must know, to have desires without endeavors, is to be like
him that lies at anchor, expecting a wind, but never hoiseth sail. Many there
are which have a secret ardour, desires fly from their hearts, as sparks from a
furnace, they break forth in heaps, but suddenly dye: Thus, they are strong in
desires, but sluggard-like weak in endeavors, and so presently quench the
Spirit which gives them motion: They desire much to be saved; but they like not
to practice S. Paul's precept, Phil. 2.12.
To work out their salvation.

But David, he is of a right temper, and in a right order: His hands second his
heart; his eager prosecution, his inward affection; he seeks, what he desires.
So are the words of his Petition in his Unum petii; One thing have I desired of
the Lord, and that will I

Know then (Beloved) we have spiritual delights in their sacred source, no
where so full, so free, as in the house of God, Applic.
as in the service of the Sanctuary. One day in thy Courts (says David) are
better then a thousand; Ps. 84.10.
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, then to dwell in the
tents of wickedness. The delights of Gods Sanctuary, like the waters of
Bethlehem, they are pure; but Egypt, they are polluted. Whilst the Tradesmen
then hie them to their Shops, Merchants to their Change, Mariners to their
Ships, Wantons to their Chambers, Covetous men to their Chests, Revellers to
the Taverns, all men to their delights; David too will haste to his, but it is
to the Temple, to the Sanctuary; there is the object of his joy, there is the
Theater of his delight, there is the Center of his desires, even the Beauty of
the Lord, and the glory of his Worship.

O ye wretched souls! how are you become enemies, not only to the Cross of
Christ, but also to the Comforts of his Spirit; Enemies to Reason and Religion,
Enemies to Gods Sanctuary and his Ordinances, Enemies to Christ's Church and
chosen: O how are you enemies to all these! Ye that prefer a Tavern before a
Temple, and a Strumpets arms before your Saviors embraces; ye that prefer
Bacchus Bowls before the Cup of Salvation, and carousing healths before your
Saviors blood: Oh O profane and licentious wretches! which delight to live
with that mad Legion in the filthy Sepulchers and dark Tombs of carnal
concupiscence; Mat. 5.2, 3.
and this with a sordid and sottish contempt of Angels fellowship, Saints
communion, heavenly Gods Sanctuary, and the Ravishments of his holy Worship.

2. Be we exhorted so to give up our selves unto God at his Altar, that he may
make us to dwell with him in his Temple; so resign up our selves to him in his
Sacrament, that (if it be his blessed will) he may continue his Service to us
in his Sanctuary; resign we up our selves to him in his Sacrament, that blessed
Sacrament of the holy Eucharist. And when we come to Gods Altar, prepare we our
Sacrifice aright, Act. 15.9. P. 26.6.
purifying our hearts by faith in sincere humiliation, and washing our hands in
innocence by fervent supplication: And thus compassing Gods Altar, he will
accept our Offering, even through the merits of the Lamb Christ Jesus, which
was offered up for us.

Heb. 11.4.
In this oblation of himself it was, that Abel^ offered a more excellent
sacrifice then Cain; (...), a more full sacrifice; Plurimam hostiam, (so the
Vulgar) but how this? Why, Rupertus Rupert. l. 4. in Genesis c. 2.
Abel primo cor suum, deinde rem suam offerendo, plurimam hostiam per fidem
obtulit: Abel by faith offered as a more excellent, so a more plentiful
sacrifice then Cain, in that he offered himself as well as his Lambs; whereas
Cain offered sua, but not se, his goods, but not himself. Abel offered his
heart and himself, as well as the Firstlings of his Flock: And thus if we will
be accepted as Abel was, we must offer as Abel did, our Hearts unto God; these
the Firstlings of our Flock indeed, the Heart being the primum the first that
lives in grace, and the chief that is accepted in prayer.

And that (coming to Gods house and his Altar) we may bring (...), a more
plentiful sacrifice; we must remember, that the Measures of the Sanctuary are
double to those of common use: Exodus 16.22.
Wherefore with double diligence do we prepare our hearts, our devotions; join
we eager prosecution, to our inward affection; seek, as well as desire. So does
holy David, in his unum petii;

Now to close this Sermon, observe that of the Preacher; Look to thy foot when
thou go into the house of God. Eccles. 4 1.
Look to thy foot, that is, order thy affections, even with humility,
reverence, and devotion.

Ps. 22.6.
1. With humility: Bow thy knee low with David; I am a worm, Genesis 18 27.
and no man. Fall down even to the ground with Abraham;

Ezod. 4.5.
2. With reverence: Put off thy shoes, says God to Moses, for the place whereon
thou stand is holy ground. Holy ground, because of Gods holy presence, which
must not be approached but with holy fear. Ps 99.1.
God that sits between the Cherubims, he here hearkens to our prayers, and
speaks to us in his Word; and his Majesty then requires our reverence.

Ps. 122.1.
3. With devotion: That of David's; I was glad when they said unto me, We will
go into the house of the Lord. And as we come with cheerfulness, so continue we
with watchfulness; not letting the fire go out upon the Altar, not letting our
devotion cool in Gods presence, especially when we present our selves at the
Table of the Lord, that sacred solemnity of the blessed Eucharist. Oh that we
could here compose our Souls to David's frame! That seeing God in Christ is the
Center of all holy delights, we may make the enjoyment of his presence and
communion the Center of all hearty desires; and then say in an humble faith,
and ardent fervor of devotion: One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I
will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life, etc.

THE SECOND SERMON PSALM. 27.4. -- To behold the Beauty of Lord, and to enquire
Introduction. Psalm. 87.2.
GOD that loves the Gates of Sion, above all the habitations of Jacob; he
prefers the Public Services of the Church, before the Private Worship of the
Closet. 2 Samuel 7.16. Zech. 3.8.
Wherefore David's zeal to the Building, and Zorobabels to the rebuilding
Messiah, issuing from their loins: And if the holy zeal of building and
restoring the House of God, had the promise of Christ in the flesh; sure I am,
the blind zeal of prophaneing and destroying Gods House, can have no communion
with Christ in the Spirit. For observe we, how, the Prophet Haggai foretells,
That, Hag. 11.9.
the glory of the latter House, should be greater then that of the the glory of
Zorobabels Temple, greater then that of Solomon's; which could not be meant as
to the outward structure, or the inward ornaments; the latter House wanting
what gave the excellency to the former, even the Ark of the Covenant, the
Heavenly Fire, the overshadowing Cloud, the Urim and Thummim, and the gift of
Prophecy; which gift of Prophecy was only supplied by an Echo, which the
Hebrews call Bath Kol, the Daughter of a Voice, revealing sometimes something
of the Will of God. Such Titus besieged Jerusalem, Joseph. Bell. Jud. l. 7. c.
12.
Migremus hinc, Let us be gone hence.

Now all that glory, being wanting in the latter Temple, What made it more
glorious then the former?

I answer, It was the presence and manifestation of Christ in the flesh, who
was the substance of those Figures; the Body, of which the Temples glory was
but a shadow. And if this was the glory of the Jews Temple, That Christ in the
flesh, was there manifested and presented unto God; shall it not be much more
the glory of our Christian Oratories, That there Christ in his Word and
Sacraments is preached and exhibited unto us?

Christ is present in all places, Rev. 2.1.
but is said To walk in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks: Present he is in
the Congregation of the

Epicures set themselves to the enjoyment of their sensual delights, whatsoever
they cost them, though body and soul, and all; yet fix we our desires on David's
one thing, which is as much beyond comparison, as it is above exception, even,
To dwell in the House of the Lord: This the center of David's Prayer, the main
object of his longing desires, and eager importunities, the thing he sues and
seeks for; so says the Psalmist, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of
my life; to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

We proceed to the second General part, The Divine Reason of David's Petition,
which is twofold, of Delight, and of Devotion. First, Of Delight, To behold the
Beauty of the Lord; Secondly, Of Devotion, To enquire in his Temple.

We begin with the first particular, that of Delight, To behold the To behold
the Beauty of the Lord! Why, what commerce has Earth with Heaven, finite with
infinite, flesh with spirit, dust and ashes, with majesty and glory, man with
God? O the gracious sweetness of divine love! God descends to exalt man, the
Creator humbles himself to a communion with his Creature, and to so near a
communion, as to make his Spirit, man's life; his grace, man's comeliness; his
wing, man's shadow; his hand, man's strength; his heart, man's rest; his beauty,
man's delight; and his

This Beauty of the Lord, is of too glorious a ray to be beheld, otherways then
under avail; and therefore, it is the goodness of our Maker, to exhibit
himself; not according to the strength of his glory, but according to the
weakness of our capacity: The object is proportioned to the faculty, the
Creatures are as the Waters, and his Word and Sacraments as the Mirrors, which
represent God by reflection, whose glory we cannot look upon in a direct Beam.

And thus did David behold the Beauty of the Lord in his Sanctuary, Heb. 9.2,
3, etc.
as represented in Types and Figures; for we find in the first Tabernacle,
called Holy, the Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shewbread; and in the
second Tabernacle, called The Holy of Holies, we find the Golden Censer, the
Ark, the Manna, Aarons Rod, the Tables of the Covenant, the Cherubims of Glory,
and the Mercy Seat. Now, this Tabernacle and Sanctuary did aptly represent the
Church of Christ; whose Militant part, through the vail of Faith, does
contemplate the glory of God; and our Lord Jesus Christ is our (...), our Great
High Priest, Heb 4.14.
by whom we have access unto the Father, in the Holy of Holies, that is, the
Highest Heavens: The Brazen Laver did signify our Baptism and Repentance; the
Sacrifice of Burnt offerings, the Mortification of our Lusts; the Altar of
Incense, our Oblations Golden Candlestick, the Preachers of the Gospel; and the
Lights thereof, their holy Doctrine; the Table of Shewbread, did prefigure the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the Communion of Saints.

The Holy of Holies did represent the Heavenly State of the Church Triumphant;
there being the Ark of the Covenant, the Personal and Corporal presence of
Christ; the Golden Propitiatory, his glorious Humanity; and the Table of the
Law, his perfect Obedience: the Cherubims wings, did represent the Ministry of
Angels; from Golden Pot of Manna, even an abundant fullness of Divine Joy, whose
sweetness is incorruptible and everlasting; yea, here is Aarons Rod, which
being withered, after budded, flowred, and brought forth ripe Almonds; that is,
the dead bodies of Gods Saints, raised to life, are clothed with immortality
and glory.

Or further, By the Tabernacle and Sanctuary, was represented, not Ark of the
Testament, as the Word of the Father; placed in the Tabernacle, as clothed
with flesh: He the Table of Shewbread, as our Life and Food in the Eucharist;
he the Candlestick, as our Spiritual Light; he the Incense in the sweet savor
of his Merits; he the Sacrifice, in the sufferings of his Cross; he the Altar,
in the efficacy of his Mediation, by which ou^ persons and our Prayers, our
selves and our services become accepted

Further yet, The Tabernacle and Sanctuary was a Map of the Universe, the
greater World; and of Man, the lesser World:

1. A Map of the Universe, the greater World; the outward Court representing
the outmost Creation; the holy Place, the Church of Christ; and the Holy of
Holies, the Heavenly Presence.

2. A Map of Man, the lesser World, consisting of Body, Soul, and Spirit; the
outward Court, that is the Body; 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
the inward Tabernacle, that is the Soul; and the holy Sanctuary, that is the
Spirit; by which Spirit we have our communion, yea, and our communication too
with our God. And well may the Temple of God be compared unto man, 1 Cor. 3.16.
1 Cor. 6.16.
seeing man so often in Scripture is called The Temple of God.

David, in all these Representations of the Sanctuary, contemplate a Beauty,
and that Beauty divine, even the Beauty of the Lord? No wonder then if David be
so importunate in his suit, to have his dwelling in so pleasant a seat, as the
House of the Lord; an Habitation, which has Heaven for its prospect, the
beauty of the Lord, for the object of the eye, and delight of the Soul.

But however David does behold the beauty of the Lord in the Sanctuary,
Liturgy; both as to the decency and order of her daily Service, and Sacramental
Administrations. First, As to the decency and order of her daily Service. There
being nothing in Devotion, nothing in Doctrine, nothing in Substance, nothing
in Circumstance, but what Gods Word either explicitly commands, or implicitly
allows. O lovely Order of holy Worship! right, a form as being a continued
Exercise of all the parts of holy Worship, taking up the whole mind and soul
of the Spiritual man. In this Divine service, the Church by an orderly progress
of Piety, and performance of Devotion, sometimes makes confession of sin,
sometimes deprecations of wrath, sometimes Petitions of mercy, sometimes
intercessions for all men; even all estates and conditions of men whatsoever,
from the highest Prince, to the meanest Peasant, from the holiest Saint, to the
vilest sinners, Turks and

Yea, in this Form of Divine service, and Public worship, see how the Church
of Christ does sometimes adore Gods sacred Majesty, sometimes extol his
glorious attributes, sometimes commemorate his famous acts, sometimes recount
his gracious blessings, sometimes denounce his severe judgments, sometimes
declare his Fatherly promises, sometimes set forth his heavenly praises.
Sometimes the Church makes profession of her Faith, sometimes she publishes
chain of Gold; one part still linkt within another, to become a fit ornament to
set off the Churches beauty, whereby she is the more comely and fair in the
eyes of her beloved.

Secondly, View we the Beauty of holy Worship, in the Churches Public
Administrations; to instance in that one of the blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist: O how does Divine Order, Reverence, and Devotion, mutually contend
which shall give greatest luster to the Beauty of this solemnity! First, the
judgment is rightly informed from sacred Scripture, in the Mysteries of that
blessed Sacrament: And the judgment being rightly informed by instruction, the
affections are divinely raised by exhortation, set on with that persuasive
Harmony of Prayers and Praises.

Then the Faithful Pastor of the Flock, having offered unto God Rev. 8.3.
and others Devotion (ascending up before the Throne of Grace, as sacred Odors,
made acceptable through the Incense of Christ's merits,) he proceeds, with fear
and reverence, to the Consecration of the Sacramental Elements; and how is
this? why, observe, It is with a most pathetical commemoration of Gods love, of
Christ's passion, and of man's redemption; yea, with an obediential and
Eucharistical acknowledgement of Christ's holy Institution, Administration; in
which the dearest pledges of Divine love are delivered with a Summary
Recapitulation of the whole Sacraments mystery; That so the Soul of the
receiver may have a present impression of renewed Devotion, in the very act of
receiving. This Ministration being performed, the close of the whole service is
applicatory

Now, ex pede Herculem, know ye the Eagle by its Feather, the Diamond by its
spark; the excellency of the Churches Liturgy by this one part of her Public
service, the solemnity of the Eucharist; of which Sacraments administering, I
may say what St. Paul said of the Corinthians prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.25.
That, if an unbeliever, or any one ready to fall down upon his face, and
worship God, reporting that God is in them of a truth. I may confidently
affirm, That so lovely is the Beauty of the Churches Order, Reverence, and
Devotion, in the Public worship of her daily service, and Sacramental
administrations, as is really attractive of every eye, and heart, except what
is prejudiced by Error, and Interest: Wherefore, though the unparalleled
profaneness of the present age, throw contempt upon the Sanctuary and House of
God; yet do we there acknowledge a Beauty of Holiness, as the object of our
desires and delight. So that we can say with David in a zeal to Gods Public
worship, One thing have I desired of the Lord,

The second Reason of David's Petition, That of Devotion; To enquire in his
Temple. As Cities had their original from single Families, so Temples their
beginning from single Altars. We no sooner read, That the holy Seed became
propagated into several Families; but we presently find those Families met in
a Public Congregation: For so in the days of Enosh, did men begin, Genesis 4 26.
publicly, to call upon the Name of the Lord; then, even in the morning of the
World, did the Church keep her first Mattins, for so does St. Chrysostom, and
the Ancients; yea, the best, and most of Modern Expositors, all interpret that
of Men's calling upon the Lord, as to his Public worship and service. So that,
we may well plead Church Liturgy, as ancient as Church Communion; and Church
Communion, as to Gods Public worship, contemporary with the third generation
of mankind, and the third century of the World.

Bethel, an House of God, Genesis 28.19, 22.
where was consecrated an Altar unto the Lord. No doubt, from the beginning of
the World, God had his Sabbaths and his Sacrifices, his Priests and his Altar,
and his Tithes; and therefore, times persons place, and things, consecrate and
appropriate to his Worship. Of this, and all this, we are assured from Reasons
dictate, and Scriptures proof. And as it was thus from the beginning, so it
shall be also unto John's prophecy in his Revelation, and Christ's promise in his
Gospel.

Altar and Priests to the most high God, we read to have been from Adam to
Melchisedech, but a Tabernacle and Temple we find not till Moses and Solomon:
The Tabernacle, that a Type of our Earthly pilgrimage and temporary sojourning,
as still flitting and removing in the Wilderness. The Temple, a Figure of our
heavenly rest, and eternal habitation, as founded and fixed in Canaan.

Moses framed the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.40.
it was according to the pattern in the Mount; which pattern, was that of
Spiritual Mysteries which God shadowed forth by Moses in Mysterial
Representations: This Tabernacle being pitched, Exodus 40.34, 38.
Moses goes up no more to God in the Mount, but God comes down to Moses in the
Cloud; which Cloud was light, and fiery; and in that, Clem. Alex. ^ta^. adhort.
ad Gent.
as Clemens of Alexandria observes, (...), a token of grace and fear: If Israel
were sincere and constant in their obedience, God was a light to lead them; but
if froward and perverse in their iniquity, he was a fire to consume them.

And though God is not now present in our Churches, by a visible light and
fire, which was but a Type; yet is he present in grace and fury, which is the
thing typified; grace to accept the prayers of his people, and fury to avenge
the profanation of his Sanctuary. From which fury it is, that never any
Nation, or Family, or Person, prospered John 2.16.
which either made Gods house a place of Merchandise by profaning it, or
Merchandise of Gods house by destroying it.

The Eagle that takes flesh from the Altar, carries coals to fi^e his own Nest;
and never did any man seek to build his house with the stones of Gods Temple,
but his honor was laid in the dust, and his ruin has been remarkable. Of this
it were easy to give you multitudes of sad examples, in Gods late and severe
judgments upon this

I might set before you the examples of Gods vengeance; but I shall wave that,
and present you rather the evidence of Gods Word, confirming to you the
relative holiness of Gods Sanctuary; and this, Paul, where he makes it an
Argument unto holiness, 1 Cor. 6.19.
That we are Gods Temples: Which, how vain had it been, 2 Cor. 3.11.
if either God has no Temple, or those Temples be not holy? Besides it is St.
Paul's argument, If that which is done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious. If the Gospel then excel the Law; and Christ's presence
in his Sacraments, his presence in the Sanctuary; then must our Christian
Churches excel the Jewish Temple; as excel in glory, so in beauty, even the
beauty of Holiness: Psalm. 93.6.
For, Holiness becomes the House of the Lord for ever. Psalm. 96.9.
the Psalmists admonition still stands good, Worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness: And worship him, not only by praying at his Altar; but also, by
inquiring at his Oracle: Both the inseparable parts and appurtenances of his
Temple; for says David, I will dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days of
my life; to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple.

To inquire in his Temple! Inquire, of what? why, of our right Jacobs Vision
will tell us, Genesis 28.17.
That the House of God, it is Scala and Janua Cali, the Ladder, and Gate of
Heaven: So that our sure way to ascend, and enter Heaven, it is to hold
Communion with Gods Church, in the Profession and Devotion of his Public
Worship.

And to confirm us in this truth, we may behold the Servants of the Family, who
know well the way to their Masters house; we may behold the Angels ascending
and descending, Heb. 1.14.
in their several Ministries, for the good of those, whom God makes Heirs of
Salvation. And O how much need have we to inquire in Gods Temple! David himself
is in so great a hazard, of being dejected with the tribulations of the godly,
and seduced by the prosperity of the wicked, till he goes into the Sanctuary of
the Lord, Psalm. 73.17.
there to inquire at his Oracle. But what is then Gods Oracle? Why it is his
sacred Word, the sure Interpreter of his holy Will; the Preaching of which
Word, Christ has committed to the Pastors of his Church.

And Oh the dignity and charge of their sacred Function! Mal. 2.7.
Whose are appointed to preserve knowledge, and that men should seek the Law at
their mouths: So that, when we speak, it ought to be with that care and
Conscience, 1 Pet 4, 11.
as delivering to you the very Oracles of God. O si quando loquamur ut Oracula,
vivamus ut numina! Oh that when we speak unto you the Oracles of Gods truth,
that we then did present our selves examples of his holiness! That so, our
lives integrity might be, Et Censura and Disciplina, 2 Cor. 4.7.
both a Censure and a Discipline to others enormity; but, We have our treasure
in Earthen vessels.

David's inquiring, St. Hierome renders by an attendere, and others by a
visitare, a visiting and attending Gods Temple. And indeed, though true it is,
That to the devout Saint and Servant of God, every day is a Sabbath, and every
place a Temple; yet, as this does not exempt us from the observation of the
Lords day, so nor from the frequenting Gods House; for as the one is a set and
holy time, so is the other a separate and holy place, Levit. 19.30.
Ye shall observe my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, which was spoken to
the Jew in the Letter, but to the Christian in the Analogy. And strange it is,
That they should be so remiss in reverencing Gods Sanctuary, who yet seem so
zealous for observing his Sabbaths, dis-joyning in their practice, what God
has so near joined in his Precept.

But, that we are to visit Gods Sanctuary, and there attend his service, is not
only from the precept of holy Scripture, but also from Divine Reason; which is
this, That, we are all to be considered in a double capacity, as to our
particular persons, and our Political Relations. Which Political Relations, are
especially two; the first, as to Civil Community; the second, as to Mystical
Communion. Now, as in Temporal Matters, we have our private places for our
private affairs; but public Halls, for public services: So in Spiritual
Matters, we have our private Closets, for our private Devotions, but public
Temples for public Worship; Civil Communion, as Members of some Corporation,
requires the former; and no less does our Mystical Communion, as Members of the
Church, require the latter.

But observe further, David, though so glorious a King, yet will become an
attendant in Gods house. O the haughty pride then of the meaner Peasant; Psalm.
95.6.
who will not bow nor bend, not fall down and worship, in Gods Sanctuary! O the
haughty pride, I say of the

Thus whilst we see the Potentate prostrate, we behold the Peasant stiff in
Gods service; yea, at present do we not behold the servant covered, whilst the
Master is bare in Gods presence? Strange disorder, as unreasonable as it is
irreverent; which to reform, know, Schools) are specified ab objecto and fine,
from their object and their end; what then is civil in respect of men and
secular Affairs, is Religions in respect of God and his glory.

And thus bowing the Knee, uncovering the Head, and the like, which are civil
actions in a respect to men, they become Religious and Divine, having God for
their object, and his glory for their end: The Soul actuating the Body, an holy
Fear actuating the Soul, and the Spirit of God actuating that holy Fear. So
that apertio capitis,

David, here, though a mighty Prince, yet of a far more humble temper, then the
meanest A^tisan of our age, he thinks it no indignity to his Royal person, but
rather a delight to his devout Soul, to attend Gods service; he will leave his
Palace, to visit Gods Temple; Psalmist, to declare the fervor of his Devotion,
One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the House of Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the Beauty of
the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple. We proceed to Application.

Applic.
1. To give you several seasonable Admonitions, know, It is the Prophets title,
which best adorns, and beautifies the Christians Temple, Ezekiel. 48.35.
even, Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there. And where

Wherefore, if it be the presence of God, of Christ, and of the Angels, which
makes the place of Gods worship beautiful; we may truly say of Gods Sanctuary,
Psalm. 45.13.
what is said of the Kings Daughter, It is all glorious within: Its chief
Beauty consists, not in the outward Forms, but the inward Mysteries; not in the
stately structure, but the gracious presence; not in the visible Congregation,
but the invisible Communion; the Beauty is not the object of bodily, Theod. de
graec. affect. cur. Sermon. 11.
it is of such things as Faith does Minister and present unto us.

And therefore, we cannot but justly reprove those who boast of their
knowledge, and cry up their Faith; as if they were the only men of a quick
sight, and peircing eye: Whereas they have so thick a film of prejudice, and
profaneness, that they cannot behold with David, the beauty of the Lord, in
his Sanctuary.

Know (vain men) that for the accomplishment of true delight,

Wherefore, O ye profane men, and dissolute minds! know, The David's, who
makes it his unum petii, One thing have I desired of the Lord, etc.

But further yet, well does David make this the end, and reason of behold his
Beauty; for, how many are there, who never behold the Lords beauty, whilst they
are in his House? They are, happily, as forward to come to Gods Temple, as
David; they desire it, ay, and seek it too; but what, is it to see God, or
rather to be seen themselves? is it to behold the Beauty of the Lord, or is not
rather (O the bewitching folly and cursed Atheism of some men's hearts!) is it
(I say) to behold the Beauty of the Lord, or not rather to behold the Beauty of

Tell me, O thou profane wanton! Is it not some Mistress, that masters thy
Devotion? Tell me, thou gaudy Minion, is it not more to show thy self, then
serve thy God? is it not more that others may see thy beauty, then that thou
may see the Beauty of the Lord? Are not these the Motives and Reasons, of too
too many who resort to Gods House? I appeal to your own bosoms; and if so, no
wonder, if they, who are blinded with the filth and folly of their own lusts,
cannot see the Beauty and Loveliness of Gods house.

The Beauty of the Lord, as it is not the prospect of every place, so, nor is
it the object of every eye; 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. No wonder then, if they taste not the sweetness of David's delight,
who see not the beauty which ravisheth him; which beauty is not seen by David,
taken and ravished with this Beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 57.7.
he cries out, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed.

Oh Beloved! Know, that when an humble penitent, and enlarged suppliant, feels
a secret ardor of Divine love, and then comes to bear a part in that holy
Worship; which is presented before the Throne of Grace, holds Communion with
the Saints and Angels, and is accepted Rev. 4.10.
those four and twenty Elders, in the Revelations, had more joy and delight in
casting down their Crowns, and Worshipping the Lamb; then ever Monarch had in
wearing his Crown, though Domitian-like he were adored by men.

And here, to restrain men's irreverence in the Church, Let me use alike
argument to that of Lycurgus, to restrain a desired parity in the State. It is
said of Lycurgus, That when the Lacedaemonians required an equality in their
Government, he wished them first to begin it in their Houses; and this did
presently instruct them to know, That par in parem non habet imperium, where
there is parity, there can be no good rule. As thus Lycurgus to restrain the
Lacedemonian parity in the State, so to restrain men's irreverence in the
Church. I Beloved, do ye, when ye serve God here, as ye require them to do, who
serve you at home; that is, as you expect they should give you a civil respect
in your houses, so do you give God a Religious reverence in his Temple;
otherwise, it will be apparent you are more sensible of your own honor, then of
Gods; and esteem more of your own houses, then his: Or else, it will appear,
you profanely think the Church, not to be Gods House; nor the Service there,
his Worship. A profaneness diametrically opposite to David's Devotion, in his
Unum petii, One thing have I desired, etc.

2. Be we exhorted, acrording to David's example, Aperto vivere unto, openly to
profess our devotion and zeal to Gods House, declare our judgment and affection
for Gods Worship, even then, when we cannot give our presence and attendance in
his Sanctuary.

There is none but thinks, the Churches present pressure, to be the Clergies
trial; and true indeed it is so, yet, to be driven from Pulpit and Altar, from
Sanctuary and Service, is no new thing to us; that has been our trial again
and again; in all which we have, to the eye and ear of the whole world,
witnessed by our sufferings, our hearty good will, and zeal to Gods House.

Wherefore, know (Beloved) this trial is also, and more especially the peoples,
to prove their sincerity, whether they have had a respect follow the Lamb
whither soever he goes, Rev. 4.14.
they will follow Christ, wheresoever he presents himself in his Ordinances;
even in private Communion, with a desire and longing after the Public
Congregation.

We say, the presence of the King makes the Court; and as it was Commodus, ibi
Roma ubi Augustus, There is Rome, Herodian. l. 1.
where is the Emperor; so there is the Church, where is Christ, Christ in h^s
Ordinances; there is his Sanctuary, where is his service. And it is no new
thing to have the Ark brought into the house of Abinadab, 1 Samuel 7.1.
changing its public seat for a private habitation.

Now, I bless God for this opportunity of vindicating the honor of his House;
that as the Jews, when driven from Jerusalem, yet prayed with their faces
toward the Temple; so ye (if God shall suffer

And here seeing we are come into Gods house, and that to feed at Christ Table,
do we so behold his beauty, as to adore his presence; adore it with the
humblest reverence of a devout heart; so worshipping God in his Sanctuary, as
Christ has taught us to petition him in our Prayers, even, Thy will be done on
Earth, as it is in Heaven.

pattern in the Mount, Rev. 4.10, 11. and 5.8, etc.
what is the precedent Angels and Saints give us in Heaven? Why, we have it in
St. John's Vision; where the heavenly Spirits, the Angels and Saints, they
worship, they fall down, and sing praise; and this with consent of will, and of
worship; keeping order and unity; one posture of adoration, one form of praise;
as one heart of devotion, and one fire of love.

Now, what better way in our aspirings after perfection, then to imitate those
who are perfect; and so, whilst Sojourners on Earth, to Non populus sed turba
est, It is not a Congregation, but a tumult; not an assembly, but a rout.
Babilonem exhibet, Bern. in dedicat. Eccle. Ser. 5.
de Jerusalem nihil habet (as Bernard well,) Such a meeting speaks men of
Babylon, not of Jerusalem; not Jerusalem which is above, whose order and unity
we have seen in St. John's Vision, and ought to imitate in Gods House.

To close: As you behold the Beauty of the Lord, in the form of the Churches
ministration; so above all, behold it in the excellency and glory of the things
ministered. Behold we that (...), that good pleasure of the Lord, wherewith he
loves us in Christ, bringing life and salvation to our Souls, in the death and
passion of his Son. See here that (...), as the Greek Church calls it, that
portentum amoris, that stupendous wonder, and astonishing mystery of Divine
love; that God should give his Son, and the Son give

And here, O thou humble penitent, and devout suppliant! When thou have tasted
the sweetness and delights, behold the beauty and glory of the Lord, in this
Contemplation of his Love; with St. Austin, I say unto thee, Aliud desidera, si
majus, si melius, si suavius inveneris, Go, consider and desire, contemplate
and enjoy something else, if any thing thou can find greater, or better, or
sweeter; David's, Unum petii. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I
seek after; that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life,
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his

Halleluiah,
FINIS.

