The most sad and Lamentable NARRATION Of the Death of Michaell Berkly Esquire,
lately of Grayes-Inne, a most eminent Scholar and Traveller, and master of a
large estate, who on Thursday May the 6. in the 63 year of his Age was drowned
in the duckingpond near Islington, about ten of the Clock in the Morning.

As also, The most deplorable account of Richard Biggrave Coach maker, who
being a man well beloved and reputed did on that day and much about the same
time hang himself at his house in Cow-Lane.

Together, With the true and sad Relation of a woman who did cut her throat in
Holborn, and of two more who on that day also did hang themselves in
Westminster.

Teach me O Lord to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom,
Psalm. 90. 12. London, Printed for Tho. Vere, and Will. Gilbertson, and are to be
sold at their shops without Newgate and in Gilt spur street. 1658.

The Fatal Thursday* being May the 6.
On which day two men, a young man and an old man made away themselves in
Westminster, A woman of middle age did cut her throat in Holburn a houskeeper
of quality did hang himself in Cow Lane, and that great Scholar and traveler
Machael Berkley, was drowned in the in the Ducking-pond not far from Islington.

THE Temptations of the Devil were never more manifest then in this Age of
ours, nor his power more unrestrained What a most lamentable accident was that
at Golstone in Lincolnshire; where a young man of honorable parentage wa^
violently taken away by the Devil, and some part of the house with him, his
hair and his brains were found mixed on the pales of the Court, and one of his
Arms in a close not far from the house, most violently torn from his body: what
is become of his body it self, there is no man can yet discover; Consider this
ye that forget God, least he come and tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you.

What an example may this be to many of our young Gallants who spend all their
time in Riot, and in wantonness, in drinking, swearing and cursing, and in
devoting themselves unto destruction, in which they strive to exceed one
another, as if they had contracted with the Devil for the Tradition and
Monopoly of sin: Look upon a great part of them and you shall find them to
dissemble even with nature it self, and to be but so many rediculous
Counterfeits.

The old men will be young, and do put on the Periwigs of youth: The young men
will be old; and have their hairs made white with powders; The women do
Counterfeit the fears of the Soldiers, and that Lady is not remarkable who
has not a valiant blackspot (...) ^o upon her face.

And as we play the Counterfeits and d^^semble with men, so we dissemble also
with God: There was never more profession of the Truth, nor less sincerity,
never more preaching, nor less practice. We are a people that draw near unto
God with our lips but our hearts are far from him.

Those that will not draw near unto God God will draw far from them, and will
withdraw with him the influences of his grace and mercy.

Our forefathers when they came to the Church every Sabbath day, would leave
at the Church door their books their paddles, and their staves; the Sermon
being ended, or the Homily rend over, they would every one of them take up that
brown bill which was his own, and so depart unto their own heuses,

A Minister of those times observing it, and withal how unprepared they came to
perform the duties of that day. told them that they brought their sins along
with them to the Church as they brought their staves, they left them at the
door when they came in themselves, but the Sermon being ended, they all of them
did take them up again, and carry them home in their hearts, as they did the
Staves on their Shoulders or in their hands.

This was the neglect with which our fore fathers were charges, but we are a
Generation more unrighteous then they, we leave not our manerly sins at the
Church-doors as they did, but we take them into the Church with us, and we shut
our ears unto the Charmer, Charm he never so wisely: when the Minister is
exhorting us to our duties, our hearts are running after our Covetousness, or
our pleasures, and while he is sowing the seed we are multiplying the Caves,
for this cause many of us are sick and many falll asleep, and many do fall into
the Implacable snares of the Devil.

It is worth your observation and a larger Sheet then this to declare unto you
by what degrees of Temptation the Devil does, work on the hearts of men to
destroy themselves: And in the first place, you are to know that the Devil
works most on those Tempers which are most prone to receive his Impressions.
He knows women to be the weaker Wessetts, and therefore he works most on
that Ser to ensnare them to his wiles. he knows they are most full of
Impatience and revenge, and therefore he does present himself unto them in that
form which he conceivs to he most agreeable to them, and does give them large
promises with some assurances that their desires in all things shall be
performed. being made their familiars, he by degrees will show himself in his
old colors, and then they are prepared for any mischief which their
Imaginations at first did startle to apprehend,

Amongst men there is none more fit for the Devil to work upon then the proud
man, the melancholy man, and the discontented man: Job says, That the Devil
is the father of the children of pride, And God says, It is not good for man
to be alone; melancholy is the mother of discontent, and discontent begeteth
despair.

There are more Temptations in a melancholy and a retired life, then in a life
that is sociable. and we are advised to avoid melancholy as the greatest enemy
to the soul and body.

Will thou avoid the occasions of despair, and temptation (says the wise man)
trust not too much to thy self alone.

It is yet fresh in our memory, since a man of a vast estate hanged himself in
Bishopsgate street, And Thornely reason that could be given for it was that he
was a proud man, from hring he discerned to melancholy, and from melancholy
to a desprate Resolution to hang himself. His pride did Tempt him to a
retirconesse he thought himself too good and too great for other men and this
having drawn him into an obstinate melancholy, it did leave him the lamentable
Butce at which all Temptations did shoot, he did shut his witfull ear against
all Counsel and comfort from others, neither would he receive any from
himself: those apprehensions being most grateful to him that could assist him
with the swiftest invention to dispatch himself.

It is possible howsoever that some man may be put to so much distress that he
may put an end of his life to put an end to his sorrows, but for a man yt
abounds in wealth and in the love and reputation of all men, for him to drown
or to hang himself, is much to be admired and it shows that the power of the
Prince of darkness is so much the stronger on him by how much there apeareth
nothing in reason or in Nasure that might ininvite him to put so horrible an
Act in Execution.

Richard Biggrave of Cow lane a Coa^^ maker by his Profession, was a man that
live in good reputation, and well beloved by all his neighbors. Those who knew
him do al report him to be of a civell and a free Conversation, and never to
show the least sign of any distrust in the merey of God, or of any enormous sin
that did lie heavy upon his Conscience.

He was of a liberal and a cheerful disposition, and free from those wants
which common nly do clowd and oppress the Spirits, All that knew him were glad
of his company, and they do as much lawent him being dead, as they did love him
being alive.

He was a strict observer of his word, and whatsoever he did promise he would
be most careful to perform. He had a wife who had a long time been sick, he
loved her most initrely insomuch yt he was heard to say, that if she recovered
not the sooner, his own days would be few amongst the lioing: Some there are
who do impute these words as a for a runner to the sad Sequels that did follow.

He was a constant observer of the Sabath day, and an Example to others in the
performance of Religious duties: From such a life as he did lead, no man could
expect such an end as he had, and those who first heard of it, would not
believe it, until by their own eyes they were convinced of the truth of it.

He had promises and Gentleman of quality that his Coach and furniture
belonging to it should he ready on such a day, which because it could not so
sudenly us performed, there are not some wanting who do affirm it to be the
only cause why he did lay violent hands upon himself, but it is not to be
believed that so wise and so deliberate a man should rashly commit so horrible
a folly: or that so dismal an end should arise from no greater a beginning.
Howsoever it was, it is too true that on Thursday May the 6. he was found to be
hanged in his own house; Being suddenly cut down by the first that did behold
him it was impossible to recover him to life, and his friends and neighbors
that passed to see him became almost as very Carcasses as himself, being amazed
at so unexpected, and so sad a sight: and not knowing what to impute it to.

Much about the same time on the same day there were two hanged themselves in
West-minster, an old man and a young, There was a woman also who on the same
day did cut her throat in Holborn. The Narration whereof at large I do
purpose^y ^^^i^, and do make have to that which follows being a subject which
none can hear without as much amazement as fears and prayers

He who exactly shall consider of this Gentleman will believe that Nature.
Fortune, learning and religion had conspired to make him absolute, and who
shall behold him dead as he was dragged out of the Ducking-pond, near to
Islington, and lay two days together on the bank to be a lamentable Spectacle
In the three score and third year of his Age will conclude again that he was
forsaken by Nature Fortune and Religion.

His name was Michael Berkly, he was descended of an honorable Family in Kent,
he was born on Michaelmas day, in the year 1597. and being likely to dye on
the same day that he came into the world he was immediately Christoned and
named Michael, after the name of the Ark Angel to whose memory the Church had
dedicated that day of his Nativity

He had his Education in that famous school of Eat on, where in the whole
progress of good Letters he excelled all those that were his Companions. From
thence he came to Christ Church in Oxford, and being famous for his learning
and Ingenuity, he received the Formality and degree of Bachelor of Arts, and
no man contradieting it, he was thosen Collector, which is an Honor that at yt
time was given yearly unto him, who was thought to be the most generous and
deserving Graduate.

Here it was that he received the uncomfortable news of his Fathers death, who
left him a great estate both in Land and monyes, He could never be persuaded by
his dearest friends to marry, although many young Ladies were mentioned to him
admirable for their Beautyes and Virtues.

His mind was altogether on Travel and on the 23. year of his Age he embarked
himself for France, not so much with a desire to behold Noveltyes and the
Fashions of other Nations, as the manner of their Government. and in this there
were few that surpassed him, for being the Master of a great purse he had the
opportunity to instnuate himself into the Acquaintance of the greatess
Personages where he would make such a manifestation of his learning, and of the
excellent Judgments of Nature, that many times they departed with admiration
frem him. It was not his desire to come acquainted with the greatest Gallants,
but with the greatest schol lers, he spent most of his time in Travel, and he
ving understood in one Kingdom the Me. thou and the Mystery of the Government
of it, he would Travel into another.

He was taken with no place more than Spain, and although he extolled the
wisdom and solemn gravity of the people, yet he as much abhominated their
cruelty. When he was in Rome and in Germany he had his conversation with the
greatest Cardinals, and would put such questions to them in the desence of our
Religion, and follow his Discourse so wisely that they knew not what to say to
him. Having been oftentimes beyond the Seas; at length his Age and health did
advise him to stay in England, and although the Parliament would willingly have
employed him in Spain. Upon the great affairs of the state, yet he refused
their propositions, and laid the excuse upon the account of his health.

Being in England, he was a great hearer of Sermons be-would very saldome miss
the London Lecture in the morning and he would be very frequent at Senmons in
the afternoon and he would constantly give you an excellent account of the
ability of the Preacher.

But these ventues were attended with great imperfections he was too great a
Lover of his money, of which he could not but he the master of vaste
considerable sums, for he lives but very sparingly at home and used all the
arts of thrifts although he has a great Estate: one of his Servants who dyed
since a Pensioner in the Charter House. being demanded why his Masser did wear
no better clothes, made answer, because he would not have the poor to beg
of him as he walked in the streets, and yet for all that he would have a penny
for the poor when he pleased and sometimes more. If selfe-dentall be indeed a
Virtue he was perfect in it, for although he were within he would almost
constantly deny himself to his friends when they came unto him upon the
promise and the account of courtesies, Without all doubt he doted too much upon
his money, and it was thought that sometimes the greatest reason of his
trabailes abroad, was because he would not be troubled with the charge of his
brothers at home.

He was extremely high conceited of himself, for he thought himself to be one
of the wisest men and one of the best Scholars in the world, and he accounted
those to be his best friends who were of the same opinion with him. The love of
his money brought him to such a retiredness that he but seldom would be seen
in the company of any, and this brought him to a deep and an extreme
melancholy, and to a great suspicion of all that belonged to him, for without
any reason he would look on the fingers of his Servants as on thieves. His
high conceit of himself did beget in him an extreme arrogance, and this
arrogance a kind of distraction, and a sickness which all working on him
exposed him to the temptation of going to the Ducking-pond on Thursday May 6.
Whither being come he demanded of some who were there at work which was the
deepest place of the pond, and more over sold them that he had a Duck to be
hunted by three dogs that were coming to him. The men who were at work not
far from him saw him presently afterward in the Pond, in which he entered
backwards, and waving up into the knees, or higher, he fell backwards into the
water, with which being over whelmed they used their speedtest endeavors to
pluck him out, and hot waters were sent for to recover him, but all in vain
for the life could not be recalled.

And what good now will his riches one him, which with too much care he boorded
up: what good will his birth, his wit, or his experience gained by so much
trabaile to him.

To conclude, let not the wise man beast in his wit, nor the rich man in his
wealth nor the Scholar in his training, nor the States man in his experience
and his policy but let him that rejoices rejoyte in this, that he loves and
fears the Lord.

The End.

