RELIGIOUS MEDITATIONS ON Ecclesiastes, Chap. 12. Verse. 13, 14.

Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his
Commandments: for this is the whole Duty Man. For God shall bring every work
into Judgment, with every Secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil.

I will Meditate in thy Precepts, and have respect unto thy ways. I will
delight my self in thy Statutes: I will not forget thy word. -- Oh how I love
thy Law! it is my Meditation all the day. Psalm 119. Verse. 15, 16.97.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1699.

DEDICATION. TO THE Piously affected Young Man.
My Beloved Friend,
AS it has pleased the God of Infinite Mercy to incline our heart to seek
after him in our tender years, and to give us a clear perception of those
things which pertains to Eternal Life and Salvation, so has be also, (Glory to
his Name in the Highest!) given us cause to testify to the truth of that
promise, Pro. 8.17.
Those that seek me early shall find me.

And although secular concerns may sometimes be ready to prevail, yet in retired
and serene Speculations of mind, the vanity of all created ob^ects is
discerned, and the Soul meeting with nothing of Satisfaction here below, Soars
aloft to a Supreme being, its proper center and place of rest; from whence is
beheld the World, with all its fullness, as only filth and dregs, and unworthy
for an Immortal Soul, to be wholly employed in: In such contemplations being
exercised, amidsts various occasions for thoughts of another kind, I have many
times been fully sensible of the blindness that is over the Hearts of Men, who
are preferring transitory and earthly Goods, to real and durable Riches, and
that are seeking more earnestly for Treasure here below, Matthew. 6.19, 20.33.
than to lay it up in Heaven, where Moth or Rust cannot corrupt, nor Theif
break through and Steal; and desires have been raised to obey the precepts of
Jesus, who said, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness
thereof, etc.

And that such desires may be strengthened and encouraged let us wait upon the
Lord, let us trust and repose all our confidence in him, and he will provide
for all our wants, all our necessities of what relation soever shall be
supplied, and we shall be upheld through all occasions of falling, that we may
pass through: But Oh that we may not presume to think of security by a God that
we do not know, let us feel after him, in whom we live, move, and have our
being; Acts 17.22.31.
he is not far from any, although they may be wholly Ignorant of it: But he is
imperceptable to the Carnal in Heart, they are wholly strangers to him, he
beholds them a far off: But let us meditate on his Laws, that we may be
partakers of his Blessings, and let us be low and humble, that we may inherit
his Glory, Prove. 3.34, 35
who scorneth the scornful, and gives Grace unto the lowly in Heart.

To the improvement of my received Talent, are these following Meditations
produced; and I expose them to public view; not to be taken for a Methodical
comment, or learned exposition: For as I am too young, and incapable (were
there occasion) for such a Work, so am I Old enough to see, that too many of
the Books, abroad in the World, of such a kind, prove more to the confusion
then confirmation of the Readers, especially when they treat of places hard to
be understood. But those comprehensive words that I make the Subject of my
thoughts; Eccles. 12.13, 14.
as it is one of the most full, so it is of the most easy and intelligable
places of Scripture, which I chose to exercise my private Meditations on; not
designing (at the first) that they should appear in this public manner: And if
any, remote from God should hereby he induced to approach the throne of his
Grace, and return from the evil of their ways, then shall I think the
Publication hereof to be done in a happy Hour: But if it be so unsuccessful, as
to work no such effect, yet my comfort is, that it has been a greater benefit
to my self, than it can be a hurt to any.

And that thou (Pious Reader) maye'st be further encouraged, I present thee
with these following metucally expressed Cogitations.

Contemn the World, its Glory all desise,
It is too base for noble minds to prize;
How vain and empty is its three fold Treasure,
Comprised in Honor, Profit and in Pleasure?
We know such Honors base, and such esteem
Is set, not as we are, but as we seem;
It Is like a new Blown, but a fading flower,
Of small continuance, and of smaller power;
It gives no real content, no lasting peace,
But as a blast of Wind does puff and cease;
If leaned upon, it is but a broken reed;
And only does our crasy fancies feed.
But not our Souls, they must have food Divine.
That Is suiting to their (...), else they pine.
And then for profit; how can we obtain,
A real, sufficient, and a sollid gain;
That will to such a lasting profit ^end,
As will not fail to be, a comfort in the end.
This lower Region will not yield, I Am sure,
One grain of gain that always can endure;
We know such Earthly pe^^'s esteemed for Wealth.
That cannot afford our crasy Bodies Health;
Much less can all its combined force prevail,
To yield content, when final fears assail.
The troubled Soul, which rowls in sorrow now.
And from its high flown Seat, in forced to bow*
To the pale attacques of Death, whose mighty power,
No strength of Riches can defer an hour.
But Pleasures limits seem of most extent,
As to afford a joy without relent;
And Peoples minds are wrapped so far therein,
As not to deem the worser of 'em Sin;
So swiming in this Sea of vain delight,
Are plunged into that dark and dismal night.
Of an Eternal Woe, a just reward
To those that think their Souls not worthy of regard
But Oh let us fly the cause of such neglect,
That so we may not be cursed by its sad effect.
And with an Elevated Soul aspire,
Above these mean delights to something higher,
That, to a Soul enflamed with Celestial fire,
Seems worthy of pursuit, and of a great desire?
And as one glimps thereof, does Elevate the Soul,
In what an ecstasy will all our Spirits roll;
When that most dazeling Glory shall appear,
To Principate our joy, and end our fear?
Then shall we sound eternal Hymns and Lays,
Of Anthems, Songs, and never ending Praise,
Unto our great Creator, whom we must
Admire at in his Love, to make of Dust
Poor Creatures; and at last to make 'em blessed,
By the enjoyment of an Everlasting rest.
By John Moss, Jun. Aetat. Anno 19/20.
Baldock, Hertford-shire, the 20th of April, 1699.
RELIGIOUS MEDITATIONS, On Eccles. Chapter 12. Ve. 13, 14.
THE Wise Preacher, 1 Kings 3.9.13.10.23.4.30. 2 Chronicles. 1.10.12. Eccles.
12.9.10.
whose Supplication was for Wisdom, which the Lord not only granted, but added
thereto both Riches and Honor, so that he excelled all the Kings of the Earth;
after he had sought out, and set in order many Proverbs, and acceptable Words,
even Words of Truth; after he had survei'd the Universe of Knowledge, 1 Kings
4.33. Eccles. 7.20, 21.
the Nature of all living Creatures, of Herbs and Plants, in a singular manner;
and in short, had attaind to the highest degree of knowledge, gives this
positive Sentence on it, Eccles. 12.8.12.
All Vanity of Vanity, all is Vanity: And having in this sure and certain sense
Admonished, that of making many Books there is no end, and that much Study is a
weariness of the Flesh, he winds up his search and scrutiny, his study and
writing, with a most profound and comprehensive Exhortation, Fear God, Keep his
Commandments, to which as a most urgent motive, he adjoyns, For God shall bring
into Judgment every Work.

A solid consideration of which has so wrought on the minds of some, that have
been Transported with desires of humane Learning, that not being insensible of
an account to be rendered for every secret thing, much more for every action,
they have been willing to abandon all inordinate inclinatons thereunto,
animated by Love of vain applause, all studies and scrutinies, that may in the
least Impede their harkening to the Voice of Wisdom, which is pathetically
expressed in the words of Solomon's conclusion; which I make the subject of my
thoughts and wrighting at this time; and indeed so deep, grave, and earnest is
the same, that to a Soul disentangled from Worldly cogitations, and in whom any
good desires are begotten, no other considerations will receive so willing an
Entertainment: insomuch as it contains the most serious, sensible, judicious,
and last words of the most knowing and understanding of Mortals; whose Wisdom,
than herein, in all his writings never more appeared.

With such attentive thoughts I will endeavor (Dei gratia) a firmer
impression, by making cursory remarks upon it.

Let us hear, I exhort you to it, I cannot compel, neither do I desire it, but
as one that has obtained favor of the Lord, Eccles. 47.22.
that has been partaker, not only of his mercies, but of his Judgments also, 2 Samuel 7.12.16. Psa. 89.30.36.
and a^ the first are comfortable but the last terrible, so I would entreat you
in that Love and good will, enkindled in me by a spark from Heaven by embracing
the one to avoid the other; I have tasted of both, and have seen Mercy
prevailing over Judgment: Further (may the Preacher say) I have been a Man
furnished with the most complete body of knowledge, Wisd. 7.87.21.
accomplished with a deep skill in all kind of science, it has been all
unvailed to me; Nature and Art have I viewed the one in the clearest
discoveries of its hidden secrets, the other in a most subtle preception of
its highest perfections: Knowledge has vaild its bonnet to me, and lies
couching at my Feet; Understanding has been my constant colleague and Wisdom
never departed from me: I have surveyed all the whole creation, its Nature and
use; the secret influences of the Heavens with the sympathy of Terrestrials,
the whole Kingdom of Nature has been subject to me, Animals and Vegetives, the
dispositions of Men and all other living Creatures, their diverse
constitutions, and the occult and Magical powers of Herbs and Plants, from the
Hyssop to the lofty Cedar, I have scrutinis'd, together with the Nature of
Pearls, and Precious Stones, yea, the whole mineral Kingdom: yet further (hear
the excellant Preacher) I was King of a mighty Nation, 1 Kings 4.24.34.10.23,
24 2 Chronicles. 9.22.26.
before nor after me none can compare to my Grandeur, Riches and Honor
encompassed me about, the height of worldly greatness was my Possession; Kings
did me homage, and Foreign Princes bowed unto me, and paid me reverance: I had
multitudes of Chariots and Horsemen, Men Servants and Maid Servants, and what
soever my Heart desired: I builded me Houses and a glorious Temple, excelling
in curious Art, my Wisdom directed me in it moreover the Fame of my Wisdom
reached to the further parts of the World, 1 Kings. 6.7. Eccles. 2.4.8.
which gained me an Honorable reverance of all; Eccles. 1.16.
then communing with my own Heart, I said, Lo I am come to great Estate, and
have gotten me more Wisdom than all that have been before me in Jerusalem, yea,
my Heart has had great experience of Wisdom and Knowledge; wherefore let me be
esteemed as a competent Judge of all enjoyments, insomuch that I know and have
tried them all: Let Earthly Kings have respect to the Counsel of their most
wise Predecessor, that knew the Glory, the Pleasure, and the content of a
Kingdom, he that was skilled in the oeconomie of a Politic Body, a mighty and
unresisted Monarch, to whom the craft of State and Councils was not concealed;
He devests himself of all, derogates from the Royalty of the World, and says,
Let us hear; In a tender, Familiar, and low manner of expression, some would
think below the Dignity of a King.

But no doubt the Wisdom which inspired his Soul, saw occasion for such an
humble style; and that all might be prevailed upon by this his most sensible
admonition, he is willing to conjoyn with them in this needful Duty: Let us
hear, we that are endowed with Wisdom, that are anxious in acquiring
understanding, that are sollicitous in seeking humane Knowledge; I have been
expert therein, and from thence assure yea, that this is the greatest Wisdom;
and further, that your selves, if not now, will have cause to confess unto it;
For a time will come, wherein you will be sensible of the deficiency of all
your vain conceits, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20.
when the Wisdom of the Wise will be turned into Foolishness, and all the
Crafty shall be confounded. Let us hear (says the King) we that are Potentates
in the Earth, to whom is committed something of an Earthly Power, I have been
great and mighty, yea far exceeding any of you, the Dominion of my Government
was largly extended, and I was not only Ruler of many but of my own self, I was
endued with Wisdom, Divine and Humane in the highest perfection that Man can
possess; and must declare, that your Policy and Stately Craft, as it is far
inferior to true Wisdom, so some higher degree of Knowledge is requisite to a
truly knowing King; I know the intreagues of Government, having from my Youth
been exercised therein, having dispensed Laws and Statutes from the dictates of
an Heavenly Wisdom, and having had a perfect understanding in all regal
affairs: From whence I counsel ye to hear the result of all my Wisdom, and
fear not to give ear to my advice, it proceeds from Knowledge, Wisdom, and Love
unfeigned, and will not fail to prove beneficial, if obeyed; if an experienced
Counselor may be regarded, if an honest Politician can gain any credit, let
me have some attention, (says the King of Jsrael.)

Again, Let us hear, we that have large possessions, that be Rich in the Earth,
we that are filled with Worldly enjoyments, that as it were, have the World at
our beck, we that are at ease in our pleasure, that command the World with our
Wealth, we that flatter our selves with hopes of perpetual bliss, and some of
us that think this false Joy will never come to an end, be ye advised and
consider; 1 Kin. 10.17.
I have had most boundless possessions, and made Silver as plentiful as stones
in the street, yet I see the vanity of all these empty enjoyments, how short
they be in yiedling true and lasting Peace; Could they so have done, I should
have been blessed above all, but now rest sensible of the insufficiency and
uncertainty of them, Riches make themselves wings, and fly away, they cannon
deliver in a day of Trouble; therefore let them be no longer as strong hold in
your imagination^ neither take them for the upholder of a lasting Peace, for I
know how little safety can be reposed in them and further, 1 Timothy 6.7.10.
that they are more often Snares by which Men are entangl'd, than they be
useful or conducing to their good: Let such thoughts and considerations (say
the Preacher) incline ye to say with me; Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter, etc.

Eccles. 12.1.
Our excellent Preacher having in the precedent part of the Chapter, given some
tender admonition to the younger People, none concludes to all, with so full a
compendium of Humane duty, as nothing in such a relation is excluded wherein
appeared, not only hi^ great and spacious Knowledge, bu^ also his reformed
apprehension of the future estate of Men, as well ^s a sensible demonstration
of his ^esubmition to his great Creator, against whom he had transgressed, by
his subjection to the Power of concupiscence: But this (as it is believed) being
of a posteriour edition, proves him a partaker of the promised respite of
affliction justly said upon him; I will for this afflict the Seed of David, but
not for ever, I will chastise him in Judgment, 2 Samuel 12 16. Psalm. 89.30.36.
but my loving kindness shall not be taken away: and therefore I doubt not, but
he by resignation and repentance, was blessed with a restoration of his
unparrallel'd Wisdom; because the meekness, humility, and charity comprised
herein, seems no other than the ejaculation of a Spiritualliz'd Man, the effect
of divine mercy alone; to which also must be imputed the efficient cause of all
attention to this conclusion of the whole matter, which is to Fear God, and
keep his Commandments

A Reverend and Holy Fear, an entire and Godly awe, a meek and submissive dread
of Spirit, is required

Fear God, keep his commands let no Worldly considerations, let no mean and
Earthly cogitations be restrictive, but remember, that the great and most
excellent Creator, whose presence fills Heaven and Earth, 1 Kings 8.27. 2 Chronicles. 2.6.6.18.
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; of Justice is worthy to be feared,
reverenced and submitted to: He is the Fountain of all our good, from whom all
our mercies flow, whose Loving Kindness never fails, whose Truth and Goodness
sustains the World, whose secret and most wise providence orders and disposes
of all.

Vacat exiguis rebus adesse nostr^ Jovi Curat noster Deus and sui and alieni.
He is not only a far off, but a God near at hand to support the weak, and to
comfort the afflicted, to give Joy for Mourning, Isa. 61.3.
the garment of praise for the Spirit of heaviness, Beauty for Ashes, Peace and
Tranquillity for trouble and sorrow of mind: 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
He is an omnipresent being, nothing can be hid from his Eyes, he beholds the
secret actions of all, the private deceipts of Men be not unknown unto him, the
dark workers of Iniquity cannot conceal themselves: He is most boundless in
power, all Nations are but as the dust in the balance in his Hand, Isa.
40.^2.17.
he that by his powerful Wisdom produced this worldly frame into a being, can
by the same consume it into nothing; let the Wisdom of this World deny its
production out of nothing, let it be employed in searching for Prima materia
and causa Vniversalis; We know that our God is Omnipotent, that as he was able
out of nothing to constitute all things, so can he reduce all things into
nothing again; the fallen Wisdom of Man, Arestotle.
not apprehending divine Wisdom, conceived the world Eternal, and shall we
render our selves as weak by dis-believing the omnipotency of our great
Creator: Oh! no, but let us with cheerful Hearts yield honor and reverence to
his Glorious Name, who, as all have plentifully received of his favors and
mercies, so requires a faithful and grateful acknowledgment thereof, by fearing
him, and obeying his commands, whereby is performed (through the assistance of
divine Grace) that only acceptable Sacrifice of pure and hearty Obedience:
First, by fearing is rendered our private worship and adoration of God, and
Secondly, by obeying him, or an active observance of his righteous Law, our
duty in respect to our Neighbors, which is to love them as our selves, Romans 13
9, 10. Gal. 5.14
herein is contained (as says the Preacher) the whole duty of Man.

But seeing our sad experience gives us to know the great aversion there is
lodged in our hearts to the desires of, and much more seeking after our good,
which is to fear God and keep his Commands; how carfully then should we seek
for the means of extirpating this so powerful an inclination to evil, and
declination from any thing that may be in the least conducing to our chiefest
good, and of attaining to such a frame and estate of mind, as that we may be in
a capacity to perform the duties required of us.

May we not sorrowfully remember how that our first Father Adam, the
masterpiece of the whole Creation, an Epitome of the World, in whom was
centered an Abreviation of all things, and who was constituted Lord of all the
Creatures, Genesis 1.26, 27.
as being endued with Righteousness, Knowledge, and true Holiness; yet, by
Transgression to the Righteous Law of God, by disobeying his Holy precepts,
Genesis 3. Romans 8.20. 2 Cor. 11.3. Eccles. 25, 24.
by reason of vain hope by harkning to the Allurements of the Woman, by
yiedling to the Seducements of the Serpent, and by Eating of the prohibited
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of go d and evil, Genesis 3.14, to the end.
became deprived of his serene and pure Felicity, lost the gracious benefit of
a sweet and immediate communion with his Maker, together with his Soveraignity
over the whole Creation: Romans 5.12.
Yea, Sin, and death by Sin, entered the world thereby, and the faculties of his
soul being infected and depraved, Darkness and Corruption seized his guilty
Conscience, the pure Image of the Deity was defaced, its passions and
affections perverted, Genesis 6.5.
and the punishment of death, which sore-threatn'd his Rebellion in these
terms. Gen 2 17.
In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, was justly inflicted on
him: Whereby, as he fell from that dignity he was placed in, Ephesians. 4.24.
from that Righteousness, Knowledge, and true Holiness he was Primitively
endued with, in disobedience to God, Col. 3.10.
listened to Satanical delusions, and from thence Polluted, Tainted, and Defiled
that pure, integer and Divine Nature, which God had Inspired him with; So all
his Posterity partaking of that corrupt Seed and Nature, became disabled from
succeeding him in those blessed Privileges he enjoyed in his State of
Integrity, and not only so, Isa. 64.5.
but also subject to the dismal effect and consequences of that corruption,
which are death, and disability to perform the primary end of Man's Creation:
Romans 5.12.
Wherefore, says St. Paul, as by one Man Sin entered the World, and Death by
Sin, so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have Sinned; He likewise proved
that all under Sin: And again, Romans 3.9 Romans 5.18.19.
Therefore as by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
condemnation; For as by one Man's disobedience, many were made Sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many be made Righteous.

Thus the cause of that Natural alienation from, and repugnance to any thing of
good is easily discovered. Adam became alienated in his mind, and in like
manner all his posterity, by reason of wicked works, and incapable to render a
due Reverence, Honor and Glory to the great Creator.

But the condemnation is not because Adam sinned, therefore as a Punishment due
to that particular Sin, all his posterity, save a few peculiarly respected,
shall be punished: The Text says, Death passed upon all, for that all have
Sinned,

Which leads me to meditate on, First, The the cause of this universal deluge
of Death; Secondly, The means of restoration to such a condition, as to be
capable of fulfilling our duties to God and Man.

Then first, The cause that Death has come upon all, being already in a great
measure evinced, I yet further prosecute to see more clearly the manner of it,
which will more evidently discover the reason of those innate inclinations to
evil, which naturally sway our minds.

As by one Man (says the Scripture before hinted) Sin entered the World, and
Death by Sin, Romans 5.12.
so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have Sinned: here it is manifest,
that Sin entr'd the World by Adam's transgression, and Death was the
consequence unto him, even a dying from God; and the reason that Death came
upon all his Progeny, Romans 6.23.
is because all have Sinned, and the reason that all have Sinned is, because
they partook of, Psalm. 51.5.
and are conceived in, that Seed and Nature of fallen Adam, which was of
alienation from any thing of good, so that all the natural affections are
deviating from God and good; all are by Nature Children of wrath and propense
to evil, and consequently all have Sinned and fallen short of the Glory of God,
Romans 3.23.9.
and become the Objects of his wrath, 8.7.
and so in a condition incapable to glorify their maker; which leads me to
think of.

Secondly, the means of restoration.

As our Protoparent, by a transgression so damnable, as not only deserving his
own destruction, Genesis 3.17.
but the Earth was justly cursed for it, did incur his Makers wrath, and was
punished by deduction of his former felicity, and a corporal Death (which some
are ready to think he had else been never cursed with) but more greivously, by
the danger of an eternal woe, which was made the inevitable effect of
unrepented Sin; and as his posterity, by Sinning, though not after the same
similitude, Romans 5.14.
are justly exposed to the same Misery, and liable to undergo it; So the Lord
in infinite compassion to the Works of his Hands, and in order to restore the
whole Creation into that Glorious Liberty which Adam before his fall enjoyed,
Romans 8.21.
provided a means to be reconciled to poor, lost, and miserable Souls, that do
nothing naturally but offend their Maker, and whose Sins and enormities are so
encensive to divine Justice, that nothing but an immense mercy can expiate: A
promise was made in love to Mankind, even inexpressible, in odium to the
Serpent, who had almost ruined the Master-peice of God's Handy Work, and a just
Damnation to fallen Lucifer, and all his followers, who not content with the
station which God had set them in, aspired to a greater place, and so for them,
as a Punishment for their presumptuous Pride, are chains of darkness for ever
reserved; which was, Genesis 3.15.
the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head.

Man was captivated by, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
and became subject to the Prince of the power of the Air, who rules in the
Hearts of the Children of disobedience, and worthy of an eternal deprivation
from all bliss: But the promise was given forth, a redemption from the power of
Satan, and a restoration to the lost felicity, Righteousness, Knowledge and true
Holiness; and moreover (to the Glory of the all-wise Creator and Redeemer, be
it said) Man was upon performing his part in the Covenant, entitled to an
inheritance of a never ending Joy: The assurance and earnest of which may cause
all to Magnify, Praise, Honor, and for ever adore that most imense clemency
of God; as will the Condemnation to eternal woe, cause a most deplorable
reflection to those Souls that have wilfully slighted the means of Caelestial
Bliss, 1 Pet. 3.18.
which is the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, the Son of his Love, the Seed of
the Woman, who as he was God became also Man, making a complete Savior, 1 John
2.2. Heb. 9.28.
and laid down his Life for Sinners, and became a propitiation for them, even
for all that believe in his Name, he procured for them a pardon by his Death,
and Salvation by his Life, as it is said, reconciled by his Death, Romans 5.10.
Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.29, 30. 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet. 1.18.
and saved by his Life.

The Creator foreseeing all things that should come to pass in time,
fore-provided a Savior for those Creatures which were the principal part of
his Workmanship, even for all Mankind; the mystery of this contrivance Natural
Reason cannot fathom, for as the Scripture testifies, 1 Cor 2.14.
the Natural Man perceives not the things of God, neither indeed can he, for
they are Spiritualy discerned, so no carnal comprehension can conceive or dive
into this mystical redemption.

In Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22.
in Christ all are made alive; in the original nature, the nature of fallen
Adam, Ephesians. 2.1.
all the Children of men are Dead, in reference to the things of God: As a
corporal Death deprives of the use of all the outward senses, the sight is
lost, notwithstanding the Eyes remain; so hearing and the other senses are
taken away, although their proper organs are remaining: So is it with respect to
the Soul of Man, it is depraved in its senses, having Eyes it sees not, having
Ears it does not hear, and though it is Life to the Body, yet it lives not,
because resting in Adam (where all die) and under subjection to the principle
of disobedience: It Is a most noble truth, that as the Soul of man animates the
Body, so the Spirit of God gives Life to the Soul, the Soul is Life to the
Body, and the Holy Spirit quickens the Soul; and as the Body without the Soul
is Dead, and unable to perform any office, so is the Soul of man not enlivened
by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 15 45, 47.
the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, Dead and unable to perform its
office to God, which is to fear and obey him.

To retreive and remedy this disability of the Soul, is the Son of God
manifest, 1 John 3.5.8.
even to destroy the works of the Devil, which have filled the Soul, and
bruised the heel of the Woman's Seed, to bring it from under captivity to Sin
and Satan, Romans 8.21.
into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; which is incomprehensible to the
carnal in Heart, which the Natural and unrenewed man cannot perceive, but to
the Spiritually minded man, to the Heavenly attracted Soul, to the Soul
enflamed with a Celestial love, with aspiring desires, with noble and heroic
affections, how con^enting! how ravishing! how sweetly consolating! is the
sensible enjoyment of a restoration to this Glorious Liberty, to this
unconceivable joy, peculiar to the redeemed Souls, when the morning Stars sing
together, and all the Sons of God, adopted Children, pure, peaceable, and
reconciled in Herrt and Soul, do sing for Joy!

So that it is not for the carnal mind to pry into these Divine secrets, which
are disclosed to none but the Spiritually inclined, to those whose affections
are set on things above, whose conversation is in Heaven, Mat. 6.21.
whose treasures and hearts are there; these alone shall not only know the
means, but feel the power of redemption, the Blood of Jesus to purge their
Consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14.
to serve the living God; these will know that they must die unto, Sin and live
unto Righteousness; 1 Pet. 2.24.3.18.
that the Redeemer came to deliver them from this present evil World; and that
they are saved according to his mercy, Gal. 1.4. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7.
by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, that being
Justified by his Grace, they may be made heirs of eternal Life. Further, that
they must not live to themselves, 1 Cor. 5.15. Ephesians. 5.25.26.
but to him, which died for them, that he might sanctify and cleanse them with
the washing of Water by the Word, to present them to his Father, Holy and
without Blemish; that he might redeem them from all Iniquity, Tit. ^ 23, 2^
and purify to himself a peculiar people, Zealous of good works: And that,
Love, Peace, Ephesians 5.22.
Joy, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
against which there is no Law, may abound amongst them; and wherein they that
are Christ's, having Crucified the flesh, with its affections and lusts do live
and walk.

Now would thou know the means of redemption, and would thou be blessed
with the same; hearken and hear, and thy soul shall Live: Thou (have been, or
still) art by Nature a Child of Wrath, and thy affections are joined to Earthly
things, to Transitory and Perishing objects, that disagree to the pure Nature
of thy soul; but above all, that capital Lust of Pride, which, as it was most
prevalent in the first Man Adam, takes up the greatest part of thy heart; so
that (not being yet acquainted with that power of Jesus, which redeems from
sin) thou art Exalted and Puffed up in thy Fleshly mind, which covets after
this world, and thereby art become wholly estranged from any good; to thee in
this desperate condition, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30
does the Son of God cry, Come unto me, learn of me, I am meek, and lowly in
heart, and if thou will be humble, I Will teach thee of my ways, my Doctrine
shall be as the Diew, it shall inspire Life into thy soul; (man lives not by
Bread alone, Mat. 4.4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: Joh. 6.48.63.
) the words that I speak unto thee, they are Spirit, Mt ^. 18.11.
and they are Life; I am come to seek, and to save; I am come to abase the
Proud, and to exalt the Humble in soul; he that exalts himself shall be abased,
but he that abases himself will I exalt; Take my Yoke upon thee, says Jesus,
for thou wilt soon find it easy, and my burden to be light; and follow me in
the way of self-denial, and of Regeneration; though thou art Blind I will restore
thy sight, though thou art Darkness I Will make thee light; nay, though thou art
dead, I will give thee Life: It shall come to pass, that the Dead shall hear
the Voice of the Son of God, and those that hear, shall live: Oh blessed
promise! God is speaking from Heaven by his Son, who is Infusing Life, even his
own Spirit, into the Souls, and making it to live: Then, the Dead cannot praise
thee, neither can they that go down to the grave, celebrate thy Name; but the
living, the living can praise thee, and magnify thy Glorious Name, who have
redeemed them by thy mighty Power, from Death and destruction, from Sin and
Satan, by thy precious Blood, by thy virifying Life, by that word of eternal
Life, by which the World was made, Man was created, and Man is redeemed again,
through whom to the alwise, and almighty, Creator be sounded never ending
Anthems, and Hallelujah's, Glory and everlasting Praise, Amen.

Thus is the redeemed Soul engaged to fear and obey the great restorer of
breaches, and of paths to walk in, John 13.15.
who as he left an example for us to follow his steps, not assuming Glory to
himself, but submitting in all things to his Fathers will, and at length laid
down his Life for his greatest enemies, so, 1 Pet. 2.21.
must we thereby learn to walk in self denial and newness of Life, in meekness
and in humiliation, in submision and pure obedience to the internal revelation
of the Divine word, which teaches to love enemies, to do good to them which
hate us, to bless them that curse and dispitefully use us; Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.
and to take him for our pattern, who endured the Cross and despised the shame,
for the joy that was set before him, who being without Sin, bore the punishment
due for Sin, that Man might Sin no more, but be restored by means of that Grace
which came by Jesus, Joh. 1.17.
to such a state of Righteousness and perfection, as to be enabled to fear and
obey the great and merciful Creator, and thereby obtain the unmerited reward of
an eternal joy, overcoming the strength of Satan through the power of God, to
him that overcomes (says Jesus) will I grant to sit with me in my Fathers
Throne, Rev. ^.21.
and blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the
Tree of Life, ^2. 1^
and may enter in through the gates into the City of God, the new Jerusalem,
the Mother of the faithful who are breathing, Rev. 10.6.22.12.
how long! Lord, how long! for him who said, behold I come quickly and my
reward is with me, to give every man according as his works shall be.

Is it so? has the God of infinite mercy engaged and incited us to fear and
obey him by such consolatory promises, such Heavenly inducements! and has he
deterred us from rebelling and committing evil against him, by dreadful and
fearful threatenings, even eternal woe, and never ceasing torture; how vigilant,
how diligent, how considerate should the Rich Man be! he would be ready to say,
I have been undeservedly blessed by a supreme Hand, I have unworthely reccived of
the blessings of Heaven, my temporal Goods are increased, and worldly
enjoyments are heaped upon me, shall I forget the hand that conferred them,
shall I ingratefully neglect to glorify him, that has thus dignified me? Oh,
no; But rather, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, I was needy,
thou have supplied my wants, I was in distress, and thou have releived me, I am
less than the least of thy mercies, I will not fail to magnify thy Name; not
by my own industry, so much as by thy blessing, does the world lend me its aid;
by thy favor, not my worth, who have so much displeased thee, are Earthly
Goods beneficial to me; I will not be puffed up with what thou have given me to
glorify thee with, but will endeavor so to use these temporal blessings as to
answer the end for which I was possesed of them, and will learn to make all
considerations tend to thy Honor, who have been thus merciful to me.

And thus will the wise Man say; I am naturally endued with profound Sagacity,
with a deep and penetrating Judgment, with a sound intellect, and with a sharp
and peircing fancy, for what end am I so qualified, is it to employ my self in
search of such knowledge, which not only bereaves me of my fleeting time, but
will also fail to be any profit in the end; shall I exercise my wit in such
matters that will show I am void of Wisdom? or shall I make use of my rational
intellect no better, than to fall short of a divine understanding! Oh no, but
rather, the great God has made me capable to do him eminent service; I am
naturally fitted to receive such spiritual gifts that may qualify me for a
Servant to his heritage; I will therefore submit and bend to him, who will yet
further furnish me with more Noble parts; for I remember the holy Man says,
Psalm. 111.10.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good understanding have
they that depart from Evil; I therefore learn to be humble and not puffed up,
as knowing it is but Earthly Wisdom which exalts it self, and will supplicate
the Lord for Wisdom of a Celestial Nature, that will make me wise to Salvation,
which will sanctify my natural reason, and make my innate genus inclinable to
obey its Heavenly dictates; I have no reason to be proud of my natural
abilities, as knowing I cannot attain to be for ever happy thereby, I cannot
conceive sufficiently of God by the exercise of my own conceptions, the natural
Man perceives not the things of God, neither can he, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for they are Spiritually discerned; So that I crave wisdom from above which
will let me know, that I should else have thought my self intelligent, when I
neither knew my self, nor the means of doing so, much less to have been endued
with such a knowledge, as will be Life eternal to my never dying Soul, Joh.
17.3.
which is to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

And if the Voluptous were not less careful to satisfy their Spiritual wants,
than to provide for their corporal pleasures, there would appear some
acknowledgments of a supreme favor to them; insomuch as health, strength, and
sufficient necessaries are so plentifully afforded, and in penitential tears
they would be ready to cry out. How have we abused the manifold mercies of God,
turning into laciveousness and luxury those enjoyments which, we have cause to
fear, may be greatly wanting to us, as a punishment for our profuse and riotous
courses; we are now sensible that a divine Majesty is offended, that our
profane lives have rendered us the objects of God's displeasure; and that if
his mercy does not exceed our almost innumerable Sins, we must to all eternity
remain the monuments of his wrath and sore displeasure: God is mercifully
pleased to allow us the use of those necessaries, and that in a plentiful
manner, which others more worthy are deprived of; but now is his love yet
further manifested, in given us to see the misery which will inevitably follow
those unrepented Sins, and not only so, but in given us hearts to bewail our
former vicious courses, and to praise him, whose blessings inwardly and
outwardly have been largely extended to us.

And as the Lord in mercy has dispensed an appearance, and gift of Divine
Grace, to every particular Soul, Tit. 2.11.12.
in order to teach the denial of all ungodliness and worldly lasts, and to live
Righteously, Soberly, and Godly in this present World.

So, if there was not wanting a diligent attention to its Heavenly
instructions, how great alteration would apear in the world; that whereas
unrighteousness, profaneness and impiety are daily presented under a profession
of Religion, then would their opposite virtues be a means to draw down the
favor of Heaven upon Men; as the contrary are its dreadful Judgments, and by a
due Adhesion, in every individual Soul, to the manifestation of this inward
teacher, John 1.4, 5.
which shines in the dark hearts of Men, though they comprehend or conceive it
not; would a sense be raised of their misery in an unreformed state; and
desires and breathings be begotten, Mat. 11.28.30.
to come unto Christ as heavy laden, that he may give them rest; and learn of
him who is meek and lowly in heart, that they find peace to their Souls: Then
they will not only know, but have power also, to perform that which is required
of all, even to Fear God and keep his Commandments, which is the whole duty of
Man.

And then they will not stand in need of humane doctrine; they will have a
teacher near unto them, unto which they do well to take heed (as St. Peter
says) as to a light which shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.
etc. They Will know their duty and, more than so, they will not be slack to
render it in all respects, both to God by living to his Glory, and to their
Neighbors by dwelling in Love and Charity with them.

For as nothing less than such a Life will bespeak them the servants of God, so
nothing more is wanting: it is their whole duty, comprehensive of Faith,
Righteousness, Charity; and all good works, the Fruits of the Spirit, the
fulfilling of the Law, one tittle of which shall not pass away, or be made
void; the loving of God with all the heart, and their Neighbors as themselves,
and the effect and product of the Ministry of Jesus Christ, Acts 26.18.
which proposes a conversion from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to
God, and from a corrupt and repugnant, to a clean and regenerate mind, as its
principal scope, whereby the Gospel, the Power, and Cross of Jesus, will be
embraced, effectual, and easy to be bore; and the consequence, glad tidings,
reformation, and Peace to the Soul, witnessed and enjoyed: which is the end of
all, and the crown of all: I have fought a good fight, says the Holy Man, 2 Timothy 4.8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness. Oh the comfort! the joy! and cause of rejoicing! has
that Man which so lives in this world, as to answer his end! He that offers
Praise, glorifieth me, Psalm. 50.23.
and to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of
God.

Oh that Men would be persuaded to consider that,

God shall bring into Judgment, every Work, with every secret thing, whether it
be good or whether it be evil; surely then there would be something of a
concern after this manner: If it be so (as it is most certain) that the great
Judge of the World takes such a strict observance of all my Actions, be they
never so Secret, nay, of all my most hidden thoughts, as that he will one day
cause me to give an account of them all; For every Idle word shall Men give an
account in the day of Judgment: How am I engaged to be circumspect and
watchful? in all things, not only in actions that have reference to Men, and in
my words, but also in my thoughts and cogitations, which none but an al-seeing
God can charge with matter of evil: In a sense of his al-knowing Power, and of
my own impotency, I Will beg of him to give me Grace so to Live in this world, as
that I may not, by reason of my neglect, be debarred of those joys in the world
to come; and further, I am sensible upon a most serious and retired
examination, that it is by, and through the illumination of a Divine Light, that
I see the evil of my ways, and the misery ensuing such an unlimited course of
Life; I am therefore willing to deny my self, and take up a Daily Cross, that I
may know the work of Reformation and Regeneration, the way to the Kingdom,
wrought; Joh. 3.3.
Unless a Man be Born again he cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven; And in the
first Place, the Fountain of all Defilements and Corruptions being in my Heart,
Mat. 15.18.20.
I Will cry with the Psalmist, Creat in me a new Heart, O Lord, and renew a right
Spirit within me; for unless the inside be clean, the outside will not be so;
whilst the principle of hatred and envy is predominant in me, it is impossible I
should bring forth works of Love and Charity; and whilst I am under the power
of the Devil, 1 John 3.
doing his works, I can by no means be the servant of God; I cannot serve two
Masters, if the power of Satan bear rule in me, I can be no subject of Jesus; I
cannot have right to call him Lord; Luke 6.46.
for I begin to be sensible that not he, who says, Lord, Lord, but that does
his will, is a Servant to him, and of the Justice of that rebuke, why call ye
me Lord, and do not the things which I command ye: And when I feel the
visitation of the love of God to my Soul, 2 Cor. 4.6.
opening the Eyes of my understanding, then shall I see how wretched and
miserable I am; as also, the exclency of the Glory of God, who has for that
end caused his Light to appear; now and not till now, do I perceive the vanity
of all Created things, and my Soul is effused with breathings to the Lord, to
give me a further revelation of his will, and to create a conformity in my
depraved Heart to the same; whereby I shall see an absolute necessity of sober
and serious consideration of all my doings; and the power of Jesus, prevailing
in my Soul, I doubt not of ability to resist all temptations, and to walk, not
as a Fool, in my former vicious lewdness, but as one that is awakened from the
sleep of Sin, and raised from the grave of Iniquity, to redeem the time which I
have spent in such an enormous manner as declares, I neither endeavored to
answer the end of my coming into the World, nor was sensible, of the necessity
of the same.

When such thoughts and considerations have possessed the Hearts of Men, they will
remember that as there is no way to avoid or escape the Judgment of God, so
also, that he will execute his Just and righteous decrees upon all without
partiallity or respect of Persons, Romans 2.6.11.
as it is said, God will render to every Man according to his works, to those
that by a patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, Honor, and
Immortallity, Eternal Life, but to those that are contentious, and do not obey
the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil, upon the Jew first, and also
upon the Gentile. but Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every Soul of Man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, for there is no
respect of Persons with God.

Then none should presume to think, that by virtue of any Personal
predestination, they shall, if evil doers, be exempted from the Sentence of, go
ye cursed: For it is apparent, that as the Lord is no respecter of Persons, so
will he bring into Judgment the works of every Man.

And in vain will it be for any to plead at the Judgment Day after this manner.

Lord, let me into thy Kingdom, whom thou Elected'st before the foundation of
the World, not by my foreseen Holiness, but in thy mere pleasure alone, as thou
did for the same reason, reject the greatest number in the World, and as
'twas thy pleasure and mercy to make me one of thy Elect, so wholly confiding
therein, I looked to be taken for a faithful Servant, because thou art a
faithful Master, and so took no care to perform any thing of Service unto thee,
as believing, that the Blood of thy Son being shed for me, there was no need of
any thing for me to do; so that whatsoever Fruits of Piety and Holiness should
through thy power be produced by me, would be of no regard: Therefore relying
upon thee, trusting in thee, and believeing that thou would not look upon me
as I am in a state of uncleanness and corruption, but through Christ, as I am
in him, I cast my self upon thee, and trust wholly in the merit's of a crucified
Savior, who came into the World to save Sinners: But to such an exclamation,
what will the Righteous God reply? Surely he will not say, I have chosen you
respectively in my good will and pleasure, that you may Glorify me World
without end, and have ordained to Destruction, the greatest part of your fellow
Creatures, not by reason they are worse, or you more worthy, but that they may
Glorify me in Hell and you in Heaven; and as I have mercy on you, so will
avenge my self on them that have in the Loins of Adam Sinned against me: Mat.
25.12.41.
But he will say in that day, to those that have not feared and obeyed him;
Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity, I know ye not, with what confidence can
you look for admittance into my Kingdom, when you know your selves unworthy and
unfit for such a Glorious place, Rev. 21, 27.
where no unclean thing can enter, or nothing that is defiled? how can you
expect that I should hear your Cries, when you would not hear mine no, no.

Prove. 1.24.30.
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man
regarded: But ye have set at naught all my Counsel and would hear none of my
reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes,
when your fear comes as desolation, and your Destruction comes as a
Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then (dismal and
terrible will it be at that time) shall they call upon me but I will not
answer, they shall seek me early but they shall not find me. (And mark the just
occasion of it) For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of
the Lord. They would hear none of my counsel and despised all my reproof.

Thus will the Righteous God plead with the workers of Iniquity, who are
covering themselves, Isa. 30.1.
and not with the Spirit of the Lord, that presume to say, we are covered with
the Righteousness of the Lamb, justified by the Blood of Christ: when they are
inwardly ravening Wolfes, corrupted and in a state of abomination, and have not
come so far (nay have not Faith to believe they ever can be able) as to know
the Blood of Christ to purge their corrupt and defiled Consciences from dead
works, performed without a renewed Heart, to serve the living God in pure and
hearty obedience to all his holy Laws.

Such are ready to forget, or at least don't solidly think that they must be
called before the Judgment seat of God, there to give an exact and strict
account of the deeds done in the Body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and to receive a reward according to them; for every secret Action, for every
hidden Thought, must they reckon.

And all that cannot stand this fiery Trial, must be consumed by it: Therefore
came the word of the Lord to the Prophet after this manner, Isa. 33.13, 16.
Hear ye that are a far off, what I have done, and ye that are near acknowledge
my might: The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
Hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the devouring Fire? who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? He that walks Righteously and speaks
uprightly -- He shall dwell on high; his place of defense shall be the munition
of Rocks, Bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure.

Oh the Blessed estate of the Righteous! who is it will not cry? Oh that I
might die the death of the Righteous, Oh that my latter end may be like unto
his! He shall lay down his Head in Peace, and nothing shall make him afraid;
in a peaceable and quiet Conscience shall he leave the world, no terrors of
Soul shall assail him: But in a certain assurance of endless Peace, his Soul is
sweetly resigned to the will of his merciful God; he takes his leave of the
world without reluctance or trouble in Spirit, and why so? Oh who can declare
that comfort and sweet consolation that he feels to abound in his Soul! He is
ready to lanch forth into that boundless Ocean of never ending joy, Rev. 7.
where the Wicked cease from troubling, and all sorrow is done away! Such a Man
overcomes that unwillingness to die, which is inherent to our Nature, and how
so? He is sure that when his Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
there is an Habitation provided for him, eternally in the Heavens; for this he
groans earnestly, and desires to be clothed with, that Mortality may be
swallowed up of Life; 1 Cor. 15.55.
then can he say, Oh Death where is thy sting! Oh Grave where is thy Victory!
whilst he is at home in the Body, is absent from the Lord, from the full and
boundless enjoyment of his Love, and Light; and walking by Faith, not by sight,
is willing to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord.

But with the Wicked it is not so, he has spent his days in contempt to the
Lord, in despite to his holy Laws, but the time of his departure is at hand,
and now he begins to remember, how he has provoked a just and merciful God,
who would have had mercy upon him, and would have reclaimed him from the evil
of his ways; but he slighted his Visitations, set at naught his counsel, would
none of his reproof, persever'd in his impious courses, and did not consider
his latter end, wherefore has terror and torture already seized his Soul, the
Judgments of a Righteous God begin to take hold upon him, now his Conscience
more then a Thousand witnesses, does condemn him and God who is greater does
condemn him also: Now he feels an Hell upon Earth, that once had his Heaven
here! Now he that had as much of Heaven as he desired, has more of Hell than
he can bear! now he begins that work of repentance, which here should have had
end! Now he cries for a longer time, that has so greivously spent his own! now
I Will part with all to have peace to my tormented Soul, that would not once part
with the least of my pleasures for it; But ah, remember, thou in thy Life time,
Luke 16.25.
how did the Lord strive to do thee good? how many years did he call unto thee,
before he gave thee over to a reprobate mind? he called and thou would not
hear, now he will not hear thy woeful cries, but will execute his terrible
Judgments upon thee; and none shall be able to deliver: Destruction comes as a
Whirlwind desolation and misery surrounds on every side! now the sight of his
Friends, that once rejoiced, help to aggravate the grief of his Soul, he spent
his time in jollitry with them, and forgot the Lord his maker, and now he
sorrowfully warns them, that as he must to all Eternity be cursed with an
inevitable woe, so must they beware, Luke 16.28.
lest they come into this place of Torment! now Hell is no longer feigned to
deterr him, but dismally felt to damn him! now Religion is no longer a Po^i^ick
design, but the neglect proves perpetual Damnation! now there is an overruling
God, that will bring all into Judgment, for he feels the weight thereof,
sinking his Soul down into everlasting pangs! now he that enjoyed the unbouaded
pleasures of this world, is enjoined to bear the never ended plagues of another.

The thoughts of which, may lay us low and humble, and cause us to seek him
that will secure us from such a deplorable condition, of which too many are
insensible, but ('it is to be feared) will undergo at last: What else can the
Wicked look for, but the fearful Judgments of a revenging Fire? which will burn
up all the proud, and workers of Iniquity, they shall be all as stubble in this
terrible day of the Lord: Mal. 4.1, 2.
But to you that fear my name (behold the repeated promises of joy to them that
fear God) shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing under his wings,
etc.

And we know that he is risen according to his promise, and by the brightness
of his appearance has dissipated the darkness of our Hearts, and discovered
the corruption of them, and by the virtue of this his arising, is healing
administered to our diseased Souls, he has cured us of our Infirmities, and
made us strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; So that we who have
embraced him in this Spiritual appearance, are enabled to run the way of his
Commandment with great delight: having opened to him who brings refreshment
with him, Spiritual food and nourishm^^^ will sup with him (has he ^^^mis'd)
and he with me; Rev. 3.20.
and we encouraged in this our travel, to (...) on our course and keep our
Fait^ because we are assured, that a crow^ of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.
will the Lord to Righteous Judge give to all the that love his appearing: And
w^ can without presumption (glory (...) God in the highest) bear an
exper^mental testimony to the words (...) the Holy Psalmist.

Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3.
Blessed is the Man that walket^ not in the counsel of the ungodly nor stands
in the way of Sinner nor sits in the seat of the Scornfu^ But his delight is
in the Law of t^^ Lord, and in his Law does he med^tate day and night; And he
shall (...) like a Tree planted by the Rivers (...) water, that brings forth
his Fru^^ in his Season; his Leaf also shall n^^ wither; and whatsoever he
does shall Prosper.

THE END.

