A MOST TRUE RELATION OF The Attachment, Life, Death, and Confession of Will.
Waller, Alias Walker, Ward, or Slater, A Priest and Jesuit, which was hanged,
drawn and quartered at Tyburne, on Monday being the 26 day of July, Anno Dom.
1641.

For not obeying the Laws of this our Kingdom, by returning again after
banishment, and seducing the Kings subjects.

WITH A DECLARATION of certain Questions, and his Answers at Tyburne.

Printed in the year, 1641.

A Relation of the Attachment, Life, Death, and confession of Will. Waller,
Alias Walker, Ward, or Slater, a Priest and Jesuit, which was hanged, drawn,
and quartered at Tyburne, on Monday being the 26. day of July, Anno Dom. 1641.
THis Jesuit whose confession I shall now relate unto you, was condemned upon
Saturday the 24. of July, for withstanding the Kings Proclaimation; which was
to the effect that by such a day of the month they should all leave England;
this man and his companion which at this time lies in Prison, thinking by
obscurity to follow their own ways in spite of all commands whatsoever, stayed
behind, but mark how it fell out; one evening he being walking in the Garden
of one, which at this time I will not name, was murmuring to himself. Shall I
live cooped up thus? shall my enemies live in honor and I in disgrace? has
Saint Peter forgot his accustomed goodness, or has the blessed Virgin lost
all her privilege which once she had to command her son: have I thus long
been a faithful son to Rome? or have I so often times invoked the Saints to
assist me in the most learned latin tongue? have I not made new Saints, and
new fasting days? Why then do not any of them in this my adversity assist
me? have not crosses, beads, and crucifixes been always my delight; has not
more water been hallowed with this my mouth then by any Jesuit this day
living? Who upon Ashwednesday, or Good Friday has been more forward to punish
offenders then I? who has kept more commemorations then I? or caused more
cominations? who has strived to suggest more then I? Or who upon their death
beds has turned to Rome more then I? when I was Confessor to the Lady Wootton
living in Canterbury, and S. Austins Monastery in Kent. Did not I turn her
Lord upon his death bed to our Religion; have not I made the whole Abbey like to
a second Rome? Have not all the Prebends in the Cathedral there, like damned
Heretics as they were, strived to turn her, to them: And have not my
persuasions returned her again? Have I not been always true? accuse me he
that can: and yet are my hayres made gray before my time; I cannot walk abroad
for fear of the Law, which by my Orders, should command; Nay, before my
banishment was proclaimed, did not each Heretical Vassal affront me, either
by their words or deeds? by profaning the sacred n^me of our holy Father the
Pope, most blessed saint: Peter's successor, I was called Pope Joanes disciple?
what she was it was unknown to all our Order at the first; why then should I
be branded with her? I suffer now, but long I vow not so to do; I Will gain my
liberty, although it be through blood: Kings by my brethren often have
murdered been, the Heavens have lent me arms and heart as well as they, and
why should I fear to add another part to their Tragedies.

Thus to himself was he heard to murmour by an honest countryman, who
presently went to a Justice of peace, and accquainted him with what he had
heard (from whose Clerk this relation came unto me) upon whose words he was
attached, and sent unto Newgate; from whence the time being come he was guarded
to the common Sessions House in the Old Bailey, belonging to the City; where he
was tried, convicted and condemned; a little before the sentence of death past
upon him, he was boasting to his companion after this manner, Why should we
fear death whence I know our meritorious actions will give us life eternal.

O vain and foolish man, I fear thy presumptious life has caused thy
everlasting death; the death of thy poor soul, which was bought at so high a
rate, the price of it was blood, thy loving and kind Saviors blood; how then
can any mortal man merit Heaven by his own works; which is impossible to be
attained, but by the meritorious death of our Savior: but I proceed.

This Jesuit being condemned upon Saturday, on Monday following was to dye,
and did so; but before he went into the Cart to be carried to the place of
Execution: he made this confession to his Partner (which was condemned also,
but repreived, how long I cannot truly tell) Brother I am now going to that
place which will create me a Martyr; I am to dye, and joyfully do I go unto
it, knowing that I dye a Saint, because I was always true to the Apostolical
sea of Rome; as for my pardon, long since I had it from our Ghostly Father, the
Pope; which makes me the more willing to dye, insomuch as I know it to be of
sufficient force to save my soul.

O horrid and blasphemous words, of a man which as then had not two hours to
live!

If only the Lamb of God can take away the sins of the World, which is Christ
our Savior; how can the Pope forgive sins: but it is manifested by Scripture,
that the Lamb of God can only take away the sins of the World, wherefore the
Pope is a deceiver. He bid his friend be constant to Rome; as he ever was, and
to fear death no more then he did; that being said, he was guarded to the
Cart, and with a cord bound therein, and coming nigh S. Pulchres Church, it is
a common use, the Bell tolling there, for the sexton to read a Prayer to those
which are to dye, and desire the standers by, to pray for the salvation of
their souls: This Jesuit all the while he was praying, seemed rather to look
upon the Dyall to see what hour of the day it was, then to mark what the
sexton said: Being come unto Tyburne, the common place of Execution, the
Sheriff asked him what his name was, he answered, Waller, notwithstanding he
was nick-nam'd by pick-pockets; then did he ask him in what Religion he dyed,
he answered, a Roman Catholic and a Priest; before the Cart was drawn away
the Sheriff bidding him pray, he turned about and gave money to the people,
and then by the help of the Hangman, upon his knees he prayed in Latin and
crossed himself: And so he ended his most miserable and (I fear) accursed
life.

FINIS.
depiction of a hanged man


