The Countess of Morton
portrait of the Countess of Morton

THE Countess of MORTON's DAILY EXERCISE: OR, A BOOK OF PRAYERS, AND RULES How
to spend the time in the Service and Pleasure of Almighty God.

The Ninth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. 1679.

TO The Right Honorable The Lady ANNE Countess of MARESHALL: AND To the Pious
Memory of Her Excellent Mother The Lady ANNE Late Countess of MORETON:
By whose earnest desire and Religious care, this BOOK was framed, and made her
devout exercise whilst she lived, recommending the Transcript and use thereof
to many others, and particularly to her who now publishes and presents it to
the Religious and private use of all Devout Persons, according to the desire of
the Honorable LADY, to whom it is Dedicated,

By Her Ladiship's most humble Servant, M. G.

I Have perused this Book, and finding nothing in it but what may tend to the
increase of Private Devotion and Piety, I recommend it to my Lord, the Bishop
of London, for his License to have it Printed.

JO. DURESME.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Grigg, R. P. D. Humfr. Ep. Land. a sac. Dom.
Ex aedibus Land. Mart. 28. 1665.
PSALM. 55. 18. In the Morning and Evening, and at Noonday, will I pray, and
that instantly; and he shall hear my voice. PRAYERS IN THE MORNING.
In the Morning.
At Uprising.
EVery day let the first thing you do, and the first word you speak, tend to
the worship and acknowledgment of Almighty God.

For upon our first thoughts commonly the thoughts and actions of the whole Day
do depend: Therefore when you first awake in the Morning, lift up your heart to
God, and say,

I. BLessed be the most Holy, Glorious, and Undefiled Trinity, now and for
evermore.

II. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who enlightnest mine eyes, and suffer me not
to sleep in death.

III. Blessed art thou, for thou have created all things and for thy Will's
sake they are, and were created.

IV. The Almighty Lord be now and evermore my defense, and vouchsafe to bless
and preserve me from all evil this day and for ever.

Amen.
When you are risen,
Retire your self, and humbly kneeling, adore God, and say,

O Holy Lord God Almighty, before whom all knees do bend, and to whom all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth do bow and obey; behold, here I prostrate myself
before thee, adoring the divine Excellency of thy sovereign and infinite
Majesty, with all the powers of my Soul, submitting my self with all lowliness
and reverence to the greatness of thy Dominion and Power, and desiring nothing
more than faithfully to serve thee all the days of my life; for Thou art only
holy, thou only art the Lord: and glory be to thee, O Lord, most High.

Amen.
Having thus made your Adoration and submission to God, let these be your
Prayers and Devotions every Morning.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Confession of Sins, and Prayers for Pardon.
I.
ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid; I come unto thee in the multitude of thy mercies, and in
thy fear do I cast my self down before thee, most humbly lamenting my sins, and
craving of Thee, the God of all mercy and goodness, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
II.
O Thou Maker of all things, and Judge of all men, I acknowledge and bewail the
many and manifold sins which from time to time I have most grievously
committed, by my thoughts, words, and deeds against thy most holy Commandments,
provoking thereby most justly thy wrath and indignation against me. I do
earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my misdoings. O rebuke me not
in thine indignation, neither chasten me in thy heavy displeasure; but have
mercy upon me for thy Goodness, have mercy upon me, and forgive me all that is
past: and grant that I may always study to serve thee, and please thee
hereafter in all godliness and pureness of life, to the Honor and Glory of thy
Blessed Name, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The Psalm.
THe Lord is loving unto every man, and his mercy is over all his works.

He forgiveth us all our sins, and has compassion upon all our infirmities.

His Loving Kindness is better than life it self, and therefore shall my soul
praise him.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who wilt not cast out my Prayer, nor turn away thy
mercy from me.

As long as I live will I magnify thee on this manner, and lift up my hands in
thy Name.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Lesson.
TAke heed that ye walk circumspectly, redeeming the timebecause the days are
evil. Be fervent in good works, and serve the Lord with all gladness of heart.
Be patient in tribulation, and continue instant in prayer. Be courteous and
meek; and as much as lies in you live peaceably with all men: and whatsoever
ye would that others should do unto you, do so to them; for this is the Law and
the Prophets.

The Hymn.
VOuchsafe, O Lord, to keep me this day without sin.
To shut and close my wandering eye,
Lest it let in Vanity.
To keep my heart as pure and free
From fond and troubled Fantasy;
To guide my Tongue, so that no strife
May breed disquiet in my Life:
To keep all harm, all ill away,
While I duly spend the day.
Or this.
O Holy Ghost, my Soul inspire,
And lighten with Celestial Fire.
Thy blessed Unction from above
Is Comfort, Life, and Fire of Love.
Anoint and clear my soiled Face
With the abundance of thy Grace.
Be thou my joy, my rest, my home,
Where thou art so, no ill can come.
Teach me to know the Father, Son,
And thee of Both to be but One:
That day by day, all my Life long
This may be my endless Song;
To Thee all Honor, Praise, and Merit,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Amen.
A Devout Confession of our Christian and Catholic Faith. With Explications
and Prayers relating thereunto.
I. I Believe in thee, O God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth;
loving thee as my Father, reverenceing thee as the Almighty, and committing my
Soul and my Body to thee as to a faithful Creator. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory, Honor, and Power; for thou have created all things, and for thy
Will's sake they are, and were created.

II. I believe in Thee O thou King of Glory, the everlasting Son of God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the Great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest
in the Flesh, and sent into this World for our eternal Salvation in the World
to come.

III. I believe that thou wast conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Blessed Virgin Mary without spot of sin, thereby to cleanse us from all sin.

IV. I believe that thou did suffer what otherwise we must have suffered for
ever. That thou wast crucified to set us free from the Curse of the Law.

That thou did Dic, and thereby take away the sting of Death.

That thou wast buried in the Grave, and had the Victory over it; to assure
us that our Bodies shall not corrupt there for ever.

V. I believe that thou did descend into Hell, to triumph over it, and to
free us from the fear of ever coming into that Place.

That the third day thou did rise again from the dead in our Nature, the
First Fruits of them that are asleep in their Graves, who are thereby assured
that they also shall not sleep there for ever.

VI. I believe that thou did ascend up into Hea- (...)

bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, and ever seek thy Honor and Glory. Good
Lord, I beseech thee to hear me.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all Men. Good Lord, I beseech thee
to hear me.

That it may please thee to save and preserve our most Gracious King, and All
his Royal Family. Good Lord, I beseech thee to hear me.

That it may please thee to reduce them that have gone astray from thy ways, to
comfort them that are in sorrow, to relieve them that are in need and
tribulation, and to amend all our Lives according to thy Holy Word. Good Lord,
I beseech thee to hear me.

O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that take away the sins of the
World, Have mercy upon me, and grant me thy Peace.

Amen.
RULES AND PRAYERS FOR THE AFTERNOON.
Advertisements.
Rules and Advertisements.
I. AFter this, you may pass the rest of the Day in what lawful Recreations or
employments you judge to be meet for you. II. Spend some while before Night in
Reading, and read with attention: but let your Books be chosen with advice and
care, for your instruction and knowledge in all good things, and specially for
your Spiritual Benefit. (...) V. If you have the Government of a Family, take
special heed that they live not disorderly or idly, to the offense of
Almighty God, and the scandal of others. VI. And forget not (as often as you
can) to be present and to assist at the public Offices and Divine Services of
the Church, there to attend and perform the Homage and Worship of Almighty God,
and to be instructed in his holy Word: for that is a Duty and a Service most
highly pleasing to him. VII. Remember (and you will much help your self, if you
remember it) that you are continually in the presence of God, and ought to live
continually in his fear, and in obedience to his Commandments. VIII. Upon all
occasions offered to you, exercise your Charity, and let not the day pass you
without some good work done by you, either of real Honor to God, or of real
Charity to them that want it.
Afternoon.
Afternoon retire you self a while, and use the Psalm, Lesson, Hymn, and
Prayers following.

UNto thee I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens: my Soul
waits still upon thee, that thou may bless me.

O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King and my God; for unto thee
do I make my Prayers.

Show Thou me the way that I should walk in, and teach me to do the thing that
pleases thee.

I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue; and I will make a
covenant with mine eyes, that they behold not vanity.

O let not my footsteps err from the path of thy Commandments. But let my
delight be in walking after the Precepts of thy Law.

Thy Law is an undefiled Law, converting the Soul, and gives light unto the
eyes.

Keep thy Servant from all presumptuous sins, that they may not get the
dominion over me; and cleanse thou me from all my secret faults.

That so I may be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my Strength and my Redeemer.

Glory be to the Father --

The Lesson.
IF sinners entice thee, do not thou consent unto them. These things does the
Lord abhor: A prood look and a lying tongue, an heart that devises wickedness
and mischief, a false witness that speaks not the truth, and whosoever sows
discord among others. In the multitude of words there will be sin. Keep
innocence, and do the thing that is right, for that will bring a man peace at
the last. Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus; and confess him
to be the Lord, who was obedient to the Death of the Cross for the Redemption
of Mankind, unto the Praise and Glory of God the Father.

The Hymn.
WHO more can crave, Than God for me has done,
To free a Slave That gave his only Son?
Blessed be that Hour when he repaired our loss I never will
Forget my Savior's Cross.
The Prayers.
I.
O God, who know the frailties and infirmities of my weak nature, and in the
midst of how many Dangers I live, being continually subject to the deceits of
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and having no Power of my self to help my
self, mercifully look upon me: and because I cannot continue in safety without
thy Succor, preserve me evermore by thy help and Goodness, and keep me both
outwardly in my Body, and inwardly in my Soul; that among the sundry and
manifold Dangers of this World, my Heart may be set to attain everlasting
Salvation, and my Affections may surely there be fixed where true Joys are to
be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
II.
O God the strength of all that trust in thee, mercifully accept these my
humble Supplications and Prayers; and grant me the help of thy grace, that I
may please Thee both in Will and Deed, and obtain thy Peace all the days of my
Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
III.
ALmighty and everliving God, I give Thee most humble thanks, for that Thou
have vouchsafed favorably to call me to the knowledge of thy Grace, and Faith
in Thee. Increase this Knowledge, and confirm this Faith in me evermore. Give
me the comfort of thy Holy Spirit, and multiply upon me thy manifold Gifts of
Grace, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and
Ghostly Strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness; and fulfill me, O
Lord, with the Spirit of thy holy Fear, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
PRAYERS AT NIGHT AND BEDTIME.
Retire your self again.

AND when you have thought upon all the day past, how you have spent it, that
is, what good or evil Actions you have done, and what bad inclinations you have
resisted or amended, asking God pardon for all your offenses, use these
Prayers.

The Psalm and Prayers.
LEt my Prayer be set forth in thy sight, O Lord, as the Incense;

And the lifting up of my Hands be as an Evening Sacrifice.

In thee has been my hope all the Day long, and under the shadow of thy wings
shall be my refuge day and night for ever.

Glory be to --

I.
O Thou Brightness of Eternity, by whose Providence both the Day and the Night
were created and governed, and who have made the outgoings of the Morning and
Evening to praise Thee, mercifully vouchsafe to let the Light of thy
Countenance shine upon me with the blessed Beams of thy Goodness and Mercy,
that neither the Prince of Darkness may have any power over me, nor the Works
of darkness overwhelm me; but that by thy mighty Protection I may be defended
both in Body and Soul from all the perils and dangers of this night, and for
evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
II.
MAke me to remember that the Darkness hides nothing from Thee, but that to
Thee the Night shines as clear as the Day, to Thee the Darkness and the Light
are both alike.

III.
OBe thou merciful unto me, and bless me; show me the light of thy Countenance,
and be merciful unto me.

IV.
INto thy hands I commend my self, my Soul, and my Body, and all that is mine,
for thou have made and created them, and thou have redeemed us, O thou Lord God
of mercy and truth.

V.
THou have Created all things, and for ^hy Will's sake they are, and were
created.

VI.
O Send thy Light and thy Truth, what they may preserve me, and save me, for
thy Mercie's sake.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Christ have mercy upon me.

Lord have mercy upon me.

God the Father bless me.

God the Son defend me

God the Holy Ghost pr^serve me now and f^^ evermore.

Amen.
Rules and Advertisements.
AFter this speak not unnecessarily to any before you go to sleep. Remember
that your Bed is a representation of the Grave, and Sleep an Image of Death. It
behooves you

FORMS OF CONFESSIONS AND PRAYER TO ALMIGHTY GOD, FOR The Forgiveness of Sins.
(...) in reverencing his Power and Majesty as I should.

Yea, I have sometimes doubted of him, misbelieving his Promises, and not
trusting to his Help. I have made Flesh my arm, and put my confidence in the
pleasing Vanities and uncertain Prosperities of the World. I have otherwhile
been full of roving and unlawful imaginations concerning God, and full of
wandering thoughts in his Service.

II. I have often framed to set up to my self diverse Imaginations and Forms of
God's Worship and Religion, which he has not set and established in his Church.

I have been negligent in giving him his external Worship and Honor, not
falling down before him with that inward reverence of Spirit and Truth, nor
with that outward Order and Humility of my Body which is requisite always to be
showed forth and done before Him.

III. I have often drawn near unto him with my lips, when my heart has been
far from him. I have too frequently, vainly, and inconsiderately used his great
and fearful Name and in the eagerness of my Spirit I have not abstained from
abusing it with rash Oaths and Execrations. My Vows and Promises that I have
made in his Name, I have not performed: Those holy things whereon his sacred
Name is set and imprinted; I have not duly regarded; and through my
presumptuous vanities, I have been an occasion to make his Name be evil spoken
of, and profaned by others.

IV. I have often absented my self from the public Worship and Service of his
Holy Assemblies and Sanctuary; vainly mispending the days that are hallowed to
the honor of his great Name.

V. I have not carried that reverence and regard, nor given that due obedience
which I ought to them whom God has placed over me, seeking rather my own will
and pleasure, than submitting my self to their lawful precepts, and advice. I
have too much unregarded the Persons of my Betters, and been unthankful to them
that have deserved well of me.

VI. I have not done to all others, as I would that they should do to me; I
have envied their welfare, the better and more prosperous Life of others above
my own. I have often let the reins of my Passion loose to anger, malice, and
revenge; uncharitably delighting in the mischief and destruction of my own
private or peculiar Enemies. When out of my abundance I might have relieved
others that were in want, I have many times neglected it.

VII. I have often suffered my fancy and affections to wander licentiously: I
have not held mine Eyes nor mine Ears nor my Tongue from vanity. I have not
carefully eschewed the occasions and enticements to corrupt and vain
affections: I have not preserved my Body in that Holiness, Honor, and Purity
which becomes the Temple of God.

VIII. I have not reckoned Godliness to be my greatest Gain, nor been content
with that which I have.

IX. I have listened to Flattery, and used it toward others: of many I have
had evil suspicions, and given rash judgment upon them. Upon my self I have set
a greater value than I deserved, and seemed better than I was, that I might
gain a false reputation from others. And I have often suffered truth to be
gainsaid.

X. I am guilty of many inordinate desires and irregular affections.

And woe is me that in all these things I have offended: For if in all these
things my Heart should not condemn me, God is greater than my Heart, and
knows all things. But I confess them, and confessing am sorry for them, and
being sorry for them, am ready to leave them, his Grace thereunto assisting me;
and not only to leave them, but to judge my self for them: with all religious
lowliness and alacrity, submitting my self freely to the pious directions and
advice that shall be given me by my Spiritual Governors and Ministers of God,
for showing forth the fruits of my sorrow and repentance, meet for amendment of
life. And though I be altogether unworthy, yet for the Worth and Merits of my
Savior, in whose Merits and Mercy I put my whole Trust and Confidence, being
(as he is) the Propitiation not only for my sins, but for all the sins of the
world, I most humbly crave pardon and absolution from them, and from all my
other sins which I may have now forgotten, and whereof my Conscience may be
afraid.

MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS AT THE Holy Communion, Referring to I. PURITY. II.
FAITH. III. CHARITY.

Meditations and Prayers at the Holy Communion.
I. Purity.
I Will wash my Hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to thine Altar; I
will come into thine House in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear
will I worship, thee toward thy holy Footstool. For Christ our Passover is
offered; Let us therefore keep the Feast not with the Leven of malice and
wickedness, but with the unlevened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

The Prayer.
O Lord, cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy Holy
Spirit, that my Body may be made clean by the pure Body of my Savior Jesus
Christ, once offered upon the Cross, and that my Soul may be washed by his most
precious Blood there shed for me, and that He may abide with me for ever.

Amen.
II. Faith.
I believe; Lord, help mine unbelief.

I Believe that God our heavenly Father did of his tender mercy give his only
Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for the Redemption of the
world. I believe that he made there by the Oblation of himself once offered, a
perfect Sacrifice and satisfaction for our sins. I believe that this Sacrament
was ordained for the continual remembrance of that his Death and Sacrifice, and
for the benefits we all receive by it. I believe that I shall here partake of
the spiritual Food and most precious Body and Blood of Christ, the Bread of
Life that came down from Heaven, the Blood that has been carried up into the
holy places, and the Cup of Eternity. For they that eat of this Bread and drink
of this Cup, shall live for ever.

The Prayer.
O My God, what are we, that thou so regarded us to give thy self for us, to
give thy self to us, to be one with us, that we may have life in us, even life
immortal, which will quicken us, and raise us up at the last day? O my Lord, I
am not worthy, not worthy the least of thy Mercies; how much less of this,
which is the greatest, greater than the World, greater than the Heavens,
greater than all the Treasures of Heaven and Earth; but, I beseech Thee, look
upon me in the Greatness of thy Mercies, not weighing my Merits, but pardoning
mine offenses.

Amen.
III. Charity.
THis is a Sacrament of Love, and this is thy Commandment, that we should love
one another, even as thou have loved us: for we being many, are one Body,
whereof Christ our Lord is the Head.

The Prayers.
O Thou Blessed and undivided Trinity, whichteachest us that all our doings
without Love and Unity are nothing worth, send into all our hearts that most
excellent gift of Charity, and inflame our Souls with the Celestial Fire of thy
Love, that living together in unity of Spirit and the bond of Peace among our
selves, we may perfectly love Thee, and worthily magnify thy Holy Name,
through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Litany Privately to be used before the Receiving of the Holy Communion.
O God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; God the most holy,
blessed, and glorious Trinity

Have mercy upon me.

O Thou immaculate Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the World

Have mercy upon me.

O Christ the Eternal Son of the Father, the Redeemer and Preserver of Men, the
Bread and Life of the World, the Author and finisher of our Faith, the Great
Mystery of Godliness, the Word that was made Flesh, to save thy Servants from
their Sins

Have mercy upon me.

Save me, O God; for I come unto Thee in the multitude of thy Mercies and in
thy Fear will I fall down and worship Thee in thy Holy Temple, that Thou mays

Have mercy upon me.

Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender Mercies, and thy loving kindness which
has been ever of old: O remember not the sins and frailties of thy Servant,
but Spare me, O Lord, Spare me for thy goodness, an

Have mercy upon me.

From my unworthiness to receive thy blessed Body and Blood, by which thou have
redeemed me; from all carnal, vain, and earthly Imaginations in this thy Holy
Sacrament; from all misbelief and incredulity of thy Word; from all defects of
Sanctity, Love, and Charity; from all my Sins and Iniquities

Good Lord, deliver me.

By that fervent ardor of Goodness and Charity wherewith thou came down from
Heaven; by thy blessed Cross and Passion, and by the mysterious institution of
this thy Holy Sacrament

Good Lord, deliver me.

By thy most sacred Body, which was broken and crucified; by thy most precious
Blood, which was shed and poured forth for the Sins of the World

Good Lord, deliver me.

O Lord God, I beseech thee to hear me, and that it may please thee to give us
all true Faith and Repentance, with devout humility and Reverence, rightly and
duly to celebrate this thy holy Sacrament, in memory of thy most hallowed,
true, and propitiatory Sacrifice, with a firm faith to receive thy blessed
Mysteries, and to give thanks unto thy Name.

O Lord, I beseech thee to hear me.

That it may please thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, our
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, the Memorial that we now make of thine
own death and Sacrifice, which was once offered for us, and to grant that by
the Merits and Power thereof, we and all thy Servants may, receive remission of
our sins, and be filled with thy Grace and Heavenly Benediction.

O Lord, I beseech thee to hear me.

O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, thou that take away the Sins of
the World,

Receive my Prayer.

When you are ready to receive the Holy Sacrament in each kind, do it with the
greatest reverence and devotion that you may, (yet without all affectation and
singularity) lifting up your hands and your heart to God.

And after you have Received, lift up your hands again, and say devoutly with
your self, while others receive;

I.
BLessed art Thou, O Lord; Blessing and Honor and Glory be unto thee, O thou
Lamb of God, for evermore.

Amen.
II.
This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

III.
I will magnify thee, O Lord, and will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

IV.
All thy Works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give thanks unto thee.

V.
Happy are those Servants whom when their Lord comes he shall find thus doing.

VI.
Salvation, and Blessing and Honor, be unto him that sits upon the Throne
of Heaven, now and for ever.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after the Holy Communion.
BLessed art Thou, O Lord God, and blessed be thy Holy Name for ever, who have
now vouchsafed to feed me with the Bread of Life, and have given me to drink
the Cup of Eternity, the holy and heavenly Mysteries of the Body and Blood of
my Savior, thereby assuring my Soul of thy favor and goodness toward me, for
the sealing of my Faith, for the pardon of my Sins, for the obtaining of my
Peace, and all other Benefits of Christ's blessed Passion.

I now most humbly beseech thee to assist me with thy Heavenly Grace, that I
may continue thine for ever, and be made a Temple of thy Holy Spirit; and that
having now Christd welling in me by faith, I may accomplish the rest of my life
in Repentance and Godly fear, in mortifying my own sinful desires, and in
keeping thy Holy Commandments. For which end guide me with thy Power, enlighten
me with thy Word, and quicken me with thy Spirit. Elevate my Senses, compose my
Manners, and order my Conversation aright; for thou art able to do abundantly
above all that I can ask or think: by which thy great and bountiful goodness
toward me, thou will glorify thy Name in me, and bring me at last to thine
Eternal Kingdom of Glory, through him who is the King of Glory, my blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Heb. 13.
THe God of Peace who brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the
great Shepherd of his Flock, through the Blood of his everlasting Testament,
make me perfect in every good work to do his Will, and that which is
well-pleasing in his sight through the same Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost be Glory for ever.

Amen.
PRAYERS UPON Sundry Occasions.
PRAYERS When you are upon a Journey.
I.
THe Almighty Lord be now and evermore my defense, to bless me and preserve me
from all evil in my going out, and my coming in, and give his Angels charge
over me, to keep me in all my ways.

II.
IF God will be with me, and keep me in this way that I go, so that I come to
my home in Peace; then shall I give Thanks and pay my Vows unto him.

III.
O God, who know us to be set in the midst of many dangers, grant that by
thy mighty aid I may be defended from all things that may hurt me either in
Body or Soul, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
IV.
DIspose and Govern the way of thy Servant, O Lord, and further me with thy
gracious and continual help, that in all my doings begun, continued, and ended
in Thee, I may glorify thy holy Name, and keep my self by thy most mighty
protection in the ways of thy Laws, and paths of thy Commandments, for the
attainment of everlasting rest and peace in thy heavenly Kingdom, through
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
V.
Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy Paths; for I lift up my Soul unto
thee. Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me; for thou art the God of my
Salvation: in thee has been my hope all the day long.

Amen.
PRAYERS In the time of any sudden danger or distress.
I.
ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon me, and in this time of
dangerand necessity stretch forth thine hand to succor and defend me, through
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
II.
THe Almighty Lord, who is a strong Tower of defense against all the Perils,
Assaults, and Tribulations of this World, be now and evermore my Aid and
Protector, through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.
III.
FRom Lightning and Tempest, from all Evil and Mischief, and from sudden death.

Good Lord, deliver me.

PRAYERS In the time of sickness and affliction.
I.
SAve me, O King of Heaven and hear me when I call upon thee; for I am in
affliction and heaviness. Thou art a defense for the oppressed, and a refuge in
the needful time of trouble: look down from Heaven and visit me with thy
Salvation.

II.
I Know that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it, and ^hy doings
are always just: but thou art also good and gracious, and of great mercy to
them that call upon thee. Thou upholdest all them that are fallen, and liftest
up those that be down.

II.
I Know that of very faithfulness thou have caused me to be troubled that I
might call upon thy Name.

IV.
ANd now, Lord, what is my hope? Truly my hope is even in Thee: For thou art
the hope of all the ends of the Earth, the aid of all that need, the help of
all that fly to thee for Succor, O turn thee unto me, and show me the light of
thy Countenance, that I may be made whole, and give thanks unto thy Name.

V.
O God, favorably, with mercy hear my Prayers, and grant that all those things
which I suffer for my sins, I may well pass and overcome, by thy most gracious
and ready help* through Christ our Lord*

Amen.
VI.
O Do well unto thy Servant, that I may live and keep thy Commandments.

VII.
MErcifully, O Lord, look upon mine Infirmity, and for the glory of thy Name
turn from me all those Evils that I most righteously have deserved, and grant
that in all my troubles I may put my whole trust and confidence in thy mercy,
and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy Honor, and
Glory, through our only Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Meditations in the time of Sickness, upon the great Mercies of God.
I.
WHen we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned
with the world.

II.
REfuse not the correction of the Almighty: it is the Lord, let him do what
seems good in his own eyes.

III.
AS it pleases the Lord, so comes every thing to pass: Blessed be the Name of
the Lord.

IV.
GOD is the Lord of Life and Death, of sickness and of health, by whose
appointment we were born, and by whose commandment again we must die; our time
is in his hand, and to him belong the issues of Death.

V.
GOD is meek and gentle, ready to accept our sorrow and repentance for sin.

VI.
HE is exceeding slow to anger, and not easily provoked; he sees our sins, and
makes as if he saw them not; he many times over-looketh them, and by his
long-suffering passes them by as loath to see them.

VII.
WHen he cannot but see, yet he forbears, and is patient; Forbears long,
suffers long, many times, many years.

VIII.
WHen he can suffer, and stay no longer, but punish he must, he does it against
his will; and when he is angry, he contains himself in it, and suffers not
his whole displeasure to arise.

IX.
HE is angry, but not according to our deserts, nothing so much: He is angry
but not long, it endures but a little while, and in his wrath he thinks upon
mercy; he thinks every stripe two, and is quickly weary; he repents him of the
evil, and is soon appeased.

X.
HE will have none to perish, but have all to be saved; he wills not the
death of a sinner, but that he should repent and live.

XI.
NOt of any sinner, not of Manasses, not of Rahab, not of Mary Magdalen; not of
Saint Paul, who was once a chief sinner.

XII.
FOr Christ came into the world to save sinners, and of them that come unto him
he casts none out.

A Thanksgiving after Recovery from Sickness.
I.
O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy Servant, according to thy great
Goodness and Mercy. Before I was troubled, I went astray; but now I will take
heed to my ways, that I swerve not from thy Precepts. It is good for me that I
have been in trouble, that I may learn to obey thy Commandments.

II.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, and true are thy Judgments. Trouble and heaviness
have taken hold upon me, but my sure trust has been in thy Mercy. O let my
Soul live and it shall praise thee, and thy Judgments shall help me.

III.
I Will always give thanks unto the Lord, his Praise shall be ever in my mouth.
O Lord my God, I cried unto Thee, and thou have healed me: Thou have turned my
heaviness into joy, and girded me with gladness, therefore will I sing of thy
Praise without ceasing, and give thanks unto Thee for ever.

IV.
I Sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me out of all my trouble:
for the Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his Ears are
open unto their Prayers.

V.
WHat reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has done
unto me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.
I will offer to Thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, evermore praising Thee, and
saying, O Holy Lord God Almighty, Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive Honor,
and Glory, and Power: for thou have created all things, and for thy Wills sake
they are and were created.

VI.
BLessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Thanksgiving, and Power, and Might, be
unto the Lord our God for ever and ever.

AMEN.
THE END.
THE LAST WORDS OF THE Reverend, Pious, and Learned Dr. HAMMOND.

Being Two PRAYERS FOR THE Peaceful Re-settlement OF THIS CHURCH and STATE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, 1679.

Prayers for the Church and State.
Prayer I.
O Blessed Lord, who in thine infinite mercy did vouchsafe to plant a
glorious Church among us, and now in thy just judgment have permitted our sins
and follies to root it up; be pleased at last to resume thoughts of Peace
toward us, that we may do the like to one another. Lord, look down from
Heaven, the habitation of thy Holiness, and behold the Ruins of a desolate
Church, and compassionate to see her in the dust. Behold her, O Lord, not only
broken, but crumbled, divided into so many Sects and Fractions, that she no
longer represents the Ark of the God of Israel, where the Covenant and the
Manna were conserved, but the Ark of Noah, filled with all various sorts of
unclean Beasts: and to complete our misery and guilt, the Spirit of Division
has insinuated it self as well into our Affections as our Judgments; that
Badge of Discipleship which thou recommendedst to us, is cast off, and all the
contrary wrath and bitterness, anger and clamor, called in to maintain and
widen our breaches. O Lord, how long shall we thus violate and defame that
Gospel of Peace that we profess? how long shall me thus madly defeat our
selves, lose that Christianity which we pretend to strive for? O thou which
make men to be of one mind in an house, be pleased so to unite us, that we
may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
And now that in Civil Affairs there seems some aptness to a composure, O let
not our Spiritual Differences be more unreconcileable. Lord, let not the
roughest winds blow out of the Sanctuary, let not those which should be
Ambassadors for Peace, still sound a Trumpet for War: but do thou reveal thy
self to all our Eliah's in that still small Voice, which may teach them to echo
thee in the like meek treating with others. Lord let no unseasonable stiffness
of those that are in the right, no perverse obstinacy of those that are in the
wrong, hinder the closing of our wounds; but let the one instruct in meekness,
and be thou pleased to give the other repentance to the acknowledgment of the
truth. To this end, do thou, O Lord, mollify all exasperate minds, take off
all animosities and prejudices, contempt and heart-burnings, and by uniting
their hearts, prepare for the reconciling their Opinions: And that nothing may
intercept the clear sight of thy truth, Lord, let all private and secular
Designs be totally deposited, that gain may no longer be the measure of our
Godliness, but that the one great and common concernment of truth and peace may
be unanimously and vigorously pursued. Lord, the hearts of all men are in thy
hands, O be thou pleased to let thy Spirit of Peace overshadow the minds of all
contending Parties; and if it be thy will, restore this Church to her pristine
state, renew her days as of old; let her escape out of Egypt be so entire,
that not an hoof may be left behind: but if thy Wisdom see it not yet a season
for so full a deliverance, Lord, defer not we beseech thee, such a degree of
it, as may at least secure her a being; if she cannot recover her Beauty, yet,
O Lord, grant her Health, such a foundness of Constitution as may preserve her
from dissolution. Let thy providence find out some good Samaritans to cure her
present Wounds: and to whomsoever thou shall commit that important Work, Lord,
give them skilful hands and compassionate hearts; direct them to such
applications as may most speedily, and yet most soundly heal the hurt of the
Daughter of Sion; and make them so advert to the Interests both of Truth and
Peace, that no lawful condescension may be omitted, nor any unlawful made. And
do thou who art both the wonderful Counselor and Prince of Peace, so guide and
prosper all Pacifick endeavors, that all our distractions may be composed, and
our Jerusalem may again become a City at unity in it self; that those happy
Primitive days may at length revert, wherein Vice was the only Heresy; that
all our intestine contentions may be converted into a vigorous opposition of
our common Enemy, our unbrotherly Feuds into a Christian Zeal against all that
exalts it self against the obedience of Christ. Lord hear us, and ordain Peace
for us, even for his sake whom thou have ordained our Peace maker, Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Prayer the II.
O Most gracious Lord who do not afflict willingly, nor grieve the childrenof
men, whosmitest not till the importunity of our sins enforce thee, and then
correctest in measure, we thy unworthy Creatures humblyacknowledge that we have
abundantly tasted of this patience and lenity of thine. To what an enormous
height were our sins arrived, ere thou beganst to visit them! and when thou
could no longer forbear, yet mastering thy Power, thou have not proportioned
thy vengeance to our crimes, but to thy own gracious design of reducing and
reclaiming us. Lord had the first stroke of thy hand been exterminatings, our
guilts had justified the method; but thou have proceeded by such easy and
gentle degrees, as witness how much thou desired'st to be interrupted, and show
us, that all that sad weight we have long groaned under, has been accumulated
only by our ownincorrigibleness. It Is now, O Lord, these many years that this
Nation has been in the furnace, and yet our dross wastes not, but increases;
and it is owing only to thy unspeakable mercy, that we, who would not be
purified, are not consumed; that we remain a Nation, who cease not to be a most
sinful and provoking Nation. O Lord, let not this long-suffering of thine serve
only to upbraid our obstinacy, and enhance our guilt; but let it at last have
the proper effect on us, melt our hearts, and lead us to repentance. And O that
this may be the day for us thus to discern the things that belong to our Peace!
that all who are (yea, and all who are not) cast down this day in an external
humiliation may by the operation of thymighty Spirit have their souls laid
prostrate before thee in a sincere contrition! O thou who can out of the very
stones raise up Children unto Abraham, work our stony flinty hearts into such a
temper as may be malleable to the impressions of thy grace, that all the
sinners in Sion may tremble; that we may not by a persevering obstinacy seal to
our selves both temporal and eternal ruin, but in stead of our mutinous
complainingat the punishments of our sins, search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord. O be thou pleased to grant us this one grand fundamental
mercy, that we who so impatiently thirst after a change without us, may render
that possible and safe by this better and more necessary change within us; that
our sins may not, as they have so often done, interpose and eclipse that light
which now begins to break out upon us. Lord, thy Dove seems to approach us with
an Olive Branch in her mouth; Oh let not our filth and noisomness chase her
away; but grant us that true repentance which may atone thee, and that
Christian Charity which may reconcile us with one another. Lord, let not our
breach either with thee, or among our selves, be incurable, but by making up
the first, prepare us for the healing of the latter. And because, O Lord the
way to make us one Fold is to have one Shepherd, be pleased to put us all under
the conduct of him to whom that charge belongs; bow the hearts of this People
as of one Man, that the only contention may be, who shall be most forward in
bringing back our David. O let none reflect on their past Guilts, as an
Argument to persevere, but repent, and to make their return so sincere as may
qualify them, not only for his but thy Mercy. And, Lord, be pleased so to
guide the hearts of all who shall be entrusted with that great Concernment of
settling this Nation, that they may weigh all their deliberations in the Balance
of the Sanctuary, that Conscience, not Interest, may be the ruling principle,
and that they may render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are God's; that they may become healers of our breaches, and happy
Repairers of the sad Ruins both in Church and State: And grant, O Lord, that
as those sins which made them are become National, so the repentance may be
National also, and that evidenced by the proper fruits of it, by zeal of
restoring the rights both of thee and thine Anointed. And do thou, O Lord, so
dispose all hearts, and remove all obstacles, that none may have the will much
less the power, to hinder his peaceable restitution. And, Lord, let him bring
with him an heart so entirely devoted to thee, that he may wish his own Honor
only as a means to advance thine. O let the Precepts and Example of his blessed
Father never depart from his mind; and as thou were pleased to perfect the one
by suffering, so perfect the other by acting thy will; that He may be a blessed
Instrument of replanting the power in stead of the form of Godliness among us,
of restoring Christian virtue in a profane and almost barbarous Nation. And if
any wish him for any distant ends, if any desire his shadow as a shelter for
their riots and licentiousness, O let him come a great, but happy defeat to all
such, not bring fuel, but cure to their inordinate appetites; and by his
example as a Christian, and his Authority as a King, so invite to good, and
restrain from evil, that he may not only release our temporal, but our
spiritual bondage, suppress those soul and scandalous Vice^ which have so long
Captivated us, and by securing out inward, provide for the perpetuating our
outward peace Lord, establish thou his throne in righteousness, make him a
signal instrument of thy glory and our happiness, and let him reap the fruits
of it in comfort here, and in bliss hereafter; so that his earthly Crown may
serve to enhance and enrich his heavenly. Grant this, O King of Kings, for the
sake and intercession of our Blessed Mediator Jesus Christ.

THE END.

