The most Lamentable and Deplorable HISTORY OF THE Two Children in the Wood:
CONTAINING The happy Loves and Lives of their Parents, the Treachery and
barbarous Villainy of their Uncle, the Duel between the murdering Ruffians, and
the unhappy and deplorable death of the two innocent Children.

As also on Account of the Justice of GOD that overtook the Unnatural Uncle;
and of the deserved Death of the two murdering Ruffians.

To which is annexed, The Old SONG upon the same.

depiction of murdering Ruffians, the Babes, and the Uncle

London: Printed by and for W. O. and sold by the Booksellers.

depiction of Mr. and Mrs. True Love

The Lamentable and Deplorable HISTORY OF THE Two Children in the WOOD, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original of Father and Mother of the two Children, and his Family, etc.
THe Subject of this History is the Deplorable Death of two Children left in a
Wood, where they most miserably perished: How they were brought thither, and
came to that unhappy End, shall be at large declared in the Sequel of this
History; in which, that we may proceed the more regularly, we shall first give
and Account of the Parents of those two innocent Sufferers.

Their Father was a Gentleman of a plentiful Estate in the County of Norfolk,
not far from Castle-Rising, an ancient Burrough-Town in that County, though at
present much decayed: This Gentleman was descended from the ancient and
honorable Family of the Trueloves in that County, and bore the Name of Arthur
(...) never would admit of. The real Worth that they were both Possessors of,
soon equally attract'd one another: So that soon after the happy Consummation
of their Marriage, completed both their Joys. And one expressed their Happiness
on this occasion in the following Lines: So joys the Pilot that has escaped a
Grave,
In the swelled Bosom of an angry Wave;
And after all his shipwrack'd Hopes, at last
Does fafe in Port his joyful Anchor cast:
Which has occasioned many pious Airs,
And been the Subject of his daily Prayers;
Nor did they live until this happy Hour,
In which their Joys were all within their Power.


To speak of the Solemnity and splendid Entertainments at their Wedding, with
all the Triumphs that attended it, would be to hold a Candle to the Sun: For to
say nothing could be wanting at it, is but to speak diminutively of it: Three
Elements at least wefle risted to serve up the Variety of which their
Wedding-dinner did consist; and universal Joy and Satisfaction was seen in
every Countenance; expressing the glad Hearts of all the Guests: Only his
Brother Nicholas seemed to wear a cloudy Brow, and appeared meancholy unto that
degree, that it was taken notice of by several; but he excused it by pretending
some Indisposition; which those that knew him best, thought he had no occasion
to excuse, it being only the Effect of his own natural and moross Temper; of
which his Brother took no notice, for his fair Bride had took up all his
Thoughts.

CHAP. III.
How Mr. Nicholas True Love grew very melancholy after his Brother's Marriage,
and of the Kindness of his Brother and Sister to him.
IT is observed by Naturalists, that Spiders will suck Poison from the
self-same Flowers, from whence the better-natur'd Be will extract Virgin
Honey: Just so it was with Mr. Nicholas True Love, the Marriage of his eldest
Brother, which was a general Occasion of Rejoicing to all others, gave him the
greatest Discontent imaginable; of which, (whatever his Pretenses were) this
was indeed the true and only Reason: His Brother Arthur having lived a
Bachelor till about thirty four Years of Age, he had fondly conceived that he
would never marry; and then by Consequence all the Estate his Brother had,
would fall to him and to his Children: But now his Brother marrying a fine and
beautiful young Gentlewoman, by whom he could not doubt of having Issue, and
thereby seeing all his Hopes defeated, the mighty Disappointment overcame him,
and touched his covetous and sordid Temper to the Quick: So that his Discontent
became too visible to be dissembled; which his Brother perceiving, was very
sensibly afflicted at it; and would be often asking of him what was the
occasion of it; but Nicholas as much as possibly he could avoided speaking to
him; and by endeavoring to hide the Malady, made it the more apparent.

It happened some five or six Months after Mr. Arthur True Love was married,
that his Wife's Pregnancy began to be apparent, and gave the joyful Parents
assured (...)

My dear Brother, I must confess that you have been always kind, above what other
Brothers use to be; and therefore I should be the most ungrateful amongst Men,
should I be wanting in my just Acknowledgements; or have one thought within my
Breast, I should not make my Brother privy to: But as Distempers come without
our leave, so neither will they go, but when Heaven pleases. And if sometimes I
do appear to indulge it, it is as my Sister very well observed, the melancholy
Constitution I am subject to, inclines me so to do. But my dear Sister
(addressing himself to her) I am resolved to take your Counsel, and come and
see what Cheer you keep at home, and go sometimes a hunting with my Brother,
and use all means I can to conquer this so troublesome Distemper. And so began
to be more merry with them.

CHAP. IV.
How Mr. Nicholas True Love went afterward to his Brother's House, and seemed
to be recovered of his Melancholy, during which time, his Brother's; Wife was
delivered of a fine and lovely Boy.
AFter this kind Visit made by Mr. Arthur and his Lady to his Brother Nicholas,
manifesting so much Kindness to him, he had a strange coufusion of Thoughts
within him; his wicked Purposes were staggered, and he began to boggle at the
Execution of his wicked Designs: For he had once resolved to kill both his kind
Brother and his Wife, that so he might be Lord of his Inheritance; but this
unatural Resolution (upon his cooler thoughts) began to be too horrid in his
Eyes; as well as it had too much Danger in it: He knew his Brother and his
Sister's Virtues, had made 'em well beloved by all the Country, and had few
Enemies; and if such a Fact should be committed, 'twou'd be a thing impossible
to hinder the Discovery: But now their Kindness had so over come him, that the
Ingratitude of such an Act, was by his better Genius, set forth in its true
Colors to his Soul, which had not yet lost all remainders of Humanity: He also
thought that time (which in each Age produces mighty Alterations) might bring
about his black Designs by ways less hazardous; and that he might obtain his
Ends without that load of Guilt, which such a horrid and infamous Action must
needs have brought upon him.

Having thus ruminated in himself, he puts on the most pleased Countenance he
could, and told his Wife (who was a Woman that deserved a better Husband, and
unto whom he nevar durst communicate the least of those black thoughts that
haunted him) that he intended to go see his Brother, and repay him his kind
Visit, and there see if he could divert himself, and shake his melancholy
Humor off: Which the good-natured Gentlewoman was extremely glad to hear, and
seconded his Resolution all she coul'd.

When he came to his Brother's, he was received by him and by his Sister, with
all the Kindness that was possible; who were extremely glad to see him look
with a serener Air than he was wont to do; and told him they rejoiced to see
him so much mended. To whom he pleasantly replied, He Would took his Sister's
Counsel, and was come thither to divert himself, and shake his Melancholy off.
His Brother was well pleased with what he said, and nothing was omitted which
might contribute to so good a Resolution: He went a hunting often with his
Brother, and visiting of other Neighboring Gentry, who now began to have a
greater Kindness for him, then e're they had before.

But now the time was come for the young Lady to be brought a-bed, and through
the kind Assistance of Lucina, was safe delivered of a young Son, to the great
Joy of all the Family. But that which was the Father's Joy became the Brother's
Grief; for by this Heir, he saw himself and Children dispossessed of what he had
so long esteemed his own; and could not so contract his angry Brow, but that
some Clouds appeared within his Face; but yet he wished his Brother and his
Sister Joy, and drank a Health to the long Life and Happiness of his young
Nephew: Which as he truly wished not then, so he obstructed afterward. But
quickly after finding this new Heir gave him a fresh Disturbance, which he was
not willing should be taken notice of, he therefore told his Brother and his
Sister that his Occasions did now call him home, and so begged their Excuse for
his Departure, and returned home again.

CHAP. V.
How Mr. Arthur True Love had a Daughter born two Years after his Son: And of
the happy Life his Wife and he enjoyed.
MR Nicholas True Love being returned home, and reflecting opon the kind
Entertainment he had received from his Brother and Sister, could not but in
spite of all ill nature blame himself for repining at his Brother's Happiness;
and therefore resolved for the time to come, that he would stifle all those
wicked Inclinations that had hitherto disturbed him; and accordingly carried it
toward them, with all Kindness and respect which became him, toward so kind
and good-natured a Brother; so that both Families were (or at least seemed to
be) happy in each other; and Providence in less than two Years afterward
crowned Mr. Arthur True Love and virtuous Spouse, with a fair Daughter to his
lovely Son, to which he gave its Mother's Name, as his young Son had his: So
that they looked upon themselves (and were indeed) as happy as their Hearts
could wish: His Prudence and good Husbandry increasing his Estate, which still
grew more and more, by all he gave away; for such was his extensive Charity,
that he never suffered any to go away an hungry from his Door, nor discontented
neither, as far as he could help it: For he still found the more he gave away,
letting Descretion always be his Guide, the more his Wealth increased upon his
Hand. For what he thus distributed abroad to such as were fit Objects for his
Charity, was like the Seed, which with a liberal Hand being shed upon the
ground, brought forth a suitable Increase in its appointed Season. Nor was his
virtuous Lady idle in her Station; but being skilled in the peculiar Vitues of
most Herbs and Flowers, her Closet was a small Apothecary's Shop, from whence
on all occasions she dispensed both Food and Physic to her needy Neighbors.
Whilst both his virtuous Lady and himself thought themselves happy in each
other, and in their little Son and Daughter, in whom and in their Issue, they
had the Prospest of a kind of Immortality intailed upon their Family; and did
not doubt but their Posterity might live for many Ages yet to come. But ah how
differently do things fall out from what we often imagine, and other Scenes
appear, than what at present is within our Prospect.

CHAP. VI.
How Mr. Arthur True Love and his Wife fell sick; and how his Brother Nicholas
came to see 'em.
HOw often have we seen the Sun (that glorious Ruler of the Day) shine with
illustrious Beams of splendent Light, and scatter his bright Rays through all the
Heavens; when on a sudden some envious interposing Cloud has robbed us of its
Luster, and brought a glooms Darknesy over the World? Just so it was with Mr.
Arthur True Love, for on a sudden his Health and his Wife's too, were both
exchanged for Sickness; both failing sick, and both of one Distemper at the
self-same-time; but what that was, neither themselves nor their Physicians
could determine, but did resolve it into some occule Morbisick Matter, which
had been long a breeding, but now came to a Head, and threatened to disolve
their earthly Tabernacle. What afterward ensued made some reflect, as if his
Brother Nicholas had offered some foul Play to 'em, at an Entertainment that he
gave 'em at his House about three Months before; when out of an Excess of
Kindness, he had 'em up into his Closet, and there gave 'em a Dram, which as he
said he kept for his own drinking; for though they both remained well three
Months after, yet there are Poisons may be so prepared as to lie latent so long
time within their Bodies and yet at last as surely kill; as if a Sword had
pierced their very Hearts; and that his Brother and his Sister no'r mistrusted
it, can be no Argument; for neither did they in the least imagine how
afterward he dealt with their dear Children; for if they had they never had
made him Guardian over'cm. But be that how it will, certain it is, that as
these virtuous Pair found their Distemper attack 'em with renewed Violence, and
that it baffled the Physicians Remedies, they sent with all imaginable speed
for Mr. Nicholas True Love to come to 'em; who seemed to be exceedingly
surpised at the bad News; and therefore hastened to go to visit them.

When Mr. Nicholas came into the Chamber, and saw in what Condition they both
lay, he looked as if he would have fallen down dead, and needed a Physician
more than they did; and seemed so troubled that he could not speak. At last
recovering himself a little (or seeming so to do) he thus began to speak: My
dear Brother and Sister, wonder not that you see me so disturbed; for it is the
most heart-killing Sight I ever yet beheld; to see you both upon a Bed of
Sickness, (you whom I love to that degree, not my own Wife and Children are
more dear to me) it drives me nigh the Confines of another World! O break my
Heart, and let me not survive it! Would my own Death might but preserve your
Lives, how much should I rejoice to make the Exchange! But is there nothing
that I can do for you? No Help! No Remedy! What shall I do? And thereupon the
Tears gushed out so plentifully, as made the Beholders not to doubt of the
sincere Affection he had for 'em. And made his truly loving-Brother say, Pray
Brother do not add to my Affliction, by weeping thus for me; my greatest
Trouble is to see you grieve thus. As to myself and my dear Wife, we are pleased
that we shall go together to a World of Happiness, where we shall have no need
of any thing that we shall leave behind us. Death is the common Lot of all
Mankind, and if it come to us sooner than others, we shall have this Advantage
by it, that we shall thereby be the sooner happy; and freed from whatsoever can
disturb us. But I have one thing, Brother to request of you, and that is, That
you would take the Charge and Care of my dear Children, for to you Care it is I
shall commit 'em.

To this the seemingly sorrowful Brother replied, That tho he had said nothing
to him, yet that unfeigned Love he always bore to him, would infallibly engage
him to take the same Care of his Children, as he would do of his own: At which
the sick Couple being very well satisfied, gave him many Thanks. But their
Brother was exceeding earnest with 'em to try further means for their
Recovering; and told 'em he hoped to see 'em better the next time he came. And
so returned again to his own House; not a little pleased he had so well
dissembled with his Brother.

CHAP. VII.
Showing how Mr. Arthur True Love made his last Will, and dying left his Brother
Nicholas sole Executor, and Guardian to his Children.
AFter the return of Mr. Nicholas True Love to his own House, the Physicians
employed the utmost of their Care for the Recovery of Arthur and his Wife; but
with no Success; For according to the Poet, The Doctor cannot always cure the
Ill,
Sometimes the Malady's beyond the Skill.
And therefore finding their Illness to increase, and expecting nothing else
but it would end in Death, he sent for a (...) Public, and desired him to make
his Will, by which he left his (...)

CHAP. IX.
How the two Ruffians took the two Children on pretense of having them to
London, and carried them into a great Wood in order to kill 'em: How they two
fell out about it, and one killed the other; the surviving Villain leaving the
two Children in the Wood, where they miserably perished with Hunger.
THe Ruffians whom True Love had agreed with, came in the Afternoon and brought
a Letter to him, to desire the Children might be sent up to London to their
Mother's Aunt: Which Mrs. True Love would by no means agree to; for she knew
none could take more care of 'em than she had dome; but her Husband was
resolved they should go; their Aunt was a rich Widow, he said, and had no
Children of her own, and she would ^^^ve all she had to 'em and he would not be their
hinderance.

The next day, all things being (...) their pretended Journey, comes the two
seeming Carriers with Horses to (...) up these harmless Babes toward London,
who were both very glad they should ride a Cock-horse. And Mrs. True Love having
kissed them with as true an Affection as her Husband did in a feigned one, took
her leave of them, charging the supposed Carriers to have a great Care of 'em,
and see they were well used.

The Ruffians having got the Babes in their Possession, and the Reward that
True Love promised them, rid some Miles toward London, the little prating
Travelers (who now, poor Innocents! were traveling to their long Home)
entertaining their Murderers with such pretty innocent Discourses, as would
even have mollified a Heart of Stone, and softened the Breasts of Tygres, but
these were far more hard and savage; At last they came to a great Wood, by
which there was a narrow Lane turned out of the Road, into which they went, and
there alighting took the poor Children down, and went into the Wood together,
the Children talking to them all the while; which made the milder Villian of
the two persuade the other to save their Lives, since they had had already
their Reward; and that 'twas best to carry them and leave them near some
unfrequented Village were somebody might see them and take them in; but this
the other Relentless Rogue refused; alleging True Love had paid 'em largely,
and therefore upon Honor they were bound to perform their Word: [See what
mistaken Notions some Men have of Honor; when nothing can be Honorable, but
what is honest, just, and virtuous.] But in this Contest the Quarrel grew so
high, that they from Words fell to their Swords, and he that was for killing of
the Children, was first killed himself; whilst the poor Babes stood crying by,
frighted to see them quarrel. The surviving Villain, after the other's Death,
came to the Children, and bid them leave their crying, and go along with him,
and he would have 'em where they should have some Victuals; and after he had
led them about two Miles farther in the Wood, he bid 'em sit down upon the
Grass, and he would bring them presently some Sugar-plumes, and Bread and
Butter, with which, the Children being pleased sat down, expecting it
accordingly. And there he left these harmless Babes to perish; as surely (though
not so kindly) killing them, as if he^d cut their Throats. Tired with their
Journey, and their Expectation of the Man's Return, as it grew dark they fell a
crying, which they continued so long till they fell aslep; and waking in the
Morning, they got up, and sought to get out of the VVood; which when they could
not do, they searched for Food, and found some Black-berries, and some few wild
Apples, which not sustaining Nature, they soon dyed with Hunger; and although
they had none to bury them, the kinder Robin-red-breast buried them with Leaves.

True Love informed by the surviving Villain, that they had muther'd the young
Children, six Months after produces a counterfeit Letter from the pretended
Aunt in London, that his pretty Nephew and Neice, were both dead of the Small
Pox, who showed as much counterfeit Sorrow as any for their Deaths: And at last
got the Estate which he so much coveted.

But though he had contrived all this so privately, yet Divine Vengeance followed
him; affrighting Dreams terrifying him in his Sleep, and the Image of the
murdered Children still staring him in the Face; and he that egged him on to
all this Wickedness, now in most horrid Shapes appeared to him, and threatening
every Moment to destroy him. Besides, most of his Cattle died of the Murrain,
his Corn was blasted, and his Barns were fired by Lightning; Mildews and
Catter-pillars destroyed all his Fruits; two of his Sons, for whom he coveted
his Brother Lands, were cast away at Sea. His company was hared by all honest
Men, and he was forced to herd with Rogues and Villains out of mere necess^^y,
amongst whom when he had profusely lavished his Estate, he run in Debt, and was
cast into Prison, where through Despair and Want he died unpitied.

Nor did that cruel Miscreant, that left the innocent Children to perish in the
Wood, escape deserved Punishment: For he being taken for a notorious Robbery,
was convicted and sentenced to dye for the same. And at the place of his
Execution, confessed the Murder of his Fellow rogue, and of his leaving the
innocent Children in the Wood, and how he and his Companion were hired to
murder them, by their Uncle Nicholas True Love.

The Norfolk Gentleman's last Will and Testament, etc.
NOw ponder well, you Parents dear,
these Words which I shall write,
A doleful Story you shall hear,
in time brought forth to light:
A Gentleman of good account,
in Norfolk dwelt of late,
Whose Wealth and Riches did surmum,
most Men of his Estate.
Sore sick he was, and like to dye,
no help that he could have;
His Wife by him as sick did lie,
and both possessed one Crave:
No love between these two was lost, each was to other kind,
In love they lived, in love they died, and left two Babes behind.
The one a fine and prity Boy, not passing three Years old,
The other a Girl more young than he, and made in Beauty's Mould:
The Father left his little Son, as plainly does appear,
When he to perfect Age should come, three hundred Pounds a year.
And to his little Daughter Jane, five hundred Pound in Gold,
To be paid down on Marriage-day, which might not be controlled;
But if the Children chance to dye, e're they to age should come,
Their Uncle should possess their Wealth for so the Will did run.
' Now Brother, (said the dying Man,) look to my Children dear,
' Be good unto my Boy and Girl no Friends else I have here:
' To God and you I do commend, my Children night and day,
' A little while besure we have within this World to stay.
' You must be Father and Mother both, and Uncle all in one;
' God knows what will become of them, when I am dead and gone.
' With that bespoke their Mother dear, O Brother kind, quoth she,
' You are the Man must bring my Babes to Wealth or Misery.
' If you do keep them carefully, then God will you reward,
' If otherwise you seem to deal, God will your Deeds regard.
With lips as cold as any stone, he kissed the Children small,
' God bless you both, my Children dear; with that the tears did fall.
These Speeches then their Brother spoke, to this sick Couple there,
' The keeping of your Children dear, sweet Sister, do not fear;
' God never prosper me nor mine, nor ought else that I have,
' If I do wrong your Children dear when you are laid in Grave.
Their Parents being dead and gone, the Children home he takes,
And brings them home unto his House, and much of them he makes.
He had not kept these prity Babes, a Twelvemonth and a Day,
But for their Wealth he did devise to make them both away.
He bargained with two Ruffians rude, that were of furious Mood,
That they should take the Children young, and slay them in a Wood.
And told his Wife and all he had, he did the Childret send
To be brought up in fair London (...)
Away then went these prity (...)
Rejoicing with a merry mind they should on Cock-horse ride.
They prate and prattle pleasantly, as they rode on the way,
To those that should their Butchers be, and work their Lives decay.
So that the prity speech they had, made Murderers hearts relent,
And they that took the Deed to do, full sore they did repent.
Yet one of them more hard of heart, did vow to do his Charge,
Because the Wretch that hired him, had paid him very large.
The other would not agree thereto, so here they fell at Strife,
With one another they did fight, about the Childrens Life:
And he that was of mildest mood, did slay the other there,
Within an unfrequented Wood, where Babes did quake for fear.
He took the Children by the hand, when tears stood in their Eye,
And bad them come and go with him, and look they did not cry:
And two long Miles he led them thus, while they for Bread complain,
Stay here, quoth he, I Will bring ye Bread, when I do come again.
These prity Babes with hand in hand, went wandering up and down,
But never more they saw the Man, approaching from the Town:
Their prity lips with Black berries, were all besmeared and died,
And when they saw the darksom night, they sat them down and cried.
Thus wandered these two prity Babes, till death did end their grief;
In one another arms they died, as Babes wanting Relief:
No Burial these prity Babes of any Man receives,
Till Robin-red-breast painfully, did cover them with Leaves.
And now the heavy Wrath of God upon there Uncle fell,
Yea fearful Fiends did haunt his house, his Conscience felt an Hell.
His barns were fired, his goods consumed, his lands were barren made,
His Cattle died within the Field, and nothing with him staid.
And in the Voyage of Portugal, two of his Sons did dye;
And to conclude, himself was brought unto much Misery:
He pawned and mortgaged all his land, e're seven years came about;
And now at length this wicked Act, did by this means come out:
The Fellow that did take in hand, these Children for to kill,
Was for a Robbery judged to dye, as was God's blessed Will;
Who did confess the very Truth of what is here expressed;
Their Uncle died while he for debt, did long in Prison rest.
All you that be Executors made, and Overseers eke,
Of Children that be Fatherless, and Infants mild and meek;
Take you Example by this thing, and yield to each his Right,
Least God with such like Misery, your wicked Minds requite.
depiction of Heart in Wood

FINIS.

