POSTSCRIPT
Arminians and friars, so near together dwell,
There is but wall between both^ One like each other well:


The Protestant walks up and down the street (with grief,)
And in his sad distractions to God praes for yreleife
MOST Fearful and strange NEVVES From the Bishoppricke of DVRHAM,

Being a true Relation of one Margret Hooper of Edenbyres, near the River
Darwent in the said Bishoppricke.

Who was most fearfully possessed and tormented with the Devil, as also in
what ugley shape he first appeared unto her, how lamentably she was handled
with this evil spirit, and at last how wonderfully the Lord delivered her.

Affirmed by these Cridible witnesses there present, November the fifteenth.
1641.

Stephen Hooper. John Hooper. John Sky. Alexander Eglestone. Anthony Westgarth
Alice Egleston. And diverse others.
LONDON, Printed for John Thomas 1641.

News out of the Bishopprick of Durham, or strange miracles, and fearful as
ever was seen or heard in the memory of man, And affirmed by diverse creedible
witnesses.
BEloved, and curtious friends and Readers, we have to consider by this strange
discourse, how ready Satan is to take hold on us, if we fall from him never so
little, he continually runs up and down seeking whom he may devour, but
not withstanding his temptations which are great, the mercyes of God are
greater, who never fail to send comfort in temptation, if we accept thereof:
great are the examples, both of Gods mercies, and might put us in remembrance
of our sins, which are infinite and loathsome, wherein if we continue, let
us undoubtedly look for the reward thereof, which is an everlasting
destruction, both of body and soul.

Let not this which is here declared seem a ^^ined fable unto thee, but assure
thy self that all such things are sent as warnings for our wickedness, and to
put us in mind of the Seat of our salvation which is an assured faith in
Christ Jesus, from which pillar if we once shrink, the tempter is ready to
drive us into despair of Gods mercy.

Many are the wonders which have lately happened, as of sudden and strange
deaths of Purjured persons, strange sights in the air, strange births on the
earth, earthquakes, commets, and the like, all which are to put us in mind of
God whose works are wonderful.

These are therefore as many warnings unto us, to be watchful for the day of
the Lord, which is at hand, least suddenly his wrath be kindled against us,
let us therefore pray to Almighty God, to hold back his rod, to be merciful
unto us, and to forgive us that is past, that through the assistance of his
spirit we may with penitent hearts live in his fear to our lives end.

Strange, news out of the Bishoppricke of Durham.
Upon the 15 day of November now last past 1641. there is a yeo man of good and
honest reputation, dwelling in the town of Edinbyres upon Darwent (...) in the
Bishopprick of Durham, whose name is Stephen Hooper, a man of good wealth, and
also welbeloved of his neighbors, who being sick, and lying in aweake estate,
sent his wife whose name was Margret Hooper to a farm which he had in a
village, called Hanstonueth, some three miles off, at whose coming thither, it
seemed all things were not according to her mind. Thus continuing there one
day and something more, she returned home to her husband, partly agreeved at
such things as she thought her husband might reform, if God lent him life,
now when she was come home to Edenbyres, she found her husband recovered to an
indifferent health, to whom she began to use very much idle talk, as we
concerning the same farm as also concerning an old groat, which her son
being a little boy had found about a week before, thus she continued as if she
had been one bewitched, or haunted with an evil Spirit, until the wednesday
at night following, which night she took her rest something indifferently
until the morning, at which time she began with much vain speech to disquiet
her husband, and to use much idle talk, but her husband seeing her in such a
mind, and finding that she was, as it were desperate; he persuaded her to call
upon, God and that being the Creature of God, she should not forget to call
upon her Creator in the day of trouble, wherefore he councelled her to pray
with him, and to say the Lords Prayer after him, which she partly did, but the
devil who always does build the Chapel, so much as he may to (...) gods
Church, began to withdraw her from prayer, and to p^^ her in mind to (...)
most fearful fort, for the groat, which he Son had lately found, as also
for her weding Ring, desiring to see them with all speed, her husband made no
great have thereunto, but continued in prayer that it would please God to send
her a more quiet spirit, and to strengthen her that fairh might speedily
uanquish such vanity in her, but the more he prayed and persuaded her to
prayer, the more she seemed to be as it were troubled with some evil spirit,
calling for the old groat, which her husband neglected to show her, whereat
she began with a uery s^^^ne and staring countenance to look on her husband
in most wonderful sort, that he was sore affrighted at the then he called for
her sister, for that he was not able to keep her in the bed, which when her
sister and others were come into the chamber, they kept her down uiolently in
her bed, and forthwith she was so sore tormented that she foamed at the
mouth, and was shaken with such force, that the bed and the chamber did shake
and move in most strainge sort, her husband continued praying for her
deliverance, so that within one half hour after her shaking was past, she
began to tell them she had been in the Towerne to beat away the beat which
followed her into the yard, when she came from H^^sten-^^rth, which to her
thinking had noe head, then her husband and frinds wished her to leave those
uaine imaginations, persuading her that it was nothing but the lightness of
her brain, which was become Idle for want of rest, wherefore her husband and
friends exhorted her to say the Lords prayer with them, which she did, and
after took some rest, and thus she continued until the Satterday following,
in which time she continued raging, as it were distract of her memory, which
came by fits, to the great grief of her husband, friends, and neighbors, yet
upon the Satterday there was some hopes of her recovery, for that she took
some reasonable rest, to the comfort of her husband and friends, and upon the
Sunday she seemed to be very patient, and conformable until midnight at which
time the candle which was set burning in the same Chamber was burned, she then
suddenly awaking, called to her husband, and cried out saying, that she did
see a strange thing like unto a snale, carrying fire in a most wonderful sort,
whereat her husband was amazed, and seeing the candle was cleene burnt out,
called to his Brothers and Sisters that were in the house, with other of their
friends watching, and sitting up to comfort her, if her extreme fit should any
way molest her, who hearing him call, come in, and brought a candle lighted,
and set it upon the table, which stood near where the woman lay, She began to
wax very fearful, saying to her husband and the rest, do not you see the
Devil, whereat they desired her to remember God, and to call for grace that
her faith might only be fixed upon him, to the vanquishing the Devil and his
assaults, Hell (quoth she) if you see nothing now, you shall see something by
and by, and forthwith they heard a great noise in the street, as if it had
been the coming of four or five carts, and presently they in the chamber
cried out saying, Lord help us, what manner of thing is this that comes
here, then her husband looking up in his bed, espied a thing coming to the
bed, much like a bear, but it had no head nor tail, half a yard in height,
and half a yard in length, her husband seeing it come to the bed rose up, and
took a joint stool, and struck at the said thing, the stroke founded as
though he had stricken upon a fether-bed, then it came to the woman, and stroke
her three times upon the feet, and took her out of the bed, and so rouled her
too and fro in the Chamber, and under the bed, the people then present, to the
number of seven persons, were so greatly amazed with this horrible sight, that
they knew not what to do, yet they called still upon God for his assistance,
but the candle was so dim, that they could scarcely see one another, at the
last this Monster, which we supposed to be the Devil, did thrust the woman's
head between her legs, and so rouled her in around compass, like an hoope
through the other Chambers, down an high pair of stairs into the Hall, where
he kept her the space of a quarter of an house, her husband and they in the
Chamber above, durst not come down to her, but remained in prayer, weeping at
the stai^es head grievously lamenting to see her so carried away, there was
such an horrible stink in the Hall, and such fiery flames, that they were glad
to stop their noses with clothes, and napkines, then the woman cried out
calling to her husband, now he is gone, then quoth he in the name of God come
up to me, and so even upon the sudden she was come up so quickly, that they
greatly marveiled at it, then they brought her to bed, and four of them, kept
down the clothes about the bed, and continued in prayer about her, the candle
in the Chamber could not burn clear, but was very dim, and suddenly the
woman was got out of the bed, and the Window at the beds head opened, whether
the woman unpind the Winddow, or how it came to pass, they knew not but it was
opened, and the wamons legs after a miraculous manner thrust out of the
Winddow, so that they were clasped about the post in the middle of the Winddow
between her legs, the people of the Chamber heard a thing knock at her feet
as if it had been upon a tubb, and they saw a great fire, as it seemed to them
at her feet, the stink whereof was horrible, the sorrowful husband and his
brother, imboldened themselves in the Lord, and did charge the Devil in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to depart from her, and to
trouble her no more, then they laid hands upon her, and cried to the Lord, to
help them in that their (...) and so pulled her in again, and set her upon
her feet, then she looked out of a winddow and began to say O Lord (quoth she)
me think I see a little child, but they gave not regard to her, these words she
spoke two or three times, so at the last they all looked our at the winddow,
and so they espied a thing (...) little child, with a very bright shi^ning
countenance, (...) a great light in the Chamber, and the candle burned very
brightly so that they might one see another, then they fell flat to the ground,
and prayed the Lord that he had so wonderfully assisted them, and so the child
vanished (...) the woman being in better feling of her self, was laid in her
bed, and a ked forgiveness at Gods hands, and of all that she had offended,
acknowledging that it was for her (...), that she was so (...), of the evil
spirit, and God be thanked she has been ever since, in some reasonable order,
for there has been with her many godly learned men, from diverse places of the
Country.

These are the names of the witnesses that it is most true.

Steven Hooper. John Hooper. John ^ky. Alexander Egleston. Anthony Westgarth.
Ali^ Egleston. with diverse others.

FINIS.

