A DISCOURSE CONCERNING A Lumber-Office: BEING A True Remedy FOR THE Scarcity
of Money.

LONDON: Printed by Sam Darker, for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
1696.

A DISCOURSE concerning A Lumber-Office: BEING A True Remedy for the Scarcity
of Money.
A Lumber-Office has been long since suggested as an undertaking of great
Advantage to the Nation, and certainly it is our misfortune that ways and means
to render it practicable have not yet been adjusted. But if it were desirable
formerly, much more may it now, during the scarcity of money; for the Notes of
Credit which might be given out upon the security of Goods, would be in effect
so much money, and the National Medium of Commerce being thus enlarged, Trade
might take its course as formerly: but according to the present method we are
in, Money is growing scarcer, and Trade is decaying daily. Some may perhaps
impute our Calamity to the present Abatement of the Numbered Money: but there is
no reason for that, since we have experienced not long ago that Guineys (alone)
did much better answer the demands of Trade, than all our Gold and Silver does
now; or if such Abatement before mentioned, were the cause of it, what is the
reason that by so vast an addition of new Money as has been since Coined, we do
not find our Calamity proportionably redressed? The Addition of two Millions,
certainly is sufficient to make a Conjecture by; but if instead of relief we
find Money more scarce, and Trade more sunk, then the cause of our suffering
lies somewhere else, Viz. In the loss of our Paper Credit: And unless this be
re-established as well as the Coin, our difficulties must continue. You Will say,
when the Coin is Reminted, Paper will be paid as formerly, and so its credit
will be restored in statu quo. But Money having got the start, it will be a long
time before Paper can overtake it again: For how can Paper be restored unless
Notes be paid? And how can Notes be paid so long as Money bears a price? (For
the profit by Banking, will not Countervail the charge of procuring Money to pay
Paper with) and how can we expect this price should be brought down by the
Addition of 3 or 4 Millions more to complete our cash, since three Millions
already Coined have no way abated its price? But after all, we find Money is
scarcer then ever. It Is somewhat surprising, but yet the reason is plain: Paper
was always of such use in Trade, that it is more then probable, the National
Cash was hardly a third part of the medium of Commerce; and if 2 thirds of this
medium shall be sunk, it necessary follows, that the other third should bear a
considerable price; and price will make it more scarce, because every Man will
keep it for Sale; and at this rate, had we never so much Coined, it would never
be plenty. Whereas if Paper were Current, there would be no Temptation to keep
up Money; for as Money Circulates Paper, so Paper Circulates Money, i. e. draws it
forth into use: And therefore they are absolutely necessary to each other. Some
perhaps may fancy it better, that Paper were altogether laid aside, and that
its Room were supplied with Plenty of Money; but as the former would be absurd,
so the latter is impracticable, it is impossible to multiply Money to that
degree, as to Answer (by it self) the demands of Trade; for the Gold and Silver
Manufactures do employ great part of the Bullion, and it is not much can be
spared to make Money of; and when it is made, if Bullion be wanting to their
Business, the Money must return to the melting Pot, because such Demands of
Bullion, will raise its price beyond the value of the Money. But suppose all the
Silver and Gold extant, were made into Money, and that it were possible to
preserve it in that form, yet this whole quantity is but little, Comparatively
to the value of all other Merchandice, and therefore would be but a scanty
Disproportionable measure, to the thing measured. Thus it being past all doubt,
that Paper is indispensably necessary to the Interest of Trade; the next thing
will be to propose such a sort of Paper, as will be unexceptionable. As for the
Notes abroad, at present, it is impossible they should be paid; during the price
of Money, for so, the Bankers would quickly pay themselves out of Doors; but the
secured Notes we here treat of, will be paid, in regard the Merchants and
Tradesmen that give them out upon their Goods, do receive such considerable
Advantage by them, that they cannot but think it worth their while to purchase
Money at any rate to pay them withal; thus if they are duly paid, they will
Answer as Money, and so (by removing the discount between Money and Paper) Trade
will revive and our difficulties will soon be over.

Having premised a few things, to show the reasonableness of this undertaking,
I shall proceed to give a description of a plain and practicable method to
Accomplish what we have proposed, and tho it be in brief, yet I hope it may be
clear and satisfactory to all, Viz.

1. The Pledge here intended is not to be Lands nor Houses, but Goods, for
these being moveable are free from all dispute about Title, and are readily
sold, in case the Notes secured by them are not duly paid.

2. These Goods are to be made security according to form of Law, (not that
they are pawned; for here is no Money borrowed on them, nor are they to be
redeemed by Money) but they are deposited in the hands of an indifferent person,
to assure the Bearer of such Notes, that the respective Principals are able to
pay, and by their making them a strict security, it appears, they resolve to be
punctual at time of Payment.

3. The goods designed to be entered at the Office, are first to be viewed by a
Sworn Appraiser, who has given Security of his fidelity in that matter, he is
to draw up an Inventory of their Qualities, Quantities and Values: The
Warehouse-Keeper that is to take them into Custody being present, that he may
be able to Subscribe, that he has received the Contents of the Inventory: And
the Warehouse-Keeper having received the Goods, is to declare a trust for the
Bearers of the Notes given out upon them, whereby he is obliged to detain them
until the Notes are satisfied.

4. The deed whereby the Goods are made a Pledge, may contain to this effect,
Viz. That the Goods entered shall be redeemable at any time, with the same
Number of Notes taken out upon them. That the Goods may be viewed by A. B. at
the Lumber-Office, or his assigus once after entry, if they shall think fit.
That they shall be removed within 12 Months after Entry. That a tenth part of
the value of the Notes in Money, be Lodged at the place of payment, directed on
the Notes respectively. That all such Notes shall be duly paid within 14 days,
after the respective Bearers have given notice thereof at the place of Payment.
That in case the owner shall lapse the time of Payment for the space of 3 days,
after the said Term of 14 days, then the Bearer is Authorized to seize and sell
the Goods, and make himself restitution: Provided always that the owner have 3
days warning, before such seizure. And that at the time of seizure, the owner
may if he please prevent it, by paying the Contents of the Notes, with an
overplus of 12 pence per Note, per Diem, for the Bearers Damages and
Disappointment. This Instrument is to be so drawn up, as to be firm security to
the Bearer of Notes, nor need the owner be Solicitous at the firmness of such
Obligation, for he is bound to no more then what common honesty always obliges
him to, Viz. To pay his Debts. For if he give out these Notes in payment as
Money, he must expect to Answer them with Money, when Demanded, or that his Goods
make satisfaction. Nor are his Goods in any Danger, unless he utterly deserts
them (which cannot be supposed) for the owner is always sure of 3 days notice,
before the Goods can be Alienated.

5. The Warehouse to receive the Goods, is not one particular place (for then a
vast Treasure might be consumed if fire happen) but any Warehouse will serve,
provided it be Common and Free for every Man's use. The owner may choose one
where he pleases, and pitch on proper Apartments there, as shall be agreeable
to his Goods; he may secure them under a Lock, and keep the Key, and have free
access to them when he pleases: But he must not remove any thing, until it be
discharged at the Office, for so the Warehouse Keeper having declared a trust
for the Bearer, might come to damage.

6. The Money set apart to Circulate the Notes, must be Lodged somewhere in some
trusty hand that the owner shall choose, who is to certify in Writing, that he
received such a sum from such a one, and will keep it in trust for the Bearers
of his Notes, or until he return the said Certificate, etc. This is the place
the Note is to be directed to, and hither the Bearer must repair for his Money.
As for the Banker that takes this trouble on him, it cannot be supposed he
makes any advantage by the Money, it being no more then sufficient to Circulate
the Notes, therefore the owner when he takes up his Notes, is to pay him a
recompense of so much per Note.

7. When the owner of Goods would enter them in the Office, he is to bring the
foresaid Inventory with the Warehouse-Keepers and Bankers Certificates, and
having Signed the aforesaid Articles of Agreement, he is to have 3 fourths of
the value in five pound Notes, which are of this form: I promise to pay unto
Mr. -- or Bearer, the Sum of five Pounds within fourteen days after his first
Demand. Witness my hand, etc.

8. These Notes when they are first paid away, are to be Dated and Signed by
their Principals, i. e. those that took them out of the Office. Thereby the
Bearer will know who is ultimately accountable for the Note, in case the Pledge
should come to any disaster. So that the Bearer has double security for the
value of his Note; the Pledge ensures the owner, and the owner (by giving his
Note of promise as aforesaid) ensures the Pledge: For by that Note he is as
much accountable for the Money, as if no Pledge had been deposited. And here you
may observe, that as he that takes the Notes is safe from any loss by them, so
he that gives them out is secure from being run upon, in regard of the fourteen
days warning, for in that time he may make provision for their Payment.

9. When the owner would withdraw his Goods out of the Warehouse, and Money out
of the Bankers hand, he is to bring the Office so many Notes as he received,
and take up all his Papers, whereby he is able to discharge the Banker and
Warehouse-Keeper from their trusts, and so may command his Goods and Money again.

10. Whereas the Counterfeiting of Notes is so often practiced, and thereby
their credit and currency much obstructed, we have provided a peculiar way of
Discrimination, which will effectually secure them from Forgery, because hereby
every Man that receives the Notes will be able to try their truth without going
to the Office. The expedient is this: On one part of the Note is fixed a piece
of Paper that is Chymically prepared, which if you write on with a peculiar
sort of Ink, the strokes will presently change from black to red, but on other
Paper the writing by the said Ink will remain black; this Ink every Man may
keep by him, and thereby Examine his Notes when he pleases with very little
trouble, and if they Answer such Trial he may be assured they are right;
because of the great difficulty of such a Forgery; for tho other Notes may be
exactly imitated by those that through long practice have arrived at skill in
writing and engraving, yet these Notes will not be so exposed, because this
secret is not to be obtained by the dint and force of Industry as the other
Arts are, but its discovery (if it happen) will be merely fortuitous; and after
that, the Man that knows it, is never the more capable of forming a
Counterfeit, unless he be dexterous also at Writing and Engraving (for these
Lumber-Notes will be Printed from a Copper Plate, etc.) and as it is very
unlikely that any one Man should ever be qualified to perform the whole
business himself, so it is very great odds, if several Men accomplished for the
several parts of such a Forgery shall happen to be so well acquainted as to
meet and concert this affair. Or after all, if such a thing should happen, we
can but call in the former Notes and Exchange them for others that have a new
Criterion, and so we may defy those impious Artists to begin as soon as they
please, for (considering the difficulty of finding out this secret, the fatigue
of giving a Note that Justness as to be fit to put off, the hazard of discovery
in putting off, and the loss of all their charge and pains by the appointing of
a new Criterion) it is demonstrable it cannot be worth their while.

11. The Goods fit to be entered on this account are all such, as are durable
and of steady value, but those especially are most fit that contain much value
under a small Bulk, for hereby the owner will save a great deal of the Charge
of Warehouse-Room. And also those that require long keeping, and are the better
for Age (such as Leather, Tobacco, etc.) for so the owner reaps double
Advantage, having his Stock to improve while his Goods are also upon
improvement.

12. And lastly, consider the profit that every Man may make by entering Goods,
which will be very great both to the Landed-Man and Tradesman, as I shall
endeavor to Demonstrate.

First, The Landed-Man may make the Products of his Land, such as Corn, Wool,
Timber, Coals, Metals, etc. A medium of Commerce which shall be Answerable to
all intents and purposes, as Gold and Silver, and by Consequence the Land that
produces such Goods, will be as valuable as if it had actually yielded those
Noble Metals, and when by this means the medium of Commerce shall be enlarged,
the interest of Money will fall much lower, which will be another occasion of
Advancing the value of Land.

Secondly, The Tradesman will meet with great Advantages not only by the low
interest of Money, but by the opportunity of Trading upon the credit of his Dead
Stock of Goods; which I shall evince by the following Examples. Suppose a
Merchant has by him 4000 l. worth of Goods which he cannot dispose of at present
to Advantage, he therefore enters them according to the methods proposed for
3000 l. credit ( i. e. 600 five pound Notes) to Circulate this credit he is at
the Charge of procuring a tenth part of the said sum, i. e. 300 l. in specie,
this perhaps during the present scarcity of Money may cost him 17 per cent. But
this Charge will cease as soon Notes and Money are reduced to an Equality.

The other Charge is as follows, l. s. d. For the interest of 300 l. for a
whole year 18 0 0 For 600 Lumber-Notes at 2 d. each 5 0 0 For Appraisment of
the Goods suppose 1 0 0 For entry at the Office 0 5 0 24 5 0

This is all the Charge that properly belongs to this account. As for Cartage,
Porterage, Warehouse-Room, etc. The Goods will require whether they are
concerned in this matter or nor. So then the Merchant will enjoy the effective
sum of 3000 l. the space of a year, for the charge of 24 l. 5 s. tho at first,
we must add 48 l. more, being the price of Procuration, both which together
make 72 l. 5 s d. whereas the usual interest of so much Money amounts to 850 l.
per An. So that the Merchant gains 77 l. 15 s. over and above the usual profits
he hopes to make when he fells these Goods. But as soon as Money and Notes
become equal, his Charge will be only 24 l. 5 s. and then he will (instead of
the 77 l. aforesaid) be gainer 126 l. 15 s. This I think is good Encouragement,
considering that if he let his Stock lie by dead a whole year, he not only
loses the interest of 4000 l. viz. 200 l. But is in the mean time straightened in
his Business, for want of Stock to Trade with.

But besides, there is another thing very considerable for the Tradesman's
Encouragement, and that is the quick Returns of his Stock, which are promoted
by this method; as for Example, suppose a Man has a dead Stock of Goods to the
value of 40 l. he enters these at the office for 30 l. Credit: hereby it is
evident that ths of his Stock is immediately returned. This 30 l. Credit is
specified by 6 Notes; and with these (suppose) he buys more Goods to the value
of 30 l. which he enters for 4. Notes, or 20 l. Credit, and so makes a return
of of his Original Stock. This 20 l. Credit will purchase more Goods to the
value of 20 l. and these may be entered for 3 Notes, and these 3 Notes will buy
15 l. worth of Goods, that may be entered, etc. for 2 Notes; these will purchase
10 l. worth of Goods which may be entered, etc. for one Note, and this will buy
5 l. worth of Goods. Thus by every bargain and entry he has returned some part
of his Original Stock. Now if he sell all these Goods (which together amount to
the value of 120 l.) at the rate of 10 per Cent profit, he then raises the sum
of 122 l. out of this he is to Answer 16 Notes, which comes to 80 l. then he
has left (40 l.) his first Stock, and 12 l. gains, which after all charges are
deducted, may be about (9 l.) Now compare this method with the present way of
Trade. Suppose a Tradesman disposes of 40 pounds worth of Goods for 10 per Cent
profit, (which is 4 l.) and after 9 or 12 months he receives his Money. And
having deducted the interest lost by trusting so long, he really gains, but 1
l. 13 s. 4 d. which is but a poor recompense for his Charge, Trouble, and
Hazard: And upon this Account it is, that the Generality of Tradesmen are
exposed to very great Discouragements, which will be removed by this expedient
of a Lumber-Office.

I shall next Answer various Queries, that will naturally arise upon this
subject.

Q. How shall we make these Notes pass, for at this time nothing will satisfy
but Money? Answ. There is no doubt, but that if Notes are well secured and duly
paid, they will be accepted as Money, nevertheless, those that are positive in
their Demands of Money, may be as freely paid in Money as Notes, for it is really
all one, in paying Notes you part with the same value as if it were Money. But
if it happen you have not Money, they must either take your Notes, or trust on
till you have it. And be sure, rather then depend upon uncertainties they will
take these secured Notes, for by these they are sure of their Money in fourteen
days.

Q. But why should I thus oblige my self to pay in 14 days? When at present I
am at Liberty, to hold my Creditours in Play as many months if I please. Answ.
There is no reason why a just debt should not be paid in 14 days as well as 14
Months, nor is there any thing got by delay, since it must be paid at last.
Perhaps you will say you save the interest of the Money, but it is most certain the
Tradesman must allow himself for that loss, in the price of his Goods* or else
he cannot live, and one time or other you must refund what you have so sordidly
gotten. But further consider this Liberty of paying when you please; confounds
all Trade, for the Tradesman cannot lay hold on several opportunities of buying,
because he is kept out of his Money, nor dare he accept of many opportunities of
selling, for fear of slow Payment and bad Debts: But if he were sure of his
Money in 14 days, or a month, or two, or be it more, so it be but certain; it is
as good as ready Money, because he can order his Affairs with certainty. And
lastly consider, that the punctual Payment here required is absolutely
necessary, to support the currency of your Notes, and if you cannot comply with
the Terms, you must deny your self those Advantages which are to be made, by
having Credit on your dead Stock of Goods.

Q. But how can a tenth part in specie suffice for Circulating these Notes? For
certainly during the violent Demands of specie, nothing less than an equal
quantity will do. And if so, it cannot be worth while to purchase Money at 17
per Cent. for this purpose. Answ. Yes, it is worth while tho an equal quantity
of specie were always necessary for this purpose. For suppose you pay 17 l. to
procure the Loan of 100 l. in specie to Circulate 100 l. in Paper, you then
have the effectual sum of 200 l. for the said premium of 17 l. which is no
more then half the prices what others are forced to give. And further consider,
if these Notes are so secured, that their Payment is certain and unavoidable, I
cannot see, but that they are equivalent to specie, and may be bought and sold
as such, and seeing you are furnished at a half price, you have an opportunity
of Advantage by selling them, if you do not need them for other uses. But when
the medium of Commerce shall be so far enlarged, as to cause this price of Money
to cease, you will easily grant me that the Demands of specie will be so
moderate, as that all Notes may be Circulated by a tenth part in specie.

Q. But why should I put my self to Charge in taking out these Notes, since
it is a question whether (if I should pass them away) they will stay abroad so
long, as to Countervail the Charge? Answ. You are sure of 14 days respite, for
every Man in taking the Note, consents to stay so long for his Money, and in
that time it is odds, but the Bearer may have occasion to pay them away, and so
gains you longer time, or if he have no urgent occasion, it is not probable he
should be in Post haste to give the pre-requisite warning of 14 days; being
well assured his Money is good: Either way you have a fair chance for gaining
time. Or suppose the worst, that he comes on the 14th day after the date of the
Note, yet you are no loser, as appears by this Example which we mentioned
before. Suppose you have given out 600 Notes to one Man, and he brings them all
again on the 14th day, to be Answered with 3000 l. in Money; the Money was due
when you paid out the Notes, but by defering it for 14 days, you have so much
of the Interest as amounts to 7 l. whereas the charge of the Notes, the Entry,
Appraisment, etc. is all together but 6 l. 5 s. So that you are no loser.

Q. But suppose I am run upon with Notes, at a time when I am bare of Money,
must my Goods by such an accident he exposed to seizure? Answ. You can never be
surprised as you imagine, because you have always 14 days notice to provide for
Payment. Again, consider that the reasons which moved you to be concerned in
entering Goods, have influenced abundance of Tradesmen besides: And if you find
any one of these to press impertinently for specie, it is likely the Office, if
you desire it, may be able in 14 days time to help you to so many of his Notes
as will pay him. Doubtless, the mere possibility of such a thing will be a
check upon all troublesome demands of specie, and if Tradesmen shall for this
reason favor one another, you need not fear other persons, for they are not
like to have so many of your Notes as to puzzle your Payment.

Q. But why do you propose only a tenth part to be Lodged at the Bankers, for
Circulating the Notes, when it is evident, an equal part can but just suffice:
For at first every Man will be eager to try the strength of his Note, and draw
out the Money as soon as possible? Answ. At first therefore you must be Cautious
not to deliver out more Notes then your specie will Answer: And afterward,
when the World begins to be acquainted with the validity of the Notes, they
will not be in such haste to draw out their Money, and so you may gradually give
out the rest of your Notes.

Q. But may not the Bearer of Notes, who is invested with the power of selling
the Goods, be injurious to the owner by unnecessary exposing them to Sale?
Answ. No, he cannot, for according to agreement in the deed, the owner is to
have 3 days notice before Seizure can be made, and in that time he may prevent
it if he please by paying the Money, or if any damage happen afterward, it is
wholly owing to himself.

Q. But suppose I have entered Goods on this Account, and have delivered out all
my Notes; must I stay till all these Notes return home again, before I can take
out my Goods from the Warehouse? Answ. No, tho your Notes are all abroad, yet
you may remove your Goods at any time, provided you bring so many Lumber-Notes
of one sort or other, for they being equally secured by valuable Pledges, may
promiscuously exchange for each other.

Q. But if I remove my Goods while my Notes are abroad, I take away the Pledge
that Answers my Notes, and how are the Bearers safe in that case? Answ. Tho
there are no Goods immediately belonging to your Notes, yet the Notes left in
their Room (when you redeemed your Goods) have Goods to support them: And
whenever the Bearer of your Notes shall repair to the place of payment, and
there find your account closed, he can but carry them to the Office, where they
will be Cancelled, and exchanged for others that will be paid.

Q. But the Warehouse-Keeper has a declared trust for the Bearer of my Notes,
and therefore without sight of those Notes he cannot safely deliver me my
Goods. Answ. If the Warehouse-Keepers obligation be returned him, he is
discharged from his trust. Now this Writing you must procure from him, by
paying an equivalent in Notes at the Office: And when he has taken up this
Writing, he need not care what becomes of those particular Notes.

Q. But how may the Bearer be assured, there are such Goods in Custody, or that
they shall be detained until his Notes are Answered. Answ. The Bearer that is
dissatisfied may view the Writings at the Office, and there see the Testimony
of the Sworn Appraiser, as to matter of fact, who may be believed, both because
he is Sworn to be faithful, and because he has no iuterest to deceive, for if
the Bearer be like to suffer through his negligence, he must make him
restitution. Nor can the owner think it any favor to have part of his Goods
(mentioned in the Inventory) left at home, for he is nevertheless accountable
for his Notes. Nor can it be supposed, the Warehouse-Keeper should acknowledge
the Receipt of such Goods, and so make himself accountable for things he has
not; much less can it be supposed, that he should deliver them before they are
duly discharged, for thereby he will expose himself to Answer damages to the
Bearer. Therefore the Bearer has all the Moral assurance that can be, that his
Notes have Goods to Answer them, and more he cannot have tho he saw the Goods,
for he must still take it upon trust that these are the Goods, that belong to
his Notes. If he have the Leisure and Curiosity to Examine whether the Goods
agree with the Inventory, he must stay till the time comes to Seize the Goods:
In the mean time, as long as he never hears any Complaint of defaults in that
respect, and if he find that all Notes are duly paid, it is an Argument to
sense, that there is a sufficient actual Cogency somewhere. And so long the
Bearer may be satisfied, tho he be not particularly informed what sort of Goods
the Pledge belonging to his Notes does consist of.

Q. You say these Notes are as good as Money, but how does that appear? For the
Notes may commonly be paid well, yet sometimes we find they fall short? Answ.
These Notes differ from other Notes; they are Notes of promise, and somewhat
more, Viz. A Transfer of conditional Title to certain Goods of equal value, as
appears by the Deed at the Office. So that there is a Real and Personal
security which we cannot suppose will fail both together, and while either of
them hold, the Bearer cannot loose by his Notes; whereas other Notes wholly
depend on personal security. Therefore the Bearer may look on these Notes as
Tantamount to so many five pound pieces of Gold, and really they are so, for
all the ends of Commerce, any, in some respects better then Money, being not
subject to the like hazards. As for instance, when you take Money you are not
sure it is true, as to weight and standard, and perhaps have not opportunity or
skill to try it: But these Notes carry with them satisfactory evidences of
their truth, which you may easily try by the liquor of probation. Money is often
the occasion of Burglaries, Murders, etc. but these Notes will be no prey in
that case, for they will not be paid, till the 14th day after notice, and in
that time the injured party may enter a Caveat at the place of Payment: And if
the Number of the Note be published, it may prove an occasion of apprehending
the Felon. Money may be lost, and is seldom or never recoverable afterward, but
the these Notes are lost, yet the Pledge is still endebted to the last Bearer,
and he may have his loss repaired with other Notes, provided he can tell their
Numbers, and will give security against their future appearance.

Q. But how can a little piece of Paper stand in comparison with Money? For this
has intrinsic value? Answ. What matters it what the outward form of Cash is?
Be it Metal, or Leather, or Paper, it is all one, so it will commute value for
value. As for the Intrinsic value of Gold and Silver, it is no more then a
Relative value, in that they are (by reason of their searcity) become the
measure of Commutation: But as to any value inherent in their natures, I do not
know that they excel so much; for other Metals (called Base because they are
found in great plenty) are really of more use to mankind. Now if Money be
desirable only for its relative value, then I say these Notes may vie with it,
for there is not one Note but what has Relation to a Pledge, that if there be
no occasion will raise the value of the Note.

Q. But how are we sure that the Office will not deliver out more Notes then
they have Pledges to support them? Answ. There is no ground for such a
Jealousy, it being impossible for them to gain by such a fraud, for all Notes
delivered out of the Office must return thither, to be answered with other
Payable Notes, or if these be wanting, they are to assist the Bearer in the
recovery of the Pledge, or if the Pledge should happen to be destroyed by any
Casualty, yet it will lie on them to prove who was the first Author of the
Note, that so the Bearer may sue him for his Note of promise.

These are all the Queries and Difficulties I can think of at present, and if
any others arise, I doubt not but they may be answered to satisfaction. Thus
you have a general view of this undertaking, and I might now descend to
particulars relating to the practical part, but I forbear till I hear the
opinion of Merchants and Traders, who are the most proper Judges in this
matter, and if they shall resolve to encourage it, Trade will soon arrive to
such an happy pitch, as to make the Nation more Glorious then ever.

FINIS.

