A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROGER EARL of ORRERY.
WHO Dyed the 16th of October, at Castle-Martyr, and was Buried at Youghall in
Ireland the 18th of the same Month in the Year, 1679.

By THOMAS MORRIS, M. A. His Lordships Domestic Chaplain.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Wickins at the White-Hart over against St
Dunstans Church, 1681.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MARGARET Countess Dowager OF ORRERY.
May it please your Ladyship,
THE high esteem I have for the extraordinary worth of my Deceased Patron,
has, I confess, such an influence on me, that I cannot but think my self
obliged to do him all the honor and service I can now he is Dead, as well as
when he was Living: And I should think my self unjust, as well as ungrateful,
should I not lay hold on all opportunities to do it.

However I must also say, that I am so conscious of my own Defects, that I
should have been willing these following Meditations on the sad occasion of his
Death, should have lain only in Private hands, had not your Ladyship expressed a
a willingness to have them more public. Not that I have any design to avoid or
suppress the Publication of your Noble Lords worth, whose Memory I shall always
honor; but that I fear my weak endeavors will rather Eclipse than render it
Illustrious.

But your Ladyships Commands having superseded all excuse, I dare not be
backward in paying this my last duty to him: in doing which, though my
Expressions have been short of his Due; yet I have hopes my zeal will Apologize
for that defect, which, however illy expressed, I am sure is hearty and real.

I have not the vanity to think, that by what I have said, either in the Sermon
or Character, I have added any thing to your Ladyships Comfort or knowledge;
since as to the first, I am sure your Ladyship is no such stranger to
Christianity, as to be destitute of those good grounds it affords for that
purpose. And as to the second, it would be a great piece of impudence in me to
think your Ladyship should not know and retain a livelier Idea of this your
Noble Lord, than what in my rude draught I have represented.

All therefore that I have done will serve more to inform others, than your
Ladyship, who as they come hereby to be acquainted with the admirable
Excellencies of one more of the worlds most Famous Worthies; so in the perusing
and considering what is here said of him, they may be further provoked to
follow his steps.

Since therefore this unpolisht piece must by your Ladyships order come abroad,
I cannot but take the confidence to crave your Ladyships pardon for, as well as
Patronage of it: which by reason of its meanness, I confess is as unworthy of
the latter as it stands in need of the former. Hoping that though I have not
drawn things so well to the life as they have deserved, yet my endeavors that
way may be accepted, because in them I have chiefly aimed to give a testimony
to the world of the great Honor and Esteem I have for the memory of the
Deceased, and also to show how much I am,

Right Honorable, Your Ladyships most obedient, most faithful, and most humble
Servant in Christ Jesus, Thomas Morris.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the Right Honorable ROGER EARL of ORRERY.
REVELATIONS xiv. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, write,
blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth; yea says the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.


SUCH and so many are the troubles and afflictions which by divine appointment
Christians are likely to meet with in this vale of tears, that had they hopes
of no other happiness, than what in this world they partake of, they would be
of all men the most miserable: Insomuch that even Death it self, which Nature
shrinks at and abhors, would be desired by them, though not as a door that
opens to an happy state; yet as a period to all their calamities and sorrows,
as well as their beings.

But there is no such bad news for sound, and sincere Christians; they are
happy even in their very Afflictions, which they are assured from Gods spirit
will work for them an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.


They are so far from being without the hopes of enjoying a more blissful state
than here they are in, that they only of all men in the world, have the most
sure and certain hope that way.

For Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, has by his precious death and
sufferings procured for those that are his sincere followers, all things that
may conduce to their felicity. He being the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. 2 Timothy 1.10.
especially of them that believe. It Is He that has brought Life and
Immortality to light through the Gospel: Which they, Romans 2.7.
who by patient continuance in well doing seek for, Coloss. 2.14.
shall undoubtedly enjoy: It Is in a word, he that has blotted out the
handwriting of Ordinances that condenm'd us: And having taken away our Sins,
and nailed them to his Cross, has thereby disarmed Death of his sharpest
sting; so that now of a King of Terrors, he is become the sweet harbinger of
bliss and peace, to all that live and dye in Christ.

It Is therefore an utter mistake to think, that sound and sincere Christians,
though grievously afflicted here, are in an hopeless condition; on the
contrary, it is Infidels and Hpyocrites are so, they who will not have Christ
reign in their hearts, but rather a beastly lust; they who do not, and will not
strive to conform their lives to Gods holy precepts; these, indeed, as long as
they continue in their hypocrisy, unbelief and disobedience, are of all men
the most miserable: for they can have no solid hopes of any other happiness,
but that low, mean, and pitiful one, that in this world only is to be enjoyed;
and Death is so far from being a friend to them, that the very thought thereof
terrifies them, and marrs all their pleasant enjoyments; and when it does draw
near to execute its fatal Office upon them, it comes armed with its most
dreadful sting, and opens upon them a floodgate of Vengeance and Misery. This
is their portion.

But now on the contrary, the truly godly have infinite reason to look upon
Death as their reconciled friend, through Jesus Christ; it being through him,
now made but an happy manumission of their pious souls from the labors and
drudgeries they underwent in the flesh, and a sending of those Immortal Beings
into those regions of rest and bliss, where the enjoyment of Gods presence,
together with the sense of all those good things, which through grace they have
been enabled to do in the body, will be an eternal solace and refreshment to
them. And the evidence we have for the certainty of this future bliss, is so
great, that to question it, will be to injure Christianity, and affront our
reasons; for besides the many other places of Scripture which bear witness to
this truth, this of the Text also, is a most full, and unexceptionable proof of
it: where we have an account from one infallibly inspired by the spirit of
truth, that he heard a voice from Heaven declare this Blessedness, and that the
spirit of God said, as it were, an Amen to it, to confirm it. For so says the
Holy Penman, And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, write, blessed
are, etc.

Which words, as they contain in them admirable matter of comfort against the
death of our selves, or others, that dye in the Lord; so they will afford me a
fair opportunity of speaking something, concerning the admirable worth of this
Noble person Deceased, whose Funeral Obsequies, we are here met, with loads of
grief, to solemnize; of whom should I say nothing, I might well deserve to be
branded with ingratitude and injustice.

His noble Birth and Parentage, his honorable Alliance, his high Titles, and
places of honor and trust, which the bounty of his most Sacred Majesty thought
good to confer on him without repenting, though they sufficiently declare to
the world, that he was a person of no mean Merit, and Quality; yet for as much
as Honor may be possessed by the unworthy, as well as worthy, therefore I
shall here pass by these things of him, as the least part of his praise, and in
the close speak a little of those singular Virtues he was eminent for, which
have rendered his Memory glorious, and happy; and his Decease comfortable to
his Friends, and Relations, though our loss of him be most deplorable: In the
mean time I shall crave leave to consider the import of the Text, and discourse
so much only of the matter contained in it, as will lead me to what I have
further to say of this Noble person.

The sacred Penman of this last part of Scripture, being, in the foregoing
Verse, acquainted with the invincible patience of the Saints under their
afflictions, is in the words of the Text, acquainted with their blessedness
also: Where we have,

First, A future blessedness after Death declared and recorded, write, blessed
are the dead.

Secondly, The persons described who are declared to be thus blessed, viz. such
as dye in the Lord,

Thirdly, The time when these persons are blessed, viz. from henceforth; from
the time of their decease to all Eternity.

Fourthly, the evidence afforded us of the undoubted certainty of this truth:
Which is twofold,

1. The testimony of a voice from Heaven declaring this thing, and commanding
it to be Recorded, which voice was heard by one of the Holy Apostles, and
attested by him, when inspired by the spirit of truth, I heard a voice from
Heaven, saying unto me, write, blessed, etc.

2. It Is moreover attested and confirmed by the Holy spirit of God, who is
truth it self, and cannot lie; yea says the spirit, that is, the spirit of God
says this is true.

Fifthly, The nature of this blessedness, wherein it consists, and that we find
is in two things,

1. In a freedom from those evils which holy persons undergo in the flesh, they
rest from their labors.

2. (...)
In enjoying the good of all they have done, their works do follow them, or
accompany with them, as the words in the original properly signify.

I should exceed the bounds of a Funeral Sermon, and consequently be too
tedious, should I take the liberty to say so much, as on this Text, and on this
occasion I might; both which afford such a plenty of matter that it is hard to
distinguish which is the most copious subject: I would do no wrong to the Text,
and I am as unwilling to be so injurious to the happy memory of this Noble
Peer, as to pass by in silence those things of him, which are worth our
knowledge and imitation, and I would not exceed my due bounds.

To be as brief therefore as the subject matter I am to discourse of, will
handsomely permit, I shall crave leave to make no other observations from the
words of the Text, than what will lead me to speak pertinently, though briefly
too, on the subject of this present sad occasion.

First, And here first it is worth our while to observe, That there is for
certain a blissful state to be entered upon, after Death, by those that dye in
the Lord: for we find in the Text, a voice from Heaven; from God himself,
declaring, that blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord; and this is one of
the greatest evidences of the truth of a thing, that mortals can expect. Exodus
20.1.
By such a voice, God declared his will upon Mount Sinai: By such a voice,
Christ is declared to be the Son of God: Matt. 3.17.
And by such a voice they are declared blessed, that dye in the Lord. And lest
we should have any doubt about the truth of this declaration, upon the account
of the reporter, who perhaps may be thought to be deceived, or deceive; to
obviate such a doubt, we find an inspired person reports this, one, acted by
the infallible spirit of God, records this, and that by a special command too
of that voice which he heard declare it: and lest yet there should be any place
of doubting, the spirit of truth peremptorily asserts and confirms it.

But to speak a little more particularly of this important truth, I shall in
brief consider, 1. Who may be said to dye in the Lord. 2. What rational grounds
we have to be persuaded that such are blessed after their death.

1. As for dying in the Lord; by Lord here we are to understand, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and to dye in him implies two things:

1. A being baptized into Christ; for a persons dying in Christ, does
necessarily suppose his being in Christ, before he dies, else he cannot be said
to dye in Christ: Now Baptism is the ordinary way, by which persons are brought
to be in Christ; for it is said, Gal. 3.27.
as many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

2. It implies also a living and dying suitable to that profession of Christ,
which is made in Baptism: for all that are baptized do not dye in Christ,
because many fall away from that profession they made in baptism, and so dye in
a wicked Apostasy from Christ: They therefore only dye in Christ who live and
dye suitable to their Baptismal profession, believing with all their hearts in
Jesus Christ; and taking care to yield such unfeigned obedience to all the
Gospel precepts, as to be always heartily sorry for the committing of any sin,
or omitting of any duty.

They that thus live conformable to Christ and his precepts, and continue unto
the death in such a conformity, may be truly said to dye in the Lord: Joh.
15.14. Joh. 8.31.
for Christ owns such to belong unto him, that do whatsoever he commands them,
and continue in his word; calling them his Friends and Disciples indeed.

Secondly, And having thus briefly showed who it is that dye in the Lord: I come
next to show what rational grounds we have to be persuaded, that such are
blessed after their death, and they are these following.

1. It should be considered, that all the promises and declarations of bliss,
recorded in Scripture, are made to such, as so live, and dye; Acts 3.19.
for we read, The Sins of those that Repent shall be blotted out, Psalm. 32.1.
or forgiven. And blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered. Matt. 5.8. Mar. 16.16. 1 Pet. 1. v. 3, 4.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. They that believe and
are baptized shall be saved: That is, as the Apostle speaks, are begotten to an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away; reserved in
Heaven for them who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation.
All these places of Scripture (to which many more might be added) sufficiently
show that there is for certain an happiness provided for those that dye in
Christ, who are therefore said to be blessed and saved; so that they may with
the Apostle say, 2 Cor. 5.1.
We know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens.

2. Consider we next, that the fervent desires of pious souls after a future
happiness, do prove there is one for them. Pious souls nauseate all those
shadows of felicity, that are here offered to them, and are soon cloyed with
the fulsomness of these worldly enjoyments; but in the mean time, 2 Cor. 5.3,
4, 5.
they thirst after, and groan for something more satisfactory: So the Apostle,
Romans 8.23. Phil. 1.23.
desires to depart and be with Christ which in his esteem is far better, than
to be here. And what do these desires of pious souls after a future happiness
declare else, but that really there is one? For God who is so wise, as to make
nothing in vain, is also so good, as not to plant desires in the hearts of his
faithful servants after a future happiness, without providing for them suitable
objects for their satisfaction.

3. It should also be considered, That the dignity of the soul is such, that
it is very unreasonable to imagine, there should be no other happiness fitted
for pious souls, than what consists in these temporal enjoyments. The soul of
man is of a Divine original, a spiritual substance, Genesis 2.7.
the breath of God breathed into the nostrils of man: it is that which makes a
very notable difference betwixt Man and all other earthly Creatures: upon which
account it is that Elihu says, Job 34.11.
God has taught Man more than the Beasts of the field, and made him wiser than
the Fowls of the Heaven: that is, has put him in an higher station than they.
Now since the dignity of the humane soul is so high, above all earthly
Creatures, next in order to the blessed Angels, Who can with any reason think
it should be placed in so high, and noble a rank of Creatures, and yet have no
other happiness than what it enjoys in the body in common with Bruits? an
happiness that consists only in sensitive satisfactions, which is as much below
the soul to take pleasure in, as sense is below reason, or as Bruits are
inferior to Men. And if there be another happiness fitted for rational souls,
than what in the body they enjoy in common with Bruits, this happiness must be
had in a future state; for it is evident by matter of fact it is not, and has
not been, so much as pretended to be perfectly enjoyed here. So that then, if
we think it reasonable to allow Man a dignity above a Bruit, it is but
reasonable to allow him also a felicity suitable to that dignity; and if we
allow the rational soul a felicity suitable to its high nature, above that of
Bruits, we must allow a time and season for pious souls to enjoy it, in a more
perfect manner than here they can; and what does this else but lead us to the
owning of a future Bliss for holy souls?

4. But lastly, if pious souls survive the body, as no doubt they do, otherwise
they that dye in the Lord cannot be pronounced blessed, nor can their works be
said to accompany with, or follow them; and if they do survive the body, they
must needs be in an happy state; for they will not meet with any of those evils
in their separate state, which grieve, and trouble them here: no spiritual
evils will afflict them there, Ephesians. 1.
for their sins being pardoned, and quite done away by Jesus Christ, all those
evils that are the fruits and consequences of sin, will be done away also; and
no corporeal evils can vex separate souls, for they have no bodies or external
senses, that can be affected with joys or griefs, till the Resurrection from
the dead. And as pious souls that died in Christ, can meet with nothing in
their separate state to afflict, and grieve them; so they must needs have
enough, and abundance to delight, rejoice, and make them happy: for they carry
with them a joyful sense of the good they have done, the very reflection on
which even in this disturbed life, affords unspeakable satisfaction and
pleasure to the mind, and therefore much more in a separate state. Besides,
there is no question to be made, but holy souls in their separate state, will
have a clearer knowledge of God, and a fuller sense of divine love and favor
than here they had; for there they will see God face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12.
and know even as they are known: And this cannot but afford them rivers of
pleasures, and raptures of joys, and all without interruption, because they
will have neither guilt, nor external senses to divert them.

So then now it is to be hoped, we see, and are persuaded, that good men don't
perish, vanish into the soft air, and so are lost, in the dark abyss of
nonexistence, when they dye; but the nobler, and better part of them, their
Immortal souls, live in bliss and peace: which, as it should comfort us against
the fears of Death; so it should persuade us, to make it our business to fit
and qualify our selves for the participation of this future bliss, by living
so piously, and holily, and parting so entirely with every sin, (which is the
main thing that debars our souls from this felicity) as that when we come to
dye we may truly dye in the Lord, and then blessed are we.

But if we do not live so, as to dye in the Lord, we cannot be blessed in our
separate state, but rather must be eternally miserable; for we shall carry that
guilt with us thither, and those vile unmortified affections and inclinations,
which will draw upon us an heavy sense of divine vengeance, and fill us with
such unspeakable horror, shame, tortures of mind and regret, as will render our
condition there infinitely sad and dismal, Matt. 24.51.
represented in Scripture under the direful expressions of Weeping and gnashing
of Teeth, Mar. 9.48.
the stings of a never dying Worm and a burning in unquenchable fire.

2. But I pass on to a second thing observable in the words of the Text; where,
from the time when, they that dye in the Lord are said to be blessed, it may be
observed, that they, who dye in Christ, do immediately after their departure
out of this life enter upon a blessed state: it is not said they that dye in the
Lord shall be blessed, but they are blessed, or blessed are they, and it is not
said they are blessed hereafter, (...)
but from henceforth from the time of their departure, and so forward for ever.
And their works, that is, the joyful sense and reward of their good works, do
follow, or rather accompany with them. All which expressions, methinks, do show
that holy separate souls, do immediately upon their separation from the body,
enter upon a blessed state. Hence Christ tells the penitent Thief, that, that
day he should be with him in Paradise: Luke 23.43.
Because that day he was to dye in Christ; and the Apostle makes no middle
state, betwixt the dissolving our Earthly House of this Tabernacle; and an
having a building of God, 2 Cor. 5.1.
an House not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens; nor betwixt departing
hence, and being with Christ: Phil. 1.23.
But immediately upon the finishing of this course, says, that henceforth is
laid up for him a crown of Righteousness. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.


But what should hinder any that dye in Christ from being immediately blessed?
not the guilt of sin; for that we are told is so done away, upon our unfeigned
Repentance, that it shall not be so much as once mentioned: Ezekiel. 33.16.
Not the habits and customs of Sin, for the same time that God forgives, Joh.
1.9.
he cleanses also from all unrighteousness: Acts 15.9.
and the grace of faith, which God gives to all that are saved, Hebr. 9.14.
is said, to purify the heart; and Christ's blood is said, 1 John 1.7.
to purge the Conscience from dead works; and to cleanse us from all sin: And
therefore there needs no purging, by, an I know not what, Purgatory fire. But
is it satisfaction for sin, which the soul must yield, by suffering certain
pains after it is out of the body, that hinders it from an immediate entrance
upon a blissful state? That cannot be, for Jesus Christ has, in his own
person, made; a sufficient and complete satisfaction to Gods justice for our
sins; insomuch, that he is in an eminent manner said to be, 2 John 2.2.
The propitiation for our sins; and not for our sins only, but also, for the
sins of the whole world. He has paid the full price of our Redemption, by
suffering the value of that, in our stead, which we should have suffered to all
Eternity. And upon this account we, that are in Christ, Romans 3.24.
are said to be justified freely through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: and if freely, then there is no satisfaction to be yielded by our
sufferings. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 9.12.
For Christ has given himself a ransom, and obtained an Eternal Redemption for
us by his own blood, or sufferings. So then, if none of these things can hinder
holy souls from an immediate entrance upon a blessed state, after death, then
nothing else can.

But, though from this very Text, much more might be said of this matter; yet
lest I should turn a Funeral Sermon into a Polemical Discourse, I shall crave
leave to say no more of it here, but shall now proceed to the last thing,
observable about the the nature of that bliss, which they that dye in Christ
shall immediately be partakers of: And from hence we may observe,

Thirdly, That the blessed state of those that dye in the Lord, consists in
their being freed from the labors and evils, which in this life they
underwent; and in enjoying the good things which God has promised and
declared, are, and shall be the reward of all the good works they have done.
Now in the handling of this observation I shall give a brief account,

1. Of the evils and labors Holy Souls rest ^^^n.

2. Of the good they enjoy.

1. As for the evils, and labors which pious souls rest from after their
death, they are such as these following:

1. They are freed from the burden of sin, and rest from all those fears and
horrors which sin in this life is often the occasion of; good men are
grievously troubled here for offending God in any thing; and under this grief
and trouble they a long while labor, till being by Death translated to that
blessed condition, wherein they are no longer in danger of sinning, and then
they happily rest from these sad labors.

2. They are freed from the grief and trouble of seeing others sin: which like
righteous Lot they are grievously vexed with here: 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Revel. 21.27.
For no sumer, or wicked person can breath in those Regions, to which the souls
of those that dye in the Lord, are by death immediately transplanted.

3. They are freed from the labors and toils of their Callings and
Employments, in which all persons, in this world, are in some degree or other
continually and necessarily engaged.

4. They are freed from all bodily infirmities, pains, and distempers, under
which many persons groan a long time in this world without relief; these no
longer trouble the pious soul, in its separate state, because it is then freed
from the Body, by its strict union with which, it only became capable of being
so affected.

5. They are freed from all those crosses and afflictions that cruelly perplex
the mind here, because after death they are out of that imperfect condition
where such things only are afflicting.

6. They are freed from all Satan's temptations, and from all his cruel
injections, with which pious souls are much disquieted in this life. For there
is a great Gulf fixed betwixt Satan and the Spirits of just men made perfect,
Luke 16.26.
which keeps that infernal Spirit from being able to molest any in those
blissful habitations where holy separate souls are.

7. Lastly, They are freed from all fears despondencies and doubts about the
love and favor of God, which create great labors and troubles of mind in this
imperfect state; 1 John 3.2.
for they shall see God as he is, and consequently be perfectly sensible of his
love and favor. And thus all those tears of grief, which in the body pious
souls labored under, Rev, 7.17.
shall be wiped away from them in their separate state.

And so I pass on from the labors and evils pious souls rest from at death,
which is but the negative part of their bliss, to consider the positive part of
it, viz. the good they enjoy: and here we shall find that,

1. They enjoy a ravishing sense of Divine love and favor, an enjoyment, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 63.3.
better than life.

1. They enjoy a sweet calm and peace in their own breasts, which is indeed but
a necessary result from the former enjoyment; for he that is in God's love and
favor, and is at peace with him, cannot but have a sweet peace, and calm in
his own mind.

3. They are filled with a joyful sense of the good works which through Grace
they have been enabled to do: for they will reflect with infinite satisfaction
upon the virtuous and pious actions of their lives, the sense of which, even in
this world, fills the soul with some glimpses of ravishing joy; and therefore
will be likely much more to do so in the next, where they see and know things
more clearly than here they can.

4. They enjoy also that peculiar reward which God has promised to all that
love and fear him, and keep his Commandments; which is shadowed forth to us in
Scripture under diverse parabolical expressions, John 14.2.
called mansions in our heavenly fathers house; Jam. 1.12.
a crown of life, which the Lord has promised to those that love him; Heb.
11.26. Matthew. 25.21.
the recompense of the reward; the joy of our Lord: and, to mention no more,
it is called by the Apostle, the Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.
which upon the finishing of his course, he was sure was laid up for him; and
not for him only, but for all them also that love Christ's appearing.

These are in brief the good things which are immediately enjoyed by those that
dye in the Lord, besides that exceeding eternal weight of glory, which, when
soul and body are united at the general resurrection of the dead, they will be
partakers of. For, though they who dye in the Lord immediately enter upon a
blessed condition as soon as their souls are separated from their bodies; yet
they are not then completely happy, only they enjoy so much bliss as in a
separate state they are capable of, which, though imperfect, will be infinitely
satisfactory. But the perfect consummation of all bliss, both in soul and body,
will be entered upon at the resurrection only, and so be enjoyed thenceforward
for ever; 1 Pet. 5.4.
For when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ( viz. to judge the world) then
shall we receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not away; that is, an eternal
perfection of all bliss in both natures. Thus then blessed are the dead which
dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them.

And now having done with the Subject matter of the Text, I have hereby made
way for what I have further to say on the Subject of this sad occasion.

Where, because what has been said concerning that future blessedness which
they immediately enter upon that dye in the Lord, affords matter enough of
comfort to alleviate our griefs for the decease of any of our Friends that so
dye; I shall therefore take an occasion to consider and represent that only in
this noble Lord deceased, which may as well provoke us to follow his steps, as
tend to the comforting of us, and moderating our sorrows under so great a loss.

A loss of such a nature, and so considerable to all sorts of persons, as well
public as private, that if we will but look a little into it, we shall quickly
see how great a need his Relations, his Neighbors, yea and the three Kingdoms
have of something to keep their sorrow upon this account within due bounds, for
the admirable endowments of mind with which this Excellent Person was, above
his Fellows, blessed; and by which he became every way publicly useful: and the
care and excellent courses he took to employ his honors, places of trust,
interest and endowments, for the honor of God and the good of his Majesty and
these Kingdoms, were things he was so eminent for, that they all seem to
conspire together to make his death a much lamented loss to all his Survivers.
So public a spirited man was he, that all those abilities and opportunities of
doing good which God and the King vouchsafed him, were always carefully
employed by him, for the public weal of Church and State: in doing which,
every one knows, he was so faithful and industrious, that as his sacred Majesty
was far enough from repenting of the trust and honor he had bestowed on him;
so we may have reason to believe the great Majesty of Heaven and Earth, to whom
all the world must bow and obey, did not repent of the gifts and abilities his
Divine Goodness had conferred on him.

For that infirmity of Body, which he so long labored under, though it
deprived him at last of the free use of most of his limbs; yet it did not take
away from him the use of his head and hands, by which he had been, and was to
the death, eminently serviceable in the world.

Neither did the Divine Providence let him fall into any of those crimes that
might justly have occasioned his rejection, nor did it permit his reputation so
much to suffer under the black mouthed Obloquy of malicious tongues, as to
occasion his removal from all capacities and opportunities of doing good: But
through the good hand and Providence of God, he was to the last kept firm in
the sincere profession and practice of all Christian Duties and loyal
Principles; and consequently was preserved in an unfeigned repute in the World,
and that notwithstanding the attempts were made by his enemies to fully his
innocence with those black crimes, which nothing but his own integrity and
Parts could wipe off, before the severest and highest Tribunal of the three
Kingdoms, the Parliament of England.

These things may make us think God did not repent of the gifts and abilities
he was pleased to bestow on him; only now our sins and the sins of these
Kingdoms may possibly have done us the prejudice to provoke the Divine Majesty
to remove him from us, as not deserving any longer so useful a Person among us:
and that too at the very nick of time when there is most need of such men, who
by their prayers and counsels, and by their interest with God and men, may be
fit to stand in the Gap, as he did. So that now indeed we may see what reason
we have with the most brinish tears to lament our loss in his decease, and our
sins as the main cause of it. And now also we may apprehend the necessity of
having something to set bounds to, and alleviate our just sorrows.

And here, as there was enough in him to provoke us to a just grief for the
loss of so excellent and useful a Person; so we shall find enough in him also,
that, being considered with a respect to what is contained in the words of the
Text, will yield us some relief in this matter.

Indeed, considering all his Virtues and Accomplishments, how pious a Christian
he was, how loving a Husband, how careful and tender a Father, how loyal a
Subject, how faithful a Friend, how wise and vigilant a Statesman, how good a
Patriot of his Country, how kind and just a Neighbor, how charitable to the
poor, how noble a Master in his Family, how ingenious and learned a Person in
his discourses and converse, and in a word, how great a Lover of all Virtue and
Goodness, and Hater of all Vice and Impiety (in all which he was so eminent,
that though he has left behind him many Peers in his honors, yet, it is to be
feared, few in his virtues;) considering, I say, all these things in him, we
might have reason never to have lest grieving and lamenting our loss of so
excellent a Person: But considering withal from what great pains and labors he
now rests, and what future evils he may be taken away from, and to what an
happy state of bliss he is now advanced, where he doubtless enjoys the
comfortable fruits of the good works he has done; though we have indeed lost
one of the Pillars and Patriots of our Country, and one of our best Friends:
yet we have reason humbly to acquiesce in the good will and Providence of God,
lest by our overmuch grief and sorrow, we show that we repine at what God has
done, distrust his good Providence, and envy the happiness of our noble Friend,
an happiness which a voice from Heaven declares they are possessed of that dye
as he did, saying, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord; the very hearing
of which, methinks, is enough to quiet and calm the most tumultuating passion
upon this account.

And now that we may see we are not deluded in this matter with vain shadows
and appearances of comfort, I shall lead you to the considerations of those
things in this noble Person which from what has been said will appear to be a
great relief to us this way.

And, to let pass those many things that might be said of him, (in all which,
should I be particular, I shall be thought to compose a Volume, rather than a
Sermon) all that I shall say, shall be only what will be pertinent to our
present comfort, which I shall digest into this following order, showing,

1. What reason we have to believe this noble Person dyed in the Lord, and
consequently is blessed.

2. What labors he now rests from.

3. What good works of his follow and entertain him with unspeakable joys.

1. That this noble Person died in the Lord, these things following
sufficiently declare, viz. His Faith, his Repentance, and his sincere obedience
to all Gods Commandments.

First, His Faith: For as he was by Baptism initiated in the true Faith, so he
continued firm and steadfast in it to the end; He believed with all his heart
and soul (as he would often phrase it) all the truths of Gods Word, and would
often declare, He expected salvation in and through none else but Jesus Christ
alone, because, he would say, Acts 4.12.
there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved. And this Faith of his was not an idle speculative Faith, but truly
active and working, which he would often say, was the only true saving Faith;
for it made him severe against all vice and impiety, and a lover of all virtue
and goodness; it made him also employ the utmost of his great Parts in the
rigorous defense of all those religious truths which he believed Gods Word
contained, against all the incroaching errors of all Parties; and this not
only in his common Discourses, but sometimes with his Pen too: neither did his
Faith make him a talkative Christian only, but it influenced all his actions
also; so that his whole life seemed to be but one continued Argument of his
firm belief.

Secondly, His Repentance: He did not only believe, but with tears often
lamented and repented of all the sins he could charge himself with; which,
though they were not many, (for he generally led too strict a life to be guilty
of very many) yet those that he was guilty of, through surprise, anguish of his
Distemper, or frailty, he had so tender a Conscience that he was immediately
sensible of them, and would with tears in his eyes heartily beg God's pardon
for them, and by many expressions testify how much grieved he was for
offending God but by a sinful word, as all that were near him can abundantly
witness. And this his sorrow for sin which wrought this repentance in him never
to be repented of, made him watch and pray, and zealous against those sins he
had been any time, through frailty, guilty of; all which are sound marks of
unfeigned repentance, if we will believe what the Apostle says concerning the
fruits and effects of godly sorrow, in 2 Cor. 7.10, 11.

Thirdly, His sincere obedience; his sound faith and unfeigned repentance could
not choose but bring forth the saving fruits of obedience in his life and
conversation. Hence it came to pass that he was truly zealous in his life for
the honor of God and Religion, which zeal of his enkindled in him an holy
indignation against the common crying sins of the Age, viz. drunkenness,
whoredom, profane swearing and cursing, oppression, schism, atheism, etc. For
which abominations he would say, The Land mourns, and God will certainly visit.
Besides all this, it made him most religiously devout in all the Duties and
Services of public and private Worship; it made him frequent in good and
edifying discourses, and in heavenly ejaculations and prayers, and that even
amidst his greatest pains; it made him charitable to the poor, humble and
modest, temperate and sober, just and peaceable, forgetful and forgiving of
injuries; and in a word, it made him do all things that Christ had commanded
him, not out of any bye and sinister ends, but in pure obedience to Gods will,
and out of a respect to God's Glory and his own souls salvation. Now what do
all these things else but testify that he lived and dyed in the Lord? For
they, who being baptized into the true Faith, live and dye in it, repenting of
all their sins, and obeying sincerely all Gods Commandments, are the persons
who, from what has been said appears, dye in the Lord; and then this noble
Person who so dyed, must needs be blessed, as such, in the Text, are declared
to be.

Having therefore now this assurance of the blessed state this noble Person now
is in, let us next take a view of the Particulars wherein it consists; and
therefore,

2. We next come to consider the great labors he now refts from. And here we
shall find, That besides those labors and evils, which it is common to all that
dye in the Lord to rest from, as from sin, and the troubles and horrors of it,
from crosses and afflictions, etc. there were some that were more peculiar to
this Excellent Man, which he now happily rests from, and they are those of his
body and mind.

First, The bodily labors and evils which he now rests from, are the pains of
the Gout, under which he labored near thirty years or more; and I leave it to
all those that ever have had the least Fit of that acute Distemper, to declare
what an happiness it is to be wholly freed from the pains of it.

Secondly, As for those labors of his mind, which he now also happily rests
from, they are those which either his great Employments and Parts engaged him
in, about affairs of State, and about composing those public Works to which
the World is no Stranger; or which the sad apprehensions he had of the evils
hanging over our heads exercised him with.

These and the like are those great labors he now rests from, which we may
well think is at least some small part of that felicity which he now enjoys.
But this being but the negative part of his happiness, we will stay no longer
upon it, but proceed to that positive part of it, which now fills him with
infinite exultations and joys; and this brings me in the last place,

Thirdly, To speak of the good works of this noble Person, the joyful sense and
reward of which, doubtless, accompany him into his separate state: And these
are so many, and so worthy of imitation by all that survive, that though I
cannot be so injurious to your patience as here to name them all; yet neither
can I be so unjust to his excellent worth as not to name and recommend some of
the most considerable of them.

1. And first let me begin with his works of piety, and declare his religious
deeds: And here we shall quickly find how much Religion has been beholden to
this Excellent Man, who not only with his tongue and pen has most notably
defended it against atheism, superstition and error, but has made it his
business to encourage the life, power and practice of it in all places and
companies where he had any thing to do; of which we find these evidences, He
has erected in those two Houses which he built, two several Places to worship
God publicly in, adorning them as much, if not more, than his own Dwellings; a
work calling aloud for imitation in this Kingdom, where to the shame, and I
fear decay too, of Protestantism, so many hundred Parish Churches lie yet in
their ruin. But whatever others could do, it seems this Noble Man's devout Soul
could not endure to live in a place where God had not a public House as well
as himself. And as he took care that God should have Places of public worship,
so did his piety lead him to take care also that there should such Persons
serve in them, whose lives should be an honor, not disgrace, to their
Profession. Neither was his care of Religion confined to his Chapels only, but
was extended to all other places, persons and things abroad, reproving and
discountenancing all that did in their words and actions affront Religion, and
commending and encouraging all the friends and promoters of it; and that others
might be religious as well as himself, he took care that even in the School and
Almes-house which he built, those wholesome Orders should be set up and
observed, that might oblige all of those Societies to live religiously and
virtuously. Neither did his piety lie only abroad in these outward things and
public matters, but it made him look home to his own Family also, to see that
piety there should flourish; ordering that there should be public Prayers in
his Family constantly twice a day; and commanding me to give him an account of
any that upon my admonitions would not leave off the vices they were guilty of,
that he might immediately discharge them from his house, for he would say, Such
would bring judgments on his Family.

And as for his Children, he was always careful to have them brought up in all
Virtue and piety, putting them upon the performance of religious Duties in
their early and most tender years. To give one Instance, amongst many, of his
care this way, I am credibly informed, That when he sent his Sons to travel, he
told their Governor, He had rather he should bury them beyond Sea virtuous,
than bring them home vicious; adding this, That vice must be crushed in the
Egg, else 'twill soon become a Serpent. Neither had he a care of his Children
only, but of his meanest Servants also; whom he commanded to be constant at
Family Prayers, ordering the Younger to be catechized, and the Elder he would
himself often mind of coming to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and would
always give them time to fit and prepare themselves for it. He would often say,
The meanest Scullion has a soul to be saved as well as I. And 'twould be well
if all Masters did imitate him in this, which if they would, there would be
more Religion amongst Servants than I fear there generally is amongst a great
many. Thus then these are some of the works of piety which this noble Man did;
and now that he is dead, I question not but that the joyful sense of them has
accompanied him into his separate state, and renders him blissful there; where
doubtless he received the welcome of that faithful Servant, who had well
employed his Lords Talents, and so is entered with him into the joy of his Lord.
Matthew. 25.21.


2. Next let me speak of his Works of Charity; in which we shall find him wise
and liberal, doing all things in this kind to the purpose, and with
cheerfulness. As he was always careful to bestow his Charity on those Persons
only that were true Objects of Charity, and would be strict in that matter, as
became a wise and good man; so he was very readily bountiful to those whom he
found so: nay, he would often give to the less deserving persons, rather than
miss of being charitable to the truly deserving. And in these deeds of Charity,
to Strangers in distress, to the Poor, and to decayed Gentlemen and Ministers,
he was many times so private, that his left hand scarce knew what his right
hand did; he was so far from withholding his Charity from those to whom it was
due, that he would often make an enquiry in the Neighborhood, where he dwelt,
for any in want, to relieve them; and so would seek out for those that others
run from. Neither was his Charity private only, but he has left a public and
eternal Monument of it in an Alms house which he built, for the maintenance of
six poor men, and as many poor women; and has liberally endowed it for ever.
And herein I wish he were imitated by the Nobility and Gentry, of this Kingdom
especially, where there is generally so little provision made for the poor,
that I fear many perish for want of timely relief. Now these, and many more,
being the Deeds of Charity which this noble Christian did, who can think but
that now he enjoys the happy benefit of those promises that are made to a
liberal soul? Prove. 11.25. Chapter 19.17.
For if he that gives but a cup of cold water to a Disciple, Matthew. 10.42.
in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward, much less shall he lose
it that has given so much that way.

3. Come we next to his Works of Loyalty and Faithfulness in public Affairs:
In which we shall find him so faithful and upright, that as no offers could
tempt him to do any thing against the public interest, so no threats or fears
of danger and disgrace could biass or divert him from his just, loyal and
honest counsels and designs; but in all things he approved himself a faithful
and loyal Subject, and a true Patriot of his Country.

He was the first of all his Majesty's Subjects of the three Kingdoms, who made
a Party to invite his present Majesty from that horrid Exile, to which the
iniquity of the times had driven him; which, to his immortal honor, his
Majesty was graciously pleased to own and declare at the Council Board in
England, soon after his happy arrival there. And after the Kings happy
restoration, this noble Man was so careful and watchful for his Majesty's and
these Kingdoms interest, that what by his wholesome advice, and what by the
intelligence he, to his no small cost, kept, nothing to the prejudice of his
Majesty's Government, could stir, where he had to do, but he had notice soon
enough of it, timely to prevent all mischief; of which the timely suppressing
of Jephson's insurrection in this Kingdom is an Argument.

And though he was indeed much in esteem in the Usurpers time, yet as it was a
very strange Providence that brought him into that esteem (too large to be here
recited) so after he was thus strangely drawn into it, quite against his
designs, he kept his heart loyal, and often made use of that interest he there
acquired, for his Majesty's good, and the preservation of many eminent loyal
Persons, of which some are yet living Testimonies. And many were the good turns
he then did even to the Irish themselves, though he fought against them; a
whole Barony of whom had been, Men, Women and Children, destroyed in cold blood
by Ireton, had not he interposed, and procured a reversion of that cruel and
bloody Order.

And as for the English and Protestants of this Kingdom, since those unhappy
times, 'twas by his means and industry, that they are now so firmly settled in
their estates by Law, that n^thing but a Rebellion can shake them; for I have
heard it said, That he drew up that Act of Settlement with his own hands, by
which every man's Estate is now secured to him in Ireland. And when he was
tempted with vast offers to absent himself from, or not concern himself in the
Council of England, when the business of the settlement of this Kingdom was
there in agitation; he so far preferred the public good before his particular
private advantage, that with a generous disdain he rejected those, though most
beneficial, Offers.

Thus then as he was a most faithful and loyal Subject to his Prince, so was he
a good Patriot of his Country, making his Princes interest and Countries good,
two inseparable Companions, the Compass by which he steered all his public
actions. He never would or could be brought to betray the one, or act against
the good of the other. And now that he is taken from us, while his Majesty may
lament the loss of so good a Subject, and the Country of so good a Patriot,
doubtless these good works also of his have followed him into the other world,
and there afford him abundance of bliss; for it is said, A faithful man shall
abound with blessings. Prove. 28.^0.
All that we can do is to pray God to send his Majesty another such Subject,
and us another such Patriot.

4. Lastly, to mention no more, His works of Justice and Peace are fit to be
considered: And here we shall find him most just and honest in all his
dealings, and a great Peacemaker. Every one found him the justest and fairest
Dealer in the world; and as he was just to a Farthing in his private
transactions, so was he most upright in his public station. For in all those
public Affairs, in which he had at any time power from his Majesty, and the
Laws of the Kingdom, to hear and determine matters, he was famed to be so
unbiased a Judiciary, that all Parties would be satisfied in having him their
Arbitrator, as knowing he would do them right, though it were in a Case his own
Father or Brother were concerned. With what admirable patience, condescension,
meekness, in partiality and judgment, has he heard, determined and made up
Controversies, and so composed Differences betwixt jarring Neighbors! What
cunning stratagems would he use to oblige them to peace and quietness! and how
readily would he employ his Parts, Interest and Authority that way! This he was
so eminent for, that he was indeed upon this account the very Cement of the
Country Gentry where he lived.

And that he was so, I am afraid his death will too sadly prove, by their
falling asunder again, upon the loss of this their common ligament, unless
every one will now henceforward begin to be so wise, as unanimously to agree
together in love, and so carry on the public good of King and Country, against
the wiles of their designing Enemies, who rejoice at nothing so much, as at the
pernicious Feuds of Protestants.

But before you can do this, Sirs, I must crave the boldness to tell you, That
you must lay aside your pride, that makebate of a Society, and that by which
only comes contention, Prove. 13.10.
says Solomon; your prejudices, and private animosities and grudges, all bye
and sinister ends, your cursing and swearing, and excessive drinking, which are
sins that provoke God to crumble a People to dust. If you do not take heed to
lay aside these seeds of contention, you will be engaged in such endless broils
and divisions, as will be yours and your Countries ruin; but if you will be
pleased to hearken unto, and follow this wholesome advice, you will then be so
united, and be so capable and ready to serve your King and Country upon all
occasions, as that instead of the loss of one, you will hereby become as many
Patriots of your Country, as you are Gentlemen of this mind.

You have had a noble Example and Copy before you, who is now, doubtless,
rejoicing amongst the rest of the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
with the sense of those good works he has done among you in this kind; Psalm.
106.3.
For blessed are they that keep judgment, and do righteousness; Matthew. 5.9.
and blessed are the Peacemakers. And now that he is gone, do you all write
after him, and do the same good works he has done amongst you, and then you
will not only recover this loss, but will also receive the reward of your good
works, as he now enjoys his. As for this noble Person, now to our grief
deceased, it is but a vain, and indeed an invidious thing, to wish or expect him
back with you again; the only way you can have him still among you is, By
keeping in your minds such a constant memory of his good works and actions, as
to do them your selves.

But I must draw to an end: And having thus far digressed to display this
Noblemans good works to the Country, for their imitation, who questionless
know, and I hope will imitate, more of him than I have opportunity here to
speak of; I must in the conclusion revert, and speak a little to the comfort
and benefit of his near and dear Relations.

And first, As for his most pious and virtuous Lady, She is already such a
pattern of all goodness, that it will be my Duty to strive rather to imitate
that, than seek to mend it; whose Christian experience and knowledge in all
religious matters is already so great, that all I have said or can say to
console her under this affliction, will serve not so much to inform her, as to
mind her only of what She already knows and practices.

And then as for his noble Children, they are already grown up such hopeful
Branches and knowing Persons, that they have little need of my pruning or
advice; only thus much let me say for the comfort and benefit of them all, That
as from what has been said, they have all reason to acquiesce in the good will
and pleasure of God, and be comforted in their, though great, loss; because,
though they have lost a friend every way dear and good to them, yet he is not
perished, but is now blessed in being freed from those pains and evils he a
long time labored under, and in being accompanied with the reward and joyful
sense of the good works he here did. So from what has been said, they that
inherit his Honor and Estate, may see they have all the encouragement
imaginable to take care to inherit his abovementioned Piety, Goodness, and
Virtues also; and then they will, doubtless, not only purchase to themselves
that renown here which accompanied him in this world, but also participate with
him of that bliss and glory hereafter, to which he is now advanced in the other
world: which God of his infinite mercy grant they may all do, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom, and the Father with the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
Honor and Glory, now and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

