AN Historical Treatise OF THE FOUNDATION AND PREROGATIVES OF THE Church of
Rome, And of Her BISHOPS.

Written Originally in French By Monsieur MAIMBOURG, And Translated into
English By A. LOVEL, A. M.

LONDON, Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill. MDCLXXXV.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
I Should be thought perhaps, no less unmannerly than fanciful, if I offered
any other reason of the Authors publishing this Book, than what he himself is
pleased to give in his Epistle Dedicatory to his Great Master, the Most
Christian King; which is, that he might thereby according to his duty, second
the grand design of the King and his Gallican Church, in removing those
obstacles that hinder the reconciliation of Dissenting Believers, and in
confuting the mistakes of Authors, who have occasioned either a scandalous
separation from the Unity of the Church, or a persistance in that Separation.
Yet seeing the Book before it came out, and since it has been Published, has
made no small noise at Rome, the French Court, and elsewhere; The Reader
possibly, may think that so Public and Religious a design has been either
very ill Managed, or far worse Interpreted. I have nothing to say as to that,
it being a matter above my reach; but I know the Ingenious will be apt to make
remarks, such as are now a days very frequent; that no great matter ought, or,
indeed can be brought about, if Religion came not in for a share, and if that
turn not the World, it will be hard for any thing else to convert it. There is
Religion, so called, that makes Turks fight against Christians, and Christians
not fight against Turks; that makes some States invade the Rights of the
Church, and some Churches usurp upon the State; that makes the Godly Plot and
fight for Peace sake, and the harmless Doves as innocent as Serpents. And since
these and many other such Principles are now a days in great vogue over most
part of the World; one may venture to say of the Religion which many, nay I
would it were not, most Men practice at present, what the Great Author of our
true Religion says of the Wind; It blows where it lists, and Men hear the
sound of it; but neither know whence it comes, nor whither it goes. And I
should not be irreverent beyond example, if I called it downright Hocus Pocus.

This may seem to the Reader an extravagance, and a start out of the road; but
I had nothing else to say for my self in attempting to Translate a Book that,
like a Quarter-Staff, strikes on both Hands, pelts Protestants and knocks down
the Pope; save only that nothing of Modern Religion moved me to it (for,
indeed, I find not that I have any inward call to labor in another Vineyard)
but perceiving that this is an Age wherein People either open their own Eyes,
or desire they should be opened, I was very willing, since I am no loser, nor I
hope the Government offended by it, to reach to others the Eye Salve that has
been handed to me. And, truly, if by impartial Readers, the issue of a Man's
Religion should be tried by the verdict of the Authors Book, perhaps it would
be no easy matter to decide the Point; since they will find in it, too much
either for a True Protestant, or a truly Jesuited Papist.

How far this may justify my undertaking I cannot tell; but since the
Bookseller can satisfy the Reader, with how great dispatch it has been
Translated, I hope, he will be so kind as to pardon the hasty mistakes of the
Translator.

A. Lovell.

The Authors Epistle Dedicatory TO THE FRENCH KING.
SIR,
ONE of the greatest impediments that hinders the reunion of Protestants with
the Roman Church, from which by a fatal Schism they are separated, is that
false Opinion wherewith they are prejudiced, that we raise the Popes even above
the Universal Church, in attributing to them what only belongs to her, and in
giving them an absolute and unlimited Power not only in Spirituals, but also
over the Temporal and Crowns of Princes.

The Gallican Church, willing to help on that great zeal which Your Majesty
makes so conspicuously successful for the Conversion of your Subjects who
continue still in Error, has thought that she could not do any thing to better
purpose, than to remove that obstacle, by undeceiving them, and professing, as
she has done by a solemn Declaration upon a Point of that importance, her
Doctrine which is in all things conform to that of the Ancient Church.

It is the business of this Treatise, which is purely Historical, to make this
out by matters of fact, against which no subtlety, argumentation, nor Artifice
of Novelty can hold good. Nay, Sir, I dare even present it to Your Majesty as a
Work that, perhaps, may be so happy as to contribute somewhat in making the
Justice of your Edict known to the World, whereby, in quality of Protector of
the Canons, you make the Ancient belief current in the most Christian Kingdom.

This it is, Sir, that makes it truly to be said, that Your Majesty has done
more for the Church of Rome than the Kings your Predecessors, who have enriched
her with the great Revenues she possesses, and who have raised her to the
pinnacle of Temporal Grandeur and Dignities. For, indeed, all that Wealth and
these Worldly Grandeurs belong not to her true Kingdom, which being that of
Jesus Christ, ought not to be of this World. But in commanding by your Laws,
that this Doctrine of Antiquity be maintained in France, to which the Gallican
Church, which has always vigourously defended the interests and just
Prerogatives of the Church of Rome, has in all Ages inviolably adhered: You
most solidly establish the Primacy of the Pope against the Novel attempts of
Heretics who dispute it, and do all that they can to snatch it from him. At
the same time you take from them the pretext of their Revolt, by letting them
see, that we believe not that which scandalises them, and which some late
Divines attribute to him, of their own Head, against the manifest Judgment of
Antiquity.

That, Sir, is what may be called an effectual endeavor for restoring the true
Kingdom of the Church of Rome to its Just Rights, from which Heretics, who
have separated from it through erroneous Notions that have been given them of
our Doctrine, have in little more than an Age rent away a great part of Europe.
Your Majesty who has wrought and still work so many Miracles, to render your
Kingdom more Powerful and more flourishing than ever, and to grant us once more
a general Peace, by making our Enemies accept it, upon the conditions you
thought fit to prescribe to them, is apparently appointed of God to work the
greatest of all, in pacifying the troubles of Religion, and in rendering to the
Kingdom of the Church in France, its ancient extent, by the reduction of the
remnant of our Protestants.

For my own part, who have but very little longer to live, and, who, according
to my Profession, can contribute nothing to your Conquests, but by my ardent
Prayers: I shall reckon my self most happy, and shall die content, if I can but
join a little by my Pen, to those which you daily Atchieve for enlarging the
Empire of the Church, by the Conversion of Heretics, which by most soft and
efficacious ways you procure; And if by my Writings and particularly by this, I
can make it known to all the World, as I hope I may, that I am as true a
Catholic as a good French Man, and that I will die, as I have lived,

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Humble, most Obedient, and Faithful Subject and
Servant, LOUIS MAIMBOURG.

A TABLE OF The Chapters and of their Contents.
CHAP. I. The design, and draught of this Treatise; and the Principle upon
which it moves. THE true Church is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. The definition
thereof. Its unity in the multitude of particular Churches which make but one
Episcopacy and one Chair, by the communion they have with a chief Church, which
is the center of their Unity. Antiquity is to be followed against Novelty in
Doctrine that is contrary to it. Upon this Principle it is proved in this
Treatise against the new Opinions, what Antiquity has believed of the first
Foundation, and Prerogatives of that chief Church which is the Church of Rome.
Page 1.
CHAP. II. Of the Foundation and Establishment of the Church of Rome. That St.
Peter has been at Rome. A Refutation of the Erroneous reasons that some
Protestants allege for overthrowing that Truth. St. Luke has omitted a great
many other things which notwithstanding are true. The true Chronology which
agrees with the progress and coming of St. Peter to Antioch and Rome, against
the wrong Chronology contrived to subvert it. There were Christians at Rome
when St. Paul arrived there. All Antiquity has believed that St. Peter was at
Rome. The Extravagance of those who have said that the Fathers were mistaken in
taking the Country of Rome or Romania for the City of Rome. Page 15
CHAP. III. That the Church of Rome has been founded by St. Peter; that he was
the first Bishop of it; and that the Popes are his Successors in that
Bishopric. THAT truth acknowledged by all Antiquity. In what sense Bishops sit
in St. Peter's Chair, and are his Successors; and how Popes are in another
manner. Page 31
CHAP. IV. Of the Primacy of St. Peter, and that he has been established by
Jesus Christ Head of the Universal Church. THE true interpretation of these
words Thou art Peter and upon that Rock will I build my Church. How the Church
is built upon Jesus Christ, upon the confession of his Divinity, and on the
person of St. Peter. His Primacy of Jurisdicton over all Believers, proceeds
from the confession of Faith which he made for all the rest. All Antiquity has
acknowledged that Primacy of St. Peter, and of all his Successors in the
Bishopric of Rome. Page 37
CHAP. V. Of the Rights and advantages that the Primacy gives to the Bishop of
Rome over other Bishops. WHAT the Council of Florence decided as to that. The
superintendence of the Pope over all that concerns the Government and good of
the Church in General. The right he has of calling Councils for the Spiritual,
and presiding in them. That appeals may be made to his Tribunal, and that he
ought to judge of greater causes. An illustrious instance of that Supreme
Authority of the Pope in the History of Pope Agapetus, of the Patriarch
Anthimius and the Emperor Justinian. The prodigious Ignorance of Calvin in
Ecclesiastical History. The System of his Heresy quite contrary to the Doctrine
of Antiquity. What are the Prerogatives of Popes, that are disputed amongst
Catholics. Page 51
CHAP. VI. The state of the Question concerning the Infallibility of the Pope.
WHether or not when he defines without a Council, and without the consent of
the Church he may err. p. 72
CHAP. VII. What Antiquity has concluded from that that St. Peter was reproved
by St. Paul. WHether St. Peter was blameworthy. His action is called an error
by St. Austin. The opinion of St. Jerome refuted by that holy Doctor. He
compares the Error of St. Cyprian with that of St. Peter. The History of the
Error of Vigilius in regard of the three Chapters, and his change compared by
Pelagius II. with the Error and change of St. Peter. The Schism of the
Occidentals founded upon the constitution of Vigilius. According to Pope
Pelagius, for quenching that Schism; the Holy See is to be followed in its
change, as believers were obliged to imitate St. Peter in that which he made
from evil to good. St. Paul believed not St. Peter to be infallible. It was
before the Council of Jerusalem that St. Peter was reproved by St. Paul. The
true interpretation of that passage, I have prayed for thee Peter that thy
faith fail not. p. 77
CHAP. VIII. What follows naturally from the great contest of Pope Victor with
the Bishops of Asia. DIfferent customs in the Church concerning the celebration
of Easter, and of the Fast before that Feast. The good intelligence betwixt
Pope St. Anicetus and St. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, notwithstanding the
diversity of their customs. The Decree of Pope Victor rejected by Polycrates
Bishop of Ephesus, and by the other Asiaticks. St. Ireneus in name of the
Gallican Church, opposes Pope Victor. None of these Bishops of the East and
West, believed the Pope to be infallible. p. 103
CHAP. IX. What ought to be inferred from the famous debate that was betwixt
the Pope St. Stephen and St. Cyprian concerning the Baptism of Heretics. WHAT
was the Judgment of St. Cyprian in that question, and what was that of St.
Stephen. Councils held thereupon on both sides. The Decrees of the one and
other quite contrary. St. Stephen cuts off from his Communion the Bishops that
would not submit to his Decree. Neither these Bishops, nor St. Cyprian did for
all that change their opinion and practice. It was also permitted long after
the death of St. Cyprian to maintain the same opinion, and to follow the same
conduct. The Holy Fathers who held a Doctrine contrary to the Decree of the Pope
St. Stephen. What the great Council of Arles, Nice and Constantinople have
decided as to that question. All then, except the Donatists submitted to the
Decrees of these Councils, because they were believed to be Infallible, which
was not thought of Popes. p. 111
CHAP. X. The fall of Liberius. HIS Letters published in all places, wherein he
condemns St. Athanasius, suppresses the term [Consubstantial] receives the
Arians to his Communion, and subscribes the Formulary of Sirmium. He is for
that deposed by the Church of Rome. p. 135
CHAP. XI. The instance of Pope Vigilius. THE constitution of that Pope for the
three Chapters. The fifth Council which is Infallible condemns them. p. 140
CHAP. XII. The condemnation of Honcrius in the sixth Council. THE History of
Monothelism. Pope Honorius willing to agree both parties, writes Letters to
Patriarch Sergius which the Monothelites made use of for Authorizing their
Heresy. The Popes John IV. Theodore and St. Martin follow a contrary conduct
to his. The Emperor Constantine Pogonatus with consent of Pope Agatho calls the
sixth Council. The History of that Council. The Letters of Sergius and Honorius
are examined there. They are condemned of Heresy, and that Pope is
Anathematised. He is also condemned in the Emperors Edict, in the Letter of Leo
II. to the Emperor. In the Ancient diurnal Book of Rome, in the Ancient
Breviaries, and in the VII. and VIII. Councils. Convincing Arguments that the
Acts of the sixth Council have not been falsified, and that it cannot be said,
that the Fathers of that Council understood not well the meaning of Honorius.
All Antiquity which has received that Council as we have it, has believed
that the Pope is not infallible. p. 143
CHAP. XIII. Of the Popes Clement III. Innocent III. Boniface VIII. and Sixtus.
V. THE Error of Clement in his Decretal Laudabilem, recalled by Innocent III.
The Error of Innocent concerning the secret of Confession. He condemns that
Error in the Council of Lateran. That of Boniface in his Bull unam Sanctam,
recalled at the Council of Vienna. That of Sixtus V. in the Edition of his
Bible. A ridiculous Answer of some Moderns. p. 165
CHAP. XIV. The instance of John XXII. WHAT he did for Establishing his Error
concerning the beatifick vision. The sacred Faculty of Paris declares the
Doctrine of that Pope heretical. It had been condemned by Clement IV, and was
since in the Council of Florence. King Philip of Valois obliges that Pope to
recant. p. 173
CHAP. XV. The tradition of the Church of Rome as to that. THE Popes themselves
have acknowledged that for ending difference in Religion by a Sovereign and
infallible sentence, there was a necessity of a Council. The Heresies which
Popes have condemned without a General Council, have been so condemned by the
consent of the Church. Popes who have confessed that they had not the gift of
Infallibility. p. 179
CHAP. XVI. The state of the question concerning the Superiority of the Council
over the Pope, or of the Pope, over a Council. WHether after a Council is
lawfully Assembled, the Pope being present in it or not, that Council has, or
has not Supreme Authority over the Head as well as over the other Members of
the Church, or whether or not all its Authority depends on the Pope. p. 187
CHAP. XVII. That it is the Holy Ghost, which in the definitions of Faith
pronounces by the mouth of the Council. WHAT is to be concluded from that
Principle. What it is, according to the Doctrine of Antiquity, to approve and
confirm a Council. p. 190
CHAP. XVIII. That the Ancient Councils have examined the Judgments of Popes,
to give a last and definitive sentence upon them. THE History of the Patriarch
Flavian, and the Pope St. Leo who submits his Judgment to that of a General
Council. An instance of the fifth Council, that rescinds a sentence solemnly
pronounced by the Pope; and of the sixth, which examines the sentences of
Martin I. and Honorius I. approves the one and rejects the other. The History
of Constantine, of the Donatists, and of the first Council of Arles, which
examines the sentence given by Pope Melchiades in his first Council of Rome. p.
199
CHAP. XIX. That the Ancient Popes have always acknowledged and protested that
they were subject to Councils. THE History of Pope Sicicius and of the Council
of Capona. Of St. Leo in the case of St. Chrysostom against the Patriarch
Theophilus. Of Innocent III. in the case of the Marriage of Philip the August.
Instances of Pope St. Agapetus, and Silvester II. p. 213.
CHAP. XX. That the Ancient Popes have believed that they were subject to the
Canons. PRoofs of this from the conduct and protestations of the Popes Celestin
I. St Leo, St. Martin, St. Gregory the Great, John VIII. Eugenius III. and
Silvester II. What the Council of Florence has defined as to that. The true
sense of these words against a false interpretation that has been made of
them. Popes are obliged to govern the Church according to the Canons. In what
case they can dispense with them. That they may abuse their Power. Of an Appeal
to a Council, and of an Appeal as abusive to a Parliament. p. 225
CHAP. XXI. What General Councils have decided as to that Point. THE History of
the Council of Pisa, where that question was first canvassed. The debates that
arose upon that Subject in the Council of Constance, which is a continuation of
that of Pisa. The Decrees of that Council of Constance, and of that of Basil
upon the same Point. The approbation of these Decrees by the Popes Martin V.
and Eugenius IV. p. 241
CHAP. XXII. Of the Writing of the Sieur Emmanuel Schelstrate against the two
Decrees of the Council of Constance. THE Declaration which the Clergy of France
met in the Year 1682. made of their Opinion touching these two Decrees, which
they hold to be of infallible Authority, approved by Popes, and for those times
when there is no Schism, as well as during a Schism. The Sieur Emmanuel
Schelstrate undertakes to refute these three Articles in the three Chapters of
his Dissertation. p. 256
CHAP. XXIII. A Refutation of the first Chapter of the Dissertation of M.
Schelstrate. THE Decree of the fourth Session has not been falsified by the
Fathers of Basil. The Manuscripts of M. Schelstrate are defective, and ours are
true. A demonstration of this Truth by two Sermons of John Gerson who rehearses
that Decree before the whole Council of Constance word for word as we have it.
The Manuscripts by which these two Sermons have been reviewed, and the other
places were Gerson relates the same Decree. An other demonstration of that
truth by Pope Eugenius IV. and even by the Manuscripts of M. Schelstrate. That
question was sufficiently examined. The Council consisted of the greatest and
soundest part of the three obediences, and the absence of others hinders not
the Council from being lawful. p. 261
CHAP. XXIV. A Refutation of one of the two other Chapters of M. Schelstrate.
PRoofs of the approbation of these two Decrees of Constance. The true
interpretation of that word Conciliariter. The abuse that may be made of the
Appeal to a Council is condemned, but not the Appeal it self. All the Authority
of Councils proceeds not from the Pope, but chiefly from the Catholic Church.
p. 297
CHAP. XXV. A Refutation of the other Chapter of M. Schelstrate. THese two
Decrees of the Council of Constance are for all times, whilst there was a
Schism, and when there is none. An Ecumenical Council is a whole, whereof the
Pope is but a part. The Pope is the Head, but not the Master of the Church. The
difference betwixt the Power of Popes and of Kings. An authentic act of the
Superiority of a Council over the Pope. What in signifies in M. Schelstrates
Manuscript. That the Pope Elected cannot be bound. The Judgment of the
University of Paris and of the Gallican Church concerning the superiority of a
Council over the Pope. p. 317
CHAP. XXVI. The state of the Question touching the Power that some Doctors
have attributed to Popes over the Temporal. THE distinction of the direct and
indirect Power. p. 341
CHAP. XXVII. What Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught us as to that. A
False distinction of Buchanans refuted. It was upon an obligation of
Conscience, and not through weakness, that Christians obeyed infidel Emperors
and Persecutors. The Allegiance that Subjects owe to their Sovereigns is of
Divine Right, with which Popes cannot dispense. All the passages cited for the
contrary opinion are understood contrary to the interpretation of the Fathers
of the Church; which is forbidden by the Council of Trent. p. 345
CHAP. XXVIII. What has been the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers of the Church
as to that Point. THE distribution that God has made of the Spiritual for the
Church and her Pastors, and of the Temporal for Kings. An Exhortation of the
passage Here are two Swords. Dominion forbidden to the Popes, and how. p. 359
CHAP. XXIX. The Judgment of Ancient Popes touching the Power over Temporals
that some Doctors of late times attribute to the Pope. THE Testimony of
Gelasius. Of Gregory II. That Pope offered not to depose Leo Isauricus, nor to
make Rome revolt against him. Testimonies of Pelagius I. Stephen II. St.
Gregory the Great, and of Martin I. supposititious Bulls of St. Gregory. Pope
Gregory VII. is the first that offered to depose Emperors. Pope Zachary deposed
not Childerick; and Leo III. transferred not the Empire to Charlemagne. p. 370
CHAP. XXX. What has always been the Opinion of the Gallican Church and of all
France as to that. The Conclusion of this Point and of the whole Treatise. HOW
the Bishops of France opposed the attempts of Gregory IV. against Louis the
Debonnaire. They have always done the like upon all occasions. What the Chamber
of the Clergy declared concerning the absolute independence of our Kings, in
the Estates Assembled in 1914. Their Declaration in the year 1682. in relation
to the same Subject. The sentences of Parliament and the Edicts of Kings upon
the same occasion. Conclusion of this Treatise. p. 387

AN Historical Treatise Concerning the FOUNDATION AND PREROGATIVES OF THE
CHURCH of ROME, And of her BISHOPS.
CHAP. I. The Design and Draught of this Work, and the Principle on which it
moves.
TO maintain a State in peace and tranquillity, which makes Subjects happy,
according to the scope that true Policy proposes to it self; The first thing
that is to be done, is to beat off the enemy that has taken up Arms for the
ruin of it, and then to take care, that the quarrels and troublesome contests,
which sometimes arise amongst the chief members of the State, proceed not so
far, as to occasion a Civil War.

All Christians agree, that the true Church of Jesus Christ, is that Spiritual
Kingdom, which he came to establish in this world; and which nevertheless, as
he himself has said, is not of this world; because the whole end of it is to
procure us eternal happiness, a thing, no ways to be attained to upon Earth.
Heretics and Schismatics have often risen against the Lord and his Christ,
that they might overturn that beautiful kingdom, and establish their
particular Churches upon its ruins; every one pretending, that his is the
Church of the Lord; though, indeed, they be no more, all of them, but the
Synagogue of Satan; and the Kingdom of him, who, in the Gospel, is called the
Prince of this world. Besides, it falls out many times, that amongst
Catholics, who alone are members of the true Church, disputes and
controversies arise, which may trouble the tranquillity and peace that Jesus
Christ has left unto them, for securing their happiness in his Kingdom. It is
necessary then, for the service of the Church, and for maintaining it always in
the flourishing state wherein Jesus Christ has established it, to fight and
beat off the enemies that attack it, and to compose and calm the quarrels that
arise amongst the children of the Church, about points that are disputed with
heat, on all hands, and which might, in the end, disturb the repose and peace
of the Kingdom of the Son of God.

As I have wholly devoted my self to the service of the Church, so have I
endeavored, as much as lay in my power, to acquit my self of the former of
those two duties, in my Treatises of Controversy; and especially in that of
The true Church. I think I have been pretty successful in that engagement, and
repelled all the efforts of our Protestants, in making it appear, by evident
and unanswerable Arguments, That there is no true Church but ours; which is
enough, without more dispute, to put an end to all our Controversies, since
they acknowledge, with us, that the true Doctrine is always that of the true
Church of Jesus Christ. I discharge my self also, as well as I can, of that
obligation, in one part of that Treatise, where I maintain against Heretics,
the declared enemies of the Holy See, the primacy, rights, power and authority
of the visible head of the Church. At present then, that I may fulfill my duty
in its full extent, I must labor to prevent the springing up of any dangerous
division amongst Catholics, by reason of some private opinions that divide
them, as to that important subject of the Church, into which they are all
equally incorporated.

Now that I may solidly carry on so laudable and necessary an undertaking, It
is at first to be presupposed, that according to Catholic doctrine, the
Universal Church, which ought allways to be visible, and to continue without
Interruption, until the consummation of all things, is the Society of
Christians dispersed all over the World, united together by the profession of
the True Faith, the participation of the True Sacraments, by the bond of the
same Law, and under one and the same Head; Because the Church, Joh. 10. v. 16.
Ephesians. 1. v. 22. August. Ep. 50.
whose first and principal property is to be perfectly one, is the mystical
body of Jesus Christ; and that the members of a living body may receive the
influences of life, they must be united to the Head. Hence it is, that,
according to Saint Austin, Epist. 48. p. 151. l. de un. Eccl. c. 4.
though one may have all the rest, yet if he be separated from the Head, and,
by consequent from the body which is united to him, he is, out of the Church
Catholic by Schism; as Heretics are cut off from it, because of the want of
True Faith.

And as all the members of the body have not the same functions; but the parts
that constitute it being subordinate one to another in a lovely order, there
are some which are for giving motion to the rest, by the spirits that they send
over all; and some for distributing the nourishment which the rest receive for
growth, and for perseverance in the perfection of their state: So amongst the
multitudes of believers that make up the Church, and who cannot all be
immediately governed, instructed and edified by one single man: for edification
of the body of Jesus Christ, there must be, as the great Apostle speaks, a
great diversity of Ministers, and many Pastors subordinate one to another in
an holy Hierarchy, Act. 20. v. 28.
to the end the people may have the Sacraments administered unto them, be
instructed and governed.

And that is the reason that there are in the world so vast a number of
particular Churches, which have their several Bishops, and which are all
subordinate to a Principal Church, of which the Bishop is the head of all the
rest. And these being assembled in name of their Churches, in an Ecumenical
Council, represent the Universal Church, which we believe to be infallible, for
absolutely deciding the points of Faith, when her Bishops, who are the Pastors
and Teachers of Christians, being one and the same as well as she, say, in her
name, to all her members in perfect unity, Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and vobis.

For as the Universal Church is a whole consisting of all believers, and of all
particular Churches, which are one, by the Communion which they have with one
Principal Church, that is the source, principle, root and center of their
Unity, as Saint Cyprian speaks: So, according to the doctrine of the same holy
Father, Episcopatus unus est, multorum Episcoporum concordi numerositate
diffusus. Cypr. l. de unit. Eccl. and Epist. 55.
there is but one Episcopacy in the Church, whereof each Bishop fully possesses
a part; and by consequent there is but one Chair, wherein all Bishops sit, by
virtue of the Union which they have with him, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Cypr. Ep. 52. Ecclesia una and Cathedra una
Domini voce fundata. Cyp. Ep. 40. Ad Trimitatis instar, cujus una est atque
individua potestas, unum esse per diversos antistites sacerdotium. Sym. Ep. ad
Aeon. Arclat.
whom they ought to acknowledge for their Head. This Pope Symmachus explains,
in a very sublime manner, by an excellent comparison taken from the Trinity. In
the same manner, says he, as there is but one Omnipotence by the Unity of
Essence and Nature, which so unites the three Persons, that they are but one
God: So amongst the many Orthodox Churches throughout all Christendom, there is
but one only Priesthood, that is to say, but one Episcopacy through the unity,
not only of Faith and Belief, but also of communion of all the Bishops with a
Head, whence results that unity which is inseparable from the Church of Jesus
Christ.

This being presupposed, in which all Catholics do agree, Aug. on Ps. 101.
it is certain that Jesus Christ himself has established his Church, which he
purchased by his own blood, and unto which he has given the Faith, Act. 20. v.
28.
the Sacraments, the Law of Grace in his Gospel, and a visible Head to
represent him as his Vicar upon Earth. And as from a very small beginning it
has enlarged it self (according to the Prophecies) over the whole earth: So
also the Apostles and their Successors, after the departure of Jesus Christ,
have founded particular Churches, establishing them themselves, or ordaining
Bishops for governing the believers distributed into several Dioceses in all
the quarters of the World.

Now seeing that particular Church, which within a few years after the
Ascension of Jesus Christ, was settled in the Capital City of the Empire, is
without doubt, the most illustrious of all others; that on the one hand,
Heretics not being able to endure its splendor and greatness, have always
furiously risen up and conspired to destroy it; and that on the other, all
Catholics, who are sensible of the real advantages that distinguish it from
all others, are nevertheless divided about certain prerogatives which some
attribute to it, and others dispute: I shall show, without speaking of other
Churches, what has been the first establishment of that of Rome, what is the
excelling dignity thereof, and what are the prerogatives, rights and privileges
of its Bishops.

And because a subject of this nature is not to be handled by Philosophical
reasonings, but by matters of fact drawn from Scripture, interpreted according
to the Fathers, Councils, and ancient Traditions, which are the two principles
of true Theology: therefore you are not to expect any speculation or Philosophy
in this Treatise, which is purely Historical. I do in the very entry declare,
that there is nothing of mine in this work. For I do no more, but as a sincere
and exact Historian, barely allege, by uncontroverted matters of fact, drawn
from the one or other of those two sources, what venerable Antiquity believed
concerning that important matter.

This method we usefully employ against our Protestants. We make it clearly out
to them, that what we believe of the Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the
Invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, and other controverted points, is
the ancient Doctrine of the Church; and that so their belief contrary to ours
being new, is false. We force them to acknowledge, that what they hold with us
concerning Infant Baptism, the Baptism of Heretics, and the change of the
Sabbath into Sunday, of which Scripture makes no mention, they have it only
from Tradition, and the ancient Practice of the Church, and that therefore they
reject the anabaptists, because of the Novelty of their Doctrine.

And this is also the great Principle that the ancient Fathers made use of
against the Heretics of their times.

Let us only consult the order of time, Ex ipso ordine manifestatur id esse
dominicum and verum, quod sit prius traditum: id autem extraneum and falsum,
quod sit posterius immissum. Tertull. de praescr. c. 32.
and we shall know that that which has been first taught us, comes from the
Lord, and that it is truth; but that on the contrary, what new thing has since
been introduced, comes of the Stranger and is false.

And in his fourth Book against Marcion: Quis inter nos determinabit, nifi
temporis ratio, ei praescribens autoritatem quod antiquius reperietur, and ei
praejudicans vitiationem quod posterius revincetur? l. 4. cont. Marci. c. 4.
Who can put an end to our differences, unless it be the order and decision of
time, which Authorizes the Antiquity of Doctrine, and declares that defective
which comes, not till after that ancient Belief?

Upon the same ground St. Jerome, who flourished about the end of the fourth
Century, said to one of his Adversaries, who would have made a new Party in the
Church: Why do you offer after four hundred years, Cur post quadringentos annos
docere nos niteris quod ante nescivimus? Hier. Epist. ad Pammach. and Ocean.
to teach us that which was not known before?

Pope Celestin I. Exhorting the Gallican Church to repress a sort of People
that would have established new Doctrines, concludes with these very pithy
words. Corripiantur hujusmodi: non sit illis liberum habere pro voluntate
sermonem. Desinat incessere novitas vetustatem. Coelest. Ep. ad Episc. Gall.
Let such men be corrected; let them not have the liberty to say what they
please; let not Novelty insult over Antiquity.

And Sixtus III. Animated by the same Spirit that his Predecessor was, and
following his steps, speaks to John of Antioch with the same force, writing to
him in these terms: Let no more be allowed to Novelty, Nihil ultra liceat
Novitati, quia nihil addi convenit vetustati. Six. III. Ep. ad Joan. Antioch.
because nothing ought to be added to Antiquity.

Not but that the Church, which makes no new Articles of Faith, may declare
after many Ages, being instructed by the Holy Ghost, which successively teaches
her all truth, that certain matters that have not been before examined, whether
or not they be Articles of Faith, are really such, as she has done upon many
occasions, obliging us to believe distinctly what was not as yet known to be
matter of Faith. But that we ought so to stick to that which has been believed
in Antiquity, in matter of Doctrine, and especially in the four or five first
Ages, when, according to our Protestants themselves; there was as yet no
corruption in Doctrine, that new Doctors may add nothing of their own
invention, nor establish any Novelty contrary to it. This solid Principle being
equally received by Catholics and Protestants, I hope to satisfy both, in
declaring calmly and without dispute, by the bare relation of evident matters
of Fact, what the ancient Church has believed concerning the establishment of
the Church of Rome, and the Prerogatives and rights of her Bishops. This then
is the Method which I shall trace in this Treatise.

CHAP. II. Of the Foundation and Establishment of the Church of Rome.
ALL Catholics who know that the Popes are the Successors of St. Peter, agree
amongst themselves as to that point, but not with all Heretics. For there are
some Modern who confidently deny that that Divine Apostle ever was at Rome, or
that he fixed his Chair either there or in the City of Antioch. Calvin. l. 4.
Inst. c. 6.
They ground so extraordinary and new an Opinion upon the silence of St. Luke
and St. Paul, who having been at Rome, would not have failed to have spoken of
St. Peter, and to have found Christians, if he had already Preached the Gospel
there; besides, they ground it upon a certain Chronology which they have made,
as they thought fit, of the Acts of the Apostles, and which can no way agree
with that History of St. Peter; and, in fine, upon the very Epistles of that
Apostle, who gives us to know that his Mission was into Asia, and that he died
at Babylon.

There is nothing that gives a clearer proof of the weakness and delusion of
the wit of man, than when, by that Pride, which is so natural to him, he shakes
off that Authority to which he is obliged to submit, and for that end, opposes
it by his false reasonings, that serve for no other purpose but to discover his
blindness and vanity. Though we had elsewhere no Intelligence of the Voyage to,
and Chair of St. Peter at Rome; yet no man of sense would suffer himself to be
persuaded by such inconclusive arguments, so easy to be refuted. St. Luke says
nothing of it in the Acts of the Apostles: Has he mentioned there any thing of
St. Paul's Journey into Arabia, of his return to Damascus, and then three years
after to Jerusalem, of his Travels into Galatia, his being ravished up into
Heaven, his three Shipwrecks, his eight Scourgings, and of a thousand things
else that he suffered? shall one conclude from that silence, that all is false?
And though St. Paul had not written of these things himself, or if his Epistles
to the Galatians and Corinthians, Galat. 1. 2 Cor. 2.
had never come to our hands, would that silence of St. Luke have been of any
greater force, to prove that that is not true, seeing it is really so, and was
true before St. Paul wrote any thing of it? That Evangelist, says St. Jerome
has past over a great many things which St. Paul suffered, as likewise that
St. Peter established his Chair first at Antioch, In Ep. ad Galat. c. 2.
and then at Rome.

And as to the Chronology calculated to refute the two Foundations of Antioch
and Rome, we maintain that it is false; and it is easy to give another fixed
by the ablest writers of Ecclesiastical History and Chronologers, which
perfectly agrees with the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles of St. Peter
and St. Paul: Take it thus then in a few words.

The year of our Lord thirty five; that Apostle was sent with St. John to
Samaria, Anno 35.
to lay hands upon those whom the Deacon St. Philip had newly converted there;
Act. 8. v. 20.
And having Preached the Gospel to the People of that Province, he returned to
Jerusalem, where St. Paul, three years after his Conversion, went to visit him
in the year thirty nine. Now seeing the Church at that time lived in a profound
peace, St. Peter took so favorable a time to go visit, Anno 39.
as St. Luke says in express terms, Galat. 1. v. 18. Act. 9. v. 31. 32.
all the Believers that the Disciples dispersed through the Provinces, during
the Persecution of the Jews, after the Martyrdom of St. Stephen, Act. 11. v.
19. Eusebius. in Chron. Chrysostom. Hieron. Greg. M. and alii.
had gained to Christ.

And then it was that being informed that many of these dispersed Disciples had
by their Preaching wrought much fruit at Antioch, he went and settled his
Patriarchal Chair in that great City the Capital of the East, as the Ancients
assure us.

From thence; seeing he had the care of all the Churches, having given
necessary orders for the government of that of Antioch, Anno 40, 41. Anno 42.
he returned into Judaea; visits Lidda, Joppa, Caesarea; opens a door to the
calling of the Gentiles, by the Conversion of Cornelius the Centurion; and
returns to Jerusalem, Act. 11. v. 4.
where having declared what God had revealed to him upon that Subject, he was
informed by the relation of those that came from Antioch, that the number of
Believers increased there daily. And therefore St. Barnabas was sent thither,
V. 22.
who finding that there was a great Harvest there, went to fetch St. Paul from
Tarsus to assist him in the work; V. 25.
and both of them labored in that holy employment for the space of a whole
year, with so great success, Anno 43.
that there the Believers, who were wonderfully increased in number, professing
publicly their faith in Jesus Christ, true God and true Man, were first called
Christians. After that they carried to Jerusalem, where St. Peter was, V. 30.
and into all Judaea the Alms which they had collected from the fervent charity
of these first Christians of Antioch, for the relief of the Poor during that
great Famine which the Prophet Agabus foretold, Act. 11.
and which was universal all over the world, Anno 44.
the second year of the Empire of Claudius, and the four and fourtieth of Jesus
Christ. Dio. Cass. l. 60.


In the mean time Herod Agrippa whom that Emperor had the year before, sent
home with freedom into his Kingdom of Judaea, caused the Apostle St. James
Brother of St. John to be put to death before Easter; Act. 12. v. 1.
and that he might still more gain the affections of the Jews, mortal Enemies
to the Christians, he cast St. Peter into Prison, to be served in the same
manner after the Feast. But an Angel delivered him out of his hands, and
brought him forth out of Prison. After that, this Apostle past by Antioch into
the lesser Asia, Petr. Epist. Metaph. ex Antiq.
where he spent most part of that year, instructing the Believers, and erecting
Sees in Cappadocia, Galatia, Pontus and Bithynia; And having from thence
embarked for Rome, according to the orders he had received from the Holy Ghost,
he arrived there about the end of that second year of Claudius, as all the most
ancient Authors who have written of St. Peter do agree.

In that capital City of the world, after he had converted a sufficient number
of Jews and Gentiles for founding a Church, he established the year following,
which was the forty fifth of Christ, his Pontifical Chair, Anno. 45.
leaving that of Antioch to Evodius, and there he held it till the consummation
of his Martyrdom, that he suffered in the year threescore and nine, which was
the thirteenth of the Empire of Nero. Anno 69.
So that reckoning from the year thirty nine, to forty five, we shall find
that St. Peter's See continued seven years at Antioch; and from forty five to
threescore and nine when he suffered Martyrdom, we have the twenty five years
of his Episcopacy at Rome.

Not that he lived there constantly during all that time, no more than he did
at Antioch, all the seven years that he was Bishop there. For seeing he was
both an Apostle and a Bishop, he traveled often, according to the Vocation of
his Apostleship, into diverse Countries of Europe and Asia, there to plant
Churches; and as Bishop he governed his own, either Personally, or by his
Vicars during his absence: So that the quality of an Apostle is not at all
inconsistent with that of a Bishop: And if all Bishops be not Apostles, all the
Apostles were Bishops, and ordained Bishops; And for that reason it is that all
these are the Successors of the Apostles. St. Peter however, since no man
before him had Preached the Gospel at Rome, Oros. l. 7. c. 6.
lived there seven years, until the year fifty one, when he was forced to
leave it because of the Edict of the Emperor Claudius, Sueton. in Claud.
who banished thence the Jews. That obliged him to return into Asia; And it is
certain that he was again at Antioch, where he had a great contest with St.
Paul, either before, Act. 18. v. 2. Galat. 2. v. 11.
or after the Council of the Apostles, where he was present, and which was held
the same year at Jerusalem.

Now seeing after that Council St. Peter could not return to Rome during the
life of the Emperor who had banished him thence, and that all the other
Apostles almost, had had their Provinces in the Kingdoms of the East; he took
that time to go Preach the Gospel to the Nations of the West, even those most
remote: For some have written that he went as far as England. Metaph. ex Antiq.
Orig. praef. in Epist. ad Romans Theodor. and alii.
So that when St. Paul wrote from Corinth, and not from Ragusa to the Romans,
in the year fifty eight, and when next year after, he was carried Prisoner to
Rome; where he continued two years, until the year sixty one, St. Peter was
not as yet come back. So nothing can be concluded from the silence of St. Paul,
who speaks not of St. Peter no more than St. Luke does, who was with St. Paul
at Rome.

And it cannot be said that there were no Christians in that City, when that
Apostle arrived there, seeing he had written to them the year before an
excellent Epistle, wherein he says, Romans 1. v. 8.
that their faith was spoken of throughout the whole world, and that he longed
to see them, that he might impart to them some Spiritual Gifts, to the end they
might be established: which he adds, says Theodoret, and makes use of that word
establish, because the great St. Peter had already Preached unto them the
Doctrine of the Gospel. Theod. in Epist. ad Romans c. 1.
Besides that, when St. Paul arrived first at Rome, the Brethren came to meet
him, as St. Luke mentions, Act. 28.
who in many places of the Acts calls the Christians by that name; and the
chief men amongst the Jews who came to wait upon him at his Lodging, asked him
not what that Sect was, as if there had been no Christians at Rome, and that
they had not learned from them what their belief was, but what he believed,
because they saw that all who owned that Profession were in all places opposed
and contradicted. This is a Chronology exactly conform to the Scripture, and
that very well agrees with the two Voyages of Antioch and Rome, which is the
Question in hand.

And as to what is objected to us, that St. Peter wrote from Babylon, 1 Pet. c.
5. v. 13.
where it is also affirmed that he died, there is nothing so pitifully weak.
For it is so clear in that place that Babylon signifies the City of Rome, that
that passage may even be used to prove by Scripture that St. Peter has been at
Rome. And indeed, it is by the very same that Eusebius makes it out that that
Epistle was written at Rome; Eusebius. Hist. l. c. 74.
when he says: St. Peter makes it appear that he wrote it at Rome, when he
calls that City Babylon. Does not St. Jerome say the same, Hierom. de script.
Eccl. in Marc.
and after him all those who have written upon that Epistle before the
Reformers? But who knows not, that Ancient Rome, which according to the
observation of St. Austin, Aug. de civitat. l. 18. c. 22. Oros. l. 7. c. 2.
Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 3. c. 13.
was built at the same time when the Empire of the Babylonians was about to
fall, is by the Ancients called Babylon, Revel. 17.
and especially that St. John in the Revelation gives it no other name when he
speaks of it at the time when it Persecuted the Christians, and so cruelly shed
the blood of so many thousand Martyrs? And what is most pleasant, the
Protestants are pleased to give to Christian Rome the name of Babylon; and are
not satisfied that Pagan Rome should be so called by St. Peter.

That being presupposed, and all the weak batteries of our Adversaries so
easily overthrown, I had reason to say, that if we knew not by other means,
that St. Peter had been at Rome, yet all the reasons that are objected against
it, would never persuade a Man of sense of the contrary. How must it be then at
present, when we have an invincible Argument to convince us of that truth which
we ought never to abandon, even though we could not disentangle our selves from
the captious Arguments wherewith they assault us? For that can never proceed
but from the weakness of our mind, and not the defect of the object, which,
when it is once certainly known to be true, is necessarily so always.

What is that invincible Argument then, which ought to convince us of this
truth? It is that which, as I have said, I shall employ throughout this whole
Histarical Treatise, I mean Antiquity, according to that great Principle which
at first I laid down; To wit, that that which is newly broached, if it be
contrary to what has been believed in the Primitive Church, is false, because
ancient belief, and that descends to us by Tradition, especially when we trace
it back to the age of the Apostles, is always truth it self.

Now all Antiquity has believed, Blondel de la prim. en l'Eglise. Chap. 32. p.
823.
that St. Peter was at Rome: That is so true, that Mr. David Blundel, the most
knowing of all our Protestant Ministers, frankly confesses it. And he must
needs do so; for being a Man of such parts, and so well read in the Ancients,
as appears in his Works, he cannot deny, but that almost all the Latin and
Greek Fathers have asserted it; Apud Prudent. in peris. toph.
Amongst the Latins, Prosper, Orosius, St. Augustine, Saint Jerome, Prudentius,
Optatus, Saint Ambrose, Lactantius, Arnobius, St. Cyprian, Hippolytus,
Tertullian, and St. Irenoeus; and amongst the Greeks, Theodoret, St. Cyril of
Alexandria, Apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24. Ibid. Ibid. c. 13.
St. Chrysostom, St. Epiphanius, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Athanasius, Peter
of Alexandria, Eusebius, Origene, Clemens Alexandrinus, Denis of Corinth, Cajus
contemporary with Tertullian, and Papias a disciple and hearer of St. John. Nor
shall we mention all the other Writers, who, in all succeeding ages, have
constantly asserted the same thing; insomuch, that no Heretic nor Schismatic
ever dreamt of calling it in question, before our Protestants, who are the
Authors of that impudent and unjustifiable novelty, which can never pass with
a Man of sense, in opposition to all venerable Antiquity, and to the authority
of so many great men, who have constantly, in all ages, given testimony to that
truth, from our present times up to the age of the Apostles.

For to say, as some have done, That all the Fathers, and these Learned men
have been deceived by an equivocal word, taking that part of the lesser Asia,
Quas omnes (provincias) aetas nostra Anatoliam vocat. Vnde apud Barbaros pars
illa in qua Asia, Bithynia, Galatia, and Cappadocia prima, Romans id est Romania,
sive Romaea appellatur. Pars vero quae ad austrum est, in qua Lycia, Pamphylia,
and Cilicia sunt, Otto-Manidia, id est, Familiae Ottomani, quibus illa
successit, quondam dicebantur. Dominic. Marius Niger Venet. Asiae Pomment. 1.
de Asia Minore.
where St. Peter Preached, for the City of Rome; and which, as the Geographer
Marius Niger writes, was called Romans or Romania: it is a ridiculous
extravagance, and no less shameful ignorance. It is only the Turks, who,
since they became Masters of the Eastern Empire, have called the neighboring
Country to Constantinople, especially beyond the Bosphorus, Romania, or Romans
or Romelia, as that Geographer says; for others give that name of Romania, or
Romelia, only to Thrace. This being so, Can it be affirmed, without disgrace,
that these holy Fathers, who flourished many Ages, not only before the
Conquest of the Turks, but even before the founding of Constantinople, have
been deceived, in imagining, that St. Peter was at Rome, because it has been
said, that he Preached in the Country of Rom.? See what extravagance they are
capable of, who, to satisfy their passion, dare confront their ridiculous
novelty with Antiquity, of which we may say with Pope Celestine I. Desinat
incessere novitas vetustatem.

CHAP. III. That the Church of Rome has been founded by St. Peter; that he was
the first Bishop of it; and that the Popes are his Successors therein.
IT will not be difficult to confirm the truth of this by the same principle of
Antiquity, to which I confine my self in this Treatise. For all the same
Fathers almost, Cyprian. ad Corn. Ep. 55. and lib. de unit. Optat. Cont. Parm.
l. 2. Ambros. de Sacr. l. 3. c. 1. Hierom. de Script. in Petr. and alibi.
Hegesip. apud Hier. de Script. Ruffin. invect. Sulp. Sever. Hist. Sacr. l. 3.
August. contra Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
and ancient Authors, who assure us that Saint Peter was at Rome; say also,
that he founded that particular Church. It is true, that many of them join St.
Paul with him in that function, as it is done at present; and there is reason
for so doing, because both of them Preached the Gospel there, in different
times, and both at the same time Consecrated that illustrious Church by their
Martyrdom. But when they speak, as they very often do, of the Episcopacy and
Chair of Rome, they call it solely the Chair of St. Peter, without joining St.
Paul with him. So that it is not to be doubted, but that all Antiquity has
acknowledged St. Peter, of all the Apostles, to have been the first Bishop of
Rome, De la Primante en l'Eglise. p. 44.
as Mr. Blondel confesses.

So also when Optatus Melevitanus, St. Jerome, St. Austin, and the rest, give a
Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome, they place always St. Peter first, and bring
them down to him that possessed the Sea in their time, to show the
uninterrupted Succession of Popes from St. Peter, whose lawful Successors
they are, and whose Chair they fill, as the holy Fathers and Councils
frequently say.

I know there are some who have said, Hilar. in Frag. p. 23. Cypr. Ep. 43.
Optat. contra Parm. l. 1.
That Bishops, being the Successors of the Apostles, are in that quality all
of them in St. Peter's Chair. We say the same also, and it must needs be
granted, for the reason that I shall allege, according to one of the
Principles which I laid down at first, in the first Chapter of this Treatise.

As the Universal Church is one, and a body constituted of all particular
Churches, in union with one principal or chief Church, the principle and center
of their unity: So there is but one general Chair in the Church, and one
Episcopacy, Cathedra una super Petrum Domini voce fundata. Cypr. Epist. 40.
Optat. contra Parmen. l. 2.
composed of all the Episcopal Chairs, by the communication which they have
with the Head of that Church, and with that chief Chair whence their unity
proceeds. So that, as all Believers are members of the same Church, when they
are united to its Head; so all Bishops, taken in general, and every one in
particular, sit in the same Chair, by the communion which they have with him
that sits in that principal Chair, from whence, by that union which they
preserve with it, results the unity of the Chair and of Episcopacy in the
Church.

But, besides that, every one of them has his particular Chair, wherein none
of the rest have any share, as they have all a share in that Chair which is but
one in the Universal Church. And because Saint Peter is head of it, as we shall
presently make it appear, not only his particular Chair of Rome, but likewise
that of the whole Church is by the holy Fathers often called the Chair of St.
Peter. It is in that sense then, that all Bishops sit in St. Peter's Chair, as
all the Doctors of the old Law sat in the Chair of Moses. But for all that,
all Bishops sit not in St. Peter's particular Chair, no more than his
Successors in that Chair, sit in the Chairs of other Bishops, every one
possessing entirely his own, as a part of the Universal Episcopacy. And thus
also is to be understood what is said, that all Bishops are the Successors of
St. Peter. Take it in this manner.

I have clearly made it out in my Treatise of the true Church, even according
to Calvin, and the ablest of our Protestants, that the true mark of the true
Church, which distinguishes her from all others, is the perpetuity that will
make her continue, without ever failing, to the end of the World. And seeing
she is that great Sheepfold, wherein all believers, who are the sheep of Jesus
Christ, are gathered together into one flock, she cannot subsist in that unity
without there be Pastors and Sheep; some to teach, and others to receive the
truths which they are to believe; guides, and people, to be guided; and unless
these pastors and guides succeed one another, without interruption to the end,
for governing and guiding believers.

Now that is not to be seen but in the Catholic Church, by the Union that all
these particular Churches and their Bishops have with him whom they own for
their Head. For in what time soever these Churches began to be planted, some
sooner, some later, they may ascend, by virtue of that Union, through a
perpetual Succession, from Pastors to Pastors, and from Bishops to Bishops,
till they come to him whom Jesus Christ has given them for Head. And because
St. Peter is he, as we shall presently see; it is evident, that it is by that
that they are his Successors; since by the Union which they have with the
Bishop of Rome their Head, who, in a straight line, succeeds to St. Peter, they
mount up, without interruption, by a continuity and collateral Succession, even
to that Apostle, as all the branches of a Tree are united to the root in
oblique and indirect lines, by the union with the trunk and body of that Tree.
But we must now consider the rights and prerogatives of St. Peter, who was the
first Bishop of Rome.

CHAP. IV. Of the Primacy of St, Peter, and that he has been established by
Jesus Christ head of the Universal Church.
I Shall not enlarge in a long discussion of this point, which the great and
large volumes that so many learned men of the past and present age have
composed for clearing of it, have drained, in alleging all that solidly can be
said, as to this Article of our Faith, on which depends that perfect unity,
which we avow to be essential to the Church. I shall only say what all
Catholics agree in, that Jesus Christ chose St. Peter, amongst all his
Apostles, to give him, not only the Primacy of order, honor and rank, by
assigning him the first place, as one chief in dignity amongst his equals; and
in those gifts, talents and graces which are inseparable from the Apostleship
and Episcopacy; but also the Primacy of Jurisdiction, Power and Authority over
all believers in the whole Church, of whom he appointed him head.

This they learn from the Gospel, in that famous passage of the sixteenth
Chapter of St. Matthew, where St. Peter, having answered for all the Apostles
to our Savior, who had asked them, what they thought of him, Thou art the
Christ the Son of the living God: our heavenly Lord, commending his faith, said
to him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood has not revealed
it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. And I say unto thee that thou
art Cephas (that is to say, in the Syriack Tongue, a Stone) and upon this rock
I will build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And
I will give unto thee the Keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Most of the holy Fathers, especially those that were before the Council of
Nice, interpret to the person of St. Peter, these words, and upon that rock I
will build my Church, according to the reference that they must necessarily
have to those which go before, I say unto thee that thou art Cephas; that is to
say a Stone or Rock. Tertul. de praescr. c. 32. Origin. in Ep. 14. hom. 5.
Cypr. Epist. 71. p. 73. ad Jabaium. Hilar. lib. 6. de Trinit. Greg. Nist. in
opera de adv. Domini. Ambros. in cap. 2. Ep. ad Ephesians. Chrysostom. in Matt. 15.83.
and in cap. 1. Ep. ad Gal. Hier. in Matthew. c. 6. August. in Joan. Tract. 124.
There are others, particularly since the Council of Nice, who, to confute the
impiety of the Arians, have understood them of that illustrious confession of
Faith that St. Peter made, when he said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God; and some have referred them to Jesus Christ himself, who is the
foundation and corner Stone, of which St. Paul says, That no man can lay
another than that which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ.

But besides, that the same Authors say elsewhere, that the Church is founded
on St. Peter, it is easy to reconcile all these opinions together, which,
without any difficulty, may be reduced to one, that results from all the three,
by saying, that these words ought to be understood of the person of St. Peter,
confessing Jesus Christ to be the Son of the living God. It is evident, that
these three interpretations naturally resolve into this, which comprehends the
Faith of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, the confession of that Faith, and the
person who made that confession.

Now seeing the Church is the Society of true Christians, and that the first
object of the Faith of Christians, as Christians, Ephesians. 2.
is Jesus Christ; by the same it is, that Jesus Christ is the first foundation
of the Church, and that no other than he can be laid, for grounding and
establishing the Faith of Christianity.

Moreover, as it is not enough to be a true Christian, to believe in Jesus
Christ, Romans 11.
and to preserve that Faith in the heart, if we do not also confess that we
believe in him: therefore it is that the Church again is founded upon the
confession of the Divinity of Christ.

In fine, besides Faith and the public profession of it, the Church also,
which is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, must be well governed. For that purpose,
he has appointed in it Apostles, Ephesians. 4. v. 11.12.
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, that they may labor in
perfecting the Saints, according to the functions of their Ministry, for
edifying of the body of Jesus Christ. And thence it is, that because of that
illustrious confession of the Divinity of the Son of God, which St. Peter made
in name of all the Apostles, he established him the foundation of the Ministry
and Government of the Church, by giving him the oversight and authority over
all the rest, who are subordinate to him, in their functions and inferior
Ministeries, as to their Head. Wherefore Jesus Christ immediately after said to
him, giving him that supreme power and authority in his Church. I will give
unto thee the Keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatever thou shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. And that promise, which could not fail of being
accomplished, was then fulfilled, when the Son of God, after his resurrection,
said to him thrice, Feed my sheep. John 20.


I know, that according to the sentiment of the Fathers, and principally of St.
Augustine, he spoke these words unto him, as to one who was the Figure of the
Church, with relation to all the Apostles, and their Successors the Bishops,
who are also the foundations and pillars of the Church, according to St. Paul,
and to whom Jesus Christ has said, Cypr. Ep. 27. de laps. Hier. l. 1. cont.
Jovin. August. Con. 2. in Psalm. 30. and in Psalm. 86.
that whatsoever they shall bind upon Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever they shall loose upon Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. But there is
this difference betwixt Saint Peter and all the rest, that when he speaks to
all in common, he gives them that which is common to all the Apostles, and
wherein they are all equal, as the power of administering Sacraments, teaching
all Nations, baptizing, forgiving sins, and what belongs to the other
Apostolical functions. And when he applies himself particularly to Saint Peter,
Cypr. lib. de unit. Eccles. Ep. 55. and 73. Hieronym. adv. Jovinian l. 2.
Optat. cont. Parmen. l. 2.
he gives him that which is proper to himself, speaking to him in the singular
number, for settling in his Church, the unity whereof he makes him the principle
and foundation, to which all the rest must have a reference, that they may be
but one, by the union which they ought necessarily to have with their Head,
without which they neither are, nor can do any thing.

For as St. Peter was the first that publicly confessed the Divinity of Jesus
Christ, which he had by revelation, and that the rest knew it not but by his
means, and that they answered only by his mouth, joining with him on that
great occasion: So Jesus Christ, in consideration of that primacy of
Confession, has given him the primacy over all the rest, making him their
head, and that one, that original, foundation and principle of unity, upon
which he has built the Church, in regard of its government. So that although
all the rest received Immediately from Christ the power of binding and loosing,
and of governing their Churches, yet they cannot exercise it but by virtue of
the union which they have with St. Peter, without which they would continue no
longer in unity, nor by consequent in the Church. And it is upon that that the
Primacy of Saint Peter is founded, and that he is next to Jesus Christ, and not
as he is, by his own power and virtue, but by commission, the foundation and
head of the Church.

The Protestants, who, by a deplorable Schism, not without Heresy, have gone
out of the unity of the Church, by making separation from the Chair of St.
Peter, which is the principle, original and center thereof; have, in vain,
disputed this Doctrine, with all their force, until this present. I shall not
here undertake a refutation of their objections, whereby they pretend to
overthrow it, and whereof the weakness has been made appear, in a vast number
of great and learned Answers that have been made to them. But to avoid
disputing, which is unseparable from the opposing of arguments to arguments,
for refuting adversaries; and that I may only make use of that great maxim,
which alone I am to employ in this Treatise, I shall only say in one word,
that if we consult Antiquity, we shall find, by tracing it to the first Ages of
the Church, that it has ever constantly believed that Primacy of St. Peter.

This is easily proved by the testimonies of almost all the holy Fathers,
Hippolyt. Martyr. de consum. mundi. Tertul. de praes. c. 22. Iren. Origin in
Ep. ad R. c. 6. Cypr. lib. de unti. Eccl. Epiph. in Anchor. Amb. in Luc. c. 10.
Greg. Naz. or. 26. Hilar. in Matthew. c. 16. Hier. adv. Jovin. l. 2. Optat.
Melev. cont. Parmen. l. 2. Cyrill. Alex. in Joan. c. 12. August. in Joan. tr.
11.36. Ep. 161.
who, in an infinite number of places in their Works, say, That he is the Rock
and Foundation of the Church; that his Chair is the chief Chair, to which all
the rest must unite; that he has the Supreme power to take care of the flock
of the Son of God; that he has received the Primacy, to the end that the
Church might be one; that he is the first, the chief and the head of the
Apostles; that he is the inspectour of all the Universe; he, to whom Jesus
Christ has committed the disposition of all things, Chrysostom. hom. 13. in
Matthew. in Joan. hom. 87. de beat. Ignat. St. Leo, Sermon. in Anniversar. su.
Assumpsit.
to whom he has given the rule over his brethren, who is preferred before all
the Apostles, and who governs all Pastors; with many other encomium's of that
nature, all which magnificently express his Primacy; and which have been often
repeated and approved in General Councils.

And that supereminent dignity of St. Peter was so well known, even of the
Pagans, in Antiquity, that Porphyrius, one of their greatest Philosophers,
upbraided the Christians, as St. Jerome informs us, that their St. Paul was so
rash, as to have dared to reprove the Prince of the Apostles, and his Master.
Hieron. Ep. 89.
Since then all venerable Antiquity has believed the Primacy of St. Peter,
which our Protestants contest by the novelty of their Doctrine, we have reason,
once more, to say to them, Desinat incessere novitas vetustatem.

After all, it is so evident, that Jesus Christ, who will have his Church to
continue to the end of the World, has given St. Peter the Primacy and Supreme
dignity of visible Head of the Church, for himself and Successors, in that
Principal Chair which that great Apostle fixed at Rome, that it would be
superfluous to attempt to prove it. For if it had been so confined to his
Person, that it descended not to his Successors, it would follow, that after
the death of St. Peter, the Church was fallen, that it had no longer that
Principle of unity, which makes it one; that it was no more but a body without
a head, and a ruinous building without a foundation. Besides, Is it not well
known that it is an order naturally fixed in lawful Successions, that Kings
and other Princes, and their Officers, in the Civil State; Bishops,
Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarchs, nay, and Ministers amongst our
Protestants, succeed to the rights and powers of their Predecessors?

But though we had no such convincing reasons, Council. Sardic. Ep. ad Jul. in
frag. Hill. Con. Constant. ad Dam. Conc. Ephesians. Conc. Calcedon ad Leon. Conc. 6.
Act 18. Ep. ad Agath. Iren. l. 3. cont. Valent. Cyprian. ad Corn. Ep. 55. and
l. de unitat. Optat. contra Parm. l. 2. Vincent. Lirin. lib. contra Haer. c. 3.
Hier. ad Dam. August. de duab. Ep. Pelag. l. 1. c. 1. and Ep. 92.162. Chrysostom.
Ep. 1. ad Innoc. Prosper. de voc. gent. l. 8. c. 6. St. Leo. St. Gregor.
Theodoret. Socrates. Sozom. and alii passim.
yet it would be enough to say, that all the same evidences of Antiquity that
have given testimony to the Primacy of St. Peter, and to his supreme power in
the Universal Church, have also by common consent attributed it, upon the same
words of Jesus Christ, to the Bishops of Rome, who are the Successors of the
Prince of Apostles. There is nothing more ordinary in the Councils and Fathers,
where the same things that are said of the Primacy of St. Peter, and of the
Prerogatives of his Chair at Rome, are in formal terms most frequently found
repeated to express the Primacy of the Popes, their super-intendance in the
Universal Church, and the superiority of their Chair, and of the Church of
Rome, to which they declare that all the rest ought to be united as Lines to
their Center, and as to the source of Sacerdotal Unity. And that is the reason
why we call the Universal Church, the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church,
because all particular Churches, of which that great body is constituted, must
be united in communion with the Pope of Rome their Head, that so they may be
Members of the true Church of Jesus Christ, which is no ways one, but by that
union which makes its perfect unity.

I have, me thinks, made it hitherto clear enough, according to all Antiquity
opposite to the novelty of our Protestants, what is the belief of Catholics
concerning St. Peter and of his Successors in his Bishopric of Rome. We must
now in order examine, sticking close to Antiquity against all Novelty, what
Prerogatives and Rights that Primacy gives to Popes, what it is that all
Catholics agree in, and wherein it is that they differ about that point; and
prove by uncontroverted matters of Fact, without disputation, what Antiquity,
which ought to direct our belief, in spite of all the attempts of Novelty,
has believed concerning points of that importance.

CHAP. V. Concerning the rights and advantages that the Primacy gives to the
Bishop of Rome over all other Bishops.
I Think that point cannot better be decided than by the Decree of the Council
of Florence in the year 1439. when that famous reunion was made betwixt the
Latin and Greek Churches, after many celebrated conferences and great contests
that happened there during the space of fifteen months, betwixt the learned
men of both Churches about that Subject and other controverted points. This is
the definition of the Council. Item, we define that the Holy Apostolic See,
and the Pope of Rome have the Primacy over all the world; that the Pope of Rome
is the Successor of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles; that he is the true
Vicar of Jesus Christ, and Head of all the Church, the Father and Teacher of
all Christians; and that our Lord Jesus Christ has given him, in the person of
St. Peter, full power of feeding, ruling and governing the universal Church, in
the manner specified in the Acts of Councils, and holy Canons.

For it is precisely so in the Greek, (...), and in the Latin, Juxta eum modum
qui and in Actis Conciliorum and in Sacris Canonibus continetur: As it is to be
read in Blondus Secretary to Pope Eugenius, Decad. 3. l. 10.
who presided in that Council. In Ekius his Treatise of the Primacy of the
Pope, Lib. 1.
in the Bishop of Rochester's five and twentieth Article against Luther, Cap.
Vlt.
and in Albertus Pighius his fourth Book of the Hierarchy. That is to say in
English, To govern the Church in the manner which is found expressed in the
Acts of the Councils, and in the Holy Canons; not as Abraham of Candie has
very ill rendered it, quemadmodum etiam, which gives it a quite contrary sense
to the intention and words of the Council, as will manifestly appear in another
place of this Treatise.

At present it is enough that we know, according to that Council, that the
Primacy of the Pope entitles him to the inspection of all that concerns the
government and welfare of the Church in general, which is more than any Bishop
of what dignity soever he may be can challenge. For the power that other
Bishops have by Divine Right to govern the Church, reaches not beyond their
Dioceses: but that of the Pope, as Head of the Church Universal, extends every
where, when the good of all Believers in general is concerned; of whom he is to
take the care; And that supreme dignity gives him a great many rights, which
none but he alone can enjoy.

To him application is made to have resolutions in difficulties that may arise
in matters concerning Faith, Hieron. ad Ageruch. Ep. 2. Innoc. 1. apud Aug.
Epist. 93. August. Epist. 106. Jul. apud Athan. Apol. 1.
manners, or general Customs. Of this we have evident proofs in the Holy
Fathers, and an illustrious instance of it has been seen in our days, in that
famous letter which the Bishops of France wrote to Pope Innocent X.

He alone has the right of calling Councils for Spiritual Affairs, and to
preside in them personally, or by his Legates, I say he has that right,
without speaking of matter of Fact, which is under debate in respect of some
Councils, and cannot prejudice his Primacy. For though he has not presided in
the first Council of Constantinople, which perhaps neither did he call, and
that it be most certain that he did not call the fifth, nor presided in it,
though he was at Constantinople, where that Council was held: yet it is not to
be doubted but he might have done both the one and the other, if he had
pleased, seeing that in the Letter which the Patriarch Entychius wrote to him
for obtaining of that Council, Council. 5. Act. 1.
he prayed him to preside in it, and that he only presided therein upon his
refusal. For thus it is in the Original, praesidente nobis vestra beatitudine,
and not residente nobiscum, as the Minister Junius has corrupted it, by a
correction made of his own head, against the clear sense of the following words.

Besides, is it not past all controversy that the Pope presided by his Legates
in the Council of Chalcedon, as he has done in almost all the others which
have been held since? For I speak not here of the great Council of Nice, nor of
that of Ephesus, because, as I conceive, I have elsewhere proved by invincible
Arguments, not only against our Protestants, but also against the sentiments
of some Catholic Doctors, that the Popes by their Legates presided in them,
nay, and that they called them, as to what relates to the Spiritual Authority
which they have over the Bishops; as the Emperors, to whose rights Kings and
Christian Princes have succeeded, may call Councils in regard of Temporals, by
that sovereign power which they have received from God over their Subjects, in
virtue whereof they may oblige their Bishops to assemble in a certain place,
either within or without their Territories, there to treat of matters purely
spiritual, wherein they meddle not, but as protectours of the Church, in
causing the Decrees and Canons of these Councils which strike not at the Rights
of their Crown, to be put in execution. It is certain then that the Popes, as
Heads of the Church, have right to call general Councils, and to preside in
them.

Moreover, seeing the Pope in that quality, Council. Sardic. Can. 3.4.7. Gelas.
Epist. ad Epis. Dardan. Innoc. Epist. ad Victric. St. Leo. Ep. 82. Cap. Car.
Mag. lib. c. 187. Hincmar. ad Nicol. 1. Flodo. Hist. Eccl. Romans l. 3. Gerson de
Protestant. Eccl. Cons. 8.
is without dispute, above every Bishop of what Dignity soever he may be, and
above all particular Churches and Synods: Appeals may be made from all these
Bishops and Synods to his Tribunal. It belongs to him to judge of greater
Causes, such as those which concern the Faith, and that are doubtful,
universal Customs, the deposing of Bishops, and some others which I have
observed elsewhere, the decision whereof belongs and ought to be referred to
him. In that manner the Inferior Judges appointed by Moses according to the
advice of Jethro, Exodus 18.
judged of causes of less importance, and the greater were reserved to that
great leader of the People of God.

Hence it is also that the Pope has right to judge, yet always according to
the disposition of the Canons, of the causes of Bishops, Metropolitans,
Primates and Patriarchs. This appears clearly by the judgment in the case of
St. Athanasius, Athan. Apol. 2. Theodoret. l. 2. Socr. l. 2. c. 15. Sozom. l.
3. c. 81.
Paul. Patriarch of Constantinople, Marcellus Primate of Ancyra, Asclepas
Bishop of Gaza, and Lucius Bishop of Adrianople: whom Pope Julius restored to
their Sees, from which they had been illegally Deposed; and by the case of
Denis Patriarch of Alexandria, who being accused, Athan. de sent. Dionys.
defended himself in writing before the Pope; in a word, by an infinite number
of other instances in all ages of the Church, which may be seen in my Treatise
of the judgment of the causes of Bishops. I shall only mention one which
wonderfully sets off that supreme Authority of the Pope.

After the death of Epiphanins, Liberat. c. 10.
Patriarch of Constantinople, the Empress Theodora, one of the wickedst Women
that ever was, and above all a great Eutychian in her heart, and a great enemy
to the Council of Chalcedon, prevailed so far, by the great power that she had
got over the mind of the Emperor Justinian her Husband, who could not resist
her Artifices, that Anthimius was made Patriarch, though he was Bishop of
Trebizonde, by that means possessing at the same time two Episcopal Chairs,
against the manifest constitution of the holy Canons, without any Precedent,
and without lawful dispensation.

Besides, that naughty man was both a frank Heretic, and great Cheat. For
though he was not only Eutychian, but also the head of those Heretics,
Justin. Nov. 42. Niceph. l. 17. c. 9.
yet he always professed, that he might deceive the Emperor, who at that time
was a good Catholic, that he received the Doctrine of the four Councils, but
without ever condemning Eulyches, who had been condemned by the holy Council of
Chalcedon. That occalioned a great deal of scandal and trouble in the East, and
seeing, when matters were in this state; Council. Constant. sub Men. Act. 1.
St. Agapetus the Pope was come from Rome to Constantinople, whither Theodatus
King of the Goths had obliged him to go, that he might endeavor to obtain of
Justinian the peace which the Goths demanded; The Monks of Syria, and many
other zealous Catholics presented him Petitions against that Intruder and
Heretic.

This without doubt is one of the most illustrious marks, and one of the
strongest proofs of the Authority of the Holy See, and of the Primacy of the
Pope, that ever was seen in the Church. The Emperor who loved Anthimius, and
thought himself obliged in honor to protect him, as being his Creature,
solicited on his behalf; and by his earnestness in the Affair, made it apparent
that he intended to maintain him. Theodora who was more concerned still than
the Emperor in the preservation of her Patriarch, employed all her Artifices,
and spared neither offers, prayers nor threats, to shake the constancy of a
Pope whom she saw resolved to make use of the power which he had received from
Jesus Christ for the good of the Church.

The Empire was then in a most flourishing state; the Emperor shining in
glory. After the defeat of the Vandals in Africa; Constantinople in great
splendor; Anthimius most powerful through the favor of his Prince, and the
Grandeur and Majesty of the Patriarchal See of the Imperial City, where he
thought himself too well fixed, to fear that he could be turned out. Rome on
the contrary being no more the Seat of the Empire, since it was fallen under
the Dominion of the Herules and Goths; retained now nothing that was great,
besides its own ruins and name. The Church of Rome Tyrannically oppressed by
these Barbarians, was, if I dare say so, in the chains of the Ostrogoths, who
used it like a slave. The Pope forced to comply under the haughty commands of
Theodatus, who sent him to negotiate his affairs in the East, so little
esteemed by that Barbarian, and so poor, that he was obliged to sell the Plate
of his Church, to raise money for this Voyage, was almost all alone at
Constantinople, without a Court, without Cardinals, without Train, without
Equipage, without support, and only upheld by his spiritual power, which was
not backed by any of those glorious marks, that at present renders the
Pontifical Majesty so venerable to all the world.

Nevertheless in that condition he pronounces two thundering sentences against
the Patriarch Anthimius: Con. sub Men. Act. 4. Marcell. in Chron. Liber in
Brev. c. 2. Vict. Tun. in Chron.
one upon the spot, whereby by reason of his manifest intrusion, he deposes him
from his Patriarchship, and puts the Priest Mennas in his place, whom he
himself consecrated Bishop and Patriarch of Constantinople; and the other
shortly after, for the Crime of Heresy, of which he was strongly suspected
guilty, ordaining that if he cleared himself not of it, by obeying the holy
Canons, he should also be deposed from his Bishopric of Trabizonde.

And seeing the holy Pope died the same year, that sentence was the year
following put in execution, in a Council held by Mennas at Constantinople, Anno
537.
where because Anthimius would never condemn Eutyches, Council. sub Men. Act. 4.
he was deprived of the Bishopric of Trabizonde, and of all sacerdotal
Dignity, according to the sentence of the Pope.

And which is still more wonderful, Justinian acknowledging that Supreme
Authority of the Pope, to which he submitted and joining thereto his own, as
Protector of the Canons, for causing that to be put in execution, made against
Anthimius that famous constitution, which is to be seen in his two and
fourtieth Novel, in the tenth collation of his Authenticks, wherein he
positively says that he has been justly Deposed by the Pope, as well because
he had intruded, Neque ipse abdicare auctores impiorum dogmatum, qui prius a
Sanctis Synodis percussi fuerant. Inst. Nov. 42.
contrary to the Holy Canons, into the Chair of Constantinople, as that he
would not condemn those who had been Condemned by Councils. Was there ever a
more admirable effect of the Spiritual Power and Authority of the Vicar of
Jesus Christ?

But before I conclude, I must, upon occasion of this Council of Constantinople
under Mennas, show the Prodigious ignorance of Calvin, in relation to the
History of the Ancient Church. I have said in the History of Calvinism, and I
say it again that that man having never entered the Schools of Divinity,
understood nothing at all in that Sacred Science; which is a Key absolutely
necessary for unlocking the sentiments and sentences of the Holy Fathers, that
contain the Principles of true Theology; as they are to be found in a lovely
order in the Master of Sentences. But it is to be confessed that his ignorance
appears incomparably more pitiful, when he undertakes to prove his new
Opinions by Church History, in which he was never versed. Take this as an
evident proof of it.

This Innovatour, who strikes chiefly at the Primacy of the Pope, says in that
place, for overthrowing it, Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 7.
that Mennas presided in the fifth Council, and that the Pope being called to
it, did not contest with him about the place of Honor, but without difficulty
suffered the Patriarch of Constantinople to preside therein. Ridiculous
mistake! Mennas was dead long before the fifth Council was called, which was
held in the Seven and twentieth year of the Empire of Justinian, as Calvin,
Consil. 6. Act. 3^
had he ever read the Councils, might have learned from the sixth Ecumenick
Council, third Action. How then could that dead man have presided in that
Council, which was not held till five or six years after his death, under his
Successor Eutychius?

Now if it be alleged, for excuse of that mistake, that Calvin, by that
Council, means the other which was held by Mennas, yet that makes him but still
ridiculous. For, besides, that that particular Council is very different from
that which is called the Fifth, and which holds that rank amongst the General
Councils: the only Pope that was at Constantinople, in the time of Mennas, to
wit, St. Agapetus was dead before that Council, wherein Mennas calls him, Act.
4.
his Father of holy and blessed memory.

And had that Pope been still alive, How durst Mennas have pretended to the
first place in his presence, he, whom that Pope had made Patriarch, who
protests in the same Council, that he is subject to the Holy See, and who knows
the thoughts of the Emperor Justinian, (...). Cod. l. 7.
that declares publicly, That the Pope is the Head of all the holy Prelates of
God, and who will have his Patriarch of New Rome to have the next place to the
holy Apostolic See of Old Rome? Novel. 131.
So that to what side soever Calvin turn, he shall always find his Man dead in
stead of alive. And as it is very well known, that God favored him not with
the gift of working Miracles, he can never raise him again, to place him there
where nothing but his extreme ignorance could put him.

By the same defect of knowledge, accompanied with a ridiculous boldness, that
he may strip the Pope of his Primacy, he takes Nice in Thracia, for Nicoea in
Bithynia; Pope Julius for Silvester; the first place for the last, in citing
Sozomene, who, beginning by this Man, L. 1. c. 16.
in the enumeration of the Patriarchs, ascends, in order, to the first, where
he puts the Legates of the Pope, speaking of the first Council, wherein, by the
grossest ignorance that can be in History, and which none but Calvin could be
capable of, he makes Saint Athanasius preside, who was then but a simple
Deacon, waiting upon Alexander his Patriarch at that Council, Athan. Apol. 2.


Such was the ignorance of the head of our Protestants in Ecclesiastical
History. I do not at all wonder at it; for that was none of his study. But I am
astonished to see, that men of wit and learning dance to his Pipe, in that they
implicitly assent to his ignorance in Antiquity, when in the systeme of his
heresy, he rejects matters that are manifestly authorized by Tradition and
History, which is the Court of Record of it; nay, even when he traces it back
to the Primitive Ages of the Church, wherein they are forced to confess, that
it was in its purity.

There are evident proofs of this in the History of the Fathers and Councils,
where, setting aside some frivolous superstitions of weak people, which we
condemn, it may be seen, that the ancient Church believed and did, what
Catholics believe and practice concerning the Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the seven Sacraments, the Consistency of Grace with Free Will, the
Authority of Tradition, the Invocation of Saints, Churches dedicated and
consecrated to God in memory of them, the Veneration of their Relics and
Images, Prayer for the dead, the Fasts of Lent and of the Ember weeks, the
distinction of Holy days and working days, that of the Habits of Laymen and
Churchmen, the single life of the Clergy, Vows, Sacred Ceremonies in the
administration and use of the Sacraments, and in public Worship, Divine
Worship in Greek all over the East, and in the Latin Tongue in the West,
though in most Provinces this was not understood but by the Learned; in a word,
concerning all that distinguishes us from Protestants, but especially
Calvinists.

This the famous Cardinal Perron made out by unquestionable testimonies, in his
Reply to the King of Great Britain, where he shows, the conformity of the
Ancient Catholic Church with ours, in the Eighteenth Chapter of the first
Book, and throughout the whole Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Books of that
Learned Work. And to which also David Blondel, a Man incomparably more able
than Calvin, especially in the knowledge of Antiquity, thought it not fit to
make an Answer in that overgrown Volume which he wrote against the Reply, and
wherein he thought it convenient to begin his pretended refutation only at the
Three and twentieth Chapter of the first Book; and to end it with the Four and
thirtieth of the same Book.

But to pass by the Protestants, against whom I pretend not to Dispute; It is
enough to me, that hitherto, without any disputation, I have proved by
Antiquity alone, the Primacy of St. Peter, and of the Popes his successors in
the Chair of Rome, and the Prerogatives and Rights which are inseparable from
that Primacy, wherein all Catholics agree. However, it is very well known,
that at present, they are not all of the same mind, as to certain other
Prerogatives, which some grant, and others will not allow to him; and
especially these four, which are, Infallibility, Superiority over a General
Council, the Absolute Power of Governing the Church independantly of the
Canons, and the Direct or Indirect Power over Temporals. And therefore I must
now, without deviating from my Principle drawn from Antiquity, make appear,
without disputing and reasoning, but as a bare Relater of the sentiments of the
Councils and Fathers, nay and of the Popes themselves, what venerable Antiquity
has always believed concerning these points.

CHAP. VI. The Question stated concerning the Infallibility of the Pope.
THE Question here is not to know, whether the Pope, as a private Doctor, and
only giving his opinion and thought of a point of Doctrine, concerning Faith
and Manners, may be deceived: for it was never doubted, but that in that
quality he speaks only as another Man, and that by consequent through the
weakness and infirmity which is incident to all Men, he is subject to Error,
according to the saying of the Psalmist, Omnis homo mendax.

Nor is it the question, neither to enquire, whether he be infallible when he
pronounces from the Chair of the Universal Church, jointly, with the Members
that are subject to him as to their head, whether it be in a General Council
where he presides in person, or by his Legates, or with the consent of the
greatest part of Catholic Churches and Bishops. For as we all allow, that
Jesus Christ has given the gift of Infallibility to his Church, and to a
Council which represents it, for determining Sovereignly, by the Word of God,
the differences that might arise amongst Catholics concerning these points of
Doctrine: so we do confess, that when the Pope speaks and decides in that
manner, according to which he may say, Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis; his
words and decisions are Oracles, and he can in no ways be deceived. As to this
there is no disagreement amongst Catholics.

The question then that may be debated, is to know, whether when he speaks from
his Chair of Rome, as the Master and Teacher of all Believers, and having well
examined the point in hand, in several Congregations, his Consistory, or his
Synod of his Suffragans, of his Cardinals and Doctors, nay, and having
consulted Universities, and by most public and solemn Prayers begged the
assistance of the Holy Ghost; he teaches all Christians, defines, proposes to
the whole Church, by a Bull or Constitution, what Christians are to believe;
whether, I say, when he pronounces in this manner, he be Infallible or not, and
whether his Judgment given and declared in that manner, may not be corrected by
an Universal Council. And this, methinks, is all that can be said, in clear and
formal terms, as to the state of this formal question.

And it is the very same, about which all Catholic Doctors do not agree. For
most part of the Doctors on the other side of the Alps, especially the famous
Cardinals Cajetan, Baronius and Bellarmine, and all the Authors who have
followed them, will have the Pope in that case, when he declares solemnly to
all Believers, by his Constitutions, what they are to believe, as to any
controverted point, to be no ways liable to a mistake.

On the contrary, an infinite number of the most noted Doctors of their time,
as Gerson, Major, Almanus, the Faculty of Theology of Paris so often and so
publicly praised by the Popes, and all France, as it is even acknowledged by
the Doctors Navarr, Victoria and John Celaia Spaniards; Denis the Carthusian,
Tostatus Bishop of Avila in his Commentaries upon St. Matthew, and in the
second part of his Defensorium, Thomas Illyrius a Cordelier, in his Buckler
against Luther, which he dedicated to Pope Adrian VI. The Cardinals of Cusa, of
Cambray, and of Florence, the Bishops of France in their Assembly representing
the Gallican Church, Aeneas Sylvius before he was Pope, Pope Adrian VI. when he
was Professor at Louvain, in his Commentary upon the Fourth of the Sentences,
which he caused to be reprinted at Rome when he was Pope, without any
alterations, and a thousand other most Catholic Doctors of the Universities
of France, Germany, Poland, and of the Low Countries, who have all very well
defended the Primacy of the Pope; all these, I say, maintain, that he is not
Infallible, if he do not pronounce in a General Council, or with the consent of
the Church.

The diversity of Sentiments amongst Catholics about that Subject, is then a
matter of fact not to be questioned. But what part are we best to take in this
dispute, as the most rational and best grounded? that is a question which I
ought not to answer, according to the design I have taken, and the method that
I have proposed to my self in this Treatise. I shall only then barely relate
what has been believed as to that in Antiquity, and I shall do it without
touching at the matter of Right, but only faithfully producing uncontroverted
matters of fact, which make appear what the belief of the Ancient Church was
concerning that Point.

CHAP. VII. What Antiquity has concluded from St. Peter's being reprehended by
St. Paul.
THAT Action which was of great importance, and which notwithstanding is not
mentioned by St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, is related by St. Paul
himself, in a very few, but very significant words. But when Peter, says he,
Galat. c. 2.
in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, was come to Antioch, I
withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. For before that certain
came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he
withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision.
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also
was carried away with their dissimulation. But when I saw that they walked not
uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter, if thou
being a Jew, live after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why
compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews.

It is evident, that St. Paul in that place rebukes St. Peter, and that sharply
too, and that he not only relates what he said unto him upon that occasion,
but also assures us, that St. Peter was to be blamed, and consequently had
erred. Now, wherein had he erred according to Saint Paul? It was not that he
had lived with Jews according to the Law of Moses, August. Epist. ult. ad
Hieronym.
concerning the distinction of meats: for before the Synagogue was honorably
interred, the legal Ceremonies might still be observed; when it was thought
convenient, as Saint Paul himself, Act. 16.18.21.
oftener than once, observed them. But it was, in that he withdrew himself from
the converted Gentiles, and that living no longer with them, for fear of
offending these Jews that were come from Jerusalem, he gave occasion to the
other Jews and converted Gentiles, to think, that they were still obliged to
observe the Law of Moses.

The truth is, some of these new Christians amongst the Jews, Act. 15.
who were lately come to Antioch, had caused a great deal of trouble in that
Church, because they maintained, that all who had embraced the Faith of Jesus
Christ, were obliged to be Circumcised, if they were not so before, and to
observe the Law of Moses, without which they could not be saved. St. Paul and
St. Barnabas, who at that time still Preached the Gospel at Antioch, with all
their might withstood those false Apostles, and taught the contrary. But when
those poor Christians of Gentilism saw that the Prince of the Apostles, who had
far greater authority than St. Paul had, wholly changed his conduct after the
arrival of these Jews; that he ate no more of meats prohibited by the Law; and
that those of Antioch, who were converted from Judaism, and even Barnabas, who
was before for the liberty of the Gospel, did the same as Saint Peter did, and
separated from them, they thought that they only did so, because it was in
reality found that these legal observations were necessary to Salvation, and
that they were obliged to keep them as well as the Jews.

And that made St. Paul tell Saint Peter, that he compelled the converted
Gentiles to Judaise, because, by his example, which is a stronger and far more
persuasive argument than words are, he gave them to know, that for all they
were Christians, yet they were still obliged to observe the Law of Moses, which
is contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, whose yoke is easy, and who by the
New Law of Grace has put us in the perfect liberty of the Sons of God. And
therefore Saint Paul on that occasion said, That St. Peter, and those who
adhered to him in that conduct which made the converted Gentiles to err, walked
not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel.

Quod hoc ei coram omnibus dixit, necessitas coegit. Non enim erat utile
errorem qui palam noceret, in publico non emendare. Aug. lib. de Expos. Epist.
ad Galat. Si verum scripfit Paulus, verum est quod Petrus tunc non
ingrediebatur ad veritatem Evangelit, id ergo faciebat quod facere non debebat.
Epist. 19. ad Hier. c. 2.

Petro dicenti quod fieri non debebat. l. 6. contra Donat. c. 2.


Take the words of St. Austine concerning that action of St. Peter, in three or
four passages of his works, where he plainly calls it an error. St. Paul,
says he, was obliged publicly to reprove Saint Peter, that he might cure all
the rest by that remedy; for an error that did hurt to the public, was not to
be rebuked privately. If St. Paul said true, says he in another place. Saint
Peter walked not then according to the truth of the Gospel, and did what he
ought not to have done.

It makes nothing to the purpose, to say, as St. Jerome has done, that all
that was but a design laid betwixt St Peter and St. Paul, to bring the Jews to
their duty, by letting them see, that their Protector St. Peter submitted to
that reprimand of St. Paul. Besides, that that way of proceeding suiteth very
ill with the temper of St. Paul, and agrees not at all with his words; that
dissimulation no ways justifies Saint Peter, and makes St. Paul an Accomplice
in his fault. For it is not at all lawful to dissemble in such a manner, as
that the dissimulation becomes the cause of a great scandal and
stumbling block, Hieron. Ep. 86. and seq. August. Ep. 8. and seq. Consilium
veritatis admisit, and rationi legitimae, quam Paulus vindicabat, facile
concensu. Cypr. ad Quint. Ep. 71.
which makes people fall into error, by compelling them to Judaize.

St. Austine then who valiantly oppugns that opinion which so little favors
those two great Apostles, and who alleges for himself St. Ambrose and St.
Cyprian, is so persuaded that St. Peter on that occasion erred, that he makes
use of that Instance to excuse the error of St. Cyprian concerning the Baptism
of Heretics, which he reckoned to be invalid. If St. Peter, Si potuit Petrus
contra veritatis regulam quam postea Ecclesia tenuit, cogere Gentes Judaizare:
cur non potuit Cyprianus, contra veritatis regulam quam postea tota Ecclesia
tenuit, cogere haereticos and schismaticos Re-baptizari. Aug. l. 2. de Bapt.
contra Donatist. c. 1.
Peter, says he, could compel the Gentiles to Judaize, contrary to the rule
of truth which the Church has since followed, Why might not St. Cyprian
compel Heretics and Schismatics to be Rebaptized, contrary to the rule of
truth, which the whole Church has observed since? And elsewhere he makes use
of the same instance, to condemn that error of St. Cyprian: I admit not, says
he, that Doctrine of Cyprian, Hoc Cypriani non accipio, quamvis
incomparabiliter inferior Cypriano, sicut illud Apostoli Petri, quod Gentes
Judaizare cogebat, nec accipio, nec facio, quamvis inferior incomparabiliter
Petro. l. 2. contra Craescon. c. 32.
though I be incomparably inferior to that great Man; as though I be
incomparably less than St. Peter, yet I admit not, neither do what he did, in
compelling the Gentiles to Judaize.

An infinite number of great Men have in that followed St. Augustine, as the
Master and chief of the Doctors: but at present I shall only produce one,
whose authority far surpasses that of all the rest. And that is Pope Pelagius
II. who, following the example of St. Austine, in relation to St. Cyprian,
acknowledges, and, at the same time, excuses the error of Pope Vigilius, by
that of St. Peter. It is a very remarkable matter of fact. Take it thus.

After that wicked Nestorius had been condemned in the Council of Ephesus, some
of his party published certain Writings of Theodore of Mopsuestia, Liberat. in
Breviar. c. 10.
wherein, under other terms than those which that Heresiarch had used, he said
almost the same thing, making it apparent enough, that by the two natures which
he admitted to be in Jesus Christ, he understood two distinct Persons. But
seeing that error was not expressed in such formal terms, that all men might
discover it, and that besides, this same Theodore had, in his lifetime, been
held in great veneration: that, as it commonly happens, occasioned great
debates; some, as John Patriarch of Antioch, saying that there was nothing to
be found fault with in his Book: Others, who were headed by Rabula Bishop of
Edessa, maintaining, that it contained pure Nestorianism a little disguised.

This dispute growing hotter after the death of Rabula, Ibas, who succeeded him
in the Bishopric of Edessa, taking a course quite contrary to his
Predecessor, wrote a long Letter to Maris Persan a Nestorian Heretic, wherein
he thought it not enough to give great praises to Theodore, but inveighs also
sharply against St. Cyrill of Alexandria, the scourge of Nestorianism, though
at the same time he condemns the Doctrine of Nestorius; whether he spoke
sincerely, or that he would thereby caution himself against the process that
might have been brought against him, for that he had so openly declared for
Theodore.

The truth is, sometime after he was accused in the famous Council of
Chalcedon, where that Letter was produced against him, Ann. 451. Council.
Chalced. Act. 16.
and read in full Council. But seeing there was nothing to be found in it but
praises of Theodore, whose Book had not been examined, and invectives against
the person and conduct of St. Cyril; and besides, that Ibas in that Council
pronounced Anathema against Nestorius, and condemned his Doctrine, more
severely than he had even done in his Letter: He was Absolved, as well as
Theodoret, who did the same, though he had Written against St. Cyrill, more
bitterly than Ibas had done. But the Council took no notice of that Treatise.

Nevertheless, seeing these three Writings, which are very well known by the
famous name of the Three Chapters, so much talked of, favored Nestorianism,
and that that Heresy is directly opposite to that of Eutyches, which admits
indeed but one person, but also, but one nature in Jesus Christ. The Emperor
Justinian was easily persuaded, that if these Three Chapters were condemned,
the Catholics might be reconciled with the Acephali, who were a remnant of
Eutychians. Ann. 546.
This Prince, who at that time desired nothing more than the Peace of the
Church, zealously undertook that affair. He made an Edict against these Three
Chapters, Petav. 1. p. Ration. l. 7. c. 7.
which was signed by Mennas and the other Patriarchs of the East; and to render
that condemnation still more authentic, seeing he was at that time Master of
Italy, having driven the Goths out of it, he made Pope Vigilius come to
Constantinople, that he might oblige him to sign it as the other Patriarchs of
the East had done.

There is nothing in History more extraordinary, than the fortune of that Pope.
His ambition at first made him Antipope, having got himself to be chosen by
the interest of the Empress Theodora, who put him in the place of Sylverius the
lawful Pope, Liber. c. 28.
that she caused to be deposed and banished, and to whom that Intruder promised
to condemn the Three Chapters, Victor. Tunon. in Chron.
and to approve the faith of Anthimius, as he did. And therefore Sylverius, for
all he was banished, Sylver Epist. etc.
Excommunicated him as an Antipope. This holy Prelate dying shortly after that
Condemnation, the Clergy of Rome, for avoiding a Schism, elected of new
Vigilius Canonically, who by that means became true Pope; and then changing his
conduct, that he might overturn all that he had done in favor of Theodora: he
condemned Anthimius as an Eutychian, Greg. l. 2. c. 36. Paul. diacon. l. 17.
and recalled the Condemnation of the Three Chapters, which indeed were
contrary to the Eutychians, but also bordering upon the other extreme, mightily
favored the Nestorians.

In this condition was he then when the Emperor called him to Constantinople
to approve the Condemnation of the Three Chapters. He had much ado to resolve
upon it, Forundus Hermianen.
because he thought, as many Occidentals did, that that was to empeach the
Council of Chalcedon, which had received Ibas and Theodoret, the defenders of
Theodore of Mopsuestia. But it was represented to him, that the Council had not
received them until they had condemned the Nestorians, and that it had not
examined neither the Book of Theodore, nor that of Theodoret; and that, seeing
now they were sufficiently convinced and persuaded, that the Doctrine of
Nestorius, condemned in the Council of Ephesus, was contained in these
Writings, he ought to condemn them, thereby to take all advantage from the
Nestorians.

Vigilius, at length, Ann. 547. Judicatum.
acquiesced to these Remonstrances, and the year following made his Decree,
whereby he condemns the Three Chapters, but with this reserve, Saving the
respect and submission which is due to the Council of Chalcedon. Justinian not
satisfied with that, would have the Pope, seeing the question concerned not
that Council, which had not examined these Books, to condemn them absolutely,
and without that modification, lest the Nestorians might make use of it for
eluding a like condemnation. But Vigilius, who was always loath to offend that
Council, would not condescend to it, how badly soever they treated him to
oblige him to do so.

In fine, after many debates about the subject, Justinian, who resolved to put
an end to that affair, for restoring peace to the Church, caused the Fifth
Council to be held at Constantinople in spite of Vigilius, Ann. 553. V. Syn.
5. Tom. 3. Council. Constitutum.
who was so far from granting the Emperor what he desired, that he made a new
Constitution, wherein he again takes upon him the protection of the Three
Chapters, and forbids to condemn them. But notwithstanding all his efforts,
that Council, where he would not assist, absolutely condemned them; and because
Vigilius would not consent to that condemnation, he was banished by Justinian,
who some time after gave him his liberty, and sent him home to his See, because
once more changing his conduct and opinions, he condemned in Writing the Three
Chapters, Evagr. l. 4. c. 37. Phot. de septom Synodis.
according to the Decree of the Council; and that was the fourth and last time
that he had changed; for as he was upon his return to Rome, Appen. Marcell.
he died in Sicily the year following.

However, this last change did not cure the Schism that was formed in the
Church about that point. For though the Successors of this Pope had admitted
the Decrees of that Council, Greg. Pap. 1. Ep. 24. and alib. saepe.
which holds the fifth place amongst the Ecumenical Councils, yet many Bishops,
and amongst others, those of Africa and Istria, Vict. Tun. Farund. Herm.
taking no notice in the least of that last change of Vigilius, stuck
obstinately to his former constitution, whereby he had publicly declared for
the Three Chapters, forbidding all Believers to condemn them; and though
Pelagius II. who held the Holy See Two or three and twenty years after
Vigilius, did all he could to persuade and bring them to their duty, and to
undeceive them of their error, he could never succeed in it.

For they always alleged, Pelag. 11. Ep. 7. quae est tertia ad Episc. Istriae.
Dicentes quod in causae principio, and seeds Apostolica per Vigilium Papam, and
omnes Latinarum Provinciarum principes, damnationi trium capitulorum fortiter
restiterunt. ibid. Errorem tarde cognoverunt and tanto eis celerius credi
debuit, quanto eorum constantia, quousque verum cognoscerent a certamine non
quievit. ibid.
that the Roman Church had formerly Taught them the contrary of what they would
have them at present confess; and that the Holy See, by Pope Vigilius and the
other Bishops of the West, when that cause began to be debated, had vigorously
opposed the condemnation of these Three Chapters. Whereupon that wise Pope told
them, ingenuously and convincingly, That for that very reason they ought to
condemn them, because that vigorous resistance was an evident sign, that the
Romans, and other Occidentals yielded not, till at length they came to the
knowledge of the truth, which they had not known before, and clearly saw that
they had been mistaken, in approving and maintaining Writings which ought to be
condemned; and he adds, that it is a very laudable change, to turn from error
to truth.

He moreover confirms that Argument by the examples of St. Peter and St. Paul.
St. Paul, Quia diu veritati restitit, unde ad confirmanda corda credentium, in
ejusdem praedicatione veritatis adjutorium sumpsit.
said he, long resisted the truth of the Gospel, and was the most zealous
asserter of Judaisme against the Christians, whom he persecuted. By that he
proves to the Jews and Gentiles, that they ought to embrace Christianity,
because after so great resistance he would not have yielded to Jesus Christ, if
he had not clearly known the truth, and that he had been in an error before.
St. Peter, continues he, Diu quidem restitit, ne ad fidem Gentes sine
Circumcisione, etc. diu se a conversaram Gentium communione subtraxit, etc. Ab
eodem Paulo pestmodum ratione suscepta cum vidisset quosdam, etc. dixit: cur
tentatis Deum imponentes jugum, etc.


held long for the necessity of the legal observations, compelling the Gentiles
to Judaize. He yielded afterward to reason and truth by the reproof that St.
Paul gave him, telling him, that he walked not uprightly according to the truth
of the Gospel. After that, changing his conduct, he powerfully withstood those,
who, in the Council of Jerusalem, would have subjected Christians to the yoke
of the Ancient Law.

Would they have had reason then to have said to him, Haec quae dicis audire
non possumus, quia aliud ante praedicasti.
when they saw him Teach the quite contrary to what he had Preached before, We
will not hear what you tell us at present, because you formerly Preached to us
quite another thing? Not at all, because these two Apostles having long
resisted the truth of the Gospel, each in his way, and at length followed that
truth, changed from evil to good. So, goes on that Pope, making a right
application of these two instances, to the point of the Three Chapters, The
Holy See ought not to be upbraided with a change, Si igitur in trium
capitulorum negotio, alind cum veritas quaereretur, aliud autem inventa
veritate dictum est; cur mutatio sententiae huic sedi in crimen objicitur, etc.
since after it has found out the truth which it searched into, it now
condemns the Three Chapters, which it approved before it found the truth.

It is, in my Judgment, very clear, that Pope Pelagius in that place says
plainly, and without biass, that as St. Peter and St. Paul had erred before
their change, to which they ought to adhere, so Vigilius was mistaken in his
constitution, whereby he obliges Believers to maintain the Doctrine of the
Three Chapters, and that they must imitate the Holy See in its change, Quid
obstat, si ignorantiam suam deserens verba permutet?
when having approved them with Vigilius, it condemns them, after he had
discovered the truth which he knew not before. These are the words of Pelagius
II.

I know very well, that Cardinal Baronius says, and labors to prove in his
Annals, that St. Peter, upon that occasion, erred not at all, and committed not
the least fault. I shall not undertake to refute and overthrow his Arguments,
Baron. ad Ann. 51. n. 39.
as some think they have done with very little difficulty. I dispute not at all
in this Treatise, where I am only to relate matters of Fact. It is enough then
that I say; It Is true that that great Cardinal is of that Judgment, because he
believed Saint Peter to be infallible; In the mean time St. Austine, so far
from believing it, thought he erred five times, when he was in fear of being
drowned, and our Savior told him, Et cum in mari titubasset, and cum dominum
carnaliter a passione revocasset, and cum aurem servi gladio praecidisset and
cum ipsum dominum ter negasset, and cum in si, mulationem postea superstitiosam
lapsus esset. August. de agone Christiano. c. 30.
O thou of little faith wherefore did thou doubt? when he would have diverted
him from suffering for us, and was rebuked by these piercing words, Get thee
behind me Satan; When he cut off Malchus his Ear, and three times denied his
Master; and last of all, when he fell into that failing for which St. Paul
reproved him. St. Austine then, St. Ambrose, St. Cyprian, Pope Pelagius, and
even St. Paul, speak positively to the contrary of what Baronius says, as I
have just now demonstrated.

This has made learned men argue from St. Austine, who they think cannot be
answered: Either Saint Paul spoke truth, when he said St. Peter was to be
blamed, that he walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, and
compelled the converted Gentiles to Judaize; or what he said was false. If he
spoke truth, it is then true, that St. Peter was not Infallible, since he
actually erred in that particular. If he did not speak truth, it must then be
concluded, that the Epistle to the Galatians, which makes a part of H.
Scripture, is not the Word of God; which is a manifest error in matter of
Faith.

Again, when St. Paul spoke in that manner, either he thought as he spoke, or
did not. If he believed what he said to be true, it was his opinion then, that
St. Peter was not Infallible. If he believed it not, then must he in the same
Epistle to the Galatians, wherein he protests before God that he lied not, have
told a lie; which is not to be said without Blasphemy, since what he writes in
that Epistle is the Word of God who cannot lie. And thus it is made out, that
according to St. Paul, those great Saints, and that wise Pope, who understood
himself very well, St. Peter was guilty of a notable mistake at that time, when
he insinuated to the Jews and Gentiles that they were obliged to keep the Law
of Moses: which the Church immediately after condemned in the Council of the
Apostles held at Jerusalem.

For it is to be observed, which a great many have not minded, that, as that
Pope whose words I have cited, does expressly say, it was before that Council of
the Apostles that St. Peter did that action which rendered him blameworthy. And
who does not see that he had been incomparably more worthy of blame and
reproof, if, as Cardinal Baronius will have it, he had done it immediately
after the Decree of the Council, which had just then defined, he himself having
subscribed to the Decree, that Christians were no more obliged to observe those
legal Rites, excepting in one small point, and that for a certain time; and
that after he had spoken so well on that subject, to free Christians from that
Yoke, he should have again endeavored to subject them to it, by obliging them
to Judaize? That would have been so strange a thing, and so unbeseeming an
Apostle, and the Prince of Apostles, that I make no doubt but that for the
honor that is due to him, it is far better to follow in that the judgment of
that ancient Pope, than the Opinion of this Cardinal who lived but in the last
age. It follows then from these matters of Fact which I have now most
faithfully related, that a great Pope, and those Holy Fathers, the most
venerable and learned of Antiquity, have not believed, even according to St.
Paul, that St. Peter was infallible, nor by consequent that the Popes who have
no greater privilege and prerogative than St. Peter had, have received that
gift of Infallibility.

Inter omnes Apostolos hujus Ecclesiae Catholicae personam sustinet Petrus:
huic enim Ecclesiae claves regni coelorum datae sunt, and cum ei dicitur, ad
omnes dicitur, amas me, pasce oves meas. August. de Agon. Christ. lib. 30. Ita
Ambrose l. de dign. Sacerd. c. 2. Chrysostom. hom. 79. in Matthew. 24. Cypr. de unit.
Eccles. Hier. contra Jovin. lib. 1. Vt Petrus, quando ei dictum est, tibi dabo
claves, in figura personam gestabat Ecclesiae: and quando dictum est, pasce
oves meas, Ecclesiae quoque personam in figura gestabat.

August, in Psalm. 108. Tract. 1.118.129. in Joan. Ser. de 4. quaest. apud poss.
c. 5. and 6. Sermon. 13. sup. Matthew. c. 2.


As to the objections that are drawn from the words of Jesus Christ spoken to
St. Peter, Upon that Rock will I build my Church; I will give thee the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven; I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; feed my
sheep: It is easy to answer them by saying that, according to the common
interpretation of the Fathers, and especially of St. Austine, they were spoken
to St. Peter as representing the Church by the union of its Pastors with him
as with their Head, and who, by virtue of that union, make with him but one
universal Episcopacy. And the better to express that unity, he applies himself
and speaks to one only, that is, to the head, to whom he gave the Primacy over
the rest. So that when in that union, or rather that unity, he pronounces and
defines jointly with them in a Council, or with consent of the Church by her
Bishops; he cannot err, the foundation stands always sure, and the sheep are
always well governed and well fed.

But because Cardinal Bellarmine, and those who follow him, will have these
words, I have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail not, to be applied
absolutely to the Person of St. Peter, and without relation to the Church which
he represents by virtue of his Primacy, we must grant them what they pretend.
For, the truth is, they may be understood also in that sense: but then they
have a very natural and literal meaning, which is that of almost all the
ancient Fathers and Interpreters of Holy Scripture, who say that in this place
our Savior only spoke of the time of his Passion, when the Apostles were to
be terribly tempted, as he himself foretold them. Then addressing himself to
St. Peter, told him that he had prayed for him, not that he might not commit
any sin of Infidelity, for he committed a fearful one against the confession
of Faith, by denying his Master thrice: but that being recovered from his fall,
he might not lose the Faith for ever, that by the example of his Repentance, he
might confirm therein his Brethren, who were much startled and shaken; and that
afterward he might persevere unto the end.

Non dixit, non negabis; sed ut non deficiat fides tua, cura enim illias factum
est ne omnino Petri fides evanesceret. Ne deficiaet fides tua, hoc est ne in
fine pereas, and humanam arguens naturam, cum ex se nihil sit. Chrysostom. hom. 63.
Quid enim rogavit, nisi perseverantiam usque in finem: Aug. de Cor. and Ge. c.
6.

Vt non periret finaliter. Hug. in c. 22. Luc.

Non ut Petrus non caderet, sed ut non deficeret, quia quamvis reciderit,
resurrexerit. Bonav. in Luc.

Ne penitus extirpetur, aut finaliter deficiat. Dion. Carth. in Luc.

Vt non finaliter deficiat fides tua.

Albert. Mag. in hunc locum.


This is the common interpretation of the Holy Fathers, and particularly of St.
Chrysostom, and Saint Austine, who often make use of that passage to prove the
necessity of praying, and of obtaining grace from God, without which we cannot
persevere. And this is also the sense that Theophylact, Oecumenius, Euthymius,
Cardinal Hugo, Albertus Magnus, St. Thomas, St. Bonaventure, Lyranus, Dionysius
Carthusianus, and all the rest of the most famous Interpreters and Divines,
have followed as being the true literal sense. It is evident that that only
agrees with the time of the Passion, and the Person of St. Peter alone, wherein
his Successors can have no part. And though they should pretend they had, yet
that would not hinder but that they might fail and fall as St. Peter did, by
publishing a falsehood contrary to the true faith; which is more against the
duty of a Pope, than to believe an Error without publishing it.

CHAP. VIII. What follows Naturally from the great debate that Pope Victor had
with the Bishops of Asia.
THere had been for a long time very different Customs in the Church about the
Celebration of the Festival of Easter, and the observation of the Fast which
ought to go before that holy day. For all over the West, according to the
practice observed from the beginning in the Church of Rome, that Festival was
kept on Sunday, which is the day of our Savior's Resurrection. But the
Churches of Asia founded by the Apostle St. John, Euseh. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
24. Hieron. de script. c. 44. Exodus 12. Hieron. de script. in Polychr.
some of their Neighbors, and many other Churches of the East, kept it always
the fourteenth of the Moon of March, as the Passover is appointed to be kept in
Exodus, and according to the Tradition which they had received from St. John.

As to the Fast that is to be observed before Easter, there was still a greater
diversity in the Customs established in several places. Irenae. ap. Eusebius.
hist. l. 5. c. 24.
For some fasted but one day before that Feast, as we do on the Vigile of
Christmas and of Whitsunday; others fasted two days; some who were numerous
fasted longer, and many observed punctually the Forty days fast of Lent. Omnes
Ecclesiae tum eorum qui decimo quarto die diem festum pachat is observabant,
tum eorum qui secus, tranquilla pace inter ipsas fruebantur. Eusebius. Ibid.
However these different customs that were amongst Christians of the second,
nay and of the first age of the Church, concerning Lent and Easter, made no
breach at all of the peace, and every one observed peaceably the custom of
their Church, which they thought to be good, without condemning the practices
of others.

This is so true, that St. Polycarp Bishop of Smirna being come to Rome, under
the Pontificat of Saint Anicetus, these two great Saints, in a long conference
which they had about the celebration of the Feast of Easter, did what they
could mutually, to draw one another over to their party; and seeing both
remained steadfast in their opinions, St. Polycarp, saying always, that he had
from St. John his Master the custom that was observed in his Church, and St.
Anicetus affirming, that that which was followed at Rome, and in the Western
Churches, was derived from St. Peter, they could never agree upon the matter.
Yet that hindered not but that they still lived together in great amity, and in
the same communion, insomuch that the Pope, to do honor to St. Polycarp, Ibid.
prayed him to officiate publicly in his Church.

That good intelligence continued always betwixt the Popes and Asiatick
Bishops, Ann. 193. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 22.
until Victor I. who having held several Councils at Rome about that subject,
amongst the Gauls and elsewhere, where the practice of the Roman Church was
observed, Eusebius. c. 24.
would needs compel the Asiaticks to conform to it, by celebrating Easter on
Sunday. And because these who thought not themselves obliged to obey him
contrary to the tradition which their Churches had from St. John, Omnes fratres
eam incolentes regionem prorsus a communione secludendos edicit. Ibid.
would by no means comply: He threatened them with Excommunication, and
published against them that which now adays is called a Monitory.

Polycrates, who was at that time Bishop of Ephesus, held also a Council with
his brethren about the same subject, and answering in name of all by a Synodal
Letter, to Pope Victor, and his Bishops, he says, That what the Asiaticks did,
had been religiously observed by the Apostles St. Philip and St. John, Hieron.
de Script. in Polychr.
by another St. John a Bishop and Martyr, whose body rested at Ephesus, by St.
Polycarp Bishop of Smirna, by the Martyr St. Thraseas, and by many other holy
Bishops, who had always celebrated that Holy day the fourteenth of the Moon,
according to that Tradition; that for himself, who was sixty five years of age,
having consulted many able Men of all Nations, and carefully read all Writings
for informing himself in that controverted Peragrata omni scriptura non
formidabo eos qui nobis minantur. etc.
point, he did not fear those that threatened him, because it has been said by
his Predecessors, that it is better to obey God than Man.

And seeing Victor still persisted in his threats, and that he would by all
means Excommunicate the Asiaticks if they obeyed not: Verum ista caeteris
omnibus parum place-bant Episcopis....... quorum verba utpote Victorem acrius
and acerbius coarguentium, scriptis prodita adhuc extant. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
Ibid.
several Bishops of other Countries, who blamed his proceeding, wrote sharply
to him, to divert him from his enterprise. Amongst others St. Irenaeus the
great Archbishop of Lions sent him a long Letter in name of all the Gallican
Church, whom he had assembled for that effect, wherein he represents to him,
with as much force at least, but with far greater moderation than the rest,
that he ought not, for a difference of that nature, cut off from the Universal
Church so many particular Churches, so many Bishops, and so many Believers, who
acted according to an ancient Tradition, upon which they founded themselves. He
adds, that he would do far better to follow the example of so many holy Popes
his Predecessors, Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus and Sixtus, who, though
they, as well as he, had observed a quite different custom from that of the
Bishops of Asia, yet never treated them as Heretics for that, nor forbore to
communicate with them in a perfect union.

Multos Asiae and orientis Episcopos..... damnandos crediderat. Hieron. de
script. Eccles. c. 24.


But notwithstanding all these Remonstrances, Victor was still of the mind that
they ought to be Condemned. Nay, there are some who affirm, that he did
actually condemn and thunder an Anathema against them. However it be, it is
certain that they would not submit to his Ordinances, that the custom of their
Churches, concerning the Feast of Easter was allowed them, and that they who
observed it were not reputed Heretics, Victori non dederunt manus. Hieron.
Ibid.
cut off from the communion of Catholics. It was about an hundred and eight
years after that the great Council of Nice abolished that custom, in respect
that Saint John had only allowed it for a time, in these Provinces of Asia
that bordered upon the Jews, to give an honorable Funeral to the Synagogue,
and that the other practice was taken universally as transmitted from the
Apostles; after which, there lay an obligation upon Christians to submit to
that Decree, and they who headstrongly refused to obey it, were declared
Heretics under the name of Quartodecumans.

This being so, it is evident to all Men, that neither these Bishops of Asia
and of the East, nor St. Irenaeus and the Gallican Church, nor the Bishops of
other Countries, who wrote so smartly to Pope Victor in favor of these Eastern
Churches, did believe the Pope to be Infallible. For had they believed it, it
is certain on the one hand, that these Asiaticks would have submitted to the
Decree of the Pope, as they afterward submitted to that of a Council, because
they believed, as all other Catholics do, that a Council is Infallible; and
on the other hand, it is very clear, that St. Irenaeus, and so many other
Bishops would not have written, as they did to Pope Victor, and found fault
with his conduct: For they never questioned but that those who refused to obey
an Infallible Tribunal, ought to be condemned and punished. It was not then
believed in the Church, that the Pope had the gift of Infallibility, though he
might make a Decree for the instruction of all believers.

CHAP. IX. What inference is to be made from that famous contest that happened
betwixt the Pope, St. Stephen, and St. Cyprian, concerning the Baptism of
Heretics.
THis famous question that has made so much noise in the Church, was forty
years before St. Cyprian, solemnly examined in a Council held in Africa by
Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage; Ann. 217.
and there it was determined, that the Baptism of Heretics being null, there
was a necessity of Re-baptizing all those, who, having abjured their Heresy,
should return to the bosom of the Church. Cypr. Epist. 71. ad Quin. and Epist.
ad Jubaian. Commonit. 6.9.
Vincentius Lirinensis has Written, that that same Agrippinus was the first,
who, contrary to the custom of the Universal Church, and the determination of
his Brethren, thought that Heretics ought to be Re-baptised. But saving the
honor and respect that is due to so great a Man, it is evident he was
mistaken. For besides that the Bishops of Africa and Numidia, Cypr. loc. citat.
with common consent, and in conjunction with Agrippinus, decided the same
thing: Tertullian, Ann. 203. Cap. 12.
who Wrote his excellent Book of Prescriptions against Heretics, fourteen
years before the Council of Agrippinus, says therein very plainly, that their
Baptism is not valid: Cap. 15.
Which in his Book of Baptism he also asserts in most express terms; a Book
Written by him before he fell into the Heresy of the Montanists. Ann. 200.
Strommat. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who flourished in the same time, also rejects the
Baptism of Heretics: which shows, that it was the doctrine and custom of the
Church of Alexandria, the chief and most illustrious Church, next to that of
Rome. So that Agrippinus, and the Bishops of Africa and Numidia, whom he
assembled in a Council to determine that Question, are not the first who
established that Custom and Disipline, which appoints all Heretics, who
return into the bosom of the Church to be Rebaptized.

Probably it may be objected by some, that what these ancient Authors say,
ought only to be understood of the Heretics of their times, who, all of them,
blaspheming against the most Holy Trinity, Baptized not in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and that therefore their Baptism was null; which is
most true. But the reason whereupon they ground the nullity of the Baptism of
Heretics, to wit, that they are strangers, without the Pale of the Church, Ad
quos vetamur accedere, quis servus cibaria ab extraneo, ne dicam ab inimico
domini sui petat? etc. Tertull. de praescrip. Quos extraneos utique testatur
ipsa ademptio communicationis. Id. de Baptis.

Trajicies aquam alienam? etc. Clem. Alex.


and that we are forbidden to have any commerce with them, proves manifestly,
that what they said ought to be understood of all sorts of Heretics, both
present and to come, because they are all out of the Pale of the Church.

Now seeing some considerable time after the Council of Agrippinus, Novation,
who was the first Antipope. caused Catholics who followed the party of the
true Pope Cornelius to be Rebaptized, the Question concerning the Baptism of
Heretics was argued afresh in Africa, where it was put, Whether or not the
Novatian Schismatics, who returned to the Church, ought to be Rebaptized.
Litt. Synod. ad Epis. ad Episc. humid. ap Cypr. Epist. 90. Numid. ap Cypr.
Epist. 70.


Whereupon St. Cyprian having assembled a Provincial Council at Carthage, it
was there declared, that since no body can be lawfully Baptized out of the
Church, there was a necessity of Re-baptizing Heretics and Schismatics, those
excepted, who, having been Baptized in the Catholic Church, Cypr. Epist. 74.
ad Pomp.
had afterward separated from it; because Baptism, once rightly administered,
could never again be reiterated.

The Bishops of Numidia who had received the Decree of the Council of
Agrippinus, Litt. Synod. ad Epise. Numid.
having consulted Saint Cyprian upon that new emergent, received also the
Decree of the Council of Carthage; and that it might be rendered more
Authentic, Saint Cyprian assembled them together, with the Bishops of his
Province, in a second Synod, where the decision of the former was confirmed.
And thereupon a Synodal Letter was written to the Pope St. Stephen, Cypr.
Epist. 73. ad Jubai.
informing him of what had been decided in those two Councils, to wit, that all
those, who being out of the Church, Eos qui sunt foris extra Ecclesiam tincti,
and apud haereticos and schismaticos profanae aquae labe maculaeti, quando ab
nos venerint Baptisare oportere, eo quod parum sit eis manum imponere. Epist.
70. Apud Cypr. and ap. August. l. 6. and 7. de Bapt.


had been polluted by the profane Baptism of Heretics and Schismatics, ought
to be Re-baptised: which was also confirmed in a third Council, wherein were
present the Bishops of Mauritania, with those of Africa and Numidia.

Pope Stephen, though his Predecessors had not opposed the Council of
Agrippinus, but left the Africans in the possession of their custom, thought
that he ought to condemn it as contrary to Apostolical Tradition. And
thereupon, Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 5.
in two Letters which he Wrote to the Africans, he made a Decree quite contrary
to that of St. Cyprian, and of those three Councils. These are the proper terms
of the Decree of the Pope, which we have in the Epistles of St. Cyprian, for
the Letters of St. Stephen have not come to our hands. Si quis a quacunque
Haeresi venerit ad nos nihil innovetur, nisi, quod traditum est, ut manus ei
imponantur ad poenitentiam. Ap. Cyprian. Epist. 79 ad Pompeian.
If any one return to us from what Heresy soever it be, let nothing be
innovated, and let nothing be done but what Tradition authorizes; that is to
say, that hands be only laid upon him, to reconcile him by repentance.

There is nothing more opposite than those two Decrees, Qui ex quacunque
haeresi ad Ecclesiam convertantur, unico and legitimo Baptismate Baptizentur.
Cypr. Epist. ad Jubaian.
if you take them literally. That of Saint Cyprian will have all Heretics to
be Rebaptized, from what Heresy soever they return, and all that are out of
the Church; and that it is not enough to lay hands upon them; but the Pope by
his, Eo quod parum sit eis manum imponere. Stephanus Baptismum Christi in nullo
iterandum esse censebat, and hoc facientibus graviter succensebat. August. l.
de unic. Baptis. c. 14.


declares, that it is sufficient, and forbids any Heretic to be Re-baptised.
This St. Austine confirms, when he expressly assures us, that Stephen would have
no Heretic to be Rebaptized, and that he was extremely offended against all
those that did it.

The truth is, Eusebius in his History remarks, that the true state of that
great Question, that was then in agitation, was to know, Whether those who
returned from any Heresy whatsoever, ought to be Rebaptized.

Indeed, if one would stick, without admitting any explication, to the natural
sense of these words of Eusebius, A quocunque Haeresis genere; Erat id tempor
is non exigua quaestio and controversia excitata, utrum oporteret eos qui se a
quocunque haeresis, genere revocassent, lavacro Baptismatis, repurgare. Eusebius.
l. 7. c. 2.
and of those of the Decree of Saint Stephen, Si quis a quacunque Haeresi
venerit ad nos, nihil innovetur, nisi ut manus ei imponatur in poenitentiam; It
will seem, at first sight, that as St. Cyprian was, for having all generally,
who had been Baptized by Heretics, to be Rebaptized; so that Holy Pope, on
the contrary, forbad the Re-baptizing of any who had been Baptized by
Heretics. And that is also the error that some have attributed unto him upon
these words, Si quis a quacunque Haeresi, which they have taken according to
the strictness of the Letter. But it is to be confessed ingenuously, that as
Tradition has always rejected the Monstrous Baptisms of some Heretics, which
may be seen in Epiphanius, who Baptized in a quite different manner from what
Jesus Christ prescribes, when he commanded his Apostles to Baptize in the Name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; So that Holy Pope, who, with
St. Cyprian, rejected all these false Baptisms, would only, that the Baptism
administered in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, by any Heretics
whatsoever, should not be reiterated.

And certainly, without necessity of alleging any other proof, that, in my
opinion, appears evidently, by that testimony of St. Augustine, which I have
just now cited: Stephanus Baptismum Christi in nullo iterandum esse censebat:
Pope Stephen thought, that the Baptism of Jesus Christ was to be reiterated in
no Heretic. The Question was only then about the Baptism of Jesus Christ,
which ordains Baptism to be administered in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The Romans would have that to stand good by what
Heretic soever it had been conferred; and the Africans maintained that it was
null, if it was conferred by Heretics out of the Church, or by Schismatics.
And this is the precise state of that great Controversy, betwixt the Pope
Saint Stephen and St. Cyprian, though the Decree of that Pope be not altogether
so clearly worded as that of St. Cyprian. Aug. l. 1. de Bapt. contra Donat.


Now this Decree which the Pope grounded wholly upon the ancient custom of the
Church, Cypr. Ep. 74. and al.
and the Tradition of the Apostles, having been brought into Africa, St.
Cyprian, and all those of his party, which was very considerable, opposed it
with all their might. For besides, the African Bishops assembled in three
Councils, after that of Agrippinus, Firmil. Epist. ap. Cypr. Epist. 75. Dionys.
Alexand. apud Eusebius. l. 7. hist. c. 4. and 6.


Firmilian Bishop of Cesanea in Cappadocia, and most of the Bishops of Asia
adhered unto him, and had, as well as those of Africa, decided against the
Baptism of Heretics, in the Councils of Iconium and Synnada, and of many other
Cities of Asia, where the Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia, Phrygia, and
other Provinces, assembled for examining that Question, which had been the
cause of so great a difference.

Denis Patriarch of Alexandria, a Man of extraordinary merit, singular
learning, and great authority, Ibid.
made it also evident enough by his Writings, that they should not offer to
condemn that Doctrine which his Bishops of Africa and of Asia maintained to be
exactly conform to holy Scripture, affirming, that as there is but one Faith,
Cypr. Epist. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75 and 76.
one Church, and one Baptism, this cannot be administered out of the Church; And
as Heretics can neither absolve from sins, nor give the Holy Ghost by the
Imposition of hands, so neither can they Baptize. And as to the custom that
was objected to them, they absolutely denied it to have been the practice of
the Primitive Church, nor a Tradition derived from the Apostles; but on the
contrary, said, that theirs was Apostolical, and that their practice, being the
more ancient, had been observed time out of mind in the Church.

Notwithstanding all these reasons, the Pope continued steadfast in the
resolution he had taken, of causing his Decree to be observed, in so far,
Dionys. Alexand. apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4. Firmil. ap. Cypr. Epist. 75.
that he cut off from his communion all the Bishops of Asia, who would not
submit to it. And this he did, although Denis of Alexandria had written
earnestly to him to dissuade him from it, representing to him, that he might
appease him, that Pope Cornelius, and the Antipope Novatian having written to
these Bishops, to engage them severally unto their party, they had, in fine,
all of them, condemned Novatian and his Heresy, which consisted in this, that
he maintained, that the Church had not power to reconcile those, who, in time
of persecution, had fallen off to Idolatry.

Cardinal Baronius concludes from these words of the Holy Patriarch, that the
Asiaticks had quitted their opinion concerning the nullity of the Baptism of
Heretics. But without doubt that is an evident Anachronism, and manifest
contradiction, which that great Cardinal had not leisure to mind. For the
Patriarch Denis speaks only here of what these Bishops had done under the
Pontificate of Pope Cornelius; and he prays Stephen, the Successor of that
Pope, not to use them harshly for the Judgment they are of, that the Baptism of
Heretics is null: Them, says he, who under his Predecessor condemned the
Heresy of Novatian. Is there any thing clearer, than that Baronius, without
minding it, has taken the Counter-sense? and besides, Denis of Alexandria
would have had care not to call an opinion, which he believed to be true, an
Heresy.

Firmilian then, and the Asiaticks, persisted still in their opinion, as well
as St. Cyprian, the Africans and their successors, till the decision of a
General Council, as may be clearly seen in an hundred passages of the Books of
St. Austine, which he Wrote concerning Baptism against the Donatists. I know
that St. Jerome says, in the Dialogue against the Luciferians, that the Bishops
of Africa returned to the ancient custom, saying, What do we do? and that
abandoning St. Cyprian, they made a new Decree conform to that of Saint
Stephen. But all the Learned agree, that that holy Doctor, who Wrote that
Dialogue before the most part of his other Works, had taken that out of some
Apocryphal Writings, such as that which bears for Title, The Repentance of St.
Cyprian; and was declared false and supposititious, in a Synod held at Rome
Threescore and fourteen years before the death of St. Jerome. For, to be short,
the quite contrary is to be seen in the Books of St. Austine that I have just
now alleged, in the Letter of Saint Basil to Amphilochius, and in the Eighth
Canon of the first Council of Arles.

Now, if during the life of Saint Stephen, there were so many Bishops who
refused to obey his Decree, there were as many that opposed it after his death.
For the Patriarch Denis of Alexandria Wrote in a high strain to Pope Sixtus the
Successor of St. Stephen, Eusebius. l. 7. hist. c. 4.
exhorting him to follow a conduct contrary to that of his Predecessor, and
not to break, as he had done, with so many Bishops for a constitution contrary
to his own; since it had been approved in several Councils; Hic in Cypriani and
Africanae Synodi dogma consentiens de Haereticis Re-baptizandis, ad diversos
plurimas mifit epistolas quae usque hodie extant. Hieron. de script. Ecclesias.
in Dionys.


and St. Jerome himself, in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Writers, which he
made long after his Dialogue against the Luciferians, assures us, that that
great Man declared openly for the Doctrine of Saint Cyprian and African
Bishops, and that he thereupon Wrote many Letters which were still extant in
his time. That was the cause that the Successors of Sixtus entertained Peace
with the African and Asiatick Bishops, every one freely following their custom
and opinion as to that Point, without being blamed for it, until that a
General Council had pronounced Supremely in the matter.

This we learn from St. Austine, in his Books of Baptism against the Donatists.
These, August. l. 1. de Bapt. contra Donatis. c. 7.
who began their Schism against Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, in the year Three
hundred and two, alleged continually the example of St. Cyprian, and of his
fellow Bishops, to justify the conduct which they held, as well as those in
Re-baptizing all Heretics. It is most evident, that they durst not have made
use of that instance, if St. Cyprian and those Bishops had retracted: For St.
Austine would have confounded these Schismatics upon the spot, by saying, that
all these Bishops had condemned their former opinion. Yet he never did so. On
the contrary, he confesses, that they always believed that Heretics must be
Rebaptized: but he adds, that it was lawful for them to believe it, and for
all who have succeeded them to doubt of that point, which was then in
controversy, and to dispute about it. As, indeed, there were many conferences,
great disputes and debates on Church decided that difference, and all submitted
to that Sovereign Authority; Cui and ipse cederet, si jam eo tempore
quaestionis hujus veritas eliquata and declarata per plenarium concilium
solidaretur. Ibid. c. 4.89.


as St. Cyprian would have done without doubt, says St. Austine, if the whole
Church, in a full and general Council had in his time pronounced concerning
that point. And because the Donatists would not submit to the Decree of that
Council, in that they added Heresy to their Schism.

Now before we come to show what that General Council decided as to that point,
we must make a serious and solid reflection upon what we have now said, which
will suffice, to make it clearly out to us what Antiquity has believed
concerning the Infallibility of the Pope.

Here then, we have a Pope of famous memory in the Church, who makes a Decree,
whereby he instructs all Believers, concerning a point of highest importance,
where the question is about the validity or nullity of Baptism, without which
one cannot be saved; and by that Decree he pretends to oblige the whole Church
to believe, that Heretics, who are converted, ought not to be Rebaptized, and
does so pretend it, that he cuts off from his communion great Bishops, who
would not submit to his Decree. And nevertheless St. Cyprian, all the Bishops
of Africa, Mauritania and Numidia, those of Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia and
Phrygia, Denis Patriarch of Alexandria, and the Bishops of his Patriarchate,
will not receive that so solemn a Decree of Stephen Pope of Rome.

Besides, St. Austine, and all the African Catholics, united with that great
Doctor of the Church against the Donatists, say, that before the decision of
the Council, that came not till long after that Decree of the Pope, it might
freely, without making a separation from the Church, be held, what St. Cyprian
had believed concerning the Baptism of Heretics. In fine, St. Athanasius, St.
Optatus Melevitanus, Athanas. Or. 3. contra Arian.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Optat. l. 4. Cont. Parmen.
St. Basil, and some others, Cyril. Hieros. praef. in Catech.
who have Written as well as they after that General Council, Basil. Epist. 3.
Con. 47.
whereof St. Austine speaks, and before that of Constantinople have believed,
that all Heretics, who have not the true Faith of the Trinity, ought to be
Rebaptized, who, in those first Ages of the Church, were incomparably more
numerous than the other Heretics, who believed that great Mystery.

These are not bare conjectures that may be doubted of: but uncontroverted
matters of fact. A Man needs no more but eyes in his head, to prove them, by
Reading the testimonies alleged. It must necessarily then follow, seeing they
submitted to a Council, because they knew it to be Infallible, which was not
done in regard to the Pope St. Stephen, that St. Cyprian, Firmilian of
Caesarea, Denis of Alexandria, St. Athanasius, Saint Optatus, St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, Saint Basil, St. Austine, and most Catholic Bishops of Egypt, Asia
and Africa, not to mention those, who, in the interval of almost Threescore
years, that was betwixt Pope Stephen and the Council, had liberty to follow the
party of St. Cyprian, believed not in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Ages of the
Church, that the Pope was Infallible. What can be answered to that?

Let us now consult the Council in Question, or rather the Councils which have
pronounced Sovereignly concerning that point of the Baptism of Heretics. You
have three of them. First, the full Council, which is the first Council of
Arles, to which the Pope St. Sylvester sent four Legates in the year 314. makes
this Decree, in the Eighth Canon, upon occasion of the Africans, De Afris quod
propria lege utantur, ut Re-baptisent, placuit ut si ad Ecclesiam aliquis de
Haeresi venerit, interrogent eum symbolum, and si perviderint eum in patre, and
filio, and Spiritu Sancto Baptizatum, manus ei tantum imponatur and sic
accipiat Spiritum Sanctum. Quod si interrogatus, non responderit hanc
Trinitatem Rebaptisetur.


who Rebaptized all Heretics: If any Heretic return to the Church, let him be
asked the Question; and if it appear that he has been Baptized in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that hands be only laid
upon him, to the end he may receive the Holy Ghost: but if he answer, not
according to the Mystery of the Trinity, let him be Rebaptized.

Moreover, the great Council of Nice, Twelve years after, ordains, in the Canon
19. that the Paulanists who return to the Church should be Rebaptized, De
Paulanistis ad Ecclesiam Catholicam confugientibus definitio prolata est ut
iterum Baptisentur omnimodis. Aug. de haer. ad quod vult Haeres. 44.
because, as St. Austine says, these Heretics, the Disciples of Paulus
Samosatanus, who believed not the Trinity, nor the Incarnation of the Word,
Can. 1.
observed not the form of Baptism, in Baptizing in the Name of the Three
Persons of the Trinity. But as to the Novatians who Baptized in the Name of the
Trinity, as Catholics did, the Council declares, that it is sufficient to lay
hands upon them.

In fine, Can. 7.
the first Council of Constantinople, which is the second General, ordains also
the Montanists, Sabellians, and such other Heretics, who Baptized not in the
Name of the Three Persons of the Trinity, against which they blasphemed, should
be Rebaptized; but not the Novatians, the Quartodecimans, nor yet the Arians
and Macedonians, because although these had not the true belief which ought to
be had of that great Mystery, yet they Baptized in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: which St. Austine, who has Written after
that Council of Constantinople, assures to be sufficient for the validity of
the Sacrament, though the Faith of him who Baptizes be not pure. So that, says
he, Manifestum est fieri posse ut fide non integra^ integrum in quoquam maneat
Baptismi Sacramentum....... Quamo^rem nisi Evangelicis verbis, in nomine
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti Marcion Baptismum consecrabat, integrum
erat Sacramentum, quamvis ejus fides sub iisdem verbis aliud opinantis quam
Catholica veritas docet, non esset integra. Aug. l. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donatist.
c. 14, 15.
if Marcion Baptized, using the words of the Gospel, in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, his Baptism was good, though that
Heretic, under these words, believed a thing quite different from what the
Catholic Church teaches.

That being so, there is no more to be done, but to compare these Decrees of
Councils with those of the Pope St. Stephen, and of Saint Cyprian. Si quis a
quacunque Haeres. etc. manus ei tantum imponatur.
This Pope Decrees, that if any one return from any Heresy whatsoever, he
shall have only hands laid upon him, without being Rebaptized: Si quis a
quacunque Haeresi, Qui ex quacunque Haeresi, etc. Baptisentur.
etc. St. Cyprian says on the contrary, that if any one return from any Heresy
whatsoever, he ought to be Rebaptized. These are two extremes, directly
opposite one to another. The Three Councils take the middle course, explaining
the one, and condemning the other. They are not for Re-baptizing the Novatians
and other Heretics who Baptize in the Name of the Three Persons of the
Trinity, and they hold their Baptism to be lawful and good, according to the
true Apostolical Tradition; but they are also absolutely for Re-baptizing the
Paulanists, and all such who Baptize not in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; thereby clearly defining that their Baptism is
null. And therein they explain and rectify the Decree of the Pope St. Stephen,
adding but in formal terms an exception, which is only understood therein.
They plainly then declare on the one hand, how the Decree of St. Stephen is to
be understood; and on the other, that St. Cyprian, Nondum veritas eliquata and
declarata per plenarium concilium.
who expressed himself clearly enough in his, was deceived, but very
innocently; because, as St. Austine says, L. 1. de Baptis. Contra Donatis. c.
7, 8, 9, 17.
the truth was not then discovered and declared by the Council. Now seeing
before that Declaration, one might, according to that holy Father, freely
follow the opinion of St. Cyprian, notwithstanding the Decree of the Pope, and
that after that of the Council one had not the same liberty: it is altogether
evident, that it must once more be concluded, that it is, because the ancient
Church believed, that a Council is Infallible, and that the Pope is not.

CHAP. X. The fall of Liberius.
THESE two holy Popes, Victor and Stephen, whom so many Catholic Bishops of
the Ancient Church have not believed to be Infallible, had notwithstanding the
truth on their side, and in their favors the Councils decided. But there are
others, who, according to the unquestionable testimonies of the Ancients, have
fallen into error: whence it may be irrefragably concluded upon better reason,
that Antiquity reckoned them not Infallible. I shall only allege seven or
eight of the most evident instances, which will be sufficient to prove, that
the Ancients acknowledged no other Infallibility amongst Men, but what God has
given to his Church.

The first is Liberius, who, to get himself recalled from the Exile to which
the Arian Emperor had Banished him, and to remount the Pontifical Throne which
Felix had usurped, Ann. 357.
solemnly approved Arianism. This he did, by condemning jointly with the
Arians, St. Athanasius, the great defender of the Faith, and scourge of
Arianism; besides, by suppressing the Term Consubstantial, which distinguished
a Catholic from an Arian, and which was, in a manner, the Character and Mark
of Catholicity; nay more, by receiving the most obstinate Arians into his
Communion; and, in a word, by subscribing to the scandalous Formulary of
Sirmium, which was presented to him by the Head of the Semi-Arians.

And, at length, that it might not be doubted but that he acted as Pope, who
makes known to the whole Church what Men ought to believe, for that was the
thing the Arians pretended to, who were willing it might be known, that the
Head of the Church was on their side: He Wrote two long Letters, which were
made public all over the Empire; one to the Emperor Constantius, the great
Protector of Arianism; and the other to the Arian Bishops, wherein he declares
his intention in terms most significant, and most advantageous for the Arians.

Vbi cognovi quando Deo placuit, Just vos illum condemnasse, mox consensum
meum commodavi sententiis vestris. Lib. Epist. 7. ad Episc. Orientales. Amoto
Athanasio a communione omnium, cujus nec Epistolia a me suscipienda sunt, dico
me cum omnibus vobis pacem and unanimitatem habere; ut sciatis me veram fidem
per hanc Epistolam meamloqui: hanc ego libenti animo suscepi, in nullo
contradixi, etc.


For there he says, That having known, when it pleased God to illuminate him,
that they had justly condemned Athanasius, he presently consented to their
Judgment; that he had Excommunicated him; that he would not so much as receive
his Letters; and that he would have them to know, that he was perfectly united
with them in mind and heart: that he professes in that Letter the true Faith,
which Demophilus had made known unto him, which they had declared and received
at Sirmium, and that he most willingly embraces it without the least
contradiction.

This, methinks, may be said to be an Authentic Declaration for Arianism, and
a falling from on high into the Abyss of Heresy. And it cannot be known by a
more unquestionable evidence than his own, that he fell so unfortunately. And
therefore St. Hilary, In fragment, a Pithaeo editis. Liberius taedio victus
exilii, and in haeretica pravitate subscribens, Romam victor intraverat.

Hieron. in Chron. and de scrip. Eccles. in Fortunati.


who lived in that time, most positively calls him Heretic, pronouncing three
or four Anathema's against him, one upon the heels of another; And St. Jerome,
in more than one passage of his Works, says, That that Pope subscribed to the
Arian impiety; and that the vexation he lay under for his Banishment having
made him subscribe to Heresy, in a Victorious manner he again entered Rome.

But not to mention all the others who have spoken of that deplorable fall of
Liberius, Auxili. l. 1. de ordinati. c. 25. and l. 2. c. 1. and alii.
we need no other proof fully to persuade us of it, than Rome her self and all
her Clergy; or to say better, the Church of Rome, which so abhorred that
scandalous Declaration of Liberius, that on the spot she deposed him from his
Papacy, as an Arian Heretic of public notoriety. Nor was he chosen and
acknowledged of new for true Pope, till that after his Successor St. Felix had
suffered Martyrdom, he abjured his Heresy, and was again become the same
Liberius that he was before his fall, a wise, generous and zealous Pope. This
being so, Is it not clear, that the Church of Rome her self, in the fourth age,
did not believe the Pope to be Infallible?

CHAP. XI. The instance of Pope Vigilius.
THE Second instance that I produce, is that of Pope Vigilius. I have already
related that example upon occasion of St. Peter's being reproved by St. Paul,
and shall at present apply it, in a few, but decisive words, to the subject
whereof I treat in this Chapter. This Pope, before the fifth Council, made a
Constitution, Vigilii Constitutum ad Justin. Imper. Ex verbis Epistolae viri
venerabilis Ibae rectissimo ac piissimo intellectu perspectis, etc.

Nec quemquam hoc nostro constituto permittimus aliquando praesumere super
ejusdem Epistolae negotium..... quoquo modo aliquid temerariae novitatis
infer.


which he addressed to the Emperor Justinian, wherein, amongst other things,
undertaking the defense of the Letter of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, he declares,
that according to the words of that Letter, understood in the sound sense that
might be given unto them, it seemed to be Orthodox, and strictly prohibits any
whosoever to innovate any thing touching that Letter, in what manner soever it
might be; nor to condemn it, seeing Ibas had been absolved, and received as a
Catholic in the Council of Chalcedon.

The Fifth Council which was held sometime after, Ann. 553.
and at which Vigilius would never assist, though he was then at
Constantinople, where that Synod was celebrated, decides exactly the contrary.
For having well examined the Letter of Ibas, Si quis defendit Epistolam quam
dicitur Ibas ad Marim Persam scripsisse, quae abnegat Deum verbum de sancta Dei
genitrice semper virgin Maria incarnatum hominem factum esse, dicit autem,
etc...... and defendit Theodorum and Nestorium, and impia eorum dogmata and
conscripta. Si quis igitur memoratam impiam Epistolam defendit, and non
Anathematizat eam, etc.....and qui praesumit eum defendere; vel infertam ei
impietatem nomine sanctorum patrum vel Concilii Chalcedonensis.....Anathema
sit. Synod. 5. Coll. 3. c. 14.
concerning which the Council of Chalcedon had pronounced nothing, it solemnly
declares the same Heretical and impious, as containing the Blasphemies of
Theodore of Mopsuestia, and Nestorius against Jesus Christ and his holy Mother,
and pronounces Anathema against all those who Anathematise it not, and dare
undertake the defense thereof, as if it had been approved in the Council of
Chalcedon.

There you have two decrees quite contrary one to another. Whence it must
follow, that either the Council in its decision, or the Pope in his
constitution, are deceived, and maintain an error. Or whether that Pope did at
length consent to that Council, as I have said, upon the credit of very good
vouchers, or that he never consented to it, as there are some who affirm: It is
certain, that his Successors, Pelagius II. and St. Gregory the Great have
approved it, and that it has always been received since without contradiction,
by all the Western Church, as a true Ecumenical Council which cannot err. It is
then most certain that Vigilius decided wrong in his constitution, and that by
consequent, even according to the Popes and Church of Rome in the fifth Age;
The Popes, for all they are heads of the Church, are not therefore Infallible.

CHAP. XII. The Condemnation of Honorius in the Sixth Council.
THE same appears clearly also, in the case of Pope Honorius, of whom so much
has been Written in these later times. I am not for contesting with any body.
I shall only produce matter of Fact, which being barely related, will clearly
determine that affair. Sergius Patriarch of Constantinople, being corrupted by
Theodore Bishop of Pharan, Lateran. Synod. sub. Martr. 1.
Author of the Heresy of the Monothelites, who would not acknowledge two
Wills and two Operations, the one Divine, and the other Humane in Jesus Christ,
undertook to spread that Heresy all over the East.

For that end, seeing he had already on his side Cyrus Bishop of Phasis,
Histor. Miscell. l. 18. Cedren. and Zonar. in Heracl.


who was shortly after Patriarch of Alexandria, Macarius Patriarch of Antioch,
and Athanasius Patriarch of the Jacobites, he acted so cunningly, that being
powerfully seconded by these three Bishops, who were much esteemed by the
Emperor Heraclius, he drew that poor Prince, in his declining Age, into that
Heresy. So that he prevailed with him to make that famous Edict under the name
of Ecthesis, or the exposition of Faith; whereby he commands all his Subjects
inviolably to follow that Doctrine. And then that Patriarch of Constantinople,
having caused it to be signed by all the Bishops of his Patriarchy, whom he had
assembled in a Council, he affixed it upon the Doors of his Cathedral Church,
at the same time that Cyrus planted the same Heresy in Egypt.

Now seeing Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem vigorously opposed it, he caused
that pernicious Doctrine, that came near the Error of Eutyches, who confounded
the two Natures in Jesus Christ, reducing them singly into one, to be condemned
in his Synod; as the Council of Chalcedon had condemned the other. Sergius
finding himself attacked in this manner, Sect. Syn. Act. 12.
wrote a long Letter to Pope Honorius, wherein he accuses Sophronius of
troubling the Peace of the Oriental Church, by introducing a new Doctrine by
these new terms of Two Wills, and Two Operations, which had never been heard of
before, neither in the Fathers nor Councils. Cyrus failed not to second his
Colleague in Impiety, complaining, as he had done, of Sophronius to the Pope;
And that Patriarch also on his part, did what he ought, in defending himself
well, and in making known to Honorius the extreme danger they were in in the
East, of seeing error triumph by power, and by the Artifices of these
Heretics, if a speedy course were not taken.

It was never more apparent than on this occasion, that when the Catholic
Faith is to be declared, one must never biass; nor dissemble, and conceal part
of truth, for reconciling both parties, and bringing back to the Church those,
Sext. Synod. Act. 12.
who, through Heresy or Schism, have separated from it. Honorius, who was a
very peaceable Man, and so zealous for the peace of the Church, that he
endeavored to accommodate all matters, and content both parties, Wrote back to
Sergius, in a manner, whereby that Patriarch and his party took great
advantage, publishing, in all places, and persuading many, by the reading of
these Letters, That the Bishop of Rome, owned at that time by the Greeks for
Head of the Church, and Ecumenical Pope, approved their Doctrine; which
rendered the party of the Monothelites more powerful than ever.

The Successors of Honorius, Hist. Miscel. Cedr. and Zonar.
who in the interim died, took a conduct quite contrary to his, for quenching
that great conflagration that spread over all the East. John the IV. in his
Council of Rome, annulled all the Decrees which these Monothelites had made in
their Synods. Pope Theodore condemned and deposed Pyrrhus, Anastas. in Theodor.
who succeeded Sergius, and maintained his Heresy, and after him his
Successor Paul, the most furious of all those Heretics, who, as a foaming and
raging Bear ravaged the Vineyard of our Lord* For he grew to that height of
more than Barbarous fury, as to cause the Popes Nuncio's, sent to
Constantinople for remedying these disorders, to be scourged.

The Illustrious Pope Martin, Auct. Vit. S. Mart. Pap.
Successor to Theodore, acted more vigorously than his Predecessor. For in a
Council of an Hundred and five Bishops, which he held at the Lateran, where the
Writings of the Monothelites were examined, with the Petitions that were
presented against them, he declared their Doctrine Heretical; Anathematised
Theodore of Pharan, Cyrus of Alexandria, Sergius, Pyrrhus and Paul, Patriarchs
of Constantinople, who had always maintained it; Exhorted the Gallican Church,
Epist. Mart. Pap. ad Amand. Trajectens.
which has always vigorously defended the Catholic Faith, against all
Heresies, to thunder against this as he had done; and solemnly condemned the
Ecthesis, or Edict of the Emperor Heraclius. Hist. Misc. l. 19. Auct. Vit. S.
Mart. Anastas. in S. Mart. Cedr. and Zonar. in Constante.
This put the Emperor Constans, Grandson of Heraclius, and a great Protector
of the Monothelites, into such a rage, that he caused the Holy Pope to be
carried away from Rome, and having most outragiously used him, Banished him
into the Chersonesus, where, being overwhelmed with miseries and poverty, he
gloriously accomplished a long Martyrdom, which shortly after was followed by
the deplorable death of that Tyrant.

His Son Constantine Pogonatus, a great Catholic, by his prudent conduct,
repaired all the faults of that unhappy Prince. For having settled the Empire,
by the great Victories which he obtained over all his Enemies, he resolved also
to give Peace to the Church, which his Father had troubled near Fifty years by
the Monothelites. Anno 680. Hist. in Miscel. Cedr. and Zonar. Anastas. in
Agath. Id. and Synod. 6. Act. 9.
For that effect, with consent of Pope Agatho, he called the sixth Council at
Constantinople, where the business of the Monothelites was sifted to the
bottom, and sovereignly determined to their shame. In that Council there were
above Two hundred Oriental Bishops, four Legates of Pope Agatho, Theodore and
George Cardinal Priests, John a Deacon, who was afterward Pope, and
Constantius Subdeacon; and on the part of the Council, of Sixscore Bishops
held for the same purpose at Rome; Three Bishops, the Deputy of the Archbishop
of Ravenna, and many other Learned Churchmen and Monks, who were sent thither
from the Western Church.

The Writings that had past on both sides, upon that subject, Council. 6. Act.
12.
were read there, and particularly the Letter of Sergius to Pope Honorius, and
the Pope's Answer to that Patriarch; And after they had been well examined,
this is the Judgment which the Council in the following Session solemnly
pronounced against them, and is the same which we have in all the Editions, and
particularly in the last of Paris. Act. 13. Has invenientes omnino alienas
existere ab Apostolicis dogmatibus, and a definitionibus Sanctorum Conciliorum,
and Cunctorum probabilium Patrum, sequi vero falsas doctrinas haereticorum, eas
omnino abjicimus, and tanquam animae noxias execramur, and Honorium qui fuerat
Papa antiquae Romae eo quod invenimus per scripta quae ab eo facta sunt ad
Sergium quia in omnibus ejus mentem secutus est and impia dogmata confirmavit.
Having found the Epistle of Sergius to Honorius, and that of Honorius to
Sergius, wholly contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, the Definitions of
Councils, and the Judgment of the Holy Fathers, and that they were conform to
the false doctrine of Heretics, we absolutely reject and abhor them as
pernicious to Souls. We have moreover Judged, that the names of Theodore,
Sergius, Cyrus, Pyrrhus, etc. ought to be blotted out of the Church; and that
with them, Honorius, heretofore Pope of ancient Rome, ought to be
Excommunicated, because we have found by his Letters to Sergius, that in all
things he has followed the mind of that Heretic, and that he has confirmed
his impious Doctrines.

The holy Council repeats that Condemnation in the definition of Faith, that
was made in the Eighteenth Session, and again Anathematises him, as also the
Heretical Patriarchs, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter of Constantinople, Cyrus
of Alexandria, and Macarius of Antioch, Ad haec and Honorius Antiquae Romae
Papa hujusmodi haereseos confirmator. Sext. Syn. p. 1084. Edit. Paris.


in the thanks that were given the Emperor at the end of the Council; And that
Emperor, in his Edict, whereby he Banishes the Heresy of the Monothelites out
of his Empire, declares the same against the Heretical Bishops, and against
Honorius, whom he calls the confirmer of that Heresy.

The Council being ended, the Legates brought an Authentic Copy of it to the
Pope St. Leo II. who succeeded Agatho, that died during that Council; And this
Pope Leo, who understood Greek very well, took the pains himself to Translate
it into Latin, such as we have it. Afterward, Writing to the Emperor, to whom
he sent his Approbation of all the Acts of the Council; he Anathematises
Honorius, Necnon and Honorium qui hanc sedem Apostolicam non Apostolicae
Traditionis Doctrina lustravit, sed immaculatam fidem subvertere conatus est.
T. 6. Council. Edit. Paris. p. 1027.
who enlightened not (says he) the Apostolic Church, by the Doctrine of
Apostolical Tradition, but who on the contrary endeavored to destroy the
Faith. And in the Letters which he Wrote to the Bishops of Spain, and to the
King Ervigius, to whom he sent the Definition of the Council to be signed, he
expresses himself as to that point, in words, at least as significant and
weighty, Qui immaculatam Apostolicae traditionis regulam, quam a
praedecessoribus suis accepit, maculari consensit. Ibid. p. 1252.


saying, That that Pope has been smitten with an Anathema with Theodore, Cyrus
and Sergius, for having consented that the Immaculate Rule of Apostolical
Tradition, which he had received from his Predecessors, should be corrupted.

What this Pope, who had Read, Examined, Translated and Approved that Council,
said of Honorius, other Popes, his Successors, have also said in the following
Ages. For in the ancient Diurnal-book, which is a kind of Ceremonial of the
Church of Rome, the Confession of Faith, which all the new Elected Popes did
make, is to be seen, and wherein they declare, That they receive the Sixth
General Council, where Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, etc. Vna cum Honorio qui
pravis eorum assertionibus fomentum impendit.
inventers of the Heresy of the Monothelites are, say they, condemned with
Honorius, who favored and countenanced their wicked Doctrines.

Adrian II. in his Epistle that was read, and received with applause in the
seventh Action of the Eight Ecumenical Council, confesses, That the Orientals
pronounced Sentence of Anathema against Honorius, accused of the Heresy of the
Monothelites; And that great Eighth Council, which so strongly maintained the
Primacy of the Pope against Photius, yet for all that, with consent of the
Popes three Legates, who presided in that Council, in the definition of Faith,
they Anathematised Theodore of Pharan, Sergius, Pyrrhus, etc. and with them
Honorius Bishop of Rome, Cyrus of Alexandria, and Macarius of Antioch.

These are matters of fact to be read in the Councils, and in the Books which I
cite; and they are so strong and decisive against the Infallibility of the
Pope, that Baronius, Bellarmine, Pighius, and the other modern Authors, who
will absolutely have the Pope to be Infallible, have been forced to deliver
themselves from the persecution of those troublesome matters of fact, to
allege forgery in them, and boldly to say, that the Acts of the Sixth Council
have been corrupted by Theodore of Constantinople, who, in hatred to the Popes,
foisted in, immediately after the Council, all that concerns Honorius; and that
the Epistles of St. Leo are false, and have been forged by some Impostour, an
enemy of the Holy See. For, say they, what likelihood, that after the Letter of
Pope Agatho had been read in the fourth Action, wherein he says, That the
Apostolical Church has never swerved from the truth, they would have condemned
one of his Predecessors, and that Leo his Successor should do the same?

But they who yield not to that reason, nor to some other conjectures which
they find to be weaker, object reasons against them, which they think can never
be answered. For, say they, if that wicked Patriarch had corrupted the Acts,
would not the Popes Legates, who presided in the Council, and brought a Copy of
them to Rome, have clearly seen the Imposture, and that what was inserted
concerning Pope Honorius was no Act of the Council, which had not mentioned
him? Would they not have complained to the Emperor of that horrid Cheat? Would
they not have told Pope Leo that these Acts were falsified? Would they have
suffered, without speaking one word, that he should have Translated them in
that manner, to impose upon the whole Church? And would the Emperor, who was
himself present at the Council, put into his Edict, that Honorius had been
condemned there, or at least would he have suffered that Edict to be falsified
in his presence?

Now if any one, to excuse the Legates and Pope Leo, should think fit to say,
That these Acts were not corrupted till long after their death; Might not his
mouth be stopped with this Reply; To what end then was that Imposture? Was there
not to be found in the Records of the Vatican the true Copy of that Council,
the Translation of it made by Pope Leo, and besides, a Thousand Copies of it
elsewhere, which might have been opposed to those Falsaries for discovering
their Cheat? Would not Pope Adrian, very far from Writing to the Fathers of the
Eighth Council, that Honorius had been condemned in the Sixth, have advertised
them, that their Copies were corrupted? Durst the Fathers have renewed the
Anathema against Honorius, and Adrian's three Legates never have opposed it? Yet
they did no such thing, and there was no complaint made at that time that the
Acts of the Sixth Council were falsified, because there have never been any
other Copies of these Acts, either in Writing or in Print, except those which
we have, wherein Honorius is condemned with Sergius and Pyrrhus, and the other
heads of the Monothelites.

As to the Epistles of Pope Leo, Father Francis Cambesis, a learned Jacobin,
Edit. Paris. 1648.
has so cleared the truth of them, that at present no body doubts of it. And
besides, he has given us a very rare piece, which alone might end the
Controversy, if there still remained any, about a point so fully determined.
That is a little work of the Deacon Agatho Keeper of the Records, and
Vice Chancellor of the Church of Constantinople. For he says there, that
Officiating as Secretary in the Sixth Council, he Transcribed all the Acts with
his own hand, which were carefully kept in the Imperial Palace, and that by the
command of the Emperor he took five Copies of them, for the five Patriarchs,
that so the Decisions of the Council might not be altered: by Consequent, it
was one of these Copies which the Legates carried to the Pope, who, without
doubt, is the first of the five Patriarchs. A little after he adds, Id
praeterea autoritate decernens, ut Sergii, Honoriique ac caeterorum pariter ab
eadem sancta and oecumenica Synodo ejectorum nomina in sacra Ecclesiarum
dyptica praeconio publico referrentur, eorumque per loca imagines erigerentur.
that Philippicus, who from his youth, was bred in the Heresy of the
Monothelites, being advanced to the Empire, caused a Picture to be removed from
before the Gate of the Palace, before he would enter it, which represented the
Sixth Council; and commanded that the Images should be set up again, and that
the Names of Sergius, Honorius, and of all the rest who had been Anathematised
in the Holy Ecumenical Council, should be replaced in the Sacred Dypticks.

So many convincing evidences make it manifestly out, that the Acts of that
Council have not been corrupted by the Greeks. And therefore most part of those
that said it before, abandoning so weak a defense, have retrenched themselves
behind another, saying, That the Fathers were mistaken, in not having rightly
understood the sense and meaning of the Epistles of Honorius, who made use of a
wise dispensation for uniting and calming all Winds. But that is a worse and
far more dangerous Answer than the former. For it strikes only at some private
persons, who are accused, but not known, upon bare conjectures of having
falsified the Acts: but the other attacks a whole Ecumenical Council, robbing
it of all the authority and force which it ought to have against Heretics.

The truth is, by the same liberty that is taken, to say, that the Council has
not rightly understood the Letters of Pope Honorius, thought it has examined
them, the Monothelites, if there were any at present, might say, That it has
not rightly understood the Scriptures, nor the Fathers, upon the credit of whom
it pretends to have rightly condemned the doctrine of Theodore of Pharan,
Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul of Constantinople, and of Macarius of Antioch; and
thereby are made useless all the Decrees of Councils, and all the Constitutions
of Popes received in the Church, which have condemned, as Heretical, certain
doctrines, and certain propositions particularly pointed at, and contained in
the Books of some Authors, as the Fathers of the Fifth Council did, in regard
of the Three Chapters; and in our time Pope Innocent X. and Alexander VII. in
regard of the Book of Jansenius.

These are Arguments, which, in my opinion, can never be answered. But since
the method of this Treatise is not the way of Arguments, which draws always
Dispute after it against those, who, that they may not seem to be at a stand,
when they are put to it by evident reason, never fail of the subterfuges of
perplexed distinctions, which are never well understood: I Will keep within the
bounds that I have set to my self, and only make use of unquestionable matters
of Fact in Antiquity, that History furnishes us with. Upon that ground then, I
say, for an Answer to both, in the first place, that whether the Acts of the
Sixth Council have been corrupted, or not, it is certain, that all Antiquity
has received it in the same manner as we have it at present with the
Condemnation of Honorius.

Detestamurque cum ea Sergium, Honorium, etc. Act. ult.
That appears, not to say any thing of Pope Leo, by the Decree of the seventh
Council; which, as the sixth did, anathematises Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Honorius;
Anastas. in Vit. Leon. and Epist. ad Jo^^. diacon.
by Anastasius the Library Keeper, who certainly saw the Copy that was brought
from Constantinople, and who, in the Life of Leo II. says, that that Pope
received the sixth Council, where Cyrus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Honorius, were
condemned; by that Letter of Adrian II, which I have alleged; by the
determination of the eighth Council; and by the Confession of Faith which the
ancient Popes made after their Election: nay more than that, by the constant
Tradition of the Gallican Church, as it may be seen in the Chronicle of Ado,
and in the most ancient Manuscript of his Martyrology; Aetat. 6.
which is to be found in the Mazarine Bibliotheke.

This is also to be seen in the Opuscles of Hincmar Archbishop of Reims, Opusc.
de non Trin unit.
where he puts the Condemnation of Honorius in the sixth Council, with that of
the other Monothelites. And for that very reason it was, that writing to Pope
Nicolas. he says, Opusc. 33. c. 20.
, That it is known that all the Churches of France are subject to that of Rome,
and that all the Bishops are subjected to the Pope by reason of his Primacy;
and that therefore they ought all to obey him: Apud Flodard. l. 3. Hist. c. 13.
but salva fide, adds he, the Faith being secured; which it is most clear he
would not have added, had it not been believed in France, as elsewhere, that
Popes might err, as well as Pope Honorius. In fine, for an authentic
Confirmation of all this, there is no Author to be found, who, before some
Moderns of the last Age, durst say, even contrary to the Tradition of the
Church of Rome, that the Acts of the sixth Council have been corrupted by the
Greeks.

This is so true, that in the ancient Breviary of Rome printed at Venice in the
year 1482, and 61 years after at Paris, in the Year 1543, after that it is said
in the first Lesson of the second Nocturn of the Office of St. Leo, on the
eight and twentieth of June, Hic suscepit sanctam sextam Synodum; in the second
it is to be read. In qua synodo damnati sunt Cyrus and Sergius, Honorius,
Pyrrhus, Paulus, etc. But in the new Breviary the Name of Honorius is left out,
and it has been thought sufficient to put into that second Lesson, In eo
Concilio Cyrus, Sergius, and Pyrrhus, condemnati sunt. Whereupon it is easy to
conclude from most manifest matters of Fact alone, that all Antiquity,
Oecumenick Councils, Popes, all the Gallican Church, nay and even the Church of
Rome, until the last Age, have believed that the sixth Council received by all
the Church, has condemned Pope Honorius, and ranked him amongst Monothelite
Heretics. Whence it clearly follows, That Antiquity has believed, that the
Pope was not infallible. The same may be said to those who maintain, that the
Council, in condemning the Epistles of Honorius to Sergius, did not rightly
understand them. Whether that be so or no, it is certain, according to your
selves, that it condemned them: Then a whole great Council of above two hundred
Bishops of the seventh Age, representing the Universal Church in her Pastors
lawfully assembled, did not believe the Pope to be Infallible; for had they
been of that Belief, they would have had a care whether they had well or ill
understood these Letters, not to have anathematised him as they did.

The Result of all is, That Antiquity, in the Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Ages,
as well as in those that preceded, has believed that the Pope was not
Infallible. This is it that I was to prove; leaving the Modern Doctors who hold
his Infallibility, to their Liberty of thinking and saying thereupon, whatever
they please, by Logic, that can never overthrow the truth of matters of Fact
which I have produced, and which make known to us what Antiquity has believed
concerning the Infallibility of the Pope.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Popes Clement III. Innocent III. Boniface VIII. and Sixtus
V.
SUch as apply themselves to the Study of Antiquity, find, that in the Ages
following there have been other Popes that have erred in their Decisions; as
these that follow. In the twelfth Age, Ostiens. C. Quarto de Divortiis.
Clement III. declared in his Decretal, Laudabilem, That the Wife of an
Heretic being converted, and her Husband continuing obstinate in his Heresy,
might be married to another; which, doubtless, neither Catholics nor
Protestants could at present suffer to be brought into practice. And therefore
Pope Innocent III. who filled the Holy See shortly after Clement, recalled that
Constitution; thereby plainly declaring, that his Predecessor had erred. This
is affirmed by Cardinal Cortzeon, who flourished in the Pontificat of Innocent
III. in his Sum, which I have seen in Manuscript in the Abbey Royal of St.
Victor. And this same Pope Innocent himself, for all he was so able a man, was
subject to the same failing, from which Popes, according to the Belief of
Antiquity, are not exempted; that is, to be deceived, even when they decide a
point of Doctrine in their Council, without the Consent of the Church.

The matter of Fact is related by Caesarius a Cistertian Monk, Lib. 3.
Historiar. Memorab. c. 32.
and contemporary with Innocent. He says, that a Monk of his Order, who,
without doubt, before he entered the Monastery, had given it out that he was a
Priest, committed daily a dreadful Sacrilege, in celebrating Mass, though he
had never received sacred Orders. Having confessed this to his Abbot, who
failed not to enjoin him, as he ought, to abstain from saying it for the
future, he would not obey him: for on the one hand he feared, that by
refraining he should disgrace himself, and give occasion to his Brethren to
think ill of him; and on the other, he thought he had no cause to apprehend
that his Abbot, to whom he had discovered his Crime under the inviolable Seal
of Confession, durst do him any prejudice because of that Discovery.

The Abbot being in great perplexity, bethought himself to propose this Case,
in general Terms, in a Chapter of his Order that was held some time after: and
asking the Question, what was to be done if such a Case should ever happen in
their Monasteries; the whole Assembly were as much puzzled as the good Abbot had
been; and neither the Chapter of the Cistertians, nor any of the rest, durst
ever undertake to decide that case of Conscience, which was thought to be so
difficult, that it was resolved upon, by all, to write about it to the Pope for
a Resolution.

Innocent III. the then Pope, assembled thereupon, the Cardinals, Doctors, and
Learned Men, to take their Advice; who, after some debate, agreed all in his
Judgment: to wit, That such a Confession being rather Blasphemy than a
Confession, the Confessor, in such a case, ought to discover so horrible a
Crime, because it might bring great prejudice to the Church. And the Year
following he wrote to the Chapter what he had determined, Et placuit sententia
omnibus, scri: sitque sequenti anno Capitulo quod fuerat a se determin^tum, and
a Cardin^libus approbatum.
and what was approved in that great Congregation of Cardinals. It is not at
all to be doubted, but that that Definition is wrong. So that the same Pope, a
little after, made no Scruple to retract it in the great Council of Lateran
where he himself presided, Ann. 12 15.
which positively declared the contrary in these Terms: Caveat sacerdos ne
verbo, vel signo, vel alio quovis modo prodat aliquatenus peccatorem. Qui
pecca^um in poenitentiali Judicio sibi detectum praesumpserit revelare, non
solum a sacerdotali officio deponendum decernimus, verum etiam ad agendara
perpetuam poeniten^iam in arctum Monasterium detrudendum.


Let the Priest have a care that he discover not, either by Word, Sign, or in
any other way whatsoever, the Sin of his Penitent. That if any one, adds it,
presume to reveal the Sin that has been discovered to him at the Tribunal of
Confession, we ordain, not only that he be deposed from the Sacerdotal Office,
but also that he be confined to a Monastery, there to do Penance during Life.

These are two quite opposite Decisions upon a Point of highest Importance,
Conc. Later. 4. c. 21.
and which concerns a Sacrament; one of the Pope with his particular Council,
or his Council of Cardinals, Priests, and Deacons, who represent the Church of
Rome; the other of the same Pope, with a great Council, representing the
Universal Church. Whence comes that difference, if it be not, That the Pope
pronouncing and deciding upon any Point concerning Doctrine and Manners in a
general Council, or with the Consent of the Church, is Infallible; and when he
acts otherwise he is not.

This appears still more manifestly in the Bull, Vnam Sanctam, of Boniface
VIII. whereby that Pope, whose History is sufficiently known, proposes to all
Believers, as an Article of Faith, the Belief whereof is necessary to
Salvation, That Popes have a Supreme Power over all the Kingdoms of the World,
as to the Temporal. It was believed then in all these Kingdoms, and is so
still, that that Definition is wrong. Even they themselves who hold that the
Pope has some Power over the Temporal, have a care not to say, That one is
obliged to believe it upon pain of Damnation: and it is known that Clement V.
recalled that Bull in the Council of Vienna. Cap. meruit. de Privilegiis.
That Pope then, and that Council in the fourteenth Century, believed not that
the Pope was infallible.

The same may be said of the Bull of Sixtus V. which he caused to be printed
with his Bible, and whereby he declares to the whole Church, That that Bible is
corrected according to the Primitive Purity of the Vulgar Translation. And
nevertheless, because it was afterward clearly seen that it was not, Clement
VIII. suppressed that Bull, and caused another to be printed, wherein all the
Faults of the former are very well corrected: and so it may very well be
concluded, that Clement VIII. was persuaded, that his Predecessor, instructing
all Believers in a point that regards even the Principle of Faith, might be
deceived. However, I will not say so, because I will not at all enter into
Dispute with some Modern Doctors, who, to slip the Collar, have bethought
themselves to say, That it is true the Bull was printed with the Bible,
Tannerus disp. 1. de Fide, q. 4. dub. 6. n. 263. Thom. Comptonus in 2.2. dis.
22. de sum, pontif. sect. 5.


which is still to be seen in many Libraries, but that it was not affixed upon
the Gates of St. Peter's Church, and on the Field of Flora, so long as it ought
to have been, according to the Laws of the Chancery of Rome. As if the Truth or
Falsehood of the Contents of a Bull, depended on the time that is to be taken in
publishing it; and as if the Pope who makes it, became not Infallible but at
the precise Minute of the Accomplishment of the time that it should have been
affixed. Let us leave that Instance then of Sixtus V. that we may not engage
into that Sophistry of Disputation, which to me seems not altogether so serious
in a matter of that Importance.

CHAP. XIV. The Instance of Pope John XXII.
I Shall produce no more Instances but that of Pope John XXII. That Pope, in
his extreme old Age of near fourscore and ten Years, took a Conceit, that as a
certain and constant Truth, the Opinion of some ought to be established in the
Church, Contin. Hangii.
who had heretofore taught that the Souls of those who died in Grace, and had
been entirely purged from all the remaining dreggs of their Sins, did not see
the Face of God till after the Resurrection. He did all that lay in his Power
to have it pass. He taught it publicly in Conferences and Congregations which
he held upon that Subject: he preached it himself; he obliged, by his Example,
the Cardinals and Prelates of his Court, and other Doctors, openly to maintain
it. He caused a learned Jacobin, named Father Thomas de Valas, Ibid. and Gobel.
persona in Cosmodr. aet. 6. c. 71. Paul Langius in Chron. Citizen.
to be put in Prison; who not doubting but that Opinion was an Error contrary
to the express Word of the Son of God, who said to the good Thief, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise, preached the contrary even in Avignon, where
the Pope held his Court. In fine, I find a Doctor of very great Authority,
Hadrian. 6. in 4. sentent. art. 3. de Minist. Confirm. 22.
whose eminent Virtue and singular Learning; with a consummated Prudence in the
management of Affairs, raised him afterward to the highest Dignity of the
Church, that says very plainly, Public docuit, declaravit, and ab omnibus
teneri voluit, quod animae, etc.
That he obliged all men to hold that Doctrine for the future.

Be as it will, it is certain that he did what lay in his Power to bring into
his Opinion the Sacred Faculty of Theology and University of Paris, which was
by all men reverenced as the Mother of Sciences; that for that end he sent
thither two Doctors with the General of the Cordeliers who publicly maintained
that Doctrine, and preached the same; which stirred up all Paris against them.
Whereupon, King Philip de Valois caused all the Bishops and Abbots that then
were at Paris, Continu. Hangii.
to assemble with the Doctors of the Faculty; who in his Presence confounded
those of Avignon, and proved to them, that what they had preached by order of
the Pope, was heretical.

That Prince, who would suffer in his Kingdom no Novelty of Doctrine, wrote to
his Holiness with a great deal of Force and Respect, beseeching him to retract
that wicked Opinion, Quatenus sententiam Magistrorum de Parisiis qui melius
sciunt quid debet teneri and credi in fide, quam Jurista and alii Clerici, qui
parum aut nihil sciunt de Theol^gia, approbaret. Ibid.
which caused so much Scandal in the Church. Nay he prayed him to send a Legate
into France, who in his Name might approve and confirm the Decree of the
Doctors of Paris, who knew far better what was to be believed as a matter of
Faith, than his Canonists and other Clergy of Avignon, that were no great
Divines.

The Pope, who would neither wholly retract, nor yet on the other hand provoke
the King, whose Protection he stood in need of, took a middle Course, which he
thought would not be disagreeable unto him, and prayed him to be satisfied,
Epist. Joan. ad Philip. 14. Calend. December. Pontif. 12.
that every one might continue in their Opinion, and Say, Teach, and Preach,
what they thought good upon that Subject. As to that Proposition, the King
would again have the Advice of the Faculty, Joan. Gerson. Sermon. in die Paschat.
coram Rege. Petr. de Alliac. prop. de toll. sc. coram Rege. An. 1406. Gob.
Person. Langius Odor. Rayn. ad An. 1334.
whom he there assembled; and the Faculty by a Decree of the Second of January,
One thousand three hundred and three, at the Mathurins, declared of new, That
the Opinion in question was Heretical, and that by consequent it could neither
be Preached nor Taught. After that, Philip proscribed it by Sound of Trumpet,
prohibiting all his Subjects to teach or maintain it: and then, that he might
oblige the Pope to condemn it, he wrote to him a second time in so forcible and
extraordinary Terms, that at length the Pope retracted it a little before his
Death, which happened the Year following.

I have said all that I could, in my History of the Fall of the Empire to
excuse him, even so far as to affirm with some, that that Doctrine which he
would have established by his own Authority, was not as yet condemned, as it
was afterward by Benet XII. his Successor.

There are some notwithstanding who say, that it had been long before rejected
by the Roman Church, as appears by the Confession of Faith that Clement IV.
sent in the Year Two hundred threescore and seven, to the Emperor Michael
Paleologue, whereof I have spoken in my History of the Schism of the Greeks.
However it be, it is certain that it is an Error, condemned not only by Pope
Benet, but much more solemnly, above an hundred Years after, in the third
Article of the Definition of Faith which the Council of Florence made for
reuniting the two Churches. And seeing it was not doubted but that Pope John
XII. in the manner he set about it, acted with all his Authority and Force to
introduce and establish that Error in the Church; so also was it believed in
that Fourteenth Age, that the Pope teaching the Church might err, and that he
is not Infallible, but when he pronounces from the Chair of the Universal
Church, as Head of it, in a general Council, or with consent of the principal
Members of the Church, who are the Bishops.

CHAP. XV. The Tradition of the Church of Rome as to that.
IT will be no difficult Task for us to prove that that Doctrine is conform to
the constant Tradition of the Church of Rome, as appears by the conduct of
ancient Popes, who in great Controversies about Faith, after that they
themselves had pronounced against Error, have thought that for condemning it by
a sovereign and infallible Sentence, there was need of a Council, or at least
by another way, the consent of the Church: Vt pleniori Ju^acio omnis possice
ror aboleri; Ep. 15. ad Ephesians. council.
to the end that Error might be abolished by a more solemn and decisive
judgment, said the great St. Leo writing to the second Council of Ephesus,
though he himself had already condemned Eutyches in his particular Council
which for that end he held at Rome.

This has been confirmed by the Popes of the last Age, when that after Leo X.
had published his Bull against the Errors of Luther, Solumque Concilium
generale remedium a nostris praedecessoribus, in casu simili usurpatum
superesse. Clem. VII. in Bull. indict. Council. 1533. Tam necessarium opus. Pius
IV. in Bull. confirm.
they declared in their Bulls, speaking of the Council of Trent which was
called for the supreme Decision of that Controversy, that that was the last
and necessary Remedy, which had always been made use of by their Predecessors
on the like Occasions. Wherein all the Popes perfectly well agree with the
fifth Council; which for proving that necessity, alleges the Example of the
Apostles, who decided in common with St. Peter, the Question touching the
Observation of the Law of Moses, Nec enim potest in communibus de fide
disceptationibus aliter veritas manifestari.
and then declares, that otherways Truth cannot be found in Controversies that
arise about the Faith. It is evident by that, that the Popes and that Council
did not believe that the Pope was infallible: for had they believed him
infallible, they would also have been persuaded, that it was sufficient to
consult that Oracle, or, that after his Responses and Decisions, it would not
have been necessary, for abolishing Error entirely, to have recourse to the
determination of the Church represented by a Council.

But if it be said, that there are some Heresies which the Popes alone have
condemned, and which have always been reckoned lawfully condemned, without the
Interposition of a Council; it is easily granted: but at the same time it may
be said, that that concludes nothing at all, because in the three first Ages of
the Church there were Heresies, such as that of Cerinthus, of the Ptolemaits,
the Severians, Bardesanites, Noetians, Valesians, and many others, that single
Bishops or particular Synods have condemned, and which we are obliged to
account Heresies, tho neither Popes nor General Councils have had any hand in
their Condemnation. Not that these Bishops and Synods are infallible, but
because all the other Bishops who abominated these Heresies as much as they,
condemned them as they had done, by approving all that they had done. So when
Popes have decided against any Doctrine which is afterward to be esteemed
heretical, it is so, because they have defined with consent of the Church,
which has received their Constitutions; as we have in our days seen an
illustrious Instance of it.

That which more confirms that ancient Tradition of the Roman Church, is, the
great number of Popes, who condemning some of their Predecessors, after
Ecumenical Councils, have thereby declared, that they themselves no more than
others, have not received of God the gift of Infallibility, which he has only
bestowed upon his Church. And indeed, two great Popes of the last Times were so
fully persuaded of this, that they would not accept of it from the hands of men
that would have attributed it unto them.

The first is Adrian VI. who in his Commentaries upon the fourth of the
Sentences, Art. 3. de Mines. confirm.
says positively, and in a most decisive manner, Certum est quod Pontifex
possit err are, etiam in iis quae tangunt fidem, haeresi^^ per suam
determinationem aut decretalem asserendo.
that he is certain the Pope may err, even in matters belonging to the Faith,
teaching and establishing a Heresy by his Definition or by his Decretal; which
afterward he proves by many Instances; and very far from following Pius II.
and changing Opinion as he did when he came to be Pope, he persisted in it so
constantly, that he thought fit, during his Pontificat, that a new Edition of
his Book should be printed at Rome, exactly conform to that which he published
when he was Doctor and Dean of Louvain, wherein that Passage is entire, without
the Omission or Alteration of one single Word.

The second is Paul IV. who before his promotion to the Papacy had been great
Inquisior, Relat. Joann. Hay. Paris. Theol. Addit. aux mem. de Casteluam. c. 2.
b. 6:
the most severe and zealous that ever was for the preservation of the purity
of the Catholic Faith against all Heresies. Number matrimonium per verba de
prasenti contractum, quod est verum matrimonium and verum sacramentum juxta
sanclorum Theolegorum sententiam, authoritate n^stra dissolvi possit, intelligo
cum carnalis nulla conjunctio intercessit.
This Pope, in the Year One thousand five hundred and fifty seven, held a great
Congregation of Cardinals, Bishops, and Doctors, at Rome, for the examining
that important question, Whether by the power of the Keys which Jesus Christ
had given him, as Successor to St. Peter, he could dissolve the Marriage which
the Marshall of Montmorency had contracted in formal terms de praesenti, with
the Lady de Piennes.

Having proposed the matter to them, by giving them to understand, that the
Question was about the deciding of a Point of very great Importance, concerning
a Sacrament, he declared to them, that he would not have them allege to him
the Examples of his Predecessors, Non dubito quin ego and decessores mei errare
aliquando potuerimus, non solum in koc, sed etiam in pluribus aliis rerum
generibus.
that he would not follow them, but in so far as they were conform to the
Authority of Holy Scripture, and solid Reasons of Divinity. For I make no
doubt, added he, but that my Predecessors and! may fail, not only in this, but
in many other things: Which he even proved by Testimonies of Scripture, which
teaches us, Nec rationem habere ullam exempli quod hic vel ille decessor meus,
etc.
that God permits that men should for a time be ignorant of that which
afterward he discovers to his Church. Perspicite an decessores nostri id satis
intellexerint quod de indissolubili matrimonii vinculo disquirimus.
Who knows then now, said he, but that God may manifest by our means, what
others have not known touching the indissolvable Bond of Marriage? Wherefore,
have no respect to Examples, and don't tell me what this man or that man of my
Predecessors have determined about this matter in a like Case Confider only
whether these Popes have understood rightly or not what they have decided
concerning this matter of Marriage which we examine.

There is a Pope, who doubtless will never be accused of having failed in
maintaining the pontifical Authority, that nevertheless frankly confesses, and
in very plain terms, that he and his Predecessors may have erred in Decisions
that they may have made concerning points relating to the Faith. So that from
all that I have hitherto said upon that Subject it may evidently be concluded,
That great Saints of the ancient Church, Bishops in all parts of Christendom,
in the East, in the West, and in Africa, full and general Councils, ancient
Popes who have either presided in or consented to these Councils; in a word,
that all Antiquity has believed, that the Pope deciding by his pontifical
Authority, without the consent of the Church, is not at all infallible.

CHAP. XVI. The state of the Question touching the Superiority of a Council
over the Pope, or of the Pope over a Council.
IF I proceeded in this Treatise by way of Discourse and Argument, I might soon
conclude, and not fear that any Objection could be brought against my
Conclusion: for if Antiquity has believed as I think I have demonstrated, that
the Pope is not Infallible, and that he may be deceived in his Decrees; it is
most evident, that it has also believed by necessary consequence, that the
Tribunal of the Universal Church, which without contradiction is infallible,
and represented by a general Council, is above that of the Pope. But because
for avoiding of Dispute, I only allege evident matters of Fact, against which
all the Arguments in the World can never prevail; for, in fine, can one by dint
of Argument make that which has been, never to have been? I shall only relate
what the Ancient Church has believed touching that famous Question. Seeing the
State of the Question ought plainly and without Ambiguity to be proposed, for
avoiding perplexity, to the end that people may at first agree about the thing
that is in question, and that it may not be said as it oftentimes happens after
much jangling and dispute without concluding any thing; that the thing was
understood in a quite different sense than it was proposed in: Take therefore
the state of the Question as follows.

It is enquired, Whether after that a Council is lawfully assembled, the Pope
who without contradiction is Head of it, presiding in it in person, or by his
Legates, or not being present nor presiding therein either the one way or
the other, as it has happened oftener than once, and is to be seen in the second
Ecumenical Council of an hundred and Ann. 381.
fifty Bishops, Ann. 553.
and in the fifth of above an hundred and sixty: Whether, I say, that Council
considered in its Membets united, either under the Pope who has Right to
preside in it, or failing of him, under another President, is above the Pope,
and has sovereign Authority over him, so that he is obliged to submit to its
Decrees and Definitions, to approve them and consent thereunto as all others
are, though he be in his own particular, of a contrary Judgment; or whether the
Pope is so above all the other Members of that Council united together, be he
there or not, that if he approve and confirm not by his Assent and Authority
the Decrees and Definitions thereof, That Council has no Authority, neither
over Him nor over Believers?

In this precisely consists that Question which has not been moved in the
Church, but since the Council of Pisa, some two hundred and forty Years ago.
Ann. 1409.
And the reason why it was never spoken of before, is, because it was not at
all doubted in the Ancient Church, but that a Council was above the Pope. I
shall make it out by matters of Fact, against which no Reply can be made.

CHAP. XVII. That it is the Holy Ghost, which in the Definitions of Faith
pronounces by the Mouth of the Council.
ANtiquity has always believed, as it is believed at this day, That the
Council held at Jerusalem concerning the Legal Observations, to which many
amongst the converted Jews pretended that all who embraced the Faith of the
Gospel were tied, has been a pattern to all Ecumenical Councils which have
been since celebrated in the Church for the supreme Decision of other points of
Controversy, which have often divided Christians in^o very different Opinions:
and when the matter in question had been well examined, the Decree that passed
in that Council proceeded from the Holy Ghost, which was uttered in these
Words, Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. It has ever since also been
believed, that when other Councils, after an exact Enquiry into the Truth,
defined what was to be believed, or what was to be done, it is the Holy Ghost
that speaks in their Decrees; and that it may truly be said, as it was said at
Jerusalem, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to this Assembly. This
has been expressed by St. Leo, in these terms, Sanctorum patrum canones
spiritu Dei conditi, and totius mundi reverentia consecrati. St. Leo Epist. 84.
ad Anast. Thessalonic.
which have been received with so much Applause in the whole Church, when he
says in one of his Epistles, That the Canons of the holy Fathers have been
made by the Spirit of God, and that they are consecrated by the Veneration of
the whole Earth.

Now it is certain, that St. Peter depended upon the Holy Ghost as well as St.
James, St. John, St. Paul, St. Barnaby, the Elders, and other Brethren who were
present in that Council; and if after that he compelled by his Example the
Christians to Judaise, as Cardinal Baronius has thought, he had been much more
to be blamed for having disobeyed the Holy Ghost and the Council, than when St.
Paul rebuked him openly before the Council; as I have made it clearly out by
the Testimony of the Fathers, and of Pope Pelagius II.

So that it ought to be concluded, that the Pope, who is no less inferior to
the Holy Ghost than St. Peter to whom he succeeds, is obliged to submit to his
Judgment against his own, to obey and consent to his Decisions, and
consequently to those of the Council, who neither speaks nor decides but with
the Holy Ghost, according to those high Words which contain all the Force,
Authority, and Soul of Ecumenical Councils; Visum est spiritui sancto and
nobis.

This is so true, that if after the great Council of Nice, for example, defined
by Plurality of Voices, that the Word is consubstantial to the Father, the Pope
St. Sylvester had not received that definition, and believed the
Consubstantiality of the Word, as the Arians did not, he would have been
reckoned an Heretic as well as they. And therefore he failed not to consent to
the Decrees of that Council, by approving and confirming them by his own
Assent, and by the Assent of the Bishops whom he had assembled at Rome upon
that occasion. I offer you, says he, in his Epistle to the Fathers of Nice, if
that Letter be true, as Cardinal Baronius thinks, I offer you my Hand, and that
of my Disciples, Meum chirographum and discipulorum meorum in vestro sancto
concilio quicquid constituistis una parem dare consensum. T. 1. Council.
for consenting with you to all that ye have determined in your holy Council.

And it is that precisely which in the Ancient Church is called the confirming
of a Council; to wit, to consent by Vote and an authentic Act to what has
been established in it. That appears evidently by the Letters of two great
Popes; St. Leo, and St. Martin. The Council of Chalcedon made Decrees
concerning the Faith, for condemning the Heresy of the Eutycheans, and the
Remains of that of the Nestorians, and by the eight and twentieth Canon
thereof, to honor the Imperial City, the second place among the Patriarchs was
given to the Patriarch of Constantinople: which is contrary to the Council of
Nice, that disposed of it otherways; and to which St. Leo also would never
condescend, what Instance soever the Fathers of Chalcedon made to him for it.

He was nevertheless apprehensive, that this might have a bad Effect, and that
because of that Refusal it might be thought in the World, that he would not
consent to the determinations of that Council which had so well asserted the
Faith, against the Heresy of Eutyches; therefore he wrote to them in these
terms: Ne per malignos interpretes dubitabile videatur utrum quae in Synodo
Chalcedonensi per unanimitatem vestram de fide statutae sunt approbem, haec ad
omnes fratres and Coepiscopos nostros scriptae direxi. -- Vt and fraternitas
vestra and omnium fidelium corda cognoscant, me non solum per fratres qui vicem
meam executi sunt, sed etiam per approbationem g^storum synodalium propriam
vobiscum iniisse sententiam in sola fidei causa, etc. St. Leo Ep. 61. Syn.
Chalced.
Lest by malign Interpreters of my Intentions it might seem doubtful whether or
not I approve what you have with unanimous Consent determined concerning the
Faith, in the Council of Calcedon; I write to all my Brethren and
Fellow-Bishops these Letters, which the most glorious Emperor, as he has
desired, will deliver unto you, to the end your Fraternity, and all Believers,
may know, that not only by the Approbation of my Legates, but also by my own, I
have joined my Judgment to yours, but only in those Points which concern the
Faith, for the sake of which this Universal Council has been celebrated by the
express Order of the Emperors, and the Consent of the Holy Apostolic See. You
see then, that to approve a Council, according to St. Leo, is to conform in
Judgment to that of the Fathers, and to consent to the Definitions that have
been made in it.

This is still more clearly apparent by the circulatory Letter which the Pope
St. Martin wrote to St. Amand Bishop of Vtrecht, and to all the Bishops of
France, sending them the Acts of the Council of an hundred and five Bishops
whom he had assembled at Rome against the Monothelites, Ann. 549.
and exhorting them to subscribe to them in a Council of the Gallican Church,
Secundum tenorem Enclyticae a nobis directae scripta una cum subscriptionibus
vestris nobismet destinanda concelebrent, confirmantes and consentientes iis
quae pro orthodoxa fide and destructione haereticorum vesaniae nuper exortae a
nobis statuta sunt. Mart. 1. Ep. ad Amand. Traject. ext. post Act. Council.
Later. sub Mart.
and to send them back to him with their Subscriptions, whereby we may see,
That they confirm and consent to all that has been defined in the Council of
Rome, for the Catholic Faith, and for overthrowing that furious Heresy which
of late has risen against the Church. He desires that the Bishops of France
may confirm the Decisions of Rome concerning a Point relating to Faith: it is
not, for all that, to be said, that the Gallican Church is superior to the
Roman; and there would be no reason to say so, because to confirm Definitions,
is nothing else, as St. Martin explains himself, but to consent unto them by
Vote and Suffrage.

So that every Bishop who subscribes to the Decrees of Council, approves and
confirms it in consenting to it by his handwriting; which perfectly agrees
with what St. Cyril of Alexandria wrote to the Bishop of Meteline, whom some
would have made believe, Ne credat hoc sanctitas tua: scripsit enim consona
sanctae Synodo omniaque nobiscum confirmavit and nobiscum sentit. Cyril. Alex.
Epist. ad Acacium Meliten. Episc.
that the Pope protected Nestorius: Believe it not, said he to him, for I
assure you, that the Pope has written to us conform to the Decisions of the
Council of Ephesus, that he has with us confirmed all the Acts, and that he
agrees with us in one and the same Judgment. This it is then which the Popes
themselves call confirming a Council: and it is never to be found in the
Ancient Church, that Councils, by their Synodal Letters directed to the Popes,
have demanded any other Confirmation of their Decrees relating to the Faith,
than their Consent and Approbation, which they were obliged to give. For, in
fine, if the Holy Ghost speaks by a Council lawfully called, when they
pronounce concerning a matter of Faith, and that they say, Visum est spiritui
sancto and nobis; the Pope must needs approve and obey what the Holy Ghost has
said. And if the Holy Ghost speak not by the Council until the Popes have given
their Approbation to it, then might they alone, by refusing that, have been the
cause, that the Holy Ghost, who is to teach us all Truth, might never have
instructed us, and that Arianism, and all other Heresies, had only been
tolerable Opinions; which, in my Judgment, no Man dares to say.

CHAP. XVIII. That Ancient Councils have examined the Judgments of Popes, that
they might pronounce the last and definitive Sentence upon them.
THough Councils have always had a great Respect for the Popes, and that in
great Controversies which have given occasion for calling them, for giving a
supreme Decision in controverted Points, they have many times pronounced
Sentences conform to those which the Popes had already past against one of the
two Parties; nevertheless they have examined them, to know whether they were
just or not: which makes it apparent, that they believed that they had a
Superiority over the Pope, altogether like to that which superior Judicatures
have over inferior. Take two famous Instances of this, which puts the Truth
thereof beyond all doubt.

Flavian, Patriarch of Constantinople, in his particular Council, condemned the
pernicious Doctrine of Eutyches, who acknowledged but one Nature in Jesus
Christ; and the great Pope St. Leo, by his Judgment, confirmed that of the
Patriarch, as appears by the Letters which he wrote unto him, wherein he
wonderfully well asserts the Catholic Belief concerning the Distinction of two
Natures, the divine and humane, in one only person, in Jesus Christ, against
the Error of that Arch-Heretick who confounded them. Dioscorus, Patriarch of
Alexandria, who openly declared himself the Protector of Eutyches, undertook
his Business, and prevailed so far by favor of Chrysaphius, who could do any
thing with his Master the Emperor Theodosius the younger, that this Prince
called the second Council of Ephesus, there to examine what had been determined
at Constantinople and Rome against Eutyches.

St. Leo, who approved not this Proceeding that looked like cabaling, Quia
etiam talium non est negligenda curatio, and pie ac religiose Christiamssimus
Imperator haberi voluit Episcopale concilium, ut pleniori Judicio omnis possit
error aboleri, fratres nostros, etc. qui vice mea Sincto conventui vestrae
fraternitatis intersint, and communi vobiscum sententia quae domino sunt
placitura constituant, hoc est, ut primitus pestifero errore damnato, etc.
at first withstood it, but consented thereunto at length for the sake of
Peace, hoping that all things would be carried in that Council according to
Canonical Forms, and that then the definitive Judgment that would be pronounced
there, would calm the Troubles of the Church. Whereupon, he sent his Legates
thither with Letters to the Patriarch Flavian and to the Council, wherein
having declared what he had done against the new Heresy of Eutyches, he adds,
that however, seeing all care is to be taken to reclaim those who were gone
astray, and that the Emperor had appointed a Council to be held for that
Effect, to the end that Error might entirely be abolished by a more ample
Judgment, he sends a Bishop, a Priest, and a Deacon, with an Apostolical
Natory, to assist thereat in his Name, and there to settle, by common Advice,
what was fit for the Service of God; that is to say, Si tamen sensus haereticos
-- plene aperteque propria voce and subscriptione damnaverit. St. Leo Ep. 15.
ad Ephesians. Syn.
that after so pernicious an Error should be condemned, they would take into
consideration the re-establishment of the Author of it, always provided that he
condemned his Heresy by Word and Writing.

This great Pope openly declares, That that Opinion of Eutyches is Heresy. Ep.
16. ad Flav.
Nay, he writes to Flavian, that it is so manifest, that there was no necessity
to assemble a Council for condemning it; and nevertheless, he is content that
one be held, to the end that Error may be entirely abolished by a more ample
Judgment.

But more still. For that second Council of Ephesus, by the Power of
Chrysaphius and Violence of Dioscorus, being become that infamous Den of
Thieves where all Order was over-turned, and Eutyches absolved; this holy Pope
who would have that Heresy thundered by a definitive Sentence, made continual
Instances to the Emperor Marcian and the Empress Pulcheria, after the Death of
Theodosius, for calling of a new Council, which was held at Chalcedon; where,
after Examination of the Doctrine of Eutyches, and the Letters of St. Leo, they
confirmed by their Sovereign Authority, and by a supreme Judgment, what the
holy Pope had pronounced against that Heresy.

And in that he gloried, when writing to Theodoret who had condemned in that
Council the Heresy of Nestorius whereof he was suspected, and that of
Eutyches, after he had congratulated with him in a most obliging manner, he
subjoyns upon his account these lovely Words: We glory in the Lord, Gloriamur
in Domino, -- qui nullum nos in nostris fratribus detrimentum sustinere
permisit, sed quae nostro prius ministerio definierat universo fraternitatis
firmavit assensu, ut vere a se prodiisse ostenderet, quod prius a prima omnium
sede formatum, to^ius orbis Judicium recepisset. St. Leo Ep. 63. ad Theodor.
who has not permitted that our Brethren should do any thing to our
Disadvantage; but on the contrary, has confirmed by the Assent of the whole
Council what had been before defined by our Ministry, to show that that
Judgment has truly proceeded from him; which being first rendered by the chief
of all Sees, has been received by the Judgment of the whole Church. Is not
that to say, that to know whether the Decisions of the Pope proceed from God or
not, they must be received by the whole Church, and that by consequent the
Council which represents it, and which gives them their full force by its
supreme Authority, is above the Pope?

This appears still more clearly by one other Instance, where it is to be seen,
that a General Council having examined a Judgment solemnly rendered by the
Pope, rescinds it, and passes a contrary Sentence. It is that which the fifth
Council pronounced against the three Chapters, and against the Constitution of
Pope Virgilius, whereby he had approved them, forbidding all men whosoever to
condemn them. I have already spoken of that Action which stands not in need
of any long discourse to set it off in its full Force and Vigor.

In this Council the Doctrine of the Three Chapters, and the Constitution of
the Pope who approves them, are examined. He is prayed to preside in that
Assembly, and in the Examination that is made there of these Writings. He
refuses, though he was then at Constantinople where the Council was held, and
with all his might still maintains those three Chapters; and nevertheless they
are condemned, and are to this day reckoned to have been very lawfully and
justly condemned: nay, he was afterward necessitated to submit to that Decree,
as I have already said upon the Credit of very good Vouchers; and if yet he did
not submit to it, it is still certain, that the Council examined his Judgment,
and rescinded it. After that, can it be doubted, but that the ancient Church
believed that a Council is superior to the Pope?

Let Us reflect a little upon what I said of the sixth Council, which condemned
the Heresy of the Monothelites. In it was examined what the Pope St. Martin
had decided concerning that Subject in his Council of the Bishops of Italy
celebrated at Rome, and what Pope Honorius had before him declared, in relation
to the same Controversy, in his Epistles to Sergius Patriarch of
Constantinople, one of the chief Authors of that Heresy. The Judgment of St.
Martin was approved in that Council; and that of Honorius so severely censured,
that the Pope was there anathematised. Whether these Letters were well or ill
understood, it makes nothing to our present purpose. The Council passes
Judgment upon him, and no body ever objected against it in Antiquity. This is
sufficient to conclude invincibly, that the Council is superior to the Pope.

But is there any thing more convincing and decisive for fixing of this Truth,
than what was done in the case of the Donatists, who by their Schism troubled
all the Church of Africa? Optat. Milevit l. 1. contr. Parmen. Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. l. 10. c. 5.
They applied themselves to the Emperor Constantine who was then in Gallia,
and desired of him Judges chosen from among the Bishops of the Gallican Church,
against Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, because they would shun the Judgment of
the Pope, whom they distrusted. August. Ep. 162. ad Gelor. and Eleus Ep. 165.
ad Generos. 166. ad Donatist. 167. and alib. saepe.
The Emperor nevertheless having protested that it belonged not to him to
meddle in Ecclesiastical matters, sent them back to the Pope, to whom, as Head
of the Church, it belongs to judge of greater Causes. Pope Miltiades took for
Assessors in this Judgment, fifteen Bishops of Italy, to whom he joined three
famous Bishops of the Gallican Church, Maternus of Cologne, Rheticius of Autun,
and Marinus of Arles, whom the Emperor had sent him to be of the number of the
Judges, that the Donatists might not have cause to say, that every thing had
been refused them. That Cause was solemnly judged in that Council of Rome.
Donatus, Head of the Schismatics, appeared there with ten Bishops of his
Party, and alleged all that he had to say against against Cecilian, who
appeared also, accompanied with ten other African Bishops, and defended his
Cause and that of the Church, so well against the Authors of that Schism, that
they were condemned.

They were very willing to be judged by this Council, imagining, as St. Austin
observes, Ep. 162.
that either they might gain their Cause by Artifices and Calumnies, or that if
they lost it, yet they might still maintain their Party, by complaining loudly
in all places, that the Pope and his Bishops, who were prejudiced against them,
had judged partially. The truth is, they did so, and pressed the Emperor so
hard to give them new Judges, and in greater number, that that good Prince,
overcome by their extreme Importunity, Orabida furoris audacia! Opt. loc. cit.
which he called extreme Fury, granted their desine: and seeing he passionately
desired to restore Peace to the Church, and utterly to abolish so fatal a
Schism, by a supreme Sentence that might for ever put an end to that great
Contest, he called the great Council of Arles, Apud Arelatum eandem causam
diligentius examinandam terruinandamque curasse. August. Ep. 162. Eusebius. l. 10.
c. 5. August. Ep. 167. ad Fest.
which St. Austin calls a full and universal Council, because as Eusebius
assures us, and after him that holy Doctor, there was there an infinite number
of Bishops of all the Provinces of the Empire, Ex omnibus mundi partibus, and
praecipue Gallicanis. Council. Arelat. 11.
Ganls.

The Legates of Pope Sylvester, with the eighteen Bishops who had been at the
Council of Rome were present there. The Cause of the Donatists was examined
there afresh, with the Judgment which Pope Melchiades, the Predecessor of St.
Sylvester, had given against them; and they were again condemned by a
definitive Sentence, and without appeal, in regard of the Ecclesiastical
Tribunal: for the Appeal which these Schismatics, who observed no measures,
brought to the Tribunal of Constantine, August. Ep. 162.
was most unjust, as was frankly acknowledged by that Emperor, who said that
if he at length took cognizance of that Cause, to stop the mouth of these
Heretics, and arrest the course of their Fury, he humbly begged pardon of the
Bishops, whose Authority, in what concerns the spiritual, he should invade.

Whereupon, St. Austin answering the Complaints that the Donatists of his time
always made of Pope Melchiades, Quae vox est omnium malorum litigatorum, cum
fuerint etiam manifestissima veritate superati. Ibid.
as their Ancestors had done, jeered them pleasantly, saying, that they acted
like bad Lawyers, who having lost their Cause blame their Judges, and complain
to all men, that they have been unjustly condemned, when they have even been
convicted by the most manifest discovery of the Truth. Ecce putemus illos
Episcopos qui Romae judicarunt non bonos Judices fuisse: restabat adhuc
plenarium Ecclesiae Vniversalis concilium, ubi etiam cumipsis judicibus causa
posset agitari, ut si male judicasse convicti essent, torum sententiae
solverentur. Ibid.
Then, to confound them, he adds these great Words, which plainly decides the
Question that we examine, and to which nothing can be replied: Suppose that the
Judges who condemned your Ancestors at Rome had judged amiss, was not there
still the full Council, where that Cause might be again examined with the same
Judges who had already judged it; that if it had been found that their Judgment
was not just, their Sentence might have been rescinded?

I freely confess, that I cannot see how it can be better made out that the
Pope's Tribunal is subject to that of a full and general Council, which may
confirm or rescind a Sentence past at Rome, as a supreme Court can confirm or
rescind the Judgment of an inferior. So when the same St. Austin says in
another place, speaking of the Pelagians, Jam enim do hac causa duo concilia
missa sunt ad sedem Apostolicam; inde etiam rescripta venerunt, causa finita
est. August. Sermon. 2. de Verb. Dom. c. 10.
We have Rescripts come from Rome, the Cause is ended; that is to be understood,
that it is ended at Rome, whither these Heretics after they had been condemned
in the Councils of Africa, appealed to the Pope, and thought to have gained
their Cause by their Artifice which had once succeeded with them. It was not
judged supremely but in the Council of Ephesus. We must then of necessity
conclude, that it cannot more clearly he seen than in those Instances which I
have now alleged of universal Councils which have judged the Sentences of
Popes, That it was believed in the ancient Church, before Saint Austin, and in
his Time, and after him, without the least doubting, that a general Council is
above the Pope. And that is the thing I was to prove.

CHAP. XIX. That the ancient Popes have always acknowledged, and protested,
that they were subject to Councils.
BUT that I may farther prove it upon as solid a ground, and which ought to be
the more plausible, and less to be rejected, because I shall produce, as
Evidences for this Truth, those who are most concerned in the Affair: I need
say no more, but that the ancient Popes, whom of late, in spite of themselves,
they would have elevated above Councils, do themselves protest, that they are
subject unto them, and that they ought to obey them in matters belonging to
Faith, the Regulation of Manners, the universal Good and general Discipline of
the Church.

Is there any thing clearer and more sincere as to that Subject, than the
Testimony of Pope Syricius, Successor to Damasus? The Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinian the younger, Ann. 390.
had called a great Council of the Eastern and Western Bishops at Capoua,
Ambros. Epist. ad Theoph. Alexand. Epist. Syricii ad Anys. Thessalon.
for quenching the Schism of Antioch, which after the Death of Meletius and
Paulinus still continued by the Election that the two different Parties of that
Church made of Flavian to succeed to Meletius, and of Evagrius Successor to
Paulinus. Seeing Flavian appeared not, the Council delegated Theophilus of
Alexandria to judge and determine that great difference with consent of the
Bishops of Egypt; and at the same time, since the Council was informed against
a Bishop of Macedonia called Bonosus accused of Heresy and Impiety against the
holy Virgin, who durst not appear; the Council committed the Trial of the Cause
to Anesius of Thessalonica, that he might determine it in a Synod which he
should hold with the Bishops of Macedonia and Illyrium.

These, whether to discharge themselves of the Judgment which they well foresaw
they must of necessity pass against one of their Brethren, Cum hujusmodi fuerit
Concilii Capuensis Judicium, ut finitimi Bonoso atque e^us accusatoribus
Judices tribuerentur, advertimus quod nobis Judicandi forma competere non
possit. Nam si integra esset body synodus recte de ii^ quae comprehendit
scriptorum vestrorum series decerneremus. Vestrum est igitur qui hoc recepistis
Judi^ium, sententiam far di o^nibus -- vicem enim Synodi recepistis quos ad
examinandum Synodus elegit. -- Primum est uti ii judicent quibus judicandi
faculias est data: vos enim totius ut scripsimus Synodi vice decernitis; nos
quasi ex Synodi authoritate judicare non convenit.
or out of the Veneration that they had for the Holy See, referred that
Judgment to Pope Syricius. But he wrote back to them, that if the Council had
determined nothing about the Cause of Bonosus, he would have pronounced a just
Judgment concerning what they had written to him of that Bishop; but that since
the Council had commissionated them to take Cognizance of that Cause by a
decisive Judgment with the Bishop of Thessalonica, he frankly confessed, that
he had no Power to judge of it. It is you, said he, who are to supply the place
of the Council in that Judgment, and who received the Power to determine it, to
whom it belongs to pronounce about that Affair, Epist. Syricii ad Anys. These.
in collect. Roman. bipertit. veter. monument. Romae, 1662.
seeing you represent the Council which has transferred its Authority upon
you, and not to me who have it not. There is a Pope of the fourth Age, who
ingenuously confesses, That the Delegates of the Council, much more the Council
it self, have greater Power than he has, and who by consequent acknowledges
that the Authority of Councils is above that of Popes.

Innocent I. who three Years after Syricius, was Pope, and who had observed his
Conduct in relation to the Council of Capoua, walked also according to the
Tradition of the Roman Church, Chrysostom. Ep. ad Innoc. 1. Ep. Inn. ad Jo. Chrysostom.
apud Sozom. l. 8. c. 26. Innoc. Episc. ad cleric. Constant. Pallad. dial. de
vit. Chrysostom. c. 2.
and the Example of his Predecessors, who never thought that their Power was
equal, and far less superior to that of a Council. For in the great
Persecution that Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria, raised against St. John
Chrysostom, who was condemned and deposed, in a Synod of Bishops of the Faction
of Theophilus, Theophili Judicium cassum and irritum ^sse decrevit, dicens
oport^re and conflare aliam i^rep^ehensi^ilem Synodum occi^entalium sac^rdotum
cedentib^s a^ci^is primun, d^inde inimicis; neutra^um quippe partiam ut
plurimum ^ectum esse Judicium. Pallad. lo^. cit.
and Enemies to that Saint; seeing the Pope and Western Bishops had been
written to on both sides, that holy Bishop did indeed rescind that Judgment
past contrary to all the Forms and Rules of Councils by incompetent Judges,
against an Absent who had judicially appealed to a lawful Council: but as to
the Substance of the Affair, and the Accusation in hand, he would never meddle
in it. He thought, that considering the Importance of the Affair, wherein the
Honor and Dignity of a Patriarch, whose Faith had always been so pure, and his
Learning and eminent Sanctity in so high a Veneration over all the Church, was
struck at, Quodnam remedium hisce rebus afferemus? necessaria erit Synodalis
cognitio.
nothing but an impartial Council, wherein the Friends and Enemies of neither
side should be present, could pronounce a definitive Sentence concerning the
matter.

Ea sola est quae hujusmodi procellarum impetus retardare potest. Innoc.
This he wrote to both Parties; and in the Letters which he directs to St.
Chrysostom to his Bishops and Clergy of Constantinople, he says positively,
that that Council, Cum opem ipse far non posset. Pallad.
even the same to which that holy Patriarch had appealed, was absolutely
necessary for determining that great Affair by a supreme Sentence; that there
was no other Remedy but that, for the Evils that afflicted them; that he could
not help them otherwise; Multum deliberamus quonam modo synodus Oecumenica
congregari possit, per quam etc. Expectemus igitur and vallo patientiae
communiti, etc.
that an Ecumenical Council alone could restore Peace to the Eastern Church,
and calm so furious a Tempest: and that in the mean time it behoved them to arm
themselves with Patience, and have recourse only to God, expecting till that
Council should be called, wherein he labored incessantly, searching out the
Measures that might be taken for having it called. Could that Pope express
himself in clearer terms, that a general Council has an higher power, and of
larger Extent than his own, and that by consequent it is above him?

However, if I mistake not, there is somewhat that strikes higher in what
Innocent III. one of his Successors, no less zealous than he was for the
Grandeur and Rights of the Holy See, wrote to Philip August. This Prince, who
had a great desire to have the Marriage which he had contracted with the Queen
Ingerbuge dissolved, instantly pressed the Pope to declare it null, that so he
might be free to marry another. That wise Pope writing back to the King,
protests before God, Innoc. III. in l. 3. Regest. 15. Ep. 104. ad Philip. Reg.
Franc. Non auderemus in hujusmodi casu de nostro sensu pro te aliquid definire.
that if he could in Conscience grant what he demanded, he would do it with all
his Heart; but, that tho he would stand by that which the Queen had answered
Cardinal Robert Cortzeon, in favor of the dissolution of that Marriage, who
had interrogated her judicially, yet he could not of himself determine any
thing about so important an Affair as that; and that, Si super hoc absque
deliberatione Concilii determinare aliquod tentaremus, praeter divinam offensam
and mundanam insamiam quam ex eo possumus incurrere, forsan ordinis and officii
nostri periculum immineret.
If he offered to do it without a Council, besides offending of God, and the
Disgrace that he should draw upon himself in the World, he might perhaps be in
danger of being deposed, and of losing his Pontifical Dignity. There was a
Pope, and one of the most learned that ever sat in St. Peter's Chair, who
twice, and in few Words, confesses with much Sincerity, that the Council is
above him: once, by saying, that he could determine nothing in that Affair
proposed to him, without the Definition of a Council; and then, if he offered
to do so, that he should run a hazard of being deposed from the Popedom. By
whom? Without doubt by a Power that was superior to his; which, as it is
evident, could be none other upon Earth but that of a Council.

Pope Agapetus, long before, said the same upon an occasion, where the Question
however was not about a matter of so great Importance as this, and of which, it
is fit, I should give my Reader an Account in few words. In one of the Councils
which Pope Symmachus held at Rome, there was a prohibition made, That no Pope,
for ever, should alienate the Goods of the Church, and especially of the Church
of Rome, which at that time were not Cities and Provinces, as they were after
the Donations of the Kings of France, but some Lands and Farms which it held of
the Bounty of Believers, besides the Oblations which in those days made up the
greatest part of it. I give you here the most considerable terms of the Decree,
which prohibits that Alienation. Ann. 500.
We ordain in the Presence of God, Mansuro cum Dei consideratione decreto
sancimus, ut nulli Apostolicae sedis praesuli a praesenti die, donec,
disponente domino Catholicae Fidei manserit doctrina salutaris, liceat praedium
rusticum, quantaecunque fuerit magnitudinis, vel exiguitatis, sub perpetua
alienatione vel commutatione, ad cujustibet jura transfer; nec cujusquam
excusentur necessitatis obtentu.
by this Decree, that from this present day, so long as the Doctrine of the
Faith continues in the World, by the Disposition of divine Providence, that it
be never lawful for any Pope to alienate any farm, great or small, nor to
transfer the same by way of Exchange to any whosoever, under pretext and excuse
of any necessity that may happen.

Now seeing about thirty six years after there was a Permission desired of Pope
St. Agapetus to alienate some of these Lands, Council. Romans sub Symmach. de bon.
Eccles. non alien. c. 4.
under a very specious pretext of relieving the poor, he made Answer, that the
venerable Constitutions of his Predecessors that had prohibited such kinds of
Alienations, tied him from granting it; that he thought they would not take it
ill that he did nothing contrary to those Decrees, whatever the occasion might
be, for any Respect in the World. Nor would I have you think, adds he in his
Epistles to Caesarius Bishop of Arles, Nec tenacitatis studio, aut saecularis
utilitatis causa hoc facere vos credatis, sed divini consideratione Judicii
necesse nobis est, quicquid sancta synodalis decrevit authoritas,
inviolabiliter custodire.
that I do so out of Covetousness or any temporal Interest. But, considering
the strict Account that I must give at the last Judgment, I think my self
obliged to observe inviolably what the holy Council has enjoined us. Yet, all
this while, this was but a National Council of Italy which had made that
Decree, to which Pope Agapetus says that he was obliged to submit: upon
stronger Reason, without doubt, would he have said the same, if it had been a
Decree of an Ecumenical Council.

There are a great many Popes who have expressed themselves as plainly as
these, that they were subject to a Council. I Will mention no more but one, who
delivers his Mind upon that Subject in such a manner, as no man is able to
reply to. And that is the famous Gerbert, Silvester II. who filled three Sees
successively of Reims, Ravenna; and lastly of Rome, and was a most Learned
Pope, whom I have characterized in some of my Histories. For that purpose, he
makes use of this passage in the Gospel, where our Savior says to his
Disciples, That if your Brother offend you, reprove him privately, and then in
presence of two or three Witnesses; and if he amend not, tell the Church of
him; and if he obey not the Church, let him be as a Publican and as a Heathen.
Defensor. p. c. c. 29.
The famous and learned Tostatus Bishop of Avila, employs that Passage to prove
that the supreme and highest Tribunal of the Church is that of a Council, to
which Jesus Christ referred all his Disciples, and by conquent St. Peter, who
is therefore subject to it as to his lawful Judge, from whom he is to expect
the Justice that he may demand against his Brother. Pope Silvester makes use of
it in another manner, but for the same end: for he pretends, what is true, that
these Words spoken to St. Peter by our Savior in relation to his Brethren,
were also spoken to the same Brethren in regard (...) St. Peter, as well as of
the rest. Whereupon that Pope writing to Seguinus Archbishop of Sens,
Constanter dico, quod si ipse Romanus Episcopus in fratrem peccaverit,
saepiusque admonitus Ecclesiam non audierit, hic, inquam, Romanus Episcopus
praecepto Dei est habendus sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus. Sylvest. 2. Epist. ad
Seguin. Senon.
has made no difficulty to express himself in these very pithy and significant
Words: I say it boldly, that if even the Bishop of Rome offend against you, and
that being often admonished he obey not the Church, that Bishop of Rome, I say,
ought to be looked upon by the Command of God himself, as a Publican and as a
Heathen. Could that Pope have expressed himself more clearly, That he thought
the Popes, for all they are Heads of the Church, are still subject to a Council
that represents it.

CHAP. XX. That the ancient Popes have believed, That they were subject to the
Canons.
IT is another invincible Argument that Antiquity has always been in that
Belief, that the ancient Popes have always protested in their true Epistles,
for I speak not of those which are supposititious, that they were obliged, in
the Exercise of their Power, and in the Government of the Church, to square
their Conduct according to the Canons and holy Decrees of Councils, against
which they could undertake nothing.

Is there any thing plainer as to that point, than what is to be seen in the
Epistle of Pope Gelasus to the Bishops of Dordany, Vniuscujusque Synodi
constitutum, quod universalis Ecclesiae probavit assensus, non aliquam magis
exequi sedem prae caeteris oportere quam primam.
That no man ought more exactly to execute what is ordained by the Universal
Council, than the Bishop of the chief See? In that of Celestin I. to the
Bishops of Illyrium; The Regulation of Councils must be our Rules and have
dominion over us, Dominentur nobis regulae, non regulis dominemur. ^imus
subjecti canonibus, dum canonum praecepta servam (...).
and not that we should raise our selves above these holy Rules, that we may
dispose of them at our Pleasure: let us submit our selves to the Canons by
observing what they enjoin. In what St. Leo wrote to Anatolius: Nimis haec
improba. nimis sunt prava quae sacratissimis canonibus inveniantur esse
contraria.
Whatsoever is contrary to the most holy Canons is too wicked and d praved to
be tolerated. In the Letter of Simplicius to the Patriarch Acacius: Per
universum mundum indissolubili observatione reti^etur, quod a sacerdotum
universitate est constitutum.
What is established by an Universal Council is retained throughout the whole
World by an inviolable Observation. In that of Pope St. Martin to J^hn Bishop
of Philadelphia: Defensores divinorum canonum and custodes sumus, non
Fravaricatores; quandoquidem Praevaricatoribus conjunctae sunt retributiones.
We are the Defenders and Guardians of the holy Canons, and not the
Prevaricators of them, for we know, that great Correction is reserved for those
that betray them.

St. Gregory the Great speaks with as much force as these* in an hundred places
of his Epistles; as when he says in the thirty seventh of his first Book: Absit
hoc a me, ^t statuta majorum in qualibet Ecclesia infringam.
Far be it from me, that I should infringe the Statutes of our Predecessors in
any Church whatsoever: And writing to John, Patriarch of Constantinople: Dum
concilia universali sunt consensu constituta, se and non illa destruit, quis
^uts praesumit aut solvere quos ligant, aut l^gare quos solvunt.
He that presumes to loose those whom General Councils have bound, or to bind
those whom they have loosed, destroys himself and not the Councils. He was so
well persuaded of his Duty, that obliged him to observe the Canons, that he
even thought, that that Obligation extended to matters which he found to be
established by an ancient Custom and Tradition in his Church.

For, the Empress Constantina having entreated him to send her either the Head
or some other considerable part of the Body of St. Paul, to be put in a Church
which she had built to the Memory of that great Apostle; that holy Pope wrote
back to her, Illa praecipitis, quae facere nec possum, nec audeo, etc. In
Romany vel totius occidentis partibus intolerabile est atque sacrilegium, si
sanclorum corpora tangere quisquam ^ortasse volucrit: quod si praesumpserit,
c^^ium est quia haec temeritas impunita nullo modo remanebit. lib. 3. Indic.
12. Ep. 30. ad Constant. Augus^am.


That he could have passionately desired, that her Serenity had commanded him
in any thing wherein he could have served and obeyed her; but as to what she
ordered him to do, he neither could nor durst do it, because, said he, it is at
Rome, nay in all the West, looked upon as unsupportable, and a great
Sacrilege, to touch the Bodies of the Saints; and if any one have the boldness
to attempt it, his rashness will never pass unpunished.

Perhaps if at Rome they had made any Reflection on this Epistle, when it was
resolved there to have an Arm of the Body of St. Francis Xavier, the Apostle of
the Indies, which was then to be seen at Goa in his stately Monument above
threescore years after his Death, as fresh and ruddy as when he was alive, they
would not have given Orders to have it cut off; and that if he who obeyed that
Command, had read that Letter, he would have answered with as much respect as
St. Gregory did, Nec possum, nec audio. For besides, that that Arm which is now
to be seen at Rome is all withered, and that since that time the holy Body is
not so fresh as it was before; they who were employed in that Office, and had
the boldness to lay hands upon that sacred Body, died within the Year. And I
have learned of a very honest Gentleman of Quality who lately returned from the
Indies, that those of Goa attribute to that Action all the Evils they have been
afflicted with since that time, and all the Losses which the Portuguese have
sustained in the East Indies.

Thus the holiest Popes, when they were desired any thing to the prejudice of
the Canons, or even of the ancient Customs, which pass for so many Laws, have
not scrupuled to confess, that their power extended not so far. For besides the
Instances that I have just now alleged, Ne in aliquo patrum terminos
praeterire videam^r, contra majorum statuta ag^re neq^ivi^us. Joan. VIII.
Epist. ad Carol. Reg.
John VIII. speaks in the same manner to one of the Kings of France: We could
not act against the Decrees of our Predecessors, lest it should seem that we
transgress the Bounds set to us by our Fathers. Contra Deum and sacr^rum
c^nonum sancti^es nulli omni^o petitioni possumus praeber^ cons^^sum.
And Eugenius III. to the Bishops of Germany; We can grant no Demand against
God, and against the Decrees of the sacred Canons. The meaning of that is, that
as the Pope can grant nothing against the Service of God, because he is
inferior to God, so neither can he grant any thing against the Canons of
Ecumenical Councils, because he is under them.

In fine, that we may not allege an infinite number of other Testimonies,
which may be seen in the true Epistles of the Popes, since Syricius, I shall
conclude with that of Silvester II. to the Archbishop of Sens, Sit lex communis
E^^^^sie Catholinae, Evan^^lium, Apos^oli, Prophet^, Canones spir^tu D^i
condati, (...) totius mundi reverentia cons^^erati, and decret^ se^as
Apostolicae oh his non dis^o^dantia. Epist. ad Seguin. Arch. Senon.
wherein he says, This is the Law according to which the Catholic Church is to
be governed, The Gospel, the Writings of the Apostles and Prophets, the Canons
which the Spirit of God has made, and which are consecrated by the Veneration
of all the World, and the Decrees of the Apostolic See which are not contrary
to these Canons. Ex Art. Concilii Florent. e Sesi. 25. Antiq. E^ition. cum
a^^rob. Clement. VII.
And that is the very same that was defined in the Council of Florence after
long debate betwixt the Latins and Greeks, concerning the primacy and power of
the Pope in the Universal Church.

It was agreed upon on both sides, That the Pope, as Successor of St. Peter,
was Head of the Church, the Father and Teacher of all Believers, who had
received from Jesus Christ, in the person of St. Peter, full power to govern
the Church. The difficulty only rested in expressing the manner how he might
and ought to govern it. The Latins would have the Definition run thus, That he
had above all others the privilege and full power of governing the whole
Church according to the Sayings and Sentences of the holy Fathers, Juxta
determinationem sacrae Scripturae, and dicta sanctorum. The Emperor John
Paleologue and Greek Prelates, An siquis, inquit, sanctorum in Epistola honoret
Papam, accipiet hoc pro Privilegio?
vigorously opposed that Clause, and dicta sanctorum. How, said he, if any of
the Holy Fathers, writing to the Pope, says to him what he thinks fit, for
rendering him greater Respect and more Honor; shall the Pope take these
Expressions of Complement and Civility for Privileges that belong to him?
Besides, in the draught of the Bull of Union of the two Churches, the Pope
having only put his own name, Eugenius Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God,
as if he alone had made these Decrees: the Emperor and the Greeks would by all
means have that amended, and that there should no mention be made of the Pope
in it, unless the other Patriarchs were also named.

At length, after that these two considerable Clauses had been well examin^d,
the Union was made in the manner that the Greeks desired it, to which the
Latins agreed. Then the Bull was framed, which began thus; Eugenius, Servant of
the Servants of God, etc. Our death beloved Son John Paleologue illustrious
Emperor of the Romans, those who hold the place of our venerabl^ Brethren the
Patriarchs, and all the rest who represent the Eastern Church consenting to all
the Decrees which an^ in this Bull, etc. And then amongst other Articles it was
defined, (...), etc. (...) m^d^m qui and in ^^^ti^ conci^i^^^, and in canonibus
con^^^.
That Jesus Christ has given to the ^ope in the person of St. Peter, full
power to govern the Universal Church in the manner as is contained both in the
Acts of Ecumenical Councils, and in the sacred Canons, and not according to
the false Translation, Quemadmodum etiam and in gestis Conciliorum, etc. as if
it were said, that the Canons of Councils attribute also to the Pope, the power
of governing the Universal Church. It is a quite contrary Sense to the Words of
the Council, which says only, that the Pope has received from Jesus Christ the
power of governing the Church in the manner as is prescribed to him by the
Canons, Juxta eum modum qui and in gestis Conciliorum, and in Canonibus
continetur. Which comprehends all, because it is supposed, as it is very true,
that the Canons of Ecumenical Councils are conform to holy Scripture,
Tradition, and the true Sayings of the holy Fathers, from whom we derive our
Tradition.

From those two Clauses of the Bull wherein both the Eastern and Western
Churches, after they had well examined them, agreed, two things may be
unquestionably concluded: the one, that the Pope can determine nothing in his
Constitutions of infallible Authority, without the Consent of the Church; and
the other, that the Exercise of his power which is not infinite and unlimited,
ought to be moderated according to the Rules prescribed to him by the Canons of
the Councils, to which all Believers are subject. What the Popes have over
others, is the Care they ought to take to see them observed, not only by their
Authority, but by their Example, which is of greater force and efficacy than
their Ordinances; and if they themselves violate them acting arbitrarily as
they please, without regard to the Canons which ought to be their measures, or
suffer them to be violated by others without punishment, they become culpable
before God, who has made them not the Masters, but the Stewards of the Church,
to act according to her Orders, and cause them to be obeyed. This the great St.
Leo expressed admirably well in those rare words which he wrote to the Emperor
Martian: With the Assistance of Jesus Christ I must constantly continue my
Service, In quo opere auxiliante Christo, fideliter exequendo, necesse est me
perseverantem exhibere famulatum, quoniam dispensatio mihi credita est, and ad
meum reatum tendit, si paternarum regulae sanctionum quae in Synodo Nicena ad
totius Ecclesiae regimen spiritu Dei instruente sunt conditae, me, quod absit,
connivente, violentur. Ep. 54. ad Martian. Dum tamen evidens utilitas vel
necessuas id expo^cunt. Greg. IX.

In talibus eadem utilitas and urgens necessitas secundum instituta canonum
debet attendi. Innoc. III. Ep. ad Episc. Favent.


in faithfully executing what I am commanded, because he has trusted me with
the Care and Dispensation of his House; and I make my self guilty of great
Unfaithfulness, if by my Connivance, which God preserve me from, I suffer the
Rules and Canons to be violated, which have been made, by the Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, in the Council of Nice, for the Government of the whole Church.

Not but that the Pope, who ought to take the care of the general Good of the
Church, may, on certain Occasions, dispense with the Canons: but in that thing
it self he is subject to the Canons, seeing he cannot dispense with them as he
pleases, and without any other reason save that of his Will, but only in Cases
prescribed by the Canons, when urgent necessity, Vbi necessitas non est,
inconvertibilia maneant sanctorum patrum instit^ta. Gelas. Vbi necessitas non
est nullo modo violentur sanctorum patrum constituta. St. Leo.
or manifest advantage, makes it appear according to the Canons that the Church
intended not to oblige to them. Except in such cases, the ancient Popes say
openly, that the Canons and holy Decrees must be inviolably kept, and that they
cannot dispense with them.

Whereupon St. Bernard writing to a Pope, Quid? Prohibes dispensare? non sed
dissipare, etc. ubi necessilas urget excu abilis di^pensatio est; ubi utilitas
prov^cat, dispensatio laudabil^s est, utilitas dico con munu, non propria: nam
cum borum nih l^. est, non plane fide^is d^^she^satio est, sed c^^eussima
dissipation. Bern. de cons. ad Eugen. l. 3. c. 6.
told him with a great deal of holy liberty, that he forbids not to dispense,
but to dissipate; that he knows very well that the Popes are the Stewards of
the house of God, but for Edification and not for Destruction, and that the
Steward ought to be faithful: when Necessity urges, Dispensation is excusable;
and laudable when Advantage, not of a private person, but of the public,
requires it; and when neither appear in that which is defired, then what is
granted is no more a faithful Dispensation, but a most cruel Dissipation. And
this, as a learned Pope teaches, Hadrian. V. de dispens. Apostolic.
renders both him that obtains that Dispensation, and him that grants it,
criminal in the sight of God, unless he that grants it has been, without his
Fault, imposed upon by a false Information, as many times it happens. The power
then of dispensing exempts not Popes, according to the Ancients, from the
Obedience which they owe to the Decrees of Councils; and when they do
otherwise, and act in their Constitutions contrary to the Canons, that is not a
lawful practice, but an abusing of their power, and an abuse that draws many
others after it.

Pri^cipium maiorum inde fuisse quod nonnulli pontisices coacervaverant sibi
magistros and prurientes auribus -- ut eorum studio and calliditate inveniretur
ratio qua liceret id quod liberet -- pontificem esse dominum beneficiorum
onni^n^ -- Ita quod voluntas pontificis qualiscunque ea faerit, sit reg^la qua
ejus operationes and actiones dirigantur, etc.
This that great Assembly of Cardinals and Prelates picked out of the best and
ablest men of the Court of Rome, which Paul III. called in the Year One
thousand five hundred and thirty eight, to search for means of remedying the
Troubles of the Church, represented to him with much Vigor and Respect, when
they told him that the source of so many Disorders was the Flattery of some new
Doctors, who strained their false Subtilties to make his Predecessors believe,
that they were the absolute Masters of all in the Church, that they were above
all Canons, and that there was no other Law for them, but their own Will and
Pleasure.

So that when it happened that some Popes manifestly abusing their power,
transgressed the limits set them by the Canons, Appeals were made to the next
Ecumenical Council; Ann. 1303.
as was done upon account of the Bull of Boniface VIII. who pretended to a
Sovereign power over all the Crowns upon Earth; as the University of Paris, in
the Year 1491, appealed to a Pope better informed, and to the first general
Council, concerning certain exactions and gatherings of Tenths, which were
attempted against the Canons and Liberties of the Gallican Church; and as has
been done oftener than once in Germany upon the like Occasions.

But seeing that Remedy is tedious, and that it may be abused by Appeals very
ill brought, which, seeing they could not be judged in an whole Age, would
render the pontifical Authority useless in the smallest matters, which Pius II.
and Julius II. have most justly condemned; instead thereof, we have in France
an Appeal as of Abuse, to the^^ arliament, which (representing the King sitting
in his Chair of Justice, to whom, as protector of the Canons, it belongs to
hinder any thing from being acted contrary to them) has Right to judge whether
there be any matter, in the Bulls, Ordinances, and Ecclesiastical Sentences,
which wound the Canons and our Liberties.

For in this chiefly consist the Liberties of the Kingdom and Gallican Church,
that no new thing can be commanded or enjoined us contrary to the holy Decrees
of the Councils received in France, and against the ancient Law, in the
possession whereof we have always maintained our selves, without submitting to
any other Laws, unless we our selves consent to them; so that whatever
derogates from these ancient Constitutions which are our inviolable Laws, is by
Decree rescinded. And this seems to be grounded upon that excellent Sentiment
of Innocent III. a great Pope, great Canonist, and great Lawyer, who speaks
like a Pope, when he says, Quae in derogationem sanctorum canonum attentantur,
tanto potius infringi volumus, and carere robore firmitatis; quanto authoritas
universalis Ecclesiae, cui praesidemus, ad id nos provocat and inducit. Innoc.
III. l. 1. Ep. ad Episc. Favent.
We will that all that is undertaken and attempted against the holy Canons, be
void and null; and we will it so much the rather, that the Authority of the
holy Church wherein we preside moves and inclines us to it. As if by that he
would tell us, that the Authority of the Church depends upon the Observation of
her Canons and Laws, and not on the Liberty that a Pope might take to violate
them.

From all that I have said in this Chapter, this truth of Fact results, That
all Antiquity has believed, that Popes being subject to the Decrees of
Councils, and obliged to act and govern according to the Laws that are
prescribed to them by the Canons, Councils by consequent are above the Popes.

CHAP. XXI. What General Councils have decided as to that Point.
SEeing that Question was not moved in the Ancient Church, when all were of the
Opinion that I have now mentioned: Councils that decide nothing but upon
occasion of Differences and Disputes which arise amongst Christians about some
certain point of Doctrine, have given no definitive Sentence as to that
particular, till it was begun to be questioned and disputed about. Council.
Pisan. t. 11. Edit. Paris Act. conc. ex codic. Gemmetic. t 6. Spirit. Monach.
Dionys. 1.29. l. 1. and sequen, Niem. l. 23. Platina. Ciacconius.
And this I think happened upon occasion of the Council of Pisa, which the
Cardinals of both obediences, that is, of Gregory XII. and Benet XIII. with
consent of almost all Kings and Sovereigns, called for extinguishing that
Schism; which these two Competitors and pretended Popes entertained by their
Collusion and Obstinacy, contrary to the express Promise they had made of
resigning up their Pretensions.

For seeing some who stood for Gregory, Ann. 1409.
protested against the Council which, as they said, had no Authority over the
Popes, such an unprecedented protestation in the Church being exploded, the
famous Doctor Peter Plaoust, one of the Deputies from the University of Paris,
which at that time was in the Meridian of its Reputation, made a long and
learned Speech in full Council, 29 May.
wherein he proved by many Reasons, that the Universal Church, and by
consequent a General Council which represents her, is above the Pope; adding,
that that was the Judgment of the University of Paris, and of all the other
Universities of France.

No sooner was he come down from the Pulpit, but that the Bishop of Novare
stepped up, and read aloud a Writing, which declared, that an hundred and three
Doctors and Licentiates of Divinity, deputed by the Universities to that
Council, being assembled by order of the Cardinals to consult about that
matter, were all unanimously of the Judgment of the University of Paris; and he
affirmed, that besides the Universities of France, it was also the Judgment of
the famous University of Bologna, 1 June.
from which they had Letters, and of that of Florence, who had given it in
writing under the Hands of sixscore Doctors.

Six days after, the Process that was brought against Gregory and Benet having
been proved and made out in a judicial manner, the Council past a definitive
Sentence, whereby it declares, Pietro de la Luna and Angelo Corario heretofore
called Popes, Benet XIII. and Gregory XII. obstinate Schismatics and
Heretics, convicted of enormous Crimes, of Perjury, Impiety, and of Collusion,
to deceive Believers, and to keep up the Schism which so long had rent the
Church, and as such, deposes them from the Papacy. This the Council did
pursuant to the Decree, whereby it had before determined, that that Council
represented the Church universal, and that it was the only supreme Judge upon
Earth to whom the Judgment of that Cause belonged, though it was most certain,
that one of these two Pretenders was the true Pope.

After wards they chose Alexander V. who was acknowledged by the Universal
Church, except those two wretched Remains of Obedience, who held out still for
the two Antipopes; and that Pope approved all the Decrees of the Council, even
a moment before his Death, which was most holy and precious in the sight of
God. I have heretofore proved, according to the Judgment of almost all the
Churches of Christendom, of that of Rome in particular, nay and of the
Universal Church represented by the Council of Constance, which was but a
continuation of this, that it ought to be reckoned, without contradiction,
lawful. But, since on the one hand, it has pleased some Doctors beyond the
Alps to doubt of it, and that on the other, I decline all dispute in this
Treatise, I will only stick to matter of Fact, which cannot be contested; to
wit, that this Council of Pisa has been one of the greatest Assemblies that
was ever seen in the Church.

For there were in it five and twenty Cardinals, four Patriarchs, six and
twenty Archbishops, an hundred fourscore and two Bishops either in person or by
Proxy, two hundred fourscore and ten Abbots, amongst whom were all the Heads of
the Orders, the Generals of the Carthusians and of the four Mendicant Orders,
the great Masters of Rhodes, of the Holy Sepulcher and the Teutonick Knights,
the Deputies of the Universities of Paris, Toulouse, Orleans, Angers,
Montpellier, Bologna, Florence, Cracovia, Vienna, Prague, Cologne, Oxford and
Cambridge, and of some others, and those of the Chapters of above an hundred
Metropolitan and Cathedral Churches, above three hundred Doctors of Divinity
and of the Law, the Ambassadors of the Kings of France, England, Poland,
Bohemia, Sicily, and Cyprus, of the Dukes of Burgundy and Lorrain, Brabant,
Bavaria, of the Marquess of Brandenburg, Lantgrave of Thuringe, and of almost
all the other Princes of Germany; besides that the Kings of Hungary, Sweden,
Denmark, Norway, and, in a word, those of Spain, except Arragon, shortly after
adhered to that Council; and by consequent, all these Prelates, all these
Doctors, all these Orders, all these Universities, all these Kingdoms, all
these States, that is to say, in a word, almost all Christians, in the beginning
of the fifteenth Century, when that Dispute was started concerning the
Superiority of the Council or of the Pope, believed, conform to the Belief of
Antiquity, That a Council is above the Pope.

But you are to take notice of somewhat more particular and convincing still.
When five years after, the Council of Constance was opened, for continuing that
of Pisa, as it had been decreed in that Council, which was rather interrupted
than concluded, the Dispute concerning the Superiority of the Pope or of the
Council, was started again with greater Heat than before, For some Cardinals
being arrived from Scaffhausen, whither the Pope who had escaped from Constance
had retired, attempted in full Assembly where Sigismund the Emperor was
present, to prove that the Council was dissolved, because John XXIII. who had
abandoned it, being owned for true Pope by all that were present, was above the
Council which could have no Authority without him.

Then was there a general murmuring in the Assembly, and many of those who had
greatest Authority and Reputation by reason of their Dignity and Knowledge, Et
iis responsum fuit alacriter per plures de ipso concilio viros magnae
authoritatis and scientificos, scilicet quod Papa non esset supra Concilium,
sed sub concilio, and facta est illie contentio magna hinc inde. Niem. in vit.
Joann. J. Gers. Sermon. coram Council.
undertook to refute them, and to prove on the contrary, That the Council was
superior to the Pope, conform to the Sermon that the famous John Gerson had
made to the Council a few days before, wherein he had made it out in twelve
propositions, That a general Council representing the Universal Church, is
above the Pope, not only in the doubt whether or not he be true Pope, but also
in the Assurance that is to be had, whether he be lawfully chosen or not, Etiam
rite electi.
as they did undoubtedly hold John XXIII. to have been.

Wherefore that Question, both before and after the Sermon of Gerson, having
been examined in the Conferences of Nations, according to the Order appointed
by the Council, a Report of it was made in the fourth Session, Act. Council.
Constan. t. 12. con. Ed. Paris. Anton. tit. 22. c. 6.. 2.
where nine Cardinals and two hundred Bishops were present with the Emperor
Sigismund, the Ambassadors of the Kings of France, England, Poland, Norway,
Cyprus, Navarr, and many Princes of Germany; and there, seeing it had been
already declared in the preceding Session, that the Council subsisted, and
still retained all its Force and Authority, tho the Pope had withdrawn himself,
it was by common Consent thus concluded and defined; That the Holy Council
lawfully assembled, and representing the Church Militant, has received
immediately from Jesus Christ a Power which all and every one, even the Pope
himself, are obliged to obey, in all that concerns the Faith, the extirpation
of Schism, and the general Reformation of the Church of God, in its Head and
Members.

And to the end that it might not be said what some have said since without
having carefully read the Council of Constance, that that is only to be
understood during the time of a Schism, it is added to the Decree in the
following Session, That whatever Pope refuses to obey the Decrees not only of
this Council, but also of any other that shall be lawfully called, ought to be
punished if he amend not.

The Council afterward exercises its sovereign Authority over Pope John XXIII.
acknowledged by them for true Pope, by the Church of Rome, and by all Christian
People, except a very few who still adhered to the Schismatics. Martin V. who
was chosen Pope in place of John XXIII. in the forty fifth Session, approved
the Decrees which had solemnly been made in that Council, and protested that he
would observe them inviolably. In fine, in the Bull wherein he enjoins what is
to be asked of Heretics who return from their Heresy, amongst others this
Article is put: Whether they believe not that all Believers ought to approve
and hold what the holy Council of Constance, representing the Universal Church,
holds and approves for the Integrity of the Faith and the Salvation of Souls;
and whether they condemn not and repute not condemned, what the same holy
Council has condemned and condemns as contrary to the Faith and good Manners.
This, without doubt, is one of the most authentic Approbations that a Pope can
give to a Council.

Now seeing, in compliance with a Decree of this Council, the Pope had called
another at Pavia, afterward at Sienna, and lastly at Basil, where it was held
fourteen Years after that of Constance, under Eugenius IV. who caused the
Cardinal Julian of St. Angelo, named by his Predecessor for that Function, to
preside in it in his place, that Council in the second Session, when without
contradiction it was very lawful, the Pope presiding therein by his Legate,
renewed those two Decrees, and defined the same thing in the same terms,
touching the Superiority of General Councils, to which Popes were obliged to
submit, in matters concerning the Faith, the extinction of Schism, and the
Reformation of the Church in its Head and Members.

This was not all: for sometime after, Eugenius having sent the Archbishops of
Colossis and Taranto to the Council, to represent the Reasons and Authority
that he had to dissolve it, and to transfer it to another place: The Fathers,
in a general Assembly, made a Synodal. Respons. Synod. Sess. 6.
Answer by way of Constitution, containing more than twenty four large Pages;
wherein having refuted all the Reasons whereby one of these Archbishops would
have proved the Superiority of the Pope over a Council, September. 1432.
they, on the contrary, evince by many Reasons, and by the Authority of the
Council of Constance, and of the Gospel which remits St. Peter to the Church,
that the Council which represents her has all her Authority; and again define
once more, that the Council is above the Pope

However, Eugenius dissolved it contrary to the Advice of Cardinal Julian who
presided therein. But when he perceived that that began to produce very bad
Effects, Ann. 1433.
he made the Year following a new Constitution, whereby annulling and
rescinding all that he had done for dissolving it, Illas and alias quascunque
and quicquid per nos aut nestro nomine in praejudicium and der^gationem sacri
Concilii B siliensis, seu contra ejus authoritatem factum, attentatum seu
assertum est, cassamus, revocamus, nullas and irritas esse declaramus.
that that Council had lawfully continued till then from the Beginning, and
approves whatever had been done in it, even so far, as to declare null certain
Constitutions, in one whereof he declared, that in matters belonging to the
Government of the Church, he had power over all Councils. And that was so
authentic and solemn, that Pius II. even in the Bull of his Retractation,
ingenuously confess, that Pope Eugenius consented to the Decrees of that
Council, Accessit and i^sias E^g^nit consen^us, qui dissolutionem Con^^^ii a se
sactam revocavit, and progressam e^^e approbavit.
approved its progress and continuation, and recalled the Bull whereby he had
dissolved it.

There are two Councils then without speaking of that of Pisa, whereof the
Council of Constance was a continuation, and two Councils in formal terms
approved by two Popes, Martin V. and Eugenius IV. and these Councils determine,
the one during the Schism, and the other after the Schism was extinct, that
every Council representing the Universal Church, is superior to the Pope. Now
all the Doctors of that party which hold for the Pope's Superiority,
acknowledge that a Council universal and approved, cannot err in its Decisions;
whence it may easily be concluded, that since the Decrees of these Councils,
one is obliged to believe what all Antiquity before these Councils believed,
that is, that an Ecumenical Council lawfully assembled, is above the Pope. I
don't see how one can avoid this, without finding ways to invalidate the
Authority of the Councils, and particularly of that of Constance, which is held
for the sixteenth General Council. And this a modern Author has attempted to
do in a Book written on purpose, and last Year printed at Antwerp by John
Baptista Verdussen. We are now to see how he has succeeded in it.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Writing of the Sieur Emmanuel Schelstrate against these two
Decrees of the Council of Constance.
THree years since, Ann. 1682. Cleri Gallicani de Ecclesiastica potestate
declaratio.
the Clergy of France representing the Gallican Church, being by Order of the
King assembled at Paris, made an authentic Declaration in four Articles, of
what they believe and define concerning Ecclesiastical Power, conform to the
Holy Scriptures, Tradition, and the practice of the whole Church, and
particularly of that of France. Amongst other things, they declare in the
second Article, That the Popes, Successors of St. Peter, have in such manner
full power over the spiritual, That the Decrees of the holy Council of
Constance, approved by the Holy Apostolic See, and contained in the fourth and
fifth Session, concerning the Authority of General Councils, must also remain
in their full force, and not at all be infringed. And they add, That the
Gallican Church approves not the Opinion of those who would weaken these
Decrees, and rob them of all their force, saying that their Authority may be
called in question; that they are not sufficiently approved, or that they
extend not beyond the time when there is a Schism in the Church.

Doubtless there is nothing more authoritative, (and at the same time more
modest) than that Declaration of a Church so venerable in all Ages as the
Gallican has been, and which, next to that of the Apostles, has always
maintained, and made the Catholic Faith to flourish in France in its full
Integrity, without having been ever suspected of the least Error. Nevertheless,
there is a late Writer, to wit, the Sieur Emmanuel Schelstrate, Canon of
Antwerp, and Under-Library-keeper of the Vatican, who, as he declares at first
in the Scheme of his Dissertation, undertakes to overthrow all that the Clergy
of France has asserted concerning these Decrees, and to show in three
Chapters; first, that one may and ought rationally to doubt of their Authority;
secondly, that it is only to be understood during the time of a Schism, and in
regard of controverted Popes; and lastly, that they are so far from being
approved, that they have been manifestly rejected by an express Bull.

Now seeing the authentic Acts which we have of the Councils of Constance and
Basil are in the hands of every Body, and owned for true for above two hundred
and threescore Years, and no man ever dreamed to call them into question: he
has bethought himself of disputing us that lawful and peaceable possession,
authorized by the long Prescription of almost three hundred Years. And this he
pretends to do, by opposing to us certain old Manuscripts that he has raised
out of the Grave, which contain the Register and Acts of the Council of
Constance, which had never been seen, as they are there, and which God, by a
singular Providence, as he says, has suffered to be found almost at the same
time when the Gallican Church made her Declaration; as if he would afford means
of confounding it at the very Instant that it was published.

This, without doubt, is an Undertaking magnificently projected. But what is it
founded upon? Upon the most ruinous Foundation in the World, and which I might
easily overturn, and by consequent all the Superstructure, by saying in one
word, which is most true, that the pretended good Manuscripts that he produces
against us, after a Possession of two hundred threescore and ten Years, are not
more to be received, and are not near so good, as those from which the Decrees
that we have of the Council of Constance have been taken. Should I answer him
in this manner, it would lie at his door to prove that his Manuscripts are
better than ours, which he will never be able to do, as we shall presently see.
But to do him a favor, I am content not to handle them according to Rigor,
only will clearly and calmly make it out to him, with all the respect that is
due to his Character, that the Consequences which he draws from what he finds
there are false; and that after his way of arguing, all Ecumenical Councils
might be stripped of the Authority which they ought to have, and which they have
had in the Church to this present.

CHAP. XXIII. A Refutation of the first Chapter of the Dissertation of M.
Schelstrate.
THIS Author undertakes to prove in this Chapter against the Gallican Church,
That the Decrees of the fourth and fifth Session of the Council of Constance
are of dubious Authority; first, because the Decree of the fourth Session has
been corrupted by the Fathers of the Council of B^sil, who in the Extract that
they caused to be made in the Year 1442. of the Decrees of the Council of
Constance, omitted in the first Decree the words ad fidem, and added thereunto
these words; Et ad reformationem generalem Ecclesiae Dei in capite and in
membris: That all men, even the Pope, are obliged to obey that Council, in what
concerns the Reformation of the Church in its Head and Members. As to the
Omission of the word ad fidem, he is so favorable as to excuse it, for it
appears only to have been done by the fault of the Transcriber, because that
word is generally to be found every where, and indeed ought to be there. As to
the words which he pretends have been added, he confesses that they are in all
the Editions of the Councils that have been hitherto made; because, as he says,
they have all followed the first that was made in the Year One thousand four
hundred fourscore and nineteen, at Haguenau, from a Copy of that Extract of the
Fathers of Basil: but he pretends that it is not lawful, and that those Fathers
have added these Words; upon no other proof, but that they are not to be found
in the ancient Manuscripts which he has seen.

Well, must it be allowed then upon a proof of this Nature, and a bare negative
Argument which does not conclude, to accuse a whole Assembly of Prelates of an
Imposture, in which a Cardinal presided, a man of a very austere Virtue, whom
Pope Clement VII. has canonized? Let him be accused of Head-strongness, and of
abounding in his own Sense, in what he thought to be just; I consent to that,
there was his weak side: but that he should be taken for an Impostor and a
Falsary, and be treated so, upon so bare a conjecture, is a thing that honest
men can hardly suffer.

The Manuscripts which M. Schelstrate has seen contain not these last Words of
the Decree: be it so, we take it upon his Word, reckon him an honest man, and
shall never accuse him of having imposed upon us, but only of having reasoned
ill, in concluding from thence, that the Fathers of Basil have falsified that
Decree: for who has told him that the Manuscript from which the Fathers of
Basil made their Extract, contained not these words? Why does he, without being
well assured of it, accuse them of Imposture? Don't we daily see, that there is
difference amongst several manuscript Copies of one and the same work, that
there is to be found in one what has been omitted in another, and that
therefore ancient Editions are corrected? Witness that true and famous History
of St. Austin, which the Fathers of Saint German des Prez cause to be made from
a great many Manuscripts, the differences whereof they mark, and from some of
which they take what they add to the ancient Editions which want certain words
that are not to be found in the Copies from which they have been printed. Ought
he not to presume that that Copy of Basil has been taken from a Manuscript
that had these last Words, which he has not found in his own, that ought to be
reckoned defective?

And to prove to him that they are so, I declare, that those which I have seen,
and which are very ancient, have the same Words at the end of the Decree of the
fourth Session. And at the very Instant that I am writing this in my Apartment
in the Monastery of St. Victor at Paris, where the Canons regular of that Royal
Abbey have done me the favor to let me choose an honorable Retirement,
suitable to my Profession and way of Living. I have before me that famous
Manuscript of their celebrated Library, from which Monsieur de Sponde has
taken all that is most rare in his History of the Council of Constance, which
is certainly the finest part of his work. Now in this Manuscript which is the
most ancieat that can be seen, I read that Decree word for word as it stands in
the printed Acts, and in the last Editions, the most exact and most correct of
all.

But there is one thing still more observable. We have in these Manuscripts of
St. Victor, the Extract of the Sessions which they who were at the Council for
the French Nation, sent to Paris, as fast as they got them; and that Decree of
the fourth Session is to be found therein in express terms as we have it. Will
M. Schelstrate say, that the Council of Basil, which was not held till many
Years after the Council of Constance, has falsified these Extracts? What can
he answer to that?

And, that he may not think to object to us the multitude of his Manuscripts,
for he quotes nine of them, I can tell him that there are ten in Paris, all
conform to that of St. Victor, which alone is worth all his. And certainly I
can very well exceed that number, seeing I my self, not to speak of ot her
Manuscripts which they who are more curious than I am, without doubt, have in
their Libraries, have discovered ten of them.

Besides, we may produce against him the unquestionable Evidences of Peter D'
Ailly Cardinal of Cambray, and of the famous John Gerson Chancellor of the
University of Paris, who was at the Council of Constance, not only as the
Deputy of that great Body, but also as Ambassador from the King: for, in fine,
that holy and learned man, who cannot be suspected of Imposture, and whose
Manuscripts we have, in many places relates that first Decree of the fourth
Session, word for word, as it is in the Manuscript of St. Victor, Tractat. de
potestat. Ecclesiast. Tract. an and quomodo licet appel. Sermon. pro viagio Reg.
Romans directione prima. Sermon. coram Council dom. secunda post Epiph.
and the printed Acts; and what can never be answered, he related it even in
presence of the whole Council, in the Sermon which he made for the Journey of
the King of the Romans; and having recited the Decree entirely with that
Clause, Ad generalem reformationem Ecclesiae Dei in Capite and in Membris,
immediately after he said to all the Fathers of the Council, declaring his
Judgment, these very significant and expressive words.

Conscribenda prorsus esse mihi videretur in eminentioribus locis, vel in
culpenda per omnes Ecclesias, saluberrima haec definitio, lex vel regula:
tanquam directio fundamentalis etc. vilut infallibilis, adversus monstruosum
horrendumque offendiculum quod hactenus positum erat per multos de Ecclesia in
itinere mandatorum Dei, determinantes ex textibus Glossae, non ad regulam
evangelicam and aternam acceptis, Papam non esse subjectum Generali Concilio,
neque Judicari posse per ipsum: quod praeterea Generale Concilium ab ipso robur
immediate sumebat, nec poterat sine eo casu quocunque convocari, vel stabiliri:
quod nemo poterat ei dicere, Cur ita facis? Quoniam solutus erat legibus, and
supra jus. Et ita de plurimis per quae blonda, fallax and subdola adulatio
fovebat libidinem dominandi, and in tyrannidem Ecclesiae destructricem Papatum
seu ejus usum convertebat, ita ut non pateret via reductionis seu pacis.
I am of Opinion, that in all Churches, and in the most eminent Places of the
World, this holy and most useful Definition, this Law or Rule of the Council,
ought to be written, or even engraved, in great Letters, as being the
fundamental and infallible Direction which we ought to follow against the
horrible and monstrous Scandal, which is a stumbling Block that many amongst us
have cast in the way of the Commands of God, determining, and endeavoring to
prove by Texts of the Gloss ill understood, contrary to the Evangelical and
Eternal Rule, that the Pope is not subject to a General Council, and that he
cannot be judged by it; besides, that a General Council receives from him
immediately all its force, and that in no case it can be called and held
without him; that no man may say to him, Why do you do that? because he is not
bound to obey the Laws, and that he is above all Canons: and many other such
Maxims, whereby a soft, fallacious, and malicious flattery fomented the
unbridled desire of predominating, and changed the Pontifical Power, or the
exercise of it, into a Tyranny which wholly ruined the Church; so that there
would no way remain of reducing matters into good Order, and of settling Peace.

Now I would beseech M. Schelstrate to tell me ingenuously, if he dares think
that the Chancellor of Paris had the Impudence to recite in a Sermon, and
before all the Fathers of the Council, the Decree of the fourth Session,
otherwise than they themselves had made it; and add impudently these words, Ad
reformationem Ecclesiae in Capite and in membris, which the Council had not put
into it; and afterward to speak to them in the manner I have now mentioned. I
take him to be a man of too much Honor, and too prudent, ever to let that
Thought enter into his Head; and I make no doubt but that he will give Glory to
God by confessing, That since Gerson recited that Decree before the whole
Council as we have it in the printed Acts, it is altogether evident that the
Council made it so, and that it is not in the least falsified; that otherwise
the Council would have given him the Lie as an impudent Impostor.

But what now if I show that that so famous Doctor has done the same oftener
than once, as may be seen particularly in the Sermon which he made before all
the Fathers of the Council, the second Sunday after the Epiphany, upon that
Text of the Gospel, There was a Marriage in Cana of Galilee? There he treats
very amply of the Marriage of Jesus Christ with his Church, represented by the
Council of Constance; and having said that the second Advantage of that Spouse,
is the fullness of Power that the Council which represents her has even over
the Pope, and that that was solidly proved in a Book lately before published;
he speaks in this manner.

Quamvis ultra multiplicare sermonem quid opus est super ea veritate; cujus
decisio clarissima solidissimaque facta est per hoc sacrum Concilium, cui non
licet obniti, nec ipsam in argumenta deducere, quoniam disputationum and
argumentationum, and evasionum frivolarum nullus unquam esset finis, sed casus
assiduus in errores absurdos, insanos, and impios. Vere and graviter
Ecclesiastes, Quia cito non profertur contra malos sententia, filii hominum
absque ullo timore perpetrant mala. Nunquid non ideo sacra hujus synodi
Constantiensis impugnantur Judicia qua sic habent?
But what necessity is there to enlarge Discourse, or reason any more upon that
Truth which has been most clearly and solidly decided by this sacred Council,
to which it is not lawful to gainsay, nor to bring that Question any ways under
Examination again, to clear it by Arguments? for there would be no end of
disputing; Evasions and frivolous Distinctions would always be found out, to
betray men into absurd, mad, and impious Errors. The Preacher has truly and
gravely said, that because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed
speedily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
Evil; Is it not therefore that there are some who dare boldly impugn the
Determinations and Decrees of this Council of Constance, of which the Tenor
follows?

Primo declarat, etc. Here he relates at length the Decree of the fourth
Session, with that Clause, Et ad reformationem Ecclesiae in capite and in
membris; and having done so, This, says he to the Fathers of the Council, is
the Decree that you have made. Dare M. Schelstrate, after this, still say, that
those of Basil have falsified that Decree, by adding thereunto those Words?

And since, for convincing him, he has obliged me to allege so authentic a
Piece in that part of this excellent Sermon which John Gerson made to the
Council of Constance, I should be glad he might know what, after the Rehearsal
of the Decree as we have it, that learned Doctor adds speaking still to the
Council. These are his own Words, which are very considerable. Huic veritati
fundatae supra petram sacr^e Scripturae quisquis a proposito detrahit, cadit in
haeresim jam damnatam, quam nullus unquam Theologus, maxim Parisiensis, and
Sanctus asseruit.
Whoever opposes and contradicts that Truth founded upon the Rock of Holy
Scripture, falls into the Heresy that now has been condemned, which no
Divine, especially of the Faculty of Paris, nor no Saint, ever maintained. In
this manner Gerson speaks of the Opinion of those who will not have a Council
to be above the Pope. We give it a softer term, and reject it, not as
heretical, but as contrary to the Doctrine of Antiquity, and consequently false.

Then he goes on with greater force still, and expresses himself in these
Words. I lately saw St. Thomas and St. Bonaventure; I have not here the Books
of other Doctors. They allow the Pope the supreme and full Ecclesiastical
Power; Vidi nuper Sanctum Thomam and Bonaventuram, hic reliquorum libros non
habeo, dant supremam and plenam summo pontifici potestatem Ecclesiasticam,
recte proculdubio, sed boc faciunt in comparatione ad fideles singulos and
particulares Ecclesias. Dum etiam comparatio facienda fuisset ad anctoritatem
Ecclesiae Synodaliter congregatae subjecissent Paepam and usum potestatis suae
eidem Ecclesiae, tanquam matri suae, cujus legem dimitti non debere iradit
sapiens; tanquam praeterea regulae vel legi directivae infallibiliter, cui se
submittere tenetur omnis frater peccabilis de Ecclesia, cujus anctoritatem si
non audierit frater quilibet, etiam Papa qui nobiscum dicit Pater Noster, audi
itur quid dixerit omni Catholico Christus: sit tibi, inquit sicut Ethnicus and
Publicanus, id est, excommunicatus.
and without doubt they are in the right, because saying so, they compare the
Pope with all Believers and all Churches taken particularly. But if they had
been to compare him with the Authority of the Church assembled in a Council,
they would have subjected him, and the exercise of his Power, to the same
Church, as to his Mother, whose Laws the Wise Man says one should never
forsake, and as to the Rule which directs us infallibly, and to which all men
in the Church liable to failing, are obliged to submit. And if any one, whoever
he be, of our Brethren, though he were Pope, who says his Pater Noster as we
do, will not acknowledge her Authority, and obey her, let us hearken to that
which Jesus Christ enjoins to every Catholic, Let him be to you, says he, as
an Heathen and as a Publican; that is to say, as an excommunicate Person. And
this is just the same which the Pope Silvester II. said in express terms many
Ages before Gerson. And to prevent M. Schelstrate from offering to say, that
the Text of this Doctor has been falsified, by adding thereunto these words,
Et ad reformationem Ecclesiae in caepite and in membris; I declare unto him,
that the Treatise de potestate Ecclesiastica, where that great man quotes that
Decree, has been collationed with four Manuscripts, two of the History of St.
Victor, marked N N. S. and M M. 11. with one of the College of Naevarr, and of
the Bibliotheke of Monsieur Colbert, marked 99. That the Treatise An and
quomod^ appellare liceat a summo pontifice, where the same Decree is to be
found, is altogether conform to two Manuscripts, one of St. Victor marked N N.
9. and the other of the Bibliotheke of Navarr. That the Sermon, pro viagio
Regis Romanorum, has in like manner most exactly been compared with a
Manuscript of St. Victor, marked according to the ancient Catalogues, N N. 11.
with one of the Bibliotheke of Navarr, and with one of the Library of Monsieur
Colbert, marked 99. In a word, that what is to be read in the Sermon, Nuptiae
factae sunt, etc. wherein Gerson repeated before the Council the Decree of the
fourth Session, is to be found in a very ancient Manuscript of St. Victor,
marked N N. 19. word for word as we have caused it to be printed.

All these Manuscripts have been communicated to me by Monsieur d' Herouval,
Regular Canon of St. Victor, and Doctor of the Surhonne, whose merit already
well known to the Learned, will shortly be to the Public, in the new Edition
that he is preparing of the Works of Gerson, which by his Care and Pains, will
be found restored to their Perfection, that they have never hitherto had.

This, I think, is enough to oblige M. Schelstrate to yield. Would he have any
thing more precise? He shall be satisfied. The Council of Basil, ten Years
before the Extract made, which he pretends they falsified, proposed that Decree
such as we have it, and renewed the same in the second Session. Cardinal
Julian, who was nominated by Martin V. to preside in that Council, and who
after the Death of that Pope presided therein in Name of Eugenius IV. consented
to that Decree in behalf of the Pope in that second Session, and defended it in
the Letter which he wrote to Eugenius, to remonstrate to him the Reasons which
obliged his Holiness not to offer to dissolve that Council. Had not this Decree
been that of Constance most faithfully proposed, would he have consented to it;
Would not he have objected against that notorious Falsification? Et tibi prout
opus ^^deris esse juxta tibi injuncta and ordinata in Concilio Constantiensi
optime provideas. Julian. Ep. 2. ad Eugen.
Would not he have protested, that what was added to the end of the Decree was
no part of it, he who was very well acquainted with his Council of Constance,
and daily studied it, having express Orders from Eugenius, to act in the
Council of Basil, as he should find it expedient, according as he was enjoined
and directed by the Decrees of the Council of Constance.

Would he have more still? Here is enough to satisfy him. Eugenius IV. in the
Bull which he published during the sixteenth Session, declares, That, according
to the Decrees of Constance, he had called the Council of Basil for the
Extirpation of Heresies, the Peace of Christian People, and the general
Reformation of the Church in Capite and in Membris: and seeing the Council was
lawfully assembled, Qui nimo praefatam dissolutionem irritam, and inanem
declarantes, ipsum sacrum Concitium pure, simpliciter and cum effectu, ac omni
devotione and favore prosequimur, and prosequi intendimus.
it has still continued, and so ought to be continued, for procuring those
three ends, as if it had never been dissolved. Then he rescinds all that he had
done for the dissolution of it, protesting that he approves it, and will have
it to continue purely, simply, and with all Devotion and Favor. Thus the Pope
speaks, who when he was Cardinal was present at the Council of Constance, whose
Decrees he could not be ignorant of; and by consequent, if the Decree of the
second Council of Basil, related in the same Council, as being that of
Constance, had not been the same in proper terms, it is not to be doubted but
that Eugenius would have affirmed it to be false, and have rejected it.

In fine, in the very same Manuscript which M. Schelstrate produces, there is
to be found in the Preface of the Decree, as in our Acts, that, This Holy
Council of Constance lawfully assembled for the Extirpation of the present
Schism, for the Union, and for the Reformation that ought to be made of the
Church in its Head and Members, to the end that that Union and Reformation of
the Church may the more easily, more surely, more amply, and more freely be
obtained, ordains, declares, and defines as follows; to wit, That all men, of
whatsoever Dignity they be, even Papal, are obliged to obey the Council in all
things belonging to the Faith, and the Extirpation of this Schism. And who does
not see that for completing the Sense according to the Intention and express
words of the Council, one must not stop there, but that it must necessarily
follow, and to the Reformation of the Church in the Head and Members thereof?
So it is in our Copies which are true, and is wanting in his, which
unjustifiable Omission makes them clearly appear to be defective.

But, says M. Schelstrate, one of my Manuscripts affirms, that the day before,
and the very same day of the fourth Session, there were great Debates
concerning the matters to be put into the Decree, and that at length by a
sudden Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, all agreed, that nothing should be put
into it but the Points that are to be seen in that Copy; and the other
Manuscript informs me, that the Emperor made them all agree by finding a
moderation to which he brought the Cardinals to consent. Now that is exactly
what we would be at: I Will tell ye how. There were four Points to be examined
relating to that Decree: first, Whether the Council has received immediately
from Jesus Christ, a full Power to which the Pope himself is obliged to submit
in what concerns the Faith and the Extirpation of Schism; secondly, and if it
ought to be put into it, in what concerns the Reformation of the Church, in the
Head and Members; thirdly, whether in case the Pope would not obey it, he might
be punished; and fourthly, if all that ought to be understood of any other
Council as well as of that of Constance.

As to the first, since all the Nations agreed upon it, it easily past; but as
to the three others, some, and especially the Cardinals, who, at least, would
therein gratify the Pope, opposed them. Now the mean and moderation which the
Emperor Sigismund found out to unite all dissenting minds, was, that in the
Decree of the present fourth Session, the two first Points only should be
inserted, and that for the other two they might afterward consider what was to
be done about them in the following Senssion. That appears manifestly by our
Acts, by our Manuscripts, and even by that of M. Schelstrate, wherein, as I
have just now proved, there is a necessity, considering that Proceeding, for
making a rational and complete Sense, that these Words which have been omitted
in it, be added, And as to what concerns the Reformation of the Church in the
Head and Members.

This is more clearly still to be seen in the fifth Session which was held
eight days after, and wherein for putting an end wholly to that Affair, and for
proposing without Interruption, and at one glance, what men ought to believe
concerning that Point, they put in the first place the Decree of the fourth
Session word for word as we have it; and then made a Decree, by which the two
other Points were defined and declared, to wit, that the Pope himself is
obliged to obey not only that Council of Constance that was held during the
Schism, but also all others; and that if he refuse to submit to them he may be
punished. And this is to be seen not only in our Acts and Copies, but likewise
in the Manuscript of M. Schelstrate, as he himself confesses; and therefore he
must acknowledge, that even though these Words, for the reformation of the
Church in the Head and Members, had not been put into the Decree of the fourth
Session, as he pretends, yet that would not at all reach the bottom of the
Affair, because they are actually in the Decree of the fifth Session. For to
render a Decree authentic, what matters it in what Session it has been made?

After all, it must necessarily be concluded from what I have now said as to
these uncontroverted matters of Fact, that we ought not to correct the Council
of Constance, according to the Manuscripts of M. Schelstrate. But on the
contrary, it is his part to correct them according to ours, and according to
the Council, as we have it. And so, the first Argument that he alleges why we
should doubt of the Authority of these Decrees, is null.

The other two are of the same force, and in a few words, may without any
difficulty be overthrown. Seeing he cannot deny but that these two Decrees are
in the fifth Session, he says what he has learned from those Vltramontanian
Authors who have written for the Superiority of the Pope against that Council;
to wit, that they were made in a hurry, without sufficient Deliberation, and
against the Judgment of many who opposed them. This is the very same thing that
the Nestorians, nay and some of our Protestants, have said against the Council
of Ephesus, and against St. Cyril, whom they accuse of having caused Nestorius
to be condemned with extreme Precipitation, without hearing him, and without
possibility of having the cause sufficiently examined. All Heretics might say
as much, and do, indeed say so of all Councils which have condemned their
Heresy.

But, not to rest on that, I maintain to M. Schelstrate, that there never was a
Question better examined, than that which was moved in this Council. For, since
the Council of Pisa, where it was first started, had decided in favor of the
Council, it was almost the whole Subject of Disputes and Conferences, and was
tossed to and from in the Council of Constance even before and after the Sermon
of John Gerson. Besides, after that Assembly wherein all that the Cardinals who
were sent from the Pope objected, had been convincingly refuted, it was so well
examined, that all the four Nations acquiesced in the Point.

I know very well, there were great Debates about it, and that the Cardinals
opposed it; I even grant him what he has found in his Manuscript, and which he
confesses had never been known before, and which, perhaps, is not true, that
the Cardinals, nay and the Ambassadors of France, made a private Protestation
in the Chamber of Presence, that it was only for avoiding of Scandal that they
assisted at the fifth Session, and not for consenting to what they knew was to
be defined in it. What can he conclude from thence? Has not he read the
History of the Conclaves, where, after a thousand Intrigues, a thousand
Oppositions, and a thousand other things more than I can tell, at length a
lawful Election is made, to which all the Cardinals who were so divided before,
consent? Let him read the Histories of the Council of Trent written by Fra.
Paolo and Cardinal Pallavicini, there he will find a great many Debates about
Points that were to be decided in the Sessions; and nevertheless the Holy
Ghost, which unites all minds into one Judgment, made all the Decrees of that
Council to pass with the unanimous Consent of all the Fathers who had been so
divided before.

It is just so with this Council of Constance; I grant there may have been
Oppositions, Contests, private Protestations, and whatever M. Schelstrate
pleases to inform us of from his Manuscripts: yet when all is done, these
Cardinal and all they who debated and protested privately, were present at the
fifth Session: and seeing the Holy Ghost unites all minds in a Council, to the
end they may say, Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis, the two Decrees of that
Session past by common Consent, as the Acts say, to which M. Schelstrate has
nothing at all in his Manuscripts that can be objected. Quibus articulis sive
constitutionibus lectis, concilium cos and cas uniformiter approbavit and
conclusit.
This is the Language of the Acts: These Articles and Decrees having been read,
the Council with a common Consent approved them.

In fine, the third Argument he makes use of to weaken the Authority of the
Decrees of these two Sessions, is, that the Council being then only made up of
those of the Obedience of John XXIII. could not represent the Universal Church.
Now, to convince him of the Insignificancy of that Argument, which without
doubt is the weakest of all, I need only tell him in two words, that what he
supposes after Bellarmine, who has supplied him with all his weak Objections,
is very false. For almost all the Cardinals of the two Obediences of Gregory
XII. and Benet XIII. were united in the Council of Pisa, where these two
pretended Popes, who by Collusion played upon all Christendom, were declared
Schismatics and Antipopes, and Alexander V. chosen, who was acknowledged for
true Pope by most Churches, without any Competition, and especially by the
Church of Rome.

Now the same Cardinals and Bishops who constituted that numerous Council,
continued it at Constance, as Pope John XXIII owned by the same Council for
true Pope, declares in express terms in the Bull whereby he calls that Council,
according as it had been decreed at Pisa five Years before. So that the
Obedience of John XXIII. besides the Concurrence of almost all the Kingdoms of
Christendom, nay and of the Church of Rome also, was over and above composed of
the greater and sounder part of the two other who were reunited at Pisa, and
continued that Council at Constance. If M. Schelstrate pretend that the Absence
of those who held for the one or other of those two who had been declared
Schismatics and Antipopes, hinders the Council from being Ecumenical, he must
know that his unjust Pretense would ruin most of the Ecumenical Councils; for
the Heretics that have been condemned in them might say, that those of their
Party who had right to be present in them, either were not there, or would not
own them for lawful and Ecumenical Councils.

And Protestants might say the same, especially of the Council of Trent, where
neither the Bishops of the Church of England, nor of Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
and that part of Germany who followed the Confession of Ausbourg, nor the
Bishops of Greece, of the East, and of Egypt, who own not the Pope for Head of
the Church, and who are no more of his Obedience, than those at the time of the
Council of Constance, who held for Pietro de la Luna or Angelo Corario, were
present. All these Bishops, I say, of so great a part of the Christian World,
were absent from the Council of Trent when it made its Decrees, and would not
own it. Is there any thing more certain? And nevertheless M. Schelstrate is
obliged to confess with all other Catholics, that their Absence could not
hinder that Council from being Ecumenical, because for making it universal, it
is enough that all be invited to it, as they were, and that they might be
present there if they pleased, or if the Princes on whom they depend gave them
leave. So that the Absence of the Prelates who were the Dregs of those two
Obediences, hinders not but that the Decrees of Constance are the Definitions
of an Universal Council, and that they have an infallible Authority.

But there is still somewhat that presses more home: for if it were not so, and
if it were to be approved which Bellarmine says before M. Schelstrate, that
these Decrees have no Authority, by reason of that Absence, and that there was
no Pope in Council when they were made, strange things would follow from
thence. In the first place, the Condemnation of the Errors of Wicleff and John
Huss would be null, because they were condemned in the fifteenth Session, Sess.
15.
before the Union of the remnant of those two Obediences, and when as yet there
was no Pope there in the Council. Secondly, that detestable Proposition of John
Petit, that any private man might meritoriously kill a Tyrant, any way
whatsoever, would not be lawfully condemned of Heresy by the same reason. And
lastly, that the Condemnation, and afterward the Deposition of John XXIII.
Sess. ^.
which happened long before the Union of the two Obediences, must have been
made without any lawful Power.

Cardinal Julian, who presided in the Council of Basil for Pope Eugenius, wrote
this to him to take him off of his design of dissolving it because of the
Decrees of the second Session. And would to God Cardinal Bellarmine and M.
Schelstrate had read and considered that Letter before they made an Objection
that draws after it so dangerous Consequences! Nam ^quis dixerit decreta illius
concilii non esse valida, ne^ess^ babet sateri privationem oli^^ Joannis factam
vigor^ illorum decretorum non valuisse. Si illa non valent, nec etia^ ^apae
M^rtini tenuit electio facta illo superstite. Si Martinus non fuit Papa, nec
sanctitas vestra est. quae per Cardinales ab ipso factos electa est, etc. Ep.
2. Juliani ad Eugen.
I am obliged, said he to him, most holy Father, to remonstrate to your
Holiness, that if the Decrees of Constance, which the Council of Basil has
renewed, have no Authority, that whereby John XXIII. was deposed, is of no
force. If it be so, the Election of Pope Martin V. which was made during the
Life of John XXIII. is null, and consequently that of your Holiness, seeing you
must then have been elected by Cardinals of his Creation who was not Pope. By
the same reason it is evident, that all the other Elections made since Martin
V. until the present Pope, must be unlawful.

M. Schelstrate, without doubt, will answer to that, that John XXIII. consented
to his Condemnation, and even ratified it when he was at liberty. But he must
needs have done so, considering the condition he was in; and it is enough to
read the very Author who is cited, that is Leonard Aretin, to be informed that
the poor deposed Pope went to Florence to cast himself at the feet of Martin V.
only because he knew not whither to betake himself, Consilio Martini cognito
(id erat ut Man^ouae perpetuo carcere tencretur) antequam, etc. Leonard Aretin.
Hist. ver. Italic.
and that he was informed, that it was resolved, that if he did it not, his
Person should be seized, and confined to perpetual Imprisonment. And besides,
is it not well known that the Ratification cannot be good if the Act that is
ratified be null?

Bellarmine's Answer has as little force: Though, says he, Etsi Concilium sine
Papa non potest definire nova dogmata fidei, potest tamen judicare, tempore
Schismatis, quis sit verus Papa, etc. L. 2. de Conc. c. 19.
the Council without the Pope cannot determine new Doctrines of Faith, yet it
may judge during a Schism, who is the true Pope, and provide a true Pastor for
the Church, when there is none certain. In the first place he grants by that,
that all which the Council determined against Wicleff, John Huss, and Jerome of
Prague, and against that damnable Proposition of John Petit, is null, as having
been decided by an incompetent Judge: Who dare maintain such a thing? Secondly,
it is absolutely false that a General Council, without the Pope, cannot make
Decrees concerning the Faith. Did not the first Council of Constantinople make
such against Macedonius, concerning the Divinity of the Holy Ghost? And did not
the fifth condemn the Heresy of the three Chapters, not only without Pope
Vigilius, but likewise contrary to his Constitution, who would have had them
not to be condemned? Besides, it was not the Business of that Council to judge
who was the true Pope: for the Council of Constance never questioned but that
John XXIII. was, it would only have had him perform the Promise which he made
to renounce his Right, and freely to lay down, for Peace sake, tho he was true
Pope. And in the fourth place, if that Council was not then, as he called it
before, but a particular Council where a third part of the Church only met, it
could not lawfully have condemned John XXIII; because, as all agree, none but
an Ecumenical Council, representing an Universal Church, has that Power and
supreme Authority; nay, and many deny that it can, unless in case of Heresy,
proceed against any Pope, much less if that Council held him for a true Pope,
as the Council of Constance owned John XXIII, to have been.

From all this it follows, that the three Reasons alleged by M. Schelstrate in
as many Articles, to prove against the Clergy of France, that one may doubt of
the Authority of the Decrees of the fourth and fifth Session of the Council of
Constance, are not only false, but also of dangerous consequence to the Church.
Thus we have dispatched his first Chapter: the other two will not long hold out.

CHAP. XXIV. A Refutation of one of the two Chapters of M. Schelstrate.
THis Writer, in one of these Chapters, pretends to prove, that those Decrees
of the fourth and fifth Session are not approved. I have already made it out,
that Martin V. approved them twice solemnly; once, by ordaining that those who
return from Heresy should be interrogated, whether or not they approved,
without Exception, all which that Council approves, and condemned all that it
condemns; and another time in the last Session, where he declares, that he
approves, and will inviolably observe, all the Decrees that have been made in
that Council concerning matters of Faith, and as he expresses it by a new word,
Conciliariter. Upon which, two Objections are raised against us.

The first, from these Words, concerning matters of Faith: from which M.
Schelstrate concludes, that the Pope has only approved the Decrees against
Wickleff, and John Huss, because they alone, says he, concern matters of
Faith. What then will become of the other Decrees that were made for the
Extirpation of Schism, and for the Reformation of the Church, which are the two
principal Points for which the Council and the Popes Martin and Eugenius, in
express terms, declare that the Holy Synod, representing the Universal Church,
was called?

Let him tell me, whether those Decrees be approved or not: if they be not, he
must then, according to his Principles, grant that the Deposition of John
XXIII. is null, that all that followed upon it is invalid, and that all the
good Laws that were made in that Council for Reformation, are of no Authority,
and oblige no Man. And if they be approved, it is not to be doubted but that
those of the fourth and fifth Session are also approved, seeing they were
chiefly made for the extinction of Schism. For if the Council were not above
the Pope, even lawfully elected, as John Gerson says, and if it had not Power
to depose him, when that is necessary for the common Good of the Church, in
case of Heresy, Schism, or enormous Scandal, as it has happened oftener than
once; the Council could never have compelled the Pope, who was acknowledged to
be true and lawful, to renounce his Right for peace sake.

The other Objection brought against us is weaker still than the former.
Cardinal Bellarmine, whom M. Schelstrate has followed step for step, upon that
word Conciliariter; from which he concludes, that these Decrees of Constance
have not been approved by Pope Martin V. because the Pope declares, Id est move
aliorum Conciliorum, re diligenter examinata. Constat autem hoc decretum sine
ullo examine factum a Concilio Constantiensi. L. 2. de Council c. 19.
that he only approves those which have been made Conciliariter, or, as that
Cardinal interprets it, in the manner as other Councils have made their
Decrees, the Matter having been diligently examined. Now it is sure, adds he,
with the greatest Confidence imaginable, and as if no body could doubt of the
truth of what he says, without so much as bringing any proof for it, the thing
being clear in it self: It is then, says he, most certain, that that Decree of
the Superiority of a Council was made by the Council of Constance without any
Examination, sine ullo examine.

I have two things to say to that; first, that a manifest Falsehood was never
asserted with so much Boldness: for never was there a Question examined nor
debated in the Council with greater heat than this, as I have already made it
appear, and as it even appears by the Manuscript of M. Schelstrate. For there
it is to be seen, that before the fourth Session, the Deputies of the Nations,
and the Cardinals, after many Contests and Oppositions of the same Cardinals,
all agreed, Habita fuit non modica disceptatio inter D. Regem D. D. Cardinales
and deputatos nationum, etc.
by a sudden Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in one Judgment concerning that
Point of the Superiority of a Council over the Pope, who ought to obey it in
what relates to Faith and the Extirpation of Schism. And he adds, that before
the fifth Session, Die Sabbati 6 Aprilis, cum per prius inter D. D. Cardinales
and Nations altercatum fuisset -- tandem ordinatum and conclusum est, etc.
which was not held till eight days after, and wherein, according to himself,
it was defined, that the Pope ought to obey the Council in what concerns the
Reformation of the Church in the Head and Members, there fell out again great
Debates betwixt the Cardinals and the Deputies of the Nations. How can it then
be said so boldly, without bogling, as Cardinal Bellarmine has done, Nullo
facto examine? I declare that it is a thing I cannot comprehend, after the
unquestionable Testimonies that I have before alleged to the contrary.

The next thing that I have to say against the Answer of Bellarmine, is, that
that word Conciliariter signifies not only, as he has interpreted it, the
matter in question having been well examined, but also being afterward
solemnly decided in a Session of the Council, without which nothing is defined.
In the Council of Constance Votes went by Nations. There were at first four,
the Italian, English, French, and German, and afterward the Spanish was added.
The Deputies of every Nation consulted first severally; and then all the
Nations communicated their Opinions: after which, all these Nations held an
Assembly, where every private Person had liberty to speak and give his Voice,
yet all the Voices made but one Suffrage for each Nation, though they differed
in the number of Prelates and Doctors.

In fine, when they were all agreed, after much disputing and debate, that was
no more but preliminary, and a necessary Condition to a final Decision, which
was only made in a General Assembly of Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
Generals of Orders, Ambassadors of Princes, and, in a word, of the whole
Council, with great Ceremony, after high Mass, Litanies, and other Prayers, in
the public Session held in the Cathedral Church, where after that a Cardinal
or Bishop having from the Pulpit read the Decrees and Articles framed in the
Assembly of the Nations, demanded if they approved them: it was still free to
every one to say what he pleased concerning them. And when they had all
unanimously said Placet, We consent to them, as they never failed to do after
these previous Deliberations, shorter or longer, according to the greater or
less difficulty of the matters that they had examined; then was the Decree
authentically made, and had its full force: and that, in the terms of Martin V.
is called a Decree made Conciliariter.

In this manner the Errors of Wickleff were condemned in the eighth Session;
that of John Huss, and the damnable Proposition of John Petit, in the
fifteenth; definitive Sentence pronounced against John XXIII. who was deposed
in the twelfth; and the Decrees of the Superiority of the Council made in the
fourth and fifth Session. Before that, the Council had determined nothing at
all, nor laid any Obligation upon Believers.

This the Pope, like a very knowing man, expresses in the terms he makes use
of, approving the Council, in the five and fortieth Session. The College of
Cardinals and of the Nations, concluded, that a certain Book of F. John
Falkenberg, full of Heresies, ought to be condemned. The Ambassadors of the
King of Poland, and of the great Duke of Lithuania, who concerned themselves in
that Condemnation, publicly besought the Pope to condemn it in full Session
before the conclusion of the Council, according to the Resolution taken by the
Cardinals and the Nations; and they pressed him to it in so offensive a manner,
that they protested in name of those Princes their Masters, that in case of a
refusal, they appealed to the next Council.

Seeing these Ambassadors had spoken so haughtily, and in so disobliging a
manner, under the specious Pretext of an extraordinary Zeal for the Faith; and
that besides it was not at all to the purpose, that the Pope, in the present
Juncture, should give cause to think, that he thought himself obliged to submit
to what the Cardinals and Nations had determined in their Assemblies: he
weighed his Words, and answered very prudently, making it by his Answer appear,
that on the one hand he was not wanting to comply with his Obligations; and on
the other, that he knew very well how to preserve his Rights and Liberty.

For he told them, that he would always inviolably observe and stick to what
the Council had decided in matter of Faith, Conciliariter. That shows that he
had at least as much Zeal for the Faith as these Ambassadors had, who pressed
him in so disrespectful a manner to condemn a Book. And at the same time he
adds, that he approves all the Decrees which the Council had made
authentically, and according to the forms Conciliariter, but not at all what
was done otherwise; as if he would give them to understand, that tho he be
obliged to obey the Council, and inviolably to approve and observe what has
been defined in the Sessions, yet he is not at all bound to submit to what the
Cardinals and Nations might conclude in their Assemblies, without the Authority
and Approbation of the Council in their Sessions. This, I think, may undeceive
M. Schelstrate, who pretends, that the Pope, by speaking so, makes it appear,
that he is above the Council: he ought to say above, not the Council, but the
College of Cardinals, and the Assemblies of the Nations, when they are not
authorized in the Sessions.

And therefore, when one of the Ambassadors of the King of Poland would still
appeal to the next Council, the Pope commanded him Silence upon pain of
Excommunication: and he did very well, because that Appeal was manifestly rash,
abusive, and unwarrantable, it being most evident, that a bare Resolution of
the Cardinals and Nations, without the Authority of the Council, could not
oblige the Pope. And this was the reason why Martin, justly provoked by so
unworthy a Proceeding, made shortly after a Bull, Joan. Gerson. Tract. an and
quomodo possit appellari a Papa.
which he caused to be read, not in the Council, but in a public Consistory,
whereby he declares, that it is not lawful for any one to appeal from the Holy
See* or the Pope, nor to decline his Judgment in cases of the Faith, which, as
being greater Causes, ought to be brought before the Pope, and Holy Apostolical
See.

M. Schelstrate alleges these words as his last Argument which he thinks
invincible, to prove that the Pope is absolutely above all Councils. But it is
very easy to give him an Answer that has been an hundred times made without
Reply, That these Words, and others of the like nature, ought to be understood
with relation to all Churches taken particularly, to all Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates, and Patriarchs, from the Judgment of any of whom Appeals may be made
to the Pope, and not to any of them from the Judgment of the Pope who is their
Superior, not when they are assembled in Body in a General Council
representing the whole Church; but when they are taken separately and each of
them in particular, according to these Words of St. Austin in his second Book
of Baptism against the Donatists: Quis nescit illam Apostolatus prercipatu
cuilib^t Episcopatui pr^fere^dum. L. 2. de Bapt. contra Donatist. c. 1.
Who knows not that St. Peter, by reason of the Primacy of his Apostleship,
ought to be preferred before any other Episcopacy whatsoever? He says, before
every Episcopacy, and not before all Episcopacy in a General Council. So that
that Bull of Martin V. no more than another of P^as II. which begins
Execrabilis, cannot absolutely condemn and forbid the Practice, but only the
Abuse that may be made of an Appeal to a General Council, by appealing to it
rashly, without Reason and a lawful Cause, as those Ambassadors of Poland and
Lithuania did.

If, notwithstanding all this, M. Schelstrate will have the Pope, by that Bull,
absolutely to condemn all Appeals to a General Council, which nevertheless it
does not express; he may be answered without difficulty, that were it so, yet
it could be of no force, because it was not made Conciliariter, and facro
approbante Concilio, nor with the consent of the Church, which has never
pretended but that in certain Cases Appeals may be made from the Pope to a
Council. Quomodo and an liceat a summo pontifice appellare, and ejus Judicium
declinare?
To be persuaded of this, he need only read the Treatise written upon that
Subject by that learned and holy man John Gerson, Chancellor of the University
of Paris, and the Declaration which that famous University made by an
authentic Act to Philip the Fair, Decl. Univ. Paris. Ann. 1303. mense September.
that a Comcil might be called, and appealed unto, against Boniface VIII. and
that the University consented and would stick, according to the holy Canons, to
that Convocation and Appeal, which the King and all France made to the Council.

If I mistake not, I have hitherto showed the Weakness, or rather, the Nullity
of what M. Schelstrate objects, and that Martin V. solemnly approved the
Decrees of the fourth and fifth Session, by the Declaration which he made in
the last Session, and by the Questions that he will have to be put to Heretics
that are converted. But though we had not those two so formal Declarations of
that Pope, would our Author make no account of that of Pope Eugenius,
concerning which it has not pleased him to tell us one word? Nevertheless, he
cannot be ignorant, that the Council of Basil, Basiliense Concilium initio
quidem fuit legitimum, nam and legatus aderat Pontificis, and Episconpi
plurimi. Bellar. l. 3. de Eccles. Milit. c. 16. and l. 2. de Conc. c. 19.
which all men, even Cardinal Bellarmine himself, own to be lawful, in the
second Session after its first opening renewed these Decrees of Constance,
which were approved by the Cardinal of St. Angelo Juliano Caesarini, who
presided therein in name of that Pope. Nor do I doubt but that he knows, that
Eugenius IV. himself, in the Bull which he made during the time of the
sixteenth Session, approved all that the Council till then had done, and
consequently these Decrees of Constance renewed in the second Session, and the
Synodal Answer wherein the same Council anew confirms those Decrees, and backs
them with very strong Reasons, which are there specified at length.

And now I have but two words to say to M. Schelstrate concerning the
Approbation of these Decrees. First, if he be not satisfied with it, he must of
necessity reckon as null all the Decrees which the first Councils made against
the Arians, Macedonians, and the other Heretics, because it is never to be
found, that these Councils have been approved, neither so formally, nor so many
times, as the Decrees of Constance have been, by the Popes Martin V. and
Eugenius IV.

Again, that he ought to know, as I have formerly made it appear, that in the
Ancient Church no other Approbation nor Confirmation was ever known to have
been made of Councils by the Popes, but the consent which they themselves, as
well as others, were obliged to give to them. For, if after that the Councils
of Nice and Constantinople which were lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, had
defined the Consubstantiality of the Word, and the Divinity of the Holy Ghost,
the Popes Silvester and Damasus would not have received these Decrees, nor have
approved them: it is certain that they would have been reputed Heretics by the
whole Church; Who can doubt of that? And these Councils would have been no less
infallible than they were in making their Definitions, by the Inspiration of
that divine Spirit, which is the Soul of all Ecumenical Councils, according to
these Words, Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis.

For to say that all the Authority of Councils is derived from the Pope, who
may not follow and approve their Decisions concerning the Faith, and thereby
take from them all their force, is an error condemned by the learned Cardinal
of Cambray, Peter D' Ailly, in most significant terms, when preaching before
the whole Council of Constance and Pope Martin V. in the Year 1417. the second
Sunday in Advent, about a month after the Election of that Pope, he related the
whole History of the Council which the Apostles celebrated at Jerusalem, and
then expressed himself in these Words: By that it is manifest, Manifest
reprobatur error quorundam perniciosissimus, and toti Ecclesiae
periculosissimus, qui adulando potestati Papae, ita detrabunt Authoritati sacri
Concilii, etc.
that the Authority of deciding and defining ought not to be attributed to the
Pope alone, but to the whole General Council; whence it follows, that the most
pernicious and dangerous Error to the Church, of some men, ought to be
condemned, who, to flatter the Pope, so rob the Council of its Authrity, that
they have the Boldness to say, that the Pope is not of necessity obliged to
follow the Decisions of the Council; and that on the contrary, we should test
upon the Judgment of the Pope, if he oppose that of the Church, or of a General
Council.

Thus that great Cardinal, from the chair of Truth before the whole Council of
Constance, conform to its Decrees, and in presence of the Pope himself, who
found no fault with it, and seemed not at all displeased, that that Opinion was
called an Error most pernicious and most dangerous, invented by the Flatterers
of Popes.

Decr. Facult. Ann. 1429. Kal. April.
So also the sacred Faculty, following so good an Example, about twelve years
after made F. John Sarasin retract that Proposition which he had put into one
of his Theses: All the Authority that gives force to the Decrees of a Council,
Tota authoritas dans vigorem statutis residet in solo summo pontisice.
resides in the Pope alone. He was obliged to make a public recantation, and
to change his Proposition into this, All the Authority that gives force to the
Decrees of a Council, To^^ authoritas dans vigorem statutis residet non in solo
summo pontifice, sed principaliter in spiritu Sancto and in Catholica Ecclesia.
resides not in the Pope alone, but chiefly in the Holy Ghost and Catholic
Church.

And certainly it is very rational that the Pope should depend upon the Will of
the Holy Ghost, who teaches, as it pleases him, all Truth to the Church, and to
the Council which represents it; and not that the Holy Ghost should depend upon
on the Will of the Popes, as it must needs do, if after that divine Spirit has
by the Council defined the Consubstantiality of the Word, the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost, the Unity of Person, and the Plurality of Natures, Wills and
Operations ^n Jesus Christ, and such other Truths concerning the Faith, his
Decisions had no Authority, if it pleased not the Pope to consent to them. And
this, I think, is sufficient in relation to the Approbation of the Decrees of
Constance: one word more as to what M. Schelstrate pretends, that they were
only made for the time of a Schism.

CHAP. XXV. A Refutation of the other Chapter of M. Schelstrate.
THis Objection that is made against us, is of an old ruinous Engine ready to
fall of it self, tho we set no strong hand to it to push it down. The truth is,
the Council of Constance, which foresaw that it might be made use of to weaken
the supreme Authority of Ecumenical Councils, did anticipate and overthrow it
even before it was made; and for that end, in the fifth Session, wherein it
declared that all men of what Dignity soever, are obliged to obey the Decrees
and Ordinances of that sacred Council of Constance, these words are added, And
of any other General Council lawfully assembled. Et cujuscunque alterius
Concilii Generalis legitime congregati.
He that speaks of any other Council without Restriction, comprehends all
times, both out of Schism and during a Schism. So the Council of Basil which
was a long time lawful, when there was no Schism^ declared that the Pope was
obliged to obey it, and every other Council; and the Reasons given for it in
that long Synodal Answer approved by Pope Eugenius, necessarily comprehend all
times, as may be seen in the two Reasons which only I shall allege.

The first is, That an Ecumenical Council is a whole, and a Body whereof the
Pope, or he that presides in it in his place, is the Head For there is no
Acephalous Council, as M. Schelstrate speaks, that is to say, without a Head,
calling that of Constance so in the Absence of the Pope. Nay if he refuse to
preside when he might, or withdraw himself from it, there is always some body
that presides therein in his place; and represents him in that quality of Head,
as the whole Council represents the Universal Church; and it will be
acknowledged without difficulty, that the Head is no more but the chief Member
and principal Part of that great Body, Certe Petrus Apostolus primum membrum
universalis Ecclesiae est. Gregor. l. 4. Ep. 8.
as Saint Gregory, speaking of Saint Peter, positively affirms.

Not as Jesus Christ, who is not only the Head, but also the Master of the
Universal Church which he has purchased with his own Blood; and by consequent
it is his Church, it properly belongs unto him, and he can dispose thereof as
he thinks fit, as an Owner can do with his Estate, Dominus est. Hence it is
that he cannot be said to be but a part of the Church: Domious Vniverss, no^
est pars universi^^^ Arist. 12 Me^aph.
he is over all, as God who is the absolute Master of the World, is not a part
of that whole, of that Universe whereof he is the Master, as Aristotle himself
has acknowledged.

It is not so with the Pope, who is indeed Head of the Church Universal, but
not Master, Jesus Christ having said to St. Peter, as well as to all the other
Apostles: Matthew. 20. Mark 12. Luke 22.
The Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them; but it shall not be
so among you. And that entirely ruins that odious Comparison that some would
make between our Kings, who are over the States of their Kingdom, and the Popes
whom they would place over the whole Church. There is a great deal of
Difference: Our Kings are the Masters in their States, exercise Dominion over
them; but not the Popes in the Church, but it shall not be so with you. The
Pope then is but a part of the Church, and of a General Council that represents
it, and not the Master.

Now it is evident by the light of Nature, that the whole is more noble than
every part, and carries it over them, according to that sentence of St. Austin,
L. de Bapt. c. 4.
Vniversum partibus semper optimo Jure praeponitur. And upon that Maxim
received of all Men without contradiction, St. Jerome in one word derides that
question, when he says, Ep. ad Evagr.
Major est Authoritas orbis quam urbis. Thus the Pope as the chief part and
Head of the universal Church, is above every part, and his power regulated
according to the Canons extends over all the Churches taken particularly, and
none are exempt from his Jurisdiction, but no ways over all the Churches
assembled in a General Council, unless it be for calling of them, and presiding
therein. And in this manner is to be understood what is to be found in the
Bulls of Eugenius IV. and Leo X. in the Councils of Florence and the Lateran,
besides that this last is not agreed upon to be an universal Council.

The other reason of the Council of Basil in its Synodal Answer is, that an
Ecumenical Council has received the gift of Infallibility as well as the
universal Church, which it represents; and that the Pope may err, as I have
proved it to have been the belief of all Antiquity. But to avoid disputing:
This reason may be set off in a stronger and more convincing manner, by saying,
They who hold an opinion contrary to that of the Superiority of a Council, are
still ready to grant that during a Schism it is above the Pope, who is
controverted, because what is certain ought always to be preferred before the
uncertain. This is a Principle then agreed upon on both sides, from whence it
may be thus argued.

It is certain that a general Council representing the Universal Church is
Infallible; no Catholic can doubt of this. On the other hand it is not certain
that the Pope is so, seeing many very able and Catholic Doctors, and most
famous Universities, not only doubt of it, but teach and vigorously maintain
that he is not. Hence it must necessarily be concluded, that, seeing what is
certain ought to be preferred before the uncertain: The tribunal of a Council
which, as it is certainly known, cannot err in its determinations, is over that
of the Pope, who, perhaps, may be deceived, there being no certainty of his
Infallibility.

It is evident that those two reasons of the Council of Basil, when it was very
lawful and approved by Pope Eugenius, make it appear that every General Council
is above the Pope, both in the time of a Schism, and when there is no Schism;
seeing in both times the Council is a whole, of which the Pope is but a part;
and that it is certain that in both these times the Council is alike
Infallible; and that at least, it is not certain that the Pope is, neither in
the one nor other of these times.

Having said so much, I think I have fully answered M. Schelstrate as to what
he has alleged in the dissertation that he has made against one of the chief
Articles of the Declaration of the Clergy of France. For as to the long
discourse which that Author makes in one of his Chapters, to persuade us, upon
the credit of his Manuscript, that after great debates among the Nations it was
at length resolved, by common consent, that the Reformation of the Church in
the Head and Members should not be attempted 'till after the election of the
Pope: It is without doubt pitiful and deserves not any answer.

Can it be concluded from thence that a Pope lawfully elected, who is present
and presides in the deliberations of a Council, is not a part of that whole and
of that Body which represents the Universal Church, whose Authority ought to be
preferred before that of any of its Members in particular, by that reason which
proves that the whole is greater and more noble than any of its parts? And by
what Philosophy does he pretend to make us acknowledge, that from the presence
of a Pope in a Council, it follows that that Pope is not obliged to submit to
the Decrees that may be made in it, even contrary to his own Judgment, when
they are carried by the plurality of Voices, whether it be of individual
Persons or of Nations? That is the very thing in question, to wit, if a Council
whether the Pope be there or not, is above the Pope: How will he make out his
proof?

Besides, it was not concluded in that Assembly of the Nations, that no Decrees
concerning Reformation could be made before the Election of a Pope, but only
that before that time, they should not all be made, and especially such as
moderated the Power of the Pope, and confined it to just limits, it being very
reasonable that he should be present at those deliberations wherein he was so
much concerned. The truth is, not to speak of the other Decrees of Reformation
that were already made in the Council, there was a very considerable one made
relating to the Pope in the nine and thirtieth Session, before the Election of
Martin V. who was not chosen till after the one and fourtieth.

It is appointed by that Decree that the Popes being so much the more obliged
to make the light of their Faith conspicuous, by how much they are raised in
Dignity above all others, shall for the future make in presence of those who
have elected them, and before their Election be Published, their Confession of
Faith according to the Form prescribed to them by the Council in the same
Session. That, without doubt was a pretty important Reformation, seeing thereby
was revived what heretofore had been practiced, and what King Childebert
demanded of Pope Pelagius I. to inform himself of his belief, because it was
thought that that Pope had too much favored the Eutichyans, who had surprised
him by their Artifices.

The Council then might have made the other Decrees of Reformation before the
Election of the Pope: but they were willing they should not be made till after
that the Pope was elected; and the manner how they appoint that Reformation to
be made, is so far from favoring M. Schelstrate, that it infers a conclusion
quite contrary to what he pretends, and manifestly proves that the Pope, even
when not questioned, is inferior to a Council.

Statuit and decernit.
And indeed the Council wills and ordains in the fourtieth Session, that the
Pope, either with the Council, or with the Deputies of the Nations, do reform
the Church in the Head and Members, as to the Points that were to be given him,
and that he make that Reformation before the dissolution of the Council. Was
there ever a more authentic act of supreme Authority than this? When there was
no more Schism, after the union of the three obediences, as M. Schelstrate
owns. The Council ordains, that an undoubted Pope, such as certainly he that
was to be elected must be, do reform the Church in the Head and Members; but it
will have it to be done with consent of the Council. Any Bishop may do as much:
the difference is, that he shall not be President of the Assembly, where he
shall give his Vote as all the rest do. Now if the Council will not in Body set
about that work, it refers it to the care of the Pope in conjunction with the
Deputies of the Nations. He does not act then in that Reformation but by the
authority of the Council that deputes him; and all the advantage that he is to
have over the rest, is that he shall be the first Deputy at the Head of all the
others.

In fine, they prescribe to him both the Articles upon which they would have
the Decrees of Reformation made, and the time wherein they should be expeded.
If that be not to ordain, prescribe, command, and consequently if these be not
evident marks, and Authentic acts of Authority and Superiority; I know none in
the World. What will M. Schelstrate then say now with his long discourse about
the five Nations agreeing that the Reformation should not be made 'till after
the Election of a Pope?

But once more: What does he mean with the great mystery he makes of this, that
after much debate in the Assembly of these Nations, concerning the manner how
the Decree should be made, whether by obliging the Pope with these Deputies to
make the Reformation formation before his Coronation, Postea fuerunt factae
diversae formae decreti ad h. c: Tandem dictum fuit, quod Papa electus ligari
non poterat.
or after, it was at length, said Papa electus ligari non poterat, that when a
Pope is chosen he cannot be bound? Does he by that then pretend, that we are
obliged to believe, that a Pope lawfully elected, as St. Silvester was, is not
obliged to subscribe to the Decrees of an Ecumenical Council, as that of Nice
was: And that when such a Council has decided the consubstantiality of the
word, and forbidden Priests to marry, the Pope is not bound by these Decrees as
well as the rest of Christians are, and that he is still at liberty to believe
of the one what he thinks fit, and to act in regard of the other as he pleases?

But does he not see, that to have the true meaning of those words they are to
be applied to the Subject in question: to wit, whether it should be put into
the Decree that the Pope who was to be chosen, Ante Coronationem Pape, and
Administrationem aliquam.
should be obliged to make the Reformation before his Coronation, nay and
before he could have any part in the Government of the Church, and to give good
security for it, as the German Nation demanded? Whereupon they had reason to
say that a Pope could not be obliged to a thing so unbeseeming the Pontifical
Majesty, nor so tied up as to deprive him of the Power he has, by Divine
Right, to Govern the Church, by virtue of his Primacy, from the very instant
that he is Canonically elected Successor of St. Peter.

Thus ought these words to be understood in relation to what goes before, and
not that the Pope is not obliged to any thing. The truth is, in the Decree that
was made after that Conciliariter, in the fourtieth Session, The Pope was not
obliged in that manner, as the Germans had proposed, nevertheless he was bound
in another most reasonable manner, if I may say so, that is to say, he was
obliged to reform the Church in the Head and Members, with consent of the
Council, or with the Deputies of the Nations, before the end of the Council.
But if M. Schelstrate will still be opinionative and pretend that the Nations
understood something else by these words, Quod Papa electus ligari non poterat;
there need no other answer to be made unto him, but that we must not stick to
what has been said in the Assembly of the Nations, as he does, but to what
has been defined Conciliariter, in the Session, as we have just now mentioned.

I am apt to believe now that M. Schelstrate will be fully satisfied with me,
seeing I have exactly answered Point for Point all that he has said upon his
Manuscripts unknown to the whole World for near three hundred years, and which
at present, he thinks fit to object to us, as most Authentic Pieces, in the
dissertation he has made against the Declaration of the Gallican Church, and
against the perpetual Edict of the King, who, as Protector of the Church, and
of her Canons, makes it to be observed in all his Territories; and in fine,
against the Council of Constance received by all Christendom, and especially by
France, which looks upon and reverences it, as its Palladium, the prop, support
and defender of its liberties.

This being so, there remains no more but in a few words to conclude what I
have hitherto said of the superiority of a Council over the Pope. I made it out
in the beginning that all Antiquity believed it, without the least dispute as
to that Subject, as there happened about the time of the Council of Pisa. Then
I clearly showed what that Council, and the two following of Constance and
Basil even approved by the Popes Alexander V. Martin V. and Eugenius IV.
determined on that Subject in favors of Councils. As to the times that have
succeeded these three Councils, it is certain that all those great Men, those
Bishops, Cardinals, Popes, those Universities and Learned Doctors of all
Nations, who, as I have said, have taught that Popes are not Infallible, have
by consequent maintained that an Ecumenical Council, which cannot be doubted
but to be Infallible, is above the Pope. But in a particular manner it is a
Doctrine which the more renowned Doctors of Paris have always taught; I say, of
that learned University the ancientest and most famous of all others; of whom
if I should make a List, with the quotations of their Opinions, it would easily
fill up a whole Book.

It is enough for me to mention here what the great Cardinal of Lorraine,
fearing that some term might be slipped in the Council of Trent that might be
interpreted against that Doctrine of all France, caused his Secretary to
represent to Pope Pius IV. in the year 1563. These are the proper terms that he
put into his instructions concerning that Point. I cannot deny but that I am a
French Man, and have been bred in the University of Paris, where it is held
that the Pope is subject to a Council; and they who teach the contrary there,
are looked upon and noted as Heretics -- The French will sooner lose their
lives, than renounce that Doctrine -- It would be folly to think that there is
one Bishop in France, that ever would consent to the opinion contrary to that
truth.

The truth is, Edit. Card. Borom. 9. Jan. 1563. Pallabicin. Hist. conc. Trid.
l. 19. c. 12. n. 10. etc. 13. n. 2.
The Legates of the Council being instructed from Rome, that they should
endeavor so to bring it about, that in the Canon concerning the Pope the terms
of the Council of Florence should be used, by putting into it that the Pope
has received the Power of Governing the Universal Church, Ibid. n. 7.
inesse summo Pontifici potestatem regendi Ecclesiam universalem, the Bishops
of France opposed it, and were followed by most of the Fathers of the Council.
Not that these words, regendi Ecclesiam universalem, signify any thing else
but that general Jurisdiction of the Pope, which reaches all the parts of the
Church, in what concerns the Public good of all Christendom, that he may see
to it, according to the Canons, as the Council of Florence expresses it, so as
we have made it appear. But they would not have these words Ecclesiam
universalem, so much as abused, to insinuate thereby that the Pope is above the
Church universal, taken altogether assembled and represented by an Ecumenical
Council.

And therefore, to remove all ambiguity, and to prevent the wresting of these
words to a sense contrary to the Superiority of a Council, they said, that
instead of Regendi Ecclesiam universalem, it ought to be put into the Canon,
Potestatem regendi omnes fideles, and omnes Ecclesias; that the Pope has the
Power of Governing all Believers and all Churches: which is to be understood of
all, not Assembled in Council, but taken severally and in particular, none of
them being exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Pope in what relates to the
public good, the general Government, and the cases limited by the Canons. So
careful even to a scruple, have our Ancestors been, to stand upon their guard
on that side; that no attack in the least might be made against the ancient
Doctrine always inviolably observed in this Kingdom. And it is most remarkable,
that at that time when the Doctors of Paris most strenuously maintained that
Doctrine, after the Councils of Constance and Basil, against those that strove
to invalidate their Decrees, Innoc. VIII. Litter. ad Theol. Paris. 7. i^. Sept.
Ann. 1486.
Innocent VIII. sent them a Brief, wherein he makes their Elogy, and amongst
other things magnifies the greatness of their zeal which they expressed for
maintaining the honor and rights of the Holy Roman Church, and for defending
the Catholic faith against the Heresies, which they incessantly confuted.

After all, that I may end where I began to handle this question, I shall
conclude with the testimony of another Pope, whom the Authors who will have it,
as M. Schelstrate will, that Popes are above Councils, can never reject. And
that is Pius II. who when he was no more but Aeneas Sylvius Picolomini, Clerk
to the Council of Basil, whereof he has given us the History, maintained with
all his might, as well as the Doctors of Paris, that the Authority of a General
Council is Superior to that of a Pope. But when he himself was promoted to be
Pope, he thought, for a reason that may easily be guessed at, that he ought to
make known to the World, that he had changed his Opinion, and that then he
thought the quite contrary of what before he had maintained with all the heat
that a Man ought to have who is well persuaded of the Justice of the Cause
whereof he undertakes the defense.

And that he solemnly did by a Bull, wherein he retracts; and in that
Recantation, that he might declare that he followed another Opinion, he would
not stiffle the manifest truth, concerning the nature of the Opinion which he
forsook, and of the other that he embraced. For in this manner he speaks in his
Bull, hinting at the Conferences and Disputes that were had with Juliano
Cesarini Cardinal of St. Angelo, who stood up for the interest of the Pope as
much as he could, and yet for all that agreed in Judgment with the Council
wherein he presided. Tuebamur antiqaam seutentiam, i le novam defendebat:
Extollebamus generalis concilii autoritatem, ille Apostolicae sedis potestatem
magnopere commendabat.
He defended, says that Pope, the Ancicient Doctrine, and he took the part of
the new. We extolled the Authority of the Universal Council, and he magnified
extremely the Power of the Apostolic See.

This now is plain dealing. Pius II. in Bull. retract.
That Pope, who was willing to change his Opinion with his condition, which
after him Adrian VI. did not declares fairly and honestly in his Bull, that the
Doctrine whereof he had formerly undertaken the Defense, concerning the
Superiority of a Council, is the Doctrine of Antiquity, and that the other is
new. And that is all I would be at, I need no more to gain my cause: For all
that I have pretended to in this Treatise, is to show what Antiquity has
believed concerning the Points in hand. So that after so authentic a
Declaration of Pope Pius II. I have ground to say, as to this Article, what I
have already oftener than once said in relation of the others, with Pope
Celestin I. writing to the Bishops of the Gallican Church, Desinat incessere
novitas vetustarem.

CHAP. XXVI. The state of the question, touching the Power that some Doctors
have attributed to Popes over the Temporal.
I Have, if I mistake not, made it clearly appear in all the preceding Chapters
of this Treatise, how far the Ancient Church has believed that the Power over
Spirituals which Jesus Christ gave to St. Peter and his Successors, as Heads of
the Universal Church extended. I am now to show, whether, according to the
Judgment of venerable Antiquity, they have also any Power over the Temporal of
any person whatsoever, and especially of Kings and other Sovereigns, by virtue
of the primacy that by Divine right belongs to them.

Heretofore there have been some so passionately concerned for the Grandieur of
the Apostolical See, or rather so blindly devoted to the Court of Rome, that
differs much from the Holy See, that they have dared to publish that the Pope
representing the person of Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
and Universal Monarch, who has an absolute Power over all Kingdoms, from which
he may even depose Kings, if they fail in their duty, as these Kings may turn
off their Officers who behave not themselves as they should. And this is called
the direct Power which Boniface VIII. thought fit to take to himself in his
Tuae unam Sanctam, that his Successor Clement V. was obliged to recall.

That is not the question here: For I cannot think that now a days there is any
Man who has the boldness to maintain so palpable and odious a falsehood. But
there are a great many beyond the Alps, who by the Philosophical distinction of
an indirect Power which they have invented, teach that the Pope may dispose of
Temporals, depose Kings, absolve Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance that
they have taken to them and transfer their Dominions to others, when he judges
it to be necessary for the good of Religion, because, say, they since he has
the inspection over every thing that concerns it, so has he Power to remove,
destroy, and exterminate every thing that may annoy the same; and by that
clinch they cunningly enough come home to their Point though they would seem to
forsake it. For a Pope will always take the pretext of the welfair of Religion,
when he has a mind to undo a Prince, as all these Popes have done who after
Gregory VII. deposed Emperors, and since them Julius II. who transferred the
Kingdom of John King of Navarre to Ferdinand King of Arragon, because that King
would not declare against Louis XII. whom this Pope persecuted.

Now seeing that Opinion which the Gallican Church, and all our Doctors have
always reckoned very dangerous and inconsistent with public tranquillity, has
still vouchers amongst some Modern Doctors, especially beyond the Alps: I must
now make it appear, according to the method which I have followed in this
Treatise, what the Doctrine of Antiquity is, as to that, and that the Ancients
have always believed, that neither the Pope, nay nor the Church, have received
any Power from Jesus Christ, but only over things merely Spiritual, and wholly
distinct from Temporals; that therefore Kings and Sovereign Princes, according
to the appointment of God, are not Subject, as to Temporals, either directly or
indirectly to any Ecclesiastical Power, as depending upon God alone who has
established them: And that they cannot be Deposed, upon any Pretext whatsoever,
by the Authority of the Church, nor their Subjects absolved from the Oath of
Allegiance and Obedience that they owe them. This I shall briefly and solidly
prove by matters of fact which cannot be denied.

CHAP. XXVII. What Jesus Christ and his Apostles have Taught us as to that.
THERE is nothing in the Church of God more Ancient than Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. Now they are the first that have Taught us that the Church and the
Popes have nothing at all to do with Temporal affairs. I shall make no long
Discourses here for proving of that truth, which is so conspicuous at first
glance, that we need no more but Eyes to read the words that express it,
without any necessity of a Commentary to explain them.

Don't we read in the Gospel that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, John 17.
and by consequent of his Church, and his Vicar upon Earth is not of this
World? Matthew. 22.
That we must render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the things
that are Gods? That afterward Jesus Christ submits himself, and his Vicar also
to the Emperor, by commanding St. Peter to pay the Tribute that was due to him
for them both? That he takes not the Crown from Herod, Matthew. 17.
who did what he could to rob him of life, which has given occasion to the
Church in one of her Hymns to say. Non eripit Mortalia quia Regna dat
Coelestia; He deprives not Kings of their Temporal Kingdoms, since he came into
the World to give us the Kingdom of Heaven? John 6.
Is it not clear that he fled into the Desert; when they talked of making him a
King? Luke 12.
Who would not so much as judge of a difference betwixt two Brothers concerning
their Succession? And that he positively told his Apostles oftener than once,
that he would by no means have them like the Kings of the Gentiles who bear
rule over their Subjects, Matthew. 20. Mark 10. Luke 22.
and far less have any Dominion or Jurisdicton over Kings?

May not we see in the Epistles of the Apostles an express command given to all
sorts of Men without exception, Every Soul, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.
to be Subject to Sovereign Powers? That the Powers that are are ordained of
God? That whosoever resists them, resists the Ordinance of God, and draws
upon himself Eternal damnation? 1 Pet. 2.
That all without exception must be subject to their King, for so is the will
of God; and that we must needs be subject not only for Wrath but for Conscience
sake? Romans 13.


This shows the falsity of the distinction of Buchanan and of his impious
followers, Buch. I. De Jure Regni apud Scotos.
who to answer those that objected to them the express command of God made to
us in Scripture of obeying our Princes, whoever they be, and the example of
Primitive Christians, who, according to the Law of God, were always Loyal to
the Emperors, tho Pagans, Persecutors and Enemies of their Religion, have had
the boldness to say that that was only fit in the first Plantation of the
Church, when Christians were too weak to take up Arms against Princes, and to
shake off their yoke. They are to know that it was for fear of offending God,
and of bringing upon themselves Eternal damnation that they were Subject and
Loyal to the Emperors, and not for fear of their wrath and of the punishments
which with so much courage they slighted, when it was put to them to go to
Martyrdom, or to deny the Faith.

Buchanan ought at least to have read the fourscore and seventh Chapter of the
Apology of Tertullian, that he might have learnt this truth from that great
Man, that it was only to obey the command of Jesus Christ and of his Apostles,
that the Christians of his time were Loyal to their Princes, and not at all
because of their weakness, and inability of acting, and of rising in Arms
against them, to deliver themselves from their cruel and tyrannical Government.
If we would, says he, Si hosts exertos, non tantum vindices occultos, agere
vellemus: deesset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum? -- vestra omnia implevimus,
urbes, insulas, castella, castra ipsa etc. sola vobis relinquimus Templa -- cui
Bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares copiis, qui tam libenter
trucidamur; si non apud istam disciplinam m^gis occidi liceret quam occidere?
revolt by openly declaring our selves your Enemies, could we want Forces and a
great number of good Troops, we who fill your Towns, your Isles, your Forts,
your Camps, your Armies, in a word, all, but your Temples? And though we were
not equal in number, yet what is it we might not undertake, and with what
courage and zeal could not we fight you, we who suffer our selves to be
inhumanly put to death with so much Joy, if we had not learnt in the School of
Christ, that we had better suffer our selves to be Massacred, than to kill Men
in Rebellion, and in waging War against our Princes who persecute us? It was
not then propter iram, but propter conscientiam, to satisfy their Conscience,
and obey the Law of God, that these Primitive Christians inviolably kept their
Allegiance which they owed to their Emperors, though they were infidels and
wicked.

This is it which we have plainly declared to us in the Gospel, and in the
Epistles of St. Peter and St. Paul. Whereupon the true Divines, who in their
Discourses are not conducted by the bare light of Human Philosophy, which many
times degenerates into Sophistry, but by the Principles of Scripture, that
cannot deceive, have in all times made this truly Theological Argument, to
which no Philosophical subtlety can be objected.

It is most evident by these clear and express passages of Scripture, that
Kings are ordained of God, and that the Allegiance and Obedience that Subjects
owe to them, is of Divine Right.

Now neither Popes nor the Church can destroy and overthrow what God has
fixed, nor dispense with that which is of Divine Right, as manifestly appears
in what concerns the essential parts of the Sacraments, as for instance, of
Marriage, of which it is said, Quod Deus conjunxit, homo non separet.

Therefore neither Popes nor Councils can ever depose Kings, nor acquit their
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance.

And this is the more convincing, that the contrary opinion has not so much as
the least appearance of any rational ground in Scripture. For of all the
passages that are cited for maintaining it, there is not so much as one that is
interpreted by the Church in Councils, nor by any of the Holy Fathers, in that
most erroneous sense that they put upon them. Wherein these Modern Authors who
in that manner do interpret them, act directly contrary to the Decree of the
Council of Trent, fourth Session, and against the Confession of Faith enjoined
by Pius IV. which will have Scripture never to be interpreted but according to
the sense that Holy Church gives it, and according to the common Interpretation
of the Fathers. These new Doctors in that most dangerously follow the conduct
of Heretics, who for maintaining their Errors, interpret as they please, and
not as the Church pleases, the Scriptures, that they may wrest them to their
sense. Bellar. l. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 7. Suarez. l. 3. de Prim. Sum. Pont. c.
3. l. 6. de form. Jur. fidel. c. 4. Becan. Anglico contr. c. 3. qu. 3.
This appears manifestly in those two passages, upon which Bellarmin, Suarez,
and after them Becanus and all the others, who, as these, have copied or
abridged them, chiefly ground their opinion.

John, Last.
The first passage is that where Jesus Christ says to St. Peter, Feed my Sheep,
Feed my Lambs. Is there so much as one of the Holy Fathers, who has understood
these words of the Power which St. Peter has received over the Temporal of
Princes? There is none of them who has not expounded them as they ought to be,
of the Spiritual Pasture which Popes are bound to give to Believers, by
Doctrine, Example and good Government, and never one of these Doctors and
Masters in the Church ever let it enter into his Head to wrest them to a
Temporal meaning, as these new Divines have done. And more, Ambres. l. de dig.
Sacer. c. 2. Chrysostom. hom. 79. in Matthew. c. 24. August. de Again. Christian. c.
30. Tractat. 47. in Joan. in Ps. 108. and alii.
most part of these Holy Fathers having said, what is most true, that Jesus
Christ applies these words in the person of St. Peter to the whole Church in
general, and to all its Pastors in particular, if the new sense that these new
Doctors give to them were to be followed, it must be said, that all Bishops and
all Curates had right to dispose of the Temporals of those who by their bad
Doctrine, or scandalous deportment do injury to the Spiritual good of their
Churches. And as to that comparison which they make betwixt the Shepherd in
respect of the Wolf, which he may dispatch omni modo quo potest; and the Pastor
of the Church in regard of a Prince who may have fallen into Heresy; it is not
only a base Sophism contrary to the rules of right Logic, but also impious and
detestable, which leads Men in a full career to Parricide, and for which the
Books that contain it have been justly condemned to the fire.

The second passage is taken out of St. Matthew, Chapter sixteenth, where the
Son of God says to St. Peter, That whatever he shall bind upon Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatever he shall loose upon Earth shall be loosed in
Heaven. Whence these new Rabbis conclude that the Successors of St. Peter have
Power to dissolve the obligation that binds Subjects to their Prince, by the
Oath they have made to him, and by the tie of Allegiance which binds them in
fidelity to him. Is it not strange that Catholics should take this liberty of
wresting the sense of Scripture to what they list, without any respect to the
common interpretation of the Fathers, to which the Council of Trent obliges
them? For of all the Holy Fathers who have expounded that passage, there is not
so much as one to be found who has so understood it: all of them have
interpreted it of the Power that that Apostle received of loosing and absolving
Penitents from their sins. Nor do the Popes themselves expound it otherways,
Paul. 1 Ep. ^0. ad procem. Fran. Ad^i. Ep. 1. ad Carol. Magn.
as it may be seen in the Epistle of Pope Paul I. to the French Lords, and in
that of Adrian I. to Charlemagne.

To absolve Men from their sins, is it to absolve them from their Allegiance?
And that whatever, which signifies only any sort of sin and censure, and some
obligations that are not of Divine Right; can that Power, I say, be extended to
ths Temporal, and to the duty that Subjects owe to Kings? To persuade us of the
contrary, we need only read the words that go before these. I shall give thee
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, says Jesus Christ, and not, of the Kingdoms
of the Earth, for deposing of Kings. And those that follow comprehend the use
of the Power of the Keys that he gives him, for opening the Kingdom of Heaven,
by forgiving Men their sins, or for shutting it, by not absolving them, John 20.
as he in another place expresses himself, speaking to all the Apostles after
his Resurrection.

But that we may not swerve from the words in question, we need no more but
read the Eighteenth Chapter of the same Gospel of St. Matthew. There it is to
be seen that Jesus Christ repeats them to all his Disciples, and gives them the
whole Power that they import, by saying to them: Verily I say unto you, that
whatever ye shall bind upon Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatever ye
shall loose upon Earth shall be loosed in Heaven. If these words comprehend the
sense that the new Authors give them, and that their meaning is also of the
Temporal, it must needs be said that all the Bishops who are the Successors of
the Apostles, nay and all Priests who have the Power of binding and loosing,
may depose Kings, and dispense their Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance,
which is the highest extravagance. Or else, let these Gentlemen tell us by what
Authority of the Church or Holy Fathers they find that when they were said to
St. Peter, they have a different meaning from that which they ought to have
when they were spoken to St. Peter and to all the Apostles.

Now that is a thing they will never be able to find out. Miss. Romans An. 1520.
Paris. apud Francis. Renaud. Miss. Romans a Paulo III. nefar. Ann. 1543. Diurn.
Monast. Congrez. Cassin. a Greg. XIII. confir. Venet. ap. Juris.
And this is so true, that the Church of Rome her self, sticking to the sense
wherein all the Holy Fathers have expounded these words which Jesus Christ said
to St. Peter, will not understand them but of the Power which he has given him
of binding and loosing Souls. For in all the ancient Missals, Breviaries, and
Diurnals, in this manner was read that Prayer, which is said in the Feastival
of St. Peter's Chair at Antioch: Deus, qui Beato Petro Apostolotuo, collatis
clavibus animas ligandi atque solvendi Pontificium tradidisti. This perfectly
well expresses the nature of that Power of binding and loosing, which reaches
not beyond Men's Souls and the Spiritual. But in the review that was made of the
Divine Offices at Rome under Clement VIII. about the end of the last Age, and
the beginning of this, they who took the pains of revising and correcting them,
thought convenient to expunge that so essential a word Animas. Wherefore? Nay
it is no hard matter to guess at the cause of it: For it was under that
Pontificate that the most famous new Doctors wrote with greatest earnestness
and zeal for the new Opinion, which gives to Popes, at least the indirect
direct Power over the Temporal of Kings.

CHAP. XXVIII. What has been the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers of the Church
as to that Point.
THAT absolute independence of Kings as to Temporals, is Justified by the
constant Tradition of the Church since Jesus Christ, the Apostles and their
Disciples, and in all the Holy Fathers, who with common consent teach us, that
all Christians, without exception, whether he be Apostle or Prophet, In E. ad
Romans c. 13.
as St. Chrysostom speaks, ought to be Subject to their Sovereigns, though
they be Pagans and Heretics, as it is evident they themselves were. As to that
Point, De constable. Mon. c. 21. or. 17. In cap. 13. Romans c. 25.
let us consult Justin, Athenagoras, St. Ireneus, St. Basil, St. Gregory
Nazianzen, St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, and St. Chrysostom, St. Austin in his
fifth Book of the City of God, and above all Tertullian in his Apology, where
he says that Kings are under the Power of God alone; In cujus solius potestate
sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi: And that they hold the second place,
being the next after God. Is not that plainly enough said, that betwixt God and
Kings, it is not lawful to put the Popes as to the Temporal? In Ps. 50.
And thereupon it is, that Cassiodorus, and after him Venerable Bede have said,
that none but Kings can say to God, as David did, Tibi soli peccavi, because
they have no other Master nor Superior but God alone, who has right to Judge
and punish them. This they learnt from St. Jerome, who interpreting the same
verse of David has these excellent words: He speaks in that manner because he
was King; Rex enim erat, alium non timebat, alium non habebat supra se. Hyer.
in Ps. 51.
he stood in awe of none but God alone, and had no other Superior but him.

Hence it is that St. Chrysostom speaking of King Ozias who was severely
rebuked by the High Priest, Regi corpora commissa sunt sacerdoti animae: ille
egit, hic exhortatur; ille habet arma sensibilia, hic Spiritualia. Chrysostom. hom.
4. dc verb. Isa.
openly declares that the Power of Priesthood is confined to the sole Right
that God has given to Popes to admonish, reprove, exhort, and to make use of
their Spiritual Arms when it is necessary, the care of Souls being joined to
their ministry, but not at all that of the Body, that is of the Temporal which
God has reserved for Kings. That is the distinction which God has made
betwixt the two Powers, the one wholly Spiritual, and the other Temporal, both
which ought to keep within the bounds that the Master of both has set to
either of them. Apud Athan. Ep. ad solitar.
And this the great Osius of Corduba so vigorously represented to Constantius
the Arian Emperor, when he wrote to him that as the Church has no Power over
the Emperor, and that he who attempts any thing upon his Empire transgresses
the commands of God, so also does the Emperor, if he take to himself what only
belongs to the Church. It is written, adds he, Give unto Caesar the things that
are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods.

I know that the Modern Authors, having none of the Ancient Fathers of the
Church for them, have thought at least that they may make use of the testimony
of a great Saint, who tho he be not of the number of those who flourished in
the Ancient Church, and therefore are the true evidences of her belief, has
nevertheless in a manner as great Authority, as is needful to make his Judgment
pass for a truth well confirmed. This Father is St. Bernard, Bernard. l. 4. de
consider. c. 3.
who, upon these words of the Apostles to Jesus Christ; Here are two Swords,
and upon the answer that he made to them, it is enough, says, that these two
Swords signify the two Powers, Sed is quidem pro Ecclesia, ille ab Ecclesia
exercendus est, ille Sacerdotis, is militis manu.
the Spiritual and the Temporal: that the material Sword ought to be employed
for the Church, and the Spiritual by the Church; this by the Hand of the Pope,
and that by the Hand of the Soldier. Hitherto there is nothing at all that
favors their Opinion. But what they found upon, are the following words, sed
sane ad nutum sacerdotis and jussum imperatoris, that is to say, as they
interpret it, according to the will of the Priest, and by the command of the
Emperor.

But it is an easy matter to answer them, first that that is a witty thought
and an Alegory of St. Bernards invention. For of all the Holy Fathers who have
interpreted the Gospel unto us, there is not so much as one, that has given to
these words, Here are two Swords, that sense, which is not at all literal,
which we are not obliged to follow, nay and according to the Decree of the
Council of Trent, which we ought not to follow for fixing a Doctrine that we
ought to embrace, seeing it is not conform to the common interpretation of the
Holy Fathers.

Secondly, We'll tell them that the words of St. Bernard ought to be understood
according to those of Cesarius Cisterciensis who flourished in the same twelfth
Age; and who, pursuing the same Allegory of St. Bernard, says, that the two
Powers, the Spiritual and Temporal, Unus gladius Spiritualis est qui Papae
collatus est a Domino; alter materialis, quem tenet Imperator, similiter a Deo
collatus: hoc duplici gladio regitur and defensatur Ecclesia Dei.
are the two Swords; that the Spiritual has been given to the Pope, and the
material to the Emperor, and that by these two Swords the Church is governed
and defended: it is plain enough that by that the Spiritual Sword is only given
to the Pope.

In the third place, Caesar. Cisterc. hom. 2. in dom. 2. advent.
if they would have us stick precisely to the words of St. Bernard, we readily
grant what they would have: but at the same time we must ask them who has told
them that, ad nutum Sacerdotis, signifies according to the absolute will of the
Pope? We maintain that it signifies there, according to the absolute will of
the Pope? We maintain that it signifies there, According to the advice and
counsel of the Pope: which is plainly to be seen by the opposition of these
words, ad nutum Sacerdotis and ad jussum Imperatoris, which signify two
different things, that the Soldiers take Arms by the command of the Emperor, ad
Jussum, and by the advice of the Pope ad nutum. It cannot be said that that is
by the command, otherwise St. Bernard would have said briskly, ad Jussum
Sacerdotis and Imperatoris; but he makes a distinction, and for the one says
ad Jussum, and for the other ad nutum, by the counsel and advice.

Just so as it is said of the Disciples in the Gospel, Annuerunt sociis qui
erunt in alia navi; They beckoned to their companions that were in the other
Ship: that annuerunt, beckoned does not signify a command, but an advice, an
exhortation. They pray them to come: So that ad nutum which comes from the same
verb annuere, means nothing more, but the advice, counsel and exhortation of
the Pope, as Urban II. exhorted the Emperor and all Christian Princes to cross
themselves, and to take Arms against the Sarasins for rescuing the Holy
Sepulcher. And as we see at present that Pope Innocent XI. exhorts all the
Potentates of Europe to League against the Turk, and sends Money to the Emperor
and King of Poland to carry on the War in Hungary against that common Enemy of
all Christians. It will not be said for all that, that the Pope commands these
Princes to employ the material Sword: all that can be said of it is, that the
Germans and Polanders make good use of their Swords in Hungary, and beat the
Turks, ad nutam Sacerdotis, and ad Jussum Imperatoris; by the counsel and
exhortation of the Pope, and by the command of the Emperor and the King of
Poland.

But to prove to these new Doctors that that is the true sense of St. Bernard,
I Will only object to them the same Saint in the same Treatise of Consideration
to Pope Eugenius, wherein doubtless it will not be said that he has
contradicted himself, by overthrowing in one place what he has built up in
another. For in this manner he speaks to the Pope, upon what our Savior three
or four times told his Apostles, that he would not have them to be like the
Kings of the Gentiles, that bear Rule over their Subjects: It is plain, says
that Holy Man, that all Dominion is forbidden to the Apostles. Planum est
Apostolis interdicitur dominatus: ergo tu, and tibi usurpare aude, aut dominans
Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus dominatum, plane ab alterutro prohiberis, aut si
utrumque similiter habere voles utrumque perdes l. 2. de cons. c. 6.
Go then boldly and usurp the Apostleship either by domineering, or Dominion by
retaining the Apostleship. From one of the two you are excluded: If you think
to retain both, you shall lose both. Are these the words of a Man that would
have Popes so far to domineer over Kings as to depose them, and transfer their
Crown to others, seeing he will not so much as have them to have any Dominion?

Not that he finds fault that Eugenius III. as other Popes have had, should
enjoy Lands and Principalities, and those vast demains which they hold of the
liberality of the Kings of France, and which, by the favor of times they have
since converted into Sovereign and independent States. Grant, Esse, ut alia
quacunque ratione haec tibi vindices, sed non Apostolico Jure: nec enim ille
(Petrus) tibi dare q^od non habuit potuit.
adds St. Bernard, that you have that Temporal Dominion by any other title: but
I declare you have it not as Pope, nor by any right of Apostleship; for St.
Peter who had no such thing, could not give what he had not. So that Popes as
Popes have no other Power but what is purely Spiritual, for binding or loosing
Souls, and have nothing to do with the Temporal of the meanest of Christians,
much less with that of Kings.

After this, I am not of the mind that the new Doctors will be found of
alleging to us the words of St. Bernard, nor indeed, be able to oppose any
considerable Authority to that of all the Ancient Fathers, since Bellarmin
himself, in the Treatise that he made of the Power of the Pope as to Temporals
against William Barclay, produces only for justifying his Opinion, the Authors
of the last four or five hundred years. What can all these upstarts do against
the Fathers of the Ancient Church? It is enough to send them packing to tell
them once more, what Pope Celestin I. said, Desinat novitas incessere
vetustatem. But because we speak with a Pope; and that the question in Hand
concerns the intetest of all Sovereign Popes, let us now see what the Belief of
the Ancient Popes has been as to the same Point.

CHAP. XXIX. The Judgment of Ancient Popes touching the Power over Temporals,
that some Doctors of late times attribute to the Pope.
THESE of all Men are evidences of greatest Authority, and least to be
rejected, seeing the question is about a Power that some would attribute to
them, and which they openly declare they have not. I mean Ancient Popes, who
for most part were great Saints, and who very well understanding their
obligation, have always kept within the bounds of that Spiritual Power which
they have received from Jesus Christ, for Governing his Church according to the
Laws and Canons of Ecumenical Councils, so as the Council of Florence defined
it.

The truth is, they were so far from attempting any thing upon the Temporal of
Emperors and Kings, tho even Infidels and Heretics, as to deposing of them,
and absolving their Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance that they had taken
to them, that they have always openly protested that they were wholly submitted
unto them, as most humble Subjects, and have acknowledged, as well as the great
Osius, that distribution which God has made of the Temporal for Sovereigns,
and of the Spiritual for the Church, for the Popes and Bishops.

There is nothing more evident than this in Ecclesiastical History: We need
only read the Epistle of Pope Gelasus I. to the Emperor Anastasius, wherein he
makes that distinction of the two Powers, one Temporal, and the other wholly
Spiritual, and both independent one of another: That of Nicolas I. to the
Emperor Michael, wherein he distinguishes them, Actibus propriis and
dignitatibus distinctis, by their Dignities and proper Functions, which are of
two quite different kinds; and what Gregory II. wrote to Leo Isauricus, a most
wicked Arch-heretick and cruel Persecuter of Catholics, saying to him in one
of his Letters: In the same manner as the Pope has no Power of inspecting the
Palace of Emperors, Quemadmodum Pontifex introspiciendi in Palatium poteftatem
non habet, ac dignitates regales conferendi: sic neque Imperator in Ecclesias
introspiciendi, etc. Gregor. II. Ep. 2. ad Leon. Isaur.
nor of conferring Royal Dignities, so neither has the Emperor any right to
meddle with the Government of the Church.

This is enough, to show that Cardinal Bellarmine has impertinently made use
of the example of that Pope against us, because according to the relation of
some Greek Historians, though the Latins of that time take no notice of it, he
by his Authority hindered the Romans his Subjects from paying the Tribute which
they owed him. To overthrow this weak Argument there needs no more, but to
consider Gregory in the quality of Pope, and then in the quality of the chief
Citizen of Rome. As Pope he wrote to that Iconoclast Emperor long and excellent
Letters, wherein joining force to affection, he admonishes, reproves and
exhorts him, he prays him, and threatens him with the Judgments of God; and
then, so far was he from deposing him from his Empire, that he prevents as much
as in him lay, all Italy from revolting against him, and from acknowledging
another Emperor, thereby maintaining the People, who were ready to shake off
the insupportable yoke of so wicked a Prince, in their obedience.

But when he saw that Leo grew more and more obdurate in his impiety; that he
had attempted two or three times to have him assassinated; and that he gathered
together all the Forces of the Empire, to come and do at Rome, as he gave it
out in all places, what he had done at Constantinople, in beating down the Holy
Images, and putting all to Fire and Sword, if they renounced not the Ancient
Religion: Then, having as Pope, declared him Excommunicated, he did, as chief
Citizen of Rome, as the rest did, what the Law of nature allows, to wit, take
the Arms out of a mad Man's Hand, and prevent the giving him money, which he
would have used for their ruin and desolation, and afterward he put himself
with the other Romans under the protection of Charles Martel, for the safety of
their Religion and Lives, though for all that, this Pope never offered to
depose Leo, nor to absolve his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance. For he
himself and his Successors long after acknowledged the Greek Emperors for their
Sovereigns, and it was not before the Empire of Constantin and Irene, that the
Romans, and with them the Pope, as a Member of that Civil and Politic Body,
and not by his Pontifical Authority, seeing that they could no longer be
defended against the Lombards by the Greeks, who had abandoned them, submitted
to Charlemagne.

This is fully and clearly made out in my History of the Iconoclasts: Wherein
it may be seen that the example of Gregory II. which Bellarmin alleges against
us, is nothing at all to the purpose. As also more it may be seen there that
Pope Adrian I. wrote to Constantin Copronymus and to Leo his Son, both great
Heretics, in very submissive terms, as to his Masters and Sovereigns; and
that is a thing which the Ancient Popes never failed to do.

Let it be considered with what submission Pelagius I. wrote to Childebert King
of France; who would have him send to him a Confession of his Faith. He obeyed
his orders, and told him that according to Holy Scripture Popes ought to be
subject to Kings as well as other Men, Quibus nos etiam subditos esse Sacrae
Scripturae testantur.

In what manner did Stephen II. implore the assistance of Pepin against the
Lombards? I beg of you, Peto a te tanquam praesenti aliter assistens provolutus
terrae and tuis vestigiis prosternens. Steph. II. Ep. 4. ad Pip.
says he, that favor, as if I were in your presence prostrate upon the ground
at your Feet.

Can there be terms of greater humility and of a more perfect obedience, than
those which the great St. Gregory makes use of in one of his Letters to the
Emperor Mauricius, who enjoined him a thing to which he had great aversion, and
which in his own Judgment he thought contrary to the Service of God? Ego vero
haec Dominis iners loquens, quid sum nisi pulvis and vermis? -- Ego quidem
Jussioni subjectus, etc. Greg. l. 2. Jud. 11. Ep. 62. ad Mauric.
What am I, says he, who represent this to my Masters, but a little Dust and a
Worm? For my part, who am obliged to obey, I have done what has been commanded
me: and so I have fulfilled my obligations on both sides, for on the one Hand I
have executed the Emperors order, and on the other I have not failed to
represent what the cause of God required.

And in another Letter upon occasion of his being informed that the Lombards
had put a Bishop to death in prison, De qua re unum est quod brevitur suggeras
serenissimus Dominis nostris, etc.
he would have it represented to the Emperors, whom he calls his most Serene
Masters, that if he would attempt any thing against the lives of the Lombards,
that Nation should have no more King, Duke, nor Count: But because I fear God,
says he, Sed quia Deum timeo, in mortem cujuslibet hominis me miscere formido.
l. 7. Jud. 1. Ep. 1.
I am loath to have an Hand in any Man's death.

He therein followed the example of one of his Predecessors St. Martin I. who
would never resist, tho it was in his Power, the orders of the Emperor Constans
a Monothelite Heretic, who caused him to be carried away from Rome to
Constantinople, and from thence into banishment. And although those who would
have opposed that violence, called out to him, Nulli eorum accommodavi aurem,
ne subito fierent homicidia. Melius Judicavi decies mori, quam uniuscujusqu^
sanguinem in terram fundi. Epist. Mart. 1. ad Theodor.
that he should not yield, and that he should be well backed, yet he would not
listen to them, for fear it might come to Arms and Slaughter be committed,
Judging it better, said he, to die ten times, than to suffer the Blood of one
single Man to be shed.

These holy Popes who were so afraid lest the least drop of humane Blood should
be spilt, were far from deposing Kings and Emperors, and giving away their
Dominions to others, under pretext of the good of Religion, as long after them
some of their Successors did; which was the cause of so many cruel Wars that
with Blood and Butchery filled Italy, Germany, and France it self during the
League.

In this manner the ancient Popes kept within the bounds of their Power purely
Spiritual, rendering the honor and obedience which they owed to Temporal
Powers, and especially to their Sovereigns, nay even to their Sovereigns who
were heretics and Enemies of their Religion. This makes it very apparent, what
learned Men have so clearly proved, that it is no more to be doubted of; to
wit, that these Letters of St. Gregory are supposititious, wherein he ordains
that every King, Prelate, or Judge that shall neglect to preserve the Privileges
which that Pope gives to the Abbey of St. Medard of Soissons, and to three
other Monasteries of Autun be deprived of his Dignity, and as a destroyer of
the Church, separated from the communion of Believers, and from the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ; that, in fine, he be smitten with all the Anathema's
which till then had been thundered against all Heretics, damned like Judas,
and with him sent headlong into Hell, if he do not do penance, and make his
peace with the Monks.

Such extravagant terms as these, and so remote from the temper and style of
St. Gregory are alone sufficient to discover the gross imposture, and the
supposition of these pretended Bulls, which some have not been ashamed to make
use of, for subjecting the Crowns of Sovereigns to the Pope. That holy Pope
behaved himself in a far different manner in relation to Kings and Emperors, as
may be seen in all his Epistles. Lego and relego Romanorum regum and Imperat
rum gesta, and nusquam invenio quemquam eorum ante hunc a Romano Pontifice
excommunicatum, vel Regno privatum. Otto. Fris. l. 6. c. 35.
And that wise conduct which his Predecessors held, continued still after him
until Gregory VII. who, according to the observation of the learned Otho Bishop
of Frisinguen, was the first Pope, that contrary to so many good Examples of
his Predecessors, takes to himself the Power of deposing Kings, warranting
himself, as he himself says in his Letter to Heriman Bishop of Mets, by this,
that Jesus Christ gave St. Peter the Power of binding and loosing. Waltr.
Naumbourg. Apol. pro Henr. IV. l. 1. c. 3. and 4.
To which Waltram Bishop of Naumbourg made the same answer that we make at
present to those who abuse that passage contrary to the interpretation of all
the Fathers, that that Power was given to loose Men from their sins, and not
from the Oath of Allegiance which Subjects are bound by a divine and
indispensable Law to observe toward their Sovereigns.

It was upon that so weak and ruinous a foundation, That this Pope Gregory
undertook against the Ancient Doctrine of above a thousand years, to settle that
false and pernicious Opinion which he, the first of all Popes, put into
practice, by Excommunicating and Deposing the Emperor Henry IV. For as to what
is said to the contrary of Pope Zachary whom Bellarmine pretends to have taken
the Crown from Childerick, and given it to Pepin, is of no force, and must
needs proceed from a great ignorance of our History. It was the French Lords,
who, Ann. 752.
after that they had consulted the Pope, to be informed by him if they might
lawfully make that Translation, did in effect do it, upon the Popes answer
touching that case of Conscience, whether right or wrong is not the question in
Hand. The words of Ancient Authors are express in acquainting us, that it was
no more but a consultation on the part of the French, that they might Authorize
their action by the advice and opinion of the Doctor and Father of Christians.
Missi sunt ad Zachariam Papam, Chron. ver. a Pith. Edit.
ut consulerent, says an Ancient Chronicle. They sent to Pope Zachary to
consult him upon the Point. Missi fuerunt ad Zachariam interrogando -- si been
fuisset an non, Ann. Francor. Metens.
etc. says another Author. They sent to Zachary to ask the question if they
should do well or ill in deposing Childerick, and putting Pepin in his place.
The Popes advice was only asked, which was not approved by his Successor.

For Theophanes a Greek Author of that time, tells us that Pope Stephen gave
Pepin absolution for the sin which he had committed by violating the Oath of
Allegiance which he had taken to Childerick. If that be so, it remains to
enquire which of the two Popes was in the right: But it is not my part to
examine that question. It is enough at present that I say, to prove that the
French applied not themselves to Zachary, as to him who had power to depose
their King, that they did not so much as consult Pope John XV. when they placed
Hugh Capet on the Throne, instead of Charles, who had abandoned them to close
with the Germans.

As to what concerns Leo III. who is said to have transferred the Empire of the
West to Charlemagne, it is a mere illusion. I have made it clearly out in the
History of the Iconoclasts, that four years before Charlemagne was Proclaimed
Augustus, he was Master of Rome, and of Italy as King of France, and that he
took not that title of Emperor, which he did not at all care for, but because
the French Lords and Romans that were his Subjects besought him to do it: And
it is certain that the Pope was the first who rendered Homage to him as to his
Emperor, and that he had no other part in that Ceremony but the same which the
Archbishop of Reims has in the Coronation of our Kings.

It is certain then, as Otho of Frisinguen assures us, that Gregory VII. was
the first Pope that offered to depose Kings. I have made it clearly enough out
in my History of the Fall of the Empire, how he formed and pursued so terrible
an enterprise: But I should be very glad, that it might be taken from a very
famous ultramontean Author, Onuphrius Panvinius a Veronese, of the Order of St.
Austins Hermits, in the life of that Pope. In this manner he speaks of it.
Primus omnium Romanorum Pontificum Gregorius VII. armis Normannorum fretus,
opibus Comitissae Mathildis mulieris per Italiam potentissimae confisus,
discordia Germ^norum Principum Bello civili laborantium inflammatus, praeter
majorum morem, contempta Imperatoris Authoritate and Potestate, cum summum
Pontificatum obtinuisset, Caesarem ipsum, a quo si non electus, saltem
confirmatus sucrat, non dico excommunicare; sed etiam Regno Imperioque privare
ausus est. Res ante ea secula inaudita. Nem de fabulis quae de Arcadio,
Anastasio, and Leone Iconomacho circumferuntur, nihil moror.
Gregory VII. is the first of the Popes of Rome, who, supported by the Norman
Forces, trusting to the great assistance of Money, which he got from the
Countess Mathilde a most powerful Princess in Italy, and encouraged by the
divisions amongst the Princes of Germany, who were engaged in a Civil War,
dared, contrary to the custom of his Predecessors, slighting the Imperial
Authority and Power; so soon as he was promoted to the Papacy, I shall not only
say to Excommunicate, but even depose from Kingdom and Empire, the very same
person, by whom, if he was not chosen, he was at least confirmed in his
dignity. A thing unheard in all foregoing Ages: For I take no notice of the
tales that have been spread abroad of Arcadius, Athanasius, and Leo Isauricus
the Iconoclaste. Before that, (says the same Author) Popes were Subject to the
Emperors, and durst neither judge nor resolve of any thing that concerned them.

Imperatoribus suberant de iis Judicare; vel quicquam decernere non audebat
Papa Romanus.
Thus the Ancient Popes behaved themselves, and so much they believed of their
Pontifical Authority, which does not at all reach the Temporal. And to this you
may add, Onuphr. Pavin. in vit. Greg. VII. ex edit. Gresser. page 271. 272.
that in the eight first Ecumenical Councils, there is nothing to be found but
what speaks the complete submission that is due to Emperors and Kings; but
nothing that can in the least encroach upon or invalidate the absolute
independence of their Temporal Power. Now if in some of the Councils which
succeeded the Pontificat of Gregory VII. Kings have been threatened to be
deposed, and if an Emperor has been actually deposed, that was not done by the
way of decision; and though a Council had made a decision as to that, yet it
must only have been an unwarrantable attempt upon the Right of Princes, and
could have been of no greater Force than the Bulls whereby it has been often
enough offered at to dispossess them of their States, but which have always
been condemned and rejected as abusive. For, after all, there will be reason
everlastingly to say, that which all Antiquity has believed, that the Church
her self, infallible as she is, which the Pope according to the same Antiquity
is not, has not received from her heavenly spouse the gift of Infallibility,
but as to matters purely Spiritual, and wholly abstracted from the Temporal and
the Kingdom of the World, wherein Jesus Christ, who has said, my Kingdom is
not of this World, would never meddle.

CHAP. XXX. What has always been the opinion of the Gallican Church, and of
all France as to that. The conclusion of this Point and of the whole Treatise.
HItherto I have made appear what has been the Judgment and Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, of his Apostles, the Fathers, Ancient Popes, and of the Councils, that
is, of all venerable Antiquity, concerning that Power, at least indirect, which
some would attribute to Popes. Now seeing the most Christian Kingdom, above all
other States of Christendom, has always stuck close to the Ancient Doctrine of
the Church, which is the solid foundation of their Liberties: Therefore it was
that all the Bishops of France representing the Gallican Church, the faculty of
Theology of the great University of Paris, so much respected in the World, the
chief Parliament of France, and in imitation of it, the rest, acting in the
Name, and by the Authority of the King, as Protector of the Canons and holy
Decrees, have even in this Kingdom maintained the Ancient Doctrine, and upon all
occasions condemned that pernicious novelty which is contrary to it. This I
intend briefly to prove.

The Gallican Church, since the settlement of the most Christian Monarchy
amongst the Gauls, has always inviolably observed the Rights of the Royalty
in her Councils, which were so often called by the sole Authority of Clovis and
his Successors, especially during the first and second race of our Kings. And
when the Popes would have attempted any thing upon their Temporal, the French
Bishops have always opposed it with all imaginable force and vigor. Of this I
shall give you some instances.

Lotharius, Louis, and Pepin, Sons of Louis the Debonaire; instigated by some
who had a mind to make their advantage of the dissentions that they had sowed
betwixt the Father and his Children, Auct. Anonym. Vic. Ludou. Pii.
rose in Arms against him, and found means to engage into their party Pope
Gregory IV. Ann. 832.
who came in person to their Camp, to favor their pretentions. The Emperor on
the other Hand, accompanied with a great part of the Bishops of France, failed
not to advance with a Powerful Army, in May the year following, as far as
Worms, not far distant from the Camp of the Princes his Children.

Ut si more praedecessorum suorum aderat, cur^tontas necteret moras non sibi
occurrendo?
Immediately he sent them some of his Bishops, who exhorted them to return to
their duty, and who told the Pope in his name, that if he was come according to
the custom of his Predecessors, he much wondered that he had so long delayed to
come and wait upon him. But when it was discovered that instead of keeping
within the bounds of a bare Mediator, for reconciling the Children to their
Father, so as it was believed, he was come with a design to Excommunicate the
Emperor and his Bishops, if they obeyed not his Will and the Princes for whom
he thereby manifestly declared himself against the Emperor: Then these Bishops,
without being startled, Nullo modo se velle voluntati ejas succumbere: sed si
Excommunicaturus adveniret, Excommunicatus abiret, came aliter se babeas
antiquorum Canonum autoritas.
made it known to him plainly, that in that they would no ways obey him, and
that if he was come to Excommunicate them, he should return Excommunicated
himself, seeing the Authority of the ancient Canons prescribes and ordains the
quite contrary to what he attempts.

The truth is that expression seems to me a little too high: but it cannot be
denied but that it makes it clearly out to us, that the Bishops of France would
not at all suffer that the Pope should offer to enjoin any thing concerning the
Government of the State; and the Temporal interests which were the Points that
occasioned the War; and besides that, they were very well persuaded that Popes
are Subject to the Holy Canons, and by consequent to the Councils which have
made them.

Moreover, the great clashing that Philip the Fair had with Pope Boniface VIII.
who openly attacked the Rights of his Crown, is very well known; and it is also
well known what the Gallican Church did for maintaining them, and the cautions
they took against the Bull unam Sanctam, which raised the Popes, in Temporals
above all Sovereigns. It is likewise known what decisions she gave Louis XII.
for the preservation of his Rights, in the difference that he had with Julius
II. and what the Clergy of France Assembled at Mante during the League, Anno
1591.
declared upon occasion of the Bull of Gregory XIV. against Henry IV.

To the Estates General at Paris. 1614, 1615.
Now if Cardinal Duperron has in his Speeches said something not altogether
consistent with the Doctrine always maintained by the Clergy of France, that is
but the opinion of one private Doctor, who has oftener than once changed his
sentiment, and on that occasion transgressed the orders of the Ecclesiastical
Chamber of the States General, in name of whom he spoke, and who would have him
only represent to the third Estate, that it did not belong to them, but to the
Church, to decide that Point of Doctrine concerning the Pontifical Power, as it
seemed they had done in the first Article of their address.

That was the sole cause of the difference that was betwixt the two Chambers,
as that of the Clergy informed Pope Paul V. in the answer they made to his
Brief of the last of January one thousand six hundred and fifteen. Augebamur
enim non mediocriter, cum videremus ipses Catholicos, zelo quodam minus
prudenti abreptos cognitionem earum rerum quae ad fidem pertinent ad se
trahere, and de quaestionibus ejusmodi statuere velle, quas nisi pastorum
suorum vocibus edocti, non debeant attingere. Sed ea molestia e vestigio in
laetitiam versa est, postquam iidem nostris monitis and justis rationibus
adducti, demum agnoverunt, omnem hanc autoritatem penes Ecclefiam, eosque solos
esse quos illa fidelium gregi preesse voluerit. 7 Calend. Nartii.
We were not a little troubled, say these Prelates, to see even Catholics
transported with an undiscreet zeal offer to take cognizance of matters
relating to Faith, and to decide such kind of questions as they must needs
first be instructed about by their Pastors before they can meddle with them.
But our grief was soon changed into gladness, when these Gentlemen yielding to
our Admonitions and just Remonstrances, at length acknowledged that none but
the Church has that Authority, and that none but the Pastors have from her
received the Power and Right of instructing and guiding the Flock. That was the
thing in question, and not at all the substance of the Article wherein the
Clergy of France agreed, though they judged it not a proper business to be
proposed in the Estates, especially at that time.

The truth is that Chamber of the Clergy was so far from invalidating in the
least the substance of the Doctrine contained in that Article, and in all times
received in France concerning the absolute independence of our Kings as to
Temporals, that on the contrary they oftener than once protested, that they
acknowledged that independence, Manifest de ce qui se passa aux Estat,
Generaux enter le Clergi et le Tiers Estat. 1615
and that it ought to be held for a Maxim, That the King in Temporals can have
no other Superior but God alone, Discourse veritable de ce qui se passa aux
Estats Generaux.
and that the Vicar of Jesus Christ has no jurisdiction over matters purely
Temporal.

So that although the Clergy declared that it belonged only to the Church to
handle and decide a Point of Doctrine and Religion, nay and that that was not an
affair to be consulted about in the Estates: Process verbal de cequi s'est pass
en la Chamber du Tiers Estat. Avis done au Roy en son Conseil par M. le Prince
sur le Cahier du Tiers Estat.
yet they avowed that they believed in substance the same thing which the third
Estate had proposed, and which the late Prince of Conde a great Defender of the
Catholic Faith, most prudently represented to the King in Council the fourth
of January the same year, and which the University of Paris expressed in most
significant terms in their Petition presented to the Estates upon the same
occasion, the two and twentieth of January: To wit, Discourse veritable dece qui
s'est pass, etc.
That our Kings depend upon none but God us to Temporals, and that there is no
Power upon Earth that can depose them, nor dispense with, or absolve their
Subjects from the Obedience and Allegiance that they owe to them, under any
pretext whatsoever. That was their Doctrine, which they would not have to be
weakened or impaired in the Remonstrances which they had caused Cardinal Du
Perron to make to the Chamber of the third Estate.

And certainly after so many proofs, one cannot doubt of the Opinion of that
learned Clergy, always uniform as to that Point. I might here produce a great
many very convincing Testimonies: but that would not be necessary now, after
that famous declaration which the Archbishops and Bishops assembled at Paris by
order of the King in the year one thousand six hundred and eighty two, as
representing the Gallican Church, have made of their Judgment, concerning the
Ecclesiastical Power. This is the first Article of it, whereby they declare,
That God has given to St. Peter and his Successors the Vicars of Jesus Christ,
and to the Church Power over Spiritual matters, which belong to Eternal
Salvation, but not over Civil and Temporal, The Lord having said, My Kingdom is
not of this World; and Render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto
God the things that are Gods. And that Apostolical Decree ought to remain firm
and inviolable, Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers, for there is
no Power but of God: The Powers that be are ordained of God: whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. That Kings and
Princes then, according to the Ordinance of God, are not subject to any
Ecclesiastical Power, and that they cannot be deposed, neither directly nor
indirectly, by the Power and Authority of the Keys of the Church; that their
Subjects cannot be exempted from the obligation that lies upon them to obey
them, nor be absolved from the Oath of Allegiance which they have taken to
them; and that that Doctrine ought inviolably to be observed as not only
necessary for the public Peace, but also useful to the Church; And as being
conform to the word of God, the Tradition of the Fathers, and the examples of
Saints. This now is a positive Doctrine that says all; and all that I have
written upon this Subject, has only been to exhibit the convincing proofs of
all the parts of that Article, which contains so excellent and solid a
Declaration.

As to the sacred Faculty of Theology, it has never failed on any occasion to
evidence its zeal for the true Doctrine, authorizing and confirming this, by its
Decrees, and Censures of the contrary opinion, from time to time renewed,
especially in the years 1413. 1561. 1595. 1610. 1611. 1620. 1726. And lately in
the condemnation of an ultramontanean Jacobin, by renewing the censure of the
Book of Santarelli. This appears still in a stronger and more Authentic
manner, Non esse Doctrinam Facultatis, quod sammus Pontifex aliquam in
Temporalia Regis Christianissimi antoritatem habeat, imo Facultatem semper
obstitisse etiam iis qui indirectam tantum modo illam Authoritatem esse
voluerunt.
by the six Propositions that were presented to the King in the year one
thousand six hundred threescore and three, in name of the Faculty; By my Lord
De Prefixe Archbishop of Paris, Visitor of the Sorbonne.

Take here two of them which relate to that Article.

Esse Doctrinam Facultatem ejusdem, quod Rex Christianissimus, nullum omnino in
temporalibus habet supersorem praeter Deum, eamque esse suam antiquam
Doctrinam, a qua nunquam recessara sit.
The first, That it is not the Doctrine of the Faculty, that the Pope has any
Authority over the Temporal of the most Chrishian King; that on the contrary it
has always opposed even those who would have that Authority only indirect.

The other, That it is the Doctrine of the same Faculty, that the most Christian
King has no other Superior in Temporal affairs but God alone; and than that is
the ancient Doctrine of the Faculty from which it will never swerve.

After all, these Decrees of the Gallican Church and of the sacred Faculty have
always been powerfully supported by the Edicts of the Kings, and the thundering
sentences of Parliament, against all such as ever durst in France maintain and
teach that pernicious Doctrine condemned by these Decisions and Censures, Of 2
December. 1561.4 Januar. 1594. 7 and 10 Jan. 1595. 27 May, and 26 Nov. 1610. 27
July 1614. 2 Jan. 1615. etc.
which in this Kingdom are reverenced as proceeding from God, upon whose word
they are grounded. So that a Doctrine so well established, and which all France
look upon as the chief foundation of our Liberties, can never be shaken, much
less overturned by Novelty, which, whatsoever effort it may make, shall never
amongst us prevail against Antiquity, to which we will always stick close, as
to the Principle and solid Foundation of true Tradition.

And therefore also it is that the King, as Protector of the Canons of the
Councils received in France, and of the Gallican Church in particular, by his
perpetual Edict registered in all the Parliaments, not only prohibits all his
Subjects, and all strangers within his Kingdom, to teach or write any thing
contrary to the Doctrine contained in the Declaration of the Clergy of France,
but also commands all secular and regular Professors to submit to and teach it.

Wherein it is most evident that his Majesty does no more but what many
Generals of Orders do, who, for preserving the uniformity of Doctrine in their
Congregation as to Points which they look upon to be of great importance for
the good and reputation of their Body, oblige their inferiors to maintain and
teach certain Opinions which the whole Order has adopted against others who
dispute them. Much more ought it to be lawful for so great a King, so zealous
for Religion, and for the Ancient Doctrine, upon which are founded the
inviolable rights of one of the most August Crowns of Christendom, and
liberties of the Gallican Church, to oblige his Subjects, for preservation of
Uniformity of Opinion within his Kingdom, as to Points of that importance, to
maintain and teach the Doctrine of the Clergy of France, in all things conform
to that of the Ancient Church.

And so much I had to say in this Treatise, wherein, always following that
Principle which both Catholics and Protestants equally agree to, I have held a
mean betwixt the two extremes that ought to be shunned. One is of those, who,
blinded by the hatred which they have conceived against the Church of Rome from
which they have separated, would take from the Pope the Prerogatives which
Antiquity has believed were given him by Jesus Christ, as Successor of St.
Peter. The other of those, who through a zeal not according to knowledge, nay,
and if I dare say with those Cardinals of Paul III. through a too great
compliance with Popes, attribute to them, what Antiquity instructing us by the
Fathers, the Councils, and even by the most Ancient and most holy Popes
themselves, have believed they never have received from Jesus Christ.

Seeing the mean is the place of Virtue and Truth: I think one cannot mistake
the way when he follows Antiquity for his guide, which placing us with it self
in that lovely mean, will make us condemn our Protestants who are in the first
extreme, and abandon those who abandon themselves to novelty, under the conduct
whereof they are fallen into the other extremity.

Now if it be said to me that these new Authors, who have fallen into that
which I call the second extreme, have only done so out of the great zeal which
they have for Religion: It will be easy for me to answer with the great Pope
St. Leo, That many times Men carry on their private interests under a specious
pretext of Piety, Privatae causae pietatis aguntur obtentu, and c^piditatum
quisque suarum Religionem habet velut pedissequam. St. Leo Epist. 25. ad
Theodos. Imper.
and that every one makes Religion to be the handmaid of his lusts and
desires. The truth is, it may very well be, that the luster of the Purple,
wherewith at Rome the three Authors who have most highly exalted the Power of
Popes, by raising it beyond all the bounds that Antiquity prescribed to it,
were clothed, may have dazzled the Eyes of that crowd of Modern who have
followed them, and who for all that, what ever they may have expected, never
received a like reward.

But not to Judge of the secret motives of their Heart, which it belongs to God
alone to dive into, I had rather Answer with Vincentius Lirinensis, one of the
most zealous Defenders of the true Doctrine: Mos iste semper in Ecclesia viguit,
ut quo quisque religiosior foret, Vincent. Lerin. l. 1. Commonit. c. 3.
eo promptius novellis adventionibus contrairet. It has always been the custom
in the Church, that the more of Piety and Religion any one had, the more ready
he was to oppose all new inventions in Doctrine.

And to conclude my Work with the excellent words of the same Author, I should
be glad that Men would think that in composing it I have had no other design
but to discharge the duty of a good Catholic, by doing what he enjoins me,
when he says:

Christianus Catholicus providebit ut Antiquitati inhaereat, quae prorsus non
potest ab ulla Novitatis fraud seduci.

The Catholic Christian will have great care to stick close to Antiquity,
which cannot be deceived by the artifice of Novelty.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull in
Cornhill, over against the Royal Exchange.
THE famous History of Auristella, Translated from the Spanish.

The whole Art of Converse. Cicero's three Books touching the Nature of the
Gods, done into English.

A Breviary of the Roman History written in Latin by Eutropius. Translated into
English by several young Gentlemen privately Educated in Hatton-Garden.

The Countermine, by Dr. Nalson.

History of Count Zosimus, done into English.

Love Letters between a Noble Man and his Sister.

The Doctors Physician or Dialogues concerning Health. Translated out of French.

The Prerogative of Primogeniture, by David Tenner, B. D.

Navigation rectified, by Peter Blackborough.

The Works of Mr. John Oldham together with his Remains.

A Discourse of Monarchy, as it Relates to the Succession of his Royal Highness
James D. of York.

Seneca's Morals by way of Abstract, by Mr. Lestrange.

Beaufions or a new discovery of Treason, in an Answer to the Protestant
Reconciler.

Familiar Epistles of Col. Hen. Martin.

The Rampant Alderman, a Farce.

Dame Dobson or the Cunning Woman, a Comedy.

Jovial Crew or Merry Beggar, a Comedy.

Venice preserved, a Tragedy.

Sir Hercules Buffoon, a Comedy.

The disappointment, a Play.

An Essay upon Poetry.

Choice new Songs never before Printed by Tho. Dirfey Gent.

The Malecontent being the sequel of the progress of Honesty.

Vivat Rex, a Sermon Preached at Bristol on the 9th of September. 1683. by Mr.
Kingston.

The History of the Civil Wars of France, Written in Italian by H.C. D'Avila,
Translated out of the Original. The Second Impression, whereunto is added a
Table.

FINIS.

