Some Meditations on the History recorded in the first fourteen Chapters of
Exodus, in Meeter.
The Sons of Jacob dwelt in Egypt, where Chapter 1. v. 7. 9.

Their great Increase made the Egyptians fear.
Two causes of it are assigned; the one,
They Will join with foes, the other, they will be gone. 10.

Stay now, let us think: And was there Cause indeed
To have such thoughts of honest Jacobs seed?
Would they betray the Land where they were bred, Genesis 12. 10 42, 1.

Where their fore Fathers more then once were fed
In their distress? No, no, this could not be,
They had more holy ingenuity.
Or would they leave their Native Country? leave
A fruitful Goshen; and themselves bereave
Of house and home, and knew not where to go?
No, never think it; They Would more wit then so.
But yet there is somewhat in it; perhaps 't may be
Pharo'h was conscious to himself that he,
Had wronged them in there liberties; and craves
To keep them still, as profitable Slaves;
Had stinted their Religion; (for that Nation
May Not sacrifice the Egyptians 'bomination.) Chapter 8. 20

Perhaps their thoughts his thoughts thus represent:
Why shall we Pharo'bs happiness resent?
Why shall we fight? what matters it, since we
Must still be Asses, who the loaders be?
What? is our public worship nothing worth?
Gods Heavenly Ordinances? Come; let us forth
Into the wilderness; it is better there
With God, then with these black Egyptians here
Joseph's forgot, and we requited thus: Chapter 1. 8. Ge. 47. 20. occulta revelans
Genesis 41. 45

He got him all, who now takes all from us:
Had Zaphnath paaneah this fore-known;
He'ad never so strengthened him, to spoil his own
Conscience thus works, thus speaks, what no man dares
That Is no Courtflatterer; that no man spares.
Come let us wisely deal with them (says he) v. 10.

Lest they the Landlords, and we Tenants be:
Let Us tax them roundly; make them serve with rigor; 14.

Mortar and bricks lay on, lay on, with vigor.
Their bitter lives shall sweeten mine, their charge
My Treasuries and Treasures shall enlarge, 11.

But 't was a policy, which God never blessed;
The more they grew, the more they were oppressed.
Yet he will not leave it so; he will next assail
A private Plot, when public force does fail.
He calls the Midwives; bids them slay the Boys, 15.

Preserve the Girls; there is ruin without Noise.
The Females may be saved to serve our lust;
The Males destroy, for them we dare not trust:
This age let us well keep under, and their breed,
This will prevent, that none shall them succeed.
Come, this will do our business. -- Ney pray stay;
Gods promise sure will lay a rub in the way:
Abraham's line must lengthened be; his heirs Ps. 45. 16. Genesis 17. 5. 8.

Must live to see the Land of Canaan theirs.
The Midwives fearing God more then the King)
Wave th'hangmans strangling office, and do bring v. 21.

A fly excuse; Thereby his craft befool:
Oh! it is not every one will make a Tool.
Dirty employment's only fit for those
That Dirty fellows are; Carrion for Crows.
God made them Houses -- such will better be, 21.

Then raised by reward's of iniquity.
But, since these will uot do it; he next will try,
Who Will give a cruel pledge of loyalty?
He charges all his people, nor did doubt, 23.

But Bloodhounds might be found among the rout:
As after Saul found none amongst his friends, 1 Samuel 22. 17, 18, 19.

His Loyal Israelites, to work his ends,
Yet had an Edomite (fit for the job)
That slew Gods Priests, and overthrew their NOB.
And now is Moses born; hid for a while; Chapter 2. 2. v. 3. 5.

Exposed; made Pharoh's Grandson by a wile.
God counter-plots the plotter; makes him keep
(Wolf as he was) a Shepherd for his Sheep. 10.

Let none as born in a bad time, repine,
Whom God may for some special work design;
It matters not what Age, or in what Nation;
So that we serve him in our Generation. Act. 13. 36 11.

Moses is grown a Man; goes forth to see
His poor oppressed Brethrens misery.
Does an Heroic act of Justice; smites 12. 13. 14. 15.

A sierce Egyptian; Chides two Israelites
That were a wrangling, but had such reply,
As made him first to fear, and then to fly.
Thus often, who others, would make friends gets foes;
And he, that will part fighters, meets with blows.
He dwelt with Revel; Zipporah he marries; 21. 22. 23. 24.

Has Gershom by her, and long there he tarries,
Till he was quite forgot, and Pharoh dead,
Till God his covenant remembered.
Let none think, God forgets us, or neglects;
He looks on Israel, and them respects. 25.

Let none think Gods time long, for he best knows,
When we are fit for mercies, they for woes.
Now is he called from keeping Jethroes sheep, Chapter 3. 1.

To feed Gods flock, and them to guide, and keep.
As after, some Apostles from their trade,
Eishers of Fish, Fishers of Men were made. Mat. 4 19

A noble change; but time rously, he shrinks; v. 11.

Alas! it is too high for him, he thinks.
Though in the Burning-Bush God had declared
The burdened Israel should at last be spared. Chapter 3. 8.

Yet could he not discern how it should be
Effected by so mean a Man as he.
Can I before the Mighty Pharo'h stand? 11. 12. 13. 8.

Why not? (says God) I Will lead thee by the hand.
And will the Israelites believe poor me?
Yea that they shall (says God) by what they 'I see.
Jehovah shows him wonders, cures his fears; Chapter 4. 2.

Strengthens his faith, that he might strengthen theirs
See here, and imitate a humble soul:
See here a faith, that does a fear control.
Yet fear Repullulates, he would fain be free:
I am not fit: Send whom thou will for me. 13.

Bold cowardice, that dares Gods precept break;
Yet fears before a mortal Man to speak:
Blind Sensuality, that counts even
A Glittering Gloworm to the light of Heaven.
He pleads a sloth of speech, would not be sent, 10.

Because (forsooth) he was not Eloquent:
Whereas Court-Preechors must be Glib and free,
Smooth-tongu'd, as I am not (O send not me)
Neither before, not since I spoke with thee. 10.

God condescends to weakness, and allow'th
His brother Aaron to become his mouth. 14.

And now are answered all his little pleas
And now he must away without delays.
Delays are dangerous, but yet take heed,
We mind our have no more then our good speed:
He takes his leave; proceeding with his wife, 10.

And Son uncircumsised; whereby his life
Is brought in danger, 'twas because that he 24.

To Israel a comforter would be
By Covenant, and yet neglects the Seal:
Will thou (says God) my holy will reveal?
Declare my name to others, that they fear it,
And thou thy self forget me? I Will not bear it.
Reformers must Reformed be: Who Preaches,
Must first believe and practice what he teaches.
Moses thus warned, his Son does circumcise: 25.

Draws blood from Gershom, tears from Zipporahs eyes.
Oh Bloody husband (cries she) Man of blood: 26.

Carnal relations often hinder good.
But it is better friends then God to offend;
Make friends our enemies, keep God our friend.
Now on he goes; his brother Aaron meets him. 27.

(Sent forth by God) and brotherly he greets him;
And hand in hand they into Egypt go, 29.

Congregate Israel, and to them show
Gods wondrous works, and gracious words; which said, 30. 31.

Israel believes, worships, and bows the head.
Approaching mercies, when they do appear,
Should be received with reverence, and fear.
To Pharo'h fruitful Egypts mighty King, Chapter 5. 1.

Next they address, and do this message bring;
The God of Jacob says, Let Israel go,
And worship me; the Lord will have it so.
The Lord? (says Pharo'h) stay; I do not know him; 2.

Nor any Suit, or Service that I owe him;
Who is the Lord? The Hebrews God (say they) 3.

Has us commanded; Let us go we pray.
A three-days Journey in the desert, there
To Sacrisice, for otherwise we fear
He Will angry be; if we neglect his word,
He Will fall on us with Psstilence and Sword.
Here Is Gods command, and Isreal's request,
Whereby in humble manner he is pressed:
Israel's in danger, if they do not do it;
If Pharo'h lets them, then let him look to it.
If they a Sword, and Pestilence do fear,
Then what may He, that is their hinderer.
But he is resolved. Go; get you gone (says he)
Moses and Aaron; to your burdens; ye 4.

Do hinder business; you that are but two
Do stay the work that many hands might do. 5.

Then does he call the Taskers; makes this Law;
Require the Tale of Bricks, allow no Straw. 7. 8. 8.

For they are Idle; hence arise their cries,
Let us go worship God, go sacrifice.
Wretched uncharitableness is thine,
That think all Religion but design.
Not to please God, only our selves to please:
Not inward comfort, but for outward ease.
Lay on more work, and keep them at it hard: 9.

Their vain religious canting never regard.
It Is said; it is done; they find it to their grief. 10. 14. 15.

And first they fly to Pharo'h for relief:
Oh! Why are we thus hardly dealt withal?
How can we work without material? 16.

Thy people are in fault, and we are beaten:
Pharo'h (instead of helping them does threaten, 17.

Sends them away with scorn: Go Idlers, go,
(Youl'd serve the Lord? Serve Me:) I Will have it so.
Hear how the Harpy harps upon that word;
You Are Idle; you would go and serve the Lord?
A Pharoh's better farther off then nigh one;
Sheep little get, by coming near the Lion:
This will not do; Moses and Aaron next 20.

They met, but being grieviously perplexed,
They charge them as the cause of all their woe; 21.

Had it not been for you, 't had not been so.
You made's believe and put trust in the Lord,
And this has put in Pharo'hs hand a sword.
Never was so severe the Egyptian rod, 23.

Till you persuaded us to worship God.
Moses to God complains, Why was I sent 22.

To Israel, their sorrows to augment?
Jehovah answers; I do hear their cries; Chapter 6. 5.

See their distresses; I do Sympathise:
Do feel their loads. Moses again is sent
With a new Covenant, new encouragement. 6. 7. 9.

But Israel, that under griefs does languish,
Cannot hear God nor Moses for their anguish.
O men of little faith that cannot see
For tears, the Almighties Al-sufficiency!
O! men of feeble spirits, that for one
Rough passage, doubt of their redemption!
O little love you show, that will depart
From your Religion, for a little smart!
Moses again is sent unto the King: 11.

But now (alas) his faith is wavering;
For, if (says he) Israel will not hear 12.

My message, Pharo'h will much less I fear.)
But God does charge him and his brother both, 13.

And therefore in they go (though very loath.)
Thus Stars of greatest magnitude (we see)
With fogs and clouds sometimes obscured be.
Thus strongest pillars of the Church, with weight
Will bow a little, till God set them right.
When into Pharohs presence they were come.
He frowning says, what will these troublesome
And ill bred fellows have? they know our will:
They have our answer: Will you never be still?
Where Is your commission? mak't appear that you
Are sent of God, and that your God is true.
Show us some tricks our High Priests can do this
By power from our Gods Isis, Osiris,
Our Garden gods, Leekes, Onions; (O the dotage Nascutur in hortis numina. Chapter
7. 10.

That shreds divinity to make their Pottage:)
Then Aaron cast upon the ground his rod;
It Is changed into a Serpent by his God.
The Jugling-wizzards Pharo'h calls, and they 11.

Perform the like: But soon are made a prey,
To Aarons Serpent, all their Magic fry. 12.

Thus solid Reason swallows sophistry.
Pharo'h is hardened: Tush! (says he) for this 13.

I care not, while it does not bite, but hiss.
Thus some men Comets to a jest do turn,
Because they only blaze, and do not burn;
Although (perhaps) sometimes they do foreshew
Burning of Cities, and of Navies too.
They shall not go; no? Sure it were as good,
You did permit them: Next sign shall be Blood; 17. 18. 19. 21.

Blood in the rivers, choking all the fishes;
Blood in your ponds, stone pots, and wooden dishes;
Blood that shall putrify the air, and stink;
Blood in the waters, you shall loathe to drink.
It Is done: Hell vicars ape this too: His will 22.

Is obstinate; Pharo'h is Pharo'h still.
This is the first plague, and indeed it is great,
(Though greater follow) it is about their meat:
Though some are of opinion, and will tell ye
Fish is no meat, for you may fill your belly
Therewith, and yet keep fasting days. But I
(Saving their reverence) think it drollery.
Now enter Frogs filling their region, Chapter 8. 2.

Water, and Land (a frog's Amphibion)
Some swim in broths, some baked in their bread. 3.

Some are cold crawlers in their naked bed.
Some mufick croak to Pharo'h, and perchance, 4.

Some in his Presence Chamber skip and dance.
It Is true his Priests had tried what they could do,
And (through permission) frogs they brought up too:
But can they drive them down? Now let them prove it
They can bring mischief but they cannot remove it.
Thus when, with Moses, they dare enter lists,
The appear Enchanters but no Exorcists.
Moses must be entreated now to pray,
This loathsome judgment may be taken away.
Wretches may need, and beg the prayers of those
Sometimes, whom otherwhile they most oppose.
And in design would their religion use,
Whose Persons and Religion they abuse.
Now that, in this, his turn might served be,
He makes a promise; Israel shall go free: 9. 8.

It Is the word of a King, set thoughts at rest,
It shall be done: There Is honor in this breast.
Goodness and greatness, did they always meet,
Then peace and righteousness would always greet;
But it is the Scripture says; men that are high Ps. 62. 9.

In their degree (in th Abstarct) are a lie.
Moses does try his truth, prays off the frogs: 12. 13. 15.

They die on Land and only live in bogs.
The Egyptian respited, the Gypsy played;
Retracts his word, denies what he had said.
A complicated sin; he breaks his word,
Not only with the men, but with the Lord.
The matter of his Covenant was sublime,
Increases guilt, and aggravates the crime.
God is offended greatly, and now must
The wonder-working Rod enliven dust. 16.

Beggars and Cheats they were before, and now
Lousy Egyptians all, from Throne to Plow. 17. 18.

Then try the Artists (Chaplains of the House
And all there Art cannot feign a little Louse.
Jannes and Jambres time is out, and all 2 Timothy 3. 8.

Their store is spent, Jannes and Jambres fall;
Those two Arch-flamins of his kingdom, those
That Pharo'h hardu'd, Moses did oppose;
Who now themselves confess it is Gods hand, 19. Isa. 26. 11. Lu. 23. 47 Act.
16 17

That thus afflicted had the Egyptian land.
Though sinners long persist, and will not see.
Heaven will at last, by Hell, acknowledged be.
But Pharo'hs lofty spirit will not hear'm; 19. 24. princeps muscarum 22.

More judgments must come on, and he must bear'm.
Then grievous swarms of flies possess the air
As if Beelzebub had dominion there.
Goshen is free. -- Herein his power he shows
To save his people when he plagues his foes.
Men make distinctions with mischeivous heart:
God seals for safety, keeps them still apart.
Moses, O Moses help me (Pharo'h cries)
Go worship now your God, go sacrifice; 25.

Only let it be in the Land, I pray,
To going out, reason of state says nay.
He would compound a Gallimauphery;
Part Gods command, and part state policy.
Methinks I hear him say; What does possess
Your minds to worship in a wilderness.
'Twere more august here: Lo (for your contents)
We Will Temples lend Utinsels, Ornaments.
You may your own God keep and conscience too
Though amongst us, like us you seem to do.
But 'twil not do; a little more he yields: 26. 28.

Let it be wilderness, but near our fields;
For if from us you do depart too far,
We shall suspect, you do intend a War.
Once more (says Moses) to my God I Will cry; 29.

But deal not any more deceitfully.
And reason good he now should be suspected
That former obligations had rejected.
The fly is gone. Pharo'h is still the same 31. 32.

What shall we say to him that knows no shame?
Come Murrein slay the cattle; Spare no man's, Chapter 8. 3. 4.

But let it be only Egyptians.
He that would Isreal's have at his dispose
Keeps not his own, all covet and all lose.
Pharo'h is hardened still: Come sprinkle ashes 7. 8.

For botch and blayne; I Will whip with soarer lashes;
Let the Magicians feel them; try their skill 11. 12. 13. 14.

To cure themselves. Pharo'h is hardened still.
And still shall plagued be; even on his heart:
An inward searings worse then outward smart.
Sad is his case, that is raised high alone 16.

To show Gods Justice and his Power upon.
Now warn them of a Storm, and let us see, 18. 19. 20.

If all Egyptians are as bad as he:
No; Some believe and fear; follow direction,
And for their goods and servants get protection.
It was a Storm indeed; Fire, Thunder, Hail, 23.

Extremes of heat and cold made hearts to fail;
The Fire ran on the ground; as sad September
Taught us to know; will teach us to remember.
The fire dispersed it self over the land,
As if continued by a secret hand.
Shall we hear more of Pharoh? Yes: His cry
Is Moses, Aaron, help me or I dye: 27.

He Is now grown penitent (at least in show)
Oh I have sinned (he speaks it falsely true)
I and mine wicked are, your God is just:
(It is enough) pray him in whom you trust: 28.

Dreadful experiments do prove him stronger;
I Will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.
Can any now make any doubt but he
To all his promises will faithful be?
A gentle mildeness does the man discover
(As Snakes in Winter till the Storms be over)
Though charity cannot but judge him right,
Yet is he false in the All-seers sight.
Well, well, (says Moses) let it be; I know
You Are naught, and to your ruin will be so: 29. 30. 33. 34.

The Hail is gone: What say you? Shall we go:
And serve our God? Answer directly: No.
My promises were made in fear, I Am told
By all my Casuists, such do not hold.
Then look for Locusts, such as have not been; Chapter 9, 4. 5. 6. 7.

Such multitudes, the earth shall not be seen.
This said, the Prophets leave him: But the threat
So srights the Egyptians, that they him entreat
To lay to heart, Egypt is plagued so,
Only for Isreal's sake; O let them go!
It Is strange that Intercessors for them be
Instruments of his rage, their misery.
Well call them then (says Pharoh) ask them who? 8.

What is the Number of them that would go?
What Number? (is replied) why even all; 9.

Men, Women, Children, Cattle, great and small.
Nay; that shall never be; I Will breed your Sons; 10.

They are my Wards: Go; leave your little ones.
Unreasonable men; I see it well,
If I concede an inch, you will crave an ell.
You only asked for men alone; 'twas given;
Now you will have all: Look to it: So for th they are driven 11.

The promise (sure) had choked the man, without
Distinction and a lie, had helped him out.
He Will have them in a rope; 'T was his intent
To draw them back in time convenient.
He never me'nt to let them quite go free,
But had an eye unto posterity.
Now the strange locust come; Obey command; 14. 15.

Devouer every green upon the land.
God can make use of Frogs, Lice, Locusts, Elyes,
Thus to subdue his proudest Enemies.
Insects commanded by the Lord of hosts
Are Concquering-Armies over him that boasts.
Gods messengers are hastened in; it is true, 16.

O I have Sinned against your God, and you.
Forgive I pray this once, pray God above, 17.

That now he would this only death remove.
Here Is a confession larger then before,
And pardon asked: Sure now he will sin no more.
You Would think so; but no good fruit can he bring;
Judicial hardness is a dreadful thing.
The Locusts are blown off; but oh! alas! 19. 20.

The King's no Changeling, he is where he was.
O let not Mankind suffer by him; for
Nature does Monsters (such as he) abhor:
Nor Reason, nor Philanthropy allows,
To think all men, like him, persidious.
Palpable three days dark ness next must tell 21.

Their final ruin, prodromous of Hell.
But Goshen all this long and dreadful night, 23.

Had, as a pledge of Heavenly glories, light:
Pharo'h may now be hear^ (though not be seen) 24.

Calling for Moses, and as if it had been
A Credible he tells him, really
He meant to let them go; (a real lie)
Only your Cattle leave behind (says he)
^eave your Estates, your Persons shall go free.
Let Us hunt the Plot, was it his Avarice
To sell them their Religion at a price?
Or was it good Husbandry save what he could,
Seeing he could not have all that he would?
Or, was it Policy to draw them back,
When Wilderness makes them begin to lack?
For when this heat is over (perhaps he thought)
They will repent what they have so dearly bought.
What e're it were; his Grant does not suffice,
They must have where withal to sacrifice. 25.

^ivil as well as Sacred Liberty,
^n all respects, their God will have them free.
^ea? say ye so? I thought (quoth Egypts King)
That Heaven-born souls minded no earthly things;
And that you did believe, God would supply
All things, both for your life and piety.
But since you will have it so; to let you see
My love, I Will not give leave, but banish ye:
See, that you see my face no more, Petitions 28.

I Will have no more, nor tedious repetitions
Of that same, Let my people go: be gone.
Moses went out in Anger; which in one Chap. 11. 8.

So meek was much; but yet behind him leaves
A dreadful word; Pharaoh, my God bereaves 5.

Thee of thy Firstborn; all thy Sons shall dye,
For my Sons sake; and a sad mid-night-cry Chapter 4. 24. 6. 8.

Shall fill the Land, and (stout as is thy heart)
Thou and thine shall entreat us to depart.
Brave Souls make no unworthy compositions,
Nor will admit of sordid Propositions;
Moses has conquered and must triumph now, 8.

And proud Egyptians must before him bow.
He now is great whom lately they did slight, 3.

Both in the Courtiers and the Country's sight.
Next he prepares his People to be gone,
Appoints the Door-mark, bids them every one Chapter 12. 13. Chapter 11. 2.

Of the Egyptians Gold and Jewels horrow;
Who lend with joy, what they must lose with sorrow.
Justice gives them to Jacob for a spoil, Chapter 12. 36. Ezekiel. 39. 10.

Who had enriched themselves by Jacob's toil;
Who in their eyes at last does favor find,
Who had so long to them been so unkind.
The blow is given whether at heart or head, 24. 30.

But so it is in every house one dead.
Pharaoh awakes, arose, cries out dismayed,
Go Worship (not as I) but as ye said. 31. 32.

Take all your flocks, do all your God requires;
And last of all their Blessing he desires:
As Esau did, Pharaoh does, blessing crave,
Which neither he, nor he, deserved to have:
Had he done like the Mede-Darius, true. Ezr. 6. 10.

He might have then expected it as due.
But this does show, that wicked men distressed,
Do value by God's people to be blessed.
After seven precepts, let my people go,
After three promises, it shall be so.
Urged by the Egyptians, Israel hasts away; 33. 34. 38.

Lap up their Dough unleav'ned as it lay.
A mixed multitude follow anon;
Prosperity will have its hangers on.
And now their Dough unleavned Israel bakes; 39.

Liberty sweetens mean unleav'ned Cakes.
And now they have time to count the time they spent 40.

In a strange Land, and what they underwent.
Four hundred thirty years just was their stay,
God brought them out the self same promised day. 41. 17.

He led them forth not by the nearest cut,
Through the Philistines (great opposers) but
From Succoth march they on by God's direction, Ch 14. 2.

Camp by the Seaside, under God's Protection;
Though Pharaoh fancies them in great distress, 3.

shut up, entangled in the Wilderness;
And with six hundred Chariots does pursue, 7. 9. 10. 11. 12.

And chosen Horsemen, quickly comes in view:
Israel fears, chides Moses, wish for Graves
In Egypt, wish they would lived and di'd there slaves.
The last four Lines two Wonders make appear;
That Pharaoh should have hope, and Israel fear;
Considering all the Wonders that had been;
What the one had felt, and what the other had seen,
These Wonders are no Wonders (you will find)
Compared to Wonders, that are yet behind.
But Moses bids them only stand, and see, 13.

What should their safety, Egypts ruin be.
The Angel that before them did appear, 19.

Removes behind, the Pillar guards the rear:
On that side darkness, and on this side light, 20.

To Israel day, to the Egyptians night.
The Sea divides on each hand; mounts on high, 21.

Like VVater-walls, the sandy floor is dry: 22.

There march the Israelites within the hollow,
And boldly do the proud Egyptians follow; 23.

On whom the Lord an angry look does cast;
Troubles the Host, and stays their Overhast; 25.

Till Israel is landed on the shore;
The Sea returns, and Egypt is no more. 30.

I'ved done the story; now sit down and muse,
I Have set before you good and evil; choose.
Now let the Sinner (if he durst) be bold,
And Obstinate, who hears this story told,
Now let the feeble, fearful, trembling saint
From this day forward never more be faint.
May this a Warning and an Arming be
To Men Concerned: O Lord I heg of thee,
Cui Gloria in Excelsis and hominibus Pax.
FINIS.

