THE MOST Remarkable Passages From most parts of Christendom, for about three
months past:

Gathered out of the best Intelligence that comes to this Kingdom, either by
Letters or otherwise, very useful for our. Nation to take notice of.

Wherein you have the actions of Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and the
Low-Countryes.

In Upper Germany, the various fortunes of the Swedish and Imperial Armies.

In Lower Germany (since the joining of the Hessish and Weymarish) the
continual good success of that party against Lamboy, the Bishop of Collen,
and other their Confederates.

The undertakings and actions of the French and Spanish Kings in Catalonia,
with the taking of Coluvre.

Something of the Hollander both at home and abroad, in the West Indies, as the
taking S. Tomee.

LONDON, Printed for NATH. BUTTER. 1642.

Brunswick the 1.11. of Feb.
General Major Pfuel, (who heretofore served under the Swedes) and Monsieur
Peus, are passed through this City, and gone to Archduke Leopold William to
desire service of the Emperor. The French Ambassador Monsieur Avaux has been
at Hildesheim, thinking to hinder the agreement betwixt the Emperor and the
Dukes of Brunswick and Luneburg, but came too late.

An abstract of General Piccolominies Letter to Colonel Westphalen, bearing
date the 29. of Jan. the 7. of March.
THe confirmation of the unhappy encounter of General Lamboy with the
Weymarish Army, I have understood out of your last Letter; and upon the
consideration of many circumstances, I can conclude nothing else, but that this
defeat and overthrow was for the most part overseene, and proceeded out of a
mere ambition, because he had under his command good old beaten soldiers, and
Field-marshall Hatsfeld with his Troops was not above a days marching from
him, with whom he should have joined. Without this overthrow we had been
masters in the field every where, but God intended to visit and humble us. Upon
the receipt of this unpleasant news, Archduke Leopold William was confirmed
the more in his heroical resolution, and furthered the marching of the Armies
hitherwards, and against the Swedes, and yesterday arrived hereabouts about
Weidel and Tangermund: Whereupon the Swedes hearing of our coming, moved
likewise their former quarters, and marched with their maine strength and power
toward Saltzwedel, where they ly now. We seek nothing else, but to meet them
in these eaven and flat fields, and to force them to a battle, being
confident, that with our Cavallerie, which is in a good case, we shall
over-match them, and within three or four days we shall lay a Ship-bridge
over the river of Elve, either here or somewhat lower, that in case of
necessity we may the better draw the Silesian Army to us. What further shall
pass, I will certify you by the next.

Given at Tangermund the 29. of Jan. 7. of Febr. 1641.
Weymar the 3.13. of Feb.
AT this instant comes our Foot-Post from Rommelsburg, certifying, that on
Sunday last the Swedish Commander in the Castle of Mansfeld, fallied out with
displayed colors, and got not only in the Mill at Leimbach a great store of
meal, but also put to the sword by the way many Imperial soldiers, and made
a great hole into the siege.

Hamborough the 1.11. of Feb.
WIthin these two days the King of Denmarks Camp shall be demolished, and all
the Forces drawn off. It is reported that the Emperor has highly upbraided
the said King of Denmark, for framing a Camp upon the ground of the sacred
Roman Empire, without the knowledge of any man, what his design is.

Vienna the 2.12. of Feb.
THis City has agreed to pay unto the Emperor 200000 Florens, and the States
of Lower Austria will do the like; and being the Swedish soldiers in Beuthen
mutined, wherefore the Swedish Commander in it was forced to surrender the said
City unto the Imperialists. The Palatine Treaty goes on very slowly, and is no
hope as yet of any restitution.

Norimberg the 5.15. of Feb.
FRom Leipsig and Dresden is confirmed, that the Swedes have given a blow to
some Imperial Regiments, and forced the rest to retire over the river of Elve.
From Gothen they write, that a Swedish party has straggled already as far as
Magdeburg.

Lower Saxony the 9.19. of Feb.
THE Imperial Army that lay about Tangermund, has laid a ship-bridge over
the river of Elve, over which they are marched, and intend to come upon the
backs of the Swedes, which lie yet in and about Sultzwedel, and have likewise
strongly guarded Osterburg, out of which the Imperialists were beaten. Colonel
Goldacker has been commanded abroad with 600. Currassiers, and Colonel
Feduary with 600. Crabats, which have strugled as far as Stetin and Wismar, and
in two several places lighted upon 300. Swedish horsemen, whereof they slew
many, and took many prisoners. The Imperial Ambassador Count of Auersberg
appointed for the treaty of peace with the King of France, and the Sweads, is
conducted by General Torstensohns Trumpeter from Wolffenbuttle to Hamborough.
The Duke of Luneburg has cashiered the Commander in Hieldesheim, because he
had made a secret agreement with the Townes-men to suffer no other garrison to
come into the said City, but keep it out by force.

Basel 9.19. of Feb.
THis City has levied already a company of 500. men for the King of France,
the City of Bern levieth four companies, in so much that the King of France
receives fully the 6000. Switzers.

Collen the 9.19. of Feb.
THE tumult in this City is now appeased again. Doctor Osterman with some
others is fled away, our Magistrates have imprisoned six of the chiefest
ringleaders, which according to their deserts shall be punished soundly, for
an example to others. The Spaniards have put 600. men more into Gulick, for the
re-inforcing of the garrison there. From Mastricht they write that the
Spaniards draw together about Piest 1500. horse and 1500. foot, some whereof
are passed already by Namur. It is reported that they are to join with Field
Marshall Hatzfeld, and if they do it, then the States of Holland have given
order to some 1000. men of their forces to join with the Weymarish. Here is
made great preparation for a ship-bridge, over which the Imperialists are to
march. The Lorraine troops are come to this side of the river of Mosel, and
have taken their quarters there.

Collen the 10.20. of Feb.
THe French and Weymarish Forces have set already a strong foot into this
Country, and they will hardly ever be driven out of it again, because they
strengthen themselves exceedingly. They have taken the Castle of Hulekrath,
Lin, and Duyren, wherein they found great store of corn and other provision;
and into all places that they take, they put Hessish garrisons. At this instant
we receive avisoes, that the Cities of Munster Eyffel, and Sulch, are likewise
surrendered unto the Weymarish; but those of Liege have obtained the neutrality
of Conte de Guebrian, which levy now 4000. Foot and 1000. Horsemen for the
defense of their Country.

From the Bishopric of Collen the 12.22. of Feb. and from the Country of
Gulick the 13.23. of Feb.
HItherto both parties have paid for the winter quarters; and albeit the Duke
of Newburg comforted all the Cities in the country of Gulick, with the
neutrality, if so be they do deny quarters to the Imperialists; yet the said
Duke finds himself deceived now, for the Weymarish Auditor told the said Duke
at Dusseldorp to his face, that they take nothing else but what they can carry
along with them, because the King of France knows hitherto of no neutrality
with the Country of Gulick, and that therefore now according to the custom of
war, instead of the Imperialists which lay enquartered here last year, they
have now taken up their quarters, and so they have made themselves masters of
the Cities of Gladbach, Dulcken, Dahlen, Grevenbroch, Caster, Berchem, Hambach,
and other places, and now they are gone against Duyren, Sulch, Eyskirchen,
Munster Eyffel, Sintzig, Romegen, and other places. Yesterday they pillaged the
City of Sulch. They find no where any opposition. In Duyren they have found
above 100000. sacks with corn; every where they have found all the Noblemens
houses full of provision; it is not to be expressed what booty they get. From
the Castle of Bebber they have carried away two wagons laden with plate; They
carry all the booty to Wesel, and into the Country of Cleve. Colonel Rosa has
his quarter at Duyren and thereabouts; Tupadell at Sulch and Munster Eyffel;
Conte de guebrian at Neus, where the headquarter is; they make all places as
strong as they can. At this instant we hear that they are marching now toward
Aaken.

Collen the 13.23. of Feb.
IN my former Letter I certified you of the taking of Lin, the Castle of
Hulekrath, being very strong, and having round about a deep and wide moat,
together with thick walls, has now been besieged these eight days by the
Weymarish, and five days long they battered it with their Canons. This morning
we receive avisoes, that it is likewise surrendered. Three days ago, a part of
their Army marched toward Duyren, which was yesterday surrendered in like
manner. The City of Sulch they have likewise taken. At Bergerhausen they have
got above a thousand horses. At Blatzeim the Boores offered to make opposition,
but they fell short: and many of them were slain. The Weymarish strengthen
themselves exceedingly. At this instant we receive avisoes, that Munster Eyffel
is likewise surrendered. In a word, they make themselves masters of the whole
Country. The other day, General Major Enckefort went from hence to the Duke
of Lorraine to consult with him, and General Beck, and to see whether a way
may be found out to oppose the Weymarish forces, because they give over now all
hope of the Bavarian succor.

Leipsig the 12.22. of Feb.
FRom Magdeburg they write, that the Swedes have taken the strong passage of
Osterburg, wherein Colonel Wolff lay with five Companies of Dragooners, the
most part whereof they put to they sword; and it is said, that only his
Lieutenant Colonel escaped. Whether. Colonel Wolff be dead or taken Prisoner,
is not known as yet: It is certain, that the Imperial and Bavarian Army is
passed the river of Elve, and lies now betwixt the river of Havel and Sprew: It
is said, that they intend to march into the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, but they
will find but little provision there either for men or horses. The Swedes have
surrendered the City of Spernberg, pillaged the same, and put some men in it to
the sword; and the Lo: Ulrich Wentzeln Baron of Biberstein, they took prisoner.
From Eysleben they write, that the Castle of Mansfeld is yet stoutly defended
by the Swedes.

Hamborough the 14.24. of Feb.
PAssengers coming from the Swedish headquarter at Saltzwedel, confirm the
great plot and treachery that was discovered, which Colonel Seckendorff had
laid against General Torstenson and the whole Army, which he intended to
deliver over unto the Imperialists, for which he was imprisoned, and afterward
his head cut off.

Collen the 15.25. of Feb.
OUr Magistrates here take yet daily some persons in apprehension: The
Imperial succor which was expected so long, appears not yet, at which the
Bishop of Collen is vexed very much. Hulekrath is surrendered by composition
unto the Weymarish. They have divided their Army into three parts; One part is
gone toward Duyren, the other toward Aaken, and the third over-runs the
country, and brings in the contribution. The States and Peers of the
Bishopric of Collen, are going again toward Neys, to remonstrate, that it is
impossible for them to raise in the country so great a sum of money, which
the Weymarish and Hessish Forces demand.

The King of France has made over by bills of exchange to the Princess of
Hessen, 100000. crowns for the continuation of the war: 23. Hessish Companies
of Foot and 12. Companies of Horse are marched through the county of Bentheim
de gone to join with the Weymarish Forces. 2500. Boores of the country of
Gulick have likewise joined with the Weymarish Army, threatening that they will
be revenged of the city of Collen, which as they pretend has been the undoing
of them.

From Amsterdam the 19. of Feb. the 1. of Mar. they write, that the city of
Aaken is likewise surrendered unto the Weymarish. They write also, that with the
last ships from Fernamboucque in Brazill, they have news, that the Hollanders
since the taking of the Island of S. Thomee, have likewise taken the Island and
City of Maranhaon.

From Paris they write, that the French in Catalonia had some overthrow given
them by the Spaniards, and that the King with the new Army makes the more
haste thitherwards. They write also, that the Cardinal of Savoy is to marry his
deceased brothers wife the Duchess, and that the said Cardinal has
delivered up to the King of France the strong Seaport Nizzade la Paglia.

Lower Saxony the 9.19. of Feb.
IT is certain, that the Imperial Army, together with the whole Artillery,
is passed at Tangermund the river of Elve, and the Shipbridge was presently
thereupon taken up and sent back toward Magdeburg. At this instant we hear,
that the Swedes are marching over the Garleber Plain toward New Haldesleben,
which lies three Dutch miles from Magdeburg, where they intend to keep their
randevouz, and then to march farther into the Bishopric of Halberstat and
Arbishoprick of Magdeburg; and this day diverse Swedish parties have been seen
about New Haldesleben: Whether now the whole Swedish Army will follow, time
will show.

Magdeburg the 13.23. of Feb.
THe Imperial Head quarter is now at Loburg, and the Bavarian at Mockeren,
three or four Dutch miles from hence. The Shipbridge lies yet at Rogen, four
Dutch miles from hence; which by reason of the continual high winds, cannot be
brought hither; but the Swedish Army, we hear, is now going downwards.
General Major Coningsmarek with some Regiments of Horse, lies in and about
Garleben; what his design is, time will show. The Imperial Colonel Goldacker
and Colonel Feduarii have been with 1200. Horsemen in the Dukedom of
Mackelburg, where they had good success, especially at Wittemberg, where they
obtained above 200. sadled horses, with all their furniture, and the horsemen
they put to the sword.

Collen the 12.22. of Feb.
HEre in this city daily new forces are levied. Since the taking of Lin and
Kempen, the castle of Hulekrath and the city of Duyren is likewise surrendered
unto the Weymarish. In a word, they do yet what they list: Yesterday they were
mustered, and they were found above 20000. strong in the field, besides those
that they have lying here and there in Garrison. The Lorraine Troops lie yet at
Bobers, which are but in a poor case.

Hamborongh the 12.22. of Feb.
ALbeit the King of Denmark has caused his Camp before this City to be razed
and demolished, notwithstanding he begins to form another, and to that end
has sent to Gluckstat for ten Pieces of Ordnance more to be brought unto him.
The said King has likewise commanded, that all men's names throughout all his
dominions shall be set down, to employ them in War by sea and land, whenever
occasion shall require it, whereof the Magistrates in the Cities have made a
beginning already. The Dremblinger Boores have taken in unto them 1000.
Imperial Musketeers, which offer to venture their lives with them.

From the Swedish Camp they write, that Colonel Seckendorff, a Franconian
Gentleman, had correspondence with the Imperialists, and his plot was to
provide a great banquet for the chiefest Swedish Commanders, and when they had
been soundly drunk, the Imperialists should have fallen upon the Swedish Army,
and thus overthrown the same, which was discovered by the Trumpeter, whom he
had sent with a Letter to the Imperialists; for when he was passing through the
Swedish Centrie and Watch, he was questioned, and found inconstant in his
speeches; whereupon a suspicion was presently cast upon him, and after that the
Letter was found with him, the whole baseness was discovered, whereupon the
aforesaid Colonel Seckendorff was laid hold on, and being condemned by the law
of War, his head was cut off. He intended likewise to revolt with his whole
Regiment from the Swedish Army, and to come over to the Imperial Army. This
day the Count of Aversperg arrived here, who shall be employed in the Treaty of
Peace. The Swedish Forces are yet resolved to fight. And albeit General
Torstenson is yet very weak, notwitstanding he does not omit to give audience,
counsel, command, and the like, and follows the business to his utmost
abilities.

Brunswick the 12.22. of Feb.
THe Imperial Ambassador Doctor Kallsmith is daily expected again at Goslar,
who brings the ratification from the Emperor of the Treaty agreed upon
between the Imperial, Brunswich, and Luneburgish Ambassadors.

Berlin the 12.23. of Feb.
ABout New Holdesleben, three Dutch miles from Magdebueg, appear daily strong
Swedish parties, and it is not known as yet, whether the whole Swedish Army
will follow; and if they do not follow with the whole Army, yet questionless
they will command strong parties toward the strong Castle of Mansfeld, to
relieve the same: And it is certain, that the Bavarian Colonel Wolff, who lay
with 5. companies of Dragooners in Osterburg, was surprised by the Swedes, and
all his men were put to the sword, and taken prisoners, insomuch that no more
but his Lieutenant Colonel escaped. Whether Colonel Wolff himself be slain or
taken prisoner, is not yet known. The Swedes upon the Castle of Mansfeld
defend themselves yet stoutly. 5. days ago, an Officer of Col: Dracmullers
Regiment was sent into the Castle, which is not yet come back again: the
reason of it is not known. And at this instant we receive intelligence, that
the Swedish General Major Coningsmureck is going thitherwards with 8.
Regiments of horse, who has order to relieve the said castle. The Swedish
troops in Silesia have surprised the city of Sprenberg, plundered the same, and
put some of the Inhabitants to the sword, and carried away prisoner the Lo:
Ulrich Wentzell, Baron of Biberstein.

Minden the 13.23. of Feb.
THe Swedes have yet their Head quarters at Saltzwedel, and the Imperialists at
Stendel. The Imperialists upon the persuasion of General Major Pfuel, who has
served many years in the Swedish Army, and is now with Arch-dake Leopold
William, have been moved to advance thus far against the Swedish Army, telling
them that the same was but weak, starved, and conditioned in such a manner,
that if they would now take their advantage, they might easily overthrow and
totally extirpate the same: But being that they found his report false, and the
said Army in a good condition and Posture, it is believed, that the
Imperialists will shortly return back again, and the Swedes (being they have
received certain intelligence, that the Imperialists are not by far so strong
as it was reported, as also that the Bavarian Army by reason of the
successful progress of the Weymarish and Hessish Forces, will be drawn off
from the Imperial Army) march directly against the Imperialists.

Wesel the 13.23. of Feb.
THe Weymarish have surprised the Boores that lay entrenched in the village of
Adelgeest, and most of them put to the sword. They make the inhabitants every
where pay great sums of money unto them. About 1500. dead bodies of Lamboys
soldiers lie yet unburied, and are eaten up by the dogs, which causes a very
noisome stink.

Hamborough the 14.24. of Feb.
LAndgrave John of Hessen Parmstat, who has been General for the Duke of
Luneburg, has agreed (as we hear) with the French Ambassador, to deliver
over unto his Master the King of France, 2000. horsemen and 3000. Foot: On the
other side, the said King shall pay unto him 100000. crowns, and declare him
Marshall de France. The said Ambassador has likewise desired Christian
Lodwyck Duke of Luneburk to turn over unto his Master the King of France one
Regiment of horse, and two Regiments of Foot, for 50000. Rixdallers. From Lower
Saxony they write, that General Torstenson is broke with his Army from
Saltzwedel, and gone toward Adelberg and Danneberg. Mean General Major
Coningsmureck with 7. Regiments of Horse and 1000. Musketeers arrived the
other day at Ohsfeld in the Bishopric of Magdeburg: Whether he will relieve
the Castle of Mansfeld, or attempt something else, time will show. The
Imperial Colonel Goldacker, and Feduarii, which were lately commanded abroad,
have caused great terror and fear in the Dukedom of Magdeburg, because they
surprised the City of Wittenbach, wherein they cut off a whole Swedish Company,
and used the Inhabitants cruelly. The Imperial Army is now passing the river
of Elve, and going toward Wittemberg.

Collen the 17.27. of Feb.
ON Sunday last the Castle of Hulekrath was forced to yield upon discretion
unto the Weymarish, the common Soldiers forced the Officers to it, though they
could have held out eight days longer: In the said Castle they have obtained a
great booty, the 2000. Weymarish Soldiers that lay before it, are now
following the Army toward Duyren, which City the Weymarish begun the other
day to batter; and since we hear the City is surrendered. A part of the said
Army is gone toward Sulick; and being they intercepted Letters by the way
sent by the Elector of Collen to the Commander in it, wherein he commanded him
to make no opposition against the Weymarish, but agree with them in the best
manner he could. Which Letter the Weymarish sent unto the Commander with
threatening words, to hang him and all his soldiers, if he did make opposition
contrary to his Electors order and command: Whereupon he came presently to a
composition, and did march out with bag and baggage: but being the Weymarish
Forces were then likewise marching thitherwards, the said Commander with his
soldiers was persuaded to take pay under the Weymarish, and afterward those
in Eyskirchen did the like, whereupon a part of the Army went toward the
Mosel to look to the Lorraine Forces: Hatsfelds Forces lie yet still, and
Hatsfeld himself lies sick here in this City.

Collen the 23. of Feb. 5. of March.
THis Bishopric and the next neighboring Countries are totally ruinated by
the Weymarish. The City of Aaken is in great danger; The Magistrates of the said
City will not suffer the Townes-men to carry away any goods, and take up 500.
men for the defense of the said City: Only to the Clergy they have given way
to send away their Church Ornaments. Mean while the Weymarish play the masters
in these countries, and take one place after another. They keep themselves
close together, that they may not easily be surprised. Conte du Guebrian, who
is made of the Order of the holy Ghost, has his head quarter at Neys, which
City he will keep for his King, and has put the Duke of Wittemberg into it for
Governor, and the Count of Eberstein will keep the city of Kempen for the
Princess of Hessen. Tupadell lies at Sulick, and Rosa at Duyren; they get
infinite store of provision, and strengthen themselves exceedingly. Hatsfelds
Forces lie at Lintz, Hammerstein, and other places thereabouts, and long for
the Lorraine and Bavarian succor.

Leipsig the 19. of Feb. the 1. of March.
BEing the Elector of Collen and Field-marshall Hatsfeld sent one express
after another to solicit a speedy succor; whereupon the Bavarian Army is to
march toward the river of Rhine, and to that end is parted already from the
Imperial Army, and gone toward Magdeburg, where the Ship-bridge is taken up
again, and shall be laid over the Elve, betwixt Aaken and Barby. Mean while
the Swedes have taken the city of New Holdersleben, three Dutch miles from
Magdeburg, wherein commands now the Swedish Colonel Witzleben, who has
summoned the whole country as far as the river Saala, to come in and pay
contribution unto them.

Wesel 24. of Feb. the 6. of Mar.
FEw days ago the Weymarish summoned the City of Lechenich; the other day the
Deputies of the Bishopric of Collen came back from Neys to Collen, and have
brought a little more satisfaction. It is hoped, that the Weymarish will come
to a composition with the said Bishopric for a sum of money, that the
inhabitants may return again to their dwelling places. At Ordingen the
Weymarish have laid a Toll upon all ships that go to and fro. General Major
Tupadel has chased the Lorraine troops back again over the river of Mosel. A
part of Hatzfelds Cavallerie came over the Rhyne, intending to surprise some of
the Swedish Troops, but they failed, and were chased back.

From Cassel in Hessen the 22. of Feb. the 4. of Mar.
FRom Hildesheim they write, that the Imperial and Swedish Armies are parted
one from the other, without fighting; only the Swedes have ruinated some
Companies of the Imperial Curassiers. The Imperialists are passed the river of
Elve, and the Swedes are returned toward the country of Luneburg, and three
days ago they arrived at Wolffsburg.

Amsterdam the 23. of Feb. the 5. of Mar.
THe 26. of Feb. arrived here before this City the Pinace called Leyder Dorp,
which came from Fernambouc in Brazill the 8.18. of Jan. which brought these
avisoes following. The 25. of October 1641. our Admiral Lichthand and Colonel
Kom after some few shots made, took by composition the City and Castle of
Maranhaon; for as soon as our men were set ashoare, the Inhabitants set up a
white flag, desiring that they may enjoy the liberties of Inhabitants, in these
countries. This city is a great place, and called S. Laurence Maranhaon. The
Castle is very strong, provided with 45. Pieces of Ordnance, and the country
is very fruitful. The 13. of Jan. came hither from S. Tomee, three ships
manned with 700. men, amongst which were three companies of Bazillians, which
brought certain news, that our Admiral Houtebeene, or Wooden leg, had
likewise mastered the Island and City of S. Tomee. The guarrison that was in
it, was sent to Portugal. The besieged defended themselves stoutly, but at
last they were forced to yield. This city is of a reasonable bigness; after
the taking of it, the Admiral fell sick of the country sickness, and within
six days after, dyed of it: And of five companies the most soldiers also
dyed, amongst which is Captain Damer, Valet, Galant, two Lieutenants, four
Ancients, and other officers. In Guinea our Forces have likewise taken the Fort
of Atshyn, near Cape tres punctes, so that the Portugals have not a foot of
land more upon the coasts of Africa.

The Weymarish Forces demand of the city of Aaken, 12000. pair of Pistols,
12000. Carabins, and a great sum of money. The Bishop and Bishopric of
Collen have offered to pay unto them 440000, Rixdallers for a ransom; whether
they will accept of it, we shall hear.

At Dunkerke is openly proclaimed, that none upon pain of death shall
undertake to carry any succor or relief to the Rebels in Ireland.

Lions the 13.23. of Feb.
THis day his Majesty the King of Erance, together with the Cardinal
Richelieu, after that they had continued here for three days, are broke up
again, and gone toward Narbona, where the general randevouz shall be kept of
an Army of 40000. men, wherewith the King intends to march into Catalonia, and
to master the City of Terragona by force. The Infanterie was carried by sea,
and the Cavallerie went by land: It is thought that the said Army when it has
made an end with Catalonia, will march toward Italy. The new levied Switzers
shall be enquartered in the Dukedom of Lorraine.

Brunswick the 15.25. of Feb.
AFter that the Imperialists had passed the river of Elve, at Tangermund, the
Swedes enquartered themselves in the Bishopric of Magdeburg and Halberstat,
within four Dutch miles from hence. Coningsmareck with the whole Cavallerie
has his head quarter at Ohsfeld.

Aaken the 19. of Feb. the 1. of Mar.
ON Thursday last the City of Duyren after six days siege was surrendered unto
the Weymarish and Hessish Forces; and although it was agreed upon, that but
600. of them should come into the town, notwithstanding there entered into the
town two Hessish Regiments, and three Weymarish, in so much that in every
house lie 20.30. or 40. soldiers; and besides, the Citizens must now ransom
their own persons, wives and children, and pay intolerable contribution. They
demand of the Duke of Newburg to contribute monthly 240000. Rixdallers; and of
the Elector of Collen, 200000. Rixdallers, and that for the space of six
months. In a word, their intent is to ruinate wholly this and the Elector of
Collens country. We expect them now every hour before this city, and we are
resolved to defend our selves as long as we can, because we see that no
promise and accord is kept by them. We begin now before this City, where it is
weakest, to raise Bulwarks. The said Weymarish have likewise taken 4. hours
going from hence the Castle of Wetten, and obtained a great booty in it, and
put 40. men into it for a guarrison. They have likewise mastered the Castle of
Eyes, and afterward returned back again. The country of Monsiou has likewise
agreed with them, where they used the inhabitants better then in Duyren. From
Cornelis Muster all the inhabitants are fled, and not one man staid in it. Our
Magistrates continue still to levy soldiers for the defense of this City, and
they have got already a thousand men.

From the Swedish Head quarter at Saltzwedle the 12.22. of February.
COncerning Colonel Seckendorff who kept correspondence with the Imperialists,
the business stands thus. The said Colonel had here before desired of General
Torstenson a Pass to send his Trumpeter to the Imperial Army, to get a Pass
likewise of Arch Duke Leopold William for his wife, which was near her time to
lie in, that he might have her the safer carried to Erfund, which Pass he
obtained in November last. The 1.11. of this month he sent his Trumpeter with
other sealed letters which he had hid in the Saddle toward the Imperial
Army, but when the said Trumpeter came to the passage Abeburg within two Dutch
miles from hence, and his pass was seen by the Major of General Major
Coningsmareck that the same was dated above two months ago, he took it into
consideration, whether he should suffer the said Trumpeter to pass, whereupon
he lighting down from hence to answer it, and to make his Pass good, the
horse shaked the letters out of the saddle upon the straw, the Trumpeter not
knowing of it rides back to relate the business to his Col: after his
departure a young puppidog coming thither by chance, and tumbling upon the
straw, finds one of the letters, and plays with it in his mouth, so long,
that a Captain of horse spies it, takes the letter from him, breaks it open,
and after reading of the same, understands, that Seckendorff keeps
correspondence with the Imperialists, makes it known to the present Officers,
and afterward searching, they find another Letter in the straw, whereupon both
were sent to General Torstenson: Mean while Col: Seckendorff having
understood of the Trumpeter, how he had been staid by the above Major, comes
hither on horseback to complain to the Ambassador Grabbe, of the affront done
unto him; and having hardly been with him half an hour, and just at dinner
time, comes in a Captain of Horse with 30. Horsemen, who puts presently a
Pistol and naked sword to his breast, desiring to yield himself a prisoner;
whereupon he was presently carried to the Towne-Hall, and the 2.12. of this
month he was examined by the general Auditour, and all his writings were
searched into, amongst which they found an Imperial Avocatorium. The third day
about nine of the clock in the morning, he was brought before the Marshall Law,
where General Major Coningsmareck was President; and after reading of the
Letters, and examination of the same, he was condemned to be beheaded; and
although by a long speech, that his correspondence concerned but his own
person, and not the public, hoped to prolong his life; and especially
considering his children, he prayed so earnestly, that most part of the high
Officers that sat in the Counsel, wept like children: Yet nothing would help,
but was brought down from the Towne-Hall, and upon the market place in the old
City his head cut off, but his corpse was next day after buried in a decent
manner. Our Army is come back again from Osterburg, which shall be
enquartered somewhat more asunder, as far as Lawenburg; to which end diverse
Regiments of Horse are passed already through this City, and marching
thitherwards. The Head quarter and the general stave remain here; the
Imperialists have sent 1000. men, most Dragooners, over the Elve, and had a
design in hand against Colonel Slanghs Regiment that lay in Garlau, which the
7.17. of this month was surprised by the Imperialists, but they lost no more
but 30. Horsemen and about 100. horses; the rest retired into the Castle, but
their baggage was plundered for the most part, and afterward the Imperialists
returned back again. The Luneburgish Treaty at Gostar was held in most places
to have been ended, but the Dukes of Brunswick and Luneburg sent a large Letter
to General Torstenson, certifying therein, that as yet not the least thing was
concluded, and withal assured him, that they would agree upon nothing, that in
any way should be prejudicial to the Crown of Sweden, or the Protestant
cause, nor that they intended to show any hostility against the same, but
General Torstenson has answered them in a fair letter, admonishing them,
that they would be pleased to continue yet this small time with the Swedes,
till the treaty of a general Peace might begin: what they will resolve now,
time will show.

Collen the 19. of Feb. 1. of March.
ALL the Citizens here have been mustered, but none more, that had a hand in
the tumult with Doctor Osterman, are apprehended. The 14.24. of Feb. the Castle
of Hulekrath was likewise surrendered by composition unto the Weymarish, and the
most part of the garrison took pay under the Weymarish. The parties overrun
the whole country, finding little opposition; they have now the whole Lower
Bishopric of Collen, excepting the Cities of Sonst and Keyserswerth under
their devotion, out of which they fetch an infinite treasure of gold, silver,
and money: In Bebert they got such a treasure, that it is not to be expressed,
more then 40. Mules could carry. They have summoned by open beating of the
drum, the Inhabitants of Lin, to come home again, offering to furnish them
again with cattle and horses. General Lamboy had almost made an escape out of
his enprisonment by the help of a Boore and a Mass Priest near a Cloister,
that close stands on the wall of Neys, and had got into a Boat already, but was
fetched back again.

From Upper Alsatia the 24. of Feb. the 6. of Mar.
IN Switzerland a Cow brought to the world two children, a boy and a girl; the
Cow is burned, but the children are nursed up, till it may be seen, whether
they will have a humane nature, and be reasonable creatures, then they shall be
baptized.

Swaben 25. of Feb. the 7. of Mar.
THe other night Field-marshall Horn lay at Goppingen, and from thence went to
Kirchen, and last night he lay at Tubingen; he shall be brought to Strasburg,
where he shall be exchanged for John de Werth.

Collen the 24. of Feb. the 6. of Mar.
THe Weymarish Forces lay for a while still, but now they are marching toward
Hensberg, where they will find more resistance, because they keep no promise or
accord. Those of Duyren are sorry now, that they did not defend themselves to
the last man. At this instant we hear that a part of their Army has
besieged Lechenich. General Hatsfeld has desired of this City, five of the
greatest Pieces of Ordnance, together with all the furniture, and some 100. men
of our new levied Forces, but it is thought that they will afford him nothing,
which will defer his going to field. The King of France is marching with a
strong Army toward Catalonia, who carries along with him 10. millions of
gold. Although Maximilian, young Duke of Bavaria, is chosen Coadjutor of the
Bishop of Collen, notwithstanding the Duke of Lorraine for diverse reasons
protests against it, pretending that the said Duke of Bavaria has gotten some
voices by corrupting them with moneys.

Hall the 22. of Feb. the 4. of Mar.
THe Swedish General Major Coningsmarck with 2000. Horsemen and 1000.
Dragooners marched toward the Hartz, and yesterday about 9. of the clock in
the morning arrived before the Castle of Mansfeld, where he surprised the
Imperial and Saxon Troops of Horse and Foot, took most of them Prisoners, put
some to the sword, and the rest retired hither to Hall, Querfurt, Moersburg,
and Sangerhausen; Colonel Baron de Four and his Lieutenant Colonel being both
wounded, and having lost 3. Standards, came to Moersburg, two Saxon Captains of
Dragooners, Captain Kluge and Captain Leheman, and Sergeant Major Rickard
were wounded, and taken prisoners, those that fled into Eysleben are likewise
taken prisoners, and the city was pillaged 6. hours long by the Swedes, and
afterward marched back again toward Mansfeld.

Moersburg the 23. of Feb. the 5. of Mar.
THe Imperial Colonel Baron de Four is fled hither from before Mansfeld, but
before his retreat, he beat the Swedish Vantgard five or six times back, but
they were too strong for him, they had 8. Squadrons of Horse, and 1000.
Dragooners. Col: Four has lost many of his Horse, notwithstanding he carried
away prisoners some of the Swedes, which relate, that the Swedish Artillery is
gone from Saltzwedel and Luckaw, toward Minden, and the river of Wesar, and
that the whole Army is following.

Lutzen the 24. of Feb. the 6. of Mar.
THe City of Eisleben the Swedes have wholly pillaged, and they have likewise
taken prisoner Colonel Kochs wife, who lately dyed of the Consumption. We
hear, that the Foot Forces of Colonel Koch are for the most part slain, as
also Lieutenant Colonel Shlick, who commanded them. Baron de Four, Sergeant
Major Shafgotch, and the Lieutenant of Col: Kochs Regiment, are wounded, and
brought to Moersburg.

Vienna the 23. of Feb. the 5. of Mar.
THey hope here still that the Palatine Treaty will have a happy success,
because the Emperor (as is said) has likewise declared himself concerning
the King of Spain, to restore the Lower Palatinate.

Gulick the 25. of Feb. the 7. of March.
THis City is so full of the poor Country people, that all cellars and
streets, together with the walls, are filled with men and cattle, which are
starved for want of food. The Count of Eberstein, General of the Hessish
Army, has sent a Letter to the Spanish Governouthere, desiring him to
continue the neutrality; but the said Governor has referred the Count of
Eberstein to Brussels, to Don Francisco di Melo, Governor of Flanders.

Aaken the 25. of Feb. 7. of Mar.
I Cannot but certify you in few words, of the distressed state and condition
of this City. Whereas the Citizens here intended to send their best goods with
a strong Convoy to Mastricht, they have been intercepted by the Weymarish, and
all the goods taken away to the value of a Tun of gold. Our Magistrates have
sent their Deputies to the Weymarish Generals, to what end is not known.

Durgen the 26. of Feb. 8. of Mar.
AFter that the Weymarish are come into this City, they have not kept the least
condition of their accord made with us, but enquartered here five regiments, as
namely, three of horse, and two Regiments of Dragooners; and besides, they have
brought hither so many horses, which they have taken up and down in the
Country, that in this City about 11000. horses stand, the Stables, Halls, and
Parlours of most houses are filled up with horses, and if the Weymarish have time
to mount themselves, and be furnished with saddles and Pistols, they will form
an incredible Army; they have pilladged all houses, taken a note of all the
come, amounting to above 100000. quarters, and besides, they begin now to
ransom all persons, every one according to his ability, and that which is the
worst of all, they keep no promise and accord to no body, which makes the
people quite desperate, and believe, that the Turks cannot deal worse with
them; by which means they draw all young trades men to their side, because,
wheresoever they come, all things are a prey unto them: And of all this our
misery and loss, our own Prince is the only cause, because he spoke so much
of the neutrality, and made thereby the inhabitants secure that they did not
send away their best goods.

Eyskirchen the 26. of Feb. 8. of Mar.
BY these heavy Guarrisons and plundrings, which the neutrality of our Prince
has brought upon us, our Prince summons now anew the contribution very
earnestly, for the Weymarish and Hessish forces. Here about and as far as
Sulpich lies in every Gentleman's house a company of horse, of a 100. 120. and
130. men, all their horses they have gotten in the Country, they want only
arms, and it is to be feared, that the Cities do treat with them to remain
free, and that they will furnish them, which within few days will come to
light, because out of all quarters they are going toward Hengsperg, and let
Aaken alone, it is supposed that those of Aaken have agreed with them. From all
Gentlemen's houses all the corn, bacon, and provision is carried toward
Sulpich, Neus, and so forwards to the next Holland Guarrison. They have such a
number of horses, that they can mount at least 12000. fresh horsemen. We are in
a most miserable condition, the succor stays so long away: it is feared, that
when it comes it will he too weak: In the mean time the Weymarish grow
stronger and stronger.

Collen the 27. of Feb. the 9. of Mar.
THE Queen Mother is arrived at Wesel, and is coming for Holland; the French
in Piccardie draw together, intending to go to field, and to make a diversion,
because the Spaniards intend to besiege Bassee. The French King is passed
Narbona, and hasteneth his march toward Catalonia.

Hamborough the 22. of Feb. 4. of Mar.
THe Swedes lie at this present at Saltzwedel, where the head quarter is, and
diverse of their Regiments lie enquartered at Garleben, Osterburg, and Luneburg,
and some lie at Danneberg, Luchaw, as far as Atlingburg, along the River of
Elve. Gen: Major Stolhans is at Stralsond, where likewise is the Lord Lichtmar,
Ambassador for the Electour of Brandenburg. As soon as the same are
dispatched, the Lord John Oxenstern will go from thence with a train of 15.
Coaches to Osnabrugge and Munster, where a general treaty of Peace shall be
held, but Stolhans, as soon as he has received the moneys, is to return back
to his Army. The K. of Denmark keeps a Diet at Coppenhagen, intending to put
himself into a posture of war, because Holstein, and the County of Shaumburg
and Pinneberg are a thorn in the Emperors eyes.

Erfund the 23. of Feb. the 5. of Mar.
AFter that the Swedish General Major Coningsmarck had relieved the strong
Castle of Mansfeld, he returned with 600. Prisoners back over the Hartz to the
Army, who has ransomed Nordhausen for 6000. but Sangerhausen for 3000.
Rixdallers, and many other places, he pillaged. General Torstensons Army lies
yet in and about Saltzwedel. The Imperial and Bavarian Forces are arrived in
Misnia and Duringen: At Franckenhausen and Naumburg is the Headquarter.

Leipsig the 23. of Feb. the 5. of Mar.
YEsterday the Imperial Army broke up from Prena, and marched hither toward
Shleunitz. Yesterday Piscolomini himself came hither into this City, intending
to meet Archduke Leopold William at Wartzen.

Leipsig the 27. of Feb. 9. of Mar.
THe Bavarian Army which passed the 24. of this month at Aaken, over the
ship-bridge, marched through the Principality of Anhalt, toward Cothen and
Delitsh, and they are to march toward Moersburg, Lubenaw, and Skeiditz, and
from thence toward Zeitz and Newstat, and so forwards toward Cronach, and the
river of Main and Rhyne: But the Imperial Army under the command of
Piccolominie, which is likewise broke up and passed the river of Elve, is to
have its head quarter at Zeitz; and the Foot-Forces at Hall, Weissenfels,
Maersburg, Naumburg, Jena, and thereabouts, by the river Saala; and the
Cavallerie along the river of Mulda, to keep a watchful eye upon the Swedish
Army; And for that Coningsmarck has relieved the Castle of Mansfeld,
therefore the Imperial Colonel de Four with his Troops is arrived at
Moersburg. Sangerhausen the Swedes have ransomed for 2000. Rixdallers, and
taken along with them some of the Senate. Out of the Marquisate of Brandenburg
we have no other news, but that the Imperial Forces under the Duke of Saxon
Lawenburg, are gone to their Winter quarters. Mean while Col: Wanke has
pillaged the City of Forced, and done great harm in Lusatia. General Stolhans
is come with 50. Horsemen to Sletin, to solicit for the Winter Quarters: in
whose place General Major Lillietweck has the command, and at Cressen makes
great preparations with fire-work, scaling ladders, and other necessaries.

Collen the 2.12. of Mar.
THe Weymarish Forces have got a great number of horses in these countries, and
mounted the most part of their Foot forces. They have mustered their Army, and
found the same 22000. strong, besides those that lie here and there in
guarrison.

Norimberg the 4.14. of Mar.
THe Bavarian Forces are now in the way toward the river of Main and Rhyne,
and so to Collen. The Imperial Forces are marching into Misnia. The Swedish
General Major Coningsmarck is following, and no question is but Gen:
Torstenson himself will follow with the maine Army. The Bavarian General
Waht is arrested by Archduke Leopold William. It is reported, that the
Imperialists and Bavarians have not left above 4000. Foot of their Armies.

From the Country of Wirtemberg the 27. of Feb. the 9. of Mar.
THe Swedish Governor at Hehenwiel keeps those at Constance in a continual
Alarm, has burned Engen and Slecko, and makes many places pay contribution
unto him.

Collen the 3.13. of Mar.
OUr Magistrates have as yet resolved nothing upon the three points propounded
by Genesis Hatsfeld: mean while the levying of Forces is strongly continued, as
also the building of the Ship-bridge. The other night some of Gen: Hatsfeld his
Forces had an enterprise in hand against the City of Eyskirchen, being strong
about 1500. Horse and Foot, amongst which were 2. a 300. Boores; their intent
was to blow open the gates with Petards, and to surprise the Weymarians there,
but took no effect. From Brussels they write, that the Duke of Lorraine is
entered anew into the King of Spains service, the Conditions are kept secret,
and that an extraordinary Express coming from Spain is arrived there with
Bills of Exchange of 3. millions, and 150000. Crowns, which causes amongst the
Spaniards great joy.

Gulick the 3.13. of Mar.
OUr Governor has order from Don Francisco di Melo to keep the neutrality
with the Hellish forces. Wherefore the subjects of the Bishop of Collen and of
the County of Gulick, dwelling near this City, as also at Erchlentz and
Kerpen, are now carried away prisoners, which the Hessish and Weymarish
ransom, in so much that they can now bring away all their booty without any
hinderance, which is to be admired.

Duyren the 3.13. of March.
ALL the Citizens here, women, children, and families, as also all Boores, are
now ransomed, in so much that it is not to be expressed what store of money the
weymarish and Hessish Forces bring together: In these Countries they have
gotten and taken away above 20000. horses serviceable for war.

Leipsig the 4.14. of March.
THe Bavarian Army is marching toward the river of Rhyne, to join with
General Hatsfeld. Yesterday 5. Regiments of Foot about 1000. strong, marched
through the Suburbs of this City toward Lutzen and Zeitz, and the Cavallerie
passed through Skeiditz and Harburg. There comes still one Express after
another to them to hasten their march, because the Elector of Collen has great
need of them, and the Imperialists would likewise feign keep that Army here.
The Imperial Army has its head quarter at Brembt, 4. Dutch miles from hence,
2. Dutch miles from Hall, in the way toward Bitterfeld. The Forces are not yet
all come over the river of Elve; in their main march the Ship-bridge broke,
whereof some ships were driven down toward Magdeburg: the rest of the
Imperial Army shall be carried over the river of Elve, at Wittemberg, or
Torgaw, to be enquartered on the Frontiers of Bohemia. The said Army is
mightily consumed, and the soldiers remaining look very poor.

Collen the 6.16. of Mar.
THe Weymarish and Hessish Forces at this time keep their randevouz at Duyren,
and found their Army complete 22000. strong, and do daily strengthen
themselves. Hatsfelds and the Spanish Troops begin to draw together; they long
for the Bavarian succor. Few days ago they had some enterprise in hand
against the Weymarish, that lie in Eyskirchen, intending to blow open a gate
with Petards, but failed of their enterprise. The City of Aaken is yet in great
danger and fear, and the townes-men fortify themselves as well as they can,
being resolved to defend themselves to the last man.

From Narbona of the 8.18. of March they write for certain, that the whole
Kingdom of Arragon is revolted from the King of Spain, being resolved to
choose a new King. 5000. Foot and 2000. Horse of the French Forces are already
amongst them to aid and assist them. The King of France in person with the
maine Army was marching toward Coluvre to besiege the same place, because the
City of Perpignano and other places thereabouts have still been relieved from
thence.

Hamborough the 10.20. of Mar.
THe Swedish Ambassador has brought here 2000. barrels of corn, which shall
be carried to the Swedish Army. The Swedish General Major Coingsmarck has
been again with some Troops as far as Oshersleben, which passage he viewed
very narrowly: and of the City of Helmstat he demanded a great store of corn
to victual therewith the Castle of Wolffsburg. The Imperial Forces lie
enquartered in Misnia and Duringen; in some places betwixt the river of Saala
and Elve, lie 14 a 1500. men a piece to keep a watchful eye to the design of
the Swedish Army, in so much that the Dukedom of Saxony will suffer again
very much, and by all appearance, it will cause a great famine in that
Country. The Bavarian Forces make all the haste they can to march toward the
river of Rhyne, to join with Field-marshall Hatsfeld.

Gollen the 10.20. of Mar.
ALL the Generals of the Weymarish Army have been together at Neys, where they
kept Counsel of War. Conte de Guebrian, General of the French Forces, lies
with the Infanterie, and Artillery about Lechenich. One of our Convoyes
coming from thence hitherwards with corn and other commodities, was by 200.
Weymarish Horsemen surprised in the village of Lubler, which slew some of our
Townes-men and soldiers, took from them all the corn and goods, fired six
houses, and chased the fugitives to the very gates of this City. Afterward
they took a view of our new builded Ship-bridge, in so much that we were feign
to play with our Canons amongst them. General Major Rosa with some troops
has stragled as far as Bonne, where he pillaged diverse Villages, and
afterward marched toward Mastricht, to fetch from thence 14. great pieces of
Ordnance, which the States of Holland do lend to the Weymarish Army; there are
likewise 6000. French Soldiers expected from France to join with the said
Army. The 50. Companies which the States of Holland have cashiered, are
likewise marching thitherwards to join with the said Army.

Leipsig the 11.21. of Mar.
YEsterday Archduke Leopold William went from his Head quarter at Skeuditz to
Seitz. The Imperial Regiments are now all gone to their assigned quarters, as
also the three Regiments, which at the breaking of the bridge could not pass
the river of Elve, and lay hitherto in the Suburbs of Wittemberg. Those 3.
Regiments are now likewise passed by this City. From Magdeburg they write, that
Col: Kinsky and Col: Hoecking are set are liberty, and gone from thence to the
Swedish Army, but Col. Birckenfeld is staid yet there, who hopes to be
exchanged for the Imperial Colonel Count Pompei. The Shedish horsemen in
strong parties overrun all the country. General Major Coningsmarck in his
return from Mansfeld has pillaged diverse cities and market towns, and for
his own particular got a booty of 60000. Rixdallers. From Silesia they write,
that the Imperial forces there are to keep these 3. months long in their
quarters, to refresh themselves; mean while Stolhans his horsemen overrun all
the country thereabouts, especially Lower Lusatia.

Collen the 11.21. of Mar.
FEw days since the Weymarish have been with 1000. horsemen about Bonne, and
fired some houses; before Lechenich they appeared likewise very strong, and
skirmished with the Imperial Guarrison there; afterward they met with a
Convoy, which was coming from thence hitherwards, which they defended, and
took from them 50. horses, for a booty. A strong troop of them appeared
likewise by this City, which had an aim at our Ship-bridge: we keep now
strong watch near unto it, and diverse Courtguards are builded. General Major
Rosa has been with the Governor of Mastricht to fetch away from them the 14.
promised pieces of Ordnance.

Leipsig the 12.22. of Mar.
THE Bavarian army, which is passed by this City, has taken its way toward
Zeits and Gera, and so for Franconia. The Imperial Army whose Head quarter is
in Zeitz, lies betwixt the river of Saala and Elve, and some regiments here
abouts, and in the Principality of Anhalt, in so much that this Country will
now fully be ruinated. The Bavarian Army is so much ruinated, that it is not
to be expressed. Of 9000. men are hardly left 4000. able and fighting men, and
the Officers themselves confess, if they must march to Collen without
refreshing, that the rest will for the most part be fully ruinated. In their
passing by this City, many being half starved, could not follow the Army, and
were forced to stay behind. The Imperial Army is not much less consumed and
ruinated, which consists of 35. Regiments both horse and foot, 8. a 9000.
strong. In a word, the relieving of Wolffenbutle, and the marching over the
river of Elve, has consumed many brave and stout soldiers, in so much that
the said Army is weakened exceeding much. It is still reported, that Archduke
Leopold William and General Piccolomini are to go into the Low Countries, and
in stead of them Duke Francis Albert of Saxon Lawenburg, is to command both
this and the Silesian Army.

Shweitz the 9.19. of Mar.
THe Burgundians about 1500. strong, under the command of the new Governor
Baron de Lecy, have taken the Castle of Crimors, and lie now before Poligni, so
that their neutrality comes to nothing. The Swedish Governor in Hohenwiel
urges much Rosenegge and Homburg for contribution, and goes about now to levy
new forces. The like does Col. John Rosa.

Strasburg the 11.21. of Mar.
THe exchanging betwixt Gustavus Horn and General John de Werth, shall be
performed on Monday next about 9. of the clock in the morning, betwixt
Offenburg and Bryssack in the open field; each of them is to have for a Convoy
100. horsemen, 1. Lieutenant Colonel, and 2. Captains, so that all things shall
faithfully be performed.

Magdeburg the 12.22. of March.
THe other day the Ships and other materials of the Imperial Ship-bridge were
brought hither again. At this instant we hear, that the Swedes draw now
together all their Forces, and keep their randevouz about Osterburg. It is
believed, that they will march into this, and into the Bishopric of
Halberstat; and because they bring all their Artillery and Ammunition to the
randevouz, it is believed that they will not long lie still.

Skeuditz the 13.23. of Mar.
Archduke Leopold William has his headquarter yet here; and this day the most
part of his baggage was carried toward Zeitz: and we hear, that he himself
will continue here yet these two or three days, because the whole Cavallerie
shall be provided with victuals for ten days, and then be commanded over the
river of Saala, because the Swedish Army is broke up, and marching toward
Halberstat.

Leipsig the 13.23. of Mar.
YEsterday the Count Broy and General Major Sperreutter were commanded abroad
with 600. Imperial horsemen, to descrie the Swedish Army, which (as it
seems) has an aim at Halberstat, and intend to surprise the Imperialists in
their quatters here and there.

Gulick the 13.23. of Mar.
IT is not to be expressed what riches the Weymarish Forces get in this
Country, and in the Bishopric of Collen, because these Countries before their
coming were full of riches and provision. They ransom now highly all men,
villages and Castles; they carry all the riches away out of the Country to the
next Holland Guarrisons, and the Bavarian succor is yet far off.

Collen the 13.23. of Mar.
FIeld-marshall Hatsfelds Army lies along the river of Rhyne, on the side of
the country of Bergh; the Country people will afford them nothing without
ready money, and before the coming of the Bavarian succor they dare not
venture to come over the Rhyne, because the Weymarish Forces are so exceeding
strong. The Imperial Colonel Hiacinto di vera, who was taken prisoner in the
last battle, when General Lamboy was taken, has made an escape in a Boors
habit, and is come from Neys to Keyserswerth. The Imperial common soldiers
run daily away in a great number, and take pay under the Weymarish. The
Weymarish have promised unto the Duke of Newburg, that they will not meddle
with Bruggen, Mullem, Hinsberg, Born, Gulick, Hambach, Eshweiler, and Kolberg;
if so be that the state of war will permit it, the rest of the country of
Gulick, and the Archbishopric of Collen, are taxed to pay monthly unto the
Weymarish 37176. Rixdallers. Yesterday the Weymarish appeared again very
strong before this City, and killed some of our townes-men: whereupon our
soldiers about 3000. strong, marched without the gate, and put themselves in
battalia, but nothing passed between both parties. General Major Rosa has
obtained of the Governor of Mastricht 14. great Pieces of Ordnance. Yesterday
arrived here Col: Dunckel, who shall be exchanged fer the Marquess of Durlach.
It is certain, that the States of Holland have cashiered 3. Regiments, which
have taken pay again under the Weymarish: and it is certain also, that 6000.
fresh soldiers are coming from France to join with the Weymarish Army. Don
Francisco di Melo makes preparations to besiege la Bassee, wherefore the French
draw likewise together about Amiens to make a diversion.

Collen the 14.24. of March.
AT this present 2000. Weymarish lie here about the Weyer gate, on the other
side of Lazarus house. They have about them, as is reported, two Mortar Pieces;
what their design is, is not known. The Bavarian succor about 5000. strong,
is passed by Coburg, and is is to be here within 14. days. The 8.18. of this
month, the Imperialists that lie at Keyserswerth, about 150. strong, have
defeated not far from Neys a Weymarish Convoy coming from Wesel, and obtained
from them a very rich booty.

Bremen the 14.24. of March.
THe Emperor has sent 300000. Florens to Duke Francis Albert of Saxon
Lawenburg, to pay the Imperial Army; and upon the said Duke he has bestowed
the Generalship of the Empire, and it is yet for certain reported, that Arch
Duke Leopold William is to have the government in Braband. The States of
Moravia have consented to contribute to the Emperor 250000. Florens, for the
continuation of the war.

Norimberg the 14.24. of Mar.
THe Bavarian Forces could not get leave to lie still, and to refresh
themselves a little, because there comes still one Express after another to
hasten their march. From Coburg they are gone toward Coningshoven; from thence
they are to march through the Bishopric of Fulda, the nearest way toward the
Bishopric of Collen, they must make all the haste they can.

Antwerp the 14.24. of Mar.
THe other day in the afternoon, arrived here Don Francisco di Melo, who was
received by twenty companies of townes-men; all the Canons were discharged, and
Vollie shots made by the Musketeers. Yesterday in the afternoon he went up
to the Castle, where he was again welcomed with discharging of the Canons,
and this day he intends to go to visit all Forts. The Spanish Troops that lie
in the Country of Luxenburg, have order to keep themselves in a readiness. It
is thought that the said Don Francisco di Melo will assault within few days
the City of la Bassee. From hence are carried again some 1000. Crowns to
Brussels, and the levying of strong Forces is still continued in Artoys,
Hennault, and Flanders, in so much that the Spaniards intend to go to field
this year with a stronger Army then they did last year.

Collen the 16.26. of Mar.
THe Bavarian Army is making all the haste it can hitherwards, but the
soldiers tire themselves exceedingly, and look most pitifully. The Swedish
General Major Coningsmarck, as we hear, is going with some 1000. men at
Minden over the river of Wesar; It is thought, that his intent is to lie
betwixt the Bavarian Forces, and Field-marshall Hatsfelds Army, to hinder
their conjunction; 2. a 3000. of Hatsfelds horsemen are already drawing
together. The Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria made over to this City a great
sum of money to buy ammunition and armor for the soldiers. In the
Palatinate they take up fresh soldiers for the re-inforcing of the Companies.

Amsterdam the 19.29. of Mar.
AT Dunkerke are brought up two small prises coming from Barbados, laden
with wool and Tobacco. All our men of war are ready to go to sea. The Hessish
go about it to lay a man of War before Ordingen, which is to take the Custom
of all Ships going up and down. The Prince of Orange has charged Col: Morgan,
Governor of Bergen Opsohm, to keep in readiness 4. companies of his soldiers
to aid and assist with them Count William of Nassaw, as soon as he shall
receive order from him. We hear that the Spaniards draw together at Damme, and
that they have some design in hand. It is confirmed also, that a great sum
of money is made over from Spain by bills of exchange to Don Francisco di Melo,
amongst which are 60000. Pistolets to pay the Soldiers, which must have their
Companies complete against the 5.15. of April, and it is promised unto them,
that as soon as they come into the field, they shall have two months pay. At
Dunkerk is published by Proclamation, that to take all suspicion from the Crown
of England, no man shall undertake to carry any ammunition or men for Ireland,
to relieve the Rebels there. The Count of Harcourt is expected at Amiens, who
is to command the Army in Piccardie, which keeps its randevous about Peronia.
Into the court of the Duke of Longueville at Paris are brought 155. Ensigns
and Standards, which were gotten by the Weymarish Army in the overthrow of
Lamboys Army.

Franckford the 18.28. of Mar.
IT is certain, that Gustavus Horn and John de Werth are exchanged one for
another. Gustavus Horn is gone to Bryssack, and John de Werth to Munchen to the
D. of Bavaria. The Palatine treaty at Vienna by all appearance will be
dissolved, and come to nothing, because the Duke of Bavaria demands such
unreasonable conditions, that Sir Thomas Row, and the Palatine Ambassadors,
cannot with any reputation condescend unto it. With the last letters from
Vienna they write, that the treaty with the Emperor of Turkey which was
dissolved, is reassumed again, and that a peace is now concluded betwixt the
Roman Emperor and the Emperor of Turkey for 20. years. On Wenesday last was
christened here in our Church at Franckford a Jew, who had served in Lamboys
Army for a horseman, and had followed the war these 14. years.

Franckford the 25. of Mar. the 4. of Apr.
THis week arrived here a person of great quality, who brings news that the
Electour of Saxony is exceedingly offended with the Imperial enquarterings,
complaining that a heavier burden was not laid upon his subjects since the
beginning of these wars, which forces his subjects to run away, and to leave
their goods behind them, because the Imperial soldiers exact so much upon
them; whereas their promise made at first was, that every soldier should pay
for his victuals, which is not performed by them, but the subjects must furnish
them with all necessaries at their own charges. That party reports also, that
the Elector of Saxony has not so stately entertained now Archduke Leopold
William as he has done at former times; of whom our Electour asked at dinner,
how the treaty stood betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Luneburg; he
answered, that the Imperial ratification would show it; the Electour replied,
it may prove such another as the conclusion of Peace made at Prague: the said
Electour is extremely impatient. Archduke Leopold William is gone to Vienna,
Piccolomini is to follow after. Mean while Count du Soys is to command the
Army, and Duke Francis Albert is to assist him, which Duke will not go to
field before the latter end of June, and not under 20000. men complete; the
said Duke told openly, that he cleared Silesia of the Swedes more by favoring
of the Protestant religion, then by the sword. From Dresden they write that the
Electour of Saxony intends to seek a neutrality of the Swedes, because the
Electour of Brandenburg has done the like, and the Electour of Collen seeks
the same of the French King.

Hamborough the 25. of Mar. 4. of Apr.
THe King of Denmark is to keep a Dyete at Coppenhagen, and is preparing many
Ships for the Sea, and has given order to his forces to be ready for a march.
Our City fears that he aims at us, and we keep our selves in readiness
for it. The Swedish General Torstenson is broke up with the Army, and gone
over the Elve at Sandaw, some think that he will take his way toward
Silesia. General Major Coningsmarck has been abroad again, and pilladged
Quedlenburg, and other Towns and Villages, and returned with the booty to the
Army.

Coburg the 28. of Mar. the 7. of Apr.
THE Bavarian Forces are broke up again from hence, and are gone through
Franconia, toward the River of Rhyne. About Smalkalden are arrived 1000.
Imperial horsemen, and the rest of the Imperial forces are enquartered in
Misnia.

Collen the 28. of Mar. the 7. of Apr.
THe Ship-bridge for the Imperial and Bavarian Army is laid here over the
Rhyne, and on both sides of the River Sconces are made. The Spanish begin to
fortify the City of Gulick, thither are sent moneys and 20000. pallisadoes to
make it a place invincible: they expect also 2000. foot to reinforce their
Garrison. The Weymarish and French do in the Country what they please, and
lie about Aaken. They have taken Betshat, and batter now the Castle of
Bredenbent. General Major Rosa has mustered the Cuarrison at Duyren, and
found in it 7. a 8000. horses. General John de Werth is arrived at Augspurg,
and stately entertained by the Magistrates, from thence he goes to Munchen,
where a flying Army of 6000. men is found for him to go with it to the upper
part of the Rhyne.

Leipsig the 18. of Mar. 7. of Apr.
THE Letters from Berlin confirm that the Swedish Army is passed over the
River of Elve at Werben and Sandaw, and is going toward Silesia, to join with
Stolhans his forces, which lie about Franckford on the Oder, Crossen, and other
places. From Dresden they write, that the Imperial Ambassador Count Frawn
Colonel went from thence to Vienna, his message was, that the Emperor desired
that the quarters for the Imperial forces in Misnia might be enlarged, which
the Electour of Saxony refused.

Zeitz the 28. of Mar. the 7. of Apr.
THe Swedish Gen: Major Coningsmarck has gotten again about Quedlenburg of
Col: Feduaries Regiment, 50. horses. and 60. dismounted horsemen.

Lower Saxony the 28. of Mar. the 7. of Apr.
General Torstenson has kept a stately banquet for all his chief officers
the 20.30. of March at Saltzwedel. The next day after he broke up with his
Army, and went toward Arnsea, Tangermund, and Werben, and at Sandaw was his
Ship-bridge, where he passed over the Elve; his march is supposed to be either
for Silesia, or Zerbst and Wittenberg. Christian Ludwig Duke of Luneburg,
causes ammunition and other necessaries to be carried from Hildesheim to
Hanover, to keep there his residence, as is supposed. From Padeborn they write,
that the Luneburgish Colonel Reush intended to lead his 400. horsemen to the
Hessish Army, but his men perceiving it, made a mutiny at Nicheim, tore off
the Standards, threatened to kill the officers, asked money, and compelled the
Officers to lead them back again, because they will rather serve the Duke of
Luneburg, or the Emperor.

Duringen the 2.12. of Apr.
THe Swedish Governor at Erfurd having heard that 4. Companies of Croats of
Col: Beygotz his Regiment arrived at Greissen; he sent some 100. Horsemen and
Dragooners, which seized upon that town; at night at two of the clock slew
many Croats, and took prisoners one Sergeant Major, one Captain of Horse, two
Lieutenants, one Standard bearer, and 250. soldiers, which they with 245.
horses brought into Erfurd.

Collen the 3.13. of April.
HEre is a great dearth, and we can scarce get bread for money. The Weymarish
lie about Aaken, and take in all Noblemens houses. The other day some 100. of
them passed by this City, against which our Garrison issued forth, and killed
40. of them. The City of Aaken fearing a siege, provides ammunition and
provision, and entertains Col: Goldstein, who commands 1000. Musketeers. The
Magistrates of the said City entertain five Captains more, and gather daily
more soldiers, and make Sconces. The City of Liege has promised to assist
them. The Croats at Gulick have defeated a Convoy, and brought into that City
two Captains prisoners. They have many Engeniers, which are to fortify that
place with more outworks. The Governor of the said City brings into that
town a great store of ammunition and provision for two years. From Frankford
they write, that the Bavarian Forces are arrived not far from thence, which
desire of the Landgrave of Parmstat that they might have quarter thereabouts
for a fortnight, but it is denied to them.

Leipsig the 2.12. of Apr.
THe Swedish Army marches on both sides of Berlin, in two parts. On Tuesday
last one of their parties took away many horses and cattle, within half a
Dutch mile of Berlin. At this instant we hear, that General Torstensons
headquarter is four Dutch miles from Wittemberg, from whence messengers art
sent to Piccolomini, who lies yet at Zeitz, to come and to succor the said
City, at which (as is supposed) the Swedes do aim. Piccolomini has commanded
some Regiments thitherwards. From Zerbst they write, that 6. Swedish Companies
of horse and some Quarter Masters, are arrived there, and their Cavalerie is
much seen about the Elve, descrying the Country of Zerbst; they demand 15000.
Rixdallers, or else they must take in 5. Regiments. Their Infanterie and
Artillery, marches along the River of Havell to join with Stollhans his
Forces, and some of their Companies are passed the Havell already, and hasten
their march toward Lusatia. From Dessaw they write that Col: Spiegel has
commanded a party of the Elve, which has defeated a Swedish party, took 1.
Col. 1. Captain of horse, and 50. common soldiers.

From Cassel in Hessen the 4.14. of Apr.
IT is certain that the Swedish Army is passed at Sandaw, the River of Elve,
and has joined with Stolhans his army, which is now going for Lusatia and
Silesia, betwixt the Imperial head Army, and Francis Albert, Duke of Saxon
Lawenburgs Army. The Swedish General Major Coningsmarek with some 1000.
horsemen, lies yet in the Bishopric of Halberstat, who is to follow the Army
within few days. At this instant we hear, that the Swedish Army is arrived
already about Torgaw, it is thought that they intend to besiege the City of
Wittenberg, which puts the D. of Saxony in great fear, who has sent one
express after another for Picolominie to aid and assist him in keeping the
Swedes out of his Country: unto the Imperial Army are given 2. months pay.

Aaken the 6.16. of April.
THe Weymarish are gone with 2000. horsemen toward Mastricht, to fetch from
thence ammunition and other necessaries, we are still in great fear that they
will beseige this City; our Magistrates have called home again all the Citizens
that are fled, and those that will not come, shall pay 100. Rixdallers apiece.
To Neys are brought 19. carts laden with money, and 70. carts and wagons with
ammunition for the Weymarish army, so that it is not doubted but they have
some great enterprise in hand; they have made an attempt again upon the
Ship-bridge at Collen, but could do no good. The Bavarian succor consisting
of 17. Regiments, but very we ache, is passed already the City of Hanaw:
Hatsfeld means to bring together with the Bavarian Forces an army of 16000.
men, but the Weymarish are stronger.

Dusseldorp the 7.17. of Apr.
THE Weymarish and French Forces keep themselves ready in all quarters to
march forward, some think they aim at Aaken, others at Bonne. From Cassel
they write, that two Luneburgish Regiments of horse are going to take pay under
the Hessish General Count of Eberstein. The Imperial soldiers under General
Hatsfeld run away in great number, and for want of pay live most miserably. The
Weymarish Commanders keep now better discipline among the Soldiers then they
have done, so that the husbandman can plough the field again. From Amsterdam
they write, that the Spanish Governor in Bridges DonCantelmo had a design in
hand against Sluyce, but being discovered was forced to retire with the loss
of 100. men and some boats. The Hollanders at Mastricht had likewise a design
in hand against Stevenswerth, but their plot was likewise discovered.

Franckford the 8.18. of Apr.
AT Collen are met together Ambassadors from the Emperor, to consult how to
oppose the Hessish and Weymarish Army, which play still the masters in the
Bishopric of Collen. The Bavarian Army under the command of General What and
Mercy, lay last night at Budringen; they make all the haste they can for
Collen. The treaty betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Luneburg is broke off,
and come to nothing. The City of Collen is in great distress for want of
provision; they can hardly get corn or bread for money, and for fear of an
insurrection, many of the chiefest townsmen are retired from thence, and fled
hither to this City. From Hamborough with the last Letters they confirm, that
the Swedish Garrison at Erfurd has sallied out, and defeated a whole Regiment
of Crabats, killed the most part of them, and brought back into the City for
above 250. horses, and 4000. Rixdallers in money. From Lion is written and also
confirmed that the French General Houdencourt after that he had taken upon
discretion the City of Coluvre, in the Country of Russillion, has likewise
totally routed and defeated the Spanish Army, slain above 4000. Spaniards
upon the place, taken prisoners above 2500. common Soldiers, and about 200.
great Commanders, and other Officers, amongst which is the Viceroy of Arragon.
After this overthrow the Spaniards forsook the City of Constantin, and retired
into Arragon; for this victory the French King has made Genesis Houdencourt
Marshall of France. From Dunkerck and other places they write for certain, that
the Spaniards have besieged la Bassee, which is guarded by the French, with 3.
a 4000. men.

From Holland they confirm that the Hollanders in the West Indies have taken
the City and Isleland of Saint Tomee.

From Collen is confirmed, that to Neys are brought 27. barrels with money, and
80. wagons laden with ammunition, pikes, boots, and other necessaries for
the Weymarish Army.

Hamborough the 8.18. of Apr.
THe King of Denmark is yet at Coppenhagen who is setting out 26. men of
war, and causes great preparation to be made both by Sea and land, to what
end is not yet known; his Forces that lie in Schoven, Sealand, and other
Provinces, shall be sent within few days toward Halstein. Last week the old
Prince of Luneburg dyed at Harburg, of whose residence D. Fredrick of Cell took
presently possession. From Lower Saxony is confirmed, that the Swedish Gen:
Torstenson having passed the river of Elve, and left strong Garrisons in
Saltzwedel and Garleben, is gone toward Zerbst; and so upwards toward Silesia
and Lusatia. At this instant comes a flying report, that the Imperial Colonel
Goldacker having passed at wittenberg the river of Elve, has rouzed 2. Swedish
Regiments, taken prisoner 1. Leiutenant Colonel, 1. Captain of horse, and some
common horsemen, and obtained forty horses for a booty. General Piccolominie
lies yet in his head-quarter at Zeitz, who, as it is still reported, is to go
within few days with four Regiments toward the Low Countries; and mean
while, till the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg comes back from Vienna, the Imperial
General of the Artilery, Baron de Soys, is to command the Imperial Forces,
which lie yet still in their former quarters in Misnia and Thuringen, which
must be ready to break up against the 11.21. of May. General Stollhans having
cleared himself of the accusation laid upon him, is gone back from Stetin to
his army, unto whom is promised a succor both of men and moneys; and for a
recompense of his service, a brave piece of land is bestowed upon him in
Pomerania.

Erfurd the 8.18. of Apr.
THe Imperialists lie in their quarters yet still, we hear nothing as yet of
their breaking up: only it is reported that the Imperial head Army shall be
divided, and that one part of it shall join with Francis Albert, Duke of Saxon
Lawenburg, and the other part under the command of Genesis Piccolomini shall go
toward Collen and the river of Rhyne. The 29 of March some 100. horsemen,
Dragooners and Musketeers of our Garrison here surprised at Griessen about two
of the clock in the morning, 4. Companies of Croats of Col: Beygots Regiment,
slew many of the Croats, took 150. Prisoners, amongst which was one Sergeant
Major, one Captain of Horse, together with two Lieutenants, and one
Standardbearer, and brought hither for a booty 250. horses.

Collen the 7.17. of Apr.
THe Weymarish and Hessish Army is now broke up, and lies about Caster and
Grevenbroeck. Yesterday 16. Pieces of Ordnance were carried from Hulekrath
toward Bebber. Many are of opinion that they aim at Aaken, in which City lie
2000. new levied soldiers, which are resolved to defend themselves, to which
end they have cast up diverse Sconces and outworks. The Electour of Collen
fearing that they might fall upon Lechenich or Breul, has sent thither about
an hundred men more, to reinforce the Guarrison there. Within few days we
shall see what their design is. The Country about Aaken has made its
agreement with the Weymarish and Hessish Army, and paid 5000. Rixdallers
contribution.

Cassel in Hessen the 8.18. of Apr.
WIth the last Letters from Hamborough they write that they have not as yet
received the least information concerning the Imperial ratification about the
Praeliminaria or beginning of the Treaty. Hence the Ambassadors of the Crown
of Sweden and France, conceive and are of opinion that on the Emperors side,
they have no great mind to a peace, especially because the King of Denmark,
caused the Letter which instead of the ratification he received from the
Emperor, to be delivered unto the Swedish Ambassador Salvius by his Resident
here, bare, and without any other joint letter; neither had he commission to
propound therewith any thing else, which the said Ambassador Salvius took for
an affront. The King of Denmark is yet at Coppen Hagen, present at the Diet,
which is kept there, and in his dominions great preparations for war are made,
both by sea and land. The Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg have had an
Ambassador at Hamborough with the Swedish and French Ambassadors, to acquaint
them with the reasons that moved them to the treaty, assuring them also, that
that treaty should be in no way prejudicial to both Crowns, and desiring
withal, that they might be spared with all manner of hostilities, and the
Cities of Nienburg and Bleckede be restored back unto them. To which the
Ambassadors returned that answer, that they would acquaint their
Principalities therewith, and that mean while they would keep with them the
former correspondence. The like they desired of Genesis Torstenson, of whom they
had not so fair an answer.

Collen the 10.20. of Apr.
THe other day the Weymarish and Hessish Cavallerie begirded the City of
Lechenich, which lies but 3. hours going from hence; and the night thereupon
following, the Infanterie with the Artillery consisting of 20. Pieces of
Ordnance, amongst which are 4. Demicanons, came likewise before it. In the said
City lie 700. Imperial soldiers, and 2. Companies of Horse: The horsemen
being they can do no service in the City, thought to break through the
Weymarish and Hessish Army, and so get away, but they were beaten back again
by the Weymarish Cavallerie, and chased to the very gates. The said City is
fortified with deep and broad moats, and the Castle sufficiently provided with
Canons, and other necessaries. The Weymarish are resolved as soon as they have
taken that place, to assault either Bonne or Breul. Here in Collen are
published Letters Patents by the Imperial Ambassador, that every Citizen
shall contribute the 100. penny of his whole estate for the maintenance of the
Imperial soldiers, which our Magistrates will not condescend unto. The
Ship-bridge is now laid over the Rhyne, and a half Moon cast up before it.
Hatsfeld longs for the Bavarian succor, and to hasten their march, he himself
in person is gone to meet them, which Forces lie yet enquartered within a Dutch
mile of Frankford. As soon as Gen: What comes back again, for whom 150000.
Rixdallers lie ready at Frankford, they are to receive a months pay, and then
hasten forward for Collen. The Weymarish that lie at Duyren have given out
Commissions to levy two Regiments of foot and two Regiments of horse: the
country people come by hundreds to them, and take pay. The 7.17. of this
month the Weymarish received 3. months pay. From Basil they write, that
Field-marshall Horn is passed through the said City, who takes his way through
France for Sweden. From Bryssack they write, that Col. Canofsky has surprised
an Imperial party, killed 40 of them, and taken 100. prisoners.

Leipsig the 10.20. of Apr.
FRom Berlin they write, that the Swedish General Provant Master, and Captain
Rebe, are arrived there, which solicit for provision; wherefore the Nobility
and the Cities are now in deliberation to provide for them as much as they can,
that they may be rid of them, because at Treyenbrietzen and other places
thereabouts, they have eaten up all the provision, and at Brandenburg they have
bought great store of bread and beer for their moneys, but the city of Zerbst
is in great distress, of which city they demand 20000. Rixdallers, 120000.
pounds of bread, 600. vats of beer, and 180. horses. Genesis Torstenson with his
Army and Artillery lies now before the city of Luckaw in Lower Lusatia, which
he battereth fiercely, and at this instant we hear that he has taken already
the said city, and afterward fired the same: we hear also, that Stolhans his
Army has joined with him about Colbas. It is reported also, that the Swedish
Army is now marching toward Wittemberg; what they will attempt, we shall
hear by the next.

Vienna the 6.16. of April.
THe Lady Elizabeth, widow of the late Prince Electour Palatine, has sent a
Letter hither to the Electorall Ambassadors about the restitution of her
jointure, wherein she styles her self yet Queen of Bohemia, Duchess of
Silesia, Marquess of Moravia, and Upper and Lower Lusatia, and uses also the
Arms of that Kingdom, and the hereditary countries: which Letter the
Ambassadors kave communicated in original to the Emperor, but being it is
not the way to a fair treaty, wherefore the Original was sent back again to
her. It is reported, that the Emperor intends to send for England, Count
Lesley, together with another Privy Councellor, for Ambassadors.

From France they write, that since the taking of Coluvre in the county of
Russilion, and the overthrow of the Spanish Army, the French have close
besieged the city of Perpignano, and that the K. of France himself in person is
in the camp. The city of la Bassee in Artoys is close besieged by the
Spaniards, under the command of Don Franciscodi Melo. The Count of Harcourt,
General for the French, and Duc de Guyse, went with 1200. men to relieve it,
but coming near the city, he found the Spaniards so fast entrenched, that he
was feign to return back again without any expedition; which city the French
themselves give already lost.

From Holland they write, that all the train of the Artillery of the States
Army is carried to Nimmegen, and that the Forces begin to march thither from
all places to their randevouz. With the last Letters from Hamborough they
confirm, that the K. of Denmark has laid a custom 16. per cent. upon all
English and Scottish ships going through the Sound. An English Ship called the
Exchange of London, with 24. Pieces of Ordnance, going from Dover toward S.
Malo with 160. sacks of Reals of eight, and many bars of silver and other rich
commodities, to the value of above 50000. li. sterling, is taken by 5. Dunkerke
Fregats, and brought into Dunkerke.

An Extract of a Letter from Narbona the 8.18. of April.
WIth the last Post Licertified you of two several battails and encounters
that happened in Catalonia, betwixt the French General Monsieur de la Met,
Houdencourt, and the Spanish Army, which came to succor and relieve the City
and Castle of Coluvre being close besieged by the French General Monsieur de
Milleraye, and brought to great extremity, in which two battails and
encounters, the Spanish Army had always the worst, and was defeated. At last
the Marquis de Bouvoir, who had the command over the Spanish Army, finding it
impossible to succor and relieve the City of Coluvre, took his return again
toward Terragona, wherefore the above named General, Monsieur de la Met
Houdencourt lay in wait for him near Ville Franyne de Panades, and meeting him
in the mid, totally routed and defeated the remainder of his Army, that of
high Officers and common Soldiers hardly one escaped, that was not taken
prisoner, or slain, as appears by the List: Of the like battle was hardly
ever heard in these Countries; wherefore his Majesty the French King, came
hither to this City of Narbona, and caused Te Deum laudamus to be sung in the
great Church. Within few days after the City of Coluvre was taken by assault
by the French, in taking whereof not above 25. or 30. French Soldiers were
slain; as soon as the French had entered the City, the Spanish Guarrison
retired into the Castle, where they thought to hold out so long, till some
succor or relief might come, but the French being loath to lose any time,
fell presently to work with them, and being they intercepted, the Governors
Marquis de Mortaras letters to the Spanish General, wherein he intimated his
distress and extremity, and solicited for a speedy succor, the French
Soldiers were the more eager at it, and fell to undermining of a half moon
and the walls, but the said Spanish Governor being loath to expect the blowing
up of the Mine, yielded, and came to a composition, and marched out with bag
and baggage. Here follows now the List of those Spanish Commanders, and
Officers, and common Soldiers, that were slain and taken prisoners in the
forementioned battles.

A List of those Commanders, and Officers of the Spanish Army, which were
taken prisoners in the battails.
MArquis de Saccare, Colonel of the K. of Spains Lifeguard, and General of
the Arragonian Army. Duke Francisco de Forieto, Marshall de Camp. Marquis de
Dugla General of the Cavallerie. Baron Vicenzo de la Maro, Lieutenant General
of the Army. Marquis de Moussin, Maistre de Camp. A Young Duke of Cordona.
Baron de la Dose, General Commissarie. 4. other Commissaries. Don Francisco de
Tailfert, Lieutenant General of the Artillery. Don Bertrant de Toralto.
Captains of Horse. Don Thibercare. Captains of Horse. Don Carlo Caussietant.
Captains of Horse. Don Hieronymo de Marque. Captains of Horse. Don Mannel de
Guion. Captains of Horse. Don Josepho d' Erpinel. Captains of Horse. Don
Gabriel de Marque. Captains of Horse. 4. Majors. 2. Sergeant Majors. 40.
Captains of Foot. 45. Reformed Captains. 45. Lieutenants. 25. Reformed
Corporals. 15. Reformed Lieutenants. 1. Reformed Colonel. 13. Colonels of the
Dragooners. 130 other Officers of the Cavallerie. 1200. Common soldiers. In
all, 1555. prisoners, together with all the Artillery and baggage, and 4000.
are slain upon the place, both of Officers and common soldiers, but the List
of their names is not come to our hands.
FINIS.

