A PINDARICK POEM, CONSECRATED To the Memory of his much Honored Friend,
WILLIAM FOX Esquire.
WHO DIED Of the Fatal small Pox April 22, 1680. In the 19th. Year of his Age.
Dedicated to his most afflicted Parents the Right Honorable Sir Stephen Fox
Knight, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, Clerk of the Green
Cloth, etc. and his most Virtuous Lady.
AH Sir! they told me he was Dead,
To prepared Joys, and endless Glories Fled.
Oh my Prophetic Fears!
The pointed news like Lightning pierced my Ears,
Too great to be relieved with Cries and Tears.
It quickly ran through every Part,
It licked up Life in all my Veins,
It shot new Tortures and new Pains,
And like cold Death surpised my trembling Heart.
At length my struggling Griefs their ^ilence Broke,
And in their Pangs with great submission Spoke.
Ah how dark to Humane Seize,
Are the mysterious ways of Providence!
Why should ill Man wast long, and pleasant Lives?
Enjoy their Friends, their Children, and their Wives?
Who cause the Widows Groans, and Orphans Tears,
And live to count their Vices, with their Years.
Whilst the young Man, his great Creators Praise,
Famed for ripe Virtues in his greener Days,
By Strangers much caressed, and much Admired,
Much loved by all his Friends, but more Desired,
Like some fair Flower soon Withers, and Decaies
Amongst ten thousand Weeds, which thrive, but Yield
No Profit to the Master of the Field.
Though by the Bed the Pious Mother Rears,
Her pensive Soul upon the Wings of Prayers,
That gentle Heaven would grant him a Reprieve,
Alas in vain she rends the Skies,
No Prayers, nor Tears can Life Retrieve,
For the good Youth grasps her dear Hand, and Dies.
[2]
How secretly Heaven manages Mankind!
And out of kindness keeps is Blind.
In all its penal Laws,
It gives the Effect, but veils the mighty Cause.
It Is hard, but punished Man must not complain,
Or if he does it is but in Vain,
For struggling does but closer draw the Chain.
Hence it is more easy, as it is Good,
In the sharp Torments of our Flesh, and Blood,
To bear the strokes with Patience, and to Trust
Those Dispensations, though obscure, yet Just.
Ah Madam, let me first my pardon Crave,
Before I bring you to his Grave,
And on the hallowed Tomb Express,
The Figure of your once great Happiness.
Then let your Grief find Ease, and some Content,
To think your Son di'd Young, and Innocent.
[3]
Indeed he did afford a lovely Sc^ne.
Here, pleasant Fields adorned with cheerful Green,
And early Flowers ollig'd the Eye,
With Natures primitive Simpicity.
There, Artificial Currents did appear,
With Music running, and wi^h deepness Clear.
Which being cut with greatest Art, and Toil,
Did beautify the View, and fat^en all the Soil.
From these fair Streams, the fruitful Trees that Grew
Upon the smiling Barks, renew
Their cheerful strength, and as the Waters pass,
Rejoice to see themselves within the liquid Glass.
A Rich fair Hill did ^^and hard by,
Climbed up with ease by him, though very High,
From whose larg Top, he might as twere from Home,
Take a true Scheme of life to come.
Honors though distant seemed ^o be at Hand
Within his reach, and ready at Command.
Beneath this Hill was drawn a Valley Low,
There the freshest Virtues Grow,
Humility and Condescension too.
It Is there Mankind takes most Delight,
And best from it observes the Mountains Height.
[4]
But whilst our Eyes were Blessed
With this kind Prospect Cruel Fate
Demonstrated this Truth, that small Content
Ought to be placed in humane State.
For lo! the Calm and Glorious day was Spent
And the bright Sun soon hurried to the West.
Ah Fatal sight! within my View,
The Croaking Raven to the Forest Flew,
And after him the Screeching Owl,
With the Foreboding Jay,
Pitched on the Top of the unlucky Yew.
Whilst underneath the Ravenous Wolf did Howl,
Desirous of its Prey,
Glad to behold the Conquest of the Day.
Now horrid Night came Marching up apace,
And with black fumes infected all the Place.
How quickly all things changed, seemed Flat, and Dead,
In Have each Form retired, each Beauty Fled,
And the delightful Landscape Vanished.
Then Groans, and Shreeks were heard, and Showers of Rain
Descending feircely down, Washed all the Neighboring Plain.
[5]
It Was a sad change! And as my Grief's are True,
Pray Madam let me weep with You.
If I forget Thee, my much Honored Friend,
Till life worn out shall reach its desired End.
Oh! may no real Friend of Mine,
So much my worldly good Design,
As thou did freely Vow to be,
A faithful profitable Friend to Me.
For which kind promise Dear, and Generou^ Youth,
As I am sure thy words were born of Truth
So I will gratefully remember Thee;
Often with Silent steps I Will come,
To vent my Grief at thy sad Tomb,
Thy Bodies second Womb:
But chiefly on that Lamentable Day,
When thy chaste Soul made have away,
I will my Melancholy Sonnets Sing,
And scatter there my Flowery Offering*
Thy Grave like Thee shall imitate the Spring.
On thy beloved Relics I will Strew,
The blushing Rose, and Violet Blew;
Thee Hyacinth, and thee Narcissus Too.
For once he was more sweet, and fresh than You.
[6]
As for thy Soul it is now at Re^t,
Happy with Saints, with Angels Blessed;
Freed by thy new Immortal Birth,
From that allay of our Contagious Ear^h.
Safe from the world, and ^^l its Snares,
From its light joys, and hea^y cares,
From painted Sepulchers, and Gilded Pills,
From Smooth beginnings, and their f^al Ills.
Nay Heaven was kind to call Thee h^me so Soon,
And lodge thee in thy Inn before it was Noon.
Else had thou ventured on thy danger^us Way,
In a long Journey, and the heat of Da^,
Though thou as yet were very cool and Pure;
Yet who on earth can be Se^ure?
Perhaps some Malady had seized thy S^ul,
Perhaps had pitted it and made it Foul
Or else some Thief joining himself to Thee,
Under pretense of Fatal Company,
Perhaps had lead thy better sense astray,
And made at last thy Innocence a Prey.
[7]
But now henceforth for ever Young,
Ever Powerful, ever Strong,
Ever Virtuous, and secure of Bliss,
With such Companions as thy Brother Daphnis is.
Daphnis, than whom none is more Gay, or bright,
Amongst the fair Inhabitants of Light,
The Joyful Daphnis clap^*d his Wings, and Said,
But spoke it with a Smile,
Brother it is well, our Parents call us Dead,
And that you staid behind so short a While.
Like me on Earth you dwelt without its Crimes,
But Heaven in mercy took you Home,
To rescue you from Sins of Present Times,
And from the Punishmen of those to Come.
Here we enjoy Eternal Health,
Eternal peace Eternal Wealth.
Hither our Parents every Day make Have,
And Hither all good Friends on Earth shall come at Last.
[8]
Ah ye Blessed Immortal Pare!
Most blessed because ye dwell together there.
Look down, and if you c^n, with Pity, Know
The wretched state of Morals here below.
Behold how every Age does run,
Driven by peculiar Vice to be undone,
Headlong into it own Confusion.
This Young Man gives his heart to loose Desires,
And burns it up to Dross, in lawless Fires.
That, with his Wine pow'^ out his precious Day,
Drown's his Estate, and wishes Health away.
Ambition grants Man's middle Age no Rest,
The Viper always gnaws his Ulcer'd Breast;
For a false fame, he will his soul Ensnare,
Come short of Heaven, for Castles in the Air.
But miserable Old age catches Hold,
On the loved Canvass, to ado^e its Gold.
On useless Wealth the broodin^ Miser lies,
Turned into native Earth, before he Dies.
Therefore the longer Man ad^ances Age;
He does but change his Vice, and tread another Stage.
Hence old, and conscious Sin^ers fear to die,
For gross Souls clogged with Earth, can never Fly.
Or their short wings grow weary, and cannot move
To the high Palace of the Pu^e Above,
But flutter in the lower Regions of the Sky.
L. MAIDWELL.


