A most wonderful and sad judgment of God upon one Dorothy Mattley late of
Ashover in the County of Darby,
within fourteen miles of the said Town of Darby; who for so small a thing as
two single pennies which she was charged with the taking of from a boy, did
most presumptuously with sad imprecations wish and desire, that if she had
taken or stole the same, that the ground might open and she sink therein, which
by her neighbors relation was an expression very common with her, but so it
pleased God to deal, that upon the same words the ground did open, and she with
a Tub which she was washing Lead-Oare in sunk into the ground, to the amazement
of the beholders, and the ground closed again upon her, as here underneath it
is more fully declared; and this was done upon the 23 of March 1660. All which
may well serve for an example to all wretches of this age whatsoever, who to
advance themselves by falsehood, or for the trifles of this world, take to
themselves assumptions, and imprecations, nay will not at all stand to forswear
themselves to compass their own ends, as if there was no God or judgment to be
expected; but they may hereby take notice that some time God will punish such
creatures even in this life for example sake; yet if not here, their reward
will be according to their works hereafter, and none shall be able to let it.

The tune is, Fortune my Foe:


LIsten a while dear frinds I do you pray,
And mark the words that I to you shall say
A wonder strange I mean for to declare,
In this our time, I think without compare.
In The month of March, the three and twentieth day
As we in England do compute and say:
In The year above expressed, this thing was done,
To many peoples admiration.
Ashover parish in fair Darby-shire,
There God did manifest his dreadful Ire,
Upon one Dorothy Matley called by name,
As many neighbors can attest the same.
This wicked wretch it seems did think to get
Two single pennies from a boy by cheat
And when they asked her for them, still ye more
They were demanded, she the faster swore:
She had them not, but would full sadly scold,
And with sad imprecations be so bold:
As to desire from God, if ^ter She
The same ere had, she might example be.
Unto the world, if she such things had done,
Although there was more then suspicion
To prove the same, yet she did it deny,
And to her neighbors still would say and cry.


IF I this money stole, or it be found
With me, then let me sink into the ground,
Ith place whereas I stand and let me be
Example to you all that do me see.
Her neighbors present wishes that she would
Cease imprecations, and not be so bold
As to provoke her Maker, but still she
Did use the same, and never would it flee.
But here my pen methinks is at a stand,
To think how God by his revenging hand,
Most justly did this wicked wretch confound,
And she alive forthwith into the ground.
Begins to sink, a thing it is full sad,
She scrieched and cried for help, but none she had
One foot she something moved, but suddenly
Straight down she went with a most hidious cry
When she was sunk the ground forthwith did close
And did return unto the first repose.
Which made all for to muse that did it see
And much admire that such a thing should be.
Her neighbors some of them would dig to find;
This woeful wretch, to satisfy their mind
They found her buried in the ground so deep,
Which would have made the hardest heart to weep
As for the Tub not yet spoke of before
Wherein the wretched woman washed her Oar
It clear was gone, not yet found out by man,
As many of her neighbors witness can.
This then may serve to persons of this age,
To warn them from provoking God to rage
By Oaths, Assumptions, and false imprecations,
Least they pull down his vengeance on these Nations.
For he it is that can discern aright,
The meanest Subject and the greatest Might.
Each one according to his works shall have
From the just one, he needs it not to crave,
Thus have I done what here I did intend
Nothing but love unto my Country friend,
Gods wonders to declare, I think it is just
That they may not lie buried in the dust.
FINIS.
Printed for VV. Gilbertson.


