THE PRESENTMENT OF A Schismaticke.

By the Right Reverend Father In GOD, THOMAS, LORD BISHOP of DVRHAM.

In his Sermon Preached at the Cathedral CHURCH of Saint Paul's the 19. of JUNE
1642.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for R. Whitaker, and S. Broun, and are to be
sold in Saint Paul's Churchyard. M. DC. XLII.

1 CORINTHIANS 11.16. But if any Man seem to be contentious we have no such
Custom neither the Churches of God.


THe sound (Beloved in Christ Jesus) I say the very sound of these two words
which you have heard, Contentions and Churches; can tell you of the consonancy
which is between this Text, and these our times of Contentions and distractions
in our Church, which will more manifestly appear in the discussing the Text it
self, which consists of these two parts.

The first is the presentment of a Schismatic, in these words [ If any seem to
be Contentious.]

The second, of a Renouncement and rejecting of him in the next words [ We have
no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.]

In the first place we are to learn the Presentment, [ If any] does the
Apostle doubt hereof? He shows in the former Chapters that he had information
thereof, and does he now question it? Let us consult with himself in the 18
verse, Verse 18.
where speaking of that his intelligence, saying [ I hear there are Schisms
among you] adds, saying [ and I partly believe it.] O that we could believe
our contentions but in part: Next [ If any] says he, naming none, nor will I:
No nor yet will I aim at any one; however: [ If any] says the Apostle, he is
absolute, he will not spare any one; There is no respect of persons with God;
and so it ought to be with the Ministers of God: But we shall see our
Schismatic in the next words, If any seem to be Contentious. Behold the Man,
it is the contentious Man; who will be far more visible in the Greek, (...),
signifying a contentious Man: And which is more, there is in it both (...), a
Lover, and (...) in the end observed by the Grecians, to give this Emphasis to
such words, as to import a delight of doing: And now you have the full face of
this Schismatic, that he is one that delightfully loves Contentions:
Nevertheless, because one may see the face of another, and yet not discern the
linaments and figurature, except he take an exact view. So here will it be hard
for us to mark the right properties of this kind of man, without some
description, setting out his Characters even to the life; to this purpose we
have brought you one, as exact as either wit could invent, or art express;
borrowed from St Augustine, which for the excellence thereof Calvin. Institut.
lib. 4. c. 1.. 16. ex August. lib. 3. contra Parm. Illi filii mali qui non odio
iniquitatem alienarum sed stud^o contentionum suarum infirmas plebes, jactantia
sui nominis ir^etitas, vel totas trabere, vel ce^te devidere affectant,
superbia, tumidi, pervicatia vefani, calumniis insidiosi, sed^tionibus
tumulenti, quine luce veritatis carere osiendantur umbram rigidae severitatis
ostend^ntes ad sacrilegiem Schismatis and occasionem praecisionis.
Master Calvin translated into his Institutions the which I am now to deliver
to you paraphrastically.

First, this Contentious Man, says he, makes ostentation of his own
worthiness; his Character here it self conceitednesse, rank poison at the
first, Prove. 24.12.
as Solomon in his Wisdom thought of it: See thou one conceited in himself
(says he) there is more hope of a fool than of him: especially if it be of
the worthiness of his own wisdom: And if he be given to Ostentation, then sure
he will seek our some company among whom he may boast it: That is the next
carrying people after him (says Augustine) alluding to the words of Christ,
concerning like contentious, drawing disciples after them, this Character is
popular ambition, that that company may be dependant upon them, and then it is
odds he will carry and draw them from the Church, which is specified in the
next words. Affecting Divisions: This Character is black malice, affecting
divisions, that is, delighting in divisions, even for divisions sake, as much
as to cut off the Limbs of a Man, only to cut them off: And when this division
is wrought, what will this boaster think of himself trow ye; It is told us, He
swells with Pride, You have his Character named, it is swelling Pride. And no
marveile, for when this ostentator shall look behind him and see, as a Leader,
what Troops of People he carries, or, as a Rabbi, what number of Disciples he
draws behind him: Is it any wonder that being cried up by their acclamation,
their breath should be a full Gayle (He hoysing up his top-sayle) to carry him,
he knows not himself whether, being now destitute both of the Helm of
discretion, and Anchor of moderation, as will now appear by his other
Characters, in respect both of Church and State: Church how? He is deceitfully
slanderous: You see the Character is lying deceitfully: And so it must needs
be; for does any separate themselves from any Church, but will cast dirt with
their heels upon the face of that Church by imputations (albeit never so
false) against their general conversation, as profane, their Doctrine
Erroneous, their worship as Superstitious, or Idolatrous, whereof we shall have
occasion to speak hereafter. Nor shall the Civil estate escape them.
Therefore does Auguistin note them to be Trecherously seditious: Germany gave
the world sufficient Arguments hereof, by the miserable combustions raised by
the Anabaptisticall faction among them: And something I could say concerning
the same among us; If the report of Pamphlets were worthy the Pulpit: only this
one thing, which I have read in diverse of their printed Books; that in their
invective against Church Government and Service, they excite their Auditors by
such Texts of Scripture as speak directly of massacring: One I have yet in
memory, the words of Jeremiah, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, where immediately follows, And cursed be he that keeps back his
sword from Blood: whereby was meant the vengeance which God would have executed
upon Moab, as if they who are now Thorns in the Eyes of States, would afterward
prove Goads in their sides: But can any imagine how these contentious ones can
presume to show their faces in broyling the world in this manner? Be it known
unto you that however ostentative such Men are, yet they disguise themselves,
as the same Father will have us observe. Least they may seem (says he) to be
destitute of the light of Truth. Destitute then they were of Truth, which is
the Character of Ignorance, although they would not seem to be such; next they
arrogate to themselves the shadow of Austerity* Not true austerity, but a
shadow of it, which is a Character of Hypocrisy? The Devil himself could not
deceive Men coming (as I may so say) in his own likeness, and not putting
upon himself the semblance of an Angel of Light. And notwithstanding all
this, his Austerity is but a a shadow, Why so? Because it is not substantial
in them; for what is the substance of a Christian, is it not Charity? If I give
my body to be burnt, and have no Love, I am nothing: 1 Cor. 15.
If I give all my goods to the poor, and have not Charity, I am nothing. So
that these men having but a shadow of goodness, they themselves are
transparent; so that a Man (in respect of Charity) may look through them, and
then their Character must be just nothing, otherwise our Apostle will give them
a proper one: where he says of such contentious spirits, Whilst you have
Schisms are you not (...), Carnal? When therefore we are to discern of
these, we are not to regard there outward; because their Austerity is but a
pretended singularity of Devotion in themselves, and tigidity against others,
which how spiritual soever it may seem to be, yet it may be Carnal: For
Pride and Envy are Notionals; and yet by the Apostle are listed among the
Fruits of the Flesh, Gal. 5.20.
which are the corrupt Acts proceeding from the rational power of Man, even as
Heresy it self is there termed, which beside attribute Sacrilegious what the
appetite of Schismatics has always been this way is notorious, whereof
somewhat hereafter. I have reserved for the last place a Character which makes
his case most desperate, called by Auusten maddish obstinacy, of which kind
Augustine himself had full experience, when he said Convincere cos possum,
convertere non possum, convince them I can, although I cannot convert them,
which is not to persuade them, although they be persuaded, Aristotle his
sothisters just whose scope in all Disputes was not verity but victory,
especially by holding there one conclusion

And no^ that we have so full a presentment of this (...), what shall we do
with him? What, but send him to receive his doom from the Apostle in his next
words in the second part of this Text.

We have no such custom nor the Churches of God.

As much as to say, that the Schismatic by raising contentions in the Church,
he is an adversary both to the Apostolical Order, and also to the Custom of
all Churches of God: And therefore he justly incurreth that judgment from God,
which he is liable unto: In a word, these contentions being rise in the Church
of Corinth, the scope of the Apostle herein was to preserve the reputation and
dignity of this Church.

I must first being with this scope of the Apostle, who finding these
contentious persons seeking division in this Church will have them know that
departing from it, was to depart from the Church of God; but stay a little,
could the Church of Corinth be accounted then the Church of God? Did S. Paul
think so; Nay, did he not reprehend some in that Church for their impetuous
transferring of their Civil jars, and suits of Law unto the Courts of
Infidels? 1 Cor. 6, 7. Others for their wicked connivance and indulgence
toward the Incestious, 1 Cor. 8.5. Others for their vile prophanations in the
sacred Assemblies, 1 Cor. 11.32. Yea and other some for Heresy to boot, 1
Cor. 15 Now is there any Schismatic, yea or not Schismatic almost who at the
first hearing of thus much would not judge this Corinth, to have been a
Sinagoge of Satan, rather then so much as to carry the title of a Church, what
would our Apostle have said to this objection if he had been now a live; verily
the same which he said in the inscription of this his Epistle to the
Corinthians, when he wrote thus, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ to the Church
of God (where) in Corinth: Corinth therefore was then the Church of God.

Hereby we have this Doctrinall point, Use.
to wit that we are not to depart from any Church of Christ, for any scandal
given unto us by any members and professors therein, but either for extreme
Errors of Doctrine, or Godless practices as being professed by it. You have
heard of the resemblances which have been made of Gods Church, as namely that
it is compared unto a Field, wherein are sown Tares as well as Wheat; to a
Net, wherein are contained dead fish as well as living; and to a Fould, having
in it Goats as well as Sheep: Yet is not the Field to be spoiled because of the
Tares, nor the Net to be rent, because of the dead Fish; nor the Fould to be
broken, because of the Goats. But the example of Christ may be our best
direction, who since his Ascension into Heaven, sent his Messages to the seven
Angels of the seven Churches in Asia, charging five of them with their several
faults, Apo. 2. and 3. Saying, I have something against thee: And I have
something against thee, and thee: And in each of these every Something was a
crime of a large cise. These Angels by Antiquity were termed Bishops, albeit
ill Bishops, now let us see the process of Christ against them, does he
deprive them at the first; No, but gives them their particular admonitions,
denouncing their removal, except they should Repent. Nor does he threaten the
Innocents together with the Delinquents: much less does he denounce
eradication of the Office, because of their abuse of it; no, but by
reprehending their vices only, he thereby justifies their Offices. As we read
of the Lord of the unjust Steward in the Gospel, he said to him, because of
his injustice, Thou shall be no longer Steward: Out with the unjust Steward
then; but will the Lord therefore have no Steward and abolish all Steward-ship
ever after? There was no such meaning, neither had Christ here: Because the
other two good Angels were still continued and conserved. In a word, I should
but ask any of these refractories, wherein all their reading of the book of
God, from the beginning of Genesis, unto the end of the Apocalips, they ever
found a free and visible Church, wherein there was not a mixture of Godly and
Wicked professors.

Now that we have vindicated this Church of Corinth, you will expect (I
suppose) how we shall defend our own Corinth, the Church of England. This must
be our next endeavor, by retourning to our Text again.

We have not such Custom, nor the Churches of God.
Which words we say, did consequently infer both a confutation of the errors of
Schismatics and likewise a condemnation of their practice; we begin with our
confutation.

But first, we must understand their criminations against our Church, the
principal are these; her Constitutions, Episcopacy, Ceremonies and Liturgies:
The Imputations they lay upon her in these respects are towfold, one is the
unlawfulness of them, as being no matters indifferent, the other is their
other viciousnesses, as being either Popish Superstitious or Idolatrous
respectively.

Against the first, we shall answer by way of appeal, as our Apostle
instructs, namely, unto the Custom of the Apostles themselves, or of other
the acknowledged Churches of God.

Are Constitutions unlawful? We appeal to the Apostles and there
Constitutions against eating of strangled or blood, Act. 15. and for brevity
sake, we challenge all our opposites, to bring us the example of any one
public peaceable constituted Church in all the Christian World, wherein there
were not inacted Constitutions to regulate the Churches by; and we shall as
easily return unto them a perfect body of a Man without joints or sinews; we
shall not except herein the Church of God at Geneva: Beza Epist. 8. and 44.
Beza a famous Pastor in that Church, wished that, They who oppose the
Constitutions of the Church might be punished as the ennemies to the Church.

Secondly, Episcopacy had the next Crimination, of which I shall not say many
words, but yet much, for we (for the lawfulness thereof) dare appeal unto the
Apostles institution of it, to Christ his approbation already spoken off, to
the universal practice thereof throughout the whole Christian world, as Jerome
speak, even the compass and breadth of Christianity, for this time as also
for its length in the continuance of it Universally, until this last Age: We
add (for the justification of the same lawfulness) to the Judgment of all
Protestant Churches of former times.

Thirdly, concerning the lawfulness of significant Ceremonies, likewise we
appeal to this our Apostle, who says here against the Schismatics, We have
no such Custom: You need not turn many leaves to find his Judgment, it is
expressly set down in the 14 and 15 Verses, immediately before this Text as an
occasion thereof, requiring that The Man should be uncovered, in the Assembly
for Divine service, to represent his sovereignty over his wife; The Woman to be
uncovered, betoking her subjection to her Husband, both these Ceremonies
significant, and used in the public worship of God; shall any say this was by
an extraordinary Apostolical authority, and therefore not appliable in this
point to after Churches: Then was the the Angel of the Church of Geneva out
when he inferred from this Text, a confutation of such refractories then, as we
do against the Zelots of our times; saying, (They are the words of Calvin)
Tales sunt illi qui bonos ac utiles Ecclesiae ritus covellunt: Such are they
(says he) who abolish the good and useful rites of the Church. Beside that
the Apostle has prescribed rules for regulating the Ceremonies of the Church,
one whereof is Edification, and what is edificant the same is also significant:
whereunto we say, all the chief Protestant Divines of several Churches have
subscribed.

One word of the by, What if the uncovering of our Heads (as then) were
continued in our Church still, could it be called an Innovation, which is not
now invented, or Popish, which rather should be an exprobration to Papists, to
see our devout and reverend comportement, at the hearing of Embassages from
Christ.

Lastly our Liturgy, because a set form of Prayer is fallen into their
crimination; as though we might not appeal herin to our Savior Christ,
delivering the the Apostles that set form, which we call the Lords Prayer,
saying, Pray you thus our Father, etc. Math. 6.9.
Yea (say they) it is said, Pray Thus, not pray This, that is, to make it a
Pattern for oath Prayers, and not to be used as a Prayer it self, we desire
that S. Luke may moderate the matter, who related Christ's Words in this manner,
viz. When you Pray say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11.2^.
And is not there that [ Our Father, This,] which now they were commanded to
pray? Again although it were a form for other Prayers, yet this hinders not
but it may be our Prayer too: The standing measure of the Land for
proportioning all other like measures for Grain, May, notwithstanding, be
measured by. It must be some new conceit sure, which has ingendered this
Innovation, They think perhaps that the command, being Pray Thus or This, in
our former sense, would exclude all other forms of Prayer excepting This,
which scruple arises from an inconsideration, not to observe that Christ his
Answer was directed to the intention of the Apostles, then desiring to have a
prefixed form of Prayer of Christ his own conception, as John's Disciples had
from their Master: The sense then is, When you shall use a Prayer of mine own
prescription, Pray thus, so that this kind of direction for that one form can
be no exclusion of all other: He that takes from his friend own hand a
special token of Remembrance in his absence, is not thereby forbid to make use
of other Memorandums, which he might have had otherwise.

One thing more would be demanded of them, to wit: when ever they knew in all
their Reading any Divine that made this Gloss upon that Text, as to say These
words, Pray Thus, import as much as to have said, Pray not This Prayer.

Easy it were to mention the Greek and Latin Liturgies of the ancient
Churches, I rather shall instance in one, which may be satisfactory in it
self: The Emperor Trajan appointed Pliny to be one of the Inquisitors to
search out the behaviors of Christians, especially when they were exercised in
their Religious Assemblies and Devotions, and to certify: His certificat was
this, The Christians (says he) assembling in private places, among other
Prayers, have one for your Highness, Praying God to grant you long life, a
faithful Senate, a strong Army, and a Peaceable People: These was the Collect
of those Saints and Martyrs, to avow their Allegiance unto those Emperors
albeit Heathnish. I have done with the first imputation against these
particulars, touching the simple unlawfulness of them.

The second criminations, I told you, was against their pretended vitiousnesse,
judging two of them Popish, two superstitious, and two Idolatrous; In all which
accusations, we find that Character visible which Augustine noted then in his
Schismatikes, when he called them slanderous: as first for calling our
Constitutions, concerning Doctrine, Popish; notwithstanding they manifoldly and
manifestly make against both Pope and popery; And shall Episcopacy be also
called Popish without a slander seeing, that the Pope himself will be reddy
herein to give the Schismatike the lie, telling that he does allow for Popish
Bishop, none but such as shall have immediate dependence upon himself, their
Pope, by acknowledging him the universal Bishop of all Bishops: A transcendent
title which all our Bishops since the Reformation, have utterly abhorred, and
have abandoned h^s whole Papal jurisdiction, all of them even unto death, and
some also by their death and martyrdom.

Secondly, Superstitiousnesse the next crimination, and is one degree above
Popish, because we cannot say that every Popish act is superstitious, this
they impute to our Liturgy and Ceremonies; Let us pity their ignorance, who
never yet knew what formal superstition meant; let them then learn it? A
superstitious act (say we) is that which is founded upon a superstitious
opinions. It was not merely the Pharisees often washing, but their opinion of
some especial purgation thereby, which Christ reprehended in them; nor was it
the having of an Alter for which St. Paul reproved the Athenians, when he
called them superstitious Aols 17. but the opinion of honoring a God thereby,
they knew not whom: And is it not in our Law to hold it no fellonie or treason
which is not done in a felonious or traiterous intention? Let us but opening
our eyes, and we shall easily see their slanderous lying also, for behold our
Church in her service Book, does make known to all the world that she does
detest the superstition of the Romish Ceremonies, by condemning their
superstitious opinions. First, in making them necessary parts of Gods worship.
Secondly, in ascribing an efficacious sanctity unto them: Thirdly, by
arrogating a meritorious condignity from them unto themselves. Yea and besides
she instructs her Reader that she has professedly purged her Liturgy of all
those Lees and dregs of superstitious opinion of Papists; which makes this
their slander far more slanderous.

Yet notwithstanding they persist in condemning the said Ceremonies as having
bin either used or abused in Popery, still bewraying their ignorances, for even
this our Apostle did make use of the saying of Poets, Menander Aratus, and
Epimenides, all Heathens; And shall therefore such Divine sentences be called
Heathenish. I cannot omit, the piece of Prayer in our Liturgy, which is: That
God will accept of our bounden duty not weighing our merits, but pardoning
our offenses; the same has been continually used in the Romish Mass,
beseeching God that he would admit of them and their devotions, Non tanquam
aestimater meriti, sed tanquam veniae largitor, Not as an esteemer of merit,
but as a giver of pardon; wherein the Romish, will they, nill they disclaim
all conceit of merit in their public Liturgy, which is a condignity of a
work by the exact Law of Gods; justice deserving an eternal reward, which
merit notwithstanding they maintain in their new Romish Creed, and books of
controversies as an Article of their faith; howbeit, This sentence was that
which brought the great Cardinal Bellarmine upon his knees: when after his
long and large dispute about justification by perfection of works; he was
enforced at last to cast Anchor absolutely upon the mercies of God, as (for so
he says) Tutissimum, The most safe refuge of man's soul; this being granted,
the same sentence serves us, both for a testification of this our saving truth
to our selves, as also for a confutation of the Popish error of merits, which
is a judging out of his own mouth: We demand then? ought our Church to have
used this sentence or not? if so, then is not this prayer therefore to be
called Popish, because used in Popery, but ought she not? Then do they fondly
affirm she ought not use a form of prayer, which is both wholesome for him
that prays, and useful to convince the Romish Church of Error in her
superstitious opinion of merit; But our Savior has taught us a more Divine
lesson, saying; Matthew. 11.
Wisdom is justified of her Children: to let us understand, that truth is truth
wheresoever it sounds, even as a Pearl is a Pearl of price, although it be
taken out of the head of a toade: I have insisted on this point, because it may
justify our whole Liturgy against the censuring of a rite Popish for that it
was used in that popish Church.

But there next blow is harder, condemning such rites, because abused by
Papist^, albeit not ignorant that herein we can justly appeal not only to
the custom of ancient Churches of Christ, but even to their own schismatic
assemblies, for the Primitive Fathers, at the first dawing of public peace in
the Church, began to convert the Temples of Pagans, (although they had been
the brothell houses of devils) into the Houses of God consecreated to his
worship; And our opposites themselves can sometimes be contented to use these
Churches wherein was professed and practiced that Popish Liturgy, which they
(and justly) inveighed against as indeed Idolatrous, which is the blackest
brand that can be put upon any worshippers: and which these opposites cast
upon our Church as their last filth and dung.

This they do because of two kind of kneelings, one at the administration of
the holy Communion, the other of bowing at the hearing of the name of Jesus: To
the first our answer is, that Papists will not approach to our Sacraments; Or
if any do, yet it is in opinion that our consecration does not operate their
feigned transubstantiation, and also the professed Protestants, believing that
there is therein no corporal presence of Christ, cannot adore that as Christ
which they know is not Christ, and therefore can as impossible be Idolatrous,
as the Papists in the worshipping their breaden God, cannot possibly but be,
our reason is that that was an Article of Faith in the Primitive Churches of
God, whereunto we may justly appeal in a doctrine never to be repealed.

It is this: That it is impossible for any Creature to be in two places at
once, not excepting the sacred body of Christ, which their Catholic doctrine
they professed for two causes, one to avouch the prerogative of God, to whom
the existence in diverse places at one time is properly essential: and this
they grounded upon that divine foundation the Scripture of God, Psalm 39.6.
wherein the Psalmist in professing the Diety of the spirit of God, says,
Whether shall I go from thy spirit, if I go up to Heaven, thou art there, if
down to Hell, thou art there also, and if to the outermost part of the Sea,
thither shall thy hand lead me: The Argument thus: The spirit of God is here,
and there, and yonder, therefore it is in diverse places at one time, and
consequently GOD, because by the same essential property, he is as well in
three Millians of places, and indeed every where as he is in any three or two:
and this they confirm by two circumstances.

First, that the spirit of God was at one time in diverse Prophets, Jeremie in
Judea, Daniell in Babylon, Ezechiel in Chobar, this in the Old Testament,
accordingly in the New, the same spirit of God, at one and the same time, was
in the Apostles, when they were dispersed in diverse nations in the world for
preaching the Gospel of Christ.

There second reason of this their dispute was to preserve the integrity of the
body and humanity of Christ. According to that caution of Augustine, Cavendum
est, ut ita divinitatem Christi astruamus, ne humanitatem ejus auferamus. We
are so to defend the divine nature of Christ, that we destroy not his bodily
and humane nature.

And therefore they distinguish both natures (in respect of local existence)
arguing thus. Although the Deity be in Heaven, yet is it then on Earth also,
and if on Earth, then is it in Heaven; but the humane Nature of Christ, if it
be on Earth, it is not in Heaven, and when in Heaven, then is it not on Earth;
This was the Catholic Faith in those perfects and purest times of
Christianity; and that this was believed of them as an Article of Faith is as
plain: Because they maintained that Truth against the Heretics of their time,
who impugned the essential properties of Christ's body, with one Article of
ancient Faith does strangle more all the virall parts of the Romish Mass
worship.

When we speak of impossibility of this or that, you are not to imagine that we
thereby derogate any thing from the Omnipotence of God: God forbid, no, but
that which we say of Impossibility, is truly for the dignifying of his Power;
as when we say of the God of Truth; It is Impossible that he should lie, Heb.
17. or for the Lord of Life, and in himself Immortal, that he should dye.

I would not have brought disputes into the Pulpit, if the importunity of this
our unseasonable Season had not exacted it of me.

The next and last brand falls upon the Reverence given to Christ at the
hearing of the name of him our Savior Jesus, and therefore Jesus, because our
Savior, which they call (o black tongue) Idolatrous; Beloved Brethren, I
appeal to every Conscience of Man when I hear mention of my Savior, my heart
is inwardly lift up to reverence the person of Christ in my soul, now on the
Throne of Majesty; shall it not then be lawful for me to express the same
praise of him, which my body, who has redeemed me both body and soul for his
praise. But reasons will not down with these men, except such as may seem to be
Divine: We shall offer them not an only seeming, but even a convincing reason
from God himself, who to preserve his people from Idolatry, least they might
make any Image of him (the high way to an Idolatrous worship) commanded them to
remember, that when he manifested his presence among them, you saw no shape
(said he,) how then did they perceive his presence? he tells them, you heard
only a voice: as if God had said unto them, pinge sonum: Let your Painters
picture a voice, or any man adore a voice if he can, how impossible this is:
you may know by this my every voice, which while I utter, is transient, past
and flowne, before you can fasten your thoughts upon it, and yet in despite of
truth it self, they will have us Idolaters.

Before I can end the point of kneeling, I cannot silence my grief, to see all
gesture of kneeling almost shut out of the Church; And yet we all know that
kneeling in prayer time was the Decorum practiced by Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and Christ Himself; now what gout it is that hinders, whether of
pride, or lasinesse or perverseness, I know not, This I know, that take away the
outward form of Devotion, the inward will sooner cool: hitherto we have been
exercised in the first consequence of this Text, which is, the confutation of
the errors of the Schismatic faction: Our second remains, which is the
condemnation of their practices, yet before I can enter upon it, I would gladly
be understood concerning the premises, namely that I have not so pleaded for
Ceremonies and Litturgy as to prejudice the wisdom of them, who by just
Ecclesiastical Order shall so regulate these matters, as may be most
conducible for peace unanimity and uniformity in the Church. In the interim, it
cannot be offensive that the Child after so much vile ugly aspersions cast upon
our Mother, should vindicate her honor, by whom, through the blessing and
mercy of GOD; he has his souls spiritual birth and breeding.

And now I hasten to our last passage whereunto we have been induced by the
same Text.

We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.
These words necessarily implying that they who are contentious against the
Customs of the Apostles, and Churches of God, do by their separation from
her, make themselves Advesaries against the Church, against her members,
against God and against their own souls these four. For the Church is
thereby left to a vexatious destruction, breach of Christian liberty, load of
infamy, and lurch of spiritual maintenance as much as can possibly be wrought.

First, The very separation it self is to the Church as a rupture in the body
of Man; which did make Chrysostom to burst out into this hyperbole. These that
raise contentions in the Church, are worse than they who pierced the sides of
Christ: In which figure there is this truth, That Christ, who gave his natural
body for His Mystical body, which is his Church, will require a severe account
of them who shall rent the peace of the Church.

The liberty of the Church (by the confession of all Christian Churches, none
excepted) is a power in GODS Church to order things indifferent according to
the Apostolical rules, of Decency, 1 Cor. 14.
order and edification, whereupon we make bold to call these contentious men,
for their contrary opinion of judging this liberty of Gods Church unlawful,
superstitions: strange will some say: They who enveigh against superstitions so
bitterly, and in that pretense fall into separation from the Church, to be
termed superstitious.

Yes Beloved, and we need not to strain a gnat in proving it: That Admirable
Man of God, and Pastor in the Church of God in Geneva, whom without preface of
honor, I cannot name, to wit Calv. upon the words of Deutronomie, wherein Gods
People were forbid to make any compacts with the Heathen: which (being no
morrall but only a judicial Law, and therefore was not to be exacted now of
Christians) reflecting upon the liberty of Christians in their use of
Ecclesiastical rites, gave this caution, that none urge to vehemently this
against Ceremonies according unto the Apostles doctrine; wherein condemning
them who took away the Christian liberty of eating meats by these and their
contrary prescripts, Eat not, taste not, handle not: Col. 2:
which is all one with moove not, read not, and other cases of indifferency:
Are not then these men fit objectors of superstition against the Churches
Ordinances, who are themselves so grossly superstitious, pardon us, for who is
their in these times that will not stand zealously upon his right of liberty.

Infamy is (after mortal) the most grievoust of persecutions which they have
multiplyd outragiously by their infamously famous Libels and Pamphlets; beside
the slanders which, as have bin alleged, by imputing Idolatry the vilest of
Adulteries unto her, as if cursed children should call their mother whore:
whereas our Apostle held it necessary to admonish all Christians to take heed
they give no scandal to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. be this spoken to the
Sectarists who make themselves scandalous against the Church, rather than
endure any the least of this which they call the scandalls in the Church.

The injuries to the members of the Church are the next mischiefs of
separation: the first is the breach of Unity: Ephesians. 4.4.
O how many obligations did our Apostle put upon his Ephesians for preserving
of Unity in the Church; the first is because it is one body; second one
spirit, which is the spirit of Union: third one hope of our calling: that is to
say the hope of one heavenly inheritance; after follows one Lord; which is
our Head Christ, and one faith, the soul of our souls, and one Baptism, the
Seal of the said Faith, and last and chiefest one Father of all who above all
things, delights in the unanimity of his Children; for take away Unity, and
all Sympathy is dissolved, which is a compassionate assertion one to each
other, which the Apostles shows in his comparison betwixt the Church of God
and Man's body, wherein the Members do mutually rejoice and green at the joy
or grief of each other, in so much as, if the Heel be pricked the tongue
cries I am hurt, and every part of the body if it were a tongue would cry the
same, I am hurt, this is called the sympathy of the members of the body: but
when Members are dislocated and disjoined then mutual affection is deaded; and
where Sympathy cease, fare well all Charity, which necessarily seperateth it
self together with the separation; now, I beseech you, losses of Unity,
Sympathy and Charity are not these injuries? And commonly all these spring from
one root envy.

For Ecclesiastical records tell us that the Original of Schisms has been
that he who (according to the first Character of the contentious person) did
make ostentation of his own worthiness and found not respect from Governors
in the Church; did thereupon pick quarrels with her in one pretense or other,
even as Aerius the Head of a faction, because he could not obtain to be made
Bishop, was the first that spoke against the degree of Episcopacy it self; But
yet there was peradventure some title of worthiness of learning in such kind
of men in ancient times: But what now? Our Apostle, according to the former
comparison of members of the Church and parts of man's natural body, wishing
the contentation of every part, and to avoid envy; The hand (says he) will
not say because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; meaning every part of
the body contenteth it self with the natural Order it has in the body, else
their would be a dissolution of the whole body: But in these times the hand and
foot both mutine cause they are not eyes and except our Cobblers and Weavers be
allowed for Ministers, they will acknowledge no head nor member; how these
should receive so much tolleration any where within this Church I know not,
except men thought themselves worthy to be led with blind guides: when as
there might be as true Doctrine some time expected from Bedlam, whereof some
examples might be given, if such Doctrines were not fitter for a Stage then a
Pulpit.

But to speak one word of them who arrogat the spirit themselves by their
extemporall faculty which they brag of; and enveighing against Popery:
notwithstanding make themselves Popish, yea very Popes, for this is the
excellency which the Pope of Room boasts of, that he is the supreme and sole
infallible Judge in matters of Doctrine; a privilege thus expressed by the
Jesuit Valentianus: Papa sive diligentium adhibuerit, sive non adhibuerit
tamen infalibiter judicat; that is, whenever the Pope determines any
doctrine, his judgment is infallible, whether he use diligence to try the
Truth or not, which is flatly the heresy of Enthusiasticks.

As for the impiety against God, it is evident in this that the Churches,
wherein Schism is made, are called the Churches of God; And the God of these
Churches is called the God of Peace; and so styled by Saint Paul almost in
every Epistle, a^ Romans 15.13. in his blessing to them, The God of Peace be
with you all, 2 Cor. 13.11. He joyneth blessing and admonition together: Live
in Peace and the God of Love and Peace be with you, Phil. 4.7. He prays,
That their hearts and minds may be possessed with Gods peace: 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
His Prayer to the Thessalonians is That God would give them peace, (...)
always and by all means: Peace is a Jewel. But to what end is this? even to
know that he that is enemy to the Peace of God is also enemy to the God of
peace. For 1 Cor. 14.33. For God is not the God (...), that is, of
Tumultuousnesse confusednesse: but of peace as in all the Churches of the
Saints.

Sacrilege was the last Character wherewith Augustine decyphred this
contentious man; And Sacrilege being a depriving the Ministers of God of their
due. God by the Prophet accounts it a Robery to Himself. But is it possible
that devout men, who are so great enemies to Idolatry, and assume to be above
all others spiritual, should become Sacrilegious. The Apostle shows this was
no news in his days, Rom 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, Committest thou
Sacrilege. Match we now an Idolatrous, and a Sacrilegious Man together, as the
Apostle does here, and the Sacrilegious will think that the Idolatrous is
far more execrable then he himself can be. This Text which I have alleged
will say no: for doubtless Saint Paul the most excellent disputant that has
bin known, knew his Logic, in reasoning, for when he condemn, the
Sacrilegious Jew in comparison of the Idolatrous Gentill, it must be held
either (as the School speaks) an argument ab aequali: that is, thou
Sacrileger, art as ill as the Idolater is: or else a minori: thou art worst,
wherefore how ever these contentious men may mask themselves, under the visard
of Religion and Austerity in abhorring popery, superstition, or Idolatry, yet
are they in one respect far worse than the other, in as much as experience of
all times has proved that the Idolater was always a Reverencer of some Diety,
nor ever was a Superstitious Atheist heard of, although contrarily when has
been of any Atheist who was not Sacrilegious, that is, a rober of Gods right.

Seeing now that contentiousnesse for separation is every way so pernicious:
how shall the Seperatist satisfy himself? shall he think to make a Church of
his own which shall be a Church of God, let us try this, 1 Cor. 12.27. speaking
of this Church of God at Corinth, 1 Cor. 12.27.
he says, You are the body of Christ, and Members of your part: Wherein we are
two have to considerations of the Church of Corinth, one as it was a particular
Church, and compared with that which is called the Catholic and universal
Church of Christ: And so it is but a Member thereof. Secondly, as it is
compared with its own Members, so is it The body of Christ in it self; whence
it follows that Members broken from this Church of God in Corinth did thereby
devide themselves from God Himself: Cyprian and Augustine had to deal with
such contentious persons in their times, and either of them proclaimed this
saying: None can have God for his Father, who has not the Church for his
Mother; meaning them who were separated from their own Churches: The Papists
you know arrogate this saying to the Church and Pope of Rome, but vainly,
because Cyprian at this time was at difference with Stephen the then POPE and
contemned his excommunication, and Augustine was one of them, who withstood the
Popes usurpation of appeals to Rome.

It is time to conclude, the contentious men being Authors of too many
miseries, the greatest mischief will be against their own souls, because
whosoever by contention makes himself an adversary to the Church of the God
of Peace, does therein make the God of Peace of the Church an Adversary to
himself and what must his reward then be but here sorrow and anguish of
soul, and in the end, endless woe: As for you (Beloved in Christ Jesus) be
you exhorted in the words of our Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10. I exhort you, Brethren,
by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you speak one thing, and that there
be no divisions among you, be perfect in one mind and in one judgment.

All Glory be to God, etc.
FINIS.

