THE KING ON HIS THRONE: OR A Discourse maintaining the Dignity of a KING, the
Duty of a Subject, and the unlawfulness of Rebellion.

Delivered in two Sermons Preached in the Cathedral Church in York.

By R. M. Master in Arts, Coll. S. Fet. Cant.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642.

By special Command.

To the Right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Cumberland, Lieutenant General, etc,
To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Glemham, Sarjeant Major General, my much
honored Colonel, and to the rest of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen,
attending His Majesty's Service in the City of York.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
LOyalty as it is the Kings Joy, the Kingdoms Happiness, So the Subjects
Glory; So long then as your Hearts continue Loyal, your Names shall continue
Glorious, being hereby a means to restore Joy to your King, and recover
Happiness to the Kingdom. To you I Dedicate my Labors, That as they afford a
Lesson, So you a Pattern, both of Loyalty; whereby men may be the better moved
either to yield the one their Practice, or the other their Imitation, Besides
(Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful) They who take up Arms against the
King, will not fail to take up Arms against the Author, and Arguments too
against his Work. Your Patronage therefore must be my Refuge, and whilst you
are pleased to Protect my person, I fear not (by Gods Assistance) to maintain
the Truth. Not in confidence of mine own Ability's (for they are too weak)
but because (as Their Acclamation before Darius) Magna est Veritas and
Praevalecit: Great is Truth and it will Prevail. You have Uouchsafed these
Sermons your Approbation in the Pulpit, you have honored them with your
Command to the Press; and now my request is, that you will be Pleased to
Countenance them with your Patronage to the Public Veiw; In which I am
confident nothing is delivered, but what may beseem either the Tongue, or the
Pen of a good Christian, of a Loyal Subject, And of

Your most humble Servant, R. MOSSOM.
York, November. 20. 1642.
To the READER.
BEfore thou do peruse the ensuing Discourse, let me entreat thee to lay
aside all Prejudice, and with as much Sincerity to Read, as the Author writ;
and that is, so, is to inform thy Judgment, not to please thy Fancy; to
satisfy thy Cons ience, not to strengthen a Faction, making no better use of
these Sermons, then Nero did of Seneca's Instructions, ad armandam malitiam, by
perverting the Truth, to Arm thy Disloyalty. Thou shall find here, That,
endeavoring in some measure to do well, I have followed the best, and kept my
self to the Holy Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and Orthodox Divines (who I am
sure would teach me true Divinity) with which the Library in York (so useful
and necessary) did very well furnish me. If then (Courteous Reader) thou find
here the choicest Flowers, (gathered out of the spacious Fields of larger
Volumes) bound up into a fragrant Posie of a short Discourse; Kiss the Hand
that presents them in courteous Acceptance, defile it not with the Spittle of
black-mouthed Censure. If thou find not things handled so fully as thou
desire, consider the short limits of an Hours Discourse; if not so Learnedly
as they might be, accept them as they are, and find not fault till thou can
do better, and then I shall be glad to be thy Reader; let me suffer, rather
than Gods Truth, and in that, my Soveraognes Cause. There are some who quarrel
at the Text, and will ^^ve the Touchstone naught, rather than acknowledge their
(...) Counterfeit, but what is it think thou (Reader) (...) Object? why,
Solomon was a King, and spoke in (...) himself. Odi profanum vulgus! the
Objection will tell thee who are the Objectors, such as will blaspheme rather
than be convinced. But what more? Why, there is no rising up against the King,
as there is no rising up against a Lion, propter terrorem, least he fall upon
us, and rent us in pieces. But what? Is this the going well? Is this the
comeliness in going, the Wiseman speaks of verse. 29? no sure. The best (if not
all) Expositors Interpret this in bonam partem; and if (Reader) thou do
consult the Commentators, and especially Salazars Exposition upon Solomon's
Proverbs, thou shall be fully satisfied. I will not contest about the Words of
my Text (I can easily choose another) if so be, they will subscribe to the Truth
in my Sermons; with which, they who have not been convinced, sure I am, they
have been silenc't. If in perusing, thou turn Critic (who like the Philomele
is Vox and praeterea nihil) consider that these Sermons having had the
Countenance of so great Nobles, so worthy Knights, and able Gentlemen; having
had the Approbation of so learned Bishops, so Reverend Doctors and other
Divines, Quis tu? Who art thou, that I should fear thy supercilious look, or
malicious censure? I shall be glad if any Man more Able, will undertake the
handling this Subject more fully. What I have done, if it may avail any thing
(as something I know it has, and hope will more) to Gods Glory, in the
Advancement of my Sovereigns Cause, I have my desire. Farewell.

Thine, whilst thou art thy King's R. M.

A Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church in York, on the sixth Day of
November, 1642.
Prove. 30.31. -- And a King, against whom there is no rising up.

Let the Words of my mouth, and the Meditations of my Heart, be now and ever
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.


TO frame a Discourse, concerning the Supremacy of Kings, the Allegiance of
Subjects, and the unlawfulness of Rebellion; (after so many Learned Tongues
and Judidicious Pens) is to make Iliads after Homer; to do that, which has
been already so well done, that it cannot be done better. But fit it is the
Preachers Trumpet should sound, so long as the Rebels Drum does beat; fit it
is to press Loyalty to the People, when the People are so much pressed to
Disloyalty. Who that they may know, they are not more willing, and able to
defend the King, and His cause, by force of Arms, than the Scholar is, by
force of Arguments. I have made choice of this Text, a fit Doctrine for these
Times: And a King, against whom there is no rising up. The dependence of the
Words.


In the handling of which Words, I will first speak of their Dependence upon
the former, employed in the conjunction And; And a King, etc. to understand this
aright, we must look back to the 29. verse, and so downwards. There be three
things which go well, yea four which are comely in going: A Lion which is
strongest amongst beasts, and turns not away for any; a Greyhound, or rather
as the Margent, to which accords Junius, accinctus Lumbis Equus, an Horse girt
in the Loins, Equus edoctus militiam, an Horse trained up for War; An He-Goate
also, and a King, against whom, etc. By the by, Observe; That the Scriptures
are a rich Golden Mine, wherein, those parts which seem most earthy, have in
them some rich Veins of Heavenly Doctrine. Solomon, not only as a Man endued
with Wisdom (for then some would here, as in some passages else, have had the
boldness to have brought his Wisdom into question) but as a Man inspired by
the Holy Ghost, tells us here of things which go well, and which are comely in
going. But what is this to a godly Man's Instruction? Why, search this oar, try
it in the fire of discretion, and we shall extract some Golden Sentence, some
Godly Doctrine. To omit the pious descant of Clarius the Scholiast, and others;
I will adhere to that set rule of the Doctors of Lovaine. Quod quarto
tribuitur, Doctores Lovanten. in annotat in loc.
convenit etiam tribus; sicut quod tribus adscribitur, quarto convenit. That
which is attributed to the fourth, is agreeable also to the three; as that
which is ascribed to the three, is agreeable also to the fourth. The Lion then,
the Horse, and the he-Goate, are said to go well, Vid. Salazar. exposit. in
Proverb. Solomon.
and to be comely in going; ob innatam quandam Majestatem, for a certain innate
Majesty, which they especially express in their manner of going. So that
whereas the Wise Man says, There are three things which go well, yea, four
are comely in going; a Lion, an Horse, an he-Goate also, and a King; we may
insert this Conclusion, That Majesty is the ornament of the Crown, The
Conclusion inferd.
the beauty and comeliness of a King. This for the Dependence. Now for the
Words themselves, A King against whom there is no rising up. I will not divide
the Words, for the King has been too ill handled in Divisions, I will
therefore take them in order as they lie, and first speak of the King; and for
Method sake, The Method observed.
I will give you these Heads of my Discourse. 1. Quid, what a King is. 2. Per
quem, by Whom he is King.

1. Quid, what the King is, in se, and ad nos. 1. quid in se, what he is in
himself; and 2. quid ad nos, what he is to us.

1. Quid, what a King is? Some may here stop me, First Quid. What a King is.
in limine, at the very Threshold, and tell me, I may spare my pains, they
know well enough what a King is. And indeed they have some show of Reason
for it; for there have been too many Bethshemites of late, who have curiously
pried into Arcana Imperii, the Ark of Sacred Royalty. But stay; the matter is
not so easy neither, to know what a King is; unless what he is, must be
resolved, by what those Men would have him be. All enjoy the benefit of the
Suns glorious Light, and it is refreshing Heat, but know not the quality of
it is Celestial Body, nor the greatness of it is Heavenly Orb. So all of us
have, and (by Gods blessing) may enjoy the benefit of the Kings Government, and
his Scepters Peace; yet know not the quality of his Kingly Office, nor the
dignity of his Royal Throne: Neither will I now determine either: only such
Truths as are clear in Scripture, evident in Nature, consonant to Reason, and
withal, agreeable to the Time. I will produce in the prosecution of this first
particular, concerning the King: quid in se, what he is in himself.

First, quid in se, what he is in himself. Aquinas.
A King consists especially of these three; Huperoche, Exousia, and 'Arche.
Huperoche, Excellency; Exousia, Power; and 'Arche, Principality; in which
three, Kings of the Earth, are fair and glorious Resemblances of the King of
Heaven. Quicquid communiter de Deo and Creaturis dicitur, a Deo in Creaturas
derivatur; Whatsoever is attributed in common to God and the Creature, is
derived from God upon the Creature; so Aquinas upon Romans 13. whereby, Kings are
Gods Images, and glorious Beams of that all-glorious Sun of Righteousness:
Whence it is, that as God is often called King, so Kings often called Gods.

Huperoche, Excellency, and that either Sanguinis, or Virtutis, Huperoche.
excellency of Birth, or excellency of Gifts: excellency of Birth, when Divus e
sanguine Divum, descended of the Blood Royal: excellency of Gifts, enabled to
discern Judgment, and to go in and out before his People. 2 Cron. 1.10.
Exousia, power, Civil and Ecclesiastical; Civil, over the Commonwealth;
Ecclesiastical, over the Church. Exousia.
No power then above the King; not the Bishop of Rome under the Gospel, no
more than the High Priest of the Jews under the Law, who had a Mitte upon his
Head, Exodus 19.6.
but withal, a Crown upon the Mitre. 'Arche, principality or Government, being
established in his Throne, Arche.
supreme Governor over all his people. Huperoche, excellency, that for
Direction; 'Exousia, power, that for execution; and 'Arche, principality or
Government, supported by both; for Excellency and Power are the two Legs upon
which Kings do stand, the two Pillars upon which the Throne of Government is
established. Now these three things which complete a King, require three things
correspondent to complete a Subject: What a Subject.
his Excellency, that requires Honor; his Power, Fear; his Principality,
Obedience; and Excellency, Power; Principality, there is a King; Honor, Fear;
Obedience, there is a Subject. But in that 1 of Timothy chapter 1. v. 17. Honor
there is Gods Tribute, and belongs only unto him: True, properly and exactly
so it does; but because God has imparted to the King of his Excellency,
therefore also has he imparted to him of his Honor, Psalm. 76. v. 7. Fear
also, that is Gods Tribute, and belongs only unto him: True, properly and
exactly so it does; but because, Power is not but from above, Joh. 19.11.
God imparting to Kings of the Power which he has, imparts also unto them of
the Fear we owe. So Obedience; also, God most peculiarly and exactly requires
of us: yet we must be subject, we must be Obedient also to Kings, for the Lords
sake: he has ordained their Government, and therefore enjoynes to them, as to
himself, our Obedience. If therefore Honor, Fear, Obedience, are the Kings
dues, Mat. 22.21.
then Apodoce, in the Language of our Savior, reddite, render them, for ye
cannot withold them, without manifest Injury; as to the King who has this
Excellency, this Power, this Principality, so also to him that gave it, even
God himself. Thus quid in se, what the King is in himself.

2. Quid ad nos, what he is to us. And he is first, 2. quid ad nos, what he is
to us.
the Defendor of our Faith. Secondly, the preserver of our Peace. Thirdly, the
protector of our Laws.

1. The Defendor of our Faith, 1. The Defendor of our Faith. Isaiah 49.23
in the true Worship and Service of God; in which respect especially, the
Prophet Isaiah styles Kings Nutricii Ecclesiae, the nursing Fathers of the
Church; to this purpose, as the Kings of the Jews had a Copy of the Law, so now
our Kings the Book of holy Scriptures committed to them at their Inauguration.
That as the King of the Jews was Custos utriusque Tabulae, the keeper of both
the Tables; so ours also, Custos utriusque Testamenti, the keeper of both the
Testaments.

Secondly, the Preserver of our Peace.
2. The Preserver of our peace, preventing by his Wisdom, or suppressing by his
Power all Insurrections at home; and withstanding and repulsing all Invasions
from abroad. Ver. 23.
Hence it is, that in the 34 of Ezech. the King is called, the Shepherd of his
people; the Shepherd, as pascere to Feed them, regere, to Guide them, so tueri
too, to defend them, to defend one from the other, and all from the Wolf; Ver.
20.
one from another, the Lean from the Fat, the poor from his Oppressor, and
all from the Wolf; the Wolf, the Enemy without the Fold, the Enemy without
the Kingdom. In that 1 Timothy 2.2. we are commanded to pray, for Kings, Why?
that we may live Heremon kai 'Esuchion Bion, a peaceable and quiet Life;
Heremon Bion, a peaceable Life, free from Civil Dissentions, and 'Esuchion
too, a quiet Life, safe from Foreign Invasions. This then is the King also ad
nos, to us, the preserver of our peace.

Protector of our Laws, as the Sun is the Fountain of Light, The protector
of our Laws.
so the King the Fountain of Justice; the Magistrates in the State, like the
Stars in the Heavens: the Stars borrow their luster of Light from the
Sun, and the Magistrates their power of Justice from the King; the Rule of
which Justice are the Laws. So that if any Magistrates shall violate the Laws,
they eclipse the Kings Justice, and cast dishonor upon his Throne. Which
Indignity to revenge, he has the Sword committed to him by God, and is
appointed Vindex malorum, Romans 13.4.
to take vengeance on them that do evil, and this protection of our Laws, is
the preservation of our peace, and defense of Religion, the glory of both. This
then is the King ad nos, to us, the Defendor of the Faith, and to that end
especially he has Huperochen, his Excellency; the preserver of our peace, and
to that end especially he has 'Exousian, Power; the Protector of our Laws, and
to that end especially he has 'Archen, Principality, or Government; or, put
them altogether, as in good Kings they are never asunder, he has Excellency,
Power, Principality; for the Defense of the Faith, the preservation of the
Peace, and the protection of the Laws of his Kingdom. That the King is in se,
in himself; this he is ad nos, to us. Now on our part is due to the King, a
full maintenance of his Royal Estate; a full Maintenance is due, non donum sed
debitum, not a Gift, but a Debt, For this cause pay you Tribute also, so Saint
Paul, Romans 13.6. from which Tribute, Aquinas Comment. in Romans 13.
though Aquinas will have the Clergy exempted ex privilegio Principum, by the
privilege granted them from Princes (for indeed, no Man can remit a Debt, but
he to whom the debt is owing) yet he confesses, it has, equitatem quidem
Naturalem, truly a Natural Equity; for it is Equity indeed, if we will have
our Faith defended, our Peace preserved, and our Laws protected, that then the
Excellency, Power and Principality of the King should be maintained. To see a
Man stand bare headed, we account an ordinary and usual Sign of Subjection;
and what is it think we then, to see a State bare headed? the Prince who is the
head kept bare, not only denuded of his power and Aurhority, but also of his
means and maintenance?

defense of the Faith, the preservation of the peace, and the protection of the
Laws? against him there is no rising up.

evil Counselors opposes, the sincerity and truth of Religion? may not the
Subject then stand upon Religions guard, and Defend the Faith, even against the
King himself? Judge. 6. v. 31.
Here I might answer as Joash did, Let Baal plead for himself, let wicked
Kings Patronize their own Cause; Thanks be to God, we have no cause to
complain of our Kings wickedness, but of our own; and so need not I plead
for evil Kings, since God has given us so good and gracious a King. But
because this is that which many pretend, to countenance their unlawful Arms;
I Answer, That in case a King neglects, nay, seduced by evil Counselors
opposes the sincerity and truth of Religion: the Subjects may not rise up
against the King, Vi and Armis, with Force and Arms; but Precibus and
Lachrymis, with Prayers and Tears, the Weapons with which the ancient
Christians overcame the cruelty of their Persecutors; according to that of
Saint Bernard, Bernard Epist. 221.
Stabimas and pugnahimus usque ad mortem (si ita oportuerit,) We will stand to
it, and fight even unto Death, (if need be,) But how? why, hear the Father,
non scutis and Gladiis, not with Shields and Swords, sed precibus and fletibus
ad Deum, with Prayers and Tears unto God.

The Subject then may defend, by Petition to the King, and Prayers for the
King. By Petition, I say, to the King, yet not as Caesar's Captain Petitioned
the Roman Senate (as Plutarch Relates it) with his Hand upon the Pummell of his
Sword; that if they would not grant it, that should give it. And in case the
King will not Grant, not Read, not Receive a Petition, then Vince serendo,
overcome by suffering. And if it be the Truth of the Gospel a Man stands for,
so that the goodness of the Cause will bear him out, he must not refuse to
undergo Solomon was chosen by God to build the Temple, because he was a King
of Peace. 1 Cron. 2.
Sure then (Beloved) whatsoever Men may pretend, God has not chosen them to
reform the Church, who are Men of War, yea, War against their King, against a
Solomon too, War against a King of Peace. To raise a Civil War is certainly
to exalt Satan's Kingdom, and not Gods or the King; every where (as too sad
experience tells us) to settle vile Profanation, no where to settle true
Religion.

And if Petitions to the King will not prevail, we must use Prayers to God,
for Solomon tells us, The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord (not in the
power of the People) and he turns it whethersoever he will. He can move evil
Princes to good, in mercy to his People, as he did Belshazzar and Darius, as
well as suffer good Princes to be moved to evil, in judgment to his People,
as he did David and Hezekiah; yea, as he can move evil Princes, so remove them
at his pleasure, as he did Saul and Ahab.

But the full clearing of this, belongs to the last part of the Text. Only
this by the way; Since there are Men, who are now up in Arms against their
gracious Sovereign; least any should be led away with their fair pretenses,
we must know, That no Man ought to take up Arms, but in the Defense of a just
cause, Note.
and in Obedience to a lawful Command. For, as a Man must have a good Cause to
justify his Arms, so a lawful Authority to justify his Cause: which who so
wants, is not only a Rebel, but a Murderer, as Bernard to the Templars, Sermon.
1. Concerning unlawful Duels, so may I say of him who takes up unlawful Arms,
if he dies, Moritur homicida, he dies a Murderer; if he lives, Vivit homicida,
he lives a Murderer: yea, whether he lives or dies, Est homicida, he is a
Murderer: Occ sor lethaliter peccat, and occisus aeternaliter perit; if he
lives, he is spiritually dead in that he slew, and if he dies, he is eternally
dead in that he is slain, slain without Repentance: here then enter a serious
Deliberation, and no sudden Resolution. Were the Cause as Just as is pretended,
though no Man will think, to pillage Houses the way to reform the State, to
deface Churches the way to confirm Religion; formerly towling a Bell on the
Lords Day, has been accounted a great breach of the Sabbath; now, sounding of
Trumpets, beating of Drums, taking of Castles, plundering of Houses on the
Lords Day, an acceptable and commendable Service. Will any Man think this the
way of Reformation? no sure, unless this Reformation must be another Creation,
and so require another Chaos of Confusion. But suppose we yet the Cause as good
(I say) as is pretended; yet where is the lawful Command of Authority? As for
Excellency, Power, and Principallity, which must constitute this Authority: The
Scriptures allows them to Kings, denies them to Subjects, though Magistrates,
yea, the highest Magistrates, denies them (I say) jointly and together as in
Kings. For the Magistrate though never so high, 1 Epist. 2.14.
he is the Kings Creature. So Saint Peter, and so his Power and Government a
Derivative. The Subject may have an Huperochen, an Excellency of Gifts; yea,
Megisten Huperochen, the greatest Excellency, which makes him capable of being
Councellor to the King, but not a King. But his 'Exousia and 'Arche, his Power
and Government, being only Delegate, and Derived from the King; it is not
Consonant to Reason, that they should afford a lawful Command against the
King. For the King being the Fountain from whence the Magistrates Power does
Stream; how against Nature is it, for the Stream to run backwards into the
Fountain? for the Power derived from the King, to be exercised against the
King? So that whilst Men take up Arms and prosecute a Civil War against the
King, in stead of Defending, we see, they destroy Religion, in stead of
Preserving; they disturb the Peace, in stead of Protecting; they violate the
Laws, and that in an high Measure, and an heinous Nature. Indeed if we ask,
whether there be any Cause that can justify Arms against the King, and any
Authority that can justify the Cause? The Scriptures (as shall afterward
appear) will say no, the Fathers say no, the best of Modern Divines say no.
What shall we say then? or rather, what shall we do then? Why, Defend our
Kings Person, and he will Defend our Religion; Preserve His Honor, and he will
preserve our Peace; maintain His Royalty, and He will protect our Laws.

Strigellus tells us, That Alphonsus King of Naples, his Emblem was, A Pelican
feeding her young with her own Blood; with this Motto, (better applied then of
late) Pro Rege and pro Grege. What was that Kings, may be most truly Ours; who
Pelican like, is now ready to spend His own Blood, for the redeeming His own
Honor, and His Peoples safety; and if ye now tread in His steps, follow His
Example, in being ready to sacrifice your own Lives, for the Honor of your
King, and the Peace of your Country, if ye dye in the enterprise, your Deaths
shall not be Mortes, but Immortalitates, having made your peace with God, an
Eternal Reward shall attend your Temporal Deaths. And here I pass from Quid,
What the King is, to the per Quem, by whom he is King. 2. Perquem, by whom he
King.


2. Per Quem, by whom? If we come to Solomon's Proverbs, we shall find this per
quem answered, with a per Me, Prove. 8.15. per Me Reges Regnant, by me Kings
Reign, by Me King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: where the per is not a mere
Permission, but a full Commission; it is not that they Reign by my Sufferance,
but by mine Ordinance, for if we bring our per quem to St. Paul, he will answer
us with an Ordinatae sunt a Deo: Romans 13.1.
The Powers which are, are ordained of God. Bring this per quem to the Ancient
Fathers, Lib. 5. c. 24.
and Irenaeus will tell us, That Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and
Reges constituuntur: By whose Command Men are Created, by his Command are Kings
Ordained. Tertullian in Apologet. tells us, Inde est Imperator, unde and homo
antiquam Imperator, By him is the Emperor, by whom he is Man before he be
Emperor, Inde potestas illi, unde and Spiritus, from him he has his Power,
from whom he has his Spirit. Hence it is, that in 1 Cron. c. 29. v. 23. it is
said, Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord, in solium Domini, not in solium
Populi, on the Throne of the Lord, not on the Throne of the People. Yea, bring
this per quem to the Heathen, and such is the dictate of Nature, that he will
answer it with a per Jovem. And it were more than a Miracle, that among the
Heathen (as one has well observed) so many Princes should submit themselves to
one, and that one peradventure a Woman, peradventure a Child; were it not that
they did acknowledge a Divine Power (which St. Paul more Divine-like, calls
Gods Ordinance) which begat a Reverence in their hearts. Hence it is that we
owe Honor and Subjection unto Kings (though wicked) even because of Gods
Ordinance; for as the unfaithfulness of a Man cannot frustrate Gods promise,
as appears, Romans 9. so nor can the Wickedness of the Person make void Gods
Ordinance: So that a King is nor a King, because he is a good King, nor leaves
being a King, when he leaves being good. We give Honor, says Bishop Andrews
well, not proswpw, but proswpwpoiw, not to Man: but to God in Man. So that as
contempt of the Magistrate the Kings Vicegerent, is contempt of the King, who
ordained the Magistrate; so contempt of the King, Gods Vicegerent, is contempt
of God who ordained the King. For in the chain of order one link still depends
upon the other. Saint Basils advice then is good, That we give Honor, Tois men
calois hws tw thew, tois de cacois dia ton theon, to godly Kings, as to God; to
wicked Kings for God. Though Kings themselves then be evil, yet must we
reverence Gods Ordinance, and not resist, but suffer their Commands to be
fulfilled, either a nobis, or de nobis; a nobis, in Active obedience, if
lawful; de nobis, in Passive, if unlawful, we must take up, not a Sword of
resistance, but a Buckler of patience; and if occasion be, we must maintain
Truth and Justice morte, rather than mart, by suffering rather than by
resisting. For qui insurgit in Christum Domini, insurgit in Dominum Christi, He
that rises up against the Anointed of the Lord, rises up against the Lord of
the Anointed. Monarchomachoi, are theomachoi, fighters against the Kings, are
fighters against God. Therefore howsoever we respect the Royal Person as Man,
we must Honor, Fear, and Obey him as King. For therefore are Kings called
Gods, as Brentius well, upon Joh. 10. non quod natura sint Dii, sed quod
officium eorum ordinatio sit divina: Not because they are Gods by Nature, but
because their Kingly Office, is Gods Divine Ordinance. Since the King then is
per Deum, by God, we must Honor, Fear, and Obey him propter Deum, for God,
which is the Charecter of a good Christian, as well as a good Subject; who does
arcessere rivum fidelitatis, a font pietatis, draw the stream of Loyalty from
the Fountain of Piety; and where Loyalty is the Daughter of Religion, like
Naomi and Ruth, they are inseparable. When Saul was made King, though the
Sons of Belial did despise him, yet, they whose hearts God had touched (say
the Scriptures, 1 Samuel 10.26.) they followed after him. They did not then look
upon him as the Son of Kish, but as the King of Israel; as after, David looked
upon him, not as his Persecutor, but as his Sovereign; and therefore though
cruel and impious, yet did he Honor him, propter Deum, as the Lords Anointed.
And thus have I done with the first word, Rex, a King; having shown you, 1
Quid, what a King is. 2. Per quem, by whom he is King. Quid in se, what a King
is in himself, Huperoche, 'Exousia, and 'Arche, Excellency, Power, and
Principality; which require of us, Honor, Fear, and Obedience. Quid ad nos,
what he is to us, the defender of our Faith, the preserver of our Peace, and
the protector of our Laws; which require of us a full maintenance of his Royal
Estate. This for the quid. 2. The per quem, answered with a per me, where non
vox hominum sonat, it is not the voice of Man, but of God, by him Kings Reign,
who loses the bond of Kings, and guirdeth their loins with a girdle, Job.
12.18. This the Sum of what has been delivered. I should now speak of that
which follows, against whom there is no rising up. But of these Words, when
opportunity shall be offered. Give me leave to add a word or two, which shall
neither be propter, nor ultra tempus, beside, or beyond the Time.

Beloved, Elijahs small Cloud has now overspread the whole face of the Heavens
with a Storm; The not long since Tumults, have overspread the whole Kingdom
with a Civil War, and we must now know, Storms come not but by Vapors, so
that if the Storm of Gods Judgments fall down upon us, the Vapors of our
filthy Sins have first ascended: take away the Vapors, the Storm will cease;
take away our Sins, Gods Judgments will be removed. We attribute the
continuance and increase of our miseries, to the raging malice of the
Adversary; who like Jehu, drives furiou ly, and what conditions of peace are
offered, yea, what Articles concluded, he casts them behind his back. But
indeed we ought to look within our selves, and if we desire peace with Men, we
must first make our peace with God, and having made our peace with him, we need
not fear the Enmity of Man. God shall be to us, what he was to David, Ps. 62.
our Rock, and our Salvation, our Defense, our Refuge, and our Glory. And if he
be our Rock, what Storm shall shake us? if our Salvation, what trouble shall
deject us? if our Defense, what Weapon shall Wound us? if our Refuge, what Enemy
shall pursue us? if our Glory, what Tongue shall disgrace us? Fear we not then
the power or violence of the Adversary, fear we not his great strength. It is
a remarkable passage, which History relates concerning Phocas, who when he had
slain his Master the Emperor Mauritius, he strengthened himself with strong
forces, fortified himself about with strong Walls; and when he thought himself
secure from the Enemy without, he heard a voice in the Night saying to him, The
Enemy that is within, that shall destroy thee, meaning his rebellious sin; the
Application is easy. We may (blessed be God) say with holy David, Ps. 21.2. In
virtute tua Domine, The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, exceeding
glad shall he be of thy Salvation. The King shall rejoice in thy Strength, not
in the strength and number of his people, not in the valor and prowess of his
Captains; but Virtute tua Domine, in the might of the Almighty, for that is
Virtus ad Salutem; that Strength brings Salvation; in which Salvation great
shall be our Kings Joy, great shall be his Glory and his Honors, v. 5. Now
Regis ad exemplum, let not us place our Strength in an Arm of Flesh, which
like Jeroboams hand shall suddenly wither, and bring inevitable ruin upon us:
but let us rely upon the Arms of the Almighty, which are Everlasting, Deuteronomy.
33.27. strecht out to all Eternity, as for the Defense of his Anointed, so for
the Safety of all those, who repose their whole trust and Confidence in him.

Let others think Force of Arms whereby they offend God no less than their
King, the way to reform and repair all: my advice to you is, that if you
desire the Times should mend, you would first mend your selves; and to that
end, in unfaigned humiliation betake your selves to God with Prayers and Tears,
least your Darkness be without Light, your Judgment without any Beams of
Mercy. Sue to God for a Treaty of Peace (for your Souls first, and then for
the Kingdom) sending forth, Legationem Lachrymarum, (as Gregory calls the
weeping of a Penitent) an Embassage of Tears, to which God will assuredly give
a gracious audience. Now that our State like Noah's Ark is tossed upon the
waters of Civil Dissentions, send out the Dove of humble Prayer, and though it
return into your bosoms, as the Dove into the Ark, empty; yet send it out
again, and at length it will bring in the Olive Branch of Peace. Though the fury
of War had sucked out all the marrow of the Commonwealth, so that it were like
those dry bones in the Prophets vision, Ezech. 37. v. 4.5.6.
yet by our Prayers and Tears we should so prevail with God, that (according
to the Scirptures expressions) he would make the several Joints of Kings,
Nobles, and People, to knit again; and tie them together with their Sins and
Ligaments, Loyalty and affection; cloathe them with their old Flesh, of peace
and plenty; wrap them in their old skin of Riches and Glory, and breath Life
into them again, even the execution of justice, the life of a Commonwealth, and
soul of a Kingdom; which God of his infinite mercy, and for Christ Jesus his
all-sufficient Merits graciously vouchsafe unto us, Amen.

Laus Deo.
To His Excellency WILLIAM EARL of NEWCASTLE, General of His Majesty's Forces
in the North, etc.
Right Honorable,
IT is not the Excellency of the Work, which has induced me, to present it to
the Patronage of your Excellency; But because there is a Congregation, or
rather a Combination of Men, who with Hermogenes in Tertullian, Maledicere
singulis officium bonae Conscientiae judicant, think it the discharge of a good
Conscience, to speak evil (yea and to do evil) against all those who oppose
them: The same dutiful respect, which begot the intention of having your
Excellency my Auditor, begot also the desire of obtaining you my Protector;
that as the Work has had the Grace of so general an Approbation, so the
Author the Countenance of so Honorable a Patronage, and withal the Protection
of so Worthy an Excellency. The praises of whose greatest Worth, are best heard
from the Voice of this greatest County; into which (by the solicitation of the
Loyal Nobility and Gentry, and by Commission from His Sacred Majesty) your
Excellency has advanced with your present Forces, to repress the fury of
Rebellion; which, neither pitying the tenderness of Infancy, nor the
infirmity of old Age; neither regarding the Privilege of Sex, nor the plea of
Condition, has offered inhumane violence to all. And now (Right Honorable)
maugre the malicious attempts of the Rebellious (whatsoever is the issue of
your noble Endeavors) here shall Posterity find it Recorded, That William
Earl of Newcastle was Loyal to His Sovereign, and faithful to his Country;
Quem non Ardor prava jubentium mente quatit solida. Whose Memory shall be
precious in the minds of all good Men, and Loyal Subjects. So that, should you
Sacrifice your Self in affection to your King and Country; your Honorable
Death shall be a means to procure you a Glorious Life, and an Eternity of
Happiness shall Crown your Fidelity to your Prince. In whose Honor and
Safety, that you may be preserved safe and Honorable, is the devout Prayer of

Your Excellency's most humbly devoted Servant. R. MOSSOM.
York, December the fifth, 1642
The Second Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church in York, on the 27. of
November, 1642.
Prove. 30.31. -- And a King, against whom there is no rising up.

Let the words of my mouth, and the Meditations of my Heart, be now and ever
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.


AN abrupt Beginning dulls the Attention of the Auditor; for the better
Introduction then to our present Discourse; give me leave to recapitulate, and
recall to your Memories, the Heads of our former. In the handling of the Words,
I showed you first their Dependence, employed in the Conjunction And; And a
King: From whence I inferred this Conclusion, That Majesty is the Ornament of
the Crown, the beauty and comeliness of a King. The Words themselves I took in
order as they lie, making a King the Subject, yet without subjecting the King;
for our method was, First to show you quid, What a King is. 2. Per quem, by
whom he is King, etc. Here I left the King, in his Relation to His Subjects;
and Here I left the Subjects, in their Relation to their King. And I wish this
mutual Relation had been kept so inviolate, as that, having spoken of the
King, I had not any occasion to enter upon the latter Words of my Text, more
than to repeat the Words themselves, and tell you that, against him there is
no rising up. But since Solomon's Nemo insurgit, there is no rising up, is
turned into David's, multi insurgunt, many are they that rise up. I could not
any longer sit still, but rise up I must too (and good manners you will say
when my betters rise before me) But how rise up? why, as every good Subject
ought to do pro, not con, for the King not against him: For, against him there
is no rising up.

In the handling of which Words, I shall observe this Method. The Method
1. To speak of the Words as denying rem factam the thing done; and herein I
follow Junius and Tremelius with their in quem nemo insurgit, the same with our
English, Against whom there is no rising up. 2. As denying, jus facti, the
lawfulness of doing the thing; herein I follow Lyranus, Clarius the Scholiast,
the Doctors of Lovaine, and others, with their nec est qui resistat ei, neither
is there any that may resist him. Having done with the Words as denying rem
factam, the thing done, and jus facti, the lawfulness of doing the thing. I
shall show you the quomodo, and the quare.

1. The quomodo, the manner how, there is no rising up.

2. The quare, the reason, why there is no rising up.

1. The quomodo the manner, how there is no rising up.

1. Non Cord, no rising up in the Heart, malum cogitando, in thinking evil.
2. Non Lingua, no rising up with the Tongue, maledicendo, in speaking evil. 3.
Non Manu, no rising up with the Hand, malefaciendo, in doing evil.

2. The quare, the reason, why there is no rising up, and that is, 1. Propter
malum culpae, for the evil of sin. 2. Propter malum paenae, for the evil of
punishment, Rebellion being properly Satan's sin, both to denotate the krima,
and the katakrima, the guilt and the punishment.

1. Then to speak of the Words as denying rem factam, 1. Denying rem factam the
thing done.
the thing done, in quem nemo insurgit, so Junius, against whom there is no
rising up, so our English. But what? Nemo insurgit, no rising up? What means
then those soundings of Trumpets, those beatings of Drums, those Alarums of
War? Are these so frequent in our Ears, and yet Nemo insurgit, no rising up?
What think you? was Solomon acquainted with the Logic of our Times, that Towns
should be Garrisoned, Armies raised, Fields pitched, Battails fought, contrary
to the Kings Command, with contempt of the Kings Majesty, and with hazard of
the Kings Life, and yet Nemo insurgit, no rising up against the King? no sure;
there is ingens hiatus, a vast distance betwixt Achitophels policy, and
Solomon's Wisdom; that foments Disloyalty and Faction, this instructs
Obedience and Subjection. What then? is it, because rising up in Rebellion
against the King, is a Sin so horrible, and the Miseries which attend this Sin
so insupportable, that Negare maluit quam prohibere, he rather chose to deny
than to forbid it? That as St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.3. would not have covetousness
so much as once named amongst the Saints, so nor Solomon here Rebellion amongst
Subjects? This doubtless is not far from the Wise-Mans intent. But the truth
is, non tam negat, quam negando fortius prohibet, he does not so absolutely
deny, as by denying the more strongly forbid. For we may observe, that in the
Language of the Scriptures, as the strongest Negation is by an Interrogative,
so the strongest prohibition, is by a Negative: as here, Rex in quem nemo
insurgit; A King against whom there is no rising up. 2. Denying jus facti. the
lawfulness of doing the thing.
Thus as denying rem factam, the thing done.

2. As denying jus facti, the lawfulness of doing the thing. And here I must
lanch out into the deep, and not fearing what Storms may follow, steare
forwards; guiding my Course by the Compass of Gods Word. Non est qui resistat
ei, so Clarius the Scholiast, and others, Neither is there any that may resist
him. Not any, whether of the Clergy or Laity, whether Private Persons or
Public, whether Lords or Commons. Solomon has a Non est qui resistat ei for
them all. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, so Saint Paul, Romans
13.1. pasa psuche every Soul, si quis tentat excipere conatur decipere, is the
known Language of S. Bernard, he that attempts to except, endeavors to
deceive. Though a Prophet then, an Apostle, or Evangelist, though a Man of an
Extraordinary Calling, yet subject to the Ordinary Jurisdiction; no Cloister or
Church, no Profession, Employment or Dignity, is a Sanctuary, a Priviledg'd
Place, from the Tribute of Obedience due to Caesar. To apprehend the strict
tie, in which the Subject is bound to His Sovereign; we must know that Kings,
are the Successors of the Patriarchs, both in the right of their Fatherhood,
as Fathers of the Country; and in the rule of their Government as Governors of
the Commonwealth. The difference seems to be only this, that the Patriarchs
were Kings of their Families, and Kings are the Fathers of their Countries. B.
Andrews.
So that jus Regium comes out of jus Patrium, the Kings right from the
Fathers, and both hold by one Commandment moral, and one Bond natural; so
that as the Son by the same Command of God is bound to obey his Father, that
the Subject is to obey His King; So by the same Bond of Nature the Subject is
to obey his King, that the Son is to obey his Father. What the relation of a
Subject to his King.
Yea, in the Relation of a Subject to His King, is contained not only the
Relation of a Son to his Father, but also of a Wife to her Husband, of a
Servant to his Master. And what Father will admit it lawful, for his Son
violently to resist him? What Husband, for his Wife forcibly to oppose him?
What Master, for his Servant to rise up against him? And shall we admit it
lawful then, for the Subject violently to resist, forceably to oppose, and
with Arms to rise up against the King, who is Pater Patriae, the Father of the
Country; Maritus Reipublicae, the Husband of the Commonwealth, and Subditorum
Dominus, the Lord of all His Subjects? degenerare in Tyrannum, degenerate and
become a Tyrant; and when the King deserts his Duty, no marvel if the
Subjects forsake their Loyalty. dum been se gesserint. I told you before, and
now tell you again. I might here answer as Joash did, Judge. 6. Let Baal plead
for himself, let wicked Kings Patronize their own cause (thanks be to God) we
have no cause to complain of our Kings wickedness, but of our own, and so
need not I plead for evil Kings, since God has bestowed upon us so good and
gracious a King, had we but thankful Hearts to acknowledge his Goodness. Yet
because the Press and the Pulpit have abounded with false aspersions cast upon
the Royal Majesty, and prepossest the People with vile Opinions, and wicked
conceits of His Sacred Person and Dignity. I will suppose those Men, who
maintain the People in their disloyalty, not to be what indeed they are,
fallaciae Magistri, (as Tertullian calls some in his time) Masters of Falsehood;
and to be what indeed they are not, Magistri Veritatis, Masters of Truth; and
so all their false reports, true relations. And notwithstanding this
supposition, I shall make good Solomon's non est qui resistat ei, make it
evident unto you, That it is not lawful for the Subject to rise up in Arms
against him. You may remember I touched upon this point formerly, I shall now (I
hope) to your better satisfaction more fully handle, what I then but lightly
touched.

Our Groundwork must be this infallible Axiom, That It is not lawful to take
up Arms, but in the defense of a just Cause, and in Obedience to a Lawful
Command. 1. Then I will make it apparent, that there is no Cause. 2. That there
is no Authority that can justify a Subject taking up Arms against the King.
But before I proceed, give me leave to premise somewhat, for the preventing
prejudice and misunderstanding (a thing too too incident in the cause of
Kings.) When God and the King stand in Subordination, Note.
there, Deo and Hominibus, we must obey God and Man. But where they stand in
Opposition, there the Apostles Maxim is good, Deo potius quam Hominibus, Acts
4.19. we must obey God rather than Man. When then I tell you, you must obey
wicked Kings, think not that I would have you obey Kings in their wickedness.
No. I know there is a quae Caesaris, and a quae Dei, so that our Oath of
Allegiance to the King, must be no breach of our Oath in B^ptisme to God. As
Kings Reign, per Deum, by God, so must we obey them propter Deum, for God, not
contra Deum, against God. Not, because Kings are Kings, therefore, quod libet
licet, their Will must be a Law. What were this, but to Deifie Kings; and in
stead of Gods, by Analogy, to make them Gods indeed, instead of Dii dicti, Dii
facti, and so wipe the first Commandment out of the Decalogye. We must know
then, we are to learn a Lesson of Obedience, even when we disobey, Obedience
to the punishment inflicted, when we disobey the Command enjoined; yielding
though not Active Obedience to do, yet Passive, to suffer what the evil Prince
lay's upon us; so that, as we may not obey Princes in doing the evil they
Command, so nor may we rise up against them, when they Command that which is
evil. And this is the Sum of Gods Truth, and the Saints Practice, in this
case of Subjection to wicked Kings. This to remove Prejudice and
Misunderstanding, now ad Rem.

1. No Cause can justify the Subjects taking up Arms against their King. 1. No
cause can justify arms against the King.
We must know Satan deceives not more, than when an Angel of Light; and
Rebellion prevails not more, than when it is pretense is Religion and Justice.
See that one Example of Absolon, 2 Samuel 15. He steals away the Hearts of the
People; and how that? Verse. 6.
First he possesses them with an evil opinion of the King, Verse. 3.
that he neglects the execution of Justice; and then insinuates into them,
Verse. 4.
That if he were made Judge in the Land (not yet seeming to aim at the Crown,
he only desires to be made a Judge in the Land) them the times should be
better: If any Man had any suite or cause, if he came unto him, he would do
him Justice. Verse. 5. etc.
And then condescended to a winning Affability with the People, he raises a
most unnatural Rebellion; which he colors over, not only with the fair
Pretense of executing Justice, but also of preserving Religion, and therefore,
he offers Sacrifice before the People. And the better to countenance his
Rebellion, he makes use of Achitophell the great Councellor, and others of the
Nobles of Israel. And if we look upon King David, he (good Man) is put to as
great straits as King Charles. He is driven from the great City Jerusalem, he
is forced to fly a far off, and glad that he can be furnished with provision
at Mahanaim, at the bounty of his better Subjects. And being at this distance,
he Assembles what Forces he can raise, and sends them out to suppress the
Rebellion of Absolon; who as he brought upon the Kingdom, the misery of a
Civil War, so upon himself the confusion of an unnatural Son, and a
Rebellious Subject. Here let me say to King Charles, what Cushi said to King
David, (since their case is not much unlike) when he brought the News of the
Victory, 2 Samuel 18.32. Let the Enemies of my Lord the King, and all that rise
up to do thee hurt, be as that young Man is. But that a pretended Cause how
specious soever, should justify Arms against the King, no Man will believe.
Therefore I must go a great way farther, and draw the Cord much longer, and
make it appear; that no Cause, how just soever truly and indeed, can justify
the Subjects taking up Arms against their Sovereign. What cause more Religious
than that of Religion? What cause more Just than that of Justice it self? Yet
neither for the Profession of Religion, nor for the execution of Justice, may
Subjects take up Arms against their King. This is evident. Ashur is the Rod of
Gods anger, yet must Israel be subject; Nebuchadnezzar his scourge, yet must
Judah submit, and be so far from raising Arms against him, that they must
pray for his Peace, Jer. 29.7. In that 1 Timothy 2.1. Prayers are commanded to be
made for Governors, who were they? not Christians, but Heathens. In that 1
Pet. 2.13. Honor the King. Who was that? Constantine the good? No, but Nero
the Cruel. And sure, where God Commands Prayers to be made for Kings, Horour
and Obedience to be given to Kings, he takes away taking up Arms against Kings;
though such as Nebuchadnezzar, such as Nero, Idolatrous and Cruel.

Blessed are they (says our Savior) who suffer persecution for Righteousness
sake, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 5.10. not Blessed are they
who raise Rebellion for Righteousness sake, that theirs may be the Kingdoms
of the Earth. And again, Verse. 44.
Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which
despightfully use you, and persecute you; and the reason is, ut Filii sitis,
That ye may be the Children; the Children of whom? Filii hujus seculi, Children
of this World? no; Flesh and Blood cannot endure this; they are for another
Way, a Way of Opposition, a Way of Rebellion; but Filii Patris vestri qui est
in Caelis, the Children of your Father which is in Heaven. If then to love our
Enemies, to Bless them that Curse us, to do good to them that here us, and to
Pray for them who despightfully use us and persecute us, be Godly, Spiritual,
and Heavenly; then to have bitter Envyings and Strifes in the Heart, to raise
Civil Dissension and Division in the State, is Earthly, Sensual and
Divellish, as S. James speaks chapter 3. v. 15. S. Peter in 1 Ep. c. 2. v. 18. He
admonishes Servants to be subject to their Masters, with all Fear, not only
to the Good and Gentle, Alla kai tois skoliois, but also to the Froward, so our
English, pravis the wicked; so Beza: duris, hard or cruel; so Tremelius. And
if Servants must obey wicked and cruel Masters, then must Subjects obey Wicked
and Cruel Kings; for the same relation that the Servant has to his Master,
the same has the Subject to his King. And Beza's note here concerning the
Servant, may, not unfitly, be applied to the Subject; That, though his
condition seem in this case very grievous, yet his subjection shall be so much
the more accoptable to God, si voluntas ipsius plus valeat quam Dominorum
injuriae; If the good pleasure of his will more prevail with them, than the
injury's of their Lords. Again in Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved (says Saint
Paul) avenge not your selves: If we may not avenge our selves upon our Equals,
much less upon our Superiors, and least of all (that is, not at all) on him
who is Supreme, Comment in locum.
Ergo affligemur inulti, shall we then be tyrannized over without Revenge?
Musculus makes the Objection, and gives the answer; adjecta est, (says he)
hujus gratia, assertio illa, ego rependam, For this cause, is that Assertion
added, I will repay, says the Lord; and a fearful thing it is to fall into
the hands of the living God, Heb. 10 11.
and ideo horribilius Regibus, therefore the more fearful for Kings, because
they have him alone to be their Judge, and, quid credimus judicem illum, si non
and ultorem? as Tertullian speaks, Wherefore do we believe him a Judge, if not
a Revenger? As for Kings then, God will punish them Autocheir, with his own
hand; which David knew well, when he answered Abishai (moving, yea, inciting
him to slay Saul, or suffer Saul to be slain) with a Deus percusserit, God
shall smite him; but as for himself, he would not stretch out his hand against
him, 1 Samuel 2.6.10.11. I could heap up Texts of Scripture to confirm this
Truth, but this one sentence of my Text may suffice; where we have it propriis
terminis (a thing now a days so much stood upon) A King against whom there is
no rising up.

If we desire Examples for further confirmation, let us retire back to former.
Ages, and we are presently (as Saint Paul speaks upon another occasion)
encompassed about with a cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 12.1.
Nephos martyrwn, a cloud of Martyrs, sealing and maintaining Gods Truth, with
their own Blood, not with the Blood of others. Was not Saul a bloody
Persecutor, slaying Abimelech, with fourscore and four Priests in one Day,
upon the false accusation of Doeg? was he not a Demoniacke, possessed with an
evil Spirit? a cruel Tyrant, seeking not only the death of David, but also
of Jonathan his own Son? Yet when God had delivered him into David's hands,
and Abishai (looking upon him only with a Soldiers Eye, as his Enemy) had
been earnest to kill him; yet says David, destroy him not, for who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. The
Lords Anointed! What Saul a Persecutor, a Doemoniacke, a Tyrant, and yet
Christus Domini, the Lords Anointed? Note.
Here (beloved) let me give you a remarkable Observation; This Anointing here,
does not betoken any Spiritual Grace, as elsewhere it does in several places
of the Scriptures; a mistake (let me tell you) which has begotten many
irreverent opinions concerning Kings. Royal Unction gives a Just Title to the
Crown, not divine Grace to sway the Scepter; it gives Right to rule, not to
Rule rightly. Though true it is, it were much to be wished, that Grace in their
Hearts, were as fragrant, as the oil upon their Heads; and that, as they
excel in Glory and Dignity, so in Godliness and virtue. But we see wicked
Saul then, as well as holy David, is Christus Domini, the Lords Anointed; he
had (as all wicked Kings have) sanctitatem Vnctionis, though not sanctitatem
vitae, an holy Calling though not an holy Life. Yea, the Lord rules in the
Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, so the Prophet Daniel, c.
4. v. 32. so that he may be Christus who is not Christianus as was Darius the
Heathen, Is. 45.1. If then Kings are made Christi Domini, the Lords Anointed,
neither for Religion nor Virtue; then certainly, they may not be unmade for
either Heresy or Vice, according to that Divinity axiom, dominium temporale
non fundatur in gratia, Salis. determinat. Comment in locum.
temporal Dominion (or power of Rule) is not founded upon Grace. To all this
accords that of Junius, and Tremelius, Vncto Jehovae (say they) the Anointed of
the Lord, that is, a Deo ad Regnum assumpto, admitted by God to the Kingdom;
and what? to have his Crown presently cast down to the ground, and himself
upon misdemeanour deposed from his Throne by the States, by the multitude, by
the Collective body of the Kingdom, as some would have it? no, a Deo ad Regnum
assumpto, ac proinde sancto, and munito ab omni injuria, admitted by God to the
Kingdom, and therefore sacred and fortified from all Injury. Note.
In that great defection under Jeroboam, did there not live many holy Prophets?
in that hot Persecution under Nero, did there not live many holy Apostles?
under that grand Apostasy of Julian, did there not live many holy Fathers? yet
(I will speak it ex animo) let it appear that there was ever any one Prophet,
any one Apostle, any one Father, that stirred up sedition, or moved the People
to take up Arm's (though in their defense) against their Sovereign; and I will
submit to their Censure who now oppose their King, and I think I could not
expect more severe Judges. Run over the Acts of the Apostles and you shall find
them in the Prison, not in the Camp; drawn before Magistrates, not drawing
Magistrates before them; stoned but not stoning; struck with the Sword, but not
striking with the Sword. And in 2 These. 1.4. We glory in you (says the
Apostle) in the churches of God; for what? for their Valor and Courage in
defending the Gospel by force of Arms? no, but for their Patience and Faith,
in all their Persecutions and Tribulations for the Gospel. Epist. 42.
Ask Saint Augustine (that holy and Learned Father) how Paganism and Heresy
was vanquished, and how the Truth of the Gospel was maintained? and he will
tell you, non a repugnantibus, sed a morientibus Christianis, nor by Christians
resisting, but by Christians dying. What think you now? who are the best
Christians, they who take up the Cross and follow Christ, or they who take up
Arms and resist their Sovereign?

Tertullian tells us of in his Greek Fragments? Plinius Secundus observed the
numerous Company of Christians which suffered Martyrdom for the Faith of
Christ; tarachtheis tw plethei, multitudine interremptorum permotus (as
Ruffinus Translates it Paraphrasticws) astonished at the Multitude of them that
were slain, he related to the Emperor, quod innumera hominum millia quotidie
obtruncarentur, that innumerable thousands of Men were slain daily (as the
same Ruffinus tells us) what so many thousands slain, and quotidie too, slain
every day? how easy had it been (having the Lord of Hosts on their side) to
have gathered themselves together in every Province, and to have stood, not
only for the Truth, but also for their Lives; and to have destroyed, to have
slain, and to have caused to perish all the Power of the People, and of the
Provinces that should have assaulted them, as did the Jews, (yet not without
Commission from Ahasuerus) Esth. 8.11. But we see the contrary affirmed to
their Faces with a Challenge, in Nazianzens Oration. 2. contra Julian; In quos
vestrum (says he) populum exaestuantem contra vos infurgere solicitavimw?
quibus vitae periculum attulimus? Against whom of you have we moved the
Tumultuous People to rise up? Which of you have we put in danger of his Life?
They had not so learned Christ. They knew well, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force; but what Violence? of opposing? no,
but of suffering. What Force? of arm's? no, but of a godly life. They knew
well, if God had intended the founding his Church, the propagating his Truth,
by an Arm of Flesh, by the Power of the Temporal Sword, he who is
kardiognwstes, the searcher of the Heart, is also kardiotreptes, the mover of
the Heart; and so would have moved the Hearts of Kings, rather then the hearts
of the People; he would have called the Wise, the Mighty, and the Noble, rather
than the foolish, the base, and the despised. But that no flesh should glory in
his presence, and that Gods Strength might appear in Man's Weakness, he chose
the foolish things of the world to confound the Wise, the Weak things to
confound the things which are Mighty, and base things of the World and things
which are despised, did God choose; yea, things which are not to bring to naught
things that are, 1 Cor. 1.26.27. etc. That of Cyprian to Demetrianus is full to
our purpose; none of us (says he) when he is apprehended resists, quamvis
nimius and copiosus noster sit numerus, though our number be far the greater.
Above all, Ecclesiastical History relates, that Julians Army (notwithstanding
his great cruelty and persecution) did consist most of Christians, who (we
read) fought for him against his Enemies, but never for themselves against
him; and that his Army did consist most of Christians, appears by that full
Acclamation of theirs to Jovinian afrer Julians death, Christiani sumus, we are
Christians. So that we may well say with Tertullian, concerning the Sect of
Christians in their Persecutions, occidi licet, occidere non licet; not occidi
potest, occidere non potest; not, that it is in their Power to be slain, not in
their Power to slay; but, it is Lawful for them to be slain, not Lawful for
them to slay. Solomon here confirm's it with a non est qui resistat, there is
not any that may resist.

Yet are not the Adversary's herewith satisfied, The Adversaries objections
answered.
but object to us the Men of Jerusalem who rose up against King Amaziah, 2
King. 14.19. Yet see how the Scripture setts a brand upon them, and tells us,
that conspiraverant conspirationem, they made a great Conspiracy; an act as
little commendable, as it is imitable. They tell us of the ten Tribes falling
away to Jeroboam; though the Scripture tells us, that it was of the Lord, 1
Kin. 12.24. Jeroboam being anointed to the Crown by Ahijah the Shilonite. They
tell us of Jehu smiting the House of Ahab, and rising up in arms against Joram
his King, though the Scripture tells us, 2 King. 9.6. Thus says the Lord, I
have anointed thee King over Israel; and so Peter Martyr well, It was an act
extraordinary, Loc. com. cla. 4. c. 20.
and non in Exemplum trahendum, and not to be drawn into example. They tell us
also of the People delivering Jonathan from Saul, 1 Samuel 14.45. Though it
appears not in Scripture, that they did it by forceable arms of resistance, but
rather (as Junius and Tremelius) by forceable Argument of Persuasion, ut
posthabita juramenti ratione, Comment in locum.
juris haberetrationem, That laying aside the account he had of his Oath, he
would have respect to Equity and Justice. Thus then, notwithstanding the
Opposition of the Adversaries, I have made it clear to you, that no Cause can
justify the Subjects taking up arms against the King.

2 No Authority. Who shall command against him, 2. No authority.
from whom issues the Power of commanding? he may be deprived of it, by the
Commonwealth. Note.
so will I conduct you out again.) Upon this Supposition then, consider well
our many Hero's, brave Worthies, Stars primae magnitudinis, shining no less
in Valor than in Virtue; consider the gravity of their Wisdom, the Authority
of their Persons, the Uprightness of their Lives, Men fit for Council in
Peace, and Conduct in War. Consider those great Nobles, and Grave Judges of
the Land; the Learned Doctors and Clergy of the Land; the Faithful Gentry, and
Loyal Commonalty; consider the great Counties, the many Cities, with the
Famous Universities: All which stand up in the defense of their Sovereign, the
Lords anointed. Consider these well, and then tell me, what is that you call
the State? what is that you call the Commonwealth of the Kingdom.

Thus you see, that not without cause Saint Jude tells us, v. 8. that they who
despise Government, kurioteta, not Dominum, but Dominatum, not the Governors,
but the Government; Comment in locum.
ordinem ipsum a Deo constitutum, so Beza, the Order it self constituted by
God. They (the Apostle tells u) are 'Enupnazourenoi, altissimo veterno sopiri,
buried in a dead sleep, so Beza again; they are filthy Dreamers, so our
English; delusi insomniis, deluded with Dreams, so Erasmus. That of our
English may be applied, to the great Statesmen, the Patriots; that of Erasmus
to the People, their Disciples; the former they are filthy Dreamers; the
latter, they are delusi insomniis, deceived with their Dreams. For is it not
evident to him that is awake, and his Eyes open; That what those Men set down
to justify their Actions, do most of all condemn them, they swerving from
their own Principles? But to return.

The Power of Kings is de super, nor de subter, from above, not from beneath;
from God, From whence the power of Kings is.
not from the Subjects; call them what you will, the Multitude, the States, or
the Commonwealth, Ego dixi Dii estis, Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods; Ego
dixi, I have said, not nos diximus, We have said; he has said it, whose Dixit,
is a Fecit, by him are Kings ordained, by whom all things are created; Per me
Reges per quem Regna, by him are Kings, by whom are Kingdoms; the World, and
the Government of the World, has the same per, both potestatis and personae,
of Power and of Person; If wicked Men once separate Reges, from per me, Kings,
from him by whom they are Kings, no wonder if they strike at Regnant too, no
wonder if they strive to cast their Crowns down to the ground, and lay their
Honor in the dust. Tertullian is full for an Heathen Emperor; In Apologet.
Imperatorem (says he) necesse est ut suspiciamus, it is necessary that we
reverence the Emperor; and how so? ut eum quem Dominus noster elegit, as him
whom our Lord has chosen; ut merito dixerim noster est magis Caesar, ut a
nostro Deo constitutus, that I may very well say, Caesar is rather our
Emperor, as constituted by our God. mediante Populo, by the choice of the
People. Psalm. 89.20. there says God of King David, I have exalted one chosen
out of the People* The King not chosen by the People.
Electum^e Populo, chosen out of the People; not electum a Populo, chosen by
the People, qui exaltavit, etiam elegit, by him he was chosen, by whom he was
exalted; by him he was chosen out of the People, by whom he was exalted above
the People. And as for King David, so for all the Kings of his Race, God has a
per me for them all; and as for them, so for all Kings else by lawful
Succession, that is, certum and determinatum; As for unlawful Usurpation, I
leave that sub Judice, as needing no Sentence at the present. If then the King
receives not his Power from the Commonwealth, then cannot the Commonwealth,
either take away the Power from the King, or exercise a Power and Command
against the King. Thus then, if no Cause, no Authority can justify arms
against the King, whatsoever Cause Men pretend, whatsoever Authority they
produce, Solomon stands up still for the King with his non est qui resistat ei,
there is not any that may resist him. But here I must not pass neither,
without a stand.

The several places of Scripture, which yield either Precept or Example of
Obedience to Kings (though wicked) there are those who evade the Force of them,
by applying them to private or Particular Men, and so runs indeed the whole
Current of Antimonarchians. And therefore say they; the Magistrates under the
King though singuli separatim each one several be his inferior, yet Vniversi
conjunctim, all conjoined are his Superior. By the way observe, ut dicta
factis deficientibus erubescant, as Tertullian (de Patientia) speaks, That
their Writings may shame their Actions. Their own Tenet is, That if the
Magistrates be above the King, they must be universi conjunctim, all conjoined;
not divided, and so, Note.
as that the less part prevail over the greater. Which perchance may be true,
as concerning a Duke of Venice (as you have formerly had the Example) or a
Prince of Orange; but most certainly not as concerning a King of England.
Therefore (Beloved) beware of those kind of Statesmen, who following their
Masters, would first bring us to a low King, and after that (I fear) a
Low Country too. Buchanan a great Patron of this Faction tells us, quasi ex
Tripode, with as much confidence, as if it were an Oracle (in Dialog. de jure
Reg.) jus idem habere in Reges multitudinem, quod illi in singulos e
multitudine habent: It is too poisonous to be Englished. Thus sometimes the
States, sometimes the Multitude in these Men's opinions, must supereminere, be
Supreme; and not the King in Saint Peter's. But what? shall we believe Buchanan
and the Presbytery, or Saint Peter and others of the Apostles? cui potius
siguram vocis suae declarasset, quam cui figuram gloriae suae revelavit (says
Tertullian) to whom should Christ have revealed his will, rather than to whom
he revealed his Glory; namely, Saint Peter and the rest. I will not abuse your
patience, nor misusemy pains to enlarge a Confutation; vel recitasse, est
confutasse, to have recited them, is to have confuted them. Only observe, that
the Practices of those in our times who oppose the King, are fallen besides the
Foundation laid them by their Masters, for if they look their Lesson over
again, they shall find; that not a part or parcel of the Magistrates, but
universi conjunctim, all conjoined; not aliqui e multitudine, Note.
sed multitudinem, not some Companies of the Multitude, but the whole
Multitude; not unus aut alter de judicibus, aut Principibus Regni, one or two
(that is, some few) of the Judges or Nobles of the Kingdom; but they are
universi Regni ordines, the whole States of the Kingdom, who may either
moderari coercere, or punire Principem. Thus as Job speaks, c. 5. v. 13. God
takes the Wise, 'En panourgia 'autwn, says the Septuagint, in their subtle
wiliness, and the council of the froward is carried headlong, consilium
reluctantium, so Junius; the council of the Rebellious, not devised with more
folly, than prosecuted with fury, to their own destruction.

I will conclude this point then, with that place in the Church Homilyes (so
full against wilful Rebellion, That certainly Satan intending to raise
Rebellion in the People, first thought it necessary to suppress the Homilies
from the People.) The Words are these, Turn over and read the Histories of
all Nations, look over the Cronicles of our own Country, call to memory so many
Rebellions of old time, and some yet fresh in Memory; and we shall find, That,
were the Multitudes of the Rebels never so huge and great, the Captains never
so Noble, Politic and Witty, the pretenses feigned never so good and holy;
yet the speedy overthrow of all Rebels, of what Number, State, or Condition
soever they were, or what color or cause soever they pretended, is, and ever
has been such, that God thereby does show, that he allows neither the
dignity of any Person, nor the Multitude of any People, nor the weight of any
cause, as sufficient for the which the Subjects may move Rebellion against
their Princes, Thus far the Homily's of the Church. And if thus no Cause, no
Authority against a wicked King, Note.
much less can any Cause, any Authority justify Arms against a gracious King.
If Jeremy will have Subjection to Idol^trous Nebuchadnezzar; if Christ to
Heathen Caesar; if Saint Paul to Persecuting Nero; who shall deny it to pious
King Charles? If for any King, then sure for our King; Solomon's non est qui
resistat ei, stands good, There is not any that may resist him. Thus of the
Words as denying rem factam, the thing done, and jus facti, the lawfulness of
doing the thing. I will briefly run over the rest.

1. Quomodo the Manner, how there is no rising up, 1. Quomodo the manner how
there is no rising up. 1. Non Cord, not in the Heart.
and first, non cord, no rising up in the Heart, malum cogitando, in thinking
evil. Rebellion is the rankest poison, the least drop whereof is deadly; not
only the large quantum, but the least Scruple is forbidden, Eccl. 10.20. Curse
not the King in thy thought; the very hatching of a Cockatribe Egg is poison,
as well as the Viper; the Intention of Treason is a Sin of an high nature, as
well as the Action, and if proved, shall be equally punished. Esth. 2.22. it is
said of Bigthan and Teresh, that voluerunt insurgere, not that they did rise
up, but that they would have risen up against Ahasuerus; though but a voluerunt
an intention only without action, yet treason, for which they are adjudged to
death. Touch not mine Anointed (says the Lord, Ps. 105.15. Noljte tangere, not
the hand only to act, but the Heart also to will, is forbidden. Not unfitly
then for this Cause (though for others too more fitly) Kings are called Gods,
because of the divine Privilege communicated to them from God; that as against
God, so against the King, sufficit cor, the Heart is enough; therefore nemo
insurgit, no rising up cord; in the Heart, malum cogitando, in thinking evil.

2. Non Lingua, no rising up with the Tongue, 2. Non Lingua, not in the Tongue.
maledicendo, in speaking evil. In that 21. v. of Saint Iudes Epistle, it was
contradictio, the gainsaying of Core, in which he and his Company perished. If
the defacing of the Kings Picture be Treason, what think you is the disgracing
the Kings Person? veni and maledic, come and curse, where God has blessed is
Balaam's Office; to rail and revile whom God has humbled (especially if a
King) is Shimei's practice, neither sit for imitation, neither fit for a
Subject against his Sovereign. The King is the Father of his Country; and as
for the Natural Father, so for the Political, maledictus qui vilipendit,
cursed is he that despises him; yea, and qui maledicit, who speaks evil of
him, Deuteronomy. 27.16. cursed, and that with a mount Ebal's curse, a curse to which
many have formerly said Amen, who now are in Arms against their Political
Father the King. Thus nemo insurgit, no rising up, Lingua, with the Tongue,
maledicendo, in speaking evil.

3. Non manu, not with the hand.
3. Non Manu, no rising up with the Hand, malefaciendo, in doing evil, 1 Samuel
26.9. Who can stretch forth his Hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless? Quis, Who can? that is, nullus, no Man can. This the triumphant
Negative (as one calls it) a Negative with a Challenge. We have some with
Jacobs Voice, though Esav's hands, who tell us, they take up arms in the Kings
Defense, (though this Defense be his greatest danger) but I question, whether,
if they had David's opportunity, they would have David's resolution, of not
stretching out their hand against him. Observe in David here, not only a ne
perdas (in the former part of the verse) a giving of the blow; but a ne Manum
mittas in the latter) a stirring of the Hand, is forbidden. Therefore as nemo
insurgit, no rising up, cord, in the Heart, malum cogitando, in thinking
evil, Lingua, with the Tongue, male dicendo, in speaking evil; so especially,
nemo insurgit, no rising up, Manu, with the Hand, malefaciendo, in doing evil.

2. quare, the Reason why.
2. Quare, the Reason, why there is no rising up. 1. Taken from malum culpae,
the evil of Sin. 2. Malum paena, the evil of Punishment, it is but borrowed
of Saint Paul in Romans 13. He that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance
of God, there is the malum culpae, the evil of Sin, and they that resist, shall
receive to themselves damnation, there is the malum paenae, the evil of
Punishment. The former Argument is for the Godly, who are moved cum timore Dei,
with the fear of God. The latter is for the ungodly, quos ut magis moveat
(says Musculus) whom that he might the more strongly move, he comes upon them,
metu Judicii, with the fear of Judgment.

1. Then malum culpae, the evil of Sin. If a Rebel were asked his Name, how
well might he answer with the Man possessed with Devils, that his name is
Legion, for they are many. Rebellion being a Nest of Devils, a Sink of all
Sins, a Mass of all Impieties; what Profanesse, what Murders, what
Robberies, what Whoredoms, what Malice, what Hatred, what Mischief is it that
you can name, which is not heapt up in this Chaos of Confusion, this one
manyfold Sin, Rebellion? Rebellion in the State, is like an Impostume in the
Body, which breaking inwardly, distempers and corrupts the whole, and makes
it is recovery desperate. So that to redress Disorders, by dissorderly
Commotions, to compose Distractions by Rebellion, is all one, as if a Man
should quench fire with pitch, or cure old sores with new plagues Better
therefore (as our Church speaks in her Homily's against wilful Rebellion)
undergo the worst of Governements, then the worst of miseries, Rebellion the
Destruction of all Government, a right Apollyon, bringing ruin upon all
States. so that as the Lacedaemonians, to cause their Chidren to loath
drunkenness, caused them to behold their Servants when they were drunk; so that
you may abominate Rebellion, it is enough if you look upon those men's actions
who are Rebels, for then will this Reason appear good, that there is no
rising up against the King, 2. Malum paenae, the evil of punishment.
propter malum culpae, for the evil of Sin.

2. Malum paenae, the evil of punishment, why? what is the punishment of a
Rebel? Death. What death? an ignominious death, an untimely death, a painful
death, vt sentiat se mori (as he in Seneca) whether it be that of Bigtham and
Teresh Esth. 2.23. or that of Sheba 2. Sam. 20.22, or that of Baana and Rechab,
2. Sam. 4.12. and to this add that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 109. his Lands and
Estate are confiscate, his Posterity disgraced and beggered, his Name quite
blotted out, or if remembered, he is damnatae memoriae, a Man whose Memory does
stink, and is corrupted. This Punishment is Temporal, far short of that which
is Eternal, when he shall go to his own place, where with the Arch-Rebell
Satan, he shall suffer the hottest flames in Hell, who has raised so great a
fire in the State. Thus then nemo insurgit, no rising up, propter malum Paenae,
for the evil of Punishment. I will end all in a few Words of Application.

Because (Beloved) I have not gravity enough to be the Speaker, take it as
spoken from the Ancient of days, even God himself, Prove. 24.21. Fili mi, time
Deum and Regem, My son, fear thou God and the King, and meddle not with them
who are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows
the ruin of them both? Here God seems to stand as a Father, as a Judge; as a
Father, his advice is loving, My Son fear thou God and the King, and meddle not
with them who are given to change; as a Judge, his sentence is severe, Their
calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? As we
behave our selves, we shall find the benefit of his Council, or the penalty
of his Sentence, It Is added, Cajet* vult hanc sententi am esseancipi tem and
posse quidem antecedentes sententias claudere and consequentes etiam ordiri.
These things belong to the Wise, to them who either are, or would be accounted
Wise; such as are the Fathers of the State, no shame for them to be Solomon's
Sons, and to accept this Fatherly Council, which if they do not, though they
will be Judges themselves, yet God a Judge above them, has past their Sentence.

Give me leave to reveiw the Words by way of Paraphrase; since they so much
reflect upon the Text, by way of Comment; and may (not unfitly) conclude my
S^rmon by way of Application; My Son, ^ear thou God and the King; Here a fit
place for David's quam bonum and jucundum, Psalm. 133.1. how good and joyful a
thing it is to see? to see what? why, to see God and the King in conjunction;
and we know our Saviors axiom, quos Deus conjunxit, nemo separet, whom God
has joined let no Man put asunder. He that separates God from the King,
separates himself from God. But why fear God and the King? because no Man
does rightly fear the King, unless he also fear God; neither does any Man
truly fear God, unless he also fear the King. Fear the King in a Loyal
subjection, not put him into a fear by unlawful Rebellion. Fear God and the
King, and meddle not, Cum mutatoribus. So Cajet vi, Salazar exposit. en Prove.
Solomon.
meddle not with whom? cum detractoribus, with them, who are given to
Detraction, so the Vulgar, cum variis, with them that are given to change, so
Junius and our English; cum seditiosis, with them who are given to sedition, so
others. The Word and the Sense will bear all three.

1. Then, ne commiscearis cum detractoribus, 1. Ne cum detractoribus.
meddle not with them who are given to Detraction. Detraction is ever the
forerunner, and the fomenter of Sedition. Either Moses and Aaron take too much
upon them, so Corah and his Company, Numb. 16, 3. Or, there is no Man appointed
by the King to do Justice, so Alsolon, 2 Samuel 15.3. Or too heavy a yoke is laid
by the King, upon the necks of the People, so they who fell away to Jeroboam, 1
King. 12.4. Therefore, ne cum detractoribus, meddle not with them who are given
to detraction.

2. Ne cum variis.
2. Ne cum variis, meddle not with them who are given to Change. Upon
Detraction, is buz'd into the People a desire of Change. Moses and Aaron take
too much upon them, and therefore their Power and Authority must be lessened;
the King takes no care of Justice, and therefore the Power of Justice must be
by others communicated; the Yoke is too heavy upon the Peoples neck's, and
therefore, Their liberty must be enlarged. Therefore ne cum variis, meddle not
with them who are given to Change.

3. Ne cum seditiosis.
3. Ne cum Seditiosis, meddle not with them who are given to Sedition. Upon
Detraction, men are put upon a desire of Change, and upon that grows Sedition.
Corah and his Company then assemble; Absolon with his Accomplices then make
war; the People with their Patriot, then Desert their King, and enter the
field against the Lords Anointed. Thus Shimei's railing, ends in Sheba's
rising; Detraction ends in Sedition. Defiling of Government, begetts Despising;
Despising begetts Opposing; Opposing begetts Removing, and Removing begetts
Ruin. Therefore in that the Wisman advises, with a Ne commiscearis cum
detractoribus, meddle not with them who are given to Detraction, he seems as
it were, obstare principiis, to stop the beginnings of Rebellion; and if some
be carried away with that perversitas fidei, that perverseness of faith, so as to
believe and give credit to the Detraction, then his, ne cum variis, stands
good, meddle not with them who are given to Change, and if again any be so far
misled as to desire a Change, an alteration, or (if you will) a pretended
reformation, yet, ne cum Seditiosis, by no means meddle with them who are
given to Sedition.

Ne commiscearis, meddle not, which forbids not only with Ioab to be general,
with Achitophell to be Councellor, with Sheba to be Trumpeter, with Abiather to
be Priest, with the City Abell to be harbourer, with the men of Sichem to be
Contributers, with the Congregation of Israel to be Approvers; but ne
Commiscearis, meddle not, have no part or portion with them; though they tell
thee as it is Pro. 1.13.14. We shall find all precious Substance, we shall fill
our Houses with spoil, cast in thy Lot amongst us, let us all have one purse;
yet, ver. 15. My son (that is, such an one as he would have fear God and the
King) walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path;
meddle not, that is, rise not up, cord, in the heart, by Consenting; Lingua,
with the Tongue, by Encouraging; Manu, with the Hand, by Acting, or
Contributing. But why so? why, their calamity shall rise suddenly, etc. here is
the malum culpae, and the malum paenae, the malum culpae the evil of Sin
employed, and the malum paenae the evil of punishment expressed, for Punishment
ever presupposes Sin, and by the greivousnes of the Punishment, we may
conceive the hainousnes of the Sin. Their calamity, or their destruction, shall
rise suddenly, it shall not come lento, but cito pede, not with a slow but a
swift pace, repent consurget, it shall rise suddenly; and sudden mischiefs
confound the mind, and fitly, when the mind is set upon confusion. Yea
consurget also, it shall not only rise up against them, but consurget, rise up
with them, following their Sin as the Shadow does the Body. Thus their
destruction shall rise suddenly, and ruinam eorum quis scit, and who knows the
Ruin of them both? both whom? why the Author and the Actor, the Rebel and the
Rebell-Maker; the Detractor, and him that gives credit to his wicked
Detraction; the innovator, and him that favors his unlawful innovation; The
Seditious, and him that meddles with his detestable Sedition; quis scit? who
knows? rather quis nescit, who knows not the end of a Traitor, the Ruin of a
Rebel? true, as concerning his temporal Ruin; but his eternal Ruin, quis
scit, who knows that? his Sufferings are suitable to his Doings; there is a
quis scit? for his Rebellious Actions, and not unfitly then a quis scit? for
his just Sufferings The Praecipice of Rebellion is such, that Seldom does it
stop till it come to the Bottom, even hell it self, where I wish it had
been long since chained. That (to the Glory and Praise of God, with the Peace
and Prosperity of this Kingdom, and to the joy and happiness of our King) we
might say with Solomon, in the praise of our Sovereign, as well as of his
Subjects; Rex, in quem nemo insurgit; A King, against whom there is no rising
up.

Laus Deo.
Errata.
Page 10. lin. 21. allows r. allow, p. 11. l. 19. Strigellus, r. Strigellius.
p. 12. l. 12. antiquam. r. antequam. p. 14. l. 17. hominum. r. hominem. p. 14.
l. 24. propter r. praeter.


