A Scheme of Learning Proposed to be Taught in the Royal Schole, for the Real
Improvement and Advancement of Useful Navigation, Humbly Submitted, etc. That
from Its Candid, and Beneficial Intention, This Great and Good Work may Deserve
the Encouragement of This Honorable House.
THIS Institution being Calculated to the Perpetual Honor, and Advantage of
England, for the Free Education of a Certain Number of Gentlemen's Sons, in a
more Useful, Polite, and Comprehensive Degree of Naval Knowledge and Instruction
than has been hitherto, (so far as any thing appears,) in any Time, or Place
Attempted; In Order toward Fitting them for the Service of the Public, and
Advantage of their Familys: It will be Suitable and Necessary, that the
Foundation of this Undertaking should be Sufficiently Larg: To Answer as well
the Capacities and Qualities of those that are to be Educated, as to take in
the Full Extent and Scope of that Education which is thereby intended.

Navigation
In its True Extension, is that Marine, and Naval Science, which Comprehends
whatever has Relation, either to Ships, or to the Seas whereon they Move, in
order to the Perfecting a Prosperous Voyage, or Navigation of what sort soever.
Some Particulars whereof are these that follow; viz. The Fabrication, Expense,
and Uses of a Ship, and of its several Parts. The Knowledge of Seacoasts,
Banks, Sands, and Harbors; Tides, Winds, Tornado's, Hurricanes; The Naval
Direction and Government of a Ship at Sea; Naval Oeconomie, with the Laws and
Customs of the Sea, Civil and Military. An Exact Knowledge of the Motions of the
Sun and Moon, and of such Instruments as are properly and commonly made use of
in Celestial Observations, Relating to the Sea. The Construction, Management,
and Application of Machines employed in Naval Services; with Sufficient
Knowledge concerning the Effects resulting from them. The Conducting and
Directing Fleets, so far as may be taught in Schools. With diverse other Useful
Naval Speculations.

But Common Schools in a more Narrow Method Teach

1. The Care and Skill of Conducting a Ship or Vessel well, into, or out of a
River, Road, or Harbor; (called Pilotage).

2. The Knowledge of the Mariner's Compass; Of Soundings, Lands, Points,
Distances, Depths of Water, Shoals, Sands; the Qualities of Grounds and
Streams; the Point of the Compass whereon the Moon makes High Water in several
Places, and the like; (called Coasting-Navigation).

3. The Direction of a Ship's Way from One Port, or Part of the World, to
Another, separated by One Sea, or More; Keeping an Account of the Ship's
Movement on the Surface of the Sea according to the Methods of Plain-Sailing,
Mercator's Sailing, or Great Circle-Sailing; The being able by Celestial
Observations to Correct such Errors as unavoidably will happen when those
Observations are wanting; An Exact Knowledge of the Ship's Place at all Times,
and what Course and Distance she must sail to Arrive at an intended Port or
Place. These Things, with some Few more, are generally Aesteem'd, and Taught
for Navigation: But are indeed, scarce all the Virtues of one Good Officer. To
wit, the Pilot, or Master of the Ship.

Therefore that the End for which this Naval Education is Designed, may not be
Disappointed, by taking in too Few Particulars, and that the Institution may be
Competently General, and Useful to the Public; The Arts, Sciences, and
Languages hereafter mentioned, are Proposed, in this Schole, to be Sufficiently
and Accurately Taught, viz.

1. Geometry.
Elementary, and Practical, for so much as Relates to drawing Schemes.

2. Arithmetic.
In all the Usual Necessary Parts thereof, viz. In Whole Numbers; Fractions
Vulgar, and Decimal: Extraction of Roots; Construction and Use of Logarithmical
Tables, etc. according to the Practices of all known Trading Nations.

3. Algebra.
With the Application thereof in Arithmetic, and Geometry; so far at least, as
to perfection in Quadratic Aequations.

4. Mechanics.
Or that part of Geomety, which Treating of Motion, Contemplates according to
Geometrical Rules, by what Force, and in what Time, any (possible) Motion may
be performed: With the Construction and Application of Machines and Powers,
proper and in use, for moving Heavy Bodies, viz. The Balance, Leaver, Axis in
Peritrochio, Pulley, Wedg, Screw, etc.

5. Statics.
A Science treating of Heavy Bodies; their Weight, Centers of Gravitation,
Aequilibration, etc.

6. Hydrostatics
The Art or Science of weighing Liquide or Solid Bodies in Liquids: And
comparing one with another, etc.

7. Zurveying of Land.
The End of this Art being to find the Area, or Superficial Content of some
Quantity or Parcel of Ground contained within one Hedge or Limit, (or if within
many, yet such as Ultimately terminat in one.) The Art it self may seem to be
Remote from Navigation. But passing successively by all the Bendings of an
Enclosure; and taking, by the help of a Circumferentor, the Position of every
Hedge or Limit with that immediately before and after it; together also with the
Length of each Hedge or Limit by the Chain; And lastly joining these Orderly
together, by the help of a Scale of Aequal Parts, and a Protractor: This Method
of proceeding in Surveying, is, truly neither more nor less than keeping an
Account at Sea of a Ships several Courses, and the Distances sailed thereon:
And laying down from thence, the several Traverses upon a Chart or otherwise;
for finding out the true Place of a Ship at any Time, and what depends thereon.
And this is Noted here, in regard that Surveying, Fortification, and diverse
other Arts and Sciences which seem not to Relate to Navigation, are
nevertheless Essentially subservient thereto.

8. Fortification, or Military Architecture.
That is, the Art of joining certain Lines together at the Angles of a Polygon,
in such a manner, that Walls, or Banks, or Both, being built according to the
Measures of those Lines and Angles: The Place, whether Town, Citadel, Fort,
etc. may thereby be Rendered so Secure, that a competent Number of Men with
Ammunition, may be capable of Resisting, with advantage, a more considerable
Army. Castrametation, or Encampments, etc.
To this may be added the Methods of Encamping Armies, and Besieging Garrisons,
etc.

9. Perspective.
Or the Art of Representing Natural Objects on a Plane, by the help of a Ruler
and Compasses, in like manner as they appear to the Sight under any Situation
or Position.

10. Drawing.
Which performs like Operations as Perspective, by Observation, and the Power
of Imitation; joined with an Habit of the Hand, acquired by Care, and Exercise,
and is performed, for the most part, without Ruler and Compasses.

11. Trigonometry Elementary and Practical.
Or the Doctrine of Triangles, Right-lin'd and Sphaerical: With the
Construction and Use of the Tables of Sines, Tangents, and Secants, Natural and
Logarithmical; and of diverse Useful Instruments Constructed from these Tables.
Being the Art of Measuring Triangles with regard to their Sides and Angles
only. Being a part of Mathematical Learning so Useful and Necessary, that
without it Practical Geometry, Astronomy, Dialing, Geography, Fortification;
the Direction and Knowledge of a Ships Way in the Sea, with diverse other
Disciplines, Mathematical and Nautical, can in no wise be competently
understood.

12. Practical Geometry.
Taking Heights, and Distances, by the help of Instruments and Tables; And
finding the Contents of Superficies, and Solid Bodies.

13. Use of Globes, Spheeres, etc.
The Use of Globes Celestial and Terestrial; of Sphaeres, Quadrants, Sectors,
Scales, and other Mathematical Instruments relating to the Sea, and in frequent
Use with Navigators.

14. Mapps, and Sea-Charts, Draughts of Harbors, etc.
The Projection of the Sphaere in Plano, the Delineation and Use of Mapps, Sea
Charts, Draughts of Harbors, Roads, Bays, etc.

15. Astronomy.
That is, so much thereof as pertains to the Situations, Orders, Motions,
Magnitudes, Distances; with other Accidents, and Phenomenon, Relating to the
Sun, Moon, and Fixed Stars.

16. Chronography.
Or the Doctrine of Times. So far at least, as the Knowledge thereof Relates to
Time, Considered as it is the Measure of the Duration of Things, taken from the
Motions of Celestial Bodies. The Political Distribution of Time into Years,
Months, Weeks, Days, etc. and of their several Kinds, according to the Usage
and Customs of Diverse Countries.

17. Calendars.
The Explication, Construction, and Use of Calendars, Ancient and Modern;
Julian and Gregorian, etc. Whereto may be added, The Principles upon which the
most useful and proper Automata, or Self-Movers, are Fabricated. As Watches,
Pendulums, Clepsydrae, with other Measures of Time, and Motion.

18. Geography.
A Science Teaching the Constitution, Division, Description, Dimension,
Representation, and other Affections of the Terraqueous Globe: As Figure,
Place, and Magnitude; Continents, Regions, Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands,
Chersonesus's, and Istmus's; Mountains, Promontarys; Seas, Rivers, Lakes;
Zones, Climates, Parallels, etc. into which it is divided; With diverse other
Matters unto each respectively pertaining.

19. Architecture, Civil and Naval.
The Art of Building Well: That is, with Respect to Duration, Regularity, and
Commodiousness. This consists very much in assigning to each Member of an
Aedifice, a Just Proportion and Bigness, together with a proper Disposition or
Placing all the Parts thereof according to their Uses, and Appointments. And
these Qualifications are no where more needful to be understood and heeded,
than in Building Ships of War: Because in them, The Men, Provisions, Stores,
Good Properties for Fighting, Working in a Storm, etc. should rather Find, than
Seek Accommodation.

20. Promiscuous Learning.
The Art of Gunnery. General Sea-Laws and Customs Relating to War, or Commerce.
The Original, and Natural History of Winds and Tides. Proper Instructions for
Reading Voyages and Travels, and for making Useful Inquirys and Remarks by such
as go Abroad. Fair Writing, Shorthand; and whatever else may really Advance
the Art of Navigation.

And to the End this New Method of Education, may be Truly Liberal, and of Real
Use and Benefit: It is further proposed, That the aforesaid Arts and Sciences,
shall be Taught in all the undermention'd Languages; which are the Chief of
Those, wherein the Sciences Themselves are generally Treated of, as They are
also the Languages of Nations (except Latin, which is common unto All) among
whom the Greatest Part of Naval Commerce, both for War, and Trafic, is
Maintained.

The Languages are These, Viz.
1. Latin. 2. French. 3. Italian. 4. Spanish. 5. Portuguese. 6. Dutch.
Nil habet Fortuna Magna Majus, nec Natura Bona Melius, quam ut velit
Benefacere quam Plurimis. SCHEME For the Better Instructing of Youth in the Art
of Navigation only.


