THE Loving Enemies: A COMEDY, As it was Acted at His Highness the DUKE of
YORK'S THEATER. Written by L. MAIDWELL.

Inventum secuit primus qui nave profundum*
Et rudibus remis sollicitavit aquas,
Tranquillis primum trepidus se credidit undis,
Littora sccuro t^amite summa legens:
M^x vagus exultat pelago, coelumque secutus
Aegeas hye^es Io^iasque domat.
Claudian. LONDON, Printed for John Guy at the Sign of the Flying Horse between
St. Dunstan's Church, and Chancery Lane. 1680.

To the much Honored CHARLES FOX, Esquire.
SIR,
I Very much congratulate this occasion, though I readily acknowledge, that
this poor Present brings small advantage to any, but him that gives it; who
gains thereby the opportunity of publicly owning those great respects he shall
always pay your name, and of setting his hand to a paper, as a voluntary
surrendry to you, of all his good Wishes, and Services. If the Treat he
provided be not so well dressed, or served up, as it ought to be, pray let him
beg pardon, with that common, yet necessary excuse of a young Housekeeper, one
not well settled, and scarce with any thing in readiness. Suppose his Garden
newly planted, very little, or no fruit to be expected the first year, and the
unexperienced Planter, not as yet well skilled, in keeping off the cold winds,
and nipping Frosts; howsoever he entreats you to receive what he has raised,
and to eat kindly of his first fruits, with which the greatest men have been
always pleased, and Heaven claims them before other off rings.

Now dear Sir, as I once loved you with your other Brothers, so those hopeful
Gentlemen being dead, I will center my good wishes on you; may you join their
virtues and sweetness to your own, may you be one for all, to your Relations,
and Friends, and may you like your excellent Father, be as eminently concerned
in the World, and as honorably praised by it, to the great satisfaction of

Sir, Your most humble Servant, L. Maidwell.

PROLOGUE.
WHo dares be witty now, and with just rage
Disturb the vice, and follies of the Age?
With Knaves and Fools, Satyr's a dangerous fault,
They will not let you rub their sores with salt.
Else Rose-streets Ambuscade shall break your head,
And life in Verse, shall lay the Poet dead.
Since therefore such unequal Judges sit,
Who for suspicion punish men of Wit,
'Twill be self-preservation to be dull,
It cracks the credit but preserves the skull.
Henceforth live long and undisturbed lives,
Your Countrey-Worships, and your tawdry Wives,
The flaunting Punk and Ladies eldest Son,
All such who are by mutual crimes undone;
Like Lakes look green and flourish to the Eye,
But yet for want of stirring putrify.
For I am told that Fop, and eke the Clown,
Jointly subscribe Petitions in each Town,
And swear all Satyr with bold truth shall down.
Why, cry they, What has wit to do with me?
With this Man's folly, or his knavery,
It is not fit we lose our property.
We'll pound the Poet up in small extent,
Far from his arbitrary Government.
Birthright is birthright, and he shall not rail,
We are undone, if common sense prevail.
Meum and tuum now shall be the rule,
The Magna Charta for the Knave and Fool.
Therefore the Poet that designs this Treat,
Ventures to serve up light and innocent meat.
And since high seasoned sauce don't well agree,
Excuse a strangers plainer Cookery.
For to extremes you do the Poet drive,
And make him leave his best prerogative.
So the poor Beaver lest he prove a prey,
Bites off his dearest part, and throws away.
Dramatis Personae.
Lorenzo Two Noblemen Enemies to one another from a long fewd in their
Families. By Mr. Betterton. Marcello Mr. Smith. Antonio. In love with Lucinda,
but pretends it to the Widow. Mr. Io. Williams. Paulo. A brisk old Gentleman in
love with the Widow. Mr. Leigh. Circumstantio. A formal Valet de Chamber very
troublesome with impertinent Rhetoric. Mr. Underhill. Albrigi^. Servant to
Lorenzo.Mr. Richards.
Iulia. Sister to Lorenzo, in love with Marcello, yet never seen by him.By Mrs.
Mary Lea. Camilla. Sister to Marcello, in love with Lorenzo, yet never seen by
him.Mrs. Barry. Lucinda. Old Paulo's daughter, in love with Antonio. Mrs.
Shadwell. Paulina. A rich Widow. Mrs. Leigh. Nuarcha. An old Maid almost undone
for want of an Husband.Mrs. Norris. With other Servants and Attendants.
Scene FLORENCE.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Antonio and Circumstantio. Ant. waking and rising from his Couch. Ant. BLess
me, Circumstantio, how goes the day?


Circ. Dear Sir, two hours precisely are roul'd off since the Meridian, and Sir
by the way I have often thought the Sun a proper emblem of all us, though we be
never so glorious for birth or parts, like him alas how soon we set! it is pity
noble Sir that men of parts --


Ant. -- Again Fool brushing up your thredbare phrases* your nasty ends of Gold
and Silver, your tawdry intellectual Wardrobe, you had best tell me what is a
Clock without your foolish sentences and morals -- Thou everlasting Coxcomb,
are not words to express thoughts by, and the plainest expression of our
meanings best?


Cir. Oh Heaven Sir you amaze me! plain speaking!

Sure words were meant for ornaments of thoughts, and I Would not for the Universe
be without those tropes, and flowers that my discourse adorn.


Ant. Most excellent Rogue! flowers? no your weeds rise thick, and I will root
out them or thee, thou gross nauseous Fool: laughter which first thou tookest
as an applause, since it has been the cause of thy disease, shall be thy cure,
and thou shall be a scorn to all the Family.


Cir. The envy, not the scorn, no men of parts can laugh at me


Ant. In short Sirrah, tell me plainly what is a clock, or I will cudgel you
most excessively.


Cir. Sir, the Sun has from its Zenith these two hours declined.


Ant. Incorrigible wordy Rogue! -- Come Sirrah, I Will stop those Rhetoric
vapors -- Ho there within Pietro, is the Pillory I bespoke for this Fool made?


[Enter Pietro. Pietro. It is Sir.


Ant. Let it be brought in.


Pietr. It shall Sir.

Ex. Pietro.
Ant. Now Sir you shall find the ill success of translating the florid Coxcomb.
Is there but one sort of Fool more nauseous than other to me, (I mean your
Orator) and must you copy him?


Cir. Sir be concise and clear, I hope you mean not me.


Ant. In short, most eloquent puppy, you must stand in the Pillory, exposed to
jeers and taunts of all the house, until two hours precisely are rolled off. --
Sirrah, I told you the next trope was Capital, no metaphors but in turned suits
Fool.


Cir. Oh utinam nescirem literas -- the Pillory for Rhetoric and good parts!


Ant. There is no remedy, I have often threatened you before.


Cir. Oh cruel master whose heart is hard as Rocks of Adamant!


Ant. Within there, bring in the Pillory, I Will try if punishment will reform
thee.


Cir. I Will dye a martyr Sir to tropes and figures, Oh Nick -- Nick Machiavel
thou Enter with pillory. have well observed, great merits when they rise too
high, meet hate from them who ought to recompense them. Consider Sir the injury
you do your own fair Honor, alas I shall not be hurt.


Ant. I Will try that, put him in.


Piet. Come, come on.


Cir. Be not so temerarious, Friends.


Ant. Put him in, he is at his tropes still.


Cir. Must I abandon eloquence? -- Certes thou wast not born of Humane race,
but sprung from some wild Numidian Father, and got on some rough Caledonian
Mother, from Ganges West, to Gades East, there is not one so savage. Hold,
Hold, I say --


Enter Marcello. Ant. Welcome my dear Marcello thou art come in good time to
see my Farce.


Mar. What Engine's this?


Ant. It Is a Collar for my Orator, you have often known him plague me with his
tropes; this Rascal served me all the while I studied at Padua, where (instead
of Learning) the Coxcomb got a little false Rhetoric and Pedantry, he affects
to talk like a Scholar, and never since would bring a message or tell what is a
clock without a trope.


Marc. It Is pity you should affro^^ one of such parts, release him now, I Will be
his surety.


Ant. He Is incorrigible.


Circ. Sir, when for this noble intercession I shall cease to offer the
oblation of my thanks upon the Altar of my heart, may I become the scum and
scorn of vagabonds.


Ant. You see his amendment. [ Enter Nuarcha. Dearest Nuarcha, I am your humble
servant, let me kiss thee.


Nuar. Thank you dear Sir.


Ant. What news from my Mistress the Widow Paulina?


Nuar. This night she ends her year of Widowhood, and now will see and speak
with man again, she has removed my old Masters statue out of her Bedchamber,
and old Seignior Paulo has leave this night to speak with her, but sure she is
designed for one more young, of whom she thinks and talks, sleeping and waking.


Ant. Much thanks for thy goods news, faith I must kiss thee again, though much
against my conscience and my appetite.


[aside. Nuar. How sovereign a Cordial is Mankind!


Cir. Sir I beseech you to entreat for a remission of my ignominious censure.


Mar. Pray release your Orator on his submission.


Ant. I do upon condition he will abandon tropes and figures, and speak sense
to his fellow servants.


Nuar. My affairs call me home, I had almost forgotten, Mrs. Lucinda, Seignior
Paulo's daughter, whom you know her Father has placed with my Lady, has a
desire to speak with you in the Garden about the prevention of her Fathers
marriage with my Lady, which would much prejudice her affairs, I will make way
for you to see her.


Ant. You will most infinitely oblige me, assure her I will not fail to do her
all the service of my life, and should think my self happy to venture it for
her. One kiss more, dear sweet Mrs. Nuarcha.


Nuar. A most absolute complete fine Gentleman, a civil proper young man is a
most sweet Creature! Sir your most obedient servant.


Ant. Your servant.


[Ex. Nuar. Marc. You are a most vigorous man to be able to kiss this Succubus.


Ant. This salacious old Chambermaid is better bribed this way than any other.


Mar. You have a lusty mind to the Widow I see, that you can travel through so
soul a way to her.


Ant. O Marcello, it is not the Widow which I aim at. Lucinda's Mine of beauty
far exceeds the Widows wealth, so excellent, so sweet, so rare a Creature, I
but pretended passion to the Widow to get access to beautiful Lucinda, and now
congratulate my happiness, she has contrived an interview her self. But why do
I tell thee of this? thou art an Heretic, an Infidel to love.


Mar. Oh thou mistak'st me, dear Antonio, I am a Convert, I have the Image of a
fair one stamped upon my heart, that never can be effaced.


Ant. This is news indeed, may I know who this fair one is?


Marc. That adds to my confusion, she is unknown; yesterday morning going to my
devotions, this Lady being near me dropped her Handkerchief, I stoopt and gave it
her, she hastily put up her Veil, and with so sweet an air thanked me for my
service, and showed me such a face, that nature in all her plenteous store can
never show an equal.


Ant. The showing of her face in Florence, is an encouragement against despair.


Mar. I should have thought so, had not I found when she perceived I watched
her she shunned my search, and spite of all my diligence avoided me in the
crowd at Church, so that the showing o^ her matchless face appears an accident
from her surprise, and no designed favor.


Ant. It cannot be, you construe it amiss, fear not she will give you opportunity
again to see her. But as you are my Friend I have a thing of near concernment
to relate to you, a thing that grievs me much, I find the Duke's command has
not yet power to tame Lorenzo's spirit, he seems yet more enraged than ever.


Marc. I know it since the Duke checked him so severely, and vowed to punish his
disobedience if he contracted not a friendship with me; he thinks that I by a
complaint caused his disgrace, and is more bent upon revenge for that.


Ant. It is a custom too frequent, and too brutal here, for Parents to entail
their Quarrels with their Estates.


Marc. It is so, and therefore I Would avoid them. Our Fathers ambitious of
preferment could not admit superior or equal, they lived like the two famed
Theban Brothers always in war, the fierce Lorenzo when but young was sworn to
oppose the Growth and Fortune of our house, hatred was left by Will and
Testament. I have used all healing ways, affecting the friendship of a person
that but for this, would be most worthy of it, but it is all in vain.


[ Enter Circumst. Cir. A Messenger from Padua, who by his haste may well be
called a Mercury, well figured by his wings on Head and Feet, is much
sollicitous to impart his grand affair unto your proper ears.


Ant. Again at tropes, thou odious Rogue?


Marc. Antonio Fare thee well, I will to Vespers, and see if I can find my
unknown Mistress out.


Ant. Farewell Marcello, I see this Love will make thee very devout. Where is
this Messenger?


[Exeunt. Enter Julia and Leonora her Governess in the Town. Leon. Madam, do
not thus blast your beauty with your sighs
And drown it with fond tears, forget the cause
Of this dire mischief.

Iulia. As soon a wretch with dislocated limbs
Might put the rack out of his memory
That caused his torments. How just is heaven
To punish thus the Brothers unjust ra^e
With hopeless love upon the Sister! Fierce Lorenzo
Still more and more pursues the good Marcello
Hurryed by my ^athers hot spirit, and
His own mistakes and Jealousies, whilst I
Dote on Marcello's generous nature, which
Would pass by all his cr^ing injuries,
And heal the wounds which weaken both our Families.
At first I but admired his lovely form,
His virtue now compleats the victory.

Leo. Why do you call yours hopeless love? Marcello
Though yet he knows you not, has seen and loves you,
By yesterdays good signs you saw it, which
I Am too skilful not to understand.

Iulia. Ah Leonora, should my Brother know
He once has seen my face, although by chance,
He Would tear my heart out, but did he know
I loved him! Oh fatal eyes that ere beheld
This lovely enemy.

Leon. Yet were you married to Marcello, his courage
Might defend you from your Brother and perhaps that marriage
Would close the breach between the Families.

Iulia. 'Twould pull down ruin on us both.
I see thou know not his ungoverned ^age.

Leo. Too well I know and fear it, he is talking yonder
In the Piazza, should I suffer you to loiter thus
In the way to Church, I should soon feel his rage I fear.
Let Us hasten to Vespers, devotion and good music
May perhaps soften your care.

Iulia. No Leonora, no divinity can justle out Marcello
From my thoughts.

[Exeunt. Enter Camilla and her Governess. Gov. Come Charge, let us hasten to
the Church,
The Saint of this day whatever good he
Does, brings us good Music. All the Masters
In Florence assist at the Ceremony.

Came. Yet all will cause but little harmony
In me, there is naught but discord in my thoughts.
Oh fatal love! yonder is my Lorenzo,
Heaven! my Lorenzo, foolish tongue he never
Alas can be so, though he long has warmed
My tender heart, and yet he never saw me.

Gov. What are you musing on? let us haste to Church.

Came. He Will hate the Sister of his enemy,
His rage does burn so fiercely in his breast
'Twill cause eternal separation
'Twixt him and any of our Race; fool that
I am, that I should like that fierceness
In him too, and think it does become him.

Gov. What do you mutter to your self? go on.

Came. I find my love too hard for me, when we are
Bewitched to love a man, we like
Each fault, and folly in him too.
Bless me! my Brother and he come
Toward one another! stand by, I Will
Wait the sad event, I shall be known
By thee, else my black habit makes me
Undistinguished, and I would try to hinder it.

Gov. I Will not appear.

Came. Retire, I Will venture on an odd experiment.

Enter Julia and Leonora. Iulia. What Is here my Brother and Marcello!
Oh fatal meeting. Retire Leonora and let
Mealone --

Enter Lorenzo and his man Vincentio, and Marcello with his man Albricio. Lor.
Who Is here, my hated Foe? now for his
Blood, what power has hitherto defended
Him from this Arm and Justice?

Vinc. So I shall have an honorable occasion
Of showing my prowess.

Mar. I will avoid him as much as honor
Will permit me.

Lor. What do thou shun me, Coward?

Mar. I am less a Coward than thou a Brute,
I fear thee not thou know it,
But I Would obey the Duke.

Lor. That name calls all my strength into my arm
And quickens my revenge, you have abused me.

Mar. It Is false.

Lor. At thy life.

They go to fight. Mar. Thou never shall reach it.

Albr. Sir I will wait upon you.

Vinc. Your servant Sir.

Julia goes to Marcello and Camilla to Lorenzo. Iulia. Oh hold your hand, spill
not Lorenzo's
blood,

Mar. My life, my soul, my Genius, my good Angel
In appearance, but my destroyer now.
Am I a Rival to my enemy?

Lor. Is your protection there?

Mar. It Is in my hand.

Came. O Sir, If ever prayers could move your fierce
And stubborn nature, hear 'em now,
Pull not Marcello's blood upon thy head.
He Is Generous and would forget your injuries.

Lor. He dare not then remember 'em, prithee
Woman let me go. -- Come from thy guard
And fight.

Came. Hold, hold, the rashness of this act will ruin you.
Came. puts up her vail. Beho^d my tears, deny 'em if you can.

Lor. Ha! who art thou?
By heaven the brightest thing that e're was seen,
What is it shrinks up my nerves, and calls
Back my revenge?

Came. I on my knees beseech you will desist
From your rash action, can you deny me?

Lor. By all the Saints in heaven I cannot.
Death what is this that softens me to
Woman? By heaven and earth she is
The sweetest Creature that earth e're was,
Or heaven e're made.

Iulia. Who is it that on her knees can beg for my
Marcello? have I Rivals too besides the
Enmity of our Family to undo me?

Mar. Ah Madam had the care you have expressed
Been aimed at me, I had been blessed enough.

Iulia. I had a care of you, but he must be my care.

Lor. Marcello go and live, this Lady bids thee
Live. Thank her.

Mar. I thank none but heaven for my life,
It is unmanly to be thus vainglorious.

Iulia. Good Sir walk this way, I have something
More to say to you.

[Ex. Marcello and Iulia. Lor. Who are you Madam that have hindered
This present quarrel between my mortal Foe
And me, but let me tell you, you have (...)
My private peace, and raised a war more
Dangerous within me than any thing I
Could have met from him.

Came. I dare not tell my name, I meant no
Harm to you, but if you love your self,
Or if your nature has imbibed
But the least softness from your Mothers milk,
Pursue not farther good Marcello's life.

Lor. Good Marcello! Hell and Furies! she loves him.
First let me know who gives me this command.

Came. First Sir, deserve it by your temper,
And be assured I will not be ungrateful*
Farewell.

Exeunt. Came. Gov. Lor. Tempests and whirlwinds! whither am I rapt!
She is gone, she has lest me quite unmann'd,
At once I am stung with love and jealousy,
And I have let my Rival escape my fury.
Sirrah, dog that Lady, and on your life
Enquire out who she is.
[Ex. Vinc. Thou art not my Foe alone but happy Rival.
Instead of cooling shor has inflamed our strife:
I Will first defeat thy love, then take thy life.
[Ex. Loren.
The Scene discovers Paulo leaping with his Doublet off. Paulo. In troth it is
well leapt, Paulo, who can say you are old, let me see any young man leap with
more agility -- hah well done Paulo, come thy joints are plyant, thy back
lusty, and thou fit for an able Bridegroom, -- hah well done again honest
Paulo. What? gray hairs are no marks of old age, but of many years, of chaste
and sober youth, and of no idle expense of life, of no years cut off by a
Surgeon, nor washed away in a Tavern. Widow I commend thee in thy first
choice, and hope thou will resemble it in a second -- Have at thee Widow, have
at thee. -- Now well jumpt Paulo. But now I must fatherly infuse Chastity into
my Daughter, and teach her rules too hard for me, Declaim against the lewdness
of the World, and advise her to choose the virtue of a Nunnery, for ^he being
(...) settled, my Widow can assault me with no very strong objection. Lucinda
come hither.


[ Enter Lucinda and Nuarcha. Lucin. I come Sir.


Paulo. What have you been doing Lucinda?


Luc. Sir I have been observing the Pictures in the long Gallery.


Paulo. Which of them Child?


Luc. I observed Europa and Jupiter, and the Picture of Calisto surpised by
the same amorous God.


Nuar. And we observed how he put a trick upon Danae, for all the Guards of her
severe Father.


Paulo. Out upon it, mere bawdry, do thou know my Child the moral of it? it
declares a hot Gallant, and a vile Governess debauched with money to ruin her
charge: Out upon you naughty Girl! to indulge your Carnality with provocation;
why did you not look upon the good Saint Mary Magdalen, you know she bemoaned
all her love-vanities, you should have viewed St. Katharine of Alexandria. Did
not I bid you speak to your Lady to take down these Pictures, and that of Mars
and Venus in a net?


[ To Nuarcha. Nuar. O Devilish dissembling old Fe^^^w!


Paulo. I will be a kind Father in keeping thee spotless from this world, I am
now old, and can best tell you the small improvement virtue makes in Worldly
conversation; come, have you considered well my Child our late Discourse about
a Nunnery? Oh the sweet life! O the blessedness of such retirement! O divine
pleasure of a Nunnery!


Nuar. This old Goat thinks to deceive me. What sure do you propose most
unnatural rules to be observed by her in the fresh spring of her life, which
you cannot submit to in the frozen December of your age?


Paulo. Peace vain naughty carnal Woman. Speak Child, does silence give
consent? perhaps thou may through piety be Canonized: O what joy! and what
honor to us all! to have posterity after thy death pay devotion to St. Lucinda.


Luc. Pray Sir, may not Wives be Saints? if you please I will turn Nun when I
am a Widow.


Nuar. I well said Madam; Pray have you the heart to put a young Woman of this
neat shape, this complexion, these bright eyes, this sweet breath, these clean
teeth --


Paulo. Woman, hold thy tongue.


Nuar. I will not, what into a Nunnery! what flesh and blood dares be her
Confessor? there is never a shaved pate of them all but has more mind to her
than a month's fasting.


Paulo. O Lord! she will make me deaf with talking.


[He walks disturbed and she follows him. Nuar. Had she been crooked, had she
wanted an eye, one leg shorter, one hand reversed, or uncurable fits, or by any
distemper improper for copying out her own sweet-fac'd Picture: then she had
been fit for a Nunnery, then most fit for your Matins and Vespers.


Paulo. Well, have you done?


Nuar. No Sir, I have not done, Is this flesh and blood for a Nunnery? no, she
shall be a Matrimonial Saint, her shrine shall be a Down-bed and a Quilt, and
her Chapel a well furnished Chamber, the Pilgrim that shall kneel to her and
kiss her, shall be a young handsome man, and you need expect no Miracle, but to
see her Nuns work run up and down, and call you Grand Pappa.


Paulo. I tell thee Woman, I shall chastise thee if thou hold not thy
tongue. Thou have been false, thou have corrupted my daughter, thou have
confederated with Carnality: Get thee out of my sight, I will forthwith speak
to my Lady Abbess about it, and she shall be admitted to morrow.


Luc. Sir, if you please, since a Daughter cannot with a Father dispute this
great affair, which like marriage is for better for worse, let your Friend and
mine reason it calmly, whether your only Daughter should turn Nun; If their
reasons convince me, I obey.


Paulo. Well, for once I consent, who shall they be?


Luc. Sir, any young Gentleman of Florence shall judge for me, and for you my
designed Mother-in-Law Paulina.


Paulo. Begone you saucy Baggage: What, concern your self in your Fathers
Business? what, you can prate, can you disobedience?


Luc. No Sir, I am all duty; you told me, you loved me, because I did resemble
my Mother: I would fain increase your love, and be like my Mother in every
thing.


Paulo. Begone I say, my will is fixed.


Luc. Pray Sir, I ever loved my Father, and since the world is so perilous,
let us both leave it: You often commanded me to follow my Parents Example.


Paulo. Hence Impudence. And get thee out of my presence, Thou pestilence of
the Family: [Exeunt Luc. and Nuar. -- pert Sl^t -- Well now for my Widow --
Well jumpt Paulo -- hah vigorous Paulo, hah lusty Paulo -- Hah brave Paulo.

[Exit jumping.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Antonio, after him Circumstantio. Ant. WEll sirrah, what makes you stay
so long, when I bid you return a speedy answer from Lucinda?


Circ. Pray Sir, let me excuse my stay, secundum quid, by the History of some
extraordinary contingences which interfer'd, though indeed I am of the Stoics
opinion, that nothing is contingent, but only seems so quoad nos.


Ant. Sirrah to the purpose Rogue, Rascal.


[He kicks him. Circ. Sir, why do you wrong your self, and debase your nature
by this vile employ, which instead of making you red with anger, should make
you blush for shame?


Ant. You tormenting Villain speak now, or else I am resolved to damn you to
the Pillory.


Circ. Alas Sir, the Pillory! by this passion you extinguish every thing that
is Socratick, or indeed Philosophical; you become my servant, I can make you
kick me when I please, alas poor Gentleman! did he but see how passion alters
his countenance, and defaces the pleasure of his Mistress!


Ant. Within there-bring in the Pillory; now sirrah you shall not escape: bid
your fellows come in with the Pillory and Garland.


Circ. Sir, pray ponder the thing, and that you may not by designing me, expose
your self to domestic ignominy, I will endeavor to give verbal satisfaction.


Enter Pietro, Cook, Butler, Coachman, with the Pillory and Garland. Ant. Look
invincible fool, here is the best Scheme for your Rhetoric, this must be your
Climax, and this the ornament for your florid head, come put his Collar on,
lest in his madness he bites some of you, and so infect you.


Circ. Fellow Servants entreat your Master to consult his reputation, and not
pursue a thing so mal a propos.


Ant. Insufferable slaye, as impudent, as invincible.


Circ. Sir, what ^rrour, what fault, what transgression? where is the least
Circumlocution? though habits are very tough.


Ant. In with him. I leave him to you, let him not sleep, for that is bad in
Physic, I allow you all battering instruments; sirrah, your faults are many, I
hope they will reckon them up in my absence.

[Ex. Antonio.
Circ. Torrens dicendi copia multis, and sua mortifera est facundia.


Pietro. What at it again? I hope this punishment will prove a cleansing vomit
for your tough bits of eloquence.


Circ. I will suppress my anger, though it swells my heart, and hear what the
dull Rout will say, and thus by taciturnity deceive them. Philosophy I thank
thee!


Cook. Lord what makes Circumstantio in this strange disabilie as he used to
call it! he swells like some Don in his ruff, sure the rogue has got a cold and
cannot stir his neck.


Butler. No, no, the Landress has put too much starch in his Cravat: that light
pate of his peeps like a Cork out of a bottle.


Coach. Well learned Domine! I knew you would at last be yoked for your
frequent breaking of hedges, most high and mighty, you were always despising
your fellow servants, calling the Cook greasy, Butler frothy, the Coachman
stable man.


Enter Nuarcha. Pietro. I am afraid our sport will be prevented by the coming
of this old Maid, now must we kiss her, and talk of her husband, to keep her in
some tolerable humor. Come Gentlemen show your breeding.


[they kiss her one after another. Nuar. Blessings on you all, kind hearts, I
have not received so much comfort these two months: pray where is Antonio? for
I came to speak with him: ah! but what do I see the accomplished Circumstantio
in the Pillory?


Circ. Ah how dark and erroneous are the sentiments of the unphilosophick,
which proceed from want of definition and distinction, they suppose this
Pillory to be malum verum, which we that have been better taught know to be but
malum apparens, no wise man can suffer ill; for how insignificant is malum
poenae, when the essence of a man is free from malum culpae! Oh what
consolation do I find in Metaphysics! I will assure you Auditors, neither
candid, nor gentle, that I value not this Pillory nor its Pilloreity.


Nuar. Well, I never heard him speak so finely before.


Pietro. Mrs. Nuarcha, my Master is coming.


Nuar. Then I will compose my self. Sir, Mrs. Lucinda so desirous of your
company [Enter Ant. has sent me after your servant to hasten your coming, and
to tell you that she expects you within an hour at the Garden door, where I
shall be ready to receive you, and for this good news let me beg
Circumstantio's liberty. Indeed Sir you do not use him according to his deserts.


Ant. Indeed Mrs. Nuarcha you are in the right, but for your sake and this
excellent news, I will not at this time be ungrateful in denying you any thing,
well let him come out; Circumstantio you're bound to pay your respects to this
Lady, and by right, if she thinks fitting, to marry her that brings you the
reprieve, but as the Prologue of Matrimony, kiss her.


Cir. I kiss her not qua Nuarcha, but quatenu^ my deliveress.


[Kisses her. Nuar. Your words and lips shall always be acceptable.


Antonio I must now return, shall I tell Lucinda that you will not fail, for
she expects me with impatiency.


Ant. Tell her I will watch each minute, and the hour will seem a year till I
wait on her.


[Exeunt. Enter Julia and Governess, presently after Marcello, and his Servant,
in the Town. Gov. Madam, Marcello just meets us.


Iul. -- If he
Knows me I am ruined, is there no way
To escape him? though I would willingly
With his leave fly into his arms.

Gov. -- Come, come
Prepare your discretion to receive him.
And put him off with hopes of seeing him,

Marc. Madam, though in obedience to your command
I durst not enter the Church after you,
So nice you are of discovering your self,
Yet now be not offended if I strive
To know the name of my kind Protectress.

Iul. Sir, pray retire, for sure the fierce Lorenzo
Hovers hereabouts to meet you, and then
I his fury returns, as sure it will,
Perhaps the kind Lady that bowed his heart
And arm, may not be at hand to help you.

Marc. Like Heaven you gave us unexpected help,
And speak your mind like it in Oracles,
Dark and mysterious. I know no Lady
Neither you nor her, and owe no safety
To any but your self. Strange interview!
Big with contraries, which saves, and yet destroys.
To hinder my chance of death thrown
From my enemy, yet as the same Friend
To murder me by kindness to my foe!

Iulia. Let it satisfy in this place in words
To promise you, that I am as ready
As the other Lady to render my
Assistance to the worthy Marcello.

Marc. It seems you know me Madam.

Iul. -- Not so well
As the Lady who ventured the blind rage
Of Lorenzo, by exposing her life
To save yours, you have small reason to blame
My hard heart, when you find such softness there.

Marc. Madam, it is the greatest severity
To rally with a Wretch upon the rack.

Iul. Come, you must be kept there till you confess.

Marc. Confess! what Madam?

Iulia. -- The name of her that
Did you such service, and then you may more
Justly expect mine, for my part I can
Allow you but one Mistress at a time.

Marc. Madam, if you design me by cruelty
For death, let me not mistake some kindness
In your words to keep me longer in pain.
Oh speak my fate, for doubt is worse than death.
You Will prove unkind if you pronounce my death,
Yet more kind by speaking to finish life and pain.

Iul. Sure despair is the worst vice of the Brave.
Well, to be short, I will make
This agreement with you, pursue no more
Questions nor any further inquiry
At this time, and I promise suddenly
To grant the satisfaction you desire.
And may Heaven grant that knowledge don't increase
Those torments which we both conceive in ignorance.

[Iul. Governess exeunt. Marc. Well, I submit, it is more generous to say, I
obey my
Mistress, than necessity, and it is better far to stand still, than
march after love, when it moves like a wandering fire.
Lest the poor Traveller goes more astray
In a blind Moonless light, and unknown way.

[Marc. Serve. exeunt. Enter Lorenzo, in the Town. Lor. Sure my Servant is lost,
as well as his poor Master. Oh how I rack my mind to know who this fair
Creature is! perhaps to my greater torment, for some small hope hovers about me
in my ignorance, which will take wing and upon information leave me [ Enter
Vincentio. Well, who is she? speak -- hold -- upon your life forbear, your look
foretells misfortune.


Vinc. Pray Sir, shall I tell you, or shall I not tell you?


Lor. If your relation be good, stay not a moment, but if fatal, let it remain
in everlasting silence -- yet I must hear, come who is she?


Vinc. Nay Sir, be not so passionate, for I can neither kill you, nor save you.


Lor. Slave be quick, who is she?


Vinc. Pray Sir be satisfied, heaven and St. Peter knows for me.


Lor. Wretch, do thou not know? why do thou keep me thus in pain? speak or
for ever hold thy tongue, who is she?


Vin. Sir, in short I dogged her, but she was too nimble for me, she was
mingled with so many in the Church, that I could not distinguish her.


Lor. Villain thou lie. I will kill thee, and write fool in thy blood, what,
not distinguish her? villain thou lie, it is impossible, a bright circle
always crowns her face, her vail was all illustrated, as clouds gilded by the
Suns darted beams, her breath would discover her at distance, as spices in
blossom betray Arabia to approaching Travelers. Roses grow for ever where she
treads, and nature paints her footsteps: not know her, not distinguish her!
Impudent sot; recollect, and tell me you know her.


Vinc. Hey-day: here is brave alteration in my Master: truly Sir, to speak the
truth, I have a great cold, and so perhaps could not smell her, and then my
eyes are very weak, and cannot look against so much light; as for Roses I saw
none. Ladies servants, and their servants servants look not with the same eyes.
Perhaps it is always Summer, and hot weather when you see her, but it was
Winter by that time I drew near to her.


Lor. Yes, by your stay it seemed so; march before, and lead me to her; or --


Vinc. Lord Sir, what do you mean? have a little patience, and she may come by
this way again. Vespers were almost done when I came to you: (...) -- see your
enemy Marcello is just going into his house.


Lor. I would it were his grave, but I will shortly send him or my self thither.


Vinc. Sir pray look that way -- I think I spy the same Lady coming, yes it is
she, now I see the light about her face, yes I smell the roses, and see them
blush, and peep under her Petticoat.


Lor. It Is she -- I know my murdress is at hand by inward bleeding. My heart
beats vehemently, and my blood presses with haste through life's floodgates:
love which animates all creatures, abates my courage, when I have most need of
it. I cannot speak to her, and yet I must.


Enter Camilla and Governess. Came. Lorenzo is here, alas I tremble
To meet the Man I love. I know he stares
To learn who I should be, and where I live.
It Is only ignorance can make him kind,
For knowledge would extinguish his devotion.
He comes this way, be sure you discover
Nothing of me to his servant.

[aside to her Governess. Lor. Madam
Grant me the favor of some few minutes,
To tell you that you have killed me, and saved
My enemy; pray pardon the roughness
Of my unpracticed love, born in a storm
And yet wrapped up in its clouds and darkness.
Oh tell me I beseech you who you are,
That were so kind to my foe Marcello.

Came. Sir, I should venture more to save the life
Of good Marcello; and since time and place
Hinder me from offering long prayers
To you, let me beg one boon on my knees
If you can love

[he stops her kneeling. Lor. Madam, I beg of you
Not to abuse you supplicant; O Death!
She names the villainous Marcello with affection,
And calls him good, but in death I should be
Charitable, pray name your boon that I
May grant it.

Came. May good heaven bless Lorenzo
For this mercy; be kind to Marcello
And then --

Lor. Cursed expression! each syllable
[aside. Proves a poynard, and stabs me to the heart.
Marcello is my rival; Dear Madam
Pronounce those words again to make me happy,
If there be happiness for me in death.

[He stands musing. Gov. Come Charge, let us go.


Vinc. Hold, hold, you have not proved your self a woman yet, and discovered
who your Lady is.


Gov. But you have declared your self a Serving-man by that question, What are
you? your masters forlorn hope? ^ent out to skirmish with the enemy, and then
retreat to the main body.


Vinc. I never heard the Sutlers wife, or the Laundress call her self part of
the Army before.


Gov. Saucebox, I believe your empty belly, and foul Linen put these words
into your mouth; come Charge let us go and not expose our selves thus in the
street.


Came. I go with great regret, but must retire,
Farewell Lorenzo, and be kind to me.

[he starts. Lor. By heavens I am astonished and scarce know
Where, and who I am! O stay a little
And hear my last petition, pray tell me
Who you are, so cruel to Lorenzo
And so kind to your Marcello; Whom now
I must for ever hate, for what can move
A man so much, as his lost fame and love?

Came. O speak not such ill omens, for kind heaven
Will bring us safe out of our labyrinth.
I go Lorenzo, but will soon find time
To see you, and make my self more happy,
If now you will promise me to retire
Without observing me.

Lor. Well, I promise
Since it pleases you, to torment my self:
And be tormented by my ignorance.

Came. It Is best, for knowledge would my hopes destroy,
His hatred is so inveterate against any of
Our house: farewell Sir

[Exeunt Came. Gov. Lor. Farewell my Visionary Mistress; for I neither know who,
no^ whence thou art; like Ixion, I did fancy a Goddess, but embraced a cloud.
Sirrah what were they we discoursed with just now?


Vinc. Two Women, without doubt Sir.


Lor. It Is false, impudence, are your sure you talked with any woman?


Vinc. I am sure mine was a true Woman, by her way of speaking.


Lor. It Is strange that I should thus forget my self, to lay open my follies
before my servant: hurried with new passions of love, and jealousy. Marcello
is my Rival and my Foe. My Rival -- it is enough -- it is decreed. I will
forthwith to his house, and kill him: no place shall save him, not the Court,
nor Duke; nor Household gods; no bright apparition shall rescue him from death
the second time.


[Exeunt. Enter Marcello and Camilla in their house. Came. Brother, are you
resolved to go to night?

Mar. Yes Dear Sister, my horses are ready.

Came. When shall I see you again?

Marc. To Morrow.

Came. I am sorry you go; pray have a care
Of your self. Lorenzo you know is much
Enraged, and seeks after you

Marc. -- Fear nothing
Sister, Lorenzo is honorable.
His greatest fury can suggest nothing
That is unworthy of a Nobleman.
To day I met him, and I will tell you
At more leisure what wondrous providence
Diverted his rage, and divided us.

Came. My Brother little thinks, I know the thing
[aside. So well, which he pretends to hide. -- But yet
Brother, last nights dream disturbs me. Methoughts
A young Gentleman of that house killed you,
And I in just revenge stabbed Lorenzo.
Ye both ^ay dead upon the ground, and then
Rose up, and like the dearest Friends embraced.
But that must signify the other world.

Marc. Dreams are but the Echo's of the thoughts
Possess your mind by day. -- a lively mark
Of your great concern for me, for which I thank
My loving Sister.

[Enter Albricio. Alb. Sir, Lorenzo whom I never saw here before, with angry
looks and hasty words, bids me tell you that he must speak with you.


Came. Oh my Brother!


Marc. It Is fortunate Sister to have him here, I hope he comes prepared to hear
me speak: retire Sister, whilst I introduce him.


Came. I will withdraw, but overhear you both.


[Ex. Came. Marcello going to the door meets Lorenzo. Marc. Lorenzo most
welcome, you oblige me
And my house for ever, by this favor.

Lor. Marcello you mistake, I hate both you,
And your loathed house. I desire no welcome,
But come hither like thy evil Genius
To terrify thee, and bid thee meet me
In such a place, where chance shall not part us.

Marc. I cannot fear it in Lorenzo's shape,
Who rather should command my love, than fear,
If he could bridle passion, and (...)
His better reason, and the Dukes command.

Lor. Oh thou Rock under smooth waters! thou shall
Never deceive me, thou base enemy,
Best able to kill at distance, and to
Murder me by whispers.

Marc. You wrong me much,
I hate the wretch as much as you, who can
Deserve this character. I would in my
Own house be calm, and make my plea
To these false objections.

Lor. -- as true, as thou art false.
Now I find in thee a vice, I ever
Thought thee free from, I mean base cowardice,
Which springs from guilt; thou understand'st my rage,
And its just cause, yet would by oily smoothness
Loosen my hold, if thou have any heat,
I will raise it by the remembrance
Of thy Mistress, who saved thee from my revenge
Today, it is her I Will have too, yet that
Shall never buy my friendship.

Marc. It Is enough,
You have broke for me all ties of honor,
And good manners. Lorenzo, be gone,
My house is your best defense, pray leave it,
Your last words will force me to imitate
Your rudeness.

Lor. I will not go without you,
I came to fetch you out, and punish you.

Marc. It is in vain by calmness to flatter
His proud insolency any longer.
I have been tame too long, and that my wronged
Love and honor may have their quick revenge
Upon thee, beyond the reach of casual
Assistance to save thee, name some secret place
Where we may meet, if thou dare come,
Early to morrow morning.

Lor. Marcello
For this kindness, if I find it real,
I must thank thee: in nothing else thou can
Oblige Lorenzo -- well -- by Sunrising
Tomorrow, let us meet at the great Oak
In the Neighboring Forest, till then -- Farewell.

Marc. Let not my passion spoil civility,
I will see you safe out of my own doors.

Lor. Forbear your cere^^nies, I hate them
From you, like him that uses them, it seems
As recantation of your former words.
[Ex. Lor.
Mar. You might accept them now, for I will show you none to morrow. I dare not
tell my Sister what has passed betwixt us. [ Enter Camilla. Here she comes, I
will prevent her questions by telling her my story first; Camilla I am glad
that all things will be soon composed between Lorenzo, and my self; for he came
very kindly to propose a conference to morrow, where we shall upon the debate
grow more calm, I hope for ever; and that my proposed affair may not hinder me,
I must take my leave, and be gone. Dear Sister Farewell, and wish me good
success.

[Exit Marcello.
Came. May all that is good preserve my dear Brother. He Is gone, and now my eyes
shall freely speak the rest. He thinks he has deceived me, and that I did not
over-^ear their f^tal assignation, I will retire to my Chamber, and consider
how to save them both.

[Exit Came.
Enter Paulina and Lucinda in a Garden. Pauli. Lucinda, your father is so brisk
and vigorous of late, that he seems to have dropped Twenty years of his life.


Luc. Yes Madam, he has been fortifying himself these three months to my
knowledge, that he might appear brisk upon this day of admission.


Pau. Prithee pay more respect to the old Gentleman before your Mother-in-law,
he always appeared cheerful though not to this degree.


Luc. Well Madam, if you have a mind to be my Mother-in-Law, it is you will have
the worst of it, not I.


Pau. Why so merry Cousin?


Luc. Because after a very little time my Father must return to rheum and
spitting-sheet, and then how will you away with it? I love an old man well
enough for a Father, but not for a husband.


Paul. Pray Cousin let us reason it, such an old man as your Father, or my late
husband, would make you an excellent match, come think of it Lucinda, it might
prove most proper, his gravity to allay your levity, his cold your heat, as we
correct Wine with Water.


Luc. Out upon it! I would not have an old man, though he made me a jointure of
the Indies, though he built me a house of Silver, and turned a rich stream of
golden Tagus to wash my garden walls, though he could afford me Cleopatra's
draughts every morning, I should find out another Antony.


Paul. O brave Girl, had you rather venture a young man's frolicks?


Luc. Yes, rather than to lie by an old man, it is lying with a Coffin, and I am
sure you had rather lie by a certain young man than my f^ther.


Pau. Why do you think so Cousin? an old man is a very wise bosom friend, whom
long use of life has polished, from whom you may learn the wisest rules to
methodize your self.


Luc. Very good, you advise me to marry an old man, that is to say an history
incarnate, true Annals writ upon a Skeleton; and what then, go to bed with this
rotten Chronicle? no he shall lie covered with Cobwebs first. I don't intend to
embalm matrimonial mummy, to spoil the Apothecary's trade, and fill my Closet
with gally-pots.


[Enter Nuar. Nua. Madam, Seignior Paulo desires to speak with you.


Pau. Well, I will go wait upon my Cousin, it is to give my approbation to the
design of his music he presents us with to night at Supper. Cousin farewell,
and think more charitably of an Old husband.

[Ex. Paulina.
Nuarc. Antonio is just come to the back door, and I have got my Mistress
luckily away.


Lucinda. Pray bring him into this walk pray make haste, and I will give you
the best gown I have.


Nuar. I go, I go to serve you both.

[Ex. Nuarcha.
Lucin. I know there is no danger of the Widows marrying my Father, though she
carries it so demurely; she has a greater longing after my dear Antonio, and my
love is not without some hope; for though he seems to court the Widow, yet his
looks and words may be as well interpreted to me, I wish my supposition proves
true.


Enter Antonio with Nuarcha to Lucinda. Ant. Madam, this happiness you confer
upon me is more than any past or future service can repay: pray Madam let me
know the honor of your commands, that I may express some thanks by readiness
to obey them.


Lucin. Sir you shall know them presently, they concern both you and my self:
good Nuarcha, oblige me in observing my Cousin and Father's motion, that I may
not be surprised talking with Antonio.


Nuar. Well, dear heart, I will, I go most willingly, for a hundred to one but
they will talk about my Mistresses affection to Anton^o, which amorous
discourse will so heat my desires, that they will exceed moderation: well
goodly Couple ^arewell, I dare trust you both.


Ant. Ah Lucinda, give me leave to speak, and whilst there is time to
undeceive you, by all that is good you should believe: you are the design of my
true love, and the Widow but the Shadow of the Picture to cheat the eyes of the
beholder.


Lucin. Antonio, you mistake, I am not she you mean, I am Lucinda and not the
Widow, it is she has ever had the appearance of your love by words and actions,
which bid her judge it real. But I wi^h with all my heart he means what he
sp^aks.


[Aside. Ant. Let this propitious hour be for ever blessed, in affording me time
to express my heart.


Lucin. Well, well, you are a merry man to whet your discourse on me, against
my Cousins coming.


Ant. Madam, do you think I want eyes and ears to distinguish the beauty, and
wit of Lucinda?


Luc. But to be serious, the only way to procure your Widow, is by keeping off
my Father; who to speak dutifully of him seems in the Autumn of his life to
pretend a second Spring: I will assure you your Rival is very brisk with her;
therefore pray Court your Widow to the purpose, and give her greater assurance
of you, that my Father may be diverted from clapping me into a Nunnery; and
that is the end of my giving you this trouble. Would to God I could tell him
plainly that I love him.


[aside. Ant. Oh Lucinda, be not so cruel as to condemn me to new pains: for
this falsehood of pretended love is as great a torment to me, as a mistake in
you; rather command me to own my love before your Father, and the Widow.


Lucin. No, pray Court on, upon discovery Lucinda must forthwith march into a
Nunnery, I believe you will hardly free her from it without her Portion.


Ant. Dearest Lucinda do not think so basely of your Lover, that the spirit of
his love so much delights in dross and earth. I love not Lucinda as the Heiress
of her Father; but for the inestimable dowry of her Virtue and Beauty: I have
enough left me by my Ancestors, and fortune would be prodigal, to grant me
Lucinda to command me and it.


Lucin. These words will make be believe former passages, that he is real, I
must confess. [aside. -- Well, you are a pleasant man, yet I think it would
prove better for me to think of a Nunnery, and its happy quiet, than of
launching into a troublesome world, and Domestic Employment, if it were not
for one thing --


Ant. What is that Lucinda?


Lucin. Why it must out -- if it were not for -- my Antonio.


Ant. Oh pronounce those blessed words again, lest it passes for a dream of
happiness.


Luc. Nay, I am glad it is out, but if it had not been for fear of Nunnery and
Hair-cloth, I had held out longer: yet you must Court the Widow, as you used to
do, the next time you see her.


Ant. For heaven sake do not relapse, I am weary of the cheat: I must
acknowledge the truth, this unkindness suggests as if you did not love me; for
Lovers like the Deity hate to have their dues offered to an Idol.


Lucin. But as you love me, continue it for a while, I warrant you for some
handsome Plot to discover all in a little time.


Enter Nuarcha. Nuar. Madam, your Father and my Lady are coming, pray set your
self in order.


Enter Paulo and Paulina. Paulo. How now! what do I see? is not that a young
man, and that my daughter?


Nuar. Yes Sir, and a handsome young man too, he happened to come by when the
Garden door was open, and being delighted with the beauty of the place, I
invited him in, as one not unknown to my Lady.


Paulin. Good Sir be disturbed at nothing, he is a Gentleman of my
acquaintance, I am glad that any thing here has obliged his stay: and that my
Cousin was here so luckily to entertain him.


Anto. Madam, I need not fear to come off in the old Gentleman's opinion, having
so good an Advocate.


Paulo. Umph, Advocate, and old Gentleman! no more old Gentleman than your
self, for years do not bring age, but debauchery of youths and such Jacks as
you are. Come Sauce-box, can you jump as I can? come, the old Gentleman, as you
call him, shall try your activity.


[he jumps. Ant. How zealously this old Gentleman, like some sort of lovers,
acts one thing and is another, declaiming against youth, yet mi^^^king its
gaye^y!


Paulo. Young fellow there -- leave off your prating, and try if your back can
bear jumping as mine does: prithee sweet Widow don't mind his prating, but
observe this trial of skill.


Lucin. Pray Madam, speak to my Father to have a care of straining.


Paulo. How is that, you Saucy baggage? abuse your Fathers back to his face,
that was one cause of bringing you into the world? get you gone you undutiful
slut, to abuse the spring of your being.


Anto. Madam, what must your influence and virtue be, which can thus change
nature, and metamorphise old age into brisk youth?


Paulin. But the victory is greater which conquers the stronger, and set^les
wandering youth within the sober bounds of constancy.


Paulo. Come troublesome Companion, if you will have all prating and no
jumping, pray leave this Lady and prattle with that young Flirt there. I Will
warrant her I shall punish her within few days for impiously throwing dirt
upon my back.


Ant. Madam, since at this time this old Gentleman will be your only Guardian,
pardon me if I am forced to play the hypocrite.


Paulo. Well Rag-manners forbear your flouting, or you shall take what follows.
And be satisfied that this Lady is otherwise disposed of.


Ant. Lucinda, it certainly foretells good luck that I have so easily obtained
your Fathers consent to Court you.


Lucin. But what would become of us if either of them imagined the plot betwixt
us?


Ant. Faith, I will directly discover it.


Lucin. Yes, yes, throw me into a Nunnery* and then see how you can get me out:
pray at this time break up company, lest it seems too much familiarity at first
sight, I will contrive to see you again before midnight.


Ant. Well, I will obey you in all things -- Madam I must beg you^ pardon for
my rude intrusion, and yours Ancient Sir, if I have given you any occasion of
trouble.


Paulo. Well Sir, we thank you as much for your room as your company -- Ancient
say you? -- Widow pray give him his farewell.


Paulina. Antonio, I am sorry my circumstances will not permit me to discover
how much I value you: but be assured that you shall be always welcome to any
place, which calls me Mistress.


Anto. Madam, your most obedient Servant, I wish I might in this place plainly
express the truth of my affection. With your Fathers good leave Lucinda let me
be esteemed your most faithful Servant.

Exit Ant.
Paulin. Paulo, what think you of him, is he not a most accomplished Gentleman?


Paulo. No, no, -- very indiffe^ent, -- a mere flash, come put him out of your
head. Let Us go in, the air grows cold.


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT III.
SCENE I*
Enter Marcello, Circumstantio in the Town. Circ. MY Master has I must confess
above my merits honored me with a Commission to wait upon you and kiss your
noble hands, the which Province I embrace with an eminent Exaltation of joy,
since you are a person of such illustrious honor that Florence scarce contains
your equal, I am sure not your Superior, which is no small symptom of my
Masters piercing wit and more distinguishing Judgment, that have made so
Excellent a choice.


Marc. You Will never leave your Rhetoric.


Cir. The subject needs it not, your vast merits afford so ample a Field of
Discourse, that with Excessive pleasure I could wander in those delightful
paths, but at the present I am too strictly bound by my Masters too hasty
expectation of my too quick Return.


Mar. Prithee to the point if you be in haste, for I am so.


Cir. I shall be brief, for brevity, though I must confess it does too often
obstruct the ravishing torrents of an eloquent* and charming tongue, yet in
quick dispatch of business I hold it ne^essary, and therefore I shall proceed.


Mar. I must be gone else, what would Antonio have?


Cir. You being a person strictly allied to him by firm necessitude, and boun^
to him by the indissoluble knot of an inviolable Friendship, and being a person
to whom he is mu^^is nomini^us obstrictus.


Mar. What would he have with me?


Cir. He being also a person embarrass'd with an amorous Intrigue, well may I
say embarrassed for res est (...) plena ^imoris amor, as the Poet sings
sweetly, But Antonio being a person --


Mar. -- That would speak with me, when and where?


Cir. I shall inform you, he being a person who not only having great
proclivity to that amorous passion, but being driven by the violence of her
beauty whose Image he wears upon his heart, she being a person --


Mar. -- Ounds is she a person too, nay then Farewell.


Cir. Hold good Sir, and hear the end.


Mar. God's Death you will never come to an end.


Cir. She being a person --


Mar. -- I will not stay if she be a person.


Cir. I am astonished Sir at your impatience, would you have me speak vulgarly
and abruptly, and in haste like a Nursekeeper that is sent for Aqua-vitae?


Mar. I am going out of Town, I shall return and wait upon your Master to
morrow.


Cir. Hear me first, I shall be concise, for I am a person --


Mar. -- You a person? nay then farewell* a pox on your person.


Enter Marcello 's man Albricio. Albric. I am much mistaken Sir, if your
unknown Mistress be not coming this way -- and if it be she, I saw her come out
of Lorenzo's house: She Is here.


Enter Julia and Governess. Mar. What do I hear? Madam I know your person.
And yet I know not what to call you,
Unless it be Lorenzo's Mistress.

Iulia. Jealousy is sometimes a sign of great love,
But always of little wit.

Mar. I see then you will own it.
Has my so violent passion deserved your scorn?

Iulia. Jealous and angry too! nay then I Am sure
You are fast enough in the toil.

Mar. Lorenzo has employed you then
To set your beauteous snares to draw me in.
Then prey on me. This is most exquisite revenge

Iulia. You are confident I am Lorenzo's Mistress,
Because the Lady who spoke to him to day*
Is yours.

Mar. On my honor I know her not,
But I am sure, you came but now
Out of Lorenzo's house.

Cir. Shall I not accomplish my Embassy to you?

Mar. Pox on thee, begone Impertinent. -- Albricio know the
Tools Message if you can find it out.

Iulia. What luck is this he should discover it --
[aside. I visited his Sister who was bred in the
Same Nunnery with me, and whom I love
Equally with my self.

Mar. If this be all, I may be happy yet.

Iulia. Lorenzo is the man on earth I would not have,
I hate his stubborn and inveterate humor,
If he were sole Monarch of the Universe
I would not marry him, but if my too forward
Care of you will make you jealous, you
Shall have less of it hereafter.

Mar. O say not so, I had rather my good Angel
Should neglect me, and hover about my
Enemy.

Iulia. Were there no other man in Florence, he
Should never have my love.
A Bark that is tossed by Tempests on a Rock
Were safer than a woman cast on him.

Mar. Dear beauteous vision, for yet I know not
What to call you, I am convinced
You would refuse his love, and were I sure
You would accept of mine.

Iulia. You are not sure I am worthy of it.

Marc. Thou art worthy of the love of Princes.
The greatest Hero that the earth e're bare
In thee might meet the end of all ambition.

Iulia. Suppose I were one of Lorenzo's Kindred.

Mar. Were thou his Sister, I would headlong fly
Into thy Arms, though he were at my back
Ready to give me the malicious blow
He long has wished me.

Iul. How I admire and love his generous nature!

[aside. Mar. By this plain declaration I deserve
Thou should reveal thy self, and make me happy.
For whosoever thou art, by Heaven I swear
My life and love to thee shall end together.
I am sure you are good, for nature would not slubber so
To place an evil mind in such a body.

Iulia. Your Generosity has so obliged me
That the next meeting which I will contrive
As soon as may be, you shall know my name:
Let it suffice at present to inform you
My virtue is unquestioned, and my birth
And fortune too may claim the good Marc^llo.

Mar. Life of my soul, here let me seal my vows.

Cir. The Naturalists observe --

Albr. -- What have I to do with your Naturals, what would your Master have
with mine?


Cir. I am confounded, that I should draw my breath in so unlearned an Age!


Albr. Where is your Master?


Cir. I cannot say affirmatively what place does circumscribe him, I suppose
you hold with Aristotle, that locus est superficies.


Albr. Pox on Aristotle, where is your Master?


Cir. Paulina's Mansion did contain him locally, for Corpus must always be in
loco, that is certain, but at this present point of time I can only say
indefinitely he is not at home.


Albr. Farewell, a pox of this stuff. Sir, I cannot understand one Sentence
that he says.


Iulia. I see Lorenzo coming up that street.
Now if you would have me believe one word
You speak: avoid him quickly.

Mar. I am all obedience, Joy of my life farewell.

Cir. Will you not lend your ears for one small moment?

Mar. Damn you impertinent Rascal.

[ Exeunt Julia, Marcello and Albricio. Cir. The world is envious of my parts I
see,
There Is no man truly honored while he lives.
I will write something, Quod nec Iovis ira nec ignis,
And then I Will dye and purchase true renown.
[Ex. Circ.
Enter Camilla and Govern. in the Town. Came. Dissuade me not, I am resolved to
venture
Through all the dangers Cowards can imagine.

Gov. Consult your honor and my safety Madam
As gentle as Marcello is, he would revenge
Your love adventures upon me.

Came. Fear not.
I will protect thee and defend his life,
Or perish with him, it is no time to (...)
With his or with my loved Lorenzo's safety.
I Will save my honor too, or lose my life.
Go to Lorenzo's house, and let him know
I am here to speak with him.

Gov. Consider Madam.

Came. I prithee lay thy tedious wisdom by,
We must have desperate remedies for this ill.
If thou would preserve my life, I do conjure thee
To do as I appoint thee.

Enter Lorenzo and Vincentio. Gov. Here he comes.
Put a strict guard upon your honor now
And let not love find out its weaknesses.

Came. My honor's safe, he sees me not.

[aside. Lor. Revenge,
Thou art my Deity, to thee I pay
My vows and off rings, Oh cursed Marcello
To morrows Sun shall see thy treacherous heart
Throbbing within this hand. Oh Heavens who is this?
My Genius come to stop the lawful rage
Came. puts her self before him. Of this avenging Arm? It is her shape
The motion too of her Celestial body.

Vinc. I know her by her Governess my Mistress.

Lor. Fair unknown Saint of all my vows, to thee
The dear protectress of my life and fortune
I humbly kneel, and from thy powerful doom
Expect my life or death. If thou wilt be kind,
I will look down upon and pity Kings,
If not, the miserablest slave may pity me.

Vinc. speaks to her Governess kneeling. Vinc. Fair unknown Saint of all my
vows, to thee
I humbly kneel Protectress of my fate,
Pu^ up this Cloud and shine upon thy servant.

Gov. Whose Fool art thou?

Vinc. I am Lorenzo's, pray whose Fool art thou?
It is a secret I would gladly know.

Gov. I shall never be thy Fool, that is, thy wife.

Vin. Break, break distracted heart, there is no cure.

Came. Sir, you ask pity of me who needs it more.

Lor. Pray mock me not, such beauty stand in need
Of pity? it is impossible, you may
Give law to all that see you, and those wretches
That once could disobey you ought to be
Cast out from all humane Society,
And left to the company of Bears and Wolves.

Came. Oh were these words the dictates of your heart,
I should be happy.

Lor. By all the joys of Heaven
They are, I swear on your fair hand, except
You intercede for vile Marcello's life,
There Is no command of yours I Would not obey,
I Would singly stand a breach, leap into fire
Or mount a billow when the foaming Sea
Is most enraged with tempests: I for you
Would scorn all danger, but the loss of honor
I cannot bear.

Came. Nor could I e're esteem
One that would hazard that; but to be just
And honorable, you should end this fewd.
It Is the most brutal custom of our Country
For Families to fight they know not why:
Beasts are more civil, for they never quarrel
But for necessity of nature: Good Marcello
Is willing to contract a Friendship with you,
And would on that condition give his Sister
Who Is young, and they who have seen her say she is fair,
And all conclude her rich and virtuous,
This Sister he would give in marriage to you.

Lor. How! marry one o^ his accursed Race?
I Would sooner take one sick of the Plague and keep
My Nuptials in a Pesthouse. There Is no yoke
Which the most savage Tyrant could impose
I would not sooner bow my servile neck to.

Came. Ah what hope
Poor lost Camilla now remains for thee!

[aside. Lor. But for the life of base Marcello Madam
You are the most improper Orator,
Can a scorned Lover hear his cruel Mistress
Pleading for his successful, hated Rival,
And not be more enraged against him for it?

Came. He never yet by words or signs made love
To me upon my honor. -- Heaven I fear
I shall reveal too much.

[aside. Lor. It is too plain you love him. Oh Devil
With what patience can I reflect on that
And let him live an hour?

Came* He has my esteem because I think him generous,
And he is beside a Friend to our Family,
My love he never shall have: But it is as plain
You have a Mistress who staid his arm from you.

Lor. No Lady e're could touch my heart but you,
May Thunder strike me dead if e're I loved
Before I saw your all commanding beauty,
Which I am resolved to perish, or deserve,
If all the service of my life can do it.

Came. If you desire to make me credit you,
Meet not Marcello in the wood to morrow.

Lor. Hah, has his fear made him betray the place.
And time of Assignation, where I was
TO enjoy my enemy? What riddle's this?
Can you be so concerned, and yet not love him?

Came. It is your safety Sir which I consult,
Make me not blush to tell the cause of this.

Lor. If this be true, as I will never distrust
The words so fair a mouth as yours shall utter,
Say but the cause is love, and tell me who
You are. -- let my lips dwell upon this hand for ever.

Came. My birth and fortune equal yours,
My honor's yet unblemisht in a ^^ught.
If I can love a man on earth it is you.

Gov. Madam, this is too much, we must be gone.

Lor. Peace Screech-Owle, or by Heaven I Will strike thee dead
With Curses. Oh let me hear those Sacred words
Once more, that I may think I dream not.

Came. I have said too much to one who loves so little.

Lor. Little! -- the virtuous love not heaven so much.
They know as little of it too, as I
Of you my Heaven.

Gov. Thou art as impertinent and as inquisitive with me as thy hotheaded
Master is with my Mistress.


Vinc. Perhaps you may be as handsome, and I may have as much reason. Oh let
thy splendid face break out upon me sweet, and I will be as full of raptures as
my Master.


Gov. You Will soon be satisfied, as for example.


[she puts up her veil. Vinc. Benedicite, I am satisfied thou have punished me
enough. By heaven a Succubus: Thou Scarecrow to preserve that goodly fruit.


Gov. Saucy fellow, I hope my face deserves better than yours.


Vinc. If e're I trouble thee with love again, may thou confound me, and
consent.


Came. Grant me but this request, and on my honor
Next enterview which shall be sudden, you
Shall know my name.

Lor. How is my nature lost, how soft I Am grown!
By heaven I cannot disappoint my enemy,
And yet by all the sacred powers above
I never can deny thee ought. -- But yet my honor.

Came. False Braves alone are jealous of their honor,
The true are still assured they cannot lose it.
Or grant me this, or I Will conclude you love
So little, 'twill not be worth my seeing you again,
And I will never attempt it.

Lor. Say not so.
My life, my honor, all I have is yours,
You shall dispose of all, and I Will obey you.
I will not meet him, though I had much rather
See him in opposition with his Sword
Than have the fairest Lady but your self
Within my arms in dalliance.

Came. Strange passion of revenge! and I Will not trust it.
I have another way yet to prevent their meeting.
Since you are pleased to promise you will not meet,
I take my leave for a short space of time.

Lor. Why should we ever part?

Came. It must be now.

Lor. First let me kiss thy hand, once more, again, again,
Why should I ever leave it?

Came. Farewell my good Lorenzo, I was saying Dear Lorenzo.
Hold, if you dog me, I Will never see you more.

Vinc. ready to dog her. Gov. Farewell Todpool, Toad, Monkey.

Vinc. Farewell Hag, Nightmare, Scarecrow, Mawkin, etc.

[Ex. Came. Gov. Lor. Heaven, with what pangs she leaves my soul!
That in its last flight will not leave my body
In half so bad.
Methinks she tears my heart strings, as she goes,
I feel her pulling at'em. But what, have
I promised not to meet my enemy;
To lose my honor and revenge for one
I know not? I was not my self, my madness
Made it. Perhaps she may be one
That Is prostituted to the vile Marcello.
By heaven I lie, it cannot be, she is
Divine, the Saints we pray to are not half
So beautiful, or holy.

[Enter a Messenger with a Letter. Mess. Are you Lorenzo?


Lor. I am.


Mess. Marcello sends you this, I lie, but it is no matter, I am well paid for
lying, and I believe it is for pimping too.


[aside. Lor. reads. My mind is changed, and I will meet this night at eight by
the Great Oak in the neighboring wood, it is Moonlight. If I hear not from
you, I will conclude that you consent to it.


Marcello. Mess. What answer Sir?

Lor. There needs none, there is something for you.
[Ex. Mess. Luc^y above my wishes,
I only promised not to meet to morrow,
I am free, and I will haste to my revenge.
[ Enter Julia. Sister whither are you going?

Iulia. No farther, I came to meet you at your coming in.

Lor. Iulia I have news for you.

Iulia. What Is that dear Brother?

Lor. I have appointed time and place to meet
My mortal enemy Marcello, and suddenly
All our vexatious Quarrels will be ended.
I know the bravery of thy spirit makes thee
Hate that cursed race, and (...)
With me.

Iulia. Heaven send a good end.

Lor. Do not distrust my courage or my fortune.

Iulia. When and where, is this meeting to be?
Oh my Marcello!

[aside. Lor. Hah, she sighs, I must not trust her tenderness,
Inquire no more, 'twill not be long.

Iulia. I see a paper in his pocket, perhaps it contains
The appointment: forgive my theft.
[aside. When e're you meet may heaven preserve my
[To him. Dearest brother.

She embraces him and takes the note out of his pocket. Lor. Thanks my Iulia,
let us in.

Iulia reads. What Is this? To night in the neighbo^ring wood by the great Oak.
Heaven, how shall I find this out. -- Hold, I shall be observed.


[ Ex. Lorenzo and Iulia. Enter Antonio and Lucinda in Paulina's house. Ant.
Think Mada^ if Paulina discovers my deceit, how we shall be defeated, what e're
my tongue may utter, my eyes will tell her plainly whom I love.


Luc. We women are vain enough to interpret all to our advantage, as perhaps I
do when I believe you.


Ant. To put you out of doubt, this night I will contrive your escape, and to
morrow a Priest and you may make me happy, I have sent to my Friend Marcello to
be in readiness, in hope that I might persuade you to this reasonable proposal.


Luc. Is it reasonable then to run away with a Gentleman at the second
Interview?


Ant. Rather than to be ^lapt into a Nunnery before the third Interview.


Luc. It Is fit we should try men's tempers first, and what they can bear, be
coy, and use them scurvily beforehand, for they are sure to use us so
afterward.


Ant. Our Italian Marriages are made for interest, but mine with you would be
for love, and to assure you of it, I could wish you were a Beggar.


Luc. I am like to be little better, if I marry without my Fathers consent, and
he will not give it because his paying a good portion to me may be an objection
of the Widow against his Marriage.


Ant. Ah Madam, I would have you come all love and no money into my Arms. Our
Italian Ladies in love matters use to be so wise to consider that opportunities
are but few, think of a perpetual prison, Hair-smocks, Midnight Prayers, lying
on Matts alone, Green Sickness, and continual Chalk-eating.


Luc. These are terrible things, and you being less terrible, I cast my self
upon you.


Ant. My dear incomparable Lucinda!


Luc. None of your raptures, those are always short-lived affections, that
show themselves that way.


Ant. My love is as immortal as my soul. [ Enter Circ. Oh here is my Man, what
news?


Cir. As soon as I had received the honor of your Command, I did forthwith
repair with all the haste that was decent for a Florentine of that Gravity and
Education that I pretend to, to the house of Don Marcello, which I soon found
at that time did not circumscr^be its Master: the noble Pater Familias being
lately sallied forth upon some important affair, which at that particle of time
urged his absence from his own Mansion --


Ant. Thou eternal Rogue, the presence of my Mistress saves thy life.


Cir. But to proceed, departing from this Mansion almost in despair


Ant. Rogue --


Cir. Of any opportunity that might present itself of my encountering with the
noble Gentleman to whom my Embassy was then addressed --


Ant. Villain --


Cir. I applied my self to a more gentle and deliberate motion, uncertain where
I should guide my wandering steps to the attaining of my wished for end.


Luc. Most eloquent impertinence!


Cir. And though I must confess with anxiety enough duly weighing the emergency
of your occasions, yet I could not retain my self from reflecting with pity on
the erring and illiterate vulgar: who wanting the unspeakable benefit of
education and literature were little better than so many two-legg'd beasts
wandering up and down within the several walks of this fair Urbane Forest.


Ant. Dog, Rogue; incorrigible Rascal, there is a reward for your Damned
Rhetoric.


Cir. Alas Sir, these unseemly blows do you more harm than me, in as much as
they betray your want of Philosophy.


Ant. Again Villain.


[beats him again. Cir. Are these the Guerdons due to eloquence, which might
most justly claim its wreaths of Laurel?


Ant. Of Laurel! wreaths of Indian Cane, which thus Sir I confer upon you.


Luc. Hold Sir, he is distracted, this is not the way to cure him, let him be
bled and dieted.


Cir. Is she barbarous too?


Ant. Madam, I ask your pardon for the rudeness his impertinence provokes me
to; but sirrah tell me what Marcello said to you or by Heaven I Will kill you.


Cir. I had indeed at last post varios casus, post tor dis^rimin^ reru^, a
vision of Marcello, but he whether possessed with more important thoughts, or
rather diverted by an encounter with a Nymph, who is a person --


Ant. Well Dog, I shall not know, be gone and see my face no more.


Enter Albricio. Albr. Sir, I beg pardon for intruding thus upon you, but my
Master not being able to find out your man's meaning has sent me to know what
service you would command him.


Ant. Desire him if possible to put off his Journey into the Country to night:
for I have a business of the greatest consequence in the world to me, which
will require his assistance.


Albr. I will tell him instantly.

[Ex. Albricio.
Cir. What a vulgar and illiterate Fellow's this!


Ant. Now Madam, with the assistance of Marcello we safely shall escape, but do
you hear Rogue, see me no more as Master.


Enter Nuarcha. Nuar. You are always cruel to my Circumstantio, who is a man
of such excellent parts you are not worthy of him: I Will not be kind to you if
you use him thus: in the mean time my Lady desires your company to atone for
that of Signior Paulo's.


Luc. I have such a design which I will tell you of, as I Will secure you shall
break the marriage, I Will go first, do you follow.


Ant. I will Madam.


Ex. Lucinda and Antonio. Cir. I will take every occasion by the forelock,
whereby I may express my grateful resentments and my services within the narrow
Sphere of my Activity.


Nuar. I must confess I love men of activity, but at the present I will conduct
you where we may in a Corner hear. Paulo's Music, and confer about our mutual
affections.


Enter Paulo and Paulina. Paulina. You are indeed the gayest young Gentleman of
your age that I have met with.


Paulo. Age, pox of age, your young washy fellows are all Jades, I am tough and
will hold out the matrimonial ^ourney: young Rogues like tender plants wither
presently, but I like a Bay tree am green and flourish all the Winter. Here Is a
^ody of Iron.


Paulina. And a face of brass.


[aside. Paulo. Faith Widow I shall be brisk with thee, I wish thou may be
able to sustain my vigor. Hem, hem, here are lungs for thee, Hah Widow, I am
in the flower of my age, come faith let us be merry -- fa, la, la, la.

Ah how I love thee my Widow,
Ah how I love thee my dear!
Of Rivals I soon would be rid ho
If thou would but gracious appear.
Ah how I love, etc.
I ^ade this my self, faith I did.


Enter Lucinda and after Anton^o Pau^ina. Very good, is there no more?


Paulo. Ah how I love my Paulina
Ah far beyond each living thing.
Honest Paulo would make her his Queen a
If Paulo were once but ^ King.
Ah how I love, etc.
Hum, ^^h, what say you?


Paul^. O, excellent.


Paul^. Hah! What a Devil does this young Rogue here?


Ant. I am bold again to come and kiss your hands, Lovers like Ghosts, will
always haunt the place where their Treasure is.


Pauli. In the time I would not speak to any man, you did seek occasions to
express a generous Passion. I was not then, nor am I now insensible of your
Flame.


Paulo. Hah, Flame! Who Is that has a flame for my Widow? I Will burn him in his
own Flame, and make a Martyr of him. Da -- God, Young Fellow, I Will make thee
smoke.


Pauli. Though, he being here, it is no time for Discourse, Yet, I assure you,
you shall not find me ungrateful.


Paulo. Do you know I pretend to this Lady? and that it is dangerous to be a
Rival to Paulo del Campo.


Ant. No indeed neither. Alas, old Gentleman, by those white Hairs I see you
have one foot in the Grave, and should not think of a young Lady.


Paulo. Sir, I would have you know I was white at two and twenty; What can you
do? What are you good for? Hem, hem; there is Lungs boy; I Will spit with you for
Twenty pound: what can you do? can you vault or dance, Fa, la, la, la? I can.


[He dances. Ant. Fie, Sir, it is unbecoming your Gravity to dance, you are Old,
and being Wise should be reserved, lest you should be found to be otherwise.


Paulo. Old! Thou art a decrepit young Fellow; Widow, have a care of young
Sparks; all the Youth of this last Generation are but half-Gotten, born with
the Rickets, knocked in the Cradle, starved at Nurse, basely Educated, neither
with Sense, Learning, or Manners, and grow up at last to be feeble, foolish,
positive, confident, idle, debauched Fellows, full of Mercury, and empty of
Brains, and of no Use in the Dukedom.


Ant. Have a care of an old man, with whom you will have the Name of a Wife,
but the Office of a Nurse.


Paulo. Will thou not change a young, hotheaded, crazy Wencher, for a sound,
solid, sober Husband?


Luc. One that will keep home, and Sup at home, and after Bed well-warm'd, and
wrought-Cap air'd, his Posset Drink turned off, enters his Bed, coughs thrice,
and goes to sleep.


Paulo. Well Jade to a Nunnery to morrow. Had not a man better be sober and
civil, and go on a Carriers pace, than make a Post-horse of a Wife?


Ant. What can those Embers, those Ashes of Love be good for?


Pauli. A prudent, stayed man in years, makes a good Husband.


Paulo. Witness my old Friend Ferdinand, your late Husband.


Ant. He was of middle Age; but is it fit for this young Lady to nurse up
Children with long Beards, and Infants of three Feet, to have a Deaths-head by
her instead of a Husband every night?


Paulo. Do thou hear, can thou fight, Sa, sa, sa?


Pauli. Hold, that I forbid.


Luc. Heaven deliver me from an old man to my Husband, 'twould grieve me to
hear him groan all night for the Gravel, or for the Gout, wrapped in Flannel for
his Rheums and Aches, and in the morning to see my Maid sweep away six ounces
of my Husbands Lungs with a Besom.


Paulo. I shall provide you Iron bars instead of a Wedding Ring, Huswife.


Luc. Nay, not that my Father is such a one, but an old Husband is good for
nothing but for a Wife to foretell change of Weather by.


Paulo. Will you wrestle a Fall with me, Boy, Scoundrel?


He mimicks wrestling. Ant. A Humane weather-glass, a Flesh Barometer, what,
take a Husband for an Almanac, the common mark for all Influences; now Taurus
hurts his neck, and Pisces makes his feet catch cold.


Paulo. Young Fellow, Have thou paid thy Surgeon? I warrant thou art so full of
Quicksilver, that all the Gold in the Room is discolored with the Atoms that
fly from thee. Mind him not, Widow, he is a young, silly, flashy Fellow: be
wise, Widow.


Pauli. I warrant you, I Will do what is best for my self.


Paulo. Nay then, I am thine own, thy hand Widow.
Young Fellow, despair and hang thy self. -- Hark,
Fiddles flourish within. Now my Musick's ready, Widow, pray mind my
Music, It Is very good Music, in troth.

SONGS. DANCE.
Basse Let Fools consume themselves with fruitles care,

Recit. And with fond hopes search after empty things,
But Beggars with their Love are happier far,
Than are, without it, the most mighty Kings.

1 Treble Let all the World beside go pine,
And sigh, and weep, and groan,

2 Treble To dismal Griefs their Breasts resign,
And with sad, sad Accents moan.

Chorus 2 Trebles and a Basse. Lovers shall laugh while they shall whine.

1 Treble Fools for it is self will Treasure prize,
Some dazzling Greatness blinds.

2 Treble Beauty alone can charm our Eyes,
And Love delight our Minds.

Chorus of 3. Beauty alone can etc.
What is the Use of Wealth or Power
By which they men subdue,
If not in order to gain more
To vanquish Women too.
If not etc.
Beauty's the Sum of all Delight,
Without Love Life were vain.
The ambitious Toil, the valiant Fight,
For these, for these Kings Reign.
The Ambitious etc.
They who on these fix their Desires
Go right in Natures way,
All others are but wandering Fires
That lead Mankind astray.
All others etc.

Pauli. It Is very fine, now let us to Supper.


Paulo. Prithee send away that Puppy with a Flea in his Ear.


Pauli. By no Means, he is a civil Person, Antonio, your Company too.


Paulo. Civil person? a Puppy, a Flash, a Vapor, a Butterfly. Well I Will rout
him.


Exeunt Omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Circumstantio and Nuarcha. [He ^isses her first very formally. Circum.
There Is Nectar and Ambrosia on thy Lips, enough for Men and Gods to surfeit on.


Nuar. Good lack a day! but since our Hearts are now made one, what rests but
that a Priest to morrow may make us one flesh too.


Cir. That would be Joy beyond my Oratory to express, but my Affairs being yet
tempestuous, let me take Harbor in old Paulo's Service, and then we will
consummate. Antonio with whom I lived to advise and cultivate him with some
politer Arts, being too obdurate to receive Impressions, I have discarded
utterly, I did even now insinuate this to Signior Paulo.


Nuar. Let me alone, I Will do your Business with old Paulo.


Cir. The Churches Seal shall then confirm our mutual Loves, but I will perish
e're I will throw all my good Parts away on her.


[Aside Enter Paulina and Antonio. Pauli. While Paulo is in Discourse with his
Daughter, we have some time that is free from Interruption.


Anto. My Affections I have at large expressed already, and since the Beauteous
Creature understands me fully, I hope she will not cast away a faithful Lover.


Pauli. I for my part shall never Delight in Cruelty.


Enter Paulo and Lucinda. Paulo. Prithee my dear Widow, send this impert^nent
young Fellow away, I wonder how thou can suffer him.


Pauli. Give me leave to retire a Moment, and I will give him such an Answer,
as shall make him press me further in this matter.


Paulo. Do so my Dear, and let him go home and hang himself.


Nuar. Sir this Gentleman who is a great Scholard, and has the most eloquent
Tongue, a Tongue tipped with Silver, has a mind to serve you.


Paulo. I understand as much from himself, and in Troth I take him to be a very
pretty Fellow.


Cir. I sucked my Education and my Literature much from Imitation, and much from
Pad^a, bred with the ignorant Antonio, who never knew enough to value me; I did
--


Paulo. In Troth a very pretty Fellow, have thou a Certificate from thy Master?


Cir. Behold here it is in prom^in.


Paulo. These are to certify you, that Circumstantio Paulo reads. served me
several years, but I was forced to part with him, for a certain immoderate
Guilt he has of impertinent Eloquence.


Antonio. Oh foolish young Fellow! what does he hate Eloquence? I honor it,
and do receive thee as a Jewel, but can thou write as well as thou can
speak?


Cir. My Style in writing is much more neat, terse, and polite, than
indeliberate speaking can be, which you soon will find, if you please to fix on
this occasional Reflection which Meltetique Paper contains some small Diversion
of my Thoughts.


Paulo. Good Faith he speaks gallantly.


[ Paulo reads. Nuar. Beyond mortal men!

Upon a Magpy sucking of an Hen's Egg, rare I faith, I love these pretty things
of Wit.

After the too enticing Charms of a soft and downy Repose, walking abroad one
Morning with the beauteous and excellent Clarinda, most noble Theophilus, just
as blushing Aurora had left the Bosom of the Deep, and the Sun had with infant
Beams begun to smile upon, and dally with the various Beauties of the Spring,
and had gu^lded and adorned the verdant Meads it chanced that our wandering and
indeterminate Steps conducted us into one soe^^eld and bespangled with Flowers,
so beauteous and so fragrant, that we were in Doubt, whether our Sight or
^melling was (...) with Excess of Pleasure: and all the while the little
innocent Choristers of the Spring, chanted forth their pretty and melodious
Caro^ls to welcome in Clarinda and the Morning, when lo! on a sudden divinely
thus the Nymph broke Silence. Behold most noble Cunophilus, a Beauty in these
Meads, which Flora her self would blush at and be proud of, behold how Natures
pretty Wildness does exceed all the feeble Endeavors of emulous Art, when her
Speech was on the sudden interrupted by the clamorous Importunity of a pretty
chattering Animal, which by it is Color did seem to be of the Dominican Order
among the Fowl, and was in Brief a Magpy. At first we considered whether Joy or
Anger or what Passion it might be, had surpised the checkered Fowl, and caused
its sudden Ecstasy, when lo! hard by we spied that garrulous and domestic
Bird, vulgarly called a Hen, which soon became more loud and sonorous than the
other. The Cause of which we soon perceived to be a sudden Joy it had conceived
for it is safe and happy Delivery of an oviparous Production, which no sooner
had the unopining Bird deserted; but its false and chattering Neighbor leaped
hastily on the forsaken Birth. And after making a little Fracture on the too
brittle Defense, (I mean the Shell) the gready immoral and voracious Fowl did
in a Moment absorb all the precious Liquor it contained.


Paulo. Come my dear sweet Widow, have you given that foolish Fellow his
Answer?


Enter Paulina, Antonio, and Lucinda. Pauli. He knows what he must trust to.


Lucin. Now go about your Business, the size of the Statue fits you exactly.


Anto. As it were made for me, I can conceal my self within its Hollowness.


Lucin. You will turn them to Statues e're you have done.


Anto. Madam I humbly kiss your Hands, Old Gentleman your Servant.


Paulo. Farewell young Coxcomb.


[ Exit. Anto. Lucin. It Is time now to retire, it is my Cozens Bedtime.


Paulo. Let me but see my old-Friend's Statue first.


Lucin. I Will draw the Curtain, are you ready A^tonio, Anto. within.] I am.


Nauar. Bless me what is the Matter? The Candles burn blew, Oh Heaven I am
afraid of Spirits!


Pauli. They do burn blew, what is the matter?


Cir. The Tapers shine with a sulphurious Flame, and shed a sickly and unusual
Light.


Lucin. Heaven what will become of us!


Paulo. I will turn the Statue, Circumstantio stand by me, art a Scholar, the
Statue stirs.


Cir. I am possessed with panick Fear.


Anton. in the Statue.] Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


Nuar. Ah my dear Circumstantio.


[She runs into his Arms. Pauli. Heaven defend us, what Prodigy is this.


Paulo. O Lord forgive me my Sins, good Widow pray for me, have you some Holy
water to cool the Spirits Courage?


Lucin. Rather ask hot water to increase your own.


Pauli. Alas! we are helpless Women, you are a Man, a good old man, if you were
a young man laden with Sins, you might with Reason fear: Pray speak to it.


Ant. Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


Paulo. Speak reverend Spirit, speak whence come thou, whence art thou, and
what disturbs thy Quiet?


Anto. My Soul commanded for old Paulo's Good,
Against his Sins informs this carved Wood,
I for some years enjoyed that Woman's Bed,
And bound the lovely Living to the Dead;
For which I was to Purgatory sent,
To expiate my Crime (...) ^unishment.
But if you long for better or for worse,
You should have made a Matrimonial Nurse
Of some old Widow, who in Country Town,
From Salves and Waters has obtained Renown.
She best might fit your Cap, and spitting Sheet,
And ply the Panting Pigeons to your Feet.
She could with Skill your strengthening Plaster spread,
And by back door relieve your aching head.
Yet Heaven is better pleased if you should live
A Widower, and your Lucinda give
Into some young man's Arms, for that would be
In Virtue best for her, and l^st for thee.

Paulo. Oh! I am wounded to the Heart with fear. Oh! I dissolve, I dye. Has it
done speaking?


Nuar. Yes sure Sir.


Paulo. I thought my old Friend and School-fellow Ferdinand would not have
served me so: What, dissuade me from taking a short Lease of his own House? but
what must be, must be.


Nuar. Nay, many times it made mouths, and grinn'd at me, as my old Master used
to do in his Fits of the Cholick, yet I never ventured to speak of it till now.


Paulo. Well, Paulina, there is a man baulk't, I had a zealous Passion for you,
and, with the Statues leave, no old man could deserve more than my self; but
since a Plenipotentiary comes to forbid the Banes, I must submit. In troth it
breaks my heart, it is a hard trial to my Flesh and Blood, I cannot forbear
weeping; the fire within makes my Heart boil over. Widow, in troth, I designed
you for my comfort, my Bosom Friend, in troth I love you, but what Heaven
pleases: In troth I did love you, and hanged you on my Heart Strings, but no
more of that: farewell, sweet Marriage, it mu^^e henceforth one in a Bed, be
the Weather never so cold.


Nuar. Alas, I pity this poor old Gentleman.


Paulo. Well, Widow, my Heart glows still, I have not yet conquered my self, in
troth I loved you, but must love no more.


Pauli. O yes, you must not deny your Charity, your Friendship and good Wishes
upon occasion, as heretofore.


Paulo. Oh, Widow, remember Paulo, this has been a sad surprise to my poor
loving Soul, I shall never forget it, but farewell, I am not well, Widow, I must
now take my leave, perchance I may see you no more, this kiss shows that in
troth I loved you.


Pauli. Good night to you, Sir, I hope a good sleep and the sure knowledge of
the Care Heaven has for you, may settle this disturbance, but I shall not
suddenly recover it.


Lut. Madam, It were better to let him compose himself a little in my Chamber
before he goes, Pray Sir do.


Pauli. I think nothing better; or if he pleases to stay all night. (I am
almost dead with fear) Lucinda, thou shall lie with me, and thy Father shall
lie in thy Chamber.


Paulo. With all my heart, sw^et Widow, and Circumstantio, thou shall lie with
me. Widow, in troth I loved you, in troth I did, sweet Widow.


Pauli. Let Us to our Chambers from this frightful place.


Exeunt. Enter Camilla in the Wood. Came. This is the tree, and this the
appointed place
Where my dear Brother is to meet Lorenzo.
Both I would save, or dye for both; oh Love,
How much thy Torments overcome thy Sweets!
And yet nothing can be so terrible
Or full of Danger which thy Proselytes
Will not for thee encounter: I am transformed
From Woman to a man, a fearful Maid
Grows bold, and dares by the Moons sickly light
TO expose her self alone. Here comes
One this way, sure it is he, my Sex returns,
And I am fearful. How this will end, Heaven knows.

Loren. This is the time when Death and my Revenge
Shall have their Sacrifice. Were it my Fate,
As I believe it cannot be, to fall
Under Marcello's Sword, I Would bleed contentedly,
Doing my best to vindicate my Fame,
And Death is better far than withering Honor.
The oppressed Indian did not more abhor
The place where Spaniards were, than I this Earth
Where vile Marcello triumphs. Who art thou?
I did expect to meet another man.
Does cowardly Marcello send you to beg his Life?

Came. He scorns the thought of it: he will be just to his word.
'Twas I that wrote the Note to change the time,
Being one of his House, I came to speak with thee.

Lor. Being one of his House, I am come luckily.
To kill thee.
I came with as much joy to meet my Enemy
As Bridegrooms go to bed. Rash youth,
This great Disparity will make me blush.
Nature has not made thee for fight, but rather
Has shaped thee for my Ladies Page; but yet since
His base Blood runs in thy Veins, I Will let it out.

Came. First, let us parlee and perhaps you will find
Not so much cause as you imagine.

Lor. Death! Parlee with my Sword in my hand,
And with one of Marcello's cursed Race.
Draw. --

Came. I will not draw, till you have heard me speak.

Lor. I Will make thee draw. Take that young Fool,
He strikes Came. For daring to provoke me thus with trifling,
And when thou fightest I Will give thee more
She draws, he wounds her slightly. For being of that hated Family.

Came. No. Thou have done enough to one who was before so deeply wounded. Heaven
preserve Lorenzo.


[She faints. Lor. What do I hear? the Youth did bless me sure
Just as he fainted, the small Wound torments me,
And Gratitude returns it on my self.
I Will chafe his Temples to recover him,
Nothing but Fear has made this Agony.
Oh Heaven and Earth, forgive me! it is a Woman.
Hah! my unknown Mistress! wretched, damned Lorenzo,
Thou art cursed to all Eternity.
Earth swallow me, and let me be forgot.
She Is gone, she is gone: Was ever Mortal yet
So cursed as I? feel a Hell within me,
And all the Furies are raging there; O Speak,
My Saint, my Goddess, speak, look up, Is there
No help of Mercy?

Came. Lorenzo censure not my Modesty,
'Twas Love to you; and care of good Marcello
That brought me hither, this Wound was kindly given,
There is no other Cure for those my Breast
Received from you before: for I could never
Have enjoyed Lorenzo.

Lor. What Riddle's this?
She faints again, Oh dearest Creature stay,
One Moment stay, the pen^tent (...)
Will wait upon there.

Came. Oh! no but if you can
[She revives. Forgive and love one of Marcello's House,
Let me conjure you by my dying Words,
To love Marcello for my Sake.

Lor. She Is gone again, Oh Guardian Angel stay,
And hasten not away your lovely Charge
In Flesh as much Angelick as thy self.
Is there no Hopes, weep Oh ye Heavens, and give
Water to sprinckle on her Face, weep thou
Wretched Lorenzo, but thy Tears are hot
Like thy accursed Rage. There is hard by
A Sovereign Fountain famous for it is Cures,
I Will run and fetch some of it is Water.

[ Exit hastily. Enter Julia in Man's Habit. Iulia. This sure is the fatal
place of Assignation,
Where the two furious Combatants will meet,
Where I like the renowned Sabin Woman,
With Cries, disheveled Hair, and Floods of Tears
Will strive to close their mortal Enmity.
Hard by there dwells an honest Countryman
Whom I have gained to give me safe Retreat,
And rest for some few Hours, if Sleep can bind
The Sense where so much weighty Care does dwell.
Oh blessed Inhabitants of Cottages!
Oh that I had been born some rural Girl,
To have fed my Fathers Flocks with cheerful Thoughts
As impolluted as the Crystal Streams!
There if some Flame had warmed my tender Heart
With good Assurance I might own my Pain.

Came. Oh! Oh! Oh!

Iulio. Speak, what art thou? For I can ask no more.

Came. Help who ere thou art, alas I am robbed,
And wounded in this Wood.

Iul. How robbed? Heaven how I quake!

Came. Yes worthy Sir, in Charity
Convey me hence or else I faint again.

Iul. How my Limbs tremble, I scarce have Strength
Enough to help you. Hard by my Chariot stands,
I will convey you to a safe Retreat.

Came. Thanks noble Sir.
Savage Lorenzo could thou wound me, and
Then leave me, I Will never see the more.

Iul. Come lean on me.

Ex. Julia and Camilla. Enter Lorenzo. Lor. With too much Have I missed my Way,
and stayed
Too long, so much has my Misfortune
Confounded all my Faculties, Oh my Saint
Go not without me, hah, what is she gone?
I left her here: she is dead, and Angels have
Conveyed away her sacred Corpse, too good
For Worms to feed on, or has Heaven suffered
This lovely Creature to recover Life
Without my Help, who did commit this Crime?
Oh cursed Wretch damned beyond Repentance!
Art thou awake, do thou behold these Trees?
Or do thou see the bright Moons silver Beams?
Oh hide thy Face, for thou should be eclipsed
In Horror of this Sin.
If Fables feign man for ill Nature
Derived from fiery Flints and stubborn Rocks,
From what hard Metaphor shall fancy draw
Parents fit for Lorenzo: what Floods, what Seas
Can cleanse these bloody hands: if she be
On Earth I Will find her out, if in the other
World I Will follow her, but Ah! alas, I never shall see
That happy Place: this Sin will weigh me down.
Ex. Lorenzo.
Enter Marcello with two or three Servants in the Town. Mar. This is the place
Albricio, where my Friend Anto^io appointed us to be.


Albri. I wonder Sir he is not yet come.


Mar. The time seems fit for our Adventure, the Moon is civil, and is just gone
down. Who is there?


Ant. Your Friend Antonio.


Enter Antonio with Servants. Mar. Well my dear Friend, let us on, and good Luck
to our Enterprise.


Ant. I am ashamed of engaging my best Friend in any thing of this Hazard, but
I had none whom so entirely I could trust as you.


Mar. You honor me with your Confidence, but injure me, if you think I can
value Danger, where my Friend is concerned: he that will not embrace the Perils
Friendship draws upon it, ought never to enjoy the Pleasures it brings with it.


Ant. I know you are a generous Friend, and The Clock strikes twelve. the World
knows you are a brave Enemy. Hark the Clock strikes, it is twelve, it is my time,
good Luck dear Friend.


Mar. Fear not, it is a noble Cause.


Ant. Servants stand under the House, while Lu^inda sings in the Window. you
secure the Door, and I go in -- hark by Heavens an Angels Voice! It Is
Lucinda's, this is a Quality I never knew: now for my Sign.


[He strikes upon his Sword Hilt. Luci. I hear the Sign, lie by my Lute.


[She descends, Mar. and Ant. go in. Paulina. within. Lucinda where art thou?
Foolish Girl,
Go to Bed -- ha, there is some Body in the House,
Nuarcha rise -- ring the Bell, Thieves, Thieves.

The Scene changes to the Hall in the House. Luci. I have set my Cabinet of
Jewels here in the Hall, I Will take that and away.


Pauli. Rings.] Thieves, Thieves Lucinda, where is Lucinda?


Luci. Oh ill Fortune! the house is alarmed, they are coming toward us, the
Attempt without doing the thing would undo me.


Ant. Let Us away, we are strong enough to defend the Attempt and Action too.


Luc. No, they will raise the Town, when they miss me, my Father is in the
House too, stand you here let your Friend secure the Door. Mind what I do, and
be ready for your Cue. They come.


Enter Paulina, Nuarcha, and Servants. Pauli. Thieves, Thieves, search every
Hole.


Luc. Oh Madam have a Care whither you go; I was singing and playing upon my
Lute, I broke a String and came down for my string-Box which I had left in a
lower Room, and there I met the Ghost of your former Husband, Seignior
Ferdinand, I cried out, swounded with the Fright, and your Coming has revived
me: For Heavens sake to your Chamber, Madam give me the Candle, Oh it burns
blew again.


[ Lucinda drops the Candle, the Women shriek, and run about in Confusion. Ant.
Paulo, Paulo, Paulo,


Pauli. Ah Heaven bless us.


Lucin. Now dear Antonio your hand,
Oh Misfortune, another Light.

Enter Paulo with a naked Sword, Circumstantio with a Candle. Cir. What may
these Disorders portend!


Paulo. Where are these Theives, Rogues, I Will cut them off in the middle.


Ant. Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


[They cry out, the Ghost, again. Paulo. Ah, Ah, Benedicite.


He lets fall his Sword, crosses himself and mambles Prayers. Circumstantio
lets fall the Light. Anto. Paulo, Paulo, Paulo.


Pauli. Lights there, Lights.


Ant. Thou must thy amarous Passion quite forgo;
Or suffer dire avenging Flames below.

Paulo. Oh, Oh, ever honored Ghost, I have done with my Love, I do not care
for thy Widow now, I cannot abide her, a Pox on her for me, I hate her
mortally, I prithee let me rest, the Devil take her for me.


Ant. Now all to bed, quiet repose to ta^e,
No more shall you b'affrighted for my sake.

Luc. Now Antonio slip away.


Ant. A thousand blessings on thy Wit and Beauty.


Mar. Go on boldly, I Will make good the Rear carry her to my house, my Sister
shall wait on her


Exeunt Ant. Luc. [Marc. and after, all the rest groping. Enter Camilla and
Julia. The Scene a Wood. Came. How much I am indebted, worthy Sir,
To you, in this my great extremity!
My Heart with thanks conceives, and bears me witness
That I shall always pay my gratitude.
Could I but know the kind Author of these
Favors, and hope to be esteemed his Friend.

Iul. Sir, I shall endeavor to promote our
Lucky Friendship and mutual knowledge,
After you have reposed some time.

Came. Oh Sir!
It is in vain for me to wish for rest
This night, or indeed for ever: but I hope
Providence in mercy designs few days
For one whom it decreed unfortunate;
The morning Sun will tell me whether Life
Be worth my Care.

Iul. Alas, I pity you
For I feel grief to make me sensible.
I would resemblance might allay our pain;
For I as little value Life as you.
My Fortune likewise in this World depends
Upon good Omens, when the Sun shall rise.

Came. Your Virtue cannot fail of good success
To crown the goodness you have showed to me,
But I shall beg of Heaven to keep you free
From my dire Circumstance, howsoever
My Lot falls out, may yours (resembling you)
Be kind and fair.

Iul. Still I deplore you more,
Our Fates appear so parallel, yet here
I vow, for your so^' ^houghts and tender wishes,
A Friendship firm as Destiny, since you
Please to ask it, with fervent zeal to serve
A Friend, which cannot wrong that Sacred name.

[They embrace. Came. Dear Sir, You make me long for Life, and love
My grief, because in that alone I must
Pretend to equal you, blessed be this Grove
Where first we meet, blessed be this silent Night
Where we two Friends contracted Friendship first.
These few happy Minutes shall be an Age
To me, and when cold Death (perhaps to Night)
Shall shut my Eyes, I may with Reason say,
This close of Life, has fully recompensed
It Is sad Beginning, and in Confidence
Of our true Friendship, I will tell my Friend
The great Secret of my Soul, who I am,
And why I hither came.

Iul. You will excel.
As you deserve, and teach me what I ought
To do, begin my Friend, and whilst you make
Your sad Relation, I will sigh for you,
And you shall do the same for me.

Came. Dear Friend
You may remember when you saw me first
I told you that I was robbed and wounded
And so I was: but 'twas by Love. My Heart
Was stolen and wounded, by such a Thief
Whose Charms are irresistible, let not
My following Words stagger our Friendship,
I am a Woman.

Iul. Still may your Words add
Fresh Delight, and so am I; no less robbed
And wounded than your self: but what
Occasion drew my Friend this way to Night?

Came. I cannot speak for Joy, I came to save
The Life of one I prize above the World,
And he loves me as much, you may know him
When I call him Marcello.

Iul. Oh my Death!
What do I hear? Iulia thou art lost
^^r ever!

Came. What says my Friend?

Iul. Only remembering what sad Accidents
Lovers undergo.

Came. It Is most true. This Marcello
Has promised to morrow morning to fight
His deadly Enemy, called Lorenzo,
And in that fatal place where you found me;
To quench their Hate in Blood, my Death would be
A pleasure to save their Lives, to morrow
I am resolved to meet them there, Dear Friend,
Will you be there and help me?

Iul. It Is too true,
My new Friend is turned my Rival, and such
A Rival, whose great merits, my small worth
[aside. Dares not pretend to balance. Now I am
Truly wretched, bound in my Soul to love
My Death, and bless my Executioner.

Came. Friend, you do not mind me, you seem disturbed,
Are you not well?

Iul. Never so ill before.

Came. Forbid it, gentle Heaven, where lies your grief?

Iul. A murdering pain at your last words surpised
My Vitals: it is impossible for me
To last out long. Now pointed Tortures shoot
Through every part, oh! give me some relief,
For you are she must help me.

Came. Oh, teach me
But the means, and I will dye to serve you.

Iul. I only beg of you to give your Friend
Some Physic, the best for my Distemper,
I have it here about me.

Came. Blessed Fortune!
Come give it me, by all that is good I will
Most faithfully apply it.

Iul. Here, kill me
[She draws her Sword. This is my Cure, remember your promise,
Start not, it must be so,
If you love your self or me: By my Death
You shall remove your Rival, and confirm
Your Monarchy in Love. Oh! that I had
Never seen your Face, or else had never
Heard your Story. My Fever makes me mad,
Pray let me blood.

Came. Perdition seize me first --
Oh, my pernicious Fate! put up your Sword.
Can you not love me still?

Iul. Yes, after Death.

Came. And not in Life. Why do you talk of Death?
There is no danger in your Love, it is I
Am lost: Yet I could still love you.

Iul. Farewell.
You break your Oath, and are no more my Friend;
You love to keep me on the Rack: be gone --
And give me not new Torments by your stay.
When the Day dawns, expect me at the Tree
Where both must die, because you killed not me.
Exit.
Came. Hurried with rage, she will not hear me speak,
Oh, that my hated Life might sooner end,
To ease my pains, and cure my pensive Friend.
For what good Omens can attend my love,
Since Friendship does so unsuccessful prove?
Exit.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
The Scene discovers Julia sleeping under a Tree. Enter Marcello. Marc. I
Lately saw my Friend Antonio
Made happy in the Marriage of his
Dear Lucinda, which by comparison
Discovers what a Wretch I am: condemned
To pains and fatal Errors; till Death shall free
Me, or my Enemy. And in this Wood
I must expect him and the Sun together.
These Summer days are good Types of Man's Life,
For the most part through Heat insufferable,
T^ Morning and the Evening best for Use
And Pleasure, but yet how short! whilst Manhood
Like Mid-day-hours, too much ferments our blood,
And gives long Fevers from our eager Passions.

Iulia. O stay, O stay!

[She cries out in her sleep. Mar. Who is this that invokes
My pity? a most lovely Youth! sleeping
And yet disturbed; sure he is full of Grief:
For in his ugly Dream he sighs and weeps

Iulia. O, Why has sleep
Forsook me! Why could it not last for ever?
Sleep had compassion on me, and by Dreams
Deluded all my Sorrows. My fair Rival
Just now was very kind, she smiled and seemed
To give me Joy, I sighed and cried, because
She fled before she told me how.

Marc. By Heaven the Voice of my fair unknown Mistress,
It has performed Lorenzo's will, and pierced
My heart: each syllable did stab
And burn me in the passage.

Iulia. It Is now the break of Day, a fatal Morning!
But I will sing my Troubles to these Woods.
SONG.
It Is too severe, ye Powers, that Love,
The Noblest Object of the Mind,
Should now so fatal be,
That the sole pleasure of Mankind,
And the chief Joy of those above,
Should be a Curse to me.
Why should the spightful Stars contrive
That in such Torments I should live?
That I should love the Man that must hate me,
And still pursue impossibility.
Ah, fatal Love! like other fire,
Thy Heat to Objects does impart
Most different Effects,
Whilst thou do melt thy soft desire,
Thou harden'st my Marcello's heart,
Till he my Love neglects.
Thy Godhead I with Faith have served,
And have not this from thee deserved
Yet, though to me his heart no love can give,
He still might let me in Lorenzo live.

Marc. Sure my Mistress then is Sister to Lorenzo.

Iulia. Alas! who is there? who are you?

Marc. Madam, it is your Creature.

[He kneels. Iulia. Who are you? you frighted me.

Mar. O hear
With Patience, and forgive my crime, I am
Marcello, your Foe Marcello, guilty
Of Death, yet begging Life.

Iulia. It Is he, blessed Heavens!
It proved a happy fright -- Rise Marcello,
And let Lorenzo's Sister kneel to you:
Can you forgive my Brother's daring rage?
And hide some Crimes for headstrong Nature's sake,
Some, for a wretched Sister, some for one
That loves you; Pardon this bold confession
From her that became bold to save you both.

Mar. Oh Balsom to my wounds! by Providence
That brought me hither, my Love, my Dear, my Soul.
It Is you have saved my Life and Fortunes, You
Can bring eternal Quiet to my Mind.
By Heaven I value Life only for you,
And love you far above it.
Consider Sir before you speak, I am
Lorenzo's Sister.

Mar. And I Will be for ever
Lorenzo's Friend, I can no more fight with him
Than with my Father, were he now alive.
^'ll meet him unarmed and catch him with Arms
Of Friendship, sure he cannot hurt the breast
Which you blessed Image guards.

Iulia. The time draws near
Which proves my Happiness, and your Virtue.
^arcello how can your appear so cruel
With false Hope to deceive a harmless Maid?
You Will find a much more potent Guard to save you,
My charming Rival, she expects you there,
She will preserve you safe from Injury.

Mar. Oh! Madam be not cruel in mistrusting me,

Iulia. Nothing in Nature is so wild, but grows
Gentle before her, and lays down it is Fierceness
At her feet, nay she makes me love her, who
Have most Cause to hate her, and when I had
Her in my Power, I had no Power to hurt her.

Mar. This is wondrous strange! by all my present
And my future Hopes, I understand you not.
My Breast now feels its Virgin-Flames, which never
Can be extinguished.

(hasten from you Iulia. Time gives us leave to talk no more, but bids me
To the fatal place, where I soon shall meet
You, but I charge you if you love me now,
Do not pursue me too close.
Exit Iulia.
Mar. When you command I will obey even Ruin.
Now by my strange Captivity I prove
My former Sins against the Power of Love:
In sharpest Tortures without Hopes to gain
Through so much Doubt, an end of so much Pain.
Exit.
Scene turns to Paulina's House Enter Paulo and Paulina. Paulo. Now Widow it is
clear, what is become of my most undutiful Baggage, and yours too, if Heaven
and the Statue had so pleased. It seems your Skip-Jack Antonio was about the
House, for he was seen by your Coachman as he thinks, to go out of the Door in
her Company.


Pauli. It Is very strange, and it vexes me no less than it does you, what
should be the meaning of it? But if Antonio is concerned in it, without Doubt
Circumstantio and the Officers may discover them.


Paulo. The Meaning of it is plain now upon second Thoughts, but if your civil
Antonio be concerned in it, cannot you guess that no young Wench runs out at
Midnight with a young Fellow, but she has a mind to eat Flesh with the Friars
Leave? I pray God it proves no worse. I ever told you Widow, that these young
Fellows were never without their Rogues Tricks.


Pauli. He has raised a strong Jealousy in my Head, which I never thought of
before.


[Aside. Enter Nuarcha. Paulo. Well Mistress Nuarcha what News of my Daughter?
have the Officers and Circumstantio discovered where she may be?


Nuar. Sir, Circumstantio is just returned to give us an Account, Having been
all night about it.


Enter Circumstantio. Paulo. Well good Circumstantio let me beg of thee to be
as brief as thou can, what is become of my confounded Daughter?


Cir. Ah Sir exerce Patientiam, for my Relation do^^ require it above Mode and
Figure.


Paulo. I know it will, but prithee at this time be very plain.


Cir. What Sir, shall it be said that Circumstantio speaks without Embroidery.


Pauli. Ah! Good Circumstantio oblige me so far, as to tell me if you have
found her, and in whose company.


Cir. Well, Madam, If I must do violence to my self and Rhetoric, and take a
sorrowful farewell for some time of my familiar Tropes, it shall be the less
injurious to my Reputation, since it is in obedience to the Commands of so
hyperbolick a Lady, to whom my depositions bear a particular respect.


Paulo. I charge you to tell forthwith what you can say of my Daughter, where
she is, and what is become of the Off-Officers, upon the penalty of a Quarters
Wages; do hear Fellow? though I love Eloquence very well, yet now it is very
unnecessary in these Circumstances.


Cir. Ah, gentle Sir! May Heaven forgive the rashness of your Expression: what,
can Eloquence be unnecessary? but to imitate some well-designing Poet, I shall
begin in the middle of my Story, and declare the former part in some succeeding
Narrative.


Paulo. Pox on you, you will distract me, what is become of my Daughter?


Cir. Gentle Madam and ungentle Sir, to come to the so much desired
Proposition. Your Daughter I declare categorically is no more Lucinda, she is
changed, she is altered, she is metamorphosied.


Paulo. How! What do thou mean thou man of Ambiguity? How changed?


Cir. Yes reverend Sir, she is changed, there is a Transmutation, or rather a
Transcorporation.


Paulo. Into what, good Circumstantio?


Nuar. Yes, yes, do you think this Ghost came for nothing?


Paulo. But prithee, young Fellow, explain thy self.


Cir. What Mortal, endued with natural prescience could have had prospect of
this most affecting alteration in the beginning, or a part ante as the
Schoolmen sweetly phrase it. O most occult Antonio, I must confess I never did
rightly conceive thy Antoneity.


Pauli. He names Antonio and makes me almost mad with Fear.


Paulo. Prithee Fellow do not distract me, at your Peril.


Nuar. Good honey Circumstantio, discover your meaning for Love's sake.


Cir. Forbear your Arms of Concupiscence, Pace vestra dixisse liceat, there is
a Change, Lucinda is changed, Antonio is changed. Proh Deum atque hominum fidem!


Paulo. Do thou hear Fellow, God I will not suffer thee longer.


Nuar. Ah prithee dear Bird save thy Nuarcha's Longing.


Cir. Why then Quaeso animos Advertite, they are neither He nor She, but both
from henceforth, by the Application of a Friar, Antonio and Lucinda are fastened
together about the Middle, and here they are.


Enter Antonio and Lucinda. Antonio. Sir in all Duty I desire your Blessing.


Lucinda. And I beg your Blessing on us both.


They kneel to Paulo. Pauli. O most false of Mankind!


[Aside. Paulo. What do you mean you impudent Runagate, what Change is this?


Lucinda. Sir it is for better for worse. This Gentleman is my Husband, I am
glad with all my Heart that he has rescued me from a Nunnery, which terrified
me as much as the Ghost did you.


Paulo. Out upon thee, thou incontinent profane Baggage, what think of Marriage
in that very Moment, when the dead declaimed against it?


Lucinda. Yes Sir they dissuaded you, but I thank them I found good Friends in
Purgatory, and took the first Opportunity to obey their Counsel.


Pauli. How dare thou look me in the Face, thou base perfidious man?


Ant. Madam, I blush, I must confess after my Falsehood to behold your Face, but
my violent Love to Lucinda (since by no other Means I could approach her)
forced me to it.


Pauli. Was I a fit Property? must I be thus abused?


Antonio. You might have perceived the Love I seemed to make to you was all the
while addressed to her: pardon the Extravagance of my Love, for next to my
Lucinda, there is not one on Earth I have more Honor for, and if all the
Service of my Life can but atone my Crime with you, I then shall dye contented.


Pauli. Think not false Wretch I Will honor thee so much as to be angry, I cast
thee from my Heart and Memory, and spoil thy Triumph, O thou base Companion of
my Solitude, and Partner of my Secrets false Lucinda.

Exit Paulina
Paulo. Widow I thank thee for being so angry in my Concern, it shows thou
love me, Pox on the Ghost I say, what gone on a sudden -- come hither you
young Fellow, that will be my Son whither I will or no? How durst you marry my
Daughter -- ha -- well sauce Box since you have her, and I cannot take her from
you, here take her, -- but do you mark me, As her Mother gave her me -- naked
-- without a penny of Portion, since your Stomach is so good, you shall eat
your Meat for me without any Sauce, in troth --


Ant. Sir, I am contented.


Lucind. I hope Sir, you will give me a Wedding Dinner.


Paulo. Yes, perhaps I may give you a Wedding Dinner, since you have rid me of
so much trouble in finding another Keeper. Ah! what a happy man had I been if
the Ghost of old impertinent Ferdinand had not been giving Advice to night,
freed of my skittish Daughter, and in an hopeful way for my Widow, but the
Will of Heaven be done.


Nuar. A right Godly old Gentleman!


Paulo. Well, I will pluck up my old courage, and give consolation to the
disturbed Widow.

Exit Paulo.
Nuar. Madam, Heaven bless this happy change to you; indeed you have surprised
us very much.


Lucind. I thank you, good Nuarcha. I hope your change will come suddenly.


Nuar. When the accomplished Circumstantio pleases.


Cir. Sir, Injuriarum remedium est oblivio. May Hymen and Venus look
propitiously upon you, and conferr upon you Infinity --


Ant. Thanks, good Circumstantio, no more Speeches to night, I beseech you.
Come, dear Lady and Mistress, your hand.


Lucind. Here, dear Lord and Master, with my Heart to boot.


Exeunt. The Scene turns to the Wood and Tree. Enter Camilla. Came. How my Heart
beats, and calls up my Passions,
My Hope, my Fear, my Love, my Jealousy.

Enter Julia. Iul. You are here before me --

Came. I am here to serve you, and to assure you
I am that Friend I once pretended, and
Am here to give you to the hand of him
I love, and beg one favor for so rich
(...).

Iulia. Ah, my charming Sophister!
You know your Beauties strength, and so would put
The Prize upon too unequal Combat.
I in this Cause can fight, and boldly dye.
Injurious Rival, draw thy Sword, and free
[She draws. Me or thy self from Jealousy and pain.

Enter Marcello. Mar. A^, ^adam, why do you unsheath your Sword,
When Life (...) ^eath depend upon your Eyes?

Iulia. O (...) Marcello, there you mean these words;
On those Eyes Life and Death depend -- oh, turn
A way, and look not on her, for that face
Will make you fals^, if you be not already!

Mar. Sure I should know that Face -- Camilla,

C^^. Even she,
Who changed her Habit to preserve Marcello.

Mar. Camilla, How I love thee for this Action!


[He embraces her. Iulia. Marcello, Can you so soon
Deride your Vows and me?

Mar. Mistake m^ not.
My happiness, when you know her to be
My virtuous Sister, you will love with me.

Iulia. Ten thousand Blessings on that name, it gives
Me Heaven on Earth. O pardon me, my Friend!
O pardon fierce Lorenzo's unknown Sister,
[She runs to her. And place her in the state from whence she fell.

Came. O Joys which Angels fell! O blessed Brother!
By such an unexpounded Miracle,
I could hold my dearest Friend for ever
In my Arm^, (...) (with Reason)
Would not chide.

Mar. I will thus embrace you both,
And with these two impenetrable Shields
Will meet Lore^zo.

Enter Loren^o. Iulia. Such unexpected Joy must hurt
Like Grief.

Loren. The Sun never shined on such a Wret^h as me,
My Mistress wounded, nay, for ought I know
Killed by this hand, and the sweet Body lost.
My Strength decays, and Life feels Winter in
My chilly Veins: a Child would now disarm me.
How d^^ I meet Marcello at this time?
How does his Genius baffle mine?
Weary of Life and sick of my few Minutes?
I needs must bow beneath his just Revenge.

Mar. See Lorenzo approaches, but he does seem
To have more of Sorrow than of Anger in him.

Loren. What do my wretched Eyes behold?
My Mistress in Marcello's Arms?
Giving my Foe by Looks, and hand her Heart.
O stabbing Object! placed there to complete
My Sorrows. Now it is time to dye, but not
Without Marcello's Company. That Sigh
Boils up my Blood within me, and swells my Rage
Like a swift Torrent beyond Banks and Bounds,
I will speak and turn him to an Eunuch.
Marcello view this Sword, whose Sight may chill
Thy hot Desire, what can thou think of Love
In Death, how dar's^ thou touch that Beauty
Which only I must worship?
Draw short lived Wretch and try thy feeble Right.

Came. O Dear Lorenzo pacify your Wrath
Toward Marcello for his Sister Sake,
She lays hold on him, and kneels. Who loves you and came here to tell you so,
Camilla will not rise nor let you go,
Unless you promise Peace.

Iulia, OF dear Brother,
Imitate my tender Mothers Mildness
She lays hold o^ him, and kneels. And be not altogether the Picture
Of my furious Father: For Iulia's Sake
Whom you have often said you dearly loved,
Proffer and take Marcell^s Amity,
For he loves me, and I love him as much.

Came. Speak gently, and do not kill your Lover,

Iulia. O calm your Breast, and then you will give us Comfort.

Lor. I am amazed at this surprising Sight!
And this strange Riddle of Happiness! it is
My lovely Mistress, with my much loved Sister,
But how these Impossibilities should meet
My mind cannot unfold! O Providence!
How dark are all thy ways? And yet how kind?
Doubling all Favors by their great Surprise.
O! rise good Angels both, and pardon this
Forgetfulness. Such Wonder takes away
My Sense, alas forbear your Fears, the Storm
Within my Breast is now laid on a sudden,
My Soul is altered, or a new one given,
O let me go, ye Glories of your Sex
Who have atoned the Sins, all Women kind
As ever yet committed. Forgive my Faults
Marcello, for my beloved Sisters sake,
I embrace you with the same Zeal as Friends
Meet after Storms and Battles, O Marcello
Wipe away past Records, and take your Friend
Regenerated.

Mar. Brother Lorenzo
Let me plead in your words: Remember not
Marcello as he was, but as he is.
And when you think of him, at the same time
Think of his happy Sister good Camilla.

Came. Yes happy indeed in such kind Brothers,
This place though we must leave it now, deserves
It Is Consecration, and should be yearly
Visited. But now how shall we get home,
For the bright day recalls my Sex to mind?

Iul. I brought a Coach last Night with me to serve
One of you, who for his Wounds might use it.

Mar. Still you deserve more thanks, it may bring
Us to my Cousin Paulina's where both may change
Their Habits.

Came. Well mentioned, and as we go
Explain our Stories, and their strange Success.

Lor. Beauteous Camilla, can thou pardon one
So barbarous, so inhumane as I was?
To wound my Mistress, Oh, this cursed Arm!
But, had I known my Saint, I sooner would
Have torn my Heart out. On my knees I beg
Your Mercy, the Damned have not suffered worse pains
Than all this night have wracked my tortured Breast.

Came. Rise, dear Lorenzo, it was but a scratch by a mistake,
I know it.

Lor. I went to fetch some Water from your Fountain,
And I had lost you: then my Pangs --

Came. No more, this happy Agreement has healed all,
And every one had a worse wound than this.

Lor. In Nature as in Form thou art an Angel.
All Griefs and Enmities far hence remove,
And let us consecrate the rest of Life to Love.

[Exeunt. Enter Circumstantio, and after him Nuarcha. Nuar. My dear and
constant Circumstantio, I am glad I have met you.


Cir. Why? what Novel, or Business of importance do you bring?


Nuar. The greatest of my Life; I have been seeking of you all over the House,
being stirred up by the good and happy Example of Lucinda, and your late Master
Antonio, to confirm my happiness, and I shall endeavor to make it yours by the
mouth of a Priest, this sweet inviting Morning.


Cir. It Is a very ill juncture for so weighty an Affair. Abi -- and suspende te.


Nuar. Well, Delight of my Eyes, I admire you, though I understand you not; but
dearest Dear, what do you mean by this?


Cir. Mrs. Nuarc^a, you are a Person upon whom I design to bestow --


Nuar. A thousand Blessings on my most lovely Love --


[She embraces him. Cir. Forbear, I say, and cool this amorous Flame. To be
short, and to affect Laconick brevi^y, Mrs. Nuarcha, as I was saying, you a
Person that I am forbidden to marry.


Nuar. Oh! where shall a poor Maid find Fidelity, if Circumstantio prove
unfaithful?


Cir. Hear me, I say, and with pri^ked up Ear attend to my Ratiocination.


Nuar. I will hear nothing but Marriage. O unfortunate Maid, to place
confidence in man!


Cir. Cease your objurgatory Language. For, Heac commemoratio, quasi
exprobratio est; I have a great Respect for you; but for several reasons am
much deterred from Marriage. Ask the performance of any Command rather than
this Entreaty of necessitous Conjunction Copulative.


Nuarc. I will ask nothing but Marriage --

Cir. Put a Bridle I say upon your immoderate desire.
Here comes your Lady with other Company.

Enter Paulo, Paulina, Antonio, Lucinda. Paulo. Well, Widow, I am glad to hear
your Noble Resolution, not to concern your self with Mankind, and I rest pretty
well satisfied, that since I could not have you, that no Body else shall.
Widow, I believe it is for my sake -- Ha, -- Widow! yet we might comfort one
another by the by, the Ghost did not forbid that.


Pauli. It Is a very hard thing to find your Constancy without your Years, I
believe Sir; and therefore I bid Marriage farewell.


Paulo. Yes, yes, and so will I take my leave of Marriage, it is time for me, in
^roth W^ddow: but I shall always take delight to visit you now and then,
Widow, and take a caper or two in your Parlour -- Ha, Widow, -- that, I
presume, my old Friend Ferdinand will admit of.


Pauli. You take a prudent course, Sir, I shall follow your Example, be
Mistress of my self; free from the Treachery of any Governor.


Paulo. Widow, in troth I rejoice at this bravery of Spirit, and in token of
it I jump for joy.


[He jumps. Luc. Antonio, Your Widow bears her loss of you with great
indifference.


Ant. You see, Lucinda, how small your prize is.


Luc. I value it the more because I shall possess you absolutely without fear
of a Rival.


Paulo. Well, This new Son of mine, Antonio, puts me in mind of my self, when I
was at his Years, I had my tricks then as well as the best of them. I was once
in the mind to have stolen that Baggages Mother just so from her Father's
House, when he made a dispute with me about Articles. Since the Widows
Resolution has thus pleased me, my good nature returns; I will forgive him.
Come hither, Antonio. --


Ant. Sir, Your pleasure.


Paulo. Sirrah, you are a Wag, a very Wag, I believe, but I forgive you. Come
hither, Hussy, -- you are a Wag too, so there is Wag for Wag -- Get you together
in Gods Name; and remember, Antonio, when thou make me a Grandfather, I will
settle a good Estate upon the little Raseal.


Anton. S^^, I will deserve your Favors by my Industry.


Paulo. Well, you are a Wag in troth.


Enter N^a^cha. Nuar. Oh, Madam, I bring you the strangest News, be^yond
belief. Your Co^en Marcello, and Lorenzo, with two other young Gentlemen, are
coming up.


Ant. How^


(...). It Is impossible!


Enter Marcello, Lorenzo, Camilla and Julia. Mar* I hope Cousin Paulina, that
you will easily excuse me for this early Trouble, when I have told you it is
Occasion, and the solid Happiness that is befallen me and my Family; These two
in men's Clothes, are the perpetual Ornaments of your Sex, this is Iulia my
adored Mistress, Sister to my beloved Friend Lorenzo; this is my Sister Camilla
most happy in her Lorenzo's Love.


Pauli. This Surprise is as welcome as it is wonderful, and does no less
astonish us than the strong Accidents that have happened to us on our side last
night; but in Civility I should refer my asking Questions to our better
Leisure, and at present wish nothing but continual Joy to my Cousins.


Came. Oh! Cousin I am this Morning the happiest Woman in the World, who was
last Night the most unfortunate.


Iulia. And give me Leave to be your Sister even in both Extremities of good
and bad Fortune.


Lucin. May Heaven continue every day like this.


Anton. Marcello you amaze your glad Friend with the Strangeness of your Story,
who most rejoices that Heaven rewarded you so soon with Love, for assisting him
in his.


Marc. I succeeded the better in being any way serviceable to you and your
Lucinda, pray know the worthy Lorenzo.


Ant. Lorenzo shall always command my Life, since he calls Marcello Brother.


Lorenzo. After the name of Lorenzo's Brother, I cannot find any more pleasing
than that of Friend to Antonio.


Cir. The Learned observe that the mind of man in great Passions of Joy and
Grief cannot curiously attend the El^quence of Speaking. Ergo, I will defer my
complemental Entertainment, till I have woven my Thoughts into an Epithalamium.


Paulo. In Troth this Sight is almost as strange as our Apparition to night,
and silences me almost as much. The Devil take the Ghost for me, that all
should speed in the Flesh but I and the Widow. Well, what must be, must be.
Yet I am heartily pleased for two Reasons, first, to see these old Quarrels
between two good Families so handsomely ended. And then that my Son in Law
carries himself so prettily amongst 'em. In Troth I find he is a pretty Fellow,
and in Troth you are all pretty Fellows, and may you all live to be as lusty as
I am, at my years -- Hem -- There Is your Lungs in Troth.


[He Hems. Mar. Antonio you have a merry Father in Law, but Cousin Paulina, let
me beg you to assist our Mistresses in changing of their Habits as soon as you
can, and let me beg the same Favor of Lucinda.


Lucinda. Marcello has laid such an Obligation upon me, that I can never deny
him any thing.


Loren. I would most willingly see dear Camilla in a Woman's Dress, for in this
she still seems to upbraid my last Nights Inhumanity.


Pauli. Well Gentleman you shall be forthwith obliged whilst my Cousin's in
Recompense shall relate us their Stories.


Marc. Thanks good Paulina, and in the mean time Antonio and we will explain to
one another what has happened.

For in such Happiness it is new Delight,
To tell the Ioys of this successful Night.

[Exeunt. FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Written by Mr. Shadwel* Spoken by Mrs. Barry.
OH! How severe is our poor Poets Fate!
Who in this barren Trade begins so late.
True Wit's no longer current, it is cried down,
And all your half-wits into knavery grown.
Those who once loved the Stage, are now in years,
And leave good Poets for dull Pamphleteers;
Nay, for the worst of Rascals, Libellers.
In none of these will the young Sparks delight,
They never read, and scorn all those that write.
They only come the Boxes to survey,
Laugh, roar, and bawl, but never hear the Play.
In Monkey's tricks they pass the time away,
At least, the Poet hopes, th've done to day.
The Graver sort, he is sure, have so much Sense,
That they will never damn him for his first Offense.
He may take warning, and fling off this Itch,
That does poor Poets Hearts so much bewitch,
And, in a duller way, drudge and grow rich.
Ye have no hardened Malefactor here;
He never before did at this Bar appear.
If he should suffer, the first time he is in,
'Twere hard, as for a Girl, fresh, at six^een,
To meet, at the first Venture, the mishap
To lose her Maidenhead, and get a Clap.

