A VINDICATION OF THE BISHOP OF DVRHAM, FROM THE VILE AND SCANDALOVS CALVMNIES
OF A LIBELL INTITVLED THE DOWNFALL OF HIERARCHY, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Robert Milborne, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the sign of the holy Lamb in Little-Britaine, or at
Britaines-Burse. 1641.

A VINDICATION OF THE BISHOP OF DVRHAM, FROM THE VILE AND Scandalous Calumnies
of a Libell Entitled the Downe-fall of Episcopacie, etc.
IT has been always the policy of the evil Spirit, that when he cannot
shake Religion, or undermine a well-grounded Truth; then he betakes himself
to persuade the hearts and minds of wicked men to level at the worth and
reputation of the chiefest Professors of it, to wound their lives, and stain
their good names, with reproach and obloquie, that by such means those
Scorners may satisfy their own humor, by how much the other side is brought
into hatred and contempt; and before they are able to vindicate themselves by a
just defense.

Thus has a late Libeller dealt, who has made himself the Author of the
Downe-fall of the Hierarchy, and tells us at whose reputation he does more
principally and professedly and aim, by reason of his nourishing ignorance,
blindness, persecuting Orthodox Preachers, and cherishing Popery, and Papists,
which if it shall be made good (says he) in Thomas Duresme, the best in the
bunch, etc. that so through the Prelate of Durham's sides he may wound the rest
of that sacred Order; yea, and (we may add) in some sort Religion it self;
which cannot but suffer the while he is traduced by this wayward generation of
men at home, who by reason of his many Elucubrations has for many years had a
reverend esteem by sundry famous and worthy Divines of the reformed Churches
beyond the Seas in their public books and letters, accounting him a Modern
Father, and choice Pillar of Gods Church; yea, and by all Protestants
acknowledged as an Impugner of the Synagogue of Rome for the space of almost
40. years. All which injurious and uncharitable dealing notwithstanding, this
Libell might have been contemned and passed over (which is the best charm for
such spirits) had it been a single paper, and not as a plague spread by many
infectious copies. The case thus considered, it was thought fit by some one or
other, to whom the Reputation of that R. Bishop ought to be dear and tender,
and unto whom the falsities of those imputations are well enough discovered and
known, to undertake this present Vindication in his behalf, thereby both to
prevent the prejudice of them who have not yet tasted of that venomous
Calumny, and also as by an Antidote, to remove it from the hearts of such as
have peradventure sucked any dram thereof.

Now that the Reader may the better have notice of those his false accusations,
it is most necessary we first take a survey of the platform, whereon he has
planted his sixth Canon (as he terms it) to batter down the Bishops, and (of
them) chiefly the Prelate of Durham, which is this.

Libell. The very nature of their Office is to thirst after the blood of Gods
Saints. Apoc. 2. 13. where Antipas my faithful Martyr is slain, there is
Satan's throne.

Answer. Very learnedly forsooth. Was Antipas slain by the Angel of that
Church? (whom the Libeller unawares has styled Bishop) the Spirit in the same
verse enformes us the contrary, commending the same Angel for holding fast his
name, and not denying his faith. Yea rather, was not Antipas himself (as some
write) Bishop of Pergamus, whom the Angel (there mentioned) succeeded, and
there was put to death by the command of Domitian that persecuting Emperor, if
antiquity be of any credit with you? For whose death, as also for the Doctrine
of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans taught among them, In Pergamus (says the
Spirit) is the seat of Antichrist. Your argument then stands thus; Antipas the
good Bishop and faithful Martyr of Christ was slain by the command of the
Tyrant Domitian. Ergo, It is the nature of Episcopacie to be bloody and
tyrannical. It will be an happiness to Bishops to have no better Accusers
then such, who cannot defame their calling, but with blaspheming, in a manner,
innumerable other Bishops, who have been the glorious Martyrs of Christ. But
let us try his first Battery.

Libell. P. 9.
Of this tyranny let one of themselves be witness (out of whose mouth the Lord
exacted this testimony, Prelate Vaugham in a Speech to Doctor Morton long ago
(now Prelate of Durham) confessed that the Persecution of those times were
worse then in Queen Mary's days, and gave reasons for it.

Answer. Mark how he rakes the channels of times, whereby to throw dirt upon
the living name of a dead man, and Saint of God, as if God had exacted out of
his mouth a saying which was never heard, and also the Reasons thereof, which
are so modest as they blush to speak. But how will not this first Canon
recoyle upon the Libeller himself? Did that good Bishop (as is here alleged)
grieve at the persecution of any of those times? then has this man overshot
his mark, when he said, that the Nature of Episcopacie is to thirst after the
blood of Gods Saints.

Libell. P. 9.
Now let Prelate Morton speak how they (meaning, persecutions) are increased
in his time, and by him: if he will not, it may be God may exact it of him
sometime with more horror of conscience then any of his Predecessors, because
he sins against the greater light and more warnings.

Answer. Or rather let any rational man judge whether that Spirit of
malignity, which is so predominant in this man, would (in all probability)
permit him to forbear clamouring to the High Court of Parliament against the
Bishop, if any such kind of tyrannous persecution could not colourably be
branded upon him: yet is the Bishop beholden to this Libeller for joining him
in this horrid crimination with the most Reverend, and thrice learned the Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, who for his integrity and innocence of life, till this
present scandalizing time, malice it self could never call into question, and
therefore let this Reviler expect that God will one day exact these impudent
calumniations of him with more horror of conscience (they are his own words)
then of any other, because he knowing him (whom all good men do honor and
esteem) sins against greater light, and more warnings. But since he more then
once retrives this objection, P. 9.
and flies it home with more eagerness P. 24. 25.
afterward, it shall be referred to a further consideration; and in the mean
time his next Crimination is to be examined.

Libell. The Bishop said, that if Popery came into England again, the Puritans
were the cause of it, P. 19.
even as Tenterton steeple is the cause of Goodwine sands.

Answer. So he, wittily you see; but yet wilily withal, by dissembling the
full expression and discourse of the Bishop, which was this; That Schism being
a breach of the Church-fence, if it be done by those who are guilty thereof, it
would be easy for a wild Boar out of the Popes Forest to enter and depopulate
the Church; for what is domestical dissension else but as a Trojane horse
importing ruin wheresoever it is placed? However, it is to be wished that the
same conjecture may never prove Prophetical! But this Canoneere, that he may
hit home, desires to give instances of his charge.

Libell. P. 21.
Thomas of Duresme assumeth to himself the highest style of an Earl in his
writings.

Answer. False, for none shall ever be able to show or produce any such style
under his Lordships handwriting, or in his works.

Libell. P. 24.
So as in one County of Northumberland and town of New Castle in above 72. or
more Parishes, besides Chapels, whereof diverse Livings of 2, 3, and 400. li.
per Ann. We are credibly informed, there is scarce a Minister left that is not a
Popish Innovatour, or not Popish, and Armintan, or that makes conscience of
Preaching.

Answer. And why may not your information fail you herein, being a mere
(...)? It will be granted that in Northumberland there are four or five
Livings in Church-mens hands of 200. per Ann. or thereabouts, There are but 3.
Ministers collated into Livings in that County by the said Bishop, all which
are painful and orthodox men.
all the rest being of much meaner value, even to 4. li. or 5. li. per Ann. The
former and best of these are supplied by learned and able Preachers, neither
accounted Arminians, nor Popishly addicted; and the mean provision for the
later, being either stipendaries of Impropriations, or poor Vicarages in
several Lay-Patrons gifts, is too true a cause of the want of Preaching in
those places, and the just reason why some of the Ministers are constrained to
live otherwise then men in that holy calling ought to do: For the redress of
which, it is well known to the best of the Country that his Lordship has not
only placed and maintained several Lecturers out of his own purse in some
needful places in that County, but also had given order for that end and
purpose to prefer a Petition to the last High Court of Parliament for a
redress herein. Having thus visited Northumberland with the same false gallop
he passes into the County Palatine of Durham.

Libell. That soil can bear no sound preaching, P. 24. 25.
etc. Preachers, no Plants for his Palatinate: but if you will talk of fat
Parsons and Parsonages, most of such Livings have been lately supplied by his
kinsmen, and other his friends -- Popish Arminian Mountebankes, profane antique
fellows.

Answer. What? No sound preaching and Preachers in the County Palatine of
Durham? you mean of your own garb, (for that is your phrase) otherwise you must
be let know (to your blush, if you be not past it) that there is no County of
England (of so small an extent) which has so many able and sound Preachers,
and these also who make a conscience of the faithful discharge of their duties
in preaching, as that County Palatine has. And lastly in the meanest living
within his Diocese there should be want of instruction to the people, he has
from time to time taken a strict course care that there should be due and
constant Catechizing of the youth in each Parish, to which end, at his own
charge, he has continually supplied them with many thousands of Catechismes on
purpose printed for that end. But grant that, of that number of Preachers,
there be some such as you repute Arminians, must other men's crimes be entitled
upon the Bishop, especially since himself has preferred but a few, and those
such (whether Kinsmen or other) as both for life and sound Doctrine are able to
abides test, and stand in comparison (not to boast) with any of the Plants he
talks off?

Libell. P. 25.
For oppression and Enclosures his poor Palatines may say, that their case is
little better then the poor Irish Crammacrees.

Answer. Had this been true, no doubt his Lordship had heard of it ere this,
there being never better opportunities of relieving those who are oppressed,
then at this time. But perhaps by Enclosures oppressed; how so? when most
commonly such are granted upon the earnest suit and petition of the several
Towneships, or of those who are principally interested in the same. And were
this Intelligencer an Inhabitant of that County, he could not but confess (did
not his malady blind him) that many thousands of Acres might there be improved,
to the great benefit of the County, and Commonwealth, which now lies waste and
unpeopled. In this his Circuition he next viewes the Cathedral Church in this
manner.

Libell. P. 25.
For Superstition let his Cathedral and Sea of Durham witness and be visited,
it will be found that Thomas Duresme himself is so zealous of Altar-worship,
and such fopperies, as before he miss of his Devotion, he will duck to a Tomb
instead of an Altar. It Is good to be sure.

Answer. Here is petulancy enough, whereas a conscionable man would have
ingenuously confessed contrarily, as to have said, the Bishop of Duresme did
not only argue against all Altar-worship, by condemning it as a brutish
Absurdity for a reasonable man to give worship to an unreasonable creature,
which cannot be capable thereof, but also against the very name of Altar, in
the propriety of the sense, lest it might infer a proper Sacrifice, whose
matter should be either Christ's natural Body, which were Popish, or else the
substance of Bread, As is confessed by Bellat. and other Romanists, because the
Jewish Sacrifices had life, the Bread and Wine none.
which were worse then Jewish. This he ought to have acknowledged, because if
he have read the Bishops works, he could not be ign^rant thereof: where also
he might have learned to distinguish between Superstition, Altar-worship, with
such fopperies, and the zealous Devotion of a religious and discreet
Protestant. But to look for such fair dealing at this man's hands were to
gather figs of thistles. As for his scoff about ducking to a Tomb, he might
as well have said unto a Tub, and had been altogether as sure.

Libell. P. 25.
For countenancing Popery, and cherishing Papists, his Chancellor, Archdeacon,
and Officials in riding their Circuits made these their chief familiars: but
for Puritanes, they toss and tumble them in their Courts, till they be wearied
out of their Callings and Country too.

Answer. If it were granted that in their Visitations (which he calls Circuits)
Papists resorted unto them, did not Probats of Wills, granting of
Administrations, and Churchwardens Presentiments cause that resort, rather then
familiarity? and at such times, it is well enough known, they found no other
countenancing or favor then the Laws permitted, who had been more roundly,
and severely dealt withal for their Popery, but that by reason of their
compositions they were too much exempted from the Ordinaries Jurisdiction. And
so far were they from being cherished, as that they continually complained of
their hard usage and extremities to them that were in higher authority. As for
tumbling and tossing of Puritanes in their Courts, it will not be denied but
some of them have been presented for some Irregularities; but that they were
wearied out of their Callings and Country by their Ecclesiastical censures,
or other proceedings in their Courts, they utterly deny, and challenge the
Accuser to make good this taxation. But what is this unto the Bishop, who never
heard of any complaint hereof?

Libell. P. 25.
Tho. Duresme himself threatening that he would rid the land of them; and till
then, said he, it will never be at rest.

Answer. Certainly this man must conjure up some Spirits from hell, where he
resides, who is the Father of lies, to testify this crimination, for the
Bish^p avoweth that no mortal creature ever heard any such words out of his
mouth. And for a further belief of this, if any such have been driven from
New Castle, (wherein he instanceth in particular) it had been good, that he
had first consulted with the parties so troubled, and that they should have
been the Accusers; who know right well (by reason of the jelousies of the
time) by whom they were removed and displaced.

Libell. P. 26.
The said Tho. Duresme amongst his Palatine Soldiers most Papists in their
late Episcopal broils, was observed to have in his Coach with him one of the
most dangerous Papists in the North, and fit to be one of his Counsel of war
in his Regality, and in that Episcopal Quarrel with the Scots, which being
publicly taken notice of was very offensive to many, and scandalous to his
Majesty's government, and to his pretended divine Authority, to see him so
accompanied, I know not what he can say to this.

Answer. But such as were employed in any office of nearenesse or attendance on
the Bishop can say, that in those times (he points at) the Bishop used all care
and diligence that no Popish Recusant should be so much as a common Soldier in
the Regiment; which was raised not for any Episcopal Quarrel, but for the
necessary defense of the Country. And as touching that dangerous Papist, who
was observed to be with him in his Coach, as fit to be one of his Counsel of
war in his Regality, there can be no such called to mind, it being very
unlikely that any such had to do in a business of that nature, and especially
at that time; except he should mean one, Sr. E. R.
a tall man indeed, but no great Soldier, a stranger to the Bishop, saving
that being lately censured at Durham in the Commission for Causes
Ecclesiastical, for private Popish Christnings and Marriages, he became known
unto him, and at that very time had taken a sudden journey to Awkland for a
mitigation of that censure, wherein he no ways prevailed. Yet the Bishop being
in the morning bound for Durham, took him into the Coach, not in a civil
respect only, but to the same purpose as Philip was in the Coach with the
Eunuch, to confer with him for soules-sake, as his ordinary practice has
been, whenever he met with any such Recusants. Which surely ought not to
scandalize any that are Christianly affected. Yet let no man wonder at this
reproach, when in the very next line he may find him charging our Brethren the
Lutheran Ministers in Germany with joviality and drunkenness, (none excepted)
three by disgracefully blasting a great part of the reformed Church to gratify
our Adversaries the Papists; for excuse whereof the Chameleon (he there names)
can afford him no color. Again he revisits the Bishops Diocese, whither he
must be followed, who may P. 24. We are credibly informed, etc.
seem to take on trust what he writes, as appears by his disjoynted passages
and Excursions.

Libell. P. 26.
He also nourishes in his Diocese a company of Popish Arminian Ministers of W.
Cant's correspondencie, by whom (as by like in other parts of the Land) he has
had constant Intelligence in all matters, and of Persons and Families that
favor our Religion.

Answer. What again? Popish Arminian Ministers nourished by Bishop Morton; who
could not but have feared his censure, whose great jealousy is known in that
behalf. As for his reasoning that some one Arminian or other bad
correspondencie with W. of Cant. Ergo, the Bishop of Durham did favor the said
Arminians. Could the man so suddenly forget the absurdity he talked of by an
inference from Tenterton steeple to Goodwine-sands? P. 19.
The crimination following proceeds from the said vein.

Libell. P. 26.
He also connives at dangerous meeting of the stirring Papists, their Baptismes
and night-Burials with Tapers and Torches, and Bells ringing, but without the
use of the service book, and against their own Canons, which serve only
against Puritanes, and must not be discharged against Papists.

Answer. These dangerous meetings of most stirring Papists, not only the
Bishop, but all other his Majesty's Officers in that County should and ought to
have suppressed, if any such as this Intelligencer had discovered and made it
known unto them. As for Popish Baptismes, those who came to his Cognizance
received their due punishment one with another, as has in part been formerly
related. And as for their Burials, if the Bishop do suffer our Common-service
to be used, and Bells to be rung at Popish Fu^erals, then behold he is devoted
for a Conniver at Papists: but if he suffer not the Service to be then used
(which is his constant practice) then is he taxed for a Transgressor of the
Canons. Is not this kindly done? But to the point, to allow the Papists the use
of our Church Service at their Burials, were it not, as on the Protestant part
scandalous, so in the estimate of Papists themselves must it not be utterly
ridiculous, to wit, that that Service should be read at their Funerals, after
they are dead, which themselves despised, and would not be present at whilst
they were alive? He proceeds to another discovery.

Libell. P. 26.
That the chief Towns in the Bishops Diocese are of late become dens of
Papists, and places of resort to their meetings and Mossings.

Answer. It may be that some chief Towns there have been dens, if he call
them so, as being hidden from the Bishops knowledge, otherwise such has been
his strict care and command to his Officers, that such suspected Persons have
been sometimes found out, and without any connivence been proceeded with
according to Law. And it were strange indeed, that he, who since his coming to
Durham has written two books against the Doctrine of the Romish Mass, should
be remiss in suppressing and abolishing of that Idol? Which is the less
credible, because there was never more preaching in that Diocese, then since
his coming, and that (God be blessed) with some happy success, both in
preserving those that were within the Net, and gaining of others who have not
wilfully played the deaf Adder in stopping their ears, especially he having
not the gift of Miracles to make the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.
Not to say, that the increase of Popery had been now less, then in former
times, if his power had been greater. However, did this man never learn that
Paul can but plant, and Apollos but water, and that it is only God who can
give the enrease? all outward means are nothing without Gods inward grace. Or
has he not heard of them who complained to their Master, that they had
labored all night, and caught nothing? Wherefore it is gross Sophistry thus
to argue a Non Causa. From the Mass it self, he comes to the massing gear.

Libell. P. 26.
And the Papists have their traffic and trade in their Books and Beads, and
Romish Merchandise.

Answer. It is confessed that some have been bold that way, but not without
their damage and loss, as often as they could be met with, whether Scots or
English; and notwithstanding their impunities, and the greatest means, by
which they wrought, they have been compelled to undergo the Law at the
general Assizes, and receive the punishment which was due to such Merchants.

But he having now run himself off his legs, at length he sits him down
to breath out this conclusion.

Libell. P. 26.
All which considered, he may be said to have given the lie to all his former
works and writings against the Papists, so that it may be verified of him,
that he is the greatest Papist friend that ever came in Durham since our
Reformation.

Answer. Indeed all these just defenses well considered, this Pamphleter may
be said to have given the lie to all his former accusations against the
Prelate of Durham, they are so utterly false, except he mean by friendship,
that which is the necessary Duty of a Bishop, to tender the Papists in the
better part, in which respect he professes himself their best friend,
according as he is taught by that of the Apostle S. Jude, Have compassion of
some pulling them out of the fire. For have not we Christians learned so to
love the Persons of men, as that we hate their Idolatrous Profession? Did some
of them come to his Table? they were welcome; Came they to confer? twice
welcome; Came they after with him to the Lords Table? then did he (as do the
Angels) rejoice, and congratulate their Conversion from Babylon unto Sion. But
to stir no more this filthy puddle of Calumniation. All the answer the Bishop
was willing (upon sight of this Pamphlet) to return unto the Author of it, was
(in his own words) this: I cannot let him pass without some revenge, yet not
that which Michael gave to the father of Libellers, The Lord reprove thee, but
that which every Christian is taught by the example of Christ, God forgive thee.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 1 line 6, for Episcopacie read Hierarchy, page 6 l. 17, for Penterton
steeple, read Tenterton steeple, page 7 l. 16 for (...), ad (...),


