THE NECESSITY OF Christian Subjection. Demonstrated, and proved by the
Doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles; the practice of Primitive Christians, the
rules of Religion, cases of conscience, and consent of latter Orthodox Divines,
That the power of the King is not of Humane, but of Divine Right; and that God
only is the efficient cause thereof. Whereunto is added, An Appendix of all
the chief Objections that malice it self could lay upon His Majesty, with a
full Answer to every particular Objection. Also a Tract entitled, CHRISTVS
DEI, Wherein is proved that our Sovereign Lord the King is not only Major
singulis, but Major universis.

1 PET. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King. OXFORD Printed in the Year. 1643.

THE NECESSITY OF CHRISTIAN SUBJECTION.
ROMANS 13. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake.
WOuld men but meditate, or were they persuaded of the truth of the Prophets
speech, ( 1 Samuel 15. 22. 23.) Behold to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to
hearken then the fat of Rams; for Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. (Were they I say persuaded of this
truth) there would not be so little hearkening to the commands of Authority,
nor so little obeying what they hear; nor would men run so fiercely into the
fearful sin of Rebellion, only to maintain and justify their own
sacrifice of fools; Eccle. 5. 1. Olympio. dor. in loc.
which is indeed no other then their foolish imaginations have devised, and
their vain thoughts have set up as an Idol to themselves. Or were we not
fallen into those last and worst of times prophesied of by the Apostle ( 2 Timothy
3. 1. 5.) wherein men that make show of godliness (yea many that most show of
it) have only a show, but deny the power of it, being proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents: Proud indeed, His Majesty's large Declaration, p. 12.
13. 225. 256. 257. etc.
when they dare exalt themselves against Gods Vicegerent; Cursed speakers, when
they dare libell and slander Prince and Prelate; Disobedient to Parents,
Natural, Ecclesiastical, and Political; were we not I say fallen into such
times, I should not need to urge the Apostles inference, which the unseasonable
sins of these seasons make so seasonable: [Wherefore ye must needs be subject,
etc.]

In which words, Infert conclusionem Principaliter intentam, Aq. wherein,
Concludit Paraenesi^ subjectionis ejusque necessitatem, Roll. showing that we
must obey the Magistrate, not only for fear of punishment, but much more
because that (although the Magistrate has no power over the conscience of man,
yet seeing he is Gods Minister) he cannot be resisted by any good conscience,
Gen: Notes, ex Calv, and Bez. In qua duas potissimum urget causas ob quas
potestatibus necessario obediendum, Marlor. First their power to cause fear of
wrath. Secondly our conscience to obey Gods ordinance; In respect of both which
we must be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake:

Wherein I shall consider these 5 particulars.

1. The Illation, [Wherefore,] 2. The Duty, [subject] 3. The Necessity, [must
needs] 4. The persons obliged, [Ye] 5. The Reasons persuading, and those
twofold: 1. From fear of wrath, although [not only for wrath.] 2. For
conscience, [But also for conscience sake.]

1. The Illation and inference in this word [Wherefore] being a conclusion,
Aquin. Lyr. Calv. Bez. Marlor. Rolloc.
wherein Quod initio praeceperat de praestanda Magistratibus obedientia, nunc
per modum collectionis repetit, sed cum expositione: Calv. It will be
convenient for conceiving fully the Apostles meaning, and the force of his
Arguments, and the drift of this conclusion, that we reflict back as far as
the beginning of this Chapter; where (besides those two mentioned, verse. 4. Of
1. Terror to the ill, which I reserve to be handled under that of wrath. 2. And
Reward to the good, which I refer to that of conscience.) We shall find
four Reasons premised to enforce this conclusion, [Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, etc.]

1. First, (...), ( v. 1.) for there is no power but of God. How much soever we
may perhaps dislike them, and how ill soever they may sometimes use their
power; As Pilate did his, Jo. 19. 20. Matthew. 27. 26.
in crucifying him whom he should have loosed, and loosing him whom he should
have crucified; yet out Savior himself acknowledges, that even this abused
power was (...), given him from above; ( Ioh. 19. 11.) For misery comes not out
of the dust, neither does affliction spring out of the earth: ( Job. 5. 6.) But
as Omne bonum desuper, August. de Civitat. Dei, l. 5. c. 21.
Every good gift is from above, ( Iam. 1. 17.) so is there no evil in the City,
and the Lord has not done it, ( Amos 3. 6.) (i. e.) Ma^um poena, no evil of
punishment.

Per me Reges regnant, By me Kings reign, is the general ground of the
Charter, both of good and evil Princes, and Nobles, and all the Judges of the
earth, ( Prove. 8. 15. 16.) He it is that raises unto David a righteous branch,
a King who shall reign and prosper, Jer. 33. 5, 6.
and execute judgment and justice upon the earth, in whose days the people
shall be safe; Hos. 13. 11.
And he it is that gives an evil King in his anger, and takes a good King away
in his wrath* Qui regnare facit hominem hypocritam propter peccata populi.
(Job. 34. 30.) vulg. So that whether they be good or evil, we must be subject,
sithence there is no power but of God; (...), lest we will be found fighters
against God, Act. 5. 39.
whose power none is able to resist, whether it be for protecting or for
punishing; [Wherefore we must needs be subject.]

2. Secondly, Citat.
they are not only not without God, (...), and so of him permissive; but they
are the ordinance of God himself, and so of him positive, (...), ordained of
God ( v. 1.) whereupon they worthily use in their style, not only Permissione
Divina, or Providentia Divina, although those be good titles taken in a good
sense; (yet they imply some intermediate means betwixt God and those who bear
them:) But Princes write Dei Gratia: for by the Grace of God (no favor of man)
they are what they are; Gal. 1. 1.
so that I may say of their government, as Saint Paul said of his Apostleship,
It is not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, For,
Cujus jussu homines nascuntar, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur; apti his,
qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regantur. (Iren. lib 5. cap. 24.) Which may be
demonstratively evidenced, if we shall take a survey of the Series, and
succession of Governors, from the first man that was placed upon the earth,
whom we find created with an intention to make him Gods Vicegerent; ( Genesis 1.
26.) and at his very first setting foot upon the earth, actually invested with
Monarchical government; ( ver. 27. 28.) That government being indeed the
special form, Boet. de unit. and uno.
whereby he could resemble the image of God who is in Heaven, as he made him
upon Earth the sole unequalled Monarch, from whom alone Quicquid est ab uno
est, Apoc. 4. 11.
and est id quod est; and therefore he is worthy to receive glory, Romans 11. 36.
and honor, and power, for of him, and for him, and through him are all things.

Nor was it his intention that he should only govern the Beasts already
created, But also he made him to be the Monarch, And confirmed his Authority
lure naturali, Potestate patria, over all mankind, Theophil. l. 2.
which should be propagated after him; who as the Angels and those of Heaven,
had their beginning from God by Creation, Chrysostom.
and therefore were subject to him; so all the Armies upon earth were to deduce
their offspring from that one Adam by Generation, Ho^. 34. in 1 Cor.
and so to owe to him subjection; whereas had not God intended to have
Principality, depended only upon his own institution and not upon the
subordinate Nobles* nor the multitudes of popular election, It had been as
easy for him, to have Created a Company, a Colony, a Country, a Nation, a
World of men upon earth, with his own faciamus, As it was, and as he did, so
many Legions of Angels in the Heavens; that so out of those choice Colonies
themselves might have made choice of a Commander. But he, who found the Heavens
not free from mutiny, when he produced a multitude of inhabitants there,
although all were his offspring, Apoc. 12.
would not give the least color to contention, for superiority or equality,
nor pretext of disobedience against his Monarch upon earth, whilst he suffers
no Subject to be set by him but such as owed the Subjection and duty of a Son
in Descending from him; Thereby teaching all posterity, how the power of a
Prince over his Subjects is, and ought to be acknowledged, as natural, as the
power of a Father is over his son; yea and also thereby signifying, Theophil.
Chrysostom. ubi supr.
That as Naturally there can be but one Father of one Child, So Politiquely
there should be but one Prince and Monarch of one People and Nation. Whereupon
God did not create two men (no nor Eve, but out of the rib of Adam) that so
from them all others should issue, and they might rule promiscuously, or that
each of them should rule such as would make choice to be under his government,
rather then under the others, Gen 10. 9, 10.
(although perhaps propagated of the other) Nor that the mightiest Hunter, he,
that could get most, should govern most, as afterward it fell out in the
degenerating days of Nymrod. But he created only one, thereby to intimate,
How far Monarchical government is to be preferred before any other, Dan.
Aphoris. Polit. p. 402. 24.
Aristocraticall, Democraticall, Oligarchicall, or the like. This and this
alone of man on earth, being an Idea or resemblance of Gods government in
Heaven; and we pray daily, that his will may be done on earth as it is in
heaven; And how can it be so, if we reject or resist that form of government?
Marth. 6. 10.
As also, thereby he implies, that all other lormes of government are against
the course of nature, different from the pattern of heaven, diverse from
divine institution, and indeed punishments rather then blessed governments, If
they be compared with Monarchy; Which made the wisest of Kings affirm, that
many Princes are imposed for the transgression of a Land, But that Realm only
indures long which is ruled by one man of understanding and knowledge ( Prove.
28. 2.) Which Doctrine seems to be squared to Gods own practice throughout
all ages, whenever he designed any government over his people the Jews (after
they were taken notice of for his peculiar) although for a long time he
retained the royal supreme Title of King to himself, 1 Samuel 8.
(during which time, he often times immediately delivered his Regal mandates by
Urim, Thummim, Visions, Oracles, Prophesies. etc.) Yet he appointed one
Supreme Vicegerent over them, and not many (for as for the Sanhedrim they were
but as Moses or the High priests Privy Council, Judge. c. 10 c. 15.
Or as delegated Judges because of the multiplicity of businesses) One I say
and not many, witness Moses 40. years betwixt Egypt and Canaan, Joshua near
60. years settling them in Canaan, after them Judah, after him Othniell, then
Ehud, then Shamgar, then Deborah, then Gideon, then Tolah, then Iair, then
Iephthah, then Sampson, But never above one at one time. And how lamentable the
times were when there was not one Supreme, but the multitude took power into
their own hands; Judge. 19, and 20.
that hideous story of the licentious Danites, and the ravished Levites wife,
and the revenge of one upon another may serve to astonish all posterity, and
affright them from affecting Anarchie; yea and when God, afterthat he had in
mercy looked upon their misery, sent them new Judges, Hely, and Samuel
successively, and they not therewith satisfied would have a King like other
Nations, he does not set several Kings over them, as Joshua found 31. over the
land at their entrance, 2 Samuel 8. 5
but he appointed them only one King ( 1 Samuel 8. 22.) As being safest for his
people, Josh. 12.
best resembling his government and most agreeable to his Ordinance; Wherefore
we must needs be subject to such form of government, for it is the Ordinance
of God.

Oh! how much therefore are those too blame who go about to alter this form
of government, and to introduce a new deformed device of their own ambitious
invention, wherein they are not agreed, whether they shall be styled, 1. The
States of England as some of their Preachers (forgetting the King in their
prayers) have sycophantically phrased them; 2. Or whether they shall be
entitled, The perpetual Senate, or Assessours of the kingdom, as some have
endeavored to derive their style, as the Impresse of a Republic; 3. Or
whether they shall be dignified with the Princely Attribute of Gentlemen of the
Crown of England (to which should be annexed the power of electing their King
although hereditary) as some of themselves have ambitiously expressed their
affectation in assimilation to that of Poland; only to the end that themselves
might be sharers in Supremacy. A Government which admitting a Monarch whom yet
they dare not deny, is neither Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, nor
Oligarchie; and Anarchie, I dare say, they would not have it entitled; A
Government which if Aristotle himself were to sit in Council at their close
Committees, he could not yet resolve what to call it, a government never
grounded on the Ordinance of God, nor practiced in any established
Commonweal. And what fearful effects must necessarily follow it, Besides,
that it is to conjecture when men leave the fountains of the living waters,
and take themselves to Cisterns of their own digging. It may also be apparent
to any indifferent understanding who reads or hears the story of Hen. 3. when
there was an attempt of 24. Assessours and a traiterous appointing Les Douze
Piers, Speed H. 3. p. 635. ex. Mat. West monast. Martin. H. 3. p. 66, 67, 70,
71, 73, 74.
far short of this confused insolency, what Robberies, what Rapes, what
Murders, what Burglaries, what Extortions, what Exactions followed, (every one
shrouding himself under that Assessour, which he followed, yea and every one of
the Assessours after a little time, bandying himself against another, either
for their own faction, or favoring of their followers) is rather to be
imagined then reported, yet those times too really felt it, and all must
necessarily taste the like bitter fruit, who will plant and nurse the tree of
popular faction. Upon the Lords Prayer.


And alas how foolish and fond of flitting (to use King James his Scottish
Proverb in another case) are those people which will be bewitched to follow
these many-headed Hydra's, before the voice of the Lamb, and never consider
that old Adage Citius impletur unus saeceus, quam plures? has there been so
much pains bestowed in vain, if it be in vain, (As the Apostle speaks in
another case) to bring this Kingdom from an Heptarchie to a Monarchy; that
now one part of this Island should be turned from a Monarchiy to a Roman
Decemvirate, a Venetian Senate, a Low Country State, nay to the government
without a name, God forbid: Vi^^^ita fortior, Mat. 12. 25.
but a Kingdom divided cannot stand. I beseech you therefore brethren mark
them diligently which cause divisions amongst you, and avoid them: ( Romans 16.
17.) for those who at first cause divisions, in Opinion, in Doctrine, and in
Religion, will at the length attempt divisions in Government, in Policy, in
Countries and Kingdoms. Let us in the fear of God consider with our selves,
That if there be no power but of God, even the punishing and persecuting power,
and if we must be subject even to that, lest we should fight against God, Oh
howmuch more then, Esaias 49. 23.
where Kings are nursing fathers, ought we to show our subjection with all
readiness and cheerfulness? If Saint Paul enforce obedience to the Prince
with so many forcible arguments, when that Tyrant Nero (who devoured Christians
like a Lion) reigned and raged. Oh how should we urge and press this point,
when a Constantine, a Patron of the Church, and pattern of piety is our
president in religious exercises, 2 Timothy 4. 17.
as well as president over us with righteous government: for certainly, [They
that resist, Resist the Ordinance of God] which is the third reason whereupon
our Apostle grounds this inference, Wherefore ye must needs be subject.

For as in his Church Christ gave some to be Apostles, some Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
and for the work of the Ministry: 1 Pet. 2. 13.
so God in the Commonweal appointed some to be Kings (...), most eminent and
excellent above all other, some to be Governors under them (...), ver. 14.
sent by Commission from them: Amongst whom some are Nobles, some Judges, (
Prove. 8. 16.) some Priests (for those howsoever some conceive of them, were not
incapable of government in the Commonweal: Exodus 40. 15.
) yea, some things there are which could not be decided without them. ( Deu.
17. 8. to 12.) some are Governors of Cities, Heb. 7. 8.
( Deuteronomy. 21, 3, 4.) some Rulers of thousands, some of hundreds, some of tens, (
Exodus 18. 25, 26.) and some live merely in subjection, Polit. l. 1. c. 3. 4.
as the inferior poor servant, etc. whom Aristotle that Linceus of Nature
affirms, Nature it self framed only to that use; and every man bound in
conscience by the law of God to abide in that state wherein God has placed
him, and to be contented, with his Vocation, Degree, and calling, ( 1 Cor. 7.
20, 21, 22.) unless he will be as guilty of confusion in the body politic,
or Ecclesiastical, as the members should be in the body natural, if one
should strive to usurp another place; 1 Cor. 14. 12. to 31.
The foot the head, the ear the eye; and unless we will be as guilty in
resisting the ordinance of God, as they should be of deferming the act of his
Creation.

Submit your selves therefore to all manner of ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. to 17.
(...), Mat. 20. 14.
Take that which is thine own and go thy way. If thou be a Ruler, do it
with diligence: If an Officer, wait on thy office: If a Teacher, attend to
teaching: If but a servant, do that without slothfulness, ( Romans 12. 7. to
11.) If a Judge, be learned, ( Psalm. 2. 11.) yea, and upright too, ( Psalm. 58.
1.) Deuteronomy. 17. 9. to 13.
If thou art to be judged, be obedient, or else thou must be cut off, both for
thine own sin, and also for others example. Nor must thou be obedient only
when Superiors be good and courteous, but even when they are cruel and
froward: Nor only when they punish thee justly for ill doing, but even when
thou suffer wrongfully, yet must thou endure for conscience sake, ( 1 Pet.
2. 18, 19.) which the Apostle confirms by the example of our Savior Christ,
to ( verse. 25.) who when he suffered resisted not, no nor so much as threatened,
( verse. 23.) although he could have had more then twelve Legions of Angels, (
Mat. 26. 53.) teaching us, that we must not resist Authority, although unjustly
oppressing: (muchlesse justly ruling although punishing.) First, Neither
offending it, ( Mat. 17. 27) Secondly nor defending our selves against it, (
Mat. 26. 52.) what specious pretenses soever we may make for it. For who might
have pretended fairer in that kind, than the Primitive Christians against
Idolatrous Persecutors? Ambros.
yet they profess, that Arma sunt preces and lachrimae; so that nemo nostrum
quando apprehenditur reluctatur; nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestrum,
quamvis nimius, and copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur: Cyprian. Who might
have pretended more rightly the defense of himself, of his fellow Disciples, of
his Master, yea of Religion, that Saint Peter? Yet hear our Saviors mandate
and his menace, his mandate: [Put up thy sword into thy sheath:] His menace,
[For all they which strike with the sword, shall perish with the sword.] [All]
whosoever Clergy or Laity, strike against authority, or without the license of
it, in what case soever without exception of 1, Aug. l. 22. cont.
Se defendendo, or a Maintenance of a Covenant, Faust, c. 75.
or 3. Defense of Religion. And what manner of Christians those men are who
dare resist their rightful, righteous, religious Sovereigne: Or what manner of
Religion that is, which they pretend gives privilege to such rebellious
practices, I leave to every good Christian to consider: Only give me leave to
tell you, sure I am, it is not such as was known to Primitive Christians: It is
not such as was allowed by our Savior to his Apostles, nor is it such as the
Apostles taught the People of their times: His Majesty's Proclamation and
Declaration, etc.
for they without any cloak, Sub moderamine inculpatae tutelae (which indeed
never can be by Arms but only by Laws) Howsoever Pontificians and
Consistorians conspire: as Buchanan labored to beguile his Nation, and some of
our Contrymen have beguiled themselves, and Jesuits would have beguiled the
whole world, and without any distinction so offensive and defensive
disobedience, the Apostles taught the Church of God, That he which resists, (be
it how it will) resists the Ordinance of God.

[And he that resists purchases to himself damnation.] which is [Wherefore,
etc.] and bears a threefold reading, 1. Iudicium, Judgment: Tremel. 2.
Condemnationem, Condemnation: Beza and Tompson. 3. Damnationem, Damnation:
Vulgar and Kings Bible. All which are but the Graduations of the punishments,
implied by the original, (...); for not only (...), ( Matthew. 5. 22.) they
shall be in danger of the judgment of censure and condemnation of the
censorious: Although this be a punishment which an ingenious spirit would
willingly escape, which made David pray, ( Psalm. 39. 8.) Let me not be made a
rebuke unto the foolish, whilst they censure, reprove, condemn my actions in
their Assemblies, much more a man that is shot through the head with
popularity, as His Majesty says of the then revolted Rolloc, Larger
Declaration. p. 25. 405.
as indeed all factious persons in Church and Commonweal are, especially if
they aspire by, or adhere to the popular faction; For such, like the Camelion,
which turns to all colors save white, lives only by the air, and delights
rather in breath then other, Ac si mallet coctam quam crudam; so they who apply
to popularity, and suit themselves to all company, saving the innocent, can
live no longer (at least not with delight) then they suck the breath of
applause from the multitude. Ps. 69. 12.
But behold, not only those which sit in the gate (the Rulers) speak against
such disobedient persons, but if they escape the songs of the Drunkards (who
perhaps may whoop on their sides) yet shall very babes and sucklings chant
their disloyalty, and the Vipers tongue shall slay them, ( Job. 20. 16.) Thus
an evil condemnation shall fall upon them, Prove. 10. 7
whereby their name shall rot, and their memorial shall stinck, even (...),
under the censure of those who are as censorious as themselves: Nor only so,
but (...), They shall receive Judgment, and Condemnation: 1. Both Judgment
before the Tribunal of men, Ps. 41. 8.
where the sentence of guiltiness shall proceed against them; Ps. 109. 6.
and when sentence is given upon them, Ps. 1. 15.
they shall be condemned, for such ungodly persons shall not be able to stand
in Judgment, neither these sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. 2.
And also they shall receive Condemnation from the Justice of God, who stands in
the Congregation of Princes, Ps. 82. 1.
(as to survey, so to assist) and is a Judge amongst the earthly gods, yea even
of those whom they sometimes cannot come by to judge according to their
deservings; Verse. 8.
who when he shall arise (as he will arise) to judge the earth, he will
recompense such wicked persons after their deservings; he will reprove them,
Ps. 50. 21.
and set before them, even in Order, the things that they have done: As first
their Pride, next their Covetousness to maintain it, after that their
rebellion to declare it, then their Hypocrisy and counterfeiting Religion to
veil and defend it, Ps. 55. 16.
and at the length he will bring Death hastily upon them, and they shall go
down into hell, sithence such wickedness is in their dwellings and amongst
them; and is not this a fearful Judgment and Condemnation? so fearful, as
what can be conceived to be added? And yet behold, 3. (...), Romans 14. 23.
(...), the Judgment, Condemnation, yea, Damnation of an accusing conscience
shall consummate their misery, even such as drove Judas to be his own
Executioner upon earth; Matthew. 27. 3, 4, 5.
This shall do continual execution of Gods just judgment upon them in hell,
by that worm that never dies, and that fire which never shall be quenched,
where their rebellious carcasses shall be an abhorring to all flesh; Esaias 66.
24.
wherefore for the escaping such fearful. 1. Judgment. 2. Condemnation, 3.
Damnation here, and hereafter from God and man; We must needs be subject.

2. [Subject] Which is the duty; That as the Devil overcame man by his
disobedience to God, Matthew. 20. 27, 28.
so man may return to God and overcome the Devil, by obedience to man for the
Lords sake. Christianity is a School of Humnity, Philip. 2. 4 Verse. 5. to 9.
and we must not look every one upon our own excellencies, but upon other men's;
having the same mind in us, Romans 12. 10.
which was in Christ Jesus, in giving (not in taking) honor, preferring one
before another, (...), humbling our selves as little children; Matthew. 18. 2.
As they submit to their Parents, so must we be subject to our Prince, for he
is the Person to whom principally the Apostle presses this subjection; as
Aquin. Dion. Carth. Bruno. and Claud. gloss it. The subjection to others being
for his sake, as the subjection to him is for the Lords sake; which that we may
perform aright, let us consider these three particulars:

1. Qualibus, To what manner of Princes we must be subject. 2. In quibus, In
what things we must be subject. 3. Quomodo, How we must express our
subjection.
1. Qualibus, To what manner of Princes we must be subject. As the Apostle
injoynes Servants concerning obedience to their Masters, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.
so say I to Subjects concerning their Sovereigns; Let as many as are under
the yoke count their Governors worthy of all honor, ( Sive fideles, sive
infideles, whether they be gentle, or whether they be cruel) that the name of
God and his Doctrine be not ill spoken of: 1. And if they be believing, let us
not despise them because they are faithful and beloved, and partakers of the
benefit, to wit redemption. 2. Or if they be unbelievers, let us not rebel,
nor resist them; because although, 1. Quidam illorum dantur ad timorem and
poenam, and increpationem, Some of them are sent merely for a terror and a
punishment. 2. Yea, Quidam ad illusionem and contumeliam, and superbiam; Some
of them set up themselves in pride, merely to contemn, and scorn, and scofte
at their Subjects, as the persecuting Emperors did, when they exposed the
Christians naked to fight with beasts and beastly Heathens. 3. As Well as Quidam
ad correctionem and utilitatem subjectorum, and conservationem Iustitiae; For a
fatherly reformation of offenders, a loveing protection of the obedient, and
the preservation of Justice for both: Yet we must consider and confess, that
Ad utilitatem Gentilium terrenum Regnum positum est a Deo, non a Diab^lo, qui
nunquam omnino quietus est; Imo qui nec ipsas quidem gentes vult in tranquill^
agere, ut timentes regnum humanum: Earthly Kingdoms are erected by God, not by
the Devil, who as he is never quiet himself, so would he not have the people
live in peace, (as appears by his late practices) which government is the
means to procure and preserve, preventing men from devouring those that are
more righteous then themselves: And for being like the fishes of the Sea, Hab.
1. 13. 14.
or the creeping things who have no Ruler over them: for, Per legum positiones
repercutiant multiplicem gentilium injustitiam, Kings and Princes by their Laws
restrain and bridle the fury and violence of our natural corruptions: yea,
and the worst of Princes is never worse then Quemadmodum populi digni sunt Dei
justo judicio in omnibus aliqualiter superveniente: Iren. l. 5. c. 24. such as
the people have provoked God to set to afflict them, whose just judgment
always interposeth it self in such weighty cases. Although sometimes we know
it not, oft-times we will not acknowledge it: which being so, may oblige every
one of us to be subject to all powers, of all qualities, conditions,
dispositions, tempers, religions, under whom the Lord has placed us: Sive 1.
Nutriciis, sive 2. Hypocritis, sive. 3. Haeroticis, sive 4. Tyrannis: Whether
they be noursing fathers, for whom we must praise God: or dissembling
Hypocrites, or obstinate Heretics, or bloody Tyrants, for all which we must
pray to God: Whatsoever Sanders, Allen, Stapleton, Parsons, Mariana,
Boucherius, Santarellus, etc. on the Romish part: And Knoxe, Buchanan, Gilbey,
Goodman, and Daneus, on the other extreme have formerly taught, Calderwood
has followed, and some too fiery spirits of late have seditiously and
scandalously put in practice, of whom I may say in the Apostles language, 1.
Tim. 6. 3, 4, 5.
If any man teach otherwise (then what I have affirmed) he consents not to
the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is
according to godliness: but is puffed up and knows nothing as he ought to
know, but doateth about questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy,
strife, railings, evil surmiseings, froward disputations of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness,
(howsoever they pretend godliness rather then gain) from such separate thy
self: For howsoever we must perform active obedience to such Princes only so
far as lawfully we may, Calv. Bez. Marl. Roloc. G^^^v. usque a^ara^, so long as
Cum Deo non comparabuntur, Scorpias.
they are not set in competition with God: Tertul. Yet we must perform passive
obedience and absolute subjection, Act. 4. 19.
suffering without resistance, being subject without rebellion, even if they
should command the most unjust superstitious, idolatrous, profane, or
irreligious things which can be imagined; yet I say we must not rebel, unless
we will renounce Christianity, Gloss. interlin.
but we must let this be Probatio subjectionis, the touchstone of our
subjection, even our patient and constant sufferings:

For, Tertul. ubi supr.
Quae passos Apostolos scimus manifesta est Doctrina, The truth of this
Doctrine is sealed by the Apostles sufferings, who endured of Heathen Princes,
and for not renouncing Christianity, Carceres, Vincula, Flagella, Saxa,
Gladios, Impetus Iudaeorum, Coetus Nationum, and Tribunorum Elogia, and Regum
auditeria, and Proconsulum Tribunalia, and Caesaris nomen interpretem non
habent: Imprisonment, Bonds, Stripes, Stoning, Wounds, Violence of the Jews,
Conventing before the Gentiles, Questioning in the Courts of Tribunes,
Examinations and Answers before Kings, Arraignments at the Tribunals of
Proconsuls, yea and could not find an Appeal to the Emperor, any protection
for their innocence; yet they not only submitted themselves, and possessed
their own souls with patience, but also taught all pious people so to do; as
here our Apostle makes it apparent, and ( Titus 3. 1, 2.) presses it to all
posterity: Put them in remembrance (for indeed we are too apt to forget) that
they be subject to the Principalities and Powers, and that they be obedient,
and ready to every good work; that they speak evil of no man, His Majesty's
Declaration ubi supra.
(much less of Princes and Prelates, as some of late have done) That they be
no fighters, (much less Armed Rebels) but soft, lowly, gentle, showing all
meekness to all men, much more to Rulers; yea, and such effect did this
Doctrine produce, that Sanguis Martyrem semen Ecclesiae, Cypr. The blood of the
Martyrs was the seed of the Church. The blood, not the sword, that were too
Turkish. And however, Circa majestatem Imperatoris infamemur, Tert. ad Scap. l.
2. They were slandred as disloyal to the Emperor; yet, Nunquam Albiniani, vel
Nigriani, vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani: Never any Nigrian, who
made Religion the stalking-horse for Rebellion; Nor never any Cassian who
assaulted his Sovereign by Assassination, could be found amongst the
Christians: Christianus nullus est hostis nimirum Imperatoris, quem sciens a
Deo suo constit^i, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat, and rever^atur, and
honoret* and salvam velit, cum toto Romano Imperio, quousque seculum stabit,
tam diu enim stabit: Colimus ergo Imperaborem, sic quomodo and nobis licet, and
ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consecutum, and
solo Deo minorem: For no true Christian can be an enemy to his King or
Emperor, whom he knows to be placed over him by God, and therefore upon
necessity must love him, reverence him, honor him, pray for him, and desire
and endeavor his safety as the safety of the Kingdom; as being next to God,
lesser only then God, and endowed with the power which he has from God, over
all the men in his Dominions. Hereupon was it that the Christians fought so
many valiant battles, and obtained so many glorious victories, even for Heathen
and persecuting Emperors, yea even for Julian the Apostata himself: but never
did they fight any battle, pitched any Field, arrayed any Army, armed any
Legions, or so much as entered into consultation against their Emperor. And
thus you see, Qualibus, to what manner of Princes we must be subject. And I
think all will willingly conclude, Si parendum est magistratui profane, certe
multo magis obedire oportet Sancto and Christiano, In Matthew. 22. 21.
Bez. If Heathens were thus obeyed, much more should Christians; If
persecuting, much more pious Princes, such as our Gracious Sovereign, whose
clemency may challenge our love, as well as his power command our duty, whom
God preserve, and prosper long over us in honor and felicity, and give us the
grace and gratitude to be subject, not only for fear, but even for conscience
sake. And so I come to consider

2. In Quibus? In what things we must be subject? Wherein the true stating of
the Question is much differenced from the mistaken and mistaking Tenants of
many of these times, who conceive and would bear the world in hand.

1. That they are bound no further to Subjection, then with a Rightly Regulated
Conscience, they may perform Active Obedience to all their Superiors Edicts
and Commands.

2. That they are not bound to Active Obedience, where they have a doubting
conscience, although not fully informed by the right rule of Reason, or
express authority of Gods word.

3. That the Supreme Magistrate, must have express affirmative warrant in the
word of God for all his injunctions, or else the Subject needs not obey them.

Whereas the truth is,

1. Concerning the first, That although Active Obedience binds only in the
Lord, yet absolute subjection is due without any resistance for the Lords sake,
(...), Ephesians. 6. 1.
To humane Ordinances ( 1 Pet. 2. 13.) Even when man ordaines; not the Load ( 1
Cor. 7. 12.) yet such a man as is ordained of the Lord, and so presumed to
ordain according to the Lord, we may not in any wise resist.

2. And as concerning the second, Although when man is left to his own liberty,
The rule is to be observed, Quod dubitas ne feceris, because he that doubts
is condemned of his own Conscience, yet when we are Commanded by Authority,
Romans 14. 23.
and we only doubt in our selves whether that be good and lawful which is
commanded, or not, The Rule of Saint Augustine must be observed Si dubitas
feceris, If you only doubt do it, except you have express warrant out of
Gods word, or the Analogy of faith, and undeniable necessary Consequence to
the contrary; Authority must turn the scale of thy doubting conscience, and
weigh down thy Judgment to Active obedience, so that

3. The Magistrate is not bound to express Text for warrant of each of his
particular edicts; It is sufficient that it is contained in his general
Commission Dixi Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods. ( Psalm. 82. 6.) and
therefore have committed my delegated power to you, Per me Reges Regnant, By me
Kings Reign ( Pro. 8. 15.) And therefore by my authority may lay injunctions
upon their Subjects, and they are obliged to Active Obedience, except they can
produce a negative Act of Parliament out of the high Court of Heaven; for
Princes are not only instead of God by representation ( Exodus 4. 16.) but
they have the power of God over those to whom they have commission ( Exodus 7.
1.) I have made thee Pharoahs God, yea and put case the Subject could produce a
contradictory command of God to that of his King, yet is not his passive
obedience dispensed withal, nor any part of his absolute subjection dissolved
or cancelled, Ambros. To. 3. Epis. l. 5. Orat.
But we must needs be Subject, (at least by suffering if not by doing) in all
things, even against the dictate of a doubting, yea, or a discerning conscience.

3. But then in the next place it remains to be resolved by what means, or in
what manner this subjection is to be expressed, which must be by these seven
means following; where there are not Iura Regni by mutual consent of Prince
and people to supersede them, or dispense with any of them.

1. First by praying for them ( 1 Timothy 2. 1. 10. 4.) I exhort therefore that
first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be
made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved,
and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Where observe we must pray, 1. To
the end that we may live godly and peaceably, when we did not live so before:
2. That they may come to the knowledge of the truth, when they knew it not
before: 3. And that they may be saved, when they were not in that state before.
None so bad then, to and for whom we are not to express our subjection by this
duty.

2. Secondly, Li. Tit. 3. 1, 2. Citat.
we must speak no evil of them; ( Exodus 22. 28.) Thou shall not revile the
Gods, nor curse the ruler of the people. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art
wicked; and to Priuces ye are ungodly? ( Job. 34. 18.) No certainly, nothing
less, and therefore follow the counsel of M^rtialis, who lived in the
Primitive times, learned of the Apostles, and taught to succession A
murmuratione custodite corda vestra; Keep not only your hands from mutiny,
and your tongues from muttering, but even your hearts from repining.

3. Thirdly, we must not dispute their Commands, for where the word of a King
is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? ( Eccles. 8. 4.)
(i. e.) Not publicly and illegally to raise opposition against him, only we
may privately inform our own judgment, to prepare as peaceably either for
active obedience or for Martyrdom.

4. Fourthly, we must express our subjection by doing all their commands which
are not directly against God, Josh. 1. 16, 17.
resolving with the Israelites, All that thou command us we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us we will go, only the Lord thy God be with thee.

Fifthly, we must express it by suffering all punishments patiently without any
resistance; for those things which we dare not do when they command them,
because they appear (not seem) to be directly against God, (as has been
before demonstrated;) imitating S. Chrysostom, (Epist. ad Cyriacum) Cum a
civitate fugarer, dicebam intra meipsum, si quidem vult Regina me exulem agere,
agat in exilium; Domini est Terra and plenitudo ejus; and si vult secare,
secet; idem passus est Isaias, etc. Et si substantiam auferre, auferat nudus
exivi ex utero matris meae, nudus etiam revertar; If the Queen will have me go
into banishment, let her banish me; The earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is. If she will have me sawen in sunder, I submit my self; Isaias
suffered so before me. If she will confiscate my goods, Apoc. 13. 10.
I am contented; Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked must I return
again. Behold, this must be the patience of the Saints.

Sixthly, by supplying means, Ad necessaria secundum status sui conditionem;
Lyr. paying due tribute to our Princes; for this is the manner, Quomodo velit
te subjici protestatibus, redere jubens cui Tributum, Tributum: cui Vectigal,
Vectigal; (i.e.) quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, and quae Dei Deo. Tertul. Which
tribute must be paid without limitation of the quantity before, or account of
the disposing of it after payment, Gloss. Ordinar, If Calvin understand it
aright, Calv. in ver. 6.
(which I dare not assure, nor will I dispute) for* Neque nostrum est vel
Principibus praescribere, quantum in res singulas impendant, vel eos ad
calculum vocare: We have no power to prescribe to Princes what they shall
expend upon occasions, nor to call them to account for their employment of what
is expended which I conceive to be intended where there are not Pacta inter
Principem and Populum: nor fundamental Laws of the Land to the contrary.

Seaventhly, we must express our subjection by guarding of the Princes person,
fighting for him upon occasion, and sparing him from going out with us to
battle, 2 Samuel 8. 11, 12.
lest he should quench the light of Israel, Et 10. 26.
( 2 Samuel 21. 17.) And what kind of consciences those men have, 2 Samuel 2.
who can let their liege Lord go out to battle without them, 2 Samuel 11. 11.
(they being required) or who can leave him in his Tents in the field, when
they return to their own houses, I leave both to men experienced in the Word,
and practiced in the sword to consider: and so proceed.

3. To the third part of my Text, which is the necessity of this duty of
subjection, employed in these words [must needs.] Must is for the King, and so
it is indeed: and so is this: And therefore implies a double duty by these two
words [must] and [needs] terms of double necessity; Matthew. 21. 3.
Dominus opus habet, Our Lord the King, the Lord of us and all we have has
need, and who will not then let all go presently? He must have it: in case of
true absolute, imminent necessity, to save our selves and the public,
according to the Laws of the Land. The supporting of His State is that Vnum
necessarium for our safeties, Luke 10. 42.
and the safety of the whole Kingdom; and therefore the Apostle does not only
say, 1. It is convenient that we be subject ( i.e.) for ornament sake. 2. Or it
is fit that we be subject ( i.e.) for order sake. 3. Or it is profitable that
we be subject ( i.e.) for providence and discretion sake. 4. Or it is
contenting that we may be subject ( i.e.) for peace and quiet sake. 5. But
(...), It is necessary Obligationes juris and propter vim coactivam superioris,
viz. quia tenemini and potestis ad hoc compelli ad profitendam veram
subjectionem. [We must needs be subject] for absolute necessity sake: Dion:
Carth:
Necessitate salutis, Aq. even for the necessity of our salvation in Heaven,
and of our safety upon earth. What is it but subjection which continues the
blessed Harmony in Heaven amongst the Angels? What is it but Rebellion which
bred that confusion in Hell amongst the damned spirits? What is it but
subjection which can continue Peace, Plenty, Piety, Order, and Unanimity
amongst men upon earth, Whereas Rebellion brings forth War, Waste, Wickedness,
Confusion; Desolation, and Destruction: wherefore for avoiding these, and
preserving those, We must needs be subject. And so I come

4. To the persons obliged, which is the fourth thing proposed in my Text, in
this word [Ye] (...), Theoph. And so Saint Chrysostom before him, (...). With
whom consent Theodoret and Oecumenius amongst the Greeks, and Greg. Mag. and S.
Bernard amongst the Latins, express themselves both in opinion and phrase to
the self same purpose; we the Clegy, ye the Laity; we the Priests, ye the
people; or ye the mighty Peers, Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 20.
we the many multitude. 1. For neither are Peers excepted and reserved like the
Lacedemonian Ephori, Roman Tribunes, or Athenian Demarchi, to restrain the
insolences or exorbitances of Princes oppressions. 2. Nor are the Priests
exempted like the Roman Hierarchy, to be insolent and exorbitant in the
Commonweal. 3. Nor are the people privileged (as is pretended by some
schismatic Demagogi) to carry all by force of their collective body; Buchan.
But we and ye, 1. Peers, 2. Priests, 3. People, must all needs be subject: And
that

5. [Not only for fear, but even for conscience sake.] Which is the last
member proposed for prosecution. [Not only for feare] And yet we must be
subject for fear too, which, Cogit vel invitos, Marlorat. Theophylact.
Compels those that have no Conscience; Imo and possunt potestates etiam sine
causa irasci, Hieron. And yet we must fear and be subject too (though they
oppress our tender conscience) for fear of punishment from God, and from the
Prince. Lombard.


1. From God, who will not suffer his Ordinance to be contemned; Non enim
privati est hominis abrogare imperium ei quem Dominus cum potestate nobis
praefecit. Calv.

2. From the Prince; for, Vltionem reposcere possunt magistratus ob dignitatis
suae contemptum. Idem. They may justly avenge the contempt of their authority,
1. Either by their Laws, by which In legum transgressores and inobedientes
severiter animadvertunt: Marlorat. Or else by Arms; for, Portat gladium, He
bears the sword, ( verse. 4.) And if He draw it against Schismatiques,
Heretics, or Rebellious persons, Lib. 1. and Parmon. c. 7.
Magistratus just punit gladio, Aug. They must not cast off fear, and
encourage themselves and their company against his commands, as if resisting
for the cause of God (as they pretend) they were to be accounted Martyrs; for
they are no more capable of Martyrdom, dying in contempt of lawful
Magistracy, then the Idol Priests, or the devils themselves were by the
subversion of their Temples, or ceasing of their Oracles, by virtue of our
Saviors Incarnation; or by the command of the Emperor, converted to
Christianity: Aug. ubi supra. But on the contrary it may be verified, that they
who under the royal command of a rightful King, obediently, conscionably,
zealously, and courageously fight against a Schismatic, or Heretical
Rebellious people, (who make Religion the pretext for Rebellion) if they die,
they dye Martyrs, if they live, they live Confessors: and therefore we must
fear even the Princes sword. That I may not insist upon loss of favor,
friends, honor, Prove. 20. 2.
credit, and the like; Although a wise man will consider even in this, that the
indignation of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; Amos 3* 8.
and if this Lion roar, who can but be afraid? for he that provokes him to
anger, sins against his own soul; and what then shall become of his body? Or
if any be so foolhardy as not to fear, yet must he be subject nevertheless,
Not only for fear,

[But even for conscience sake.] Non solum, quia resistere potentioribus and
armatis impune non liceret, quemadmodum tolerari solent injuriae quae
propulsari nequeunt: Sed sponte docet obeundam hanc submissionem, ad quam verbo
Dei obstringitur conscientia: Call. Not only because they are armed and can
over-master us, for so men suffer injuries from private men, because they
cannot withstand them: but the Apostle teaches, that a Christian is bound to
subjection to his Sovereign by the Word of God; and the tie of conscience more
firm and close, then by a Soldiers Belt, or Jaylors Boles and Manacles:
Ambros.
So that, Etiamsi certo constaret nos manus illorum (alioqui valde longas)
posse effugere: Theophylact.
Marlorat. Although we were assured that we could escape their reach, or oppose
their power: Yea, Etiamsi exarmatus esset magistratus quem impune lacescere,
Calv.
and contemnere liceret, nihilo magis id tentandum quam si poenam statim
imminere cerneremus. Although the Magistrate had neither Arms, nor Armies, so
that men might provoke and contemn his power in respect of punishment, must we
not presume to neglect him any more, then if we did see Arms and Armies, Racks
and Gibbets, and all engines for execution prepared before us: Quia nisi omnino
subjiciamini Principi polluta esset conscientia vestra obvians divinae
ordinetioni, Bruno. Because unless we be absolutely subject to our Prince
(pretend what purity we will) our conscience is defiled, and every step we
march against him, we set our selves in battle array against the Ordinance of
God: And indeed I cannot but wonder what hard hearts and cauterized
consciences those men have, who do not presently smite themselves, and their
hearts die within them like Nabals when they find themselves guilty of
subtracting subjection from their Prince, 1 Samuel 25. 37.
(a greater ingratitude then which cannot be excogitated, and ingratitude is
one of the greatest sins;) for Subjects are obliged.

1. By the rule of right Reason, to obey him, without whom we cannot be safe;
but without the King the Commonweal cannot be safe, no more then a ship
without a Pilot in a stormy Ocean; And therefore by the rule of right reason we
must obey him.

2. By natural equity, which binds to do good to them which do good to us,
but Kings and Princes do good to us, for by their means we obtain great
quietness, and by their providence many worthy things are done to our Nation:
Act. 24. 2.
By them we receive honor, enjoy riches, peace, plenty, and freely profess
and practice piety: and therefore even for natural equity, We must needs be
subject, which is the least good we can do to them.

3. By moral civility we are bound to be subject to him who protects us: But
Kings and Princes protect us from evil doers, who would violently take away
our lives, insolently usurp our lands, prodigally mispend our goods,
laciviously deflowr' and ravish our wives, and mercilesly slave our children,
yea, they are the Protectors and defenders of our faith, and therefore we are
bound at least not to rebel sithence all these mischiefs have been, are, and
will be the effects of such disobedience, from which Good Lord deliver us.

4. By Christian Religion and conscience, which enjoins, that we must not
resist the Ordinance of God: but Kings and Princes are the Ordinance of God,
and therefore we must not resist them. verse. 1, 2.

And do 1. Right reason, 2. Natural equity, 3. Moral civility, 4. Christian
Religion and conscience oblige us to subjection? Oh then take heed, and never
trust any (though never so fair Professors) who pretend conscience to
countenance disobedience, at least to cast off subjection, as it is hard to
disobey and not to rebel. Yet such always have been the fair pretense of the
foulest practices. Thus the color of the common good to free the people from
Subsidies, Taxes, and Oppressions (which then seemed by their Governors to lie
upon them) led the people of the Jews, yea and some Romans too, to follow
Theudas, Judas of Galile, Catiline, Iosep. Antiq. Iudai. l. 18. c. 1. and l.
20. c 6.
and their companions. Thus the Rebels of elder times in this Island, christened
their Insurrections, the Army of God and the holy Church, making Religion the
Patroness of their impiety. Jack Straw, Salust conjurat. Catilin.
Jack Cade, Wat Tyler, Friar Ball, alias Wall, and such others, made 1. The
oppression of the Commons, 2. The insolency of the Nobility, 3. The
covetousness of the Priests, and the inequality of men of equal merit, Speed.
the vail of all their violence and villainy. Hollinshed Rich. 2. p. 429.
Thus the Rebellion in the Nortb, Lincolnshire, and Norfolk, were raised under
pretense of 1. Reforming Religion, 2. Freedom of Conscience, Grafton p. 330,
331.
and 3. Bettering the Commonweal, yea, and they are always masked under the
vizard of, 1. Pro Lege, 2. Pro Grege, 3. Pro Rege; whereas indeed they are
against the King, L. 2. de Bello Iudaic. c. 16.
break the Laws; and make spoil of the people, as Josephus relates the story
of the Rebellious Jews, pretending only against Florus harsh, unjust, and
cruel usage, and not against the Romans: Naucler.
But as King Agrippa cleares it by his Remonstrance, They did but only say so;
for their actions were such as worse could not have been done by the greatest
Enemies of the Roman Empire, for they sacked the Towns, robbed the
Treasuries, burnt the Houses, wasted the Fields; neither were they the Towns,
the Treasuries, the Houses, the Fields of Florus, but of the Roman Empire. I
will not make Application, but sithence these things have ever been so, Prove.
24. 21, 22.
I will only conclude with Solomon's Admonition: My son, fear God and the
King, and meddle not with them that are seditious; for suddenly shall their
destruction come, and who knows the ruin of them? Yet certain it is that
ruined they shall be, and perhaps when themselves least suspect it, suddenly as
with the Arrow of Lightning shot from the Bow of God, which may serve as a
Corollary to our Apostles premises to enforce this conclusion, [Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but even for conscience sake.]
Which God grant us all grace to be, for Jesus Christ's sake, the Pattern and
Patron of perfect obedience; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, glory, power, might, majesty, and dominion, from this time forth for
evermore. Amen.

FJNJS.

