A COPY OF VERSES PRESENTED ^o all my Worthy Masters and Mistrisses, In the
Parish of St. Mary Newington-Buts, in Southwark.
By WILLIAM MAJOR, Bell-man.
depiction of William Major, Bellman

The PROLOGUE.
Leaving all Paths by me before times trod,
I now resolve to take another rode;
That Muse, that lately Women's Virtues praised,
And to their Honors lasting, Toophies raised.
Must leave her own dear Sex and Court the men,
That they and I may once be Friends again;
For shhuld we not do this I dare to swear,
I must not Ring my Bell another year.
Of Men in General.
^n his Makers Image, and the Crown
all the Works which in six days were done,
man the Monarch of the Universe,
unto Dame Nature and would pierce
^n it self, had he but power to do,
^^mense desires would prompt him to;
^ite, to man these Lines I give
^uch to Gain, by such to Live.
Their Virtues.
^an an Impious Creature or a Rude
^ormed Lump, devoyd of Fortitude,
^^ove, Justice, given to all Vice,
^^^e, Contention, Avarice,
^^on beat Hemp, as sing their praise
Adorn their Heads with Bays.
^^y good Embrace, avoid all Ill,
Commend them, and I will.
A Prudent man.
^^^e, thou ballast of mankind, O how
(...) directed by thee here below!
^ndued, man tak^^ (...) Lofty flight,
Eagle soars quite out of sight,
^^^'s coming, and prevents what is Ill
^^^s Measures with such curious Skill,
all others are compelled to fall
is Ground, and has no harm at all.
On a Learned man.
(...) piece of grave Impertinence,
(...) stored with all, but Reason, Wit, and Sense,
^s fit for naught at most,
to make a Whipping-Post.
Ingeneous Spark, (whose Learning known)
call the Universe his own;
^^dge, while humble Supplicants greet
their Praises, prostrate at his Feet.
On a Pious man.
^^^ly Prudence, humane Learning we
^^quire without true piery;
^^^omplishments, like Morning dew,
(...) Vanish, and forsake us too.
that spark of Heavenly Fire,
our Souls up to the Clouds aspire,
to Earth, we once have farewell given
^ows us with the Joys of Heaven.
On a Valiant man.
those undanted Courage nothing fears,
^^t Valiant are when Danger most appears,
^^^ger calls, and Honor leads the way,
they follow, and with Pride Obey;
s as thick as Dust, come rallying on
brag what Noble acts have done,
maintain their Posts, they scorn to fly
^o means 'twixt Death and Victory.
On a Patient man.
^^ttle heats that others so disturb,
him are but diversion, of a Curb
to hamper Anger, and digest
Ferments of his quiet breast:
^^fects of Pasion in another,
to such, to learn them how to smother;
Unquietness which once confined,
quiet setles in the mind.
On a just man.
^ the threats or favors of a Crown
^^ch man's whisper, or a Proud man's Frown,
Pomps, and Pleasures that do wait
Places and Affairs of State,
Can frighten or allure that settled mind,
Which to strict Justice firmly is inclined.
No like a Rock he bravely steems the Tides,
And in the midst of Danger safe abides.
On a Faithful man.
GIve me the man on whom you may depend
Who will not leave you till your Journeys end,
Who faithfully dare serve you, whilst he may
Let Death or Danger, or the Devil say nay,
To whom with confidence, you may impart
The very utmost Secrets of your heart,
Thrice happy they, who of such Friends have store
They have enough, they need not wish for more.
On a Charitable Man
FAith, Hope, and Charity, are three great things
To help us forewarned to the King of Kings,
They all are needful, yet of all the three
The greatest is the Grace of Charity,
And by the Apostle as it is expressed,
It seems to be the glory of all the rest,
If so, then Charitable men may doubtless claim
Then other men a more Illustrious name.
Application to my Masters.
MY Faith is such, that I believe of you
What these my Verses offer to your view,
I think you Prudent, Pious, Learned, Stout,
Patient, Just, Faithful, I make no doubt
You Are Charitable too, which if I find
All things succeed according to my mind,
But if you make me a Liar, now I swear
I shall not dare to Write another year.
On the Times.
What means this Clutter? did you ever see
Such great Canary-Birds take wings and flee
What Peter's too? the Devil's in the Dice,
He that would make of us a Sacrifice,
Himself is packt away, a pretty Tool
(And as the Proverb says,) more Knave than Fool,
The Plots discovered, and the Blade (if caught)
We need not doubt will surely go to pot.
On the Princis's Army.
MArch on, brave Prince, Olet thy Troops March on
There Is none to'oppose the day is clearly won,
March on, brave Prince, and let no time be lost
Thy Foes have felt thy Courage to their cost.
See with what eager, and submissive Feet
All Real Protestants his Highness greet,
He comes they cry, our Laws he will restore
And keep us from all Popish Force and Power.
On Popish Intrigues.
What are your Measures countermind? and how?
Would not the English to your Idols bow?
Would they not Stoop t'abolish Tests and Laws?
Or like dull Cowards tamely yield their Cause?
One would have thought the Jesuit Grew,
Could have outwitted Men and Devils too,
But now their Policies are overcome,
The Heretics have been too hard for Rome.
Farewell to Popery.
FArewell, unholy holiness, farewell,
Thou Seed of Lucifer, and Spawn of Hell,
Pack up thy Trinkets go, and come no more
This Land has had too much of thee before,
We likewise felt thy kindness now of late,
Which was to Ruin both our Church and State;
But see how Providence has turned the Dice,
You ran the Race but we have got the Price.
To the Weavers.
MAsters, in the midst of Plenty never be poor
Of Orange colored Ribbon make good store,
You need not fear the Vent, you need not fear
But every man would fain his Colors wear,
All hands to work, that thing no Drug can be
That shows you what has Banished Popery,
And while you work, you merrily may sing
It Was Orange, Orange only did the thing.
On my self.
When I am Drinking, Wife to the Alehouse comes
And like a Devil fires all her Bombs,
I simply on her Arm perhaps lay hold
And cry O do not, prithee do not scold
A douze oth'Chaps, or out thou Drunken Cur,
Is all the answer I can have from her;
I must go with her, let who will say nay,
If She commands I dare not disobey.
My Wives Answer.
COxcomb tell true, did I er'e fetch you home,
Unless your self commanded me to come
Did I er'e Scold, or call you Drunken Whelp
This is a Devlish Lie so God me help,
Faith Masters, I say you are as bad as he
If you believe him when he rails at me,
He knows it is false yet has the Brazen-Face,
To Publish Lies to bring me to disgrace.
The EPILOGUE
Masters, believe me, I have wrrt enough,
And too much too, unless 'twas better stuff.
But as it is, accept it in good part,
And Major will rejoice with all his heart.
And this I promise you if er'e I do
Commence a POET I Will be kind to yo you.
But till such time I hope you will be so kind,
To give me what I want, you know my mind.
LONDON: Printed by John Wallis, in White-Fryers, Anno. Dom. 1689.


