THE CATHOLIC SCRIPTVRIST OR THE PLEA OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICS SHOWING The
Scriptures to hold forth the Roman Faith in above forty of the chief
Controversies now under debate.

Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Romans 16.17.

By I. M.

Printed in Gant, by Maximilian Graet. M.DC.LXII.

THE PREFACE.
1. NOw I beseech you Brethren, mark those which cause divisions, and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Romans
16.17. These words were the words of God, and of truth, as well in the year
1517. as at this present year. Had any good Christian spoaken these words in
that foresaid year 1517. all, who had heard the^, could have made no other
sense of the^, but that they were forewarned by them both to mark, and to
avoid all Authors of divisions, and offenses contrary to the doctrine which
they had learned: yet, as then, there was not any good Christian (unles you
will account them for such, whom you yourselves acknowledge to have maintained
gross Heresies) who did not believe, and profess the Roman Faith. This was
the Faith and Doctrine which they had learned. Wherefore, when in that year
Luther first appeared, causing divisions, and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which they had learned, all were bound, by the advice of the Apostle,
to mark, and avoid the said Luther and all his adherents, and followers.

2. But the world then no less addicted to old vices, then to new doctrines,
did shutt they reares to this advise of the Apostle and did open their arms to
embrace that, which was (in so very many Points) contrary to the Doctrine which
they had learned. And the misery is, that, all those new Teachers, which ensued
in whole swarms, though they all taught contrary to what they had learned,
yea, and the one contrary to the other, yet all pretended to teach nothing but
Scripture rightly understood, which they all affirmed not to have been rightly
understood, for the foregoeing thousand years, in such points as then they
began to question: yet with the same breath, they said, that in all those
several Points, in which they contradicted the former doctrine (and by doing
so caused so great divisions, and offenses) they did affirm only that, to
which they were enforced by evident, manifest, and most clear Texts of
Scripture. Which was to say that, for the precedent thousand years, no body
had rightly understood, or at least every body had by word and practice
contradicted, evident, manifest, and most clear Texts of Scripture.

3. The good Christians of those ages, and we who adhere unto the^, being in
the quiet and peaceable possession of what we had learned, were bound
(according to the advice of the Apostle) to avoid those new teachers; and it
was sufficient for us to show they taught contrary to what we had learned,
which they themselves confessed to be true and was too evident to require
proof. But because we stood constantly to maintain what we had learned upon
this ground, as the Apostle did bid us; our Adversaries, desirous to bring us,
from believing, to disputing, would be still importunely pressing us to prove,
Point by Point, every Point, which we held, by evide^t, manifest, and most
clear Scripture. We well understood that it was their parts (who affirmed all
former ages for some thousand years at least, to have thus grossly erred
against clear Scripture) to make good so great, and so scandalous an
accusation by producing Texts (in the Points under question) of so manifest,
undeniable evidence against us, that their, Texts, compared to ours alleged
in defense of the same Points, should make the Truth so clear on their side,
that all might be forced to confess they had reason to revolt (as they did)
from all their Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrates, and to frame also a new
body by themselves, wholly, and entirely, both in doctrine, and discipline,
quite different, yea and contrary, to all Congregatio^s, as then, upon the face
of the earth.

4. The exorbitancy of this their proceeding will be unjustifyable when I shall
here produce so many and so loud-speaking texts, for above forty of those
Points which they most misliked in our Religion; yea it was our holding those
Points, for which, they said, they were enforced to this so unfortunate a
Division. But how weakly they were enforced, upon this account, to cause such
divisions and offenses, will easily be seen by any impartial eye, which shall
attentively peruse on the one side all the texts, which I shall here alleadg for
forty five of those Points (for which chiefly they have caused this division)
and on the other, the few and inconsiderable and a thousand-times-answered
Texts, which they bring to the contrary.

5. This then is the Plea of us Roman Catholics, that we, ever since our
Ancestors in England were Christians, have held the doctrine which we have
learned, still avoiding those who taught the contrary. For, that we have done
this in no fewer then fifty Points (in which we are most accused of Novelty)
has been demonstrated, in a late book entitled Englands old Religion out of
Bedes own words. And though Bid had not been (as he was) the most grave, and
famed Author which ever England had; but had been only a lack straw living and
writing before the year 731. (that is above 900. years ago) yet to see, in
his words then written, those fifty Points all held, and all practiced in our
England, when Englands Religion was at the purest, cannot but abundantly
convince that we Roman Catholics did the^ hold, and practice what we hold, and
practice now. What is this, but to hold the doctrine we have learned, avoiding
those who teach the contrary?

6. Yet this is not our whole Plea; for we know it will be objected that, what
we then learnt, was contrary to Scripture; and they must mean clear, and
manifest Scripture, or else why did they go against the doctrine, and practice
which they found agreeing so exactly with the doctrine and practice of old
England, as is unanswerably demonstrated in that book. But we further more
plead, that in those very Points, in which contradiction, yea and manifest
contradiction to Scripture, is objected against us, we have Scripture speaking
so fully for us, that no one of those many Religions now tolerated in England,
can, with any color of probability, challenge greater evidence of Scripture
for their opposite Tenets, then we here produce for our undoubtedly ancient
doctrine: and therefore this our doctrine, eve^ in this respect, ought, in all
reason, to be at least as much tolerated as any of those Religions lately
spro^g up in England. The proof of what I say, must rely upon what shall
appear to be made good by me in each point, of those forty five, here ensuing

7. It only remains that I advertise the reader how impossible it is that I,
or any one else, should cite all Texts just in those very words in which he
will find them in his English Bible; for you have so many several tra^slations
of the English Bible, that, whilst I oblige my self to follow one, I shall
make sure not to follow the other* I conceived the best expedient, to avoid
this difficulty would be to follow always either the very words, or the full
sense of that English Bible which is most universally received. And in this
point I have been so very scrupulous, that I continually admonish my Reader if
at any one time I chance to put down any single text differing in sense from
the English Bible, which I have made choice of, as the best edition of their
most received Bible, which is that which was set forth at Cambridg 1635.
printed by Thomas and John Buck Printers to that University, which Bible King
James did cause to be set forth out of his deep Judgment apprehending how
convenient it was, that out of the Original sacred tongues, there should be a
more exact Translation, as is said in the Preface of this Translation dedicated
to his Majesty.

A note to the Catholic Reader.
LEt the Catholic Reader observe that when we cite the two books of Samuel, the
texts cited will be found in our two first Books of Kings. And when we cite
here their two Books of Kings, the Texts will be found in our Bibles in the two
last Books of Kings. For our Third is their first, our fourth their second So
also, with them the Books of Para^ip: be called Chronicles; the second of
Esdras they call Nehemiah. In numbering also the Psalms they do (from the 10
Psalm) differ from us, counting still one more then we until they come to Ps.
147. which, from the 11. verse includes our Psalm 147. And thence we go
forward with the same account.

A Table of the Points contained in this Treatise.
POINT I. That the Scripture alone cannot be a Rule sufficient to direct us in
all necessary Controversies. Page 1. POINT II. Tradition besides Scripture must
direct us in in many necessary Controversies. Page 12. POINT III. Of the never
failing of the Church which being perpetual, can preserve perpetual
Traditions, also of succession of true Pastors and Professors. P. 21. POINT
IV. Of the universality and vast extent of this perpetual Church which also
must be the converter of Gentiles: this no Church, differing from the Roman ever
was: Page 33. POINT V. Of the infallibility of the Church and consequently of
her fittnes to be judge of Controversies. P. 44. POINT VI. That the Roman
Church is this infallible Church and our Judge in all points of Controversy.
P. 64. POINT VII. That the Chief Pastor of this Church is the successor of S.
Peter. Page 66. POINT VIII. That this our Chief Pastor, or Pope is not
Antichrist. Page 74. POINT IX. Of the Sacraments of the Church and of the
Ceremonies which the Church uses in administrating these Sacraments as also
in other occasions. Page 79. POINT X. Of Baptism which is the first Sacrament.
P. 86. POINT XI. Of Confirmation. Page 87. POINT XII. Of the Holy Eucharist.
Page 89. POINT XIII. Of Communion under one kind. Page 106. POINT XIV. Of the
Mass and of the Holy Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice. Page 109. POINT XV. Of
saying Masses and other public prayers in the Latin tongue. Page 119. POINT
XVI. Of the Sacrament of Penance or Confession. Page 131. POINT XVII. Of the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Page 134. POINT XVIII. Of the Sacrament of Holy
Order. P. 138. POINT XIX. Of the Sacrament of Matrimony. Page 139. POINT XX. Of
the single life of Priests. Page 141. POINT XXI. Of the single life of such as
have vowed Chastity. Page 149. POINT XXII. Of works of Counsel and
supererogation. Page 155. POINT XXIII. Of voluntary Austerity of life. Page
159. POINT XXIV. Of satisfactory good works. Page 165. POINT XXV Of Purgatory
and prayer for the dead P. 173. POINT XXVI. Of Indulgences. Page 189. POINT
XXVII. That faith alone does not Justify. P. 196. POINT XXVIII. Whether
Justification be any thing inherent in us. Page 200. POINT XXIX. Whether our
Justification may not be lost. Page 205. POINT XXX. To Justification it is
necessary to keep the Commandments. Page 209. POINT XXXI. How still we have
free will to do good or evil. Page 213. POINT XXXII. How this free will is
still helped with sufficient grace. Page 216. POINT XXXIII. This sufficient
grace is denied to none Christ dying even for Reprobates. Page 220. POINT
XXXIV. How our good works done in grace and by the help of Christ's grace be
meritorious and merit life everlasting. Page 224. POINT XXXV. It is laudable to
do good works for reward. Page 233. POINT XXXVI. We laudably worship Angels
and Saints. Page 235. POINT XXXVII. The Angels and Saints can hear our Prayers.
Page 245. POINT XXXVIII That Saints can and will help us and therefore it is
laudable to pray to them. Page 252. POINT XXXIX. That among the Saints it is
most laudable to pray to our Lady; and of the beads said to her honor. Page
264. POINT XL. It is laudable to worship the Images of Saints. Page 275. POINT
XLI. It is iaudable to worship the Relics of Saints. Page 289. POINT XLII.
Some places are more Holy then others, we therefore laudably make Pilgrimages
and Processions to such Holy places. Page 296. POINT XLIII. That we laudably
keep Feasts in the honor of Saints. Page 306. POINT XLIV. That we laudably
observe Fasts, Saints eves, and other days Page 312. POINT XLV. That we
laudably in our fasts obstaine from certain meats. Page 317.
TO THE PROTESTANT READER.
I Humbly beg of thee to peruse this Table of the Points here treated, and to
turn first to that very Point, in which thou think we are less able to give
thee satisfaction. And according as thou find what I shall say, even in that
Point, to be more, or less satisfactory, so judge of the rest.

But first correct these faults escaped with thy pen, and pardon the Printer,
who was an externe.

THE FIRST POINT. That Scripture alone can not be a Rule sufficient to direct
us in all necessary Controversies.
1. NO Roman Catholic does deny the Scripture to be a sufficient Rule to
direct us in all controversies, if we take the Scripture rightly interpreted.
And therefore all those many textes, which Protestants bring, to prove the
Scripture to be our sole Rule of faith, are very clearly answered by saying
that all those Textes speak of the Scripture not taken as the letter sounds
(for the letter kills 2. Cor. 3.6.) but they speak of the Scripture as rightly
interpreted. And Protestants cannot but grant the Scripture rightly
interpreted to be a sufficient Rule of faith. But what are we the nearer? For
now comes the great Question of Questions, who be those that give the right
Interpretation to Scripture?

2. The very ground of all Religions but the Roman is the Scripture as
Interpreted by their own selves, after they have carefully conferred one place
with an other. For I ask, and ask them again and again, by whom Scripture
ought to be interpreted? They will say by Scripture conferred with Scripture.
Here I must yet ask them again, by whom the conference of one Scripture, with
another, can be made so exactly that from hence we may come undoubtedly to
know the true interpretation? This question I will be still asking them, until
they can answer it. For I am sure that, If I press this question home, they
must be at last enforced to say that the ground of their whole Religion is, the
Scripture interpreted by them selves, when it has bin carefully conferred by
them selves, so that the very ground of their whole faith is deceiptfull, and
fallible, if they them selves be fallible, either in interpteting, or in
conferring Scripture carefully or skillfully. If they say their Interpretation,
thus made, is undoubted, and infallible, then they can not blame us, for saying
that the interpretation of the Church, made with as great care, and skill (used
by her in the exact conference of one Scripture with an other) is infallible.

3. Stay here (Dear Reader) and, as thou love thy salvation, before thou
go any further, ponder attentively how fallible, and subject to a world of
errors, the ground of all such Religions must needs be, which wholly and
entirely are found, at last, to rely upon a mere human interpretation, after
that a mere human, and most fallible diligence, and skill, has bin employed in
conferring one Text with an other. Then ponder on the other side how
incomparably surer, and more justifiable in the sight of God, and man, the
ground of that faith is, which relyeth indeed on the Scripture; but not on the
Scripture, as interpreted by private, and fallible interpreters, after their
most fallible exactness of conferring Scripture with Scripture: but which
relyeth upon Scripture, as interpreted by the Church, after that she, (with no
less exactnes) has conferred one Scripture with an other in a general
Council, having incomparable greater human abilities, then those of any private
man's be, and having the special assistance of the Holy Host, leading his
Church into all truth. Of this infallibility we shall speak fully. Point 5.

4. Now the Scripture (as rightly interpreted by the Church) will send us, for
the clearing of many doubts, unto the Church, authorized by Christ to
instruct, and teach us, as in that fifth Point shall be evidenced out of
Scripture The difference then between our adversaries and us, is, that we
affirm the Scripture, as it is rightly interpreted by the Church, (after she
has exactly conferred in a general Council Scripture with Scripture) to be the
Rule of Faith, by which she decideth all necessary Controversies. But our
adversaries (misliking the dependence on the Church) will have the Scripture,
by it self alone, to be a Rule sufficient to direct each one, who shall
carefully confer it, to judge all necessary Controversies. This we deny, and
though they say it in words, yet in very deed they also come to deny what they
say; for let a man mark it well, and he shall see, that all these sectaries,
when they come to the maine Controversy, do not take Scripture alone, as
conferred with Scripture only, but they all take Scripture with their own
interpretation, made upon their own conference. And if you tell them they have
failed, by not taking due notice of several other Texts in Scripture, which
should have been pondered in their Conference, and would have produced a
different interpretation, they will say, their own spirit tells them the
contrary, so that finally, they (who laugh at the Church for trusting to be
securely guided by the Holy Ghost) come to ground their whole faith upon the
assurance of being truly guided by their own spirit or judgment but let us
come to what we propound and let us prove by Scripture that Scripture, taken as
they take it, can not be a sufficient Rule to direct us in all necessary
Controversies. This I prove.

5. First, because to end all Controversies we must at least rule our selves
by all the books of Scripture, and we must be assured we do so. This is
clear because, by no text of Scripture, it can be prouved that any determed
book, or number of books, is sufficient to end all Controversies. But to do
this, the whole number of books written by any Scripture writer is wholly
requisite, seeing that no Text speaks of any one, or any determinate number;
but all speak of all. Now mark to what pass this opinion brings you. For, if
we be to judge all necessary Controversies by all the books, which ever were
written by any Scripture writer, we must necessarily have these books amongst
us. But we have not in the whole world extant amongst us diverse books of
Sacred Prophetical Scriptures. For no fewer then twenty books of the
Prophetical Pennemen of the Holy Ghost, have quite perished, as the learned
Contzen proves in his Preface upon the four Ghospels; and I will prove this
as far as is sufficient by these following texts. Iosue 10.13. Is not this
written in the book of Iascker? Again 1. Kings 4.32. Solomon spoke three
thousand Proverbs and his songs were one thousand and five. Again 1. Chron.
29.29. The acts of David first and last are written in the book of Samuel the
Seer and the book of Nathan the Prophet, and the book of Gad the Seer. Where be
these two Prophets books? Again 2. Chron. 9.29. mention is made of the books of
Nathan the Prophet and the Prophecy of Ahyah, and the visions Iddo the Seer.
And Chap 12.15. and the book Schemaiah the Prophet and of Iddo the Seer
concerning Genealogies; which seems to be a different book from his book of
visions before specifyed. And Chap. 13.22. mention is made of the story of the
Prophet Iddo And Chapter 20.34. mention is made of the book of Iehu, son of
Hanani, and Ch 33.19 we find mention of the works of the sayings of the Seers.
We know then by Scripture that what is said by those books is said by
Prophets: And we also know by Scripture that God spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets. 2. Pet. 1.21. Moreover we know by Scripture that
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man. But the Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1.21 Standing therefore to
what is known by Scripture, these books, which have perished, did deliver what
was spoken by the Holy Ghost, and contained the true word of God. Whence is
proved that we have not (now) entierly the whole word of God written; and this
is further proved by the ensuing textes of S. Paul 1. Cor. 5.9. I wrote to you
in one Epistle. Note that he says this in his first Epistle to them. Where is
the Epistle which S. Paul wrote to them before he wrote the first to them? I
wrote to you. We then say: Give us all sacred Prophetical writings, which
ever were written, or give us at least some one, single, clear text, which
tells us that we are to end all necessary Controversies, by such books alone
as be now extant in the true Cannon of Scripture, or else be ashamed to speak
with out a text, in this very question, in which you affirm, that all our
necessary Controversies must be ended by only clear Scripture. The
Controversy about this very question is one of the greatest of all
Controversies, and yet you would have us credit you, without being able to
bring clear Scripture for what you say; especially Scripture conferred with
these now cited texts, of which I dare say you never thought. And though you
should bring me a clear text to prove what is desired, yet where would you find
a clear text, to show me that all those twelve books (yea, or any one of them)
which you have rejected amongst the Apocrypha, do not belong to the true Canon
of the whole Scripture. Remember I call for a text as you bid me; and not for a
reason against which we have our reasons; the Text say you must end all
necessary Controversies. Let then some Text be brought able to end this, even
in your own Judgment.

6. Secondly if Scripture only be the Rule to end all necessary controversies,
then some Ages had no such Rule at all; but were destitute of all assured Rule
to end their necessary controversies, and that for two thousand, and four
hundred years together. For Moses (who was the first Scripture writer) was not
borne, but after the world had stood two thousand and four hundred years, as
may be made aparent by Scripture, in calculating the Ages of such, as
successively lived one after the other, according to his own History of
Genesis: so long therefore the world was with out any Scripture. Scripture
then is not the only Rule of true Faith, seeing that Sara, Rebecca and others
of those times had true faith, though their faith was only squared by the Rule
of the Tradition of their Church, as we will see in the next Point. n. 2.

7. Thirdly the Rule, by which all men should be ruled in all necessary points,
should be in a language understood by all. But it is clear that most of the
Jews, in the Captivity of Babylon, had lost the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue,
wherein the old Scripture was written. Neither was the Bible translated into
the Syriak language, till some years after our Saviors death. Syriak differs
as much from Hebrew, as Italian from Latin. And the very letters differ as much
as Greek and Latin. The Jews then, for above fourteen Generations understood
the Hebrew no more then your people now understand the Bible in Latin. But of
all this I shall speak more fully Point the 15. n. 1.

8. Fourthly. That can not be a sufficient Rule to decide all necessary
controversies, which speaks not one word of many necessary controversies. But
the Scripture speaks not a word of many necessary Controversies. Ergo, and
first it is necessary to know which books of Scripture be Canonical, and
which not. Also whether the Canonical books we now have, be alone sufficient
to guide us in all necessary controversies? Then whether they can do this, if
they be not incorrupt. And how we shall assuredly know whether they be
incorrupted or not? Or which is the Copy that is incorrupt. Again, which is
the true Translation of this Copy. Again, which is the true sense of this
Translation; and that assuredly, with a clear Text for this assurance? Of
these, and many more particular controversies, not a word in Scripture. Again,
standing to Scripture alone, the Heresy of Helvidius (denying our Blessed Lady
ever to have remained a Virgin) seems rather to have had some colorable
defense, then any clear jugdment give^ against it by Scripture only. For
Matthew. 1.25. He knew her not till the brought forth her first borne Son. In
which Text these words, till she brought forth and those others; her first
borne Son, give some color to say she had other Sons afterward. For
which doctrine Helvidius was held an Heretik by S. Augustine. Her. 84. and by S.
Hierome contra Helvidium. You may see four and twenty necessary Points set
down all at large by Optatus Ductor in his Question of Questions, no one of
which are clearly decided in Scripture.

8. Fifthly that can not he a sufficient Rule to decide all necessary
Controversies, which in such controversies, speaks not clearly but is very
hard to be understood as the Scripture is. Whence we see all Controversies
arise about the true meaning of such, and such Texts. So 2. Pet. 3.16. In the
which (Epistles of S. Paul) are certain things hard to be understood, which
the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do the other Scriptures unto their
own damnation. Whence it is evident that damnable errors may be incurred by
misinterpteting places hard to be understood. And so this hardness is found in
points necessary to salvation. For in such only damnable errors can be
incurred.

10. Sixthly Christ did not command any one of the Evangelistes to write his
Gospel. They all did write of themselves upon particular ocasions, expressed
by Eusebius, S. Luke tells you, in his Preface, why he did write uncommanded,
Christ then intended to leave us some other Rule then this, which he never
commanded to be written at all, much less to be written so, as to be to us the
only Rule of Faith.

11. Seaventhly by reading the Ceremonial law, given by God to Moses so
clearly, so distinctly, and so closse together, in the compass of no great
book, I evidently infer, that if the self same most prudent Lawmaker, had
intended, in the books of Canonical Scripture, to deliverd unto us the sole
Rule of Faith, and which alone we were to follow; he would not only have
clearly told us so, but he would, with no less, but rather with more clarity,
and distinction, and in a far less compass, have set down unto us this
Rule, intierly and completely together in some one part of the Canonical
Scripture, distinctly expressing all those points, the belief of which he
exacteth of us, under pain of damnatiun For this did much more import to be
done thus, plainly, and distinctly then the setting down of the Jewish
Ceremoneyes. For is it likely, that the same God who prescribed unnecessary
Ceremonies to be so clearly, and distinctly set down, in a few leafes, to
direct the Jewish Church (which is but the Hand Maid) would not, for the Church
of Christ (which is the Mistress) give as clear a direction, in Points wholly
necessary to salvation? But would send every one of her Children to read over
the whole Bible, and to pick out here one place, and there an other, as
Protestants say God sends us to seek, even the most necessary Points of our
belief, (which he requires of us under pain of damnation) now in this place
of so vast a Vollume as the Bible is, now in an other place hard by, now in
another a great way of. And so to go seeking, from the beginning of Genesis,
to the end of the Apocalipse. And this though the number, of Points necessary
to salvation, be but small, as Protestants all agree. I can not therefore
think is was Gods intention te leave us to the Bible only, as to the sole Rule
of Faith.

THE SECOND POINT. Tradition besides Scripture must direct us, in many
necessary Controversies.
1. FIrst, the word of God may be notified either by Tradition, with out
writing; or by Scripture, or writing. It is undoubted, that the word of God
written, or unwritten, is the Rule of Faith; wherefore, seeing it has been
proved (in the former Point) that the written word of God is not our only Rule
of Faith, it evidently follows that Gods unwritten word (notified by
Tradition) must be taken as part of this Rule.

2. Secondly. Moses was the first Scripture writer, and he, according to his
own story, did not write till the world had continued above two thousand, and
four hundred years: so long then all the faithful in the world, were truly
faithful without any Scripture. All this long time then, the unwritten word of
God (that is Tradition) was the only Rule of Faith. For even then many had that
faith which is defined by S. Paul 11. Hebr. 1. which I prove, because in that
very place he numbers Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and Sara, all having the faith
he there described: and yet Sara cannot be showed to have had her faith
grounded on any other word of God, but that which was delivered by the
Tradition of the Church in her times. And generally then, the faith of all true
beleivers, was grounded upon Tradition only. By this Tradition they knew that
God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. Genesis 2.3. And so all held
themselves obliged to keep the Saboth. By this Tradition they knew the
distinction of Beasts clean and unclean. Genesis 7.2. By this Tradition they
knew themselves obliged not to eat the flesh with the blood, Genesis 9.4. so
likewise that the Tithes were to be p^yd to the Priest, Genesis 14.20. By only
Tradition they knew the fall of Adam, their future salvation by the Messiah to
come; their remedy from sin by Penance and repentance, their reward of Good,
punishment of evell. Again from Abraham, until the written law, (that is for
some four hundred years) they knew by Tradition only that this is the
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you. All man kind shall be
circumcised, an infant of eight days. Genesis 17.10. Now give me one Text if you
can which bide us not to take Tradition for a Rule of Faith, after the writing
of Scripture.

3. Thirdly, even after the writing of Scripture; the Gentiles had not the
Scripture, yet by Tradition only, many of them (as apeares by the book of Job)
retained true faith. And even among the Jews, after they had the Scripture,
several necessary Points where left to be known by Tradition only: as the
remedy for Original sin before the eight day, and for women children both
before and after. As also by only Tradition they knew, that all the virtue
there sacrifices had to take away sin, was from the blood of their Redeemer
to come. The observing of al these traditions, was not any unlawful Addition
to the written word of God; whence you may understand the clear meaning of
those words so often objected against us Deuteronomy. 4.2. You shall not add to the
word I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it. For here is only
forbidden to add contrary to the law. So that other place Ch 12.32. Whatsoever
I command you observe, thou shall not add thereunto nor diminish from it. For
this place is meant only of offerings, not any other sacrifices, besides those,
which were in the law prescribed. But it was ever lawful, for lawful
Superiors, to add more preceps agreeable to the law. So 2. Chapter 30.21. after the
Children of Israel, according to the law, had kept the solemnity of Azymes
seven days v. 23. The whole assembly took good counsel to keep other seven
days. And v. 27. Their prayer came to the Holy habitation of heaven. This
addition then did not displease God. Again Esther 9.27. The Jews ordained and
took upon them and their seed and upon all that would be joined with them, so
as it should not fail, that they keep these two days, and that these days
should be kept through out every Generation, every family: Behold here an other
addition: and behold also an other again of the Dedication of the Altar made
for eight days from year to year. 1. Match. 4.56.59. And that you may know
that this book is Scripture; or at least, that a feast is to be kept not
appointed in Scripture, our Savior himself did keep this Feast John. 10.22.
as I shall show Point 38. Again the change of the Sabbath into the Sunday is
only clearly known by Tradition. Yea the manner of keeping it, is contrary to
all Scripture we have; for Scripture says Levit. 23.32. From Even unto Even
shall ye celebrate Your Sabbath. Yet we do not begin the Sunday the even
before, neither dare we work after the even upon Sunday. Who taught us this?
Tradition only.

4. Fourthly Tradition is (and therefore is truly to be held) the word of God
making us fully assured of what is not written. For example for some years
after the Death of our Savior; his glorification after death was not written
so as to express, that Jesus was that Christ, whom God had glotified; and yet
before this was written S. Peter said truly Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the
house of Israel know assuredly (mark the word assuredly) that God has made
the same Jesus, whom you have crucified, both Lord and Christ. We may then
have an infallible faith of what is not written, yea we are forbidden to
believe otherwise then was delivered by Tradition 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Therefore
Brethren stand and hold the Traditions you have bin taught, whether by word or
by our Epistle. For what he taught by his tongue only was as truly the word of
God, as what he did also write with his pen. Yea this which I call Tradition
is the Epistle of Christ 2. Cor. 33. you are the Epistle of Christ not written
with ink, but with the spirit of the living God. This Epistle written with
the spirit of the living God is no less true, nor of less credit then what
is written with ink in papers. Whereforemost of the Apostles did give their
Convertites no other form of belief, but what (by their preaching) they had
written in their hearts, not with ink but with the spirit of the living God.
For the proper subject to receive, and r^^ayne the word of God, is not paper,
but the hearts of the faithful. Whence S. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 4. What if
the Apostles had also left no Scripture! Ought not we to follow the order of
Tradition which they delivered to them, to whom they committed the Churches? To
which ordinance many Nations of those barbarous people, who have believed in
Christ, do consent with out letter or ink, having salvation (that is
soul-saving doctrine) written in their hearts. For a world of the first
believers did never so much as see all scripture. It was the year 99. before
S. John writ his Gospel. And when the Canon of Scripture was fully ended,
there is no mention made, even of the l^^st care, taken by the Apostles, to
divulge the Scripture in barbarous languages; no, nor to divulge it in latin it
self, as you must needs say who deny primitive Antiquity to all Latin
Editions. All this clearly proves that Tradition was relied upon, as upon the
word of God it self. Whence S. Paul did not only counsel, but also commanded,
the Thessalonians to with draw them selves from all who walked not, after the
Tradition they had received of their P^stors 2. Th^s. 3.6. Now said he^ we
comaund you Brethren in the name of our Lord that ye with draw your selves
from every brother that walks discorderly and not after the Tradition which
he received of us.

5. It was for the keeping this Tradition, and form of Faith, why he praised
the Romans Chapter 6.17. You have obeyed from your heart the form of doctrine what
was delivered you. This form could not be a form contained in the whole Canon
of Scripture, for the whole Canon was not finished when S. Paul did write this.
It was therefore the form of uniforme Tradition delivered in each church which
taught, by word of mouth, all th nges necessary: For this he praised the
Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise to Brethren that you keep the
Traditions (so you put in the margen^ but in the Text you read Ordinances) as I
eliverded them to you: This Form, these Traditions, these Ordounances are
inculcated again and again. 1. Tim. 6.20. O Thimothie keep that which is
committed to thy trust. And v. 3. If any one teached otherwise, he is proud
knowing nothing. Again 2. Tim. 1.13. Hold fast the good form of good words
which thou have heard of me, That good thing, which was committed to thee, keep
by the H. Ghost. Again Chapter 3.14. But thou continue in those things which thou
have learned, and been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them;
learned (I say) by word of mouth; for by writing he had received but title. So
also, when as yet by writing he had taught the Romans nothing, he, in his
first, and only Epistle to them, wrote thus Romans 16.17. Now I beseeeh you
Brethren mark them which cause divisions, and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned. Likewise, when as yet he had written nothing, to
the Galatians (for where is any such writing?) he begines thus Gal. 1.6. I
marvel that so soon you are removed from him, who called you into the grace of
Christ, unto an other Gospel. I say removed, that is changed, from the form
of Faith, which I delivered, which was a true, though not a written Ghospel,
into an other Ghospel taught by these new otherwise teathers, yet says he,
with all earnestness Although we or an Angel from heaven preach any other
Ghospel unto you then that ye have received let them be accursed. v. 8. S. Paul
as yet had preached nothing to them in writing, but they had received all by
Orall Tradition and yet not with standing once again more vehemently v. 9. As
we have said before, so I say now again; if any man preach any other Ghospel
unto you, the^ that you have received, be he accursed. Note the word Received,
intimating that they had all by Tradition. For what, as then had they received
from him in writing? And he says no more then other Apostles. (Who did write
nothing, but delivered all by Orall Tradition) might truly have said of the
Ghospel so delivered by them. Neither did S. Paul speak of what they should
receive many years after but of what they had as the^ received. For that was
as true as any thing they should receive by writing. And therefore for their
forsaking of what they had received thus, he most deservedly says unto them: O
Foolish Galatians who has bewitched you? c. 3. v. 1. For indeed they seem
bewitched out of their senses, who, to follow the private judgment of some
otherwise teachers, reject what they had received by the full, and
still-continued report, of all Christianity from the first teachers of the
faith.

6. They object Tradition to be the word of men; but all these arguments show
this Apostolical Tradition (for which only we now contend) to be the word of
God: A form of sound words. And 1. These. 2.13. Ye received the word of God
which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men but (as it is in
truth) the word of God. Behold what was heard by them by only word of mouth was
in truth the word of God. Therefore a fit Rule of Faith even before it was
written.

7. They ask how we know a true Apostolical Tradition from a false one,
which is the tradition of men; I answer that a true Apostolical Tradition
comes down handed by a full unanimous report of all Catholic Nations in all
ages attested by thyr universal practice, and uniforme doctrine, what is thus
delivered is the Doctrine of the Church diffused, and therefore infallible;
upon this ground (for other infallible grounds you have none) you receive only
such, and such, Scripture for Canonical, and such, and such copies of the
Scripture, for Authentical. We can therefore, to the full, as well distinguish
true Traditions from false ones, or Apostolical Traditions from Traditions of
Ordinary men, as you can distinguish the Authentical copy of their writings
from such as are forged or corrupted; for you must first distinguish the truth
of the Tradition which recommend such books unto you, from all false
Traditions.

THE THIRD POINT. Of the never failing of the Church which being perpetual
can preserve perpetual Traditions Also of succession of true Pastors and
Professors.
1. IF the Church of Christ could fail, or cease to be, it is evident
Tradition might fail, and not be preserved in its purity. The true Church is
both infallible, as long as she lasts (of which see Point 5) and is also sure
to last to the end of the world. Yea she is assured all this time to have a
lawful succession of true Pastors, and under them true Professors of the faith
in a vast number; find any such Church besides the Roman, if you can, and I
give you leave to call that the true Church. And lest perhaps the great number
of powerful Texts, which we are to cite, should work small effect with minds
prepossest with one or two objections to the contrary, we will first clear
them, and then pass to the manifold clear Texts which demonstrate the true
Church at no time to be in a lurking Invisibility.

2. The prime objection is from the words of Elias 1. Kings 18.22. I, even I,
only remain a Prophet of our Lord. And in the next Chap. v. 10. I, even I,
only am left which again he repeates v. 14. I answer, that, at lest, he is told
presently by God v. 18. That there were left in Israel seven thousand men,
whose knees had not bin bowed before Baal. And in the former Chapter, it is
manifest he knew of an hundred Prophets. For v. 13. Abdias told him, I hidd of
the Prophets of our Lord an hundred men by fifty and fif^y, in caves. Wherefore
he knew well that there were many faithful, amongst whom so many Prophets were
known to him; yea hence it is clear that he was not the only Prophet left.
Wherefore those words I only I remain a Prophet of our Lord are to be
understood thus. I, only I, remain a Prophet, standing openly to oppose their
fury amongst the Apostated Tribes of Israel. For Elias knew full well that, not
all the Children of Israel, but only ten Tribes were fallen from God. 1. Kings
12. He knew also that the still faithful Tribe of Judah (including Benjamin)
afforded Roboam an hundred and four seore thousand chosen men, to fight against
the other revolted ten Tribes v. 21. which is again repeated 2. Chron. 11.
with a notable declaration how much the true Church, even then, flourished in
Judah and Benjamin. Roboam himself building fifteen cities enclosed with
walls: And (v. 13. the Priests and Levits that were in all Israel resorted to
him out of all their coasts. And v. 16. Of all the Tribes of Israel, whosoever
had given their hearts to seek their Lord God of Israel, came into Jerusalem
to sacrifice and they strengthened the Kingdom of Judah. All this Elias knew
very well and also that which follows, to wit that Asa reigned over all Judah
in all piety and peace 2. Chron. 14. And he built other fenced cities in Judah.
And v. 8. Asa had of Judah an army of three hundred thousand and of Benjamin two
hundred eighty thousand. And he defeated tenn hundred thousand Ethiopians. And
2. Chr. 17. Iosaphat (who lived in the day's of Elias) was yet greater then Asa
his Father, both in piety and power. For v. 10. The Dread of our Lord came
about all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were about Judah Neither durst they
make battle against Iosaphat. And he built many strong cities, and stupendous
was the number of his forces v. 14. of Iudath under Abnath Three hundred
thousand; and two hundred eighty thousand under Iohanan. And two hundred
thousand under Amasias. And two hundred thousand under Ehada And two hundred
eighty thousand under Iosobad All these make Eleven hundred thousand and sixty
thousand soldiers. And yet the Scripture says: All these were at the hand of
the King, besides others whom he had putt in Walled cities in Judah. Behold the
Jewish Church even at her lowest ebb. Christ's Church is the Mistress and of
higher dignity. Wherefore at all times after her beginning, you must find me at
lest as many visible Professors of her doctrine as the Jewish Church had in her
meanest co^ditio^. For the new testament is established in far better
promises. Heb. 8.6. As also appears by the texts which here shall be cited.
All which texts co^vince such a perpetual co^spicuous, and visibly flourishing
state at all times that no church, differing from the Roman, ca^ be showed to
have had any thing like it.

3. The other only considerable objection is, that perhapes these promises,
made by God to his Church concerning his allwaise protecting her, were made
upon this condition, that he would do this, if she should persever to keep his
commandments for so all his promises to David, and Solomon are made. I answer
that it is evide^t that some promises which feeme made to them, and their
posterity are not to be literally understood of their posterity according to
flesh, but as they, by grace, be sons of Christ, who was the son of David.
And diverse of these promises are made so absolutely, that absolutely they admit
of no such condition. Take for proof hereof that convincing Text Ps. 89.4. I
have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn to David my servant, thy
seed will I establish for ever, and I will build up thy throne to all
generations. All which is only verified in Christ Who, in his Church, has
give^ him the seat of David his father: and he shall reign in the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom, there shall be no end. As the Angel said
Luke 1.32. After this promise of everlasting perpetuity to his Church, lest any
any should think his promises might be made void by any sins of hers, or to be
made only upon condition, of their walking in his commandments, he adds in
the same Ps. v. 29. And I will putt him the first begotten high above the kings
of the earth, I will keep my mercy unto him for ever, and my Testament
faithful unto him. I will putt his seed for ever, and ever, and his throne as
the days of heaven. But if his Children shall forsake my law (this can not be
possibly, in your doctrine spoken of the Elect) and will not walk in my
Judgments. If they will profane my Justices, and not keep my commandments, I
will visit their iniquities with a Rod, and their sins with stripes. But my
loving kindness I will not take a way from him; nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail. My covenant will I not break nor the thing which is gone out of my Lips.
Once I have sworn in my holy, if I ly to David; his seed shall continue for
ever. And his throne as the Sun in my sight, and as the Moon perfect for ever.
This Text speaks home to prove what I inte^d, to wit, that these promises, be
made upon Christ. The son of David the son of Abraham Matthew 1.1. and, as S.
Paul teaches that only those who believe in Christ be the rue children of
Israel, and Abraham, so they only be the true children of David, and concerning
them is verified the promise which (as is here said) for no fins of theirs
shall ever be frustrated. Not as though the word of God had taken no effect but
they that are the Children of the Promise are counted for the seed. Romans 9.6.

4. And in this sense the Sacred Text speaks 2. Sam. 7.16. And thine house and
thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, thy throne shall be
established for ever. According to all these words did Nathan speak to David.
So Psalm. 72.5. They shall fear thee, as long as the Sun, and Moon endure
through out all generations. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and
from the River to the ends of the Earth. In whom can these Texts of Scripture
be verified but in Christ ever reigning in his Church diffufed, even in a
flourishing condition, over the face of the earth. According to what is said
Luke 1.32. The Lord God shall give him the throne of his father David. And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever (by having still the Kingdom of
his Church, consisting of those true Israelits of whom S. Paul spoak) and of
his Kingdom or Church) there shall be no end.

5. Isaias every where is very full to this purpose. Chap. 49. v. 14. And Sion
said, our Lord has forsaken me, and our Lord has forgotten me Why, can a
woeman forget her infant, that she will not have pity on the Son of her
womb? And if she should forgett, yet I will not forgett thee. Behold I have
written thee in my hands. And again Ch 54. v. 9. As in the day's of Noe is
this thing to me, to whom I swore I would bring in no more the waters of Noe
upon the earth so have I sworn not to be angry with thee, nor to rebuke thee.
For the mountains shall (sooner) be moved, and hills tremble. But my mercy
shall not depart from thee, and the covenant of my peace shall not be moved,
said our Lord, thy Miserator. Poor little one, shaken with tempest, with out
all comfort, behold I will lay thy stones in order, and will found thee in
Saphires, and I will put the Iaspar stone for thy munitions and Again Chapter 60.
v. 15. I will make thee the pride of worlds, a Joy unto generation, and
generation. (v. 18.) Iniquity shall be no more heard in thy land, wast and
destruction in thy borders, and salvation shall occupy thy walls, and praise
thy gates. Thou shall have no more the Sun by Day, neither shall the
brightness of the Moon illighten thee (these are to mean lights for thee) but
the Lord shall be to thee an Everlasting light, and thy Lord God for thy glory.
Thy Sun shall go down no more, and thy Moon shall not be diminished, because
the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light and the days of thy mourning
shall be ended. Again Chapter 61.6. You shall eat the strength of Gentiles, and in
their glory You shall be proud Everlasting Joy shall be to the^. I will give
their work in truth and make a Perpetual Covenant with them. And they shall
know their seed in the Gentills. All that shall see them shall know that these
are the seed which the Lord has blessed. Again (62.3) Thou shallt be a crown
of glory in the hand of our Lord, and the Diadem of a Kingdom in the hand of
thy God. Thou shall no more be called forsaken, and thy land shall be called no
more Desolate. But thou shall be called my will in her, and thy la^d inhabited
because it has well pleased our lord in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited.
Thy God shall rejoice upon thee upon thy walls Jerusalem I have placed watchme^
all the day and all the night: for ever they shall not hold their peace See
here the continual visibility of the church in her watchme^ and Pastors; of
which consequently there must be a perpetual succession. And v. 8. Our lord
has sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strenght, if I shall give
thy wheat any more to be meat to thy enemies, and if the strange Children
shall drink thy wine. And he conclude^h v. 12. Thou shall be called a city
sought for and not forsaken. That the true Church also shall have a perpetual
succession of Priests and Levites is clearly expressed in the last chapter of
Isaias in which after the Prophet had named Africa, Lidia, Italy, Greece, and
the Islands a far of he adds v. 21. And I will take of them to be Priests and
Levites says our lord* for as the new heave^s, and the new earth which I make
to stand before me, so shall stand the seed of your name. Note that these
Levites be now not by birth but by election ordained to be such out of several
countries, Italy Greece, and other Ila^ds, which names your bible avoids to
translate.

6 S Jeremy is no less copious C 30. v. 11. Though I make a full end of al
nations yet I will not make a full e^d of thee, but I will correct thee in
measure. The church indeed may be chastised for a while, but never be brought
to consu^matio^ For C. 31.35. Thus says our lord that gives the Sunn for the
light of the day, the order of the moon and the stars for the light of the
night etc. If these laws shall fail before me (says our lord) the^ also the
seed of Israel shall fail from being a nation before me for ever. If the
heave^s above shall be able to be measured, and the fu^datio^s of the earth to
be searched out, I also will cast a way all the seed of Israel. Again C. 32.38.
And they shall be my people and I will be their God, and I will give the^ one
heart, and one way, that they may fear me all days, and it may be well with
the^, and with their children after the^. And I will not cease to do the^
good. And I will make an Everlasting covenant with the^. And I will give my
fear in their heart that they may not revolt from me. Again C. 33.14. Behold
the days will come says our lord, and I will raise up the good word, that I
have spoake^ to the house of Israel, in that time I will make the spring of
Justice to budd forth unto David, and he shall do Judgment and Justice on the
earth. This says our Lord, there shall not fail of David a man to sit upon
the throne of the house of Israel (Christ must successively have his vicar or
vicegere^t in all ages) and of the priests and levites their shall not fail
before my face a man to offer holocaustes and to burn sacrifices and to kill
victimes all days. Behold a succession of lawful Priests still offering
sacrifices, expressed by the Priests and sacrifices as were then only known.
Again it follows, and the word was made to Ierimy saying if my covenant with
the day ca^ be made void, also my covenant may be made void with David my
servant, that there may be not of him a son (a vicar or vicegere^t) to reign
in his throne, and the levites and priests my ministers. yea v. 22. eue^ as the
stars in heaven ca^ not be nu^bred, and the sa^d of the sea be me^sured so will
I multiply the seed of David my servant and the Levites my Ministers. Whence
it is evident that the number of lawful Priests by lawful mission, and
ordination shall not only never fail, but also never fail to be a great
number. There follows again in the same Chapter the forme^ Covenant repeated
once more.

7. Ezechiel also speaks very home Chapter 34.22. I will save my flock, and it
shall be no more into spoil and will raise up over them one Pastor who shall
Lead them; my servent David he shall feed them and he shall be their Pastor,
And I the Lord will be their God and my servant David the Prince of them. And
v. 28. And they shall be no more a spoil to the Gentills. Again Chapter 37. v.
23. Neither shall they be polluted any more in their Idols and I will cleanse
them and they shall be my people and I their God and my servant David King over
them and their shall be one Pastor over them all: They shall walk in my
Judgments and they shall keep my commandments; and they shall do them, and
they shall dwell on the Land which I gave to my servant Jacob; themselves and
their Children and their Childrens Children, Even for Ever. And David my
servant Prince for ever. And I will make a peace to them, an Everlasting
Covenant shall be to them, and I w^ll found them, and will multiply them, and
will give my sanctification in the midst of them for Ever, and and the very
last verse of the last Chapter. The name of the City from that Day: Our Lord
there.

8. Clearly also Daniel Chapter 2. v. 44. In the days of those Kingdoms the God
of heaven shall raise us a Kingdom that shall not be dissipated for ever (But
still continue in quality of a Kingdom) and this Kingdom shall not be
delivered to another people, and it shall consume all the (Idolatrous)
Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever, in quality of a Kingdom.

There is little need to pass to the New Testament the old sufficing, if any
thing will suffice. Of Christ's Gospel S. Paul says 2. Cor. 4.3. If our
Gospel be hid it is hid to them that are lost. Either you must confess your
selves lost men, or you must say that at no Time Christ's Gospel lay hid so as
you could not tell who professed it. I insist not in the known places, as, that
the Church Matthew. 16.18. Is built upon a Rock and that the Gates of Hell shall
not provaile against it. Again it is evident that she must still be visible in
all ages that we may still at any time Tell the Church and hear her. Matthew.
18.17. and be still fedd by her Doctrine and Sacraments. For these be the two
essential marks of a true Church as Protestants say. Hence Ephesians. Chap. 4 v.
11 He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other
some Pastors and Doctors etc. until we meet al in the unity of faith, which
will not be till the worlds end. These be the light of the world, still set
upon the candlestickes never hidd under a busshel. Matthew. 5.14. A City upon a
hill still to be seen. And though the mustard seed was the lest at the
beginning, yet in the growing it proves a Tree, and all fowls repair to it.
Matthew. 13.32. Yea this must be a Church perpetually continuing in such
reverence to our B. Lady that her words must be fullfilled Luc. 1.48. All
generations shall call me blessed And v. 33. Her Son shall retgne in the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. And so
himself says to his Apostles Matthew. 28.20. Behold I am with you all Days even
to the consummation of the world. His Apostles were not to be in the world even
to the end of the world. The promise therefore is, to be with them, in the
persons of such as should succed them in teaching, and preaching, etc. Again in
the like sense he says John 14.16. And he will give another Paraclete that he
may abide with you for ever.

All these Texts demonstrate what we have undertaken to prove. And hence it
does unavoidably follow that the Chureh must in all ages have a continual
succession of true Preachers of the word of God, and true administration of
Sacraments, for these two things (even according to the 39. Articles of the
Church of England) are the two essential signs or notes of a true Church,
which must ever accompany her in all ages. And if a Church be (as S. Cyprian
says) a flock adhering to there shepherd, then as in all ages there is a flock
of Christ, so there must be a shepherd, to whom this flock may and must adhere.
And therefore a lawful succession of true Pastors must needs in all ages be
found in the Church, at lest without any considerable interruption. And this is
expressed in several texts here cited. Now ponder that this is to be found in
no Church but the Roman. See more the next Point.

THE FOVRTH POINT. Of the universality, and vast extent of this perpetual
Church, which also must be the converter of Gentiles. This no Church, differing
from the Roman, ever was.
1. IF the Church were to remain perpetually in any very small extent, or
bigness, perhaps we might hear little news of her in some ages. But te true
Perpetual Church (foretold to be in all ages in the Texts now cited) is
likewise in Scripture, no less clearly foretold to be in all ages, so
universally spread, and so visibly numerous, that the very recital of these
Texts is enough to put quite out of countenance any other Church, but the
Roman, especially being that this true Church is so manifestly said to gain
this her vast extent by the multitude of Gentiles, which she is to convert to
her. A thing which evidently must be verified in the true Church, and yet is is
evide^t that this only is verified in the Roman Church; that is, no Church (but
such as was joined to her in communion) ever converted any one parish of
Gentiles.

2. The Texts which evidence this vast extent of the true Church are Genesis
13.16. I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: And C. 15. v. 5. Look up
to heaven and number the stars if thou can. And he said to him, so shall thy
seed be. Again Chap. 22.16. By my own self I have sworn says the Lord I
will bless tbee, and I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven and as
the sand that is by the sea. And in thy seed shall be blessed all Nations of
the earth. Now Saint Paul tells us. (Romans 9.8.) Not they that are the
Children of the flesh (of Abraham) they are the Children of God; but they that
are the Children of promise, are esteemed for the seed. And if still you
contend that these Texts are only for the Jewish Church; you must also
remember that Christ's Church is the Mistress, she the Handmayd and that as S.
Paul says. The new Testament is established in far better promises. Hebr.
8.6. And must flourish far more then ever the Jewish Synagog did. Hence Apoc.
7.5. S. John after twelve thousand of every Tribe of Israel were signed saw a
great multitudes which no man could number of all nations Tribes peoples and
tongues. But let us go on.

3. David Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me and I will give thee the Gentills for thy
inheritance and thy possession to the end of the earth. Psalm. 22.27. All the
ends of the earth shall remember and he converted to our Lord. All the Kindreds
of the nations shall adore in his sight. Again Psalm. 72.7. In his (Christ's)
days shall the righteous flourish so long as the Moon endures. And he shall
rule from sea to sea, and from the River even to the ends of the round world.
Yea all the Kings of the earth shall adore him: and all nations shall serve
him. Psalm. 98.3. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Of what Church is this true besides the Roman?

4. In this point of the multitude of Gentiles to be converted none more
eloque^t and copious then the Prophet Isaias Chap. 2. v. 2. And in the later
days (the new Testament is called the last hour 1. Io. 2.18.) the mountain
of the house of our Lord shall be prepared in the topp of mountains and all
nations shall flow unto it: and he shall judge the Gentills etc. Again Chapter 49.
v. 1. Listen, o you Islands, and attend you people from a far. And then v. 6.
It is a small thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of
Jacob, and to convert the Dreggs of Israel (it is too too poor a thing for
Christ to be author of so small a Church as the Jewish Church was) Behold I
have given thee to the light of the Gentills, that thou may be salvation
even to the farthest part of the earth. Kings shall see, and Princes arise, and
adore for our Lords sake. Behold these shall come from far, and behold they
from the north, and the sea; and these from the south country. Lift up thy eyes
round about and see all these are gathered together, thy are come to thee. And
v. 19. Thy deserts, and thy solitary places (in which no body before served
God) and the land of thy ruin, shall now be strait, by reason of the
inhabitants. And yet shall the Children of the Barrenness say in thine ears.
The place is strait for me, make me space to dwell. Then v. 22. Behold I will
lift up my hands to the Gentills, and to the people I will exalt my signs. And
they shall carry thy Sonns in their arms, and thy Daughters upon their
shouldiers. And Kings shall be thy nurcing fathers, and Queens thy Nurses.
With a countenance cast down to the ground they shall adore thee, and they
shall lick up the dust of thy feet (Kings prostrating themselves at the feet
of Christ's Vicar, and kissing them.) Again Chap. 54.2. Enlarge the place of thy
tents and streetch out the skinns of thy Tabernacles; for thou shall penetrate
to the right hand, and the left. And thy seed shall inherit the Gentills, and
shall inhabit the desolate Cities. Here note that these things were spoken to
the Jewish Church, telling her how much the future glory of Christ's Church
should exceed her, and so to her the Prophet said in the first verse. Payse o
barren woeman which barest not, sing praise, and make joyful noise because
many are the Children of the desolate (Gentills) more then of her that has a
husband. To wit the Synagogue to which he had been so long espoused. So that
it is flatly against Scripture to make the Church of Christ at any time so
barren, as the Synagogue was in the days of Elias. Allthough even then she had
in the field far above an eleven hundred thousand men: besides many thousands
of soldiers in her walled Cities as we showed Point 3. n. 2. much more is it
against Scripture to make her so little as not to be visibile or known. And
therefore again Chapter 60. v. 1. Arise be illuminated Jerusalem because thy light
is come, and the glory of our Lord is risen upon thee. Gentills shall walk in
thy light, and Kings in the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes, and
see round about: all these are gathered together, they are come to thee. Thy
sonns shall come from a far, and thy daughters shall rise from thy side. Then
shall thou see, and abound, and thy heart shall be enlarged, when the multitude
of the sea shall be converted to thee. The strenght of the Gentills shall come
to thee the inundation of Camells shall cover thee. v. 10. The Children of
strangers shall build thy walls and their Kings shall minister to thee, and thy
gates shall be open continually, (never shall thou be invisible for) day and
night they shall not be shutt that the strenght of the Gentills may be brought
to thee for the nation and the Kingdoms that shall not serve thee shall
perish. What nations can serve (yea, and be bound, under pain of perishing, to
serve, an invisible church? again v. 15. I will make thee an eternal
excellency a joy unto generation and generation and thou shall suck the milk of
Gentills, and thou shall be nourished with the teate of Kings. Again Chapter 62. v.
2. And the Gentills shall see thy Righteousness and all the Kings thy glory.

5. Jeremy also every where fully. Chap. 30.19. I will multiply them and
they shall not be few, and I will glorify them and they shall not be small.
Christ's Church still shall ever contain a vast number of people. Again 31.34.
And a man shall no more teach his neightbour and a man his brother saying know
our Lord for all shall know me from the lest of them to the greatest, says our
Lord Thus says our Lord that gives the Sun for the light of the day, the order
of the Moon and Stars for the light of the night. If these laws shall fail
before me, says our Lord, then also the seed of Israel shall fail that it be
not a nation for ever before me. This text comes convincingly home to prove
that this universality, shall be perpetual, and no more fail in any age then*
the light of the Sun and Moon. As long as they last, this Church shall be a
flourishing Nation for ever. For again v. 37 Thus says our Lord. If the
heavens shall be able to be measured, and the foundations of the earth beneath
to be searched out, I also will cast away all tht seed of Israel. And then in
a Metaphore of a City built upon hills, far distant from one another, he
says this so vastly extended City shall not he plucked up, and it shall no
more be destroyed for ever, which is a gallant expression of the perpetual
universality of the Church, for ever retaining a vast great extent in any ages
whatsoever. The same follows Chapter 33. v. 20. Thus says our Lord: if my covenant
with the day can be void, and my covenant with the night, that there be no
day, nor night in their time, also my covenant may be made void with David my
servant, that there be not a son of him to reign in his throne, and Levits
and Priests my Ministers. Even as the Stars of heaven cannot be numbered and
the sand of the sea be measured, so will I multiply the seed of David my
servant, and the Levits my Ministers. Now if the number of Priests, Pastors
and Teachers, shall be so great at all times, how great, at all times, and how
exceeding visible, must be the number of the people who are visibly to be
ruled, fedd, and taught? And yet again v. 25. If I have not set my covenant
between night, and day, and laws to heaven, and earth, surely I will also cast
of the seed of Jacob, and of David my servant that I take not of his seed
Princes of the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. These Levites and Priests
shall not be so by birth, but they shall be taken out of Italians, Africans,
Grecians, the Islands, as Isaias says in his last Chap. v. 21. Though your
Bible did not interpret the Hebrew names of the Countries. These Texts then
manifestly tell the perpetual succession of Priests, and Pastors in Christ's
Church so that we are no less assured of having lawful Princes in the
Church, lawfully still governing the same, then we are assured of having
night, and day, and the heavens moveing above us, and the earth standing under
us. A point much to be noted* yet we may confidently say no Church, no Church,
but the Roman can do this.

6. Ezechiel Chap. 17.22. Thus says our Lord. And I will take the marrow of
the high Cedar, and will set it and will plant it upon a mountain, a mountain
high, and eminent. On the high mountains of Israel will I plant it, and it
shall shoot forth into a budd, and shall yield fruit, and it shall be into a
great Cedar and all Birds and every foul sball dwell under the shaddowe of the
boughs thereof, and shall there make their nests. Behold Christ's Church,
which in her beginning was but a small grain of mustard seed, now grown up
to the greatness of such a Cedar as this is. And not grown, and grown, until
at last she was grown quite invisible. Memorable is that Text Chap. 36.25. And
I will power out upon you clear water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
contaminations, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you and give you a new
heart, and will put a new spirit in the midst of you and will (by my grace)
make that you shall walk in my precepts and keep my judgments and do them.
(Before we go farther I pray take special notice, that the Church by the
grace of Christ, is freed from fear of being abandoned, because she did at any
time grow to forsake Gods judgments, for he will still give her grace to keep
them) In that day, that I shall cleanse you from all your iniquities, and shall
make the Cities to be inhabited, and shall repair the ruinous places and the
desert land shall be tilled; and they shall say* This land untilled is become a
garden of pleasure. And v. 37. I will increase them, with men like a flock as
the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts (in which feasts many thousand
men, gathered out of every howshold of that nation, did use to go up to
Jerusalem) so shall the desert Cities be full of flocks of men. How can
universality, and a most visible numerosity be more fully expressed; when even
the desert places, shall be filled, as Jerusalem was thronged, and crowded in
the solemnityes thereof? Daniel Chap. 2. v. 35. makes the Church of a little
stone grow into a moutaine filling the whole earth; how ridiculously then do
you tell me you can scarce see it for this 1000. years before Luther.

7. Micheas Chap. 4.1. And it shall be in the later end of the days (1. Io.
2.18. the time of the new Testament is called the last hour) there shall be
the mount of the house of our Lord prepared in the topp of mountains, and high
above all the hills (what more visible?) and people shall flow unto it, and
many nations shall hasten, and shall say: Come let us go up to the mountain
of our Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob etc. And v. 7. I will make
her that labors into a mighty nation, and our Lord will reign over them from
this time, now and for ever. So that from this time now, and for ever the
Church was promised still for all ages to be a mighty, or strong nation Never a
small invisible unknown company.

8. Zacharias Chap. 14. v. 8. And it shall be in that day, liveing waters shall
issue forth of Jerusalem: half of them to the east sea, and half of them to
the last sea; in summer and winter shall they be, and our Lord God shall be
King over all the earth: and in that day shall be one Lord, and his name shall
be one. And by and by, he tells us at large, even to the end of the Chapter,
how all nations shall be accursed that come not up to adore in his Church. A
manifest sign of her pepetuall purity in Doctrine. For how would God lay such
curses, ad plagues upon men for refusing to follow the Church erring.

9. Malach. Chap. 1.11. tells us the Church shall be extended as far as the
sun beams among the Gentills. From the rising of the sun, even to the goeing
down thereof great is my name among the Genrills, and in every place there is
sacrificing, and there is offered a clean oblation, because my name is great
among the Gentills says the Lord of Hosts. Behold the true Church, all the
world over, offering a pure, and grateful sacrifice.

10. The places of the new Testament are more known, as that the Church by
reason of her continual university is A City upon a Hill, still to be seen
from all places. A Candle upon a candlestick, as well seen to the whole world
as a ca^dle to the whole Room in which it burns. The Apostles are sent to
preach to all Nations. The little mustard seed grows to be the bighest of all
plants, like the Cedar in Ezechiel chap. 17.22. S. Peter's nett is even broken
with the taking of fish etc. But because the new Testament writes no farther
then the Acts of the Apostles, and contained but small part of them, the
subsequent conversion of the multitude of Nations, of the strenghth of Gentiles,
and of all the Kings of the earth (as the above cited Texts declare) is to be
taken out of history, in which manifestly the truth of all that was foretold
does appear. But all this wholly and entirely, was performed by the Roman
Church only, that is, by such as have been known to have joined in Communion
with her. If you say the Roman is not the true Church, here foretold by the
Prophets, then I pray ponder well, how impossible it is for you upon earth, to
find any other Church, to which those manifold Prophecies, with any show of
probality, can be applied.

THE FIFTH POINT. Of the infallibility of the Church and consequently of her
fitnes to be judge of controversies.
1. NOte that in two manners or ways things of belief, and practice may be
delivered by a community. The first is, when such things, once received by the
said Community, are perpetually retained by the same in all places by the
public practice, and also, upon all occasions, taught by word of mouth, and
expressed in written books. Thus our common law in England (though never
written by any lawmaker) is notwithstanding by daily practice, most faithfully
kept, and has been so for so many hundred years by the whole Nation diffused.
And in this manner the Church diffused keeps in perpetual practice, and
delivers to her children, as infallible truth what was first delivered unto
her, by commission from God either in writing, or by word of mouth. The other
way of making and delivering Laws is to call together the represe^tative body
of the Community. So here in England our statute laws are made, not only by
the King, nor only by the Parliament but by the order both of King and
Parliament. And what is thus enacted is the decree of the Nation representative.
Now as the represe^tative of our nation is the King and Parliament; so the
Church Representative is the chief Pastor thereof together with a Lawful
general Council. And the definitions, and decrees set forth by their
authority, be called the definitions, and the decrees of the Church
Representative. All such definitions we Roman Catholics hold infallible.
Whither the definition of a Council alone, defining without their chief
Pastor, or the definitions of the chief Pastor alone, defining without a
Council, be infallible, or no, there be several opinions amongst us; in which
we do and may vary without any prejudice to our Faith, which is not built upon
what is yet under opinion, but upon that which is delivered as infallible; and
we all unanimously hold that to be so, which the universal Church
Representative, consisting jointly of the chief Pastor of the said Church
voting in, and with a General Council; not that this Representative made
wholly of men, is not, of its own nature, subject to error. For this we never
affirm. And so our adversaries say nothing at all to the purpose, whilst they
labor to prove this. Let the^ disprove, if they can (and that out of Scripture
alone) that which we say, to wit: that this Church Representative is
infallible merely, and purely by the special assistance of the Divine
Provedence, always affording to his Church a sufficient measure of the spirit
of truth to lead her into all truth. And that he is evcr so surely resolved to
do this that no sins of his Church shall ever hinder him from doing of it, as
is most expressly delivered by God himself, Psalm. 89. in the words cited by
me at large Point 3. n. 3. Which place the Reader shall find most convincing to
prove, that notwithstanding all the sins that shall ever happen in his Church,
the sun and moon shall sooner fail then God will fail to provide a
successor in Christ's throne, to govern his Church in the profession of truth,
so as his faithfulness shall not fail nor none of his words be frustrated,
which you shall see delivered again and again in the ensueing places of
Scripture. All which (to the number of thirty) I gather to fully, because the
Protestants exclaim againest nothing more then the Churches claim to
infallibility, which D. Fern calls. The very bane of Christendom though it be
the very ground work of Christianity. For all interpretation of Seripture is
fallible, if the interpretation of the Church be fallible, even then, when she
has carefully conferred Scripture with Scripture.

2. And to avoid confusion, I will divide these thirty Texts, into these three
several sorts, The first sort shall contain either such as command us
absolutely to follow, and obey the Church, in such a manner as would wholly
misbeseeme God to command us, if she could thrust errors upon us for Divine
verities, or such Texts, as theach us to rely more upon the Church then could
prudently be done, if she could teach error. The second sort shall contain a
multitude of such glorious expressions made every where of the Church, as would
be most empty and truthlesse if the Church should ever prove a Mistress of
errors and press them on her children for Divine verities. The third and last
sort shall be such Texts as plainly affirm Truth to be still taught in the
Church, and to be intailed upon her, promising she shall not revolt from it,
but stand still a true pillar and ground of Truth.

3. Of the first sort of Texts we have these by which either God commaundes us
universally to follow his Church, or speaks that of his Church, which could
not be delivered as it is, if this Church could err, For example: how could
God glory in the multitude of such as follow his Church, if, by so doing,
they should be led into error. And yet Isaias 2. God seems to glory in the
multitude of those who confidently resort to the Church, as to a Mistress of
assured Truth, to be instructed by her saying v. 3. Let us go up to the
mountain of our Lord, and he will teach us his ways and we shall walk in his
paths, and he shall judge among the nations. Behold Christ erecting a Court or
tribunal in his Church to judge among nations and decide all their
controversies which must needs suppose obedience to be yielded to this
judgment. Yea the same Prophet adds c. 54. v. 17. that No weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper: and every tongue resisting thee in judgment thou
shall condemn. And the Prophet there from the beginning manifestly speaks of
Christ's Church. Thirdly. Isaias Chapter 60.12. The Nation and Kingdom that will
not serve thee, shall perish. Under pain of perishing the Church must be
obeyed* Whence. Fourthly, Ezech: c: 44. v. 23. They (that is the Priests) shall
teach the people what is between a holy thing, and a thing polluted, and the
difference between cle^ane, and unclean. They shall show them, and when there
shall be controversy, they shall stand in judgment, and shall judge according
to my judgments. This being their office, the peoples office must needs be, not
to judge them, but obey them.

4. Whence. Fifthly. Christ (Matt. 18.17.) commands all to obey the Church under
pain of being held here on earth, as Publica^s and Heathens, and of having
this sentence ratifyed in heaven. Tell the Church, says he, and if he will not
hear the Church let him be unto thee as a Heathen, and a Publican. Ame^ I say
unto you whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. Here you
see obedience to be yielded under pain of being held as a Publican or an
Heathen, and this sentence to be ratified in heaven. Now if the Church could
err in theaching (for example) that Christ is truly present in the Sacrament,
and hence oblige all to adore him there in, as much as they adore him in
heaven: and could oblige them to this under pain of being held as Publicans
and Heathens, and held so as well in heaven, as upon earth; surely this cannot
be an error. For then in heaven this sentence would never be ratified. And
tell me not, that this texts speaks of private differences between brother,
and brother, though I deny not but this is also true, in such differences as
belong to the Court or Tribunal of the Church: yet hence evidently follows,
that this Text does much more concern those differences in point of Religion,
between brother, and brother. Both because these do more properly belong to
the Court of the Church, and to her Tribunal: as also because when scandal,
and offense is given to our brother in point of heresy, tending to the
seduction of his soul; our brother seeing this soule-murthering sin broached
to his own ruin, and to the eternal ruin of his brother, has far greater
reason in this case, the^ in any other, to tell the Church his mother, to
whom, in this difference, above all other differences, it properly belongs
to look to the safety of her childred. For this is an offense, and scandal to
the whole brotherhood of all Christianity. Therefore, in these points of
highest concernement, we are most bound to hear the Church under pain of
being accounted Publicans and Heathens, and of haueing this heavy sentence
ratified in heaven.

5. Sixthly. Matt. 23.1. Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his
Disciples: saying. Upon the chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and
Pharisees (by which sitting, with lawful succession, they as wicked as they
were, are known to be lawfully authorized Prelates) all therefore whatsoever
they shall say unto you observe, and do. Behold here a precept of obeying in
all whatsoever. And therefore behold a precept, which could not be give^, if
that, which is delivered by public authority of the Church, were not secured
from error in all whatsoever.

6. Sevently. The first and best Christians did practically acknowledge their
belief of the infallibility of the Church. For, to have a decision of the most
important Controversies (Act. 15.2.) they appointed Paul and Barnabas to go up,
and certain others of the rest, to the Apostles, and Priests unto Jerusalem
upon this question. And the Church assembled the first Council, in which,
though this Council were assisted with the Holy Ghost; yet there was made a
great disputation. v. 7. And then the definition of the Church came forth in
these words, It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and us. v. 28. Other lawful
Councills, knowing the Holy Ghost also promised to them do use to set forth
their definitions with the same words, and this most agreeable to Scripture. For
John 15. v. 26. When the Paraclete comes, whom I shall send from my father,
the spirit of truth, he shall give testimony of me, and you shall give
testimony. Mark this conjunction of (he) and (you) He the the spirit of
truth, and you Governers of my Church; so that you in giveing testimony may
freely say. It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and us.

7. Eighthly. It is clear out of Scripture that the first Christians were so
fully possessed with the belief of the infallibility of the Church, that they
would believe nothing but what thy knew conformable to her doctrine. S. Paul
was a Scripture-writer, and so great an Apostle, and yet he says of himself
Gal. 2.1. Then after fourteen years I went to Jerusalem again (not merely to
satisfy a vain fancy of some particular men: but) I went up according to
revelation, and conferred with them the Ghospel, which I preach among the
Gentills. But (I conferred) severally (or a part) with them that seemed to be
something, least perhaps I should runn, or had runn in vain. So that he thought
all his fourteen years preaching, and also his future preaching might come to
be in vain, unless, even his doctrine were made known to be approved by the
Church, as wholly conformable to the Church. So much, in these goulden days,
were the first Christians taught to rely upon the Church; which had been
imprudence, if she had been fallible. Yet we must not think that then they did
apprehend, that the approbation of the Church did add any degree of truth to
his doctrine, as it does not add any degree of truth to the Scripture, or
pretend to have power to change, or correct true Scripture. And so S. Paul
says, v. 6. For to me, they that seemed to be some thing, added nothing. For
as the toutchstone adds no value to the gold, but only evidently manifests
which is true gold, which not: so the Church, as then, did only manifest
infallibly the truth, of what he had preached. So also the Church, as now,
does only manifest to us, that such, and such Books be the true word of God,
such, and such be not; such be true copies, such not etc. But the word of God
has its true worth from it self, and not from the Church, as the gold has
its being true gold from it self and not from the toutchstone. So when
Catholics say with S. Aug. Cont. Epist. fundam. c. 5. I would not believe the
Gospel unless the authority of the Church moved me, they do not mean,
that the Church can add, or take away from the truth of any true Scripture;
but they mean, that, by her definition, as by a Sure touchstone, it is now
manifestly assured unto them, that such a book is true Scripture, and such
not. And as the orall preaching (even of such an Apostle as had been a
Scripture writer) might have been in vain, without this approbation; so also
might his writings have been in vain. Whence we see that his Epistle unto the
Hebrews was not known or acknowledged as Gods word, until the Church approved
it. If the Scripture writer himself teaches in vain without this
approbation, much more will his writings teach in vain.

8 Ninthly. The Church is to be followed by us as an assured approver or
reprover of spirits and consequently as infallible. John 1.4. My dearest
believe not every spirit but prove the spirits if they be of God: then v. 6. We
are of God; he that knows God hears us (Pastors of Church) he that is not of
God hears us not. In this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of
error. Here S. John expressly means to give to posterity a standing Rule to
know a true spirit from a false one. To wit: By the hearing of us, or not
hearing of us. This could not be a Rule to us, who live after the Apostles, if
by hearing us he only meant the Apostles, and not their successors. Yea he
could not mean only the Apostles. For the other Apostles were all dead when
he wrote this. Wherefore, the true sense of S. John is. In this we know the
spirit of truth and the spirit of error, if they hear us. Pastors, and
Governors of the Church. Not that each one of these Pastors, and Governors a
part can say to any one hear me, unless he teach that which all the rest are
sufficiently known to teach, but they in a General Council may most truly
say. Hear us. He that knows God hears us.

9. Tenthly. In declaring the true meaning of the true Scriptures, the practice
and doctrine of the Church is necessary to be followed as a certain Guide. For
example. When Christ said. Do this in remembrance of me. He did impose, says
the Church, a true command to do so. Yet, though Christ, no less clearly,
said (John 13.14.) That we ought to wash one another feet, for I have given
you an example that as I have done. So you also should do. He did not impose,
says the Church, any command obliging us to wash one another feet. For
though he said we ought to wash one an others feet; yet, by the practice and
doctrine of the Church it is assuredly declard to us, that these words of
Christ contain no precept; though the former do.

10. Eleventhly. The same Apostle in his first Epistle Chap. 2.19. after that,
concerning Heretics, he had said: They went out from us. He turns his speech
to those, who still remained in the Church subject, and obedient to it, and of
them he says. But you have the unction from the Holy one and know all things.
To wit the spirit of truth, residing in the Church, to teach her all truth,
makes you, who are guided by the Church, to know all things necessary for your
information and instruction.

11. Twelfly. It is grounded in this infallibility of the Church, that her
Prelates may exact obedience of her Children in captivating their understanding
to the faith, which she (by commission from Christ) delivers unto them. 2.
Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through
God, casting down Imaginations, or Reasonings, and every thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge, and bringing into captivity. All understanding unto
the obedience of Christ and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience.
So S. Paul. But it is most irrational to say God should empower his Church to
force men to follow a Church which being fallible, must needs confess that she
may deceive you, and enforce you to follow errors. Yet, this in a Church
having the infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost, is most rational. For
there you are, to your apparent good, enforced to follow truth in place of such
error as might be most hurtful to you.

Thirteenthly. The same S. Paul tells us that God out of an express intention
which he had to keep us from all wavering, and vnsetlement in faith, resolved
so to assist the Governors of his Church, that we might securely rely upon
them. For Ephesians. 4 11. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some
Evangelists, and other some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
until we all come into the unity of faith. To what end all this? to the end
that we hence forth be no more Children, tossed to, and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftines, from
which his Providence had not thus secured us, unless these our Teachers, had
bee^ infallible, when defining in a lawful council, or proposing what is
universally taught by them,

12. The second sort of Texts proving the infallibility of the Church conteines
such glorius Titles given her, or such admirable things spoke by Gods own mouth
of her, as must needs be vain, empty, and truthles words, if the Church ever
prove to be a Mistress of errors, obtruding them to her Children for divine
verities. First. Psalm. 132.13. Our Lord has chosen Sion, he has chosen it for
an habitation unto himself. This is my rest for ever, and ever Here will I
dwell because I have chosen it. Now Christ's dwelling place, as S. Paul tells
us, is his visible Church. 1. Tim. 3.15. That thou may know how to converse
in the house of God. The Church of the liveing God. He could not be taught how
to converse in an invisible Church: he speaks then of the Church visible. Far
be it from this house to be a store house of errors. For how then could it be
Christ's desirable Habitation and his rest for ever and ever.

13. Again Isa. 54.4. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame. What greater shame or confusion
to a Church which should be the Pillar and ground of truth, to see herself
grown now to profess open superstition, Idolatry and other pernicious errors
in whole swarms. How then is that true which follows.

14. Thirdly. Isai. 60.15. I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of
many generations. Fourthly. v 18. Thou shall call thy walls salvation our Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light. Thy Sun shall go down no more, and
thy Moon shall be no more diminished, because our Lord shall be thine
everlasting light Words manifestly spoken, not of the Elect but of the visible
Church, on earth, even from the beginning of the Chapter for v 10. he tells how
Kings should minister to her, and how he had struck her (when she was the
Synagogue) in his indignation. Which words cannot be understood of the elect,
or the invisible Church, and so he goes still on speaking.

15. Fifthly. In the like sense Chap. 62. v. 3. Thou shall be a crown of glory,
thou shall be no more called forsaken (as thou were when thou were the
Synagogue) but thou shall be called my delight in her. And sixthly, to secure
her from all error contrary to his will, he adds v. 6. Upon thy walls
Jerusalem I have appointed watchmen. And how careless soever thy be by their
own nature yet, by my continual assistance, all the day and all the night for
ever they shall not hold their peace. To wit by crying down errors. For they
had better have held their peace that preached publicly errors every where.
And v. 12. Thou shall be called a City sought for and not forsaken. And yet
Protestants say they did laudably forsake every visible Church upon earth, by
adhering to Luther and his followers, who did separate themselves from all
Churches visible in the whole world, openly professing that as then, there was
no one Church on earth worth seeking for: and so they did not join themselves
in Communion with any Church then upon earth; but pretended to return to the
Primitive Church, as it was above a thousand years before; which is to say,
that, for this whole last thousand years, the Church was a City forsaken, and
that (for so long) her Communion was not to be sought for.

16. Seventhly. There is a very convincing text to prove the Church to be by
divine Providence assuredly provided of faithful Pastors and Governors Ierem.
33. v. 25 If I have not put my Covenant to night, and day, and laws to the
heaven and earth; then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my
servant, that I do not take from his seed Princes to be Rulers over the seed
of Abraham Isaac and Jacob. So that we shall be as sure not to fail of
faithful Princes, and Governors in the Church (for none but such, as are
truly faithful, can be truly said to be the true sons of Jacob and David.)
As we are sure to have night, and day; the heaven turning over us, and the
earth standing still under us.

17. Eeightly. The Prophet Ezech. Chapter 34.22. I will save my flock, and it shall
be no more into spoil. But what spoil would that scabb of error make over all
Christ's flock, if it so infected it all, as Protestants say it did, yea they
will have even Idolatry it self (the most deadly murraine) to have infected
the whole Church this last thousand years and more.

18. The third and last sort of Texts to prove this infallibility, contain
such as plainly say that God will still direct his Church to follow truth, or
that it shall not revolt from the truth, but be a most direct way to the truth:
that the spirit of truth shall be, as it were, entailed upon the doctrine of
the Church with which Church this spirit shall ever abide teaching her all
truth. So first Isa: 61.8. I will direct their work in truth, and I will make
an everlasting Covenant with them of preserving this never failing truth.
Secondly. Behold how plain and direct a way to truth is promised the Church of
Christ. Isa. 35. v. 5. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened etc. And a
high way shall be there, and it shall be called the way of Holiness (the Holy
Catholic Church) the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err there in.
It is therefore a way infallibly leading to truth. Thirdly the same Prophet
Chap. 59. v. 20. There shall come a Redeemer to Sion, and to them that shall
return from iniquity in Jacob says our Lord. As for me this my Covenant with
them. My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed from this present, and for ever. With what clearer
words could the spirit of truth be entailed upon the Church present in each
age? or be more clearly said to Reside ever in her mouth with which she
delivers all her doctrine?

19. Fourthly, Most clearly Ier. 32.39. I will give them one heart and one way
that they may fear me for ever: I will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
that I will not turn a way from them, but will putt fear in their hearts that
they shall not depart from me. Note I pray these words I will putt my fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Wherefore they did not revolt
from him; they did not depart from him. Fifthly: no less fully speaks the
Prophet Ezech. 37.24. My servant David King over them, and there shall be one
sheapheard over them all. They shall walk in my judgment, and observe my
statutes, and do them. Moreover I will make a Covenant of peace with them; it
shall be an everlasting Covenant with them; and I will set my Sanctuary in the
midst of them for ever more. How fully is all this spoken of a visible Church
having one theapherd over all. Yea the very Heathens shall know who they be,
as there is said. Sixthly: that according to the Prophet Micheas Chapter 4.5. All
people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the
name for our Lord God for ever. Which they do not, who walk in a labyrinth of
gross errors for a thousand years together; it follows. I will make Her
who was cast of a strong nation and the Lord shall reign over the from hence
forth and for ever.

20. Seaventhly: Matthew. 16.18. The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
If Hell could ever come to make the Church a Mistress of errors so as to hold
them forth for divine verities so many ages together, the gates of Hell should
highly prevail against her. Now I pray note, that for many ages, there were no
Christians, which were not either manifest Heretics (and held so by the
Protestants themselves) or which did not (as all Roman Catholics now do)
worship, and adore Christ, as much under the shape of bread in the Eucharist,
as they worship him sitting at the right hand of his father. If this be
Idolatry the gates of Hell have prevailed against the Roman Church: yea and
against the Churches in Greece, in Armenia, in Aethiopia, etc. who all, ever
since they were Christians, have held this our doctrine, and do still hold it,
though they add a world of other errors. Where then shall the Protestants find
Christ a Church against, which the gates of Hell have not a vast long time
together prevailed? They must either be forced to make Christ false in this
his doctrine, or to confess our doctrine true. If it be not; how was this
Covenant everlasting as has been so often said in the now cited Texts? and
also the Text following in which Christ made the everlasting Covenant formerly
promised to be made.

Eighthly: S. John Chapter 14. v. 16. And he will give you an other Paraclete that
may abide with you for ever, the spirit of Truth, whom the world knows not:
but you know him, because he dwells with you, and shall be in you. Now the
Apostles not being to be for ever, and the spirit of Truth being promised for
ever, we cannot but say that the promise of this spirit of Truth is made also
to the successors of the Apostles, the Governors of Christ's Church, to abide
in them, and be in them, as the spirit of Truth, directly opposite to the
spirit of error. So ninthly. John 16.12. Many things I have to say unto you
but you cannot bear them now (hence appears how weighty those thinghs were)
but when the spirit of Truth comes, he will guide you into all Truth To
private persons the Holy Ghost is given as the spirit of sanctification but to
the Church he is given as the spirit of Truth guiding her into all Truth and so
directly excluding all error from her.

22. Tenthly: that convincing place of S. Paul shall end all these Texts: 1.
Tim. 3.15. where speaking of the visible Church in which he teaches Timothy
how to Converse the speaks thus. That thou may know how to behave thy self
in the house of God, which is the Church of the liveing God, the Pillar and
ground of Truth Can I lean more assuredly then upon the Pillar of Truth? Can I
even wish, to have a surer ground, then the ground of Truth? And yet such a
ground is the Church acknowledged in this Text, if it be not perverted by such
interpretations as be the inventio^s of me^; but of men unable to confirm
their interpretation by any Text clearer the^ this. Here the^ behold we have
produced no fewer the^ thirty texts for the infallibility of the Church.
Whereas not half so many nor half so co^vincing Texts ca^ be alleged against
it. And yet grant this, and you must grant all. Note that besides these 30.
Texts here alleged, I have also all those numerous and most full Texts
related at large Point 3. For whatsoever proves that the true Church cannot
fail to be a true church, proves also her infallibility. For truth of
doctrine is essential to a true Church. If therefore by being fallible and
erring the whole Church could recede from the true doctrine of Christ, it
manifestly follows that the whole Church could fail to be a true Church
contrary to these most express Scriptures there plentifully alleged.

23. Most impertinent is the distinction, which our adversaries use, to avoid
the force of these Texts. They say that the Church may be taken in two ways:
first for the visible Church, containing all believers, as well reprobate, as
elect: and this Church they say may err. Secondly for the invisible Church,
which only contains the elect: and this they say cannot err. But this is a
palpable contradiction if well noted. For this invisible Church of the elect,
which, as you say, cannot err, is contained in the visible Church, in which,
as you say, both reprobate, and elect are contained: which visible Church (you
also say) may wholly err. But if the whole visible Church wholly err then
also the elect (contained in it) may err: or if they cannot err the^ many in
the visible Church cannot err. And yet you cannot find many, in any Church
visible upon earth, whom you can show on the one side to have differed from
the belief of the Roman Church, and on the other to have been guarded from
error, as those, who make the true Church, must be. Again I have showed that
many Texts here by me cited speak clearly of the visible Church.

THE SIXTH POINT. That the Roman Church is this infallible Church, and our judge
in all points of Controversy.
1. THough this Question seems to import as much as the certain decision of
all our Controversies, yet having been so long in the former Point, we are
able to give in a word full satisfaction in this. For no man will deny the
Church, which is proved to be infallible, to be the most commodious decider of
all Controversies. For what can a man wish more to the right decision of his
Controversy then a clear sentence delivered there in by an infallible
authority?

2. All that can be imagined against what has been said, is this. That we have
not as yet proved the Roman Church to be infallible. We have indeed proved the
true Church to be so, but there seems a vast labor to remain to prove the
Roman Church to be this true infallible Church, and consequently the decider of
all Controversies. I most earnestly therefore beg of my Reader to note well
this one short demonstration, and he will see how evidently convincing it is,
to prove home our full intent even in a word.

3. My demonstration is this. No Church can be the true infallible Church, and
decider of all Controversies which teaches herself to be fallible. For if any
such Church be infallible in all that she teaches; she is infallible also in
teaching herself to be fallible. And hence it follows that infallibly such a
Church is fallible: but every Church in the world but the Roman teaches
herself to be fallible: wherefore (by evident demonstration) no other Church,
upon earth, can be infallible. But the true Church is infallible: (as has been
proved by no fewer then thirty Texts) therefore by evident consequence* the
Roman Church (by all those Texts) is proved the only true Church, and our Judge
in all our Controversies.

THE SEVENTH POINT. That the Chief Pastor of this Church is the successor of
S. Peter.
1. THe old Testament helps us thus far in this Point that it teaches, first
that amongst the Priests of the old law one was chosen successively to be the
highest and chief Priest Number. 3.32. The Prince of Princes of the Levitts
Eliazar the son of Aaron the Priest. And Number. 27.21. If any thing be to be
done (for Iosue their Governor) Eliazar the Priest shall consult our Lord. At
his word shall he (Iosue) go out, and go in, and all the rest of the Children
of Israel with him. By going in, and going out, all the principal actions are
usually understood in Scripture. In those actions therefore God would have
Iosue, and all the people to depend on the high Priest. When then we read Iosue
3.8. that Iosue did command the Priests, and that Chapter 5. he appointed
Circumcision to be ministered, and that Chapter 24. he renewed God's Covenant etc.
he is to be supposed therein (as in all his principal actions) to have
proceeded according to the above cited Text, only executing that, which God, by
Eleazar the Priest, had ordained him to do. For example: to command the Priests
to go with the Arc into Iourdan, to administer Circumcision, to renew the
Covenant with God etc. Again when Princes are also Prophets (as Iosue, David,
Solomon (and some others were) they might have some extraordinary commission to
do, and order several things, which belong not to the ordinary Jurisdiction of
temporal Princes. So, Kings 2.27. Solomon cast out Abiather, that he should
not be the Priest of our Lord yet this was done, that the word of our Lord
might be fullfilled which he spoke concerning the house of Hell. Solomon also
as a Prophet, by extrordinary commission v. 35. Placed sadoe the Priest for
Abiathar.

2. Secondly we have clearly in the old Testament the distinction of the
chief Ecclesiastical and chief secular Power 2. Chr. 19.11. And behold
Amariath the chief Priest, is over you in all matters of the Lord, that is
Ecclesiastical affairs. Then for temporal, or secular affairs Zebediath,
the Ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings matters whence it is clear
that the former causes are not matters which aperteine to the Kings.

3. Thirdly we have the old law Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. commanding all such causes, as
are Ecclesiastical causes, to be brought to the Tribunal of the High Priest,
and his sentence to be obeyed even under pain of death. I call them
Ecclesiastical causes, because the former Text says, they be matters of the
Lord, and distinct from matters of the King.

4. Fourthly we have out of the new Testament this unanswerable Text concerning
the high Priests even of the old law Matthew. 23.2. Upon the chair of Moses
have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees; all therefore whatsoever they shall say
unto you observe and do it. No wikedness of the high Priests his person shall
excuse your obedience, if he sit upon the chair of Moses. Moses was not
only a secular Prince but also the first high Priest amongst the Jews Moses
and Aaron amongst his Priests Psalm. 99.6. Now those who succeed Moses as he
was high Priest, are said to sit upon the chair of Moses; for as he was the
secular Prince of the people; Iosue, in that dignity did succeed him. But he
had but part of his glory, so Number. 27. v. 18. Take Iosue the sone of Nun a man
in whom it the spirit, and put thy hand upon him, who shall stand before
Eliazar Priest, and thou (o Moses) shall put some of thine honor upon him.
Now the one part of Moses his honor was to be a secular Prince and commander
in chief. In this dignity, Iosue did succeed him. But in Levit. Chapter 8. God
commanded Moses to inuest Aaron with the other part of his dignity, which was
to be High Priest. But when Aaron now came to dye, God said to Moses Number.
20.26. Take Aaron and his son with him and when thou have unvested the father
of his vestiture, thou shall revest therewith Eleazar his son, Moses did as
our Lord commanded him. And thus successively God provided his Church of high
Priests. Neither (for the wikedness of any of them) did he cease to govern his
Church by them, even by heavenly and supernatural assistance. As bad, as
Cayphas was, yet, because he was the high Priest, he did prophesy Io. 11.51. He
said not this of himself, but being the high Priest of that year, he
prophesyed that Jesus should dye for the Nation.

5. The old law being now transferred to the new, it was necessary that the
Priesthood also should be transferred, these two going togather. Hebr. 7.12.
wherefore the new law being the Lady, the old the hand maid as S. Paul
speaks; the new law also, according to him being established upon better
promises. Hebr. 8.6. we may, with all ground in Scripture, expect to see
Christ's church ever provided of such high Priests, as shall, by his bounty,
have many advantages above the high Priests of the old law. Christ then
intending to build his new church, he called to him even amongst the first of
his Apostles Simon and presently changed his name into Cephas; which is
interpreted Peter, a Rock Io. 1.42. To this Simon Matthew. 16.18. he says: Thou
art Peter, which in that language, which Christ spoke, is as much, as to say:
Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. The wisest of men
designs a sure Rock for the everstanding building of his church in the midst
of all winds and waves, and if any one say that Christ himself is a Rock so
as not to communicate this Rock-like firmity of his also to S. Peter, he
flatly contradicts Christ's saying: Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church. If any man should take a fair stone in his hand, and say:
Thou art a fair goodly solid stone, and upon this stone I intend to raise a
Chapel. Who would conceive this man in the last part of his speech to point at
any other stone the^ that which he had in his hand? True it is that Christ is
the fundation; yet with out any dishonor to him, (nay to the increase of his
honor) he communicates that very title of fundation to others. So Ephesians. 2.20.
we are said: Built upon the fundation of the Apostles and Prophets: Jesus
Christ being the thief corner stone. Christ then is the chief Rock of an
everlasting perpetuity, and this by his own virtue. S. Peter is a Rock
standing firm everlastingly, not by his own virtue, but by the virtue of
Christ, and made thus not for his own sake but for Christ's churches sake,
Christ intending that this his church should stand for ever as I proved Point
3. Whence Christ adds upon this Rock I will build my Church. We willingly grant
that the church was to be built, not upon the shoulders of S. Peter but upon
his faith; yet his faith must not be taken as separated from his person, but it
must be taken as the thing chiefly regarded in his person; for which to him
personally this dignity was given: yet given chiefly for the perpetual good of
the church to be built upon him. Wherefore lest the building should be
shattered at his death, this firm perpetuity of a Rock, that is this says of
his which Christ prayed should never fail. Luc. 22.32. was to be derived to
his lawful successors: as the chair of Moses ever had the successors of
Moses sitting in it: for no well ordered common wealth is destitute of
sufficient means, still to provide her of her lawful Heads and Governors
appointed her successively. And as it is not enough to say, Christ is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords therefore the civil common wealth needs no other King
or Lord. So it seems far greater nonsense to say, that because Christ is the
chief head, and Priest of the church, therefore we, upon earth, need no other
head to govern such a common wealth as the Church is, containing so many
several people, of so many nations, natures, customs, and dispositions, as be
found from the rising of the su^ne, to the going down of the same, though this
so far spread commonwealth were intended, from the beginning, to last as long
as the Sun and Moon. It was then for this, his churches sake, that some one
was ever to be first and Chief in it.

6. Now says S. Matthew numbering the Apostles (Princes of the Church) The
names of the twelve Apostles be these, The first, Simon, who is called Peter.
Matthew. 10.2. And so in all places where the Apostles are counted, as Judas is
allwaise the last, so S. Peter is counted first: and as it was said of Eliazar
that he was the Prince of Princes of the Levites. Number. 3.32. So amongst the
spiritual Princes of Christ's Church, S. Matthew does not only count him first,
but plainly says he was the first The first Simon who is called Peter. He was
neither the first in order of calling to the Apostle shipe, nor in age. For his
Brother Andrew was before him in both these, Io. 1. Again to signify that he
was the head and chief in ordinary; Christ said to him Matthew. 16.19. And to
thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. For though the power of
loosing, and binding was afterward given to the other Apostles, John 20.23. yet
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven are never in Scripture, said to be given to
any but to S. Peter. The giving of the Keys, is well known to signify
naturally the supreme Rule in a city, or family. Hence the Keys of the city
are offered to the chief Governors at their entrance. So also the Keye of
the house of David is given to Christ being to reign in the house of David for
ever. Here Christ gives the Keys to S. Peter as to his successor in the house
of God, which is the Church of the living God. 1. Tim. 3.15. By these Keys is
signified the plenitude of highest power.

7. Again John 21.15. Simon of John love thou me more then these? Feed my
lambs. And yet again, v. 17. Feed my sheep. Note that he would not have
required greater love in Peter, rather then in any of the rest nor have said
love thou me more then these? if he had not here intended to give him higher
dignity in Pastorship then to the rest. If every one of the other Apostles be
sheep of Christ S. Peter is here made Pastor to every one of them for he is
commanded to feed them. Note again (and principally) that the whole flock of
Christ his lambs, his sheep, his subjects and their Rulers, did not consist
of those only men who then lived, but much more of all such faithful men as
were to be of the flock and Church of Christ, even from his days to the end of
the world. Wherefore this high Pastorship being as we said chiefly instituted
by Christ, out of his love and care to his flock, and not merely out of the
desire of honoring S. Peter, was by ordinary course of succession to be,
devolved to all posterity.

8. And that no man should say that this succession shall everfaile, Thus says
our Lord (Ier. 33.17.) David shall never want a man to fit upon the throne of
the house of Israel, and of the Priests and Levits there shall not fail a man
etc. And he adds that his Covenant should sooner be made void with the day and
the night then his Covenant should be made void with David his servant. That
there be not of him a son to reign in his throne and Levits and Priests his
Ministers. And the Prophet Esau in his last Chapter, tells us that in the new
law these Levits shall not be borne Levits of the Tribe of Levi or any
particular Tribe or Nation, but by election, they shall be chosen to be Levits
out of several Nations particularly of Italians, Graecians, Affricans, and the
Islands a far of; though the English Bible does not translate these names, I
will take (says he) of them to be Priests and Levits. But shall there not
still be one chief Pastor of these never decaying races of Priests and
Levits? yes there shall, And they shall have one shepherd or Pastor over them
all. Ezech. 37.24.

THE EIGHT POINT. That this our chief Pastor, or Pope is not Antichrist.
1. BEcause there is never a pulpit in England in which the Pope has not been
preached, by all our Ministers to be not only Antichrist, but also the
Antichrist, who is so much spoken of and detested in Scriptures, I thought
fit to make my dear country men see with their own eyes, how unconscionably
these their Ministers so universally deal with them in this point, in which
they can not but see (if indeed they read and will understand) how flatly,
and point blank this doctrine is against most manifest Scripture.

2. First. The Scripture teaches clearly that Antichrist is one particulare
determinate man, and not any rank of several distinct men successively living
one after the other as Popes do. Hence 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Antichrist is called
That man of sin the son of perdition. The adversary. And Apoc. 13.14. An
image shall be made of this particular person, where as no such image can
represent those hundreds of Popes who have sit in S. Peter's chair. Again
there it follows that this particular man shall have a special name, and
such a peculiar number shall express this name: For it is the number of a man.
A man, I say and not many me^ succeeding one an other as Popes are. Whence it
follows. The number of him is six hundred sixty six. Of that Him, whom Christ
also insinuated to be one particular man when he said Io. 5.43. If an other
shall come in his Name him you will receave. Whereas no one of the Popes was
yet received by the Jews. Wherefore of the Pope it is false to say the Jews
have received him. And this is the second reason why the Pope according to
Scripture is not Antichrist.

3. Thirdly, this one particular man shall not come until we be close
bordering upon the very last end of the world. Mark 13.24. But in those days
after that tribulation (of Antichrist) the Sun shall be darkened. Popes have
been ever since S. Peter's days, and that which you all call Popery has been
(as you confess) above these thousand years and yet the Sun shines upon the
world as clearly as ever.

4. Fourthly, this one special man shall reign but a short time, where as
these Popes (upholders of confessed Popery) have reigned these many Ages.
Antichrist shall reign but three years and a half, a time, and times, and
half a time. Dan. 7.25. And Apoc. 12.14. Hence Dan. 12.11. this time is
further expounded to be a thousand two hundred and nynety days. And the Church
a little after this persecution began, shall fly into the wilderness for a
thousand two hundred and sixty days. And for this time of 1260. days the two
witnesses shall prophesy. Apoc. 11.3. For the persecution of Antichrist shall
last but two and forty months as it there expressy said. And Apoc. 13.5. Power
was given (to the beast) to continue two and forty months. The time therefore
of Antichrists reign shall be short. For the elect the days shall be shortened
Matthew. 24.22. So Apoc. 20.3. it is said that the devil shall be let loose for
the short time of Antichrists reign. After these things he must be loosened a
little time. That is after Christ has bound up the devil, during the long time
of the new Testament (described there by the complete and perfect number of a
thousand years) he shall be let loose for the short time of the reign of
Antichrist.

5. Fifthly, all the Ministers in England, or out of England, can never be able
to show that the Pope did ever kill two such witnesses as Antichrist is
clearly said to kill Apoc. 11.6. That is two witnesses who shall prophesy one
thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in sackloath, who shall have power
to shutt the heavens that it may not rain in the days of there prophesy; and
power of the waters to turn them into blood. And to strike the earth with all
plagues as often as they will. If your Ministers will prove the Pope to be
Antichrist they must not only prove that he did kill two such witnesses, as
they are (for the true Antichrist must do this) but also they must prove
that the Pope did kill two such witnesses in Jerusalem leaving their bodies
lying in the streets thereof. For this also the true Antichrist must do,
because it follows v. 7. The beast shall kill them. And their bodies shall
lie in the streets where their Lord was crucified, that is in Jerusalem.

6. Sixthly. Hence appears that the chief seat of Antichrist shall be at
Jerusalem where he shall most show his power and glory whence it was also said
before that the Jews should receave him, and the Holy Fathers commonly say he
shall be borne a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan, which is the cause why that Tribe
was not numbered with the rest Apoc. 7. neither could the Jews receave him if
he were not borne a Jew. None of these things agree to the Pope and yet they
all agree to Antichrist.

7. Seaventhly, the beast which shall set up the power of Antichrist shall
make fire come down from heaven to earth in the sight of men. Apoc. 13.13.
Tell me what setter up of the Popes power did ever do this?

8. Eighthly there also v. 17. it is said that he also shall effect that no man
shall buy or sell but he that has the Character or name of the beast or number
of his name. In what Popes days was this verified?

9. Ninthly and lastly 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. That one special man, (who is called
that man of sin) is extolled above all that is called God or (all) that is
worchiped. Now whosever is extolled above all that is God, is not only extolled
above judges, and Kings, sometimes called Gods (as all just men are) but to be
extolled above all that is called God, he must be extolled above God himself,
who (in the very first place) is called God. So he that is extolled above (all)
that is worshipped must be extolled not only above Princes and Kings, but above
saints and Angels, and God himself. Now neither does the Pope extol himself
or is extolled by any of his adherents above the Apostles or Angels, and much
less above God himself showing himself. That he is God, as there said
Antichrist shall do.

THE NINTH POINT. Of the Sacraments of the Church, and of the Ceremonies which
the Church uses in administrating these Sacraments as also in other occasions.
1. HAving treated of the Church, and her chief Pastor it follows to treat
of the Sacraments of this Church. And because our Church uses several
ceremonies in the administration of these Sacraments (and especially in
sacrifice of the Mass) as also in other several occasions (a thing much
scoffed at by our adversaries.) We will here also treat of these Ceremonies.

2. First then concerning Sacraments in general before we come to treat of
every particular Sacrament to prevent mistakes, I define a Sacrament to be An
outward sign instituted by Christ, signifying the inward grace which it
confers, when duly received. And here it must be exactly noted, that every such
outward sign, or holy ceremony (by the applying of which, inward grace is
infallibly conferred when it is duly received) must needs be a sign, or
ceremony instituted by Christ. For no body but Christ, could annex the
infallible gift of inward grace to the applying of such an outward sign.

3. Now if any one will stand contending to prove, that a Sacrament is some
thing else, and ought to be defined otherwise, all that I need to say in
confutation of him, is that I will find in Scripture seven such holy signs or
ceremonies, to the due application of which the gift of inward grace is
infallibly annexed. And for this reason I say that these be either seven true
Sacraments, or else seven things much better then those which your definition
will allow to be Sacraments* For by these seven, that divine quality of
heavenly grace is conferred; by yours it is not. But before I come to show our
seven Sacraments in particular to be such holy signs or Ceremonies instituted
by Christ (from whom all grace is derived) I will in the second place treat,
of the Ceremonies of the Church which Protestants are pleased to account
foolish, Childish, Apish, Comicall etc.

4. I say then that the light of reason teaches us in all actions (which we
desire to raise above the Rank of vulgar Actions) to devise some Ceremonies to
set that action forth in such a manner, that all shall, by the very sight of
it, be stirred up to apprehend such an action to be far surpassing ordinary
things. So in the solemn inauguration of great Princes, in the coronatio^ of
Kings, in their going to sit in Parlaments, yea in their carrying to their
graves and interment, great choice is made of exquisite ceremonies to set
forth these actions; so that they may be raised much above the strain of
vulgar actions: wherefore seeing no actions deserve more esteem, or to be
raised to a higher degree of reverence and veneration amongst the Christian
people, then the chief actions of our Religion, it was wholly convenient that
the administration of the Sacraments (being the chiefest of these actions)
should chiefly of all other actions be graced and set forth with some kind of
ceremonies, such as the Church should think fittest, that so all the vulgar, by
the very sight of those actions, may be excited to conceave a sacred esteem of
those actions, set forth so mystically, in a manner quite different from
ordinary, and vulgar actions. By this argument and not by any Text of Scripture
you must justify your Ministers surplice.

The law of nature (which was before the Ceremonial law) did teach the holiest
men of that law thus to raise the most pious actions they solemnly performed by
addition of certain ceremonies. So Holy Jacob Genesis 28.18. Arrising in the
morning took the stone that he had laid under his head and erected it for a
title (or monument) and poured out oil upon the top of it. A ceremony so
far from being superstitious that Genesis 31.13. God approves this fact
appearing to Jacob and saying: I am the God of Bethel where thou did anoint
the stone and did vow thy vow to me.

5. And because our adversaries scoff at ceremonies as if they were ridiculous
things, we desire them to reflect whether a heathen may not as well scoff at
the Jewish Ceremonies appointed by God himself, as indeed the Jews both by the
Greeks and the old Romans were held for the most superstitious people of the
world upon that account. And though the Jewish Ceremonies appointed by God do
now cease, yet it is now blasphemy to say any one of them were foolish, Apish,
comicall gestures. Yet looked upon with carnal eyes, they may (to the full) as
much appear to have bin so, as the Ceremonies of the Church appear to you.
For example: what a mimicall action would you account it in us if we should in
the Consecration of the Pope appoint that the tippe of his right ear ande the
thumb and great toe of his right hand and right foot should be the parts
particularly anointed and yet God himself commanded. (Exodus 29. v. 20. That in
the Consecration of Aaron and his sons: Thou shall take of the blood of a Ra^
and put it upon the tippe of the right ear of Aaron and of his sonns and upon
the thumbs and great toes of their right hand and foot. A number of as strange
Ceremonies as these are both in this book of Exodus and particularly in
Leviticus and yet all set down by Gods own appointment. And it is now blasphemy
to say they were ridiculous.

6. But let us pass to the new law though in this all Jewish Ceremonies be
abolished yet is it no where said, that we should serve God without all
Ceremonies, which no nation under heaven ever did, as those who are skilled in
antiquity know. Yea Christ himself was pleased to set forth some more
mystical cures, which he did, with such ceremonies as you would scoff at the^,
if our Church (in far more mystical actions,) had made use of them. So Mark
7. v. 32. in the Cure of a deaf and dumb man. First he took him from the
multitude a part. Secondly he putt his fingars into his ears. Thirdly spitting
he touched his tongue. Fourthly he looked up to heaven. Fifthly he groaned.
Sixthly he used a word deserving special interpretation, saying Epheta that is,
be opened. So also John 8. v. 6. In pardoning the adulteress he twice bowing
himself wrote in the earth God knows what. And in the nynth Chapter curing a man
blind from his nativity v. 6. He spitt on the ground, and made a claye of his
spittle then he spread the clay upon his eyes. Lastly he said unto him, go
wash in the Poole Siloe which is interpreted sent. Thus teaching his Church to
use Ceremonies in such mysterious actions as are ordained to cure our
spiritual deafnes, spiritual dumbnes, spiritual blindness. So we shall see it
to be Scripture that sprinkling of water must be used in Baptism, Imposition
of hands in Confirmation and Ordination; anointing with oil in
Extreme Unction. Before our Lord gave the Eucharist to his Disciples, he (Mark
14.) made choice of a room very spacious and adorned. He first washed his
disciples feet, then setting down he took bread, gave thanks, blessed it,
brake it etc. When he gave his disciples power to absolve and to administer the
Sacrament of Confession Io. 20.22. He first said to them. As my father sent me
so I send you, when he had said this he breathed upon them and he said to them.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins yo shall forgive are forgiven etc. When the
Pastors of our Church use the insufflation or Breathing upon any, for the like
mystical signification you cry a loud, superstition, superstition, an apish
mimicall action etc.

7. There is also one very great commodity in the Churches perscribing such
and such particular ceremonies in such and such actions, that hence it ensues
that all her priests perform all these sacred Rites in administering
Sacraments, offering sacrifice etc. after just one and the selfsame manner all
the world over, which is a most comely and orderly thing and could not have
happened, had not such and such peculiar Rites been prescribed to all.

8. But now if after that we have proved Ceremonies to be reasonable, you ask
why the Church did prescribe just these particular Ceremonies and no other?
First I answer that either these particular Ceremonies are more proper and
seemly and as it were more connaturall to such an actio^, or secondly they are
fittest for some mystical signification. Lastly I say that our unsatisfied
adversaryes would have asked the self same question of any other particular
ceremonies, if the Church had peculiarly appointed them. Even as some men will
curiously be asking. Why did God make the world just at such a particular time,
and not sooner or later? For as S. Augustine wittily answers. Had God made
choice of any other time to make the world you would still have been asking the
very selfsame wise question. Why just now and not sooner, or later? Even so you
would as wisely have been saying. Why just such a Ceremony and not as well
such or such an one? Let this suffice for the Justification of our Ceremonies.

THE TENTH POINT. Of Baptism which is the first Sacrament.
1. I Will first show Baptism to be a Holy sign or ceremony signifying and
causing grace in those who duly receave it Ezech. 36.25. And I will power upon
you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your contaminations.
Behold an outward pouring of water, cleansing inwardly from all contaminations.
The Baptism of S. John was an outward pouring of water, with a solemn
profession of doing penance toward the cleansing of the soul; but no grace
was given by it to cleanse the soul. So Matthew. 3.11. (says S. John Baptist) I
have Baptized you with water but he (Christ) shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost. His baptism shall give this soul-cleansing grace. Again Act. 2.38. Be
every one of you baptized for Remission of your sins and you shall receave the
Holy Ghost. Again Act. 22.16. Rise up ad be baptized and wash away thy sins.
Nothing can cleanse from contamination, give Remission of sins, wash away sins,
but that which gives grace. Again Gala. 3.27. As many of you as are baptized in
Christ, have put on Christ. Hence Baptism is called Tit. 3.5. The washing of
Regeneration and by it man is borne of the spirit. Whence Io. 3.5. Unless a
man be borne again of water and the Holy Ghost he can not enter into the
Kingdom of God. That is to say Baptism so breeds our spiritual birth in God,
as our carnal birth causes our life into the world.

2. Wherefore eve^ the Children of the Just need baptism. For Romans 5.12. Unto
all men death did pass in whom all sinned. Whence David Ps. 51.5* And in sin
did my mother conceave me And therefore unless such an one be born again of
water and the Holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. For of
every one it is said Ephesians. 2.3. We were by nature Children of wrath as also the
rest.

THE ELEVENTH POINT. Of Confirmation.
1. COnfirmation is approved such a Sacrament Act. 8. v. 14. And when the
Apostles that were in Jerusalem had heard that Samaria had received the word of
God they sent unto them Peter and John, woe when they were come, prayed for them
that they might receive the Holy Ghost. For he was not come upon any of them,
but they were only baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus. Then did they impose
their hands upon them (behold the outward sign) and they received the Holy
Ghost. Behold the inward grace, given to those, who, though they had been
baptized, yet they had not received this particular strength, and Confirmation
of special grace which the coming of the Holy Ghost in this Sacrament did
bring unto them. It is also most agreeable to Scripture that this Sacrament be
given not by inferior Priests but by Bishops. Whence Bid excellently notes
that it was not Philip the Apostle who is here said to have converted Samaria
but Philip one of the seven Decons. And so though he could baptize them, yet
he could not give the^ this Sacrament, and therefore the Apostles sent Peter
and John to Samaria. Not to baptize them again but to confirm them. And though
here be no mention of oil; yet it follows not that no oil is to be used in
this Sacrament. For so in the Scripture there is no mention of water, in that
very Text which mentions the institution of Baptism as Matthew the last Teach
all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost. Yet the practice of the Church, testified by all antiquity, sufficiently
teaches the use of oil, or Holy Chrisme in this Sacrament See the Remish
Testament upon the place of the Acts now cited. There also you shall find this
memorable note. That none ever, but known heretics, condemned this Sacrament of
Chrisme. Again Act. 19.5. They were baptized and when Paul had imposed hands on
them the Holy Ghost came upon them. And whereas some say the Text I alleged for
this Sacrament, to prove only the gift of the Holy Ghost, in order to speak
several languages, I remitt them to S. Austin tract. 6. in Ep. Io. Is there
any man (says he) of so perverse a heart as to deny these Children on whom we
now imposed hands, to have received the Holy Ghost, because they speak not
with tongues? Out of which words also you may observe how anciently they then
imposed hands and Confirmed Children when they were of years of discretion,
and could speak wisely though not in any tongue but their own. This is still
our practice.

THE XII. POINT. Of the Holy Eucharist.
1. FIrst, this Holy Sacrament under visible signs of bread and wine
signifying nourishment, does invisibly conteyne the Body and Blood of our Lord
which nourishes up our souls with his grace to life everlasting John 6. v. 48.
I am the bread of life your Fathers did eat Manna in the desert and they dyed.
This is the bread that descends from heaven that if any man eat of it he dye
not. I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever. Behold here the invisible grace. And the bread
which I will give you is my flesh the life of the world. Behold the outward
visible sign truly containing his person who gives the grace. And tell me
not, that it is said of his flesh. The flesh profits nothing. For it is
blasphemy to say so of his flesh of which he says here. My flesh is the life
of the world. A carnal gross manner of understanding, that his flesh was, to
this effect to be eaten in its own kind, (like flesh in the shambles,) does
indeed put upon us a sense in which it is true that his flesh profits nothing.
Neither does his flesh taken (as they took it) that is as the flesh of one who
was only man, profit any thing. But these his words are spirit and life. For
they should raise us in spirit to believe this flesh to be joined to the
divinity, which is so able to give his flesh to be eaten, that, by realy
feading upon it they may be nourished to eternal life.

2. Here then secondly comes in our belief of the real presence of Christ in
the Sacrament which we all profess to be his true body, and consequently not
to be bread, but living bread as S. John calls it, whence follows
Transubstantiation or change of the substance of dead bread into the true Body
of Christ, which we all say to be as truly in the Sacrament, as he is in heaven
at the right hand of his Father. And therefore adoration is no less due to him
here in the Sacrament, then there in heaven, as reason persuades if we can show
that the self same body is really present in the Sacrament. Let the first
proof hereof be taken from the clear, and so often repeated words (even word
for word) in the Ghospel of S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul 1. Cor.
11.24. This is my Body, this is my blood, and in S. John in the words now
cited. If I can show that these places be not to be taken figuratively, but
literally, my buisines is at an end. I think. I can make this evident by this
demonstration.

If these Texts be to be understood figuratively (as you Protestants say) then
questionless the Apostles and their successors did tell the first Christians
that it was so and to gether with their first faith, they received that
doctrine, and they with that faith delivered it to their successors. And thus
all believed for some time. But then you must come to some other time in which
some one man began first to teach, that, those texts are to be understood
literally, as they sound, and that one man taught that Christ was really
present in the Sacrament and being so, was also to be adored. Now when this
one man began this doctrine first (for some one man must have been at first the
beginner) it could not but seem new, as being never heard before; it could
not but seem suspected of falsity, as being notoriously the^ contrary to
what, all true believers in the world, believed. It could not but be manifestly
accounted of all understa^ding men to be Idolatrous, as teaching that to be
adored for God, which all (Instructed by the Apostles and their successors)
taught to be nothingh else but bread and wine. It could not be accounted a
doctrine incredible, which must needs teach the great Body of a man to be wholly
contained in a small quantity of a little piece of Bread. And which must needs
teach one, and the self same Body, to be really present at a thousand several
places, and to be eaten there, and yet to be still present here; which also
must needs teach that there should not be bread and wine where our own senses
tell us there was nothing else but bread and wine; yea where (as then) faith it
self told them the self same. This being so I ask this unanswerable question.
How could this one man (who must first begin to broach this new doctrine) be
able to set it forth so plausibly, that it being a doctrine so against all
reason, all sense, all experience, and all faith of all men (at that time) and
also a thing so hard to persuade men of piety and of understanding for fear
of open Idolatry, and plain innovation in Religion. So hard to persuade bad
and weak understanding persons, who, for no kind of gain, or benefit, were
to be made go directly, not only against their ancient faith, but to go flatly
against their own understanding, and common sense? How could (I say) this one
man be able to persuade this strange, new, unprofitable, hard doctrine, not to
one town only or City, or to one country or nation only, but to the whole
multitude of Christians from the rising of the Sun, even to the goeing down
thereof? And this so that no one is known to have either by word of mouth, or
writing opposed his doctrine, but all to have so readely, and so peaceably, and
so unanimously, embraced it; that no kind of mention should be made in any
history of the lest stop it had, or of the lest contradiction made any where
against it, or of the lest taxing it either of Novelty, or of stra^gnes, yea no
mention is made in any one country (though there be so many countries in
Christianity) when, or where, or by whom, this strange new doctrine was begun.
But behold on the sudden all Christianity (for so it was as all learned men
know) all Christianity, I say, both in the East and the West both amongst those
who hold with the Roman Church, and those who stood in defiance of it, either
amongst the Grecians, Georgieans, Abissins, Aethiopians, all, I say again all
of them, (who would be called Christians) every where firmly believing, every
where professing, and confessing the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
and falling on their knees to adore him. Is it possible that in a point so hard
as this is, so many, so differing in customs, Languages, Manners, Educations,
Interests, Opinions, and beliefes, so distant from one another in place, and
affections: in dictamens and practices, should all be found at once (and no
body can tell at what time first) to consent most unanimously? Could so great a
thing as this be done upon the persuasion of one man, and done so silently,
that no one single writer should be found to record who that omnipotent man
was, or by what means he could possibly effect a thing so incredible all
Christianity over, without finding any where, amongst good or badd, learned or
unlearned any considerable opposition? This seems to me a thing so incredible,
that all, you can say against our faith in this point, is nothing so hard to
believe as this alone. Wherefore if this can not be so (as surely it can not)
you must all be forced to confess, that when the faith was first preached by
the Apostles, and their successors, they did not teach your doctrine
concerning this Sacrament, but they taught and delivered our doctrine. And then
you will soon understand that all the difficulties here mentioned be easy to
be answered. For hence you will easily understand how no other beginning, the^
that of our first Christendom, could be found of this doctrine because such a
doctrine (as this is) found so universally spread over all Christendom, and
never recorded to have been accounted new, or to have had any particular author
or opposer, could not possibly have had any other beginning; or if it had, had
more notice would have be taken of it. But coming in with first Christianity
you can not wonder to see all Christianity found embracing it. And though it be
a doctrine containing so many difficulties, yet being proposed as a part of
that Christian doctrine with all those powerful motives (which first moved all
Christians to be Christians) you can not wonder to see those, who received
Christianity, to receive also this Christian belief. Whereas if they all had,
at first, received the contrary belief, surely at the first proposing of this
known novelty, some body or other, in some one place of Christianity or other,
would have opened his mouth and said. We can not adore that for God which the
whole torrent of Antiquity, from Christ to us, has taught to be bread as also
our senses tells us. Had it been to be adored, the Apostles, and those who were
taught by them, would have taught us so, or at lest some where some body or
other, would have heard some news of this doctrine before now. But that which
You say is too new to be true, it is too contrary to all peoples faith, to all
practice, to all reason and common sense. Can any man imagine that in all
Christianity there was neither grace nor wit enough to say this. And certinly,
at that time the very saying of this, must needs have quite overthrown that
new Paradox, or at lest have withdrawn thousands in all nations from following
of it, with so great facility. For, against a novelty so notorius, and so
absurd so much would have been said, so much would have bee^ written, so much
would have been acted in Counsels, either General, or National, or
Provincial, that some small mention of all this would have come to notice of
Posterity, as we see things of a thousand times lesser concernment have done.
Even by your own bakwardness to believe Transubstantiation, and by your great
wondering at us for believing it, and by the many, and great difficulties,
which you still object against us, you may clearly see, how evidently true all
that is which I have here so fully set down, because it imports so much.

3. Let us go on now, when (John 6.) Christ said: I am the bread of life v.
48. and v. 51. The bread which I will give you is my flesh for the life of the
world. The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves saying (as you Protestants
say) how can this man give us his flesh to eat? Jesus therefore said unto
them: Amen amen I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man
and drink his blood you shall not have life in you. My flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed. These things he said teaching in the Synagogue.
And he was so far from declaring himself to speak figuratively that by all
he was conceived so manifestly to mean literally, that many of his disciples
(and not only ill affected persons) hearing said, This saying is hard and who
can believe it? And all this happned though, even then, he told them that the
words he spoake to them were spirit and life. Because as I said these words
ought to have raised up their spirits to believe this flesh of his not to be
mere man's flesh, but to be joined with the divinity, which was able (by virtue
of its omnipotency) to give them his flesh to eat like bread, and his blood to
drink like wine: yet there being not faith enough for this high point From
that time many even of his disciples went back and walked no more with him. v.
67. That you may evidently see how hard this doctrine would have sounded at
first broaching of it in the Church if Christ had not delivered it, seeing
that, at that very time, when it came first, even from his mouth it found so
small acceptance even amongst many of his disciples Jesus therefore said to the
twelve will you also depart? Peter answered we believe and know thou art the
son of God. And so art able by that thy divinity (to which thy flesh is joined)
to give us thy flesh to eat like bread. Now to what end had either this been
said, or Christ (the lover of souls) permitted all those many disciples to go
back to their ruin, and now to walk no more with him, to what end this, if he
might have saved them all by declaring, in a word, that he only intended to
give a sign, or figure of his body to eat. This one word would have saved
both the^ and would also have saved those millions, and millions which
afterward believed these words to be literally meant, as I expounded them,
and S. Peter seems to have understood them, when to make them appear credible,
he said we believe and know thou art the Son of God. And consequently that
thou can make good thy word, which had been a very easy matter, if he only
spoke of giving his flesh to be eaten in a mere sign or figure of it: had S.
Peter thought this I dare say he would have pulled the other disciples
backsaying our master only speaks of giving a sign of his body. Had this been
so, then also undoubtedly the other Evangelists, when they had come to write
of this mystery (which had scandalized so many before their writing) would not
have increased the scandal by writing so unanimously of this Sacrament in words
sounding so loud a litterall sense as these do This is my body; this is my
blood. But they would rather have lessned the difficulty by declaring it only
to be a figure, which they might have done in a word, S. Paul was so far from
declaring it to be so that (1. Cor. 11. v. 27.) he flatly says: Therefore
whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the Chalice of our Lord unworthily he
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Which could not be unless
he received the Body and Blood truly, and not in a figure only. To eat a Paper
picture of Christ, makes no such heinous guilt though it be done by a sinner
and it be also a figure of his body.

4. S. Luke also had been particularly to blame in increasing the scandal by
expressing so clearly a litterall sense Chap. 22. v. 19. This is my body which
is give^ for you. This cup is the new Testament in my Blood which Chalice shall
be shedd for you. I say which Chalice that is that which is contained in the
Chalice shall be shed for you. Now wine was not shed for us, but his true
blood. His true blood therefore was the thing contained in the Chalice. For
though by the Latin or English words, we can not tell whether Christ said, his
blood should be shed for the^ or the Chalice, or Cup, yet S. Luke writing in
Greek makes it evide^t to all (who know that language) that he said the Chalice
should be shed for us for he speaks in the nominative case by a word which can
not agree with the blood which in Greek is the dative. Now thus having proved
that Christ literally said: This is my body I have proved also that this is
not bread. For it is his body which is as good a consequence as this, this is a
stone, therefore it is not bread. Or, this is not bread, for it is a stoone.

5. Coming now out of Scripture to answer the chief okjections I begin with
one which does afford me a new strong argument. They object then Idolatry to us
for adoring that which is bread. I answer that according to Scripture Idolatry
can not be found in the only visible Church of Christ for Scripture says
clearly of this Church Ifa. 2.18. And Idols shall be utterly abolisht. Again
Ezech. 36.25. And I will power upon you clean water etc, and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you. And in the next Chapter v. 23. Neither shall they
defile themselves any more in their Idols. Again Micheas Chap. 5.12. Thou shall
no more adore the works of thy hands. Again Zachar. 13. v. 1. In that day shall
be a fountain lying open to the house of David. And it shall be in that day,
says the Lord of Hosts I will cast of the names of Idols out of the Land, and
they shall be remembered no more. Hence I argue thus. In the whole visible
Church there continued, and does still continue adoration of the Sacrament, but
Idolatry did not continue in the whole Church visible, therefore adoration of
the H. Sacrament is not Idolatry. Moreover if worshipping this H. Sacrament
were Idolatry all Christianity (for many ages practizing this adoration) had
committed Idolatry, and Christ's Church (for so many ages) had quite failed, as
is clear out of the third and fourth point. For Christ had no other Church for
many ages but that which every where practiced this Idolatry as you miscall it.
Or, tell me if you can, what other visible Church Christ had upon earth
different from the Roman in faith and worshipe for the thousand years before
Luther. If this be the only visible Church Christ had upon earth, then I have
proved it could not be guilty of Idolatry.

6. Against such a torrent of Scripture as we have for us, you ground
yourselues not in Scripture, but in Philosophy, which, tried by Scripture, will
be found to fail you in all your objections. First then you object that an
accident can not be without a substance. We answer out of Genesis 1.3. God said
be light made, and light was made. Light is a quality or accident. Yet hence S.
Basil, S. Greg. Naz. and Theodoret are of opinion that light was without any
subject at all: for the Scripture specifyes no subject in which it was put.
Whence follows that at lest they must needs think it possible that light
should be without a subject. Secondly, you object that the same body of Christ
can not be multiplied so often over. We answer again out of Gen 2.21. Our Lord
God cast a dead sleep upon Adam and when he was fast a sleep he took one of
his ribbs and filled up flesh for it. And our Lord God built the ribbe which he
took of Adam into a woeman. I ask how many times over must this one ribbe be
multiplied, before a whole woeman (of a comely proper stature) could be made up
of it? After the same manner God can of one ordinary brick make a pillar of
many foot high by multiplying that one brick. In the like manner our Savior
multiplied those five Barley loaves with which he fed above five thousand men.
Io. 6. For if he made new loaves he did not feed them with those five, but
with those many hundred new loaves which he made and yet the Scripture says v.
12.13. After they were filled they gathered the remnants and filled twelve
baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves and not of any new loaves
created by Christ: so that the bread which was eaten remained still to be
eaten. And it is worth our noting that our Savior did this miracle immediately
before he did first declare this strange doctrine of giving his flesh to be
eaten like bread by every one, that so when he should presently declare this
strange doctrine they should have no reason to disbelieve the possibility
thereof. For his disciples seeing, that he had done that most prodigious
miracle so very lately, ought not presently to have said: This is hard and who
can hear it. Neither ought they so soon to have walked a part from him, as
there S. John says they did but rather they ought to have said with S. Peter
We believe and know thou art the Son of God, able to make they words good as
thou wart able so to multiply so few loaves.

7. Hence appears a solution of that which also they still object: one body
can not be in two places at once. For if whole Eve were made of one ribbe of
Adam (as the Scripture testifies) surely the whole substance of that one ribbe
must have been in many places or else Eve would have been a very little woeman,
or Adam must have had very great ribbs. Again our Protestants commonly read
thus Act. 3.21. Whom the heavens truly must conteyne (we read Receive) until
the time of Restitution of all things. Hence they infer that after Christ's
Ascension the heavens at all times must conteyne his body. Therefore (say they)
after his Ascension his body can not be on earth. This their own Text shall
refute them thus. The heavens must at all times, after his Ascension conteyne
his body. But after his Ascension the earth also did conteyne his body.
Therefore his body can be contained in two distant places. And, if in two, why
not in three, and more? Make the Scripture judge of this point, and it will
clearly cast you, for did not Christ, after his Ascension appear in his true
body to S. Paul Act. 9. Who said who art thou Lord, and he, I am Jesus. v. 5.
And v. 17. Ananias says to him. The Lord, even Jesus that appeared, unto thee
in the way that thou camst. That he appeared in his own true body I prove by
evident Scripture. For, by reason of this his apparition, S. Paul numbers
himself amongst those who with their own eyes had seen Christ, risen again in
his true body. For laboring to prove Christ's Resurrection in a true, and not
in a fantastical body (as some Heretics will have it) he proves it by eye
witnesses, who all must have seen Christ now risen in his true body, or else
their testimony is vainly brought to prove a true Resurrection of the flesh; he
then bringing eye witnesses, who had seen Christ now risen in his true body,
makes himself as true an eye witness of this as any other. For thus he
speaks 1. Cor. 15. v. 4 etc. He rose again and was seen of Cephas after that
of the eleven. Then he was seen of more then five hundred Brethren together
moreover he was seen of James then of all the Apostles. And lastly of all he
was seen also of me. To wit in his true body, or else all others may be said
to have seen him in a fantastical body, and also because any other manner of
seeing him, had been to no purpose to prove the true Resurrection of dead
bodies which is here his drift. Where supposing himself (by these eye
witnesses) to have proved this he presently says v. 12. How do certain
amongst you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? Yet again Act. 22.
v. 14. But he (Ananias) said to S. Paul, the God of our fathers had preordeyned
thee that thou should know his will and see that Just one, and hear the
voice of his mouth. Therefore he appeared in a true body which had a voice and
a mouth of flesh. Buth as Christ says (Luke 24.39.) A spirit has no flesh and
bones as you see me have. Yet again (Act. 23. v. 10.) S. Paul sees Christ on
earth for when there was made a great dissension, the Tribune fearing lest Paul
should be torn in pieces by them commanded the soldiers to go down and take
him out of the midst of them and to bring him into the Castle. And the night
following the Lord stood by him and said: Be constant for as thou have
testified of me in Jerusalem so must thou testify of me at Rome also. Here we
have that very Lord of whom S. Paul did testify, standing by him in the Castle
far distant from heaven, by which is evident in how distant places Christ's
body may be. To disprove so many clear Texts give me but on (if you can) that
S. Paul did not see Christ after his Ascension, in his true body upon our
earth; if you can not do this you are cast by Scripture in this point which
proves that one body can be at the same time in two distant places.

8. Lastly they object that so great a body as Christ's Body is, can not be in
so small a compass as a little bitt of bread. We still answer out of
Scripture. First Matthew 19, v. 26. where speech is of making the great body of
a Camel pass through a needles eye, Christ says: with men this is impossible.
Where note that Christ here (according to three Evangelistes) speaks of such a
passage through a needles eye, as is in possible with men; so that, though with
men there is no such thing possible as penetration of several parts of the
same great Camels body, brought into so small a compass as is a needles eye,
yet not so with God. With God all things are possible. Secondly God can put two
different bodies so, as to take up only the place of one body; therefore he can
put all the parts of one body so, as to take up only the rome of the lest part,
with which he can penetrate all the rest. Thus John 20. v. 19. When the doors
were shutt, where the disciples were gath^red together, for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in the middle. So that, as, at his birth, his body
penetrated through his Mothers womb, at his Resurrection, through the great
stone of his monument and as, at his Ascension he did not make a hole through
the body of the heavens, but his body was penetrated with those heavenly
bodies, so here it penetrated through the shutt door, or wall; and so two
bodies were in one place at once; by which also we prove that one body may as
easily, by his power, be in two places at once. Wherefore it is to you (who
against Scripture thus stand still alleging Philosophy) that we must say with
S. Paul Col. 2.8. Beware least any man deceive you by Philosophy and vain
fallacy according to the Tradition of men and the elements of the world and
not according to Christ, against whom you cite Aristotle.

THE XIII. POINT. Of Communion under one kind.
PRotestants complain we take half of the Sacrament from them. We complain
they have taken five Sacraments from us, and grace from all seven. And as for
this Sacrament they have taken both the body and blood of our Savior from it,
and left only bread and wine. If we had taken wine away, no great hurt, wine
being nothing but wine. To the purpose we have a full complete and perfect
Sacrament when we have such an outward sign as signifies, and conteyneth
invisible grace. The consecrated bread alone does this; in this therefore we
have a full, complete, and perfect Sacrament. Christ speaks this clearly Io.
6. v. 48. I am the bread of life your fathers did eat manna in the desert and
they dyed. This is the bread that descends from heaven that if any man eat
of it he dye not. I am the lyving bread that came down from heaven. If any man
eat of this bread he shall live for ever. Behold as full an effect of the
Sacrament as is any where promised to both kinds. And he being living bread
you have all him in it, and so you are deprived of nothing. He gave us his
body, not his Carcass without blood. In his body we have all, both body, and
blood. You take both from us: we give both. Agreeable to this says S. Paul, 1.
Cor. 11.27. Therefore whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink this Chalice of
our Lord unworthyly, he is guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, which he
could not be, if he did not receive both body, and blood; so that by either
eating or drinking both are received. Again Luke 24. v. 30. And it came to
pass while he sat at table with them (the two disciples in Emaus) he took
bread, and blessed, and brake, and did reach to them. Twice Christ, with his
own hands, gave the Communion. First at the last supper under both kinds.
Secondly here at Emmaus under one kind only. For many Holy Fathers (without
ever scrupulizing at the giving only one kind) absolutely say Christ here gave
the^ the Communion. And the Text insinuates as much, by the use of those
Sacramental words, of taking, blessing, breaking, reaching, with the ensuing
effect of opening their eyes to know him to be the same Christ, who, at his
last supper, had done the same action. So that it is the more probable that he
did administer Communion under one kind, the^ that he did not. How the^ dare
you absolutely condemn this? They object drink ye all of this Matthew. 26. But
this command was only given to all then present, and was fullfilled. And they
all drank of it. Mark 14.23. So when he commanded do this. He did not command
Lay men to do what he did. Their other objections are excellently answered by
the Scriptures alleged in the Council of Trent Sess. 21. c. 1. in these
notable words he that said unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood you shall not have life in you has also said: If any one eat
of this bread he shall life for ever. And he that said: He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, has also said: The bread
which I will give you is my flesh for the life of the world, he that said: Who
so eats my flesb and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him, has
likewise said: He that eats this bread shall live for ever. What need we more
then to live for ever.

THE XIV. POINT. Of the Mass, or of the Holy Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice.
1. CHrist in his last supper said Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me. We
must see then what Christ did, that we may know what is commanded here to be
done. If he did offer his Body and Blood then in Sacrifice, the Church also is
bound to have some Ministers doing that in remembrance of him. We say then that
Christ did then offer his body, and blood in Sacrifice and we say that the
doing this, is the very essence of our Mass. I know, as soon as Protestants
hear the word Remembrance, they will object that Christ can not be really
offered there where the offering is done to his Remembrance. I answer that S.
Paul tells us what it is to do this in Remembrance of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.24.26.
This do ye in Remembrance of me, for as often as you shall eat this bread, and
drink the Chalice you shall show the death of our Lord until he come. Christ
here is remembered by us to have dyed for us, yet he does not here really dye
again bloodily, but this unbloudy Sacrifice is done in remembrance of his real
bloody death. It is not only in Remembrance of him that we do this, but we do
this in Remembrance of him, dying for us a bloody death upon the Cross. Now
his being truly present makes the Remembrance not less but more lively and
perfect. For if a Prince, who had gained a great battle, with much loss of his
blood would have yearly some action, or representation exhibited in
remembrance of it, would in person be present with his wounds, acting his own
part, the representation would not cease to be a Remembrance but it would
rather be a far more lively Remembrance as often as the king should act his
own part. And the year he should not do this, the Remembrance would be less
lively and less representative: so etc. How perfectly in this Sacrifice is
Christ's death represe^ted whilst by the force of these words This is my body,
only his body is put in shape of bread in one place wholly different from that
other place, in which, by force of those words This is my blood, his blood, in
a liquide shape of wine, like blood lately shed, is put in the Chalice a part
from his body.

2. Now I will show that Christ did truly Sacrifice, and offer up his body, and
blood under the forms of bread and wine. First out of the old Testament Psalm.
100. v. 5. it is said of Christ. Our Lord swore, and it shall not repent him,
thou art a Priest for ever of the order of Melchisedech, which words S. Paul 5.
Heb. 10. says to have bin spoake of Christ, and of this is Priesthood. We have
great speech (says he) and inexplicable to utter, because you are weak to
hear. You must look therefore for a mystery, not easily understood by new
Christians. The famous Priesthood in the old Law was settled in Aaron, and his
Sonns (Levit. 8.) they offered bloody Sacrifices, and yet our Savior is not
said a Priest according to the order of Aaron but of Melchisedech, who was not
so much as a Jew. He whose descent is not counted from them, took tithe of
Abraham and blessed him, that had the promises. (Heb. 7.6.) which shows he
was a Priest of higher dignity then Abraham as S. Paul here proves. Let us see
now all that the old Testament says of Melchisedech, and his Priesthood; and
you shall find it to be only that which is written Genesis c. 14.18. But
Melchisedech King of Salem brings forth bread, and wine. And he was the
Priest of the most high God. And he blessed him (Abraham) and he gave him
tithes of all. So unanimous is the consent of all the H. Fathers (who did write
either upon this text of Genesis, or on that of S. Paul, or that of the Psalm)
that the Priesthood of Melchisedech did consist in offering bread, and wine, by
way of Sacrifice to God, and that Christ's being a Priest, according to his
order, did consist in his offering up, and sacrificing his body, and his blood
for us, under the forms of bread, and wine, that to deny this, is to cross
all antiquity, see the Rhemists upon these two last Texts. Now becaufe Christ,
to the end of the world, offers still this sacrifice by his Vicars, or
Ministers hands in the Sacrifice of the Mass. He is said to be a Priest for
ever according to the order of Melchisedech. For by force of these words This
is my body, his body is put under the species of bread, and then in a place a
part from that body of his, he, by force of these words This is my blood, does
put his blood in the Chalice under the shape of wine like blood poured forth
and separed from the body.

3. Again Jeremy 33. v. 18. There shall not fail of David a man to fit upon
the throne of the house of Israel. And of the Priests and Levits there shall
not fail from before my face a man to offer offerings, and to kindle meat
offerings and to do sacrifice continually. By such sacrifices as then were
known God expressed the continuance of true sacrifice in his Church there must
not then fail now Priests and Levits offering a true sacrifice.

4. Now God speaks thus expressly to the Priests of the old Law I have no will
in you says the Lord of Hosts and an offering I will not receive of your
hands. Malachy 1. v. 10. So that the former Text must needs be understood of
Priests offering continually Sacrifices in the new Testament. But now a clean
Sacrifice, not a bloody one therefore here in the next verse it follows, for
from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down, great is my name among
the Gentles. And in every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure
offering to wit the pure offering and clean Oblation of Christ's body, under
the sweet, and lovely shape of bread and wine into which all those Holocausts,
burnt-offerings, and killing of Victimes, were turned, though Jeremy used these
terms, because they, as then, knew no other sacrifices, as they knew no other
Priests, and Levits, but such as were killers of Victimes in a bloody manner.
But it is very observable that the same Prophet Malachy speaking in the third
chapter of the coming of the Messiah (and the Lord whom ye seek v. 1.) does
also tell us clearly this, then shall the offerings of Judah, and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord v. 4. although before he had so flatly said to the
Priests of Judah and Jerusalem I have no will in you and offerings I will not
receive at your hands. Whence it is evident that by the pleasing Sacrifice of
Judah and Jerusalem, he means not the carnal, but the spiritual Judah and
Jerusalem, that is Christ's Church, where sacrifice is to be done continually as
we did now say out of Jeremy.

5. In the very last years of the world Antichrist, knowing the chief worship
of God to consist in this Sacrifice, shall so mightily labor to abolish it,
that he shall seem (for a very short time) to have prevailed. Daniel 9.27. And
in the half of the week shall the Host and the Sacrifice fail and there shall
be in the Temple abomination of desolation which last words our Savior himself
expounds to be understood of the end of the world Matthew. 24. What sign of
thy coming and of the Consummation of the world? Said the Apostles to him v. 3.
Our Lord telling many other signs at last says v. 14. This Ghospel shall be
preached in the whole world and then shall come the Consummation thereof,
therefore when you shall she the abomination of desolation which is spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet etc. This then shall not happen until the world is eve^
come to the end and the Ghospel shall have been preached every where.

6. According therefore to the practice of the Law of nature in time of
Melchisedech and according to the practice, and manifest prophecies in the
written law, exterior Sacrifice (which from the beginning of the world was
ever held the chief, and peculiar worship due to God) is also to be found in
the Church of Christ, from the rising of the Sun to the going down, even till
the worlds end, when Antichrist, for a short time, shall in great part abolish
it. Let us then see the Sacrifice that Christ (a Priest for ever according to
the order of Melchisedech) did institute in his Church Luke 22. v. 19. This is
my body which is given for you. Now given in this very present time, and now,
by me, offered in an unbloody manner; he says not to you but for you, that is
for your sins, which body presently after I will offer in a bloody Sacrifice
upon the Cross. Behold here a Sacrifice, and a propitiatory Sacrifice: For
what is offered for us, and offered for remission of sins, is a propitiatory
offering, applying plentifully the satisfaction of Christ's Passion to us, not
derogating from that Sacrifice, but deriving the fruits thereof to us. Thus his
body is properly said given for us. But when it is given in the Sacrament, it
is said given to us, not for us. This Sacrifice the Apostles were offering to
our Lord Act. 13.2. when they are said to have been ministering to our Lord. Had
they been ministering the word of God, or ministering the Sacrament, they had
ministered to the people. But they had not been ministering to our Lord, that is
offering some thing to him. In the Greek text it is they being offering
Sacrifice to our Lord. And so Erasmus translats it.

7. This Sacrifice is plainly insinuated in S. Paul 1, Cor. 10. if his
discourse be well noted. He there, discoursing of the Jewish and Heathnish
Sacrifice does conclude, that all such persons as will be partakers of these
Sacrifices, can not be made partakers of the Christian Sacrifice of the Body
and Blood of our Savior. First then v. 14. he bids them, fly from serving
Idols* by either Sacrificing to them, or eating of that which has been
Sacrificed to them. If they will do this, he tells them of a far better
Sacrifice, of which they may be made partakers at our Altars For says he v.
16. The Chalice of benediction which we do bless, is it not the Communication
of the Blood of Christ? And the bread which we break is it not the
partieipation of the Body of our Lord? And having thus taught them, that, by
virtue of the Priests Benediction, or Consecration, the true Body, and Blood of
Christ, are made communicable upon our Altars, under the shapes of bread, and
wine he goes on to tell them, they can not be partakers of this Sacrifice, if
they will continue still to partake of either Jewish, or Heathnish Sacrifices,
of which they truly make themselves partakers if they will still eat of that
which is sacrificed by them. For behold Israel (says he v. 18) they that eat
of the sacrificed Hosts are they not partakers of the Altar? For by thus doing
they communicate with those that Sacrifice. And having thus spoake^ of the
Jewish Sacrifices, he speaks to them of the Gentills Sacrifices. But the things
which Heathens do Sacrifice, to Devils they Sacrifice, and not to God, And I
will not have you have fellow^hip with the Devils, as you will if you eat or
partake of what is imolated to the^, and will drink the Libaments offered out
of their cup. For (says he) you can not be partakers of the Table of our Lord,
and of the Table of the Devils. The reason why we cite and expound this place
so fully is, because we desire exceedingly to have it noted how that here our
Chalice, our Bread, our Table, and Altar, the participation of our Host, and
Oblation, are, point by point, in all Conditions, effects and proprieties,
compared to the Altar, Hosts, Sacrifices, and Oblations of the Jews, and
Gentills and, as he calls their Chalice the Chalice of the Devils, for no other
reason but because it conteyns liquor Sacrificed to him, so he must be said to
call our Chalice the Chalice of our Lord because it conteyns the liquor of
Christ's blood sacrificed to our Lord. For by force of these words This is my
blood, his blood under a liquid species is put in the Chalice as it were a part
from that body which before he had put under the shape of bread. All which
discourse had been very ineffectuall if this had not bin the proper sacrifice
among the Christians as those others were the known Sacrifices of the Jews
and Gentills.

8. Again the same S. Paul says Heb. 13. v. 10. We have an Altar of which they
have no right to eat who serve the Tabernacle still pressing the Jews, that
they can not partake of the Sacrifice of our Altar, if they will still stick
fast to their old Sacrifices. And note, that, which he called before the Table
of our Lord, he now calls an Altar truly and properly ordained for Sacrifice
and so he terms it thysiastirion that is Sacrificatorium. An Altar to
Sacrifice upon. And by that word allwaies the Altars of the Jews (ordained for
Sacrifice) are still out of the Hebrew interpreted in Greek. Well the^ we have
an Altar built purposely to offer Sacrifice upon, therefore we have a true
Sacrifice, not of bread and wine (for in no man's opinion we Sacrifice these)
but of the Body, and Blood of our Savior, under the shape of bread and wine.
And this was the reason why in the Primative Church the Heathens would some
times say we worshipped Bacchus the God of wine, and Ceres the Goddess of
corn: sometimes they traduced us as feeders on man's flesh, for eating the
flesh of our Savior in this Sacrifice.

9. I conclude that had not this manner of Sacrificing in the Mass been
delivered us with our first faith from the Apostles, it could never (without
notice being taken of the first author, and of the time etc.) have been
universally received with out opposition of any, or without being ever taxed
by any one of Novelty, yea and be received also so universally that, if before
Luthers days, you look into all Parishes of Christianity (where Confessed
Heretics did not domineere) you will, in every Parish thereof, find no other
Common service used publikly in that Parish, but the saying and celebrating
Mass, with offering that which they all adored for the true Body and Blood of
Christ under the shape of bread and wine. A Proof unanswerable. See what we
said before Point 12. n. 2.

THE XV. POINT. Of saying Masses and other public prayers in the Latin tongue.
1. INS. Matthew. Chap. 1. v. 17. All the generations from the Transmigration of
Babylon unto Christ fourteen generations, a very long time. And yet all this
time the Jewish Church (the only true Church in the world) had all her
Scriptures and all her public service, and prayer (which was all taken out of
the Psalms, the Law, and the Prophets) in that very language in which they
were written, to wit, in old Hebrew: that is, in a language well known indeed
to the common people of the Jews before their Transmigration into Babylon, but
in their Captivity at Babylon, they lost the knowledge of their old Hebrew
language (in which all their Scriptures were written) and did not perfectly
learn the Chaldean, or Babylonian language, whence they made a mixture of both
those languages, which was called the Syrike language. The very letters, and
characters of this language differ as much as the Greek letters differs from
the Latin. So that those, who can perfectly read the one, can not so much as
read the other. Neither do they understand one another more, then the Italians
can understand Latin, which was their ancient native tongue. The Scriptures
were not at this time (but some good time after Christ) translated in to Syrike
as your great Doctors (who now at Londow have set forth* your famous Bible of
so many languages) do profess in their Praeface to their Bible. And by the
way, they also (in the same Praeface) plainly and openly confess that in no
Parish in Christendom they could in any of those nations (which they have
caused to be searched for old copies) find, so much as one ancient service
book written in a language understood by the vulgar or common people of the
place. A testimony to their own condemnation and confusion. The knowledge then
of the old Hebrew tongue, in which all the Scriptures were written, being so
much lost in the Captivity of Babylon, they had all their Scriptures and
public service (which was taken out of the Law and the Prophets and Psalms)
read in a language unknown to all the common people and this was done for
fourteen generations.

2. Hence presently after their Captivity, when they first returned into their
country Esdra was forced by himself and others to make the Law be interpreted
unto them Nehemiah c. 8. v. 8. v. 13. So when our Savior upon the Cross did,
in the old Hebrew words of the Psalm, say as it was first written Eli Eli
Lammasabachihani Mat. 27. v. 46. S. Matthew, who did write his Ghospel in that
new kind of Hebrew or Syrike (which was vulgarly spoaken by the Jews in
Christ's days) is forced to interpret these words saying which is interpreted
my God my God why have thou forsaken me? For this reason also he interpreted
several other Hebrew words. A manifest sign they could not be understood by
the Jews (in whose language he did write) without interpretation. And as he
who writes English, should ridiculously interpret English, so if those words of
the Psalm had been written by David in the same language in which S. Matthew
did write, it had been ridiculous for him to add their interpretation.
Josephus the Jew tells you what a world of schools there were in Jerusalem for
Children to learn the Law and Prophets, they being written in a language
otherwise unknown. Well then, as those who have not been now at our Latin
Schools understand not our Latin Bible and service; so then, the vulgar sort
understood not their Scriptures, nor their common service taken out of them,
and read in their Synagogues before their Sermons, and Exhortations, which S.
Paul calls The lesson of the Law and Prophets. Act. 13.5. Neither after the
Captivity did the vulgar understand the words of Moses, who of old times has
in every city those who preach him in the Synagogue where he is read every
Sabbath. Act. c. 15. v. 21. Read I say but not (as then) understood by the
vulgar. This practice was practiced before the eyes of Christ, and his
Apostles, and they never did the lest reprehend it, or give order to have the
Bible turned into the Syriak language that the vulgar might understand it. Why
the^ must we be blamed for using either Scriptures, or divine Service in a
language not understood by the people?

3. Secondly I ask what you say to that place of Leviticus c. 16. v. 17. Let
no man be in the Tabernacle when the high Priest goes into the Sanctuary to
pray for himself and his house and for the whole assembly of Israel until he
come forth: See you not here publik prayer made expressly for the whole
assembly, and yet no one of the assembly permitted to hear, or see, what there
was done by the Priest, to God for them, even then, when the Priest made an
atonement for himself, for his household and for all the congregation of
Israel. Again Luke 1.10. All the multitude of the people was praying without at
the Hour of incense. The Priest was doing his duty with in (where he could
neither be seen nor heard by the people without) yet they assisting at the
Priests function, done for them, were not less partakers of the benefit
thereof, though they could neither, see him, nor hear him: so prayer, made and
offered up for the people, in a low voice, or in an unknown language, is
available to them who know not the particular meaning of the words said for
them. It is sufficient then they know they conteyne a particular praise of God,
and a special worship of him, and a peculiar recommending of our necessities
unto him. And that they be, as most pious prayers approved by the Church, and
recommended by all the learned men hereof who very well understand them. Now a
petition well made, even when its presented by a Petitioner, who understands
not the language in which the petition is made, obteynes of the King, or
Emperor (who understand it) as much, as if the Petitioner had perfectly
understood every word of it. When the Children (Mat. 21.16.) cried in the
Temple Osanna to the Son of David though they knew not what they said, yet
Christ called it a perfect praise saying that out of the mouth of Infants and
sucklings thou have perfected praise. A rich Jewel in the hands of an Infant,
or Clown, who knows not to penetrate the value of it, does not, for that
cause, cease to be truly of as great value, as when it is in the hands of a
Ieweller. So Latin prayers in the mouths of the vulgar, be as precious in the
sight of God. (When they be said with equal devotion) as when they are in the
mouths of great scholars. You who, scorned to use Latin service, soon came
to see your English service with all scornful contempt ba^nished out of almost
all your Church. And your people did soon grow to like no service at all since
they mislyked the Latin service.

4. I will now examine our adversaries chief ground in Scripture which is out
of the first of the Corinthians Chapter 14. Where I would have the Reader to note
that until 14. verse, S. Paul only speaks of using an unknown language in
preaching exhorting, interpreting, and teaching, in all which exercises we
still use the vulgar tongue: so that hitherto he has nothing against us. From
the 14. verse he begins indeed to speak of praying, but not of public divine
service, but of such extemporall prayer as is made before all, that all may
join with it, and he speaks there, not of the use of any set form of prayer,
practiced by the Church (as the Liturgy is) but he manifestly speaks only
against the use of an unknown, and Barbarous tongue in the making of such
Hymns, and Canticles, and Prayers, as many then did use to make by divine
inspiration in the presence of the whole Congregation to edify the Brethren
assembled; and to excite them to love, to honor and praise God; not intending
chiefly to pray to God for the people, as we do in our Liturgy, of which kind
of set form of prayer S. Paul can not be said to speak. For it is apparent,
that among the Corinthians (to whom he writ) there was no use at all of an
unknown, or Barbarous language in the Liturgy, or divine service; wherefore of
this S. Paul could not complain, for their Liturgy was undoubtedly in Greek,
which was the known language among them; and in which he did write this very
Epistle to them. Also in which they had their set forms of prayer. Now then
S. Paul speaks not at all against the use of an unknown tongue in either the
Liturgy or in any other usual set form of publik prayer, for there was no
abuse at all in that kind, but he only speaks against that use, practiced by
some in those extemporall Canticles, Prayers and Hymns (which then diverse
used) yet of such kind of prayers also (though made in unknown and Barbarous
tongues (he says v. 14. If I pray in an unknown tongue my spirit prays and
this great good I have by my prayer but my understanding is without fruict:
that is without the fruict of instruction or edifying others. A fruict which
ought to be sought for by those, to whom God had so particularly given that
miraculous gift of speaking in several tongues, purposely that they might
excyte, and stir up the people of several tongues and nations to the
knowledge, praise, honor and love of God; and therefore he adds I will pray
in spirit, I will pray also in understanding, that in those prayers I may not
deprive the standers by of that fruict. But you must know that neither the
Mass nor the set forms of prayer in our Liturgy, be ordained for this end
of instructing others. Because for this we have other exercises of Catechizing,
expounding, exhorting, preaching etc. But chiefly those prayers be appointed to
the Priest (who well understands them) to offer them up to God for the people.
The Epistles and Ghospels, (which conteyne instructions) be interpreted and
largely declared unto the people in our Churches upon those days on which they
are bound to be assembled, and to resort to Mass. The other chief parts of
the mass be, in all Masses, the selfsame. And being so often used (and
therefore upon occasions so often declared to the people) they must indeed be
very Idiots if they know not when so say Amen, when to kneel, to adore, to
knock their breasts, when to rise, when to stand, or to do any thing else that
concerns them or is proper for them to do. Therefore it can not be said against
our Mass, which you use to object out of v. 16. Else when thou shall bless
with the spirit how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say
Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say. This
(as I said) can not be said of our so well known set form of prayer and
service which we all knowing to be approved by the Church, and to be
understood, and so highly esteemed by our learned men, fear not to say Amen,
or to join our intention with any part of it; neither does its approbation
depend on our Amen. I answer therefore that S. Paul spoak of those exte^poral
blessings, Canticles and Lauds, or such like inspired prayers of private
persons, which he recommends to be said in the vulgar language, yet the
contrary is not ill though it be less perfect. For even to him who does the
contrary it is said v. 17. Thou verily give thanks well and not foolishly or
superstitiously. But the other is not edified which fruict, and end thou
should chiefly have intended, God having to this end given thee this gift.
And therefore in such exercises of devotion I will speak five words with my
understanding rather then ten thousand words in a tongue, that is a barbarous
tongue, strange to the Hears, because the chief end of these exercises is to
edify, and excite the people to praise God; whereas the chief end of the
Liturgy is to pray to God for the people.

5. I also note that S. Paul does not so much as mean here to exclude the use
of such well known tongues as the Greek and Latin were, that is such as were
the languages well known to all the better bred sort of most nations; so that
here is nothing against the Mass said in Latin through the Latin Churches, or
in all those western parts where all knowing and understanding men, very
commonly know this language. I prove this manifestly. For if S. Paul should
call this praying in a tongue (your Bible puts in a different letter the word
unknown) so as to make such a tongue as this, unfit for public service in
these Countries, he himself had notably transgressed in this matter, who being
to write to the Romans, writes to them in Greek, knowing well that they spoak
Latin, only, and that the vulgar knew no other language. Yet he did thus write
to them a very large Epistle in Greek now divided into sixteen Chapthers. And
this though he did write this chieffly for their instruction and edification.
Behold this was done even by him, who said before I had rather speak five words
with my understanding that my voice might teach others then ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue. You must not then call speaking in an unknown
tongue, the speaking in such languages as are well known to the learneder sort
of those people, to whom you speak. Wherefore you must not say he did speak in
a tongue, or an unknown tongue to the Romans when he did write in the Greek
tongue to them, though he was not understood by the vulgar of them, but only by
the learneder sort: Now then, as he can not be said to have spoaken in an
unknow tongue to the Romans, when he did write this Epistle to them in Greek,
because Greek is not a Barbarous tongue, wholly unknown to the better sort: so a
Roman Priest, saying Mass in Latin in the western parts, does not say Mass
or speak in a tongue that is a tongue wholly unknown to the better sort.
Wherefore as the Greek tongue was not judged a tongue unfit for S. Paul writing
to the Romans, even when their instruction was chiefly to be regarded: so it is
not unfitt, when not instruction, but making prayer for the people to God, is
chiefly intended, as in the Mass. Read the Remish Testament handling this
Chapter very well.

6. And observe also that the service of the Catholic or universal Church, is
best celebrated by a Catholic or universal tongue such as Greek is in the East;
Latin in the West; tongues, not subject to such alterations, and peril of
changes, in substantial words, as vulgar languages are; and therefore less
fit for the everlasting perpetuity and universality of the Church. If at our
conversion we had had our Mass in the old British, or old English language,
who would now have understood it. Yea who does not laugh at all English he
reads, which is much above a hundred years standing. It was most unfitt, the
Liturgy should be so often chopped, and changed as vulgar languages alter. Or
that it should usualy be so often turned into several tongues, not understood
by the Church Representative. So that she could not pass her Judgment,
whether there were any gross corruptions creapt into this most divine service.
Therefore in respect of universality, both of all ages (for which the Church
was to last) and of universality of all nations (through which she was to be
spread) no language more fit, for her publik, constant service, then Hebrew,
Greek and Latin. God regarded unity in worship, so much that he would have the
whole nation of the Jews (for a thousand and six hundred years) only to
Sacrifice in one place, though it might be objected, that this much hindered the
many, and frequent Sacrifices which would otherwise have been offered if in any
place they might Sacrifice. To keep unity in Religion it is most rationally
ordered that Sacrifice should be celebrated with prayers in one, and the same
language over one and the same Church. Moreover it is well known that a
distance, from what is ordinary, and vulgar, breeds respect and reverence. And
contrariwise you your selves found, that public service in English was soon
vilifyed and contemned by the vulgar English, and at last, with all expressions
of contempt, and dirision, quite exploded, and abolished. Cast pearls before
swyne and the Scripture tells you how they will behave themselves toward them.

7. Lastly show me but one service book in all the fiveteene hundred years
before Luther in any one vulgar tongue which agrees with your service book and
for that one books sake we will all come to your service.

THE XVI. POINT. Of the Sacrament of Penance or Confession.
1. EVen in the old Law some particular Confession of particular sins was under
precept appointed to the Jews Numb. 5.6. Speak to the Children of Israel; man
or woeman when they shall do any of all the sins that are wont to chance to
men and by negligence have transgressed the Commandment of their Lord, and have
offended, they shall confess their sin. And (if their sin were in point of
wro^ging their neighbor) they shall restore the principal it self and the
fifth part over to him against whom they sinned. Behold Confession, behold
Restitution, and for satisfaction, the fifth part over and above to be give^.
And, besides that, sacrifice to be offered to God, so to repair the dishonor
done him.

2. The new Law, perfecting the old, confession was elevated by Christ to a
Sacrament, giving grace Io. 20. v. 23. He said to them receave the Holy Ghost
whose sins you forgive they are forgiven, and whose sins you retain they are
retained. But Thomas was not with them, when Jesus came; yet no man can deny
that this power was also give^ to Thomas. Whence appears that it was not
give^ only to those who then were present, as a grant give^ merely for their
sakes and to increase their authority, but this grace was give^ for the sake of
all belonging to Christ's flock, of which flock the far greater number lived
after the times of the Apostles.

3. That this text is literally to be understood (as I have interpreted it)
may be demonstratively prooved by the same argument by which we prooved that
Text, This is my body, to be literally understood. P. 12. n. 2. For if the
Apostles, with the first faith, did not deliver this litterall sense, but only
taughr this power to end with them, and that no man, after their days, either
had power to forgive sins, or stood obliged to confess them, then you must say
that, in some after age, some one man began first (for allwaies one begins at
first) to vent a broad these two strange things, first that all Priests had
power to forgive sins. Secondly, that all Christians, guilty of sin, were bound
under pain of damnation to confess their sins to the Priests, though they
were never so foul, or never so secret. But shall any one man make me believe,
that this single man's doctrine so new, and so hard, could presently, without
contradiction, grow to be so generally received and practiced not in one, but
in all parts of Catholic Christianity? And that no history should tell us who
this man was? where, or when he broached this doctrine? Or how he could so
bewitch all that no man should contradict him, or that no one should have grace
or wit to say: If Priests had this power, or if all Christians had this strict
obligation, surely the Apostles, and their successors would have made this
known, and they would have made both Priests, and Christians do their duty in
this kind. For they only saying this, would have (then) been enough to have
stopped this man's mouth. Neither is the Doctrine of Confession, or the practice
of it so easy to be brought in, that it could possibly be thus silently and
speedily entertained yea and entertained all the Christian world over, without
contradiction, or opposition, even so much as in any one single place, for we
no where hear of any such contradiction.

4. I know after Confession was every where practiced, that the Novatian
Heretics did oppose it saying, that it was a dishonor to God that man should
forgive sins. But all Catholics hold this to be an Heresy in them. And S.
Ambrose says to them Luk 1. c. 7. Why should it be more a dishonor to God, or
be more inconvenient, that man should forgive sins by Penance, then by
Baptism, seeing it is the Holy Ghost who in both cases does it by the
ministry of the Priests: So he. In Baptism the Priest says: I Baptize thee,
that is, I wash thee, I ask from what? surely from sin, according to that Act.
22.16. Rise up and be baptized and wash away thy sins. I ask again can your
Priests or Ministers wash sin away? You will answer that they can administer
the Sacrament which washes sin away and so they wash away sin, not by their
own power, but as Ministers of Christ's Sacraments. Just so each Priest says:
I absolve thee, yet our Priests absolve not by their own power but as
Ministers of Christ they administer the Sacrament of absolution, which cancels
all sins. Lastly I observe that when Christ did forgive the Paralitick his
sins Matthew. 9. the multitude was so far from saying this was a dishonor to
God, that the multitude glorified God who gave such power unto men. v. 8.

THE XVII. POINT. Of the Sacrament of Extreme unction.
1. THe very name of this Sacrament is grown even unheard of to us here in
England, who boast so much of the word of God. And yet, according to the word
of God, there is not any Sacrament at all, which can be more manifestly proved
a true Sacrament the^ this, both in regard of the outwatd or visible sign, or
in regard of the invisible grace. This visible sign is proved evidently to
have been instituted by our Savior, because no body but he, could annex the
gift of of invisible grace to this visible sign, to which sign most clear
Scripture does testify this grace to be annexed. For so we read. Iam. 5.14. Is
any man sick among you? Let him bring in the Priests of the Church and let
them pray over him annoynting him with oil in the name of our Lord. (Behold
the visible outward sign of this Sacrament) And, in the next words, behold the
invisible grace annexed there unto. And if he be in sins they shall be remitted
him. Now (good Protestant) give me leave to ask thee this one question; is
there any time in which it more imports a man to have so good a warrant, as
Gods word is for the remission of his sins, then in the time of his departure
out of this world? Behold then here a means to obtain this remission, even at
this very time, and this means warranted by the very word of God. And yet
without any ground at all, in Gods word, you have rejected a thing so importing
all Christians though you found the practice of all Christianity to be
comfortable to the words as they sound; how does this stand with your pretense
of reforming our errors by the Rule of Scripture, you go so flatly contrary to
clear Scripture even in a point of abolishing a Sacrament which was used by
all the Catholic Church before your Reformation and having so clear a Text for
it and no one single Text against it.

2. To take away the force of this Text, first in place of Priests you are
pleased, against all antiquity, to read Elders, because the Greek word that
signifies Priests, in vulgar use signifies Elders. Now this is as ridiculous
as if one would say The Bigger of the City in place of saying the Major of
the City, because the word Major signifies the Bigger, or as if, for the like
cause, you would call a Doctor of Physic a teacher of Physic, whereas a Doctor
is well known to signify such a degree, as also a Major is notoriously known
to signify a secular office, or dignity in a city, so the name put in Greek
for a priest Presbyteros is as notoriously known to signify a Priest endued
with a Priestly order, office and function in the Church of God. Whence this
name is improperly translated Elder when speech is manifestly of Church
affairs as here speech is of some Ministry or other, at which sins are
forgiven.

3. I know that those who grant that here is a command (for Counsels you will
have none) to use annoynting of the sick with true oil, pretend that this was
commanded to be done only for obteyning a miraculous Cure. A doctrine full of
absurdities. The first of which is novelty. The second is flatt contradiction
to the Text expressing the chief effect to be sought for (not to be the health
of the body but of the soul, and if he be in sins they shall be forgiven him.
The third absurdity is to say there was in the Church (for a time) a command
to any one sick among us to seek for a miraculous cure. The fourth is to say
that any Priest, or Elder, whatsoever might be called in to work this
miraculous cure. Upon what authority of Scripture or History is this said? Give
me leave in the last place to ask if ever you did either read, or hear, that
at the use of any element, which was not Sacramental, sins were promissed to
be forgiven by any one, even of Christ's Apostles?

4. Other of your Doctors will have this annoynting with oil to be only the
oil of devout prayers, or Charity. But first where have you that, at your
Elders, or Priests prayer, it will follow that if the sick man be in sins they
shall be forgiven him. Do not you scoff at Priests forgiving sins, and will you
now allow a sure warrant attested by Gods own word, that at the Priests
prayers, yea at the Elders, the sick man's sins shall be forgiven? Again, this
free license of interpreting Oil to be Prayer or Charity, opens a gappe to
interpret all that is said of applying water in Baptism, to be understood
only of applying the clear, and cleansing streams of heavenly doctrine
teaching them to believe in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
without ever casting water on them. Again, did ever any Holy Father thus
interpret this place of S. Ieames? Shall I, upon your never heard of
Interpretation go and forsake a remedy taught me by the practice of all the
Church, and by so clear a Text, upon which remedy the forgivenes of my sins at
the hour of my death, and consequently my eternal salvation may depend? God
give me my wits, and I will never do it.

THE XVIII. POINT. Of the Sacrament of Holy Order.
1. HEre also Scripture teaches an outword visible sign, to which the giving
of inward grace is annexed. 1. Tim. 4. v. 14. Neglect not the gift which is in
thee. (Here you have the inward grace given) with the laying on of the hands of
the Presbiters. Here you have the outward sign by which it is given. Again 2.
Tim. 1.6. I putt thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God which
is in thee. Behold the inward grace, by the putting on of my hands. Behold the
outward sign, at putting of which, that inward grace was conferred. Note that
though S. Paul were called from heaven, and had received the true spirit of
God, yet he was ordained by Imposition of hands Acts. 13 3.

2. Now I pray where have you one text in Scripture to prove Holy Order not to
be a Sacrament? And so I say of Matrimony, Confirmation, Penance, Extreme
Unction.

THE XIX. POINT. Of the Sacrament of Matrimony.
1. WHen (Genesis 2. v. 22.) our Lord had built the ribbe which he took of Adam,
into a Woman, and brought her to Adam, Adam said, this now is the flesh of my
flesh, wherefore man shall leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his
wife, and they shall be one flesh. In the new Testament (Matthew. 19. v. 5. Mar.
10. v. 7.) our Savior repeats those words, and hence infers. Therefore they
are not two, but one flesh. Then of himself he adds. That therefore which God
has joined together let not man separate* Now S. Paul repeating part of our
Saviors words here cyted, says. This is a great mystery (we read Sacrament)
but I speak in Christ, and in the Church. Ephesians. 5.31. Although S. Paul applies
here the very name of Sacrament to Matrimony, which name is not once in all
Scripture applyd to any of the other Sacraments) yet it is not from hence we
infer Matrimony to be a Sacrament for by that word in this place, we know he
only means a mystery, yet a Sacramental Mystery: But we infer out of his
discourse, that this mystery is now elevated by Christ, to be a Sacrament,
because S. Paul cites the words of Christ spoaken (as we have seen out of S.
Matthew) when he did abrogate the law of Moses (which Law permitted in
several cases, husband and wife to be separated) and spoaken also when he
declared expressly that he would have this contract made hereafter inseparable;
saying. That which God has joined together, let no man separate. Christ then
marrying to his Church for ever would elevate this chief contract, that is in
mankind (which he made from that time to be an inseparable contract) to
signify this most sacred Mystery and therefore he says; This is a great
Sacrament or Mystery, so much, and so nearly concerning Christ and the Church,
as S. Paul tells us.

2. We may here note the impiety of them, who knowing by S. Paul, that Christ
thus inseparably had wedded his Church, do notwithstanding presume to call this
his beloved spouse a whore and a harlot, for her superstition, and Idolatry.
But to proceed; marriage being elevated by Christ to be a great Sacrament, or
sacred Mystery, and to signify the inseparable conjunction between him ad his
Church, a signification so far beyond its own nature (which was only to be a
civil contract) he made it a fit Ceremony to which now he might annexe his
grace given (to the parties joined by this Sacrament) to observe Matrimonial
Continency. That every one may know to possess his vessel in sanctification
and honor, and not in passion of lust, as Gentills. 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. They
therefore having this grace, given to this end, are thereby enabled more fittly
to express in their mutual fidelity and affection, the mutual fidelity and
affection which should be for ever between Christ and his Church. This is the
proper effect of the grace given in Matrimony.

3. By this our doctrine of Matrimony, let any impartial man judge whether
we, or our adversaries, honor it more; they, having taken this chief honor
of being a Sacrament from it (which we allow to it) are now come to celebrate
it in profane houses, before Justices, and this only for civil ends intended
by the common wealth. Neither have they one Text of Scripture to prove that
their Ministers ought always to join others in Matrimony.

THE XX. POINT. Of the single life of Priests.
1. MAtrimony being a Sacrament and giving grace, it may seem to some that all
should do better to make themselves partaker of this grace. I answer that the
want of this one grace is more then abundantly recompensed by those many great,
and often received graces, of which a single life makes us far more capable,
as of receiving more frequently and worthily the Sacrament of Sacraments the
Body and blood of our Lord, which Priests daily do with great increase of
greater graces; very singular graces also are obtained by prayer, to which
Chastity does exceedingly conduce, as Scriptures teach.

2. Let us hear the Scripture 1. Luke 23. And it came to pass that after the
days of his office were expired he, (Zacharias the Priest) departed into his
house: And after these days Elizabeth his wife conceaved. Hence it appearrs to
be true, which S. Ierom says contra Iouian: L. 1. c. 19. and Ep. 50. c. 3.
That, even in the old Law, the Priests, who offered the Holy Host for the
people, did not so much as stay in their own houses; but were purifyed, and so
separated (for that time) from their wyves. Whence the Scripture says. After
the days of his office, he departed into his house; and, after those days his
wife conceaved. Our Priests of the new Law being to offer daily sacrifice, are
daily to observe virginal purity.

3. Again even in married Laymen, S. Paul approves abstayning from their wyves.
For a time that they may give themselves to prayer. 1. Cor. 7.35. And this
(says he) I speak to your profit not to cast a snare upon you, but for that
which is comely. And that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
Priests therefore, who daily should be attending upon our Lord, and praying for
themselves and the people and so often also sacrificing, should daily abstain
from women, as S. Ierom argues L. 1. c. 19. contra Iovian.

4. Thirdly 1. Cor. 7.32. He that is without a wife is careful of the things
that perteine to our Lord, how to please God: But he that is with a wife, is
careful of things that perteine to the world. Priests should still be in a
state most capable of being careful of things that perteine to God, and how to
please him. Therefore they should not have wives. For he that is with a wife is
careful of things that perteine to the world, which Priests should not be. But
if any men surely Priests, chiefly, should be the men, who geld themselves for
the Kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 19.12.

5. Fourthly. No man being a soldier to God intangleth himself in the
affairs of this life, that they may please him, who has chosen him to be a
soldier. 2. Tim. 2.4. Of all men, Clergy men, should take care to please him,
who has chosen them to be soldiers to him, and therefore they, of all men,
should not enta^gle themselves with secular businesses, and worldly affairs.
And yet if they be married, necessity enforces the^ to enta^gle themselves in
them above all other married men. For the greatest part of other married me^
have a settled estate left tnem to leave their Children. But the greater part
of Clergy men lives wholly upon the benefices, which they can get. And being
well bred, and made fit company for the chief of the parish, they also, and
their wives, and their Children, look high, and must be highly maintained. To
mainteyn them thus, only by the benefitt of a benefice (enjoyable at the
furthest during life and perhaps to be taken away far sooner) there is a
kind of necessity for them to make hay a pace which the Sun shine, they not
knowing how little while that may be, and knowing that it cannot be long. But
let us proceed.

6. Fifthly, It behooves therefore a Bishop to be the husband of one wife. 1.
Tim. 3.3. In the first Birth of Christianity, Virginity was so rare both among
Jews, and Gentiles, that it was not possible to find men endewed therewith,
who were both of sufficient maturity in years, and knowledge, and experience
in affairs, as is requisite in Bishops and Priests. Yet, even then, the
Apostles would have this at least observed, that no man, who married a second
wife, should be made a Bishop; no nor a Deacon. And therefore not a Priest. And
thus this place is understood by the Councels, and Fathers unanimously. See the
Rhemish Test* on this place. But as for marrying after Priesthood received, it
is a thing wholly unheard of in Gods Church. Neither is there one Authentical
example thereof in the whole world, as the same Rhemists say. S. Paul adds yet
further. Let the Deacons be the Husbands of one wife. v. 12.

7. Ridiculous is the Interpretation of those who say S. Paul would only have
such made Deacons, Priests, Bishops, who have but one wife at once. For this is
to require no more then he requires of all Christians. If you say, he yet
requires of them that they never had at one and the same time more wyfes then
one before their Conversion, this is showed evidently not to express the
meaning of these words, for he uses just the same words, and the like
expression, when he could have no such meaning. For c. 5. where he speaks of
choosing a widow (for the end there intended) he in like manner says, she
should be a widow having been the wife of one man, v. 9. How ridiculous is it
to say that here (where there is just the same expression) the meaning is, that
only such should be chosen to be widows (for the end here appointed) who had
had but one husband at one time before her Conversion. For neither Jews, nor
Gentiles, did ever permit women to have more husbands then one at once. It had
been therefore ridiculous to require that which could not but be.

8. Your chief objection against all this, (as also against vowed Virginity)
is that you conceave S. Paul 1. Tim. 4.3. to teach that this is the doctrine of
Devils forbidding to marry. I answer that S. Paul speaks only against the
doctrine of Heretics, (cited by the Rhemists here to which add the Manicheans,
and others) who taught that the use of marriage came from a bad God or Devil.
As for us we honor marriage more then you, for we hold it to be a Sacrament,
which you do not. Neither can you say that we absolutely forbid marriage,
because we forbid, or rather declare marriage to be by God forbidden, to those
persons only, who wittingly and willingly have either vowed Virginity, when
they might have married, if they pleased, or who wittingly and willingly (when
they might as freely have married) undertook Holy Orders, to which state they
knew none were admitted but such as would voluntarily and freely profess
Virginity. For the Church now, abounding with very sufficient choice of worthy
persons, who will voluntarily make such vows, and undertake freely such a
profession, will admit no others to Holy Orders, because she is taught, (in
all the texts I cited in the beginning) that these be the fittest. With us
therefore there is no man, or woman, who might not have married if they would.
And therefore we cannot be said to forbid marriage, unless you will say that
S. Paul did forbid marriage, when he forbad Bishops, Deacons, and vowed widows
to pass to second marriage. This is only to forbid breaking of vows to such,
as voluntarily would make them, when they might freely have married.

9. Your other objections be foul corruptions of Scripture. The first of them
is this 1. Cor. 9.5. Have we not power to lead about a woman a sister, as
also the rest of the Apostles, and our Lords Brother and Cephas. Here in place
of a woman, your Bibles read a wife, making the H. Ghost restreyn the word
gynaika to a wife, though it is known that this word is usually put for a
woman, whether wife, or not wife. Here the Rhemish Testament shows how
Antiquity ever expounded this place of leading about such devout women as
followed Christ to minister to him. Matthew. 27.55. I could thus have maintained
my self, (says S. Paul) or by partaking of your temporal goods, to whom I
give spiritual goods. But to burden no body, I (being a tradsman) have made
it my glory to maintain my self by the labor of my own hands. Yea your own
Bible but two chapters before translated the selfsame Greek word, for such a
woeman as could not be a wife. 1. Cor. 7.1. It is good for a man not to touch
a woeman. Translate (if you dare) It is good for a man not to touch a wife
gynaika.

10. The second corrupt Text you object is Heb. 13. v. 4. For where we read
word for word out of the Greek, Marriage honorable in all, you read, Marriage
is honorable in all men adding the verb is, and the nowne men; yet your best
Bibles have not this nowne (Men) and they print this verb (is) in a different
letter. As also in the former text they did print the word woeman in the
margent. This juggling the vulgar perceives not. And the Bibles used it to make
them take for the true Text, that which is but their interpretation of it. But
if a man would presume to add a Verb, which should come as near as may be, to
the mind of the Apostle, then he should put the verb in the Imparative mood
thus. Let marriage be honorable in all. For S. Paul uses this mood in the
first verse. Let Brotherly love continue; and in the second, Be not
unmindfull, etc. And in the third verse. Remember them in bonds. The fourth
verse being, that we speak of, should be likewise expressed by a Verb in that
mood, especially seeing he still goes on in that mood in the fifth verse, let
your conversation be without Covetousnes. The Apostles sense then seems clearly
to be. Let Marriage be honorable in all. That is, let no man dishonor his
marriage bed with either unfaithfullnes to his spouse, or with unnatural or
brutish lust, and so his next words very fitly are. For God will judge
fornicatours ad adulterers. But your Bible by a double imposture maks a quyte
different sense. The first is to put the Verb in the Indicative Mood,
Marriage is honorable, and because this alone helped not much, you used a
second imposture in the words following, which in Greek are, en pasi in Latin
In omnibus. And in both languages all Scholars see that there is doubt whether
this should signify, in all men. (taking the Adjective in the masculine gender)
or in all things taking it in the neuter gender. Our Bibles leave it as they
find it in all. But your Bible undertaks absolutely to determine the sense of
the Holy Ghost, and make him say roundly, Marriage is honorable among all men,
Thus your Bible, Anno 1577. Yea, Inter quosvis, says Beza, 1565. that is,
Marriage is honorable among any kind of persons. Out of which new Scripture
the people easily infer, Marriage is honorable among those who have received
Holy Orders, or have made Vows of Virginity: and the text being thus stretched,
they might add, Among Brothers and Sisters, Father and Daughter. But we shall
(in the next point, n. 5.) show how flatly this Consequence is contrary to S.
Paul, who plainly denounces damnation to such as have married after they vowed
Chastity. Your objection is sufficiently answered by having showed a double
corruption in the text alleged, as many of you do allege it.

THE XXI. POINT. Of the single life of such as have vowed perpetual Chastity.
1. HOw commendable works of supererogation are) by which we voluntarily do
what we are not commanded, and observe that, which is of Counsel, and not of
precept) we shall see in the next point. Yet here we cannot but speak some
thing to show how much the vowing of Chastity is counseled, and recommended,
and show also how strictly those, who vow Chastity, are obliged to keep their
vows, which voluntarily, they made. Numbers 30.3. If any man make a vow to our
Lord to bind himself by an oath, he shall not make his word frustrate, but all
that he promised he shall fulfill. Whence S. Aug. q. 56. in Number. He that voweth
abstinence from a thing lawful, makes it unlawful to himself by his vow.
Now that you may evidently see that the Scripture speaks here of vows made
in matters not commanded, it follows. If a woeman vow any thing, and bind
herself with an oath she that is in her fathers house, and as yet in Maidens
age, if her father know the vow, she promised, and the oath wherewith she bound
her soul, and held his peace, she shall be bound to the vow: whatsoever she
promised and swear, she shall fulfull indeed. But if immediately as he hears
it, her father does gainsay it, both her vows and her oath, shall be frustrate,
neither shall she be bound to the promise. The same he says of the vows of a
wife, that they shall hold, if her husband hold his peace, but if he gainesay
it, he shall make her vow frustrate. Who sees not that it could not be, either
in the power of the father to make his daughters vows void, or of the husband
to frustrate and annul the vows of his wife, if they had vowed things which
they stood obliged to perform by commandments from God? For example if she
should vow to fast in the feast of expiation, her husband could not have made
her vow void by gainesaying it. For the Law obliges her, saying. Levit. 23. v.
29. Every soul that is not afflicted, that is, which fasteth not this day,
shall perish out of his people. By this you see that the Scripture here
speaks of vows made to do that, to which they were not otherwise obliged. But
after the vow, they stand now obliged to fulfill indeed, what they promised by
word.

2. Take a further evident proof of this. Deuteronomy. 23. v. 21. When thou have vowed
a vow to our Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it, because our Lord thy
God will require it, and if thou delay, it shall be deputed unto the for sin.
If thou will not promise, thou shall be without sin. But that which is once
gone out of thy lips, thou shall observe, and shall do, as thou have promised
to our Lord thy God, and have spoaken with thy proper will and thy own mouth.
What could be said more manifest to prove, that where there was no kind of Sin
or breach of obligation before, now there is a sin by the breach of a most
strait obligation arrising from this vow. Again Eccl. c. 5. 4. Whatsoever thou
have vowed pay it. And it is much better not to vow, then after a vow not to
perform the thing promised. For this is a sin, as has been proved by the
former unanswerable Text.

3. As for the particular vow of Chastity we have our Saviors own words.
Matthew. 19.12. And there be Eunuchs who have made themselves Eunuchs for the
Kingdom of heaven. Those geld themselves for the Kingdom of heaven, who vow
Chastity, says S. Aug. de Virg. c. 27. For by vow they make themselves as it
were impotent for marriage. And the doing this for the Kingdom of heaven is a
clear proof, that this state does much further toward obteyning heaven.
Again both voluntary Poverty and Chastity are particularly rewarded by our
Lord. Luc. 18.29. There is no man who has left either house parents, or wife,
for the Kingdom of God, (Note still how Chastity furthers toward the Kingdom
of God) who shall not receave manifold more at this present time, and in the
world to come life everlasting. Here I find a reward for leaving a wife, show
me a reward for marrying one.

4. S. Paul is most clear 1. Cor. 7.25. As concerning Virgins, a command of
our Lord I have not, yet I give my judgment or counsel, (can you give better
counsel or judgment, which is) Art thou loosed from a wife, seek not a wife.
Why so? It follows v. 32. He that is without a wife is careful of the things
that pertain to our Lord, how he may please God. (Note still how Chastity
conduces to the gaining heaven) But he thas is with a wife is careful of the
things that pertain to the world. The Virgin thinks of things that pertain
to our Lord, that she may be Holy both in body and spirit. But she that is
married thinks of things that pertain to the world. And v. 38. He that
joyneth not his Virgin in Matrimony does better. And v. 40. But she is happier,
if she so abide, after my judgment.

5. Again 1. Tim. 5.9. Let a widow be chosen which has been the wife of
one husband. Here he speaks of the choice of such widows as then were deputed
to the service of the Church, in assisting to prepare weomen Cathecumens to
Baptism, as also to serve the sick, to administer to the poor, especially of
their own sex. And this they did, living under the charge of the Deacons,
whence they were called Diaconissae. S. Paul here says, he would have none
chosen, or taken to this kind of state, who had been married more then to one
man. Neither does he permit them (after they have once undertaken this state)
to marry again. That hence you may see evidently, how far he was from
permitting Priests to marry again after the state of Priesthood undertaken:
Hear his discourse c. 5. n. 11. Younger widows avoyde, (in this choice) for
when they have begun to wax wanton again, (that is, well fedd by Church goods
offered to Christ, as those widows were) they will marry having damnation.
because they have cast of their first says. Behold here their marriage, and
their damnation joined together, and the reason given why they have incurred
Kryma damnation or judgment, to their condemnation, to wit, because they have
cast of their first faith. This first faith is their vow of keeping perpetual
widdowhood, according to all Fathers Greek and Latin, who ever did write upon
this place, says the Rhemish Testament here citing also S. Aug. who together
with two hundred and five-tenne Fathers in the fourth Council of Carthage
speaks thus. If any widows have vowed themselves to God, and left their
laicall habit, and under the testimony of the Bishop, or Church, have appeared
in Religious weed, and afterward go any more to secular marriage, according
to the Apostles sentence, they shall be damned, because they were so bold as to
make void the faith or promise of Chastity, which they vowed to our Lord. And
as S. Augustine says (Heresi 82.) Iovinian the Heretic was the first who
induced vowed Virgins to marry. And l. 3. Retr. c. 22. for this his new
doctrine, he calls him a monster.

6. Let us go on with S. Paul, v. 14.15. I will therefore the younger to marry
(such as be frail) t^ give no occasion to the adversaries to speak evell: for
some are already turned aside after Satan. Whence it is evident, that breach
of vows is damnable, even in these younger widows, who (by reason of that
breach) are said to have turned aside, or gone after Satan, thus making their
first faith void.

7. I end with that praise given to Virgins Apoc. 14.4, These are they which
follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes.

THE XXII. POINT. Of works of Counsel and supererogation.
1. PRotestants deny all works of supererogation, that is, works which we, of
our own selves, superadde to our bounde^ duty; and consequently they will have
no good work to be only counseled unto us, but they say we are commanded to do
all the good we can. Against this error be almost all the texts in the former
point, and particularly the Text I there cited n. 1. out of the Book of
Numbers, and what I cited n. 4. out of S. Paul, flatly saying. Concerning
Virgins a command of our Lord I have not, but Counsel I give. And again, art
thou loose from a wife? seek not a wife. Is this a command? Woe then to
Ministers marrying when they were free men. If it be no command, what can it
be but a Counsel? And again He that joins not his Virgin in Matrimony does
better, to wit, by doing something which you dare not say he is commanded,
but which S. Paul once before told you, she was only counseled. And he tells
you also once more, that it is only a Counsel. More happy (says he) shall
she be, if she remain so, according to my judgment or Counsel. Is thine
better?

To the proof of this point make all those manyfold Texts, which in the next
point we shall bring, to prove how commendable voluntary austerityes be, for
none of those austerityes be by any precept commanded, but only commended to
us; and so they be not of precept, but of Counsel, superadded to what we are
commanded, and therefore they be works of supererogation. See all those Texts,
for they be most convincing.

2. In the Law of nature, I find Jacob freely, without being commanded, vowing
to build a Church, Genesis 28. v. 20. And he vowed a vow saying, if God shall
keep me in the way, and I shall be returned prosperously to my Fathers house,
this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house. Which he being
safely returned, did fulfill. c. 35. v. 6. Jacob came to Luza surnamed Bethel,
and he built there an Altar, and called that place the house of God.

3. In the Law of Moses God himself gives a Rule Number. 6.2. To man and woeman
who shall separate themselve to vow a vow to separate themselves to our Lord.
For those I say, who shall separate or consecrate themselves, which manner of
speech shows that they were obliged by no precept: But as long as they would
be separated or consecrated, God obliges them not to drink wine, nor eat
grape or raison. Yea Jeremy 35. v. 6. Ionadab the son of Rechab most
commendably (though he were not commanded) did give these Laws to himself and
his Sonns. You shall not drink wine, you and your Children for ever, (though
wine were as common drink with that nation, as beer with us.) And you shall
not build houses, and you shall not sow seed, and you shall not plant
vineyards, nor have any. But you shall dwell in tabernacles all your days. We
obeyed the voice of Ionadab our father. Wherefore to them by Jeremy v. 18. Thus
says the Lord, for that you have obeyed the commandment of Ionadab your
father, and have done all things that he commanded you; therefore thus says
the Lord. There shall not want a man of the stock of Ionadab the son of Rechab
standing in my sight, all days, or to stand before me for ever. As your Bibles
have it. This is true: for the sonns of promise, (though not the sons of flesh)
to the Rechabites, be our Religious, of which from the time of the Apostles to
the last day, there shall not fail to be many devout men, still standing in
Gods sight. Let Protestants show any such amongst them, who can be esteemed of
the stock of Ionadab, or a Rechabite: They are so far from this, that they
rail at us for being followers of superstitious inventions of men, when we
follow the giver of so Holy Rules as Ionadab gave to his son, so praised and
so rewarded by God for following them. Let them tells us (if they can) how
amongst them it is true, there shall not want a man of the stock of Ionadab?

4. Suppose the Book of Judith (if you please) to be only a true History which
you do not deny, from thence then we have a true Relation how piously Judith
lived without any precept, who c. 8. 3. having but lived three years and a
half with her husband, he dying, she in the higher part of her house, made
her self a secret chamber, in which she aboade, shut up with her mayds, and
having cloth of hair upon her loins, she fasted all the days of her life
but Sabboths, and the feasts of the house of Israel. And this though her
husband left her much riches, and a great family. And c. 16. v. 26. There was
also Chastity joined to her virtue, so that she knew not man all the days of
her life, after that Manasses her husband was dead. And she aboade in her
husbands house a hundred five years, so that she so fair and so rich, lived a
widow about sixty nine years in Chastity, in prayer, in a perpetual fast,
and hair cloth. Who commanded her this, or who required it at her hands?
Love of serving God more perfectly.

5. Wherefore in the Ghospel to the young man, whom our Savior loved, because
he truly (for he loves not lying boasters) did say that he had kept the
commaundments from his youth. Mark 10.20. Christ notwithstanding said. One
thing thou lackest. Go thy way, go sell whatsoever thou have, and thou shall
have a treasure in heaven. This one thing was not wanting to any duty, which he
was bound to perform to be saved. For to enter into life, Christ did only bidd
him keep the commaundments. Matthew. 19, v. 7. But says our Lord v. 21. If thou will be perfect go sell the things thou have, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. This then is that one
thing which thou lackest, I say thou lackest this one thing, not to the state
of salvation (for keeping the commandments does suffice to the state of
salvation) but thou lackest this, to the state of perfection, if thou will be
perfect. For this one thing conteines all the three Eva^gelicall Counsels.
First Poverty, to sell all and give to the poor. Secondly Chastity, for him
whom he counsels to sell all, and give to the poor, he must needs counsel
not to take a wife with charge of family and Children, for else something were
to be kept for them. Thirdly Obedience. Come and follow me under the obedience
of those whom I shall place over thee in lawful authority, for our Savior in
person was not to live but a very short time after this. See all that follows
in the next Point.

THE XXIII. POINT. Of voluntary austerity of life.
1. I handle this point apart, because there being such daily practice of these
kind of works in our Religion, and so little in our adversaryes, (they scoffing
at all we do, or suffer, in this point) we will show whether they scoff not at
the practice of virtue recommended by Scripture.

2. First then observe all that has been said in the last point does
recommend austerity of life, by counselling a chaste life, which cannot be
maintained unless the flesh be tamed by some austerityes: neither is Chastity
it self a small austerity. Note also that they who in the old Law (Numb. 6.)
Had a will to separate themselves to God, had also a will to choose an austere
life, abstayning from wine, the usual drink of that country. How great and
voluntary was the austerity of the Rechabites or sonns of Ionadab, who neither
did drink wine, nor built houses (but lodged abroad in tabernacles) nor
possessed vineyeards nor sowed corn or any seed. And yet how does God praise
and reward them for it? Jeremy 35.18. How great and how voluntary was the
austerity of Judith, living sixty nine years in Chastity, in upper rooms
retired from the world, almost in continual fast, continual hair cloth,
most frequent prayer she being so rich, and (when she began this course) so
young and so beautiful? Christ also counseled no small voluntary austerity,
to him whom he advised for greater perfection to sell all, for money being the
price of all commodities, the want of it brings all incommodities. He was
advised also to follow him, who had not a hole to shroud his head in. What
austerity is here counseled?

3. Much like this was the voluntary austerity of the first Christians,
forsaking money, the price both of all delights, and also of all convenient
accommodation: and yet Act. 4. v. 34. As many as were owners of lands, or
houses, sold and brought the prices of those things which they sold, and carried
them before the feet of the Apostles. Who commanded this? Love of serving God
more perfectly: For if we speak of any obligation, they had no other then we
have. Hence S. Peter to Ananias. c. 5. v. 4. Whiles it remained was it not
thine own, and after it was sold in thine own power? That is, thou had
power to keep it wholly to thy self, or to vow it wholly to God, after which
vow thou had no further power to keep it, according to what we proved fully
out of Scripture, Point 21. n. 1.2.

4. But to speak more particularly of that which we call austerity of life,
such as that of Judith was, both great and voluntary, as also that of
Rechabites, or Sonns of Ionadab: how great and voluntary was the austerity of
Holy David though a King? His knees were weak through fasting. Psalm. 109.24. I
am weary with my groaning. All the night make I my bed to swim. I water my
couch with my tears. Psalm. 6. v. 6. By reason of the voice of my groaning, my
boanes have cleaved to my skin. Ps. 102. v. 5. I have eaten ashes like bread,
and mingled my drink with weeping. v. 9. His prayers also far exceeded any
command given him. Psalm. 119. 148. Mine eyes have prevented the nights
watches, that I might meditate thy word, I prevented the dawning of the
morning, and cried. And v. 62. At midnight I will rise to give thanks to thee.
And v. 97. Thy Law is my Meditation all day. And 164. Seven times a day I do
praise the. Daniel c. 9.3. of himself says. I did put my face to my Lord God
to beseech and pray him in fastings, sackcloath and ashes. And Nehemiah 9. v.
1. The Children of Israel came together in fasting and sackclaths and earth
upon them. What the Ninivites did is well known. Of Jacob as wealthy as he was,
the Scripture tells us, how sleeping on the ground, he used a stone for his
pillow, and so was favored with that heavenly vision: Genesis 28.11. so all Israel
is said Joel 2.12. Turn ye to me with all your heart, with fasting, with
weeping, and with mourning.

5. Now in the new Testament Christ's doctrine would have made the great sinners
of Tire and Sidon, do penance in sackloath and ashes. Matthew. 11. v. 21. He
says to all He that will come after me let him take up his cross. Great and
voluntary was the austerity of S. John Baptist. He shall be great before our
Lord. Wine and sicer (or strong drink) he shall not drink. Luc. 1.15. The
Child grew and waxed in spirit, and was in the desert until the day of of his
Manifestation or showing in Israel. v. 80. That is, from his childhoode until
he was above 30. years old. He was clothed with Camels hair, and a girdle of
skin about his Ioynes, and he did eat locusts and wild honey. Mark. 1. v.
6. And he did eat so sparingly, that of him Christ says, John came neither
eating nor drinking. Matthew. 11.18. Of his Disciples often fasting we read
Matthew. 9. v. 14. And they were instructed by him of whom Christ said, amongst
the Children of women there has not risen a greater then John Baptist. Christ
also promised there that his Disciples should do as John's did, that is, fast
often, when the Bridgrome should be taken from them.

6. They did but what S. Paul taught 2. Cor. 6. v. 4. In all things approving
our selves as the Ministers of God in much patience, in tribulations, in
necessityes, in distresses, in strypes, in prisons, in seditions. To these
(which all perhaps were not voluptary) he exhorts us, voluntarily to add. In
labors, in watchings, in fasting, in pureness or Chastity. For as we shall be
partakers of his sufferings, so shall we be of his consolation. 2. Cor. 1.7.
Mortify your members which be upon earth. Col. 3.5. But before I pass hence, I
must observe what is said of Holy Anne. Luke 2. v. 37. She was a widow until
eighty and four years (living even until that age) she departed not from
the Temple, by fasting and prayers serving God night and day. Behold by what
exercises God is served. Who commanded her this? The desire of serving God
more perfectly.

7. Hear S. Paul of himself 1. Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, and bring it
into subjection, least perhaps whilst I preach to others, my self may become a
cast away or reprobate. Who commanded him? Desire of securing his salvation.
Again Col. 1.24. I Paul who now rejoice in suffering for you, and do
accomplish, or fill up that which is behind, or those things which want, of the
affliction of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the Church. Behold an
other reason, which was to suffer, thereby to satisfy for the sins of others,
of which text more, when we shall speak of satisfactory good works in the next
point n. 6.

8. S. Timothey, Disciple to S. Paul, having great weakness of stomach, and
frequent infirmities, in the midst of so great labors did notwithstandin so
continually drink water, at all his meals, that S. Paul thought it necessary
to write to him thus. 1. Tim. 5.23. Drink not yet water, but use a little wine
for thy stomach, and thy often infirmityes. So that you see, that, before, he
did not so much as drink a little wine, though it were the common drink of
that country, and though he were so weakened by sickness and labor: Thus
voluntarily absteyning from wine, so good a creature of God. Who commanded him
this abstinence? Love of Perfection.

THE XXIV. POINT. Of satisfactory good works.
1. THese voluntary austerities (of which we spoake in the former point) and
all such painful and laborious good works, when they are performed in state
of grace, are held by us Catholics to have a great satisfactory virtue, by
which the pain due to our sin, is forgiven, and is more, or less cancelled,
as the works are more, or less perfect. For we teach that after the sin it
self is forgiven, by our true repentance and humble Confession, there yet
remains the guilt of temporal pain, to which that sin makes us still liable,
as I shall prove in the next point, which (if you please) you may read before
this. Protestants think they much magnify the Passion of our Savior by saying
that, by virtue of that alone, all sins and all pain due to all sins, are
quite forgiven. But first I ask them if nothing else be required on our parts?
They are forced to confess something else required: for they are constrained
to acknowledge First that we must be baptized, Secondly that we must lay hold
of the Passion of Christ by the hand of Faith. Thirdly that besides this faith
we must have true repentance. Fourthly they must needs say, that also you
must have a will to receave the Body and Blood of Christ. Unless you eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in
you. Io. 6.53. Fifthly they must needs also say, that either the observation of
the commandments is necessary, (as we shall show point 36*) or at least a
good will, and serious endeavor to keep them. He was made to all that obey
him the cause of eternal salvation. Hebr. 5.9. So that obeying him is required
on our parts, to have him be effectually to us, the cause of eternal salvation.

2. By this discourse it is evident, that though the Passion of Christ in it
self be of a sufficient worth, and value, to satisfy for all the sins of the
world, yea of a million of worlds, and also for all the pain that is, or can
be due to those sins; yet Christ, (out of his Prudence and Justice) thought
fit to order so, that this full fruit of his Passion should not be applied to
any, but such, as should perform several things which he requires at their
hands for this effect. Not that there is need of this to supply any want of
value in his Passion, but there is need to do all this, to fulfill, on our
parts, the Covenant, and conditions, upon which this benefitt is granted. As
you must say of all those five several things, which, you yourselves require
to be superadded by us on our part, that we may enjoy the full fruit of his
Passion. To these five things we Roman Catholics add a sixth, and we have
Scripture for this sixth, as well as you have, for the other five. That sixth
thing is, that Christ requires of us several penal, and laborious works,
which though in themselves, and as they merely proceed from us, they have no
sufficient proportion to cancel the pains due unto our sins (as also you
must confess all that is done by us in Baptism, or in believing, or in
repenting, or in receaving his body, or in endeavoring to keep his Law, has
also no such proportion) yet each of them have virtue to this effect: But this
virtue is merely from the virtue of the Passion of our Savior, which is
communicated to us by the performance of these things. For we so magnify the
virtue of our Saviors Passion, that we say a most satisfactory virtue (or a
special efficacy to cancel pain due to sins) is not only communicated by it
to Faith, but the like efficacy, in order to this effect, is by the same
Passion communicated to our painful, and laborious works of fasting,
hayrecloath, watching, praying, almesdeedes; and therefore this our doctrine is
so far from derogating to our Saviors Passion, that it honors it more
then yours, which does deny the Passion of our Savior this praise, of being
sufficient to elevate, and raise our poor endeavors of satisfying to any
ability of making real satisfaction.

3. The force and virtue of these actions was well known to H. David, who did
practice them so much, as I showed in the last point n. 4. His knees were
weakened with fasting, he labored in sighing, he every night washed his bed,
and watered his couch with his tears. The voice of his perpetual groaning for
his sins, with other austerities joined therewith, made his boanes cleave to
his skin, he being merely skin, and boanes: for did eat ashes as bread, and
mingle his drink with his most frequent tears, he gave himself to prayer
night and day. Every night washing his bed with tears, rising at midnight to
confess to our Lord, and then preventing the dawning of the day, by the cry of
his morning prayers. Seven times in the day he said praise to God, all this he
did, being a King. Almesdeeds may seem less wonderful in a Royal person:
yet his bountiful Alms, (considering the charge of so continual wars,) were
even incredible. Toward the building of the Temple 1. Chron. 22. v. 14 Behold
(says he) I, in my trouble, prepared the charges of the house of our Lord. Of
Gold a hundred thousand talents, and of silver a thousand, thousand talents,
and of brass and of iron without weight, for the number is surpassed by the
greatness: timber and stoanes I have prepared to all the charges. To all this
in the 29. Chapter v. 3 Above all these things which I have offered into the house
of my God, I give of mine own peculiar goods gold and silver unto the Temple
of my God, besides those things which I have prepared for the Holy House. Three
thousand talents of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of most
approved sylver. Thus he excelled in all the three satisfactory works, Fasting,
Prayer, and Almesdeeds to which three all other satisfactory works are reduced.
Who commanded David this? The excellency of his Charity to God.

4. In like manner Job of himself. I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes. Job 42.6. And as for Alms c. 31. v. 17. If I have eaten my morsels
alone, and the pupil has not eaten with me. If his sides have not blessed me;
and he was not warmed with the fleeces of my sheep. The stranger tarryed noth
without: my door was open to the wayfaring man. If I have been affrayde of a
very great multitude. In another place, he was an eye to the blind, a staff to
the lame, etc. Of Holy Iudiths actions we spoake in the former point. Hear
what is said to that wicked King by Daniel 4.24. Wherefore o King, let my
counsel be acceptable to thee, break of thy sins by rightiousnesse, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Behold the sins, even of
Nabuchodonozar, might be cancelled by Alms. For Prove, 16.6. By Mercy and truth
iniquity is purged. Ioe 2.12. Convert to me in all your heart in fasting, and in
weeping, and in mourning, and rent your hearts, and not your garments. Jonas 3
5. The men of Ninive proclaimed a fast, and were clothed with sackcloath etc.
And God saw their works, and had mercy etc. Why? He saw their works.

5. In the new Testament we are exhorted, to approve our selves Ministers of
God in labors, in watching, in fasting, in Chastity. 2. Cor. 6.4. We have S.
John Baptist neither eating nor drinking, Matthew. 14. His Disciples fasting
often, Christ promising that after his death, his also should fast as S. John's
did, that is, should fast often. Matthew. 9.15. We have S. Anne by fasting and
prayers serving night and day. Luke 2.37. S. Paul chastizing his body, his
Disciple Timothy drinking still water. And as for Alms, after so many woes
denounced to the most unclean Scribes, and Pharisees Christ himself says. But
yet what remains, give Alms, and behold all things are cleansed unto you.
Luke 11.41. So that to cleanse them by his blood, he would have their Alms
joined with the virtue of his blood, which blood gave this cleansing power to
their Alms. And S. Paul promises us Romans 8.17. That we may be Heirs of God,
and Ioyntheyres with Christ, if so be we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him, Note the condition if so be that we suffer: Though Christ's
suffering of its own self be more then enough, yet he will have ours joined,
upon these terms he covenants to communicate the full fruit of his Passion to
us, and therefore without this be done, on our part something is said to be
wanting to the Passion of Christ in order to its full effect.

6. This is clear out of Col. 1.24. I Paul who now rejoice in suffering for
you, and do fill up what is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh,
for his body which is the Church. Notwithstanding Christ's Passion (as I
declared n. 1. and 2.) some scores are left behind so that some things are
wanting, not wanting on Christ's part, but Christ requyres them to be done our
part, for they be our scores, which be thus behind, until we shall have done
all that he has ordained that we should do, to be partakers of the full
fruit, of his Passion in order to the cancelling of pains due for our sins.
And we must either by our selves fill up what is behind, or accomplish these
things which want of the Passion of Christ to this effect, or our charitable
Brothers must (by their suffering for us) help us out, as S. Paul here says
he did help out the Coliossians by his suffering for them. So that, if we be
fellows in his Passion, we shall be fellows in his Resurrection and gloy. Romans
8.17.

7. The obtaining of this remission of all sins and of all pains, due to
these sins, which are committed after Baptism, is not done with that facility
and easines, with which all this was done in Baptism, but it is a thing
requires much labor and pain, Heb. 10.26. For, if we sin willingly after the
knowledge of truth received, there is not left an Host for sins. Wherefore
though it be most true, which was there said, v. 14. By one oblation he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Yet the true meaning of that text
is, that he has done this in that manner which he, in his prudence, and
justice, has thought fit, that is, he has by that one oblation so perfected
them for ever, that they, to be partakers of this consummated perfection
(completed on his part) must do all things, which he exacts to be done on
their parts; that is, believe, repent, resolve to keep, or endeavor to keep
the Commandments. If thus disposed they superadde Baptism, all is perfected
wholly supposing their perseverance. But if we sin after this Baptism, (in
which we profess the knowledge of the truth received) there is now not an Host
for sin; that is, the Host of Christ Crucified (which is the oblation
consummating them for ever) is not left, to wit, it is not left to cancel, and
cleanse our sins so easily as before. For none can again be baptized in cold
water, but we must be rebaptized in the hott water of our tears, in the
baptism of penance (for so the Scripture calls penance) in fasting,
sackcloath, watching, praying, almesdeeds, or else we must smart in Purgatory,
as by Scripture we shall now prove.

THE XXV. POINT. Of Purgatory and prayer for the Dead.
1. SOme are so ignorant in the understanding of Scripture, that if they find
not there the name of Purgatory, they presently conclude that according to
Scripture, there is no such thing as Purgatory. This is as great simplicity, as
it would be to deny the most Blessed Trinity, because this name cannot be found
in all the Scripture old or new. Such men are to be taught, that any thing is
sufficiently proved out of Scripture, if the Scripture can be showed to contain
such principles as cannot be true, unless it be true also that there is a
Purgatory.

2. I say then the Scripture holds forth unto ut three several principles; all
which three must be false, unless we grant a Purgatory. For first, if any
Scripture teach, that, although our sins be forgiven us, whenever we truly
repent, but yet that they are only forgiven so, that all the pains due to them
be not always forgiven them, together with these sins; then that very
Scripture teaches us also, that there is a Purgatory: because it may often
happen, that he, to whom all sins were forgiven, did depart this life before
that all the pains, due to those his sins, were remitted. These pains being
due by divine Justice, and not being cancelled by any satisfaction made for
them in this world, it evidently follows, that divine Justice must exact the
payment of them in the next world: but not in Hell because no man is condemned
to Hell, who did truly repent for his sin. Therefore some other place, or
state, must needs be granted, in which such a soul is to pay those temporal
punishments, which are yet due to her by divine Justice. This place, or state,
is that which we call Purgatory.

3. Secondly, if any Scripture teach us, that we may live and dye with such
sins, as be not damnable, but only deserve temporal punishment and not
eternal; that Scripture also must needs teach us Purgatory, which is nothing
else but a place in which souls departed suffer only for a time and not for
eternity.

4. Thirdly, if any Scripture teach us to pray for the dead that very Scripture
teaches us a Purgatory. For prayers for the dead, are unnescessary to those,
who are in heaven, and unprofitable to such as are in Hell. Those dead then,
who can receive help and relief by our prayers, must neither be in heaven nor
in Hell; but in a third place, which we call Purgatory. My work then is done,
if I can show that these three principles beheld forth unto us in Holy
Scripture. Yet fourthly we shall add several other Texts in proof of
Purgatory.

5. Let us now begin with the first principle, and let us show how the
Scripture teaches us, that full often, after the sin it self is forgived,
there do remain some pains, yet due even to that sin. We are all born in
Original sin. This sin is quite forgiven to many children, wether it by the
faith of their parents (as in the Law of nature) or by Circumcision (as in the
old Law) or by Baptism as in the new. And yet those very infants, to whom this
sin is forgiven, do notwithstanding for the selfsame forgiven sin, suffer the
punishment of death due unto them for no other cause, but for that very
original sin, which was forgiven them. This is taught by S. Paul Romans 5.12. As
by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death: so unto all death did
pass; yea truly unto all did death pass, even to those innocent Children who
have not committed the least offense in the world.

6. In the book of Numbers, chapter 14 The people greviously offended God by
murmuring: But Moses praying earnestly for them, our Lord said, I have forgiven
it according to thy word. But yet all the men that have seen the signs that I
have done in Egypt, and in the wilderness, they shall not see the Land, for
which I swear to their Fathers. v. 23. In this wilderness shall your Carcases
lie, v. 28. and v. 32* Your Carcases shall be in the wilderness: your Children
shall wander in the desert forty years, and shall bear your fornication, until
the Carcases of their Fathers be consumed in the desert. And forty years shall
ye bear your iniquities. For as I have spoken so will I do. Note here, that
God with his own mouth said, he had forgiven the sin, and yet he with the same
mouth, and breath, (as I may say) tells them there shall be still a just
punishment undergone for this very sin, for which (though forgiven) they shall
dye in the wilderness, and for forty years their very Children shall bear
their fornication; and they shall suffer all the incommodities of wandering in
a wilderness. Can then any man wonder, if they themselves, who had their
pardon on these terms, and then were slain the very next day by their enemies,
should for a time, yea perhaps for forty years, suffer some punishment after
death? Eternal punishment (the old sin being forgiven) they could not suffer,
if they did no new one; yet manifestly some punishment after death could not
but be due to the^, seeing that so great a punishment was so justly laid upon
their Children, for their sake, for forty whole years.

7. Let us go on, 2. Sam. chapter 12. upon David's great repentance for his great
sins of Murder and Adultery, God by the Prophet Nathan told him v. 13. Our
Lord also has taken away thy sin, Howbeit because by this deed thou have
given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme the Child that is
borne unto thee, shall surely die. Behold the sin taken away, and yet behold a
punishment still due even for this deed. Yea for this deed, the sword shall not
depart from thy house for ever. I will take thy wives, and give them to thy
neighbors, and they shall sleep with thy wives in the sight of this Sun. v.
10.11. All which great punishments, even after this forgiven sin, did befall
David and his family. His son dyed v. 18. Three more of his own sons were
slain: Ammon in the next chapter; Absalom chapter 18. Adonias 1. Kings v. 24.
Yea Absalom before his death did raise an Army against David his Father and
enforced him to fly, Jerusalem being taken, they pitched a tent for Absalom in
the house top (the leads of the place) And he went to his Fathers Concubines
before all Israel, 2. Sam. Chapter 16. v. 22. Thus, in the sight of the Sun, lying
with his own fathers wives, called here concubines, because they were not
admitted to the title of Queens.

8. Our Lord said to Moses and Aaron (Number. 20.12.) because you have not
believed me, you shall not bring this people into the land which I will give
them. And v. 24. Aaron shall be gathared to his people, (that is shall dye) for
he shall not enter into the land, which I have given to the Children of Israel,
because he rebelled against my word, and v. 28. Aaron dyed there in the top of
the mountain, and Chapter 27. v. 13. God said to Moses, when thou have seen (the
land of promise) thou also shall be gathered unto thy people as Aaron thy
Brother was gathered: For ye rebelled against my commandment. Thus you see
these two great Saints, both punished with a most speedy death: For that very
sin, of which they, being admonished by God himself, questionless did repent.
Whence after this sin committed God did so familiarly converse with Moses, from
chapter 20. to 27. By all these, and a world of other such examples, it is made
evident, that upon the true repentance of the delinquent, though the pain of
eternal death be always forgiven him, yet often the delinquent remains
liable to suffer temporal punishments: even as in this world, though upon the
repentance of a delinquent deserving death, the punishment of death be forgiven
him, yet he is justly made liable to suffer imprisonment, or condemned to pay
such a fine.

9. Out of this principle it clearly follows that there is a Purgatory; for
seeing that a man may dye before he has suffered, or satisfied for the
punishment due by divine Justice unto him, it does necessarily follow, that
this punishment, according to the same Justice, must be given him in the world
to come; not in hell, because the sin is forgiven him: but yet in the prison of
Purgatory, out of which he shall not go, until he has paid the last farthing,
Matthew. 5.26. It remains then proved, that this principle, (so well grounded in
Scripture) cannot be true, unless it also be true, that there is a Purgatory.

10. I pass to the second principle, teaching that some sins are only venial,
deserving indeed some punishment, but not eternal. For as he were a Tyrant,
who would punish every offense (though it deserves but whipping) with a cruel
death, so we should have too too hard opinion of Gods Justice, if we believed,
that for every merry lie, for every idle word, or passionate speech, for every
trifling away of a small time unprofitably, for every vain or lazy action, he
should punish the delinquent with death everlasting, and the endless and
unspeakable torments of Hell fire, if the person dies without repentance, as
thousands must needs do, who dye suddenly or out of their senses, or in their
sleep, etc.

11. That there be such venial sins, or smaller offenses, as these are, which
be truly sins yet not mortal or damnable is clear out of Scripture Exodus 1.17.
But the Midwives (of Egypt) feared God, and preserved the men Children,
contrary to the command of the King; who questioning them for breaking his
commandment, they answered; The Hebrew weomen are not as the Egyptian weomen;
for they have the knowledge to play the Midwife themselves and before we come to
them they are delivered. God therefore did well to the Midwives; and because
they feared God, be built them houses: Here you she the Midwives telling an
officious lie, which is a sin; yet this sin did not take from them the love of
God, or made God hate them: but they even then feared God, as the Scripture
says, and he for this their fear, (exercised not in this lie, but in their
Charity and Mercy,) highly rewarded them. Yet this lying being a sin, divine
Justice could not but reserve some punishment for it, though not eternal.

12. Even so Iosue 2.2. The spies sent by Iosue entered the house of Rahab. And
it was told the King of Jericho. He sent to Rahab saying; bring forth the men
that came to the, for they be spies: and the woman taking the men, hid them and
said, I confess they came to me, when the gate was a shutting in the dark: and
they withal went out; I know not whither they be gone pursue quickly, and you
shall overtake them. But she made the men go up to the roof of her house, and
covered them with the stalk of flax which was there. Here you have another
officious lie, but only a venial, not a damnable sin. By lying she sinned
venially, but by that act of charitably hiding the spies, she pleased God: For
S. Paul says, by Faith Rahab. perished not, receiving the spies with peace,
Hebr. 11. 31. And S. James chap. 2. v. 25. Rahab, was she not justified by
works, receiving the Messengers and putting them forth another way, after that
she had first hid them? Of these kind of venial sins the Scripture also
says. Seven times shall the just fall and rise again. Prove. 24.16. For, these
smaller sins cast us not out of Gods favor; wherefore by his grace, we soon
get pardon again. And hence these sins are called venial; such as easily have
pardon.

13. Whence our Savior himself does distinguish several sins, and affirms
some of them to deserve punishment, but not hell fire. Matthew. 5. v. 22.
Whosoever is angry (for so the Protestant Bibles read it) with his Brother,
shall be in danger of Judgment. And whosoever shall say to his Brother Raca,
shall be in danger of Council. And whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in
danger of hell fire. Of which only eternal punishment, the two former sins did
not endanger us, they being but venial. Hence it is evident, that there be
some sins, which God judges worthy of punishment, and yet not to deserve hell
fire: and he speaks of the punishment of the next life, as of hell, etc. Again,
Matthew. 12.36. I say unto you that every idle word that man shall speak, he
shall render an account thereof in the day of Judgment. The words of lesser
anger deserved not hell fire as the former Text taught us; yet they being worse
then mere idle words, some punishment is due to them. For here this Text says,
some account must be rendered even for every idle word. But a lesser account
then for angry words, and therefore they will not alone make us liable to hell
fire. Again, Matthew. 7.3. some sins be called Beams, some only Mothes; which
name Christ (hating deadly sin to death) would never give to any sin, that were
damnable. Neither would he (if these lesser sins were damnable) speak of them
as he does, Matthew. 23. v. 24. You tithe Mint and Anise etc blind guides, that
strain a gnat, and swallow a Camel. Behold some sins only like gnats, and the
doing of them compared to the fault, that would be in omitting te pay Tithe for
Mint and Anise, Yet because all venial sins do something pollute the soul
this stain must be purged or cleansed. Often this is not done in this world;
for we see daily men continue in doing these sins to the last, loosing all
sense, and life also, before they repent them: some account then in Judgment
(following after death immediately) will be given of them. Not in Hell, for
they deserve it not: therefore in Purgatory.

14. Agreeable to this is that which our Savior says Luke 12.47. That servant
who knows the will of his Lord, and does not according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes: but he that knows it not, and does things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. Hence it is evident, that there be
some men, who do things worthy of stripes, which they shall not escape; but yet
they shall be beaten with few stripes. But if these stripes be to be laid on
for all eternity (as all stripes be, which are paid in Hell) they will not be
few; because being everlasting, the number of them will be without number: will
then any one call these stripes few? Or can any man persuade himself, that a
God, who is all mercy, will, in this unmercifull manner, punish the speaking of
one idle word? Yet Christ himself says, that we shall be accountable for every
idle word we speak, Matthew. 12. Wherefore we must be liable to some punishment
for every idle word: so that if a man of full age converted from Idolatry, be
baptized, and by and by after killed, before he commit any other sin, then the
speaking of one idle word only; shall this man be tormented for ever and ever,
so long as God shall be God? And shall the Father of mercies give this
unmercifull sentence? Doubtless if any man can do a thing worthy of stripes,
and for doing it, deserve only to be beaten with few stripes, this man may hope
for this mercy. But for greater then this he cannot hope; seeing that Christ
says, that some account is to be given for that idle word. Some punishment
therefore he must suffer, but not eternal; and consequently not in Hell, but
in Purgatory. For he must be beaten with few stripes, not with masny, or
everlasting stripes. If this principle (so well grounded in Scripture) be true,
then it cannot but be true, that there is a Purgatory.

15. The third principle, clearly also contained in Scripture is, that prayer
may profitably be made for the dead. This is proved, as well out of the old as
new Testament. In the old Testament, 2. Match. 12. where after diverse of the
soldiers of Judas Machabeus had been slain in the Battle, v. 43. He making a
gathering sent twelve thousand drachmes of silver to Jerusalem to have
Sacrifice offered for the sins, (of the dead) well and religiously thinking of
the resurrection. For unless he hoped that they who were slain should rise
again, it should seem superfluous and vain to pray for the dead. It is
therefore a holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may
be loosed from their sins. Your English Bibles so mangle the sense here, that I
would not follow them.

I know Protestants will say these Books be not Canonical, though in the third
Council of Carthage Can. 47. They be registered in the Canon. Yet not to dispute
this matter, I take that which is granted without all dispute; that is, that
these Books be written by a true and faithful writer of the ancient Church
History: or else why do you place them in the Bible? And without dispute also
they were written before our Saviors time. So that by the most grave testimony
of so ancient a writer of Ecclesiastical History, we have, first that Judas
Machabeus, who then was High Priest, and also chief commander of the Jews,
(Gods only true people) did hold prayer for the dead to be laudable. Secondly,
that this was not his private opinion, but a thing done confirmably to the
custom of the Jewish Church, which to this very day uses prayer for the dead;
Thirdly, all the soldiers being men, who had devoted their lives for the
defense of the true belief, concurred, by contributing to this act of Piety,
That Sacrifice might be offered for the dead. Fourthly the Priests of
Jerusalem, who best knew their Churches custom in Sacrifices for the dead
(which were the same that for sin) are never said to have scrupulized at the
matter. Fifthly, this most ancient Historian recommends this custom as holy.
All these things not being singular in those men alone, and happening not full
two hundred years before Christ, and still lasting to this day among the
Jews, there could not but be many, who practiced this (so common a thing) in
his and his Apostles times. And yet you never read the least reprehension given
them for it.

16. Out of the new Testament we have two places: First S. Paul, 1. Cor. 15.29.
What shall they do, who are baptized for the dead? if the dead do not rise at
all, to what end are they baptized for them? As if he would say, to what end do
men do penance for the dead? To what end is this done, if there be no
resurrection, and the soul do not still survive expecting to be reunited to
the body? S. Paul can speak here of no other baptism which can profit the
dead, but the baptism of penance; for so S. Mark, and so S. Luke speaks. And
certain it is, that S. Paul takes his argument from that, which with profit to
the dead, can be performed for them. Otherwise when he presses so hotty those
words, To what end are they baptized for them? one might easily answer, to no
end. True then it is, that to a very good end we undertake this painful
Baptism of Penance for the dead, so taking upon us part of their fiery
Baptism in Purgatory. This is the language of Holy Fathers, expounding
Scripture, as Bellarmin shows (l. 1. de Purgatorio cap. 4.) out of S.
Hierome, S. Basil, and Bid, all expounding those words, He shall baptize you
in the Holy Ghost and fire, Matthew. 3. That is (say they) with the Holy Ghost
shall he baptize in this world, and with fire in the world to come. To the same
effect he cites S. Gregory Naz. calling Purgatory fire the last Baptism.

17. The second text is 1. Io. 5.16. If any man see his Brother to sin a sin
not to death, let him ask, and life shall be given for them that sin not to
death. There is a sin to death (committed by irrepentent sinners) I do not say
that he shall pray for it. And so we never pray for those, whom we know to die
unrepentant. This is the true sense of this place, and hence it is clear, that
there be sins to death, and sins not to death. The meaning is not, that there
be sins mortal, and sins venial, neither according to our interpreters, or
according to yours, who deny all venial sins. As for us we all hold prayer
lawfully and fruitfully made for any sin whatsoever during the life of the
sinner. Wherefore a sin to death, is to leave faith, working by Charity even to
death. As S. Austin says, de Correp. and gra. c. 12. Whence it follows
contrariwise, that a sin not to death, is that which a man commiteth, but does
not persever in it until he be dead. S. John therefore encourages us with
confidence to pray for any, whom we do not know to be departed in deadly sin
unrepented. For it is evident that S. John speaks here of praying for the dead.
First, because before the death of any sinner, we may pray for pardon of his
sins, whatsoever they be, and our prayer may be heard. But S. John speaks of a
sinner now placed in such a state, that prayer for him will not be available.
Therefore he speaks of praying for sinners who are dead. And of those, some are
dead in their sins without repentance. For these he bids us not pray. Others of
them are dead after they duly repented their sins; and for these he encourages
us to pray. I prove this secondly, because he speaks of their prayer, who know
their brother to sin not to death, that is, to have given signs of true
repentance. For any such let him ask, and life (of glory) shall be given him,
sinning not to death. Now if this principle of praying for the dead be true, it
cannot but be true, that there is a Purgatory, seeing that prayer brings no
relief to any, that are either in heaven or Hell.

18. To these three principles, we may yet add several Texts, to the same
effect, as Apocal. 21. v. 27. There shall in no wise enter into it (heaven) any
thing that defiles. Many die polluted with multitudes of venial sins
unrepented. This pollution must be purged before they enter heaven. Many also
dye before they have fully satisfied for all pain, due to their mortal sins
forgiven them. This full satisfaction must be made, before they enter heaven.
But where? In that prison, of which it is said, Matthew. 5. v. 27. Amen, I say
unto you, thou shall not go out from thence, until thou payest the last
farthing. Upon which place, S. Hierome. This is that which he says, thou shall
not go out of prison, until thou shall pay even to thy little sins: And so S.
Cyprian. Now that after the paying of the last farthing, there is going out,
and forgiveness in the world to come, Christ himself does teach, Matthew. 12. v.
32. saying, It shall not be forgiven the, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come. For it is non sense to say, I will neither marry in this world,
nor in the world to come; because in that world there is no marrying; the like
non sense would be in Christ's words, if there were no forgiveness in the next
world. I conclude with S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. v. 15. If any man's work shall be
burnt) as wood hay, and stubble, will do (by which lesser sins are signified)
he shall suffer loss. But he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Which
S. Ambrose Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. expounds thus, Whereas S. Paul says, yet so
as by fire, he shows indeed that he shall be saved, but yet shall suffer the
punishment of fire; that being purged by fire, he may be saved* and not
tormented for ever, as infidels are, by everlasting fire.

19. All these proofs we have out of Scripture, though they be so little noted
by our adversaries, who daily read Scripture. Yet they are to know, that if
they will do what the pretend, they should, by clear Scripture (before they
deny Purgatory) show us manifestly, that there is no Purgatory. For their prime
pretense of just separation from us, is, that they were enforced thereunto, for
such errors, as they can manifestly by only Scripture demonstrate to be
damnable. Let them show this of Purgatory, and we have done.

THE XXVI. POINT. Of Indulgences.
1. TO understand this point well, which is misunderstood by a world of people,
note first what we proved in the former point, that full often, after that God
has pardoned the guilt of sin, he does not pardon the guilt of all that
pain to which the sinner, according to Justice, is still liable for the sin
forgiven. Note secondly: that we are most grossly belyed by our adversaries who
say that our doctrine is, that the Pope can forgive us our sins by granting
Indulgences unto us, whereas no Catholic Doctor can ever be showed to have
taught this doctrine. We all unanimously teach that the Pope by no Indulgence
can forgive any one single mortal or venial sin. For our Faith tells us that
those sins are only forgiven us by true contrition or due sorrow in the
Sacrament of Confession, joined always with a sincere purpose of offending no
more. That which is forgiven by an Indulgence is not the guilt of any sin,
either mortal, or venial; but it is only the pardoning of part, or of all
that pain, which yet (according to Gods Justice) we stand liable to pay for
the sins already forgiven. Neither does any Catholic Doctor teach that the
Pope can forgive any sinner this pain at his pleasure, by granting him a
Plenary Indulgence. But, if our doctrine be truly understood, we all require
more for gaining pardon, even of the least part of the pain (still due to our
very least sins) then Protestants require to the full forgivenes of all the
greatest sins that are, or can be, taken all together with all the pain which
can be due unto them, which is a point exceedingly to be noted it being
apparently true.

2. For the first thing which we require to gain any part, even of the least
Indulgence, is to have true faith producing true repentance for our sin. This
alone with Protestants suffices to remit the guilt of all sins whatsoever and
all pains due to all sins of which any man can be guilty. Does it do so with
us? No, it is far from it. We say that after this, first he must make a true
entire Confession* Secondly. He must moreover stand obliged to make perfect
restitution of any thing to which hs is bound. Thirdly he stands obliged to
perform the Penance enjoined him. Fourthly if this penance fall short of
satisfying the divine Justice for the pains yet due to the sins forgiven; the
sinner stands still obliged to satisfy the divine Justice by other penal
works. Now all that we say is, that this pain may be pardoned him by
Indulgences; though not by Indulgences granted merely at the Popes pleasure;
but by Indulgences granted by him upon sufficient causes, which causes he must
carefully examine. And after the grant of Indulgences (upon due causes) you
must not think any thing is done until we, on our parts, have done what is
required. What is that? It is, that after such humble Repentance, and after
such an entire Confession, and restitution, as I said, we perform the things
expressed in the Grant of the Indulgence. And when all is done, the most, that
we obtain, is to have pardon due to such sins the guilt of which is already
forgiven by our repentance and Confession. But the Protestants teach that Faith
alone quite frees men for ever of all their sins, and of all the pain that was
due for their sins though never so many or so great: for after this faith God
imputes their sins no longer to them.

3. Before I prove that the Pope has power by Indulgences, granted upon just
cause, to pardon such as duly perform what is enjoined, I further note, that
the Blood of Christ was of that infinite value, that the shedding of one drop
thereof was able to satisfy divine Justice for all the sins of the world, yea
of a million of worlds, and able to satisfy also for all the pain that could
be due for all those sins: Wherefore, seeing Christ did not shed his blood for
us by dropps, but by showers; hence it follows evidently that the
satisfactions of Christ alone be, in a most high degree, superaboundant. Tell
me now, is the most precious treasure of all this superaboundancy of
satisfactions, in order to cancel the pain due to our sins, so wholly lost,
that, even the liveing members of Christ's body can receive no benefit by this
superaboundancy? God forbid. They be not treasures wrapped up in a napkin.
Wherefore there must be a power on earth to dispense this rich treasure, but
yet to dispense it so, as becoms a prudent dispenser of the mysteries of God.
Now, who is the highest and chiefest in this dignity of dispensing, but he,
whom we have proved to be the head and chief Pastor of Christ's Church, to
whom it was said. To thee I will give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven.
Matthew. 16. v. 19. Feed my sheep Io 21. v, 15. See the seventh Point.

4. That such Indulgences as here described, may be granted, I prove first
because to give thus the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven to S. Peter and to his
successors (as is there proved) is to give power of removing any bar that may
shutt us out of heaven, whether this bar be the sin it self which excludes us
eternally (if not removed) or whether it be the guilt of pain, for our sins
forgiven, which excludes us only until such time as due satisfaction is made
for that pain. Satisfaction may be made for this pain either by our selves,
performing sufficiently for this effect such satisfactory works as we spoke of
Point 9. and 24. Or which may be performed for us by others. For, as I may pay
my debts by my self, so I may pay them by a friend.

5. And the proof of this is a second proof of Indulgences out of Col. 1.24.
I Paul, who now rejoice in suffering for you, and do accomplish those things
which want of the Passion of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the
Church. Of which Text see what I said Point 24. n. 6. whence appears that
notwithstanding the fullnes and superabondance of Christ's Passion in it self;
yet in order to our being made completely partakers of several fruits thereof,
something may be (and often is) wanting on our part. What is this? It is the
adjoining of those satisfactory works, which (in that Point) we have at large
showed Christ to expect at our hands. And, until such works be performed,
either by us in person, or for us in the person of some other, we still stand
liable to the pain due to our sins forgiven. Now that an other may offer such
works for us, is made evident by the text we cited out of S. Paul, affirming
that he rejoiced in doing this deed of charity, which consisted in suffering
(that is in doing a work most satisfactory) for them and by it to make up or
to accomplish in his flesh that which was yet behind or as yet wanted of the
Passion of Christ: that is, what was wanting, not on Christ's part but on the
part o his body, which is the Church. Now as S. Paul (as then confirmed in
grace) had few sins, and many sufferings, which he could well spare, and give
away to pay his brothers debt; so had S. John Baptist, so had our Lady; so the
Apostles, so the Holy Martyrs and many others. But above all Christ's sufferings
alone had an inexhaustable superaboundance which sufferings, although Christ,
by his ordinary course of providence does not apply to the full cleansing of
our sins, and of the pain due to our sins; unless we do what is required on
our part: yet he has left power to his Vicar on earth, upon just causes and
with due circumspection to impart (by way of special favor or Indulgence)
those superabundant satisfactions of Christ and his Saints unto us, that, by
this superabondancy, our wants may be supplied, if we duly dispose our selves
by his grace to be partakers of that great favor.

6. A third proof of Indulgences out of Scripture is to show S. Paul
exercising in the person of Christ this special favor or Indulgence toward
the incestous Corinthian. Whom (in his first Epistle to the Corinthians) he
had given over to Satan by Excommunication. But afterward moved to be more
favorable unto him by his great repentance, he does not only absolve him from
from the sin, and from the Excommunication: but having enjoined him a most
severe public penance (which was to have lasted for a great time before the
pains due to his enormious offense would have been fully cancelled) he
notwithstanding out of the plenitude of his Apostolical power graciously
pardons the remnant of his penance. Now this pardon would have been no favor
nor grace, unles, at the same time, he had pardoned the remnant of the pain
still due, according to divine Justice. Therefore he declares expressly, that
he does it in the power of Christ; so he says 2. Cor. 2. v. 10. To whom you
forgive any thing I forgive also in the person of Christ: that is, by Christ's
commission I give this pardon, Christ ratifying the pardon or Indulgence which
I give, to one so well disposed, as I see this delinquent to be.

7. And hence comes in a fourth proof Io. 20. v. 23. Receive the Holy Ghost,
whose sins you shall remitt, they are forgiven, and whose sins you shall
retain, the are retained Behold power in the Church not only to forgive the
remnant of the pain due to the sins forgiven, (which is all that is done by
Indulgences,) but also behold a power to forgive the very sin it self, and
consequently to take quite away the very eternity of pain, which before was
due to the sin. See Point 16. Whence you cannot wonder to see power of taking
away only temporal pain due to sin, when such conditions be fulfilled, as we
did express here, n. 2.

THE XXVII. POINT. That faith alone does not Justify.
1. THis is a point, point blank, against the very prime Point of Protestant
Religion as their grand Reformers call it, who define this faith to be, an
assured confidence that their sins are forgiven them wholly by Christ's Passion:
And yet in all Scripture they will not find one single text to prove, that ever
yet, any one single man, was justified by this special faith (as they call it)
I say, by this special Faith, which breeds in them an assured confidence, that
their sins in particular are pardoned them for Christ's sake. We ask only for
one such Text: And yet though the belief of this the Protestant belief, be
chiefly grounded in this Point, they have not so much as one simple clear
Text; so groundles is their very ground. Look upon the Faith of Abraham, who is
called the Father of all that believe, and see what Faith was counted to him,
for his righteousness. Romans 4.3. and you shall find that verse taken out Genesis
15. v. 6. where, when God had told him he would multiply his seed like the
stars, Abraham believed God, and he counted it to him for righteousness. Why
so? For his believing promptly that which God had revealed in a matter so hard
to his understanding, as is expressly said Romans 4.21.22. Hence I argue thus:
Here is no mention of his assured confidence that his sins were forgiven him by
Christ's Passion, but here is mention of Justifying Faith, or of Faith counted
or imputed to man for righteousness, therefore Justifying Faith is no such
matter as this special Faith, or confidence. How this Faith of Abraham came to
Justify, S. James tells us, that it was by being a Faith effective of good
works. For he so firmly believed what God had said, that he feared not to see
that saying made null, and void, though he should offer upon the Altar that
very Son of his, upon whom, by name, all Gods fair promises seemed grounded.
For was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac
his Son upon the Altar? Iam. 2.21.

2. We say then, that Faith alone does not justify, but that Faith, working by
Charity, compleats Justification. Luke 7.47. Many sins are forgiven her because
she loved much. So Matthew. 22. v. 11. He that was called to the marriage
Feast, and came to it, and entered in, and sat down, could not do this but by
faith entering the Church, yet, because he was not attired in a wedding garment
of Charity, he was cast out, and for his sake it was said; Many are called, but
few are chosen.

3. S. Paul also inculcates this 1. Cor. 13.2. If I should have all Faith, so
that I should move mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing Note the word
all Faith. Again v. 13. The greater of these three, is Charity. And again, Col.
3.14. But above all things have Charity, which is the bond of perfection. For
Matthew. 22. v. 40. On these two Commandments (of Charity) depends the whole
Law, and the Prophets. Yet again Gal. 5.6. Neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Charity, or love. Behold
that very Faith, which our very doctrine requires, that is, (Faith working by
Charity) which also before he called, Faith observing the Commandments of
God. 1. Cor. 7.19. Where it is said, Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God. Again,
Gal. 6.15. Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor incircumcision, but a
new Creature, formed by Charity, according to Gods commandments. Again, Ephesians 1
4. He has chosen us before the constitution of the world, that we should be
Holy and without blame, before him in love, or Charity. Note how that which
makes us Holy, and without blame before him, is Charity Again Ephesians. 3 17. Christ
dwells by Faith in the heart, rooted in Charity. Again, Hebr. 5.9. He became the
author of eternal salvation to all that obey him. He was not made the author
of this salvation to any but such as did obey him. For as is said, 1. Io. 1.7.
If we walk in the light (Lex Lux) the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin. Where read you that it does so, if we walk not in the light, or do
not obey him?

4. Note, that besides other Texts, I have cited here eight out of S. Paul,
because our adversaries chiefly ground themselves, in those his words, Romans
3.28. A man is justified by Faith without the works of the Law. Where his
meaning only is, that neither the works of the written Law, done by the Jew,
nor the works of the Law of nature, done by the Gentil, (before either of them
believe in Christ) can, (without Faith in Christ) justify any one. For neither
Jew nor Gentil is justified by any one of those works; but they are justified
by that Faith, which he told you in the former Texts, to work by Charity, and
to be a Faith observing the commandments of God, making us a new creature,
rooted in Charity, and obeying him. Thus S. Paul is explicated by S. Aug. upon
this place. Yea he is explicated by S. James in many places of his second
chapter, as v. 14. Though a man, says he, has Faith, and have not works, can
Faith save him? Note here first that S. James supposes this may happen, that a
man may have Faith, but not works, and that, in this case, his Faith will not
save him, which is that which S. Paul also said before. If I have all Faith
but have not Charity, I am nothing. S. James goes on v. 21. Abraham was he not
justified by works, offering Isaac? See thou not, how Faith wrought with his
works, and by works was faith made perfect. If this Faith had justified before
any works proceeded from it, it had been perfected before any such works Yet it
is said, that by works this Faith was made perfect. Whence follows v. 24. Ye
see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only. This then
is our demonstration; if Faith justifyeth alone, it justifyeth without works,
but S. James says it does not justify without works, therefore it does not
justify alone. For by works, and not by Faith alone a man is justified. What
more clear?

THE XXVIII. POINT. Whether our Justification be any thing inherent in us.
1. Our adversaries doctrine is, that we are only just, because God is pleased
to repute us so, in regard of Christ's Justice imputed to us, and thus he does
only cover our sins, these sins still remaining in us, but God does now impute
them to us, because, we having once laid hold of Christ's Justice by the hands
of Faith, this Justice is made ours, and by Christ's merits we shall undoubtly
be saved. Our doctrine, opposite in all points, shall be, point after point,
proved out of Scripture.

2. First then we say our Justice is a quality truly inherent in us. Ezech.
36.26. A new heart also I will give you, and a new spirit I will put with in
you. And cause you to walk in my statutes. And ye shall keep my Judgments,
and do them. I need speak no cleerer. So Romans 5.5. The Charity of God is powerd
forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given us, by the infusion of
this Charity into us, in us is framed the new creature. Gal. 6.15. And this new
inward man is said, Col. 3.12. to be put on by us by such virtues as are
inherent: As by the bowels of mercies, kindness, humblenes of mind, meeknes. And
(v. 14.) Above all these by Charity, which is the bond of perfection: Behold
the parts of this inward new man, of which again he says Ephesians: 4.23. Be renewed
in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness, which be qualities most inherent. And Ephesians.
1.4. He has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be
Holy without blame in his sight in Charity, which Charity is an inward quality.

3. Secondly we say that by this quality we are not only reputed just, but
we are just verily, and really. And because we verily are so, we truly are
to be reputed so, we being Holy before him in Charity. Ephesians. 1.4. For, as was
said in the former Texts, we have in us a new heart, a new spirit by Charity,
powered forth in our very hearts, transforming us inwardly into new creatures,
and new men being truly renewed in spirit. Whence 1. Io. 3. We are not only
called the Sons of God, v. 1. But, now we are the sons of God, v. 2. So when
you read that Abraham's Fai h, working by Charity, was imputed to him to
righteousness, and he was called the friend of God James 2.23. You shall note
that he therefore was reputed just, and therefore called the friend of God,
because truly he was just, and was truly Gods friend, having Faith quickened by
Charity in him. So Luke 1.6. of Zachary and Elizabeth. They were both righteous
before God, (whose eyes see what is the most covered) walking in all the
Commandments, and Ordinances of our Lord without blame. They therefore were
just, even before Gods eyes. And this true Justice in the eyes of God, is, in
the same chapter, promised to us, by the grace of the Savior there foretold,
that we may serve him in Holiness, righteousness, and Justice before him all our
days. v. 75. Note this Holiness before him, which is to be Holy in his sight.
Hence God to Noe, Genesis 7.1. I have seen thy righteousness before me. Hence also
Col. 1.10. That you may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing,
fructifying in all good works. Giving thanks to the Father who has made us
meet to be partakere of the inheritance of the Saints So Apoc. 3.4. Thou have a
few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk
with me in whites, because they be worthy. And 1. Io. 3.7. Little Children let
no man deceive you. He has does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous. Note those words, even as he (that is God) is righteous. For God is
righteous not by imputative, but true interior Justice, of which inward Justice
Christ says Matthew. 5.20. I say unto you, unles your righteousness shall exceed
thae of Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not entee into the Kingdom of heaven.
For if there be not righteousness in us, exceeding Scribes and Pharisees, we
shall be damned, and no righteousness shall be imputed to us. For as is said
Romans 2.2. We are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth. It were
not verity but falsity to repute him just, who in very truth is not just, but
is still a sinner. Hence Prove. 17. v. 15. He that justifyeth the impious, and
he that condemns the Just, both are abominable before God. Dare you say that
God does that which is abominable? He reputes things to be as they truly are in
themselves. So Romans 2.9 Wrath and Indignation, Tribulation and Anguish upon
every soul of man that works evil. He imputes Justice to no sinner, until
he leaves of to be so* by true returning to works of Justice. Those whom he
reputes clean, truly are clean. And you are clean. Io. 13.10.

4. Thirdly hence we say that our sins be not only covered, but wholly taken
away. For we by virtue of Gods inward grace given for Christ, are cleansed,
made white, and glittering. For Christ is the Lamb of God who takes away the
sins of the world Io. 1.29. He does not only cover them, but takes them quite
away. And so Psalm. 32.2. when David says, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
does not impute iniquity, and whose sins are covered. It follows, there is no
guile in his spirit. And because there is no guile, therefore no iniquity can
be imputed to him. Protestants still cite the former words, but leave out these
latter, which words teach us excellently, that that which is covered from Gods
eyes, must not be at all, and therefore his sin now not being at all, cannot
now at all be seen, For as the same David tells you, Psalm. 103 v. 12. As far
as the east is distant from the West, so far has he removed our
transgressions from us. This expressio^, though it may be thought very full,
yet really our sins forgiven, are as far from us, as that which is not now,
is distant from that which is now, which is a greater distance then East from
West, though that be far enough to declare a true perfect remission, by quite
abolishing the sin forgiven by infused grace, according to Ezech. 36.25. I will
sprincle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness.
And 1. Io 1.7. And the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. So that by
this his blood the body of sin is destroyed. Romans 6.6. And thus, he will cast
all our sins into the depths of the sea. Mich. 7.19.

THE XXIX. POINT. Whether our justification may not be lost.
1. THe heart is deceitful above all things, who can know it? Ier. 17.9. Yet
Protestants placing justification in such a special faith, as assures each man
of his salvation by the merits of Christ, are hence enforced to teach two
strange Paradoxes. The first is, that this special faith breeds a full
assurance, grounded in a real truth, wherefore we need not fear our
salution. The second, (which is contained in the former or thence clearly
deduced) is, that this justification of ours cannot be lost, for else, that
assurance might have had a lie for its ground and sole fundation.

2. We teach first that no man, (without a special Revelation) is assured to
be saved, and so all ought to work their salvation with fear and trembling.
S. Paul every where proves our doctrine. Thou by faith do stand, be not
high minded, but fear. Romans 11.20. Again 1. Cor. 4.4. he says, he knew
nothing by himself (concerning any guilt) but I am not justified herein. But
he that judges me is our Lord. I dare not judge my self, though I know
nothing by my self; how then dare thou? Again 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under
my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means whilst I preach
to others, I my self may become a cast away or reprobate. Again, c. 10. v. 12.
Therefore he wh^ thinks himself to stand, (as Protestants do) let him take
heed left he fall. Again, Phil. 3.11. If by any means I might attain to the
resurrection of the dead He found no security in that special Faith you speak
of: Therefore he said Phil. 2.12. Work your own salvation with fear, and
trembling. Apoc. 3.11. Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy
crown. For Luke 8.13. There be those who for a time believe, and in time of
temptation fall away.

3. Secondly, conformably to all the Texts we say, that those who were just,
may come finally to be damned. For exodus 32.33 Whosoever has sinned against
me, him will I blot out of my Book. Those who are baptized, are born again of
water and the Holy Ghost. Io. 3.5. Yet how many thousands of these, once
regenerated men, sin afterward, and never rise again; and truth says of him
who rises not again, whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of
my Book: out of which he could not be dashed, unles his name had once been
enroled in it. Solomon his salvation is much doubted of by Holy Fathers, yet
there could be no doubt thereof, if your opinion were true; for God himself
says, he once was just. 1. Chron. 28 7. I will establish his Kingdom for
ever, if he be constant to my Commandment and Judgments as at this day. At
that day then he was in a state pleasing to God and yet you see doubt of his
perseverance is even here intimated. Yea, by and by David his Father tells him;
but if you forsake him, he will cast the of for ever. v. 9. David did not judge
Solomon to be at this time out of Gods favor, yet his words show he feared
that he might hereafter come to loose Gods favor. What Solomon after did, the
Scripture tells us. 1. Kings 11. v. 3. Weomen turned away his heart. And when he
was now old, his wives turned away his heart to other Gods. He worshipped
Astarthee the Goddess of the Sidonians, and Moloch the Idol of the Ammonites,
he built a Temple to Camos the Idol of Moab, and in this manner he did to all
his wives, who where strangers. Therefore our Lord was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned from the Lord. v. 9. Did he not cease to be just,
when his heart was turned away from our Lord? David says Psalm. 5.7. Thou
hate all workers of iniquity. God then did hate Solomon. I dispute not
whether he repented or no, whether he were saved or no; but without all
dispute, he once lost his former Justice, his heart and mind being turned away
from God, and our Lord therefore bearing wrath against him, and hating him. Let
us proceed.

4. The Apostles Act. 6.3. Commanded seven men full of the Holy Ghost to be
made Deacons. One of them was Nicolas a stranger of Antioch. These they set in
the presence of the Apostles, and praying they imposed hands upon them. Yet
this Nicolas did fall finally into Heresy, and began the Heresy of those who,
from his name, are called Nicolaites, Apoc. 2.6. S. Paul also, Hebr. 6. v.
4.6. tells us, the sad condition of those, who were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, if they shall fall away, which is manifestly to suppose that even such
men may, fall away. So the foolish Galatians having begun with the spirit,
ended with the flesh. Gal. 3.3. It is therefore said to them. You did run well
who hindered you not to obey the truth? Gal. 5.7. Behold, they came not to obey
the truth, who before, did not only walk well, but also run well. Hence also
it is that the Scripture uses to speak thus fearfully, and conditionally
concerning our perseverance in Justice. Io. 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth. And Romans 11.22. If thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou
also shall be cut of. And 2. Io 8. Look to your selves that we loose not
those things which we have wrought. Evident therefore is our Doctrine thus
delivered by Ezechiel c. 33. v. 12. The righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgression. Neither shall the righteous be
able to live for his righteousness in the day that he sins. All his
righteousness shall not be remembered. But for his iniquity, which he has
committed, he shall die for it. He then may die for iniquity who once was just.
Hence he taught his just Apostles to pray, Lead us not into temptation, for
fear of falling into it. Let us therefore, when we have faith, Hold faith and
a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made
shipwreck. 1. Tim. 1.19.

THE XXX. POINT. To Justification it is necessary to keep the Commandments.
This is possible.
1. I Say first that it is possible to keep the Commandments by the help, and
assistance of Gods grace, sufficiently afforded us to that end. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 1.
Moses called all Israel, and said to them, hear Israel the statutes which I
speak in your ears this day. Learn them, and keep and do them. And then, in
the sixth verse, he begins to tell all the ten Commandments, which God would
have them learn, and keep, and do. But God will exact of no man to keep, and do
that, whieh is impossible, ergo, this by his grace is possible. I will give my
Law in their bowels. And in their heart I will write it. Ier. 31.33. The law
of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall stide. Psalm. 37.31. And Romans
8.4. God sending his Son etc. That the Justification of the Law might be
fullfilled in us. All these Texts prove that, by Gods grace, we my fulfill
his Law. And therefore as S. Leo excellently says (Sermon. 16. de Passione)
Just Deus instat praecepto, qui praecurrit auxilio. God justly presses upon
us the doing of that, to performance of which, he offers us his grace.

2. And because some Protestants say, that the Commandment of loving God with
all our heart and soul, is the Commandment impossible to us all in this life,
I will show this to be flatly against Scripture. For of David, 1. Kings 14.8.
it is said. He kept my Commandments, and followed me in all his heart. So of
Josias 2. Kings 23.25. He returned to our Lord with all his heart, and with all
his soul, and with all his might. What more is commanded any were? With my
whole heart have I sought thee. Psalm. 119.10. He who has commanded us to do
this, has promised grace enabling us to perform his command. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Our
Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love our
Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. And v. 11. This
Commandment that I command thee, this day, is not far of. It is not in
heaven (where Protestants say it shall only be fullfilied) that thou may say
which of us is able to ascend to heaven to bring it to us, that we may hear
it, and do it (as God required in the first Text) neither is it beyond the sea,
that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto
us, that we may hear it and do it. But the word is very nigh unto thee, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it, do it (I say) by the help
of my grace, making this possible even in the old Law. So Psalm. 119.55. I have
keept thy Law.

3. And this grace makes this really done and performed far more in the new
Testament. God saying Ezech. 36.26. I will geve you a new heart, and will put
within you a new spirit, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my Judgments, and do them. And c. 37. v. 24. They shall walk in my
judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. This then can be done.
Likewise this was done by Zachary and Elizabeth Luke 1.6. They were both
righteous before God, walking in all his Commandments, and ordinances of our
Lord, blameles, or without blame. Also Matthew. 19.20. The young man says to
him, (Christ) all these have I keept from my youth; and Mark 10. v. 20. All
these things have I observed from my youth. And Jesus beholding him loved him,
which he would not have done, if he had been a liar in what he said. This young
man then was not a liar. But he that says he knows God, and keeps not his
Commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him. 1. Io. 2.4. For as it
is said there, Hereby we do know, that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. Again, Io. 17.6. And they have keep thy word. And yet further,
1. Io. 3.22. Whatsoever we shall ask, we shall receive of him, because we
keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight.
Again, Apoc. 14.12. Here are they that keep the Commandments of God. It is the
saying of Christ himself, If thou will enter into life keep the Commandments.
Matthew. 19.17. Mark 10.20. Luke 10.28. and Io. 14.15. If you love me, keep my
commandments. And v. 21. He that has my Commandments and Keeps them, he it
is that loves me. They may therefore be keept. Yea Christ himself, Matthew.
11.30. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. For 1. Io. 5.3. This is the
love of God, that we keep his Commandments. And his Commandments are not
grievous. Note also that all the ensuing Texts, which prove keeping of the
Commandments, in those who are of age, to be necessary to our Justification,
do prove also that they are possible to be kept. For no impossible thing can
be necessary to our salvation.

4. Secondly then I say to all, (who have the use of reason) keeping of the
commandments is necessary to salvation and consequently to justification. This
is taught in a number of Texts which I cited, Point 27. to prove that faith
alone does not justify, but chiefly requires Charity. And S. John says 1. Io.
5.3. This is the love of God that we keep his Commandments. And Matthew. 22. v
40. On those two Commandments (of Christ) hang all the Law and Prophets. Our
Justification therefore cannot but depend upon those two Commandments.

5. Hence S. Paul 1. Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the observation of the Commandment of God. So that, if this, be
nothing, or a thing impossible, all comes to be nothing. Again, what we cited
in the 27. Point n. 4. evidently proves works to be necessary to salvation. But
no works are more necessary then those that are commanded, these therefore are
chiefly necessary to justification.

THE XXXI. POINT. How still we have free will to do good or evil.
1. WE are foully slandered by those, who make us to teach, that it is in our
power to do that which is able to advance us toward heaven; (as if we said
this, without adding, or at least understanding) that this is in our power only
by the help of God, first moving, and exciting us; and then lending us his
helping hand, even all the while that we art doing any work, which can
advance us toward heaven. By this help we say our free will is still enabled
to do good, or avoid evil; and that, by this help, it is in our power also,
either to omit our duty, or to do it, a sufficiency of this grace being still
affoarded us, according to that 2. Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee.
Hence 2. Tim. 2.21. If a man purge himself, he shall be a vessel into honor.
By virtue of this grace it is in our power to approach to God. Iam. 4.8. Draw
nigh to God, and he will drove nigh to you Cleanse your hands ye sinners and
purify your heart. We may also by the free will we have to resist this grace,
harden our hearts.

2. Hence Pharao his obduration is ascribed often to his free will. Exodus 8.15.
And Pharao seeing this, he hardened his heart. And 1. Samuel 6.6. Why do you
harden your hearts, as Egypt and Pharao did harden their heart. And so David
cries to us all, Harden not your hearts, Psalm. 94 8. And Ezech. 18.31. Cast
away from you all your transgressions, and make you a new heart, and new
spirit, for why will you dye, o house of Israel? for I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, says the Lord God. Wherefore, turn your selves; and
live ye.

3. Behold how God himself declares, that by the grace he offers us, we may
make our selves a new heart, a new spirit, turn our selves and live. God
speaks clearly in Deuteronomy. 11.26. Behold I set forth in your sight this day
benediction, and malediction; benediction, if you obey the Commandments of our
Lord; malediction if you obey not, but revolt from the way, which now I show
you. Again Deuteronomy. 30.15. See, I have set before the this day life and good (and
contrariwyse) death and evil. And v. 19. I call for record this day, heaven
and earth. I have set before you life, and death blessing and cursing.
Choosing therefore life. See here the choice left to our freewill. So Iosue
24.15. Choose this day whom you will serve. 2. Samuel 24.12. Choice is given the
of three things. Choose one one of them which thou will. And Philem. v. 14.
Without thy mind I would do nothing, that thy benefit should not be as it were
of necessity; but willingly, And 1. Cor. 7.37. He that stands steadfast in his
heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will, does well.

4. Behold we have power over our own will to do that which is less perfect,
or that which is more perfect. For, as it there said, he who gives in marriage
does well, he that gives not, does better. And we have power over our own
will to do either. Yea Gods grace so enables our power, that Io. 1.12. As many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God. By this his
power we cleanse our hands, purify our hearts cleanse our whole selves, we
(Matthew. 12.33.) make the tree and fruit good And as it is said Io. 3.3. Every
man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself. Hitherto of free will* in
doing good.

5. How frees will comes to lead us to all our evil, S. James tells us, c. 1.
v. 14. Every one is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and
enticed, (hitherto no sin) but then, when? (I pray note this) then, when lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin. Then sin, and only then, is hatched,
when free will yealds her self to concupiscence so, as to consent to what is
suggested. Ye did not hear, ye did choose that* wherein I delighted not. Isa.
65.12. The Texts also in the following point, confirm free will.

THE XXXII. POINT. How this free will is still helped with sufficient Grace.
1. IF God gave us not always that grace which is of sufficient force to
excite us to the effectual performance of all the good, which we are bound to
do, or to the avoiding of all the evil, which we are bound to avoid, our free
will could neither do the one, nor avoid the other. All the former Texts then,
which so clearly prove, that we, (by Gods help) can, (if we will) do what
we are bound to do, and can avoid, what we are bound to avoid, do
consequently prove, that God always gives such Grace to both effects, as
wants nothing of perfect sufficiency to produce them, but our free consent.
Hence S. Paul thus exhorts us, 2. Cor. 6 1. We then, as workers together with
him, beseech you also that you receive not the grace of God in vain.
Excellently the Rhemists upon this Text. It lies in man's power and free will
to frustrate, or to follow this motion, of God, as this Text plainly proves,
which really is the very selfsame that the Council of Trent says Sess. 6. c.
5. That by Gods exciting, and helping grace we are disposed to co^vert our
selves by freely assenting and cooperating to the same grace, so that God,
touching the heart of man, by the illumination of the H. Ghost, man is neither
void of all action, he receiving that inspiration, for he receives it so, as
having in his power to cast it away. Neither can he without the grace of God
move himself. And therefore it follows in the fourth Canon; If any one shall
say that the free will of man moved and excited by God, does cooperate nothing
at all, by giving her consent to God exciting, and calling, by which he may
dispose himself to the grace of Justification, and that he cannot dissent if
he will, let him be Anathema. Let those harken to this, who harken so much to
the Iansenists. And let us go on to speak of this sufficient grace, which, in
the next point, we will show more fully to be offered to all. Of this grace
Isaias 5.4. What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done
in it? For Prove. 1.24. I called you, and you refused. And that you may not say
he only called, and did not stretch forth his hand to help, you to come, the
next words are. I stretched forth my hand, and no man regarded. But ye have set
at naught all my counsel. And Isa. 65.12. When I called ye did not answer, when
I spoke ye did not hear, and did choose that wherein I delighted not. Though
they did choose thus against Gods call, yet this his call was so sufficient to
have moved them, that God tells Ezechiel c. 3. v. 6. that if he had sent him,
with so strong and powerful preaching to barbarous and unknowen people, They
surely would have heard thee But the house of Israel will not heart thee, for
all the house of Israel are impudent and hard hearted. They will not be moved by
those calls which would move others. And because they answered like Protestants
c. 33.10. If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine in them
how should we then live God commands the Catholic doctrine to be thus
delivered. Say unto them. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye,
turn ye from your wicked ways, and why will you dye o house of Israel. Note
how still he says, he excites them sufficiently, otherwise vainly had he said,
why will you dye o house of Israel? For they might reply, we cannot but dye,
because thou give us not the grace to live.

2. And as God said of Ezechiels preaching, that it was sufficient to have
converted Barbarians (though the Jews would not be moved by it.) So Matthew. 11.
v. 20. of Christ it is said. He began to upbraid the Cities wherein were done
the most of his miracles, for that they had not done penance. Woe be to the
Corozain, woe he to the Bethsaida: for if in Tire and Sidon had been wrought the
miracles, that were wrought in thee, they had done penance in hairecloath and
ashes long ago. Though the Jews would not repent, yet hence I am sure that
Christ did sufficient for that end. Hence that most just exprobration both here
and Matthew. 23.37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem how often would I have gathered together
thy Children, as the hen gathers together her chickins, and thou would not
I would, thou would not, therefore justly it follows. Behold your house
shall he left desert; Again Romans 10 21. All the day long I have stretched forth
my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. Again Apoc. 3.20. Behold I
stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I
will come in to him. Whence again 1. Tim. 2.4 Who will all men to be saved, and
come to the knowledge of truth. And therefore the same Apostle, Romans 2. v. 4.
Do thou contemn the riches of his goodness, Patience, Longanimity; but
according to the hardness of thy heart thou heapest up to thy self wrath. Behold
a free will able to contemn the very riches of Gods goodness, in still giving
graces, and with so much patience and longanimity expecting the effect of them,
still (by man's voluntary malice) made fruitles. Of such a soul it is said
Apoc. 2.21. I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented
not. You cannot blame a poor man for not dining, because you gave him space to
dine, unles you also give him meat wherewith to dine, so God could not
complain of our not repenting because we had time, unless also he offered us
grace to repent.

THE XXXIII. POINT. This sufficient grace is denied to none, Christ dying even
for reprobates.
1. IT is evident in Scripture that no grace is give^ to any but by the merits
of Christ consummated with his death. He has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3. So that if you see (Point
30.) Grace given to all to make the keeping of the commandments possible to
all; if you see (point 31.) That our free will is still by Gods grace able to
do good; if you see (Point 32.) This free will still helped by sufficient Grace
to avoid evil and do good; you must needs by all this see, that this grace can
come only from Christ's death; and therefore this grace, being so often proved to
be offered to all, by the same Texts it is also proved that Christ dyed for
all. Call to mind how many (according to what was proved (Point 29.) do become
reprobates, who by virtue of Christ's death, once received the gift of heavenly
grace in Baptism. The like grace was by Christ's death given to that just man,
of whom Ezechiel cited there n. 5. says, That his Justices shall be forgotten,
because he persevered not, and in his iniquities he shall dye. He therefore
became a Reprobate. And thus it is true which God said to Abraham Genesis 12.3. In
thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And Gcn. 22.18. In thy
seed shall be blessed all the nations of earth. Now as S. Paul sayrh, Gal.
3.14. The blessing of Abraham comes on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus. There
is none therefore to be excepted from being partaker of this blessing, seeing
that all the families of the earth, and all the nations of the earth do enjoy
it. Yct it is evident that many among these families and nations be Reprobates.
Reprobates therefore enjoy many blessings by Christ's death, which eould not be,
if Christ did not dye for them. By the merits of Christ's death many are called,
yet of these many, few are choosen. Matthew. 22.14. Hence Ezech. 18.23. Why? Is
the death of a sinner my will (says our Lord God) and not that he convert from
his ways, and live? Which without grace from Christ he could not do. Again c.
33.11. I will not the death of the impious, but that the impious convert from
his way and live. Why will you dye o house of Israel! And so Prove. 1.24. To
those to whom he said, I have called and you have refused, I have stretched
out my hand, and you have not regarded. He shall say likewise, I will laugh
when your destruction comes, as a whirlewind. v. 27. They therefore shall be
destroyed and perish, who by Christ's death and merits, had many graces, helps,
and callings, given them. Note that in Christ, the will, with which he called
them, was a serious will, of which 1. Tim. 2.4. He will all men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of truth. See in the former Point, the many
evident Text cited to this effect. Hence it is said Romans 2.4. He showed the
riches of his goodness to those who despised it treasuring up wrath to
themselves. Who be those but the Reprobate? Again 2. Pet. 3.9. Willing that
none should perish. And Romans 5.6. Christ did dye for the impious or ungodly.
And most clearly. 1. Io. 2.2. He is the propitiation of our sins. And not for
ours only, but also for the whole world. The whole world comprehends more
reprobate then elect. He then who dyed for the whole world, did also dye for
the Reprobate. Wherefore S. Paul more then once, warns us not to be occasion
of damnation to those for whom Christ dyed. So Romans 14.15. Do not with thy meat
destroy him for whom Christ dyed. He therefore, for whom Christ dyed, may be
destroyed, and perish eternally. Again, 1. Cor. 8.11. Through thy knowledge
shall thy weak Brother perish for whom Christ dyed? And again 2. Pet. 2.1.
False teachers bringing in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord, who bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. Hence you see that even
those, who have brought upon themselves destruction, have done this by denying
him, who bought them at the price of his blood and death. He therefore even dyed
for those Children of perdition. Whence Holy Fathers often say, that son of
perdition, Judas did shed that blood with which he was redeemed. Let us then
all be, as is said 2. Cor. 5.14. Judging this that if one dyed for all, then
all were dead, S. Paul had not proved, by Christ his dying for all, that all
were dead, if any man could be found, for whom Christ did not dye. And, that no
one should presume to say, that any such man could be found, S. Paul's next
words are, Christ dyed for all, v. 15. The Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 3.
citing these words, says: But though he dyed for all, yet all receive not the
benefit of his death, but only those to whom the merit of his Passion is
communicated. Hence it is said 1. Tim. 4.10. We trust in the liveing God who is
the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe. Savior he is to all
men, by giveing what suffices to save all me^, but this sufficiency is
effectual to salvation only in the truly faithful, whose works answered to
their belief* and therefore chiefly, he is their Savior. Yet it is true,
that speaking generally of us all, 1. Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will
not permit you to be tempted above what you are able. But now it is most
evident that God does daily permit us to be tempted beyond our own power,
because no power, we have of our selves, as of our selves, is able, or
sufficient, to resist those temptations, which daily set upon us. Seeing
therefore it is clear Scripture, that God will not suffer us to be tempted
above what we are able, it hence demonstratively follows, that Gods grace
sufficiently enables all men to resist any temptation whatsoever falls upon
them. This is that which we properly call giving sufficient grace, to all men,
though all will not resist the temptations, which they were able to resist.
Even as he sufficiently by nature enables most me^ to lift their hand up to
their head though some for lazynes will not do it. Now the grace sufficiently
enabling all to resist all kind of temptations, is given them through the
merits of Christ dying for them.

THE XXXIV. POINT. How our good works done in grace, and by the help of
Christ's grace, be meritorious, and merit life everlasting.
1. THis is a point in which our adversaries are pleased to be much
scandalized, because many of their teachers have notably belyed us: in so much
that you shall find few who are not apt to think, that we hide our doctrine,
as ashamed of it. Whereas we do plainly and clearly tell them, that none of
our works deserves any heavenly reward, as it is the work (and even the very
best work) of man, done only by our natural free will. But we all, and every
one of us, teach, that those only good works are meritorious, which are done
first, by a soul dignifyed with Gods grace inherent in her, (accordingly to the
28. Point) and we say that the value of this action (making it meritorious
proceeds from this grace. Secondly we say no man can do any such meritorious
action, without the actual grace of God exciting him thereunto. Thirdly we say
the grace of God must be aiding, and assisting him all the time he does any
such meritorious action. All this is taught by the Council of Trent sess. 6. c.
14. We add that, even to such actions done in this manner, God (if so he had
pleased) might have given no reward. But he was pleased to promise, and to give
this heavenly reward out of his free gracious goodness, he being, moved by the
merits and Passion of Christ, (from which all the foresaid graces flows) to
accept, for his sake, all those works, as rewardable; the said works, by his
grace, being made worthy to be accepted of so, as to be recompensed by that
heave^ly reward, which God has mercifully promised to them. This is our
doctrine.

2. And in the very beginning of the world God taught this doctrine saying to
Cain. Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? When Abraham was
ready to offer Isaac, God by an Angel said to him Genesis 22. v. 16. By my own
self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou have done this thing, I will
bless thee, etc: Behold a large blessing for doing this thing. David also
Psalm. 18.20. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness. According to
the cleanes of my hands; has he recompensed me. And Psalm. 19. v. 11. That in
keeping Gods precepts there is great reward. And his Son Solomon says 1.
Kings 8.32. God is justifying the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness. And that zealous Prophet speaks thus 2. Chron. 15.7. Be you strong
therefore, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded.

3. How often has S. Matthew this doctrine? First c. 5.12. Be glad and
rejoice, for your reward is great in heaven. Here the word which (both in
Greek, and Latin) is put for Reward, does properly signify the very wages, or
hire due to the work. Secondly in several places of the sixth chapter Christ
exhorts us to the secret performance both of our Fasts, our Almsdeeds, and of
our Prayers, and he tells us, that otherwise we loose our reward. But if we
do them in secret, thy Father which sees in secret, will repay the* Thirdly c.
6. v. 20. Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven. Fourthly c. 16.27. He
shall reward every man according to his works. He says not according to his
mercy, but according to their works. Fifthly, c. 19.27. We have left all and
followed thee, what therefore shall we have? To them, thus expecting a reward,
Christ gives no check, but makes them a promise of having, upon the account of
their works, a hundred fould in the present, and life everlasting in the future
life. Sixthly c. 25.23. Because thou have bee^ faithful over a few things, I
shall place the over many things. Enter into the joy of our Lord. Note here
many things given in heaven, because such a man lived faithfully. So Seaventhly
c. 25. v. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father possess etc. For I was a hungry,
thirsty etc. And you gave me to eat, drink, etc. Note the word For, that is,
For this very cause come possess the Kingdom. So if a Prince, taken by his
enemies in war, should be rescued by a common soldier, whom he presently
preferring to be a Colonel, should say, I make you a Colonel, for I was taken,
and you freed me, who can doubt, but that these words clearly affirm the cause
of this great reward, to be the soldiers great merit. So contrariwise, where
in that Chapter it follows. Get you away you cursed, into fire everlasting.
For I was a hungry, and you did not feed me etc. Every one will confess, that
the particle For, manifestly signifies the Cause. My eighth, and last text is
of S. Matthew. c. 10.42. Whosoever shall give to one of these little ones a cup
of cold water, only in the name of a Disciple, Amen I say unto you, he shall
not loose his reward. Other Texts might be alleged out of other Evangelists,
as Mark 10. v. 21. Go sell whatsoever thou have, and thou shall have treasure
in heaven. And again Io. 5. 29. They that have done good things, shall go forth
into the Resurrection of life. Behold the reward of good works. And again Luke
14. 14. For feasting the poor recompense shall be made in the Resurrection.

4. But to proceed; how often also does S. Paul inculcate this doctrine? As
first 1. Cor. 3.8. Every one shall receive his own reward, according to his own
labors. Secondly 2. Cor. 4.17. For our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us an eternal weight of glory. Note the word works, which
really signifies the cause. Thirdly, 2. Cor. 9.6. He that sows sparingly,
sparingly also shall reap. And he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully. Note here Almesdeeds made the seed of glory. Fourthly there
again, v. 10. As it is written, he distributed, he gave to the poor (But with
what effect?) his righteousness remains for ever. Fifthly Gal. 6.9 Be not
weary in well doing, why so? For in due season we shall reap if we faint not.
Sixthly Ephesians. 6.8. Knowing that every one, what good so ever he shall do, that
shall he receive of our Lord. Seaventhly he seeks in his Convertites the doing
of good works, by reason of the reward they shall receive for them. So Philip.
4.16. Ye sent once and again to my necessity; not because I desire the gift.
But I desire the fruit that may abound to your account. Behold S. Paul desired
the increase of their merit. Eighthly 1. Tim. 6.17. Charge them that are rich,
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute Laying
up store for themselves, a good fundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold of an eternal life. Ninthly Tim. 2.4.8 There is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness, which our Lord will render to me in that day a just
Judge, and not only to me, but etc. It is his mercy to promise heaven to our
good works, it is his mercy to give us that grace which confers all the
meritorious value upon these works; it is his mercy to excite us by actual
grace to perform such works, and to accompany and assist us whilst we work.
But it is his Justice and righteousness to give that reward, which his mercy
made these works able to deserve. So that now as a just Judge he rewards our
merits, though they be his gifts. Tenthly Heb. 11.24. Moses refused to be
called the Son of Pharao his daughter, choosing to be afflicted with the
people of God, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the
treasures in Egypt. For he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.
Behold how much Moses valued the recompense of the reward, due to so
meritorious an act as that was. And Eleventhly, Hebr. 10.35. Cast not away your
confidence, which has recompense of great reward. I might end all these Texts
with that of the Apocal. 22.12. My reward is with me, to give every one,
according as his works shall be.

5. But I thought fit to add that we Roman Catholics do so extol the
dignity of good works in regard of that value given them by the grace of Christ
(merited for us by his Passion) that we say these works, thus dignifyed, make
us worthy of heavenly bliss. And this we prove by Scripture. S. Paul Col.
1.12. Who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of Saints. And
Apoc. 3.4. But thou have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, and the shall walk with me, in whites, because they are worthy.
Hence Psalm. 18.21. The Lord shall reward me after my righteous doings.
According to the cleanes of my hands shall he recompense me. See Point 28. n.
2. 3.

6. Against so many and so clear Texts our Adversaries chiefly object; First
that the Scripture Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness are as filthy rags. I answer this is said of us and our works
done merely by us, as we are left to our selves, borne and grown up in sin,
and not aided, nor cleansed and dignified, by Gods grace. And it is a strange
inference of our Adversaries, to draw from hence, that our best works done in
grace, and by the help of Gods grace, be all deadly sins. For so in the Texts
cited, David could not be rewarded after his righteousness, and according to the
cleanes of his hands. Neither should there be any of so unfiled garments, as to
walk in whites because they are worthy; again how says S James, c. 2.21.
Abraham was he not justified by works offering Isaac? See thou not how faith
wrought with his works, and byworks was made perfect? How so, if both his
faith, and his works were deadly sins? What? does God thus reward deadly sin?
or could such a sin be a work justifying Abraham? In the Texts n. 6. It is
said that God will repay us for fasting, praying, giving alms in secret. How
is this true, if all these works be deadly sins in us? Tell me how it is
possible by heaping up deadly sins to do what Christ bids us, that is, to heap
up treasures in heaven. The young man (of whom I spook) was told that by selling
all, he should purchase a treasure in heaven. How then? was this selling all a
deadly sin? If selling all be a deadly sin, then to say, If thou will be
perfect go and sell all, is to say, go and do a deadly sin, if thou will be
perfect. Is that the one thing that was wanting unto him? And thus I might
argue out of most of the above cited Texts. I am sure Christ says, Matthew.
3.10. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, his hewn down, and cast
into the fire. If the fruit of no tree be good, then every tree must be burned
S. James 1.26. Of the doer of the work* says. This man shall be blessed in his
deed. And S. Paul Phil. 4.18. calls the alms sent to him, an odor of a sweet
smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. These almesdeeds then were
not filthy rags.

7. Secondly they object out of Luk 17.10. When you have done all that you are
commanded, say we are unprofitable servants. I answer this is true, that by
all we do, or can do, even by Gods grace, we are servants unprofitable to
God. For all we do, or can do, profits him nothing. But we are servants
profitable to our selves. For heaping up treasure in heaven, and making friends
of Mammon to receive us into the eternal Tabernacles, are things very
profitable unto us, as also to be good and faithful servants, and therefore to
be placed over much, and enter into the joy of our Lord. S Paul said 1. Cor.
13.3. If I should distribute all my goods to be meat to the poor, and have not
Charity, it does profit me nothing. Ergo with Charity it profits me much. Yea
though faithful servants be thus unprofitable to God, yet in regard of the
service they do him, he says Io. 15. v. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you: a thing of no small profit and honor. Again, is it
not, think you, any profit to have a hundred fold here in this world, and life
everlasting in the next for leaving what they had for his like? Is it no profit
to us to say truly with S. Paul Col. 1 12. He has made us meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints, and to walk with him in whites, because we
are worthy. Apoc 3.4. Had he no profit by overcoming to whom it was said He
that shall overcome and keep my works until the end, I will give him (in
heaven) power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron?
Apoc. 2.26. He that shall overcome, I will give to sit with me in my throne
Apoc. 3.21. Do we not then by overcoming, profit our selves in a high degree?

THE XXXV. POINT. It is laudable to do good works for reward.
1. AS Charity toward our neighbor is a most commendable virtue, so charity
toward our selves cannot be but most commendable Wherefore seeing these good
works do profit us so very much, (as we have seen in the last point and last
number) I cannot possibly understand that Paradox of our Adversaries, saying,
they do ill, who do well out of a desire to gain heaven. True it is, a man may
do well out of a more commendable motive, that is to honor and please God. But
because something is better then doing good for hope of reward, the doing good
out of that hope, does not cease to be good. You say faith alone is so good,
that it does justify a man, and yet Scripture tells you, that of these three,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, the greater (and better) of these, is Charity. 1.
Cor. 13.13. Faith is very good and commendable. Whence appears that nothing
ceases to be good, because an other act is better.

2. The Scriptures cited in the last point evidently exhort us in our
sufferings, to be glad and rejoice, because our reward is great in heaven, and
to do our good works in secret, not to loose our reward, but to heap up to our
selves treasure in heaven, and to sell all to purchase treasure there, and in
doing good works not to fail, for in due time we shall reap, not failing. May
we not sow in hope of harvest? Did not S. Paul, seek the fruit abounding on
this account to those who had sent to his use. Did he not bid us, not to loose
our confidence, because it has a great reward? Hebr. 10.35. And not to sow
sparingly that we may reap plentifully. 2. Cor. 9.6. Did not Christ himself
say, make friends of the Mammon of iniquity. Luk 16.9. To what end this? To the
end, that they may receive you into the eternal Tabernacles. But what can be
more clear then that which I there cited out of Heb. 11.24. Moses denied
himself to be the so^ of Pharao his daughter, choosing to be afflicted with the
people of God, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, then the
treasure of Egyptians. For he looked to the reward, or (according to your
Bibles) for the regard, or respect, he had to the reward. No less clear David
Psalm. 118. verse. 112. I have inclined my heart to do thy Iustifications for
ever for reward. And for this reward he inclined his heart to do them, says S.
Augustine in this place, reading it as we do. And so (as we tead it) it is so
faithfully translated by the Septuaginta out of the Hebrew, and so your
Translatours might have translated it, if they had pleased, but they wilfully
choose another sense, though they so much profess to follow the Septuaginta.

THE XXXVI. POINT. We laudably worship Angels and Saints.
1. FOr the ground of this question I lay this fundation out of Scripture, that
as the Angels are in heaven, so the souls of the Saints go directly from hence
to heaven, without they have some few offenses to clear in Purgatory. Our
souls sleep not until Doomesday. Christ said to the good theife. This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. And therefore S. Paul desired to be
dissolved, that he might be with Christ. And again, 2. Cor. 5.8. We are
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with our Lord,
Therefore we may come to be present with our Lord, even whilst our souls are
absent from our body. Neither do our English Protestants deny this.

2. This supposed, our doctrine is, that great reverence and worship is due to
the Angels, and Saints with God. Secondly, that they can hear our prayers.
Thirdly, that they can, and will help us, and therefore it is laudable to pray
to them, and that this does not derogate from Christ's honor. Fourthly, that
among the Saints it is most laudable to pray to our Lady. And here we shall
speak of the Beads said to her honor. Fifthly, we laudably worship Images of
Christ, and his Saints, Sixthly, that we laudably worship their Relics, and
inshrine them richly, and place them as honorably as we can. Sevently, that
some places are more holy then others, sanctified by the presence of those
Relics, or by special graces given there. And for this reason we laudably
make processions, and pilgrimages to these places with all devotion. Eighthly,
that we laudably keep Feasts or Holy Days, as also fasts in the honor of
Christ and his Saints. Lastly, in these our fasts we laudably abstain from
certain meats. All, and every one of these nine things shall have their
particular proofs, in so many several Points next following in the order here
designed.

3. And first for the worship of Angels or Saints, note that the very self
same outward worship, (yea and Adoration it self) may outwardly be given
either as a civil reverence, to persons of respect and great eminency, or it
may be given to them out of a religious respect, in regard of the great
Sanctity and heavenly dignity in such a person, or lastly, given in regard of
Divine perfection and infinite worth. When this respect is given thus
outwardly, there passes inwardly an act in our understanding apprehending the
exellcency which we honor, to be either human (as in civil honor) or to be
an excellency of singular, though limited, heavenly eminency (as in the worship
of Saints which we call Dulia) or lastly we judge that there is a devine and
infinite excellency in that person, as it happens in the worship of God only,
which we call Latria. An other act passes in our will, answerable to that
which was in our understanding, by which we have a will to make this outward
worship or adoration, to be either a civil honor only, such as is due to men,
of highest human dignity, or to make it a Religious worship (though far from
devine) such as is given to persons of eminent Sanctity, or endowed with great
heavenly gifts: or lastly we intend to make it an act of devine worship, as
when we do it to God. Whence it is evident, that by doing of the outward act,
it cannot be known whether the honor we do, be merely civil, or Religious,
or Devine.

4. With only civil adoration, Abraham rose up and adored the people of the
land. Genesis 23.7. Jacob coming into the presence of his elder Brother Esaias, Genesis
33. v. 4. Going forward adored prostrate to the ground seven times. And v. 7.
Lia with her Children adored in like manner, and last Joseph and Rachel adored.
And Genesis 43, v. 27. Joseph's Brethren offered him presents, holding them in
their hands, and they adored prostrate to the ground. And again Genesis 50. v. 18,
And Joseph's Brethren came to him, and adoring prostrate on the ground. All
these Texts are thus read in the Rhemish Testament. But the Protestant Bible
refusing to put the word Adore, put either bowing down, or falling down on
their face. We do no more outwardly when we worship Saints, or adore God.
Wherefore to prove what I have undertaken you see I need go no further then
Genesis, but I thought fit to add one very fit passage of 1. Chron. 29. v.
20. All the assemble bowed themselves down, and worshipped the Lord, and the
King. Exteriously the bowing was both alike to thc ground, but the inward act
made this bowing as done to the King, to be civil honor, only, and the like
bowing as done to God, to be devine honor or worship, and true adoration in
the most rigorous sense. It is very strange to observe how cunningly your
Bibles still avoid the word Adore eve^ when it is applied to God which seems
so often omitted by them because the same word signifying to adore, is so often
applied to creatures you cannot then blame us if, when we reverence Saints, or
pray to them, we bow, kneel, or prostrate our selves to the ground. even
seven times. For if civil worship (for this word the last Text has) may pass
so far, without robbing God of his honor, why may not an inferior Religious
worship do the like?

5. But of this adoring for Religious worship, we have clear Scripture. Iosue
(c. 5.) being told by an Angel, that this Angel was but a Captain of the Hosts
of our Lord, Joshua fell on his face to the earth and did worship. v. 14.
Behold before we had worship given by the people to the King, here we have
worship done to an Angel, known to be an Angel. By and by (in the Apocalips)
we shall see this very word of worship, to signify the Reverence which is to
be given to God. Now I go on, and I observe that the Angel was not only willing
to admit of this honor, but commanded him also to show reverence to the very
place made Holy by his presence. Loose (says he) thy shoes, from thy feet, for
the place wherein thou do stand, is Holy. If any reply that we may, with
Religious worship, adore Angels, as Iosue did, but not Saints, behold the
Scripture shows this Religious worship or adoration, (due to spiritual
excellency) to be laudably given even to those who excel in sanctity, even in
this world. So 1. Kings 18.7. Abdias governor of the house of Achab, King of
Israel, meeting with (poor) Elias the Prophet, when he knew him, fell, on his
face, and said, My Lord, art not thou Elias? And 2. Kings 2. v. 15. The
Children of Prophets seeing Elizeus, said, the spirit of Elias has rested upon
him, and coming to meet him, adored him flat to the ground, or (as you read)
They bowed themselves to the ground, before him. See you not here that it was
not for any worldly excellency, but merely in regard of his spiritual
excellency, that they thus bowed themselves to the ground before him. This
spiritual excellency is incomparably more eminent in those who are now made
Coheires to Christ himself, in the partciipation of all heavenly gifts and
glory. To them therefore Religious bowing, or worship, is far more due: and
we are commanded by S. Paul. Romans 13.6.7. To render to all their due, to whom
honor, honor. Owe to no man any thing which you do not pay him. This I staid
upon, because our Adversaries often ask for a precept commanding us to honor
Saints. Behold I have given you one, which is a precept grounded in the very
Law of nature and equity, cammaunding us to render to teach one what is due to
him.

6. Again, Apoc. 3.9. Behold I will make them come, and worship hefore thy
feet: words spoaken to the Angel of Philadelphia. If by this Angel you say the
Bishop of Philadelphia is understood, then we prove first that, (a fortiore)
we may worship before the feet of the chief Bishop of the Church. Secondly
we much more, (a fortiore) infer that we may worship before the feet of
those, who have a far greater excellency in virtue, grace, glory, as Saints
have above all men on earth. For Matthew. 11.11. He that is the least in the
Kingdom of heaven, is greater then he (that is, is greater then the great S.
John Baptist was upon earth) though of him Christ himself said; There had not
risen a greater among the sons of weomen. S. John the Evangelist then knowing
it to be true which he himself had written, that Christ would make men come,
and worship before the feet of the Angel of Philadelphia, thought it is duty to
adore before the feet of any Angel, and hence he says of himself Apoc. 19. v.
10. And I fell at this feet to worship him, (the Angel) and again* c. 22. v. 8.
I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, which showed me those
things.

7. Our adversaries object, that at each of these adorations the Angel checked
S. John for them, saying at each time. See thou do not, I am thy fellow
servant: worship God. Our answer is, that if the first adoration, (used by S.
John) had been of its own nature Idolatrous, and sinful, (which is incredible,
it proceeding from so great a Prophet, and so sublime a Scripture writer) yet
at lest being told so, and instructed by the Angel to the contrary (as you say
he was) he would never the second time have done that Idolatrous, and damnable
sinful act, both wittingly, and willingly; and this so very soo^ after he had
bee^ warned not to do it. It was not the^ by reason of any unlawfulnes in this
action, that the Angel willed him not to adore or worship: But the Angel
refused at both times this honor, upon some other consideration, to wit, out
of singular respect unto him, whom he knew to have been at the last supper,
admitted to ly on Christ's breast, and so he would not permit him to ly now
prostrate at his feet, whom he also knew to be so highly favored by God, with
so many admirable heavenly visions: Moreover to be a Virgin; to be a Priest, an
Apostle, and to be that very Disciple whom Jesus so singularly loved: to be
also a Prophet and an Evangelist. Therefore he would not admit of such
profound respect at his hands, but humbly saying unto him, I pray do it not,
for I am thy fellow servant, and thou either now art greater in Gods sight then
I am, or soon may come to be far greater. Worship and adore God, who has
so magnifyed thee. Yet S. John's humility working still upon him more, by seeing
an Angel so humble, and producing in him a mean conceit of himself, (by still
reflecting on what he was as of himself and knowing what his master said,
that even the lesser in the Kingdom of heaven was greater then the great S.
John Baptist (to wit according to the present state) he therefore did the
second time show the Angel the honor he knew due to him. (See above how Iosue
worshipped an Angel) which honor notwithstanding was also refused by the Angel
in this place, both for the former reasons, and for that he knew full well how
much this great humility of his had advanced him yet higher.

8. Their second objection is that of S. Paul Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you
in worshipping of Angels. To answer this objection, note that the former passage
of S John happened to him, when he was in banishment in the Island called
Patmos. Apoc. 1. Whence it is manifest that S. John in his Apocalips, now
cited, used both these two several adorations, twice worshipping the Angel,
long after S. Paul had written these words, forbidding the worship of Angels,
which words S John understood either much better, (or at lest full as well) as
our Protestants understand them. And therefore he knew very well that in
adoring or worshipping the Angel, two several times, he, in neither of these
times, was seduced in the worship of Angels. We therefore may adore Angels, a
S John did, and yet not be beguiled in this worship of Angels, as S. John was
not. Those then are rather seduced by wilful mistake, of what this worship of
Angels is, who, (to make us guilty of it) define it to be such a worship, as
must make S. John as guilty, as they would make us. Therefore this Text is
fondly alleged against us, for holding only and maintaining such worship of
Angels, as S John used twice, and that long after he knew what S. Paul had
written. This then serves our turn, that in what sense soever S. Paul is to be
understood, he cannot be understood in a sense, forbidding any thing contrary,
to that which S. John did, and which we (with him) do practice. The truth is
S. Paul speaks only of such Religious worship of Angels, as had been taught
among the Jews by Simon Magus, who would have Sacrifice offered to all Angels,
as well evil as good. Epiph. heresi 25. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in hunc locum. And
this is that which is condemned in the Council of Loadicia c. 35.

9. There is another very pertinent exposition of this Text in Tertul. l. 5.
contra Marcionem. That is, that the Apostle laboreth in that place to prove,
that the new Christians should not keep the old Judicial Law, and for this end
he says, let no man beguile you in the worship of Angels, by saying that we
owe so much respect to the Angels, that although Christ has abolished the old
Law, yet because that old Law was given them by the Ministry of Angels, (Act.
7.53.) it ought still to be kept, out of respect to the Angels, by whose
Ministry it was given. Again, some then taught that this, as a heavenly
verity, had been revealed by some of the Angels. But the Angels, revealers of
such doctrine, being Angels of darkness, S. Paul calls the Judicial
observation of meats (maintained by these Christians out of this principle) the
doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4.1. Such also is the worship of Angels given them
by such observances. And it is to be noted, that immediately before these
words, he expressly spook against the Judicial observation of meats, saying,
let no man judge you in meat. v. 16. Of which Text see more Point 45, n. 5. 6.

THE XXXVII. POINT. The Angels and Saints can hear our Prayers.
1. PRotestants undertaking to reform all our pretended errors out of
Scripture, can, with no ground, pretend to reform our error in believing
Saints to hear us, unles they can show some clear Text to prove that Saints
cannot hear us. It is enough for us to go on still believing what we ever
believed, unles they can show us Scripture to the contrary. They produce but
one poor Text falling far short of any clear proof. It is Isa. 63. v. 16.
Thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge
us not. Thou o Lord art our father, our Redeemer. I answer that the Jews
considering how enormiously they had continually swarved from the life,
example, and instruction of Abraham, and Jacob, did with great reason fear
that they would not look upon them as their Children, as that word acknowledge
does express. Wherefore knowing Gods mercy to be infinitely greater, then that
of the greatest Saints, they hoped that he still would look upon them. They
did not say Abraham, and Jacob knew not their state, or condition; but they
conceived that they for their sins (well known to them) had all reason not to
own them as Children, and to say, we know you not: as Christ shall say one
day, to the reprobate.

2. Again, though we should grant that Abraham and Jacob did not know the
state of the Jews then, when Abraham and Jacob were still in Limbo Patrum, it
does not follow that the Saints, now present with God, enlightened with the
light of beatificall glory, cannot (by virtue of that light) know all that
passes on earth, as far (at lest) as any thing makes to their felicity. For
it is a part of hapines to know how things pass with our deerly beloved
friends, especially when we are in a condition to help them easily, as the
Saints are, Yet is also false that Abraham, even in Limbo knew not what passed
among the Jews after his death. For he could tell Dives that his five Brethren
had Moses and the Prophets Luke 16. v. 28. though Moses and the Prophets
lived long after his death. See n. 4.

3. As our adversaries have but this one poor proof out of Scripture against
us, so we have many for us. Jacob calls upon an Angel to bless his Children.
No man would call upon one, who could not hear. The Text is Genesis 48 v. 16. I
shall speak largely of it in the next Point, n. 2. Again, 1. Sam. 28. The witch
whom Saul consulted, calling by her charms upon the devil instantly was heard
by him, for presently she did that, which without help of some ill spirit,
could not be done. Shall devells hear witches presently, and shall saints want
power to hear their suppliants? See what I here say, n. 7. Raphel, ( one of the
seven which assist before our Lord, Tob. 12.15.) Although he be there
assisting, yet he truly told Toby, v. 12. When thou did pray with tears, and
did bury the dead by night, I offered thy prayer to our Lord. If this be not
Canonical Scripture, yet at lest it is a most ancient Ecclesiastical History,
and of such credit, that SS. Cyprian, Ambr. Austin, Hierom, Gregory, the 3.
Council of Carthage, and many more, held it Scripture, and consequently they
thought it as true as Scripture, that Saints could hear our prayers. And you
must bring something more then your own imagination to discredit it on this
account. Eliphaz in Job c. 5.1. spoak thus to him ( call now if there be any
that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? This shows
the common practice of invocating Angels in that time, for as then, no Saints,
but Angels were in heaven. Whence the Septuagint, (whom you use to extol) do
here interpret the Saints to be, the Holy Angels. David supposed the Angels to
hear him, when he sung Psalms, whence he says, before the Gods, (we truly
read the Angels) I will sing praise unto the. Psalm. 138.1. No man will say, I Will
sing my song in the hearing of deaf men. The Angels then could hear his song.
Of the letters of Elias I will speak by and by. n. 5. And there I shall show
that Elias after his death knew what passed, and took care for the people of
God.

4. In the new Testament Luke 15.10. There shall be joy before the Angels of
God upon one sinner having done penance. No act is more interior, and passes
more properly in the bottom of the heart, then the Conversio^ of a sinner.
Weeping, sighing, groaning, knocking of the breasts, may be done by Hypocrites.
The Angels then, who joy at the conversion of a sinner, must know this
conversion, which they cannot know, unles they know the bottom of the heart by
divine revelation. Again Luke 16.26. Though there was a great gulf fixed
between the souls of Abraham and Dives, yet God gave then some means to hear
what each of them said. Can he then find no means for Saints, to hear us? Do
not you Protestants say Abraham's soul was then in heaven. Could he hear Dives
from hell, and can he not hear from earth those who pray to him? Again there v.
29. Abraham said to him (Dives) they have Moses and the Prophets. Moses and
the Prophets lived many a year after Abraham was dead; and yet you see,
Abraham knew there were such men, who left such books to the Jews. Secondly
he knew their books were yet extant. Thirdly that these writings of theyrs
were of no less efficacy to convert Dives his five Brothers, then the
preaching of a man risen from dead would be. If you say this is but a Parable,
I answer that in Parables the Interlocutors must be made to speak sense, and
not nonsense, as it would be in one of Lucians Dialogues to make Julius Caesar
discoursing with Alexander, about what they had seen in Charles the fifth, who
lived so long after their time.

5. But I have reserved one passage of the old Testament to declare in this
place how Saints, even then, knew what passed. Elias departed out of this life
(whether God knows) the eightenth year of King Iosaphat, 2. Kings 2.11. Now
Iosaphat reigned five and twenty years. 2. Chron. 20.31. So that seven years
of Iosaphats reign passed after the departure of Elias. Then Ioram his son
reigned for him. 2. Chron. 21.1. After some time of this Iorams reign, v. 12.
There came a writing to him from Elias the Prophet saying. Thus says our Lord,
because thou have not walked in the ways of Iosaphat thy Father, etc. And then
he tells him many particular wicked acts of his, all done after Elias was dead.
Elias therefore being departed, knew what passed, and showed his great care to
help Gods people his Brethren, in writing after his departure, this letter.

6. When Saints come to heaven, they see far more by the light of glory, then
we can easily conceave. For now, (1. Cor. 13.9.) in part we know, and in part
we prophecy. But when that which is perfect is come, then that shall be done
away which is in part. Hence S. Aug. l. 22. de Civit. c. 21. proves that the
Saints in heaven have more perfect knowledge of what passes here, then we
have. The light of glory far exceeds the light of prophecy, and yet by that
Prophets knew many secreets of the hearts, and things far out of their sight.
Samuel says to Saul. 1. Sam. c. 9. v. 19. All that is in thy heart, I will tell
thee. And 2. Kings 5.26. Elizeus said to Giezi, Went not my heart with thee,
when the man turned again from of his chariot to meet thee. So Acts 5.4. S.
Peter did see the deceiptfull heart of Ananias saying to him. Why have thou
conceived this thing in thy heart? Note, that as the light of prophecy is not a
glorious glittering without, but a quality inwardly inherent in the
understanding, elevating it; even so the light of glory is no such exterior
brightness (as some may apprehend) but it is an interior noble quality, and the
noblest of all qualities, inherent to the understanding, elevating,
corroborating, and enabling it to a wonderful perfection in knowledge: So that
it is able perfectly to see God himself. We blind worms very rashly make
those blessed souls ignorant of our low affairs.

7. Hear further to what authority, over the affairs of this world, God
rayseth his Saints, that hence you may see, how much it belongs to this their
authority to know how things pass here below. Apoc. 2.26. He that shall
overcome, and keep my works, unto the end, I will give him power over the
Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron. And as a Vessel of the
potter they (who slight them) shall be broaken. He is a blind Ruler over
Nations, who knows not what passes even in the spiritual affairs, of Nations
which be those affairs that belong to his ruling power. Again, c. 3. v. 21. He
that shall overcome, I will give unto him to set with me in my throne, as I
also have overcome, and have sitten with my Father in his throne. Do you think
Saints, raised by God so high, have no means to know what we do below? Is it
not said of the Devil Apoc. 12.10. That he accuses our Brethren night and day,
which he cannot do, unles he first knows in what to accuse us. A shameful
thing it is to deny this knowledge to Angels, which we grant to Devils. See in
the next Point n. 7. two evident Texts out of the Apocalips showing the Angels,
and Saints to offer, and consequently to know, our prayers. And note, that all
that I have said from the fourth number to this place, proves the self same.
The former Texts speak indeed of only Angels, but you see Saints raised to as
high light of glory as those Angels, besides, they, living so mixed with them,
and still enjoying their conversation, it cannot but seem strange, that all
the Angels should rejoice at the Conversion of a sinner, and the Saints should
know nothing of it. Again, it being proved that Angels can hear us, you cannot
(upon that account) deny, prayers to Angels to be lawful, seeing that they
hear us as well as the Saints living upon earth, whose prayers we may lawfully
crave. If you say that we are not commanded to pray to them, I answer, so we
are not commanded to beg one another prayers. It Is sufficient that, as our
spiritual necessities command us to do this, so they command us much more to
do that. But of this in the next Point, n. 1. See there n 7. two more Texts out
of the Apocalips, showing Saints to hear our prayers. For the 24. Seniors were
Saints, and not Angels, yet they knew and presented our prayers made here on
earth.

THE XXXVIII. POINT. That Saints can, and will help us, and therefore it is
laudable to pray to them.
1. FIrst Protestants often ask us where we have a command to pray to Angels
or Saints. I answer that if there be many advantages accruing to us by the
devout Invocation of Saints then it is apparent that Prudence and Charity to
our selves ought to excite us thereunto, as it does to seek shelter when it
raines, without being called to go under shelter by the cryers voice as they
say some simple people are: it is as simple to exact a command in a thing of
greater benefit. I say moreover that if there be a command to beg the prayers
of Saints living on earth, that command (a fortiore) urges us to beg the
prayers of Saints living in heaven, they being more willing and more able to
help us. If there be no such command, and yet we may without any command,
practice that laudably; so also may we laudably practice this without a
command, seeing that they hear us, as well as the Saints living with us. Why
then may we not say to Saints in heaven, that which S. Paul said to Saints on
earth, Brethren pray for us? Jobs friends were commanded to go to Job to pray
for them, as we shall show more fully n. 9. You all keep the Sunday. Where is
that commanded to you? You answer, it is sufficient to see examples of it among
the first Christians. So say I, it is sufficient we show you exemples in
Scripture of such as prayed to Angels. For of praying to Saints the old
Testament could not write, no Saints being as then in heaven. The four Ghospels
writ no farther then the Ascension of Christ to heaven, before which no Saint
also was in heaven. Wherefore you need not wonder that in the 4. Ghospels you
see no mention of praying to Saints in heaven. In S. Paul's Epistles you find
him begging prayers of Saints on earth. So Hebr. 13. v. 18. Pray for us. Seeing
then that prayer to Saints in heaven is more beneficial to us, it is also,
(by manifest consequence) more to be used by us. And as often as the Scripture
exhorts us to promote our salvation, and spiritual good by all means we can,
so often does it exhort us to use this means as much (or more) then begging
the prayers of others upon earth. In fine when a thing has many spiritual
goods in it, we are sufficiently invited thereunto without a command: So no
body commanded Timothy, still to drink water, S. John to drink no wine, and to
come neither eating nor drinking, nor his Disciples to fast often. (See Point
22.) It is sufficient that we obtain much good thereby.

2. That by praying to Saints we obtain much good, I prove, by proving that
Saints can, and will help us, which all they supposed, who called upon them, as
Genesis 48.15. And Jacob blessed the sons of Joseph, and said, God before whom my
Fathers walked, the Angels that delivered (or redeemed) me from all evil,
bless the lads. He calls first upon God, and then upon his good Angel, to
help those Children. And he tells you, that this Angel delivered him from
several evils How Jacob prayed this Angel, is expressed Osee 12.4. Jacob
prevailed against the Angel, and he weept, ande made supplication unto him. So
Jobs friend (following the practice of those times) did bidd him call upon some
Saint or Angel, as I showed last point, n. 3. How well the Angels wish us,
their joy for the conversion of sinners testifyeth. And if the evil Angels are
so restles in circling about to see whom they can devour, and accuse our
Brethren night and day, as I showed in the former point, n. 7. The good Angels
are no less careful to seek whom they can defend, help, and save.

3. Hence that earnest prayer of that Angel Zach. 1. v. 12. And the Angel of
our Lord said, o Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem,
and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these three
score and ten years. What call you praying, if this be not? Now hear with
what effect this Angel prayed for them. And our Lord answered the Angel good
words, confortable words. Behold here this Angel would and could help our
necessityes. And of S. Michael in particular Daniel says c. 10. v. 21. There
is none that holds with me in these things, but Michael your Prince. And c.
12. v. 1. At that time shall stand up Michael the great Prince, who stands
for the Children of thy people. In what does S. Michael stand for Gods people,
if he does not so much as pray for them?

4. That by the merits of Saints we may beg and obtain favors, I prove also
thus 1. Kings 15.5. When wicked Abias reigned in Judah, for David's sake our Lord
his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, that he might raise up his son after
him and establish Jerusalem, because David had done right in the eyes of our
Lord. When a hundred eighty five thousand Assyrians came to besiege Jerusalem,
God by his Prophet said to Ezechias. I will protect this City, that I may save
it for my own sake, and for David's sake my servant. Isa. 37. v. 25. That is
(say the Protestants) for my promise made to David. But we, say if they seek
over all Scripture, they will find no such promise made to David of defending
or protecting Jerusalem. Yea we prove there could be no such promise, because
Jerusalem, in the captivity, was not protected but ruinated.

5. The power which the prayers of Saints have, and that they use carefully to
pray for us, is often expressed in Scripture. Jeremy 15.1. Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward the people. By which
manner of speeeh it appears that Moses and Samuel (long sincc dead) were
(after their death) used to pray for the people, and that their prayers were
most powerful. So a King may say, though my Mother shall come to me, and pray,
I will not hear her. You shall see Daniel of like merit and power with God in
just such another Text. (Ezech. 14. v. 14.) I will kill out of the Land man and
beast. And if these three men shall be in the midst thereof Noe, Daniel, and
Job, they, by their Justice, shall deliver their own souls. Yet, though these
three men were in it, says our Lord, they shall deliver neither Sons nor
Daughters, but themselves alone shall be delivered. Which he repeates again v.
20. This joining of Daniel, (a Saint then living) with Noe and Job, (dead so
many hundred years before,) shows that these men, by their prayers, no less
powerfully interposed themselves then Daniel living. Of Elias his care to
assist his people after his death, we gave you a memorable testimony in the
former point, n. 5. In the famous vision of Judas Machabeus 2. Match. c. 15. v.
12. First Onias (who had been the high Priest, but was now dead) stretching
forth his hands, prayed for all the people of the Jews. After this there
appeared also another man, marvelous for age and glory, and for the port of
great dignity about him And Onias said, this is the lover of his Brethren. This
is he who prays much for the people and the whole City, Jeremy the Prophet
of God. And he gave to Judas a sword of gold saying. Take the Holy sword a gift
from God, wherewith thou shall overthrow the adversaries of my people. The
event confirmed the truth of this vision, Origin (Tom. 18. in Joan) reflecting
on this place says It appears that Saints departed from this life, have care
of the people, as it is written (says he) in the acts of the Machabees, many
years after the death of Jeremy. This is Jeremy the Prophet, who prays much
for the people. So that though the Books of Macabees be admitted not as
Scripture, but only as a true Ecclesiastical Hystory, we have from thence
that the most Holy High Priest, and chief of Gods only people, believed that
Saints prayed for us, and helped us, and that all the people (who were said
encouraged by this vision) were of the same belief. How far then is this from
all novelty, which can be proved to have been practiced before the days of the
Apostles, and this by an authority far greater, then that of Josephus, or any
such Historian, to whom you would scorn to give a place in your Bible, as you
do to the History of the Machabees.

6. Let us now come to the New Testament. What motive soever moved Dives, (Luke
16.27.) to pray to Abraham saying, I would beseech the^ that thou would send
to my Fathers house, for I have five Brethren, to testify to them, least they
also come to this place of torments. The very same motive will work far
more upon the heart of departed Saints to help us, their poor Brethren from that
place of torments, and promote us to those eternal Tabernacles, of which
Christ, Luke 16.9. Mak^ unto your selves friends of Mammon of iniquity, that
when you fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Again, Apoc.
2.26. He that shall overcome and keep my words, to the end, I will give him
power over the nations. And he shall rule them with a rod^ of Iron. The Saints
having authority to rule nations so powerfully, (as is here expressed by a rodd
or scepter of Iron) they exercise this their power chiefly by making
intercession so powerfully to God for us, as to obtain for us such graces, as
we stand most in need of, this their power being given to a spiritual end.

7. And as God, (who is goodness and mercy it self in an infinite degree) does
notwithstanding not so show this his mercy and bounty toward those, who never
pray to him, as he does to those who are incessantly begging his help. So
Saints chiefly are moved to aid those who are still begging their assistance,
yet true it is that they are, of their own accord helping us. So Raphael
offered the prayers made to God by Toby, as we have seen in the former Point
n. 3. So Apocal. 5.8. The four beasts, and four and twenty elders fell before
the Lamb, having every one harps and golden Vials, full of odours, which are
the prayers of Saints, which prayers (made by Saints on earth) these Saints in
heaven did know and hear, for they presented them in golden vials. And c. 8. v.
3. An other Angel came and stood at the Altar having a golden Censer And there
was given to him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
Saints upon the Altar of gold, which is before the throne of God, and the smook
of the incense, which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before
God out of the Angels hand. Note that the Angel, being before the throne of
God, did there hear the prayers of Saints in earth. Secondly he did not only
hear their prayers, but also Offer them up before the throne of God in a
golden Ce^ser, which he could not do, if he had not known the^. Thirdly these
prayers of the Saints on earth, by being thus jointly offered up by the more
fervent prayers of the Saints in heaven, or H. Angels, did become more
acceptable to God. For hence the smook of the ince^se with these prayers
ascended, (more sweetly and pleasantly to God) from the hand of the Angel. God
indeed knows our prayers, before the Saints or Angels offer them, but he knows
that they mount up less powerfully, when they be not seconded with their
intercession. So God knew before hand that all the people answered Moses
saying to him. All things that our Lord has spoaken, we will do. Exodus 19. v.
8. And yet the very next words are; and Moses returned the words of the people
to our Lord. Which words were well known to God before that Moses did return
them, yet by returning them, he did make, by his joint Mediation, this
cheerful offer of the people more pleasing to God.

8. And because he did this to their greater advantage Moses himself says,
Deutr. 5.5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time. This I note to
answer the objection of our adversaries saying, it is injurious to Christ to
take any other Mediator: For one is our Mediator. To be a Mediator is
nothing but to stand between God and us mediating for us. In this proper sense
Moses was a Mediator between God and his people. The same, in the same sense,
may be said of other Saints. Yet in that sense, that Christ is said to be our
only Mediator, we make no other Mediator. For he is called Mediator,
because he is so by his own worth, and by his merits offered for us, fully
satisfying Gods anger, and capable of no repulse. I did know that thou do
always hear me; said Christ to his eternal father, Io. 11.42 He is heard
for the Reverence due to him, as S. Paul speaks. In this sense we make no
Saint Mediator for us. We only beg of them to pray for us, as we beg of
living Saints, whom; by their prayers, we desire to mediate for us. S. Paul in
this sense desired the Thessalonians to mediate for him to God. Brethren pray
for us. 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. And to Hebrews 13.18. Pray for us. And God himself
bidds Jobs friends use the mediation or intercession of Job, promising to hear
the prayers of this their Midiatour made for them, but no where promising to
hear their prayers made without his Mediation. Yea rather intimating that he
would not hear their prayers, unles Job mediated for them, as now I shall show.

9. If you say it derogates from Christ's honor, that any other should help to
save us, I answer that Saints (yet living upon earth) help to save us. And so.
Job 42. v. 7. God tells Jobs three friends. My wrath is kindled against thee*
Take therefore unto you seven oxen and seven rams, and go to my fervant
Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt offering. And my servant Job shall
pray for you. Him I will accept, that is, his mediation shall avail to your
pardon. Neither do we dishonor, but we rather honor our Savior, when we
desire Saints to pray for us. For by this we show the dignity of his merits to
be so great, that, by his merits, Saints are advanced to so great favor with
God, that their prayers hence come to be so effectual, as were those of a
Moses, who living yet on earth, could obtain so often pardon for the whole
people of Israel From whence also it proceeds, that thc Saints in heaven, as
well as the Saints here living, are in Scripture said to save others Hence S
Paul 1. Tim. 4. v. 16 For in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and
them that hear the. And S. I^mes c. 5.20 He which converteth a sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death.

10. Neither lastly do we act against that precept of Christ saying, Come ye
all to me A S. Paul did not act against the said precept, when (after our
Savior had said these words) he himself went begging the prayers of the
Thessalonians and Hebrews, in his Epistles to them. For there be two ways of
going to Christ: The first immediately by our selves, approaching reverently in
prayer to him. The second, and more powerful way is (when we, humbly
acknowledging our unworthynes, and the meanness of our poor prayers) do procure
the intercession of Christ's greatest friends, to accompany with their joint
Mediation, our humble petitions And thus, though the Centurion did not
personally come to Christ, yet he is said by Saint Matthew truly to have come
to Christ. There came to him a Centurion. Mat. 8.5. And yet S. Luke said he did
not come to him; for (Luke 7.3. only he sent unto him the elders of the Jews,
to interceed, beseeching him that he would come. And again, when he was now not
far from the house, the Centurion sent friends to him, saying; I am not
whorthy that thou should enter under my roof. And Christ marveling said,
neither in Israel have I found such faith. Behold this more humble way of
coming to Christ by Mediators and Intercessors supplying our unworthynes,
far preferred before the former way, and that even for the faith of the
person so approaching. I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.
Ponder well this passage.

THE XXXIX. POINT. That among the Saints it is most laudable to pray to our
Lady. And of the Beads said to her honor.
1. AS we are far from honoring our Lady more then her son, because we
know that all the grace she has, and all her power in the Court of heaven, is
wholly and entirely by her son; so are we also far from equalizing any Saint
in grace or power, to the most Blessed Mother of God, who, even before she was
his Mother, was by the Archangel pronunced full of grace. Luke 1.28 The higest
Saints in heaven are only styled servants of God. But our Lady is truly styled
Gods Mother. Whence is this to me that the Mother of my Lord should come to
me? Luke 1.43. In all well ordered families the power of the Lords Mother
incomparably exceeds the power of all his servants. God, who has commanded us
in a special commandment to honor our Parents, cannot (without impiety) be
thought not to yeald a special honor to his Mother. All generations shall
call her blessed. Because he that is mighty, has done great things to her.
Luke 1.48.

2. Two things chiefly concur to eminent Sanctity: Exterior advantages to
improve our selves in grace, and interior assistance of the Holy Ghost, to
make best use of those advantages. Our Lady in the exterior occasions of
improving her self in grace, had the greatest advantages that ever any
creature had, even after she was declared full of grace. She had our Savior
lodging in her womb nine Months. And she knew who he was, and what graces he
could bestow upon her, if she neglected not to beg them. She did see the
humility of his Birth, and beheld all that the^ happened But Mary keept all
these things, and pondered them in her heart. Luke 2.19. All that we read of
our Lord until he was thirty year old is, that he lived subject to his
parents. And his Mother keept all these sayings in her heart. Luke 2.51. She
then had for 30 years together the benefit of his example to inform her, the
benefit of his conversation to move her, the benefit of his instruction to
teach her all she could desire to learn, or he desire to impart to her. When
her Son began to preach to the world and the people all said. Never man did
speak as he did, who can doubt but a Mother (so deerly affecting such a Son)
did hear him more frequently, and devoutly, then any other, still keeping and
pondering all in her heart. But her special harvest was in the time of his
Passion, which her compassion made also to be hers. Mothers will understand
some what of the Martyrdom she then suffered. But no body can understand how
much after his death and ascension her soul daily was improved by continual
Meditation of what she had seen, and also by the devout feeding upon the Body
of our Lord, which she made her daily bread. Now as for the interior
assistance of the Holy Ghost, exciting her to make the best advantages of all
these occasions, we know that all such excitations and graces are dispensed by
the hands of her own Son. Is not she then the likest, to have the largest
share in all these graces? which graces, her Son also, had instructed her to
use so well to her best advantage, and to their howerly increase and
improvement.

3. Hence it is, that as she surpassed all in the practice of virtue, so she
is raised above all in supereminency of heavenly glory. Whence it follows
that both love to God, and love to her neighbor being most perfect in her,
she, by them both, is most powerfully, moved to afford to all such, as devoutly
call upon her, all the assistance she is able. Wherefore seeing her power is
far surpassing that of other Saints, we have all reason to believe her
intercession to be most available for us.

4. Among other devotions which we use to procure this her so advantageous
intercession, one is to say the Rosary, or Beads to her honor. Not that our
Church commands any one to say these beads, but that she holds this to be a
very commendable thing, which she knows full well to be but a late practice
of piety, as also many other prayers are most pious, which were made long
since the Apostles time For you cannot prove that in their time any one prayer,
which is in your Common Prayer Book was used, except the Pater noster and
Creed. Will you say then that the use of them is not laudable? Let us th^n go
on.

5. As the Psalter consists of a hundred and fifty Psalms, so in imitation of
that, the whole Rosary consists of a hundred and fifty Ave Mary's. And as the
Instrument to which David did sing his Psa^mes, was an instrument of ten
strings, Ps. 32.2. So we distinguish these hundred and fifty Ave Mary's, into
several tenns, that is, into fifteen tenns, if we say the whole Rosary, or
into five tenns, if we say but the third part of it, as we do, when our
leisure or devotion reaches not at once to the whole Rosary. Every tenn is
distinguished with a Pater noster, said in the beginning thereof. For before
we call upon our Lady, we think it fit to call upon our Lord, from whom all
the graces of our Lady did proceed; and from whom all must be given, which we
beg of her to obtain For we do not acknowledge our Lady to be the giver of any
graces, though her intercession be most powerful to obtain them to be given by
her Son, When we use this devotion, we do indeed deed say ten Ave Mary's for
one Pater noster. But the reason of this is not, that we honor our Lady more
then our Lord; for we are so far from equalizing her to him, that we
confess her infinitely inferior to him. But the reason is, that it is fit
we should set some time a part to honor her, or else we should honor her at
no time. Now, as when we are busied in honoring our Mother, we are not, at
that time busied in honoring our Father: So when we bestow this parcel of
time in honoring our Lady; we only, at this time honor our Lord, so far,
as all the honor we do to his Mother, is done out of the respect we bear to
her, because she is his Mother. We reserve other devotions to our Lord, which
contain an honor of an incomparably higher strain, then any honor we give to
our Lady. For, because our Lord dyed on the Friday, we, to his honor, fast
all fridayes; because he remained dead all Saturday, we honor him for it, by
abstinence from flesh all Saturdayes. Because he did rise again on the Sunday,
we honor his Resurrection by solemnizing all Sundays. Because he fasted
forty days for us, we, to his honor, yearly fast the forty days of Lent. No
such honor is done by us to our Lady. Our adversaries will ask us first, what
authority we have for the Ave Mary. Secondly why we use this prayer just so
often reiterated, and how we busy our minds in the mean time? You will soon
know what to answer by the ensuing discourse.

6. We say then the first part of the Ave Mary was made by an Angel; and he,
as Ambassador from God, used such words as he knew to be to Gods mind, saying
to our Lady: Hail full of grace our Lord is with the, blessed art thou among
weomen. Luke 1.28. The second Part came also from God. For v. 41. Elizabeth
was filled with the Holy Ghost, and she spoke out with a loud voice, and said;
blessed art thou among weomen. And blessed is the fruit of thy womb: The Holy
Church adds, Holy Mary Mother of God (for she is in the next verse called
Mother of our Lord) pray for us sinners, now, and at the hour of our death.
Amen. Which words are most full of piety, supposing (what we have proved)
prayer to Saints to be pious: for if we may pray to our Lords servants, we
may pray to his Mother. Behold the whole Ave Mary.

7. Secondly we use just the number of a hundred and fifty Ave Mary's, in the
whole Rosary, because we would say a whole Psalter to her honor. If these had
been a hundred and fifty several prayers, (as there be a 150. Psalms) who
would have remembered them? But now, they being all but the same prayer so often
repeated, (and this prayer also so well known) any simple person (though he
cannot read) can say this whole Psalter to our Lady without book. And it was
made chiefly for a devout entertaynement for those ignorant people who cannot
read, though it be also an excellent entertaynment even for the most learned,
when either they have not light to read, or when being wearied out with
contemplation, or less disposed thereunto, they desire to walk, or pass the
time devoutly without any overmuch tiring exercise. If any one adds an Ave Mary
more or less, then this number, he does no other hurt then he, who intending
to say the whole Psalter, should say one Psalm less, or repeat one twice.
These hundred and fifty Ave Mary's are most conveniently divided into fifteen
tenns, to help us at every several ten, to call to our memory, and devout
consideration, a several Mystery of the life of Christ and our Lady. For the
prime Mysteries of their lives be reduced very fitly and orderly, into fiften
Mysteries, of which five be joyful, five be sorrowful, and five be glorious.
To the honor of all these fifteen Mysteries, we say the fifteen tenns, when
we say the whole Rosary If we have not will or leisure, to say the whole
Rosary at once, then we say only the beads of five tenns, honoring, or
pondering, either the five joyful; or the five sorrowful, or the five
glorious Mysteries. When I say the first five tenns, at each tenn I will
honor, and attentively ponder with devotion one of the five joyful Mysteries.
As first, the Annunciation of our Lady, when the Angel announced unto her, that
God would become man, and she should be exalted to be his Mother. Secondly her
Visitation, when visiting her Cosen Elizabeth. As soon as Elizabeth heard the
salutation of Mary, the infant did leap in her womb, and Elizabeth was
replenished with the Holy Ghost, and cried out, Blessed art thou etc. Luke
1.41. Thirdly, the Nativity of our Lord. A joy that shall be to all people,
because this day was borne to them a Savior. Luke 2.10. Her joy was greatest
who was the Mother in this joyful birth. Fourthly, her Purification, when
Simeon (in whom the Holy Ghost was) came in spirit into the Temple, and took
the Child into his arms, showing him to all publicly in the Temple, and
declaring him to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the
people of Israel. Luke 2.32. Fifthly her finding the lost Child disputing with
the Doctors in the Temple, where they, all were astonished that heard him,
upon his wisdom and answers. Luke 2.47. And he went down with his Mother and
lived subject unto her, even till he was thirty year old, and she keept all
his words in her heart. v. 51.

8. When I come to say the second five tenns, I will honor and ponder the five
sorrowful Mysteries. First, Christ his prayer in the Garden Secondly, his
whipping at the Pillar. Thirdly, his Crowning with thorns. Fourthly his
carrying of the Cross. Fifthly, his being Crucified, and dying upon the
Cross. All which as Christ felt them most sensibly in his body, so our Lady,
next to Christ, had a most tender feeling of them in her own soul. And her own
soul the sword of grief did peerce. As Holy Simeon prophesied of her. Luke
2.35. When I come to say the third five tenns, I will spend the time in saying
each of them by meditating upon (and so honoring) each of the five glorious
Mysteries. First the Resurrection of our Savior. Secondly his Ascension to
heavenly glory. Thirdly, his sending the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, the Assumption
of our Lady: When (as many Holy Fathers have taught) that body of hers (in
which Christ took flesh) was soon after its burial, not made meat of worms,
but, with far greater reason, made partaker of her Sons Resurrection, then
were those many Saints, of whom S. Matthew. c. 27.53. says, their graves were
opened, and they rose. And they going forth out of their graves after his
Resurrection, came into the Holy City, and appeared to many. Fifthly and lastly
I will, to her honor, consider her Coronation, importing her special state in
that heavenly glory, in which she is looked upon, and reverenced by all Saints
and Angels, as their Queen, she being the Mother of the King of glory. The
Mother of my Lord. Luke 1.43.

9. The intent of the Holy Church, recommending this devotion, is to teach all
that use it (especially the more ignorant who cannot use Books) how to employ
their minds fruitfully in a most commendable Meditation, of Mysteries most
glorious to Christ, and his Mother, and most beneficial to our souls, whilst
their lips are most devoutly busied in reciting words so pleasing to the
Mother of God; to which end the Teachers of our Church, both by words, and by
writing, still are inculcating this true use of the Beads.

10. Now this number of fifteen tenns, or of five tenns (serving so fitly for
the orderly practice of so easy a devotion) cannot be more easily observed,
then by letting one Bead fall at each Ave Mary: And the beginning of the next
ten can no way be more easily notifyed, then to begin the said ten with a
bead of so different a bigness, that it may easily be noted, even in the dark
without any distraction. And the same different Bead serves also to mind us of
passing to the consideration of a different Mystery, unles perhaps our soul
has other predominant pious thoughts or affections, which (tending to a very
beneficial Meditation) are better continued then interrupted. Now, though many
simple people use not these considerations, but attend only to the words they
say, yet those words be so excellent, that this entertaynment proves most
virtuous, by their using the recital of them to honor Christ and his Blessed
Mother.

11. Neither is the often repeating of the same prayers or prayer, a thing
blame worthy. For if, after the saying of one Ave Mary, we should use a less
excellent prayer, (yea, or no prayer at all) you could not blame us. How then
grow we to be blame worthy for using this so excellent prayer? He, who should
every hour say our Lords prayer, although he should do it three times each
hour, is not to be blamed, but commended. How the^ is he to be blamed, who
says the Lords prayer three our fourscore times in one hour? Next unto our
Lords prayer, no prayer has greater authority or excellency, then the Ave
Mary. Why then be we blamed for using it so often, in so short a space, whilst
(as you thinck) you remain without blame, who use it so seldom? our Savior
had the rarest invention that ever man had, and (if we may make bold to
account any of his prayers more excellent then an other) his prayer in the
garden may seem to have been most excellent. And yet even then, (as rare an
invention as he had) He prayed the third time using the same words, Matthew.
26.44. And not inventing any new form. So likewise those four blessed six
winged Creatures, Apoc. 4.8. Had not rest day and night saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God Omnipotent. The oftener they said this one prayer over, and over,
the more fervor appears, even in so rare inventive spirits. All the Publicans
prayer was; God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13. and v. 38. All the
prayer of the blind man was, to cry again and again saying; Jesus Son of
David have mercy upon me. And when they rebuked him to hold his peace, he
cried much more, Son of David have mercy upon me. And thus he, by
perseverance in the same prayer, obtained his request. Who does not see a
special power to stir up a great feeling of Gods mercies in the Psalm one
hundred and thirty six, which contains but twenty seven verses, and yet it
does twenty seven times repeat those words. For his mercy endures for ever.

THE XL. POINT. It is laudable to worship the Images of Saints.
1. IT is laudable (I say) to worship the Saints Images in that sense, in
which we Roman Catholics worship Images. The very Saints themselves we worship
not with divine honor (as I said and largely declared Point 36. n. 3. 4. 5.)
And therefore it is a most unconscionable slander, which our Adversaries lay
upon us, saying that we give divine honor to Images. No: we give no such
honor to the Saints themselves, much less do we give it to their Images:
without you think we worship the Images more then the person represented by the
Images. All that we Roman Catholics hold, as a Point of faith, may be read by
all men in the Council of Trent sess. 25. where this Council teaches, due
honor and veneration to be given to the Images of Christ and his Saints, not
that there is believed to be in them any Divinity, or Virtue, for which they
are to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or that any
confidence is to be placed in the Images, as anciently was done by the Gentiles,
who did put their hope in their Idols. Psalm. 115.8. But because the honor,
which is given to the Images, is referred to the persons represented by the
Images, so that, by, or, through the Images, which we kiss, and before which
we uncover our head, or ly prostrate, we adore Christ, and reverence the
Saints, whom these Images represent. Behold the belief of our Church, teaching
that all the reverence done before Images (I pray note well this manner of
speech) All the honor I say that is showed before the picture, rests not in
the Image, but passes through it, and rests in the person represented to me
by this picture. He that abuses King Charles his picture, or statue, neither
intends to show, nor shows any anger or disrespect to Paper, or to stock or
stone. All the abuse (by all men's Judgment) is given to King Charles
represented by his picture in paper, or engraven in wood, or stone. A further,
and an evident proof of all this, is that your selves on the one side believe
the Sacrament to be only a sign, or figure of Christ's body, and yet on the
other side, you count it no Idolatry to kneel before this Sacrament at the
receiving of it, because that worship is done to the person signified by this
sign. But that which presses you far more is that S. Paul says. He that
eats and drinks unworthyly is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. 1.
Cor. 11.27. Now, of this being guilty of Christ's Body and blood, it is
impossible for you to give any other reason, but that the abusing of the sign,
or figure of Christ's body, is a high abuse done to the body it self. The same
is proved out of Samuel 2. c. 6.16. where (of David's dancing before the Arc)
it is said Michol saw David dancing before our Lord. You see the honor thus
done as much to the Ark, as our bowing, or kneeling, or prostrating, is done to
the Images, is referred not to the Ark, but to our Lord, and is laid to be done
before him.

2. First then I say we neither are, nor can be accounted guilty of Idolatry
upon this account. No understa^ding man can deny but this has been the
practice of the only true visible Church for a thousand years at lest;
therefore no Idolatry can be in this practice. For Idolatry destroys the very
essence of a true Church. Moreover the Scripture manifestly tells us that all
Idols, after the coming of our Savior shall be quyte abolished in his known,
and visible Church. For how can otherwise be understood that Isa. 2.18. Idols
shall he utterly abolish. That of Ezech. 36.25. I will power upon you clean
water. And from all your Idols I will cleanse you. And Chap. 37. v. 23. Neither
shall they defile themselves any more in their Idols. And therefore Micheas Chapter
5. v. 13. Thy graven images also I will cut of, and thy standing Images out of
the midst of thee. Therefore in Christ's Church there can not be found the use
of such Images as were unlawful, that is of such as should be made to be
adored as Gods; whence the next words are. And thou shall no more worship the
work of thine hands. Now all those words are evidently spoken of what should
happen after the coming of the Messiah; for in the beginning of this chapter is
the famous Text prophesying that Christ should be borne in Bethlem. And then he
prophesyeth the ensuing benefits of his birth. Zacharias also speaking. c. 13.
v. 1. of this time says In that day shall be a fountain lying open to the
house of David, and it shall be in that day says the Lord of Hosts I will
cut out the names of Idols out of earth, and they shall be remembered no more.
And yet what a remembrance of Idols would it be, to see all Churches in the
whole visible Church, filled full of statues, Images, and pictures, exposed to
all to be worshipped, if the worship, used in these Churches, be Idolatrous? A
most urging Argument and clear demonstration. Yea among the Jews (as prone as
they were to Idolatry) there was, by Gods appointment, a Religious use of
Images.

3. Thus God to Moses: Thou shall make a mercy seat of pure gold. Two
Cherubins also thou shall make of beaten gold, on the two ends of the
mercyseat. Let one Cherub be on the one end, and the other on the other end.
And the Cherubins shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the
mercyseat with their wings. Exodus 25. v. 17. And thus Moses, by the command of
God made the Propitiatory, that is the Oracle or mercyseat of the purest gold.
Two Cherubins also of beaten gold on either side of the Propitiatoryes even to
the mercyseat ward were the faces of the Cherubins. Exodus 37.9. It is no small
sign of honor that these Cherubins pictures, were made of gold, as also that
they were placed before the Oracle it self: The Holy of Holies. Hence S. Paul
says Hebr. 9.5. Over it were the Cherubins of glory shadowing the mercyseat.
When this Tabernacle came to be placed in Gods Temple, The Temple it self had
graven Cherubs in the walls. 2. Chron. 3.7. And v. 10. And in the most Holy
house he made two Cherubins of image work and their faces were toward the
house. v. 13. So that the people adored toward them. v. 14. He made the veil
of bleue and purple-crimson, and wrought Cherubins thereon. Note here how all
the people kneeled immediately before these pictures when they prayed yea graven
Cherubins were in the walls (as I said) placed before them, which way soever
they turned.

4. There is also a memorable passage of Osee the Prophet Chap. 34. where
lamenting the great desolation of the Temple, he particularly also laments the
want of that Religious use of Images in Gods Temple. Because (says he) many
days shall abide, many days sit, without King, without Prince, without
Sacrifice, and without an Image (or statue) and without Theraphim that is
without Images; which word of Images some of your Bibles have, some put the
word Theraphim which properly siggnifies a Statue, Image or Similitude either
of Indifferent use as the statue which Michol put in David's bed, Sam. 19.16.
is called Teraphim, or of an Idolatrous use as Genesis 31. v. 19. Rachel stole the
Teraphim, (Idols) of her Father, or of Religious use, as in this place of Osee,
where the want of Teraphim is bewailed with the want of Sacrifice, and Altar.
And hence the Ancient Rabbis proved that Images of Angels are not contrary to
the Decalogue. The same we may say of the Images of Saints, not then used,
because, as then, the Saints were not in heaven. But their Images now may, so
much the more be allowed, because they can be pictured in their own true
likeness and shape, which Cherubins, and Angels could not, no more then God.
Where (for simple people) you may note that it little imports whether the
Picture be just like the person pictured. It is sufficient it serves perfectly
to represent him: as these Cherubins, and Angels, were represented perfectly
enough to our Imaginations by their Images or statues which were nothing like
them.

5. A further proof for Images is out of S. Paul Phil. 2.10. He has given him
a name above all names that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow. We
have from hence that because this name is above all names therefore every knee
is to bow at it. Why so? because it is a name representing Christ by our
ears, as his Image represents him to our eyes. Only the Image being a more
lively representation (especially to those who know not the person) is the
far more noble Remembrance of the two. And as to bow at the name of Jesus
was, and is commanded the English reformed Church by their Canons; so to bow
at the more perfecter Representation of Jesus, can not be but as lawful an act
of Reverence to his person. The Jews out of Reverence to God dared not to
pronounce his most sacred name of Iehova (for so you are pleased to read this
name) now as the honor done to the name of any person, so the honor done the
Image of such a person redownes to the honor of that person.

6. But because our Adversaries much blame us for using this honor before
insensible creatures, let us see whether such honor is not used in Scripture
before things wholly insensible of any honor. Yet behold, before I look into
the Bible, and whilst I only stay looking upon it, I see Protestants cover
their Bibles with curious covers, and placing them in decent places, and taking
it very ill if any one should trample them under foot, or scornfully tear them
in pieces. And all this is done by reason of the relation which the word of God
has to God himself. You know (and we shall tell you in the next Point) what
honor was given to the Ark, by reason of the Relation it had to God in regard
that from thence he gave his Oracles to the Priests. And 2. Sam. 6.16. it is
said: Michol saw David dancing before our Lord. Because he danced before the
Ark he is said to do this before our Lord; so when he kneeled or adored before
it, it may also be properly said: David kneeled and adored before our Lord.
And in this sense when we kneel before any Image of our Lady or Saint, we may
be said to kneel before our Lady or before such a Saint. This manner of
speaking, which you account ridiculous, and superstitious, is (as you see) the
very phrase of Scripture in like occasion. Yea adoration it self was used
before the Ark. David Psalm. 99.5. Says worship at his footstool for he is
Holy. Mark that the reason, why worship is to be made at his footstool, is the
Relation, which this footstool has to him whose footstool it is for he is
Holy, that is, for it is the footstool of him who deserves that worship should
be done even at his footstool.

7. Our Adversaries will make us believe that they can call to mind, Christ and
his Passion, as well, and as frequently, without seeing a Crucifix as by seeing
it, which is contrary to all common experience. And the Scriptures teach our
weakness, and dulnes to be much helped toward stirring up pious Acts, by the
outward use of these material signs. Numb. 15.38. Speak to the Children of
Israel to make to them selves fringes in the borders of their garments. And it
shall be to you a fringe that ye may look upon it that ye may remember all the
commandments of our Lord. These fringes were those Philacteria Matthew. 23.5. We
see that to help their dulnes in remembering Gods commandme^ts, this command is
given them: so Deutr. 6.9. Thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house,
and on the gates. And you Protestants usually (for this reason) write them in
great letters in your Churches. Give us then leave by Images of our Savior to
excite the memory of him. Now to their objections.

8. You first object Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make to thee a graven thing
(you read Image) nor any similitude. But I pray go on. v. 5. Thou shall not
bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. I answer these last words do tell
you the sense of this commandment. That is we are not to make any graven thing
to adore it, or serve it. And this is the sense insinuated in those words: Thou
shall not make to thee: that is to be adored, as God, by thee, or served by
thee. We neither bow to them, with intention to adore them as Gods, nor do we
hold them so much as capable of being served by us. Again the Hebrew word
Pesel does only signify a Graven thing though you did translate this word as if
it had determinately signified a Graven Image. This you did purposely to make
us apeare Idolaters. Certainly, if God had declared it unlawful to make Graven
Images he would never have caused the Images of Cherubins to be made in the
Ark, before whose only presence Idols could not stand, as we see (1. Sam. 5.7.)
by Dagon so often cast down before it. Neither would Solomon have presumed to
place round about the walls of Gods Temple Images of Cherubins. Wherefore in
this command Idols only are forbidden and not such Images as are not used as
Idols. Whence the septuagint (whom you pretend to follow) has the very word
eidolon that is Idols, why then translate you Graven Images? If our Images be
Idols God has not fullfilled his promise to take out of his Church the worship
of Idols as I said n. 2.

9. Your other and only objection to any purpose is Exodus 32. To answer which I
must note some things before I put it. First the people being assembled
against Aaron said. Arise make us Gods that they may go before us. v. 1.
Secondly Aaron knowing that they meant such Gods, as they had seen worshipped in
Egypt, made them a Molten calfe neither can you think of any other reason why
he made rather a Calfe, then any other thing, but only because the Egyptians
worshipped their God Apis or Serapis, in the shape of a black Calfe with white
spotts as S. Augustine testifyeth l. 18. de Civit. c. 5. Thirdly this Calfe
being molten v. 4. they said: These be thy Gods o Israel which have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt: which when Aaron had seen, he built an Altar
before it, and by the Cryers voice proclaimed saying. To morrow is the Feast of
our Lord. Here comes your objection. The word which Aaron uses here, for the
Lord is the name Adonai or Iehova as your Protestants will have it: a name
proper to the God of Israel: so that it seems they only worshipped the God of
Israel. Neither is it (say our adversaries) credible, that Aaron would do
otherwise, or that he could call the Egyptian God, by the most sacred name of
all names, a name so especially appropriated to the God of Israel. Whence (say
they) you committ Idolatry, if through the Images you worship the person it
represents. For the Israelits, when they committed Idolatry, did only, through
that Calfe, worship the God of Israel, represented by It. And this seems
strongly confirmed. For Jeroboam renewed the selfsame Idolatry by making molten
Calves to the house of Israel yet, through these Calves he only worshipped the
God of Israel, calling him Baali as appears by these words of Hosea c. 2. v.
16. And it shall be in that day, says our Lord, that thou shall call me no
more Baali. Where you see the God of Israel says they called him Baali. Him
therefore the Israelits worshipped Calling him Baali, And so through Baali they
worshipped him. I answer that they did not, in this their Idolatry, worship the
true God but false Gods. The people themselves desired Gods to be made them by
Aaron, as is thrice, in that Chapter of Exodus, expressed. And Aaron knowing
that they meant such Gods, as they had seen worshipped by the Egyptians, did
(for that reason) make a Calfe as I said. To this Calfe (or if you will to the
Egyptian God Apis through this Calfe) they did offer Sacrifice. Hence God said
to Moses v. 8. They have made them a molten Calfe and have worshipped it, and
sacrificed thereunto. And said these are the Gods of Israel who have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt. You see God himself says they have worshipped
it, and Sacrificed thereunto: that is to the very Calfe, and not to the true
God. And they did not acknowledge that the true God had delivered them from
Egypt, but they did attribute their delivery to the Gods, to wit the
Egyptian Gods. Wherefore the true God said (in that place of Exodus just now
cited) They have quickly revolted forgetting me who so very lately did so many
wonders to deliver them, all which they, now ascribe to the Egyptian Gods. And
that you may see I say this most groundedly, I show the same expressly said in
other Scriptures, Moses, speaking of this very act of Idolatry here committed,
says Deutr. 32.16. They provoked him with strange Gods. The God of Israel can
not be called a strange God. And the next words are: They Sacrificed to Devils
not to God. And yet you say they Sacrificed to the true God, which also is
expressly contrary to the next words. They Sacrificed to new Gods, that came
newly up, to Gods whom they knew not. To Gods whom their Fathers feared not.
What more clear? David also manifestly Psalm. 106. v. 19. They have made a
Calfe in Horeb, and they worshipped the molten Image, they forgott their
Savior who had done great things in Egypt. A strange thing indeed it was that
all those strange wonders should be so soon forgot. But it is that very thing
for which God so often blames them. So that Moses, with great reason, wondered
how Aaron could be brought to be partaker in this sin, and as astonished he
asked him (Exodus 32.20.) what has this people done to thee (for I am sure they
must have used great violence, and force to bring thee to this) that thou
should bring upon them an heinous sin? Aaron, for his excuse, allegeth the
violence offered to him. Now whereas Aaron proclaimed this solemnity as the
solemnity of the Lord of Israel, he did so because, he denounced that the very
self same honor should to morrow be solemnly given to this Idol which was
formerly given to the God of Israel. And seeing that they resolved to give to
this new God all other honors, they would also give him the honor of the
highest name Iehova; a name yet famous among them. So you might lately see a
Quaker say to James Nayler. Thou art my Christ, as S. Paul said of the Gentiles
Rom 1.21 that whereas they knew God, yet they did not glorify him as God. And
they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into a similitude of a
corruptible fourfooted beast. So might we say of these Jews Now I answer what
was added of Ieroboams renewing this Idolatry. For he also did worship false
and strange Gods, as appears by what God spoak by his Prophet Ahias 1. Kings
14.3. Thou have gone and made thee other Gods, and cast me behind thy back: So
that he did not honor (for of him these words are said) the God of Israel in
those Idols, but casting him of, he honored other Gods yea in Chap. 12.32. He
Sacrificed unto the Calves that he had made. But how then (say you) did they
call the God of Israel Baali? I answer, that as a Quaker calling James Nayler
Jesus Christ, does make Christ to be no better man then James Nayler, and so
does as good as call Christ James Nayler. Even so these Jews taking Baali for
their true God, did say, that in effect, their true God was no better then
Baali, and so they vilifyed him as much as if they had called him Baali, giving
all honor to Baali that was due to God; yea even the honor of being their
chief God as we said of Aaron.

10. Thus I have answered at large this their best argument upon which chiefly
they must build their uncharitable, and heinous accusation of the whole visible
Church to have been guilty of the highest of Crimes, that is of Idolatry it
self. Alas! how far short does this objectio^ come of making good so foul an
accusation, which is most injuriously made if it cannot be better proved then
by this weak argument.

THE XLI. POINT. It is Laudable to worship the Relics of Saints.
1. ALL the worshipe, we give to the Relics of Saints, is only such respect
as insensible Creatures are capable of, as to be kissed, costly inshrined,
touched, worn, and used with reverence etc. And all this is merely for the
respect we bear unto the person, whose Relics they be. By the worship done
to the Ark, we shall fitly both prove, and declare the honor, of which such
insensible holy things are capable. The Ark of God was only that portable little
chapel, in which God was pleased to speak, and impart his mind to the High
Priest, consulting him with due Ceremonies. And yet, see I pray, what honor
God would have done to this Ark, though it were a creature insensible of
Honor, and only capable of being honored for his sake to whom it had
relation. And this relative honor was exceeding great, and extended to
manyfold strange expressions of Reverence. Yet all these honors were far from
being Idolatrous: yea God by this so much worshipped Ark confounded Idolatry.
For 1. Sam. 5.4. Dagon fell upon his face unto the earth before it. Let us see
what reverence God declared due to the Ark. When (without respect) they had
looked on the Ark of our Lord he smote of the people fifty thousand. Chap. 6.19
And 2. Sam. 6.6. Because Vzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took
hold of it. For the oxen shook it. God smote him for his error, and he dyed by
the Ark. Whence David fearing want of due piety in himself said, how shall the
Ark of our Lord come to me? And so he caused it to turn into the house of
Obededon, where it was three months. And our Lord blessed him and all his
house. We may then hope for blessings by wearing Relics, by having Saints
Bodies buried in our cities etc. And when Solomon placed the Ark in the Temple
2. Chron. 5. v. 2. He gathered to geather all the ancients of Israel and all
the Princes of the heads of families of the Children of Israel into Jerusalem,
to bring the Ark from the city of David, which is Sion. See here this most
stately and goodly procession to bring the Ark. And all that were gathered
before the Ark Sacrificed Sheep and Oxen, which could not be told nor numbered
for multitude. v. 6. And God graced this Procession and Translation of the Ark
by a miraculous Cloud filling the house of our Lord so that the Priests could
not stand to minister by reason of the cloud v. 14. Laugh not then at our
Processions made in Translations of Relics this being done for the Ark. Now
of other Relics. 2. Kings 2 v. 13. Elizeus took the mantle of Elias, he smote
the waters the second time and they were divided this way and that way, and
Elizeus passed over. Do you not see how Elizeus, yea rather how God honored by
a stupendous miracle, the cloak of Elias? No wonder then Saints bodies should
be more graced with miracles then their garments. Read what follows there c.
13 v. 20. Elizeus therefore dyed, and they buried him. And the Bands of the
Moabites invaded the Land the same year. And it came to pass as they were
burying a man, behold they spyed a Band of men, and they cast the man into the
sepulcher of Elizeus (anciently they buried in the open fields making caves,
and grottes capable of more bodies ( And when the man was let down, and
touched the bones of Elizeus, he revived, and stood upon his feet. And will you
be still scoffing at us for devout touching of Saints bones when so casual a
touch, caused so great, and stupendius a good to that man as was the restoring
of his life? Note also how God honored Elizeus his bones by so miraculous an
accident.

2. Now to join the new Testament with the old. I find that for keaping with
all Reverence, and rich inshrining of Relics we read thus Heb. 9.4. In the
which (Ark) was a golden pott having Manna, and the rodd of Aaron that had
budded, and the Tables of the Covenant. All these Relics (so honorably placed
in gold and in the Ark) were by consequence all hid by Jeremy with it, and in
it. And so after the Captivity thus being miraculously found, were, with all
pomp, placed in the Temple, which was restored by Zorobabel, and amplified by
Herod, And there they remained till Jerusalem (under Titus and Vespasian) was
destroyed, and had not left a stone upon a stone. This is most to be noted;
because Protestants scoff so much at us for believing the wood of the H.
Cross, and many such Relics to be preserved so many years incorrupt. Indeed
(though this be no part of our faith) the probability of it is hence invincibly
confirmed. For the Tabernacle and all things perteyning to it was finished
about the year of the world 2485. Now Christ was borne after the year of the
world. 4000. He lived 33. years and 40. years after his death Jerusalem was
overthrown; so that the Ark and Tabernacle with their Veiles and Courtaines,
and other appertinances, lasted well near 2000. years incorrupt, and so the
Rodd of Aaron so much inferior to the Cross, and the table of the Law, yea and
the Manna it self though so corruptible by nature that, what was gathered one
day, would grow full of worms the next day unless it were the Sabbath. No
wonder then many Relics should keep, and be reverently keept since Christ's
time which, is far shorter then the space which these Relics were keept as
appears by S. Paul. Let us go on.

3. What Relic meaner then the latchet of a shoe? and yet S. John Baptist
(the greatest Prophet which had risen) said truly Io. 1. v. 27. Whose shoes
latchet I am not worthy to unloose. For the Relation it had to Christ. With
what reverence think you, would a S. John Baptist have touched that poor
leather thong? Hence that devout woeman Matthew. 9.21. If I may but touch his
garment I shall be whole. And Jesus turning him, and seeing her says. Thy
faith has made thee whole. The faith therefore, in this devout touch, was not
superstitious. Note here how the cure, was wrought by this exterior touch, with
interior faith, see Mark 5.30. Luke 8.46. who Chap. 6.19. says. The whole
multitude sought to touch him. For virtue came out of him and cured all. We
indeed touch the Relics with faith and Reverence, but the virtue, by which
any favor is granted, comes from the Saint whose Relics we touch, God
giving him power to assist us for our devout recourse to him. Hence Apoc. 2.26.
He that shall overcome, and keep my words to the end, I will give him power
over the nations. He shall have power to help even whole nations, but he shall
have this power given by me. I will give him etc.

4. Note also that the very manner of applying other things to touch Saints
Bodies, and, after they have touched them, to apply them with devotion (a thing
most ieered at by our Adversaries) is notwithstanding a thing recommended unto
us in Scripture, proposing the example of the first and best Christians in this
point Act. 19.12. There were also brought from his (Paul's) body napkins, or
handkerch^fs upon the sick, and the deseases departed from them, and the wicked
spirits went out. Do not then blame us for hoping to obtain some blessings by
wearing Saints blood or bones, or other Relics which commonly have a far
greater Relation to them then those napkins or handkerchifs had to S. Paul,
merely in respect of a simple touch of his body, unles you dare venture to say
that it is more to touch a Saints Body, when his soul lives in it, then when
his soul lives with God in heaven. I pray tell me what has a thinner relation
to man, then his shadow? Or what apprentise Painter of one days standing, will
not be able to make a better Image of such a man then his shadow is? And yet
the first and purest Christians, did hold the very shadow of Saints in great
veneration, either because it was a kind of Picture of them, or had some small
relation at lest to them. And God confirmed their devotion by a world of
miracles Act. 5.5. In so much that they did bring forth their sick into the
streits, and laid them in beds, and couches that at lest the shadow of Peter
passing by, might over shadow some of them. Our Bibles have that they all might
be delivered from their infirmities. Which it seems they should not have been
though they had been nearer to him on the other side, on which the Sun
shined. Note here that there being so great a resort of all, and all being
cured, surely many came devoutly from remoter parts to enjoy this favor. Blame
not then our Pilgrimages to his Body it self at Rome where he is enterred,
being the Scripture shows many to have come, to his very shadow to obtain
help.

5. The Point following has so great connection with this present point, that
as we desire the Reader to note all here said for proof of that point, so, we
desire him, for further proof of this point, to have recourse to what shall be
said in the point following. And particularly in both thief points we earnestly
entreat our adversaries to observe, how many, and how strong Texts we bring
for our doctrine in these points, and how few, and how weak proofs they can
bring out of Scripture to the contrary. It is a shame to them to appeal to
Scripture in these Points or to say they will reform our errors in them by
clear Scripture, which is here so clear against them.

THE XLII. POINT. Some places are more Holy then others, we therefore laudably
make Pilgrimages and Processions to such Holy places.
1. OVt of Holy Scripture it is evident some places were more Holy then others,
and for that respect choice was made of such places to perform the best acts
of devotion. The great Patriarch Abraham had dug a well, and there called
upon God by that solemn oath which he made to Abimalech Gen 21.31. Wherefore
he called that place Beershebath that is the well of the oath. This is the
place of which it is said Genesis 26.23. And he (Isaac) went up from thence to
Beersheba. And the Lord appeared to him that night, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, I will bless thee and multiply thy seed for my (dead) servants
Abraham sake. Hence the Well was accounted a sanctified place. And you shall
find in the 46. Chap v. 1. that Jacob (or Israel) many years after taking his
journey with all things that he had (toward Egypt) came to the well of the
oath and offering there Sacrifice to the God of his father Isaac (who there, as
I said, appeared to Isaac) he heard God by a vision in the night calling him
etc. You see Jacob with all his Children beginning his journey with a
Pilgrimage to this Holy Place, you see that purposely he makes choice of this
place to offer there Sacrifice. You see God in this Holy place favoring him
with a heavenly vision as he had done his Holy Father Isaac in the same place.
Does not then God make choice of some particular place rather then of others?

2. The place where God appeared, is to be called and hield Holy. So Exodus 3.5.
God out of the burning bush to Moses says, draw not nigh hither, loose of thy
shoe from thy feet. For the place wherein thou stands is Holy ground, to wit,
made Holy and sanctified by the presence of God, or rather of an Angel sent as
Gods Ambassador. For Acts. 7.30. S. Stephen says: There appeared to Moses an
Angel in the fire of the flame of a bush saying loose of thy shoe, for the
place wherein thou stand is Holy ground. Whence it was the transitory
presence of an Angel appearing for that so short a time, which did Sanctify
this place, and make respect and reverence due to it upon that account.
Therefore, by good consequence the permanent abode of a Saints body, resting in
such a monument, may do the like: that is, may Sanctify this place. This is
also made evident by the mouth of that Angel who exacted reverence to be done
in the place where he appeared (Ios. 5.) saying to Iosue I am the Captain of
the Hosts of our Lord, loose thy shoe from thy feet For the place wherein thou
do stand is Holy. The ordinary common field of Jericho was, by the Angels
presence, made so Holy that it was indecent to tread upon it with a shoe.
Wherefore those who come bare foot to the Bodies of Saints commit no
superstitious excess in devotion.

3. Moreover some places are far more Holy then others. There was a place in
which the Propitiatory or Mercyseat stood, called Sancta Sanctorum, the Holy of
Holyes or the Holiest of all, to which place, for reverence to it, none
approached but the High Priest alone once a year, not without blood. Hebr.
9.7. Thus offering Sacrifice always when he entered this so Holy a place which
is the highest act of worship. And, because Sacrifice was the highest act of
worship, God would not permit that to be performed in any ordinary Holy place.
But he thus commanded the people of Israel Deutr. 12.5. To the place which the
Lord your God shall choose out of your Tribes to put his name there, even unto
his habitation shall you seek, and thither shall yeu come, Thither shall you
bring your burnt offerings and Sacrifices, where I note that this place is
called his habitation or dwelling place In which sense some Catholics may say,
our Lady dwells at Sichem or Loretto, for the choice God has made of those
places in order to bestow favors and graces to such as there implored our
Ladys aid. Note also that verse 26. How far of soever they lived, God
commands the things Sacrificed and vowed to our Lord to be all offered here. So
that Pilgrimage to this Holy place, did always accompany this Holy offering.
His command does justify the Holiness thereof.

4. Yea because the Temple of Solomon (which was the place chosen) was the
place thus Sanctified, and made so peculiarly Holy, the very ordinary prayers
which men made, when they came in Pilgrimage to this place, and made them
there, were upon that account, more pleasing to God, and sooner heard by him.
For 2. Chron. 6.19. His eyes be open upon this house night and day, upon the
place whereof thou have said that thou would put thy name there to harken to
the prayer which thy servant prays TOWARD THIS PLACE: harken to the
supplication of the people made TOWARD THIS PLACE. And the next verses are all
full of Blessings begged for them who shall pray, or make supplication, or
spread forth his hands in THIS HOUSE. v. 24.29. Wherefore, for easier obteyning
of all these blessings, a Pilgrimage to this place was usually undertaken. For
a Pilgrimage is nothing else, but only a going to some Holy places for
devotion. Those who could not go to the Temple, or Jerusalem would at least
turn themselves toward these places when they prayed, as we shall presently
see Daniel did.

5. At the first bringing of the Ark into the Temple there was a most solemn
Procession made 2. Chron. 5. by the King Solomon himself gathering all the
ancients of Israel, and all the Princes of the Tribes, and the heads of the
families of the Children of Israel to bring the Ark of the Covenant from the
city of David. From that place then the Procession began, the Priests, and
Levits carrying the vessels of the Sanctuary, and at the Temple in mount Moria
the Procession ended, with Sacrifices without number.

6. Pilgrimages to this place, and processions, at the same time were used by
the most Holy Kings of the Jews. So 2. Chron. 20.3. The most pious king
Iosaphat feared, and set himself to seek our Lord, and proclaimed a fast
through all Judah. And Judah gathered themselves to gather to ask help of our
Lord. Then v. 13. All Judah stood before the Lord with there little ones, their
wives, and their Children. For with them they all came up in Pilgrimage to this
place, here making this so solemn supplication. And God, upon the very place,
prophesied victory to them. And Iosaphat the next day caused a procession of
singers to the Lord to go before his Armey singing that Psalm Praise the Lord.
And when they began to sing praises, our Lord turned the Ambushments upon
themselves. Lo here the pious procession favored from heaven with a stupendous
victory. For they, not fighting one stroke, their enemies by their own swords
lay dead, in so great a number that for three days they could not take away
the spoils for the greatness of the prey. v. 25. And v. 28. The fourth day they
entered into Jerusalem with Psalteries, and Harpes, and Trumpets into the house
of our Lord. Thus by a Pilgrimage and Procession, returning thanks for so great
a victory got purely by a Pilgrimage, and Procession accompanied with fasting
and prayer as we usually accompany our Pilgrimages and Processions. How often
do Protestants read these places, and for want of practice in these devotions,
never understand them or note them?

7. Again what shall, or can they say, to that pious fact of Naaman general
Captain of Syria cleansed from his Leprosy by washing seven times in the
river Jordan. God prescribed the waters of the Holy Land for his cure though he
had better in his Country as he said 2. Kings 5.12. But it is for a far other
reason why I speak of Naaman. It is because being heartily converted by this
miracle, and resolved to serve only the God of Israel, he said to Elizeus v.
17. Shall not then, I pray thee, to thy servant be given two mules burden of
earth. For thy serva^t hence forth will offer neither Burnt offering nor
Sacrifice but unto the Lord. Where I observe that he apprehending how hard it
was for one of his quality to come in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem and Sacrifice
there, and knowing himself (because he was a stranger) to be licensed to
Sacrifice else where, would notwithstanding carry the earth of that Holy Land
(a Land chosen by God for his service) that upon the Holy earth he might raise
an Altar, and so do his devotions in a Holy place as well as circumstances
permitted. Yet how do our Adversaries scoss at us, if we bring a little earth
from about our Lords sepulcher, or Mount Calvary upon which he shed his
blood, more sanctifying that earth then ever earth was Sanctified? When Daniel
was captive, and could not go to the temple to pray yet His windows being
open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees thrice a day,
and prayed, and gave thanks to his God as he did before time. Dan 6.10. Behold
this was his usual devotion to turn toward a Holy place and pray when in body
he cold not go thither.

8. In the new Testament you have Matthew. 2. the three sages or Kings coming an
exceeding long Pilgrimage to adore, in personal presence, our newborn
Savior, allthough they knew fullwell that he did, as well see, and hear, all
the respect, and devout prayers performed to him by them in their own
Countries, as far of as they were Yet they personally would show their respect
by waiting on him in person. So we Catholics personally will honor S Peter in
presence of his body at Rome, by going to that end so long a Pilgrimage,
allthough we full well know he could hear our prayers made at our own houses,
yet we know those prayers to be more acceptable to him (as has formerly been
showed concerning prayers made in Holy places) expecially when those prayers
receive so great force from so painful, and devout a Pilgrimage. Again in the
new Testament you have also Io. 12. v. 20. That there were certain Greeks who
came up to worship at the feasts. These Greeks were not obliged to the Jewish
Law. But their devotion exhorted them to this long Pilgrimage. And though they
were by birth descending from the Gentiles, yet their coming to worship makes it
evident that they were true believers. Now that this their Pilgrimage was
gratfull to our Savior it appears by his divine providenc ordering things so
that they should be introduced in, to see him at such a time as a voice came
from heaven (saying) I have glorified it (thy name) and again I will glorify
it. v. 28. Likewise, Philip by Gods special providence was sent to instruct,
convert and baptize that noble Eunuch of Candace Queen of Aethiopia who was
come to Jerusalem to adore though he lived as far of as Aethiopia. A
grattfull Pilgrimage to God though not commanded him by God. See Acts 8. v. 26.
evident therefore it is that some places are to be held more Holy then others
and upon that account we do laudably go in Pilgrimages to them that is we go to
them for devotion sake, to do our best duty to God in those places. Again,
because our Savior was transfigured on Mount Thabor. S. Peter calls that Mount
a Holy Mount. 2. Pet. 1.18. When we were with him in the Holy Mount. So say I,
because our Savior was so disfigured at Mount Calvary and all besprinkled that
place with his sacred blood, that is also a Holy Mount. And far more
grattfull to God be all the devotions which are made in that Holy place.

9. There is a memorable passage of John e. 5.2. to confirm all that has been
said or that is believed, or practiced among us in this Point. For there is in
Jerusalem by the sheepmarket a Poole having five Porches, in these lay a great
multitude of persons, blind, lame, withered, expecting the stirring of the
water. And an Angel of our Lord descended at a certain time into the Pond, and
the water was stirred, and he that had gone down first into the Pond after the
stirring of the water, was made whole of what infirmity soever. Interpreters
affirm this great and constant miracle (which was true though the former
Scriptures never did set it down) to have therefore been given to the water
of this Pond, (which made so great recourse of Pilgrims to that Place) because
the Carcasses of the sheep Sacrificed in the Temple, were washed in this Pond,
or else because the blood of them did run into it. Shall not the blood of
Martyrs, Sacrificed for Christ, more Sanctify any place, where it was shed,
the^ the blood of sheep Sacrificed in his honor? Scarce any Relic has less
relation to the person whose Relic it is then this miraculous Pond had to
that great Lord to whose honor these beasts were sacrificed. Yet this Pond
had an Angel of God deputed to look after it. The miracle was constant and
infallible. And so no wonder a great multitude of persons came from remote
places in pilgrimage to this place; so also many came or were brought even to
S. Peter's shadow, as we noted in the former Point n. 5. His bones and other
Relics have a far stricter relation to him then his shadow.

10. Let no man think that miracles now cease. All England knows that our
Kings, by touching with certain Ceremonies, cured, and still cure the Kings
Evell, and all France knows their Kings do so, to this day. The first for S.
Edwards sake, the other for S. Lewis. Our Savior speaks home when he says
(and he says it without limiting any time) He that believes in me, the works
that I do, he also shall do, and greater then these shall he do. Io. 14.12.
Believe to find no true belief, where there be no true miracles. Christ himself
of himself says John 15.24. If I had not done among them works which no other
man did they had not had sin To wit the sin of Incredulity. No sin therefore
it is to reject Luther, and Calvin, and all such new teachers as never did
miracle.

THE XLIII. POINT. That we laudably keep feasts in the honor of Saints.
1. THese feasts to many seem to have no ground in Scripture, and therefore
not to be keept, but to be esteemed unwarrantable. Yet we say first, the
Apostles may have instituted several feasts of our Lord, and our Lady, though
they thought that they sufficiently recommended them to posterity upon the
warant of tradition only. For they knew, that upon tradition only, the Sabbath
had been kept from the beginning of the world until Moses, that is for 2400.
years. After which time Moses did first set down in writing this command.
Yet at the very beginning of the world Genesis 2.3. God blessed the seventh day,
and sanctified it. See the 2. Point n. 2. And thus we know, by Tradition only,
that we are not any longer to keep the seventh day, though God had sanctified
it, but that we are to keep the Sunday in honor of his Resurrection, which is
the eighth and not the seventh day.

2. Now, it is a strange thing that we should be appointed by the Apostles to
keep weekly a feast in honor of that day of the week, on which Christ did
rise, and yet should not be appointed to keep the feast of the Resurrection it
self. The Jews keept their Pentecost for having received Gods law in written
tables. And shall not Christians keep a Pentecost for having received the law
of grace first divulged, and written in men's hearts, at the coming of the Holy
Ghost. If the Resurrection of Christ be a mystery so great that one day every
week should be keept through the whole year Holyday in honor of it, shall
Christ's Ascension be so far inferior, that no one day in a year (and
consequently no one in an age) is to be keept in memory of it? Had the Jews
reason to keep the feast of Tabernacles, because God preserved them living in
Tabernacles 40. years in the wilderness (a benefitt belonging only to their
Fathers) And has not the Church reason to institute a feast in the honor of
Christ coming to live in the Tabernacle of our flesh at his Nativity? And
another feast in memory of his giving us, under the shape of Bread, his body to
remain in all the Tabernacles of our Churches, and to enter so often into the
Tabernacles of our Breasts; both inestimable benefitts to us personally, and
also to all our posterity? Had the Jews all reason to keep a feast of
assembly, or Collection, in gratitude for the peaceable possession of the Land
of promise, and have not we more reason to keep the solemnity of all Saints
(our most Holy Fathers) who now are in peaceable possession of the Land of the
living, and the inheritance of Christ, and from thence afford us help and
assistance to come thither? Had the Jews sufficient reason to keep the feasts
of Trumpets (Numb. 29. v. 6.) in grateful memory that their father Isaac was
freed from being sacrificed by Abraham, God sending a Ram to be sacrificed
in his place (and therefore they allwayse offered a Ram in that feast) and
has not the Church sufficient reason to keep a less solemn feast in
grateful memory that our chief Patriarch, and head of our Church S. Peter was
freed, when Herod intended bloudily to Sacrifice him to the good pleasure of
the Jews, and when prayer was made to God without intermission by the Church
for him. Act. 12.5. An Angel of our Lord was sent the night before Herod would
have brought him forth to deliver him, as well as to deliver Isaac, now upon
the point of being slain. This I bring because many wonder that we keep a
feast (though less solemn) of S. Peter's Chains, and of his delivery from
them. As for the feasts of Martyrs, because to them it is a greater benefitt to
suffer all torments, and consummate them by death it self, then to be freed by
miracle from them, the Church has all reason to solemnize the days upon which
God glorified these blessed Martyrs by enabling them, first to undergo so
excessive torments so courageously, and then crowned them with immortal bliss
after their Victory. The Jews also besides these solemnities here mentioned,
and besides their weekly sabbath had diverse other feasts; yea every new Moon
brought them at least one solemnity. And will you think that Gods Church can
have no reason, nor authority to appoint any other feast then the Sunday?

2. I will therefore farther show you out of Scripture that, besides the feasts
appointed by God in Scripture, other feasts have been superadded laudably by
the authority of the Church. By which will appear her authority to do this
when she judges it expedient. The law prescribed the solemnity of Azymes, or
of unleavened bread, to be keept but seven days. Yet upon a peculiar occasion
it seemed expedient to the Church (then assembled) to add seven more, so says
the Scripture 2. Chron. 30.23. The whole Assembly took counsel to keep other
seven days, and they keept other seven days. And the Scripture adds (v. 27)
in commendation of this great piety. And the Priests, and Levites blessing the
people, their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his Holy Habitation
of heaven. For as in Holy places, so in Holy times prayers are more effectual,
as here they were in a Time made Holy, or set a part to Gods service by the
authority of the Church only.

3. Again Esther 9.20. upon the like authority it pleased the Jews, to
establish this among them that they should keep the fourteenth day of the Month
Adar, and fifteenth day of the same, yearly. As the days wherein the Jews
rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned to them from sorrow
to joy. And the Jews undertook to do this. And v. 27. The Jews ordained, and
took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves
unto them; so as it should not fail, that they would not keep these two days
according to their appointed time every year. Why? Did any Scripture command
this? No: but the Church did put this obligation upon it self. The Jews (says
the Scripture) took upon themselves and their seed. Christ's Church has no
less authority in this kind, then the Jewish Church had, to impose an
obligation upon herself and her seed, and upon all that will be joined to her
Religion. We read also that, because the Church so judged it expedient, a
perpetual feast with an Octave (that is, lasting for eight days) was
instituted Match. 4.56. with out any peculiar warrant from Scripture, besides
the common warrant of holding that warrantable which the Church appointed. Now
if the books of Machabees be not true Scripture (as we hold them to be) yet at
least, according to our Adversaries, they conteyne a faithful Ecclesiastical
History, in which (in the place cited) it is recorded. That they keept the
Dedication of their Altar eight days. Moreover v. 59. Judas (then high Priest)
and his brethren, with the whole congregation of Israel ordained that the days
of the Dedication of the Altar should be keept in their season, from year to
year, by the space of eight days from the five and twentieth of the Month
Casleu (that is November) This Feast was keept by the Jewish Church until our
Saviors time, and that with out warrant of Scripture. Yea our Savior himself
observed it. For so we read Io. 10.22. And the feast of the Dedication was in
Jerusalem, and it was winter. I know the feast of the Dedication of the Temple
restored. 1. Esd. 6. Was in February, and therefore in winter. But this being
the winter before his death, it could not be in that part of the winter which
was spent as far as February; because our Savior is there by S. John, and by
the other Evangelists said to have done more then could be done between
February and 25. of March upon which he suffered death. So that Beza himself in
his Annotations upon this place of S. John confesses this feast (which our
Savior keept) to have been the feast we speak of. A great proof also of
using prayer for the dead. For had the Institutor of this feast (who in that
book is recorded to have used prayer for the dead) had he (I say) been
superstitiously given, Christ would never have keept a feast of his
Institution. Note here also the warrant for feasts of Dedications so usual in
our Church, yet so unheard of among Protestants.

THE XLIV. POINT. That we laudably observe Fasts, Saints Eves, and other days.
1. OVt of the former Point we make this strong argument. The Church has
power to oblige her subjects to keep such, and such Feasts, as has been
proved, therefore she has the power to oblige her subjects to keep such and
such fasting days, for the Scriptures speak universally of this obedience,
requiring of us carefully to hear the Church Matthew. 18.17. and saying he that
hears you hears me. He that despises you despises me. Luke 10. v. 16. As
also obey them that have the Rule over you for they watch for your souls.
Hebr. 13.17. Yea though Scribes and Pharisees should (by lawful succession)
sit upon the chair of Moses. Christ himself will bid us Therefore to do all
whatsoever they command All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do. Matthew. 23. v. 2. And if you say that we must obey only, when
they bring clear Scripture, you are refuted by the former point, where you see
so many feasts commanded with out clear Scripture which did no where appoint
those feasts: she then may command fastes not commanded by Scripture.

2. And now I will show you fasts to have been commanded by the Church upon a
day not appointed in Scripture but only by the appointment of the High Priest,
or Church. So Iosaphat proclaimed a fast to all Judah. 2. Chron. 20.3. So Joel
1.14. exhortes the Church to command an extraordinary fast; sanctify ye a fast.
Also upon a day not commanded by Scripture, Esdras the High Priest commanded a
fast. And I proclaimed a fast, that we might be afflicted before Lord our God.
1. Esd. 8.21. And we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated
of us. v. 23. And Ester 4.16. To gather together all the Jews, and fast ye for
me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day. And it was done
according as it was commanded. And Hest. 9.27. The Jews ordained and took upon
them, and upon their seed, so as it should not fail that they would keep these
two days (of feast) every year. And v. 31. They decreed for their selves, and
for their seed, the fastings and their cry. For fasting and crying to our Lord
were fitly then appointed to be observed in the Vigil or Eave of this feast, as
we usually fast in the Vigils of our feasts; for devout fasting best disposes
our mind to devotion the next day. Moreover you Protestants teach there be no
Counsels given us by God, but only precepts; If this be so, God himself
commands you to fast, when he says Joel 2 12. Turn ye to me with all your
hearts and with fasting, and weeping, and mourning.

3. We fast on Ember days because those days be deputed by the Church to
ordain and Consecrate new Priests and other Ministers of the Church. And it is
Christ's command Matthew. 9.38. Pray the Lord of the Harvest that he send forth
workmen into his harvest. To obey this command the more perfectly, and to make
our Prayer, powered forth for so important a blessing, the more effectual, the
Church with this prayer, joins three days fast. So of the most primitive
Church we read, Acts 13.3. When they had fasted, and prayed, and laid their
hands on them they sent them away (to wit Barnabas and Saul) se they being
sent by the Holy Ghost departed. And Chap. 14.23. When they had ordained the^
Elders (Priests) in every Church, and prayed with fastings, they commended
them to the Lord.

4. Moreover by our fastings in each one of the four seasons of the year, we
consecrate those seasons, and our life's to God, and more effectually petition
for his blessings in, and at, all seasons. We fast on Frydayes, because our
Savior dyed upon a Friday. And because he remained dead all Saturday, we
abstain from flesh upon Saturdayes. Christ said expressly Matthew. 9.14. That
after the bridegroom should be taken from his Disciples (as he was at his
Passion) then they should also fast as much as the disciples of S. John, and
the Pharisees did. And there the Seripture says they fasted often. And you
know the proud Pharisee braggs that he fasted twice a week. No wonder then that
the Church thought this measure at least expedient for us. She also knew, by
Scripture, that it was expedient to keep under our Body, and bring it into
subjection. 1. Cor. 9.27. And to approve our selves in watchings and fastings.
2. Cor. 6.5. And to give our selves to fasting. 1. Cor. 7.5. For this reason it
was that S. John, the greatest of Prophets, taught his disciples to fast often
Matthew. 9.14. Our new Prophets teach their disciples to scoff at fasters often.
Moreover we, who sin daily, have but to much need to fast weekly, so to
satisfy for our sins, to which effect how much fasting, avails I declared P.
24. n. 6. Now there being so great good in fasting and all Gods greatest
Saints having practiced it so much upon this account (as I showed out of
Scripture Point 23.) it is a wonder that, among our ungodly Saints, even good
Friday it self (on which we received a greater benefitt then ever man kind
received) should have no more notice commanded to be taken thereof then if
Christ his death belonged not to us.

5. We fast the Eves of several great feasts, so to be the better disposed to
prayer the next day. By fasting also we imitate and excite those Saints to
help us whose feast we solemnize, thus more honoring them, and more powerfully
imploring their intercession by fasting joined with our prayers. We fast for
40. days in Lent for even the most ancient Fathers called this fast an
Apostolical Tradition. And surely if the Apostles had not, together with the
other practices of our Religion; delivered also this practice of fasting for
40. days (the like may be said of fasting weekly) no man afterward could have
had sufficient authority, and this through the whole multitude of Christians,
to make them all believe themselves to be obliged to fast so often. Men love
their belley to well to be brought so easily to such an insufferable burden as
this seems to many. Nothing but a strict command of an undoubted authority
could have made all Christianity accept of this great fast, with that rigor,
which Luther found in the whole Church at his time. Some Protestants venture to
say that Pope Telesphorus (who lived Anno Domini 141.) was the first that
commanded this fast. They should have said he was the first that by written
Law commanded the more exact observance of this Apostolical Tradition which,
by some men's neglect, was grown to be less observed; if they make him the
first Introducer of Lent, then they must be enforced to confess that, in that
primitive age, the Popes authority was known for undoubted, and reverently
obeyed even over all Christendom at that time, and this in a matter which
pincheth many so hardly that we see here in England neither the known Laws of
the land, made by those of their own Religion, nor the Kings Proclamations
pressing those Laws, nor the Penalties enjoined by them, can prevail half so
much in this one nation, as the Authority commanding Lent did, in those pure,
and primitive ages, prevail through all Christian nations. I must not end this
point without observing that the whole Church may stand obliged to observe such
and such fasts, notifyed to her without any Scripture, by the sole attestation
of Church Tradition, delivering this obligation as imposed first by the
Apostles, or such like lawful authority. For, from the days of Noe until
Moses (that is above a thousand years, all were obliged thus not to eat the
flesh with the blood. Genesis 9.4. (see Point 2. n. 2.) A Command made known to
them only by Tradition.

THE XLV. AND LAST POINT. That we laudably in our fasts abstain from certain
meats.
1. Our adversaries finding fasting so often, and so highly commended in
Scripture, and not knowing well how to find fault with it, they turn to pick a
quarrel against our manner of fasting. For upon fasting days we abstain from
flesh, and in Lent from eggs, yea from whitemeates also in some places: for we
hold that the more afflictive, or laborious the fast is (so that it be
discreet) the more perfect it is, of its own nature, as being more
satisfactory for our sins past; and, by more taming of our flesh, more
preventive of new sins, and containing a greater exercise of virtue to the
greater increase of merit. Not that God delights in our sufferings, as they are
afflictive of us but because he highly delights in them, as they are so many
ways beneficial unto us; hence Joel 2.12. Turn ye unto me with all your
heart and with fasting. Now to fast all day, with out eating any thing, is a
thing over hard to be prescribed by preccpt, to such a vast eommunity as the
Church is. The Church therefore, according to her prudent Charity, has thus
moderated the Matter. First that we should fast till noon, or there about with
out eating any thing that may break out fast. Secondly that the meat we then
eat be not of flesh, which, being more nourishing, does also nourish
temptations. Thirdly that at night we eat no supper; but a slight collation is
permitted for fear our nights rest should otherwise be lost, with prejudice of
health. Other fasts be less strict, and be rather to be called days of
abstinence, as Saturdayes are, on which we only abstain from flesh. But other
fasts we have yet more rigorous as from eggs, and all that is made of eggs;
from whitemeat, which no one (who has the sense of feeling) can deny to be a
very considerable addition to the austerity of fasting.

2. This abstaining from certain nourishing and delightful meats is
peculiarly recommended by Scripture as especially pleasing to God. First the
Nazarites Number. 6. were obliged to abstain from wine: though wine were the
usual drink of their Country there being no beer. Secondly Jeremy 35. The
Rechabites in like manner, abstaining, upon command, from wine, are highly
commended by God, and rewarded for it v. 18. Thirdly (S. Luke c. 1.15.) He
shall be great before our Lord, wine, and strong drink he shall not drink.
Fourthly the same great John Baptists ordinary food was Locusts and wild honey.
Matthew. 3.4. And, even of this course food, he did feed so sparingly, that
Christ himself said he came neither eating nor drinking. Matthew. 11.18. Fifthly
S. Timothey could not be induced to drink a little wine in the weakness of his
stomach and his often infirmities, until S. Paul (for this reason) advised him
not still to drink water. 1. Tim. 5.22. Sixthly I might add that this kind of
fast is the most effectual to keep under our bodies and bring them into
subjection least we become reprobate as S. Paul said of himself. 1. Cor. 9.27.
Daniel says also of himself Flesh and wine entered not into my mouth for three
weeks. Dan. 10.3.

3. Hence we may easily answer our Adversaries objections. First then they
object Mark. 7.15. Nothing that is with out a man entering into a man can defile
him. For the sense is this, no meat, of its own nature, is polluting, or
defiling; though to eat meats that are forbidden does pollute and defile the
soul, as the Apple defiled Adams soul; as also the taking of drink in excess
pollutes the Drunkard. And even after our Savior spoak these words, eating of
Hoggs flesh would have defiled the souls of the Apostles. Yea and the first
primitive Christians should have been defiled by eating blood or meats
strangled. Not because those meats were still unclean but because the Church
thought fit, yea and necessary, to forbidd, at that time, the eating of those
meats Acts 15.28. It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us to lay no
further burden upon you then these necessary things, that you abstain from meat
offered to Idols, and blood and that which is strangled. So Genesis 9.4. For above
a thousand years before Scripture all were obliged not to eath the flesh with
the blood And this no Scripture then either commanded or testified; yet, even
then, not the meat, but the breach of the Churches commandment would have
defiled them, and still defiles us if we eat what the same Church still
forbids to be eaten at the times forbidden.

4. Secondly you object 1. Cor. 10. v. 25. All that is sold in shambles eat,
asking no questien for Conscience. I answer that the Apostle there only tells
them, that, though to eat in the Temple of Idols, that which there is offered
up to the Idol, be unlawful v. 28. yet we must not have a Scruple of eating
what we see sold in the shambles, by asking questions (out of an over timorous
conscience) whether that ox or Calf, or sheep, sold there, were not (before it
was brought to the markett) immolated to some Idol? Now what is this to our
purpose?

5. Thirdly it is objected Col. 2 16. Let no man judge you in meat nor drink,
or in respect of a Holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath. I answer by
what is here added of a new Moon it is manifest this Text only speaks of fasts
according to Judicial distinction between meat clean, and unclean, all meats
being now clean to Christians still, as above, excepting blood and strangled
meat though sold in the shambles, for this is not contrary to that S. Paul
said: All that is sold in the sambles eat.

6. Fourthly, and chiefly they object. 1. Tim. 4.3. The doctrine of devils,
forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats, which God created
to receive with thanks giving. For every creature of God is good, and nothing
is to be refused which is received with thanksgiving. For as much as concerns
our doctrine of abstaining from marriage, we have all ready answered this Text
in Point 20. n. 8. We must see now in what sense it is Devils doctrine to
abstain from meats, which God created. It can not be in that sense, in which
the Nazarites, and Recabites abstained from wine, and S. John Baptist from wine
and strong drink and from all meats almost but Locustes and wild honey coming
neither eating nor drinking: Or in which S. Timothy also abstained from wine:
or in which all Christians, as then, abstained from blood and what was
strangled or offered to Idols. The abstinence of the Manichees was Devils
doctrine: for they taught to abstain from meats which God created. Because
they said that the Devil, and not God, created some meats. Against such men S.
Paul, of all meats without exception, says, God created them. To attribute
such meats to the devils creation (and therefore to abstain from them) is to
teach the doctrine of the devils. This doctrine of the Manichees was held by
diverse more ancient Heretics as the Rhemish Testament shows in this place.
Again the doctrine of some Jews was the Doctrine of Devils, who taught that
still we must make a distinction between meats clean and unclean, and abstain
from these because the Law was given by Angels, and they said that the Angels
had revealed, that therefore this law was still to be keept, even by
Christians. But these Angels were Angels of darkness, and this was truly the
doctrine of Devils, though disguised in the shape of Angels of light. This is
the Interpretation of the most learned Tertullian, as I also showed Point 36.
n. 9.

The Conclusion to the Protestant Reader.
SVpposing these forty five Points have been with attention read by thee, it
only remains that I should press thee to answer me sincerely to this one
question. Whether in thy Conscience, and in the sight of Allmighty God, thou
can remeyn persuaded that we Roman Catholics have, so much as in any one of
these Points, hield, or forthield, any doctrine opposite to clear Scripture?
Name that Point, and read over again what we here have said of it: and see if
thy conscience does not tell thee that we have rather clearer Scripture for
it, then you for the contrary. Why then are we, who did build (in a manner)
all the Churches in England, and who taught no other doctrine in them, then
what had been delivered us at our first being made Christians, a doctrine
found so conformable to Scripture, even in these uery points, in which we stand
accused by you to most contradict Scripture, why (I say) should we not so much
as have one Church left us in one shire, or County, with free liberty to teach,
and practice that faith, which has been taught, and practiced by all our
forefathers in this Kingdom, and established by all the Laws thereof, ever
since we professed Christianity until this last Age gave birth to so many new
Religions. And this shall be the Conclusion of our Plea.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 2. move read more P. 3. l. 13. Host r. Ghost P. 4. l. 27.
determed r. determined P. 6. l. 18. 59. r. 5.9. P. 14. l. 1. whrre r. were P.
14. l. 17. offerings not r. not offering P. 17. l. 1. last r. lest P. 17. l.
18. what was r. which was P. 17. l. 25. praise to r. praise you P. 18. l. 10.
title r. little P. 25. l. 27. the rue r. the true P. 36. l. 26. Payse r. Praise
P. 42. l. 28. University, r. Universality P. 46. l. 12. nor r. or P. 51. l.
10. to r. so P. 51. l. 13. same r. some P. 57. l. 23. thy r. they P. 60. l. 3.
see r. seed P. 62. l. 27. the r. he P. 75. l. 14. adversay r. adversary P. 76.
l. 20. began r. begins P. 83. l. 29. clade r. clay P. 91. fine not be r. not
but be P. 94. l. 26. dele had l. 27. be r. been P. 96. l. 3. besser r. lesser
P. 99. l. 18. ir r. is P. 102. l. 14. they r. thy P. 106. l. 18. life r. live
P. 110. l. 2. is r. his so also in the last line. P. 127. Hears r. Hearers P.
144. l. 5. which r. whilst P. 153. l. 25. baving r. having P. 171. l. 7. our
part r. on our part P. 175. l. 6. it by r. it be by P. 179 l. 24. she r. see
P. 185. l. 25. hotty r hotly P. 239. l. 4. he r. be P. 246. l. 28. 2. r. 28. P.
310. l. 10. not keep r. keep.


