A SERMON preached at St Paul's, By HENRY MAISTERSON Fellow of St. John's
College in Cambridge.

HINC LUCEM ET POCVLA SACRA

Alma Matter

blazon or coat of arms

Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1641.

To the virtuous and Right Worshipful the Lady Delves, wife to Sir Thomas
Delves Knight and Baronet in Cheshire.
MADAM,
THe world has been dead to me of late; I wish I were as dead to it. It is
hard to make or keep a friend in adversity: and innocence is no protection; it
rather exposes unto dangers. But I intend not to write satyrs, nor to trouble
your Ladyship with any tedious or unacceptable discourse. I rather submit my
self and cause to him, who is best able to judge: and amongst other my worthy
friends, whose favor has had influence upon me, I fly unto your self for
protection, humbly entreating you to accept of my homage and service, whilst
according to my engagements I do ever remain'

Your Ladyships in all hmuble observance, HENRY MAISTERSON.

HEB. 13.18. For we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to
live honestly.
SAint Paul (for him we will suppose with all the Greek Fathers, and Saint
Augustine, Ambrose and Gregory among the Latin, to be the author of this
Epistle) knowing prayer to be the golden key that unlocketh the cabinet both of
earthly and heavenly blessings, in these words uses an argument or reason to
move the Hebrews to remember him in their prayers, and that is his confidence
upon good ground that he has a good conscience; For we trust we have a good
conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.

Which words without any rack or violence offer themselves to this division:
first, The Apostles confident persuasion, we trust: secondly, the Object of it,
that we have a good conscience: thirdly, the foundation or ground upon which
this edifice of trust which towers up to heaven is built, and that is in these
words, in all things willing to live honestly. Which words are not referred to
the predicate good conscience, as though they were a bare description thereof,
or a difference to distinguish what kind of good conscience the Apostle means,
and to be read thus, We trust we have a good conscience, or a good heart, which
is willing in all things to live honestly; or not able to fulfill the law of
God as (...) propounded unto Adam, but yet willing to perform Evangelicall
obedience, and in all things to live honestly: but they are referred to the
subject, we, (...), and are to be read thus, We, willing in all things to live
honestly, trust we have a good conscience. And so they note unto us not barely
the object of his trust, but the ground thereof. And then the reasoning stands
thus. First, To move them to pray for him, he uses this argument. If I have a
good conscience, then you are bound by a special relation to pray for me, not
only as a man but as a believer: but I have a good conscience. Therefore pray
for me. Secondly, To prove his minor, he reasons thus, He that is careful and
willing in all things to live honestly, he has a good conscience, or he may be
confident that he has a good conscience: but I am willing in all things to
live honestly. Therefore I trust I have a good conscience.

To omit the coherence of these words with the former, noted unto us in the
conjunction For, and to consider them absolutely, and in themselves, they
afford these three propositions: first, From the object of St. Paul's trust. for
that is in nature before the act conversant about it, That St. Paul had a good
conscience: secondly, From the act conversant about this object, That St. Paul
was confidently persuaded that he had a good conscience: thirdly, That he was
persuaded upon this ground, because he was careful and willing in all things
to live honestly.

First, St. Paul had a good conscience. For these words, we have a good
conscience, though read in the plural number, are to be understood in the
singular, as appears by the context, And I beseech you somewhat more
earnestly so to do, that I may be restored to you more quickly.

And here by the way, we may take notice of St. Paul's modesty ( verba haec
modestiae serviunt, says a Commentatour upon this place) who, when he is to
speak any thing that tends to his own commendation, sometimes uses the third
person, as if he spoke of some other, not of himself, 2. Cor. 12. sometimes the
plural number, as ashamed to appropriate that praise to himself, which indeed
belongs unto him. A good example for them to think upon, whose vainglorious
mouths are wont to trumper out their own praises, whilst they forget that of
the Greek Comedian, (...), nothing is more lamentable then vain glory; or that
of Chrysostom, Homil. 4. in 1. cap. Matthew. Si glorificari cupis, gloriam
despice, and eris omnibus gloriosior; but of this a word only by the way.

Now for the better understanding of this proposition, it is necessary first to
lay open the nature of conscience in general, and the several acts and
offices thereof: secondly the nature of good conscience, and the several kinds
thereof: thirdly, to show what kind of good conscience St. Paul means, when
he says, we trust we have a good conscience.

First, What conscience is. Conscience is a part of the practical
understanding, in all reasonable creatures, applying their actions to some
rule, which it conceives to be the Law of God, and determining either with
them, or against them.

It is a part: not that the understanding has parts properly, it being one
simple and undivided faculty, but by way of analogy in respect of diverse
objects and actions: And I call it a part, to show that it is a natural power,
or quality created together with the soul, and inseparable from it, and not an
act or a habit or any thing that may be lost.

Secondly, It is a part of the understanding, not of the will or affections.
For however some effects there are in the will, and affections, which proceed
from conscience, as fear and terror, which are therefore called fear and
terror of conscience; yet these are but extrinsecall effects of conscience,
and flow not immediately from it, but from the will, as from the next and
immediate cause, from conscience remotely, in respect of that influence, which
the understanding has upon the affections.

Thirdly, It is a part of the practical understanding; because conversant
about action, about things done or to be done, and not about mere speculation.

Fourthly, in all reasonable creatures; to let you see the proper subject of
conscience. For first every one that has conscience must needs have reason.
For conscience compares a man's life with his rule, which requires discourse.
And therefore things that have no life, or having life that have not reason,
cannot be said to have conscience. Secondly it must be a creature. For God the
creator of all things having no superior to impose a law upon him, and
consequently none that has either right or power to inflict any punishment,
cannot be said properly to have a conscience; yet we may conceive some analogy
betwixt some acts of his understanding, and the excusing acts of conscience
properly so called. For there being in him an eternal law or rule, which he
has purposed from eternity in all his works of creation to observe, his
understanding may reflect upon the works of his hands, compare them with this
rule, and judge them conformable thereunto. Thus God saw every thing that he
had made, and behold it was exceeding good, Genesis 1. that is very artificial,
agreeable to that idea, which God, the most skillful workman, before the
beginning had set down for himself to do all things by. Nor only does the
understanding of God reflecting upon his actions judge of that artificial
bonity which is in them, but also of the moral: For there being certain
general practical notions of good and evil naturally seated in the
understanding of God, according to which his will, the fountain of action, is
moved (for his will is not, properly to speak, the rule of it self, but is
guided by counsel) his understanding may reflect upon the moral acts of his
will, compare them with their rule, and accordingly judge them just and good,
pronouncing an approving sentence upon them, which has much analogy and
agreement with the excusing act of conscience properly so called.

Thirdly, In all reasonable creatures: because it is impossible that any
reasonable creature should be without conscience, it being a part of the
understanding; and if any seem to have lost it, they have only lost the use
thereof, as a mad man, or a drunken man has lost the use of reason, and that
but for a time. For God will one day awake those consciences that were here
asleep, give mouths to those that here were dumb, so that they shall speak,
and never cease to speak, judgment, horror, confusion, death. For the
condemning sentence of such a conscience does but remain like letters written
with the juice of Oranges to be made legible by the fire of Gods wrath.

Fourthly, Applying their actions to some rule: Here we have the proper act of
conscience, together with the object of it. Where first we are to understand
moral actions, not such as are merely natural: For these latter cannot be
comprehended in the object of conscience, none being ever so mad as to think
there was either virtue or vice in them, they being the actions not of us, but
of nature in us; and consequently conscience cannot to speak properly either
excuse or accuse us for them. Indeed it may tell us we have not done ill in
them, because they are neither good nor bad; but this is not properly to
excuse: for to excuse properly is to judge that a man has done well and
virtuously, either in a voluntary choosing of some good, which he had power to
have refused, or in a voluntary refusing some evil, which he might have chosen.

Secondly, we are to take action not strictly, for external moral action
only; but largely, as it comprehends both words and thoughts. For though
man's law extend no further then the outward man ( Hominum leges non nisi
externam honestatem requirunt, nec penetrant usque ad internum cor and animum;
ratio est, quia neque corda vident legislatores, nec ipsorum providentia
extenditur ultra civilitatem externam) yet Gods Law, which is the rule of
conscience, is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart, Heb.
4.12. And therefore the Psalmist calls it a perfect law converting the soul,
Psalm. 19.

Thirdly, all omission of moral action is hither to be referred, whether it be
direct or indirecte volita, whether it be a velle non agere, or a non velle
agere when we may and ought. For conscience bears witness of our omission as
well as of our commission, of our not doing as well as of our doing.

Fourthly, their actions: for the object of conscience is our own actions. For
conscience is a power that the soul has to reflect upon it self, and to judge
it self: And therefore not others actions, but only so far as they are made
ours, either by imputation grounded upon nature, as the sin of Adam; or else
because we are some way a cause of the sins of others, either positively by
furthering them, or privatively by not hindering them when we should and might:
And in this sense that saying of St Gregory is true, Qui non corrigit
resecanda, committit; so likewise in the same sense another prays, Lord
forgive me my other men's sins. But otherwise the sins of others, which we
are no ways guilty of, though they may be objects of our science, and must be
objects of our grief too, if we see and know them, yet they need not at all to
trouble our conscience.

Fifthly, Which it conceives to be the law of God. These words I add for a
twofold reason: 1. Because it is not necessarily required to the general
nature and working of conscience, that the thing we make conscience of should
be truly commanded; it is sufficient if conscience apprehend it to be so. Thus
some out of an erroneous principle make conscience of worshipping relics, of
adoring images, of praying to Saints: others again oppose those laudable
ceremonies which tend to order, decency and edification in the Church, though
God never required these things at their hands, because they conceive
themselves bound thereunto by a true and real command. 2. Because it is not
necessary that are party commanding or giving the law should be truly and
indeed God: it is sufficient to the general working of conscience, that
conscience conceive him so. And therefore the Heathen made conscience of those
commands which the Devil gave them in the Oracles, because they thought that
God spoke by them, and in them. Virgil gives us two examples of this in one
place of his second book of his Aeneid. Suspensi Eurypylum scitatum oracula
Phoebi
Mittimus: isque adytis haec tristia dicta reportat,
Sanguine placastis ventos, and virgin caesa,
Cum primum Iliacas, Danai, venistis ad oras;
Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litandum
Argolica: vulgi quae vox ut venit ad aures,
Obstupuere animi, gelidusque per imacucurrit
Ossa tremor, cui fata parent, quem poscat Apollo.
But it is necessary that conscience conceive both the command to be real, and
the party commanding to be truly God, else it cannot bind us to obey the
command, or to fear the commander. For God only, who is creator of
conscience, has this privilege to bind conscience: And none can give this
subjection to any, but to such a one as he apprehends to be more then a
creature. And therefore the Heathen were wont to call those that were sent to
inquire of their oracles (...) or (...), vel ex (...), quasi Dei curam
gerentes, and the ships wherein they were sent, (...), and their sacrifices,
(...).

And if any object and say, That we are and ought to be obedient to the laws of
men for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. And therefore humane laws bind conscience.
I answer, That humane laws bind not conscience properly by inherent virtue in
themselves, but by virtue of the general law of God, which commands
obedience unto men; as water may burn or scald, not by any natural quality
from it self, but by heat received from fire: and a breach is made in
conscience, not simply because man's law is neglected, but because Gods law is
broken. For, Whosoever resists the power resists the ordinance of God, Romans
13.2.

Lastly, Determining either with them, or against them, which is another act of
conscience, and that is, after application of our actions to their rule, to
judge of their conformity or difformity thereunto.

But for the better understanding of conscience, consider with me these
distinct acts, and offices of conscience.

First, to know and keep the law and rule which a man thinks himself bound to
observe: and conscience in this respect is called (...).

Secondly, To take notice of a man's actions before they are done to consider
what he is about to do, after, to remember and bear witness of them upon
occasion, judging of the entity and existence of the action, as whether done or
not done, whether with such and such circumstances, or without.

Thirdly, To apply the action to the rule, and compare these two together;
which act is called (...), and from it conscience in the Schoolmans opinion
has its name, because it is a knowing of the action together with the rule, or
an applying of these two together.

Fourthly, To judge of the quality of the action according to the rule, or of
its agreeing or disagreeing to the same; and this act is called (...), the last
and perfectest act of reason, or of conscience. And because every law
contains two things. 1. A command of obedience: 2. A threatening of punishment
in case obedience be not performed: First conscience judges whether the
command be kept or transgressed, and consequently whether the action for
quality be good or evil, which is to excuse or accuse: Secondly, It judges of
the guilt and desert, whether the punishment threatened belong to the agent for
this action or not, and so absolveth or condemns.

These are the intrinsecall acts of conscience, which flow immediately from it;
but by reason of that influence which the understanding has upon the
affections, there is a sift act of conscience which is to comfort and torment
in respect of good and bad actions past; to spur on, to bridle and restrain
in respect of good and bad actions to come: which it does by stirring up those
four principal affections of the soul, as Aquinas calls them, viz. Joy and
Sorrow, Hope and Fear; but this is but an extrinsecall effect of conscience, as
I have already showed. All this is done by a practical syllogism thus, --

Every one that commits murder transgresses the law of God, and deserves
everlasting damnation: But, says the conscience of him that is guilty, I have
committed such an act, at such a time, in such a place, which is murder:
Therefore I have transgressed the law of God, etc.

He that commits murder transgresses the law of God, and deserves
everlasting damnation: there is the first act of conscience, viz. knowledge of
the command, and of the punishment due to the transgression of it. But I have
committed such an act, in such a place, at such a time; there is the second act
of conscience, which is to remember and bear witness of a man's actions,
whether done, or not done, whether with such and such circumstances or without.
Which is murder: there is the third act, application of the general knowledge
to this particular action. Therefore I have transgressed the law of God: there
is accusation; and deserved everlasting damnation; there is sentence of
condemnation. And upon this sentence in the understanding, follows fear and
terror in the affections. And thus much for the explication of the general
nature of conscience, and the several acts and offices thereof.

The next thing that I am to insist upon, is the nature of good conscience, and
the several kinds thereof. Conscience thus described is either good or bad: A
good conscience is such a one as is conformable to that rule, by which it ought
to be guided; A bad one, is such a one as wants conformity thereunto. Both may
be distinguished according to their several subjects, into the good and bad
conscience of men, and of Angels.

Man's conscience (for that only we are to speak of now) is good when
conformable to the will of God revealed in the Scriptures. Now because the
Scripture has two parts, answering to the twofold estate of man before and
since the fall, viz. the Law and the Gospel, hence it comes to pass that good
conscience is twofold; either Legally good, which has that perfection which
the law requires; or Evangelically good, which has that perfection which the
Gospel accepts unto salvation: Of the former sort was the conscience of Adam
before his fall; of the latter sort was the conscience of Adam after his
repentance. I might be large in showing the difference, betwixt these two kinds
of good conscience; but I haste. This latter may again be distinguished into an
upright conscience, and a peaceable conscience. An upright conscience is a
conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ, or, a conscience purified by
faith, such as is in every man that has repented him truly of his sins past,
being for the present careful and willing above all things in all things to
live honestly.

There are these things required to it.

First, That it be well principled, and know in some good measure Gods
commandments, accounting them the rule by which all action is to be guided.
According to that Psalm. 119. verse. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a
light unto my paths. For as it is necessarily required to the general nature
and working of conscience, that it have some principles which it may upon
occasion apply to particular actions; so it is essential to a good or an
upright conscience, that it know the true rule, and be informed with good and
honest principles, so that so far as conscience is either ignorant of the
true rule, or guided by a false, so far it is not good, but evil and corrupt:
and if it be either altogether ignorant of any of the main commandments, the
practice of which is necessarily required to a Christian life, as namely, that
we must believe in Christ, repent of our sins, and the like; or entertain any
principle, which does by direct and immediate consequence overthrow any of
these, it is not only secundum quid, but simpliciter and absolute mala, and
falls short of that evangelicall goodness, which is spoken of in my text.
And because knowledge of the commandment and things to be practiced does
necessarily presuppose knowledge of the creed and of things to be believed, it
being impossible he should not err in principles of action, who is ignorant of
the fundamental points of faith; for example, he that thinks there is no
God, or no Christ, or that they regard not men's actions, to reward the good and
punish the bad, or that is ignorant of any of these three propositions, he can
never lay down this for a practical conclusion, That God is to be served, or
Christ to be obeyed: For he that comes to God must believe that he is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. hence it
comes to pass that a knowledge and assent to the fundamental points of
faith, at least general and confused, is necessarily required to integrity of
conscience, as being the foundation of that practical knowledge, which ought
to be the rule of our actions.

Secondly, As the second act of conscience in general was to take notice of a
man's actions, so it is required in the second place to the nature of an upright
conscience, that out of a godly solicitude and fear to offend God, it observe a
man's carriage, and take notice of his actions; that it consider before his
actions what he is about to do, that it remember and bear witness afterward
what he has done, that so they may be applied to their rule: And this is actio
intellectus imperaeta a voluntate. And therefore those men that out of a
natural strength of memory, or because of some extraordinary impression that
some notorious sins have made in them, remember their evil actions against
their will, whereas they would forget them, that so they might be secure; or
those that out of carnal security take no notice of their actions, but do
things rashly, hand over head, and afterward carelessely forget what they have
done, have not integrity of conscience. I speak not here of that forgetfulness
which proceeds from a defect in memory, but either from a custom of sin,
as those that have got such a habit of swearing that they know not when they
swear; or from gross security, and want of fear of the Lord.

Thirdly, That it apply a man's actions to the right rule impartially. And this
likewise is actio intellectus imperata a voluntate, and proceeds from that
godly solicitude, which I spoke of before. And therefore those men that apply
not their actions at all to the law of God, or if they do, do it partially,
grossly favoring themselves in their sins as being loath to find them out or
to part with them, have not integrity of conscience. Nay, these are far from
having it: For, Nemo periculosius peccat, quam qui peccata defendit, None sin
more desperately then those that find out colors and excuses to cover and
extenuate their sin. And this impartial application must be before and after
our actions: before, that sin may be avoided; after, that if we have sinned
we may repent. Of the former we have a notable example in Joseph, who when his
Mistress tempted him to that wicked act, consented not immediately unto her,
but out of a godly solicitude and fear to offend God, applies the action to
the law of God, and upon impartial application finding it to be unlawful,
returns her this answer, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? Of the latter we have an example in the Prophet David, Psalm.
119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies. And the
want of this impartial application, as it is the cause of men's lying in sin
without repentance, so it is the cause of their first fall into sin. Hoc nos
pessimos facit, quod nemo vitam suam respicit, says Seneca,

For upon impartial application necessarily follows the fourth act of an
upright conscience, which is the conclusion of the former premises, to wit, a
true and sincere judgment of the action according to the commandment, at least
so far as conscience shall be enlightened and enabled to judge; or a
determination, that those particular actions are good, which are indeed such,
and that those are evil, which are in their nature evil; And this likewise is
either before or after our actions. If this practical judgment of an upright
conscience be before our actions, then the effect of it is cohibere a malo, and
instigare ad bonum, to spur us on to the practice of good, and to restrain us
effectually from evil: which efficacious power the understanding has upon the
will and affections, and consequently upon the whole man, virtute prioris actus
voluntatis, by virtue of a former complete and peremptory resolution of the
will, whereby we are resolved to choose that which is good, and refuse that
which is evil, where ever we meet with it; which is that very desire in all
things to live honestly, which the Apostle speaks of in my text. For that
desire which is the foundation of the Apostles trust, is not a bare velleity,
but a completa voluntas, which when he came to particulars put him upon action.
And therefore those men whose consciences put them not upon the practice of
good, nor restrain them effectually from evil; but suffer them to live in the
wilful omission of good, or commission of evil, have not integrity of
conscience.

If the action be past, and bad for quality, then the judgment of an upright
conscience is to accuse and condemn, that is, to judge the sin worthy
damnation: And the effect of this is grief and sorrow, not only for the
punishment we have made our selves obnoxious to, but for the sin it self. And
therefore seared consciences, which never smite men for their sins; and secure
consciences, which do it but sometimes, and for grosser sins; and on the
other side wicked tormenting consciences, which cause grief only for the
punishment and not for the offense (such as was Cain's, My sin is greater
then I can bear) these kinds of consciences are not upright.

But if the action past be good for matter and manner, then the act of
conscience should be to excuse and absolve, that is, to pronounce it such as
God is well pleased with, and does accept to salvation in Christ: And the
effect of this is joy and comfort, such as none can express, and such as a
carnal man cannot conceive.

But because no action is accepted with this kind of acceptance, unless it
proceed from justifying faith, ( For without faith it is impossible to please
God to salvation, Heb. 11.6.) and consequently from an upright conscience,
which is a necessary attendant of faith; (For faith purifieth the heart) hence
it comes to pass that a man cannot know that any act he does is such, unless
he know his conscience to be upright and purged by faith: which reflexed act,
because it necessarily presupposes integrity of conscience, (for a man cannot
know that his conscience is pure unless it be so) therefore this is not
essential to integrity, but to peace of conscience. And so I proceed to the
second kind of good conscience, which is a peaceable conscience.

A peaceable conscience includes all that I have said of an upright
conscience, and superaddeth something more. For though every peaceable
conscience be an upright conscience; yet every upright conscience is not
always able to speak peace. That which it superaddeth is a power to reflect
upon it self, and to testify that it is upright, and purged with the blood of
Christ. For as a man may be alive, and not know that he is alive, as a child in
his mothers womb, or a man in some distemper; so it is possible that a man may
have faith and a good conscience, and yet either through his own weakness, or
some other extraordinary distemper or temptation, not know for the present that
his conscience is good. But when he is confidently persuaded upon good ground,
that all his sins are pardoned, and that his person is justified and at peace
with God, then he has not only uprightness but peace of conscience.

And so I have done with the second thing I was to treat of, the nature of good
conscience in general and the kinds of it: I pass unto the third. And that
is, what kind of good conscience S.t Paul means when he says, We trust we
have a good conscience.

First, His words are not to be understood of a conscience Legally good, or at
the bar of Justice. For it implies a contradiction, that any son of fallen
Adam should have such a conscience: for then he should be fallen and not
fallen; fallen because a son of fallen Adam, not fallen because his conscience
were legally good. For this is the sentence of the law, Cursed is every one
that abides not in all things that are written in the book of the law to do
them. it must therefore be understood of a conscience Evangelically good, or at
the bar of mercy.

Secondly, An upright conscience must be understood, and not a peaceable one:
For though without doubt St Paul had a peaceable conscience, and these very
words do imply as much, because he was persuaded upon good ground that his
conscience was good; yet that goodness which is the object of his trust, is
goodness of integrity, not of tranquillity; because his trust is built upon
this ground, that he was willing in all things to live honestly: which
necessarily infers integrity but not tranquillity of conscience; because a
man may desire in all things to live honestly, and yet sometime for the present
not have peace of conscience.

Thus you see the meaning of the proposition, St Paul had an upright conscience.

This I might demonstrate a priori, from the causes of integrity, as 1. The
Spirit of God, the chief author thereof, which was not wanting to St Paul. 2.
The word of God, the external instrument, which St Paul was not ignorant of.
3. Faith resting upon the promises of that word, the internal instrument
thereof, wherewith he did abound. I might likewise prove it a posteriori, and
show you that St Paul's whole life after his conversion, which lasted from the
year of our Saviors passion, till the fourth year before the destruction of
Jerusalem (in all, about thirty seven years) was nothing else but a continual
exercise of an upright conscience. And here I might show you what he did for
conscience sake, how he traveled to preach the word of God in Arabia, in
Galatia and phrygia, in Syria, Asia and Italy, in France, Spain and other
countries; and that in the mean time whereas he might (as good reason he might)
waiting on the altar have been partaker with the altar, he notwithstanding
labored working with his hands, that he might not be burdensome to any, 1.
Cor. 4. He wronged no man, corrupted no man, defrauded no man, 2. Cor. 7. It Is
not his own testimony of himself, but the testimony of the spirit of truth by
him, and of him.

I might here show likewise what he suffered for conscience sake: of the Jews
five times he received forty stripes save one, thrice he was beaten with rods,
once stoned; he was stocked at Philippi, after again apprehended at Jerusalem,
kept prisoner two years at Caesarea, from thence sent bound to Rome, where he
was put to death by Nero, that sanguisuga, that cruel and blood-thirstie
tyrant. But that time which is remaining bids me make haste.

First, then it follows from this proposition, That every man is bound to get
integrity of conscience. For what St Paul says here of himself, is not proper
to him, but common to all believers: And therefore if St. Paul, not as St Paul
but as a believer, have an upright conscience, it follows secundum id
generis, quod est in specie, That every true believer has an upright
conscience, and that every man is bound to get one.

Here likewise vanishes, like the morning dew before the sun, the opinion of
those that are so far from goodness themselves, that they think there is no
such thing in rerum natura, in the wide world, as good conscience, that the
state of regeneration is but preciseness, that true holiness is but an idea
or an ens rationis, a Plato's commonwealth or a mere fancy created in the
heads of some fond and scrupulous men; That think with the Thnetopsychitae that
the souls of men are mortal, and perish with their bodies; or with the
Sadduces and Simon Magus that there is no resurrection; or with Pope Leo the
tenth, that the story of the birth, death and resurrection of Christ is but
futilis and anilis fabula, an old-wifes tale, fit for nothing but to fear
fools, and keep people in awe, or perhaps to be a bait to catch such fish as St
Peter fished for, that have their mouths full of silver; or that think with the
Atheist that there is no God, or at least with Epicurus, that there is no
providence, that forsooth it cannot stand with the majesty of God to regard
what is done in this inferior world (scilicet is superis labor est) making
God, as Tertullian complains, Otiosum and inexercitum neminem in rebus
humanis. But this web is not worth sweeping down: I will not therefore honor
the heresy (pardon my mistake, I cannot afford it so good a name, because it
is a universal revolt) but the Apostasy, the Atheism so much as to spend time
to coufute it; I will rather turn my arguments against them into prayers to God
for them, that if it be possible, the thought of their hearts may be forgiven
them: for they are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.
And for our selves, let it ever be our humble prayer to Almighty God, that of
all judgments he would keep from us spiritual judgments, blindness of mind,
hardness of heart, a reprobate sense, etc. Ever praying as the Church Letany
directs us, From all false doctrine and heresy, from hardness of heart and
contempt of thy word and commandments, good Lord deliver us. And, Grant we
beseech the, O Lord, that we may never make shipwreck of faith and good
conscience, the Ark and ship wherein faith is preserved.

And so I proceed to a just censure of those that neglect integrity of
conscience: and here it is no less then a wonder to behold how conscience is
neglected on every side, which yet is not so wonderful as lamentable.

The covetous man sells the integrity of his conscience for a little red and
white earth, one of the basest things in the world, if we except the party that
adores it, and makes it his God: which when he has got, the Chest he putetth
it into may be said to possess it as truly as he. For it keeps it (clausum
possidet arca Jovem) and he does no more: For he is afraid to use it. Quaerit,
and inventis miser abstinet, and timet uti. The ambitious man sells it for
the thing called Honor which can neither be got nor enjoyed without labor and
travail. Fructus honos oneris, fructus honoris onus. And therefore the Hebrew
(...) which signifies honor comes a radice (...) which signifies ponderosum
esse, to be heavy or burdensome. To which we may apply that of St. Augustine,
Qui te amat, non te cognoscit; qui te contemnunt, ipsi te intelligunt. The
envious man, for a little (...), or a short rejoicing at the misery of his
brethren. The vain glorious man, for the breath of the multitude, which he can
enjoy no longer then he is every man's servant, Vniversis singulisque servit
servus gloriae. The adulterer, for a momentany dalliance, which perhaps leaves
rottenness behind it in his bones.

The proud person that doteth upon apparel, the thing that blazons man's
downfall and the devils conquest, puts of integrity of conscience as a wear out
of fashion, to put on a fantastic garment, which may force the beholders into
wonder, not so much at the strangeness of the unwonted habit as the monstrous
folly of the party that wears it. Nazianzen affords these no better a name then
silk-wormes or butterflies; and doubtless such ridiculous creatures they are
in the eyes of God, and his Saints and Angels, who value not the adorning of
the outward man, but the comely ornament of an upright and undefiled conscience.

The beastly intemperate drunkard and glutton (pardon the weakness of the
expression) chops away the integrity of his conscience for a sin which turns
men into swine, with such devilish charms, that they would not leave their
brutish nature for their former reason; or if you will, for a pleasure scarce
two fingers long, quae non durat nisi quantum durat transitus ille per gulam,
which continues but whilst the meat passes from mouth to stomach; and that too
is but an anteambulo to usher in a thousand pains and distempers. Such
pleasures as these are but (...), deceitful mistresses, or rather (...),
bitter-sweet delights, or, pleasures mixed with pain: Of which St. Cyprian
excellently, Voluptatem vicisse voluptas est maxima, The greatest pleasure, is
to overcome these pleasures.

The sacrilegious Church-robber puts out the integrity of his conscience, by
putting forth his unhallowed hand to purloyn that which is sacred, and to eat
the forbidden fruit, upon which God has set a noli me tangere. This stole a
good conscience from Adam, and cast him out of paradise, whilst he robbed God
of his forbidden fruit; and I fear it has deprived many a son of Adam, not
only of the integrity of his conscience, but of his earthly inheritance.

I Will add but one instance more, and that is those restless spirits, whose
chief study it is, without call from God, by wicked contrivement and sinful
practices to enervate and weaken that wholesome established government, which
through the provident care of virtuous kings and religious parliaments has a
long time flourished and still does flourish (thanks be to God and a good
King) both in Church and state. These sell integrity of conscience for swarms
of discontented thoughts, whereby they do but turn themselves into hives of
unnumbred cares, sorrows and passions, make themselves in an especial manner
the outlawryes of heaven, and sometimes procure their own just and deserved
punishment.

Thus I have run through some sins no less dangerous then common: it would
not be hard, were it not too tedious, to do the like in all professions; but
I Will only instance in one, without private spleen to place or person, and that
is the unconscionable tradesman: And for the rest, because time will not
permit, I leave their own consciences to make the application.

A man would bless himself to think what a world of mysteries are found out in
every trade, what tricking and counterfesance to delude the sense, what
intricate devices of sophistry and dissimulation, what lying, equivocating,
perhaps swearing and forswearing, and all this for the getting of a little
money, which when it is lawfully got is but (...), Luke 16.9. that is, not Mamon
about which the sons of men use to be unrighteous, as some understand the
words; but Mamona fallax, so Beza, that is, deceivable and uncertain riches,
when compassed by lawful means, and no fit objects for us to trust upon, being
such things as are but got out of the bowels of the earth, and which they that
have them are forced many times (like Euclio in Plautus) to hide there again.
And yet notwithstanding how ordinary is it with men, for the getting of this
trash, to transgress both against religion and reason, as if they hoped that
after this life there were nothing to be hoped for; and to violate the laws of
justice in their unequal weights and measures, in their abusing ignorant and
unskilful chapmen, whereas commutative justice observes proportionem
arithmeticam, an arithmeticall proportion, which is immutably one and the same
in respect of all persons of what quality soever. Such as these sell integrity
of conscience for gain, and yet gain nothing by that bargain but the loss of
their souls, whilst with the golden book they swallow down the worm of
conscience, and barter away their own eternal happiness for very trifles,
which, if they did but like the good merchant buy that pearl our Savior speaks
of, Matthew. 13. should as far as were convenient as a mantissa or an overplus
be cast in at their bargain. But if any shall make profession of religion
profits stirrup to get up by, and bait craft with humility, rough casting his
countenance as if by an hypocritical monopoly he had ingrost all honesty and
integrity of conscience, that he may the more easily deceive, his case is far
worse then the former. Is religion grown now to be an art of deceiving? or does
he deserve the name of Christian, whose chief study it is site mentiri, id
est, mentiri ut lucro sit, nec tamen possis deprehendi, as Erasmus speaks.
Nay I must tell him heis stark naught as well as the former, and doubleth his
fault by seeming good. And if any notwithstanding this persuasion shall still
persist, either in this or in any other sinful way, let them go on to please
themselves, and displease their God in their over greedy pursuit of
unprofitable vanity. Let me only have an upright conscience for my portion,
(...), as Isocrates of virtue; and let me never want it till I envy them.

And for our selves, if we delight not to weave the web of our future woe, let
it be our chiefest care to get, and having got, to keep integrity of
conscience. I Will add but two motives to move you thereunto; A good conscience
will be your best friend, and a bad conscience will be your worst enemy.

1. A bad conscience will be your worst enemy. It deprives us for the present
of union with God, of communion with Christ, of interest in his promises, of
protection of his angels, and of title to heaven; and when God shall awake it
and arm it against us, it will sting us with such torments, as I pray God we
may rather know by relation then experience. An ancient Father calls this
horror of conscience, primitias infernalis flammae; and I may call it a
walking hell. For our Savior himself seems to intimate that the rackings of
a self-accusing conscience are the greatest part of their torments that are
condemned to that dungeon where darkessen puts on her blackest garment.

2. A good conscience will be our best friend. It will be our most
plain-dealing friend, our fastest friend, and our potentest friend.

1. Our most plain-dealing friend. Some are flattering friends and will not
speak and inform men of their miscarriages, but rather make them believe that
all their vices are virtues, and all their dusky actions chrystalline. Nimis
sciti sycophantae, to use Plautus his phrase, men that live altogether out of
themselves studying other men's humors. Like Gnatho in Terence, Quicquid dicunt
laudo, id rursum si negant, laudo id quoque: negat quis? nego; art? aio. Others
again are fearful friends, and dare not speak lest they incur displeasure,
and indeed all men naturally are displeased with those that inform them of
their misdoings, especially those that are great, and unwonted to be crossed in
their desires. These many times reward good counsel with ill turns, and account
real injuries the just recompense of wholesome reproof: witness John the
Baptist, who lost his head for telling Herod it was not lawful for him to keep
his brothers wife. Witness Calisthenes, who lost his life, not for betraying
Alexander to others, but because he would not betray Alexander to himself, and
account him worthy of divine worship, as all his detestable flatterers did.
Witness St paul in my text, who, if St Chrysostoms testimony be true in his
first book adversus vituperatores vitae monasticae, was slain by Nero for
diswading an harlot of his from prostituting her self to his ungodly desires.
The observation of which practices of great ones caused a witty speech to fall
from a famous man of our times, that whosoever should follow truth too near the
heels it might happily strike out his teeth. And in this regard the most are
afraid to admonish, especially great ones when they do amiss, and all
generally are shie and loath to speak truth. But now a good conscience neither
desires to flatter us, nor fears to tell us the truth, be we what we will or
can be however it be taken.

2. It is our fastest friend. The relation betwixt man and wife is a near
relation; but the relation betwixt a man and his conscience is nearer.
Conscience lies with us, sits with us, rides with us; a man may as soon fly
from himself as from his conscience. Jonathan never adhered so to David, though
the text says, he loved him, as his own soul. Nisus never stuck so close to
Euryalus, though he desired by his own death to ransom the others life, Me,
me, adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum, etc. Nor This be to her beloved
Pyramus, though she endeavored to accompany him after death, Quique, a me morte
revelli Heu sola peteras: poteris nec morte revelli. I say none of these did so
adhere to other, as good conscience will to us; when riches, when friends when
parents, when life and breath forsake us, good conscience can, yea cannot
choose but cleave unto us:

Thirdly, It is our potentest friend. Good conscience is the darling of the
Almighty, which if we do but continue faithful in her service will crown us
with peace of conscience here, and hereafter with eternal happiness. For
though these two may happily be severed for some time, as I have already
showed, yet the fruit of constancy in righteousness is peace even in this
life. And therefore St. Augustine calls them duas sorores; and he that is
constant in his love to the one, shall be sure to be beloved of the other. For
integrity and peace, like Martha and Mary, dwell under one roof. O sweet and
blessed name of peace, the beauty of heaven, the desire of earth, the joy of
angels, that every good, and every thing, that all that man delights in! Who
but a man possessed with frenzy would not labor for thee? who but a cruel
tyrant against his own soul can be content with any other reward but thee? o
selix conscientia jucunditas (cries out holy Augustine, as in an ecstasy)
paradisus delitiarum, palatium Dei, thalamus Christi, habitaculum Spiritus
sancti: Tu in terra ad huc es, and in caelis habitas. O happy, thrice happy
peace of conscience; thou art yet on earth, and yet thou dwell in heaven, or
rather thou changest the earth thou art in, into heaven, what have not the
blessed Saints done for thee? what have not the crowned martyrs suffered with
thee? Blessed is that soul which possesses the, or rather which thou
possessest. For it has in deepest sorrow height of joy, prosperity in
adversity, liberty in captivity, and life in death. It Is an instrument that 's
sweetly tuned, it is an angel clad in flesh, it is a mint of golden thoughts,
it is a world of joy and concord, where there is nothing but halcyon and summer
days of peace. Happy is the man that is in such a case, yea blessed is he that
has peace of conscience for his portion.

And now me thinks it is labor in vain for Cosmographers to spend themselves
in finding out the place where paradise was seated. It was not the whole earth,
as some conceive; nor a place mounted higher then the middle region of the air,
as others; nor betwixt the tropicks in the torrid zone under the equinoctial;
nor in the country of Eden, or in the parting of the two regions Assyria and
Babylonia: It is not in your pleasant gardens, though they perhaps may excel
those of Alcinous mentioned by Homer, when in the pride of their spring they
are bespangled with all choice of eye-pleasing flowers; nor in your orchards of
delight, surpassing the Elysian fields, adorned with variety of beautiful
walks, and those shaded with the green canopy of every pleasant and fruitful
tree: It is not in your glorious wardrobes, though they perhaps be filled with
garments of silk, and of broydered work, of fine linen coral and pearl: It is
not upon your couches of Ivory, nor in venereous embraces upon beds of down,
decked with coverings of tapistry, and of carved work, perfumed with myrrh,
aloes, and synamon. It is not on your richly furnished tables, though they
abounded with all variety of creatures that earth, and sea, and air can afford:
But if you will needs know where to find out this place of bliss, believe me
(for you may) it ever was, and is, and there only is, where there is
tranquillity and peace of conscience.

Lastly, good conscience, if we continue faithful in her service, will crown
us with eternal happiness. What preferments has she procured at the
merciful hands of God, for all those that have lived and dyed in her service?
How does joy now triumph in the eyes, and comfort lodge in the hearts of all
those, that whilst they were here upon earth were careful with St. Paul to
keep a consciencevoyd of offense toward God, and toward men. How must their
souls needs be full of angels pleasures, and swell with overflowing delights,
how do they bury the miseries that befell them here, in the triumph of that
conquest which they have obtained over the enemies of their salvation? Though
my speech should be as endless, as their joys, yet would it come too short of
a full expression. For the excellency of happiness can neither come out of the
speaker by relation, nor enter into the hearer by apprehension, yet I Will tell
you what S. Augustine says of it, in the 22. Chap. of his meditation. O tu
vita quam praeparavit Deus iis qui diligunt eum: vita vitalis, vita beata, vita
tranquilla, vita secura, vita pulchra, vita munda, vita casta, vita ignara
mortis, nescia tristitiae, etc. Quanto plus valeo mecum considerare, tanto plus
amore tui langueo. And no marvel, holy Augustine. For those that enjoy this
life behold to their unspeakable comfort the host royal of the blessed Angels,
the holy spirits of Saints departed, the noble army of martyrs, which now shine
much brighter then those flames, which here put a period to their transitory
lives, the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the
prophets, and which is more, the most sacred humility of our Savior, and his
comely face, fairer then the sons of men, clearer then the sun, and that
which infinitely transcends what is or can be said, the glorious presence of
him, who is all in all; a power ineffable, a virtue infinite, a light by
abundant clarity invisible. I will therefore conclude with S: Augustines
exclamation, O ergo felix ju ounditas, and jucunda felicitas sanctos videre,
cum sanctis esse, and sanctum esse; Deum videre, and Deum in aeternum habere,
and ultra.

God of his infinite mercy teach our consciences now whilst we live to nature,
to die to sin, that so when we die to nature we may live with him in this
blissful life of glory.

FINIS.

