Greenwich-PARK: A COMEDY. ACTED AT THE Theater Royal, BY THEIR MAJESTY'S
SERVANTS.

Written by WILLIAM MOUNTFORT.

LONDON: Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball in Cornhill, R. Bentley,
in Russel Street in Covent Garden, and A. Roper, at the Mitre in Fleet Street.
And are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. M DC XCI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ALGERNOON Earl of ESSEX, Viscount Malden, Baron Capell
of Hadham, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Hartford.
My Lord,
THE General good Character the World gives of your Honor and Virtues, has
emboldened me to beg your Favorable Protection of this Comedy: And though it
be a hard matter for so young a Pretender to escape the industrious Ill Nature
and Malice of the Town, yet I shall have this satisfaction, that if they will not
allow me a Judge of Poetry, they must of Persons; and they cannot impartially
disapprove of my choice in a Patron.

Indifferent Authors in most Ages have been encouraged and preserved under the
Clemency of the Nobility, in hopes they might be better: But the severity of
our Wits would have the first Plays which are now written, equal to the best of
Ben Johnson, or Shakespeare: And yet they do not show that esteem for their
Works which they pretend to, or else are not so good Judges as they would be
thought: When we can see the Town throng to a Farce, and Hamlet not bring
Charges: But notwithstanding they will be Critics, and will scarce give a man
leave to mend; like the rigid Precepts and manner of the most Famous Master of
Westminster: Who, though he has bred the greatest Men of Parts and Learning in
this Age; yet I believe, if the Impatience and Spirit of his Knowledge could
have submitted to the slower Capacities of his Scholars, he might have made
many more.

Poetry, I must confess, has ever been my Delight, as Honor and Goodness, your
Lordships. And the* I can never expect to be as perfect in the first, as you
are in the last; I am sure of two good supports from such Excellencies; and
which your Lordship never omitted expressing to those who have seek'd your
Protection.

Your early Gallantry for the Liberty and Welfare of your Country, in so
needful a time (and where the small number of Volunteers magnifies your
Lordships being one) proves the Spirit of your Predecessors is left behind 'em:
And though this Nation has heartily mourned the loss of one of 'em; Yet the
death of a good Subject, like that of a good King, is best dispensed with by
the Public, when his Virtues shine in his Offspring.

I would avoid the Censure of Flattery, and of tyring your Lordship with the
Commendations which you justly deserve: but perhaps may not desire. I have only
this to say, that it is not to be doubted, but the Spirit which has inspired
this Noble Undertaking of waiting on your Prince, will merit a Providence to
preserve your Person. And as you will be a Credit to his Camp, may you return
to be an Ornamemt to his Court. And as you are the Pride of our present young
Nobility, may you be a Pattern for the future. Then I shall wish for the fancy
of Mr. Cowley, with the Judgment of Mr. Dryden, to express my Sense of your
Worth: But in the mean time, I humbly entreat your Lordship would accept of the
Hearty well Wishes, and perfect (though distant) Respect

Of Your Lordships most Humble, Obedient, and Devoted Servant, WILLIAM
MOUNTFORT.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
SIr Thomas Reveller, an old wicked lewd Knight. Mr. Lee. Both jolly Citizens,
and Companions with Sir Thomas. Mr. Raison a Grocer. Mr. Nokes. Mr. Sasaphras,
a Drugster. Mr. Underhill.
L. Worthy, a young Nobleman newly returned from Travel. Mr. Hodgson. Y.
Reveller, Son to Sir Thomas, a wild young Fellow, kept by Mrs. Raison, and
Courts Florella for a Wife. Mr. Mountfort. Sir William Thoughtless, a foolish
Knight. Mr. Bowen. A Beaux. Mr. Bowman. Bully Bounce. Mr. Bright.
WOMEN.
Dorinda, a private Mistress, kept by my Lord Worthy, and in Love with Young
Reveller. Mrs. Barry. Daughters to my Lady Hazard. Florella in love with Y.
Reveller. Violante with the L. Worthy. Florella, Mrs. Mountfort. Violante, Mrs.
Lassels.
Mrs. Raison, in love with Y. Reveller. Mrs. Knight. Lady Hazard. Mrs. Osborn.
Aunt to Dorinda. Mrs. Corey. Constable, Watch, Masqueraders, etc.
SCENE GREENWICH.

Prologue.
WIth the sad prospect of a Long Vacation,
The Fear of War, and Danger of the Nation;
Hard we have toiled this Winter for new Plays,
That we might live in these Tumultuous Days.
Sad Days for us, when War's loud Trumpets sound,
Nothing but Beaux and Parsons will be found:
Look to it, you Men of Battle, of Renown,
They Will claw your Ladies off, when you are gone:
Servants for ^^^^ity. Your Beaux's of Sense:
Will's Coffee-House is the Office of Intelligence;
And for the Masks who hunt the smaller Fry,
Their Chocolet-House will their wants supply:
Our Play presents you with all sorts of Men,
From keeping Courtier, to the horned Citizen,
Whose handsome Wife brings in the constant Gain.
At Greenwich lies the Scene, where many a Lass
Has bin Green-Gown'd upon the tender Gross.
If Flamstead's Stars would make a true Report,
Our City Breed's much mended by the Court:
What Wagers about Mons were-lately laid?
Had all that Money to the King been paid,
It might have saved the Tax of each Man's head.
I heard a Shopkeeper not long since swear,
If England's old Militia had been there,
We had spoiled the Monsieur's Projects for this Year.
Since they depend so on their own Commanders,
Why weren't the Royal Regiment sent for Flanders?
With English hearts of Oak, and Horns well steeled,
To Butt the Puny Monsieur from the Field.
But those who threaten him so much, I fear,
Were they encampt where any Foe was near,
Would wish themselves behind their Counters here.
Epilogue.
WEll, Sirs, is it Peace or War, that you declare?
I am ready armed, so is my Second here.
If you're displeased with what you have seen to Night;
Behind Southampton House we'll do you right,
Who is it dares draw against me and Mrs. Knight?
Be kind, Gallants, if you can mercy show,
Press not the Plant which of it self does how.
Ladies, your Goodness is our best support,
The Men must like the Play, if you are for it.
And sure the Vizards will not cry it down,
Since our Intrigues resemble still their own,
Here all your Coquet tricks to the life are shown.
Will you take us to answer your desires?
We look like two kind keeping Country Squires.
You Will say we are Chits, too slight and little made,
You Will scarce find larger in this Age, I Gad.
For such a Pigmy-Race are now ^^me up;
They Are but half sprouted, like a second Crop.
The Fathers Sins are in their Offspring shown,
And each now Puny Chit's an elder Son.
Nature disowns the slender half-got Race,
Every Lath-Carcass, with his small Pigs-face,
By Art endeavors Nature to outdo,
And since he cannot pass for a Man,'s a Beaux.
If such as these your favor, Ladies, find,
To Knight and me, as Pages, pray be kind.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Grocer's Shop.
Enter Raison, his Wife and Servant. Mrs. Raise. ARE all my things carried to
the Waterside, Sirrah?


Serve. Yes, Madam, and the Gally with an Awning, is ready to carry your
Ladyship to Greenwich.


Raise. A Gally! why a Gally, Wife?


Mrs. Raise. Because you will not allow me a Coach, Husband.


Raise. And because I will not allow you a Coach with two Horses, you will have a
Boat with four Men?


Mrs. Raise. Yes, a Barge with twelve, if I had my Will: Must I jolt about in a
Hackney, or trapes a Foot like my Inferior Neighbors? Since you will make no
distinction of me at Land, I Will make some my self by Water.


Raise. I don't know what you would have; you go where you please, and come when
you please; live how you please, and do what you please; have Money as you
please, and yet I can never please you!


Mrs. Raise. Therefore I Will have those that can.


Raise. Yes, I suppose you have.


Mrs. Raise. It Is fit I should; did you not promise me when I married you, I
should keep my Coach, and live like what I was?


Raise. A Beggar.


Mrs. Raise. Did I marry you when I could have had --


Raise. No body else!


Mrs. Raise. The best of Quality; but that I credited your Protestations: Did
you not swear, I should outshine the best of all the City, and yet deny me a
sneaking 100 l. a Year for a Coach, which almost every Tradesman keeps his Wife
for a Twelvemonth, tho he break at the Years end for it?


Raise. They deserve it, when their Vanity exceeds their Ability: You took an
Oath too, Wife, to Love, Honor, and Obey me; but you have taken your own
Measures for all that; you have a Spirit that the Devil cannot Conquer, and a
Desire that I cannot satisfy: You make me Ridiculous where ever you come, and
seem as if you were ashamed of me.


Mrs. Raise. Since you will not use those Methods to gain my Love which you know
will do it, I look upon you only as my Convenience.


Raise. Yes, I have been a Convenience to your whole Family: Five hundred pounds
your Brother had to buy him a Company, which was broke in two Months; then he
set my Prentice at Dice, cheated him of Two hundred pound, which he robbed me
of: And three hundred pound your Father had to purchase a Place at Court, to
keep him from his Creditors, which he lost one night at the Groom-Porters, and
durst never peep out of Whitehall since. Indeed you are a Gentlewoman, and have
behaved your self like one: In less than a fortnight after I married you, you
ran away with a Captain of the Guards, and I was forced to take you out of his
Lodgings with a Messenger; and you have played me abundance of pretty tricks
since, which my Love and Folly has forgiven: So I have been your Father's
Bubble, and your Brother's Cully; the Mark of the City, the Shame of my own
Family, and your Cuckold and Convenience.


Mrs. Raise. Let me but have a Coach, and I Will live as you will have me.


Raise. Don't think of a Coach, and you will live as I Will have you.


Mrs. Raise. Why, Ingredient, the Pothecary keeps his Wife a Coach, and is not
worth half so much as you are; besides you have fined for Alderman.


Raise. Ay, and if I had not fined for Fool, in giving your Relations a thousand
pound, you might have had a Coach.


Mrs. Raise. Why, I did not advise you to it.


Raise. Yet would never let me rest till I did it.


Mrs. Raise. Why, let me have a Coach, and I Will save it in other things; I Will
catch Cold else every Winter, and it shall cost you as much in Slops; for my
Clothes are so good, and my Shoes are so fine, I cannot walk a Foot.


Raise. Oh Citizens! Citizens! how are the times altered, since your Wives wore
High-crown'd Hats, Farendin Gowns, Red-Cloth Petticoats, Spanish-Leather Shoes,
and trudged about in Pattons: Now your Feet must be furnished with a Guiney a
pair; your Milliners Ware from the New-Exchange, the Old cannot please you; your
Silks bought in Covent Garden, Paternoster Row has no Choice. We are a pretty
Corporation! that are the Metropolis of the Kingdom, furnish the whole Nation,
yet cannot please our selves! like Vintners that love to be Drunk in others
Men's Taverns! well may we decay, when our Wives, like French Mistresses, send
our Money abroad.


Mrs. Reas. If the times are altered with the Wives, so they are with the
Husbands, since they wore slash Doublets, short Cloaks, and open-knee'd
Breeches, with their own thin lank Hair, that looked like the Fringe of a
Blanket, or the strings of a Bunch of Leeks; you can now wear the best Fashion
and richest Clothes, Swords upon occasion; come Drunk to a Playhouse; pick up
Whores at the Chocolate-House: Be bubled by Sharpers at Ordinaries: Carry a
good Face at Change, though within a day of Breaking; take up 3 or 4000 l.
under pretense of unexpected Bills; whip over to the Kings Bench; Bilk your
Creditors, and die with the Curse of Orphans and Widows on ye.


Raise. I pity them that do so. But Women commonly bring 'em to it.


Mrs. Raise. But not their Wives.


Raise. Their Wives or their Whores, they are Women still: Why, how extravagant
that Head looks now, what a Monument of Topnots is there? On my Conscience, if
the French had landed, the Heads of the Women might have served for Beacons all
over the Nation.


Mrs. Raise. Well, well, shall I have a Coach?


Raise. Not this Year.


Mrs. Raise. Shall I have one the next?


Raise. I cannot tell.


Mrs. Raise. Nor yes will not give me a positive answer?


Raise. We Will think on it.


Mrs. Raise. We Will think on it, Bungler. I long for a Coach, and I will have a
Coach; and you may spare it out of Clarret, you So^; since you can get no
Children to Inherit what you have, I Will spend it; and thou shall never live an
easy hour till I have a Coach; and so think on it, thou Associate of Drunkards,
eternal Tobacco Funker; must I be contented with a Beast that stinks
perpetually, sits up till two or three of the Clock in the Morning, and knows
nothing but his Bottle some times a Week together? The World shall know what a
Bedfellow thou art, that snores all night, and art sick in the morning; thou
Dehilitated Booby, thou sapless trunk.

Exit.
Raise. What will become of me? Beat her I cannot, hate her I cannot, turn her
away I dare not. If I could complain of her, I must not, for my own Reputation
suffers in it; besides, she has such a bloody crew of Relations, that would
murder me, if I should do any of these things; A Pox of all Fools that marry
poor Gentlewomen, for you wed their whole Family, and entail a Plague upon your
Posterity. Well I Will go up to Sir Tho. Reveller, invite him to Dinner, with two
or three more, and drink her out of my head. The Daughter of a Knight; with a
pox! the Honorable Sir Francis Haughty, Brother to the Viscount Blusteror,
Baron of Rockey Hills in Scotland! Well, take warning all by me.

I Robert Raison Grocer,
To have and to hold, and so, Sir,
Took the Daughter of a Knight from Covent Garden,
I Worth 10000 l. she not one Farthing. Exit.

SCENE II. Tower Hill.
Enter at one door the Lord Worthy and Servant. At the other Young Reveller. L.
Worcester. Bring my things out of the Boat, and call me a Coach.


Water. Yes, Master.


Y. Rev. I think I have heard that voice, I Am sure I have seen that face.


L. Worcester. George Reveller!

Embraces.
Y. Rev. My Lord Worthy! Welcome ashore: how long has this happy Island been
blessed with your approach?


L. Worcester. Prithee, sweet Orator, lay aside thy Rhetoric, and Preserve if for
Friends of lesser date; I am glad to see thee, and take my Joy heartily.

Embraces.
Y. Rev. Nothing more acceptable by the pleasure of friendship. But, my Lord,
being so long abroad in the Courts of celebrated Breeding, I was afraid a
hearty English Salute might have been too gross for the tender Constitution of
Italian Ceremony.


L. Worcester. Why faith, George, there are follies all over the World; but by my
long absence, and observation, I have studied to despise 'em; I can be
Courteous, without Formality; Cleanly, without Vanity; Friendly, without
Flattery; free from Prodigality, yet Generous in what is necessary; Honest,
without Partiality; and can be merry with a Friend, without talking Bawdy or
Divinity.


Y. Rev. Faith, my Lord, I cannot match you; if you expect such Virtues here,
you must e'ne keep company by your self: Why you will be envied by the Wise, and
scorned by the Fools: for a true English man abhors what he cannot reach, and
neglects what he can.


L. Worcester. Well, George, if thou art as free from these sins, as thou were when I
left thee, I shall complete my Travels in thy so wished for Conversation, and
repent that my curiosity abroad kept me so long from home.


Y. Rev. Nay, my Lord, I was heartily grieved my Fortune would not admit of my
accompanying your Lordship abroad, but I have been faithful in my
Correspondence to your four years Travels, and my Letters never mist of any
passages here that were worth your acceptance.


L. Worcester. Dear George I thank thee for 'em; and but that I thought I should
sooner reach thee than a Letter, I had given thee notice of my arrival; for I
came in the Packet Boat from Callis to Dover, where I took Post to Greenwich,
shifted my self, and so came hither; and had I not met with you, was going to
seek you.


Y. Rev. I am glad this accident prevented that trouble, I was just going to
Greenwich; but if you please, we'll go back to the Change, pick up an honest
fellow or two, and dine at the Rummer in Queenstrees; which, though the dearest,
is indeed the best accommodated house we can boast of.


L. Worcester. What, are all the famous Houses about Covent Garden and Charing Cross
abolished?


Y. Rev. Faith, my Lord, they are mightily degenerated, since Strephon the
wise, the witty, and the gay, and the Prince of all Company, as well as all
hearts, forsook us: Those that are left of that glorious Society, are retired
from the world, and mourn the remembrance of their lost Companions, that Wit
and good fellows are as hard to be found, as Conscience in a Jury, or Honesty
in a Guardian.


L. Worcester. Well, since those Golden Days cannot be called again, we must make the
best of our present Insufficiency, and be as happy as we can, though not to such
perfection. For to tell thee truth, George, we have a very indifferent
Character abroad; and the respect to an English man is lessened extremely; our
understanding is become a jest, by our not knowing what we would have; and the
next Age must play the Fool within its own bounds, for as the Gent. Usher says
in the Rehearsal, for Politicians no body else will take us.


Y. Rev. It Is a sad truth, my Lord, for our distractions, which we might heal,
we strive to enlarge; and our misfortunes abroad are occasioned by our sollys
at home: Our Nobility love their Ease and Pleasure, the Gentry are Careless and
stubborn, the Commonalty grumbling and Positive, the Clergy Ambitious and
froward, and the Mobile mad for an Insurrection.


L. Worcester. So much for Politics; but setting State Affairs aside, how does the
old Gentleman your Father?


Y. Rev. Why it is a tuff Thief, my Lord, he will bend double before he will break,
and prefers living with his Equals below, before going to his Betters above:
^^^lfes me, as most Parents do their Children, who are at vast charge to give
'em the Education of Gentlemen, and, when they are fit for the society of such,
starve 'em.


L. Worcester. Is he in Town?


Y. Rev. Ay, my Lord, and ten to one but we meet him at Change; he is a jolly
Spark, and loves his Whore and his Bottle, as well as the Lewdest of Eighteen.


L. Worcester. Are our Youth so perfect at 18, George?


Y. Rev. Ay, my Lord, as our Grandfathers were at 50: Youth now keeps Company
with Age, and Men with Boys; Vice is so much Improved within these ten years,
and madness so Pregnant, that within five more our Lads at 12 will begin to
Whore and bear Drink, as Portuguese Women do Children, and be past it at five
and twenty; they are Downright fots at 30, Drivel on till 40, when being fit for
nothing but Hospitals, they expire in a Flux, and you read in the Bill of
Mortality, they dyed of a Fever.


L. Worcester. Well, prithee let us be gone, for I long to see some of these whose
Characters thou have given.


Y. Rev. As we go, my Lord, we'll call at the old Gentleman's Lodgings,
Probably he is at home; I must imform you, as you go, of his humor, that you
may the better know how to manage him: Next have a care you buy not the sight
of these Sparks too dear, for they will fasten on you with the least Encouragement
you give 'em, and they will worry you with more Questions, than an old Scholar
would his Son, when he comes home from School at Christmas.


L. Worcester. O fear not, I Love Fools as I do a Landscape, they are always best at
distance. Tom bring the things.

Exeunt.
SCENE III. Sir Thomas Reveller Dressing himself.
Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, the Steward has brought his Accounts, according to your
Worships Order.


Sir Tho. Bring him in; I look frouzy this morning, ad I must leave off this
Drinking, it will kill me else; For the heat of my Body's so violent, it will
set the Clarret within me a Boiling, and make a hash of my Bowels for Satan;
Yet, I look pretty well of my Age too; What a pox I Am but eight and forty, and
have Lungs as shrill as an Eunuch, fo, la, la, la; ah that Eye, Sir Thomas,
that Leer of the left Eye has broke many a heart, you old Rogue; George's Eye,
Son George has the same Eye to a T, all it is a wicked Dog at a Wench, but a
cursed Rogue keeps all his Whores to himself, he will not let his none Dad come in
for a snack; I Am forced to lay on my own Maids, and then the Coach-men get 'em
with Child, and the Whores put 'em upon me; ad I must take up, I must take up
my Life, and take down my flesh; I have had 20 Coach-men within this 10 year,
and every one of them has left me the Illegitimate substance of his Brawny
Ability.


Enter Steward, gives Sir Tho. the Account. Sir Tho. Is this a sincere Account
of the last 3 months?


Stew. It Is both sincere and Just.


Sir Tho. It may be so, but it is very Extravagant; three hogsheads of strong
Beer Drank out in one Day by Harvest People.


Stew. Yes, and please you.


Sir Tho. Yes, and vex me; it went thorough 'em as fast as they Drank it, they
could never hold so much.


Stew. Yes, and make nothing on it.


Sir Tho. So methinks. Stolen one night 5 Piggs, 7 Turkeys, 9 Geese, 11 Ducks,
13 Hens, and 15 Dozen of Pigeons, by the new-raised Dragoons; what will they
do when they come to be old Soldiers* But they are always in an Enemies
Country, though Quartered on their own Fathers. Spent likewise 40 s. at several
times with the Overseers, about agreeing for giving Security for 4 Maids with
Child.

Maids with Child!


Stew. Servants, and like you.


Sir Tho. Yes, they have served me finely! which were left so by the aforesaid
Soldiers; so what they rob us of in poultry, they give us in Bastards, a
pretty Exchange. Spent at fair Sarah the Dairy-Maids crying-out, who in her
Labor laid the Child to your Worship; why, you Son of a Whore, laid it to me!
I have not known her this 12 Months.


Stew. Sir, she Swore --


Sir Tho. Sir she is a Bitch if she swore any such thing, and I can satisfy a
Jury of Midwives I have keen past it this 10 years; a young Dragooner, I Will be
hanged else; Owns what an Age we live in, that the Civil Powers must keep
Whores for the Military, and maintain the Children at their own Charge! I had a
Sister but 12 year ago, that run away with a Welsh Ensign, who made a Beggar of
her in 2 years, Poxt her the third, was Hanged the 4 th for a Highway Man, and
she Burnt in Wales for a Clipper.


Stew. It Is a crying shame, Sir, that ones own Kindred cannot be safe for them.


Sir Tho. It is so, wherefore I will Petition, that the Army may have a certain
allowance of Strumpets, which shall be maintained by the Country Gentlemen,
that we may keep our Families and Relations for our own use.


Enter Sasaphras. Sasa. Good Morrow, Sir Thomas the Worshipful, how is it, Sir?


Sir Tho. Mr. Sasaphras the Drugster! 'faith warm with last Nights Toping, my
Head Aches, and my Hand Shakes, this Morning.


Sasa. Ah, Sir Thomas, that will be at our years, if we drank water; but
indeed, we roared mightily, were very Merry, and Bumper'd it about cheerfully;
ad my Neighbor Raison the Grocer was pure and Wicked after you left us.


Sir Tho. Ay!


Sasa. Ay, fackings.


Sir Tho. Why, Prithee? What did you? for I went home at 9 of the Clock.


Sasa. Why, we were Delitions and Lewd, and had a mind to play some of your
Covent Garden Tricks, and Court-Diversions; and Mr. Billet the Wood-Monger goes
Home very Drunk, and like a true Gentleman, kicked his Wife, and went to Bed to
his Maid.


Sir Tho. A very goodnight, I says, Steward, depart, this Wickedness is too
Gentile for your Capacity.


Stew. Yes, Sir, and would become me as ill as your Companions: These Citizens
would feign do something like Courtiers; but I find they affect their Vices, as
they do their Fashions, never till the Gentry are both weary and ashamed of 'em.

Exit Stew.
Enter Raison. Raise. Sir Thomas, good day; Neighbor Sasaphras the same; well
how is it Gentlemen? Pure, Bonny, Blithe, Brisk, Gay, Jolly, Whimsical, what say
you? seasoned with last nights Wetting, for to days soaking? does not the
Spirit of Claret shine in your Souls, and illuminate your Faculties, inspiring
your Understandings fit for fresh Wantonness, ha?


Sir Tho. Well said, Landlord Raison, the Honor of the Grocers I faith!


Sasa. And Master of the Company, you forgot that, Sir Thomas.


Raise. How now, Sasaphras the Drugster, old Ingredient for Claps, Infusion for
Potions, and Author of wry faces.


Sas. Free from the Noose of Matrimony, Old Spicer of Plumb Porridge, Quest
Ale, and Funeral Dead Claret?


Sir Tho. To him, Sugar Loaf.


Raise. Well said, Bachelor, old Baudy Solitude, and Single Fornication.


Sasa. Why, you are as brisk. --


Raise. Why? my Wife's gone into the Country, I Am Lord of all, and Master of my
self.


Sasa. Till she returns, Neighbor Raison.


Raise. Right, Neighbor chip Roots.


Sir Tho. I gad, if she were mine, I should be loath to trust her in such
public places, as thou do; as Epsome, Islington Wells, and Greenwich Park.
Ad if I were a young Fellow, my Mouth would so water at her.


Raise. Like enough. I warrant you, there are Fellows water at her, and it may
be she thirsts after them; may be she is Honest, or may be I Am a Cuckold; all
Married Men must stand to their Wives Mercy; and if I should be one, I have so
much Sense, as not to make a noise about what I cannot help, and had rather be
a private Plague to my self, than a Public Jest to the World.


Sir Tho. Advice to Cuckolds, Seneca the 2 d.


Raise. Pshu, Pox, if we Marry Gentlewomen, they will play us Gentlewomens Tricks;
we Citizens marry them for Love, and they take us for Interest: I wonder at the
Impudence of any Tradesman, to think to keep a Gentlewoman to himself.

SINGS.
Ye Citizens of London,
That will have Gallant Wives,
Ye never would be undone,
If you would Marry Dames in Quoives.
But Gentlewomens Tales
Have got the Itch of Loving,
And when the Fancy once Prevails,
Their Buttocks will be Moving.

Sasa. Ah Boys, ifackins, he is in a rare Cue to day, his Wife's absence has new
Soul'd him.


Sir Tho. We will not baulk this good Humor, where shall we Dine?


Raise. Faith, with me, Sir Thomas, this is my Birth day, and I Will Drink
To the Memory of he that got me, she that bore me,
And Heaven grant Wife thou dy'st before me.

Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, There Is my Lord Worthy newly come from Travel, and
my young Master below.


Sir Tho. Entreat my Lord to Approach, but bid your young Master wait below,
till I send for him.

Exit Servant.
Sasa. Why, what a crooked tempered Knight's this, he will do nothing his Son
would have him, nor suffer him to follow his own desires.


Enter Lord Worthy. L. Worcester. Sir Thomas Reveller, may a Man be admitted to your
Embraces after six years absence?

Embraces.
Sir Tho. Heartily Glad to see you on my Soul, my Lord. Pray be pleased to
know, my Landlord Raison, and his Neighbor, Mr. Sasaphras a Drugster,
ingenious Men both, particular Members of the Common Council, and in all
private Affairs consulted for the good of the Public.


L. Worcester. Seeing 'em in your Company, is a sufficient Testimony of their good
Parts.


Sasa. Sir Thomas is pleased to be Witty, my Lord; but we have some Power in
this City, and should be Proud if your Lordship had occasion to use it.


Raise. We are plain Men, my Lord, but have good Credit, and can make our
Friends welcome; we can Drink without being Exceptious, be Merry without
State Affairs, hate parting when we are good Company, abhor knowing how the
time goes, therefore no body carries a Watch amongst us.


Sir Tho. Pray, my Lord, how long have you been in London?


L. Worcester. Faith, Sir Thomas, not an hour, and if my Good Fortune had not thrown
me on your Son, must have been a Wanderer much longer; but he has the strangest
fancy, he told me he would bring me to his Father, and I could not get him up
stairs by any Persuasion.


Sir Tho. I sent to him to stay below.


L. Worcester. No, Sir Thomas, before I saw your Servant he swore he would not come
up.


Sir Tho. Swore it, I Will make him break his Oath, or break his Neck; Jack, go
and bid George come up.

Exit Servant.
Raise. I suppose he has told your Lordship his Father's Humor, he is forced to
act by contraries with him; I swear it is pity, he is a fine Gentleman, and I
love him extremely.


Sir Tho. I never knew a Cuckold in my Life, but was fond of the Rogue that
made him one.


L. Worcester. Why truly, Sir, I think Nature has been juster to him, than his
Fortune, which I am sorry is not equal to his Merit; and all the Virtues I
could wish my self, or in a Friend, I find in him.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, your Son's gone.


Sir Tho. How, Gone!


L. Worcester. He Is but gone to Guildhall, he said he would walk there till I came.


Sir Tho. Fetch him, Sirrah.

Exit Servant.
Raise. It Is true indeed, my Lord, and I am sorry his Father will not let him live
like a Gentleman.


Sir Tho. What, you would have him Master of my Purse, as your Wife is of yours! as
long as the world knows he is a Gentleman, what is matter for his living like
one; 'Gad, I know abundance about this Town that live like Gentlemen, and are
ashamed to own their Parents.


Sasa. So far I must side with Sir Thomas, he allows his Son to live on the
sharp, and that is like most of the Gentlemen of this Age.


Sir Tho. Come, come, it is best pinching 'em in their Youth, they will the better
know how to prize Money in their Age.


L. Worcester. 'Faith, Sir Thomas, that Precept seldom takes effect; for a Son is apt
to run into Extravagancies the latter part of his Life, to make amends for the
ill usage of the first; and when Pleasure's in view, Consideration's a Foe.


Raise. Understandingly spoken, my Lord; this Traveling is an ingenious thing,
it is pity, that there are not half a dozen Members of the Common Council, sent
yearly abroad to learn Politics, at the Expense of the Nation.


Sir Tho. What, how to Cheat more than you do. Pox, Tradesmens Politics
consist in Lying only, and ye need not go out of your Parishes to learn that.


L. Worcester. But pray, Sir Thomas, how long have you forsook the Court, and
Embraced the Order of Citt?


Sir Tho. Why, ever since Knavery took Place of Honesty.


Sasa. And that is a long time, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. I speak in my days, Pimp.


Raise. There Is a Bob for Batchelors, for they are all so.


Sir Tho. There Is nothing but Whoring, and -- for Whoring, I think we are
pretty even with 'em here; but there is Gaming and Perjury, Murder and
Blasphemy, Divinity and Hypocrisy, running in Peoples Debts, and borrowing of
Money: I Will say that for the Honor of the City, I have lived here this 3
years, and han't been struck for a Guiney by any younger Brother among 'em.


Sasa. He that will not provide for his own Son, will scarce lend to an
Acquaintance.


Sir Tho. Peace, Bedlam. Kicks backwards. My Lord, shall I describe you the
Life of a the other end of the Town, thorowpac'd Rakehell.


Raise. Pray let him, my Lord, he is an admirable Satylist.


Sir Tho. It Is to speak ill of every Man; yet be courteous to all Men; borrow
of most Men, and pay no Man; always at home to their Whores, and ever abroad to
their Creditors; to Cheat their Brothers, Debauch their Sisters; to be Drunk
Nightly, Arrested Weekly, Beaten Monthly, Poxt Quarterly, Live Cursedly, Dye
Wretchedly, and so be Damned to all Eternity.


Sasa. Here Is the Spleen of the City, my Lord; we can be as sharp upon them as
they upon us, sometimes.


L. Worcester. Pleasantly described, in faith, Sir Thomas.


Enter Y. Reveller. But see your Son.

Sir Tho. What was the Reason you did not wait on my Lord up stairs, Sir?


Y. Rev. You sent me word it was your Pleasure I should stay below.


Sir Tho. And therefore you went away, Jackanapes.


Y. Rev. I thought it not for your Honor, I should keep Company with Footmen.


L. Worcester. Nay, Sir Thomas, You must not look upon him now as your Son, but a
Friend of mine, and pray be Civil to him for my sake.


Sir Tho. Sir, for my Lord's sake, you're very welcome.

Bows very low.
Y. Rev. Nay, Good Sir.


Sir Tho. Why, Tom Totty, will neither Austerity nor Civility please you?


Raise. Good my Lord take him off, here will be a Quarrel else.


L. Worcester. Well, Sir Thomas, I Am resolved we'll Dine together, since I did not
pay my Foy when I left the Town, I Will pay my Welcome to it.


Raise. If your Lordship pleases, let me give you your Welcome; Sir Thomas has
Promised to Dine with me, it is my Birth Day, and if you will grace it with your
Presence, I Will give you a Cleanly and Hearty Entertainment; we'll have Wine in
abundance, speak but one at once; Wit as it happens, and no Wives.


L. Worcester. Truly, Sir, the Invitation is indeed alluring.


Sir Tho. Come, my Lord, be good Natured for once, and let my Landlord have the
Maidenhead of your Arrival.


Y. Rev. I think, my Lord, we cannot do better.


Sir Tho. Who spoke to you, Jack Sause, you may Dine elsewhere.


L. Worcester. Nay, Sir Thomas, you forget he is my Friend.


Y. Rev. Nay, Sir, I ask your Pardon; for I Am engaged, now I think on it, at
Pontacks, though not with such good Company.


Sir Tho. Indeed, Sir, and now I think on it, you shall not be engaged at
Pontacks.


Y. Rev. Indeed, Sir, but I am.


Sir Tho. I will break your Head, if you say that again.


Y. Rev. Why, Sir, my Word is past.


Sir Tho. Therefore you shall not go.


Y. Rev. Would you have me break my Word, Sir?


Sir Tho. Break your Word, Sir, 'twon't go for a Groat, Sir.


Sasa. That Is your fault, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Drugster. Stamps his Cane on Sasa's Toes. But I Will make you break it,
for having the Impudence to engage your self in any thing, without advising
with me.


Y. Rev. What, not to dine with a Friend, Sir!


Sir Tho. No, Sir, not to say your Prayers, if I think fit.


Raise. Let him alone, my Lord, there is no other way of working him.


L. Worcester. I know it.


Sir Tho. Did you never pray for my Death, Sirrah? answer me sincerely. Did you
never wish me at the Devil?


Y. Rev. I have wished him out of you often, Sir.


Sir Tho. Out of me! Why, you Dog, do I incorporate with the Devil?


Raise. This is too far* Come, come, Mr. George, you shall dine with me.


Y. Rev. Indeed Mr. Raison, I shall lose a Guiney if I do. For I left one as a
Forfeit, if I made not my appearance.


Sir Tho. Come, come, George; stay George, thou shall not want for a Guiney.


Y. Rev. Sir.


Sir Tho. I say thou can not want for a Guiney; my Landlord Raison, or Mr.
Sasaphras, will lend thee a Guiney.


Raise. What, and the Father present!


Sasa. No, thank you for that.


Y. Rev. I cannot stay without the Guiney.


Sir Tho. Why get you gone and be hanged, you mercenary -- George.

As he is going off.
Y. Rev. Sir.


Sir Tho. Will Not you dine with your Cuckold, you fair-fac'd Dog?


Y. Rev. My Cuckold!


Sir Tho. Ay, ay, you leering Rogue, my Landlord; ah you're a sly Toad, George.


Y. Rev. I know nothing on it, Sir.


Sir Tho. Why did you never lie with his Wife, Smock-face?


Y. Rev. Not I, Sir.


Sir Tho. As you hope to be saved.


Y. Rev. Nay, Sir.


Sir Tho. I Will knock you down, you cursed Dog, if you stand in a lie to me.

Offers to strike him, who offers to go.
L. Worcester. Nay fie, Sir Thomas.

Parts him.
Sir Tho. A hardened Rascal; why whither are you going, Sirrah?


Y. Rev. Out of your presence, Sir, that I may not disturb the Company.


Sir Tho. Stay, Sirrah. I cannot let him go, because he has a mind to it. And
must you lose a Guiney if you stay, Sir?


Y. Rev. Ay, Sir, besides the Conversation of some pretty Women.


Sir Tho. Pretty Women Sirrah! My Lord, we'll all go and dine with George.


Raise. Come Sir Thomas give him the Guiney, I had rather give it him my self,
than be without his company.


Sir Tho. Why then give it him, if thou like it so well.


Raise. Not before you, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. I Will go out of the Room.


Sasa. Ah, hold there.


Sir Tho. I have no Gold about me; -- my Lord will you lend George a Guiney?


L. Worcester. Ay, Sir, twenty, if you say the word.


Sir Tho. No, no, but one, my Lord; nay, give it George; but one, my Lord;
twenty I must pay him, one he may forget, or be ashamed to ask for it.


Raise. Come all is well, and we'll be rare and merry.


Sir Tho. George be cheary, I will lay by the authority of a Father, and
dedicate this day to Familiarity and good Fellowship.


L. Worcester. Give me your hand on it.


Sir Tho. There it is, and if I talk like a Parent, break my Head.


Y. Rev. There Is mine, Sir, I Will do it.


Sasa. Come, my Lord, lead the way.


Raise. Pray do, my Lord, and we four will sing a Whim ex tempore. Eat an Oyster
before Dinner, and take a whet.


L. Worcester. Away with it.


Raise. SINGS. The Son's reconciled, and the Father is free;

Sasa. The Husband's at home, and the Wife is abroad;

Y. Rev. We'll empty the Cellar, and drink it quite dry;

Sir Tho. But every man here shall have his full load.

Raise. Confusion to him that is not true to his Friend,

Sasa. And hang the dull Rogue that shrinks from his Wine,

Y. Rev. May all hard hearted Parents and Usurers mend,

Sir Tho. And may Sons at their Fathers never repine.

Raise. May all these good Wishes increase with our Riches,
But a Pox take all Wives that e're wore the Breeches.

Chorus. May all, etc.
Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE, A Garden.
Enter Florella and Violante. Flor. WEll, this Young Reveller's not coming to
Dinner vexes me.


Viol. Ay, and had not Mrs. Raison come down this Morning, you would have been
much more uneasy.


Flor. Why truly I should have thought 'em together, that is the wicked truth
on it; but hang him, he has more Mistresses to diverthimself with: These young
Fellows that run at all, value no body any longer than they are with 'em. Well,
Virtuous Women, when once they are in love, should never let the man stir out of
their sight, till they have made him sure; for we set the Devil a dancing in 'em;
and because we will not comply without Matrimony, they meet while their eager some
kind she that has less Grace, which reaps the fruit of our Labor.


Vio. Fie, how you talk!


Flor. Fie, how I talk! why you think the same, and so does the whole Sex.


Vio. Have you no Regard to Virtue?


Flor. Yes, as long as Virtue has any Regard to me. Prithee let us not affect
that nicety when we are alone, which we assume in Public: I confess I would not
go beyond the Rules of Honor, and yet I cannot help envying those that do,
when I think they enjoy my Lover.


Vio. Florella, a lewd satisfaction is but of a short date; And however Gay or
Splendid a Miss may appear for the time she Triumphs, she falls at last as
unpityed, as unhappy; for the thoughts in each Man, that every fool who has
money is as acceptable as himself, makes the Woman as cheap as the Pleasure.


Flor. Why, do you believe that none of the Women about the Town were ever true
to one man?


Vio. No more than I believe one man is enough for the Women about Town. The
vanity that first betrayed 'em, always pursues 'em. Pride makes more Whores
than Love. Love never made Whores; Convenience and Lust: Love's pure and chaste,
the Beauty of the mind, if so allowed; the Beauty of the mind can never abuse
the Glory of the Soul: They that can fit contented with their being, will never
use base methods to advance it: And I cannot help thinking that she who will be
Debauched to mend her condition, will afterward lie with any man that can
better it.


Enter Boy: Boy. Here Is a Letter from Mr. Reveller, to Madam Florella.


Flor. So, the Rascal has sent an excuse, that is better than nothing.

(Reads) Dear Madcap (somewhat familiar for a Lover of a Fortnights standing) I
was robbed of thy Company by the Arrival of a Friend, my Lord Worthy, who this
Morning came to London, being returned from his Travels, and waiting on him to
my Father, was kept by the old Fellow at Dinner; pray pardon the misfortune,
since 'twas not my own seeking: I will wait on you this Evening in the Park,
and bid your Sister look about her, for I will bring my Lord, who is as mad to
see her, as she will be to have him, when she knows him. So in hopes to Cherish
you in Sickness and in Health, I remain your Obedient, George Reveller.

And thou shall obey some time, George, for I know I must hereafter altogether.
Do You hear, Sister, how you're threatened?


Vio. Oh, forewarned forearm'd; however, if he be so accomplished as your Lover
has spoke him, as frozen a Virgin as I am, I may be melted: but when that time
comes, Florella, I Am resolved, if possible, we'll be Married the same Day, and
Bedded the same Night, that the Ignorance of one may not put the Experience of
the other to the Blush.

Enter Mrs. Raison.
Mrs. Raise. Your Servant, Ladies, what taking the Air to digest the Fumes of
your Dinner?


Vio. Any thing, Madam, to avoid sleeping, which I am mightily given to after
meals?


Mrs. Raise. It Is very unwholesome, indeed: But your Mother expects you, for
there are several Ladies come to visit her, and she wants your good Company to
help her to entertain 'em.


Vio. We'll wait on her, Madam; come, Sister.


Flor. Stay, I Will vex her a little first. Will not young Mr. Reveller be here
to Day, Madam? he promised to come and play at Cards again.


Mrs. Raise. Why, do you like his Company so well, Madam?


Flor. No, Madam; but I find he does mine; you were the first that introduced
him into the Family, and I was civil to him for your sake, which I find he
misinterprets, and has sent me a Love Letter.


Mrs. Raise. A Love Letter! what was in it? pray let us see it.


Flor. 'Twas not worth your Reading, or my Remembering, and I exposed it to the
flames the minute I perused it. And though his Father makes Love to my Mother, I
have more value for my self, than to admit the Addresses of one who is a
Beggar; and so pray tell him.


Mrs Raise. I shall; and severely, Madam.


Flor. She Is roused. Will you not walk, Madam?


Mrs. Raise. I Will but gather a few Violets, and follow you.


Vio. Fie, why would you fret the poor Woman so? You might spare her the use of
him, 'till you purchase him your self.


Flor. Hang 'em for Cutt-Loaves, as they call 'em; if it were not for the
Convenience of such, young Fellows would marry faster.

Ex. Flor. and Viol.
Mrs. Raise. Oh false base Villain! have I maintained him, kept him even from
starving, fed still his Pride to keep his Figure up, slighted the Addresses of
great Men for him, neglected every duty of a Wise, and Sacrafic'd my name, my
Peace, and all the ornaments of Reputation? With him I ran away, e're scarcely
warm within my Husbands Arms: oh 'twas too short a Siege, he won too easily the
Fort, which had to others seemed Impregnable; without an Oath I rendered him my
Heart, and in the Zeal of Love forgot conditions; I had intentions to forget
the Monster, return to the Obedience which I swore; for what I use so ill
deserves it not; nay, I had resolved it, had framed my self by mild Degrees to
leave him. I would have been his Friend though still in want, and could with ease
I thought have parted with him.

But that which was indifferent before,
His Loving her now, makes me Covet more.
Exit.
SCENE II. Dorinda and her Aunt.
Dor. Oh tell me not of Honor, what I ought
Of Obligation's Gratitude to Worthy:
It Is true, he is the Man who first seduced me,
And thou art she who first betrayed me to him:
I then was Poor, was ignorant of Sin;
So Innocent, that had I loved as now,
I could not for the Soul of me have told
What 'twas I longed for more than talk and kisses.

Aunt. Well, well, Experience has cured those Errors,
And I suppose you can tell what you long for now.
You know this young Reveller is your Lord's Friend,
Who was so fearful of the World's admiring you,
He would not trust him with the Knowledge of you:
What can you hope for? If his Friend has Honor,
He cannot condescend to wrong his Love.

Dor. He knows me not, nor nothing of my Being.

Aunt. You will be known in time, and then consider
What the Event will be of such a Breach.
My Lord can never forgive so foul a Crime,
And in the heat of Vengeance both may fall;
You then will wish you had kept the worst of 'em.

Dor. Impertinent, thou prattlest for thy Interest,
And see no further than my ill-got Pension:
When Vice grows Ancient, it grows Mercenary.

Aunt. Well, well, I was believed in the days of your Stepmother, when you sat
with your Needle in your hand from morning till night, with a short Meal a day,
whilst all her own Children took place of you. I then was appealed to, and my
Advice was acceptable.


Dor. It was my Poverty that gave the Credit.
Temptation in Affliction seldom fails.
Freedom was first proposed, and first inclined to;
Then Wealth, which made that Freedom relish better.
My Vanity was eager of the Bait*
And thou with Art did play it to my likeing.
Fools, when they find their Masters Weaknesses,
Are Eloquent in flattering their Errors:
The Wife that would correct them are thought Fools.
I loved the Purchase, but I cursed the Price:
My Pride, not Inclination did undo me.

Aunt. But now your Inclination will, I find:
What is it you propose in following Reveller?
The Man must live on you, you cannot on him;
Nor will your Stock maintain your Follies long;
Cannot you take one without forsaking the other?
Keep both, and I Will side with you.
Let Reveller his absent Hours supply,
But let the others Gold still make you easy.

Dor. Thou art a worthy wicked Counselor:
Sin when it shows good nature is excusable;
My Treachery must thrive by Treachery:
I know the Act I am about is base,
But that serves little, when I cannot help it.
Morality, thou art unprofitable;
When once our Souls are prejudiced to Reason,
Affection helps the most decrepid sense,
And reconciles Impossibilities.

Aunt. Do you stand to my Proposal?

Dor. Oh, any thing to feed my Hopes;
These four Years to the World I Have lived a Nun,
Conversed with naught but Books, and thy dull self,
And use at last made Solitude most easy;
But oh, that fatal Morning be accursed,
When Curiosity debauched my Quiet.
'Twas Yesterday, would some Disease had stopped me,
Fond of a sight, I forced thee to the Wells,
And Criticis'd upon a crowd of Fools;
Each Fop Buz'd, in a Road of talk, his Folly,
And being Masqu'd, I was obliged to hear 'em:
I laughed at the insipid Chatterers,
And was diverted with variety.

Aunt. Till Reveller approached?

Dor. It Is true.
I love my Weakness, though I blush to own it:
That Reveller! why was he made so Lovely?
Not but I could have stood the Charms of Person,
Had he not backed his Beauty with his Tongue.
I was a stranger too to Conversation;
But Reading, which informed me, that the rest
Were Fustian Souls, uneducated Blockheads,
Proved Reveller had Art with wondrous Sense;
His words fell easy, soft, not starched with Method,
Nor was his Language cramped with unknown Terms;
His Arguments gentilely conquered mine,
And when he found me silent, urged 'em strongest.

Aunt. Why would you go? I persuaded you against it.

Dor. Thou did,
But 'twas an evil Itch that would not hear thee.

Aunt. It Is strange! you have the sense of the ill, yet cannot shun it;
Judge equally the Benefit and Loss,
Take in the cooling draught of Temperance,
And weigh impartially, e're it is too late.
You that can argue thus the right and wrong,
If you would endeavor, sure might make good choice!

Dor. Oh, thou mistakest, the weighing it confounds us.
It is in Love, as it is with Factious Writers,
Who state and answer every thing themselves;
That side seems fairest which they most affect.

Aunt. Well, well, since it cannot be hope, you must have the Man, and there is
an end on it.


Dor. I must, I will, by Heaven I have him now,
I feel the Panter throbing at my Heart,

Ant. Still let us be merry and wise, as the saying is:
What will you do about my Lord Worthy?
He has sent you a Letter here, but you will not see it; he says he will be down
to night.

Dor. Give it me -- (Reads.) Dear, dear Dorinda, (Dear and dull, but come,
let us on) this morning I came from Dover to Greenwich, where my Treasure was,
but unknown to me; in the pursuit on it I have lost such precious hours, as
nothing but thy self can make amends for: They told me, where I use to direct
my Letters for you, how you were disposed of, and had not Y. Reveller hindered
me, I had been with you as soon as this: But at night expect a longing Lover,
to whom Dorinda is the dearest Object.

Worthy.
Aunt. Well, and who could write prettier; or indeed, who is prettier? I don't
think you have mended your choice; he is Young and Handsome, Rich and Noble; the
other has nothing but his Wits to live on.


Dor. To night! why Reveller meets me to night! nor will I miss the
appointment, for ten Lords.


Aunt. Why, you don't mind what I say to you?


Dor. Disturb me not -- what is to be done?


Aunt. Why, what are you thinking of?


Dor. How to avoid this Worthy.


Aunt. Mercy on me now, Heaven forbid!


Dor. Do you forbid his coming, or I go.


Aunt. Go, whither?


Dor. Any whither, Madness never wants a place.


Aunt. What will become of us? -- Consider.


Dor. Perish Consider! I have cursed all thoughts but those which favor Love
and Reveller


Aunt. Well then, he shall be put off. I Will tell him, that you went to London
to see for some Letters, just before his came, which is probable enough, and so
missed each other; and that you being fearful of the Water would scarce venture
to come home to night; but says I, when she hears of your coming, her Love will
do any thing: Then after you have discoursed with Reveller, you may come in as
from London, which will the more and more endear him to you.


Dor. Do as thou will, and tell me on it hereafter.


Aunt. Sure you might hear what is for your own good, one would think.


Dor. Talk but of Reveller, and I Will listen calmly;
My Soul shall dwell on the enticing Tale,
And I Will be stupidly in love with Silence;
No Passion ever, ever equaled mine:
But oh, my Reveller! be thou as kind,
What harmony will be in both our Souls!
Whilst trembling sighs bedew the willing Lips,
And every squeeze still closer than the former.
Oh Ecstasy!
But hold, keep down my Joy, it were a Crime
That I should lose my self before my time. Exeunt.

SCENE III. The Park.
Enter Y. Reveller and L. Worthy. Y. Rev. This coming by Water has refreshed us
mightily. 'Sdeath, the old Fellows drank like Germans.


L. Worcester. Or like Women with Child, it had no Operation with 'em: I was pretty
far gone when we took Boat, but the Air has somewhat settled me.


Y. Rev. How did you like the Entertainment, my Lord?


L. Worcester. Much better than I thought I should; they are the honestest Plebeians
I ever met with; and as thy Father says, George, I wonder thou can have the
heart to Cuckold so honest a ^riend to the Bottle, as Raison.


Y. Rev. Faith, my Lord, I Will be ingenuous with you; it is an Intrigue of a
pretty long standing, and though it be somewhat scandalous to receive more
Favors from Women than one, my necessity has obliged me to comply; for ever
since your Travels she has been my Father.


L. Worcester. Thy old man has used thee scurvily; truly, but this Amor with
Florella, as thou talk of it, if it succeeds, will put it out of his power
to wrong thee.


Y. Rev. I have fair hopes on it, she is worth 15000 l. and her Sister as much.
They are the Co-heiress's of Sir Tho. Hazard, a famous Merchant, that died
about two Years ago. Their Mother-in-law, my Lady Hazard, did order it so, as
to be their Guardian, but the Money's their own upon the day of Age or
Marriage; nor is there any scurvy Proviso of the Mother's liking, and so forth;
and if I can but secure the Inclination, the Money comes of course.


L. Worcester. How came you acquainted?


Y. Rev. Why, you must know, my old man has made Love to the Mother this six
Months; she has 1200 l. a Year for her life, which her Husband gave her, not as
a Jointure, but generously, when he died; which with my Father's two thousand
pound per annum, will put 'em into a condition of living without being obliged
to Relations. But indeed Mrs. Raison was the person who first presented me to
the Family, for she Boards in the same House with 'em.


L. Worcester. And thou have well rewarded her. I wonder at the Humor of Women, that
cannot have a handsome young Fellow, without the vanity of showing him; had she
never brought you into better company, then her own Discretion had kept, what
her Folly has lost.


Y. Rev. I think both Sexes are equally to blame in that point; and especially
Husbands that carry their handsome Wives to all the public places about Town,
as if men married for the approbation of the World, and not their own likeing:
Now, when I drink, I make use of my own Pallet; when I buy any thing, my own
Opinion's my guide; and not the persuasions of the Seller.


L. Worcester. But, George, you would take it till to put on a new Suit, and have the
Town damn your fancy. Every man loves to hear his choice commended; and a
rarity in any kind will be shown by the owner, out of the pride of his
particular possessing it.


Y. Rev. Why truly there is something in that, my Lord. But I had rather keep
my Money in my Pocket, than by exposing my Stock, give Sharpers opportunity of
borrowing it.


L. Worcester. But see, George, Petticoats!


Enter Violante and Florella masked. Y. Rev. The right, I hope; I know you,
Madam, by that vicious turn of your head, and side leer.


Flor. Indeed, Sir!


Y. Rev. Yes, indeed, Sir -- my Lord -- Madam, you know what I writ in my
Letter: Pray unmask Ladies, that my Lord may be satisfied I spoke truth; for I
have given ye Beautiful Characters.


Flor. I think an honest face need not blush, though somewhat homely. Come,
Sister, let 'em see the worst of us, lest my Lord should think us uglier than
we are. I think our faces are clean.

They unmask.
Y. Rev. Little Charmer!


L. Worcester. If my Friend, Madam, bought his Curiosity as dearly as I shall
purchase mine, he is in a languishing condition, I assure you.


Viol. Soft and fair, my Lord; you are an Artist I find; that can love, as
Fiddlers play, at first sight.


L. Worcester. Love, as it is unaccountable, is irresistible.
There must be a beginning, why not now?
A Laziness in liking is insipid.
Nor would you prize the lightning of your Eyes,
If it were slow in giving us the Wound.
That Flint is best, that fires at first stroke.
Such fierce born Sparks, if they not take effect,
Proves that which should receive 'em is in fault,
And makes the Striker peevish.

Viol. The Fire that kindles quickest, burns too fast;
What boils too fierce never strengthens, but decays;
The simmering, though slow, is still the stronger.

L. Worcester. No method, sure, can be allowed in Love.
Prudence and passion never were allied.
The Flame which Reason rules has Interest in it:
What Is raised by Art, is still maintained by cunning:
The naked looseness of the Soul is best;
And that which shows most madness, owns most love.

Viol. I find you are experienced in it, my Lord,
And are a Bowler in the Green of Love;
Can lie in the Way, or hit the Heart at pleasure.
I am a Stranger to my Bias yet,
Nor is it fit my weakness should be challenged
By one who knows the Ground, and all its rubs.

L. Worcester. The Game which I propose I Am sure to lose at;
The most unknowing of your Sex in that,
Will quickly learn, and baffle the Instructor.

Vio. My Lord you go too far, I Will hear no more.


Flor. So, his Wit has made him too familiar; and she has done with him: What
can you say now that is pleasant and modest? I know it is a Restraint upon your
Capacity to talk civilly and well: But if you don't, I shall follow my Sister.


Y. Rev. As you say, Madam, Lewdness is most easy, especially to those who
abhor Virtuous Company; but I, who am naturally addicted to goodness, can bear
a Subject as Pious as the Priests of our times.


Flor. So, your Vice will peep in spite of your Tiffany Virtue: But, d'hear,
talk to me of nothing but Love; and manage it so that I may believe you; nay,
honest Love too, mark that, Sir!


Y. Rev. That latter obligation is somewhat heavy: Prithee let us talk of other
Love, though we shall act none; the thoughts of a Miss has oftentimes relished a
Wife.


Flor. Indeed, Sir! is your Stomach so queasie? methinks you might swallow the
bitter-Pill of Matrimony, when so sweet a bit as 15000 l. is to follow.


Y. Rev. Faith, Child, I bear a Conscience, and had rather serve thee for
nothing, than take so unreasonable a price for my Labor.


Flor. Truth is, I don't know whether you will deserve it; and I think I had
better keep my money, than run the hazard of so uncertain a purchase.


Y. Rev. Pox on it, thou have too much Wit for a Wife; besides, I suppose you
have such a Villainous Constitution, as to expect me all to your self.


Flor. I leave that to your own discretion; but if you should play me foul, may
you only think at the same time I am serving you the same fauce; and go on as
well as you can.


Y. Rev. As you say, when a man cannot trust his Servants at home, he can take
but little pleasure abroad: I find I shall be undone, in spite of my aversion
to Wedlock. Well, my Lord, will your Fort accept of Proposals, or is it
stubborn against Articles?


L. Worcester. Faith, George, somewhat Peremptory, and much upon Resistance.


Flor. Why, my Lord, I thought you Travelers had the Knack of taking Hearts.


L. Worcester. I had of keeping one, 'till I saw your Sister, Madam.


Vio I desire Consideration, my Lord, the surrender's of consequence, it being
the inlet to my Eternal Peace or Disquiet.


Flor. Ay, ay, give her time, my Lord, as much as she will; the more you offer,
the less she will accept; so much I know of my Sex.


Vio. Thank you, Sister; but men are not so scarce, that we need run mad for
'em.


L. Worcester. But you may, if the War continues, for ought I know; you will wish you
had taken a whole Man hereafter; if the Prophecy comes to pass, you will be very
indifferently fed, when one Man is a mess for 7 of you.


Vio. Methinks you young Gentlemen, Mr. Reveller, should go and serve your
Country; it is a shame to make Love, when there is Honor in view.


Y. Rev. Thank you, Madam; but if you could persuade my Father to go in my
Room, you would much more oblige me.


Vio. He Is old.


Y. Rev. The fitter to be knocked on the head. Young Fellows get the King
Soldiers. Drones that have lost their Stings are useless.


L. Worcester. I find these Ladies would be Courted like those in Romances, we must
kill Monsters for 'em.


Y. Rev. Thank Heaven, we are not so hard put to it, as the Romans were with the
Sabines; we need not fight for Women in this Age.


Flor. Not if all be so free as the Lady in the Mask was yesterday Morning at
the Wells, Mr. Reveller.


Y. Rev. Jealousie's a Sign of Love, Child, I am glad to see it. Why Faith
'twas a likely Soul, and a Woman of Sense; for she railed at Matrimony damnably.


L. Worcester. Well, George, I as much envy thy Happiness, as I mistrust my own; my
Lady has no pity.


Vio. As much as you care for, my Lord, or becomes me: You have Rallied enough
now, I suppose, which was the utmost end of your Conversation. Do I color,
Sister?


Flor. A little guilty about the Eyes.


Y. Rev. Come, Ladies, will you honor us so far as to play at Cards with you
this Evening? my old Fellow's with your Mother, and we'll pretend a visit to
her; I have often talked to my Lady of my Lord, and she will be Proud of a
Nobleman for her Son-in-Law, though you are so indifferent to him for a Husband.


Vio. Ads my Life, here is your Father, my Lady, A Noise of Music. Mr. Raison,
and abundance more with Music!


Enter Sir Thomas Revel, Lady Hazard, Mrs. Raison, Sasaphras, Raison, and
Fiddlers. Sir Tho. Come, my Lady, it is pity such an Evening should be lost
within doors.


La. Haz. Look, yonder are my Daughters, Sir Thomas, with your Son and another
Gentleman!


Sir Tho. Ad so, my Lord Worthy! the Flower of Europe, Madam: ad if he takes a
likeing to your Daughter, we shall have a Glorious Son-in-Law -- George -- my
Lord, your Lordships humble Servant; pray be pleased to know my Lady Hazard,
the Mother of these Girls, and, in all likelihood, of Election to be the
Partaker of my Flesh and Blood.


L. Worcester. You much honor me, Sir Thomas, and I wish my interest there were
equal to yours here.


Vio. If he goes on as he begins, he may get the start of 'em.


La. Haz. Your Lordship has so noble a Character, that were I a stranger to
your Quality, the fame of your Virtues would recommend you alone; nor would I
willingly call her Friend, or Relation, that could refuse such goodness.


L. Worcester. I humbly thank your Ladyship.


Sir. Tho. Very well; Faith, very well said of both sides; and so much for
Complements. Come Neighbor Sasaphras, Landlord Raison, bear up Sirs; what a
Pox, Dos'd, stupefied, hum drum! Wine used to have another Operation.


Raise. Pox on it, I Am sorry we left off Drinking. Prithee let us to it again: I
don't care for Women's Company.


Sir Tho. Why, was it not thy own Proposal, to come down to Greenwich, to Sup
with thy Spouse, and be merry with this good Company?


Raise. Truth is, I was but half Drunk when I had a mind to my Spouse, I find
since the last Bottle I am incapable.


Y. Rev. I am sorry your Husband's in such a condition, Madam.

To Mrs. Raise.
Mrs. Raise. I am more sorry you're in such Company, Sir. I have not only a
Beast for a Husband, but a Villain for a Lover.


Y. Rev. Madam!


Mrs. Raise. Rascal.


Y. Rev. Your Servant.


Flor. What, are you angry, Mrs. Raison?


Mrs. Raise. A little troubled he should make my Husband such a Sot, Madam.


Flor. Such things will be: you may repair the Lady's loss, Mr. Reveller.


Y. Rev. I wish I might, Madam; for I was always inclined to help the afflicted.


Sasa. Come, what do we do here, Sir Thomas? a Pox of these Petticots, they
spoil more Company than e're they Created; let us have some Wine, and cold
Chickens, go upon Flamstead's Leads, and huzza to the Neighboring Counties.


Raise. Ay, ay, let us huzza, let us huzza.


Y. Rev. Nay faith, Mr. Raison, since you have Fiddles we'll have a Dance, and
what you will.


Sir Tho. Why, you impudent Rascal, how come you to speak of a Dance before I
thought on it?


Y. Rev. You forget, Sir Thomas, what we shook hands about.


Sir Tho. Gads so, I beg thy Pardon, George; come then, let us have a Dance.


Sasa. Hang Dancing, Sir Thomas, 'twill put us all into a Sweat, and make the
Air unpleasant.


La. Haz. I think we had better Dance at home, for we shall have the whole Town
here gaping at us.


Sir Tho Agreed, then we'll first to Supper, and then for a Rubbers at
scampring. My Lord, we must desire your good Company.


La. Haz. By all means.


L. Worcester. It Is a Blessing I have Prayed for.


Sir Tho. Lead on then; George, handle your Mother-in-Law, and I Will take
Water-wag-Tail, my Lord here is yours, Sas take Mrs. Raison, and let the Husband
bring up the Rear.

Raise. stumbles on Flor.
Flor. He had better lead the way, that he may not fall upon us.


Raise. I think I ought to go first, as being the only Married Person among you:
Besides, as I Am a Cuckold, I Am a single Man in this Company. Fiddlers, Play
Buffcoat, la, la, la.


Flor. Well said, Mr. Raison -- Madam, bear up, your Husband's good Company.

To Mrs. Raise.
Mrs. Raise. What means this Devil?


Sir Tho. Come, away with it, la, la, la.

Exeunt Singing, and the Music Playing.
ACT III.
SCENE, The Park.
The Moon Shining: Enter Dorinda and Aunt. Dor. HAs not the Clock struck Eleven
yet?


Aunt. No, but it is very near it; I Will in, and wait my Lord's coming.


Dor. Do.
Oh! Reveller! you are slow, or I Am in haste,
Love should be still before hand with the time,
For it is a Thief that often Robs our Joys.
How tedious are the Moments of my Longing!
Whilst Worthy, at a years end, comes too fast.
Yet such a Slave I am to my Impatience,
That for one early Minute with my Love,
I Would meet an hour sooner what I hate.

Enter Reveller Drunk, followed by Mrs. Raison's Maid. Y. Revel. It Is a fine
Moon Shiny Night, much ado I have stole from my Company, and much ado I have to
manage my Footing, 3 Bumpers more had rendered me incapable of Crawling; now for
this Mistress, it is the prettiest wittiest thing I ever met with; shine out
thou Pale-faced Bawd to Midnight Wooers; Blush if thou can, to make thy Flame
more cheerful, for I will do a deed, if she will let me, shall make thy Cheeks
glow, little Luna, and wish instead, of Lighting the World, thou were in her
Condition of Peopling it; oh! th^re's Man's Meat already; has thy Blood, child,
any simpathetical motion toward mine? if you expect a Lover, tell me? if not,
leave the place for one that does? There Is a convenient Pond at the lower end,
if you are in a Despairing Condition.


Dorin. 'Twere hard to be droun'd so near a good Harbor, would not that Flesh
and Blood, you talk of, fling out a Rope to save me?


Y. Revel. O, it is the Devil, I know the Instrument by the sound; well, Madam,
I know not whether you will esteem it a Favor; but I have left Wit and Wine,
Women and Wealth, to show how much I am your Humble Servant.


Maid. It Is as my Mistress Raison suspected, and I Will acquaint her instantly.

[ Aside.] Exit.
Dor. Well, Sir, and I have neglected my Repose, ventured catching Cold, and
run the hazard of a Parents fury; to bid you welcome.


Y. Revel. So far we are upon the square; but how must I accost you? shall we
chat easy and naturally, without the Cant of Romance, and Ridiculous Whineing,
or must I open my Heroical Budget, for extravagant Raptures?


Dor. Keep it shut, I beseech you, Sir; for as I desire no Lies, I expect no
flights; let our Expressions be Cordial, whether they prove effectual or no;
what a Condition the Knave's in! now Cunning help me.


Y. Revel. Why then, as I hope to be Saved, and that is a Presumption --


Dor. Hold, Sir, I must give you some Cautions; in the first place, I am a
Maid, therefore talk Decently; in the next place, I am Honorable, therefore
talk Respectfully; and thirdly, I am and will be Honest, therefore talk
Virtuously.


Y. Revel. Oh Lord! what Company have thou betrayed me into? Virtuously and
Honest! the very words have made me Sober; if I were Dying of a Hycop, the
surprise of a Thumb Ring would destroy it.


Dor. I Will try you, Sir.
For if I yield, I lose him after it,
It is the Pride of Man, with Oaths to win us,
And then with scorn he boasts his Treacherous Conquest.
Why should I for the Joys of one poor Night,
Create the Plague of Doting ever after? Aside.
All Men despise what is given too willingly.

Y. Revel. Child, I find we shall do no great matters,
I wish Thee and thy Honesty a good Nights Rest,
Such a Cold Couple can get nothing but Agues sure.

Dor. Stay, Sir. I cannot part with him.
Goddess of Wisdom and of Beauty help me,
Pour all the Guiles and Graces of my Sex
Into my Face and Soul, but for an hour.
Diana, from thy Freezing Isicles
Of uninstructed harmless Chastity,
Send to his wanton Blood one drop to cool it,
That I may catch him in the Bonds of Honor,
And never more expose my self to lewdness.
Then will you go, Sir! She Pulls him, and looks Amorously.

Y. Rev. Why, what a charming look the Baggage gave me! Not if you talk within
compass; I am pretty good natured, and can pass by what is said, upon condition,
you don't Relapse; for look you, Child, Honor is as great a check to Love, as
fear of being discovered is when we are acting it.


Dor. But how can you esteem what comes so cheap?
When there is no tie, where is the security?
You have a treacherous notion in your minds,
Which, on the least occasion, you improve;
Believeing, if we are seduced by one,
By the same Rule we may be kind to all:
But Marriage binds us by a sacred Oath,
And Reputation checks all Lawless Thoughts.

Y. Rev. Look you, Madam, my Mother made me swear, upon her Death Bed, I never
should be bound for any body.


Dor. Though I know the Rogue lies, yet he pleases me: ( Aside) But as great an
Enemy as your Mother was to Wedlock, she was married to your Father, sure.


Y. Rev. If I thought 'twould any ways add to the making her a Whore, I Would
confess my self the Son of one. Why, Child, I think there was some such hugger
mugger business, but that was to preserve an Estate from going out of the
Family; 'twas a kind of an incestuous match, for they were Sisters Children;
but Interest, Interest; now mine is a Love free from all such design: Our
Fancies shall not be palled with cares of Wealth, of Cuckoldom, or chargeable
Posterity.


Dor. But nothing can be constant out of Wedlock.


Y. Rev. No, nor in it neither, scarce, to my Knowledge. Wedlock may cover a
sin, but 'twill never prevent one; and we have such an itch to be gadding when
we are confined: Had our first Parents never been forbid, they had never been
Curious. What makes men love eating abroad, when they may have it so much
better and cheaper at home, only because it is home.


Dor. Suppose you should gain Credit,
Would you for ever love, and never leave me?
Would you not covet still Variety,
And seek out some fresh Mistress to deceive?

Y. Rev. Not I, by Heavens;
Thou have Charms sufficient to secure a Heart,
Thy Wit's unimitable, thy Beauty matchless:
Nature was in thy Composition lavish.
Would Jove create a Mistress for himself,
He Would choose thy Mould to Cast her in.

Dor. Blessed Moment, he grows sober.

Y. Rev. Think what a glorious pride will swell my Soul,
When I possess what none beside can purchase:
Thy Generosity will oblige my Faith,
And I must shame my self in wronging thee.
What Fool would run the hazard of a change,
When he is secured of certain happiness?

Dor. Now Woman -- Oh, you flatter!
This heat of Love comes from the zeal of Lust:
No Passion can be lasting that is so eager,
And when you have pleased your self, and ruined me,
You will forget as fast as you invented.

Y. Rev. Desire can never forget what it must feed on;
Like Jealous Piety, I Will have the Figure
Drawn of the Saint I worship, to prevent it,
And to thy Shrine such hearty Offerings pay,
As no methodical dull Wife can merit.

Dor. Then I Have another Game to play.
Heat, heat his Blood, instead of cooling it,
That I may work his eager hopes to Love,
Then act a Virtue which shall tie him faster.

Y. Rev. Our Joys shall be irregular, but often:
Despising a Domestic Decency;
And when we faint with Emulating Fondness,
As two hot Combatants wearied, not beaten,
Whose violence has dried and choked their Lungs,
Creep to some Spring to re-instate their Spirits,
I from thy Lips will take such Verdure in,
As shall relieve my droopy drowthy Soul,
And make me fiercer for the next Engagement.

Dor. By Heaven, if he persists I am undone,
His charming Tongue will blast my Stratagem;
And will ye swear? but what avails men's Oaths!
Forgot when the occasion's passed which urged 'em.

Y. Rev. What should I swear!

Dor. Swear that you will never marry whilst I live,
For that is the Rock our yielding Sex still splits on.
You to the Generous Mistress curse the snare,
But when you're tired, make use on it to avoid her.

Y. Rev. May Poverty and Jealousy attend me
The minute I prove false:
Come let us retire, and wind our selves in Bliss,
Tangle our Souls in Ecstasies unknown,
And drop into Confusion by consent.
By Heaven, I Am sir'd, her every touch distracts me,
So over eager am I to possess her:
I fear the fierceness will destroy the Power.

Dor. And will you ever love me?

Y. Rev. Can I love Heaven, Prosperity, or Content?
Oh do not drill me thus! but take me to thee,
Smother me in thy Arms with kind Convulsions,
And hug me to the utmost verge of Bliss.

Dor. Stand off, Base Villain! thou Beastly part of man!
Thou glowing Satyr! got by some rank Devil.
Go to the Stews, vile thing! and make thy Choice;
Take Pleasure and Diseases both at once,
And scatter 'em through all the Strumpet-Tribe:
I loath thee for this wicked Supposition:
And all the noble Notions in my Soul,
Which crowded with a fondness to prefer thee,
I here dismiss, and in their Room admit
As base thoughts of thee, as thy intended Practice!

Y. Rev. Stay, Madam; what an Apoplexy's here in the midst of Health You can
but try me sure, and think this way to work me to a higher value for you.


Dor. Touch me not, Monster!
If thou do, I Will call for help; I feared thy Treachery, and have it near me.
Because I tried thee with a seeming kindness,
Could thou believe so poor of me, to yield
On a first Conference? had I really doated,
So much I hate thy low esteem of me,
That you are as much my scorn, as once my likeing.

Y. Rev. Yet stay, Madam! by Heaven, I cannot leave her!
There Is something from her which has touched me nearly:
Stay, Madam!
And since I have committed such a Crime,
Let me gain Pardon, though I lose your Favor:
For mild discretion tells me I Am to blame,
And all those Charms, which when my Blood was warm
Enticed me to a lewd imagination,
Now strike a Reverence upon my Soul:
'Twas cursed Wine! that Spirit of Assurance,
And Introducer of all Lawless thoughts,
That bred the mischief. I now am temperate,
Shame has destroyed the Vice, and I am honest.

Dor. Oh happy management!
How can I trust what has so lately wronged me?
If I forgive you, and you again relapse,
I am alone in fault.

Y. Rev. By Heaven I am as calm as a Platonic:
Thy Glorious Virtue has increased that Flame,
Which after its lascivious heat had ended.
Propose a Remedy to heal this Breach,
And like expiring Mortals, fond of life,
I Will take in any thing that gives me hopes. Enter Aunt and whispers Dorinda.

Dor. No more, I Am called; keep steady in this Faith,
And you shall hear soon from me.

Y. Rev. Will you not tell me when; that being full of the expecting Bliss, I
may some comfort purchase, with the knowledge that every tedious hour that
falls away, I have an Enemy the less?


Dor. To morrow at the Wells: but be gone.


Y. Rev. I cannot leave you.


Dor. Nay offer not to watch me, but convince me of your love, by your
obedience, and you shall know to morrow what I am.


Y. Rev. Thou dearest, thou first I ever truly loved, adieu.

Exit.
Dor. Thanks to my prosperous Art, I think I have thee.
Now to my Interest; how dull is all
That Is coming, how dear was all that is past!
Yet I must seem to covet what I Would shun;
Oh what a curse it is, when for filthy Gain
We affect a Pleasure in a real Pain. [ Exit Dor.] Re-enter Reveller.

Y. Rev. What the Devil ails me! or does the Devil govern me! my Blood's quite
altered, and those loose desires, which never liked but for Convenience, are
changed to real Passion; my wanton Drunkenness turned to a sober Admiration,
and I begin to fear I Am growing a downright dull, insipid, constant Lover! oh
for some kind she to allay this mighty Fever, that I may snub this damned
honest Inclination, before it gets the better of me.


Enter Mrs. Raison masked, in a Scarf. Satan, I thank thee, here is a Petticoat
I Am sure! I find wickedness will not be kicked out this night, and my
Constitution returns to its rambling Custom. Madam!

Mrs. Raise. Sir.


Y. Rev. What cruel accident can be the occasion of this solitary traveling
so late?


Mrs. Raise. Why, Sir, I am come to look after a lost Lover, who parting from
me in a sullen humor, I fear has hanged himself.


Y. Rev. No, no, Child, never trouble thy Head about that, those Roman
Gallantries are expired; but if thou would be thoroughly revenged on him for
leaving thee, take up with me: I bear a tender Conscience to all distressed
Damsels, and keep a particular Fund for Acts of Charity.


Mrs. Raise. Should all the distressed Damsels come to you for Relief, I believe
you would shut up your Exchequer quickly.


Y. Rev. Look you, Madam, I am not the first Banker that has broke, when his
Bills have come too thick upon him.


Mrs. Raise. Say you so, Sir.

Vnmasks.
Y. Rev. Mrs. Raison!


Mrs. Raise. To your amazement, ungrateful, perjured Villain.


Y. Rev. Oh, I find what this will come to, and thanks to my unknown Mistress,
am pretty well provided for a Reconcilement: What means this Fury, Madam?


Mrs. Raise. Devil, can thou ask that Question! The Lady you have had so long
should know the meaning, could I find her out.


Y. Rev. Now for a good Face to a bad Cause: I suppose, if you would examine
into it, you might easily find her out.


Mrs. Raise. What says the Beast?


Y. Rev. I do confess I am somewhat Brutify'd, but I have so much humanity
left, to remember I tipped you the Wink when I left you, and you Leer'd, as much
as to say, I Will follow you.


Mrs. Raise. Was ever such impudence!


Y. Rev. Was ever such forgetfulness! why; what the Devil, because I am Drunk,
do you, think I Have lost my Senses? Did you not come presently after me, Masqu'd?
and have you not been bantring me this hour, with a pretense I did not know
you, though I called you by your name; and hinted some Particulars of our
Familiarity? and did you not turn short from me at the upper end of the Walk,
and run from me, and now here I have met you again?


Mrs. Raise. This is beyond all Patience!


Y. Rev. I Am sure I have shown a great deal, in bearing what I speak of, and
but I was thorughly convin'd it was you, and only a trick to try me, I would no
more have saunter'd after you, than an old Courtier would have followed a
Statesman out of favor.


Mrs. Raise. Distraction! Did you not address to me as a fresh Woman?


Y. Rev. Ay, that was when you used me like a fresh Man; trick for trick,
Child, that is all: and since you have had your humor, come along and let me
have mine.


Mrs. Raise. And do you think I Will be satisfied thus?


Y. Rev. No, no, I Will satisfy you better.


Mrs. Raise. This will not do, Devil, I am so convinced of your Baseness, that --


Y. Rev. ^^^h, pox, too much is too much: Prithee don't drive the Jest so far
neither; I can bear, you know by what is passed, but I gad the Worm will turn at
last.


Mrs. Raise. It Is a folly to talk to him in this condition, I Will take the
Morning to School him in; perhaps it might be some midnight Jilt watching for
Prey, like a Polecat in a Warren, and my aproach might frighten her away.


Y. Rev. Come, come, Child.


Mrs. Raise. Whither, what do you mean?


Y. Rev. How silly that is; where is your Husband?


Mrs. Raise. Why, your Father and he, with the Drugster, are all gone a Rambling
into the Town: I expect none of my Wedlock Monster this night.


Y. Rev. That Is as much as to say I must take care of her. Well, we'll to my
Lodging, you may get in early enough unseen the back way, as you use to do.


Mrs. Raise. My Maid will take off that; but I shall catch my Death here,
standing so long in the Dew.


Y. Rev. We'll go, My Dear. Claret I worship thee!
At last the injured Termagant's grown Civil,
A Drunken Impudence can outface the Devil. Exeunt.

SCENE continues the Park. Enter Sir Tho. Reveller, Raison, Sasaph. Drunk,
Singing; with Music, Servants with Wine. All Sing. There Is nothing like a
Brimmer,
To make the Heart full glad;
It chears the Soul,
Inspires all,
The Drunk are never sad.
Raise. Sir Thomas, let us out-roar Thunder, be Lewder than Atheists, out-Swear a
Gamester at the loss of his last Stake, out-drink a Cook in the Dog Days, be
Saucyer than kept Whores to their Cullys, and Prouder than Constables at
midnight.


Sir Tho. Let Us be as conceited as City Wits, vainer than City Wives, fonder
than City Husbands, and as great strangrs to our old Acquaintance, wherever we
meet 'em, as a new made Sherriff to his next Neighbor


Sasa. Let Us be frollicksome as Counselors Clerks; and as Awkard as their
Masters; make as much of our Whores as Presbyters in private, value discretion
no more than our young Nobility. Let Us commit Murder, that we may be company
for Gentlemen, and stalk as stately as a Foot Captain, when he marches through
the City at the head of his Mirmidons, to relieve at the Tower.


Sir Tho. Till by affecting what we are not capable of, we become as Rediculous
as a dancing Judge.


Raise. Well said, Sir Thomas, but where is this Son of yours?


Sir Tho. Hang him, Rogue, he is stole home to some Whore I warrant him.


Raise. A Pox take all Whores, say I.


Sas. Thou have reason, poor Cuckold. It Is a Heavenly Moonshiny night. Some
Wine, Rogues.

Servant's fill Wine.
Enter Constable and Watch. Constable. Stand.


Raise. And that is as much as we can.


Constable. Who are ye?


Sas. Drunkards, rich Fellows, and not over wise.


Constable. Oh, Sir Thomas, and Mr. Raison, good Morrow to you Gentlemen; you're
upon the frolic, I see. Rest ye merry, Gentlemen; pray do no mischief, and be
as Jovial as you please.


Sir. Tho. Nay, drink the King's health, Mr. Constable.


Constable. If ye please, Gentlemen; come, Sirs, Heaven bless him.

Drinks.
Watch. May Not we pledge ye, Masters?


Sir Tho. No, Vermin, no; there is Money to swill malt with, Claret's as much
out of your Element, as good Manners beyond your Understanding.


All Watch. Bless ye, Masters.

Exeunt Constable. and Watch.
Sas. This Constable has more Sense, than ever I met with in any of his Tribe;
some Rogues now would have provoked a Quarrel, only for the Convenience of
their Watchmens stealing Hats and Perriwigs, and so forth.


Sir Tho. The VVatch of Covent Garden would no more have missed such an
opportunity, than a Thief would slipping into a House, when the Door's open.


Raise. There is one of those Watchmen they say is a terrible Fellow, pray who
is he?


Sir. Tho. Why, he is a Midnight Rakehel driver, that has Cracked more Skulls,
than ever Pavier thump'd Flints; there is not a scourer of any Reputation, whose
facetious Noddle has not had the Honor of being Dubbed with his Quarter Staff;
he was never in the right, and yet always gets the better; he will sit you up
three hours after his time to VVatch for Prey, and use you the worse for not
coming sooner; and being an il-llook'd Fellow, he has a Pension from the
Churchwardens, for being Bullbeggar to all the froward Children in the Parish.


Raise. A most notable Description: but your Son, Sir Thomas?


Sas. Ay, your Son.


Sir. Tho. Let Us go and disturb the dog, and drown him in pint Glasses.


Sas. Agreed, agreed. Play Cats-guts and Rossen.

( Exeunt Singing) There Is nothing like a Brimmer.
SCENE, Y. Reveller' s Lodging. Enter Mrs. Raison. Mrs. Raise. Well, Mr.
Reveller, you're a wicked man; and were it not more out of a Motherly
Affection, that you might come to no harm in your Drink, than any inclination
or desire I have to your person, I swear I would not have come with you.


Y. Rev. This will be the Cant when she rises in the morning; she never was
with me in her life, but she told me 'twas to keep me from ill Women.


Mrs. Raise. But I hope you are somewhat come to your self now?


Y. Rev. I shall be, Child, when my Vapors are expelled, the night's much
wasted; come, we lose time.

A noise of Music, Sir Tho. and the rest singing without.
Enter Servant. Mrs. Raise. Heavens, what noise is that? It Is your Father's
Voice, and my Monsters!


Serve. Sir, your Father's just coming up, with Mr. Raison and several others.


Y. Rev. Go, get you in, lock the Door, and go to Bed, I Will send 'em away, I
warrant you.


Mrs. Raise. Don't drink no more, dear George, you will be senceless if you do.


Y. Rev. Don't fear it.

Puts her in.
Enter Sir Tho. Reveller, Sas. Raise. Music, Servants with Wine, etc. Sir Tho.
Sings. A Pox of the Rogue that sneaks from his Wine,
And runs to a Daggle-tayl'd Whore;
May Nature be drowzy, and bawlk his design,
Or may he never drink any more.
How now, Rogue, how now Sculker, what leave your old Dad for a Whore? I never
served your Grandfather so, Sirrah.


Y. Rev. Indeed, Sir, you were too hard for me. If I had drank any more, I
should have forgot the duty of a Son, and have used you saucily.


Sir Tho. Why, that is like most of the Sons of this Age, when we are old,
they are the only young Fellows will keep company with us, and it is against
their Wills too, only the respect of what we'll leave 'em obliges a little, so
we are forced to wink at their wickedness to keep our own in Countenance.


Raise. Ay, Sir Thomas, the greatest Seducers of Children now a days are the
Parents; the Fathers for the Sons, and the Mothers for the Daughters.


Sir Tho. And who are the greatest Seducers of Wives? old Race of Ginger.


Sas. Batchelors, Sir Thomas, illustrious and free Batchelors.


Raise. Not of thy Age, Drugster; you are as dry as the Ingredients of thy
Trade, and have no more Moisture in thee than a Potato.


Sas. Well, had I any Children, they should never go to a Playhouse, nor to
Church.


Sir Tho. Why so?


Sas. Because they go to learn Wickedness at the one, and Hypocrisy, how to
dissemble it, at the other.


Y. Rev. Ay, but you may learn good at both, if you will make a right Construction.


Sas. Yes, you may be sober in a Tavern, if they will bring you no Wine; but where
there is Object, there is Temptation, and where there is Temptation, there is
Desire, and where there is Desire, there is Uneasiness, and where there is
Uneasiness, there is Impatience to be cured, and when there is Impatience to be
cured, Adultery or Fornication's the only Remedy; so the Devil in the end's
your Physician.


Sir Tho. Well said, Sas. and since the Clergy on all sides are so fickle, I
think that Layety wisest, that believes none of 'em; and now we are talking of
Church Affairs, where is your Whore, you Dog?


Y. Rev. Whore, Sir!


Sir Tho. Ay, Sirrah, I Am sure you would not have run away, if there had not
been a Whore in the case -- therefore I Am resolved I will see her, and if I
like her, I Will be better acquainted with her.


Raise. Why, Sir Thomas, suppose your Son had a Woman with him, would you have
so little Grace as to commit Incest?


Sir Tho. Incest! that is a jest! for most of the younger Brothers about Town,
are kept by their Fathers Whores, and I say I will see her.


Y. Rev. Nay, pray Sir, you will disturb --


Sir. Tho. Ay, therefore I Will do it.


Y. Rev. But, Sir, he is not well.


Sir Tho. He, what he, Sirrah?


Y. Rev. Why Sir, my Lord Worthy's Chaplain: who being in want of a Lodging for
this night, is within, in my Bed: He Is a grave sober man, Sir, and you will fright
him out of his Wits.


Sir Tho. How, a sober Fellow and a Nobleman's Chaplain, he is at Boardwages
then; for where they command the Cellar, the Butler's never idle, and I will
see this Miracle.


Y. Rev. Nay, pray Sir. Mr. Raison and Mr. Sasaphras, I conjure you, by the
Worth and Honor of Citizens, stand by me, and keep my Father out, or I am
ruined for ever.


Raise. Yes, George, you shall find we Citizens have Honor and Worth: Come, Sir
Thomas, here is a Bumper to you.


Sas. Agreed. Sir Thomas, your Inclinations.


Sir Tho. They Are in his Bedchamber, here is her Health. Drink you Dog, that we
may be upon the square with her. Drinks. So, now I Will see her.

Offers to go in Raise. holds him.
Raise. You shall not go in.


Sir. Tho. Gad but I will.


Sas. Faith but you shall not.


Sir Tho. By the Hectors of Covent Garden.


Raise. By the Members of Grocers Hall.


Sir. Tho. Why, is not the Whore as free for me as for him?


Raise. Sir, I have given him the Word of a Citizen to stand by him, and my
^uncto will not allow me to violate the Honor of my Corporation.


Sir Tho. Why, you Cuckoldy Dog, it may be your own Wife for ought you know.


Raise. I care not if it were my Mother, and he were getting an Heir to
disinherit me, he shall not be interrupted; and though I am as it were dead
Drunk, yet I will stand by him, I say I will stand by him.

Falls down.
Sir Tho. So suddenly fell the Walls of Jerico, and Joshua plundered the Town.


Y. Rev. Mr. Sasaphras.


Sas. Hold there, Sir Thomas, I stand in the Gap, and like the Bassa of Buda
will dye in defending the place.

Saf. draws Y. Reveller' s Sword, and stands between the door and Sir Thomas.
Sir Tho. Why, what a Pox have we got a Hydra? No sooner one Head down, but
another sprouts up? Why, dare you fight?


Sas. Dare! 'ounds draw, come, for the Pass, yours or mine.


Sir Tho. And have thou really Courage?

Draws.
Sas. Have you a Heart, Sir, try if I can hit it; come on, Sir, come on.


Sir. Tho. Nay, if you are so hot upon fighting, you are no Citizen I Am sure;
and considering how Captains and Laced Coats have been admired by Shopkeepers
Wives, thou may be the hasty Offspring of an Afternoon's Recreation in
Moorfields.


Sas. Come, Come, will you Tilt for this Lady?


Sir Tho. No, I shall not do like the Fools now a days; Tilt for a Whore I don't
know; Come Sirrah, since I must not see her, Puts up. though I am sure it is
Raison's Wife --


Raise. I care not, I Will stand by him.


Sir Tho. What Liquor have you? have you any Cherry, Sir? Cherry, the Comfort
of midnight.


Y. Rev. Yes, Sir.


Sir Tho. Fetch it then; three Beer Glasses of Cherry, Sirrah.


Sas. Ay, now you say something.

Puts up.
Sir Tho. He had as good let me see her, for I Will debilitate him so with
Brandy, he shall be useless to her. Enter Servant with three large Glasses of
Cherry Brandy. Hold, let me taste 'em all, to know if the Rogue has not palm'd
something else for his Master. Sincere and Spiritual, a concealed Body, and yet
a considerable Tastes. Body too. Come, to the Memory of our poor Brother
departed.


Sas. Agreed.


Sir Tho. So, now George, fall to your Lady, and if the Brandy does its part, I
think thou will faulter in thine.


Sas. Take care of the good Man, George, for the good Woman's sake.


Y. Rev. I warrant you; ten thousand thanks.


Sir Tho. Sirrah, remember this when I have a Wench. Strike up; A Pox of the
Rogue that runs, etc.

Ex. Sir Tho. Sas. and Music.
Y Rev. Now to the Female; if fear has not killed her. Sirrah, draw Raison into
your Room, and take care he peeps not out in the morning, till all is safe.

Each Whoremaster his Cuckold thus o're-powers,
We make 'em Drunk, and then their Wives are ours.
Servant takes up Raison, who all the while cries, I Will stand by him. Ex.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. Dorinda's Apartment.
Enter Lord Worthy and Dorinda. Lo. Worcester. MY dear Dorinda Darling of my senses,
how sweet is Love after so long an absence; my hours have been as troublesome
without thee as they have been delighted in being with thee; nor will I ever
travail more for Knowledge; my utmost Study Centered still in thee; I have
wandered like a Child without my Guide, followed the Notion of improving Arts,
when I had left my Natural Genius here.


Dor. My Lord, you know you are welcome to these arms, but if the separation
was so tedious to you who have had such vast variety of Countries and of Courts,
of all that is worthy the pursuit of Fancy, think how uneasy has been my
solitude: no object, Entertainment or acquaintance, nothing diverting to
deceive the time, my prospect limited, my measures fixed, nothing but Lectures
from a peevish Aunt; nay had I not been blessed with constant Letters, which
satisfied me that my Lord was safe, I must have sunk beneath the sad restraint.


Lo. Worcester. I Will study how to recompense thy patience; the generous compliance
thou have shown in thy submission to my Jealous Love, (the dread of loosing
thee inflicted it) but I Am united now for ever here, nor will I e're torment
thee more with absence; great Natures utmost Curiosity can never match
Dorinda's full perfections.


Dor. Oh tedious Raptures and Insipid Eloquence, aside. Be constant to your
words and I am happy, but you were saying you must go to London.


Lo. Worcester. My Love.


Dor. I say if you do go to London do not stay long, may I expect you back at
Dinner?


Lo. Worcester. I have Accounts to settle, Bills to receive, things to look after
that belong to thee, some Presents.


Dor. Presents, alas! you are all I covet.


Lo. Worcester. No, my Delight, I have brought over some toys, some Silks, and
Points; still what I saw that might adorn my Love, I picked up by degrees in
Traveling, to let you know you never was from hence.


Dor. But be sure you come at Night.


Lo. Worcester. Will the Night come think thou I could stay from thee, but I Will
not leave thee yet.


Dor. Nay, then you will be so late you will not come home; the earlyer you are
there, the sooner you will be here.


Lo. Worcester. And will not you take it ill I leave you?


Dor. Unkind suspicion, can I pretend to love and be displeased at ought is for
my Lords convenience.


Lo. Worcester. Blessings upon thee, adieu then for a while.


Dor. Be sure you think upon me.


Lo. Worcester. My Soul is useless when not employed on thee my Life.


Dor. My hearts Devotion.


Lo. Worcester. I cannot stir whilst I behold thee.


Dor. You shall not stay to Prejudice your Business.

she seems to hug him, and all the while drives him toward the door.
Lo. Worcester. At Night my Love betimes.


Dor. Forgot not.


Lo. Worcester. I warrant you.

Exit Worcester.
Dor. He Is gone and all this day is mine: within there, Aunt.


Enter Aunt. Aunt. What Is my Lord gone?


Dor. To London, put on your hood and scarf, and get me mine, it is a fine
(...) I Will to the Wells.


(...) And will you still pursue this Reveller, you will Repent.


Dor. Peace, manage for thy own ends I Am resolved, if you will stay at home you
may; who waits? get the Chariot ready.


Aunt. Well, Heaven direct all for the best.


Dor. Thus the Gallant is by the Mistress Ruled,
Whilst by some other Lover she is Fooled.
Exit.
Aunt. What will this come to? here is nothing but Destruction to be looked
for; In Fine, I Will e'n tell the Gentleman downright who and what she is, better
he should have her any way then marry her, for the Treason must out, and then
she is undone, he can never forgive her, nay what is worse I shall be turned a
starving, I cannot work, and we Ancient Gentlewomen that live upon the Sins of
our Relations are very ill qualifyed to get a penny in the fear of Grace. Well,
take warning by me good Dames, for it is not only an ill thing in being
accessory to the Debauching your Kindred; but it is a provoking thing to see
Young Girls partake of what we cannot.

Exit.
SCENE II. A Garden; In the middle Debtford-Wells.
Enter several as drinking the Waters, Florella and Violante. Flor. Well, I am
satisfied, my Roving-Rascall Reveller and Mrs. Raison have been together this
Night, I watched her stealing in this morning at five a Clock, and I do not
know of any other Lover she has here about.


Viol. I suppose my Lord and he have not separated whatever adventure they have
had, well I wish I had not seen him.


Flor. Why so? You must have somebody, and why not him; he is a pretty
Gentleman, and besides a Lord, and that you know goes a great way with a
Merchants Daughter; most of our young Nobility by the Extravagance of their
Fathers are left very inconsiderable in their Fortunes; so their quality being
necessitated for money, and our Citizens Ambitious of Honor, many a Title has
been kept up by the Pride of a Tradesman, who never values what he gives for a
Nobleman to his Son in Law.


Viol. It Is true, and interest is so absolute, and Poverty so pressing, that a
Tailor who can but get a Considerable Estate, need not despair of seeing his
Daughter dye a Countess.


Flor. Well Sir Thomas has told us what passed between him and his Son last
Night, our shifting of clothes may conceal us, and I am resolved to teaze him,
and all the fools that talk to me this Morning, as far as the Spleen of a
Jealous Mistress can reach.


Viol. Agreed, we shall have variety of game presently, the Coxcombs thicken
already.


Enter Sir Willian Thoughtless and Captain Bounce. Sr. Will. Bounce, come
along, ha! A brace of Tit^ Lasses yonder let us make up to 'em -- how do you
Ladies, why this Melancholy Velvet upon such fair Complexions, has the
Chillness of the Waters made the Roses on your cheeks to fade, or has their
Influence rudely pressed upon the tip of your Noses and made 'em bleak and
sharp?


Viol. How ever sharp they have made our Noses they have had no effects upon
your understanding, for your Language is as Ridiculous as your Person.


Cap. Bou. Prithee Sir William let us seek some other game, these have better
tongues then our usual acquaintance.


Sr. Will. No gad, my stock of Raillery's not out yet.


Viol. I believe you may put it all into a sentence, and not be out of Breath
with the Delivery.


Sr. Will. Why gad, I love to talk with Vizards mightily, for we have the
Privilege of Railing as much as we please.


Flor. Without running the danger of being beaten for it.


Sr. Will. Why, pull off your Masque and I Will be Civil.


Viol. If I were sure the sight of my face would frighten you away I would.


Sr. Will. Why, you don't know but it may, I have known many a pleasant Tongue
belong to a Damnable ugly Face.


Viol. I see a very indifferent Face that belongs to a Foolish Tongue.


Flor. So we have the pleasure of being convinced and leaving your Worship in
doubt.


Sr. Will. Damn me, I believe you're ancient, your Features are expired and
your Face is in Mourning for 'em.


Cap. Bou. Well said Knight, my dear Sir William Thoughtless, Ounds, if she
answers that, I Will allow her a Wit.


Viol. Or you would be allowed no spunger, is he your Probatum est, bound to
flatter a Fool or dine with the Servants.


Sr. Will. Answer me to what I reparteed upon your Masque, and gad take me I Will
kiss you.


Viol. No, I wear it on purpose to keep flys from my Face.


Sr. Will. Flys Madam; why I am a Knight.


Viol. The best excuse in the World for a Blockhead; tell but your Title
beforehand Sir Knight, and no body will be surpised with your Conversation.


Sr. Will. I must go now Bounce, my Wit's quite gone, I have but one thing more
to say.


Bou. Ease your self, and let us depart.


Sr. Will. Gad, I believe for all your fine Clothes you are but Servant-Maids in
your Ladies Apparel.


Flor. That Is the Constant Cant of the Chitts at the Chocolet-House, where, as
they receive Favors from nothing but Chamber-maids and Trulls, they abuse all
that are above 'em, how long have you haunted that Nursery of Fools?


Sr. Will. Ever since it was the Rendevouz for Whores -- that was a smart one,
faith; and if I have not seen there, I Am sure I shall child, come Bounce.


Cap. Bou. Buy Bulkers.


Viol. Buy Bully.


Cap. Bou. 'Sdeath if your Lover were here, he should find --


Viol. None of you I Am sure -- but yonder he comes.


Enter at the upper end of the Stage Y. Revel. and L. Worthy. Cap. Boun. Let
him follow me if he dare.


Viol. He cannot spare so much time Sir, I believe, but if you will stay a minute.


Boun. I, Damme I Will wait for no man.

Exit singing.
Flor. Look you Sister yonder comes our Sparks, my Lover looks a little heavy
for want of sleep; Prithee let us slip into the Crowd and observe what female
Flag they will first strike to.

Exit.
L. Worcester. Faith George, this was a narrow escape, had the Old fellow satisfied
his Curiosity you had been in a scurvy Condition.


Y. Reve. Thanks to the kind husband and Drugster, my Credit is yet safe, but
see here comes the old Gentleman with my two Champions.


Enter Sr. Tho. Raison and Sasa. Raise. Well, I Protest Sr. Thomas there is no
Living with you at this Rate, adsheartlikins, two more such nights would kill
me outright, my Constitution will never bear it.


Sr. Tho. Then I Would never bear such a Constitution.
When I can Drink no more I hope to dye,
For without Drink Life's a Dull Property.

L. Worcester. Sr. Thomas, good morrow.


Sr. Tho. Ah my Lord Worthy, gad take me you are a Flincher, though -- you served
us somewhat basely last night, faith I am sorry to see a young Nobleman that
has no Dependence on the Government, sip like a Minister of State that has his
Fortunes to make out on it.


L. Worcester. Really Sr Thomas you must excuse me, I was so weary Riding Post, that
I could not help it but I Will make amends speedily.


Sr. Tho. But here is a Dog that left us too, Sir, Sir, somebody stayed out
till 6. this morning; pray my L. where did your Chaplain lie last night.


L. Worcester. Chaplain, Sr. Thomas, I have none.


Sr. Tho. Ha! George good boy George, oh Pretty George.

Sings At Westminster a sight was Known,
The Like was never heard,
A Judge that never wore a Gown,
And a Bishop without a Beard.
Oh Rare George -- why Sir, you Cursed Villain, what do you think will become
of your Soul, Sir, to stand in such a Lie to your own Father, and lay your
Sins upon the Church you Dog, as if they had not enough to answer for of their
own.


Sas. Pray my Lord take him off.


L. Worcester. Well Sr. Thomas to night I give a Ball or a sort of a Masquerade at my
Lady Hazards, and will fetch up lost time: I must only go up to London on some
urgent business, and will be with you in the Evening without fail; Gentlemen
till then your Servant.


Sas. and Raise. We Will prepare for you, my Lord.


Enter at one side of the Stage Dor. and Aunt; at the other Flor. and Viol. Mrs
Raise, etc. Sr. Tho Why what an abundance of Whores-flesh is here; Landlord and
Drugster let us have a Brush with 'em, I am hotheaded and can talk smartly.


Raise. I feel the Spirit of Scandal a little provoking in me too.


Sas. Let us Join, and Combine -- We Will make 'em Repine, as Satyr so fine, --
Our Wit shall outshine -- their Faces Divine -- and we will sing the Praise the
Praise of good Wine.


Dor. That Is Reveller and his Father; what women are they? they are making up, I
think my Lady Hazards Daughters, Let us observe.


Y. Revel. Ladys.


Sr. Tho. Jackanapes, after me's manners Sir, why what will you Ingross the
Women both at home and abroad?


Y. Revel. Nay Sir here is more game, there is no occasion for Confinement in
this place.

going.
Sr. Tho. Rogue, I will make you stay here, and if you speak with any Woman
till I have done with her, I Will break your head.


Viol. Is this Gentleman your Tutor Sir, that he bears so strict a hand over
you?


Y. Revel. He is my Father Madam, as to the begetting me; but an utter Stranger
as to the maintenance of me.


Sr. Tho. He was my Son Madam, when he was in his virtuous Teens, but since the
Devil has stamped him one and Twenty, alas a day he has out-Sin'd me like an
Elder Brother.


Y. Revel. I may out-sin you like an Elder Brother, but as to Estate I Am sure
I Am the younger.


Viol. What, is the Gentleman of Age, and worth nothing Sir?


Sr. Tho. There Is a Thousand such Gentlemen about this Town Madam; why what
Sir would you have my estate before I Am Dead? -- when I Am dead he shall have
all Madam, I cannot live much above 40. years longer.


Flor. And then he will be as much past the Pleasure of enjoying it as you are now
that have it.


Sr. Tho. I past the Pleasure, adsheartlikins, if you dare venture, you shall
find I can play on Taber and Fife still, Madam.


Raise Old Instruments are a long time a tuning, Madam.


Viol. Do You speak for your self or the Gentleman Sir?


Sas. Prithee stand by, married man, what says your Ladyship to me Madam?


Viol. You Sir, why who are you?


Sas. Who am I, Madam, a Reverend Alderman of the City of London.


Viol. What, one that lends money upon Acts of Parliament, manages Juries in
your Ward, and snacks with the Sheriff, give Courtiers Credit in hopes of
Getting Employments, Bribe Common-councill-men, Cheat Orphans, and sponge
Dinners all the year round at my Lord-Mayors Table.


Sr. Tho. Well whistled blackbird, a notable Baggage, and a Whore by her wit;
Child if thou likest me, I will disinherit my Son and Settle all upon thee.


Viol. Faith Sr. Thomas that would be a sure way to settle all upon your Son,
for I like him so well I should give him every groat.


Sr. Tho. Pox on me for a Fool to make Love, and this young Dog present: Get
you gone you Rogue, do'nt Dangle after me thus you booby, are you not able to
walk alone and be hanged, get you gone and be hanged.

Dor. beckons Y. Revell.
Flor. Observe him Sister with that Woman whom I will have Dogged, it is the
same he talked with yesterday. But Sr. Thomas I hear you are to be married to
my Lady Hazard, and methinks this is not a very good sign of living Virtuously.


Sr. Tho. Ay Madam, I may marry her, but may love none but you.


Flor. But Sr. Thomas, pray let us observe your Son.


Sr. Tho. Hang him Rogue, an Inconstant Dog, a faithless Villain.


Mrs Raise. So those are Florella and Violante, but who is that my false
Villain's so hot upon?


Raise. Prithee Let us make up to yonder Woman, I find these are too hard for
us.


Sas. Thou may if thou will, but I gad I Will speak no more to the Sex.


Raise. Pray if a man may be so hold what come you here for?


Mrs Raise. Not to talk with Fools.


Sas. Prithee Raison let us give over making love; adsheart, a Citizen making
love is as ridiculous as a Parson making Legs, I Will go to the Coffee-Room,
Smoke a Pipe, and Drink a glass of Mum.


Raise. Agreed, where like true tradesmen we will seem Politic, 'tho we know
nothing.

Exit Sas. and Raise to Dorinda.
Y. Revel. This is a happiness I could not expect.


Dor. I Am sure you don't deserve it, I find all Women are welcome to you.


Y. Revel. Only to pass away the time with Madam, men may Divert themselves
with several Women, but only one can make 'em truly happy.


Dor. And how many of those ones have you said this to?


Y. Rev. As I never was really in Love till now, I never had occasion for the
Expression before.


Dor. Do you not know those Women you talked to?


Y. Rev. No.


Dor. Your Love is blind indeed when only a strange Petticoat can cheat you of
your Mistress.


Y. Rev. Upon honor I know 'em not.


Dor. They Are my Lady Hazards Daughters.


Y. Rev. Indeed.


Dor. Nay this is over-acted.


Y Rev. By Heaven and Earth I know 'em not.


Dor. The Youngest I hear is the Ruler of your affections.


Y. Rev. I must confess, Madam, till I saw you I had a hankering that way, she
has a very considerable Fortune, which in my Circumstances was very Prevailing.


Dor. Besides their Father was Lord Mayor of London, their Mother I hear was a
Court-Laundress, and being given to blab betrayed the Intrigue of a great Man
to his Wife, and was Casheir'd, but having Purchased an Interest for former
Service, got Hazard Knighted, and married him.


Y. Rev. You are better acquainted with the Family then I am.


Dor. But 15000 l. makes amends for all faults in Parentage, and the Children
are as acceptable as the best born.


Y. Rev. Faith Madam, so fa^ I must justify 'em, that they Deserve better
Families, for their Accomplishments will give 'em Titles without their Fortunes
to Noble blood, nor would the most honorable blush to own 'em.


Dor. You speak like a man of honor Sir, but we are observed, you must dine
with me to day.


Y. Rev. Blessings upon you.


Dor. Be in the Park at one of the clock, I Will send to you.


Y. Rev. Must you go soon?


Dor. Immediately; they are making up to us; I suppose I have raised the Ladys
Jealousy, and she has a mind to have a fling at me.


Flor. Why how now Mr. Reveller you are the favorite of our whole Sex, I find
the Lady's Inclining.


Dor. It Is but your Leavings Madam, she must have charms indeed that can
pretend to raise the seige you have laid.


Flor. The Fort is of no great Consequence nor Worth much trouble, when it is
willing to yield to such things.


Dor. That Is Florella I Am sure, I know it by that despicable speech; -- I Will
fret her more, I love as much as the, am equally malicious, and will try the
Wit she is famed for.

aside
Y. Rev. Faith Ladys I Am not stubborn, the fairest in Conditions I give up to,
and she who thinks best of me now may have me.


Dor. The Ladys silence tells you she is indifferent; if you stand good to what
we have agreed on we will Seal Articles when next we meet; and if this Ladys face
has no more charms then her tongue, I dare trust you alone with her, without
one Jealous pang.


Flor. Pray take your spark with you Madam, for if you should relapse, 'twill
save you the trouble of coming back again and being Laughed at.


Dor. I have so much good nature Madam, that I had rather make you laugh by
coming for him again, then weep by taking him from you now.


Viol. Mr. Reveller take the Lady home with you for shame, and put on clean
linen both; it is mightily fullyed with last nights Rambling.


Dor. It Is Whiter now then ever your Mother washed, and finer then ever her
Children wore when the Father was Lord Mayor and made 'em ride in his Pageants
to save charges.

Exit Dorinda.
Flor. Devil, does she know us?


Sr. Tho. A Tite Baggage by the Sons of Apollo: now Madam I hape I may go down
with you.


Viol. I Will ask my mother Sr. Thomas;

Vnmasques.
Flor. And I Will tell Florella how constant you are.

Vnmasques to Y. Rev.
Y. Rev. Oh your Servant, do you think I did not know you.


Sr. Tho. Here Is fine work.


Viol. O yes, and so did your Father:


Sr. Tho. Now Impudence, I gad, and so I did Kirlins, and rallyed accordingly,
did not I George, Lie Lustily you Dog, and I Will be familiar with you for a
fortnight.


Y. Rev. Why Sr. Thomas told me of you Ladys, saw when you came out, and we set
you accordingly.


Flor. This will not do sweet Mr. Sly, therefore follow your Damsel and
trouble me no more.


Viol. Is this the Lady that was with you last night when Mr. Raison stood
Centinell to Secure the pass from your Father?


Flor. Good man, we saw the Wife come in this morning, and he following an hour
after, and begging pardon for his slaying out so Wickedly, but said it was to
preserve a Lady from the sight of Sr. Thomas who would have forced her from his
Son.


Sr. Tho. Well said Waggtails.


Y. Rev. Well Madam, then you see there are those that will be less shy of
their Persons and not so severe with their tongues.


Flor. And the fittest for your Purpose.


Enter several Women Sr. William Thought, Cap. Bounce, two or three Beaux, etc.
Y. Rev. Well Madam, if I have but Patience, I find here is encouragement for
Chapmen of my nature: When you Celebrated Beauties are gone, I may have hopes
among some of the ordinary sort.


Flor. Yes you may make Love as the poor go to market; when the Choice is
bought up, you will have the better Pennyworth in the fragments.


Sr. Tho. Sir, Sir, she is too hard for you, give over while you are well, for
she will make as great an Ass of thee at Board, as she would of me in bed.


Y. Rev. In Language and in Love the females are allways too hard for us, they
will have the last blow, but I Will leave you to take up the Cudgels.


Sr. Tho. No, hold there Sir, if they make so little of you, they will make
nothing of me presently.


Flor. Well said Sr. Thomas, don't let him go.


Y. Rev. Madam I have an appointment


Sr. Tho. Therefore you shall not go you dog.


Y. Rev. Sr. there is an old saying, never spoil sport, and so forth.


Sr. Tho. I know it Rogue, I know it; but I am like Rivals; when one is
despised, let him do all he can to hinder the other.


Viol. Adsme Sr. Thomas, yonder is some London Sparks come down this morning,
some City things and Covent Garden Beaux, pray let us rally a little with 'em.


Flor. Ay but let Sr. Thomas and his Son be within call, for they say your
Beaux when they cannot talk with a woman are apt to Beat 'em.


Y. Rev. Not when they have a man with 'em; indeed when they are alone they are like
Hackney-Coachmen, if they wont come to their terms they will unrig 'em.


Sr. Tho How do you Miss? do you come to take the Waters in hopes of being
fruitful, or to destroy some Unlawful Conception?


Masque. Neither, I came to satisfy my sight with Sr. Thomas-Reveller.


Sr. Tho. With me Child, I gad I Am a Noun-Substantive, and am to be seen,
felt, heard or understood; prithee Child let us walk off a little, and be better
informed of each Other.


Sr. Thomas and Masque goes to the upper end of the Stage, Mrs Raison takes Y.
Reveller aside, the Beaux come down to Florella and Violante. 1. Beaux. Madam,
will you please to eat some Sweetmeats, they will expel the Wind and take off
the coldness of the Waters.


Viol. I thank you Sir, but I never drink any.


1. Beaux. The better hopes for a Lover, if your Spirits are not chilled; Madam
I should be happy to be warm in such Comfortable Inclinations as your Ladyship
is able to bless me with.


Viol. Indeed Sir, my inclinations are as Comfortless as the Waters you speak
of, for I Am troubled with a fit of the Spleen, and desire to be in private.


1. Beaux. I should be accessory to your disquiet to encourage your melancholy
by leaving you, and there --


Viol. You will be accessory to your being ill-used if you encourage your
Impertinence.


1. Beaux. Ah Madam, we Lovers and Pilgrims in the Devotion of the fair Sex,
must bear much More, the feircer you are at first in your Indignation, the
fonder you are at last of an Assignation.


2. Beaux. Rot her, let her depart, she will follow us anon.


Viol. For what, your charity, Let me alone till that time comes, and you will
oblige me.


Sr. Will. to Flor. Madam, Madam, this will not pass upon me.


Flor. No Sir, nor you upon me, I told you my mind before.


Sr. Will. P'shaw, Pox, I know thee well enough; come, come, unmasque, and
let us be familiar as we have been.


Flor. What do you take me for one of the Orange Wenches at the Playhouse, that
fasten upon every fool they meet with.


Viol. And disturb the rest of the Audience with their nauseous Impudent
behavior.


2. Beaux. I protest I think the Ladys are somewhat in the right of that, those
Creatures are very Ignominious, and I see 'em encouraged by great persons, and
I think it a Scandalous object to see Quality condescend to be familiar with
the Spawn of a Gostermonger.


Flor. Do you use the Playhouse much, Sir?


2. Beaux. Out of Gratitude to the Ladys, Madam, who are Pleased to bestow many
favors on me by the Way of Ogle, Fan, the Language of the fingers, I am
mightily Envied by the men, and have Observed that whenever there is any Jest
in a Play Relating to a neat cleanly slender well-shap'd man, the whole
Audience have turned upon me, and maliciously ridiculed the Perfections they
could not not attain to.


Sr. Will. Pox of this Puppy Madam.


Flor. Nay pray, Sister, let us humor this fool and seem fond of him.


Viol. Ay Sir there are abundance of those Envious fellows who are in their
hearts as much Beaux as the most eminent, and only rail at others because they
are not Liked themselves.


2. Beaux. There are so Madam, but it is a harder thing to be a Beaux then they
Imagine.


Viol. Pray Sir, what are the Ingredients I beseech you which accomplish so
fine a Person?


2. Beaux. Oh your Servant Dear Madam: why in the first place, he must have a
very white hand; if it be not so by nature, he must make it so by Art, and he
must be constantly taking Snuff or picking his teeth.


Viol. Before or after Dinner Sir.


2. Beaux. No matter which, it is not that there is occasion for picking his
teeth, but it gives an opportunity of showing the beauty of the skin; he must
avoid all Wine for fear of Pimples; he ought to have a mighty sweet breath; but
that very few Beaux have, they ruin 'em all with Cashaw; he must keep in upon
Windy days, never miss Covent Garden prayer, and if he receives visits in Bed
he must lie in his Perewig.


Flor. And pray Sir --


Sr. Will. Gad take me Madam, I knew a Beaux once that flux'd for a Complexion.


Viol. But how do you pass away the time?


2. Beaux. Why Madam, it never lies heavy on our hands, we have hourly so many
billet Deux from Ladys, that we are almost worked off our Legs; you never saw a
Beaux with a full Leg. But really now and then the Knavish Wits at Wills
Coffee-house will direct Letters for us as from Women, appoint a meeting too,
and make us sit sometimes in a Hackney-coach six or seven hours in the Cold,
and the Devil of any Soul comes near us.


Sr. Will. Pshaw, pox o'these Beaux they are damned poor Rogues, the little stock
they have goes all to Perewig-makers and Washer-women, come Child lets to the
Ship, where wo'l have a rich Dinner, Fidles, and mirth in abundance.


Flor. Sir I thank you, but I like this Company much better.


Sr. Will. Why, they have not wherewithal to make thee Drink child, they are
as penuyless as a Jew on his Sabbath; come along Lasses, I Will provide ye --


Flor. No rudeness Sir.


2. Bea. Pray Sir desist.


Sr. Will. Damn me, not I.

Pulling Florella
Viol. What Insolence is this?


Bonn. Be civil, or I shall unrig.

Pulling Violante.
Sr. Will. Nay, nay, come along.


Flor. Fools.

Beaux pull.
Sr. Will. Gilt, this shall not do.


2. Bea. If you dare go out Sir.


Sr. Will. I shall wish this Lady.


Viol. Mr. Reveller.


Y. Rev. Nay Gentlemen, be not boisterous to so tender a Sex, but let 'em go.

strikes Bouns Arm.
Boun. Ounds what do you mean?


Y. Rev. I Will tell you Rascals, come Beaux, fools strikes all their arms and
Bullys, seek for Company that is sitting for you.

off from the Ladys.
Sr. Will. God's Death shall I draw Bounce?


Boun. Do, it is but retiring, I warrant he shall not hurt us.


2. Bea. Sr. this affront.


Y. Rev. Asses.


Sr. Will. You're a Son of a Whore.

They all draw upon Rev. the Women run out crying Murder.
Enter Sr. Thomas, Sas. and Raise. Sr. Tho. What Is here 4. upon one, Courage
George, Rascals.


Sas. For the honor of the 12 Companies.

beat 'em off, Raise gets behind* Sas. and fights over his head.
Re-enter Sr. Tho. Sas. and Raison. Sr. Tho. God's Death, the Rogues heels are as
nimble as their tongues.


Sas. Beaux do you call 'em, I have bounc'd one of 'em, I have made his head
ring, I warrant him, I wonder at the Impudence of these fellows that would
Engross all the women to themselves, and dare not look a man in the face.


Raise. We should have fine work this Summer if our Fleet were manned with such.


Sr. Tho. P'shaw, pox, these are bastard Beaux, Counselors Clerks kept by
their Mistresses, and palm'd upon us at Epsome, and these places for Gentlemen;
I know abundance of very honest hearty fellows they call Beaux, who setting by
their blind side of being a little over-neat will be Drunk with their friends,
fight for their friends, pimp for their friends, and do what friends ought to
do; But these are Scoundrells, awkard things of your Chocolet-house that depend
upon Ordinarys, and go to Twelve with a Charitable man at the Groom-Porters,
Beaux to day and beggars to morrow, for whose coming into the World no man e're
rejoiced, or for whose going out any will ever Greive.


Sas. I have seen these spruce Tits look as Scornfully and (...) ^ur upon a
plain dressed Country-Gentleman as a Grumbletonian upon a (...) man that has
taken the Oaths -- but neighbor Raison what made you keep ^o behind me all
the fray, and push me forward?


Raise. Why in case you had been run thorough, I had been ready to have carried
you off in my arms.


Sas. A pox of your Civility, but it is much better as it is.


Sr. Tho. But come let us after these baggages to dinner, where if occasion be,
you must vouch for me.


Sas. In what?


Sr. Tho. Why that I knew Florella and Violante for all their Masks.


Sas. Why, were those they you talked to?


Sr. Tho. Ay, I gad, stand by me or the mother will give me over else, can you
swear heartily?


Raise. Are we not tradesmen, what a question's that to a Shopkeeper?

Exeunt.
SCENE III. The Park.
Enter Young Reveller. Y. Rev. I am Punctual to my time, it is just one by the
Sun-dyall, if this Lady should convince me, she is honest, and has a fortune, I
might be fool enough to Love her in good earnest; and that would be a Rascally
trick to Florella; she has Youth, Wit, Beauty and money; this has Youth, more
wit, and Beauty, and may have more money: I but Florella was my first Mistress;
well, but this is my first Love, I only like the other as yet, Pox on it I Will
not trouble my self with the Puncto of the matter, Let the Stars take their
Course and fortune use her Pleasure.


Enter Aunt. Aunt. Mr. Reveller.


Y. Rev. Here my little Peter of Paradise may I enter?


Aunt. follow me.


Y. Rev. Till I Am weary on so good an errand.

Exit Aunt and Y. Revell.
SCENE IV. Dorinda's Apartment.
Dor. Now to my Lover, this Intrigue 'twixt him and Florella I would feign
break off, I have considered and weighed every thing, and upon second thoughts
Promise my self more security and satisfaction in Reveller as a Lover then a
husband, for howsoever fond he may seem, nay, even to marriage, when I am known
as I must be, nothing but Destruction can be my reward; however I Will so order
it that he shall think the Conquest worth his Labor, and fancy he is the Only
victor here.


Enter Aunt and Y. Reveller. Are you not much Surpised Sir at my boldness?
will not my freedom make me less esteemed? men ought to Woo.

Y. Rev. They do so always when they are encouraged, but where they are
approved and know it not, they cannot justly sure be thought the worse of:
Errors of Ignorance are most excusable, fools often fancy all that sees 'em
Loves, but Prudent men their Imperfections know and give no way to such
self-flattery.


Dor. But men too often when they think they are Liked affect a negligence of
what esteems 'em: You're naturally vain without occasion, but on the least
advantage most Intolerable; many pretend to favors never received, others
regardless seem when we strike first: So fickle and so foolish are your Sex,
it is more for Vanity then Love you Court, nothing so Wretched till we give you
credit, nor nothing more uneasy till you have told it.


Y. Rev. Such follys are, but such never entered here; I of a Contrary temper
am: Enjoyment is the least of my affection, Though it is the Crown of all alone,
it is worthless: were Heaven as easy gained as it is wished for, the blessing
scarce would tempt us from this world, Improving Fancy, constant Conversation,
frequent Addresses fed with Courteous hope makes me uneasy till I am possessed,
but when possessed, then my Impatience comes, then I am eager to increase my
Joys, and still the last breeds appetite for more.


Dor. How charmingly he talks: Well, you have cunningly excused your self:
Bring Dinner in; come Sir, sit down there opposite, that with full pleasure we
may view each other.


Y. Rev. My Eye will have the greatest Banquet, Madam.


Dor. Your Ear too shall be entertained.

Enter Servants with Dinner. An Entertainment of Music. Come Sir, you seem
uneasy.


Y. Rev. Blast not my Entertainment with that thought Madam, my senses are all
charmed with such perfection, they are Crowding which shall be first Gratified.


Dor. Some Wine; come Sir, health to that sense which is your Favorite.


Y. Rev. This distance starves it Madam.


Aun. Sir, with my Neices leave I Will change places with you, give me change
seats. some Wine: come Sir, to the Delitious prosperity of your Emergent
Inclinations.


Y. Rev. Nay, fill it Madam, it is the Ladys health.


Aun. Here is enough, Sir.


Y. Rev. I beseech you.


Aun. Nay, Pray Sir.


Y. Rev. Your pardon Madam, please your self.


Aun. Well that kind word has wrought upon me I hate to be Imposed on, come
then since it is left to me, a little more, -- up with it now; we Women can
never have too much of a good thing, come Neice, your health.


Y. Rev. Up with it full as my Love, come Madam, to your wishes satisfaction.


Dor. And to a good understanding betwixt yours and mine.


Y. Rev. Cunning and sweetly hinted; pluck up a spirit you Dog, take 'tother
Bumper and be fancy.


Dor. Sing the Scotch Song I love so. Song. Now Sir, if you please we will retire
to another Apartment, for this is litter'd.


Y. Rev. Heaven grant she may have Faith to believe, and Charity to Relieve, or
I Am a dead man; for I like her to madness; this retiring carrys somewhat of the
face of a Bedchamber in it, she has a Rare sleepy Eye which they say seldom
fails; if She have any Comfortable Waters I Will drink her into Compliance.


Dor. Your hand Sir.


Y. Rev. My heart's in your own Madam.


Dor. I fear my Ruin.
But oh with such a bait I am Drawn in,
It may excuse though not forgive the Sin. Exit Dor. Rev.

Aunt. Now all is well and my fears are over, and sure none can blame my
Discretion in this Point; it is true'tis not altogether so honest as I could
wish it, but the Prudent part of it is good, and I am secured from the thoughts
of being undone, which of necessity I must have been any other way, and she had
better have two gallants then none.

Pardon me s^^ilty, (...) upon the Score
Of self-security I increase her store,
It Is to Preserve (...) whom she had before.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Florella in Boys Clothes, Violanto in a Masquerading Habit. Viol. Thou
art a mad Girl to transform thy self thus from one Sex to another.


Flor. Well, were I a man I should be a very wicked fellow, there is such an Air
and freedom belongs to Breeches, to what our Dull and dragging Petticoats allow
of, that adsheartlikins I fancy my self of the Masculine Gender, and am for
ravishing the first woman I meet; Prithee let me try upon thee, it is the
fashion now to begin with Relations.


Viol. Well said mad-cap, thou make a very pretty Rakehell, and I could
almost wish thee Capable of being a husband that I might have the honor of
taking down your presumptious Spirit.


Flor. Thus accounted will I court Mrs* Raison, and try if the Lady be constant
to my Inconstant Rogue, or whether she is for making the most of her time: I
fancy she is a right bred City-dame, fond of every young fellow that can tender
her ready money upon her Counter.


Viol. If you can but manage the man's part well never fear it.


Flor. All but part of the man I am pretty well provided for; I can huff, and
be Saucy, be troublesome in Rumbling their Clothes, and talk a great while seem
to be familiar and force whispers, Drop out an affected Oath and take Snuff,
Stare till my eyes are as stiff as my Crevat-string, Laugh only at my own
Jests, and be only the Jest of the Company, and these are the greatest
Materials of the fools that make Love now adays; then I will Ogle, Tip, and
Leer with either Court or City-Fop from the Jews Synagogue to St. Anns Church
in So-ho, or St. James in German-Street. Well I Am sure to be diverted, but our
Company Increases.


Enter Mrs. Raison in man's Cloths, several others, Lady Hazard Lord Worthy Sir
Thomas Sas. and Raison, etc. Mrs Raise. Now for the Ladys, it is Youth and
Beauty, not Sense and Breeding Conquers now adays; I think I Am a pretty man
whate'ro I am for a woman: and this beardless boy may have as good success with
the fair Sex, as if I had been a Page in a particular Family, and Destined from
my Childhood for a comfort to my Ladys old age: I must find out Florella whom
I will Court with such an eagerness, that if she seems inclining, I Will make
young Reveller curse her from his heart, and think her easy to each Fops
addresses.


Raise. I wonder which is my Wife among all these Sr. Thomas.


Sr. Tho. I don't know which is thy Wife, but I believe any of 'em may be thy
Whore upon a good Occasion; I never saw such confusion of Babell.


Raise. My Lamb is among 'em that is certain, but I know no more how to
distinguish her then a Shepherd a stray sheep that is mixed with another flock.


Sas. This is a heavenly Life Sr. Thomas we lead, sitting up all night, and
being sick all day, Disturbing all Men, and abusing all Women; Loving all
mischief, and Hating all good; affecting of Lewdness, when you know you are
incapable, this will bring you to the Devil in time old Knight.


Raise. Ay, and thee, and I, if we do not reform Sas, I Am afraid shall Sweat in
those Everlasting Hummums with him.


Sr. Tho. No pox, thou have a Proverb on thy side; thy Spouse will save thy
Soul in spite of thy teeth.


Raise. All in good time, your worship's coming into the nooze, my Lady Hazard
may give me an Opportunity of returning your Jest, for they say Merchants
Widows are as good at it as Tradesmens Wives.


Sas. I faith Sir Thomas you are too blame I think, considering your age, and
what a brisk Son you have, to think of Matrimony, you will not only Rob her of her
Jointure, but cheat her expectations.


Sr. Tho. Good lack do you hear the Bachelor, prithee old Cracker of other men's
pipkins trouble thy head with thy own abilitys, and distrust not mine: Gad
sookers I am a Boy to thee yet, thou shavings of Hartshorn and Ivory.


Enter Young Reveller. Yo. Reve. Caelia was Coy and hard to Win,
With Artfull Cunning played the Virgins Part,
But when she once had tried the Sin,
She hugged the Charming Tingling dart,
Cried nearer Dearest to my heart,
You Are Lord of all within.
Oh what a Luscious Feast of Love I Have had, the unexpected Conquest raised the
Joy; full of desire and trembling with my doubts I lay half-satisfy'd, then
half destroyed, she cried, oh do not, do not ruin me; Weakly she struggled
till she seemed quite tired, then fainting sighed; do force me Villain, do: I
took the yielding moment in its Prime, and sent my expiring Soul to seek for
hers.


Flor. So, there is Reveller, but I cannot find out this Mrs. Raison, I Am sure
she is among 'em; I have a Trick to play her, and would no more be disappointed
in my Mischief, than she would in her man.


Mrs. Raise. What can become of this Florella! there is my Villain whom I will
plague with Jealousy, if possible, as much as he has tortured me.


L. Wort. Dear George, your late she Company has mourned for you.


Y. Reve. Oh! Friend, such an Adventure, such Joy, such Delight, such
unspeakable Pleasure, incomprehensible Transport; Imagination cannot reach it,
Fancy draw it, Nature match it, the World value it, Art improve it.


L. Wort. What the Devil, art thou mad?


Y. Reve. Mad, aye; and so would you, had you been where I have; seen what I
have; felt, heard and understood, what I have; thou had been in the uppermost
Region by this time.


L. Wort. Dear George, What is it?


Y. Reve. I Will tell you when my Soul's cool enough for my Tongue to relate it;
at present, Reflection's so vast in my thoughts, it stifles my Speech, being
above its expression.


Flor. Some fair Lady, I suppose Sir.


Y. Reve. You may suppose Sir, but ask no questions as you value your Nose, Sir.


Flor. Did the Lady you Dinn'd with, entertain you kindly, Sir?


Y. Reve. Look you Sweetheart, I gave thee a caution about Questions; such
familiarity at first sight, is not agreeable to my Constitution, therefore keep
thy Tongue within compass, left my Feet go beyond measure.


Flor. I will not provoke the Rogue, lest he should be as good as his word, and
force me to discover my self: Where the Devil is this dried Fig of his?


Sir Tho. Sirrah, Sirrah, Where have you been till this time?


Y. Reve. About some urgent Business of my own, Sir.


Sir Tho. Of the Devil's you Dog, the Flesh and the Spirit: Ounds, Sirrah, What
is the meaning I cannot Whore and Drink with you?


Y. Reve. There is a natural Infirmity, Sir, allied to 59. which in cases of
this Matter, do bear a debilitated Influence over the frigiditated
Circumstances of halting Inclination, which being preingag'd to a foregoing
want of Power, renders the Faculties incapable of exerting those necessary
Ingredients which commonly are required in the Eager Occurrences of Predominant
Desire. --


Sir Tho. Why, you Rhodomontading, Canting, Bantering, Sputtering --

Offers to strike him.
L. Wort. Hold, hold, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Why, the Rogue's a Bantring of me, spitting out his superfluous
Bombast, and ridiculing my Understanding, as if his Father was liable to his
nonsensical Raillery: Get out of the House, Sirrah.


Omnes. Nay, hold, Sir Thomas, not so.


Sir Tho. I have lived to a fine age, a fine time I mean indeed -- Sirrah, get
you out.


Lady Haz. Nay, Sir Thomas, let me intercede.


Sir Tho. Why, it is a shame, Madam, what an impudent Son in Law will he be to
your Ladyship, when it is such an insolent Rascal to his own Father.


Lady Haz. I warrant you, Sir.


Y. Reve. Hark, you Sir, lay by your mustiness, or my Lady shall know how brisk
your Worship was at the Wells to all the Masks you met with.


Sir Tho. Dog Rogue, shall she so -- well; I will not disturb the Company now, but
another time.

Winks at his Son, and puts his Finger on his Nose.
Lady Haz. Come, come, a Dance.


All. Aye, a Dance, a Dance.


Sir Tho. Gad so, it is break o'day: Come on then, strike up now Rogue, I Will
frigididate you.

Cuts a Caper.
Enter Dorinda and Aunt. Dor. My Fears are true, and he is false as Hell.


Aunt. What could you expect less from such a wild Fellow?


Dor. Peace, Mischief! inconstant Villain, altered in an hour --
Are all those Charms which extasy'd his Senses,
Those melting Joys, his Life could scarce dispense with;
When all his Spirits with excess of bliss,
Lay gasping as in Fits struggling for vent,
As if his Soul had sickned with the pleasure,
And nature could not bear the vast delight.

Aunt. Come, will you go home, now you are satisfied?

Dor. There Is Worthy, and Violante, whom he spoke of,
That is Florella, whom he is coupled with;
I Will stay and watch a little, though I burst.

L. Wort. Oh! here is more company; Ladies, will you Dance?

Dor. Not yet, Sir, if you please.

L. Wort. Your time's your own.

Dor. Why, there is another Villain, whom though I love not, I hate to think
another should get from me.


Lady Haz. Hold, Sir Thomas, I swear you will kill us all; there is no Dancing
with you.

Dance. All the time of Dancing, Sir Thomas calls to his Son; about George,
there is frigiditate for you.
Sir Tho. Aye, Madam, here is a true English-heart for you, uncorrupted with the
gross Luxuries of the Age, a plain well-bred North-Country Tit, that shall tire
Forty of these Barbary Colts, and break their Backs Gad take me.


Mrs. Raise. Sure that must be Florella, I Will try her.

Goes up to Dor.
Flor. Certainly that must be the Woman, Reveller talked to at the Wells, it is
just her Shape and Air; I Will bear up to her and try her Inclinations.

Goes up to Dor.
Viol. Well, my Lord, I Will take into consideration what you say, and if your
Inclinations be as Honorable as your Language --


L. Worcester. Else, curse me from the Blessing I desire.


Y. Reve. This must be Florella: Come, Why so froward little Mad-cap? Do you
think it possible to disguise your self from so zealous a Lover?


Wom. I don't know who he takes me for, but I Will humor his supposition for
sport sake.


Dor. Confusion, how fond he is!


A Banquet of Sweetmeats.
Flor. to Dor. Madam, What makes your Ladyship keep so far from the Company,
will you not make one at the Collation?


Mrs. Raise. Sir, I had the Honor to speak first to this Lady, and desire you
would make your Addresses elsewhere.


Dor. Fools!

All this while Y. Revel. and the strange Woman are toying together, and Dor.
is looking at 'em uneasy.
Flor. Sir, I hope my Civility, though not so early as yours, is no Affront to
the fairLady, and till she tells me, I Am troublesome, I shall follow my own
will.

Both take Dor. by the Hand.
Dor. Oh! how the Poppets toy Distraction,
Nay, Gentlemen, I never admit Suitors;
I don't know --

Flor. I think I cannot be discovered; Madam, to show how much I esteem your
Favor, I Will conceal nothing from you.

Vnmasques.
Mrs. Raise. A pretty Youth, Madam, I scorn to be outdone.

Vnmasques.
Flor. I discovered first, Sir, and now, Sir, I am as much beforehand with you
in point of good Breeding, as you were with me in your Approaches.


Aunt. By the pleasures, I have passed a couple of sweet Youths: Cannot you
divert your self with these.


Dor. I hate 'em both.


Aunt. Well, would I had the worst of 'em.


Mrs. Raise. Madam, I Will tell you --

Reveller Hugging the strange Woman, and making several Ridiculous Postures,
kneels down to her; Dor. comes up, and gives him a Box of the Ear.
Flor. I Will acquaint your Ladyship --


Dor. By Hell, I cannot bear it.


Flor. Hey day!


Dor. Villain and Traitor.


Y. Reve. Is the Frolic to go round, Madam?


Dor. to Flor. and Mrs. Raise. If you have Honor, protect me.


Flor. This is lucky, it is she I Am sure.


Mrs. Raise. This is some Rival; Madam, my Service.


Dor. Both, Gentlemen.

They clap their Hands upon their Swords, and nod at Reve.
Sir Tho. Madam, Can I serve you?


Dor. Perdition seize your Generation.

Ex. Flor. Dor. Mrs. Raise.
Sir Tho. And the Devil take your Inclination.
Why, what is the meaning of this George?

Y. Reve. Indeed I know not, Sir, some Frolic upon a Wager I suppose.


L. Worcester. George, I Would speak with you -- my Blood is chilled o'th sudden; sure,
that could not be Dorinda.


Y. Reve. I Will wait on you.


Sir Tho. Come Ladies, faith we'll have no bedtime; yet let us into the next
Room, there is a fresh Entertainment.

Exeunt.
ACT V.
SCENE II. Park.
Enter Dorinda, Florella, and Mrs. Raison, Aunt following. Dorind. NOW, as
you are Men of Honor, I entreat you would leave me to my self.


Mrs. Raise. Ay, pray Sir, depart; the Lady would be in private.


Flor. That Is what I would be with the Lady, Sir. Come Madam, we are a couple of
likely young Fellows, take your choice, and he you approve of, the other shall
give way to.


Dor. Nay, Gentlemen, it is late.


Flor. Early by this hand, Madam, the Sun's just breaking; come, take one of us
into your Livery, and see how heartily we'll earn our Wages.


Dor. I have no business for you.


Flor. If she knew me rightly, she would swear it.


Mrs. Raise. Sir, methinks you might perceive by the Ladies uneasiness, she
would willingly have you gone.


Flor. And methinks Sir, you might perceive by my uneasiness, I Would have you
gone.


Mrs. Raise. Not till the Lady pronounces Sir.


Flor. Not Sir.


Mrs. Raise. Not dam me, do you think I Will be brow beaten.


Flor. Ha! by Heavens, Mrs. Raison, that awkard huff and stamp betrayed it; I
might have looked long enough for her in Petticoats; ah! I Will swagger lustily,
now I know my man -- Look you, Sir, either desist, or I Will make you the first
dead Carcass this day's Sun shall breed Maggots in.


Mrs. Raise. Bear up Raison, and be not daunted, he is too well dressed to love
fighting, and too much like a Courtier to have any Courage, Sir. --


Flor. Well, Sir. --

Lay their Hands on Swords.
Dor. Nay, no quarrelling Gentlemen, to end the Dispute since it must be so,
let me go in here to my Lodgings, and I Will send for the Man I like best in half
an hour.


Flor. Upon Honor.


Dor. My Hand on it.


Mrs. Raise. And me Madam.


Dor. There Sir, each of you has a Hand, but he that has my Heart shall be
resolved immediately.


Flor. We depend on it.


Dor. As I hope to be satisfied in the Embraces of my choice. --


Flor. Swear by something else, your expectations may halt else.


Dor. Oh, Reveller! thou Hell and Heaven, thou Plague and Pleasure, come rid me
of these Coxcombs.

Exeunt Dor. Aunt.
Flor. Now will I bully this she Spark, and revenge my self on her, for
Revellers kindness to her: Oh! for the impudence of a true bred Page, and the
management of an old Soldier. Sir, being Jealous of my Destiny concerning this
Lady, and being likewise so struck with her Eyes and Conversation, that my
heart cannot bear the loss of her, should she unluckily pitch upon you; I am
resolved to try, who most deserves her by the Merit of his Sword, and not her
Choice: therefore Draw, Sir.


Mrs. Raise. Ads-life, What will become of me now? -- Draw Sir!


Flor. Draw Sir, ay draw Sir; dam me, do you think to brow beat me?


Mrs. Raise. It Is a pretty Fellow, and I could put him to a better Employment
than running me quite through. Sir, I don't think it worth fighting for, till
we know her Inclinations, if they claim you, there is no occasion for it, and if
it be me --


Flor. That if's impossible; for he that dare but think so damned a lie, and so
forth --


Mrs. Raise. I never saw such a little fury; I must tame him in my own Sex, for
I find this will never do.


Flor. Draw, Sir.


Mrs. Raise. Pray, Sir.


Flor. Rot you.

Drives Mrs. Raise. about the Stage.
Mrs. Raise. How, Sir.


Flor. Burn you.


Mrs. Raise. Dear Sir.


Flor. Sink you.


Mrs. Raise. Stay, Sir.


Flor. Dam you.


Mrs. Raise. Hold Sir, I must discover my self.


Flor. Roast, fry and frigacy, chop, slice and mince your Soul into Atoms.


Mrs. Raise. Hold Sir, I am a Woman.

Kneels.
Flor. This shall not save you.


Mrs. Raise. My name's Raison, my Husband keeps a Grocers Shop at the
Stocks-Market, and here he comes to justify it.


Flor. Rise Madam.


Enter Raison. Raise. I could not find out my Wife, but there was a Woman
ordered me to come into the Park, and said, she would follow me.


Flor. I am resolved to thrash him a little, for I Am sure he is a Coward: Sir,
Do you know this Lady?


Raise. Lady, Sir; what a Lady in Breeches!


Flor. Aye Sir, she says, she is your Wife; this Lady in Breeches.


Raise. Nay, it is no great wonder, for she always wore 'em since I had her.


Mrs. Raise. Oh! dear Raison, I disguised my self thus for the Masquerade; and
making love to a Lady out of waggery, this Gentleman has drawn upon me.


Flor. Aye Sir, and I don't know but by her impertinence, I Have lost the Lady
for ever; therefore I will have satisfaction.


Raise. Why, Sir; my VVife's excellent at giving every body satisfaction but me.


Flor. No quibbling, Sir; but take her Sword and do me Justice.


Raise. I Sir, why, I Am no fighting man, Sir.


Flor. No fighting man, Sir.


Raise. No Sir, I can pay those that fight, and that is as much as was ever
required from a Citizen.


Flor. Not fight, and an Officer in the Royal Regiment!


Raise. Why, that is only Ornament* Sir, it was never designed for use; but if
we would fight, we have taken an Oath, not to strike a blow out of our own
VValls.


Flor. If you will not fight, Sir; I must have the satisfaction of kicking you,
thus Sir, thus Sir.


Raise. It may be a satisfaction to you, Sir, but little or none to your humble
Servant.

Kicks him.
Mrs. Raise. Nay, Sir, if you have any value for a Woman, let me entreat for
him.


Flor. Well, Madam, to show I am a Man of Honor, for your sake, I will forbear
him.


Raise. Aye, but she let him kick me first.


Flor. And now Mrs. Florella has had her Frolic as well as your Ladyship.


Mrs. Raise. and Raise. Florella, I had some suspicions of that effeminate Face
indeed; Confusion, how shall I be laughed at!


Raise. I thank you Madam, for the Maidenhead your Bullyship.


Flor. Come, Mr. Raison, you are never the worse Man, and I Will make you ample
Satisfaction, for I ll Marry Mr. Reveller, and then you may keep your Spouse to
your self.


Raise. Well, I am the first Man that ever was kicked by a Woman, that was not
his Wife sure.


Enter Lord Worthy, and Young Reveller, Flor. Here comes Reveller and my Lord
Worthy, I Will have a Frolic with him too, you will stand by me Mr. Raison.


Raise. Not if he kicks like your Ladyship.


L. Wort. And your first Acquaintance with this Woman, was at the Wells?


Y. Reve. The very morning before you came to Town.


L. Wort. Hell, and Confusion; Oh! damned Jilt: methinks your Conquest was very
easy, considering the Character you give of her Beauty and Conversation, that
in three Days, you should bring her to compliance.


Flor. They Are discoursing about a Mistress, I think Mr. Raison, pray stand
aside a little and observe.


Y. Reve. Faith, what she saw in me, I cannot tell; our Familiarity was
somewhat hasty I confess; not but I could have stayed a twelve Month, so I had
been sure at the end, of those Joys she gave last Night.


L. Wort. Damnation on the Artful Whore. Now I reflect, methought to me her
Love was all affected, and her Embraces which she seemed with bashfulness to
give, proceeded from uneasiness; by Heaven -- Do you not know her?


Y. Reve. The Name she told me, was Dorinda: I do believe she is of some
Fashion, and Debauched by some Noble Man or other, and kept here for security
of not being known.


L. Wort. Legion of Devils burst her cankered Heart Strings.


Y. Reve. She hurried me away about Nine a Clock out of her back Door: I
suppose the Spark was come, for one of her Scouts came and whispered her, it
was a hearty well wisher to St. Valentines Day, for she coupled us as lovingly
and as securely, as if she had been to have had me her self; I think she called
her Aunt: It was the wholsomest looked Dame --


L. Wort. O true bred, plump faced Baud; then Florella is quite laid aside?


Y. Reve. No, my Lord, That I design for my constant Habitation; this is only a
Lodging by the by, to divert my self with whenever I Am uneasy at home.


L. Wort. And you are going now to her?


Y. Reve. If I can gain admittance.


Flor. I Will have a brush with you first Reveller; you are a Son of a Whore.

She strikes him.
Raise. Oh fie, draw upon a Woman!

He lays Hand on his Sword:
Y. Reve. What, my little Mad-cap in Breeches!


Flor. Hearing your Father resolved not to give you a Groat, and in despair you
had got a Commission to go to the Wars, Mrs. Raison and I, come to offer our
selves as Volunteers.


Y. Reve. Mrs. Raison, a couple of amiable Supporters faith, Alcibiades never
regaled himself with two Titer Lasses -- My Lord, will you take 'em aside a
little, till I step in to this Dorinda; for I am very impatient to know the
meaning of that Box of the Ear.


L. Worcester. A friendly Request truly -- but I shall alter your Joys speedily:
Ladies, pray walk this way a little?


Mrs. Raise. Mr. Reveller, will not you? --


Y. Reve. I Will but correct my Watch by the Sun-Dial, and --


L. Worcester. Let him alone, Madam.

Ex. Y. Reve.
Flor. So, he is gone to his Mistress, I Am sure.


Mrs. Raise. What, the Lady that gave him the Box of the Ear?


Raise. Gad I believe the whole Sex are turned Kickers and Cuffers.


L. Wort. The same, Madam; and if you will promise me to use your Interest to
your Sister, to pardon me in some things I have erred in; I Will not only restore
you Mr. Reveller wholly to your self, but entertain you with an unexpected
piece of Diversion.


Flor. I do not know what you mean; but in any thing that is Honorable, your
Lordship may command me.


L. Wort. I ask no more, Madam.


Flor. Hey-day! here is Sir Thomas and my Lady, with Fiddles; it is a mad old
Knight* my Mother will never recover the Fatigue of this Nights disorder.


Enter Sir Tho. Reveller, Lady Hazard, Violante, Sasaph, and Music. Lady Haz.
For Heavens sake, Sir Thomas, give over your Frolic; I am so sick and
untoward, pray let me and my Children go to rest.


Sir Tho. Not till Night says, Madam, and then not much Rest neither; for I am
resolved we'll Dance to a Priest, and be made Flesh and Blood out of hand.


Lady Haz. How, Sir Thomas?


Sir Tho. Even so, my Lady; it must be done, and no time so sitting as now we
are in a good humor, therefore let us nick it; Widows when they are heated must be
kept stirring.


Lady Haz. Oh fie, Sir Thomas! It requires consideration.


Sir Tho. Consideration in Matrimony! Nay then, I Will be hanged, if any man ever
weighed the State of Marriage seriously, and entered into it afterward; I Will be
bound to answer for my Father's sins.


Flor. I wonder then, Sir Thomas, you that have proved it once, will venture
upon it again.


Sir Tho. Why, How now, you little Smock-fac'd Dog, a pretty Boy faith; Sirrah,
Sirrah, if you were in Italy --


Flor. Nay, nay; but answer me as I Am in England.


Sir Tho. Why, because I Am sure I cannot have a worse Wife than I had before;
and I would try if there be any better.


Mrs. Raise. Then I find you Marry more for the Experiment, than for any Comfort
the Lady's to have of you.


Flor. Therefore if I might advise my Mother.


Sir Tho. Thy Mother! --


Raise. Florella, and my Wife, Sir Thomas, not being loose enough in their own
Habits, have chose one to be lewd in with less Scandal.


Flor. Good Sugar Loaf, none of your Censures; you know the length of my Foot.


Raise. Yes, and the breadth, I thank you.


Sir Tho. Ah, my little Squirril turned hector!


Lady Haz. Florella, I wonder at your Frailty, to commit such an Absurdity in
Discretion, by giving your self up to --


Sir Tho. Nothing but a harmless Frolic, Madam; I beseech your Ladyship not to
construe it worse than it is.


Viol. Well, my Lord, you have behaved your self so like a Man of Honor in
this discovery of your Mistress, that it shall no way turn to your prejudice in
my esteem.


L. Wort. Heaven make me capable of deserving so much Goodness.


Sir Tho. But where is George, what is become of that Rogue?


L. Wort. Sir Thomas, I have a favor to beg of you and this good Company; pray
ask no Questions, but follow me into this House; I have a Key here commands it.


Lady Haz. What should this mean?


Sir Tho. Faith, I know not; but let us follow him.


Flor. Now Vulcan and Venus will be caught in a Net.


Mrs. Raise. Some Comfort, I shall know who this Rival is; come Husband.


Raise. Ay, Wife, where you please.

Exeunt.
SCENE, Dorindas Apartment, Reveller following of her.
Y. Reve. Can nothing appease you?


Dor. Ungrateful Villain! Was the Prize so poor, it could not merit one
Night's Constancy.
Oh! Curse upon my Folly which betrayed me,
Which gave such hasty Credit to thy Oaths*
My Generosity overcame Discretion,
And I Am despised for being kind too soon.

Y. Reve. Conscience, give way a little, Madam; by Heavens, I went strait home;
nay, was in Bed when my Father came and pulled me out, and forced me to go with
him.


Dor. By Hell, it is false, you went strait thither, I had you dogged.


Y. Reve. So, that will not do then -- Why, then in short, I should have been
pulled out of my Bed if I had not gone, and 'twas better as 'twas.


Dor. Why, Did you not swear to me, you would not see Florella last Night?


Y. Reve. The Devil take me, if I know I did, I fancied several for her, but as
I hope to be reconciled to you, I did not to my knowledge see her; and to make
you amends, I will not see her this Week.


Dor. You Would sooner hang your self.


Y. Reve. Nay, if you will not believe --


Dor. I have believed too much, and you have promised more than you can keep.


Y. Reve. By the dear Joys possessed, I will be faithful.


Dor. And will you not marry Florella?


Y. Reve. Buy Trouble so dear, when I can have Pleasure so cheap.


Dor. And you will never?


Y. Reve. Impossible I should keep me here ever with thee thus, and scorn thy
Sex besides.


Dor. Oh, take me all then* thus let us grow and never separate.

Embraces.
L. Wort. within. By Heaven, a shreik destroys thee down.


Enter Worthy, his Sword drawn, and forcing the Aunt upon her Knees. Bawd,
down. Dor. Destruction, thou art come!


Y. Reve. My Lord!

Reve. draws.
L. Wort. Put up George; here is my Aim.

Runs at Dor.
Y. Reve. Honor forbid that, and a Man so near; holds him.


L. Wort. I thank thee, my Passion was too violent: What can thou say,
persidious hellish Jilt?


Dor. I am struck o'th sudden, and have naught to help me; where art thou
cunning, thou Devil at a pinch, can thou be backward when a Woman wants thee?


Y. Reve. The meaning of all this?


L. Wort. I Will tell thee George: Oh! had I trusted thee before, thou had not
wronged me.


Dor. Or had I cautioned him, thou had not know it: Curse on my Folly --


L. Worcester. This Lady that has been thy Whore, was once my Mistress; this Reverend
Matron sold her to me; her Father was an ancient Servant in our Family, and
dying, left her with this Widowed Aunt, whose cursed Avarice, betrayed her to
me. In short, I had her for 500 l. for I did love her (to my shame I own it)
above the World: It Is six Years since, in which time her Ladyship has somewhat
weakened my Estate; for as I had no Wish above her Love, I had no Power above
her Wish; all she commanded, and she has well repaid me: thy Ignorance, and my
Breach of Friendship in not trusting thee, makes thee unblamable; but she
sure's doubly damned, to wrong me with the only Man she knew my Friend.


Y. Reve. By Heavens it staggers me, and I could wish --


L. Wort. It is too late, forget her as I shall, and we shall be much happier.
What say thou Bawd, is it true what I have said?


Dor. Ay, let her speak; I Will stand to what she says.


L. Wort. Say, It (...) true.


[ Aunt.] Yes.


[ Dor.] Convulsions ^^o^^ thee.


Aun. But as I hope to dye ou^ of (...) house, 'twas all against my will; but
she threatened to run away and leave (...) to beg, if I did not comply; and
being old and incapable of gettling bread in my (...) employment, I thought it
better to wink at her Fornication, than (...) through her Indignation.


Y. Rev. Madam, this has a Face --


Dor. So has an Ass, Confusion on ye all.

is going.
L. Wort. Nay, not so fast good Madam, we'll part with Witness, though we met
with none. Sir Thomas, Will you enter?


Don. Must I then be derided; poor Insulter!


Enter Sir Tho. Sas. Viol, Lady Haz. Flor, Mrs. Raise. Raise. etc. Y. Reve. No,
let her go my Lord.


L. Wort. Nay, George, dispute it not; by Her (...) some revenge.


Sir Tho. Why, what are we to do here, is there any Conveyance we must be
VVitnesses to?


Y. Reve. Yes, here has been a Conveyance, only a damned mistake in the drawing
it up.


L. Wort. Ladies, Sir Thomas and Gentlemen; I desired your good Company to see
me take leave of an old Acquaintance, being resolved to live a sober, discreet
Life, and bend my whole thoughts toward this kind Lady, I have bid adieu to
the only Mistress I had, whom by the way, Sir Thomas, your Son has rid me of.


Sir Tho. How, my Son!


L. Wort. I Will tell you more hereafter, Madam, you may retire, I have ended my
Triumph.


Dor. That Is she that has undone me, I could have workt him yet, for all this
mischief; but there is a Fortune and a Face, too powerful.


Viol. Is this the Lady that was so very severe upon our Parents? I suppose
you will wash all at home now, Madam?


Dor. May Jealousy unquenchable possess thee; may Impotence in him still cross
thy wishes; and may you love still in despite of both: for thee I have some
pleasure in my Ruin; thou did intend, I find, for her to leave me; and I have
been beforehand with thee, in him. And since we both designed to cheat each
other, it is my Pride, though with the loss I Am cursed.


Sir Tho. I had my man, and was in falsehood first; A notable Baggage by the
Pleasures of Whoring -- but what a pox, I Am still in the dark here --


Y. Reve. You shall know all anon, Sir; now Madam, for our design with the old
Gentleman: if I seem to be fond of it, I certainly lose it; my Lord assist her.


Sir Tho. Faith VVidow, we will to Church, and there is an end on it.


Flor. Of Love! indeed it may probably enter the Church, but seldom comes out:
Madam, I have a Request to your Ladyship, your showing a very good Example with
Sir Thomas, and really, I have a mind to follow it with his Son, but he is so
very perverse toward Matrimony, that without some Assistance of the good
Company, my single Interest will never prevail:


[Mrs. Raise.] What do I hear?


Lady Haz. Why truly, Florella, I have no averse Exceptions to the Gentleman,
if his Father be willing.


Sir Tho. VVilling, ay Madam, with all my heart; 15000 l. you Dog, and you not
worth a Groat.


Y. Reve. I thank you Sir, but I value my Freedom above all Fortune.


Sir Tho. You Dog, you have been free ever since you were born, and I Will make
you Draw now with your Father.


L. Worcester. Ay, ay, it is time to leave off rambling, George, so much Beauty and
15000 l.


Y. Rev. My Lord, had I wherewithal to seatle a Jointure upon the Lady equal to
her Portion, something might be said; but I have so much regard to my own
Honor, to take a Wife who shall twit me hereafter with what she brought me.


Sir Tho. Twit you, Jackanapes, what need you value her Twitting, when the Money
is in your own hands. When Wives twit, Husbands may whore with a safe
Conscience, Hang-Dog.


L. Worcester. No, but Sir Thomas shall take the 15000 l. and settle 2000 l. a year
on you, and make a Jointure equal.


Sir Tho. Psaw, never trouble your Head, my Lord, I warrant you I Will be a
loving Father to 'em.


Y. Rev. As a Jew to his Child that had married a Christian; Sir, if you would
give me 50000 l. I would not marry.


Mrs. Raise. Oh! He has some Honor left I find.


Sir Tho. You would not marry, Rogue.


Y. Rev. No, Sir.


Raise. Come, pray Mr. Reveller be persuaded.


Mrs. Raise. What have you to do to persuade him to marry?


Raise. Because I Would willingly have him have a Wife of his own to make use of,
that he may not borrow of his Neighbors.


Sir Tho. And you will not marry?


Y. Rev. No: pray Sir don't trouble me.


Sir Tho. You Dog, you shall marry, and I Will stand to what my Lord proposed --
but I Will make you marry. I Will have the VVritings drawn presently, and if you
refuse, I Will go to Church in a Pet, marry in a Passion, get a Son in a Fury,
and disinherit you, you Dog.


Y. Rev. Well Sir, to avoid the Curse of Disobedience, I will submit; nothing
but my seeming averse could have wrought this.


Flor. I thank you good People, tho I fear I shall repent it.


Mrs. Raise. And will you be such a Villain?


Y. Rev. Faith Madam I have been a great Charge to you, and am very happy I can
--


Flor. No whispering now the Man's sold, you have had your pennyworths I Am sure.


Raise. Come Wife, you had as good live honest, since you find you cannot help it.


Mrs. Raise. Why, let him go; here Husband, take what you never had till now, my
Heart; your Generosity and good Temper, how ever I have abused it, I Will strive
to deserve it.


Raise. Why better late than never Kate.


L. Worcester. And Madam may (...)


Viol. My Lord, you may, my Sister and I shall take some time first, when my
Laday's fixed with her Consent --


Lad. Haz. His Lordship has it; but (...) where is Mr. Sasaph?


Sir Tho. Dismal drunk (...) him upon it at P^^^^ this Morning. ^o^^^ Widow, I
find (...) the only P^^^ this day then, and be not frighted.

It dreadful seems to those who wed at first,
But we who have tried i^ once (...) the worst.

Y. Rev. And may all (...) know
Their Sons by me* may (...) what to do.

FINIS.

