THE MESSIAH OF THE Christians, and the Jews; Held forth in a Discourse,
between a Christian, and a Jew obstinately adhering to his strange opinions,
and the forced interpretations of Scripture. Wherein, Christ the true Savior of
the whole world, is described from the Prophets, and likewise that false and
counterfeited Messiah of the Jews, who in vain is expected by that Nation to
this very day, is discovered.

Written first in Hebrew, but now rendered into English by PAUL ISAIAH, a Jew
born, but now a converted and baptized Christian.

Psalm. 78.37. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes,
that I be not ashamed. London, Printed by William Hunt, 1655.

To the Reverend and Learned Mr Richard Parr, Minister of the Gospel at
Camberwell.
Paul Isaiah, a converted Jew, wishes all happiness of body and soul, both
in this life and the next, through Christ Jesus our Lord. Reverend Sir,
THE many favors which I have received from you, as to the refreshing of body,
with the outward things of this life, and to the comforting of my soul, with
your most Christian instructions, and spiritual consolations, have emboldened
me thus to return you my thanks, and to make public Testimony unto the world,
how much I am obliged to you; and I hope I shall not do injury to your
goodness, by openly publishing my gratitude, as also by craving your further
countenance toward me and my poor endeavors, that this discourse between a
Christian and a Jew, written by the greatly learned Sebastian Munster, may go
abroad under your name.

The discourse was first written by him in the Hebrew Tongue which is a language,
wherein I know you had rather read it, then in my Englsh. But since my dear and
blessed Savior, has been graciously pleased to call me into his Vineyard, I have
resolved by his grace, not to be idle in it, but shall most gladly set my self
to any work, whereby I may advantage the Christian cause, though it be but by
knocking a pin into the Building, or by bringing a little Goats hair to
furnish the Ark. They that could not offer a Lamb, were accepted if they
brought only a Pigeon. And I read in the Holy Gospel, where Christ commended
the widow that gave into the Treasury, but two Mites.

And as for my self, I hope I shall not be rejected, though my present work
be only a Translation; wherein yet I would be very gladly employed, might I
be so happy, as to be acquainted by your learned self or some others, with
what books are written in Hebrew, which would be most useful in the Christian
Church, by being translated into English.

For as in former times the Gibeonites lived among my Country men the Jews,
as hewers of wood, and drawers of water; so I that am a Jew by birth, though
now by God's grace a Christian, do desire to live and be serviceable to the
Christian Church, though it be by performing the meanest offices, since King
David himself thought it would no way disparage him, to be a dore-keeper in
God's house.

The Lord of his great mercy preserve the whole Church, and add daily unto it
(even from among my native Country men, the Jews) such as shall be saved;
which is the daily prayer of him who Honors you, and begs your favorable
interpretation of this his presumption.

Reverend Sir, Your most bounden poor Servant in Christ Jesus, PAUL ISAIAH.

To the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
And (blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has made that
consanguinity between us, through the blood of his Son) that I can now say,
My dear Christian brother;

AFter that it had pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and
called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might obey that
Gospel, which once I disobeyed; and that I began an openly to make profession
of the Christian faith, I met with continual opposition from those of my
Countrymen, who have yet their minds blinded, and the veil remaining upon
their hearts untaken away; having experimentally found the words of our Savior
true, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me, St Mat. 16.24.

While I lived among my Countrymen, the Jews, and did communicate with them in
the Jewish Religion, it was my great sin and unhappiness (as it was likewise
theirs) to be eager against the Truth of the Gospel. And though we daily read
the Prophets, in the reading whereof, I have learned this excellent Lesson,
since I became a Christian, viz. That we do then understand the Prophets
aright, when we find Christ in them. But when I read them formerly in the
Synagogues, there was such a thick mist before our eyes, and our forefathers
wool had so stopped our ears, that we would neither see nor hear any thing
concerning Christ; much less would we endure to hear that any of the holy
Prophets had prophesied against us, as such who rejected the true Messiah, and
(in him) our salvation. So that we might be truly compared to a blind man,
holding a looking Glass before him; wherein, though the blind man cannot see
his own face, yet the standers by can easily discern whose face it is, which
is represented in the glass.

And here I could wish, it were no more with my Country men, than a mist before
their eyes, and wool in their ears; but there is likewise a stone, a flint
stone in their hearts; which if the Christian Magistrates among whom they live,
did not keep a strict watch over them, would soon be in their hands, to stone
Christ to death, were he again in their reach, and likewise to stone all such
who profess his name, and expect salvation in his blood.

And though perhaps there may not be now in England, any great numbers of
professed Jews (some to my own knowledge there are, who have their
synagogues, and there exercise Iudaisme) Yet, they who live here, as often as
they are bound to use their office of Prayer (which is twice a day) so often
are they bound to blaspheme Christ, and to curse him, and all true Christians
which believe in him. To make evident proof whereof, I have now by me, the
very forms of Prayer in Hebrew, which are injoined them to make use of: And
which I should have translated into English, but that I suppose such horrid
blasphemies will do best being concealed in a language that is here known
only to the Learned, then if they should be made common by being translated
for every vulgar eye.

Mean while, I have here adventured to be a Translator of a safer work, and
upon better Terms. It is a discourse, as thou see, between a Jew and a
Christian, written at first in Hebrew by a greatly learned Author, the Learned
Munster, who was himself a Translator, but of the best work in the world, the
Holy Bible.

In this discourse thou will meet with many strange fancies and conceits of my
Country men, the Jews, concerning that Messiah of theirs, whose coming they
still expect, and expect that when he comes, he should have Wife and Children
(see page 191) And that he should have a son to succeed after him in the
Kingdom page 195. And that themselves should then swim in an Ocean of sensual
delights. For the Paradise which they look for then, is only of a Tempora^^
Messiah purchasing, and for carnal Disciples to enjoy. And to say truth, these
carnal Jews (who are such as the Jew in this discourse) have very large
souls, as being capable of two Canaans (could they get them) and thinking they
can never flow in milk and honey enough.

But the answers which the other speaker in this Dialogue, to wit, the
Christian, gives to the absurd conceits of his obstinate opposer, and
especially toward the latter end of this book, in the solid close (page 225)
scourging the Jews with a rod of their own making, stabbing them with their
own sword, and cutting their stiff necks with the rasor of the Gospel. I hope
these answers will render this discourse not only delightful, but beneficial
unto the Reader, and not altogether uprofitable to the Translator, who though
he be poor, as to the outward blessings of this life, yet he blesses God that
has made him rich through his Son, in the promises of the next.

And however, that he may not eat the bread of idleness, or live like a drone
in the hive of Christ's Church; he here humbly desires the Christian Reader to
take notice, that he is ready to offer himself willing for any honest
imploiment, whereby he may preserve himself and family, from scandalous want;
but especially whereby I may be an instrument (though never so mean an one) to
do service to the Church of Christ, by putting my shoulders under to bear his
Cross.

I will keep thee no longer from entering into the house, then while at the
threshold of it, I have begged thy Prayers for the conversion of the Jews, and
that my Country men may be brought into that light of the Gospel, which by
Gods blessings, I my self do now enjoy, Who am

Thine in our Savior Christ Jesus, P. I.

A Disputation of a Christian with an obstinate Jew.
Christian. IS that man who comes to meet me a Jew? truly his face and form
show him to be a man. I know what to do, I will salute him in Hebrew, and I
shall easily know whether he be a Jew or not. If he be a Jew, he will answer in
Hebrew, but if he be not a Jew, he will hold his peace, not knowing what I say.
God save you, O Jew.


Jew. And God save you; how know you me to be a Jew, that you speak so in
Hebrew with me? art thou a Jew and one of our people?


Christian. I am not a Jew, neither of thy people, neither am I acquainted with
you; but from the form of your face, I knew you to be a Jew: For you Jews have
a peculiar color of face, different from the form and figure of other men;
which thing has often filled me with admiration, for you are black and
uncomely, and not white as other men.


Jew. It is a wonder, if we be uncomely, why you Christians do so love our
women, and they seem to you more beautiful then your own.


Christian. Your women indeed are more comely than your men, but you seduce
them most corruptly.


Jew. Nay, seeing we are the elect people of God, and his inheritance, we are
more comely than all the Nations of the earth; as it is written in Daniel, Dan.
1.15
that the countenances of the Jewish children appeared fairer and fatter in
flesh then all the other childrens. And Josephus the historian has written,
that Pompey did admire, and said, blessed is that Nation in which so fair
young men are found; you see our people by the testimony of Scripture, are of
an excellent beauty, and not uncomely as you affirm, which may be proved to
you by the very fruits; for there are many fruits which in the blossom are
white, and when they come to maturity, grow black: such are Damsins and Sloes:
but they that appear red in the blossom, when they grow ripe, become white, as
apples and peaches, and let these be spoken for example sake. The Isralites who
are free from menstruous blood, have not in their original any drop of
redness; but the Gentiles, who do not dread that uncleanness, nor abstain
from women in the time when they ought to abstain, they in their original
contract a certain redness, and for that cause their fruit, namely their
children, are white. Moreover the unchaste Gentiles in the day time do
generate, and do behold Images and beautiful shapes, and beget sons like
them, such as we read was done by Jacob, in Genesis, where it is said, and the
sheep conceived when they came to drink, etc. Genesis 30. 39.


Christian. Your arguments do not well answer the proposed business; for Isaac
being an upright man, just, and fearing God, and departing from evil, begat
his first born son, read Genesis 25. 25. and not white; also David the son of
Iesse was ruddie, having beautiful eyes, 1 Samuel 16.12. And whereas you add,
that you are more comely than any people, that is proved false in our time,
forasmuch as not one amongst a thousand is found in the Nation, who is of a
comely countenance; the reason whereof know, is this, because you no longer are
Gods inheritance, and beloved people, but rather ye are an abomination in his
eyes, and a stink in his nostrils, wherefore he has left you, so that you go
wandering up and down as sheep which are without a pastor, and have no certain
dwelling in any place.


Jew. I see you manage your business with reproaches and rebukes, as you were
wont commonly to do with us. Have you not read what Isaias wrote concerning us?
Isa. 52. 14. namely, his form is estranged from men, and his countenance unlike
the sons of men. We are unlike men by reason of our many tribulations and
injuries which we suffer by the Gentiles, amongst whom we are dispersed.


Christian. You have not yet told me, why the women amongst you are more
beautiful than the men, and are not so easily known as the men.


Jew. Because you Christians do not so much reproach them, as the men;
moreover we adorn them with excellent apparel, that they may find favor in
your eyes, and we by them obtain what we desire, and it may be well with us
by reason of them, and our souls may live for their sakes among the Gentiles;
as it is written, and they entreated Abraham well for Sarahs sake, because she
was a woman of a comely countenance, Genesis 12. 16. But I am ashamed to speak
with thee in public, in the sight of those that pass by and repasse. If you
please come with me into my chamber, and there we will speak together more
concerning these things.


Christian. Go and I will follow you; for I have many things in my heart to
speak to you, and now for a long time I have not entered the house of any Jew.
What does that white circle signify, which I see written on the walls, round
about the chamber, having this inscription? tarry without thou Lilith.


Jew. We by this circle drive away the Devil, lest he enter and hurt the
infant newly borne, for our Rabbis say, that Lilith is a certain Ghost,
having the shape of an abortive, born of an impure birth, saving that he has
wings.


Christian. Thou tellest me strange things, but go on and tell me what more
your Masters write concerning this thing.


Jew. I will. Know therefore that our wise men judge thus; that Adam the first
parent begat devils, spirits, and ghosts, and you shall be constrained to be
of their opinion, forasmuch as we find not those creatures in the number of
the other works of creation; but many of these have a body and a soul, they
are multiplied and die as other men, and again there are many spirits which
are created without a body, and of these it is said; which the Lord created
that he might make, which were not yet made but created; such were those
Devils whose souls he had created, but did not make their bodies, because the
Sabbath was at hand, and the Lord was forced to rest from all his works, which
he had created that he might make; but those which are created with a body
and a soul, as men proceeded from him, then came Lilith to Adam, he not
knowing, for he had not a body by which he might be known, and did preserve
his seed from him. But Adam was created from the beginning, and devils, and
spirits, and ghosts, proceeded from him, which we draw from this. Adam was an
hundred and thirty years old, and begat in his likeness and image; whereby is
signified, that he begat not in his likeness and image, until the hundred and
thirteth year, Genesis 5.5.


Christian. Declare to me better the mentioned text of Scripture, which the
Lord created that he might make, because I understand it not according to your
words.


Jew. The Scripture says thus, which the Lord created that he might make; and
not thus, which the Lord created and made, to signify that God created al
things by a certain word, and was not tired nor weary, for he did not make, but
created all things by a certain word out of nothing, speaking to them as to
Artificers, that they should bring forth things out of themselves; as when he
said, let the earth bring forth, let the waters bring forth; therefore the
Scripture says, which the LORD created that he might make, that is, commit
to others that they might make them; but he did determine, and told how all
things should be made. After this sort is the creation of Devils, who were
created in the even of the sabbath, as our wise men of good memory have
recorded. The holy day shone upon them, and their making was not altogether
finished, but were sent into the air imperfect, partly communicating with man,
and partly with Angels: They eat and drink, they increase in offspring as
men, they fly through the air, they ascend and steal away things within a
garment; and for the most part their speeches are lies, neither dare they
appear in the sight of God, seeing it is written, the wicked shall not dwell
with thee; and when it is said in Genesis, Genesis 36. 24. that Anas found Iemim
in the desert, he would signify Devils, wherefore Iemim is writ without Iod,
to signify that the Devils were left imperfect after the six days of
creation, for the holy day of the Sabbath began to enter, and hence it is that
they shun the Sabbath, as it is written in Exodus, Exodus 12. 42. it is a night
of observations to you, to wit, that you should beware of those injurious
spirits; on the Sabbath no Devil, or other evil assault need be feared, for
they all fly to the dark mountains, neither do they appear all the Sabbath
day, because that is the holy day, and they are unclean; but when the Sabbath
is ended, they return to fall upon men and hurt them; and therefore we say;
let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, Psalm. 90. 17. which Psalm is
against Devils, and has that commendation, that by it we may put to flight
those noxious spirits, who are called the snares of the sons of men; as it is
written, Psalm. 91. 10. evil shall not be devised against thee, neither shall
the rod approach thy Tabernacle, and because those Devils were made of Adam the
first parent, in those hundred and thirty years wherein he was sequestered
from his wife, being made I say of his seed, therefore they are called the
snares and plagues of men, and the mentioned Psalm, and the 91 Psalm, does
contain a hundred and thirty sayings with this verse, with length of days
thou shall satisfy him, etc. and Adam left this calamity to his posterity, as
it were by right of inheritance, that when at night they had felt the flux of
nature, from thence Devils, hurtful and malicious, to men are born: Therefore
the Law says, thou shall beware of every evil thing, to wit, lest man in the
day time take in any spirits, which in the night may cast him into
uncleanness, by Belial's means, who is called an evil eye, and he appears
sometimes in the shape of a woman, and is also called Lilith, that is a
night-ghost. Moreover, we must observe, that those faunes who are so engendered
of the seed of man, when the man dies, who is their father, they all meet
together, to touch and defile him; and therefore our wise men have commanded us
to make circles about the man, and remember certain words, whereby they are put
to flight, and dare not enter the circle, to touch the funeral. Moreover they
have taught us to make seven circles, to drive away seven troops of hurtful
angels which there met together, which they gather from hence, because it is
written, Job 5. 19.
Job 5.19. in six troubles he shall deliver thee, and in the seventh, evil
shall not touch thee. Evil, that is Belial; for they fly away from those
circles; wherefore those circles must be made by the grave, that presently
after the writing of them, they may put in the carcass into the grave, and no
delay at all be made in letting down the coffin, lest any evil touch it.


Christian. This is great folly in you Jews, yea madness of heart, when you
affirm, that God left any creature unperfect or uncomplete, seeing it is
written in the work of creation, The Heaven and the Earth were finished, and
all the host of them, Genesis 2.2. Genesis 2.2.
and in another place it is said, The work of the Creator is perfect, Deuteronomy.
32. 4: Deu. 32.4
if that be true, how dare you say, God made any work imperfect? do you think
the hand of the Lord is shortened, that he cannot finish any thing, or that he
wants power that he cannot bring to an end any certain work? But verily your
tongue speaks a lie, and your mouth does meditate perverseness, it conceives
labor, and brings forth vanity; you err after the same manner in the whole
heaven, when you say, the Moon from the beginning was equal with the Sun. But
I desire to hear you tell me, what your wise men write of this matter.


Jew. The Scripture says thus, Genesis 1. ^6
the Lord made two great lights; and afterward it says, a greater light, and
a lesser light, where we must note, that the lights from the beginning, were
equal in brightness, but God lessened one; and the reason why it was diminisht
in its light, was pride, and unjust accusation, or complaint; for it is
written, evil shall not dwell with thee; Psa^ 101.7
and he that tells lies shall not tarry in thy sight. Truly there is nothing
more hateful before God, then an unjust complaint: As it is written, Psa. 101.5
he that slanders his neighbor in secret, him will I destroy, and who has
eyes lifted up, and a proud heart, him I cannot behold; and because the Moon
did complain of her fellow, God humbled her; you ask me how she complained;
I Will tell you; see, says she, it is not meet that it should be said of thee,
that thou could not make diverse sons: Then says God to her; go thou and be
less in light, therefore the Moon was confounded, and diminisht in light for
her sin; and when he showed himself merciful to her, and gave the opening of
the mouth to the penitent, and to those that converted themselves from their
whole heart to him, she was received into favor. Our wise men being moved by
this, have writ; that man should never cease to make repentance, and should not
say, my iniquity is greater than can be remitted, but if he be converted, the
Lord receives him; as it is written, the Lord desires not the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 33.11.


Christian. Thou have done well in concluding that repentance is shadowed out
by the diminishing of the Moon, for the story thou have told me is a parable,
and not the truth, as many of you have falsely thought; for the Moon has not
life, soul, or spirit, whereby she might love or hate, but God has created it
from the beginning, a lesser light to rule the night, and has not diminisht
it, as you falsely assert. But hear what the Prophet says; thus says the
Lord, Ier. 10. 2. learn not according to the way of the Gentiles, and be not
afraid of the signs of heaven, as the Gentiles fear them. Behold, the
Gentiles believed such things, who knew not the living God. Moreover it is not
written that the Moon did envy the Sun, and did desire to rule in the world:
why therefore do you believe such things, which the Philosophers never thought?
who affirm that the Moon has no light of her self, but receives her
brightness from the Sun, as do all the stars, for the Sun alone is light of
it self; and hence it is, that the Moon and Stars have less light than the
Sun, which may easily be demonstrated from the eclipse of the Moon, when the
earth hinders the beams of the Sun from touching the body of the Moon; and
if you desire to hear, I Will tell you in short the cause of the eclipse of the
Moon. Forasmuch as the Moon of it self has no light, but receives its
splendour from the Sun; know, that these two lights always in the middle of the
Month, do stand one against another, and though the earth be in the middle, yet
because the body of the Moon for the most part does bow down either toward the
north, or toward the south, the shadow of the earth cannot hinder the beams
of the Sun from touching and inlightning the Moon. But when the Moon in the
time of the opposition is in the point of the head of the Dragon, or near, to
wit, twelve degrees lower, the Moon is darkened, sometimes wholly, sometimes in
part, according as it is more or less distant from the mentioned head, which I
will not here discuss in many words; therefore I will turn my self to another
thing. You say that the Jews shall celebrate a great Feast in the latter
times, in which they shall eat one common Ox, which in the mean while is fed
in a certain great mountain, and Leviathan, that is a great fish salted from
the beginning of the world, and kept for the just, and they shall drink wine
from the first six days reserved together wtih the grapes; I desire to know
from you if this be true.


Jew. It is true, our wise men speak of the Leviathan, that he was slain
immediately after the first six days; Genesis 1.21.
for the scripture says, that God created great whales, and without doubt
there was two of them, but God slew the one, namely the female, and did season
it with salt, and reserves it for the just. This we gather from hence, because
the Text has tanimin with one ( jod) and not with two; and peradventure for
this cause it is not written in the fifth day, and it so came to pass, as in
the other two days, because that existence was unperfect, by reason of the
killing the of female, which does not want a mystery. It is moreover written in
Isaiah, Isa. 27.1.
In that day the Lord with his sore and great, and strong sword, shall punish
Leviathan the piercing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked Serpent, and he
shall slay the Dragon that is in the sea. You see the Scripture speaks of one
Whale; neither was it Gods will, that he by bringing forth young, should
multiply himself in the sea, for otherways no man could go to sea without
danger. Again, it is written in the 104 Psalm 26. Ps. 104.26
There is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play therein, the Prophet
says that in the singular number, and masculine gender, therefore the female
was killed, especially seeing it is manifest, that at the first God created
male and female: concerning the Feast, it is written, Job 40. 1.
can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook, or his tongue with a cord which
thou let down? he who made him, can make his sword to approach unto him,
etc. And it is written, the companions shall prepare him for a banquet, and the
Merchants shall divide him amongst them. Moreover God planted a Garden of
pleasure. And again it is written, Isa. 60.21
The branch of my plantations shall be the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified, signifying a Garden of the best fruits: And I pray you who shall eat
these? truly now they are eat by none, but are reserved for the just, against
the time to come.


Christ. You make me laugh when you bring Scripture authorities, and interpret
them according to your folly, and understanding them according to the letter,
when notwithstanding they are Metaphors. It is true, God created great Whales,
but it is falls that he presently slew the female, for so much as at this day,
great Whales are found in the sea, that is, the greatest fishes that devour the
lesser; therefore powerful Kings are compared to Whales, who afflict and
oppress the poor, but the Lord can easily slay them, although in strength
they be not inferior to the Whales of the sea, this is the mind of Ezekiel.
Eze. 32.2.
Moreover, whereas you assert, one of the Whales was slain by God, you are
constrained to say, Jonas was swallowed up by one, seeing there was not another
in the sea. But hear what the Prophet writes of himself, and the Lord
prepared a great fish to devour Jonah. The Lord brought not a great fish, or
that Whale from the end of the world, which was left in the beginning of the
world, but that Whale which by providence was found in that sea; this the Lord
did ordain to swallow up Jonah. Ion. 1.17.
And if you object, a Whale or Leviathan, and a great fish, are unlike; I
answer, that is not true, seeing the Rabbis do expound the word tannim for a
great fish, do you think that fish was a little one, which swallowed up Jonah,
and kept him alive three days and three nights in his belly? What you bring
out of the Psalms, Psalm. 104. 26.
I shortly avoid thus; there the singular number is taken for the plural,
which you know is frequent in the Hebrew, as, a man, ox, sheep, etc. Moreover,
you deprave that place brought out of Job, for the Lord does not say there, the
companions shall eat the Leviathan: but he speaks after this manner; shall the
companions and associates make a banquet of him, or shall the Merchants divide
him amongst them? after the manner of those who buy fishes, and divide them
into parts, and that place may have this interpretation: Will the companions
dig a pit to draw him thither out of the sea by their hissing, and take him?
do you see how unhappily the Fathers have understood and expounded that place?
this also is very false, and a great error amongst you, that the just in the
world to come, shall eat temporal food, and corporal bread; the flesh of
beasts and fish, herbs, and corn of which bread is made, which we need in this
life, where we grow and do beget an offspring, and do renew that which is
appaired in our body by the adjection of meat. But in the world to come and
resurrection of the dead, it is far otherways with us; for then man shall be
by the resurrection, a new creature, and renewed upon their former bones, like
that vision in Ezekiel, Eze. 37.6
when the Lord God did raise up his people, saying, I will lay sinews upon you,
and will bring up flesh upon you, and will cover you with skin, and put breath
in you, and ye shall live. Wherefore your Rabbis have said in the secrets of
the Law, that there is in the neibe, a very stiff bone, which being put in the
fire, is not hurt by it, and being put into the ground, does not putrify, and
they affirm the resurrection of the body does increase by that. So also it is
in Genesis, Genesis 2.22
and the Lord made^ made I say upon the bone, sinews, flesh and skin, and
breathed into her the breath of life and brought her to Adam, tha^ by this
mystery he might foreshew, although man should dye, yet he should rise in the
same body, and should be mad^ a building of nerves, bones, and flesh joined
together, which should not be dissolved; wherefore Adam called her bone of my
bone, Gen: 2.23
because the resurrection of man should be in his first bones ot eternal life.
Then the just no longer shall eat corporal bread, which does not free from
death, neither drink wine which the earth does bring forth, but shall eat the
bread of Angels, that is, as the just shall live in the spirit as Angels; so
they shall eat food which shall not putrify nor perish, neither shall the
elect of God, Isa. 60.19
want any longer the light of the Sun by day, neither shall the Moon give them
light by night; but the Lord shall be a perpetual light to them, and their God
shall be their glory, and they shall then eat spiritual fruits, because eye
has not seen those things which God will do for them who wait upon him. See
Isaiah concerning this place, Isa. 64.4.
in the 60 chap. above mentioned, and thou shall find many things in the text,
which are not to be understood according to the bare sense of the letter, as
you erroneously do for the most part, but in spirit and in truth; if in the
future world, according to your error, there were bodily eating, there should
be also death, and consequently another resurrection, which is false, and a
great error; 1 Cor. 15. 44.
for it is sown in this world a mortal body, and shall rise in the
resurrection of the just, immortal, for they shall then be as the Angels of
God which are in heaven, and shall never die. And to conclude, you now see,
that those men are witless, who say that the just in the future world shall
eat a common Ox, and that salted Whale, and shall drink wine which Paradise
brought forth, seeing that the just in the future world, shall not live in the
earth, but in the heavens with God. Lu^ 14.15.
Blessed is the man who shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. But I will
propound another question to you, and I desire you to answer me to it. The
question is this, why do not you Jews believe in in our Messiah, seeing that
in him all the prophecies are fulfilled, which are written concerning him in
the Law and the Prophets; but do make your faces more hard than a rock, Ier.
5.3.
yea though with open eyes you see there is no salvation in the earth for the
people, who walk in darkness, and see no light?


Jew. If I would answer, peradventure you would be displeased, but who, being
so provoked can refrain speaking, Psa. 69 9.
especially seeing the zeal of the house of the Lord has eaten me up, and
the reproaches of them who reproach God are fallen upon me. You ask why we
believe not in the Messiah, neither receive him as you do: to which I answer you
thus: In your Christ the words of the Prophets are not fulfilled, which they
did foretell concerning the Messiah, neither are the mysteries of the Law
fulfilled; although we know the time of his coming is not far off; and
therefore through all generations, they which are of the seed of David with
great desire do expect in their days the coming of salvation, and the time of
the King Messiah.


Christian. And why, I pray you, does that your Messiah so long delay his
coming to deliver you out of your tribulations in which you are? or how can
GOD himself see for this so long time, your calamity which you suffer in this
captivity, and does not deliver you out of your troubles, executing judgment
upon your enemies? why does he suffer you so to wander through the world, as
sheep which have no shepherd? Consider, that you have not a certain and
constant dwelling place. I desire to know the reason, why God has cast you
from him so many years, nor does at any time remember you for your good: For
when of old he punished your fathers for their sins, when they were converted,
and did confess, and prayed unto him in their banishment, he forthwith
delivered them, and sent them a deliverer, why does he not the same in this
time of your grievous captivity?


Jew. Know you not that his wisdom and his counsels are not to be searched
into, which do so far exceed our apprehensions? as it is written, Psalm. 66.5
The Lord is terrible in his counsel toward the sons of men; we know not,
neither can we apprehend his wisdom and prudence, Isa. 40.13.
or find it out, and know it, but he knows what he does. Psalm. 36.9



Christian. I wonder at this your answer, when you say, you know not the cause
why God has cast you out of his presence, and surely it must needs be for some
great sin, such as you never committed from the beginning of the world, you, or
your fathers, whatsoever it is. Furthermore, when you say the coming of the
Messiah is nigh, tell me I pray, what that is, which is recited in the Talmud.
When Rabbi Joshua the son of Levi did ask Elias when the Messiah would come,
and where is he? he answered, at Rome amongst the weak; and going thither he
found him. If he was then at Rome, doubtless he is come and borne already,
and ye expect him in vain.


Jew. The Messiah is not yet come, but he was borne in the time of the
destruction of the Temple, which the book Haggadoth, that is, the book of
insinuations or denuntiations does show.


Christian. If he was borne in the time of the desolation, from which time
almost a thousand and five hundred years are now past, and at this day he is
not yet come, when I pray you, or how will he come, seeing that it is not
allowed in nature, for any man to live a thousand and five hundred years.


Jew. You know the first men lived a long time, and that to the flood, as some
came almost to the thousandth year; Genesis 5.27
but Elias and Enoch did live much longer, whom God kept alive, and who live to
this very day; so the Messiah being borne along time before, is yet preserved
in life.


Christian. Where therefore and in what place is he at this day? is he yet at
Rome?


Jew. It may easily be demonstrated from scripture, where he is. Consider, the
first Adam in his first estate was in the earthly paradise, but because of his
sin, he was cast forth from thence, as says the Scripture, Genesis 3.24
God sent him out of the garden of pleasure. It follows therefore, that he who
was free from the punishment of Adam should be in Paradise; so our wise men
have said, in the book of denuntiations.


Christian. I do not well understand what you would signify by the word
denunciations, therefore before you proceed, declare that word to me.


Jew. Know therefore, with us are three kinds of books, one kind of books we
call the 24. which commonly are called the Bible, and on these we believe
firmly, and with a perfect faith, because they were written by the Prophets,
and other godly men, to whom the Lord made known his will, and did reveal
mysteries. Another kind is called the Talmud, and is an Exposition or
explanation o^ the precepts of the Law; for there are in the Law of Moses 613
precepts, and all these are explained in the Talmud; i^ which book we also
believe as in an exposition of precepts, which are in the hands of our Rabbis,
who received it from their Fathers, and their Fathers received it from the
Prophets, and they received it from God. Thirdly, we have a kind of books,
which is called Medras, which signifies an inquisition or discussion of
matters, and we commonly interpret it, a common opinion; for there what every
man thought, and what seemed right to him, he wrote down; wherefore they which
believe these writings, do well, and he that does not believe them, wrongs not
himself. Some wise men say, and have also left it in writing to us, that the
Messiah shall not be borne, until the time of our deliverance is come, or
shall draw nigh, that he may bring us out of that captivity; and I rather
assent to this opinion, than their judgment, who say the Messiah is borne long
ago, namely, in the time of the of the desolation of the Temple, and we call
the mentioned inquisition by another name, Haggada, that is, a denunciation;
for it is nothing else but a certain denunciation, whereby one man signifies
any thing to another.


Christian. Is the Messiah always at Rome, according to their opinion, who
thought he was at Rome?


Jew. He is not always at Rome, but at that time he was seen there; for
Elias said to Rabbi Joshua the son of Levi, that at that time he should find
him there, and he might be seen for a certain cause which is signified in
Haggadoth, but which I mean not to reveal to you, nor to any other Christian,
forasmuch as I know, our words are an abomination in your eyes, and therefore
we write such mysteries in the Tables of our heart.


Christian. Disclose to me I pray you, what he did at Rome, or what he will do
thete, and why he will rather go thither than to another place; and do not
conceal it from me.


Jew. Because you have so earnestly entreated me, I will tell you, but see you
disclose it not to others, for you know how they are wont to deride us, when
they have heard our secrets. Haggada says, the Messiah remains at Rome,
until he destroy it, as we read concerning Moses our Lawgiver who was bred up
in the house of Pharaoh, until at length he took vengeance of him, Exo. 14. 28.
and drowned all his people in the sea and he came not presently after he was
borne, and delivered Israel, but after many years, when the Lord God gave him
command, then he came and said to Pharaoh; Thus says the Lord, let my people
go that they may serve me. Exo. 7:16
So the Messiah when the fullness of time is come, shall come to the Pope by
the command of God, and shall say to him, let my people go that they may serve
me, then I say the Messiah shall be said to have come, and till that time, he
is not said to be come: But neither is the Messiah called, as David the King
was not King, or anointed the same day wherein he was borne, but after that
Samuel had anointed him by the commandment of God, then was he anointed King,
1 Sa. 16.13
So when Elias has anointed the Messiah by the commandment of God, then shall
he be the Messiah, and shall come; these things are out of Haggada.


Christian. You tell me strange things, but all your words seem to be more like
a lie than truth, for the Prophets of the Lord have taught far otherways;
neither are the words of Haggada, true in this, when it will compare Moses to
Christ, and the Egyptian captivity, to the captivity of this time. For the
Israelites in Egypt, did serve only Pharaoh; for it is thus written; Moses
said to Pharaoh, let my people go, Exo. 7.16.
etc. for he alone, without another King, had the government over Israel, and
when he would not let them go, God with a strong hand, and a stretched out arm,
and with great judgment, brought them forth. Exo. 13.9.
But in the present captivity, the Jews are not only under the power of the
Pope, but are dispersed and scattered into the four parts of the world; seeing
it is so, how can the Pope by his power and authority let them go, who are not
at all found under his dominion? Furthermore Moses delaid not after his
nativity, but fourscore years, after which he delivered Israel; Exodus 7.7
and when I turn my self to the words of the Thalmud, which says, the
Messiah is born, but hitherto has delaid his coming, now a thousand and five
hundred years; I easily conclude, that the words of the Thalmud are false, or
the first comparison foolish. I would have you at least to take this to heart,
this very long captivity, which has no end or bound, nor any consolation, all
which your fathers had in the captivity of Babel, yea after that they offended
God by their manifold abominations, worshipping Idols, and profaning the
Sabbath, and other solemnities, and turning away from all the commandments of
God, proclaimed by Moses; and when they did these things, God sent the Prophets
to them, to dehort them, and he reproved them by manifold rebukes, the Prophets
telling them, unless they did break off, they should be carried out of their
own land, Ier. 16.13.
and should fall into the hands of their enemies. Lo, Ier. 12.7.
you see, that even in the worst times, they had Prophets who did threaten
them, and again gave them words of comfort, speaking to their hearts, even in
that hour when they committed the evil; likewise in the hour wherein they
went into banishment out of their own land, the Prophets came to them and
comforted them, and the Lord revealed to them the end of their captivity by the
Prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 25.11
and they were in the captivity but seventy years; but in the Modern
captivity, there is not a Prophet, there is no comforting vision, but the
captivity daily becomes more grievous, and all the bounds of the captivity,
which the wise men have set, are past a long time ago, and we are certain, the
word of our Creator shall remain, Psalm. 119. 89.
and stands firm to eternity, neither shall be accomplished from good into
evil, but from evil into good, as it appears concerning Egypt, when he began
to count the end of that captivity from the nativity of Isaac. Exo. 12. 40.
The same appears concerning the Ninevites, Genesis 15. 13.
who when they had committed all wickedness, so soon as they repented of the
evils, Ion. 3.10.
God was merciful to them. But in this your captivity, you indeed do observe
the Sabbath and solemnities, and other commandments of God, which your fathers
before the Babylonish captivity, and in the captivity did not keep, when they
had altogether forgot the Law of Moses: but notwithstanding all this, when the
time of seventy years was fulfilled, they were delivered. But is it not
written, Is. 56.1,2.
keep ye judgment and do justice, for my salvation is near to come, and my
righteousness to be revealed? blessed is the man that does this, and the son
of man that lays hold on it, keeping the Sabbath from polluting it. From this
we gather, when the Israelits do keep the Sabbath, and make repentance, they
are not banished from their own land. But in the modern captivity the Jews
keep the Sabbath, and other precepts of God, they make repentance, they pray,
and give alms, why therefore does not the Messiah come? see how often they
have made a great and solemn repentance with their whole heart, and whole
soul, and all their strength, that the end of their captivity might be
revealed to them, but their prayer was not heard, they did that, especially in
the 5262 year of the world, which was the 1502 year of Christ, when all the
Jews made a public repentance through all their habitations, in all the
earth, and through the whole captivity, and that almost for a whole year, both
young men and old men, women and children, such a repentance as was never heard
of in the foregoing ages, and they did it for the coming of the Messiah, but
all in vain; for there was nothing revealed to them, neither token, or any
sign; not to speak of any greater thing, and truly that thing is a great
wonder, a hissing, and clapping of hands to all who hear it, that nothing does
help them, not law, nor repentance, not prayer, neither any alms, all which
they do daily; is not this a manifest sign, that the Messiah is already come?
but because you refuse to believe this word, the keeping of the Law, and the
works of your hands are nothing. Hence we may conclude thus; if for repentance
your freedom shall come, and the gathering together of your scattering, ye
shall never be redeemed, for so much as you have always been a rebellious
people, and of a stiff neck. Moreover, you see and know, how vain the words
of Rabbi are, who are here doubtful, and perplexed, and disagreeing amongst
themselves: One has said, the Messiah shall not come, but in a generation
which is wholly righteous, or in a generation which is wholly wicked, and so
thought Rabbi Iohanan the son of Lacae, proving it thus: In a generation which
is wholly guilty, because it is thus written, Isa. 59.16.
and he saw there was no man, and he wondered that there was no intercessour,
therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his righteousness it
sustained him. Also in a generation which is wholly clean, because it is thus
written, Isa. 60.21
and all thy people shall be just, they shall possess the earth for ever. Also
Rabbi Eleeser says, if the Israelites shall make repentance, they shall
immediately be redeemed, seeing it is written, Ier. 3.14.
turn or make repentance, O backsliding children, to which Rabbi Joshua
answers thus, was it not said, Isa. 5213.
you have sold your selves for naught in your idolatry, and shall be redeemed
without money, namely, by repentance, and good works? Hence we gather, that
the Rabbis themselves were doubtful, whether the congregation of the
captivity should be made by repentance or not, and we now already see,
repentance has profited you nothing; therefore all the words of the Rabbis
which they speak concerning the modern captivity, are mere lies and errors,
and that verse cited out of Isa. he saw there was no man, Isa. 59.16
etc. does justly agree with Jesus our Savior, in the hour of his passion,
who saw none to repent; and for this cause it is rightly said, repent ye
backsliding children, as if he should say, if they shall repent over this
thing, and yet receive him, they shall immediately be delivered: and this is
the true repentance, and the good works which ye should do, to remove the
stumbling block out of your hearts, and believe in the living God, and in the
Messiah, who is sent for salvation both to you and to us; then shall be
fulfilled this saying of Scripture, Isa. 40.31
they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, etc. for in the time
when the Jews shall receive unto themselves the Messiah of the Lord, they
shall be called the waiters upon the Lord, and he shall give them power and
strength, and every good thing as from the beginning, whereupon it is added,
then they shall renew their strength, they mount up with wings as Eagles, and
they shall be renewed like an Eagle, which if he live to the tenth year, he
ascends aloft to the face of the Heaven, until he approach to the heat of the
fire, and then casts himself through the exceeding heat into the sea, and
being made naked, is renewed, and other feathers will grow in him. I desire you
to hear me again what Haggai says concerning the coming of Christ, Hag.
2.6. to the 10. Hag. 2.6. to the 10.
For thus says the Lord of Hosts, yet once it is a little while, and I will
shake the Heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and I will
shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill
this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts; the silver and the gold is
mine, says the Lord of Hosts. The glory of this house shall be greater than of
the former, says the Lord of Hosts, and in this place will I give peace says
the Lord of Hosts. Behold, the Prophet says, yet a little while; but if the
Messiah were not yet come, the Prophet had spoke false, seeing from the time of
the Prophet, to our times, above two thousand years are past. He says
moreover, the glory of this latter house, shall be greater than of the first;
but what was that great glory, saving that our Messiah did appear in that
second Temple, doing there signs and wonders, such as were never done in the
whole world; he also taught the people, and showed them the way to eternal
life.


Jew. Our Masters do speak otherways here, namely, that the second house is
therefore called the greater, because it stood 10 years longer; for the first
house stood 110 years, but the second stood 120.


Christian. This answer is empty and foolish; for not for so little time the
second could be said to be greater, since that in all other things, it was
less than the first house: For as it is said, Ezr. 3.12
many of the Priests and Levites, of the chief fathers and Elders of the
people, who saw the first house, when the foundations of the second house were
laid, and they standing by, saw it, they wept with a great voice, because that
second house was as nothing in respect of the first, because the vessels of the
first house were of gold, but of the second they were of brass. And moreover,
in the second house were wanting ten signs, which were done in the first
sanctuary to the Fathers, as the Rabbis write. 1. A woman did not make an
aborsement, by reason of the smell of the sanctified flesh: 2. The holy flesh
did not stink or was corrupt. 3. A fly was never seen where the sacrifices
were slain. 4. The High Priest had no nightly uncleanness in the time of the
solemn sacrifice. 5. The rain did not quench the fire by the holy place,
burning continually in the pile of wood. 6. The wind did not scatter the pillar
of smoke, ascending straight toward heaven. 7. Mouldines or corruption was not
found in the pot of Manna, in the two loaves, and in the show bread. 8. They
stood upright in the Temple, and when they bowed down to worship, they had
room enough. 9. A Serpent, or a scorpion did never hurt in the city Jerusalem.
10. Neither did ever any man say to his fellow, my place is so straight, that I
cannot remain in Jerusalem. Moreover, five other things were in the first
Temple, which were not in the second; namely these; the arc, with the
propitiatory, and the cherubims, fire sent from heaven, the holy spirit, Vrim
and Thummim, that is, certain holy mysteries on the breast plate of the chief
Priest. 1 King. 8. 7.
You see now, that the second house was not greater than the first, because of
the 10 years. I will also add this, that your Rabbis speak not the truth,
when they say, that they shall build a third Temple in the Land of Israel, and
then the Messiah shall come, seeing the Prophet does speak plainly here, this
is the last house, showing as it were by his finger, the house which was then
built, and was then standing; that house I say shall be in greater glory than
the former. But I desire to know from whence you Jews have it, that there
shall be a third Temple.


Jew. I will tell you. Our wise men of good memory say, that Abraham called
that place a mountain, but Isaac called it a field, and Jacob a house; for,
because Jacob about night came to that place, the holiness and dignity of that
place was revealed to him, therefore these three fathers did foreshew, three
Temples to be in Israel, two to be destroyed, and one to remain for ever.
Abraham called that place a mountain, (...). 22.
he says, in the mountain the Lord shall be seen. This is the mountain of
desolation, concerning which they write in the Medras, or narration of the
Psalms, Psalm. 3.4.
with my voice will I cry unto the Lord, namely, when as yet the temple stood
firm; but when that is destroyed, from whence does he answer? he adds, the
Lord has heard me from his holy mountain. Moreover, that the second house was
to be destroid they prove from this, because Isaac called that place a field,
as it is written, Genesis 24^ 63.
Isaac went forth to pray in the field. Ier. 26. 18
And Jeremiah says, Zion shall be plowed as a field. Moreover, the third
Temple, which shall never be destroyed, Genesis 28. 17.
Jacob called the house of the Lord God; and concerning that the Prophet
writes, the glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former.
Hag. 2.9^
And again it is written, I will be to her says the Lord, Zach. 2.5
a wall of fire round about, and the glory in the midst of her, Ex. 15.17
and Exo. 15.17. The sanctuary of the Lord which thy hands have established. The
two first houses were made with the hands of men, therefore they had no
stability, according to that, Ps. 127.1.
in vain do they labor who build it; therefore Jacob called that temple a
house that should always endure, and not as others, a mountain, a field, and
therefore he presently subjoines, Genesis 28. 17. Ier. 31.38
this is no other but the house of God. And Jeremiah says, behold the days
come says the Lord, and the City shall be built to the Lord, etc. and at
length concluding, he adds, it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any
more for ever. And Isa. says, Isa. 2.2.
it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains. This is the mountain
of the Lord which Abraham did show, and shall be exalted above the hills,
alluding to Isaac, who called it a field; but by that which is added, the
mountain of the house of God; he would signify the house of Jacob, of which
he says in another place, Isa. 2.3.
Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Jacob, which shall remain firm. Moreover, the Scripture in Genesis has
showed to us these 3 houses, when it thrice makes mention of the place, where
the lodging of Jacob is described, in the place of the house of God; for you
find it there, Genesis 28. 11
that Jacob came to the place, took the stones of the place, and slept in that
place; he happened into that place, when the Sun was set, whereby was signified
the destruction of the first house. He gathered the stones of the place, being
scattered in the destruction of the first Temple, and laid them under his head,
being to rest upon them all night, whereby is signified the building of the
second Temple, which should not continue long; but because he slept quietly
there, a third Temple was also signified, in which they being without strength,
shall again be refreshed, and shall rest in their beds, and every man shall
sit under his own vine, and under his own figtree, without all fear. Mich.
4.4



Christian. I can hear you no longer in this business, you so much wrest your
self, and the Scripture of God, and do sharpen your wit to pervert the word
of God; for this exposition which you have brought, is unmeete, and very unfit
for the purpose, being upheld by no foundation, especially for so much as the
Prophet has spoke so plainly; Hag. 2.9.
that latter house, as if he should say, that house which you see with your
eyes, that last shall be in greater glory than the first, if he had said the
latter house, and had not added that, you might have some appearing reason,
although that place which you bring concerning the three fathers, is not
agreeable to our purpose; therefore we find a first and a second house, but
we find not a third.


Jew. What you write concerning the first and second house, is this; if the
Israelites had not sinned, they should not have had but the first Temple, and
it should have been worthy to be builded by the hand of God, according to that,
Thy hands have established the sanctuary of the Lord; Ex. 15.17
but because they sinned, they were the cause why that Temple was built by the
hands of men, as also the second; and hence it is that they had no firmness,
according to that, they labor in vain who build it, Ps. 127.1.
and the Lord himself shall by himself build Jerusalem, and fulfill that
Scripture, thy hands have established the sanctuary of the Lord: and that, I
will be to thee a fiery wall round about thee, and for a glory in the midst of
thee. Zech. 2.5.
And then also shall the saying of our Prophet be confirmed, Hag. 2.9.
the glory of this latter house, shall be greater than of the first, and he
has not said, of the second, than of the first.


Christian. You multiply words, and cite many places of Scripture, but beside
the purpose; if sins were the cause of the desolation of the first and second
Temple, the third Temple which you expect, shall never be built, because you
sin without ceasing, and ye say, that because of your sins, the Messiah
defers his coming: If this be true, this your third Temple shall never be
built, which you say shall be, and shall be built by the hands of God: whereof
notwithstanding, neither the Scripture nor the Prophets do make mention, but
ye out of your own brain have invented this opinion, to seduce the simple.


Jew. If the truth does not stand for us, how I pray was that latter house in
greater glory than the former?


Christian. I will tell you, and I have told you already; for this cause the
second house was greater than the first, because the Lord of the Temple came
into his Temple, as the Prophet Malachi did Prophecy. Mal. 3.1.
Behold, I send my Angel, and he shall prepare the way before my face, and
the Lord shall suddenly come to his Temple, whom ye seek, and the angel of the
Testament, whom ye desire: behold, he comes says the Lord of Hosts. This
prophecy without all denial, does agree with the King Messiah, who has come,
and was seen of men, as I showed above even now.


Jew. I said above, there are some amongst our Rabbis, who believed the
Messiah was born in the desolation of the second Temple, but was not yet come,
because when he shall come, he shall do great signs, and his heart shall be
exalted in the ways of the Lord, but he shall come and command the Pope, and
all the Kings of the people, saying, let the people of the Lord go to serve
him; and then he shall do signs before the rebellious, neither shall he
fear them, and shall remain in the City of Rome, until he destroy it, and
then he shall bring forth the people of God.


Christian. You have not yet told me the reason, why your Messiah does so long
delay, and defer his coming.


Jew. I have told you already, that I know not; but our Rabbis say, that
Jerusalem was wasted for no other cause, but because they did break the
Sabbath, and for the transgression of the Sabbath, they were driven out of
their own land into banishment, and the chief good which at this day is found
amongst our banished, is the keeping of the Sabbath, as it is written, Is.
56.1,2.
thus says the Lord, keep ye judgment and do justice, for my salvation is
near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed. Blessed is the man that
does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it, that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it. He says, my salvation is near to come, if you make
your ways good, departing from evil; for repentance withholds the coming of
the Messiah; and if all the Israelites did fear God, his salvation would be
near to them: for redemption depends upon repentance; as it is written, Ier.
29. 13,14.
and the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, if thou will turn to the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with thy whole soul. And again he says, Isa.
56.2.
blessed is the man which does this, namely, keeping the Sabbath, for that is
worthy to be separated from other days, in meat and drink, and more comely
apparel, and this as to the body; but concerning the soul, that ought to be
emptied of all the businesses of this world.


Christian. I have said above, if the people dispersed in the captivity must be
gathered together by repentance, ye shall never be delivered, seeing that you
are always a rebellious people, and of a stiff neck.


Jew. Hear what Ezechiel says, Ezekiel. 36. 22.
I will do it not for your sakes, O house of Israel, etc. and he says, I will
bring you out from amongst the people, etc. And again he says in the Law, I
will remember them for my first covenant, Le. 26.42
etc. From this we think, that for the goodness of God, and righteousness of
the Fathers, and not for our own righteousness, we shall come out of
captivity. We see also how the Rabbis have been perplexed here, whether they
should come out of captivity by repentance or not. Wherefore Rabbi Iohanan
says, that the son of David shall not come, but in a generation which is
wholly just, or in a generation which is wholly guilty of sin. And Rabbi
Eleiser says, if the Israelites shall make repentance, they shall immediately
be delivered, seeing it is written, Ier. 3. 14.
return ye backsliding children. To which Rabbi Joshua does answer; Isa. 52.3.
was it not now said, ye are sold for naught, etc. Here we see, that our
fathers were doutful, whether we should be delivered from banishment by
repentance or not, because the sayings of Scripture do seem to disagree amongst
themselves, which difference shall be thus composed; that many Israelites shall
be converted by repentance, after that they have seen the signs of
deliverance; and therefore it is said, Isa. 59.16.
he saw that there was not a man that did repent, until he saw the beginning
of the salvation: and notwithstanding, some remaining wicked and rebellious,
shall come out with the multitude of repenting Israelites, and shall dye in the
journey, and shall not enter into the Land of Israel.


Christian. Tell me I pray you, what signs shall be in the gathering together
of your dispersion.


Jew. The first sign of our salvation, shall be this: That the peo- of this
world shall fall, and we shall rise, and the people shall be as it were bound
before our face, that no man dare lift a hand or foot, unless he first fall
down and humble himself before our presence: And the reason of this is,
although the judgments of God have come upon us, yet we cease not to follow
him, knowing that his judgments are good; and when his judgments do come into
the earth, then the inhabitants of the world are instructed, and learn to do
justice, Isa. 26.9.
for because of them the world stands. If we remembered the name of other gods
amongst our enemies, under whom we live, we might be delivered from their
oppression, and might be in dignity and magnificence, as well as they; but
because we refuse to do this, we suffer afflictions which hurt us not, but we
are purified by them, and our sin is consumed, that not any relics or any
spots do remain in us, and when God does chastise us in this captivity for our
sins, we cease not to hope in him, neither do we despair, but that in his own
time we may be delivered.


Christian. And why I beseech you have your Rabbis appointed you so many
bounds, which now are all past, and your Messiah is not yet come, neither have
you any hope that he will come?


Jew. Our Rabbis were much troubled and disquieted, therefore they set some
near bound, lest the common people should despair, and cast off their hope of
freedom.


Christian. Thus your Rabbis do seduce the simple Jews who live amongst you,
by saying, expect a little while there, and expect a little while there, and
behold you have no salvation nor redemption. But tell me another sign, and tell
me what shall be when your redemption shall come.


Jew. The Israelites shall not fall away as other Nations, who shall so much be
abolisht, that even the remembrance of their name shall not remain; but the
Israelites shall be so reunited amongst the Nations, that in every place they
shall be one people, although now they are banished and cast out into every
part of the world, for in the latter days they shall return to their dignity,
and shall be greater than all the Nations of the earth, for then shall
judgment draw nigh, that the wicked may be abolisht, who are amongst them.
And this shall be that day, when the Lord will send his Angel to clear the
way before the congregation of the banished, lest they should find in their way
any adversary, and evil encounter; but because the end of the banishment is
not revealed, neither explained in the book of Daniel, when it is said, Dan.
12.9
because the sayings are shut up and sealed, until the time of the end:
therefore it is said in Malachi, Mal. 3.1.
for he shall suddenly come, no man knowing the day of the coming of the Lord,
who is King, Messiah, and Angel of the Testament, or the Angel of the
Testament is spoken of Elijah. Mal. 3.^. 3.


Moreover, that day shall be like fire, purifying the rust from the silver, for
so the wicked shall be separated from the godly, and the wicked shall fall away,
and the residue shall remain just; for that day shall be a day of judgment,
when the Lord shall do judgment between the wicked and the godly, the godly
shall be his inheritance, and he shall have mercy upon them, that the evil
touch them not, which shall consume the wicked, and they shall see the good of
Jerusalem, and the peace of Israel, all the days of their life, to wit, theirs
who then shall be alive in the congregation of the dispersion, when the redeemer
shall come in their days. And the Lord shall raise those that shall not be
alive, from the dead, namely, the just, that they may see the peace of Israel;
and God shall send Elijah the Prophet for the good of Israel, and shall bring
back again his soul, which did ascend into Heaven, to a body formed like his
first body; for his first body was turned into earth, and every element did
pass into its element; and after that he has quickened him in body only, he
shall send him to Israel before the day of judgment, to admonish the Fathers,
and likewise the children, that they should turn themselves to God, with the
whole heart, Mal. 4. 6.
and they which shall repent, they shall be delivered from the day of judgment.


Chrictian. Thou have told me strange things, that even the dead, in the
coming of the Messiah, shall live again, and Elias shall return, and the
just shall see their redeemer the Messiah, and they shall rejoice with him: but
these things shall be in the second and last coming of the Messiah, that is,
in the end of the world, and not in his first coming, as you think; and if
you vouchsafe to hear, I will tell you something concerning the resurrection
of the dead, and I will tell you the truth. Isa. 26.19
We read in Isa. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise: awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Where he signifies the second
coming of the Messiah to judgment, when God himself in the day of judgment,
shall raise the dead to life. The same is also in the Prophecy of Daniel, Dan.
12.2
and many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, that is,
the resurrection of the dead to life, shall be common to all the just, and the
wicked shall also receive their bodies, but to be punished in them, and in
their souls, and dye perpetually. Moreover, when the Prophet says ( thy dead)
he directs his speech to God; and then a voice shall come from heaven, and
shall say to them, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust. So when he says (
they dew) he speaks figuratively to God; for as the dew does quicken, and
cause the herbs to grow up, so the dew of divine power shall quicken the dead,
and the earth shall cast forth her dead, that is, God shall condemn the
wicked, and thrust them out into hell, but the just shall go with Christ into
eternal life, and then the present world shall have an end, and the elect
shall be with God in the Kingdom of heaven for ever and ever, but the wicked
shall be shut up together with the devil into hell, from whence they shall
never be delivered; as it is said in the same place, Dan. 12. 2
some shall awake to eternal life, but some to reproaches, and to perpetual
abomination. Behold, this is our faith concerning the resurrection of the dead,
and so also our holy Prophets have taught.


Jew. Our Rabbis also have taught us, how we should believe, but after another
manner; for they have said, the resurrection of the dead shall be for all the
just, and for some wicked, for the Lord shall cast forth those that be dead,
that is, the wicked to the earth, but that cannot give them life. Moreover, the
dead which then the Lord shall raise to life, shall not differ from other men
in the use of humane life, for they shall have a free choice of good and evil;
for therefore he says, Dan. 12.2
some to eternal life, but some unto reproaches, and eternal abomination,
until at length they come into contempt, and a continual consummation, that
no part of good shall come to them, but even as the Prophet says, Hab. 2.14
at that time the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. Then
the abundance of divine knowledge shall so much increase, that the faith of God
shall never be wanting, neither shall man be changed, but to good, and to
perfection, and many Jews say these things shall be before the days of the
Messiah, at which time miracles without number shall come to pass.


Christian. And here you likewise err, seeing all these miracles are fulfilled
already, some few excepted, which shall come to pass in the second coming of
the Messiah, namely in the end of the world, when God and the Messiah shall
come to judge the quick and the dead, for the Messiah is come already, and has
quickened the dead, some from a corporal death, and some from a spiritual
death. At this day Idols have ceased in the world; as it is written, The earth
is filled with the knowledge of the Lord; Isa. 11. 9.
for all Nations profess at this day, one God. At this day much people walk to
the house of the God of Jacob, which is the congregation of the faithful
believing in Christ, who also figuratively are called the spiritual Jerusalem.
At this day the wolf remains with the Lamb; Isa. 11. 6.
that is, the wicked and devourer, with the meek, and does not hurt him. Peace
also was through the whole world in those days, when Christ was born; for then
one man, namely Octavianus, did reign over the whole world in peace. But in
the world to come, which is the kingdom of Christ, there shall be peace
without end; now the Ports of Jerusalem are open, that every one that will may
enter, Isa. 2.2.
and the mountain of the Lord is established upon the top of the mountains,
and is lifted above the hills. To day in the heavenly Jerusalem, which is the
City of believers in Christ, who is already, come, Isa. 65.19
a voice of weeping and mourning shall no more be heard there, but believers
in Christ shall remain there, not only five hundred years, but for ever. But
ye Jews do not understand this word, as Isaias has prophesied, Isa. 1 3.
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib; but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider: as if he should say; they would not
understand and walk in a right way; interpreting places of Scripture according
to their own fancies, knowing that their words are defended by no truth, as I
will explain below, where they say Christ shall have sons and daughters. And is
it not written in the Thalmud, in the Treatise Nisa, that the Messiah shall not
come, till the souls be perfected from the body, that is, brought out of that
closet, from whence the souls shall come which are created, for they so call
the body: Know therefore, their words are empty and foolish, when they frame
expositio^s of things to come, for they do it to triumph, and obstinately to
remain in their error, lest if they repented, and stood off from their
purpose, they should lie under shame and disgrace; but they themselves
confess, they dare not for the people, sing a recantation, for otherwise they
should be killed, because they have so blinded the eyes of the common people,
with their false consolations. But I know you Jews do object to us
Christians, that this gave occasion to your so tedious banishment, because
Jesus being born of the seed of David of the Jews, Ioh. 10.30
made himself God, and drew many of the people to him, who believed in him:
which nevertheless is a very bad error with you, and your ancestors. Did they
not kill him for it, and hang him upon a tree? if they had done well, God ought
rather to hasten their redemption for that fact, even before the end of their
banishment were come, especially seeing they had fulfilled that command, Deu.
13.5
Thou shall root out evil from the midst of thee; and did he not promise this
very thing to them by Moses? Moreover, if the words of Christ were lies, why
did not God send some Prophet or vision, as he did in the days of the Kings
when they worshipped Baal, and other Idols, admonishing them to abstain from
that vanity, and did reprove them? But forasmuch as this has not been done, we
may conclude, that his words and deeds were true and just. Blessed therefore is
the man, who puts his trust in the Lord, and in his Christ, and whose
confidence the Lord is; for the time wherein he hopes in him, and in the
Messiah sent in the second house. I have other Arguments which I could bring,
proving the Messiah to be already come; but I think it needless to allege
more here, seeing I have cited those which I thought the chiefest; but if any
man will enter a dispute with me in this business, I will give him other
reasons and Arguments, if these now mentioned, will not satisfy him. But now
speak you, and tell what you yet know, and I will hear you.


Jew. The mentioned Haggada, says also this of the Messiah, that he prays for
Israel, that the Lord would remit our sins; and he takes upon him
chastisements, and says before him: I will take upon me sufferings, so that
thou will quicken our dead, and not these dead only, but they who have been
slain by men to this present, and not these only who have died, but these who
have been cast into the sea, and drowned, and who have been devoured by wolves,
leopards, and other beasts. But this prayer shows him to be a man and not God;
neither is it in his power to raise the dead. Moreover, those passions are
nothing else but his sorrow, whereby he is grieved, that he delays so long,
seeing his people in captivity, and not being able to save them; he sees that
they worship a strange god, and deny the true God, making to themselves another
Messiah, and honoring him. Thou shall also observe this, when the Israelites
shall come out of captivity, many and great miracles shall come to pass, and
no power shall be in the great ones of this world to hinder them, and God shall
bring forth many fountains in the desert, in the mountains, and in the middle
of the valleys; neither shall he do that only, but shall cause trees to grow
in the deserts, to give shelter to the passers by, that the heat and the Sun
smite them not. As it is written, Isa. 41. 18
I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys,
I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree, and the Myrtle,
and the Oil tree, etc. And waters, and great trees shall remain in those
deserts for ever; and the men of this world shall say when they pass by them:
these things the Lord did for the honor of Israel, and they shall confess to
the name of the Lord for this miracle for ever. Moreover it is written, they
which wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, Isa. 40.31
they shall mount up with wings as eagles. Behold, the Isralites who in this
captivity do wait for the Lord, and have no strength, shall renew their
strength like as a shrub or tree, which if it be lopt, is renewed again; so
the Israelites shall again go into their own land, as the eagle, which if
he come to the tenth year, raises himself up to the face of the heaven,
etc. as you have reported above.


Christian. And who shall show you the way from these remote countries, into
which you are scattered to Jerusalem?


Jew. God shall be the guide of our journey, that not so much as fools shall
wander from the strait way; for whether any has been accustomed to run
journies or not, no man shall go astray in the way, but shall go by a strait
path toward Jerusalem; neither shall the filthy deserts hinder, in which
formerly, evil beasts have dwelt: for then when the Israelites shall pass
over, there shall no lions, neither cruel beasts be there. Again, Isaiah
says in another place, Isa. 60. 8.
who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves to their habitations? And this
is spoken concerning the congregations of Israel, who shall go up from every
place out of captivity, and with great facility, like clouds they shall come
into their own land; for the prophet compared their swift motion to the clouds.
Moreover he says, that they shall fly swiftly as doves, when they return to
their nests. Also Daniel says, Dan. 12.2
blessed is he that waits, and comes to a thousand, three hundred and thirty
five days; for then the Messiah shall first come, and shall reduce to nothing,
the false worship of the Gods, and shall cast it out of the world, and
afterward he shall gather together his dispersed people of Israel, into the
desert of the people; according to that which is written, Hos. 2.14.
I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably
to her, afterward he shall bring the Israelites into their own land: For as
Moses the first Redeemer did lead the Israelites in the desert forty years,
Number. 32. 13.
so the last redeemer shall do, as it is written, and she shall sing there,
as in the days of her youth, Hos. 2.15.
and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt. After all these
things they shall rest in their own land, and shall rejoice in the Lord their
God, and in David their King. Blessed is he that shall wait, and shall come to
these days.


Christian. Behold, now from the time of the destruction of the Temple, not
only 1335 years are past, but many more, and your fathers expected the
Messiah at that time, and this was a constant exposition of the mentioned
words, and notwithstanding, Dan. 12.12
your Messiah is not yet come: from whence it is easily drawn, that you do
pervert the Scriptures according to your pleasure. Moreover, the other words
which you have cited out of Isaiah, Isa. 60. 8.
are to be understood figuratively, and not according to the litterall meaning.


Jew. Is. 49.7, 8, etc.
It is written also, thus says the Lord the Redeemer of Israel, and his holy
one, to him whom man despises, to him whom the Nations abhors, to a servant
of Rulers; Kings shall see, and arise, Princes also shall worship, because of
the Lord that is faithful, and the holy One of Israel, and he shall choose
thee. Thus says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a
day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee
for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the
desolate heritages: that thou may say to the Prisoners, go forth; to them
that are in darkness, show your selves: they shall feed in the ways, and
their pastures shall be in all high places. They shall not hunger nor thirst,
neither shall the heat nor Sun smite them: for he that has mercy on them
shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them, and I will
make all my mountains a way, and my high ways shall be exalted. Behold these
shall come from far; and lo, these from the north, and from the sea, and
these from the land of Sinim. I say, these sayings of Scripture shall be
fulfilled, when the Lord shall bring forth Israel out of captivity ver. 7.
(whom man despises) the Lord speaks it by Israel, who is despised by the
Nations, and an abomination to them, and a servant of so many Lords; but Kings
shall behold him, and rise at his presence, and Princes shall worship him; and
they shall do this because of the Lord, who is the faithful helper of Israel,
ver. 8. To establish the earth, that is, repair the desolations of the land of
Israel, and possess the heritages lying under desolation all the time of the
captivity, v. 9. saying to the bound, go forth out of captivity, for the
Israelites are as prisoners, who have not any power to go out of captivity,
and power of the Gentiles. In like manner the captivity is compared to
darkness, ver. 9. Moreover, they shall be fed, because they shall find every
where so much as shall satisfy them, until they shall come forth out of
captivity, even in the high places, where at another time, no pasture is found
for cattle, because of the desert of water, and in places, where other
travelers can get nothing, they shall find all sufficiency, v. 10. they shall
no where suffer hunger or thirst, the Lord providing necessaries for them; who
shall open in the deserts, fountains for them, and shall make fruit-bearing
trees to grow for their profit; and all these things shall happen to them
miraculously. Also in all the places of deserts, by which they shall pass,
fountains of water shall flow forth. Lastly (he says) and I will make all my
mountains a way, and my high ways shall be exalted. Isa. 40.4.
I will make every valley to be exalted, and every mountain or hill shall be
made low, and that wonderfully, lest in their journie, they should be
compelled to ascend and descend, to their wearying. And thus according to the
litterall meaning, the saying also may be figurative, namely, that by that long
journie, they shall not be wearied, for the ascent and descent do exceedingly
weary the Traveller; therefore God shall give them strength, that they may not
at all be wearied. Moreover, the Prophet subjoins, I Will make my mountains, and
my paths. For God shall make new ways through the deserts, where before was no
way; and when he adds again, behold these, etc. He recounts the four parts of
the world, into which the Israelites are scattered: By the sea, understand the
west, and by the land of Sinim, the south, for there dwell the Sineans, who
descended from the sons of Canaan.


Christian. And what shall be after that you shall be gathered together in the
Land of Israel? will they build Cities, and til the ground?


Jew. It is written, Isa. 60.10
the sons of strangers shall build thy walls, and their Kings shall serve thee,
because in my anger I smote thee, and in my loving kindness I had compassion
on thee. The Nations in thy land shall build thy walls, and shall do thy work;
for at that time when my indignation was upon thee, thou were brought into the
service of the Nations; but in the time of my good pleasure, the Nations shall
likewise serve thee, as also their Kings. Ver. 11.
Thy gates shall be open continually day and night, neither shall they be ever
shut, that they may bring to thee the riches of the Gentiles, and their Kings
may also be brought. He says, thy gates shall be open, because peace shall be
in the whole world, they shall go by night because of the heat, and Kings
likewise shall gather themselves together, to come before the Messiah as
servants, before their Lord. For it is the manner of Kings, when they go on
foot, or ride on a horse, for honor sake, to be conducted by Princes. Ver. 13.
The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, the fur tree, the box tree, and the
pine tree, to adorn the place of my sanctuary, and I will honor the place of
my feet, for they did build the sanctuary with the trees of Lebanon, which is
set directly against the throne of Majesty; and when the throne of Majesty is
the sea of God, it follows, that the sanctuary is his footstool. Moreover, the
gate of heaven is above the sanctuary, and that is as it were the navill of the
world, and the land of Israel is put in the middle of the world, and Jerusalem
in the middle of the Land of Israel, and the sanctuary in the middle of
Jerusalem, and the Temple in the middle of the sanctuary, and the Arc in the
middle of the Temple, and the Temple of holiness is called the throne of
Majesty Again, the Lord says to Isaiah, Isa. 54 11
Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with
saphires, and I will make thy windows of agats, and thy gates of carbuncles,
and all thy borders of pleasant stones, and all thy children shall be taught of
the Lord: Therefore it may be, that these words may be fulfilled, according to
the letter, or else they may be a figure, by which is expressed the magnificence
and abundance of good things, which Israel shall enjoy, that if they would,
they might in those days build their houses of precious stones. Finally, all
his sons shall be taught of the Lord, and a man shall no longer teach his
neighbor. Isa. 54.13 Ier. 31.34



Christian. By these words heavenly Jerusalem is figured out, or surely by
these words is signified, the congregation, and Church of the faithful, which
is the spiritual Jerusalem: But I desire you to tell me somewhat more
concerning this thing.


Jew. Isa. 61. 5.
Again, Isaias says, stangers shall stand and feed your sheep, and the sons of
strangers shall be your husbandmen, and vine-dressers. But ye shall be called
the Priests of the Lord, men shall call you the servants of our God, ye shall
eat the substance of the Gentiles; do ye understand these words?


Christian. I do not clearly understand; do you therefore vouchsafe to
explain them more plainly to me.


Jew. Behold strangers shall arise out of their own place, and shall come to
serve us; but we shall not be compelled to do our own businesses, but the
sons of strangers shall do them, to the end that we may be more free to serve
God. Moreover, we shall eat the substance of the Gentiles. For besides this,
that they shall serve us in our land, they shall bring us also gifts, gold and
silver, and every good thing out of their own land, and we shall not be
compelled to go out of our own land to exercise merchandise, and to get gain;
for in our own land we shall enjoy the good of the world. Again, the Prophet
says, Isa. 61. 9.
and their seed shall be known in the Nations, and their offspring in the
midst of the people: all who shall see them, shall know them, that they are of
the seed which the Lord has blessed, and when we shall go by the Land of the
Gentiles to travel abroad, or to traffic, although we shall have no need of
them, we shall be known by our great honors, in which we shall then be;
and we shall go honorably apparelled, and men shall say of us, Ver. 9.
these are the children of Israel, these are the seed which the Lord has
blessed. Likewise our young men shall go for their pleasure to see the
Countries of the Gentiles. God also shall renew a good air, so that the
Israelites shall live in health many years. Also he shall give the earth a
singular virtue, as it is said; Isa. 65.17
Behold I create new heavens, and a new earth, and the former shall not be
remembered.


Christian. Shall men dye in that Land, or shall they live for ever?


Jew. They shall not die by the sword, because war shall not be there, neither
shall there be a natural death, exept after many years, when a man shall be
full of days; but when he shall dye, they shall not weep over him, as it is
written, Isa. 65. 19
the voice of weeping and mourning shall no more be heard in Jerusalem. Also
in that time they shall not say of an old man, that he has accomplished his
days, until he come to the three hundredth or five hundredth year, and above,
such as were in the first ages in the beginning of the world. But these days
which now in the world are counted for old age, shall then be the days of
youth, and men shall be accounted then as growing children, as it is written,
Ps 92.14.
they shall be fruitful in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing, in the
contrary manner of old men; wherefore it is written elsewhere, Isa. 65.20
a child of a hundred years old shall die, that is, if any man die in the
hundredth year, which shall be, because of his sin; they shall say of him, that
a child is dead, and he expounds it after this manner: A child of an hundred
years who shall sin, shall be accused; as if he should say, the curse of God
shall be upon him. Then they shall not build, and another inhabit, as now it
is, neither shall they plant, and another eat, but according to the days of
trees, shall the days of my people be; Ver. 22.
that is, in the elect, because they only shall have the longest lives, and
that not without a miracle, but not other people; whereupon Jonathan has
interpreted that place thus: They shall live as the days of trees. But our
Rabbis say, that a living tree does endure five hundred years. Some also say
there shall be some change in the nature of corn, in the time of the Redeemer,
that it shall as vines be preserved in strength, and there shall not be need
every year to sow new corn, but it shall be sown only once, as the vine is
once planted; and after the corn shall be gathered in; the stalks shall
remain flourishing to the next year.


Christian. In what place of Scripture, did your Rabbis find that?


Jew. In Hosea, they shall preserve their corn, and it shall flourish as a
vine. Also in that time, if they ask of the blessed God rain, he shall give
it them, and he will give every man herbs in his field according to his
desire. Moreover, our Masters say, that at that time when the Israelites shall
do the will of God, he will also do their will, so that if any one alone shall
have need of rain, he will give rain to him alone; or if any one shall want
rain for one herb in his field or garden, he will give rain to that herb
alone. And this is that which is said, ask rain of the Lord, Zac. 10.1.
and he will give thee plentiful rain for every herb in the field.


Christian. Because you have fallen upon Zachary, tell me how you understand
those words which are written in it, Zac. 14.10
shall the whole earth be turned as into a plain?


Jew. I will tell you, behold, all the land about Jerusalem, which now is
mountainous, as it is in the Psalms, Ps. 125.2.
shall then be plain like the plainness of a champion field, and it shall be
exalted, and be higher than all the land, although now it be higher than all
the land of Israel, by reason of the mountains which are about it, because of
which its height cannot be seen: But at that time when all the land round
about it shall be made plain, its height shall be seen more than all the
Land. Wherefore it is said in the prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 2.2.
the mountain of the Lord shall be established upon the top of the mountains,
and shall be lifted above the hills, and many fields which now are nigh
Jerusalem, shall then be within the walls of the City, and that City being
built, shall never afterward be destroyed, as it is written, behold, Ier. 31.
38,40.
the days come says the Lord, and the City of the Lord shall be built from
the tower of Hananeel, to the gate of the corner, etc. it shall not be
destroyed nor plucked down for ever. It is said also in the Psalm, if the Lord
build not the house, Psa. 127.1
they labor in vain who build it. But this he says of the sanctuary, and
City of Jerusalem. Behold, from that day wherein the house of the Lord was
wasted, and the Israelites led into captivity, and the City destroyed,
Jerusalem was now again rebuilt, and now again destroi'd; because it was in
the power of the Idumeans, and in the power of the Ismaelites, and every year
war was raised for it; they build it, and these destroy it again, because it
is not the will of the Lord, that the Gentiles should keep it built, Ver. 1.
and therefore they labor in vain who build it, and in vain do they rise in
the morning who keep it. First, the Idumeans did subdue Jerusalem; afterward
when they were quiet, the Ismalites came and made a great war with the
christians, and took the City out of their hands, and there was a continual
war between them, and that discord, pains and labor to possess the City,
shall endure until the Redeemer and King Messiah shall come, to whom the Lord
God shall deliver Jerusalem without all trouble.


Christian. Shall the City and the Temple be then built, as Ezechiel saw them
in the spirit of Prophecy?


Jew. Eze. 40.1.
Yes, for he says thus, in the 25 year of our captivity, in the beginning of
the year in the tenth month, in that day the Lord brought me to the land of
Israel, and set me upon an exceeding high mountain, upon which there was as it
were the building of the City, from the south, because in the day of mercy God
will pardon the iniquity of Israel, and will remember their sin no more, and
the Temple shall be built in the mountain, and the City Jerusalem shall be
next to it, on the south there the Lord shows Ezekiel the building of the
future Temple, that the hope of the Israelites might not fail, but they might
know they should return into their own land, and should dwell in it securely,
and the building of the Temple shall be much greater then it was at the
beginning, though it shall not differ in form and order.


Christian. Ezekiel had this vision in the babylonish captivity, Ver. 1.
before the second house was built, therefore it cannot be understood of the
building of a third Temple. Again, I ask of you at what time of the year
shall the Israelites go into their own land, after your Messiah shall come.


Jew. I have told you already, namely, in the day of propitiation, for then God
shall pardon the iniquity of Israel; but in the month Nisan, That is, April.
they shall be delivered, which month also, before when they were delivered out
of Egypt, was the beginning of redemption; they shall come forth before Nisan,
and shall ascend toward the land of promise, but in the first day of that
month the building of the Temple shall be finished, and they shall dedicate
the Altar in that day, and when they shall be in their journey, God shall judge
them in the desert, as it is written, Ezekiel. 20. 34,35.
As I live says the Lord God, I will bring you out from the people, and will
gather you together out of the Nations, in which you have been scattered, and
will lead you into the desert of the people, and will judge you there face to
face, as as I judged your fathers in the desert of the Land of Egypt; the
meaning of which place is this: When I shall bring you forth out from the
people, I will not lead you to the land of Israel, until I shall judge you in
the desert of the people, for there I will take vengeance of you, and will
destroy the rebellious, and every wicked one whom I shall find amongst you; I
will take my judgment of you in the place where no man shall be found to
pass or repasse, lest the Nations should see your evil, and should rejoice
over you; but he says face to face, that is, between me and between you
only, without any mediator.


Christian. Shall then all the Nations believe in one God?


Jew. Diverse faiths shall not then be in the world as now, but a chosen
language shall return to the people, that all may call upon the Name of the
Lord, and may serve him with one shoulder, for then shall be fulfilled that
which is written, Isa. 66.19
To gather together all nations that they may come and see my glory. I will set
a sign amongst them, and I will send forth the rest of them to the Gentiles,
that they may show my glory, and bring all your brethren from all Nations, a
gift to the Lord, on horses and chariots; as if he should say: I will cause all
nations to come with Gog and Magog, and see my glory wherewith I will be
glorified among them, and I will cause the remnant to go into all Nations, and
declare my glory among the Gentiles, who have not come to Jerusalem, and when
they shall hear that great miracle which God has done in the Tents of Gog and
Magog, they shall bring the sons of Israel on horses and chariots, for a gift
to the Lord, and they shall bring them honorably apparelled, set on horses and
chariots, and the seed of Israel shall continue all the days of the world,
neither shall the Israelites ever perish, or be led into banishment out of
their own land, as those Nations thought, who came with Gog and Magog, to
besiege Jerusalem, who thought to lead away Israel, and blot out their name.
Again, the Prophet says, Isa. 66.23
and all flesh shall come and worship before my face, says the Lord; for all
that are left of all the Nations, shall come every year to Jerusalem, to
worship the King of Heaven, and celebrate the feast of Tabernacles: He says
evidently, the Feast of Tabernacles, which battle of Gog and Magog shall be
in that time. Also the Nations shall come from every part of the world to seek
the peace of Israel, bringing a gift to her. A gift, as it is written, Ver. 12.
Thus says the Lord, behold I give to her, namely Jerusalem, peace as a river,
and the glory of the Gentiles as a flowing stream, not that it shall hurt like
an overflowing flood, but as an overflowing flood comes unawares, so glory
shall suddenly come to them, that is, the riches of the Gentiles, and all the
days of the world, the Nations of the world shall serve Israel, and the
Israelites shall have dominion over their enemies, and they shall revenge that
bondage, which the Gentiles have abused in their servitude, all the days of
the captivity; and now also all the Nations who do not serve the Jews, are
the debitors of death, and worthy of banishment, as it is written in Isaiah,
Isa. 60.1.
Arise, shine, for the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall
perish; therefore all the time that they serve the Israelites, they have a
strong hope, as it is said, And strangers shall stand and feed thy sheep, and
the children of strangers shall be thy husbandmen, and thy vine-dressers.
Whence it appears, you ought to serve us every hour, to fulfill that which is
said, the greater shall serve the lesser. It is also written with you, that
Saint John has said, the Jews are to be honored, for our salvation came from
them.


Christian. That last is false, because it is not written in the book of John,
that ye Jews are to be honored by the Christians, but thou have added that to
the words of our Messiah, who said it not. But yet you have not told me, who is
Gog, and who is Magog, and when their battle shall be against the Israelites.


Jew. Magog is a name of a Nation, and Gog the name of the King reigning in
that Nation. But Magog came of the sons of Iaphet, and behold they say, that
from the days of Alexander King of the Greeks, the posterity of Magog have
been shut up in the end of the north, whom Alexander shut up there within the
mountains, whence they have not gone forth hitherto, but they shall go forth
in the time of salvation, after that Israel is gone out of captivity: for so
we have found it written, that Alexander the Macedonian shut up Gog and Magog
within great and high mountains, out of which there is no egresse, but in one
place only, where he made a very strong building, whose walls are of Iron,
that no man can go forth thence; also in that wall he has made by wonderful
industry, iron men, who continually as it were with hammers, and axes, do
smite upon the wall, that the men who are within the walls may think, that
building is to be continued and fortified for ever, that none of them may ever
go forth, and that building shall not be broken, neither shall any passage be
made, until that great and terrible day come, when it shall please the Lord,
that they may go forth thence; for then mountains shall be thrown down, and
the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground; Eze. 38.3.
for thus says the Lord God, behold I am against thee O Gog, and I will bring
thee forth, all thine army, horses and horsemen, and all of them clothed with
all sorts of armor, even a great company with bucklers and shields, all of
them handling swords. Persia, Ethiopia, and Lybia with them, all of them with
shield and helmet. Gomer and all his bands, the house of Togarma of the north
quarters, ver. 14, 15. In that day when my people of Israel dwells safely,
thou shall know it, and shall come out of thy place from the north parts, thou
and many people with thee, and thou shall come up against my people Israel, as
a cloud to cover the land. ver. 19,20. And in that day there shall be a great
shaking in the Land of Israel, so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of
the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep
upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall
shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep
places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground, and I will call for
a sword against him throughout all my mountains, says the Lord God; every man's
sword shall be against his brother.


Christian. These words of the Prophet are wonderful; but pursue your
discourse, and declare what you know.


Jew. Eze. 38. 22.
It follows, And I will plead against him with pestilence, and with blood, and I
will rain upon him and his bands, and upon the many people that are with him,
an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire and brimstone. Thus will I
magnify my self and sanctify my self, and I will be known in the eyes of
many Nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Again, says the Lord,
behold I am against thee, Eze. 39. 1,2.
Gog, and I will smite thee, and punish thee with six plagues, and will cause
thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of
Israel. And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine
arrows to fall out of thy right hand. Thou shall fall upon the mountains of
Israel, thou and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give
thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to
be devoured. Behold he says, in that great war shall be a great tumult, to
which Zachary alludeth; who in his prophecy speaks thus, Zac. 14.4.
The mountain of Olives shall be rent; also every man's sword shall be against
his brother in that tumult of the Lord, neither shall be left of them but the
sixth part of the multitude, and they shall go to all Nations, to declare the
glory of the Lord amongst the Nations, that they come not against Jerusalem; or
he shall judge them with six judgments, namely, plague, blood, overflowing
rain, Ezekiel. 38. 22.
hailstones, fire and brimstone. But what he says, fishes of the sea, and
fowls of heaven, know, that is spoken hyperbolically, to show the greatness
of the tumult which shall be.


Christian. Why understand you that which is spoken of the fishes of the sea,
Ver. 20.
etc. hyperbolically, but expoundest the other part of the prophecy according
to the letter? and where I pray you is it written, that Alexander King of the
Greeks, shut up the sons of Magog within the mountains? but continue that
prophecy, as you have begun.


Jew. Again, Ezechiel says, Eze. 39.9.
And they that dwell in the Cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on
fire and burn the weapons, both the shield and the bucklers, the bows and the
arrows, and the hand-staves and the spears, and they shall burn them with
fire seven years, they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down
any out of the Forests, for they shall burn the weapons with fire, that is,
they shall not need to cut down trees out of the woods, but the weapons of
war shall suffice. Moreover, he says ver. 11. And it shall come to pass at
that day, that I will give unto Gog, a place there of graves in Israel, the
valley of the passengers on the East of the Sea; and it shall stop the noses of
the passengers; there shall the house of Israel bury them, to the end, that
they may cleanse the land seven months, the stink of the dead shall cause
those that pass by that way, to stop and shut their noses from that very evil
stink, and the people of the land shall be employed in the burying of them
seven months; also the Nations, who came to worship, shall go forth out of
Jerusalem into the valley of Iehosaphat, to see the carcasses of the army of Gog
and Magog, who dealt wickedly against the Lord. And though the house of Israel
do bury them, that they may cleanse the earth seven months, it is possible that
they may see in those seven months, the judgment of those wicked men, for they
shall see their carcasses full of worms gnawing them, and fire burning in
them, as it is written, Isa. 66.24.
They shall go forth and see the carcasses of those men, who have done
perversely against me, for their worm shall not dye, neither their fire be
extinguished.


Christian. You have hitherto multiplied words of diverse things, I would have
you repeat to me those things in a compend; which you have alleged here and
above.


Jew. I will do it, and give you 15 answers, 5 out of scripture, and 5 out of
the Caball, and 5 by clear demonstration. Of the 5 which are brought out of
Scripture, this is the first. Isa. 11.11.
It is written that all shall be gathered together from the four parts of the
world to come to Jerusalem, and not a remnant or one of them shall remain in a
strange land, and I will gather them to their own land, and will leave none of
them there any more, etc. but in the days of the second Temple, they of Israel
were not gathered together, but as it is written, Ezra 2.64
the whole congregation together, was forty and two thousand, three hundred and
threescore, and for our comfort it is written, Ver. 11.
that the Israelites shall be gathered together in the day of salvation from
these Isles; from Elam, from Sinear, and Homath: But in the time of the first
house, we do not find that one of them was transported to the Isles of the sea,
and by consequent, none was to be brought back from hence.


Christian. There is no truth in your mouth, who at your own pleasure do
pervert the Scriptures; for the mentioned places of Scripture, are to be
understood of the gathering together of the Babylonish dispersion: concerning
which, we find it thus written, Neh. 1. 8.
Remember I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses,
saying, if ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the Nations; but if
ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments and do them; though there were of
you cast out to the utmost parts of the heaven, yet will I gather them from
thence, and will bring them to the place that I have chosen to set my name
there. But if you object, that the Lord said in Ezekiel, Eze. 34. 13.
I will gather them together to their own land, and will not leave any of them:
but in the time of Ezra, all the Israelites did not return to their own land.
I answer, that is not true, for Ezra says, Ezr. 2.70.
and all the Israelites dwelt in their Cities. Moreover that is to be noted
which is written in Deuteronomie concerning the babylonish captivity, Deu. 30.3
Then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee,
and will return and gather thee from all the Nations whither the Lord thy God
has scattered thee. If any of thine be driven out unto the utmost parts of
Heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, from thence will he
fetch thee, and the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy
fathers possessed, and thou shall possess it.


Jew. If you will after this manner reproach my words, I will no longer speak
to you of this matter.


Christian. Do it not I pray you, for I will lay my finger upon my mouth.


Jew. Ezekiel: 37. 23.
The second answer is found in Ezekiel, They shall not be defiled any more in
their uncleanness, and abominations, etc. And David my King shall reign over
them, and they all shall have one shepherd: and I will put my sanctuary in the
midst of them for ever. The third is mentioned in Isaiah, for the comforts of
Sion. Isa. 60.10
And children of strangers shall build thy walls, etc. But in the building of
the second Temple, the Israelites were not suffered to build the Temple
according to their will, but were continually molested with wars, to the end
they might be so hindered in the building, as it is written, With the one hand
they did the work, and in the other held a sword, Neh. 4. 17.


Christian. I pray you take it not grievously, if I speak this once. Behold
Cyrus King of Persia, who was a stranger, caused the house of the Lord to be
built, and suffered the children of Israel to return into their own land, and
therefore the mentioned prophecy was fulfilled, according to the letter in the
second Temple, which was built by strangers, according to the prophecy of
Isaiah, Isa. 44. 28
but not without the command of God; but proceed and tell me the fourth answer.


Jew. It is written for our comfort, Isa. 60.11.
And thy gates shall stand open continually day and night. But in the days of
the second Temple, it is thus written, Neh. 7.3.
the gates of Jerusalem shall not be open until the son grow hot. Therefore
they shut the gates so long as their state continued.


Christian. There the Prophet speaks allegorically, and hyperbolically, as he
also says there, Isa. 60. 9.
thou shall not have the sun for a light by day, etc. Now speak you.


Jew. The fifth answer is written in Isa. for our comfort; Ver. 12.
for the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish. But in the
days of the second Temple, they were continually oppressed with bondage by the
Kings of the Gentiles; as it is written, Behold, Ne. 9. 36.
we are at this day oppressed with bondage, and the land which thou gave our
fathers to eat of the fruits thereof, and be satisfied with the fullness
thereof, behold we at this day are servants in it.


Christian. I have said already, that all that place Is. must be understood
allegorically, Isa. 60.12
or hyperbolically.


Jew. I will now give you some answers out of Cabala.


Christian. And I will willingly give ear to your words, providing, that you
tell me the truth, and not a lie.


Jew. The first answer out of Cabala is, our wise men have said thus: That in
the days of the Messiah, they shall burn wood gathered up in the army of Gog
and Magog seven years, so that in those seven years, they shall not need
other wood, seeing it is thus written, Eze. 39.9.
They shall make or maintain a fire with weapons, etc.


Christian. Ezekiel said not, that seven years they should burn weapons of
war, Ver. 9.
so that they should not want other wood, and therefore the words of your wise
men are false, and not true. Moreover, we must say, that prophecy is a
certain obscure figure, whose interpretation is not sufficiently manifest to
you, nor to us.


Jew. The second is, the Prophets say in the time of the Messiah, Nilus a river
of Egypt shall be dried up in one place, and the river Euphrates in seven
places, that there may be a passage for the redeemed Israelites; for it is thus
written, Isa. 11.15
And the Lord shall dry up the tongue of the sea of Egypt, that the remnant of
my people may have a way. The third; The Prophets say that in the days of the
Messiah, the mountain of Olives shall be rent through the middle, toward the
North part, namely to be divided into two halfes, one half shall bend toward
the North, and another toward the South; but through the gap or breach, a
great river shall run, for it is written, Zec. 14.4.
And the mountain of Olives shall be rent through the middle, to the East and
to the West, etc. And it follows, in that day living waters shall go forth
out of Jerusalem. The fourth is propounded in Ezekiel, namely, that the Temple
shall be rebuilt according to its first form and similitude. The fifth is
explained in the same place, Eze. 47.1.
that living waters shall go forth of the Sanctuary, on each bank whereof,
fruit-bearing trees fit for food shall grow, Ver. 12.
etc. But in the days of the second Temple, it is manifest, none of these
things are yet come to pass.


Christian. The words of the Prophets are not always to be understood
according to the sound of the words, but in spirit, and according to an
allegory.


Jew. The five answers which are gathered from clear demonstration, are taken
out of the Prophets, who say that all people shall believe in the Lord, for it
is written, Zec. 14.9.
God shall be King over all the earth: in that day there shall be one God, and
his name one: But now the Nations believe, and have many faiths, and they do
as they did at the beginning.


Christian. Although there be diverse and many faiths, nevertheless, all
Nations and people do believe in one God, who created heaven and earth, some
few men excepted, who worship Idols; but of all the Nations some men are found
who believe in the God of heaven.


Jew. The second clear demonstration is also had from the Prophets, who say
that all the Israelites shall be in quiet and peace, safe from all annoiance of
foreign Kings, as it is said in Isa. The Lord has sworn, Isa. 62.8.
I will not give thy corn any more for food to thine enemies: but hitherto we
have been in bondage under the people. The third; The Prophets say, war shall
be no more in the world; for it is thus written, I will break the bow and the
sword from the earth. And again, it is said, Isa. 2.4.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war
any more. But to this time they make war, that people against this, and a man
kills his neighbor, they quarrel among themselves, people with people, Prince
with Prince, and all the earth is full of robbery, and plundering, as in
ancient days.


Christian. I am constrained here to interrupt your words, and answer the same.
Behold, that word Od, that is, beyond, sometimes in Hebrew is taken for, for
ever, sometimes for a long time, and sometimes for a short time; as it is in
that place, thy name shall no more be called Jacob, Genesis 32. 28.
but Israel shall be thy name, and yet a little after, in the same place, he is
thrice called Jacob. So in the book of Samuel, it is said, 1 Sa. 7.13
the Philistines came no more into the bounds of Israel, who nevertheless came
into the land of Israel after the death of Samuel. 1 Sa. 28.4
So it is said here, Isa. 2.4.
there shall be war no more, that is, there shall not be war at that time, when
the Messiah shall come, and shall be born; as it was in the time of Augustus the
Emperor, when our Christ was born in great peace, that men then might have
broke, and turned their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning
hooks if they would, for that manner of speaking is used by the Prophets.


Jew. The fourth is also expressed by the Prophets, Isa. 11.6.
That the wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw
like the ox, and the suckling child shall play upon the whole of the aspe; but
these creatures are now hurtful from the days of old.


Christian. I will answer you presently concerning this prophecy.


Jew. The fifth is this, the land of Sodom shall be rebuilt as it was from
the beginning, seeing it is thus written, Eze. 16. 53.
And I will bring back the captivity of Edom, and his villages. For from the
beginning, the waters of Sodom were sweet, and watering the Land, as it is
written, Genesis 13. 10.
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw all the plain of Jordan, which was
watered every where: But now to this day those waters are dried up, and salt.
Behold, all these consolations we yet expect shall be. God grant that they may
come speedily in our days. Amen. Selah.


Christian. We have far digrest from our first discourse, when we began to
speak of the war of Gog and Magog. Now therefore tell me what shall be after
that war.


Jew. In those days all men shall be busied in wisdom, to know the Lord, as
it is written, Hab. 2.14
The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. Then that which
Jeremy says, Ier. 33.11
shall be fulfilled, A voice of joy and a voice of gladness shall be, and all
shall say; confess to the Lord of Hosts, because the Lord is good, for his
mercy endures for ever, and they shall bring an oblation for thanksgiving into
the house of the Lord. He does not say, they shall bring an oblation for sin
and for iniquity, because in that time, wicked men and sinners shall not be
among them, but all shall know the Lord. Hence it is that our Rabbis have said;
all oblations shall be made void in the last times, except the oblation of
thanksgiving. Moreover, in those days they shall say no more, Ezekiel. 18. 2,3.
the fathers have eaten sour grapes, Ier. 31.29
and the childrens teeth are set on edge, because then sinners shall be cut
off, neither those that sin at that time shall commit any great sin; then the
people shall know that GOD is King over all, neither is there another besides
him, and they shall come to Jerusalem, to learn the judgments of God and his
laws, even as he says, Isa. 2.3.
come and let us go up to the mount of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for the
Law shall go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. He
shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they shall
beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks. The
Prophet speaks here of the Messiah; for if war shall be raised among the
Gentiles, or questions arise, they shall come to judgment before the King
Messiah, who shall be Lord of all the people, and he shall reprove them, and
shall say to him who shall be found guilty, amend those faults which thou have
done against him who has called thee to judgment. And for this cause there
shall not be war against people and people, because the King Messiah shall
pacify them; neither shall they need instruments of war, but shall break
them, Mic. 4.3.
to make of them instruments of husbandry. In that day the Lord shall be
exalted alone, who shall cast out Idols universally: And although Idols have
ceased already among some people, yet some are found in the East, who worship
Idols; likewise they are truly counted among worshippers of Idols, who bend
their knees, and make images. But in the days of the Messiah Idols shall be
wholly rooted out.


Christian. At this day, and from many years there are not, neither have been
idols in the world, as I said above, but all Nations worship one God, neither
do we Christians adore and worship images, as you Jews think, neither do we
believe that any power is in images, that they can bring us any help; but some
among us, who profess themselves to be Christians, do adore and worship our
Christ before images, as your fathers also formerly in the first house did
adore and worship God before the Arc of the Sanctuary. Ps. 138.2.
But let us leave these things, or reserve them to another time, for I desire
to hear something from you concerning beasts which shall be in the time of
your Messiah.


Jew. Concerning beasts you have it thus written, Isa. 11. 6.
The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the
kid; and the calfe and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them, and the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones
shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox, and the
sucking child shall play on the hole of the aspes, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the sea. Here are some sayings, that in the days of the
Messiah, the natures of living creatures and beasts shall be changed, and they
shall be as they were at the beginning of the creation, and as in the Arc of
Noah: For if in the beginning of the creation, a lion had devoured a sheep, one
kind of the creation had perished.


Christian. What therefore did the lion, and other devouring creatures eat
then, who now eat flesh?


Jew. I say, if the lion had eat the flesh of any beast, the world had been
deprived of that creature, for so much as all creatures first were created in
each sex, male and female, and no more, neither could the devouring creatures
sustain hunger until cattle which might be devoured, had brought forth other
individuals, for the preservation of their kind; therefore it was necessary,
that in the mean while they should eat the grass of the field, until
devourable cattle were bred and brought forth, then, and after that their
nature began to be fed with flesh. We must think the same of them, for the
time when they were in the Arc of Noah; Genesis 6.19.
for if devouring creatures had destroi'd the devourable creatures, one kind
had been wanting in the world, forasmuch as only two and two were carried into
the Ark, Genesis 7.16
and no more in one kind; unless you would rather say, seven and seven of
clean beasts were carried in, for the necessity of the devouring. Some
likewise expound these words figuratively, because the wolf and the leopard,
the bear and the lion, do signify wicked men, tyrants, and violent
extortioners, who fall upon the weak and poor, as devouring creatures fall upon
the weak cattle. For the sheep, the cow, the calf, and kid, do signify the
poor of the earth. But there shall be so great a peace in the earth, in the
days of the Messiah, that no man shall wrong his neighbor. I allow not this
exposition; for the Prophet says, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain.


Christian. But I think this exposition true, seeing that Rabbi Moses the
Egyptian, write in his readings upon the book of Judges, after this manner: Let
it not enter into thy heart, that in the days of the Messiah, any thing is
diminished of the course of this world, or any thing then renewed of the works
of the six days; but the world shall have then its succession like the
succession of this time. So likewise of that place, Isa. 11.6.
the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, etc. This is the sense, that Israel shall
dwell in safety with the wicked of the world, who are compared to lions, wolfes
and leopards. Finally, in the time of the Messiah it shall be known to all,
for what cause those similitudes were spoken, and what is signified by them.
Thus much the mentioned Rabbi Moses says; and after this manner Jacob called
Judah a lions whelpe, and Isachar he called a strong ass, Ge. 49.27
and Benjamin a wolf, etc. But let us return to the Prophecy.


Jew. In the days of the Messiah, peace shall be through the whole world, as
it is written, Mic. 4.3.
And they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, etc. neither shall nation
lift up sword against nation, and they shall not learn the use of war. We may
also say, that the nature of beasts shall not be changed, but they shall
devour flesh, as they do now. But the Lord shall defend the land of Israel,
that evil beasts shall not hurt in it, as it is written, Isa. 11.9.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, the reason whereof is
showed, for the earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord, and because the
Israelites shall be good, and shall keep the way of the Lord, no evil beast
shall have any dominion over them, neither over their cattle, or over any
other thing, as the Lord promised by Moses our teacher, Lev. 26.6
And I will drive out every beast out of the land; and if they pass by it, it
shall not hurt. And again he has said, Isa. 11 7.
For the lion shall eat straw like the ox, for he shall not tear the flesh of
a beast in the land of Israel, though he find not a carcass. Ver. 8.
And the infant shall play, etc. For the enmity of the Serpent, contracted from
the beginning of the creation, shall be taken away in the days of the Messiah,
through the whole land of Israel, and also a Serpent, or other evil beasts
shall not hurt any of the people of Israel, by what place soever he pass.


Christian. Shall your Messiah have wife and children?


Jew. Concerning this it is found written thus, Psa. 45.9.
Kings daughters were among thy honorable women, upon thy right hand did stand
the Queen in gold of Ophir: that is, among the noble wives, which the Messiah
shall have, shall be the daughters of Kings; because every King of the Gentiles
shall esteem it for great glory to him, if he give him his daughter to wife. But
the Psalmist says, the Queen stood, v. 9. For although the daughters of Kings
are nu^bred among his wives, nevertheless the Queen, who shall be of the
Israelites, she shall sit at his right hand in a crown of gold, and she is
properly called his concubine, because she only and continually is appointed
for his bed; but others shall come to him at certain times, when he shall
call for them in his time, to come to the King; but the Queen his wife shall
continually be conversant in his closet, and bedchamber. Moreover, concerning
his sons, it is thus written, Isa. 53.10
He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the desire of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand.


Christian. Hoe, thou blind Jew! are you not ashamed to speak such things of
the most holy Messiah, as if he would give his heart to carnal pleasures, and
would have many wives, seeing that the Prophets have sung of him, that he shall
come to take away our sins from us? Behold, thou have fallen as a blind man at
noon day. And moreover, thou seducest other Jews with your exposition; all
these things are to be understood figuratively; for that Queen, is that
peculiar congregation of faithful men believing in the salvation of the
Messiah, and the daughters of Kings are the nations of the Gentiles, who came
to believe in Christ; and concerning this Church the spouse of Christ, Solomon
speaks in the Canticles. Can. 1.9.



Jew. Some likewise among our Rabbis expound the mentioned verse
allegorically, almost as you have done, except that they understand by the
undefiled spouse, the Synagogue of Israel.


Christian. But what think your Rabbis, concerning the death of the Messiah?
shall he live always, or shall he die as other men after a long time?


Jew. Our great Doctor, Moses the son of Maimon, says, the Messiah shall dye,
and his son shall reign after him, and the son of his son shall succeed after
his son in the Kingdom, nevertheless the Messiah shall live many days, and
at length he shall die in great glory, and his son shall inherit the Empire,
and after him his Nephew, etc.


Christian. Neither you nor the son of Maimon understand the power of God, and
the mystery of the holy Scriptures. For although the Messiah was to die, yet he
was to die for our sins, for he was stricken, smitten of God, and he was
afflicted, Isa. 53. 6.
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth. He was taken from prison, and from judgment, and who shall declare his
generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the
transgression of my people was he smitten; and he made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death, because he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he
has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hands. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he has poured
out his soul unto death; and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he
bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. You see
here, what Isaiah the Prophet has said concerning the death of the Messiah,
how he should die for our sins, that he might save our souls, and might lead
us into the Kingdom of heaven, and that he should see his seed, and should
prolong his days; and truly the pleasure of the Lord has had a prosperous
success in his hand: Forasmuch as his name has been magnified in the whole
earth; and you who slew him, are dispersed throughout all the nations; your
house is desolate, and you are become of the people of God, not the people of
God, and of Gods peculiar inheritance, an abomination in the eyes of God, and
of the sons of God, the sons of Belial. But on the contrary, they who believe
in God, and in his Christ, these are the people, the possession, and the sons
of God, and they shall never see death, because after this world, sin shall not
be, and by consequent, neither death which is the punishment of sin.


Jew. Our Masters speak far otherwise of these things; for they say in the time
of the Messiah, Isa. 11.9.
the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, because of the
plentiful pouring forth of God, whereby he shall then bow himself down to
the world; neither shall faith be then corrupted, neither shall man be changed,
but to good, and to perfection. It is also likely, that then the dead shall not
rise, but they who have been just; the wicked shall remain in death, some few
excepted. And truly you have now seen, that innumerable miracles shall be
wrought in the time of the Messiah, as I have showed you; and because all these
are not yet come to pass, we believe not in your Christ, but do expect our
redeemer, neither do we despair, though many and great tribulations do meet
us in this our modern captivity.


Christian. You and your Rabbis do err very much, for all these wonderful
things, concerning which you have spoke to me, are fulfilled already, some few
excepted, which shall be wrought in the second coming of Christ, that is, in
the end of the world, when Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead;
for our Christ has raised some dead from a corporal death, and some from a
spiritual death. At this day Idolatry is taken out of the world, Isa. 11.9.
and the earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord; because all people do at
this day confess one God. Now many people do go to enter into the house of
the God of Jacob, Mic. 4. 2.
which is the Church of believers in Christ. Isa. 2.2.
Now the wolf dwells with the lamb, that is, the ungodly man, and the
destroier with the meek, and he does not hurt him. Moreover there was peace
through the whole world in those days when our Christ was born; for one man,
namely Octavianus, did then reign over the whole world in peace, and in the
world to come, there shall be peace without end. Isa. 60.11
Now the gates of Jerusalem are open, that is, the Church of the faithful is
open, and every man of each sex, man and woman, old man and young man, rich and
poor, Jew and Gentile, whosoever will, may enter in. Isa. 2.2.
Also the mountain of the Lords house, is prepared on the top of the
mountains, and is lifted above the hills. At this day in Jerusalem among
believers, Isa. 65:19
the voice of weeping and mourning is no more heard, because they have
consolation here, and they expect in the world to come joy, which shall never
be taken from them. There men shall live not only five hundred or a thousand
years, but for ever and ever.


Jew. I understand not your words, because you speak figuratively, and not
according to the letter of the Scripture.


Christian. This is that which the Lord has said by the Prophet, Isa. 1.3.
The ox knows his owner, and the ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider. Likewise Moses says, Deu. 28. 29.
the Lord shall smite thee with madness, blindness, and astonishment of
hearth, and thou shall grope at noon day, as the blind man gropeth in
darkness, and thou shall not prosper in thy days.


Jew. This is the punishment wherewith God does chastise us for our sin, but he
will not throw off his people for ever.


Christian. What is that your sin, for which this banishment, which now you
suffer so long after the second house is so much prolonged beyond the
banishment of the first house? since that it is sufficiently manifest of the
greatness of the sins which the Kings of Judah did, and yet for them the time
of banishment was not prolonged but two and fifty years; but in the second
house they did not worship Idols, and nevertheless the captivity endures
wonderful long.


Jew. I answer you to this doubt, thus: The sins which they committed in the time
of the first house were very grievous, that even then it was decreed, that the
second Temple should not stand but seventy whole weeks, and then again they
should suffer punishment, and should bear the iniquity of their fathers, to
the end of the redemption, as it is explained in the end of Daniel, which
present captivity in which we now are, is for the sins which the Israelites
committed before the Babylonish captivity.


Christian. This your answer is vain, for the son shall not bear the
iniquity of his father, if he be not a follower of his fathers wickedness;
but I will hear what Daniel says concerning that captivity.


Jew. Behold, he speaks after this manner, Dan. 12. 12.
Blessed is he that waits, and comes to a thousand, three hundred, and thirty
five days, but a year is as a long day. And again, a day is a little year.
Likewise there is a certain place found in the earth, where almost a whole
year is but one day: For example, there is a place where the day takes up six
months, and the night challenges to it self the remnant of time; there I say
a year consists of one day. So Daniel called days years, because he would
have his words shut up and sealed. Dan. 12.4



Christian. And when shall the mentioned number 1335 be accomplished?


Jew. Some say that number is extended to the year of the world 6118 (which is
the 2367 year of Christ) For first, they counted 1290 days to that time, when
they laid down the abomination of desolation after the destruction of the
temple, according to the words of Daniel; Dan. 9.27
and afterward they began to number 1335 days: But they who went before us,
did not receive this supputation, but every man labored to find out some
account which might agree with their days. And after this manner thou shall
find with our Rabbis of good memory, many and diverse bounds, which are al
past, for they were careful to find out some near bound, lest the common
people should despair, because redemption was suspended.


Christian. And so your Rabbis do always seduce you, saying, behold, at this
time the Messiah shall come, and when that that is past, again they say, at
that time he shall come: How will ye believe these lying words? Consider, you
have no hope, and salvation is deferred from you, and God is departed from you,
and you have no consolation, not a prophet nor vision; therefore be converted,
and acknowledge your Savior and our Savior, our Lord Christ.


Jew. Neither have we had from the beginning of the second Temple, a Prophet
or vision, but in those days when the Messiah shall begin to grow, Then
prophecies and visions shall be multiplied. But at this time all vision and
prophecy is sealed; for the end of the vision of the Prophets, has respect
wholly to the growing of the Messiah Kingdom. When he shall come, we shall
have great consolations, so that all the days of our captivity, shall be
counted as a little moment, as it is written, Isa. 54. 7.
I have left thee a little moment, and in great mercies I will gather thee.


Christian. Vision and prophecy is shut up from your eyes, but not from our
eyes, for we are all taught of God, and the mysteries of the Kingdom of God
are revealed to us, Isa. 54. 13
and if you also will believe in our Lord Christ, you may enter into the
Kingdom of God.


Jew. We cannot believe in your Christ, because he was a Magician, and all
his miracles were wrought by the Magic Art, and therefore he was judged to
death, as the Lord God taught us, and because he brake the Sabbath, and said
he was a God, therefore the Jews slew him.


Christian. Hold your peace knave, and do not so reproach our Savior; but if
you will at another time, I will come to you, that we may speak more of this
matter. Who knows, peradventure thou will acknowledge the truth, and receive
our Gospel.


Jew. I am content, that according to your pleasure you come to me; but speak
nothing to me of your bad tidings.


Christian. Take heed to your self, that you say not bad tidings, but good
tidings, for it is a manifestation of the goodness of God, which came to us by
Christ the Redeemer of the world. But why do you so refuse to hear the
Gospel, and why do you shun the light, and will set in darkness? Is it not
written concerning the light of the Gospel; Isa 9. 2.
the people which did walk in darkness saw a great light, and to them which
dwell in the shadow of death, light has shined?


Jew. This is the reason why I will not hear, because Jesus your Messiah was
an evil man, and his speeches were fained, and the glorious God saw that he
would seduce the world, and would set himself forth for God, and for that God
has said that men should die, but Jesus ought to be hanged upon the Cross,
that so all that should come into the world, might see that he was not God.
Moreover, none of the Prophets has prophesied from that time, wherein Christ
being crucified, was hanged up, none of Israel, neither any of the Nations,
because a lying spirit did so much prevail in the world, that there was no
place for the spirit of prophecy. But also we suffer al these tribulations,
and this very long captivity, because that wicked man was borne of us, and in
our land, who made himself God, and seduced the whole world.


Christian. All those evils which you Jews suffer, came not upon you because
of our Christ, because he said that he was God, and the son of God, but rather
for this, because your fathers slew him and crucified him, a holy man and just,
the Savior of the world, who did no evil, neither was deceit found in his
mouth. Behold, this holy man your fathers slew, and numbered him with the
wicked, and ye all allow this fact to this very day, and therefore ye shall
never find grace in the eyes of God, unless ye return from that evil way, and
acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ, whom ye in contempt, do call Ieschim. Unless
you believe in him, you shall all perish, and shall go down to hell. Behold,
I have foretold it, you shall not find other salvation in heaven and in earth,
and for this cause seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he
is near. Forsake your unbelieving heart, and return to the Lord, and he will
have mercy on you, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon you. Be not
like your fathers, who hardened their faces more than a rock, and would not
return to the Lord, but dealt wickedly against the Lord, the God of their
fathers, who delivered them to be spoiled, as you see it at this day: I beseech
you harden not your necks as you have done hitherto, but give your hands to the
Lord, and acknowledge that Christ is sent for the salvation of all men, who
shall believe in him, the Lord our God is gracious and merciful, who will not
turn away his face from you, if ye return to him.


Jew. You shall never persuade me to receive your faith, and believe in your
Christ, for that which you believe, no reason can comprehend, neither any man
understand. For how shall I believe, that the Creator of heaven and earth, and
all things that are in them, shut himself up in the womb of a Jewish Virgin,
grew nine months, and was borne a child, and afterward increased in stature,
and was delivered into the hands of his enemies, who condemned him with the
judgment of death, slew him on the Cross, and ye afterward say and believe,
that he lived again, and returned to his former state? neither the mind of a
Jew, neither can any man comprehend this, therefore you spend your words in
vain, seeing that these things have no likelihood of truth.


Christian. Know thou not, that nothing is unpossible to God? verily all
those things which you have now mentioned, are in the Prophets, but wrapped in
the covering of words; for thus says the Prophet Isaias, Isa. 7. 14.
Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel. And in another place he says, Isa. 53. 5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed,
etc. Do you see how wonderful things the Prophet has spoke concerning the
Messiah, and all these things are fulfilled in our Christ? Again hear what
the same Prophet says, Isa. 4.2.
In that day the branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, and the
fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of
Israel. Where Jonathan has interpreted in Chaldee, after this manner. In that
time the Messiah of the Lord shall be for joy and honor. Behold, the Messiah
is called the branch of the Lord, that is, the son of God, as also in
Jeremiah he is called the branch of David, for he says thus, Ier. 33.15
In those days, and at that time, will I cause the branch of righteousness to
grow up unto David: Where Jonathan the Chaldee interpreter, says thus. In
those days, and at that time, will I raise up to David a Messiah of
righteousness. You see now, that the Creator could suffer afflictions, not in
the divine nature, but in the humanity which he assumed in the unity of the
person.


Jew. These are wonderful things, and what I pray you has that your Jesus
done, or what need was there that he should be born of a woman? why did he
sustain all those passions and afflictions, which our fathers brought upon him?


Christian. Was it not said already, that he was wounded for our
transgressions? All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one
to his own way, and the Lord has made the iniquities of us all to meet in him.


Jew. Some of our teachers have said, the Messiah has no other passions, Isa.
6.9.
but a certain internal grief and trouble, whereby he is internally
afflicted that his coming is so long deferred, and in the mean while sees his
people in captivity, and he cannot help them, and deliver them; but he shall
never be delivered into the hand of his enemies, as ye affirm.


Christian. Your Rabbis have been estranged from the womb, they have gone
astray as soon as they were borne, speaking lies, stopping their ears like the
deaf adder, that they might not hear the truth; they have ceased to hear
rightly and wisely, and therefore God has cast them off, and has blinded
their eyes, as it is written, Go and tell this people, hear ye indeed, but
understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert and be healed. Lo, it has come to pass to you Jews, according to
this prophecy; for your fathers saw the wonderful works which our Christ did,
and would not understand: They heard his doctrine, and could not reprove him,
and yet they stopped their ears, likewise ye to this very day do confirm and
approve their works, and therefore in vain do ye expect another Messiah.


Jew. If your Christ is God and the true Messiah, why did he conceal himself
in the flesh? and why did he not come openly, by renewing his law, and giving
it publicly? for so the men of his age had not erred, neither should they
stumble who come into this world after him; he should have done his works in
public, that all might believe on him, especially that great multitude which
he destroyed, and deprived of redemption by his concealing himself; for
because of that concealing, they were separated from him, and believed not in
him.

Thou know not what thou say; has he not shown in words and deeds, such
miracles, as no other did, that he was the Messiah and redeemer of the world,
and yet your fathers said, that by Beelzebub, and by the power of devils, that
is, by magic art, he did all those things, lying against their own lives? Lo,
God has sent his own son, his only son into the most pure womb of a virgin,
as Isaias did foretell, and he was made man within her, and born of her,
without her pangs and grief, and that by a miracle, far otherwise than other
women bring forth, and that was not impossible, forasmuch as all things which
do far exceed the power of man, are possible to GOD, and by his power, a body
might be created within a body, and be quickened by the spirit. Also he could
and he would send his glorious word within a pure virgin, that he might be
incarnated within her, and be born of her, without any grief or pain, and as
he entered into her, so he went out of her; and she remained a virgin before and
after the birth. But that child, who also is the glorious God, did walk upon
the earth thirty three years that he might save man, for he was sent to the
sons of Israel to redeem them, but because they were a people of a stiff neck,
and would not receive him, neither observe all the signs, such as no man ever
did; the Gentiles come and received him with love, and the blessed God chose
them for his peculiar people in stead of Israel, and they were made the sons of
Abraham for their faith, because Abraham is the father of the faithful, and
believers in God are the sons of Abraham. He therefore was that Messiah, of
whom the Prophets did prophecy, and he walked thirty years before he became
known to these who were in the world. But presently after that time, he
manifested himself to the Israelites, that he was the Christ of the LORD, and
wrought signs and miracles, such as none of the Prophets ever did, showing to
the whole world, that he came to redeem man for sin, as it is written, He was
wounded for our transgressions; and he made a new covenant with us, according
to that which is said in Jeremy, Behold, the days come says the Lord, Ier.
31.31
and I will make with Israel and with Judah a new covenant, not according to
the covenant which I made with their fathers, for I will put my Law in their
inward parts, etc. therefore it is manifest from these sayings, that the Lord
would make with the Israelites a new covenant, and not according to that
covenant which he made with Abraham, when he made a covenant with him that
every male child should be circumcised; Ge. 17.12
but this covenant was another covenant, namely, baptism, in which by the
power of Christ's sufferings, all man's sin is remitted, and that sign or
Sacrament is common to male and female. Moreover, he gave them a new law after
that the Law of Moses was fulfilled; for the Law was given to Moses only for a
time, as you have it written in the Thalmud, in the Treatise of Idolatry, where
it is said, that the law was given but for 2000 years; for the Fathers of good
memory say thus; That the world must endure 6000 years, that it should be
2000 years void and without form, that after two thousand years, the
Mosaicall Law should be given; that it should stand 2000 years under the Law,
and 2000 years under the Messiah, then it should return to its own
rudeness. But now the 2000 years of the Law, and besides many above a
thousand are past, and your Messiah is not yet come, as ye Jews say. There is
also another sign, that the Law of Moses was given for a time, because the
Prophet says, remember the law of Moses my servant, Mal. 4. 4.
he does not say, do the law of Moses, as if he should say: In the time of
the Messiah remember the law of Moses, because then all things which are
written in the law of Moses concerning the Messiah, shall be fulfilled: for the
offerings and sacrifices of oxen and sheep, did foreshew the sacrifice of the
Messiah, when he was led forth for a sacrifice, and as a sheep which before the
shearers is dumb, so opened he not his mouth, but with his blood he has washed
us from our sins, and has cleansed away our iniquities. Now therefore O Jews,
I turn my self to you. Behold, ye pray morning and evening in all your
prayers, that the Messiah and the Redeemer may be sent to you, and ye stand in
the feast of propitiation from the evening to the morning, crying and praying
with your whole heart, and your whole strength to the Lord, that he would
hear you, and send you the Messiah, but there is no change of your state,
there is none who understands your prayers, or who opens the gates of heaven,
and takes you out of this life, and much less, who sends your Messiah; yea, to
speak somewhat more, nothing is seen, nothing is heard, there is no voice or
vision which may tell you the coming of the Messiah. And behold, the property
of the blessed God is, to hear the prayers of the just, Pro. 15.8, 29.
and it is impossible according to your assertion, who say your faith is true,
that there has not been some just in all these generations which have been
from the days of the desolation of the Temple to this present, that the
blessed God has not heard their prayer, and has sent them the Messiah for
their merits, or that some sign has not been revealed to them, or vision
showed, or voice heard, whence they might have a sign of his coming.
Furthermore, for what cause do you think the Messiah does so long defer his
coming, that he does not redeem you? How can he in this so long time, see
your tribulations which ye suffer in this banishment, and does not deliver you
out of your tribulations, neither executes judgment against your enemies? why
does he suffer you so to wander through the deserts, as sheep without a
pastor, and have not any certain dwelling? why has he cast you from him now
so many years, and does not remember you with God? Truly when formerly he
chastised your fathers for their sin, presently after they confessed, and prayed,
and humbled themselves before him in their captivity, presently I say he
delivered them, although they had even committed Idolatry, and offended against
the law of Moses, had polluted the sabbath and solemnities, had broke the
covenant of Abraham; yet I say, notwithstanding these, when they repented, and
did confess their sins, forthwith he heard their prayers, he repented of the
evil inflicted upon them, he delivered them, and every day sent them the
Prophets to comfort them in their banishment, yea, when before they were
certified of the end of their captivity, Ier. 29.1^
to wit, that they should be in captivity but seventy years, but the present
captivity is now prolonged beyond a thousand and five hundred years, and it is
certain, that in the second house they did not worship Idols, neither
committed they so much as one of those transgressions, which they committed in
the first house; but neither in this captivity, is any man found who worships
Idols, as they did in former days, and nevertheless not any consolation, or
the voice of any oracle does appear, or is made known. What therefore is that
your sin, for which this captivity after the second house, continues so long
beyond the captivity of the first house, except that ye would not receive and
hear the Messiah the Savior, when he came to your land, but did persecute
him even to death; yea, when your fathers saw his miracles and terrible works,
such as no man ever did, yet they would not believe on him, and therefore
neither for them, neither for you, shall ever any propitiation ever be made,
but being cast forth ye shall lie in the dark, and shadow of death, ye shall
perish for ever, unless ye be converted and confess him. Measure for
Measure.


Jew. This captivity shall endure to the end of redemption, to purge away the
sin of our fathers, as it is declared in the end of Daniel, Dan. ^2.^2
blessed is he that waits, and shall come to one hundred thirty five days. By
days, understand years, as if he should say, for the sins which they
committed in the first house, before the captivity of Babel, the mentioned time
must be expected, etc.


Christian. I have said even now, that it is a great error among you, to think
the Son does bear the iniquity of his father, although he has not committed
his Sin, seeing the Scripture says plainly, Ier. 31.29, 30.
the sons shall not dye for the fathers, etc. And again it is written, Exo.
20. 5
Visiting the iniquity of the fathers, unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate me. Where he means, that God does not visit iniquity but unto
the fourth generation; and how many thousand generations do you think are
past to this present time? Behold now from the time of the destruction of the
Temple and City, not only a thousand three hundred and thirty five years, but
many more are past, and your fathers expected the Messiah about the end of
those years, for so they interpreted the mentioned place of Daniel, and
nevertheless your Messiah is not yet come, neither has removed from you the
punishments of this very long captivity.


Jew. This captivity is prolonged for the transgression which the Israelites
did in the second house, making themselves gods; as Jesus, the Apostles, and
other Saints did, who all were Jews, and did perversely interpret the sayings
of the Prophets concerning Jesus, and made him as it were a perpetual Idol, for
this the Israelites are almost perpetuated in this so long captivity.


Christian. Doubtless no man is ignorant how very grievously the Kings of
Judea and Israel sinned in the first house, who ordained Priests for the
worship of Idols, and clean destroyed the true worship of God, and
nevertheless they were in captivity but seventy years. Ier. 29.15
But in the modern captivity, they who have acknowledged Christ, and have
called him the son of God, have not denied God, but they saw the works of God
in Christ, and said, this is the son of God: But if they had erred in this, yet
for this they had not denied God: which seeing it is thus, why is this your
captivity so wonderderfully prolonged? therefore it appears, that your reason
is erroneous and in effectual; and truly it is the property of God, that his
goodness does exceed his severity, which seeing you cannot deny, why did not
the Messiah come in that time, which is so often touched in the book of Daniel,
Dan. 12.12
according to the supputations of all your wise men? verily he ought not,
neither could defer his coming so many hundred years, beyond the bound
appointed by himself. And if you will say that he will come in the generation
of the just, and then will not be absent one moment; I answer, that all is
erroneous, for so much as there has never been a generation, in which all men
have worshipped one God, except the generation of our time; and nevertheless
he still defers his coming. But now I must depart from you, but I will return
again to you, and speak more with you of this matter.


Jew. Go in peace, and see that you return to me again, for I also have yet
many things which I would discourse with you concerning your Christ, and
concerning your bad tidings.


Christian. You speak like a desperate and perverse Jew.


FINIS.

